Die Jovis 26. February, 1645.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that this House give thanks
to Mr IENKYN, for his great pains taken in the Sermon he Preached yesterday in
the Abbey Church Westminster, before the Lords of Parliament, it being the day
of the public Fast; And he is hereby desired to Print and publish the same:
which is not to be Printed by any, but by authority under his own hand.

J. Brown, Cler. Parl.

I Appoint Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon.

William Jenkyn.

REFORMATION'S REMORA; OR, TEMPORIZING the stop of building the Temple.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the House of PEERS, in the
Abbey-Church at Westminster, upon the 25th of February, 1645. being the day
appointed for their solemn and public Humiliation.

BY WILLIAM JENKYN, Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word at Christ-Church
London.

Text. HAG. 1.2. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, This people says,
the time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built.

Calv in loc. Hinc videmus quam been consuluerit Dominus Ecclesiae suae, dum
voluit ext rehanc objurga^ionem, no hodie nos soliciter, and metum vel pudorem
incu^iat.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the Crane
in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the HOUSE of PEERS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords:
I If this ensuing Sermon present you with ought worthy your esteem, it is the
jewel of plain-dealing; It Was preached to a Noble audience, and (I confese) with
the liberty of much plainnes; Ezekiel. 2.6. Tit. 2.11 Vt post ^ulgura pluvis, ita
post prae dicatoris verba, auditorum lacbiymoe subsequamur. Illivs dectoris
libenter vecem audio, non qui sibi plausu^^, sed qui mihi plactum mover. Si
persuadere vis, gemendo id magis quam declamando fludeas. Bern. Ser. 59. in
Cant. Vxod. 15.11.
but he that made you Noble, enjoined me to be faithful.

I dare not flatter attentions into smiles, no not upon a day of Thanksgiving.
So poor are our improvements of rich mercies, and so fearful (yea) in praises
is the God of our victories, that even upon a festival, the stage should keep
it is distance from the Pulpit. And if Sermons deserve to be suspected which on
a day of rejoicing walk in the attire of flattery: should they go in that garb
on a night of mourning, surely they deserve to be apprehended. My Lords, mine
was a Fast-Sermon. Soothing which is always bad, would have been this day,
abominable.

The faithfullest messengers that ever God employed, Duplici sub specie divinus
spiritus se mundo ostendit, columbina and ignea, quia omnes quos implet and
columbre fimplicitate mansuetos and igne zeli ardentes exhibet, Greg. 2. part
past. c. 11. Moses sic amavit ent quibus praesuit ut pro eis nec sibi parceret,
and tamen delinquentes sic persecutus est, quos a mavit, ut eos etiam Domino
parcente proster^eret. Causam populi apud Zeum precibus, causam Dei apud
populum gladijs allegavit. Intus amans ir^e divinae supplicando obsistit: foris
saeviens culpam feriendo consumpsit. Gregor. Mitis Stephanus cum lapidaretur,
sed seviebat cum non audiretur. Aug. in Ps. 32.
have set us a copy of freenes in reproving: they are known examples of Moses,
his deportment toward Pharaoh, and (after) toward his own people, of Elijah,
toward Ahab, of Nathans toward David, of Jeremiah, John Baptist, Steven, Paul;
All which were as full of zeal for God, as pity to people, and as holily
impatient against others sins, as holily patient under their own sufferings;
against those they had tongues of fire, though under these they had the temper
of a dove. They who when they were with God mourned and prayed for the people,
when they came among the people expressed their zeal in pleading for God.

My Lords, Clem. Alex. paed. lib. 1. cap 8, 9, 10. (...). Id Ibid. Charitas pie
solet saevire, sine dolo muleere, patienter novit iras^i, hu^tliter indiguar^.
Bern. ep 2. ad Fule. Inesse rectoribus debet and just conso^ans misericordia,
and pie saeviens disclplina. Greg. 2. p. past. Remissa tenita^ amputanda severa
integritas albibenda, Sit amor sed non emolliens pieta^ sed non plusquam
expediat parcens. Greg cap. 6. Molestus est medicus surenti phrenetico and
pater indisciplinato fuio, ille ligando iste coelendo, sed ambo diligendo. Aug.
ep. 1. ad Bonif. Host is redemptor is est qui per rect a opera quae sacit, ejus
vice ab ecclesia amari concupiscit. Adulterinae co^itationis est reus si
placere puer sponsae oculis appetit per quem sponsus dona transmifit. Greg.
cur, past. par. sec. cap. 8.
In your commanding me to preach, there was (at least) an implicit forbidding
of me to flatter. Sermons must show a right way, not a smooth way, the way of
duty, not of delight, the way which you ought, not which happily you love to go
in; The work of a Preacher is not to prepare you sauce but physic, not so much
to take away pain, (especially on a day of afflicting the soul) out of your
wounds as to prevent festering: And so for our selves, we get not up into the
Pulpit to be safe, but to be serviceable, not for our own pleasure, but our
masters employment, to win and woe you to Christ, not to our selves.

Your Lordships never deserved the least hurt at my hands, sure I am, Censura
intermissa aliquando proficit, ^unquam remissa. Bern. ep. 24. ad Hug.
not that which being a sin can never be a debt, should never be payment,
Plus persequitur lingua adulatoris quam ma^us interfectoris, Aug. in Ps. 70.
I mean the soothing of your souls into destruction: nay the danger of
flattering you, is extensive beyond your selves. Flattery bound up in a Sermon
and thrown into a Parliament, Naturali ducimur malo, adulatoribus libenter
favemus, and quanquam nos respondeamus indignos, and calidus rubor ora
persundat, taemen ad laudem suam intrinsecus anima letatur. Hieron. ep. 22. ad
Eustoch.
is no better then a bag of poison cast into a common conduit serving for the
use of a whole City.

May we that are Ministers ever tremble to hold our esteem by so crazy a title
as holding our peace. Every one must be accountable for his idle words, Non
solum ille transgressor est, qui palam denegat veritatem, sed qui propter
timorem tacet veritatem. Auth. op. imperf. Mat 10 33. Iure is it am vitam qua^do
divinitus affl^untur amaram seutiunt cujus amando dulcedinem peccantibus amari
esse nolunt. Aug.
and a Minister for his idle silence 100. The greatest enemy to reproofs is
unable to put in security to save either himself, or the flattering Minister
harmles another day nay even in this life (as Augustine excellently) God makes
the world bitter to Ministers by sufferings, because they make it so sweet to
wicked mgn by flatteries.

Beside, flattery is no other then Court-idolatry, and why should this piece of
it be longer lived then the rest, especially among those that profess a
detestation of it in every part.

My Lords, Your only work that now remains (for God has done the rest to your
hand) is the setting up the Temple, and the only stop is the serving of the
time. My text is a harp tuned by the finger of God himself, and it is to drive
away this evil spirit of temporizing, in a time of Temple building. I confess
he that of late used that harp, wanted the hand of David; and therefore 'twas
his fear he should not do the work of David, but I and sure he has not wanted
the spear of Saul, and therefore it is his hope that he has endeavored to do
it. My Lords, I desire to rejoice in any suffering for the service of your
souls: I consess my ruins would be very unworthy to set up the least piece of
abuilding of glory to Jesus Christ, or to make the smallest addition to the
structure of his Temple, but may they in the least conduce to such an end, my
enemies though against their wills, endeavor my happiness.

The Lord give you a discerning eye 'twixt friends and flatreries, 'twixt the
Mephibosheths and the Zibahs of these times: Dishearten not your plain-hearred
friends, who dare not wear it to save their souls (much less to thwart an
opposite way, or to lay rubs in the way of Reformation) dare not (I say) break
their Covenant, or be false to their own principles; That God would increase
the numbers of such as for him serve you, and your resolutions to serve him and
love them, is the prayer

My Lords of him who is your servant for the good of your souls, WILLIAM JENKYN.

A SERMON Before the Right Honorable HOUSE OF PEERS, at their Solemn Fast Feb.
25. 1645.
HAGGAI 1.1, 2. Thus speaks the Lord of hosts, saying, This people says the
time is not come, the time that the Lords house should be built.


GOD had restored to the Jews their own land, Reversi ad patriam redierant ad
ingenium. Calv.
yet they were regardlesse of restoring to God his worship in their land. They
had indeed laid the foundation of the Temple, Ezra 3.10. but they meeting with
discouragements, by reason of Artaxerxes his prohibition, ceased the further
prosecution of that work, till the second year of Darius, Ezra 4.24. Ezra 6.13,
14.

Haggai, opposes this cessation and sloth of theirs, and labors the
reformation of it in this Prophecy, it being indeed the main errand of this
Prophet, to stir them up to re-ingage themselves in that work. This neglect of
theirs he opposes remarkeably in the eleven first verses of this first
chapter, and that, two ways. First, by a description of; Secondly, by a
disswasion from this their sinful flothfullnes. 1. The description of this
sin is set down in my text. 2. The disswasion from it in the 9 verses
following. And that two ways: First, ab inhonesto, and injusto, the sinful
unseemlines and unfitnes of it; verse. 4. Is it time for you to dwell in your
ceiled houses, and this house lie waste. Secondly, The Prophet disswades from
this sin a pernicioso, from the hurtfullnes of it to themselves.

My text contains the description of the peoples sin, in this their sinful
cessation from the work of the Temple. Wherein you may observe four parts.
First, The accuser, or who it is that charge them with this fault, viz. The
Lord of hosts speaking by the Prophet: thus speaks the Lord of hosts.

Secondly, The parties accused, this people.

Thirdly, The evidence or testimony that God produces to prove the accusation,
that is their own saying, this people say.

Fourthly, The crime or the fault it self of which they are accused; the time
is not come that the Lords house, etc. Wherein there are two things
considerable; First, The greatness of the fault, their not building the Lords
house. Secondly, The smallnes and slightnes of their excuse or pretext, why
they did not build the Lord house, viz because in their opinion the time is not
yet come.

The three first parts I shall handle so far as they make way to the fourth,
which is that I intend mainly to prosecute.

First, The accuser, from whom this accusation issued; wherein, take notice of
two things; first, Who he was, the Lord of hosts. Secondly, how he expresses
his will, and that was by speaking, thus speaks, etc. The first contains the
describing of his name, The second contains the discovering of his mind.

From the first, Observe.
viz. the description of his name, the Lord of hosts, observe; In reproving of
sin, we must fetch our commission from the Lord. None of the Prophets undertook
this task, without a speaking from the Lord; hereby reproofs will be
administered with more confidence and comfore, confidence that they may be
successful, and comfort though they should not be successful in benefiting
the party reproved.

And hence the reprovers of sin in others, two edged sword of the word of the
Lord.

And secondly for the reproved, wroth with the seer: but say with Hezekiah,
good is the word of the Lord. If David saw God in Shemyes cursing, which was by
Gods permission, how much more should the greatest of you, see God in the
Prophets reprehensions which are by Gods commission; you must not blame the
medicine, but your own distemper: My words, says God, are good, and do good to
him that walks uprightly, Mich. 2.7.

Secondly, from the party accusing, in the description of his name; take notice
he is called the Lord of hosts; which title the Prophet may here put upon God
for a double reason. Either first to afright them from this sin of
slothfullnesse in setting up the Temple, Lord of hosts, to convince them of
their sin in neglecting for any discouragements which they met withal, the
setting up of the Temple of that God, who is the Lord of all the hosts of the
world, and therefore able abundantly to assist them in his own work, and to
keep the greatest adversaries from hurting them, when they were employed about
it.

If we take the first to be the Prophets reason, then we may observe; Observe.
That in reproving of wilful neglectings of God in his worship, we must hold
God forth as a Lord of hosts, armies, strengths; one that is able to destroy
any that shall neglect temple-building: Thus the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 1.14. in
reproving the people for their profane putting off God with corrupt
sacrifices; denounces a curse from God, and withal tells them, he had said no
more then God was able to do; for I am a great King (says the Lord) etc.

And if so, terrors of the Lord against those, be they never so high, that are
slothful in the work of the spiritual temple, though they want an hand, nay,
because they want an hand to build, the Prophets of God must have a tongue to
reprove: They must be holily patient, when they themselves are neglected; but
holily impatient (as Chryso stom speaks of Job) when their master is
neglected. How are Ambassadors wont, when they desire that their message and
motions from their Prince should be entertained, to set forth the greatness and
potency of him that sent them, on purpose to deter those to whom they are sent,
from denying their Princes desires. God is a great King; we are his
Ambassadors to you, take heed lest if his desires be not performed by you, in
setting up his house, his pleasure be performed upon you in pulling down yours;
If you set not up his house, which yet lies low, he will pull down you, were
you never so high: If you will neglect him and his worship, notwithstanding his
greatness, he will neglect and forsake you not withstanding his goodness.
Consider, he is not a Lord of one host, but of all the hosts in the world; he
has reserves of hosts, and though he suffer for the impieties of it, the Kings
army to be ruined; yet he has others, which you know not of: If there be no
armies on earth, to overthrow the neglecters of his temple, he can rain some
out of Heaven: And were there none in either Heaven or earth, he can create
them. Sooth not up your selves because the common enemy falls; God has many
arrows in his quiver, many twiggs in his rod, he has a treasury of wrath.
England shall never be without an host, so long as God is without an house.
Though your armies prosper and go up, yet if the house of God go not up too,
your rising shall but prove your ruin. God has invisible ways of plaguing his
enemies: He that has ruined the demolishers of his Temple in England, the open
enemies will find out the neglecters of his Temple secret enemies. Let Us not
flatter our selves, God has more curses then one: There is the curse of an
hard and secure heart, in the enjoyment of favors and victories: The lightning
never pierces more fiercely, then when it melts the sword, and hurts not
the scabbard; nor is the wrath of God ever more incensed, then when he
punishes the soul and spares the body. There is an ultrix misericordia, there
may be angry smiles in the face of God, and such doubtless will his prove
toward us, if his Temple continues to be neglected: I say again, If England
cannot find an house for God, God Will find an host for England, one host or
other.

If secondly the Prophet uses this title, the Lord of hosts, to convince. them
of their sin in neglecting the work of the Temple, we may then observe; Observe.
That the sufficiency of God to assist and desend us in his service, does
greaten the sin of neglecting his service for fear of opposition and
discouragements from men. Zech. 4.9. 2 Chronicles. 16.8.
The power and sufficiency that God expressed in delivering the Aethiopians and
the Lubims, with an host of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots
into the hands of Asa, did greaten the sinful fear of Asa, in not relying upon
God afterward, when Baasha King of I srael came up against him.

Take heed therefore of giving way to your carnal fears, The God Whom you
serve is able to keep you: Up, and be doing, and the Lord will be with you.
Fear no loss of friends, estate or honor by doing ought for God, cannot he
give you much more? as that Prophet said to the King? Let your hearts be lifted
up in the ways of the Lord, even to a holy neglect of difficulties; show your
selves men for courage, for God will show himself a God for assistance. The
Lord will deliver you from every evil worker, he Will keep you in all your
ways, and will he forsake you walking in his ways, so more immediately? Never
were any known to lose their lives, but by a sinful desire of suving them. He
sleeps not indeed that maligneth you; and it is as true, that he neither
slumbreth nor sleeps Who preserves you. Let not therefore hosts of men, nay,
not of Devils, make you cease from his work who is a Lord of hosts.

Thus we have seen who he was that thus accused this people of neglecting the
setting up of the Temple, you have heard the description of his name, the Lord
of hosts.

Secondly, The expression of his mind follows, That was by speaking, thus
speaks, etc. Observe then, That the thoughts of God are disclosed by his
word; his mind by his speaking. 2. Observe.
The Scriptures are nothing else, but the heart of God laid open to the eye.

Beware therefore of going any whither else to know his mind: It Is learned
ignorance, to want the knowledge of that Which the Word teaches not. It Is high
presumption for any to pretend his will without bringing his word: This must be
the rule of our faith, not revelations, not man's inventions; let nothing pass
for the will of God, unless it brings a ticket from the word of God.

Magnify his grace, Slight not his goodness, but praise his condescension. Let
not one of his words be in vain to thy soul. A man must give accout for every
idle word that he himself speaks; and surely much more for every word of God
which he renders unprofitable to his own soul.

Thus, The second part of the text.
of the first part of the text, the party accusing; The second follows, the
parties accused, viz. this people.

First a people.

Secondly this people.

That they were so much as a people, Observe.
teaches us, That When God will show his power and goodness in upholding a
people, no enemies though never so cruel, shall make them cease from being a
people. Judah was poured out from vessel to vessel, tossed up and down from
Kingdom to Kingdom like a ball, in the hands of a raging adversary, their neck
often times upon the block, and how nigh from not being a people, their memorial
had ceased, had enemies had their will; Down with it, Psalm. ^37.
down with it even to the ground, was the enemies note, but yet, they are a
people still: The ruin and reviving of a people is Gods prerogative.

If God will bless, who can blast? Dent 32.26, 27.
He can make his Church to live, though encompassed with the deaths of a
captivity. When the fire of persecution flames about the bush, God restrains it
from consuming: It is not for want of poison in our enemies, but by reason of
power in God, England is yet a people. It Is not because we bring no fuel of
sin, but because God puts not too his fire of wrath, that we are not consumed.
Oh! that since God will not be content without our being a people, we may not
be indifferent whether we have him for our God, or no: He can be a God without
us, but we not a people without him. Oh, that we would take pleasure in his
presence, who takes so much in our prosperity.

Secondly, God calls them this people; The particle this, notion (to name no
more:) First, as holding forth a note of admiration, Jer. 5 9. Shall I not
visit on such a nation as this? as if, the word this, noted them to be a
strange kind of people. This is that Ahaz: 2 Chronicles. 28.22. as if he deserved
that all eyes should gaze upon, and wonder at him. So here, This people,
denotes wonderment, if not astonishment, considering who they were, a
delivered, a lately preserved people, considering what they neglected, viz. the
setting up the house of their God! In both respects they may well be wondered
at. What? For a people to be slothful and neglective about the Worship of
their God, can they find none to slight but him? Can any Nation be found that
will do the like? Yet this people are found to do so: But yet the Wonder of
their wickedness is greater, considering they have a God, that deserves far
better at their hands; who has ever heretofore, and of late especially, saved
and delivered them; for a people to deal so with such a God, for this people to
be remisle and regardles, of one that regards them so much, is very strange, is
very astonishing.

Observe then, Observe.
It Is an astonishing Wonder, for a people, especially a delivered people, to
beremisse and slothful in setting up the Worship of their God. What ever is
neglected, the house of God should not be so; and whoever neglects it, a
freshly saved people should not neglect it; of all the people in the world, God
looks not for it at this peoples hand. This is the object of divine wonderment,
nay, God calls all the world to wonder at it, with him: Isai. 1.2. Hear O
Heavens, and give ear O earth, Isa. 1.2.
etc. I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against
me. So Ier. 2.32. Can a maid forget her ornaments, Jer. 2.38.
or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me, days without number.
Though I have bound, says God, and strengthened their arm, yet they have
imagined evil against me, Hos. 7.15.
Hos. 7.15. I have healed their limbs, and as soon as I have healed them, they
contrive how to fight against me with them.

Sinful neglectivenes of the worship of God, and that after deliverances, is a
breaking of the strongest bonds. It Is true, the most silken, but yet the
strongest. It Is the refusing to be drawn with the cords of a man; it is the
spurning against very bowels; it is not only an offense against God, but a
putting off the very man also.

A delivered peoples contempt of Gods worship, frustrates and disappoints the
very main end of their deliverance, it robs the greatest God of his greatest
delight, his own glory after, and by the bestowing of a mercy. It is the
denial of Gods tribute, and a refusal to pay the custom that belongs to this
great King. It Is the making of our selves, our own end, our God; It Is an unholy
sacrilege, and a diminution to the prerogative of the Supreme Majesty.

There are many, English ^oyl, and think nothing stupendous, but what, either
they go to see in other Lands, or from thence is brought home to them. But we
may spare our pains, we need not travel into Africa to behold a monster; no,
England afoords one far more monstrous: Hear O Heavens, give ear O earth, lose
your selves in amazement, God has nourished England, and England has
neglected God: England newly brought out of more then 70 years captivity, and
yet it has already forgot that ever it was in, our condition is altered, but
not our disposition; our estate is new, our hearts are old; our successes go
forward, but the Temple stands still. In the time of tyrannical and
Prelaticall thraldom, our miseries seemed so desperate, we could not believe
recovery: but we doubted not of thankfulness to God, if once we were
recovered; but lo the contrary: The deliverance we have, which We never looked
for, the fruitfullnes we want, which we ever promised. Many good things has
God of late done for us, for which of all these is it, that we thus neglect
him? Is Gods building of our house, the cause of our letting his lie waste?
Does Gods toleration of us, deserve that we should give a toleration of sin?
Does Gods stopping the rage of our enemies, deserve that we should stop the
work of his Temple? Are the showers of love the causes of barrennes? Do the
beams of love benumme us from divine employments? Do the rowlings of a fathers
bowels deserve our spurn? Is it because God has given us more then ever we
expected, that we have given him less then, nay, contrary to, what we have
covenanted? Does that winged speed, with which God has carried on our
victories, deserve a snail-paced Reformation? Shall mercy have wings of
swiftnes, and shall our Reformation have an heel of lead? Were all the wonders
in the world lost, they might all be found in the carriage of such a people as
this.

Secondly, The word This added to people, 2. Observe.
notes estrangement, distance, dis-interest, a denial of gracious and friendly
familiarity with them, as his own people. He calls them not his people, but
this people. This people draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me. Isa. 29.13. Isa. 29.13.
Thy people have corrupted themselves, not my people. Exodus 32.7. Exodus 32.7.
God called David, my servant, when he desired to build the Temple: but when he
left God, then 'twas plain David, without a my servant, that honorable
addition. A people that make God, a this God, and not their God, 2 Samuel 7.5.8.
by neglecting of his Worship, 2 Samuel 24 12.
shall be accounted of God, a this people, and not an his people; by remission
of his interest in them.

Religion is the uniting bond between God and a Kingdom; The cord that holds up
the tent of their peace and his presence; without it, Kingdoms are but magna
latrocinia, lurking places for thieves, not lodgings for the pure God.
Regardlesnesse of Gods worship is a States mortal sickness; and if not cured,
God, who is the soul, and the Kingdom which is the body, must needs part
asunder.

Behold then a compendious way to part between God and England, an his people,
a this people, Me thinks, so soon as the least intimation is made of Gods
breaking with us, our very hearts should break. If their greatest grief, Acts
20. when Paul departed, was, that they should not any more see his face: Me
thinks, we should make this our greatest fear, left the face of God should be
turned from us. Me thinks, if Peter said (when Christ revealed his glory in the
mount) Lord, its good for us to be here; we should say, Its good for thee
(Lord) to be here. If poverty, if sword, if pestilence, if death be here, if
thou be here, it matters not. Thy presence makes a corner to become a Court.
Mary's complaint, was, that they had taken away her Lord, and me thinks all
should complain when God is taking away himself; Happy is the people whose God
is the Lord: having him that has all, it is impossible they should be without
any thing that is good for them, though in the very want of all. Me thinks that
every one should say, though we be a wasted people, yet let us be thy people:
Lord, though an impoverished people, yet thy people. Gods interest is only able
to alleviat our burdens. Should a father tell a son, his dear son, Thou art
dirty, ragged, sickly, yet if the child can answer, but yet father I am thine,
'twill melt the father to hear it, and content the child to think it. It may
be said of us, There are these and these rents, and wants, and miseries upon
us; but yet can we plead our interest in our father, our comfort will be,
though worthles otherwise, yet we are his child: but should the Lord heap
never so many gifts upon us, and yet deny us this interest; as an husband that
is willing to give his loathed wife a maintenance by her self, but denies her
his presence; what good would any thing do us? No letters without a vowel can
make a word, no ciphers without a figure can make a number, not millions of
Stars without a Sun can make a day, nor can all the rarest gifts of plenty,
renown, victories, wealth, assembled in one Island, make up an happiness:
interest in a God must do that.

Noble Lords; Take heed, lest God remit his interest in you, or us, much more
in us by you. Oh! Let it be the work of Englands Nobles, to continue the
presence of Englands God. This is a work beseeming the highest Nobility.
Neglect not the house of God; be more vigorous in the work of the most high.
Take heed of indifferency, whether it go backward or forward. God was never
known to be coming toward a people, when Reformation was going backward. The
Sun in the firmament moves according to the same proportion, that it moves upon
the dial. If the house of God go down, Gods interest in us will decay
proportionably. Would you know how Gods heart stands toward you, how his Sun
goes; see how your hearts stand toward God, how your dials go; If God be to us
a this God, we shall be to him a this people. So much for the second
particular, the parties accused, this people.

The third is, the evidence of the fault; God says, Third part of the text.
they say, etc. It cannot be rationally imagined, that these people should
utter such a profane, abominable expression with their tongues: but it must be
understood that they said it in their hearts, and they proclaimed it in their
lives. My heart says, thy face Lord Will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. Psalm. 27.8.
Saltem in cord ita cogitant, tacita cogitatione sibi blandiuntur. Tarnoe. in
loc.
This was David's saying; This peoples heart says, It Is too soon to seek his
face, to build his house, that was their saying, in both there was the language
of the heart, that is the saying here in the Text.

And according to this interpretation, the word, say, holds forth a twofold
note. First, A note of divine perception, and observation. Observe. 1.
God sees and observes the thoughts and intentions of a people, as well as
their words, When they are set against Reformation, and the building up of his
Temple. I know the things that come into your hearts. Ezekiel. 11.5. Surely your
turning of things upside down, Ezekiel. 11.5.
shall be esteemed as the potters clay; For shall the Work say of him that made
it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed, say of him that framed it, He
had no understanding? God is included in no place, excluded from no place. He
can pierce the scull and breast of the darkest and deepest Politician.

Secondly, Observe. 2.
It holds forth a note of divine valuation and estimation; It shows us what God
accounts of those, notwithstanding their fairest professions, whose hearts and
intentions are set against Reformation. Their thinking in Gods account amounts
to a saying. It Is the language of the heart, and of the life God listens to.
Jer. 7.10.
Ier. 7.10. God there tells the people that would steal, and murder, and
commit adultery, but thought to put off all, by standing in Gods house, God
tells them (I say) That they said (there is the word) that they were delivered
to do all these abominations, though they said not so verbally, but mentally
and practically.

Tremble then unholy, the great Lord, the Lord of hosts will ruin you, unless
you amend. Quid prodest non habere conscium habenti conscientiam? Though no man
sees you, yet you cannot flee the sight of your own consciences, you shall not
be able to intoxicate this Sergeant of God; by bribes to hinder him from doing
of his office; and though you should for a while, hell shall one day awake him;
and then he shall detain you in his dismal custody, unto eternity, God sees
you, he sees (I say) what you think, what you contrive and act in secret. Be
not like little children, who, shutting their own eyes, think that none
observes them; surely your turning of things up side down cannot blind the
eyes of a wise God, who is all eye, all Wisdom.

Secondly, Quiet your selves, ye Christian Patriots; soul-endeavours set upon
Reformation? Is it in your heart to build the house of God? (as it was in
David's) Rejoice in this your integrity, though you can do nothing, every tear
and sigh shall pierce the Heavens, and wrest mercies out of the hands of God,
if not for an unworthy Nation, yet for your own precious souls. Be not
discouraged, row though it be against the tide; do your work, let God do as
seems him best. God never required success from any creature, though the
heart, the endeavor always; You shall not be rewarded according to your
success, but according to your labor. Wash a polluted Kingdom, and God shall
reward you, though it prove the blacker when you have done. Thus of the third
part; the evidence of the crime, say.

Now follows the fourth, the fault it self; Fourth part.
where observe two particulars: 1. The nature of the sin, the building the
Lords house was neglected; a great fault.

2. The excuse or pretext they use for the not building thereof, viz. the time
is not come;

1. The nature of the sin, or wherein it stood; The nature of their sin,
containing two things. 1. Observe.
their not building the Lords house. Wherein observe two things:

First, It was a sin of ^^^ssion and neglect only. They did not pull down the
Lords house; that was not their sin: but their sin was, that they did not build
it up. It Is as true a fault, not to set up the house of God when we have
opportunity, as to pull it down.

Sinful omissions are not to be looked upon, as bare negations and privations;
but as breaches of a positive Law, which commands the contrary.

Flatter not your selves in your negative Reformation, your sins are not of an
Oxonian tincture; because happily, many of you never took up arms against the
truth, nor ever employed your hands or heads against it; it is your fault, and
you shall hereafter feel the punishment of it, if you have not been employed
for it; it is not enough, not to contend against the truth, you must contend for
it. Perhaps you never stripped Reformation of its clothes, but did you ever
cloth it when it was naked? These nauseous neuters, who though because their
interest gives not leave, they never took up a sword against God, yet have
taken up their rest, that they will never do any thing for him; these, I say,
who for fear, reward, stipends, and I know not what base ends, desert and grow
cold in Religion, God will spew them out of his mouth.

Secondly, Gods house, we may note not only a neglect and a sinful omission,
but a neglective regardlessenes of such a mercy as of late, when they were in
Babylon, would have been accounted a most admirable and desirable blessing,
viz. the enjoyment of the Temple again; their return home to Zion was so
unexpected and glorious a deliverance, that when God was performing of it for
them, Psalm. 126.1.
they thought they were in a dream, 'twas too good to be true; they wept in
Babylon when they remembered Zion; Psalm. 137.
Jerusalem was preferred above their chief joy: how much did they make of a
poor harp, which they kept as a remaining remembrance of their first Temple,
and their worship therein? yet now when Temple-worship and ordinances are
plentifully offered, how do they slight and contemn them.

Great mercies, Observe.
and such as before they come are most highly esteemed, are commonly little set
by when we once enjoy them. Psalm. 78.11. Psalm 106.13.
Thus 'twas now with these Israelites, and thus formerly; they soon forgot his
works, mercies in Egypt, read-sea mercies, wilderness provisions, food from the
clouds, showers of bread, the cleaving of the rocks into cupps, etc. great and
astonishing mercies, when they wanted them; but when once God bestowed them,
soon were they forgotten. They loved the mercies of God only as men love
flowers, when they were fresh; but they soon withered in their hands, and then
they threw them away.

Here we are instructed of the true reason why God either defers to give
mercies prayed for, hungry and humble, then full and unthankefull. God gives
mercy as we are able to bear and take it; Sheep thrive best in short pasture;
It Is far more easy to surfeit with, then to be thankful for abundance: blame
not God therefore for bringing thee into wants: we stand in greater want of our
wants commonly then of our supplies.

It should admonish us to be warned of this unworthy disposition; Labor with
the receiving of every new mercy, to obtain a heart fit to enjoy it; 1. Ideo
deest amicus, quia uihil deest.
it is better to want gifts, then not to know how to use them: A new mercy
bestowed upon an old heart, is both an incongruity and inconveniencie; before
people receive a blessing, they think they want nothing but that one thing,
when as they have it, they want nothing but a heart to use it as they ought. Oh
that England in her begging of victories and deliverances, had as truly desired
and fasted for hearts suitable to its mercies, as for mercies suitable to its
desires; we see now God has abundantly given us the one, that the other is by
far the most precious part of the mercy, viz. that which we little desired from
God, a heart to improve our happiness; whence is else the wantonness,
unfruitfulnesse, contention, breach of Covenant, that our hearts expres in the
enjoyment of their golden seasons of grace, but from hence, that though God
has bestowed the things we wished, yet we want such a heart as I fear but few
thought worth the asking?

2. Entertain frequent thoughts of former lownes and dejectednes of estate;
this will cause the present comforts to set off with the more beauty. Was there
not a time, and that lately too, when the proudest contemner of a strict
reformation, was like a sheep going to the slaughter; though now more like an
untamed heifer. Our Bristol, our Gloucester, our Leceister lownes, together with
our then willingness to be, or do any thing for God, may be usefully remembered.
If the high God remembered us in the time when we were low, should not we,
though now high, remember that once we were low? This will make us the more to
love him that raised us up when others would not, and to fear him, who is able
to pull us down again when others cannot.

3. Ponder present enjoyments, and those more then wants; dwell upon the
thoughts of a mercy, the sweetness whereof cannot be drawn forth without
contemplation. Omnis festinatio coeca; swift passengers cannot be serious
observers. A transient thought, becomes not a standing and a permanent mercy;
ponder it in the author, seasonablenes, unexpectedness, undeservednes, manner
of bestowing it, the end and use of it especially, and then ponder mercies more
then wants; One mercy, even the least, deserves more thoughts of
thankefullnesse, then a million of miseries do of discontentednesse. What we
have of good, we may thank a God for, what we have of bad, we may thank our
selves for: Wonder not that we have so little of good, but that we have any
thing; wonder not that we have so much of evil, but that we have not all:
mervail more at the miseries kept off, then at those inflicted; more at mercies
bestowed, then those withheld.

Thus of the first particular in the fourth part, the nature of their fault; 2.
The smallnes of (...) excuse, and this notes three things.
the second follows, the smallnes and inconsiderablenes of the pretext to
cloak this sin, the time is not come. In which I take three things to be
comprehended.

The first, and the more general is, a note of excuse; they put God off, when
he sent to them to build his house, but 'twas not a bare put off without an
excuse, a cloak to hide the unworthines of their so doing; the excuse is taken
from the times unfitnes, which was full of many difficulties, fears, dangers,
employments, when God sends better days and better leisure, they will give him
better work; but this is not a convenient time: It Is possible there may be
frowns from the King, we are not acquainted with his temper; it is but his
second year (as yet) his predecessor was our bitter enemy, to be sure there is
barrenness and poverty at home, we being newly returned from captivity, the
time therefore is not come. Calvin therefore calls their slothfullnes in
setting up Gods house, pigritiem fucatam, painted, cloaked, Calv. in sec.
excused dulnes and neglect.

It Is very rare to find sinners, especially non-reformers, Observe. Homeres
ingeniosi in delictis regendis.
without an excuse for their fault; some way or other must be found out to put
off their sin; either the work is too heavy, or their occasions too many, or
the times too difficult; some thing it is, could they tell what, the fault is
not theirs. Here it is the times. If you will believe Laban, Genesis 29.16.
'twas not his fault that his daughter was not given to Jacob according to
agreement, no it must be laid upon the custom of the place. If Aaron may be
his own judge, Exodus 32.22.
he shall be found clear from any fault, in setting up the golden calf; no
(says he) the people, (I, what have I done?) Are a people set on wickedness.
Saul will rather cast the blame upon God himself, and the expensivenes of his
worship, if it be such a great sin to spare Agag and the fat of the cattle: 1 Samuel 15.15.20.21.
it is not for out selves that we use this moderation in forbearing to kill
them, it is for a sacrifice to the Lord. The people in Malachies time, when they
were reproved for their thin, and unworthy, and lean sacrifices; Mal. 1.13.
they desired that this might be imputed to the wearisomnes and burthensomenes
of the service (not to them,) as things then went with them. If God require of
Jeroboam a stricter reformation then would stand with his interest to give him,
there shall be the excuse of inconveniencie, 1 King. 12.27.
it is too far for the people to go up to Jerusalem; and the excuse of danger to
his life, his crown and dignity; they will kill me, and the Kingdom will return
to Rehoboam.

Carnal will ever has carnal wit attending upon it, Carnal lusts have
carnal reasonings; Love to sin, will easily refine the invention for the
defending of sin; Affection causes excuse; love will interpose the shield of
an excuse between a lust and a reproof.

Excuses, as they are caused by love to sin, so Satan knows they are the
causers of love to sin; therefore Satan puts people upon putting these excuses
upon sin. Rotten stuffs will not be vendible without watering, nor rotten
courses without excuses. No sin has beauty enough to win the affection of the
fondest person, without this varnishment of a pretext: these clothes of sin are
more worth then all the body; the foulest offenses therefore require the
fairest excuses. The chimney-peece is commonly the fairest part of the room,
and it covers the foulest and blackest place. If Satan cannot paint sin with
a likeness to a grace (which nevertheles often he does) he will paint it very
gaudy and beautiful, either with gain, pleasure, honor, etc.

Sinners have a false conceit of God, they think that he cannot see through
these pretexts and excuses, Who sees us, say they? they think that God can be
mocked; especially in things concerning his worship and service, they show
their thoughts of this kind: if they shut their own eyes, they think they are
in the dark to all others. The thorow-pae'd Politician borrows this of the
Atheist; he thinks that deceiving of God is as easy as advantageous; as if all
things were not open, and did not lie with their faces upward, Heb. 4.^^.
were not ripped up, anatomized and ransackt in his presence, by one beam of his
eye.

Beware of these carnal pretents, beware of these pretexts, in the
entertaining of any thing for a part of Gods worship, service, government; look
beyond the speciousnes of any pretext that may be put upon it from man: take
notice what body it has from the Scripture, not what clothes it has from
Politicians; if it have not Scripture features, let not humane varnishments and
pretexts draw forth thy love to it: There was never ceremony, will worship,
Prelacie in the Church, but a Politicians varnish put a kind of beauty upon
it: The ordinary gloss was wont to be of old, that these things were not
contrary to the word of God (though not in it) therefore according to it, (but
I desire one text in all the Scripture to prove that any thing is said to be
according to the Scriptures, because it is not forbidden in it; or rather does
not the word ever say, that that is according to the Scripture, which at least
may be deduced by consequence from it, or speaks the same thing for substance
with it?) but this varnish is long since washed off, and I hope shall never be
clapped on again.

Let not this pretext, of the burdensomenes, severity, etc. put upon any ways
of Christ (for Satan is wont ever to present them in their worst dress) make
us think the worse of them; let us not look upon a government of Christ with a
Politicians spectacles: never was there known any way of Christ so amiable, but
lust had will and wit to speak against it: It makes faults, if it finds none;
and it is the bolder, because it is sure to find a party in the soul to join
with it against God. Shun carnal pretexts, either for the beautifying of any
sin, or aspersing any truth or way of Christ, upon these grounds.

1. Considering from whence these excuses proceed, 1. Disswasion. Psalm. 14.
from what fountain they issue, viz. from a carnal heart, which is; 1. Blind
in the ways of God: To do good they know not: Shall the reasonings of an
ignorant spirit be regarded? Coecus de coloribus non judicat; it is not for a
blind man to discourse, much less to determine of colors. Every man by
nature is unable to judge of what is to be shund and followed; if the blind
lead the blind, both fall. A natural man has wit to excuse, no wisdom to
choose ordiscerne: shall the excuses of such an heart be regarded?

2. These pretexts for sin and against God, proceed from an heart that is
prejudiced, forestah'd, corrupted as well as blinded, very partial as well as
ignorant; Satan and lust have been tampering with it before, and have
fore-engaged it for themselves, against any thing that God loves and approves.
The palate of a carnal heart is put out of taste, and nothing of God can savor
with it; what ever it loves, it can love nothing of God: It Is prepossest
against the ways of Heaven, its reasonings are enmity to them; lusts have
bribed it: and is this an heart meet to bring in a verdict against them?

3. These pretexts proceed from an heart that is thine own greatest enemy, and
will never reason thee into any thing but ruin, and dispute thee into nothing
but destruction; who will embrace the arguings of an adversary? God never
leaves men more sadly, then when he leaves them to themselves: so he gave them
up to their own hearts lusts, Psalm. 81.82.
etc. That man whoever he is that takes the way he would, never went the way
that he should. We in every undertaking go from God, unles guided by God: Lord,
whither should we go but to thee? and how should we go but by thee? the way of
the heart is the way to hell: and will any man follow the guidance of such a
reasoner?

4. These shadows and pretexts that are used to hinder us in the ways of God,
proceed from an heart, that would have us leap over substantial truths and
real commands, though it would make us stumble at fictions and appearances. It
would have us account it easy to break cables, though difficult to snap-straws
in sunder. It labors that the shadow of a pretext may more affect us, then the
substance of a precept: and why should it be followed, suggesting only
appearances, when as it will not let us follow God, though he propounds
realities?

Shun these sinful pretexts, 2. Disswasion.
considering against whom they are made, against a God, that 1. observes and
sees through them, before whom our most hidden, veiled and excused impieties are
uncovered; An holy ingenuous confession covers sin, but never did a politic
excusing of it; ubicunque ago Deum circumsero: 'twas a good meditation of him,
that thought he might change his place and his employments, but not his
observer. God expresses not his observation indeed always, by punishing this
impure polishing over of sin, yet he observes for all that: It Is the
connivence of justice, not the suspension of his omniscience: It Is that he
holds his peace, Psalm. 50.
not that he shuts his eye.

2. Our sinful and politic pretexts to cloak these impieties, do but make us
and our sins the more abominable before God. Cursed be the deceiver, says God,
Mal. 1.14. that, etc. God will not be mocked, Gal. 6.7. Woe to them that seek
to hide (by digging deep) their counsels: Think what it is to have the curse
and woe of a great God, it is not an empty, notionall curse, that proceeds from
the mouth of a God: soli Deo idem facere and loqui, it is all one with God, to
speak us, and make us so accursed.

3. These pretexts are used against a God that gets over all excuses and stops,
to do us good; he steps over real, true deserving causes why mercies should be
withheld from us, these cannot hinder him: no mountains of provocations, but
Christ leapeth over them all, to do good to the Church: oh what a shame is it,
that she should complain of straws, and be afraid (as Zebul said) of the shadow
of the mountains, Judge. 9.36. Cant. 5.3.
that she should say as the spouse is brought in speaking; I have put off my
coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I
am warmed in my feathers, how shall I adventure abroad? should our God defer
help and victories for us, till we make the way clear for him, we might stay
long enough; he that bestows the mercy, must remove the impediment.

Beware of these pretexts and excuses when thou art doing any thing for God, 3.
Disswasion.
considering the danger of them and hurtfullnes. 1. They are Satan's engines,
whereby he commonly wins upon a soul. Satan undoeth most this way; if he can
make them stop, and stagger, and hesitate by an excuse, he will soon make them
fall: where he puts to a stand, he will soon make the soul to give ground;
where he can make a man to shield his lust with an excuse, he hopes that that
man will keep his lust alive, though God shoots never so many arrows of
threatenings or prohibitions: and where sin continues to live, the soul must die.

2. Take heed of these as dangerous, in that God may justly be provoked to
leave us to them, and let our own reasonings prevail over us, put out our eyes
from beholding, and bind our hands from performing the will of God; may not he
justly say, I Will leave such a man, such a state to themselves, that they may see
with what wise heads they have consulted against my word? God speaks of
consulting shame to our house, Hab. 2. All our wisest excuses and reasonings
against setting up his house, shall but pull down our own. If God leave us to
our own wisdom, what way soever we go 'twill be the worst. If left to our
selves, how shall we trifle and ravell out all the precious opportunities of
advancing the Kingdom of Christ? how like will our expensive voyages and bloody
adventures for a reformation be, to those voyages in Solomon's time, that were
made for Apes and Peacocks? God may suffer the taper of the opportunity to burn
out, before the work be finished, he may suffer us to do that which may cross
the principles of humane wisdom as well as divine; how unstable are the
foundations of that Kingdom which are laid in the ruin of Christ's. We shall
read by the light of a consuming fire, that truth which we would not read by
the light of an informing word; and if we will shut cur eyes when a beautiful
reformation is offered, destruction shall one day open them, and let us see how
blear-eyd and deformed that is which we have so embraced in the night of our
ignorance and prejudice. Stella in Luc.
Carnal reason and pretexts in the things of God, are but as spectacles before
a man's eyes, when he is going upon a narrow bridge, standing upon a deep and
wide river, which making the passage seem broader then it is, turns the
passenger when he adventureth upon a supposed breadth. Could but Satan now
delade us, (like that buyer, Prove. 20.14.) and persuade us that it is naught,
it is naught, this strict, precise, burdensome reformation, is not comparable to
such an one, decked with gain, honor, wisdom of self-contrivance, liberty from
the yoke of Christ: how would he afterward rejoice, that he had cheated us of
such a jewel, and put into our hands instead of it such a pibble? Thus of the
first thing in this poor excuse for their not building the Temple, it notes
pretext and covering.

2. This cover and pretext of theirs, The second particular in the fourth part.
that the time was not come, notes procrastination and delay. Put offs; it is as
much as if they had said, We intend to do it hereafter, but not as yet: Another
time, but not now: We deny not the building of Gods house, but only the present
building of it, in this very juncture of time; we stop here: No work should
admit of so few stops and delays as Temple-worke, if we regard the serious
nature of it; and no work does admit of so many, by reason of the sinful
nature of man: Temple-worke, Observe. Ezra, Nebemiab, passion.
is commonly a retarded and delayed work; The advancing of Gods worship in
their Temple-administrations, how commonly was it interrupted by the
oppositions of enemies, informers against the Jews, deriders of them,
Proclamations and edicts of potent Monarchs against them, at all times (almost)
in themselves there were timorous, dull, remiss, timeserving spirits; and thus
'twas in Hezekiah's reformation. the Priests were sometimes negligent and
delaying to reform, 2 Chronicles. 29.10, 11.
the people at other times laughed the posts to scorn, whom he sent to stir up
the people.

There is a great plausibility in procrastination; It is much credit and little
cost; credit in regard of the credulous hearer, and the piety of the promise;
little cost, for it is but a promise, a word, a pretense, a blast; good words
are good cheap. Machiavel liked it well to be a pretender The credulous
multitude thinks a thing is done as soon as it is spoke; and there may be
flatterers that cry up a promise, as if it had the integrity and reality of a
performance, and cause by their soothing representations of things (as with
spectacles) great letters to apppear in a very small print.

There is in the heart, a natural listnesnes from, and opposition unto a right
reformation: The advising and directing to it, and reproof for want of it, are
ever hard sayings, when it comes to the performance, must not the doing be much
harder? There is something of imposing on us what we would not bear, something
of removing from us that we would keep, in every true reformation. A
reformation that is true, is always bitter, more or less; if it be mera, 'twill
be amara; Isa 4. (...) 31.9.
if reformation be without a tooth, it is a shrewd sign it wants truth; God
comes with a spirit of burning, purging, when with the work of reforming. No
wonder that when men must be at so much cost in raising up and maintaining a
Temple for God, they must be at the expense of time, estate, reputation,
interest, (happily prejudice to some vocations must follow) especially when many
a dear, though beastly lust must daily be brought to the sacrificing knife in
this Temple; no wonder, I say, though head, and hand, and arts, and parts, and
all be improved to oppose it, and next to the not doing of the work at all, we
love the not doing of it as yet.

The rage of many outward adversaries accompanies this work, as well as
inward oppositenes of heart. There never was a candle of reformation set up,
but there was also a wind of opposition. Gracious and conscientious reformers,
evermore went against the wind of the times, as the tide of their own natures.

Any reformation that goes on easily,

What need need is there (Noble Lords) to help you forward, Temple-work is
commonly delayed work: What need is there, that we should pray to you, pray
for you, pray with you? your honorable resentment of that pious Petition from
the City of London, did once put joys into thousands of our hearts: and the
truth is, as your acceptance thereof, abundantly raised up our hearts and hopes
(oh let them not fall) so might the humble zeal of this famous City, put
courage and resolution into you, when you contemplate that you have many that
sue for you and to you, and that minded the very same thing with you, even a
thing which we naturally so delay, as that all incentives are too few for the
forwarding thereof: A great burden requires many shoulders; we are certainly
very inexcusable, if we strive not together with you in our prayers. Every step
you take, you will tread upon a snare, every minute is accompanied with its
difficulties; Men, Devils, Hell and Earth oppose the work we perition for, the
Lord quicken your spirits, oil your wheels, strengthen your resolutions, and
increase the number of such as employ their petitions for setting up the Temple.

It Is admonition. Take heed of being overcome by these delays,

The work, whether we look upon its safety, honor, gain, 1. Consideration.
deserves no delays. 1. For safety, none ever miscarried in Christ's work,
unless for not being full, and sincere, and constant. You may commit your self
to God in this well-doing; if they that went to worship in the Temple, had a
promise of safety, certainly they shall be safe that build the Temple; outward
safety (if it be good) shall be bestowed, however spiritual shall, and the
most that your dangers shall do, shall be but to send beyond dangers. 2. For
honor, the advanceing of Temple-service, is greater then to be head of an
Empire: the deeper in the things of Christ, the higher in glory. We say that
Titles of earthly Honor have proceeded from Military archievements, sure I am
that true solid Honor indeed is procured, by advancing of Religion; what an
unworthy thing is it, with Saul to lie hid among the stuff? earthly, private,
poor unworthy employments, when God calls you forth to save Kingdoms, to be
conduits of mercy to all his Churches in the world? what an unworthy temper is
it, and how ignoble, to be gulfs of your comforts and opportunities? what is it
but to dig in a dunghill with a golden spade, to lock up the Sun in a closet,
that would cheer the universe, to stop an oven with your robes, and to make
your honors servants to things that are or should be your slaves, as wealth
and pleasures? etc. How glorious will Moses be to posterity, that he was not
willing to be happy alone, either in Pharaohs Court, or Gods favors? So
Nehemiah and David, how famous are they to posterity, and how stable a
foundation of honor has their zeal for the Temple laid them? 3. For Gain,
none shall be losers by doing any thing for God. Indeed the very working for
God, is a reward, and Temple-service should not be performed for a reward, but
God will not suffer it to be performed without it; Christ will be beholding to
none, they shall be paid to the full; indeed sometime he asks day, but when
the day of payment comes, he infinitely more then countervails for deferring.
For the present (so far as it is good for you) you shall be rewarded; as may be
seen in the examples of David, Solomon, Hezekiah, Nehemiah: God observes every
thing which is done for him, and keeps a faithful register thereof: There can
be neither peace, nor plenty, nor victories in love to you or us, if the house
of God go not up.

The opportunities which naturally we are so willing to spend and ravell out in
delays and put offs. 1. How long was it ere we could attain them? how many
prayers, tears, how much treasure and blood have we poured forth for that which
now we neglect to make use of, viz. this blessed season? (I call it so, not for
what we do, but might do:) We were compelled to fight for our very ground, and
we got it by dint of sword: and shall we lose it as lightly as we got it
hardly? A hold taken and overcome with much difficulty, should be kept with as
much vigilance. What would we not have laid out five years since, for that
season and opportunity that now we enjoy? Oh that I could not say, mispend and
make little account of. God can reduce us to our old exigencies. What would
thousands of our friends that died immediately before, in, nay for this hour,
have given that their eyes might not have been closed up till they had beheld
it? Could they have imagined that their survivers should have received it, and
not have esteemed it?

2. In these ordinarily misspent opportunities in this season of our delays,
what great things (had we hearts) might be done for God, for three Kingdoms,
and in them for all the Churches in Christendom? Is not now an opportunity
offered, of turning the balance for Heaven? has not God given unto this
present Parliament (as 'twere,) a casting voice, to decide the so long bitter
and bloody controversy between his Church and that man of sin? Does not Rome
and all the rabble of her dependents tremble, for fear you should set up a
vigorous Presbyteriall government in this Kingdom, as in Scotland? and for fear
you should, is not the hand of Rom's Joab in all the cryings out for liberty of
sinful practice? see the exact and lively lineaments of a Jesuit, in that late
desperately wretched Pamphlet, entitled, Englands last warning: Late Pamphlet.
though for the visible part of the plot, they make use of poor misled people
among our selves? It being the expectation and hope of the Romish brood, if
liberty be given to all practical consciences among us, that they shall be
suffered to come in for a childs portion? Noble Lords, what an opportunity is
this, to be able to make Antichrist groan out his last, him and his to pine for
anguish, and all the Churches of Christ to lift up their heads again?

3. How short may be the continuance of these opportunities with you, 3.
Consideration.
and how sharp will be the thoughts of your mispending them when they are gone
from you? The longest day has a Sunset. Abused patience lasts not always. The
flower of an opportunity will soon wither. The bridge of mercy will ere long be
drawn. Your healths, assemblings, victories, successes, lives, last not always,
and if these should end before your work were (as much as in you lies)
accomplished, how pensive and soul-vexing must your thoughts be, when you shall
recollect, how rich have our opportunities been, and how poor our improvements?
when the Lord shall say, You that were so desirous of your rest, when I called
you by my Ministers, to labor, sleep on and never be once more awakened, but
take your rest, (...) not honor you to do my work. Noble Lords, where will
your Nobility become, when seasons of serviceablenes to Christ shall be removed
from your eyes? if the Lord should throw you away like broken vessels, and take
no pleasure to make you useful to his Church? In mundo superfluit qui honorem
Dei non quaerit.
if you should be but mere superfluities upon earth, and burdens to comber the
world, without any benefit to the cause of Christ? If your opportunities so
richly laden with means of making all the Churches of Christ happy, should be
cast away in the very haven, would it not grieve you, and all Christendom with
you?

God has not delayed in his goodness toward us; 3. Consideration.
mercies, victories, messengers of joy have trod upon the heels of one
another, Inveniri porest Deus, praevenial, non porest. Bern.
even like Jobs messengers of sorrow: God has not said to us, The time is not
come that I should bulld your houses; oh say not you, The time is not come that
we should build his house. God keeps on the fore-hand with you, let us follow
hard after him, though we despair ever of overtaking him.

We delay not for our selves. 4. Consideration.
We say not, the time is not come that our own houses should be built; shall we
run with the swiftnes of the Roe earthward, and go a dull Assis trot
heavenward? Did we never prevent the morning, in looking after our honors,
estates, liberties, families, bargains, and shall we put God off with the
dreggs, the last, the least, a nothing, for ought we know? Shall the tools of
our abilities and endowments be blunted in the service of lust and world, and
shall God have our after, blunt and flat performances? shall the flour be
sifted out for our selves, and the bran only left for God? shall God have
Satan's leavings and refuse? The glory of our God should not be like the lees at
the bottom, but should swim on the top of our lives and souls: in this respect,
his name should be as oil poured out: First, God must be served, then our
selves, else order is inverted, and it is preposterous.

The enemies of the Church delay not in pulling down of Gods house; They never
said, 5. Consideration.
The time is not come that it should be destroyed, why we then, that it should
not be set up? quanta damnatio a damnatis damnari? how great will our
condemnation be if we should have such to condemn us? shall they go swifter
hell-ward, then we heavenward? serve we not a better master? expect we not a
better reward? what would they not do had they our opportunities? If
Demosthenes were once ashamed that a blacksmith were sooner up at his anvill,
then he at his book, should not Christians be so, that Malignants arise sooner
to beat their brains for Satan, then they to contrive for God? learn even of
the worst in this case.

Thus of the second note in their poor pretext; the time is not come; it notes
procrastination.

I note in this their pretext, their carnal policy; 3. The third particular
in the fourth part.
their eyeing of their own conveniences, and steering their course of
reformation accordingly: This time wherein now they were, was a time of fears
of opposition, poverty and wants; in a word, 'twas a time that crossed their
interest and outward expediencies, of profit, ease, building their own houses,
and therefore say they, this is not a fit time, another will do better.

A carnal heart makes the house of God, his reformation, to lacquey to his own
private interest; so far as that gives way he is for God, but if that permit
not, he will crave pardon.

Thus 'twas in Jeroboams reformation, and Jehu's, though there was much done
for God, so far as it made for themselves, yet when their interest crossed
their reformation, there they make a stand.

A carnal heart makes his own design to steer his reformation in four
respects. 1 King. 12.28. 2 King. 10.28.29.
1. In point of specifying of his reformation: in putting him upon such a kind
of reformation, not as the word will warrant, but his design will wrest, let
the text say what it will, his own design shall make the Comment, he never
brings his heart to the word, but the word he endeavors to bring to his heart.
Jeroboams interest permits not a worshipping at Jerusalem, though the word
enjoined it, because destructive to his own ends. A carnal man's design, gives
the stamp and impression to his Religion, and effigiates and mouldeth it; he
will never make choice of such an one as shall be destructive to his ends.

2. His design and conveniencie shall sweeten or embitter his reformation: If
his interest be helped forward, then it is a happy, a joyful reformation, though
never so lame and corrupt. If his interest be prejudiced, it is an uncomfortable
reformation, though never so scripturall and approved. It Is the gay in the
lesson, that makes the child delight to learn. The worshippers of Diana would
never have regarded their dumb deity, had it not been for the toothsom
gainfullnesse of a silver shrine; there was dolus in Idolo. The Israelites
loved (like a heifer) to tread out the corn, so to reform and to be for God, as
they might now and then take a lick on the floor, they cared not for plowing,
but treading; gain sweetened their Religion. Religion to a carnal politician is
never sweet for it self, plain and unfringed reformations, that are not
attended with the carnal conveniences of honor, wealth, ease, exemptions,
etc. are poor, dry, dull things to such; hence let Religion go on never so
prosperously, he receives no comfort from God; God leaves that to comfort him
that set him on work.

3. His design and interest subordinate his reformation to them: Religion is a
mere stirrup to get up into, and to attain some further good, merely as
scaffolds to the building: It Is used only in order to interest, and in a way of
subserviencie to the main; when the design is attained, farewell then
Religion, that is obtained which was sought for, and therefore enquiry may well
be at an end, the building's set up, let the scaffolds be pulld down: Religion,
thou have done his work, go now and serve another, when he wants thee, he will
send for thee again.

4. His design shall commensurate his reformation, gives it leave to go to
such a degree and no further; Religion is modeled and proportioned by this
interest, goes no higher then this; when reforming calls him to go through, and
consummate a begun service for God, when it commands him to, leave a smooth,
soft, green way, and to go in a rugged and stony, he makes an halt till he has
consulted with his conveniences. He limits himself, and makes design a
boundary to his reformation; he dare not launch out too far, for fear his
interest meet with a storm, he will go on no further then he may come off with
safety of design; whereas a sincere heart (like a word whose emphasis cannot
be reached) is still more for God then it can express: It says, Oh that this
performance (be it never so dangerous, costly,) were better (Lord) for thy
sake; it only shows what I would, not what I should do; Lord, thou deservest,
and thy glory, something better then my very self.

My Noble Lords, Flattery becomes not my calling, Plain dealing is the best
decking for a Pulpit, especially upon a fasting day: let me speak freely, was
it carnal interest and eying of the time, that steered and regulated the
reformation in Haggai's time? and may it not be useful to enquire whether our
temporizing and regarding of carnal interest, does not regulate and shape our
reformation, that so the sin being found out, it may be dealt with accordingly?
sure I am, there is cause to apprehend it upon suspicion, for though I say not
that our motions in reforming have proceeded from interest, yet many observe,
that they are according to it; not ulike to the wheels in Ezekiels vision,
Ezekiel. 1.19, 20, 21.
mentioned, Ezekiel. 1.21. which are said to move according to the spirit of the
living creatures in those wheels: Has not the wheel of reformation among us,
gone on, or made a stop, according to the motion or cessation of the living
creature of design and interest?

1. The wheel of our solemn National Covenant, sometimes went forward very
swiftly, it was imposed very impartially; they that did not take it, were
looked upon as maligning that cause of reformation which we seemed to stand
for: But was not the motion of the living creature (carnal interest) in this
running wheel? Were we not then in a low condition, and did we not want the
assistance of our Scottish brethen, and was not this the way to secure our
selves from those who were suspected at home, to discern betwixt our friends
and our foes, and to assure to us our party against the common enemy? But,
behold, when our ends were accomplished, our Brethren come in, and engaged for,
and with us, the enemy discouraged thereby and brought low; in a word, when the
living creature of carnal interest made a stop, what regard is had, either
that they who take the Covenant, observe it, or that they who do not enter into
it, should be discountenanced: rather now are not they (in some places)
suspected, that are most forward to take and observe it? and is it not now the
way of reputation for tenderness of conscience, and a new light to refuse it?

2. The public professions to the world, were formerly very frequent and
fervent, for setting up a pious Ministry, the maintaining of them and learning,
the opposing of sinful liberty, the suppressing of errors, the not laying the
golden rains of discipline upon every man's neck; this wheel went on very nimbly
also; but did it not move according to the motion of carnal interest? was not
the open adversary at that time growing? and was not this the probablest means
to answer the objection of our malignant enemies, who labored to infuse into
the people, that all learning and order would shortly come to nothing if the
Parliament prevailed? and had we then any other way to satisfy our friends,
and to stop the mouths of our enemies, but by public appearing against them,
in these professions? But behold, when by the goodness of God the common
adversary is brought low, and is weak in his arms as in his arguments; he not
able to hurt either by tongue or pen; in a word, when carnal interest makes a
stop, how few and small are the encouragements of learning? how ordinary a
thing is it, to see illiterate mechanics to invade the ministerial function
without controlment? what a liberty is taken for sin, both in opinions and
practices, every one professing and performing as they lift?

3. How strong was out fraternall union and amiable affection toward our dear
Brethren of Scotland at the beginning of this Parliament; how did we abhor the
throwing in a mite of contribution into the treasury of an unnatural war
against them who groaning with us under the same burdensome tasks and
taskmasters, were the first that adventured the easing of both? Afterward what
Covenanting was there to join together as brethren, to maintain this brotherly
accord, and to bring such to punishment, who endeavored to sow division
betwixt the two Nations? This wheel went on very evenly and swiftly along time,
but the living creature of carnal police was in it too; we wanted their
assistance, we could not hurt them but we hurt our selves, their appearing for
us, (nay not against) could not but exceedingly daunt the common adversary; but
when carnal policy made a stop, and interest went on no further that way;
what coolings were there in our love, what stoppings in our bowels, what
frequent jealousies and suspicions whispered against them? how ordinary to hear
every wretched sectary to traduce them, and to rumor their self-seeking and
advantage? as if a notion, a trifle (in comparison) could throw down that love
which heretofore such vast offers could not so much as stagger? Blame me not
(though a Minister) for mentioning things that seem so secular. Know, friend, I
have taken the Covenant, and still remember the third article.

4. Our reformation, in the destructive part of it to Episcopacy and scandalous
Ministers, was prosecuted with much eagerness; spectatours rejoiced to see our
zeal for the Lord, in putting down them with their crosses, Images and
crucifixes, but did not this wheel move also according to the spirit of carnal
interest? were not the men and their usurped power, lately very burdensome and
prejudicial to us, to our estates and liberties, not to say to our honors and
rule? and was not the ejection of those, who knew how to fish for tithes,
though not for souls, a very taking plausible thing? interest agreed with it:
(and the breaking down of Images did not bite) but when interest makes a stop,
our reformation stops also: We throw down the superstitious Priests and their
Altars, with their many idolatrous relics, but does our reformation proceed
to deal with Jeroboams calves too? to prohibit effectually the divulging and
scattering of all those many blasphemous opinions, which are not only cried up
in (...) and Bethel, but are scattered up and down from Dan to Beersheba, from
one end of the Kingdom to the other? Are not the second and third persons in
Trinity, as much dishonored by blotting them out of our faith, as by picturing
them in a window?

5. Our care and love in encouraging the godly and painful Ministers of the
Gospel, was heretofore very common, and full out as commendable as common: A
faithful Minister that stood out under the time of Episcopal tyranny, by
opposing himself to the innovations thereof, was a man of desires in the
beginning of these wars; This wheel went or very nimbly too, but was not there
a living creature of carnal policy, that moved with it? was not respecting of
godly Ministers the way to be honored before the people? and were not they the
men that were fittest to move to contributions, and improve their power for
exhorting to assist in the cause of late so much endangered? But when they
could do no more, and by the goodness of God other means were found out for
releeving of us; in a word, when interest made a stop, our love to Ministers
was soon at a stand, nay declined; witness not only the ungracefull and
reproachful language which every uncontrolled sectary has inured his tongue
and pen to cast upon them, but the denial of necessary subsistence to
themselves and theirs, in many places where they who have wept, and prayed, and
preach down Antichrist, are how accounted the only Antichristian burdens.

My Lords, if upon inquiry the serving of our designs shall be found to steer
and stop the cause and course of Reformation: let it be your noble care to
oppose an enemy that for much opposes God himself; Let not Religion wait upon
your carnal interests, but let them be subservient to Religion; Nay, have no
other design but the full excelling of Christ. Let not the salvation, no, not
of your own souls, be your greatest end. Rejoice, that God gives you any thing,
before which you may prefer Jesus Christ; Let not so many choice endowments,
as me thinks I behold in this honorable presence of nobility, magnamity,
valor, policy, be made vassals to so unworthy an end, as carnal interest. Set
up a building of glory to Christ, upon the ruin (if such a ruin were possible,)
of all you are and have. Learn to perish, that the glory of Christ may live;
walk in the way of Christ, though never so rugged delight no further in any
thing you are or ^e, then that thereby God may be honored: Go not the way of
interest, which is gone, but the way of Christ which should he gone. Understand
the infinite disproportion betwixt Christ and any thing that may stop your
serving of him. Study what poor nothings of comfort, the sweerest delights are,
that would allure you; Study what poor nothings of misery the forest sufferings
are, that would affright you from serting up the Lords house. Labor for
unmixed aims in all holy undertakings, let Christ be sweet for himself, love
his service for its beauty, not its clothes; in going about it, let nothing
else be your scope, and then nothing will divert you. Aim not at profit, so
gain will not allure you; not at pleasure, so ease will not corrupt you, not at
friends, so favor will not seduce you. Serve not the time, but set up the
Temple. Let the Temple of a Scripture, not a politic reformation be erected
('it is for such an one we have Covenanted, namely for one according to
Scripture;) Consult only with Scripture-politikes, for building of God an
house; demolish that Babel of a confused, toleration of all practices; it is
true, 'twill certainly fall of it self in time, but if let alone till then,
'twill undoubtedly crush and bury us under its own ruins. Labor that the power
of godliness by a powerful Ministry, may be diffused through the whole land; to
this end, let learning be encouraged, let the Universities enjoy, though not
pomp, yet their privileges; and for their streams of revenues and maintenance,
let them neither be dried up nor diverted; cherish and encourage there a choice
number of Divines for controversall Divinity: remember the usefullnes of
Whitakers, Fulk, Reinolds, (not to speak of other threes) to the Church of God.
Let those Prophets be as false as malignant, who have foretold the ruin of
learning; who but Christ deserves the service of excellent parts? consider
Satan is now putting forth his ultimos conatus, improves his utmost endeavors
against us; You have (I hope) foiled him with the sword, let him not overmatch
you at the pen: forward the ordination of Ministers; believe it (my Lords) we
spend upon the old stock, Ministers die and waste apace, and shall not others
stand up in their rooms? never were there times more prodigal of laying out of
Ministers, and more penurious in laying out for Ministers; let places be
supplied with Ministers, and Ministers not starved for want of supplies from
their places.

Let the Ordinances of Christ be advanced in power, purity and plenty; say not,
the time is not come: These people here in the text had small cause to say so,
but you have less: You have no enemy that may rationally be conjectured able
to stop you in the work of God; the rubs are removed, take heed of being wrong
byast; the stops pretended are purely imaginary, and proceed from prejudice,
not from judgment.

FINIS.

