AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY, Touching the eight Quaere's upon the late
Declarations and Letters from the Army, touching sedition falsely charged upon
them.

Wherein those Quaeres are resolved, and thereby the present proceedings of the
Army are proved to be Legal, Just and Honorable.

By DAVID JENKINS, Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes. Printed in the Year, 1647.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY.
THese Treasonable and insolent Quaeries make the Army the Houses Subjects, and
not the Kings. Bracton fol. 118. Stanford. f. 2
None by the Laws of this Land can in this Kingdom have any Army but His
Majesty.

It appears, the Army does now evidently perceive, that they were misled by
the specious pretenses of Salus Populi, the maintenance of the Kings Honor,
and of the maintenance of the Laws of the Land, and liberties of the Subject,
to take up Arms against their natural Liege Lord and Sovereign, the King:
The People is the Body, Mag. Char. c. 1. and ultim. All the act concerning the
King, Church, and Churchmen. 25. E. 1. c. 1.
the King is their Head; was the Body safe when the Head was distressed and
imprisoned? For Laws and Liberties have not the prevailing party in the two
Houses destroyed above 100 Acts of Parliament, and in effect, Magna Charta, and
Charta de Foresta, which are the common Laws of the Land? Does Excize, Fifth,
and Twentieth Parts, Mealemoney, and many more burdens which this Land never
heard of before maintain the Liberties of the people: You, and that party of
the two Houses, made the Army by several Declarations before engagement,
believe that you would preserve the Kings Honor and Greatness, the Laws and
Liberties of the people: The Army and the whole Kingdom now facta vident, see
your actions, and have no reason longet to believe your Oaths, Vows, and
Declarations; and since that party in the two Houses refuse to perform any
thing according to their said Oaths, Vows, and Declarations, The Army and the
Kingdom may and ought, both by your own principles and the Laws of the Land,
pursue the end for which they were raised. And so your first Quaere is
resolved, whereby it is manifest, that specious pretenses to carry on ambitious
and pernicious designs, fix not upon the Army, but upon you, and the
prevailing party in both Houses.

The Solution of the second Quaere.
The Army, to their eternal honor, have freed the King from imprisonment at
Holmby. 3. par. Instit. f. 12.39. Eli. 1. Jacob. ibi. 2. and 3. E. 6. cap. 2.
11. H. 7. c. 1.
It was High Treason to imprison His Majesty: To free His Majesty from that
imprisonment was to deliver Him out of Traitorous hands, which was the Armies
bounden duty by the Law of God and the Land. That party refused to suffer His
Majesty to have two of His Chaplains for the exercise of His Conscience who
had not taken the Covenant, free access was not permitted, does the Army use
His Majesty so? all men see that access to Him is free, and such Chaplains
as His Majesty desired are now attending on His Grace: Who are the guilty
persons, the Army, who in this action of delivering the King act according to
Law, or the said party who acted Treasonably against the Law? Who does observe
the Protestation better, they who imprison their King, or they who free Him
from prison?

That this Army was raised by the Parliament is utterly false: The Army was
raised by the two Houses upon the specious pretenses of the Kings Honor,
common safety, and the preservation of Laws and Liberties, which how made
good has been showed before, and all the people of the Kingdom do find by
woeful experience.

The two Houses are no more a Parliament then a Body without a Head a man. 14.
H. 8.3.36. H. 8. Dier. 60.4. par. Instit. p. 1.3.12.14.16. R. 2. c. 1.5. Eliz.
c. 2.17. Carol. The act for the continuance of this Parliament.
The two Houses can make no Court without the King, they are no Body Corporate
without the King, they all, Head and Members, make one Corporate Body; and this
is so clear a truth, that in this Parliament, by the Act of 17 Caroli, it is
declared, That the Parliament shall not be dissolved or prorogued but by act of
Parliament; but the two Houses may respectively adjourne themselves; two Houses
and a Parliament are several things. Cuncta fidem vero faciunt, all
circumstances agree to prove this truth. Before the Norman Conquest, and
sithence to this day, the King is holden Principal, Caput, and sinis, that is,
the beginning, Head and chief end of the Parliament, as appears by the
Treatise of the manner of holding of Parliaments made before the Norman
Conquest; 4. par. Instit. page 12.
by the Writ of Su^mons of Parliament whereby the Treaty and Parler in
Parliament is to be had with the King only, by the Common Law, 4. par. Instit.
page 4.9. 5. Eli. c. 1.2.
by the Statute Law, by the Oath of Supremacy, taken at this and every
Parliament, it does manifestly appear, that without the King there can be no
color of a Parliament.

How many Votes have they revoked in one Session, yea, and Bills? Was there
ever the like done? Nay, is not the constant course of Parliaments violated and
made nothing thereby? They are guarded by Armed-men, divide the public money
among themselves, and that party in leavours to bring in a Foreign to invade
this Land again: If they be no Parliament, as clearly they are none without
His Majesty, they have no privileges, but do exercise an Arbitrary,
Ty^annicall, and Treasonable power over the people.

By the Law of the Land, when Treason or Felony is committed, 7. E. 4.20. 8..
E. 4.3. 9. E. 4.27. 4. H. 7.18. 27. H. 8.23.
it is lawful for every Subject, who suspects the Offender, to apprehend him,
and to secure him so, that Justice may be done upon him according to the Law.

You say, The disobedience of the Army is a sad public president, like to
conjure up a spirit of universal disobedience, I pray object not that
conjuring up to the Army, whereof you, and the prevailing party in the Houses
are guilty; who conjured up the spirit of universal disobedience against His
Majesty, your and our only Supreme Governor, But you, and that party in the
two Houses, and even then, when the house of Commons were taking, and did take
the said Oath of Supremacy? For the Covenant you mention, it is an Oath against
the Laws of the Land, against the Petition of Right, devised in Scotland,
wherein the first Article is to maintain the Reformed Religion in the Church
of Scotland: 2. pars. Coll. of Ord. page 803. Petition of right 3. Car. 2.
pars. instit. 719.
And certainly there is no Subject of the English Nation does know what the
Scottish Religion is. I believe the Army took not the Covenant: No man by the
Law can give an Oath in a new case without an Act of Parliament; and therefore
the imposers thereof are very blamable and guilty of the highest Crime.

The Writer of these Quaeries seems to profess the Laws, let him declare
what Act of Parliament does justify the tendering, giving, or taking of the
said Oath: he knows there is none, he knows that all the parts of it are
destructive of the Laws and Government to maintain which the Law of nature
and the Law of the Land had obliged them: Mag. Chart. cap. 1. and Ultimo
Articuli cleri, and many other statutes. 16. Ed. 4.10.
The Oath of the Covenant makes the Houses Supreme Governors in causes
Ecclesiastical, the Oath of Supremacy makes the King so, and yet both taken by
the same persons, at the same time. What credit is to be given to persons who
make nothing of Oaths, and contradict themselves? How do the Covenant and the
Oath of Supremacy agree? How does their Protestation and the Covenant agree?
How do their Declarations and Oaths agree? The Lord be merciful to this Land
for these Oaths.

It is a sad thing to consider that so many gentlemen who profess the laws,
and so many worthy men in both Houses should be so transported as they are,
knowing that the Laws of the Land from time to time, and in all times, are
contrary to all their actions, and that yet they should amuse themselves and
the people with the word of Parliament, without the King, and with the
Covenant; whereas they know they are no Parliament without His Majesty, and
that English men throughout the Kingdom should swear a Covenant, to preserve
the reformed Religion of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, which they no more know than the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of Prester John in Ethiopia: if they consider it, they cannot but
discern that this is a high desperate and impious madness.

Be wise in time, without the King and the Laws you will never have one hour
of safety for your Persons, Wives, Children or Es^^tes: Be good to your selves,
and to your Posterities; apply your selves to be capable of an Act of Oblivion,
and of a general Pardon, and to be able and willing to pay the Soldiery, and
to allow a reasonable liberty for men's consciences, and God will bless your
endeavors, and the people (to whom you are now very hateful) will have you in
better estimation.

The third Quaerie is thus answered.
You resemble the Army to Jack Cade and his Accomplices, and you cite the Act of
Parliament of 31. Hen. 6. cap. 1. and that it may appear who acts the Part of
Jack Cade, you and that Party in the two Houses, or the Army, I think it
necessary to set down the said Act in words at large as follows.

First, Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious and arrant false
Traitor John Cade, calling and naming himself sometime Mortimer, sometime Cap.
of Kent, which name, fame, acts, and feats are to be removed out of the speech
and mind of every faithful Christian man perpetually, falsely and traitorously
purposing, and imagining the perpetual destruction of the Kings said Person,
and final subversion of this Realm, taking upon him Royal power, and
gathering to him the Kings people in great numbers, by false, subtle imagined
Language, and seditiously making a stirring Rebellion, and Insurrection, under
color of justice, for reformation of the Laws of the said King, robbing,
stealing, and spoiling great part of his faithful people, Our said Sovereign
Lord the King considering the premises, with many other which were more odious
to remember, by advise and consent of the Lords aforesaid, and at the request
of the said Commons, and by authority aforesaid, has ordained and established
that the said John Cade shall be reputed, had, named, and declared a false
Traitor to our Sovereign Lord the King; and that all his tyranny, acts,
feats, and falie opinions shall be voyded, abated, annulled, destroyed and put
out of remembrance for ever: and that all enditements and all things depending
thereof, had and made under the power of tyranny shall be likewise void
a^^ulled, abated, repealed, and holden for none: and that the blood of none of
them be thereof defiled nor corrupted, but by the authority of the said
Parliament clearly declared for ever: and that all enditements in times
coming in like case under power of tyranny, rebellion and stirring had, shall
be of no Record nor effect, but void in Law; and all the Petitions delivered to
the said King in his last Parliament, holden at Westminster, Noveb. 6. in the
29. of his Reign, against his mind by him not agreed, shall be taken and put
in oblivion out of remembrance, undone, voyded, annulled, and destroyed for
ever, as a thing purposed against God and conscience, and against His Royal
Estate and preeminence, and also dishonorable and unreasonable.

Now we are to examine who has trod in the steps of Jack Cade, you and the
present prevailing party of the two Houses took upon them, and do take all
the Royal Power in all things; so did Jack Cade, as appears by the said Act;
the Army do not so: They who imprison the King purpose to destroy His Person
(our imprisoned Kings always Edward 2. Henry 6. Richard 2.
fared so) Jack Cade did likewise so purpose, but the Army do not so: The said
party in the two Houses made a stirring under color of Justice for Reformation
of the Laws; so did Jack Cade: The Army do not so, but desire that the Laws
should be observed: Jack Cade levied War against the King, the Army preserves
Him: Jack Cade dyed a Declared Traitor to his Sovereign Lord the King; this
Army lives to have the glorious true Honor of being restorers of their King.

Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury was murtheted by Jack Cade: William
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury was likewise murdered by that party of the two
Houses, for that an Ordinance by Law cannot take away any man's life, 25 Ed.
3.4. 28 Ed. 3.3. Petition of Right. 3 ^ar.
and his life was taken away by an Ordinance of the two Houses, the Army had no
hand in it. Many misled by Jack Cade, perceiving his Traiterous purposes, fell
from him; and as that was lawful, just, and Honorable, so it is for this Army
to adhere to their natural King, and to endeavor to settle the Kingdom
again in the just Laws and Liberties thereof: London did then right worthily
adhere to the King and the Laws, and not to Jack Cade and his specious
pretenses, and i^ is hoped they will now so do: By this it appears, that the
Gentleman's Discourse touching Jack Cade, fastens altogether on his party, and
clears the Army.

To the IV. which is solved thus.
The Arreares of the Army (howbeit it is the least thing they look after) yet
being not paid them, it is by the Law of the Land a sufficient cause to leave
and desert that party in the Houses: A person who serves in any kind, and is
not paid his wages, the desertion of that service is warrantable by the Laws
of the Land: Fi^z. N. B. 25 ^. 9 Ed. 4.20. 38 H. 6.27. 23 Eliz. Dier 369.
You say, the Houses will reform all things when the Army does disband; who
will believe it? Will any believe that the settling of the Presbytery will do
it? Will any believe that his Majesty will pass the Propositions sent to Him
to Newcastle? Will any man believe that this Kingdom will ever be quiet,
without His Majesty and the ancient and just Laws? Can the Members of the Army
conceive any of them to be safe in any thing, without a Pardon from His
Majesty? Have they not seen some of their Fellows hanged before their eyes,
for actions done as Soldiers? Shall the Kingdom have no account of the many
Millions received of the Public Money? Will the Members of the Houses accuse
themselves? Shall private and public Debts be never paid? Shall the Kingdom
lie ever under burdens of Oppression and Tyranny? There is no visible way to
remedy all these enormities, but the power of the Army.

To the V. which is solved thus.
The Kingdom has better assurance of Reformation from the Army, then from the
Houses, for that in their Military way they have bin just, faithful, and
honorable, they have kept their words: That party of the Houses have bin
constant to nothing but in dividing the public Treasure among themselves, and
in laying burdens upon the people, and in breaking all the Oaths, Vows, and
Promises they ever made: 2 and 2 Ed. 6. cap. 2.11 H 7 cap. 1. Calvin's case, 7.
para, Cook Iol. 11.
As the Army has power, so now adhering to the King, all the Laws of God,
Nature, and Man, are for them, their Arms are just, and blessed; and the King
is bound in Justice to reward his Deliverers with Honor, Profit, and meet
Liberty of Conscience.

To the VI. Quaere.
All the sixth Quaere contains Calumnies cast upon the Army; the new
elections are against all the Laws mentioned in the Margin, 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1
H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 23 H. 6. c. 15.
and are against the ejection of the old Members: and by this it may be judged,
what a House of Commons we have. By the said Laws it appears, that if any
undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a Member; the
Sherifes punishment is two hundred pounds, one to the King, and the other to
the party that is duly elected; imprisonment for a year, without Bail or
Mainprise: and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his own
charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament, by the Writ de
solutione feodorum Militum, Civium and Burgensium Parliament. And the trial of
the falsitie of the return, is to be before the Justices of Assizes in the
proper County, or by Action of Debt in any Court of Record. This condemns the
Committee for undue elections, which has been practiced but of late times: for
besides these Laws, it is a Maxim of the Common Law, 3 Ed. 4.20. 5 Ed. 4.42.
an Averment is not receivable against the return of the Sheriff, for his
return is upon Oath which Oath is to be credited in that fuit wherein the
return is made.

The said Statutes condemn elections of such men which were not resiant and
dwelt in the County or Boroughs for which they were returned; and any abusive
practice of late times to the contrary, is against the Law, and ought not to be
allowed.

To the VII. Quaere.
The Quaerist says, That the Votes of the Independents in the Houses were
arbitrarie, exorbitant, and irregular, and that they disposed and fingred more
of the common Treasure then others: That whole Quaere, I believe, is false and
slanderous; 57 E. 3. c. 17.
and the Author ought to make it good, or else to undergo the Law of Talion;
which is, to suffer such punishment, failing of his proof, as the accused
should, in case of proof made.

To the VIII. Quaere.
This Quaere is all minatorie and threatening, and the contrary of every part
is true: by the deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the bondage of that
party in the two Houses by the Army, their renown will be everlasting; they
secure themselves, they content and please the Kingdom, City, and Country,
as appears by their confluence to see his Majesty and the Army, and their
acclamations for his Majesty's safety and restitution: all which does evidence
to every one of the Army, how acceptable the intentions of the Army are to
the people of this Land, who have been so long inthralled.

Sir Thomas Fairfax, let your Worthiness remember your extraction and your
Ladies, by the grace and favor of the Prince, to be in the rank of Nobility;
remember what honor and glory the present Age and all posterity will justly
give to the restorer of the King to his Throne, of the Laws to their strength,
and of the afflicted people of this Land to peace: let the Colonels and
Commanders under you, and likewise your Souldierie, rest assured, that they
shall not only share in the renown of this action, but also shall have such
remuneration as their hautie courage and so high a virtue does deserve: This
his Majesty can and will do, the Houses neither will nor can; and God bless
you all, and prosper you.

I conclude all, as I have always done: Without an Act of Oblivion, a general
Pardon, the Arreares of the Souldierie paid, and a regard to Liberty of
Conscience, this Kingdom will certainly be ruined.

FINIS.

