A SCOURGE FOR THE DIRECTORIE, AND The Revolting SYNOD.

Which has sitten this 5. Years, more for four shillings a Day, then for
Conscience sake.

By Judge JENKINS.

LONDON, Printed for J. B. in the year, 1647.

A Scourge for the Directorie.
J Cannot but admire to see so many learned Divines so much of late
metamorphosed, that have so many years professed the Protestant Religion in
the purity of it, and now had their Eyesight more clear then any in Queen
ELIZABETH and King JAMES his reign, and sixteen years of King CHARLES, and
never writ against it till now: and I am persuaded there are very few that are
good Protestants that gave their consent for the utter abolishing the Service
Book, till they had made some good provision for the weaker sort of
Protestants: for in many hundred of Churches of England that have not means to
maintain a Preacher to instruct the people in the knowledge of Gods laws,
there is not a Sermon in half a year: and this Idol, as many call it, being
taken away, what gross ignorance will these poor souls fall into? For if you
tell them of Praying by the spirit, you may as well tell them a tale of the man
in the Moon. I am persuaded in my heart, that many of the ancient Fathers that
had a hand in the composing and contriving of that worthy Book, were endued
with Gods Spirit; witness their godly and learned Books they writ, their holy
lives they led in godly conversation and doctrine; nay, and have they no^ laid
down their live, and rid in chariots of fire to maintain that very same Book
that now many giddy-headed fellows which have scarce any Religion at all in
them, but mere time-servers, blown about with every blast of light doctrine,
that will be Anabaptist to day, a Brownist to morrow, and in a word any thing
the next day. O lamentable! what times do we live in? when the Church is
without true discipline, Gods Laws quite taken from us, no Lords Prayer, no
Creed, no Common Prayer allowed, but Master Presbyter to do as his fickle
brain serves him, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper not administered once in
half a year, and when it is delivered wonderful out of order it is, the
Sacraments of Baptism celebrated as any would have it that is in fee with
Master Parson; the dead body buried with five or 6 words at the most; no
decency in the Churches, no manners nor order, forgetting that God is the God
of order. I do not speak against Praying by the Spirit, for I know that Gods
people always prayed as they felt their wants; but for poor ignorant people
who have not the spirit of prayer, what provision have you made for them? the
answer is, Just none. What shall become of them. Your answer must be; you must
leave them to Gods mercy. But I and many more would have thought you had some
charity in you, but in leaving poor ignorant people quite without any way to
know God or his will, I think you have done worse then the superstitions
Papist ever did to the Heathen where they conquered. Was there ever any
Kingdom in the Christian world that flourished more for almost fourscore
years, then this Kingdom did all the reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James,
and sixteen years of King Charles his reign? surely God has great plagues
for this ungrateful Nation. You of the Synod, sleep not upon this thing called
4 shillings a day, till you have done some service for the poor ignorant
people of this distressed Nation, that Gods name may be known on earth, and his
saving health to all Israel. We are not ignorant that when any came to be
buried with decency, and the Minister showed that man was mortal, it did the
party deceased neither good nor harm, but the standers by might know what a
flourishing estate man was to day, and in a moment cut off by the hand of
death. For the receiving the Sacraments, which are the seals and pledges of
Gods love to his Church till he does come, and receive him often till he comes,
now how often is it wonderfully neglected? So for the Sacrament of Baptism,
the reading of Gods Commandments, and in a word Gods whole manner of decency in
his true service wholly neglected. Nay it is spoken openly, that a stable is as
good as any Church whatsoever; forgetting that the Jews which were the chosen
people of God, had their Synagogues to hear the Laws of God read and expounded
to them; and the Temple where the Priests did offer sacrifice to God for
appeasing his anger against his people. I do not intend to make two or three
years work to give direction by way of a Directory, and wrangle and brawle
with my self for it; but I had rather spend my life in instructing the poor
people in the true knowledge of Gods Laws and Commandments, then to take part
with any thing whatsoever to hinder Gods people from his known will. For it
has been an ancient thing which the Church of Rome used, to keep the common
people ignorant, that the better they might work their ends by their
simplicity: and if you take these courses, the further you go from Popery, the
nigher you come to them.

When the Christians in the Primitive church had their private meetings, the
Church was hidden, and it was death for any to profess Christ openly, then
cellars, garrets, and woods were their places of Assembly: but who reigned
then? Nero. But blessed be the name of God for evermore, we have the word of
God preached among us plentifully, we need not go in corners and holes to hear
Christ taught. I wonder that so many learned able Divines do not gain some
order against this New England brood: but I am persuaded in my heart that many
are partakers with them, and will not or dare not write or once open their
mouths against them. Blame me not though I urge this again and again, for I
verily believe Ananias the Button maker, Flash the Cobbler, Nondependants, do
more harm to poor souls, specially to poor women, by one of their tongue
Sermons, then many of your Presbyterian Sermons do good in half a year: for
come into the Church, who preaches there? Non-decency, all without order or
form. For your Prelaticall government, go to all the Churches in Europe, you
shall be sure to come short of this that was in these latter times. Go to all
the Reformed Churches in the Christian world, they did stand amazed at the
government of the Church of England. But now what is become of it? truly the
height of our glory is laid in the dust, and we made a mock and a wonder at.
The Lord in his mercy open the hearts of those who are in authority, to reform
these things, that these civil combustions in Church and Kingdoms may cease,
that God may have his Word settled in peace and quiet and his people may come to
his Temple with joy and gladness; that God may be praised here in peace among
his people for evermore. I verily believe that if every Presbyterian Priest or
Independent be left to do what they will, we shall have more domineering and
disturbance in the Church, then ever there was since the Church was first built
up in England. What would you have then? would you have Bishops, which have
bred all this broile among us? yes, provided that their Lordly dignity may be
eclipsed, and preaching Bishops put in their rooms: not to have a high
Commission Court little inferior to the Inquisition of Spain, nor meddle with
temporal affairs, but to preach the Word of God soundly, plainly, and
powerfully; to root out heresy and error out of the Church of God, like a man
of knowledge: who shall choose those good men? no^ their rich kindred, nor the
King, nor his money, but their learning, Godly lives, and conversation etc.

For Prayer and confession, we have them in the Book of Common Prayer
excellently set down; and also humiliation, with some amendments: but to take
them quite away, I am humbly of opinion you greatly sin against God and this
poor Island of England; and I think as long as you keep the Ark of God from
us, I mean the Service Book, you will ever have swellings and Emrods among you.
I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet, but I pray God in his mercy keep
you from these plagues which hang over your heads, for leaving so many poor
distressed souls in want, not having the known will of God taught among them,
who lie and languish for his known Laws, and are kept short of them by force.
For the Let any, I should have rejoiced greatly if I could have seen but half
such good matter proceeded from you of the Synod; though I am not ignorant that
there are some things that might have been amended in some passages of them,
but not utterly to have them rooted out: for those that give their voices to
put them quite out of the Church, I pray God of his mercy that he one day put
them not quite out of the Kingdom of his mercy.

As for the order of reading the Old and New Testament once a year, what a
comfort must it needs be to those who cannot read? What an excellent order is
that of reading David's Psalms once a Mouth in due place and order, which is
not to be paralleled by any Reformed church in the Christian world, with many
other excellent passages of great note and worth. But now that a company of
shuttle-brain'd fellows, who for their understanding and knowledge can scarce
hold argument with a Schoole-boy, that these I say must have that godly Book
quite taken away as a great Idol in the Church, what a kind of madness is it
let all wise men judge. I do not write so much in the applause of the Book of
Common Prayer, so to magnify it as to put down preaching, and to ease your
lazy Priests of their pains in studying, no, my earnest desire is that there
may be praying with the whole Congregation together, and preaching too, that
the Word may be taught plentifully among the poor people; and that we which
are the inhabitants of England may go hand in hand, that God may have his due
praise and glory among us; and then we with you, and you with us may give God
his due praise and honor both together: which God in his mercy grant; and that
we may sit together every man under his own Vine and Figtree. And to you the
Brethren of the separation, which have the spirit so much at command, and know
Gods Word so well that you need no teacher, take from you the exposition of the
ancient Fathers, and other good men's works, which you so much despise, and
then take the bare Bible and fall to expounding the Scriptures, and I dare
pawn my life for six pence you shall have as good nonsense as you would
desire to hear. Go back, go back, thou foolish man or woman, whatsoever thou
art, and return to thy mother the Church of England, who first brought thee up
to know God in Christ, and come out of these puddles, and light headed
fooleries, and know he that takes hold of the Plough, and looks back, is
unmeet for the Kingdom of God.

FINIS.

