A SLEEPING SICKNESS the distemper OF THE TIMES: As it was discovered in its
Curse and Cure.

In a Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the House of Peers in the
Abby-Church at Westminster upon the 27th of January, the day appointed for
their Solemn and public humiliation.

By WILLIAM JENKYN Minister of Gods Word at Christ-Church London.

Romans 13.11. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out
of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed.

1 These. 5.6. Therefore let us not sleep, as do others: but let us watch and
be sober.

LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard.

1647.

Die Mercurij 27. Januarij. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That Mr. Jenkyn, is hereby
thanked for his great pains taken in his Sermon Preached before the Lords of
Parliament this day in the Abby-Curch Westminster, it being the day of the
public Fast: And he is hereby desired to Print and publish his said Sermon.
And that none do presume to Print the said Sermon or any will thereof, without
Authority under his own hand.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

I do appoint Christopher Meredith to Print my Sermon.

William Jenkyn.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the House of Peers Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
MY LORDS,
HOw great a Remora the seeking our selves is to the setting up the Temple,
your Lordships heard when last you commanded my service in preaching before
you; another enemy I here present to your Lordships no less destructive to
reformation then that, it is the spirit of slumber. The former was a sinful
working, this latter a sinful resting; If both these have as deeply seized
upon our workmen as they, are directly opposite to our work; my excuse is at
hand for my endeavor in both Sermons more to quicken then to quiet you.

The matter of my Epistle to your Lordships, now I print, shall be the
conclusion of my Sermon, when I preached I shall preach that first to your eye
which came last to your ear, and the rather, for that the conclusion of my
Sermon, had so much of an Epistle to my hand as that it concerned only your
Lorships.

My Lords, I beseech you to shake off this spirit of slumber.

1. As it is hurtful to your own souls. 2. As it is hurtful to the
kingdom.
For the former, labor for the quickening power of the spirit of Christ to
awaken you that sleep, Ephesians. 5.14.
and to wake you stand up from the dead; all rising to the hi^hes^ pinnacle of
honor, without this is but falling. The second death will not spare the
noblest of you that have not a part in the first resurrection Entomb not your
noble spirits in the sepulcher, of sin and rottenness. Peerage may come by the
first, Grace only by the second birth. Nobles are borne without spiritual
life, and grace as well as the meanest, My Lords, I beseech you remember, that
he that is but a mere man, or a mere Nobleman, is a miserable man; and
better you had never been either of them, then not to be more then either. The
reason why you complain not so much of your misery by nature, and of your
Christ-les condition as others do is not because you are less miserable or
less without Christ then others are, but because you see it not so much as
others do; nobility is no exception from those general rules, without holiness
no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14.
and except a man be borne again he shall not enter into the kingdom of God.
Ioh. 3.9.
My Lords, the sepulcher and the scripture know no difference twixt robes and
rags, peers and pesants. If poor men be holy for themselves and you too, they
shall go to heaven for themselves and you too: what think you of your selves,
when you hear that men of low condition weep for and complain of sin,
strive, and thirst, and wrestle for Christ, and you all this while remain hard
and secure, and regardlesse of Christ and your own souls? oh that you would
instead of beleiving that you are too good for these things, 1. Cor. 1.26.
fear lest these things are too good for you; not many noble, is a dreadful
passage. And that none of the Princes of this world knew the wisdom of God. 1.
Cor. 2.8.
The Lords spiritual (so called) grew too temporal, but the Lords temporal
cannot be too spiritual; temporal pragmaticallnesse ruind them, spiritual
practices must uphold you; the power of Godliness is the only means to save
your souls and the best to silence your foes.

Shake off this spirit of slumber as hurtful to the kingdom, and that in two
respects, of 1. Insensiblenesse. 2. Vnactivenesse.


1. Be sensible that the Church is wounded by the soule-stroying opinions of
Antinomians, Arminians, Anabaptists, Seekers Anti-scripturists,
Antitrinitairans. etc. All which with many more have been more propagated these
four years of Church A, narchie then in fourscore of Church tyranny.

Be sensible that the ministerial function is by some denied, by others
invaded, by corner preachers, a company who divide their hour between
blasphemy and nonsense.

Be sensible that the government which you have set up among us is so
imperfect, and discountenanced (I tremble to say by whom) that it is rather a
scorn then a curb to men disaffected to holiness.

Be sensible that our sacred Covenant is commonly either refused, or abused;
and looked upon by many only as a Politic Stratagem to be used while our
miseries lasted, The Lord who was the witness of our taking it, will shortly
be our Judge for our breaking it. If we will keep our covenant only in our
affliction; we must look again for affliction to make (...) keep our
covenant.

Be sensible of the wants and poverties of learned and faithful Manisters,
let it never be said that they who under Bishops were overcome by batteries
should under the Parliament be overcome by starving.

Be sensible of the Cries of the Fatherless, the Widows, the oppressed, the
delayed, the maimed, the wounded, whose services have been your safties, and
their bloods your Honors, 2. Sam. 23.17.
your Estates, your ornaments, your lives.

Be sensible of the taxes, and pressing burdens of the poor wasted Kingdom;
The poor Countryman complaining that he is a long time sweating and smarting
to gather that which a little breath shall bestow by thousands upon those that
are as far from want as work, and some say, as far from worth at either.

Be sensible of this famous Cities love, care, cost, blood; Let her not suffer
by protections or any other needless burdens, by her loss (or yours shall I
say) of her faithful Ministers; Your Lord-ships noble resentment of her
religious and loyal Petitions, has several times refreshed her, go on in
answering them as you do:

2. Cast off the spirit of sleep in respect of unactivenesse. Be active in
reforming in the forementioned particulars: sleep not away your summer
seasons. The Lord grant too much of it be not spent already. Let not those
richly laden opportunities which have been safely brought through a raging Sea
by vigilance, be cast away in the haven by sloth. Let it never be said that
all are active but those that should be so. The activenesse of particular men
for themselves is rather noted then liked; God has been active for you and
us; he has given us more then ever we looked for: we him, less then, nay
contrary to what we have covenanted. What would become of your Honors if God
lay you aside like broken vessels, and say I take no delight in using such for
my service, or should Christ say to you concerning his cause, as once he did to
his Disciples concerning himself. Ma. 26.45.
Sleep on now and take your rest, behold the hour is at hand, and my cause is
betrayed into the hands of sinners; The prevention of which as it should be
your Lordships care, so it shall be the prayer, My Lords, of

Your faithful Servant and soule-remembrancer. WILL. IENKYN.

A SERMON PREACHED to the Right Honorable House of Lords, at the late fast
January 27th 1646.
JSAIAH 29.10. The Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of deep sleep.


Isaiah is famous both for promises and threatenings: for promising Comforts;
for threatening judgments. 1. When he promises mercies he ordinarily
intermixeth spiritual with temporal mercies.

2. When he denounces judgments he often threatens spiritual as well as
temporal. For the latter, viz. Judgments denounced, In this chapter he
threatens temporal Judgments to verse the 7. and spiritual to the 15.

1. For temporal judgments; 1. He tells us against whom he denounces them: 2 Samuel 23.20. Benaiah is said to slay two Lyon-like men for strength, the word
being there also Ariel.
against Jerusalem called, 1. Ariel, v. 1. 2. The City where David dwelt.
Ariel signifies the Lion of God; Jerusalem being so called either 1. because
of its potencie and strength; as the Lion is the prince of beasts, so was
Jerusalem of (...), and J^dah in which Tribe Jerusalem was, is Genesis 49.9.
called a Lion and a Lions whelpe, and to set out the greatness of this power
it is also called here a Lion of God, an usual expression to denote the
excellency and greatness of a thing. 2. Jerusalem is by some thought to be
called the Lion of God in regard of the Temple and Altar therein, which has
the same name, Ezekiel. 43.15, 16. because they looked upon their Temple and Altar
as their strength, and trusted more in that then in all their other supplies,
thinking that so long as they had them, they had God among them; or in regard
of the abundance of sacrifices which their Altar devoured even as the Lion
devoureth beasts. 3. Jerusalem is thought by others to be termed here by the
Prophet the Lion of God, in regard of its fierceness and cruelty against the
servants and messengers of God as the Lion devoureth the Lamb according to that
of Jer. 12.7. I have forsaken my house, etc. My heritage is under the (...) the
forest, it cries against me; 2. (...) the City where David dwelt; where by
God would bla^t and slight the vain opinion of their (...) and privileges,
because Davi^ (...)

2. year to year let them kill sacrifices. verse 1.

3. them; I will distress Ariel, I will camp against thee round about, and
lay siege against thee, verse 2, 3. And this the Prophet further amplifieth, 1
from the Lowness of their condition, that extreme contemptiblenesse that
hereafter they should lie under. They shall be brought down, and speak out
of the ground, and out of the dust, as one that has a familiar spirit:

2. Vide Calvin in Loc.
The Prophet amplifieth this judgment that should befall them from the in
efficacy of all those helps and helpers that should come to them for their
assistance; all the multitude of strangers that should come to help them,
against God should be as the chafe and dust: God would as easily puff them
away, and ruin them, with his storm and tempest and thunder. verse 5, 6.

The spiritual judgment that should lie upon them all this while their
Calamity was in 'its nearest approaches, an insensible regardlesse, secure
temper of soul, taking no heed, giving no regard to all these dismal
denuntiacions.

Which wretched distemper under their approaching Calamities is set out under a
3-fold resemblance.

1. Of a sweet and delightful dream, Vide Calvin.
whereby deluded Persons please themselves with thoughts of food and fulness,
though hungry and empty. v. 8.

2. of a drunken staggering Person, that regardes not what the dangers are that
hang over his head; A spiritual drunkenesse (worse then that with wine) had
invaded their hearts and heads, whereby Reason was so clogged and dul'd, that
nothing was perceived that was preached. v. 9.

3. Of a deep and dead sleep, even the Spirit of it; whereby their senses were
(as it were) so stupefied and benumbed, that did the Prophets cry and call in
their ears never so loud they would yet lie still, and not stir up themselves
to shun, or prevent the dismal judgments that were seizing on them. The Lord
has poured out upon you the Spirit of a deep sleep.

In the prosecution of which words; All that I shall do, shall be reduced to
these two heads.

1. First to explain the Text in the particular parts thereof.

2. To gather and handle one particular observation from the several parts
thereof so explained.

1. For the first; I shall open this Text in these four following Parts and
Branches.

1. The kind and nature of the judgment that had here befallen them; a deep
sleep.

2. The measure and degree of it, which is set forth by a double expression.

1. The word Spirit.

2. The word pouring.

3. The Object, or who they were upon whom this deep sleep was powered. viz. The
Jews, you.

4. The punisher, or the party inflicting this judgment, the Lord.

1. The kind and sort of the punishment, it was a deep sleep, In the Hebrew
Tardema, a word that signifies such a sleep as does so stupify and benum the
senses, as that the person on whom it seiseth, can very hardly, by any means
used, be awaked. Somnus gravis and profundior, ex quo difficulter quis
excitatur. And this may appear, both by the consideration how the Scripture
uses it in other places, and also how it is rendered by Interpreters; Adam is
said to be in a deep sleep. Genesis 2 21. In so deep a sleep, that a rib was
taken out of him, and yet he perceived it not. Saul was in a deep sleep from
the Lord, and notwithstanding his spear and his cruse was taken from his
bolster, nay, notwithstanding his mortal enemy (as he supposed him) was very
near him, yet he awaked not Sisera was so fast a sleep. Judges. 4.21. that
Jael notwithstanding her approaches, her nail, her hammer, and smiting did not
awake him. Jonah was so deep a sleep. Jonah. 1.6. that Ieopardy of life, by
reason of the tempestuous raging of the Sea, did not at all affect him, nay,
Psalm. 76.6. the destruction and the total overthrow of the Chariots, and
Horsemen are set forth by this expression of deep sleep. Now in all these places
either the word Tardema here in the Text, or a word, purely of the same
signification, and coming from the same root, is used, which root is Radam
Signifying to be overwhelmed with sleep.

The Septuagint render this word several ways. Sometimes by (...) a word that
signifies such an astonishment by reason of fear, as that a man is not
himself, or knows not what he does, sometimes they render it, by (...)
which signifies a man's going out of himself. Sometimes they render it, by (...)
a word that the Apostle makes use of Romans 11.8. where my text is alleged A
word which does notably set out the nature of this deep sleep; according to
whatever interpretation we consider it Beza, Hesychyus, Tollet, derive this
word (...), used by the Apostle, from (...), and so it signifies a deep
midnight sleep, Pareus. Oseander.
others derive it from (...), which signifies to prick or to wound; and so
either this word imports such a sleep as out of which all the pinching and
wounding, and pricking cannot raise a man, or such a sleep as whereby a man is
so fastened and nailed down to his sloth that there is no parting them; Christ
(...) Therp^^last.
or such a sleep as whereby a person is as one that is so pained with his
wounds that he regards nothing which is said to him; (...) Par.
transpunctae mentis alienatione demens. Which way soever we understand
(though I prefer that interpretation of (...) which imports such a sleep as
whereby a man is so deeply seized upon with it, as that no wounding or pricking
awakens him) which way soever I say we understand it, we must needs conceive
it to be an extreme deep sleep; not bodily, but spiritual, not a binding of
the animal Spirits and senses, but a spiritual torpor and benummednesse of
Soul under all the dispensations and dealings of God, whereby the soul is in
such a temperstate and posture, as the body in a dead and deep sleep liable to
all enemies vnactive though there be never such crying to it for help,
self-soothing in the midst of all dangers; Insensible of any stirrings, and
unwilling to be awaked.

2. The degree or measure of this punishment, (...) set down in the Text in a
double exprossion.

1. The Spirit of sleep.

2. The Spirit of sleep pow^^dont.

1. For the word Spirit, it very aptly and fully sets out the vehemence and
depth of this sleep, Number. 5.14. Zec. 12.10.
The violent and propens motions or addictednesse of p^^son to a thing being
set out in Scripture by this word spirit. Es. 19.14. Hos. 4.12.


1. Because these eager inclinations are furthered by the spirit, either good,
if they be good inclinations, or a bad spirit if they be bad inclinations.
Propensiones vitiosae a malo spiritu excitatae impetus satanici. River in Hos.
4.12.


Because these inclinations are seated in the spirit of a man, carrying the
whole man according to its own bent.

3. Because the spirit of a thing does frequently betoken force, energie,
power, effioacie; the spirit of any thing being the strength of it and vigor.
So the Scripture expounds the spirit of Elijah by the power of Elijah; Luke
1.17.
and so the spirit of sleep is the efficacy, and force, and strength of
sleep that had seized on them.

2. To the making of this spiritual judgment more full, it is said that this
deep sleep was powered out, etc. In the Hebrew Nasak, a word that has two
significations according to the different nature of those things (moist or dry)
about which it is spoken; both very apt to set forth the degree of this sleep.

1. Being used concerning the pouring out of liquid and moist things, it
signifies effudit or perfudit; he has so poured it out upon you, that it is
run all over you; it being mostly applied by the Scripture to the pouring out
of the drinke-offering upon the Sacrifice, which drencht it and ran over it. So
of the oil, Jer. 32.29.7.18.
that was poured out on Jacobs pillar: here therefore when it is said (in this
sense) that a deep sleep is poured on them, Genesis 35.14.
the meaning is, they are soaked in it, steept in it, drencht, drowned in it.
The 70. render it (...).

2. Being used concerning dry things, it signifies to hide all over, to cover,
even over head and ears, no part of the thing covered, being to be seen, and
so it is applied to the Covering of sin that makes a man blessed, Psalm 32.1.
none of his sins being to be seen, here it being used, it imports such a
Covering with a deep sleep as that no part is free, every part having this
spiritual benummednesse seizing upon it; they were all over, all parts and
degrees of men in the Kingdom under the power of this deep sleep, head, ears,
eyes, arms, legs, Rulers, Prophets, Priests, people, as afterward God speaks
particularly and distributively.

3. The object, or the persons on whom this punishment was poured, expressed here
in the word, you; A word whereby is intimated both the generality of the
judgment; upon the body and bulk of the Kingdom is this judgment inflicted:
and their pertinacy and setlednesse under it, that it was poured out upon them
that were so often reproved, and stirred, and called upon by the Prophets, to
awake: nay a people that had judgment even at their doors, and ready to fall
upon them; it being near in point of execution, and far off in point of
their apprehension.

4. The Punisher or the party inflicting: Jehovah the Lord: Author but the
Vltor, as the avenger, not the worker, not as effector but inflictor, not as
the causer of it, but the punisher with it; God not infecting any with this
spiritual benummednesse, or infusing it into any where it was not before: but
punishing those further with it who had it of themselves.

For the further explication of this, note 3. things about this spiritual
distemper of a deep sleep.

1. Natural is propensio, or inclinatio, a natural desire to be at rest; a
readiness to wish and tend to our own peace and preservation; and this
inclinablenesse to selfe-preservation, is of God.

2. Irregularitas; the distemperature of the soul in soothing it self with
thoughts and apprehensions of peace, in a course of sin, against the
threatenings and commands of God. A blessing ones self in heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
saying I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my heart; this
is not of God, but from our own corruption.

3. (...) A just reward and recompense by way of punishing and avenging the
corrupt and obstinate inclination of the soul in sin notwithstanding all the
means of grace, with more benummedness and spiritual sloth: and this God does
(I say) only as a Judge and an avenger, and that several ways.

1. By removing and denying the outward means of grace for contempt of them;
which means were ordained for the awakening of people out of the sleep of
sin; as Sermons, corrections, admonitions.

2. Denying the inward operation of his spirit, where he gives the outward
means of grace: restraining his efficacious exciting grace; and so God is
removens pro hibens, denying that grace which he is not bound to give; which
grace would have hindered them from this distemper.

3. By a judicial tradition of these selfe-soothers up to that power and
spirit, which shall more close and claspe up their souls in this spiritual
distemper; and so God delivers people up to Satan and to their own hearts when
he sees that people more obey them then him, listening to their allurements,
more then to Gods incitements, when God says judicially, let him that is
filthy, be filthy still; I deliver him up into the power both of Satan and his
own heart; thus 1. King, 22.22.23. The Lord sent a lying spirit to persuade
Ahab. so Psalm. 81.11.12. I gave them up unto their own hearts, and they walked
in their own counsels.

4. By offering and laying such occasions before men, as God knows they will
abuse to the soothing up themselves against all his awakening administrations,
Vltrix misericordia.
as impunity, long life, Friends, Honor, etc. Which not sanctified, Blanda
patrum segnes facit indulgentia natos
the corrupted stomach turns into poison against it self; In which respect
it is infinitely better that God should correct us so, as to awaken us though
with never so much severity, Satius est ut vim qualem^unque mihi inferas
domine, qua^ parcens mihi, me in meo torpore securum derelinquere Aug.
then by sparing and prospering us to let us sleep in sin, so that we awake
not till it be to late.

I now proceed to the second thing I propounded to you; viz. to Collect and
handle a practical observation from the former Parts thus explained and it
shall be this

Obs. Obs.
For a deep sleep, in the spirit of it, to be powered out upon a person, or
people by God, is a very sore judgment. 'Twas this that was the greatest part
of Ariels punishment. The soul of his judgment; not his being under this
temporal calamity of a strait siege and Captivity, but in being a sleep when
that it came. And it is very observable that this is the judgment that all
along in the new Testament is in a manner only taken notice of; it being
mentioned (by way of alleging that of Esaiah. 6. and 9.) by all the four
Evangelists, as also by Luke. in the 28. Act. and Paul. Romans 11.8.

Now for the prosecution of this observation, I shall show but two things.

1. Wherein it appears that this is such a sore and dismal judgment.

2. What use to make of it.

For the first; I shall show you wherein the greatness of the judgment
appears in the four parts of the Text before explained, and in the Text used
by the spirit of God to express the dismallnesse of this judgment of a deep
sleep.

The first whereof is the kind of the judgment said to be a deep sleep, The
greatness of this judgment of a deep sleep proved from the 4 particulars in
the Text.
which in the very nature of it denotes five things, all which are very
paenall, and dreadful.

1. The first thing that a deep sleep holds forth, is liablenesse, and
obnoxiousnesse to judgments, unarmednesse in the midst of dangers; A man in a
deep sleep, is in no condition to hinder an invader, 1. From the kind of the
judgment, and so it denotes 5. things, all very paenall.
he lies naked to the fury of every enemy, he is not in a posture of making
any resistance; like a field, without a fence, a City without a watch; like
Samson in the midst of the Philistines without his locks; This spiritual
sleeper though judgments approach, approaches not to his tower, he makes not
the name of the Lord his refuge; he clozeth not himself up in the wounds of
Christ by faith, he labors not by repentance to expel those enemies of his
soul, his sins, which will open the door to every judgment, but securely
harbors them within; he labors not by prayer to seek help from one that is
able to keep him, he arms not himself with preparedness to meet his God; he
is ruined without resistance; the fire of vengance devoureth him as stubble, he
is one fitted for destruction, It Is a greater punishment to be without
punishments, and yet to lie naked and liable to them, then to be in the midst
of them, and yet to be above them; A sleeping sinner spends all his time to
fence his estate, his family, his name, his health; but his soul when death
and judgment approaches, lies open and exposed; he takes much care to lock
up his rubbish and lumber that are not worth the keeping or taking away, but
regards not to preserve his treasure, his jewel, his soul, but throws it
among his enemies.

The second thing that this judgment of a deep sleep holds forth, is
selfe-soothing and flattery, security, self pleasing, and this is the ground
of the former, he is dreaming of a Kingdom when Iaels nail is nearer his
Temples then a Crown; hoe (as Ariel in the context) fancies himself at a
richly furnished table, where are all manner of delicacies, but when he awakes
there is a starved empty stomach; Dut. 29.19.
This spiritual sleeper, in the hearing the words of the curse, blesses
himself in his heart, and says he, shall have peace, he goes on in sin
as if hell were a notion, judgment a fable, and as if the threats of the
scripture were but some gainefull inventions to uphold the Ministers
maintenance; If God give him abundance in this life, he secretly smiles at the
severest denunciations; and inwardly applauds his own safety and integrity, as
Ephraim. Hos. 12.8. Notwithstanding all the Prophets could denounce, Hos. 12.8.
said, yet I am become rich, I have found me out substance All flattered ones
are in danger, but the self flattered are in the greatest; when they shall cry
peace, peace. 1. These. 5.3. 1. Th. 5.3.
Then sudden destruction shall come upon them; peace with ones self
accompanied with war against ones God is the worst of wars; soule-soothing is
soul slaying, he that would be caer safe must be never secure; judgments that
befall the selfe-flatterer come not more inovitably, then greviously. The same
judgment that befalls them with others, makes them more miserable the others,
in regard they expect to be happie^, judgment unthought of is judgment
intolerable. Job. 21.13.
They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to the grave; a
doleful mirth! better is that hell that makes way for heaven, then that heaven
that makes a way for hell, the self deluders happiness is a fools Paradise:
never was it known that they were quiet to eternity, that were not disquieted
in their sins here. The hell upon earth is to be in the way to hell, and yet
to think that the course is steered toward heaven.

3. This judgment of a deep sleep comprehends the punishment of unactivenesse,
unserviceablenesse, and unprofitablenesse in the midst of all opportunities and
exigencies whatsoever, whether they be the particular exigencies of our own
souls, or of the Church of Christ. The work is great, but there is no
labourer; This spiritual sleeper is a summer-sluggard, a harvestsleeper; he
stirs not up himself to lay hold upon God and life: he seeks not the Kingdom
of God and its righteousness: he strives not to enter in to the straight gate:
he offers no violence to the Kingdom of heaven: he works not out his
salvation: he wrestles not in prayer: he lives as if he had nothing to do in
the world; heaven is not his business: he is, but he lives not, as far from
doing any work in the very evening of his life, as he was in the dawning of
it; Lived he has like a drone all his days, as if he had been borne to look
on: glorious opportunities are before him; every Sabbath, Sermon, Ordinance are
full seasons of grace, a rich prize: but he has no heart, no hand; And for the
Church of Christ be the straits thereof never so great, the work never so
abundant, its exigencies never so urgent, this spiritual sleeper takes his
rest, but takes no pains, he helps not the Lord; may but he be warm in his
own feathers, he regards not the dangers of the house, he is a mere mute and
Cipher, a nullity in the world, a superfluity upon the earth, Jer. 13.
Jeremiah's rotten girdle good for nothing, or like the branches of a Vine,
Ezekiel. 15.3.
which are but weak and unusefull, good to make no beams or rafters often he
prays not, he councelleth not, he contributeth not, he is in a deep sleep,
and has lost his hands; such a kind of sleep as this, to a Saint, would be
the greatest unquietness; serviceablenesse is his heaven; this life would be
nothing worth if he might not get Christ and (instrumentally) give him.

4. This judgment of a deep sleep comprehendes the punishment of
unwillingnesse and lothnesse to have any disturbance and stirring by any that
come to awake. This sluggard is in his warm down, or in his midnight repose,
and he loves not to be molested. Yet a little more folding of the arms likes
him; Insanus contra med^^^mam.
This spiritual sleeper loves not any that stir him, he accounts them his
greatest enemies and tormenters; Pars sanitatis tell sana^i. Seneca.
he that uses means may die: but he that refuses all helps of recovery must
dye; what will become of those that say to the Prophets prophecy not, that are
mad against the medicine, that cannot endure sound doctrine, that shut their
eyes against the Sun, and stop their ear against the sound of the word; thus
it is with this spiritual sleeper; he is angry with every one that makes a
noise, that will not suffer him and his lusts to live together in quiet. He
that counts the word a burden here, shall feel another burden hereafter.

5. Lastly, this judgment of a deep sleep denotes insensiblenesse,
regardlesnesse under the threamings, noyses, wounds, and all other
administrations used by God to awaken him: whatever God says or does the
spiritual sleeper lays it not to heart, so as to get any good by it take it
in these five particulars.

1. He is insensible of danger, like a drunken man that sleeps on the top of a
mast, near dangers in regard of execution, far from them in regard of
apprehension; he puts far from him the evil day, An awaked Christian foresees
the danger, and provides accordingly ^ a sleeping sinner fears nothing,
feeling only troubles him; and that too when it is too late.

2. He is insensible of the loudest noyses, severest denunciations; line may be
upon line, precept upon precept, Minister after Minister, Isa 28.13.
and all do but fatten his heart and deafen his ear; the most effectual
warnings, the lifting up the voice like a Trumpet, the shrillest denunciations
work not upon him; the Lion roares, but be trembles not.

3. He is insensible of being uncovered and stripped of any comforts and
supplies; though God pull off his clothes, take away friends, children,
estates, health, plenty: though the water-pot and the spear be taken from the
bolster be stirs not, like the hen which loses her chickens one by one by the
devouring Kite; when one or 2 or 3. are snatched away, she still continues to
pick up what lies before her.

4. He is insensible of the stirrings and joggings that are given him in his
sleep, the faithful admonitions of friends. Rebuke a scorner, and he hates
both rebukes and rebuker. Prove. 29.1.
Though often reproved he hardens his necks: he and his distemper are so
nailed together, that reprehensions sever them not.

5. He is insensible of woundings, maimings, the very fetching out his blood.
Esa 5.12. Jer. 5.3. Hos. 7.9. Esa 1.5.
They regard not the works of the Lord: they refuse to receive correction when
the hand of the Lord is lifted up, they will not see. Gray hairs are here and
there upon them and they know it not: though smitten, they revolt more and
more. Adams rib was taken out of him and he felt it not. The storms and waves
fight against Jonah, and he observes it not.

The spiritual sleeper is insensible of judgments in three respects.

1. He is insensible who wounds; he thinks not of the hand of God in the
miseries that befall him; he only looks at man, and thinks not that it is God
who gives him to robbers and spoylers; he looks not upward as David when
Shemei reviled him, did; he considers not that he has negotium cum Deo, to
do with God when men hurt him: but all his study is how to avenge himself
upon, or reconcile himself unto the instrument, who indeed was used by the
hand of providence to do what was done against him; his endeavors in this
respect beginning at the wrong end, for God has a negative voice to all
overtures of peace and friend-ship between man and man; the hand that cuts can
only cure; the God that wounds can only heal; any structure of amity between
man and man will soon fall that is not set upon the foundation of a peace with
God.

2. He is insensible why he is wounded: of the deserving cause, sin: as he
looks not upward, so neither looks he inward: he is not driven by what he
feels, to observe what he does, no man says what have I done; he searches not
his heart to find out the Jonah when the storm is risen about him. He traceth
not the sin, the beast, by the vestigium, the print of punishment that it has
left upon him: nor labors by the stream to go to the head from whence it
issues. Every thing shall be blamed sooner then sin; his careless servants,
his disobedient child, his cheating Chapman, his treacherous Commander: but
here is not a word of sin all this while. Nay rather then that shall be
blamed, the fault shall be laid upon those that are his greatest friends, and
happily most of all desire his good. As 'its evident in the dismal example of
Saul who in all his affrightments flew upon innocent David, and never looked
into himself, Nay, rather then sin shall be blamed, cries out upon that
which is not, as his hard hap, his fortune. etc.

3. He is insensible of the way to cure his wounds and the true way of winding
himself out of his miseries. The people. Hos. 7.10.
Hos. 7.10. In the time of their calamity and declining, and when their gray
hairs were here and there upon them, return not to the Lord their God, nor
seek him, for all this, and v. the 13. woe unto them for they have fled from
me; they fly to Egypt and Assyria but they fly from God. who only can help and
v. 16. They return but not to the most High, they are like a deceitful Bow;
and the like complaint is that of Isay, Is. 51.20.
that the people are like a wild Bull in a nett, that can hamper and entangle
it self more and more, but takes no course to wind it self out; very elegant
also is that comparison of Hosea. chap. 13.13. where it is said that Ephraim is
an unwise Son, Hos. 13.13.
for he should not stay long in the place of breaking forth of Children, the
scope is this. The Prophet compares the kingdom of Israel to a woman in
travail, in regard of 'its pains and distresses, and the inhabitants to the
child in the womb of the Mother, and to such a foolish Child, which though the
Mother be in never such torture, by reason of 'its continuance in the womb,
yet the child takes no care to get forth; but remains there still though to
the killing of Mother and it self both; so the Israelites had rather stifle
themselves in the womb of sin and punishment, and undo the state, then leave
their sin, and save themselves and the Kingdom their Mother; In the 5. chapter and
v. the 13. he compares them to a sick wounded person that goes to a wrong
medicine for healing, where he says that when Judah saw his sickness, Hos.
5.13,
and Ephraim his wound, they went to the Assyrian, and sent to Jareb yet could
he not cure them; and so to a silly dove without heart, Hos. 7.12,
that flies to Egypt and Assyria for help. And yet ver. 13. They fly from
God, (Though indeed there be no way to fly from God, but by flying to him,)
they sent to Jareb but not to God; they open their mouths to be filled with the
wind but stop them when God offers that which will satisfy them; A
spiritual sleeper uses every way but the right. If there be a wrong he will
be sure to take it; he is sooner ready to destroy himself then his sin, and
more inclined with an obstinate heart to go on to ruin, then by reviewing the
greatness of his provocations, and the goodness of him that is provoked; to
melt into tears, to ask pardon, to loath himself and his lusts, and to turn
heartily to the most high; This is the complaint of Isaiah that the people
return not to him that smites them; dismal is that denuntiation of God, ^evk.
27.39.
that after all their Famine and Wars, and losses, and Captivities; they
should not withstanding all these wounds, (they that are left) pine away in
their iniquity. Notwithstanding the deaths of thousands before their eyes,
their abode in their Enemies land the visiblest tokens of the displeasure of an
angry God, yet to pine away and swelter in sin as if nothing could awake them,
how dreadful is it?

There Is the first thing in the Text wherein a spiritual deep sleep, appears to
be so dreadful a judgment, in respect of the nature and kind of it, opened
in five particulars.

The second particular in the Text,

1. Of the pouring out of it.

2. Of the pouring the Spirit of it.

1. Of pouring it; and this notes that when this deep sleep seizes upon people
as it did upon these in the Text, that it overwhelms them, it runs all over
them, it is such a dead palsy as stupifieth the whole body; that leaves no
part free; like a City that is so begirt with an Enemy, and about which there
is so strait a seige that there is no going either in or out; So here the
Ministers of the Gospel know not where to set upon, or how to endeavor
entrance into these spiritually sleeping sinners; how difficult a thing is it
to cure that patient who in every part of his body, ovtward and inward is
distempered; when the whole body is totum pro vulnere; All over one wound and
malady as it were.

2. The second expression that sets out the measure of this deep sleep, is the
spirit of it; A word that properly notes the power and the vehemence of this
distemper; As the spirit of a thing is the force and vigor and strength of it,
so here is denoted the efficacy and powerfullnesse of this deep sleep in these
people and over them; now what a judgment is it for a man to be under the
power of sin, to be in arcta custodia, close prisoner to the souls greatest
enemy, to be in the bond of iniquity, to be held in the Cords of his sin,
to have the soul garrisoned with thousands of such strong men armed as the
weakest of them is stronger then an army of men; surely to be under the power
of the greatest Tyrants breathing, is not a punishment comparable to this; it is
a power that none in the world can match, but only the power of him that is
also an Enemy to him that is a spiritual sleeper. If it be the power of God
that keeps to salvation; the power of sin and Satan (if not overpowred) must
needs keep to damnation; It is such a power as resists all the means that
come to rescue the soul from it, and that so deeply seizes upon the sinner,
that it makes him purely subdued, bowed down under it; and yet which is worst
of all, the nature of this power stands in making a man unwilling as well as
unable to get from under it; he being a very slave in every thing but only in
that which is common to all others that are in bondage, 2. Pet. 2.
namely to sigh and groan under it.

3. The third particular in the Text whereby the dismalness of this judgment of
a deep sleep is set out in the Object, the persons upon whom it is powered, You,
where we may take notice of two things.

1. The Parties.

2. The part of these Parties that the Prophet here intends to be under a deep
sleep.

1. The parties you, you a people that are under all my awakning
administrations; of words, and threatenings, of judgments, and examples, You
have I known of all the Nations of the Earth, with you have I taken pains more
the with all the people in the world beside, and for you to be in a deep sleep
is a greater, both sin, and shame, and punishment, then for others. None are
such approved tried friends to lust as they that continue in it under means of
recovery, none so inexcusable for continuing in their spiritual slumber as
they that have had helps to awaken them. It Is a shame for any to be a sleep
but more for them that are in the light, the sun, and sound of the word.

It Is not so great a marvel for others to be asleep whom God never brought
under those helps that might stir them up; but for those that live in the
daytime of the Gospel, and are under the stirring Ministry of the Prophets to
continue slumbring in sin, 1 These. 5.6.
there can be no Apology; The Apostle makes this an argument that Christians
should beware of this distemper of spiriruall sloth. Let not us sleep as do
others; q. d. it is enough for those that are in the night of sin and nature to
sleep, let not us. 'Twas the argument that the Angel used to Jacob, let me
go, for the day breaks: Genesis 32.26.
whosoever is not awaked by the light of the day, the Gospel, shall be awaked
by the heat of eternal flames.

2. The second thing is the part of these parties upon which this spiritual
sleep seizes; and that is intended by the Prophet to be the soul; The soul
of a judgment is its seizing upon the soul: spiritual blessings are the
greatest, and spiritual judgments the dismallest. There are three things
whereby it appears that the judgment of a deep sleep is greatned by befalling
the soul.

1. The soul is the excellency of man; the worthiest part: the body is a body
of vileness, Phil. 2.21. (...).
the soul a precious soul; excellent every way, but as it is depraved with
sin. It Is the noblest part of man; noble in respect of its original, it is
heaven-borne; in respect of its functions, its endowments; If all be well with
the soul, a man is happy, though the body be never so miserable; If it go ill
with the soul, the man is wretched, let the body abound never so much with
outwardblessings.

When a mean conremptible man, and one of no account dies, it is never spoken
of: but when a Prince or some great man dies, all lay it to heart; the soul is
the Prince, the body is but the page, and therefore the body is not to be
lamented, from which only the soul parts: but the soul from which God
himself parts

2. The distempers that befall the soul are hardest to remove; There Is no herb
in the garden, no receipt from the Physician, no medicine in the shop, that can
cure the soul; men are only parents of the body, and only Physicians of the
body, he that made the soul can only mend it. The father of spirits, is the
only Physician of spirits; It Is omnipotent strength that recovers sinsicke
souls: man can make them worse, but its only a God that can make them better;
Outward helps cannot cure the inward man; The God of the heart can only
restore the hidden man of the heart: 1 Pet. 3.4
He that sits in heaven must touch and teach the heart, otherwise it can never
be reached or taught.

3. The distempers that befall the soul are most deadly, if they be not
remedied. A scratch on the finger is a slight wound: but a wound that reaches
to the heart is always dangerous if not dendly; whatsoever befalls the body is
but slight, and to be slighted in Comparison of what annoyeth the soul. Soul
curses are the only dreadful ones. All calamities may be in mercy that befall
the body, for they only part between us and health wealth, and friends, etc.
but they which befall the soul, part us in some measure from him in whom all
blessedness and true happiness is laid up.

If the soul lives, the man dies not: if the soul be dead in sin the man is
dead. The life of our lives, is the health of the soul: the death in death is
the miscarriage of the soul. If a man be not heartficke, though otherwise much
distempered it is not looked upon as dangerous; he that is not spiritually and
soul and sin-sicke, is not sick unto death; the sicknesses and distempers of
the body, are but only such in appearance, and in a sort opinionative, the
diseases of the soul are only such in reality. Spiritual comforts and
miseries are only such: vera; temporal, whether Comforts or miseries are but
fallacia, seeing and deceiving; 'twas an excellent advice of Christ to his
Disciples: fear not him that can kill the bady, but fear him that can throw
both body and soul into hell; Thus of the third reason, the object of this
judgment, you.

4. The fourth thing in the Text that makes the spirit of a deep sleep so
dreadful a calamity, is the inflicter of it, and the punisher with it, and
that is the Lord JEHOVAH; The Lord, whose punishments are always either the
sorest or the sweetest; if they better not those whom they befall they ever
hurt them: Now this is a punishment ever of hurt and destruction, not medicina
but laniena, not the cutting of a surgeon or a friend; but of an Enemy and a
destroyer, It Is a blessing of God to correct and love us, A great curse for God
to punish and leave us; nay so to punish as the very punishment is a leaving of
us. The happiness of correction stands in teaching us, but, this punishment of
a deep sleep is the giving us up to unteachablenesse.

There are three things whereby it appear that it is a great addition to this
judgment, for God to inflict it.

1. In regard it is that God who is the God of all mercy and the Father of all
consolation, the God that is the giver of every good and perfect gift; for him
to punish must needs be very dismal; who shall pity if he punnish? if others
punish and God pity, there is comfort yet and hope, but who shall be our friend
when the Lord will frown?

If mercy be our Enemy, who or what shall be our friend? the Lord that opens
the ears and eyes of his people, that teaches them in his ways, that makes
them to profit, Psalm. 13.3.
that lightens their eyes least they sleep the sleep of death; it is this God
that punishes the obstinate sinner with this judgment, 'Twas a great
aggravation of Esaus punishment to mis of the blessing, because his Father had
blessed his Brother immediately before, bless me, even me also o my Father,
says he, for the same breath that blesses a Saint to blast thee, for the
same Sermon that melts a humble soul into tears for sin to stupify thee
in sin, for the same sun that dissolveth another, to harden thee, for the
same gale that blows on heavenward, to drive thee (occasionally) hell-ward;
here is a judgment indeed; If a man sin against God who shall entreat for him;
1 Samuel 2, 23.
If God set himself against a man who shall recover him

2. A deep sleep in respect of the inflicter is a great punishment because
inflicted by God in the deep'st of his displeasure, as the last and the sorest
of his judgments in this life; he never does it but when he is provoked to the
purpose, he inflicts it as a reckoning for all other faults that went before;
when all means and helps of recovery are despised; when God is showing mercy
the last mercyes are the best, and the farther he goes in mercy the sweeter
he is, and so when he is punishing, the last punishments are the sorest, and
the further he goes the bitterer he is; he both loves and leaves gradually.
This judgment of pining away in iniquity is the last that God mentions after
all those dismal ones there spoken of to befall the people. Levit. 26.39. Lev.
26.39.
It Is the last judgment the lowest stayer of hell upon Earth; it is even
contiguous to (as I may say) and bordering upon hell it self. He that is
filthy let him be filthy still, Rev. 22.11.
is the last judgment we read of (befalling in this life) in all the new
Testament. A judgment inflicted upon those that despise the offers of Christ
and grace, so he gave them up, so? how and when? my people would not hearken to
my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gave them up unto their own
hearts; 1. Sam. 26.8.
when God is punishing with this judgment, he says, as Abishai when he
offered to smite Saul, said, I will smite him to the Earth at once, and I will
not smite him the second time. God punishes with a deep sleep as with an hell
upon earth, as with that after which a man needs not be smitten the second
time.

3. distinguishing judgment, between the friends and foes of God; God loving
his people the more he corrects. Thus much of the first thing propounded for
the prosecution of the observation; viz. the showing wherein it appears that
the spirit of a sleep is so great a judgment.

The second follows, viz. the Application of it; And this I shall endeavor
in these two practical Inferences.

If a deep sleep be so great a judgment, and the greatness of it stands in
the fore mentioned particulars. us in England; upon you (my Lords) of the
Parliament. From falling into it to the utmost, the lowest degree, the Lord
preserve us but that we are fallen into it to a very dismal degree, I am
confident may be too clearly evidenced. The five fore mentioned particulars,
comprehended in the very kind or sort of the judgment of a deep sleep will be
found in a deep measure to agree with us.

1. Liablenesse, exposednesse to miseries. Aspirituall sleeper lies naked to
all invaders; is prepared to make no resistance against his enemies, For us of
this nation it cannot be denied but that the terrible alarm's and invasions of
judgments among us, ought long ago to have rouzed us out of sinful sloth,
and have driven us to our Towers and strong holds; I mean to have made us
labor to make God our friend; to run to the name of the Lord, to close up our
selves in the wounds of Christ by faith, to make up our ruinous breaches and
gaps by repentance; but have the approaches of judgments wrought upon us after
this manner; or rather lie we not still as exposed and naked to judgment, as
when it was a thousand times further off? Are we not like the enthralled
Israelites without a sword or spear in our land? 1. Sam. 13.22.
which of us labor to overcome God with his own strength of prayer, and faith
and a holy life; or rather is there not a greater decay of these of late then
ever? Do we not live as if we would invite judgments, and as if every one
studied to betray himself to ruin? the power of godliness decreaseth as the
power of judgments prevail; our religion like our buildings is of a slighter
frame then formerly, holiness is disputed into a mere speculation, and
practical religion evaporated into a notion; where is he among us that prays
more fervently and frequently then he was wont, that walks more exactly, that
lays hold upon Christ more strongly then heretofore; never were there wars
that in so short a time, made so many skillful Soldiers for the body, and so
few for the soul.

2. For the second thing I mentioned to be in a deep sleep; self-soothing, and
pleasing ones self with fancies of felicity and dreams of happiness; we in
England are the lively picture of Ariel here in the context. v. 7. Has not God
emptyed us of our men our blood, and treasure, and many renowned worthies, and
yet do we not dream we are full? how proud have we been with every success,
how sweetly does the profane worldling please himself and nestle in his
feathers of Gold, his places, and stipends, and offices, and scoff at severest
denunciations? was there ever known a people brought so low in their estate, to
be so high in their own esteem? a people whose Father did spit in their face
with so much indignation, and yet a people that were so little dismayed or
ashamed as we? witness that elfish attire, shameful and yet shameless
nakedness of necks and backs, those sin-blacke, hell-black, bewty-spotts
(people would not account it a beauty to be borne with them) that swaggering
profanation of sabbath, drinking and riotousnesse among us.

3. For vnactivenesse, and idleness; we are in so deep a sleep, that though
every thing has cried out for our help and succor and hand (there never being
a time of so much employment) yet we lie still like a company of sworn slaves
to sleep. Have we not both Parliament and kingdom, been a company of harvest
sleepers, summer sluggards? what a fair summer of opportunityes has God
afforded to you (my Lords) for the working in his harvest, and doing great
things for his name, he has bestowed opportunities so glorious, as I question
whether ever Parliament had the like; and I fear that you shall never see the
like again. The Lord grant your harvest weather be not almost at an end. Oh
that I could not say with Elijah there is (I fear at least) a sound of much
rain; 1 Kings. 18.41.
what might you not have done for God had you had hearts; you might (not to
speak of that comfort you might have afforded to dying Ireland, relief to
poor Christians, refreshment to the Ministers, ease to oppressed ones, content
to this faithful City of London) you might by this time have set up the house
of God in England, and have perfected reformation even to a beautifullnesse;
you might have made Antichrist to have groaned like a dying man, you might have
made all the reformed Churches in Christendom have blessed God for you; but
alas for your sloathfullnesse! you are in stead of beautifying and pertfecting
reformation, but now a laying something like the foundation of it; and this
little that is laid, how do Heretics and Sectaries, and Libertines, take the
stones away from it daily? how active has God been for us, how dull have we bin
for him? what a poor, weak, imperfect, lame, government have we as yet, and
what a while was it ere we could get that little we have? we have received
mercy by else (as I may say) but we have returned obedience by inches. We have
been like narrow mouthed Bottles, we have given nothing to God without an
unkind and churlish muttering and grudging; every thing has cried to you, but
what help has any received from you? poor oppressed ones cry for help, but
they and their causes are neglected, the City cries with petition after
petition and how slowly is it releied Ireland has sob'd it self to death
almost and yet you hardly begin to stir; Ministers cry not with the language
of their tongues, (for I think malice it self cannot speak them immodest
herein) but of their poverty, their oppressions, their almost starved families
in some places, these cry in your ears, and (in the Lords of hosts too) for
maintenance; these who procured and continued you money, arms, men, love, life
in your forest straits, that have saved the Kingedome, these cry aloud to the
Parliament, that Sectaries may not ruin them and theirs, that if you will not
give them books you would give them bread, a livelihood a subsistence; but
alas poor Ministers! whose ears, hearts, mouths have been opened to you and
for you, find yours stopped against them; there is no stirring for their relief.
The Covenant cries (God grant not against you) for reformation of the
Kingedome, the extirpation of heresies schisms, profaneness. etc. and these
impieties abound as if we had taken a Covenant to maintain them, and since it
was taken these sins which we have covenanted against have more abounded
then in the space of ten times so many years before, our Covenant stirs us
not, we are unactrve; we have not done what we might, the time may come that
we shall not do what we would, what if the Lord should say to you, I abhor
you and your services; I Will do my work without you.

4. Unwillingness to be stirred and be awaked is aanother punishment in a
deep sleep; And if this agree not to us, what does? we oppose and openly
dislike those who faithfully stir us from our sloth; we are commonly observed
to love flatterers, and those who may sooth us though into destruction;
painful zealous Ministers that will tell us of our sins, are now looked upon
as busy men; as those that meddle with the State; they are bid to keep to
their Text; as if that preaching which is a coming close to your lusts, were a
going away from our Texts: In the Bishops times we were suffered to preach any
thing, so we came not near their sins, and this Prelacie is still kept up among
us. Hence it is that faithful Ministers are denied their maintenance, are
abused by the nicknames of Antichristian, are voyced enemies to the
Parliament (are you and your lusts so near that we cannot be enemies to one,
but we must be enemies also to the other) that they have changed their
principles, that they are turned Malignants whereas it is not the shore that
moves, but the Boateman: the Ministers are still the same men, and walk by the
same rule; still are for you, the Covenant, and a pure reformation. The Lord
will one day judge who they are that continue faithful and firm both to him
and you, and who are unfaithful to him, to us and your selves.

5. Insensiblenesse is the last and greatest part of this punishment by a deep
sleep; and does it not agree to us? Insensiblenesse I say of dangers, noyses,
stirrings, uncoverings, woundings; dangers we put far from us, we fear
nothing; we live as if we had made a covenant with death: we bless our
selves in our own hearts, expecting peace, Dut. 29.19.
going on in our own ways. Insensible we are of noyses and stirrings; how loud
has been the voice of the word in our ears, but how deaf have we been? Rare
is the operation of the word in our congregation; the bellows are burnt, the
lead is consumed, Ier. 6.29.
and yet the founder melts in vain; Ministers are spent both in strength and
numbers, and yet our lusts in neither; and for the Parliament it is a common
observation that it is Sermon-proof; You command us to preach before you, oh
that God would command you to practice before us. You enjoin us to Print: but
'twill be an unanswerable dilemma another day, either the Sermons you caused
to be printed were good or bad: if bad, why were they so much as printed: if
good, why not more then printed, why not practiced also. We are insensible of
uncoverings and woundings; though God takes away from us our honors, estates,
rents, friends, etc. nay, has wounded us in health, strength, and even to the
death of thousands: yet are we insensible from whom these miseries come. We
only treat and deal with man, not with God; insensible why they come, we say
not what have we done, our sins trouble us not but they rather that will
trouble us in our sins, insensible how to remove them, to be rid of them; we
turn not to him that smites, witness the general inundation of all
profaneness among us; never were God and we further asunder then since our
miseries and we were near one another.

a deep sleep.

1. Embrace that Ministry that God is wont to make use of, for the rouzing up
of slothful sinners.

God can a waken people without it, but ordinarily he will not; love that
preaching most that loves most to excite thee; The word is both light and
noise, both which are wont to disquiet sleepers. There Is not a greater judgment
to a people, then to have such Preachers who labor to continue people in the
sleep of sin. A silent Ministers sins against the very nature of his Function:
his work must be to stir you out of your sins, though he knew that he should
stir some of you up to rage; he must speak frequently and fervently;
frequently, if one cry stir not, another may; he knows not what season God may
awaken you in, he must continue calling and crying though you should sleep
the faster under his noise: as long as there is life, there may be awaking:
fervently they must not be sweet Musicians and pleasant singers to cast you
into this sleep; nothing requires so much fervor and vehemence in emploiment
as the spiritual welfare of souls; They must be sons of thunder, not of
music, holily impatient against your lusts. There are some doctrines that are
pillows and bolsters to a slumbring people; the doctrine of free will,
universal, whether grace or redemption, etc. Antinomianisme in all its parts
is a doctrine of a deep sleep; It Is a dreadful presage in that these are the
doctrines of our times; never was there a time wherein God spoke more terribly,
and Ministers more mildly; There Is now a wretched prejudice against Orthodoxe
and faithful preaching, that it is not a preaching of Christ; It Is most of all
other discouraged and discountenanced. But we should be so far from blaming
the loudness of the sound of the word, that we should blame the depth of our
own slumber, we should take the part of the word against our lust; and entreat
God to speak with, and louder then the Minister to make the word an awakening
voice in the Ministry, though it be a displeasing voice; beseech the Lord to
cry in the ears of thy soul with the voice of his own spirit; to stir thee
in the Ministry with his own arm, otherwise Ministers shall rend their sides,
in steed of rouzing thy soul.

2. Secondly labor for a fruitful improvement of sufferings; upbraid thy
sin-insensible spirit with its deafness, and take Gods part against thine own
repining soul; It Is a singular mercy to be awakened though by severest
administrations; God is never more angry thou when he is not angry; God never
punishes so severely, as when he punishes by sparing, and lets thy soul
have its fill in impunity; Entreat God to do thy soul good, his own way; and
beware lest any afliction blow over without bettering thee, physic, if it
works not, hurts and not heales; afflictions are awakning seasons; to continue
in sleep under them is the loss of an excellent opportunity; afflictions
sanctified are like winds right set to blow to the port. Entreat God to set
them right, though they be rough. If thou art so close nayl'd to thy lust that
sickness, or disgrace, Isa. 1.15.
or losses in thy estate etc. cannot part it and thee, It Is both a provocation
to God to leave thee, and an encouragement to Satan to keep thee

3. Endeavor for a tender trembling heart, at the very beginning of the
solicitations of sin; sin is of a stupefying nature; and that which makes way
for eternal feeling, takes away spiritual; oppose and resist thy drousy heart
when it first enclineth to sinful rest; every sin neglected is a step
downward to a deep sleep; That deluge here in the Text, is made up of many
drops of sin; many knots tied one upon another, will be hardly loosed, sins
repeated and not repented of, Prove. 5.27
bind down the soul in insensiblenesse and sloth; every spot that falls upon
a man's clothes makes him the more regardlesse of them; and every sin
suffered to defile the conscience makes thee more careless of it; If
inclination to sin were resisted, there could be no stupe-faction by sin, that
man who dares not wade to the ancles, nay that trembles so much as to touch the
water, is in no danger of being overwhelmed with it; The modest beginnings of
sin will make way for immodest proceedings; the thickest Rock of jce that will
bear a Cart, begins with a thin trembling cover that will not bear a pibble.

4. Labor for faith in threatenings; restrain not thy belief only to what God
has promised, extend it to what God has denounced; This will make of a
regardlesse sinner, a trembling melting Saint as we see in the case of Josiah,
2. Kings. 22.11 13.
faith comprehends all truths past, present, and to come in 'its vast bosom;
and overcomes all improbabilities that seem to keep away judgments as well as
those that seem to keep away mercies; faith sees that wounded men shall be
able to overcome a sinful and threatened City, Ier. 37.10.
and it dares not permit the soul to sleep in sin, notwithstanding wealth and
friends, and honors, for it sees that the truth of a threatening and the power
of a threatner are above all these; why was not Noah drowned in a deep sleep of
sin and in a deluge of water with the old world, who lay securely insensible
till the flood awaked them? the spirit of God tells us, Heb. 11.7.
that faith kept Noah both from sleep and flood. Faith taught Noah to fear,
Subito tollitur qui diu toleratur.
and fearing is the best way to prevent feeling; A believer sees that he
shall be suddenly snatched away that is long borne with, faith makes a man
solicitous for a time and safe to eternity. 1 Timothy 4 ^.


5. Be vigorous in the exercising thy self in godliness, ever be employed,
never think or say thou have done work enough, think not that thy work is
ended if thy life be not, take heed of remissness in Gods service. Romans 12.11.
Be diligent in the business of heaven; let the tempter ever find thee
employed; the night comes and no man can work but as long as the day of life
and health, and Gospel lasts, no man must loyter; ever be working out thy
salvation; as sleep causes idleness, so idleness causes sleep; ever be
speaking of, speaking to, meditating about God and his ways; be progressive
in the way to heaven; take not up thy rest in point of cessation from
employment, lest thy rest take thee and overwhelme thee; strive to attain the
highest pitch of religion, and yet be ever working for heaven as if thou were
at the lowest.

6. Be moderate in following the employments, and enjoying the Comforts of this
life; take heed lest these vapors over-whelm thee; Satan lies in ambush
behind our lawful comforts; and in the securest enjoyments seizes upon the
soul. Christ was once lost at a feast, and in abundance it is hard not to
neglect him still.

Prosperity (never that I could yet hear of) awaked any soul out of sin: many
have been cast into the sleep of sin by it. It Is as hard to be rich and watch
full, as it is to be poor and contented; 1. Pet. 5.8.
when God remembers us most, we remember him least. Sobriety and vigilance are
enjoined together. Be sober and vigilant. Let the things of this life be thy
solatia not negotia: thy refreshments in thy pilgrimage not thy great
employments; love them as ever about to leave them: use them not as the things
for which thou do live, but as the things without which in this estate thou
can not live. Please not thy self in any thing wherein thou do not see thy
God; Let his smile in and his glory by every gift only comfort thee. Delight in
nothing upon earth for it is self. Persons that are inclined to be gross in
their body must use much exercise: and they who have abundance in the world,
should take pains with their hearts, lest while they get the world they loose
their God, and please themselves in their sin; please not your selves in the
sensual using of the Creatures, but in the spiritual enjoyment of the
Creator; Be not taken with what thou have in gift, but what thou have in love;
not with with anything the Lord gives thee, unless he gives himself it. So much
for the second practical inference, viz. of direction, and so for the whole.

That which followed, in the preaching of this Sermon; in regard it only
conceirned their Lordships is set down in the Epistle to them.

FINIS.

