A short, sure, and conscientious EXPEDIENT FOR Agreement and Peace.

TENDERED To the two Houses of PARLIAMENT:

WITH An Appeal to the Assembly of Divines; AND An Application to the People,
and the Ministry of the KINGDOM.

July Written by D. J.

NUMB. 30.2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath, to bind his
soul with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.

Printed for I. G. 1648.

A short, sure, and conscientious Expedient for Agreement and Peace.
THe King and the two Houses of Parliament declaring mutually, that they took
up Arms for the same reasons, intents, and purposes, it is a wonder how at first
they fell out, and a greater wonder that hitherto they are not reconciled.

The Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament. They have the precedence,
because they were first in Arms. The Declarations of the two Houses of
Parliament.


In the conclusion of their Declaration of 26. May, 1642. apprehending very
justly, that their expressions there would beget at least a great suspicion of
their Loyalty, they say, They doubt not but it shall in the end appear to all
the world, that their endeavors have been most hearty and sincere for the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives, the
Laws and Liberties of the Land, and the Privileges of Parliament, in which
endeavors by the grace of God, they would still persist, though they should
perish in the work.

In like manner, June 2. when they published their Propositions for bringing in
money or Plate to raise an Army, they declared, That whatsoever is brought in
shall not at all be employed upon any other occasion, then to maintain the
Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and his Person, in his royal
dignity, the free course of Justice, the Laws of the Land, the peace of the
Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament. Infinite are their Declarations
and professions in this kind.

The Kings Declarations. June 16. The Kings Declarations.
His Majesty published a Declaration to all his loving Subjects, exciting them
to bring in ready money and Plate, and to furnish him with Horse, Horsemen and
Arms, for defense of the Protestant Religion, the preservation of his royal
Person, the Laws, Liberties and peace of the Kingdom, and the Vindication of
the Privilege and Freedom of Parliament.

In his Declaration to all his loving Subjects concerning the proceedings of
this present Parliament, Aug. 12. His Majesty says, That nothing but the
preservation of the true Protestant Religion, invaded by Brownisme,
Anabaptisme, and Libertinisme, the safety of his person, threatened and
conspired against by Rebellion, and Treason, the Law of the Land, and liberty
of the Subject, oppressed, and almost destroyed by an usurped, unlimited,
arbitrary Power, and the freedom privilege, and dignity of Parliament awed
and insulted upon by force, and Tumults, could make him put off his long Robe
of Peace, and take up defensive Arms.

And in pursuance of these ends did his Majesty offer rop ositions accordingly,
The Kings Propositions conform to his Declarations. The Propositions of the two
Houses differing from their Declarations.
at all Treaties, where he might propose any thing.

But concerning the Propositions of the two Houses of Parliament, at the Treaty
at Uxbridge, his Majesty's Commissioners truly observed, That after a War of
near 4. years for which the defense of the Protestant Religion, the liberty,
and property of the Subject, and the privileges of the Parliament, were made
the cause, and grounds, in a Treaty of 20. days, nor indeed in the whole
Propositions upon which the Treaty should be, there has bin nothing offered to
be treated concerning the Breach of any Law, They alter the state of the war.
or of the Liberty, and Property of the Subject, or privilege of Parliament,
but only Propositions for the altering a Government established by Law, and by
making new Laws, by which almost all the old are, or may be cancelled.

I will not here dispute the Power of the two Houses of Parliament separate
from the King, but

That they cannot assent to any thing in Parliament, What the two Houses
cannot do in respect of the King and Crown. The Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy. What they are bound to do for the King and the Crown.
that tends to the disherison of the King, and his Crown, whereunto they are
sworn, is acknowledged by the Lords and Commons in full Parliament, 42. Ed. 3.

And, that they neither meant, nor had power, to hurt the Kings Prerogative, is
declared by the House of Commons at the passing of the Petition of Right,
Tertio Caroli.

Besides by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy they are bound positively, to
defend, and maintain his Majesty's Royal Person, with all the Prerogatives,
Privileges, and Praeheminencies belonging or annexed to the imperial Crown.
And they have bound themselves by the Protestation, with their lives, Power,
and Estates, The Protestation.
to defend and maintain His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate;
Together with the Power of privilege of Parliament, and the lawful Rights,
and liberties of the Subject: And to their power to oppose all such as shall by
force, counsel, conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing contrary in the
Protestation contained. And that they will not for hope, fear, or other
respects relinquish this promise, vow, and Protestation.

And by the solemn League and Covenant, The solemn League and Covenant.
in the preservation of Religion, and Liberties, to maintain and defend the
Kings Person, and Authority; without diminishing his just power, and
Greatness; And that they will all the days of their lives continue in this
Covenant against all opposition: The Expedient for Peace.
Now let the Lords and Commons proceed not according to their Strengths, and
Success, but according to their Legal, and voluntary Oaths; (i.) let them
maintain, and defend the King, and the Crown, his Majesty's Honor, and
Estate, his Authority, Power, and Greatness; And, an agreement, and peace,
will necessarily follow thereupon.

And I appeal to the Assembly of Divines (for their assent, or answer)
whether, in point of Religion, and Conscience, An Appeal to the Assembly of
Divines. How the two Houses and the Army have altered the state of the war.
they may proceed otherwise then according to the Oaths, Protestation, and
Covenant aforesaid. And whether they are not guilty of Disloyalty, and perjury,
proceeding otherwise? as the two Houses do, by their Propositions, devesting
the King and the Crown, of the chief Power, and Government, and establishing
it in themselves; And as the Army does, by their last Declaration, resolving to
settle the Government without the King, and against him, and against all that
take part with him: And hence our late Petitions, for his Majesty's return to
his Parliament, and Government, were so unwelcome to them. Besides, to involve
the People in this damnable Apostasy from their faith, How they would engage
the people in their designs.
and allegiance, to God and the King; and the better to carry on their
designs, have they framed an Engagement for us, to adhere to the Authority of
the two Houses of Parliament, (i.) To renounce the King, his protection and
Government, and to submit to the usurpation and Government of the two Houses of
Parliament: And this Engagement is pressed at this day in the several Counties
and Corporations; but I would have the people of the Kingdom generally to
consult their respective Ministers, How the people should consult their
Ministers about the Engagement.
Whether considering their Oaths aforesaid, they can engage with the Houses and
the Army, in their design against Monarchy, without high disloyalty, and
manifest perjury? Or, whether considering their Obligations by their
Protestation and Covenant, they ought not rather to oppose and fight against
them, for the defense and maintenance of the King and Crowns, and the
established Government of the Kingdom?

Numb. 30.1. Jf a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his
soul with a Bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according to all
that proceeds out of his mouth.
The Statutes of 11. R. 2. and of 2. H. 4. repealed.
11. R. 2. The Duke of Gloucester, E. of Derby (afterward H. 4.) with Arundell,
Warwick, and Nottingham, enforced the King to call a Parliament, compel him to
be there, else send him word they would choose another, having brought 40000. men
to London, and placed them there, etc. and at this Parliament they accuse
diverse Lords and others of the Kings Party (that withstood them) of high
Treason, for assembling and conspiring by force to destroy the King, Realm,
and Lords; who thereupon were attainted in Parliament. See Speed fol. 747, 748,
and 749. the Duke of Ireland routed by the Lords.

21. R. 2. The King having gotten the better of those rebellious Lords, they
for their old offense, though new matters were pretended, are in Parliament
attainted of Treason, and all those attainted by their power, in 11. R. 2.
restored.

1. Hen. 4. this King being by one of those five Lords (viz.) Derby, heir to
the D. of Lancaster, that procured and enforced the Act of 11. R. 2. which was
to that Kings prejudice, revives that Act, and repeales the other of 21. R. 2.
made to the disadvantage of him, and his parry, reciting also, that there were
so many pains of Treason ordained by Statutes, that none knew how to do,
speak or carry themselves, for fear of such pains; therefore the better to
draw on his maine end in the other, causes it to be enacted, that nothing shall
be Treason but according to 25. E. 3. which notwithstanding, diverse shifts and
evasions were afterward used to multiplied Treasons as formerly, which so
continued till

1. E. 6. c. 12. Enacted that all Treasons and Declarations thereof be referred
to 25. E. 3. except some Treasons in that Act mentioned, as denying the Kings
Supremacy, interrupting the succession of the Crown, etc. by which addition,
the former mischief was revived; and therefore by

1. Ma. c. 1. All treasons are limited to 25. E. 3. notwithstanding any Act
made before or after.

So that the Treasons of 11. R. 2. not being expressed in 25. E. 3. are no
Treasons now, unless they be so declared by force of 25. E. 3.2. the words
whereof are; And because many other like cases of Treason (which are not
expressed in that Statute) may happen in time to come, it is accorded, that if
any other case supposed Treason, which is not above specified, does happen
before any Justices, the Justices shall tarry without any going to Judgment of
the Treason, till the cause be showed and declared before the King and his
Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason, or other Felony: which
Declaration ought to be by the whole Parliament, and not by the King and Lords,
or King and Commons, or Lords and Commons. Cook Inst. 3. part. fol. 22.

FINIS.

