Judge Jenkin's PLEA

Delivered in to the EARL of Manchester, and the Speaker of the House of
Commons sitting in the Chancery at Westminster.

Which was Read by their Command in open Court, the 14. of February 1647.

And there avowed,

By DAVID IENKINS, Prisoner in Newgate.

Feb. 16 Printed in the Year, 1647.

Judge Jenkins PLEA, DELIVERED In to the EARL of Manchester, and the Speaker
of the House of Commons, sitting in the Chancery at Westminster.
Which was read by their command in open Court the 14. of February, 1647. and
there avowed,
By David Ienkins, Prisoner in Newgate.
I Have been required to appeal in Chancery the 12th. of this instant
February before Commissioners appointed by the two Houses for the keeping of
their great Seal, and managing the affairs of the Chancery.

I cannot, nor ought, nor will submit to this power; I am a Judge sworn to the
Laws. The Law is: First, 4^. pars instit. fol. 79. 8. Ed. 4. fol. 5. 9. Ed. 4.
fol. 15.
that this Court is coram Rege in Cancellaria: Secondly, the Chancellor or
Keeper of the great Seal is by delivery of the great Seal to him by the King,
and by taking of an Oath:

The Oath follows in these words.

1. Well and truly to serve our Sovereign Lord the King, 4^. pars instit.
fol. 88. 10. R. 2. rot. Parl. number. 8.
and his people in that Office.

2. To do right to all manner of people poor and rich, after the Laws and
usages of the Realm.

3. Truly to counsel the King, and his Counsel to conceal and keep.

4. Not to suffer the hurt or disheriting of the King, or that the Rights of
the Crown he decreased by any means as far as he may let it.

5. If he may not let it, he shall make it clearly and expressly to be known
to the King with his true advice and counsel.

6. And that he shall do and purchase the Kings proffit in all that he
reasonably may, as God him help, and the contents of Gods book.

The said Commissioners among others have imprisoned their King, Declar. 17.
Jannua. 1647.
have declared to the Kingdom that they will make no addresses or applications
to him, nor receive any from him.

Have counterfeited a new great Seal, Articuli sup. chartas chap. 5.
and after destroyed the true old great Seal which belonged by the Law to the
Kings custody.

These Commissioners have had no Seal delivered to them by his Majesty, have
taken no such Oath, or full ill kept it; and for these evident reasons grounded
upon the Fundamental Laws of this Land, these Commissioners have neither
Court, Seal, or Commission, and therefore I ought not against the Laws,
against my knowledge, and against my conscience submit to their power.

To affirm that they maintain the Kings Power and Authority in relation to
his Laws (as they often do) and restrain only his Person, is strange.

They must be remembered that the House of Commons this Parliament gave in
charge to Mr. Mr. Solicirot. Page 27.
Solicitor upon the prosecution of the Bill of attainder against the Earl of
Strafford, to declare the Law to be, that Machination of war against the Laws
or Kingdom, is against the King, they cannot be severed.

Mr. Pym had in charge likewise upon the same prosecution to declare. Mr. Pym.
Pa. 16.
That the King and his people are obliged one to another in the nearest
relations, he is a Father, and the child in law is called pars patris, he is
the Husband of the Common wealth, they have the same interests, they are
inseparable in their condition be it good or evil; he is the head, they are
the body, there is such an incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the
destruction of both. 20. H. 7. fol. 7. 8. H. 7. fol. 12. 1. Ed. 5. fol. 3. 4.
Ed. 4. fol. 25. 5. Ed. 4 fol. 29.
This agrees with our laws, and the law of this Land: In that argument of Mr.
Sollicitour, and discourse of Mr Pym directed by the House of Commons are
contained the true rights, liberties and Laws of the people deduced from our
Ancestors in all ages, and wherein there is no line or word but is agreeable to
the Laws, and is a necessary and useful book to be perused, and followed by
all; which book was published by Order of the House of Commons. If the
doctrine of that book had been followed, we had not been so miserable as we
are; neither had these great evils ensued, for the which the Land mournes.

In this month of February 6 years now past, Collect. of Ordinances, 1a.
pars. fol. 66.67.81.
the only difference between his Majesty and the prevailing party in both
Houses was touching the power of the Militia, which in plain English is power
over Sea and Land: this was the Sole quarrel: the King and his progenitors
have had it in all times, the Laws have fixed it upon them, they have used it
for the weal of the people: none of the Subjects ever had it, or claimed it;
the Laws deny it them; for the time they have had it, our pressures have been
miserable.

His Majesty has a numerous issue, and so has his Father; many great persons
of England, and Scotland are of the blood Royal, and all the Kings of
Christendom are of the same blood, so long as the Laws last, or any of the
said persons, or their descendants be liveing, this people shall have neither
peace nor profit; but all the confusions that are imaginable will atend them.

And therefore (at length) be good to your selves, restore our King, receive
from him an Act of oblivion, a general pardon, assurance for the arreares of
the Soldiery, and meet satisfaction to tender Consciences.

12. February, 1647. David Ienkins, Prisoner in Newgate.

FINIS.

