THE RIGHT WAY TO PEACE: showing the Art of Overcoming one another by LOVE: In
a Dialogue between a Friend and his Neighbor.

Humbly presented to the Right Honorable THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT:
AND To the whole Nation; by their old and faithful Servant in the Public,
THEODORE JENNINGS.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1647

THE Right way to Peace, showing The Art of overcomming one another by Love, In
a Dialogue between a Friend and his Neighbor.
Friend. WELL, overtaken neighbor, whither away.


Neighbor, I am going to bear Gods Word preached by a very ^^lous, and
powerful Preacher.


Friend. I pray you show me wherein his zeal and powerful preaching
consists.


Neigh. He deals very sharply against those that dissent from him, telling us
that such blasphemous Heretics, will corrupt as who are ignorant, and says,
that like an ill weed, they have overrun all the Land, but especially the Army.


Friend. Is this all his zeal, and powerful preaching: and wherein does he
say those Heretics do blaspheme?


Neigh. No, he is learned, jealous, and powerful in elegant expressions,
showing how Christ died for us upon the Cross, and has justified us from our
sins, and that if we will believe, we shall be saved and accepted by his
Mediation and Intercession for us unto God the Father: Wherein he shows us,
how the blasphemous Heretics say, moreover, that they are led by the spirit,
and that all men that shall be saved, must have the Spirit of God, and an
inward principle of new ^ight, and they say, they are carried out no further to
do, or act, any thing to God in Jesus Christ, then from what they Receive into
them by the Spirit, and say they have the mind of Christ, and do thereby know
and understand the things of God, which othe^^ ^^ith^^ do, (...) know; and he
(...) were but zealous, and faithful to God, and their own (...), they would
suppress these blasphemous Heretics


Friend. There are many now adays that can story out the Gospel with very
elegant expressions, to catch the ignorant, with the ^nticing words of man's
wisdom, yet these do persecute Gods faithful one, with (...) of spirit:
stirring up others to join with them, and are not afraid to bring r^^ling
accusations against them, which the Arch-angell (...) not do against the
Devil; Jude 6.
and by this manner of teaching they rob God of his honor, and the Gospel of
its power. And unto such the Apostle Paul says, My speech, and my preaching
was not with the enticing (or persw^sible) (...), but in demonstration of the
spirit, and power: (...) your faith should not stand in the Wisdom of men (...)
the power of God. And therefore Neighbor, I pity you for your ignorance, in
calling his bitterness zeal, and his elegant expression, powerful preaching;
and I pray such as he is, for (...), subtilty, and cruelty, in persecuting the
Saints, and leave (...) to God the righteous Judge of all (...) will (...) or
rebuke them.


Neigh. I thank you for your plain (...) me, because of my ignorance, I would
(...) the truth. I pray you (...) me the error of (...)


Friend, The (...) is in giving Gods (...) and not Gospel names, as Believers,
(...) and Brethren, all names showing forth Gods (...) in Jesus Christ, and
their (...) toward one another, (...)

A second (...) is, (...) they are led by the spirit, and that all men that
shall be saved, must have the Spirit of God, and an inward principle of new
light. Whereas the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.14. says, As many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. And verse 9* If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

Again, All Gods people must have an inward principle of new light, 2 Cor.
5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: old things are past away,
behold all things are become new. And if all things are become new, Gods people
must have an inward principle of new light. Know therefore, that what we
receive from the first Adam by generation, is old; and old things are past
away. Only what we enjoy in the second Adam by ^^generation is become new: So
that there is no truth (...) from Gods Word, then this: that all Gods people
are to have an inward principle of new light; New in Christ: If (...) Christ,
he is a new creature: And not become new in some things, but in all things;
Behold, all things are become new: behold it with admiration, and pry into it
believingly, Thou art wholly become new, thy light is become (...) all that is
in thee is new: Thou art born again, John 3.36. 1 Pet. 2.2. Ephesians 4.23. 2 Samuel
16.23.
Thou art born of the Spirit, Thou art new born, Thou art renewed in the spirit
of thy mind: And if not; That light which is in thee is (...): and then how
great accomplishments soever thou (...), of humane learning, and wisdom, though
thou speak as an (...), yet with A^^itophel, thou art but miserable: And
then as our Savior says, Mat 6.23, etc.
If therefore that light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness.

A third error is, in his taxing such of Heresy, as say they are no (...) out
to believe, or act any thing to God in Christ Jesus, then from what they
receive into them by the Spirit, and that they have the mind of Christ, and do
thereby know and understand the things of God; which others neither do, nor
(...) know: Whereas this truth also has appeared in the (...) in all ages, and
is asserted by the Apost^e Paul, where he says, We leaving the same spirit of
faith, 2 Cor. 4.13.
according as it is (...), I (...) believed, and therefore I have spoken; we
also believe, and therefore speak, Romans 8.15.
and again, (...) received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, (...) Father
It is the (...) privilege of the Apostle and all the Saints with him, we^^ven
we are no further carried out to believe, or act any (...) to God in Christ
Jesus, then from what we receive into (...) the Spirit. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20
Again he says, What know ye not that your body is the Temple of the holy
Ghost in you, which ye (...) of God and ye are not your own? For ye are bought
with (...) therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are
God.

Again, They that are joined unto the Lord, are one Spirit and therefore they
have the mind of Christ, and do (...) know and understand the thiings of God,
which (...) wether do nor can know: this most blessed (...) truth will clearly
appear in the Saints Union with (...) He that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit, and he (...) Spirit has the same mind; and therefore has (...)
Christ^t is an impression of the same Spirit that malt^^^ ^^^^^ness, in the
Spirit of the Believer, with Jesus Christ: (...) what the Lambs mind is, in
giving glory to God, the (...), and has been the mind of the Saints in all
ages, (...) suffering days of the victorious Saints: For the Scripture (...),
they that had gotton the victory over the beast, Rov. 15.2, 3.
and (...) image, and over his mark, and over the number of his (...), stood on
the sea of glass, having the hurps of God: And they sing the song of Moses the
servants of God, and of the (...) So that you plainly see, that the Saints, and
Moses, and the Lamb are al of one mind: they sing the same song with the lamb
in all ages. And although none know the mind of the Lord, that he may instruct
him: yet many, even all the Saints, know the mind of the Lord and are
instructed by him: for they (...) receive the things of the Spirit of God, and
know and understand the things of God, and have the mind of Christ; which
others, even all others, who receive the Spirit of the w^^ld, and are called
the natural man, have not; neither do not (...) know or receive the things of
the Spirit, because they are Spiritually discerned: as it is written: Eye has
not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9, etc.
nor as heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, (to wit, (...) man,
who is here opposed to the spiritual) the things which God has prepared for
them that have him: But God (...) revealed them (...) by his Spirit: for the
Spirit searches all things, (...) the deep things of God. Now we have
received, (...) spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we
might know the things that are freely given to (...) of God, But the (...) man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned: But he
that is spiritual judges (or disce^^^^h) all things, yet be himself it judged
((...) of (...) man. For who has (...) the mind of the Lord that he may (or
shall) instruct him? But we (...) the (...) of Christ. His last Error is his
teaching his (...) that if they were but zealous and faithful to God and their
own (...) they would suppress these (...) this (...) first to judge those
breathren for whom Chirst dyed; not in an ordinary way, but with the highest
(...) and (...) of spirit: for he knows that those, whom he (...) will with
the Apostle (...), That after the way which they call Here^^^ (...) the God of
our father believing all things which are (...) and the Prophets; Acts 24.14,
15 16.
And have hope toward God, which the (...) also allow, that there (...) of the
(...): And (...) have always (...) god and toward men. Romans 14.3, 4. 11, 12,
23.
For whether (...) the Lord: or whether (...) dye, we dye (...) Lord; whether
we have therefore or dye, we are the (...). I (...), with the Apostle Paul, say
(...) all such, (...) his own master he stands or falls: (...) shall
confess to God; (...) bling block, or an occasion to fall in his brother; way:
which such Ministers do in^ notable manner, by calling Gods (...) ones
blasphemous Heretics. And

Secondly, by stirring up their hearers unto solition; under pretense of zeal
and faithfulness unto God and their own (...) to suppress them but tell me by
what means you (...) would have them suppress.


Neigh. I shall tell you what I heard reported of one of these Ministers, that
week when the Parliament and their Speakers were driven away by that Riotous
insolency of those (...), from Westminister to the Army: How he was seen to go
from house to house, unto those members that were (...) in that Junto during
the Parliaments absence. And the Lords day following, being the first of
August, one that was in his Congregation the proceedings of the Londoners, the
Apprentions and that Junto: for the prayed God to turn the hearts of the (...),
and that they, and those that were fled unto them, would take example by the
Parliament (for so he was pleased to call them) and by the Citizens of London,
to live in godliness, unity and peace: and prayed also that the Country might
come in to the timely ^yd and relief of the City: whereby I suppose that these
zealous would have their hearers to use all possible means by the dint of the
sword to oppose and suppress such whom they asperse with Blasphemy and Heresy,
as an acceptable service, thereby to procure peace from God unto the Land: as
it is written, The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he
does God service: and therefore show me by what rule you pity such, who are
bent against you with such error and rancor, that if it were possible they
would (...) your name, not sparing any cost or design (...) by the sword or any
ways to do it.


Friend. I shall satisfy you one of the Old and New (...), both by precept and
example that we are to pity to pray for, and to do good, to our (...).

(...) and love (...) and put the gainsayers to silence: I pray therefore
proceed.


Frien. In the Law, Levit. 19.18. it says, Thou shall not avenge nor bear any
grudg against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self; I the Lord. Here we have the duty of love in the extent of it, doing
our enemies no evil; loving them as our selves: and we have the command and
example from Jehovah, the Lord; I am the Lord; and therefore, my command and
example are unquestionably to be obeyed.

Secondly, Our Lord Jesus Christ makes out this truth in the Gospel most
clearly, saying, But I say unto you, Mat. 5.44, etc.
Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
pray for them which dispitefully use you and persecute you: That ye may be the
children of your Father which is in heaven: And he gives the reason why we
should follow Gods example, from other convincing Arguments; although that were
enough, That he is our Father which is in heaven. Ye we are to observe him in
his gracious workings toward all men upon the earth: For he makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the
unjust. Again, he appealeth unto the testimony of our consciences from the
entireness of our faith and love, in singleness of heart doing what we do unto
the Lord and not unto men: looking for our reward from God only: For if ye love
them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not the Publicanes the same? And
if ye salute your brethren only, what do you (...)? Do not even the Publicanes
do so? And then we have the highest rule and clearest demonstration of a
Christians love in our Fathers perfection, Be ye therefore perfect, as your
Father, which is in heaven, is perfect.

Again, We have the example of Elisha, in the Old Testament, bidding the King
of Israel set bread and water before his enemies, 2 King. 6.22, 23.
the Syrians that they may eat, and drink, and go to their master. And the King
prepared great provisions for them, and when they had eaten, and drunk, he sent
them away.

And also we Gentiles, who at that time were without Christ, being aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.
and strangers from the Covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God
in the world. Yet then, even then, the Church of the Jews pitied us, and did
remember us at the throne of grace, saying, We have a little sister, Cant. 8.8,
9.
and she has no breasts; what shall we do for our sister, in the day when she
shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver;
and if she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.

And in the new Testament we have the example of Jesus Christ, and his servant
Steven, pitying, and praying for their enemies. Our Lord Jesus Christ being
persecuted in his own person, and in his members; pity them often, and most
tenderly, saying, Mat. 23.37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which
were sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children together,
even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? And
when they were come unto Calvary, there they crucified him: Lu. 23.33.34.
Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

And when those, that were esteemed the learned men of those times, Acts.
6.9.10. etc.
disputing with Steven, were not able to resist the wisdom, and the spirit by
which he spoke: They suborned men, and stirred up the people, and the Elders,
and the Scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the
Counsel, and set up false witnesses, which (accusing him of blasphemy) said,
this man cease not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and
the Law. For we have he^^d him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy
this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us. And then
Steven answered and spoke unto them, not with the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power. Acts 7.59.60.
Yet they stoned Steven, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit, and he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord lay not this sin
to their charge. So that here we see Steven, though not in degree, yet in truth
is perfect in love, even as our Lord Jesus Christ, and our father in heaven is
perfect. So that although he is stoned to death, and by the Testimony of false
witnesses, yet he pittieth them, and prays for them, that God may do them
good in the highest degree, even by pardoning this, even this their great sin,
and thus in his life and death, he is made conformable to our Lord Jesus
Christ. And when Steven had thus prayed, he fell asleep, his spirit reposed in
rest and peace. And our Lord Jesus Christ, and blessed Steven obtained their
requests. For Saul, who consented unto the death of Steven, at whese seet they
that stoned him laid down their Clothes, though now a persecuter, is, after
this, by our Lord Jesus Christ called unto grace, and made Paul a faithful
Apostle, even a preacher of the Gospel of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, And many of them that crucified our Lord Jesus Christ, even about 3000,
were added unto the Church at one Sermon. O therefore, let us live in love even
toward our enemies, praying for pitying, and doing good to them that hate us
and dispitefully use us. By this we shall bring glory to God, and have peace in
our selves here with rest, and sweet repose to our spirits at our death, and
declare our selves to be the children of our heavenly father, by being perfect
in love, and not only so, but in truth and acceptance also, we are perfect,
even as our Father which is in heaven is perfact.


Neighbor, O blessed truth. I heartily desire the father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, by the spirit of grace to form me, and all his, into this blessed frame
of love. I pray you, show me how we may become instrumental, to reclaim and
reduce our enemies from the Error of their evil way.


Friend. As God shall enable me by the word of truth, and his spirit of truth
forming me into the truth, I shall dedare it unto you; and in this respect, let
us be careful in our Conversations to follow Righteousness, faith, charity,
peace, 2 Timothy 2.20.
with all that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. Look how others have been
instrumental in following Righteousness, faith, charity and peace, praying and
calling upon the Lord for their enemies out of a pure heart; and be you the
like in calling upon God for your enemies, and as you have the practice of our
blessed Savior, and of his servant Steven. So be sure that you pray without
wrath, for the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. Jam. 1.20.
And in this you will show forth your righteousness, faith, charity, and peace
toward your enemies, in the sight of God, when you call upon the Lord for
them, out of a pure heart. But be sure to follow this manner, of calling upon
the Lord for them: Tim. 2.8.
Every where lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting.

Secondly, In order to our enemies themselves, when they show much hatred and
cruelty against us, take heed that we show much love, patience and kindness
unto them; when they curse let us bless; follow the Commandment, pursue it,
obey it in the Lord, for this is right: Thus let us follow righteousness and
peace toward our enemies, and in nothing be provoked either by their
unrighteous words or deeds; but exercise faith, in believing that God, who out
of the riches of his freegrace, when thou wast an enemy and ungodly, did then
call thee out of thy natural and sinful condition unto the grace wherein thou
stand, the same God may call him also unto the same grace together with
thee. Again, in the exercise of thy charity and peace toward thine enemy, be
exceeding tender unto him or her in the day of distress; this may work high
thoughts in them of Gods goodness, who has kindled some sparks of his goodness
in thee, and discovered it by thy conversation unto them: If thine enemy
hunger, give him meat; if he thirst, Prove. 25.21. Romans 12.20, 21
give him drink: this will extract goodness out of him toward thee; and by this
means, thou heapest coals of fire upon his head, not to consume him, but to
save and to refine him from that dross that is in him, even as the refiner
tries the gold from the dross, by heaping coals of fire upon the head of it, in
the refiners vessel: go thou and do good in like manner, but be sure thou be
drawn forth in thy spirit with much love to thine enemy, in showing him what
great things God has done for thee: breaking and breathing forth unto him in
high expressions of Gods love in Jesus Christ, toward wretched sinners: Do as
the Lord did with the woman of Samaria at the Well, and draw Waters of Salvation
out of that Well, to quench thine enemies thirst after sin: And as thou do
feed him when he is an hungry, and give him drink when he is a thirst; so cloth
him with the like affection when he is naked: and thus supply thine enemy in
every distress, according to the kind of it: this may work much good in thine
enemy, for it is Gods way thus to refine his heart from its corruption: if
thine enemy be in prison go unto him, if he be sick visit him: but still, what
ever it be thou do unto him, or for him, or her, be sure to carry the tender
bowels of Christ Jesus with thee in thine heart: and still drop out the
sweetness of wisdom and love unto him, or her, in the free love of God and
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ unto sinners, it is possible that God may
discover himself unto them, by the work of his Spirit in them, and so what thou
have done shall be laid up with the Lord Jesus Christ and imputed unto thee, as
it had been done unto himself, although thou know it not.


Neigh. Many now adays oppose the ways of God, with foolish and unlearned
questions, which savor nothing of Gods spirit at all, but do only gender
strife, what are we to do in this case?


Friend. We are to consider we are Gods servants, and are to act only according
to his Commands, which in this case is, That the servant of the Lord must not
strive: but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient, 2 'Tim. 2.24. etc.
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure
will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth; And that they may
recover themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.


Neigh. There are many that oppose that sweet and spiritual conversation, and
affirm that they only are in the truth, and onght zealously to contend, and to
hate such as oppose them with a perfect hatred; and they make it their work to
sow sedition amongst brethren; and make contention amongst the loving Saints,
they themselves professing godliness. What are we to do in this case?


Friend. We are still to have recourse unto the holy Scriptures, 2. Tim. 3.15.
which are sufficient to make us wise to salvation, through faith in Christ
Jesus. And if any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally
to al men, and upbraideth not: and it shall be given him. But in no case
decline Gods counsel, but hear and do. And to this purpose the Scripture
says; Jam. 3.13, 13, etc.
Who is a wise man, and enduod with knowledge amongst you, let him show out of
a good conversation his works, with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter
envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.
This wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, (natural)
anddevillish. For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, (tumult,
unquictnesse) and every evil work. But the wisdom which descends from above,
a first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy
and good fruits, without partiality (or wrangling) and without hypocrisy. And
the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace. Rom
12.18.
We are to follow the rule, and that is: If it be possible, as much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all men. Sow the fruit of righteousness in peace,
while others sow the fruit of unrighteousness, in raising sedition and
contention. Be meek and wise toward them that oppose and contend, but give
them no advantage in any thing. Be wise as Serpenes, yet innocent as Doves.
Thus Paul took the Corinthians in a wile, while he transfers their error, who
were misled by the enticing words of man's wisdom, not unto their unfaithful
teachers, but in a figure unto himself and Apollos, 1 Cor. 4.6.
that the Corinthians might lean in them, not to think of men above what is
written: and that no one of them be puffed up for one against another. And thus
the Apostle takes down the spirit of envying, and strife, and the divisions
that were among them: that they might learn, not to exalt one for his humane
eloquence, nor despise another, because he taught them plainly, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power.

Secondly, sow Peace among these envious and contentious ones, by making them
to understand that thou have so much charity as to believe they are Christians,
though as yet but babes in Christ, and such as are not spiritual, but very
carnal in comparison of grown and strong Christians, and that they are to be
fed with milk, and not with meat: And the Apostle gives the reason, saying, I
have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hither to ye were not able, 1
Cor. 3.2, 3.
neither yet are ye able. For ye are yet carnal, for while there is envying
and strife, and divisions (or factions) are ye not carnal, and walk as men?
Let us therefore receive them as brethren and babes in Christ, while they are
yet men in corruption; and have not overcome that wicked one, as those young
men, and strong, and Fathers that are experienced in the exercise of faith and
love, have done; who do not live after the flesh, as these babes do in strife
and debate. but after the spirit, and our Lord Jesus, in all wisdom, meekness,
love, and forbearance toward them, because their sins are forgiven them;
condescending unto their weaknesses and infirmities, as much as may be: but let
us by no means despise them, although they do judge us, Romans 14.3, 4.


Neigh. You know that many in their rash zeal have been as earnestly bent
against this army, as Saul was to root out the Gibe onites from among Israel. I
pray you show me what God has done by, for, and in this army.


Friend. From the beginning God has appeared much by, for, and in this Army,
in carrying them on in his own way: when they were first modelized, the
godliness of their Officers and Commanders many of them, and the inexperience
of the common soldier was derided of many that were esteemed Some body in the
first army; who threw up their Commissions, and with the rude multitude
sentenced all, both Parliament and Army, to be in a lost condition: But who
art thou that despisest the day of small things, for not by might, nor by
power, but by his own strength and wisdom has God done all. O therefore, give
him the whole glory in all those great things which at first he did in this
Army, in making them as holy and faithful as ever were any, who by faith
subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.
and wrought righteousness.

Secondly, God has done as much, by, and for this Army, as might convince all
the gainsayers, if their eyes were not wholly blinded, that God is with them
of a truth: they obtained a most glorious victory and deliverance at Nasby
field, the first fruits and earnest of Gods present goodness and future
^^^sence of love, unto them; in so much, that many of them that believed, were
then effectually established and grew consident, that the same God that had
been with them, would still be with them, and deliver them by his own
assistance of them, unto the end; and the Lord their God did so; yea, they took
his counsed, and sought him in all things, even him alone, in whom they always
bousted, saying, God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble, therefore will not we fear. And when they obtained any victory or
de^^^ance, they not only themselves, gave God the glory, but also strirredup
others to do it, saying, Come behold the works of the Lord, Psalm. 46.1, 2.8, 9.
behold what desolations he has make in the earth, he makes wars to cease
unto the ends of the earth.

O sing unto the Lord a new song, Psalm. 89 1.
for he has done marnellaus things: his right hand and his boly arm has
getten him the victory. Yen, when God had put all, that did openly resict, to
^lence by them: Yet still they saw an enemy, and weiced upon the Lord for his
salvation and deliverance, not only unto themselves, but even unto the whole
Kingdom, for whose sakes they first engaged, and in whose cause they had spent,
and were ready to spend their dearest blood, to setile a firm and wellgrounded
peace: Believing that although they were but as the worm Jacob in comparison of
their politic and potent enemies, who swarmed in al^pares and places, even in
the chiefest Chamber of strength and Judicature; that God would by them
instrumentally recover and preserve this languishing, sick, and perishing
Kingdom, and that they should become useful in reviving the dying hopes of the
Liberties, Rights, and Interests of this wretched Nation: Whereunto the
politic Enemy had inter-woven themselves, and like the moth, not only almost
eaten them into pieces, but also, with them, out free Parliament, who have been
the strongest, richest, and preciousest covering and clothing that ever God
gave unto this Kingdom, even then when they were in their weakest, poorest, and
nakedest condition that ever they were in: Yea, also the power of the Enemy
was prepared as a Lion ready-to rend and tear in pieces, and to take all away;
saying, None shall be able to rescae, save, or deliver the prey out of our paw:
Yet then, even then God performed, unto his servants, all his goodness
according as he had made them to put their trust in him.

For although the Enemy had forced our Parliament, and as they thought,
accomplished their work, and fully obtained their desired design: Yet now,
even now, at this very time, God made the Army instrumental and useful in our
greatest distress, and restored the Parliament by their despised Army, unto
their former freedore, splendour, beauty and glory; and have cleared up their
own faithfulness and godly integrity unto all men, maugre the malice of all
their enemies, who rewarded their good with evil. But yet they contiuned good
and peaceable unto them: Yea, our Parliament is secured, Gods people in all
places revived and greatly comforted, the Enemy taken in their own craftiness,
and fallen into the pit which themselves had dug, are greatly discouraged;
and the Kingdom, we hope, in a good way to be delivered, secured and settled:
For God has said, I am thy God, I will strengthen thee: yea, I will help thee:
yea, I will up old thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Fear not thou
worn Jacob, and ye men of Israel, Esai. 41 10, 14 15, 16,
I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel.
Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument, having teeth; thou
shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as
chafe: thou shall fan them, and the win! shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shall rejoice in the Lord, and glory in
the boly one of Israel.

Now therefore give me leave to say, O ye his holy ones, O ye his People, in
the Parliament, in the Army, in the City, and the whole Kingdom: Stir up your
selves in the Lord, and be ye thankful, yea, be yestrong, courageous, and very
unanimous; with one shoulder to go on, and finish the work of your God; for he
has promised, that he will be with you, and that he will never leave you, nor
forsake you.


Neigh. It comes to my mind how I have heard that the Army were divided and
dispersed, at above one hundred in let distance, in their quarters, at that time
when the Parliament and their Speakers were most barbarously driven from
Westminster, unto them; and that the Junto and the City of London, with all
their prepared forces, contrary to the Ordinances of Parliament, being b^^ted
to make war against them: Yet then the Lord wrought marvdlousty, in returing
the Parliament, and their Army together with them, within one week, in peace
and triumph to sit in their places, in Westminster, without the least
appearance of opposition, these Army marching peaceably through London, without
doing the least injury or affront to any; shilenced the Enemy: their
gentlenesle, meekness, and quiet order, was admired of all: And yet now again
many do speak against, and repine at the Parliament, and their Army; may we not
fear that this is one cause why Gods hand is out in wrath against us, by the
present dispersed Pestilence.


Friend, The people murmuring and practsing against the Parliament and their
Army, whom God has eminently exalted with his own right hand by many signs
and wonders, may be one cause of wrath upon us, both in the being, and
continance also, of the so much dispersed Pestilence, as it was with Israel in
the Wildemesse, first they believed the evil report, Numb. 13.32.33. and Chup.
14.
the Spies had brought upon the Land of Canaan, and then they murmured against
Moses and Aaron, and they said one to another, Let us make a Captain, and let
us return to Egypt. They intended to make wat against them that should resist
their design; but Moses, Aaron, Joshua, and Calcb spoke unto them saying, only
rebel not ye against the Lord and although they persuaded them in much love and
meckness of spirit, yet they bade stone them with stones. But the Lord said
unto Moses, how long will this people provoke me, and how long will it be ere
they believe me, for all the signs that I have showed among you? I will smite
them with the pestil^^^^ and disi^^^eril them. Even thus it is with those that
have received on evil report, and believe it against the Lords people; here
they rebel against the Lord: Their sormer slavery they esteem their liberty,
and in their hearts they are turned back into Aegyp^; they lust to follow their
old manners in life and Religion: seeding upon garlic and omons, and do loath
those pure and heavenly dispensations of spiritual truth, where with we are sed
daily; and call the spiritual food light manna; desiring to live in darkness
and consusion in their own understandings; despising, rejecting, and
persecuting the Lord Jesus in his members; and therefore they are spiritually
called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified; but tho Lord faith
unto all such, he will smite them with the pestilence, and difinherit them; and
it may be so because of their great wrath and hatred against the Lords people,
who are very d^^^ and render unto him; Exo. 4 22. and 19.5. Zech 2.8. Ephesians.
5.30. 1 Cor. 12.12. and 6.17. and 2.16. ult. 1 John. 2.27. Psalm. 105.14.15.
They are his first born, his pec^^d^^^-treasure, and jewels; and who so
touches them, touches the apple of his eye; they are flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone; they are one body, and have one spirit, and the mind of
Christ, having the same annoynting; God has rep^^^ed Kings for their sakes;
saying. Touch not mine annainted, nor do nay Prophets no har^^. And yet some
who are their servants, act most against them: for about five years fince.
December next, a messenger of special trust in the Parliament service, going in
at the head quarters at Winsor, was by a Lievt. of Dr^goons and some of his
company then with him in the Parliament service, surprised and drive^ back to
Slo^gh, where the said Lein. took the State Letters, from him: brake them open,
Communicated them to ethers, and kept them together with the messenger in
ducance all night: Some of the Kings forces then quartering at Maidenhead, and
the Leiut. at Horton, near Winsor: Most part of the night being spent in
Carowsing of healths, ribaldry songs, and discourses between him and his
Souldery. Mean while one of his company told the messenger, that he knew no
reason of the War between the King and the Parliament, except it were to
exhaust the treasure and strength of a generation of Tub-preachers, who at
present disturbed all things in the Parliament, the Army, in London, and in the
whole Kingdom: and he said, these Tub-Preachers intended to abolish the book of
Common Prayer, to put down Organs in the Minsters, and did preach in house^;
pers^^uring Gods faithful Ministers with imprisonment, and named Doctor
Oldsworth, and some others. And said, that when these Tubmen were brought l^w,)
he did not doubt but the King, the Army, and the Parliament would agree in one,
for they were all of one Religion, and would suppress all who were contrary
unto them. The said messenger procured the said Leiut. to be taken into custody
the next morning, until he should be tried by a Counsel of War for his said
fact.

He did also faithfully declare the whole business before a Committee o^ Lords
and Commons, and the Militia of London, at Haberd shers Hall.

And the last year, one who had been very lavish in speaking reproachiully
against the Parliament, the Kingdom, and this their Army, taxing them with
Heresy and Blasph^^^y, urging it without any distinction, in much bietemess
against the godly party in general, being asked what he thought of diverse
eminent Preachers (together with other Christians) who were then nominated unto
him, being persons unblameable and suitable to the Gospel, both for their
Doctrine and Conversation? He answered, that those and all such as they were,
were the vilest of all men, the basest and very worst of all the rest; and that
they would make them appear to be so unto all men very shortly; but God has
disappointed them, and some of the chielest of them, who had brought up an evil
report upon our parliament, their Army, and the rest of Gods people, ^^rring up
the multitude to murmur and practice evil against them, have died of the plague
before the Lord, Number. 14 37. and v. 20.
even as they did who stirred up Israel to murmur against Gods instruments,
even Moses and Aaron: whereas the Parliament and their Army also, are likewise
instruments in Gods hand to accomplish his own work, Hab. 2 3.
even his great work in Gods due time, For the vision is yet for an appointed
time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for
it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry? No, not so much as one day
beyond the appointed time. Exodus 12.41. Heb. 10.38.
Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back (though unbelief) my
soul (says the Lord) shall have no pleasure in him. But let us not cause to
entreat the Lord to forgive the iniquity of this people, that according unto
the greatness of his mercy: the wrath may be removed, the nation cured.


Neighbor, Seeing we must now part. I pray show what goods means ought all,
and each of Gods people to use, for the removing of Gods Judgments, and the
settling of a well grounded peace, personal and national.


Frien. I shall conclude this point with some short observations out of these
Scriptures; Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a shame to any people:
Prove. 14.34. Cap. 10.9.
He that walks uprightly walks surely, but he that perverteth his way shall
be known: These Scriptures concerns the duty of each particular person:
Righteousness and uprightness go hand in hand and they cannot be severed.
Righteousness more generally relates to men of authority, who sit at the stern
of Government to guide the public in a right course, by executing justice and
judgment to every one in an even and just balance: but as righteousness
relates to each particular Christian, being the subject in whom it is, it
flows from an inward principle of the holy Ghost in a sanctified heart, and
is one of the pillars of Gods Kingdom, which consists in righteousness and
peace and joy in the holy Ghost: Romans 14 17, 18
For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable, to God, and
approved of men: Here is peace passing all understanding and acceptance with
God: yea this righteousness secureth and comfort us with joy unspeakable in
the holy Ghost; so powerfully from within, acting that outwardly also, which is
approved of men; who seeing our good works, even as a light shining before
them, do glorify our Father which is in heaven: the righteous have a promise
to be kept in the way, even in Gods way; for Prove. 11.3.5, 6
the integrity of the upright shall guide them: yea, the righteousness of the
perfect shall direct (or rectify) his way, and shall deliver them: such do love
God sincerely, and have not only a promise of present grace, but of a future
supply thereof; Ephesians. 6.24. and ver. 5, 6.
Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; sincerity
puts the heart into a righteous frame, and keeps it so, such doing all things
in singleness of heart, as unto Christ; and not with eye service, as
men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart: Righteous and just men are obedient unto all lawful and just commands in
their several relations and places among men; even as all the creatures do
readily obey the word of the Lord. It was the Centurions argument unto our Lord
Jesus, to command, and his servant should be healed, and he gives an instance
not only from his own duty, but also from his own command and their integrity
that were under his authority, saying, I am a man under authority, Mat 8 8, 9.
having soldiers under me; and I say to this man, go, and he goes; and to
mother, come, and he comes; and to my servant, do this, and he does it: And
therefore he much more believes that our Lord Jesus Christ, by his sovereign
authority over all the creatures, having all power in himself, might but give
the word of command, and he should be obeyed: and therefore he says, do but
speak the word only and my servant shall be healed: and it was so accordingly
unto him: so then those, even all those, who are faithful and upright, will obey
the word of Command in their several relations wherein God has placed them,
both in respect of their duty toward God himself, and also toward all men.
And thus we see that he that walks uprightly walks surely: such decline
neither to the right hand nor to the left: but he that perverteth his way shall
be known; God will discover him sooner or later, if he walks in hypocrisy:
but if he fall into open profaneness, he discovers himself, and bearing thorns
and briers, is rejected, Heb. 6.8.
and is high unto cursing, whose end is to be burned: Even as the good tree
that brings forth good fruit does inherit the blessing; his uprightness does
bring forth righteousness also: thus righteousness exalts a Nation, that is,
that Nation or Kingdom that is governed uprightly, in righteousness, justice
and judgment it is exalted: and thus the Judges, who judged Israel righteously,
being set up immediately by God, exalted that nation all their days: And so did
David, and Jehoshaphat, and all the good Kings of Israel: (Jehoshaphat set
Judges in the Land; and said to the Judges, 2 Chro. 14.5, 6, 7.
Take heed what ye do; for ye judge not far man, but for the Lord, who is with
you in the judgment: Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take
beed and do it: for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of gifts:) And they exalted Israel all their days; yea
righteousness exalts each person and their family: we see it in Noah, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Levi, Rahab, Ruth, Mordecay and Hester: So that as all
unders and governors, even so every one of Gods people among us are to show
forth righteousness in their several Relations and Calling^^ this is the way
not only to exaltation, but also to have the denomination of righteousness: and
so it is written, He that does righteousness is righteous: 1 John 3.7.
This is the way to exale this nation, and to settle a wel-grounded peace, and
to makeall things go well with us, in this, and the other Kingdoms ^. as it is
said unto Shallum the son of Josia, Shall thou reig^^ (...) thou closest thy
self in Cedar? Jer. 22.15, 16.
Did not thy father (...) and drink, and do judgment and justice, and them
(...) well with him? He judged the cause of the poor and needy, them it was well
with him? was not this to know me, says the Lord: Yea what does the Lord
require of that, Mich. 6.8.
but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk hambly with thy God? Again, all
those that work righteousness are the Seminaries of peace: the fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace: yea, our blessed Savior
says, Blessed are the peace makers: for they shall be called the children of
God: Mat. 5.8.
That peace that flows from righteousness is a sure mark of our adoption, and
consequently of a most blessed, (...) and lasting peace unto that person or
nation: O then, let us henger and thirst after righteousness, and we shall not
only be blessed, but also filled with it; then our righteousness will run down as
a mighty stream, unto all persons, in all places and rehations: withoutnespect
of persont, And the work of right ^^^sne^ss shall he peace, and the effect of
righteousness, ^p^ietness, and assur^^de for ever ^ Isa 32:17.
Thus shall righteousness exalt our nation But sin is a shame to any people:
this is the best fruit of sin, to be ashamed of it: O therefore take heed that
thou art not one of them that have a whoresforehead, and refuse so to be
ashamed; all such shall become a shame and a reproach unto themselves, and unto
men and angels, and before Jesus Christ: sin is a shame unto all or to any
people personal or national; when he or they continued in sin, it brought them
very low: by sin all nations jointly have been over thrown and destroyed, as in
Noah's Flood, Severally, it overthrew Sodom and the Cities about it. Personally,
not only Haman, Achitophel, Absalom, Judas and King Herod, but also Achan and
his whole family. O how often it overthrew and destroyed Gods own people, the
nation of the Jews. Sin overthrew that mighty monarchy of Babylon and all its
glory: yea it will destroy all the world of wicked men, and spiritual Babylon
shall be quite overthrown by their sin, and become a perpetual shame: Wherefore
come out from among them, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18
and he y^ s^^^^r ate, says the Lord, and touch not the uncle^^ th^^g. (...)
is an unclean thing: it befits not Gods children, who are to be holy, as their
Father, which is in heaven, is holy: all unrighteousness is sin, especially the
unrighteousness and cruel soulmurthering sin of that scaple^ whore, who does
also shed the blood of the Saints, and is therefore most unclean: O let us
touch no unclean thing: And I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you,
and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these promises (dearly beloveil) let us cleanse our selves
from all fil^^^^ss of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the f^^ of
God: Yea, let every one of us in particular, show forth our uprightness in
being examples of righteousness unto each other, in our entire walking with the
Lord in all his ways, in soul and body and spirit, in our several places and
relations: And then our righteous God, according as he has testified unto us,
will exalt our nation, and will settle unto us a firm and wel-grounded peace:
Thus righteousness shall exalt our nation: for he that walks uprightly,
walks surely, Amen.


Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.
14o Octobr. 1647.
FINIS.

