Anti-Merlinus: OR A CONFVTATION of Mr. William Lillies Predictions for this
year 1648. comprised in two Books:

One of which he calls Merlinus Anglicus, or An Ephimeris: The other his
Prognostication of the Occurences in England, clearly proveing his predictions
in both Books to be groundless, absolutely void of Art, full of
contradictions, Treason, falsehood, and such a ridiculous piece of foolery, as
an Artist would blush to own, especially pretending (as he does) to ground his
predictions upon Cacodemologie, or conference with Devils, and lapsed Angels,
as well as on Astrology, an Art lawful and laudable.

As also the Authors own opinion, not only concerning what we may expect from
the present Treaty, and the principal Occurences of the remaining part of this
present year, but also his positive judgment touching the event and final
determination of this Civil War, Succinctly set down, together with his
reasons in Art therefore.

By H. Johnsen Student in Astrology.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

To His Highness the PRINCE of WALES.
Great Sir,
THat I approach so fair a shrine, with so coorse an offering; accuse not my
unworthiness, but your own worth which like the load-star, is pleased to
attract even the coorsest metal, to make known its power. And indeed to whom
else, (save to your Highness) should I Dedicate this work of mine, since it
was compiled for your dear Fathers sake, my most Gracious Sovereign? the
necessity of the times even requiring it of me, as a testimony of my unfeigned
love unto my native Country, and to its only father, to whom it is turned
Apostate yea a parricide. A task indeed not of much labor, yet of exceeding
danger, in such times asthese; I doubt not but your Highness knows full well,
that but to speak truth in England in these days, is now no less then
capitale crimen. I would therefore most willingly, if I could, have declined
this task, which I long forbore, expecting its performance, by some abler
hand; but no man would ease me of that labor. I held it therefore my duty to
my God, to my King, to my Country, to admonish all such, who through misguided
zeal or otherwise, engaged against our Sovereign, either in this or the
former War, to repent betimes, and to make their speedy atonement, both with
the one, and the other: or else to let them know, that their destruction
draws nigh; that Astrology is now clear and positive therein; that Mr.
William Lilly persuading them to the contrary, and encouraging them, with the
assurance of success; is a false Prophet, all which I doubt not (God willing)
but to prove so clearly by the rules of Art; and to confute him so manifestly,
that any man (though but of indifferent capacity) shall be easily able to
discern his predictions, to be mere forgeries, lies, and delusions, mine to
be grounded upon Art, and nature. Sir Christopher Heiden, a famous Scholar of
this Kingdom, in his defense of judicial Astrology, proves this Art to have
been deduced from God to Adam, to Sheth, to Abraham, that in all Ages,
Emperors, Kings, and men of the greatest rank, have not only been favourors
thereof, but Students also therein. I am therefore the more encouraged to
present your. Highness with a piece of this nature, not doubting but your
Highness will easily believe, that the Stars have influence upon all sublunary
bodies: doubtless omniscient God, never made any thing in vain, and
consequently did not oreate, all those glorious lamps of heaven, to bespangle
the firmament: the Scripture tells us, that they were made for signs, and for
tokens, and for days, and years; nay it goes further, and plainly affirms,
that the Stars in their course fought against Sisera; as I doubt not, but your
Highness shall perceive them to do, against yours and the Kingdoms Enemies.
I have strong, yet humble hopes, (let them not be accounted presumptions) that
your Highness will be graciously pleased, to give these my labors, an
acceptance, answerable to the ambition, wherewith he offers them, who is,

Your Highness most obsequious and ready servant.

To the Reader.
Reader,
Astrology is an Art I love, and I may lawfully do so: Cacodemologie I
extremely hate, for all men ought to abhor it. I list not mith Mr. Lilly, to
enquire into the name, nature, or potency of the guardian Angel of this, or any
other Kingdom in the Universe, nor care I to know, whether he be active, or a
sluggard. This is to taste of that forbidden fruit, wherewith our grand
Parents teeth were set on edge: for my part, I had rather know nothing at all,
then by unlawful Arts. Were there not a lawful Art, whereby a man might
foresee future accidents, I should never desire an ability to predict any
thing. That Astrology is an Art lawful enough, there is no man that is compos
mentis, will I think deny; and the validity thereof, I dare maintain against
all opponents, and yet that is a crabbed learning I will not deny. I am verily
persuaded, and that not without cause, that the Devil himself, knnowes very
little of future accidents, otherwise, or further, then he finds them legible,
in the aspects, and configurations of that starry volume of heaeven, why then
should any man be so curious, nay so mad as to desire to know that by the
Devil, which he himself may know without him, and lawfully from the same Art?
I deny not, but the Devil is the subtilest Astrologian in the world; his
angelical nature, and long experience must needs persuade us thereunto: but is
be not withal the father of lies? the word of God affirms him so to be, and
Mr. Lillies predictions for this year confirms it; for if it be possible they
out-doe the Devil himself for lying: such a ridiculous piece of folly,
foolery, and contradictions, an artist would blush to own. It is his own
axiom, and a very good one, that qui inter multa falsa, pauca miscet vera, non
est ei in recitando dicta ejus, quicquam tribuendum: he that lies commonly, and
speaks, or writes, but now and then, a truth, is neither to be trusted, nor to
be believed. I shall easily assent to Mr. Lilly, calling such Malignant
Prophets, with this axiom he lashes Mr. Wharton, for one only mistake, and
that a small one too; I mean comparatively small, in regard of his own folio
failings: for the substance of what Mr. Wharton predicted, was doubtless true;
and Mr. Lilly will find it so to be, and to his cost I fear. Upon the
Conjunction with Saturn and Mars, in the eighth house, near oculus tanri, he
predicted the utter overthrow of the Parliament: thus far I am confident he was
right enough, but the time of this their overthrow he assigned, to be about the
end of June last; and in this he failed I must confess: nor had he reason to
affirm it, for the Conjunction of those two Planets, was but then newly past;
did not yet begin to operate; their effects continue many months: and long
before the effects of that Conjunction cease; the Moon comes to be Eclipsed,
and in Gemini too, near the body of Saturn, in the seventh and eighth houses
of heaven; and if this do not totally overthrow them (provided that the King
and they agree not before, by a Personal Treaty) I shall for ever after
question the truth of that Art, which I so much love: the validity whereof, I
never yet found cause to doubt of. At least I shall exceedingly question, my
own judgment therein: the greatest fury and force, both of the Conjunction,
and the Eclipse also, will be over by the end of June next; and therefore my
hopes are strong, and my grounds in Art I am sure are good; that by that time,
most of our troubles will be overblown; yet perhaps not fully ended, for some
few months following. For this so small a mistake in Mr. Wharton, he calls him
Malignant Prophet, the scorn of Art, changelings, etc. but qui alterum incusat
probri ipsum se intueri oportet, he that is so busy to pick holes in the
coats of others, had need have more then an or dinary care of his own words
and actions. M. Lillies axiom could not reach Mr. Wharton; for he committed
not many, but one; not a gross, but a small mistake; I say comparatively
small, in respect of those grand falsehoods, those almost innumerable
contradictions, those many Treasons, and forgeries, committed to the Press
this year, by Merlinus Anglicus. I will here give you but a glimpse of his
failings and feignings this year, anon I shall set them ^out in more lively
colors; and marshall them together, and as near as I can, into rank and file.
Did he not in diverse places of his Ephimeris predict peace this year? and
absolutely affirm, that this would be a year of joy, and merryment, not of
Martial exploits, in this our Kingdom? Nay did he not basely, and
maliciously, scandalize Mr. Wharton, for predicting War? whither spoke true?
yet Mr. Lilly calls him manapian Astrologer; and this Utopian, and malignant
Astrology. Did not Mr. Lilly affirm, yea confidently also, that the Scots
would not assist the King this year against the Parliament? no nor any other
Kingdom else? he says, behold the Scots are honorable, and have no invasive
design against us: nay, he says farther, that they, who are of this opinion,
that the Scots will invade us, have no eyes: I shall willingly leave it to the
Readers judgment, who deserves most to ride blind bayard. He adds afterward,
that he can speak no evil of the Scottish Nation, since the heavens give him
no information; but after he hard that they were come, contrary to his
prediction, he could scarce invent any Oyster-whore language, bad enough to
revile them with. Again he says, that some think that the Parliament
Soldiers, will some of them dissert the cause, and fight Roundhead against
Roundhead, Citizen against Citizen; which yet he affirms will not come to
pass: and yet we all know, this and more was true enough; Ergo, Mr. Lilly said
false, and therefore is no son of Merlins: Is not I pray the Fleet revolted to
the Prince? have there been no knocks at all this year in London? is not this
Roundhead against Roundhead, Citizen against Citizen? He says of Ireland,
that this year, there will be in that Kingdom, such notorious, and so great
distractions; such fierce and cruel Wars, that of their sufferings, they, and
their Children shall know no end. Lo, they are quiet in that Kingdom; no such
thing at all has happened. Very little Blood (if any at all) has been shed in
that place: behold, they are willing, yea, and ready also to assist His
Majesty, our most gracious Sovereign. It seems this year, that his fancy was
overburthened (as himself confesses) with very intricate meditations; fine
white and yellow meditations: doubtless the Parliament cash which he has got,
for a reward of his Treason and Treachery, has had strong influence upon his
giddy crown, to fill it, with such strange Chymeraes: and certainly it were
madness in any, to belch out such horrid Treasons against his Sovereign: such
encomiums to his enemies, the Independents, and their Army, who have not only
robbed their gracious Sovereign of His native brithright, reviled His wife, and
Children, with most foul and false aspersions; but have Imprisoned, and
enslaved His person also; slain and robbed His Loyal Subjects, set all His
Kingdoms on a flame; if he were not well rewarded by his great Masters, for so
great Treason: It is now well known to all men, that have eyes to distinguish
chalk from cheese, white from black, light from darkness, that their
intentions, (not withstanding their fair pretenses for the Kings Honor, the
subjects Liberty, and the reformation of Religion) have been solely to enslave
their Sovereign, to reign themselves, and like Phenixes, to revive their
bankerupt fortunes, out of the Kingdoms ruins: and how far they have
accomplished these their aims, there is no discreet, and honest man in this
whole Kingdom, but evidently now perceives: how have they pillaged, robbed, and
plundered the whole Kingdom? to what vast sums, have they raised their own
tottering fortunes? how have they preferred to places of highest trust, and
greatest gain, such as have stoutly endeavored to raise them to this height,
either by sword or pen? this undeniable position being granted, as perforce
it must; it will also follow, that Mr. William Lilly deserves the Van, in this
list of Traitors, and consequently has been therefore well rewarded. For
doubtless Fairfax and Cromwell, could hardly have led the Kingdom by the nose
thus long, had not Merlinus Anglicus, that Welchified, London, Incubus, entered
the scene, and prevailed as much, upon the minds of giddy-headed men, with his
screechowles quill, as they upon their bodies, with all their Armies, Engines,
Weapons, and subtle machinations. For people are, and were ever too to apt to
be seduced by any, who but pretend to Astrology, Aecromancy, Chyromancy:
especially if they tell them that the things they predict are from God, or
revealed by some Angel, they will easily believe almost whatsoever such a one
shall assert: for bring them but once to believe, that there is validity in the
Art, and learning in the Artist, they come on of their own accords, to believe
what such an Artist affirms to be true, and infallibly to happen: although
it is certain, that the stars do but incline, cannot enforce. And most men
loving preferment, and estate in this world, more then their God, or their
King, the Lords Anointed, will easily make shipwreck of their duty to the one,
of their Allegiance to the other; if once they believe they shall be loosers by
either. They will argue thus: whatsoever God has decreed, shall come to pass,
cannot be avoided by any industry of man; nay it were madness in any to
attempt it, and lost labor if he did, but Mr. Lilly has affirmed, and with a
sic est in fatis; that the Parliament shall overcome the King, and His
adherents, and therefore it were madness in them, to cast away their dearest
lives, and their estates to boot, in the Kings quarrel, since all is but lost
labor.

Thus have many a thousand in this Kingdom been hobgoblin'd into Rebellion,
against their lawful Sovereign. If this will not prevail, he has yet
another bait for the devouter sort of men: he says, that the Parliament and
Army are Gods I nstruments, Ergo. says he, (and they believe it to excellent
logic, yea, and very good divinity too) you ought to adhere to the Parliament,
and not affront them, as of late. A special concluding argument indeed; but
good M. Lilly, is not the Devil too Gods Instrument? makes not God sometimes
use of him, as we do of a Hangman to execute his pleasure? must we therefore
adhere to the Devil? no certainly. I cannot sufficiently wonder at the
madness of men, in suffering themselves to be so long deluded, by mere false
shoods and forgeries; even such as are to be discerned by every eye, if they
wink not on purpose; but this was always the fashion of the world, to believe
falsehood easily; hardly to believe the truth.

Tunc etiam fatis aperit Cassandra futuris

Ora dei jussa, non unquam credita Teucris.

But that the Kingdom may be no longer deluded by such a cheating sycophant: I
am resolved to enter the Lists, against this demigorgon, this helsent fury, our
junior Merlin: not doubting, but to confute his sophistry by reason; his
Astrology, by Astrology, his Cacodemology, by the word of God; and by that
time I have thoroughly uncased him, I doubt not, but he will appear to all the
World, more ridiculous then the Apes of India, that mocked the Macedonian Army.
I desire not to derogate any thing from M. Lillies ability in the art of
Astrology; I am verily persuaded, that he is a good proficient therein; and
understands rightly, a great part thereof: but he that wilfully, and purposely
shuts his eyes, that he may not see, deserves to be lasht with many stripes. I
protest ingenuously, I never had any intentions of showing my self in Print,
upon this subject, till I saw M. Lillies Ephemeris for this year, which was not
till June: and then I was in a manner compelled to this task, for either I
must write a confutation, or some body else; or else the Kingdom must be still
deluded, gulled, and cheated with forgeries and lies: and Astrology (an art
which I extremely love) be condemned therefore. Before I had fully perfected my
confutation of his Ephemeris, he puts forth his judgment upon the parelii; and
the conjunction of Saturn and Mars: which, as soon as I had perused, I found
it so full of Contradictions, Treason, Falsehood, and such a ridiculous piece
of foppery; as the eye of man, nor that greater of the world, scarce ever yet
beheld, which made me conclude, that Master Lilly had now even sold himself to
work wickedness, which put me on to write a Confutation of both his said
Books, with all the speed I could. In the doing of which, it cannot be
expected, but that he vaunting so much as he does, of his own abilities; as to
call those who contradict him, Manapian Astrologers, the scorn of Art,
Changelings, etc. that when I find him tripping, I should bite him a little
with my cynick tooth: when I find him feighning, or failing, if I lash him
soundly with my Satyrs whip. My Love to my Country, my Allegiance to my
Sovereign, my Respect to Art, and my just detestation of all such vaunting and
Machivilian Traitors, challenge of me, and must receive from me, no less, no
lower satisfaction: I had no other sinister motives to induce me thereunto; as
hatred, malice, envy, etc. and so he unfeignedly protests, who is

Thine in his best endeavors, H. I.

ALthough the dire influence, of that prodigious Comer, in 16.18 (so fatal to
Germany, Spain, Ireland, England, and most Kingdoms in Europe) be now by the
divine permission of Almighty God, transmitted, beyond our English Horizon, to
go visit some remoter clymates, yet we have still (says Mr. Lilly) the
distempered effects of the parelij or 3 Suns visible in Lancashire, April the
3d. 1647/8 forcibly operating and not determined. We are subject I am sure at
present to the influence of the square of Saturn and Jupiter imminent the 29 or
March last, upon the 9 of March last, the sun entered Aries: Upon the 10th. of
June last, the sun entered cancer, Upon the 28 of June, there happened a
conjunction of Saturn and Mars: Upon the 12th. of September, the sun encred
Libra: Upon the 20 of November there happens an Eclipse of the Moon, and upon
the 11. of December, the Sun enters Capricorn. The 3. foremost. and only those
Mr. Lilly makes use of, in his Ephimeris for this year, but in his book called
an astrologiall prediction, of the occurrences of England, he adds the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, from these as from his basis, he extracts his
Judge. meant for this year he considers not at all, the suns ingresse into
Cancer, Libra and Capricorn notwithstanding the ascendant of the Suns ingress
into Aries, be a moveable sign, yea, and the latter degrees thereof, and
therefore cannot possibly signify the actions, of above one quarter of a
year, as most, (and let him produce any good Author to the contrary, I will
yield him the bucklers without further dispute) Nor yetdoth he consider, the
eclipse of the Moon, I shall from the ail as for my basis, and ground work,
extract my Judgment of thi^ y^^r; And so Mr. Lily ought to have done, had he
desired to have informed either himself, or his Reader right. Nay Mr. Lilly
himself imputes this as a fault to M. Wharton, upbraiding him, that he fetched
his hotchpotch Oracles, with which he so deluded the people, merely from the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, whereas every one ought he says to consider
the suns ingresse, into the 4. Cardinal points, with all the remarkable
conjunctions, and aspects of the year, the most material whereof, he himself
omitteth, and so becomes guilty of that himself which he so much taxes in
others: I desire therefore, it may be put to the vote, whether he deserves not
to be lasht with the self same whip, which he prepared for them.

Binorum Paresio^um (...) Feb. 28. 1647/48


There is hardly any one thing amrmed, by any Author, de parelijs, which is not
again contradicted, by some other author: it will be a matter therefore of
great difficulty for me, or any man else, amongst so many different opinions to
distinguish truth from falsehood, and consequently to give any certain
judgmement, of these parelij or false Suns, seen in Lancashire as Mr. Lilly
reports: I saw them not my self, but doubtless such mock. Suns do sometimes
appear; though there are some that will hardly grant it, yea, do stoutly deny
it, whither they proceed from a natural cause, or whether they be miraculous, I
will not dispute: nor what the matter is, of which they are made; but it is a
very material quaere, and worthy to be resolved, whether they proceed from
natural causes, or be miraculously framed by Angels, as Mr. Lilly asserteth.
For if they proceed from natural causes, it is then probable, that they
signify nothing but weather, if other. wise, then doubtless their signisication
is great, and of a much larger extent.

I will not contend with Mr. Lilly in this question, because it is disputable: It
shall be my care, not to justle with him, till I be sure to foil him. These
parelij, appear most in Northren clymats, commonly in the morning, the Son
being near the horizon; their motion is always with the Sun, and they ever
keep the same distance from him: their continuance is very short, seldom a
bove an hour and a quarter at most.

Many Authors do ^^isly deny these parelij, to have any other signification,
then upon weather: some contend stoutly that they have: Amongst so many
different, and indeed contrary opinions, it will be dub ous what to affirm:
but doubt, less the best way will be, to imitate nature, in resolving such
Riddles: I will therefore cull out, from Mr. Lillies collections, such
aphorisms, as are likest to be true; and then from them all extract a
judgment.

1. Parelij sunt monitores de insidij, et consilije clandestinis, quae ineuntur
adversus eos, qui in magno splendore dignitatis rerum potiuntur. Thus in
English; parelij or mock Suns do admonish of treacheries, and Clandestine
counsels against men of great dignity: had it said thus, I should have liked
it better, and questionless it had bin truer: they are Monitors of treacherous
plots, and Clandestine counsels, against some King, or Prince, by such as
would dethrone him, or make him away, for without doubt a true Sun, signifies a
lawful King, a mock Sun, an usurper. and this will clearly appear by the
second.

2. Diversa parelia Regni eiusdem gubernatores fere diverses, aut viros fere
Principes representant; circulus autem regni parts, aut civitates: verus ille
Sol circuli medio, personan^ regiam, apta similitudine monstrat Gem: Diverse or
many parelij, represent the Governors of the same Kingdom, to be many: or
they personate men of almost princely rank, or like Princes: the true sun in
the midd le of the circle, declares byan apt comparison, a regal person, of
the same Kingdom: the Circle about the suns show the parts or Cities of ^^at
Kingdom.

3. Cum fictisoles, veluti satellites, verum solemn cingunt, tunc in captivit
atem cadunt summi Reges. When mock suns like Yeomen of the Guard, do encompasse
the true Sun, then greatest Princes, shall fall into captivity.

4. Tres soles, triumvir at us esse signa, et suo tempore significasse imperia,
Caroli quinti Caesaris, Henrici secundi Gallorum Regis, et Solimani Turcarum
Sultani asserit Cardanus 3. Suns Signify honor to be conferred on three, or
many deserving men, and in his time did signify, the Emperor Charles the 5th.
Henry the 2d. King of France, and of Solimon Sultan, or Emperor of Turkey. But
I like very little of this Aphorism, nor is it likely to be true: for the
mock. suns cannot signify deserving men, nor shall such ever possess that
Kingdom they expect, because they quickly vanish, and leave the true Sun in
possession: though they besiege him, and imprison him for a time.

Hi statum mundi sibi subiectum indicaus, non in futurum, sed de die present:
indicant autens schismata, et similia, resque ad^^irandas, et rare sier^
solitas: praecipue autens evidentia deliria ac indicantur, et conatus stulti
superiorum, it aque sicut Duos soles existere superfluum est, it a superfluum
est quod illi indicant.

These parelij, intimate the state of the world, subject unto them, what shall
presently, not long after succeed: they foreshew Schisms etc. wonderful
matters, and such as are seldom used to be done, especially evident madness,
and the foolish endeavors of great men: so that as there is no necessity of 3
Suns so there is no need of such things as they signify,

6. Parelius aquas, aut ventos promittit, says Paulus the Minerva a mock Sun
signifies, rain or a tempest.

The signisication of the Parelij, seems therefore to be this. A sun whither
true or false signifies a King: a true Sun, a lawful King: a mocksun, an
usurper, or one that would be a King: here are two mock suns. there are
therefore two that would be Kings, perhaps Fairfax, and Cromwell, false suns,
admonish, of Treason, and treachery to be performed by the mock-suns against
their lawful Sovereign, whom they would either dethrone, or make away, have
already imprisoned, as appears by the mock suns encompassing the true.
Certainly these mock. suns which inviron the true sun, must signify the
Parliament and army, or if you will the Presbyterian and the Independent: These
mock suns, signify Treasons Treacheries. Schisms, Heresies, and clandestine
counsels, then acting against the true Sun.

But as it is a superfluous thing to have two or 3 suns: so is that which they
go about, that is, playing King Catchers. Though they so much desire it, yet
shall they never come to be Kings [to the Halter they may] for the mock Suns
suddenly vanish, leaving the true sun shining in the firmament, and at last
free from confinement, whence I gather, that his Majesty shall com at length
out of prison, and that whosoever desires to wear his Diadem, shall go without
it: for the mock suns quickly vanished, they shall never therefore obtain their
aim.

The Eclipse of the Moon, in November next in Gemini will soon after without
all question, banish the Parelij, or mock suns into the land of darkness, What
think you Mr Lilly, is not this the natural explication of our parelij?

But Mr. Lilly would have the true sun to signify the Parliament, and the mock
suns their opposers, and his reason ['tis judicium sine judici^] is because
these was at the time of the appearance or the pare^j, ^oe vi^^^^ face of
authority, but what was in them, what then? the authority is the Kings, de
jure, though theirs de facto. The Parliament was not imprisoned, the true Son
was environed by the mock suns, ergo the true sun signifies the King, a the
Parliament is excellent (...) and most significantly represented by the mock
suns invironing the true, for they keep him prisoner etc, that they might make
use or his power, and Authority. Let any indifferent man judge between us, Here
should have bin inferred a Scheame for the time of the appearance of the
Pare^lij
and let the Golden ball be give to him who hits the truth.

This Scheme which was set at the the time of the appearance of the parelij,
were it exactly don as I much doubt it was not: it were superfluous to judge
it; but yet let Mr Lilly say what he will, this very Scheme is ten times more
for the King then for the Parliament, nay Mr. Lilly himself though at unawares
confesses as much in these, words: Yet this of necessity will follow, either
an amendment, or a compliance, of the Members themselves, or a final revolt of
the People from them. Testimonium tunm quod in aliena re leve est hoc contrate
grave est. The Moon who signifies the people, opposes both the Ascendant, and
the Sun their significator, and after her separation from the opposition of
Sol, snee applies forcibly to the trine of Saturn, Lord of the 11. in the 2.
and this must needs signify, victory to the King, although the tail of the
Dragon, be in the 10th. house: for that signifies only scandalls, falls, and
some danger by poison to the King, Jupiter Lord of the ascendant retrograde,
hurts the Parliament more, then the King, for he oposes the ascendant, there
are many therefore of the Parliament men, who will be for the King against the
Parliament. The Moon in opposition to the sun, both well fortified in angles,
argues a defection of most of the kingdom, from them, and their adherance to
the King, in regard the Moon applies immediately after her separation, to
Saturn our friend in the second.

But Mr. Lilly affirms, that the King declined in honor, even since the
appearance of the mock-suns in 1644. and doubtless he would have him decline
worse still upon the appearance of these new mock-suns: but see how ridiculous
he makes himselse: there is no Artist but knows that it was the Comet in 1618.
and the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, and the Eclipse of the Sun in
1639. which brought his Majesty so low. And the conjunction of Saturn and Mars
in Gemini, in the 8th. house, near Oculus Tauri, and the Moon Eclipsed in the
7th. and the 8th. houses, in Gemini, near the body of Saturn, will bring the
Parliament lower.

The figure of the Suns ingresse into Aries for the Meridian of London, Here
are 3. Shemes wanting the first; for the Suns ingresse into Aries 9. Martij,
the second for the square of Saturn and Jupiter, 29 Martij, the third for the
Conjunction of th Sun and Sarne, 16. Maij.
has 26. degrees and 50. minutes, of Libra ascending which sign in regard it
is moveable, causes, that this Scheme, shall signify unto us, the actions but
of one quarter of this year, especially there being so few degrees thereof in
the Ascendent, and this is the unanimous opinion, of all the learned in this
art, although Mr. Lilly, thinking it fittest for his purpose, would needs
persuade us to the contrary, and would have it serve for the whole year: but
even reason it self would persuade us. (had the learned bin silent herein)
that the fag end of a moveable sign ascending, there is no great heed or trust
to be had to such a figure: and yet for this quarter, it must direct us. viz.
Until the Sun enrers the sign Cancer.

For as much as the ascending sign is moveable, doubtless a great change, of
humane affairs approaches, concerning the Rites. Privileges, Laws, and
Customs, of this Kingdom, si cutera concenserint, as here they do.

Venus is Lady of the asccnding sign, but Saturn has more dignities therein,
viz. his exaltation, and triplicity, neither of them have much to do in the
Ascendent, as the case stands; for in regard there are so sew degree, of Libra
in the ascendent, they quickly leave their rule to Mars, and then the dominion
of the succeeding part of the year, is in a manner wholly committed unto Mars;
not so much because he governs the sign Scorpio, intercepted in the ascendent,
at the time of the vernal-ingres, (as Mr. Lilly would have it) but because he
is the principal Planet, in most of the lunations, and remarkable Aspects,
happening this year. Clandestine practices shall therefore now fail, and deeds
of Arms be very frequent, in many parts of this Kingdom. Mr. Lilly cries
peace; but to our costs we have, and shall find, that we shall not enjoy the
settled conditon, he promises; this year will not produce it.

Si Mars fuerit Dominus anni, directus et non aspexerit Ascendentem, fignificat
plurimas combustiones et nocumentum ab ignibus, et agritudines, quae advenient
hominibus causa sangninis et destructionem vegitabilium, causa valetudiuis
ventorum. If Mars be Lord of the year, direct, and behold not the ascendent, it
signifies much burnings, and hurts by fire, many diseases in men, caused by
peccant blood: and destruction of vegitables, by the grcatnesse of winds.

In the Plenilunium preventionall he is in the 11th. house, in conjunction with
Mer. in opposition to the Moon, this signifies great enmity amongst friends,
Consumption of much treasure, his posation in the revelation in the fifth,
denounces much Fornication, Adultery, and Mortality in the Southren parts.

Saturn in the 8. house signifies much detriment, and loss to the place, which
is subject to that sign he is in, tribulation, anguish, and many contentions.

Saturn is in porigeo, as near the earth as he can be, and meets with Mars in
Gemini, where there are many stars of contrary nature; this, but not only this,
was the cause of the wetnesse and coldness of the year. The Parelij also, did
promise, and foreshew the same, for Parelius ventos aut pluvias promittit,
there are also some other reasons in art therefore, as you shall hear anon.

Luna in quartain signo infor tunato, erit populu^ fortiter obsessus, et
accident ei carceres, et anxietates graves, The Moon in the 4th. house, in an
unfortunate sign, signifies that the people shall be strongly beseiged, and
diverse shall be imprisoned, and great and heavy Calamities shall happen. She is
in this Scheme in Aquary, the house of Saturn, in conjunction with Venus, lady
of the eighth house; both of them aspected by the late full square of Saturn,
in the eight, the greatest infortune, and in the worst of houses, but if we
believe Mr. Lilly, be tells us, that the Moon is fortunate, because conjoined
to Venus, but Venus her self here is Lady of th house of Death, and
consequently as bad as any Planet in the figure, except Saturn, who is locally
in that house, howsowever, she could never take off the malicious in fluence of
Saturn, who squares them both from the 8. for this is a rule which no Artist
will deny: si times Saturnum, oppone Iovem, si Martem oppone Uenerem. The truth
of the former rule, though he denies not, yet he cruelly taxes Mr. Wharton
for his application of it, to the Moon in that figure, but the event has
answered his prediction, cont radicted Mr. Lillyes calumnies, and this, and his
other, almost infinite, and gross mistakes this year, in point of Art, will
chronicle him a dotard to all posterity.

Especially this which follows which he stands so stiffly to maintain. Venus,
says he, is Lady of the Ascendant, Mars Lord also thereof, is in the house of
Inpiter, and Jupiter himself, in the 10. the Moon also who has usually
representation, of the common condition of mankind, being not unfortunate, but
applying to the conjunction of venus, gives us great reason, says he, to hope
well, and to live in assurance, that the commonwealth of England, shall not
this year be molested with war; That every man shall live at his own house.
and in his own Vocation, and Calling, quietly and securely, Countrymen, What
say you to this? Certainly it is a fair pro mise, but is it true? is he master
of his word? no thing less. We all know it is absolutely false, yet every man
is not sensible, for all this of the greatness and grossness of this mistake.

It must not be understood barely, as an assertion of Mr. Lillyes, but as a
confutation of Mr. Wharton, who predicted war, as he had good reason to do, as
God-willing. I shall show anon, but that I may go thoroughly, and soundly to
work with him, I will first confute his mistaken grounds.

Verily says he, this is no fiction of ours but the opinion of those reverend
professors, who studied this science, long before us: From whom Origanus he
says draws this inference, fol. 5.22. In anni et quartarum revolutionibus,
ant thematibus lunationum, si luna sive firma ct potens, sit in angulo
velsuccedente dom^, in dignittiabus suis sive debilis, et cadens, extra
dignitates, applicueri beneficeo alicui planetae, Jovi aut Veneri, significat
status populi fortunatins, quo lucrd eidem accrescent, et abundnbunt
necessaria; et si applicuerit Veneri, erit bilaritas, gaudiums, et frequentia
connubiorum, which he thus translates In the revolution of a year, and the
several schemes of lunations, if the Moon, whether she be strong and
powerful, in an angle or a succedent house, in her own dignity, or admit she
be weak and cadent, yet if she apply to any benevolent planet, as Jupiter or
Venus, the state or condition of the people, shall be signified successful
and fortunate. in which year they shall increase their estates, and abound in
all manner of necessary provisions; and if that fortune to whom the Moon
shall apply be Venus, (as now) the common people shall much rejoice, be
frolic, and very cheerful. That these words are in Origamus, I will not deny,
nor that they be rightly rendered by him in English, but that he
mis-understands, and mis-applyes Origamns, is plain to a novice in this Art;
for admit the moon to be so and so posited, yea and so and so applying also
[which is more then the rule requires,] and some other planet or planets in the
scheme contradicting, ORIGANUS will not then affirm, that she, so and so
posited, so and so applying, shall take off the significations, of the other
planets: for if this had bin his meaning, that the Moon should rule all the
Roast, in that business; the rules which Mr. Lilly soon after tites out of
Haly. had bin to no purpose: and his very quoting of Haly against Mr. Wharton,
makes for me, against himself. Again Origanus speaks, of Jupiter and Venu's
when they are fortunes, they are not always so, viz. when they are in the
sixth, eighth, tenth or twelfth, houses. or are Lords of those houses: as here,
Venus is Lady of the 8th. and the Moon her self, has great dominion therein:
and both Venus, and the Moon are disposed off by Saturn, who is locally in
the 8th. in square to them both: an ill aspect, the worst of houses, and the
greatest in fortune. He does but trifle therefore, and abuse Origanus, and che
ancients, to affirm of them, which they never meant, nor did any man, that
ever I saw, heard, or read of, ever understand him so he must therefore ba^lk
the authority of Orig.

But Haly fits him to a hair, his authority shall carry it, if he puts his
words, into true English He says, Semper in revolutione, cave et respice
Martem, quia si bonus fuerit, et in bono statu, melius succedit negotium,
vassalorum regis, et exercituum. which he thus translates into English. In
every revolution be well advised, in giving judgment: and have respect to the
place of Mars, for if he be well posited, and in a good state, the business of
the Kings Subjects, and their Armies, shall the better succeed. No Sir, this
the business of the Kings Subjects, and his Armies, shall the better succeed.
He has produced Haly, absolutely against himself: yet he says, that this is
an assured testimony, that the Common wealth of England, shall nor this year,
be molested with War, or much troubled, and offended with the Soldier. Good
Mr. Lilly, does exercitus in your Dictionary, signify peace? if it signifies
an Army, as mine says it does, why then it is quite against you, not for you;
he says the King's Armies shall thrive, and you say we shall have peace. Peace
is the end of War indeed, but the Soldier is armed to fight. But he will be
sure, to make it for his parpole, one way or other: of it does speak of War, it
shall say, (or Mr. Lilly will make it) that the Parliament shall beat the King;
but Latin Haly Says, that exercitus regis shall thrive: not the people, and
their Armies. If the King's Armies thrive, the Parliaments must sing Lacrymae:
woe is me, well a day. But to be serious, Halyes meaning is, that when Mars is
strong, he does the less mischief: (the word is melius not been) yet Mr.
Lilly and all men must grant, that Mars is semper in fortuna. Well Haly has
hitherto deceived him also: and yet he is resolved, to try him once again:
produce him, let him speak, but know, that is you traduce him again, his
action of scandal against you, will be doubtless, far more valid and
vigorous. He quotes him, fol. 364. and tells us truly that be says. Nota quod
planeta, qui est demin^^, et significator anni, quando invenitur, in aliquo
signorum, significat, secundum proprietatem ip fius planetae, et secundum
ipsius proprietatem loci, in quo versatur, de domibus figurae: et secundum
statum, et ejus fortunam, et infortunia: quia per fortunam, et bonuns statum
fignificat benum, et meliorem sucessum et gaudium, et si Mars fuerit,
significat, quod homines vincent homines inimicos suos, etc Which he translates
into English thus. Observe that planet, who is significator of the year, and in
which of the 12. signs he is found; be assured, he shall signify, according to
theproperty of the Planer, Sign, and house, of Heaven, in which he is posited,
and according to his state, for tune, or unfortunatnesse, for that planet well
fortified, shall signify good success, joy, gladness, etc. And if Mars shall
at any time be so qualified, in a revolution, it imports the com. monaity shall
overcome their Enemies. That Haly speaks here manifestly for War, he himself
confesses: for so his own English renders him: but when he would insinuate,
that the Parliament or their army, shall overcome the King, (which if you
observe he does) he shows him. self a dotard, and no Scholar. It seems he
would if it were possible, make Haly, as guilty of treason, as himself; but he
says, homines vincent homines: men shall overcome men: and J say, Haly was a
loyal Subject, but Merlius Anglicus a Rebel.

But Mr. Lilly himself confesses, that Mars is the most consicerable planer,
not only in the vernallingresse, but also, in all other quarters and lunations
of the year, and therefore he rightly judges, that some will object, (I my
self am one of that number) that he might justly have been suspected, the
forerunner of more Warte, and bloodshed. Nor can the potency of Mars, in the
vernall ingresse, hinder; for he is semper in fortuna. He is strong I confess
in the vernall ingresse, and at the time of the square aspect, of Saturn and
Inpiter, but weak enough, all the year after. I hope Mr. Lilly will not brag of
his potency, at the Sans entering Cancer: at the con, junction of Saturn and
Mars: at the Eclipse of the Moon, nor in many other not able aspects,
bappening this year. I wonder therefore, that, Mr. Lilly should in such plain
terms, assume (he uses to speak Riddles commonly so dark, ^requires an
Oedipus to unfold them) that it is be. yond his knowledge, if the devouring
Sword, harm us this years: but especially, that he should be so confident, as
to affirm, that it is positive in Astrology, that there will be this year,
noe such notorious distractions, to engage the King, dome in blood, or the City
of London to a fury. We all know, Merlivus Anglicus, to be a lying Phophet its
this, and that art was plain for War, is manifest: not only from the reasons
before set down, but also from the conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Gemini,
the sign intercepted in the ascendent, of the profectionall revolution, of
Saturn and lupiter: Which makes Mr. Lilly to cry out, ab hinc lacbrymae nostra
Anglicanae, non a revolntione hu, us anni, vel ab has tam dira, et formidabili
conjunctione, infortunarum procedunt: this indeed signifies War, buy by Mr.
Lillies favor, the former reasons, are far stronger for War, then this: and
if this had been the only cause of our sufferings: there could not have been a
blow struck till the latter end of June, for this happened not till then. I
confess this conjunction happening in the sign intercepted in the Ascendent of
the profectionall revolution, of Saturn and Jupiter, and an Eclipse also, in
that very sign both of them in the 8th house, and near Oculus Tauri, a most
dismal fixed Star, will plague London, and Mr. Lillyes beloved Parliament,
to purpose, and will bring so many, and so great calamities upon them, as would
move even stones to pity, unless God, the maker and disposer of all things, be
overcome by their penitence. to over rule the influence, of these heavenly
bodies.

These doubtless were the reasons, which moved Mr. Wharton and Mr. Booker,
this year, to predict War. I wonder infinitely at Mr Lillyes brazen
impudence, in abusing all such as dissent from his opinion, with such
ignominious epithits writing far truer then himself: but much more that he
should bragg, that he has found out a new manner of Astrology, heretofore
either not known to the Ancients, or else evillingly omitted in their
writings, and would have us take it as a favor from him, for leaving us the
Key of Astrology: poor simple animal, begot between a bitch wolf, and an
Incubus, neither by Merlin nor Mercury. I am confident posterity will never
express any gratitude, for such a key, as would lead them, if they follow it,
into a maze, and laberynth of endelesse errors. Me thinks that if this had
slipped him, yet being premonisht by Mr, Wharton, his old Antagonist, that this
would be a year of martial exployts in this Kingdom e it should have made him
pump hard, to have searched the very entralls of Astrology, and if that would
not have done it, then to have called to counsel, (as his manner is,) the
Angel protector, or the guardian Angel of this Kingdom: for, flectere si
nequeat superos Acharonta movebit. What Mr Lilly, could not they inform you
better? We use to say praemonitns, praemunitus, he that is forewarned is
forearm'd; but it is not so with M. Lilly. he cannot plead ignorance, of what
Mr. Wharton would have taught him, for it is certain that he saw his book,
before his own was printed or else he could not, have called him fool
therefore, or have christened him with so many contumelious epithites.

Mars I confess as posited in our Revolution, does nor, during the vernall
quarter, premonstrate such Wars, slaughters, or such grand commotions, as our
eyes have beheld, both before, and since, yet that he here signifies
slaughters, burnings, and mischiefs, by fire, iron, powder, and other things,
subject to the influence of Mars is plain and the event confirms it, that
Mars, as posited in the vernall ingresse, threaten us with saddiscontents,
backslidings in Religious matters, great disconsolation to the Clergy and high
demands, or results, amongst the Schismatic all (take notice he calls the Army
Schismatics) he himself confesses as also that it sig nifies a strong
endeavor, to settle the Just laws of the Land, proceedings and customs of
the people, and in regard that Mars was so potent, it engaged most of the
principal Gentry, and greatest men in the Kingdom, to Deeds of Arms.

His Majesty's significator in this Scheme, is very properly the Sun, posited
in the 5 t. house: for he is over the natural significator of Kings. (nam Sol
pro Magistratu, luna pro subditis) and here he is the accidental also; being
Lord of the 10th.

The Moon and Mars are for the Patliament: Mars and the Moon are both
stronger, then the Sun, in this Scheme: this quarter therefore, the King shall
rather loose, then get: Jupiter retrograde, in the sign upon the 11th. house:
signifies that the Kings friends, for a time, shall loose themselves, for want
of Counsel, and mature advice.

Mercury is combust, the Kings friends shail therefore be betrayed: and for a
time grow weaker and weaker: not stronger.

And yet notwithstanding this is an excellent Scheme, for his Majesty, if it be
rightly judged: for the part of fortune is with Jupiter, in the very cuspe of
the 11th. And Mercury their dispositor, applying to the friendly trine of
Jupiter: The Kings friends shall therefore at last be able to procure his
re-establishment, and that by deeds of Arms; for Mercury and the Sun too, are
both in Aries, the house of Mars.

Jupiter is a slow ponderous planet, and besides that retrograde in this
figure: which will retard the business, longer far then waa expected.

If we consider the Parliaments significators in this Scheme: They are the
Moon, Venus, Saturn, and Mars: the Moon is strong in the fourth house, in
conjunction with Venus, Lady of the Ascendent: this makes Mr. Lilly cry out oh
happy Parliament, thon shall stand for ever. and never be enforced, so much as
to stoop. But who disposes of the Moon and Venus? Does not Saturn? What is
he, almuten of the ascendent, one of the Parliaments significators, but the
greatest infortune, where is he? in the 8. house most unfortunate, for it is
the house of Death: who disposes of him? The Moon and Venus, where are they?
in the 4th. house: what is the signification of that house? The end of all
things.

Why then by Mr. Lilles favor, this very Scheme, shall signify: that
notwithstanding the Parliament, shall flourish yet a while, yet in the end,
they shall be conquered, and brought low, yea many of them shall dye a death,
shameful, and ignominious: nor can the double mutual reception of Saturn and
Venus by house, of Saturn and the Moon by triplicity hinder: for Satuone
almuten of the Parliaments ascendent, Their house of life, is in the house of
death, extremely, unfortunate, and beholds their other significators viz. both
the Moon and Venus, with a hateful square, in the fourth house, the end of
all things, What think you Mr. Lilly? does not this signify unto them death?
or at leaft dishonor?

If we consider, the square of Saturn and Jupiter, the 29 of March soon
following the suns ingresse into Aries, about 26 of Leo is in the cuspe of the
Ascendent, and Jupiter retrograde very near the cusp; who yet comes to be
direct, before he comes to the degree of the ascendent.

Jupiter therefore and the Sun are in this scheme the Parliaments significators
but principally Jupiter, for plus valet plenota, corporali praesentia quam
dominio absentriae.

Jupiter is a very good planet (Mr. Lilly) and to speak truth he is the best,
and most benevolent of the seven: but is he not retrogade Mr Lilly? that
signifies, that though Jupiter, will support the parliament for a time, yet they
shall grow weaker and weaker, run backwards, loose, but not suddenly, in
regard the Sun, is so strong in the very degree of his exaltation: and from
thence beholding the Ascendent and Jupiter with a freindly trine. But Good Mr
Lilly, let me ask you one question more, what houses are Iubiter Lord of the
8. and the fourth? Death therefore and dishonor, shall be their guerdon at
last, for as Jupiter is Lord of the fourth, he sigfies the end, and as he is
Lord of the 8. he signifies death, especially being in the ascendent, the house
of life, as he is retrograde and 2 slow. Planet, so he signifies that they
shall go by Degrees. Leo is a regal sign the sun also is in a another, this
intimates their ambition, That they would be Kings, but Iupitor retrograde in
leone, spoils their Majesty, dethrones them quite especially if you consider,
that Saturn in the 10. sends his square to Jupiter in the Ascendent. beleieve
it Mr. Lilly they must fall, and have a rousing knock. His majesty's
Signisicators in this Scheme are Saturn, the Moon, and Mercury, Saturn is by
nature an inforrune. yea the greatest of all, out what houses is he Lord of?
the 8.9. and 10. from the 10 pray God there were not, nor yet be some treachery
to take away his Majesty's life. I am much aff^aid that lurida terribiles
miscent aconita noverca. But in regard that Venus his dispositrix is so strong,
I hope providence will preserve him and will help him to evade their malice.

Saturn as he is Lord of the 10 from the 10th. will restore him, though with
much dissiculty for Saturn retards all chings, and gives what soever he gives,
with labor and difficulty. Saturn in the 10. in square to the ascendent, and
to Jupiter retrograde therein, signifyes that the parliamentshall be forced,
though unwillingly, to restore unto the King, his Rights and dignityes, which
Mercury lord of the second, in the cuspe of the tenth plainly also denotes.

Mercury is Lord of the Parliaments house of substance, and of the Kings too:
now not far from the cuspe of the 10th. therefore his Majesty's estate is not
far from regaining.

The Dragous tail in the culpe of the 11th. signifies many false friends to
his Majesty, who will not long from this time appear, pretending fair meaning
hollowly; doubtless they will buy him, and fell him, once again, and slander
him what they can it impedites also the actions of his truest friends, for his
succor, but dabit Deus his quoque finem. The Prince will bring them on their
knees, for Saturn is Lord of the 5 t. and the case will be much altered anon I
doubt not.

In May last, there happened a conjunction of the Royal Sun and Sullen Saturn,
in the 10 house: which did much impedite his Majestyes Actions, a long time:
and put his very life in danger^: but caput Draconis being there it could not
hurt his life.

Mercury is both for the King. and parliament but he disposes of the Sun. and
Saturn, and is conjoined to Mars, the King could not there. fore, as long as
the fury of this conjunction lasted, thrive in Military affairs, nor the City
of London rise to help him: it will do something one day: Oh London take heed,
many remarkable Aspects have and shall happen this year in Gemini.

Summer begins the 10th. of June, Here should been inserted 2. Schemes one for
the Sun's ingresse into cancer, the other for the Conjunction of Saturn and
Jupiter. The first ha^ning IYNE the 10. the other the 10 of JUNE
10. minutes past 11. a Clock at night: at which time, the glorious Sun, enters
Cancer: The Moon, within 3. quarters of an hour, being in conjunction with
him: obscuring his bright body, and causing a great and fearful Eclipse: but
not visible to us: all the planets being at that time, subterranean, in this
Jupiter and the Moon are for the Parliament Jupiter and the Sun for the King:
for Jupiter is Lord of the first, and tenth.

The Moon is combust in the fourth House, which very thing would have
absolutely destroyed the Parliament, at that time, or near it; had not the
Dragons head, bin so near the Moon, and the Sun been Eclipsed; this therefore
up holds for a while their drooping spirits, long it cannot. The Eclipse of the
Sun, hurts not the King much, in regard it is not visiale, and consequently the
effects of this Eclipse, will be obscure, to us: yet some mischief it
doubtless did. The Dragons tail in the roth. gives fear of poison, or of
hurt by a Horse, or by riding, or else some mischeise, by fire or Iron. God
bless his Majesty from danger of death, and from scandalls, and slanders,
raised against him, by black mouth d Villains.

Jupiter the other significator both of the King and Parliament, is in the 7th.
house, opposing the ascendent, the Parl. therefore will oppose the Parliament:
and great dissension will doubt. less be amongst themselves, enough to have
caused their utter undoing, had not Mercury the dispositor of Jupiter, beheld
the ascendent, by a trine espect, this will make them piece again for a time,
but Saturn and Mars in their second house, will signify great expense of
Treasure, and much loss by fire, and War, at least to some of them.

Jupiter as he is Lord of the 10th. is in the 10th. from the 10th. and beholds
it, with a sextile aspect, and Saturn Lord of the 11th. in the second, with a
trine. This will doubtless signify ^e est (...), to his Majesty and the
recovery of his (...), yea and his pristine honor.

Not long after the Suns entrance into Cancer viz. about the 28 of June, there
hapened a conjunction of Saturn and Mars the two malevosent and worst of
planets, in Gemini, near oculus Tauri, in the 8th. house of Heaven: whose
insluence will produce, wonderful alterations, but not without other
concurrent causes, as Mr. Lilly well observes, but there are other concurrent
causes enough [(...) too many, if it pleased God] to cooperate, with this
conjunction, both before and subsequent, especially the eclipse of the moon
within three degrees of the very Place of the conjunction it self: and it
hapens also in the 7 and 8. houses of heaven, very near unto oculas tauri, and
the very body of Saturn, and this Mr. Lilly himself, coufesseth, saying that
this conjunction is near oculus tauri, a most violent fixed star, if we believe
either our own experience or that of the ancients, for there did never happen
any Eclipse conjunction, or opposition of the Superiors near that Part of
Gemini, but it produced admirable and wonderful effects: add to this that the
first conjunction, of Saturn and Jupiter, in the fiery trigon, was in the year
603. in opposition, almost to the very degree of this conjunction. We have sad
cause [I am sure, his Majesty hath] to remember the effects of the Eclipse of
the Sun in the tenth of Gemini anno^ 1639. much more reason will the Parliament
have to remember this conjunction, and the Eclipse of the Moon in that place.

Yea Mr. Lilly himself confesses, this a very sad pofition of heaven for the
Parliament, able utterly upon the first fight (yea and the second too) to
puzzle a weak, (yea Mr. Lillyes strong) affection: for I doubt, he himself has
no more then humane principles; We have Mars says he, their Significator
(because Lord of the Ascendent in the 8th house, in conjunction with Saturn.
near Oculus Tauri, a sad Planet, and more dismal fixed star: The house he also
confesses, to be the worst of houses, and that it signifies to the Parliament,
a sad and distracted condition, yea he himself confesses further, that it
imports a parliment struggling and gasping for breath, and life and that London
also is the most of any city in Europe concerned in this conjunction: as also
that the least misehief, that thereupon can happen to that City, Will be
sedition, uproares, famine, if not Gloudshed. And a little before, he is yet
more ingenious, confessing positively, thas (God out of his infinite mercy not
preventing) war, and bloodshed will succeed in this very City Page 39. and I
fear they will find all this, and much more true enough, which I shall anou
discover.

Mutantur regna, et dominia, et fides, sectaeque et opiniones hominum, dum
mutantur auges planetaru, de figno in signum, dico illarum gentium, quarum
fignificator erit plaeneta, augi^s permntae: mutatioque; erit ad bonum, vel ad
malum, secundum naturam significatorum superiorum conjunctionum illorum
temporum, et secundum naturam signi permutationis. That is Kingdoms, and
Governments, Leagues, Sects, and men's opinions, do change, and vary, when the
anges of the planets move out of one figne into another: I say of these
nations, whose significator, is the planet of the changed auges: And this
alteration shall be for good or ill, according to the nature of the
signisicators of the superior conjunctions of those times, and according to the
nature of the sign of mutation. Mars is the general significator of England,
whose abssis or Aphelium, is at present in four signs, twenty nine degrees,
fifty two minutes, and one and twenty seconds. that is 29. degrees. 52. min. 21. of
Leo: and sin the year 1656. this absis will remove into Virgo about which year
M Lylly says we must expect a strange Catastrophe in this Common wealth, and
Monarchy of England, for Mars cannot protect Aries and Uirgo, whom he beholds
not: all this is Mr. Lyllyes, I will not own it, nay I shall willingly and
ingeniously confess, that I understand not, why this should be so fatal to
England, or to London, as he would make us believe: yet am I clear of his
opinion, in that which follows, that a very sad disastre to the City is much
to be feared, long before that time, Have a care London, thou art already
strongely and strangely threatened, and wilt be suddenly more, have a care thou
rebellest no longer against thy King, thou may put an end to these Wars when
thou please, and thou had a principal stroke in beginning them: do what
thou meanst to do, quickly, 'twill be else too late: Remember the old prophecy,
part of which thou know to be already fulfilled. Lincoln was London is, and
York Chall be, the greatest City of the three.

Scorpio a fixed sign ascends, and I shall easily grant Mr. Lilly that all the
angles of the figure, are also fixed and in trine to Pisces, the sign
ascending at the Parliaments first fitting, but that all or any of these, shall
or can (rebus sic stanti^us) signify that the Parliament shall stand firm and
not be dissipated I absolutely deny and affirm the contrary to be true, and
evident in point of Art. And let him but produce good Authors to second his
assertion, and I will willingly yield him the Bucklers in this case, I think
any Artist will think him mad or worse to judge this a sufficient reason
therefore the Lord of the Ascendent being with Saturn, and Oculus Tauri, he
knows [or at least should know] signum ut corpus Planetaut anima, there is
little promised by any sign of Heaven. which has no planet in it, nor yet
well aspecting it, he is almost ashamed I perceive of this reason by that which
follows. for he confesses that their unfaithful branches, and rotten boughs,
must be lopt off, We desire no more, there are for all this (I hope) diverse
honest men amongst them, who greive at the Kings, and Kingdoms sufferings, and
would help it if they could.

When Mr. Lilly affirms, that this conjunction signifies good to the
Parliament; quia ex duabus infortunis fit fortuna; he himself contradicts what
he said before, and dotes most wickedly, most miserably. I deny not the
Aphorism ('it is Ptolemies) but I deny this sense of it; ('it is Mr. Lillies) I
doubt not indeed but it will produce much good, to the Kingdom; none to the
Parliament, or the City of London. Nor can the North node of Venus or caput
draconis, save and defend them, (as he would have it) their significator is too
far distant from caput draconis; and too much afflicted, to be helped by him. I
wonder he cries not out still, why cannot the Citizens thrive and be pleasant?
a time is now approaching, which imports felicity unto them: this he said in
Julyes observations, but they will curse him for lying before the end of Febr.
next.

Saturn in the figure of the Suns ingresse into the vernall point Aries, in
the eighth house, signifies a dearth of such creatures, as the sign represents
wherein he is; the sign he is in at that time is Taurus; which signifies great
cattle, oxen, horses, cowes; but this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the
eighth house, is in Gemini, which will not only cause many great, and
grieveous sicknesses, yea very deadly ones, but many violent, and untimely
deaths this year, by the sword, even in cold blood: Lucas and Lisle are not
forgotten yet: this signifies the plague also, or some pestilentiall disease,
in the City of London; great discontent, great scarcity of grain, and corn,
though it will not be believed as yet.

Jupiter and Mercury in this scheme, are the Kings friends; Jupiter is
accidentally strong, Lord of the fifth, uponwhose cuspe a watery sign is
placed, the Prince therefore and the King's friends shall prevail at Sea.
Soon after this conjunction happened, the Prince appeared with the Fleet, upon
the Sea, and put forth a Declaration, that He was resolved to adventure His
dearest life, to re-establish our Sovereign, His Royal Father: which He will
undoubtedly do; for Jupiter lowres upon Saturn and Mars, with a hateful
Square. Never let Mr. Lilly say he cannot do it, in regard that Jupiter is not
essentially dignified; but rather let him answer me this question: is not
Jupiter much stronger, yea far more fortunate then Mars? is he not also posited
in a better house? The Square between Jupiter, and the infortunes, will
produce almost infinite disputes, about our Laws, Customs, and Privileges,
Religion, Covenants, etc.

Saturn better dignified then Mars, signifies scarcity of Provision for man.
Mars more elevated, shows that the sword will prevail. Whose sword Mr. Lilly?
pray speak the truth, in plain English: why he confesses, that it argues the
Soldier must do strange things, or else we perish faith he; he means
himself and the Army. Alas, alas, this is ill news indeed, who can help it?
God send us never worse. Oh, but Mr. Lilly even in his very Agony, has one
trick left; ('it is Treason I fear) let us hear it; he exhorts the whole
Kingdom, yea most earnestly, to take the Parliaments part: Why so? what
against their Sovereign, thou Traitor? What then shall become of Jesus said
Pilate? what shall become of our Sovereign then say I? the Jews said,
Crucify him, crucify him; and Lilly says the like in effect, as you shall
hear anon.

Venus applies to a sextile of Jupiter; he in Virgo, she in Cancer, at the time
of the aspect: His Majesty therefore may expect assistance, from His friends in
France, because Jupiter is in Virgo, the ascendent of Paris: much from
Scotland, because Venus is in Cancer; the royal Sun being at that time in
Cancer, signifies that the Scots shall not regard their own profit so much, to
neglect the restitution of His Majesty as M. Lilly would suggest, but without
any grounds at all in art, for he gives this to be his reason, for this his
prediction; the Moon, says he, beholds Cancer, and not the Sun at all, by any
aspect: which is absolutely false, for the Moon beholds not Cancer at all,
either in the radix of the Conjunction, or at the time of the aspect, between
Jupiter and Venus; for in the radix she is in Aquary at the time of the aspect
in Gemini; neither of which signs, behold Cancer at all: besides the Sun is
both in the radix, and also at the time of the aspect, in Cancer. which is far
stronger; and much better, then any aspect to the Sun in this regard.

But that any or all of the Kings friends, shall ever be able to re-establish
His Majesty, is negative in Astrology (if we believe Mr. Lilly when he lies)
why so I pray Sir? surely because it is so often, doubly, trebly, yea doubly
and trebly affirmed. And I call heaven and earth to witness, I for my part,
cannot see, (nor can I hear of from him) any sufficient reason in Art, to the
contrary; I know there are many for it, and very strong ones too: Two negatives
make an affirmative, but two hundred affirmatives, cannot make a negative. The
best and most valid reason, that Mr. Lilly gives against it, is this; that when
King James came to the Crown, Saturn and Jupiter were in Conjunction, in the
eighth degree of Sagitarius, and this Conjunction is, faith he, almost in the
very same degree, of the opposite sign: whereby he would feign insinuate, that
this Conjunction imports destruction to His Majesty, and His family, but why so
M. Lilly? neither Saturn nor Mars are His Majesty's significators, and
therefore have nothing to do with Him, or with His family; but Mars is Lord of
the ascendent, and therefore imports destruction to the Parliament unavoidably,
unless they in time compose the business.

Another of M. Lillies reasons, but more wide then the former, is this: Pisces,
says he, ascended, when the Parliament began, and the twentieth degree of
Sagitary culminated, and Mars says he was in 10. degree of Sagitary, in Square
dexter, to the place of this Conjunction; this still signifies destruction to
them, not to him: for Mars has his triplicity in Pisces, and therefore
signifies the Parliament, now he coming to the Conjunction of Saturn, in the
eighth house, near oculus tauri, and in the same place, which he afflicted,
with his own Square, at their first sitting: this must needs signify, at
least their dissolution, with infamy, and dishonor; if not the block and
gibbet, for some of them.

To this give me leave to add, the prediction of the dying Independent Priest,
(I mean M. Saltmarsh) who is confidently reported, to have had the apparition
of, and discourse with an Angel; who if sent from God, (as its verily believed)
is an invincible argument, to warrant his prediction good. It seems he told
Fairfax to his face, that God had sent him to him, to let him understand, that
he persecuted his Saints, had done many things amiss, and therefore that he
and his Army both, should come to utter ruiue, and that with speed. Saltmarsh
was well, when he delivered this message, and gave Fairfax a sign, for the
truth of his prediction, that such a day and hour, he the messenger himself
should die, and so he did at the time appointed. Most men in the Kingdom have
heard of this, yea and many do verily believe it to be true; but very few
ponder it as they ought: for my part, it sticks with me; and I Will assure M.
Lilly, that I verily expect the accomplishment thereof.

The Sun in this scheme is the Kings significator, says M. Lilly, who is
locally in the ninth, which is the twelfth from the tenth, Ergo says he, the
King is Captived. True, He is so; but woe be to them that did it: pray Sir what
think you of those, that side with them, who have laid violent hands upon the
Lords Anointed? I Will answer for you, for this once, he is a Rebel, and the
worst of Traitors.

The motions of Saturn and Mars. are swift indeed, as M. Lilly observes
rightly. for they greatly exceed their mean motions; yet am I not of his
opinion; that the actions, signified by the Conjunction of these two Planets,
shall be carried on, and prosecuted, with so great speed, as he affirms, with
great fury and violence they will; for Saturn is the flowest of all the
Planets, he is 30 years going about the Zodiac; and therefore his effects, will
not quicklycease; and yet much the sooner for his quick motion.

Doubtless the Conjunction of these two malevolent Planets, with oculus tauri,
in the eighth house, and in Gemini, where Mars made his square, at the
Parliaments first sitting; will signify singular actions, and of very high
concernement, especially to London, and the Parliament at Westminster.

In Anno 1635. and 1636. Saturn transiting Sagitarius, London smarted with the
Plague, how much more will he and Mars, afflict her now, they being conjoined
in Gemini, in the eight house, near the Bulls eye? O London, let me tell thee
plainly, and seriously, and truly, that (if thou make not an early peace, I
mean a sudden atonement, with thy angry God, and thy abused Sovereign, his
Anointed, and Vicegerent here; against whom thou were with the first, (nay the
very first) that Rebelled, and led'st diverse Countries, by thy example, to
drink deep of the poisonous cup of Rebellion, Schism, Heresy, etc.) thou
shall soon match Jerusalem in accursednesse; thou shall see nothing, but
frowning wrath in the clouds: but Lightning and Thunder, in the mouth of the
four winds: the heavens shall be an artillery house of haile-stones; No Planet
shall revolve any thing, but vastation: Earthquakes shall dissolve thy joints:
and all thy glorious buildings, shall but crush their owners, with their falls,
affording them unasked tombs, and sepulchers: The damps of the earth, shall
breed nothing but plagues; the clouds shall drop down leanness, on thy
fields: the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, (those dreadful messengers of Gods
vengeance) shall fall upon thee, till thou art quite consumed. Oh London,
London, remember, remember, the man, who for a time, went night and day, crying
about thy streets, Woe, Woe, Woe. I speak a thing well known to thousands,
yet inhabiting within thy Walls; who then saw him, and heard him too; yet
neither they, nor any man else, that ever I could hear of yet, could (though
some of them much desired it) ever learn, what, who, or whence he was. Believe
it, the day of thy visitation is almost come, and will shortly present it
self, to thy amazed eyes, in a dreadful, crimson hiew; unless with Nineveh
thy sister City, thou do suddenly wash away those crimson spots of innocent
blood, which thou have spilt, with thy penitent tears.

Here two schemes or figures of heaven should have been placed,the first of the
Suns entrance into Libra, the other of the Eclipse of the Moon, the first
happens the 12. of September, the Eclipse the 29. of November.

Hercle restat regnum aliud piis, Coelo sub amplo, bestia cum cadot Dandum,
potostatisque sumoe Jus, pede sub dominante Christi Stratis Tyrannum verticibus.

These Verses M. Lilly placed under the scheme of the Suns ingresse into Aries,
but I have transfferred them hither, and much more properly, they are left by
him un-Englished, I shall therefore paraphrase them thus:

When Charles shall Reign again (as sure he shall
And the Westminsterian Hydra reele and fall,
(That beast composed of all religions, Sects,
Schisms, Heresies, which long this land have vexed
Lost happiness will doubtless then appear
To righteous men, the beast then falling, where
Such tyranny and oppression shall give way
To Christ's Vicegerent Charles his nobler sway.
And milder regiment: Oh may, oh may
That joyful day with speed it self present
To crown our hopes, even drowned in discontent,
The days at hand: hark, hark, methinkes I hear,
The bugle horn of watchful Chanticleere
To usher't in, and summon all those brave
Heroic Loyal souls, who shall and have
Been true to their King, and Sovereign, with joy
To welcome re-establisht Charles: those quoy
Disloyal Traitors, who thus long have kept
Thrir Sovereign their slave, and so have heap't
Vengeance on their own heads, to houle, lament,
And curse the day they were a Parliament:
Hark how the very ghosts of those who died
Rebels to Charles, and him so often belied;
Hark how they skrike, they howl, they weep, they groan,
Hark how they now lament, bewail and moan!
Hark how they Lilly junior Merlin curse
For's lying Oracles; the very nurse
Of their Rebellion! hark how they lowre
And even express their horror to this hour!
But hark how the nobler ghosts of those who died
By deeds of arms on King and Countries side,
Rejoice with lyricke songs, hark how they sing
And singing weep, because their Royal King,
Being re-inthron'd, his happy Government
Enjoy they cunnot now, must rest content,
Joyful at's re-establishment indeed
But very pensive that through want of heed.
And their ill fates, the date of their short lives
So soon expired: and this singing drives
Them eke to weeepe, who would not wish to be
Again but for his future service, see
Their piety, and seeing wonder,
Rash fate so soon should cut their threads asunder.
Hark how a quire of Angels in a ring,
Do round about them blessed music sing.
Harvest begins the 12 of September, 28 min: past two a clock, in the
afternoon: at which time Capricorn ascends. Capricorn is the house of
Saturn, whom I find in the fixth house, opposed by the Moon in the twelfth;
both being the Parliaments significators; look to it Parliament, this is a
nipping scheame, and will assuredly squeeze those spunges, which have sucked up
His Majesty's, and the Kingdoms rights, and revenues, especially fith the
Moon is with the Dragons tail in Sagitarius; the opposite sign to Gemini.
Look to thy self London, Saturn is in Gemini, in the sixth house, in perfect
opposition to the Moon: the Kings significators, are now indifferent well
posited, infinitely stronger then his adversaries, and in better houses, me
thinks this should make M. Lilly, to shrug his shoulders; and the Parliament
to gasp, both for breath, and life. I confess this is but a sickness yet,
though very grieveous, and not curable, by any other Physic, then by the
Personal Treaty; which they will scarce take long enough to do them good; if
they will not, I must tell them, that their critical day, of their great
clymactericall year approaches, and is hard at hand: I mean the Eclipse of
the Moon, the 20 of November, and that will doubtless make impatient death
press out their few remaining spirits.

The Sun, The Eclipse of the Moon.
the Moon, and Mars, are for the Parlirment: mercury is the Kings
significator, the Moon is Eclipsed in Gemini, in the seventh and eighth houses
of heaven; death therefore, ignominy, and reproach, are all falling upon the
heads of some great ones, at Westmiuster. Farewell Command at Sea; the Ships
must be some sanke, some taken, some will revolt, none will remain: the Sun is
in their ascendent with the Dragons tail; beware a horses nightcap; escape it
if you can, it is ill physic, what think you Mr. Lilly? will not this crop
away the superfluous branches, you talk of? It will make the people revolt.
You remember that the Eclise of the Sun in 1639. was a very great cause of the
Kings sorrow; how much greater sorrow will this cause to those, who have thus
long sed him, with the bred of bitterness, and water of affliction? for if you
mark it, it happens in the same sign, house, and almost degree of the sign,
that the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars did: and cooperates therewith. This
indeed will work suddenly, will divide between the very bones, and marrow.
His Majesty's significator Mercury, is singularly posited in the second house
in Conjunction with Venus, who is in reception by house with Jupiter. What
think you Sir, will this restore His Majesty or not? Take heed, if it does, as
assuredly it will, you know who has Gemini ascending at his nativity, a halter
stretch him. Let me tell you Sir, this will restore His Majesty, (unless He be
made away by poison) and I hope between this and Febr: next; I beseech God
protect Him, and my hopes are strong he will.

This Eclipse also signifies death, at least great danger of death, to a Lady
of very great fame and worth.

Mr. Booker says well, that it is much to be doubted, whether the air will be
clear enough, to have the Eclipse visible; because of the nearness of the
Eclipsed luminary, to the body of Saturn, and the opposition of the Sun,
causing a very great apertio portarum; to rain, winds, and a great distemper
in the air, much about that time; but certain I am, it will be felt, and so
smartly, that diverse will curse the very day of their births, and the womb
that brought them forth. Look to it Mr. Lilly, you and all your friends.

Eclipsis Lunae in primis december gradibus Geminorum, sacerdotibus, and in quovis
ordine sacris initiatis; dissentionem, lites, and seditiones aggerit; odia
infanda, legum cotemptum, and pietatis etiam neglectum concitat; and in
cursiones, and rapinas hostium minatur. The Moon Eclipsed in the first ten
degrees of Gemini, stirs up amongst and against the Clergy, dissentions,
strifes, seditions; it signifies also hatred, contempt of the Laws, the neglect
of piety, and the incursions, and rapines of enemies.

Haly says, that quando Luna Eclipsi obruit saturnum, and cooperit eum,
morietur Rex Clarus, and magni nominis, in terra occidentis, but I see no
reason for it: an Eclipse of the Sun would indeed have signified such a thing,
and it is to be feared even in this scheame I confess, because the Sun is
something near the Dragons tail.

Another says, destructionem vini, and multas infirmitates in hominibus, and
egritudines, and bubones significat: magnum caedem inter regem, and vulgus; and
multum malum, multas angustias, ad venientes regibus, propter inobedentiam
militum little eis. Thus in English it signifies an ill vintage, many diseases,
and infirmities, and buboes; (that is, pestilentiall or veneriall botches) it
signifies a great slaughter between the King, and Commons, and many straits to
Kings, by reason of the disobedience of their Soldiers; but M. Lilly himself
acknowledges that the Moon signifies the Parliament; those Westminsterian or
mock-sun Kings, not true Kings; those that would be Kings, but are not so, nor
ever shall be.

This Eclipse happens in the seventh and eighth houses of heaven; quarum
significationes sunt multae interfectiones, and infirmitates, multa bella, and
rumores; legum, institutionum, sectarumque mutationes, multa concupiscentia in
mulieribus miptis, and impregnatio multa. It signifies many slaughters, and
infirmities, much Wars, and rumors; the changing of Institutions, Laws,
Sects, much concupiscence in married women, and many great bellies this year.

This Eclipse indeed will spare none, from the King to the beggar, (especially
of the Londoners, or the inhabitants of that City) who have the Sun, Moon, mid
heaven, or part of fortune, in their nativities, or revolution thereof, or any
direction of their principal significators, from 4. degrees to 13. of Gemini,
Sagitarius, Virgo, or Pisces; for it will afflict them one way or other. Let
London and Mr. Lilly beware, for as I am credibly informed, he has Gemini
ascending in his nativity.

Mr. Lilly would not have this Eclipse to operate till five months after it
happens; but Origanus a very good author (one whom I had much rather confide
in, then in M. Lilly) is of a quite contrary opinion: viz. that Eclipses
operate presently, and M. Booker in his Almanac for this year, cites him to
prove it: Consentaneum namque est Eclipses statim operari, says he, from
Origanus. If Origanus says true (as I believe he does) then am I confident,
that before five months from the time of the Eclipse, be run about; Mr. Lilly
himself and most of that fraternity, must prove wandering Planets, some to the
block, some to the gibbet, some beyond Sea; and then I hope, if not before, he
will be so ingenuous as to confess, the present working of the influence, of
that dire Eclipse. But suppose Mr. Lilly to be right in this, that the Eclipse
of the Moon works not till five months after the time of the Eclipse, as I
know some very good authors are of that opinion; it gives them but a little
more liberty to repent; it will surely fall upon them within nine months after
the time of the Eclipse, viz. by the end of August next.

I have finished my judgment of this year: but before I conclude, I must needs
show you some more of Mr. Lillies feinings, and failings; that you may
evidently see, his Oracles are not of equal authority, with Sibils, or old
Merlins; whose son he would counterfeit himself; which I might (if I would
carpe at very thing he has done amiss) justly reckon amongst his feighnings
and saylings; but if he be Merlins son, he is doubtless of a bastard brood.

He feigneth that he is a perfct lover of Monarchy, and of His Majesty as his
Sovereign; yea he says that it will be a cordial to his conscience when he
dies, that he loved Monarchy: he now expresses himself to the quick: I hope
you do not think that he uses to dissemble, at least not now: but why then
does he affirm, that if the King signs the Propositions, which went to Him
about February last (as I remember) he is mortalium prudentissimus? I doubt not
indeed but he will appear so, and that really to all the world: but how? in not
granting them; for if He give away His Kingdom, over whom shall He Reign,
over Canibals or Crows? If he loves His Majesty as he pretends, why does he
so earnestly desire the whole Kingdom as one man, to engage against all that
rise against the Parliament, during the Treaties continuance, yea and after? oh
brave Subject! who would think indeed but that he loves His Majesty, since he
is so zealous for His yet captivity? no man can serve two masters (Mr. Lilly)
commanding two contrary things; if the King therefore command the Kingdom,
(His Kingdom it is not the Parliaments) to rise for His enlargement, and the
restoring unto Him His Crown, and Dignity, which they violently, and unjustly
detain; if you not only forbid them so to do, but encourage them to rise in
their behalfes, who have done all this and much more against Him, who do you
then account your Sovereign? Surely the Parliament, or Army, one of those
hopeful souls, whom you dubbe with the glorious names, of Senators, States,
Cedars, etc. it cannot be King Charles you mean, and this will further yet
appear: for speaking of the Treaty, he says, that he hopes that His Majesty
now wearied, with the sad conditions of life, attending Him, and His whole
family; and well perceiving the fruitless success of Arms, intended for His
enlargement, by His friends; will wave such strict Propositions, as in former
Treaties He might have insisted upon; That is in plain English, that he will
give away unto the Parliament, His Crown and Dignity, all but the Title, for
His enlargement: Oh Traitor, how many ropes do thou deserve? he hopes that
His Sovereign, to whom but now he professed so great love, so much Allegiance,
will un-King Himself, make His adversaries His Lords, and Sovereigns. This
indeed might perhaps procure His enlargement, bring Him, His Queen and
Progeny, to see each other; but how He, She, or They, should ever rejoice after
such an Act, as would absolutely undoc them all; for my part I can by no means
imagine. I am sure and certain, that His Majesty has ever shown Himself
most inclinable to Peace; yea, has offered to buy it, and at a very dear
rate: but should a man lay out all his estate upon one bargain, it had need
have be a good peny-worth, or he is quite undone; small hopes of recovery being
to be expected from a bankerupt fortune. If Mr. Lilly had loved His Majesty,
(as he pretends) he would never have inserted into his Book this following
wish; I pray God (says he) that His Majesty stands not too much upon His
punctoes of Honor, and that safe and sure Propositions may proceed from the
Parliament, for the good of us all. His Majesty must not stand upon such
punctoes of Honor, as to have His just rights; He must be surely bound, and is
not fit to be trusted; for this is clearly the sense of his villainous wish.
Has not Mr. Lilly now shown himself, the most notorious feighner, and
failer, that ever yet set pen to paper?

He feigneth that the Army is composed of more civil and Religious men then
ever any Army was: and dares any man to contradict if they can, any thing said
in their behalf; but he fails in this also, for this is undoubtedly a good
axiom, no Independent is, or can be an upright man: for therein they imitate
the Devil, the first Independent that ever was; and consequently the father of
that faction, for he would not depend upon Almighty God, and was therefore
thrown down from heaven to hell, whither all his progeny must undoubtedly
follow him, if they turn not and repent not in time. I fear Fairfax, and the
rest of that crew, will hardly be one day able to plead his, or their
uprightness before God, where (let them be assured) they must come to a strict
account, to answer for their great and gross abuses of their Sovereign his
Anointed, contrary to their Allegiance, yea his plighted faith. Oh England, if
thou well bethink'st thy self, thou have great cause to love these men: be
sure if thou take their part, thou must partake in their sufferings. Mr.
Lilly is so impudent, as to think that no man dares speak against them,
though they have committed ('it is evident to every eye) the greatest villainies,
the grossest impieties, that ever were set down in story: how many widows
have they made? how many Orphans have they slain? how many Virgins have they
deflowred? Oh Godly generation! they cannot err; else I should affirm, that
if Mr. Lilly should rake hell, and skum the Devil seven years together, he
could never find a more cursed crew: would they not have levelled the estates
of all men? have they not been, and yet are the locusts and caterpillars that
have eat up, and devoured the good things of this Land, and brought it almost
to an utter desolation? Mr. Lilly they that really are heretics, and
schismatickes, must look to be called so to their brazen faces, in spite of
you copper nose. Do you think that God delivered Colchester to Fairfax, or
subdued the Scots by Cromwell, for their uprightness? Away you counterfeit,
the Scots (fear nothing) will subdue Cromwell, Argile and their confederates,
but if need be, the English and Irish too will help them.

Another of his saylings is this which follows: I did ever (says he) honor
those of the Scots, who stood for a pacification without bloodshed, who were
willing to compose our differences without an Army: the others he calls
despicable fellows: A brave time when true subjects are accounted despicable,
and Traitors reveren'st, and honored as Gods darlings. Mr. Lilly did not
account it an Invasion, when the Scots came against the King; now he says
concerning Scotland, had not a Divine providence over-powred the Stars, we had
not been invaded: thus to excuse his own lying Oracles, he makes himself of
Gods counsel, and ransacks the very Cabinet of Divinity; Oh how he clawed the
Scots, when they came for the Prrliament, now he wishes, that those who plead
the Scottish civility, or call them Brethren to affront the Parliament; he
wishes Jockey, and Moggie, and all their beggarly brats quartering upon them;
but wishes are but wind Mr. Lilly. it is money that buies Land: you could call
them Brethren, and give them greater and nobler appellations, when they came of
your side in affront to the King: they quartered then upon our etates, and I
wish heartily, and it is but lex talionis, that they were now quartered upon
your estate, and upon the estates of such as you are: Their good Angel has not
yet forsaken them I perceive, as Mr. Lilly feighneth, how came then Argile to
be so beaten? I perceive Mr. Lilly that you would, but cannot rob them of their
good Angel; he refuses to hear the voice of the charmer, charm he never so
wisely.

I wonder Mr. Lilly in his Ephemeris, should highly commend our friends
Valliant Inchequin, and honorable Jones (as he calls them) men infinitely
deserving: but I am confident, that had he but misdoubted, that ever they would
have declared for the King, he would have called them Traitors; Traitors to
whom? to those Kingly Rebels, at Westminster.

But will some say, is there not truth at all in neither of Mr. Lillies books?
yes, one thing I remember he speaks very truly, for which I hope his great
Masters at Westminster, will soundly lash their Prophet, and that is this: the
Countryman has great cause (says he) to repine and grumble, having a hard
cruel Landlord, Wh^ grindes them to powder: but that you may set how loath he
is to speak any one truth, except it be at unawares against his will; he in
the same page contradicts it again: I say (says he) we must adhere to the
Parliament and not affront them us of late: what to such hard cruel Landlords,
as grindes them to powder? yes, what though? they are Gods instruments; but let
me tell you Mr. Lilly, it is an ill cause which has nothing to maintain it,
but lies, forgeries, and personal aspersions.

There is another thing in his last book, which may be true, but I much fear
it; I pray God that the Kingdom may see that verified, and then we are happy
yet: it is that the Parliament will willingly condescend, to all such things as
were formerly controverted, and thereby manifest to the people, their
willingness to compose differences by a Treaty: Heavens grant him a true
Prophet in this, but if he be I have lost my mark.

Thus every judicious man perceives, how miserably Mr. Lilly has deluded the
Kingdom, with his false Oracles, and lying predictions: and yet who bragges so
much? he boasts that the Parliament being in low condition, that he peept out
the very day of Nazeby fight, in his starry messenger, and promised the routing
of His Majesty's Armies, and their fight into the West; he oraggs that he
predicted, the integrity of the Scotch Nation, in words of length, when the
whole Kingdom was much amazed, doubting their integrity: and says, that to
their everlasting honor, they verified his predictions: I believe, both these
are but cracks, some of his old feighnings, and failings; but certain I am,
that to his own everlasting infamy, and some of their immortal honors, they
have falsified his predictions this year, although he would very gladly put it
off, in his last book, for in that he says, that he was very doubtful of
them; but I am certain, that his book spoke this year as confidently for
them, as any he wrote, or can possibly write: but however, if we grant him to
have hit right in these predictions; yet qui inter multa falsa, pauca miscet
vera, non est ei in recitando dicta ejus, quic quam tribuendum: He that amongst
so many lies, tells but now and then a truth, is neither to be regarded, nor
believed.

Astra regunt homines, sed regit astra Deus. FINIS.

