The Stil-Destroyer OR, Self-seeking Discovered.

Together With the Curse it brings, and The Cure it requires.

A SERMON Preached BEFORE THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR and Court of
Aldermen of the City of LONDON, upon occasion of a solemn Anniversary meeting,
April 9th, 1645.

By WILLIAM IENKYN Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods Word at Christ-Church
LONDON.

Serpit putrida tabes hypocrifis per omne corpus Ecclesiae, et quo lativs co
desperatius, eoque periculofius quo interius. Omnes sunt amici et omnes
inimici, omnes necessarii, et omnes adversarii, omnes domestici et nulli
pacifici, omnes proximi et omnes ferc quae sua sunt quaerunt, non quae Jesu
Christi.

Isa. 38.17. *Sic Vulg. Ecce in pace amaritudo mea. Amara pri^^ in nece
martyrion, amarior post in conflictu haereticorum, amarissima nunc in moribus
domesticorion.

Bern. Sermon. 33. in Cantic. (...).

Isid. Pelus. Lib. 5. Ep. 498. LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith at the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord MAYOR, and Court of ALDERMEN, of the famous
City of LONDON.
THe occasion was solemn upon which this Sermon was preach^t, the age is
censorious in which it is printed; that did not make me forward to be in the
Pulpit; this made me backward to be in the Press: But the concealing of my
Sermon would have been the discovering of my disobedience, and I rather choose
to be in Print then in such an opposition.

The season is stormy wherein my name puts forth, and who observes not
Shipwracks in the Seas of this my passage, enough to make the sufferers pitied,
and the spectators warned? For my self, the wisdom of your Commands is
embarked in the same bottom with my name; you make by far the greater
adventure, and should there prove a miscarriage, your loss cannot be
inferior: But why speak I of storms or losses? may my vessel but set Christ
on shore, upon any soul, it matters not afterward what becomes of it or me. My
aim was service, not safety, I went not out upon pleasure, but employment:
Sermons are but Machinae, scaffolds to set up Christ in the heart; they obtain
their end in the furtherance of his work, not in the firmness of their own
standing. Our continuing longer then'till Christ be erected, is upon favor,
not necessity.

The way whereby I desire in this Sermon the advancing of Christ, is
principally I confess by destroying of that enemy which both hinders the
setting of Christ up, and if let alone, will also cause our downfall; for the
sin I here strike at, is very improperly called self-seeking, he who is usually
termed a self-seeker, neither attending upon that which is truly self, nor
upon the right seeking of it. That cannot be said to be done for self, which is
not done for the soul, whatsoever is otherwise done being for lusts, or at the
best for the moth, the thief, the carcass, rather then for ones self. The
soule-seeker is the true self-seeker. Nor can this attending upon self be
called a seeking, unles by it we understand a laborious painful toyling, and in
that sense every sinner is a true seeker, but in respect of any wise disposal,
or right ordering of endeavors toward the thing principally desired, which is
good and happiness, it may more properly be termed a losing then a seeking;
rather a going from, then toward the thing after which there is made a seeming
inquiry. To seek our selves by sinning, by distrusting Gods providence, by
excessivenes in earthly industries, by deserting the Cause of Christ,
especially by driving our own unworthy designs under pretense of friendship
to the Church, this kind of self-seeking is in Scripture politiks no better
then selfe-losing. This is the enemy against whom I bend the force of this
ensuing Sermon; wherein if I see me to charge him with too much
adventurousness, let the hurtfulnes both of his nature and practice be my
excuse; for though it would be most happy living when self-seeking were dead,
ye who would not with Sampson even willingly die, so as but this one Philistine
might be killed also? God has followed this Sermon with two others Preached
of late by the mouth of the sword, in the very bowels of this Kingdom; The one
was a punishment upon self-seeking by our loss of a L^icester.
Town, the other a blessing upon seeking him by our winning the In that
glorious victor^e at Nasiby.
Field; In the first he taught us this lesson, seeking our selves and not God
ruins us. In the second, this; Seeking God and not our selves revives us; Oh
that he would please to Preach once more, and that by the Sword of his mouth,
the power of his own Spirit; for otherwise, it is possible indeed to scatter
Armies and overcome Cities, Pro. 16.32.
but never will this Spiritual and Beloved enemy self be vanquished; However,
I have labored to discharge my trust, and thereby to quice my Conscience in
discovering the Destroyer. The Lord grant that England may voice him, and think
him to be as that people did Sampson, when he was brought before them, the
Enemy and Destroyer of their Country and Kingdom. Judge. 16.24.


In particular, I knew not better how to express my dearest respects to this
famous City, whose Lord Mayor, with sundry of her Aldermen and Commons, have
been formerly pleased to assist my now dear charge, in calling me to the place
of my present Ministry: Besides this former love to my self, that of late to
my plain dealing, (more then which, I know nothing, that procured your
approbation to this Sermon) deserves a larger expression in this kind, of my
grateful resenting your religious favors; However, this testimony, such as it
is, of my desires to serve your souls, I humbly present to your Honorable
acceptance, beseeching God that Christ-seeking, and not Self-seeking, may ever
be your Honor, and Londons happiness, as a Minister wherein I am even to
humblest acknowledgements

Your servant for Jesus sake, William Ienkyn.
Christ-Church, London.
THE STIL-DESTROYER DISCOVERED.
2 PHILIPPIANS 20.21. For I have no man like minded, who will naturally care
for your state.

For all seek their own, not the things of JESUS CHRIST.


AT the writing whereof the body of Paul was under the restraint of bonds and
imprisonment, but never was the soul of this blessed man more then at this
time enlarged; his soul was happy in a double enlargement. First, in that of
spiritual joy, secondly, of spiritual desire. His joys were so abundant,
that he expresses them near twenty several times in this no long Epistle;
never made he so frequent mention of death, bonds and dissolution, as in this
Epistle, nor ever made he more frequent expressions of Divine joys and
comforts; now he exhorts the Philippians (for he had of this oil of joy for
their lamps also) to rejoice, Chap. 3.1.4.
to rejoice always, and again to rejoice; The thorn was at his breast, and
never sang he so sweetly as now; Chap. 4.4.
He had a fountain of joy in his soul, which the scorching season of a prison
was not able to dry up; Oh the power and effic^cie of the supplies of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ! Phil. 1.19.
How able are they to pose the cruelties of men? There is still as much in
Jesus Christ for us; his comforts are imparted, not impaired; a prison cannot
keep him more out now then in Paul's time. He still loves to feed his people
through the grate, and when he sends them a great journey of trouble and
^^derling, to bid them once and again, up and eat: and will the Lord keep us
from soul-straitnings? what matters it how strict and close the confinements of
our bodies are?

For the largeness of Paul's desires, they were not in this Epistle employed
for him self as prisoners wishes commonly are, but for the Philippians. His
own miseries lose themseves in the fears of theirs; his only grief was that of
compassion; throughout all this rejoicing Epistle I find him weeping but once,
Chap. 3.18.
and that was from apprehensions of their dangers. Chap. 1.23.
His desire of benefiting their souls could have made him content at one time
almost, Si dives quispimulieri pauper^ulae dicat, Ingredere tu ad prandium
me^um, sed quem gestas infantulum relinque for is, quoui^ plorat et moles^us
est nobis, nunquid faciet? nonne magis eliget jejunare, quam exposito pignore
charo sola prandere cum divite? ita, etc. Bern. Sermon. 12. in Cant. Verse 19.
to stay a while longer from Jesus Christ, and (as Bernard speaks of another)
rather to stand at the door a begging with his children in the rain, then to
go in and feast with Jesus Christ himself, and leave them without. Oh the
excellency of a public Spirit! It Is not limited or confined within the bounds
of self concernments. Oh the greatness of a Soul widened, with desires to
advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ! Paul's zeal in this respect puts him upon
contriving some way of making a supply of his necessitated absence from the
Philippians; what he could not do by himself, he desires to do by another,
even Timothy, him he promises to send as a living Epistle to second this
other, so as Jesus Christ might be advanced, he cares not by whom it were,
whether by himself or another. He was willing to stand in the crowd and be
hidden, so as Christ might stand upon his shoulders and be seen^.

Paul being about to give a Omnes has virtutes de Timotheo praedicat ut majori
^um reveroutla cum prae^entom ex^ipi^^^. ^ane. in loc.
Commission to Timothy for this purpose, sends first a commendation of him.
He commends him from his carfulness of the Philippiuns state. (...), from
his holy solicitousnes, the word imports a soul-cutting care. It Is then happy
with the Church of God, when they who are employed in it, have endowments
suitable to their employments, especially that of caring for souls. Ministers
must not then be without care when they are to enter upon it. How unfitly are
many Congregations in this distracted England called Cures? many there are that
cut the souls of their people, few that cut their own souls with caring for
their people; Timothy had within him a soul-diving care for the Philippians
state.

This care in Timothy toward the Philippians, Paul commends for its sincerity,
its naturalnes; (...).
He cares for your state naturally (says he) that is, heartily, truly, not
paintedly, appearingly, artificially, Non necessitatis vinculo, sed voluntatis
obs^quio.
or (as some) willingly, not constrainedly; Timothy was not a Minister in
title, in dignity, in coat, in cloth, but in truth; he had the heart of a
Minister in him; he was not a Praelate in show, and a Pilate in heart, as
Bernard complains of some in his time; Bernard.
there was in him Genuinus germanus affectus, a reality of inward and hearty
affection toward the Philippians; he was careful naturally, sincerely.

This sincerity of Timothies care Paul commends from the raritie of it; I have
none, faith he, like-minded, equally-hearted to Timothy in this cause of
Christ, I have diverse Ministers with me, (...).
but only one Timothy, the rest are far inferior to him in integrity, and of
a lower form in Ministerial fitnes to be employed, he is the most choicely
spirited man that I know in all If Peter were now at Rome, the Papists have
little cause to boast of him, rather how do they disgrace him, in saying was
so? O triste et f^^^ dum Elog^^^^. Cal^. in. (...).
Rome; I have not his fellow left when he is gone, Paul had no regard to his
own private loss of so precious a companion; he had but one, and he too was
deserving, and receiving from Paul the love of a father, yet part with him he
will if the Church want him. O self-denying soul! how do thou shame those,
who boasting that they succeed in the place of Apostleship, are (were at least)
yet so far from the grace of it, that if Philippi had been in their Dioces,
would rather have taken away from Philippi an hundred Timothies and not have
left one, then have sent one to Philippi, though there had been a hundred by
them desirous to go? 2. Paul to make the Philippians value Timothy the more,
tells them that such Timothies were very rare a motive likely to be prevalent to
move respect to Timothy. The rarity of godly Minister^ height en^ the esteem
of them. Oh that the times wherein were live were not too sad a proof^ hereof!
When our Timothies were rare how frequently were they beloved? but now they are
by the blessing of God in greater abundance (in these parts) how commonly are
they loathed? And this is occasioned by the plenty of their labors, under
which cost of a good God we grow more luxuriant and rank in weeds, more
propense to liberty, pride, contentions, and contempt of Gods so familiar
Dispensations, even to the taking up the old trade new dressed; I mean a siner
spunne persecution. Take heed, if raritie be a means to procure love to
Ministers, the Lord may soon remove from you these now (as they are counted)
Antichristian burdens, and by their raritie teach you to esteem them; I scare
your madness must be cured by keeping you in the dark, and that with shorter
and courser fare too. Paul endeavors to heighten the Philippians esteem of
Timothy, by declaring the unusualness of such Timothies; I have none equally
minded, etc.

Paul gives the reason of this raritie in the 21. verse. the words that I choose
in my following discourse to insist upon; What is the cause that there are few
or none besides Timothy that regard the things, the state of the Church?
because others seek their own things, therefore not Christ's things. Their
affections are full flood earth-ward, selfe-ward; therefore ebbing heavenward,
Christ-ward.

All seek] He speaks not of those that had made an open defection from the
faith, totally forsaking the Apostle, as Hymeneus, Philetus, etc. but of those
who were Brethren and fellow laborers: Nor yet does he intend that simply all
these were so neglective of the things of Christ, as that there was not one but
Timothy that regarded the Church; for there was Epaphr^ditus and others who
did regard them, but the word [All] is here to be taken as els-where, and in
common speech it is used, that is, not as importing its full extent, and as it
is most comprehensive, but as importing the generality, the many, the most; so
when Paul speaks as if all the Cretians were evil beasts and slow bellies,
Tit. 1.12.13. So we ^ay, Nusquem ^uta sides^nem^ castu^ in Italia Om^es in
Hispa^ia superbi.
he must be understood as speaking of the most; the generality of the fault,
causing an expression of universalitie. All, almost, or for the generality
seek their own things.

Seek] The word signifies an eager and studious prosecution and desire, by way
of inquiry after any thing; (as Mark 12.12. Luke 11.18.) sometimes also the
requiring or exacting of a thing; ( Luke 12.46.) here it is taken in the former
sense, and imp^rts a too ^ager immoderate prosecution of our own things, not a
lawful subordinate endeavor to preserve our selves and ours, so as to advance
Gods glory thereby, but an immeasurable vehement out-going of affection after
our own things which we make our aim, and end, and scope in a way of
oppositnesse even to the things of Christ himself when both come in competition.

Their own] Or things for themselves, and that belong to themselves, and here
they are to be understodd of bodily comforts, as riches, health, pleasures,
etc. Luke 19.12.
though Christ calls these another (Luke 16.12.) and those only our own which
are our souls, Grace being the (...), your own, spoken of in that place, and
indeed spiritual blessings only deserve this title of our own, because they
are only qualified for that part of a man, that is the man, the soul, and
they only continue. Other things, the own things spoken of here being rather
our Carcasses then our own, and they shall have others to own them ere long;
but in regard of our civil propriety in them among men, and in regard of the
opinions of carnally minded men, using and desiring them as if their souls
could be satisfied with them, as also own them always, these folicitously
immoderately regarded things are called our own.

Not the things of Jesus Christ] What he had called the state and things of the
Church in the foregoing verse, he here calls the things of Jesus Christ, in
regard that Christ has a true interest in the Church and all that belongs to
it. The Church is his Church, Esa. 63.19. John 10.3. Ephesians. 5.17.
her grace, glory, conditions, all his.

Not] That is, Comparatively to Timothy; they were not equally hearted to him
for the Church, not that they did simply throw off all care of the Church; but
their own private proper profits and interests did so take them up, that they
had not at that time hearts suited to so difficult an employment for Christ; To
seek the things of Christ is to make the glory of Christ principally in our
ay^^es, to employ our parts and endeavors chiefly for advancing his Honor,
preferring him to all our private conveniences, or exigences, to make Christ
the scope of our life: so Phi. 1. Phil. 1.21.
To me to live is Christ. Contrarily, not to seek him is not only not to
regard him at all, and purely to throw off all looking after the things of
Christ, but not to seek them in the first place, and not to propound them as
our chief end, but rather to undertake employments seemingly for Christ, but
intending principally our own benefit, honor, case, etc. more then the things
of Jesus Christ.

The words of both the verses thus opened, those of the twenty first verse,
which I shall only insist upon contain a proof, and an aggravation of a fault
more lightly touched in the foregoing verse, by occasion of Timothies
commendation: The fault was Carele^nesse of the Churches state; the Apostle
amplifieth it here th^^e ways.

First, by she wing what it was to be careless of the state of the Church;
it was to neglect the things even of Christ himself: it is a considerable person
that is neglected with the Church.

Secondly, by she wing how or upon what ground these things of the Church came
to be neglected; it was by reason of the seeking their own things, it was a
very inconsiderable ground upon which they were so careless of the things of the
Church.

Thirdly, by she wing the generality of those that were so careless and
neglective of these things. All, says Paul in a manner all, by f^r the most
seek their own things, etc.

Or we may observe two things mainly considerable in this o^e and twentieth
verse, Division of the words.


First, a fault or offense described.

Secondly, the generablitie of the delinquents or offenders.

First, 1. Part.
the fault has two branches: First, a positive branch, They sought their own
things. Secondly, a negative branch, not the things of Jesus Christ.

In the first, the positive, first, here is an act seeking, there is eagerness.

Secondly, an object, their own things, there is unworthiness.

In the second the negative branch; there is first, the kind of ^ffence, it
was an omission; the state of the Church was neglected, o^^itted, not the, etc.

Secondly, the d^gree of it, or the aggravating and heightning of it, the
things o^^s of Jesus Christ were neglected in the neglect of the Church.

Thirdly, the cause of all this neglect necessarily employed, it was in regard
of following inordinately their own things.

The generality of the offenders is to be handled under several
considerations. 2. Part.


In prosecution of this second division sundry fruitful observations in every
branch would offer themselves, 1. Part.
as, from the first part the offense as considered, first, in the positive
branch, 1. Branch of the 1. Part.
the seking their own things.

First, observe as this eager act of seeking was bestowed upon things that were
licita non inhonesta, own things permitted by God to be sought after, that we
are very liable to offend in lawful things. Observation.


Secondly, as these things were privata non publica, their own private, not the
Public things, Obser.
that it is a very ignoble temper of soul for Christians in times wherein the
Public wants them, to regard immoderately their own private affairs.

Thirdly, as these things were dissimulata non manifesta, things sought
underhand; no man professing or seeming to seek his own things, but the
contrary the good of the Church; Obser.
that it is ordinary, but very discommendable for Christians, under pretense of
seeking the things of the Church, to regard mainly themselves and their own
things.

So from the offense considered in the negative branch, not the things of Jesus
Christ; first, from the kind of this offense, 2. Branch of 2. Part.
it being an offense of omission, we might observe that it is a sin not only
to persecute the Church, but even not to labor the prosperity of it. Obser.


Secondly, from the aggravation of this neglect of the Church, it being a
neglect of the things of Jesus Christ, we might observe; Obser.
first, the propriety and interest that Christ has in his Church, and the
things of it, they are the things of Christ himself; as the Church it self, so
her Grace, Glory, Conditions, Officers, are all his.

Secondly, that this interest which Christ has in his Church, and the things
thereof, does much heighten the offense of neglecting the Church, in regard it
imports, first, a neglect of a service we pretend to advance, all making a
show of serving Christ. Obser.


Secondly, a neglect of a service that deserves our regard by reason of its
honor, safety, sweetness, advantage.

Thirdly, Aneglecting of him that was so loving and industrious in seeking of
us.

Fourthly, A neglecting of his service who will one day call us to an account
for it.

Thirdly, from the cause of this neglecting the things of Christ, Obser.
it is observable that the seeking our own things, binders the seeking of the
things of Christ's.

The second part of the Text, viz. the generality of the offenders, contains a
threefold respect. 2. Part.


First, Obser.
to Paul, in whom it notes sorrowful resentment of this fault, and courage in
reproving it.

Secondly, Obser.
to Timothy, by whom it notes commendablenesse in differing from the generality.

Thirdly, Obser.
to the self-seekers; who were brethren and fellowlabourers; in whom it notes
the discovery that difficulties make of pretenders to Christ and his things.

But I shall in this first part only prosecute the last particular in the
second branch, viz. the cause of the neglect of the things of Christ, and in
that the forenamed point which the context compared with the words themselves,
clearly show us was the Apostles scope; all the other particulars before
mentioned in a manner naturally falling in with it in the through handling of
it; It was this, The seeking of our own things will hinder us from seeking the
things of Jesus Christ. Proposition.


In the prosecution of which point I shall proceed, First by way of Explication.

Secondly, of Confirmation.

Thirdly, of Application.

There are three things which want Explication.

First, First, the Proposition explained, by showing what kind of seeking it
is that hinders the seeking of the things of Jesus Christ.
what kind of seeking our own things it is that will hinder us from seeking
the things of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, what things of Christ they are that will be hindered by seeking our
own things.

Thirdly, wherein the hinderance stands and does consist, that will follow this
seeking our own things.

1. What I mean by seeking our own things.

2. What by the things of Christ.

3. What by the hinderance or neglect of the things of Jesus Christ.

First, what I mean by seeking our own things. All kind of seeking our own
things will not hinder us from seeking the things of Christ. Cura, di^igenti^.
There is a lawful and an allowed seeking our own things; A diligent,
Christian, providentiall labor in looking after them, 2 These. 3.10. 2 Cor.
12.14. 1 Timothy 5.8.
is by the Scripture commanded and commeuded, there being no repugnancie at all
between it and seeking the things of Christ; Aliqu^ m^do quarere quae sua
sunt, non pugnat ^um illo quod est quaerere quae sunt Jesus Christi. Quarenda
quae sunt Christi sed non negligenda quae sunt nestra, Zanc. in loc. Nimiam
solicttudinem probibet, operationem jubet. Aug.
A Christian is not exempted from all kind of socking their own things, which
as they are to be sought for from God, before we labor for them upon the
earth; so must we labor for them upon the earth, when we have sought them
from God; Are we hungry? we must not sit still till miraculous showers of
Manna rain down upon us; Are we thirsty? we must not wait for God to cleave
the Rocks into Cups, and give us water thence; Are we desirous of c^oathing?
we doserve to go naked if we will stay till the Sheep resign their coats to
be our garments; What then? what kind of seeking is it that a Christian must
shun as hindering from seeking the things of Jesus Christ?

First, it is a seeking our own things with an^iety of heart, with
distrustfulnesse of Gods promise and providence; such a seeking as wherein we
depend not upon a father to seek with us and for us, and to be careful of us.
When we cast not the burdensomenesse of our seeking upon God, when we are not
like the sheep that follows the Shepherd for food, but like the Lion always
roaring and raving, as if there were none to provide for us; when as we are
cutting our souls with care; Matthew. 6.25. (...). Luke 12.29. (...). Ne in acre
vagamini ^ogitationibus vestris. Pisc. Hosea 12.8. Calv. H^mines applandunt
sibi. Mar. 10.24. Job. 31.24. Psalm. 52.^.
when we are always of a doub^full ^^oubled mind for these own things, as
Christ speaks; when we hang in suspense for the event of our enquiries, and
are like Meteors in the air tossed up and down, hither and thither, at the
pleasure of every blast.

Secondly, the seeking our own things with the beight of raised expectation to
sinde comfort and supplies and sufficiency in them, hinders from seeking the
things of Jesus Christ; when we think of our own things above what they are;
when we regard our health, wealth, honor, etc. as if there were no other
heaven but these, and no other hell but the contrary; when we bless our selves
securely in the hopes or possessions of them, and trust and confide in them, as
Christ speaks, Mar. 10.24. Making gold our confidence, trusting in the
abundance of riches. li a man thinks these things to be something, when they
are nothing, he deceives himself; they all say to a man they are not the
things we lo^ke for, they point to God; if we regard them with the height of
hopes, and firmness of dependencies, we shall neglect all of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, the seeking our own things with (...) and unlimited eagerness in
going out after them, when the hear i^ for upon them, and sold unto them,
there being no moder^tion to held the raines of our industry, we being
carried not with the g^^tle gales of indifferency, but the furious winder of
vi^^dence; this kind of seeking also hinders from seeking the things of Jesus
Christ; Tantum s^^ est qr^^ntum si^^^ exig it natura in suo genere conservandae
m^dus. Aug.
when we do not exevcise our limbs, but cra^^^ out sinews (...) them, not
dip the tip of our rod in tasting the honey o^ profit, ple^sure, honor, etc.
but thrust it in even all over, and engulph and swallow up our selves in
matters of se^fe (...), going beyond what is enough for our calling and
condition; resolving to have these things, what even they cost us; as the
Apostle speaks of some, 1 Timothy 6.9.
who will berich; who will through five and water, and difficulties; armies of
these shall not hinder them from the water after which they thirst.

Fourthly, The seeking our own things unleas^nably, bastowing hours upon them
that are due to other things, is a seeking which makes us neglect the things of
Jesus Christ, when weroh the (...) of her opportunities, pil^er from God, clip
the Sabbath, our Prayer^, Religion, the Church and Cause of Christ; when the
senlofeth here, 2 Kings 5.26.
that so it may gain upon our own things: which we will seek through Christ
in his Saints, and cause requires the contrary; Is this a time, said the
Prophet to Gehazi, to receive money and garments? So might Paul have said to
these tender delicate brethren, that were so unlike to Timothy; Is this a time
to mind case, and rest, and safety, and self? such a kind of seeking our own
things, must needs hinder the seeking the things of Jesus Christ. I have done
with the first thing that I propounded to be ^pened, viz. what seeking it is
that hinders us from seeking the things of Jesus Christ.

The second follows, 2. Bran^^ of Expli^^tion. Secondly, the point opened, by
she wing what things of Christ Self-seeking hinders us from seeking. 1. It
hindered fro seeking and regarding Christ a himself.
what things of Christ this self-seeking hinders.

1. This caused a neglect of Christ himself when he was here upon the ^^^th;
even to an earnest soliciting him sometimes to depart out of their ^^^sts,
Matthew. 8.34. Sometimes it made people fearful to acknowledge him, John 9.22.
At other time^openly to (...) him; It Was this that derided him in the (...)
Pharis^^s, Luke 16.14. It Was this that persecuted him in the Ruler^^^ It Was this
that (...), M^^. 19.2^. Danyed him (so far as it prevailed) in Peter, Matthew,
^6.30. That bewayed him in Indas, Matthew. 26.47. That conirived his death in the
chief Priests, they were wholly bent upon presetving their own place and their
nation, John 11.48. It Was this that condemned him in Pilate, Luke 23.24. In a
word, it made his whole life, a life of neglect, and 'twas the reason why
Christ came to his own, and his own received him not. His own sought their
own things.

Secondly, Inordinate self-regarding has ever caused and expressed a neglect
of Christ and his things, 2 And from seeking the things of Christ in his
servants.
in men's carriage toward his servants; What was it but this which made them
accounted the burdens of the earth, the wondermen? of the world, the plagues of
their several ages? they were against self, and self in every man was
against them; It Was seeking their own things that made Diana's worshippers so
loud in their outcries against Blessed Paul; Acts 19.28.
that made Peter and John threatened for that miracle of mercy; that imprisoned
and abused the Apostles; Acts 4.18.5.40^
that ston^d S^^ven for feacre of suffering a change in old and own customs;
that moved Herod to kill James, Acts 6.13.7.59^ Acts 12.3.
and endeavor the murder of Peter. Self-regarding was the wind that ever
raised storms against the servants of Christ; at the best it made them looked
upon with neglect and contempt, it made people fearful to accompany with them,
or join to their Society; Acts 5.19.
or if some did go so fa^ as out ward Compliance with them, yet has this
self-regarding caused squint-eyed aims, and secret resolutions upon occasion
of difficulty to forsake them. What but this has neglected Christ in his
distressed members, often denying relief to them, 1 Samuel 25.11. T^ties dixit
me t^^; meum, (...) tandem (...) fecit siant^.
st^rving Christ in his Saints? Was it not this that made Nabal branded with
the name of a churl, and caused that unkind denial of Davias slender
request; Shall I give, says he, my bread, my water, my fi^sh, etc.

Thirdly, This immoderate regarding our own things, From seeking the things of
Christ in the cause of Religion.
has neglected the things of Christ in the cause of Religi^n. What but this
kept Meroz back from helping the Lord? What, if not this, detained R^nben among
the sheep-folds, to hear the bleating of the ^^ocks, when the cause of God was
in ^copa^dy? Judge. 4. Chap. ^.
This t^ed D^n to his ships; This shut up the hearts and hands of the men of
S^ccoth and Pennel against the Fai^ting bodies of the pur^^ers of Gods and his
^hurches (...). 'Twas the seeking their own things that would have cursed the
Church by B^l^^^^, Numb. 22. disturbed it by Cora^, Dathan, and Abir^^^, N^^^^.
26.9. and 16.3. that abolished the purity of worship out of the kingdom of
Israel by Jeroboam, 1 King. 12.26, 27. that hindered the full reformation of it
in Jehu's time, 2 King. 10.19. that retarded the reformation after the
Babylonish-captivity, Z^ch. 2.7. Romans 16.17.
In a word, all the homebred distractions, and divisions, (...) the unsound
opinions, sidings, half-reformations, sinful limitations, to go thus far, and
no farther, ungodly bredths, which people have indulged to themselves, wretched
allowances of gross sins, and errors in some, though persecuting the
appearances of them in others; all these, with infinite more, have self-seeking
in the Church for their source. This has been ever the Tine^ babet damnum, non
sonitum.
m^th of the Church, Amariss^ma mea amaritudo in moribus domesticorum pax a
paganis, ab haere^^cis, sed non a filiis.
making up in hurt, what it wants in noise; Sions Still-Destroyer, to which the
Church may say, as I^phtah to his dangliter, I am, and ever was, brought low
for thy sake, O self-seeking: and therefore holy Bernard makes it a greater
enemy to the Church then the most raging persecutions.

Fourthly, 4. And from seeking the things of Christ in his word, it hinders
Ministers by making them to be sinfully silent. Ephesians. 6.19. To adulterate it
with humane wisdom, (...), 2 Cor. 2.17. (...) semper in fames habit^ quod
mer^es adulterant. To wrack it for false opinions. Tit. 1.11. Phil. 3.19. 2
P^^. 2.1, 2, 3.
This seeking our own things, neglects the things of Christ in the preaching of
the Word; Self-seeking has made Ministers and people neglect Christ in his
Word: For Ministers, it has made them neglect the Word, sometime by sinful
silencing some truths, and un worthy face-fearing; A sin, (so ready to creep
into the Pulpit) that Paul desires the Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.19. to pray it down,
even in himself; At other times by corrupting and adulterating the truth with
sinner-soothing words (as wine with water) not the words of wisdom, but the
wisdom of words, as Paul speaks, 1 C^rin. 1.17. all this while, they speaking
three words for themselves, for one in the behalf of Christ; Sometime again
Self-seeking has corrupted the preaching of the Word, by putting Ministers
upon perverting it, for the upholding of impious opinions, gainful to the
purse, and hurtful to the heart; thus the Apostle speaks of filthy lusre, that
made some preach things which they ought not; ^arthly mindedness in others,
that caused enmity to the cross of Christ, (I conceive the Apostle means,
their preaching the Law in a way of opposition to Christ's satisfaction:)
Covetousness and desire to make mer^h^ndise of souls, puts others upon
bringing in d^^^able heresies; At other times, self-regarding has put
Ministers upon preaching the Word, who are altogether uns^^^^full, and
unprepared, To adventure upon preaching it unpreparedly.
workmen that may well be ashamed, never trained up to handle their spiritual
atms, not like those ^ilfull Beni^^^ites able to shoot at a hairs breadth,
though too like them in being left handed; Judge. 20.16.
attending to, and preaching of exhortation, but unable to meddle with
doctrine, though God commands both; tormenting the most innocent Texts, making
them speak what they never intended; 2 Timothy 4.2. Vid. Call. in loc.
dealing with the Scriptures as Chy^^ists with natural bodies, laboring to
extract that out of them, 2 Pet. 3.16.
which nature never put in them; wounding the Scriptures with their own
weapons, and making them (Vriah-like) carry letters for their own destruction.

Nor has the Word fared better from self-seeking hearers; 2. Self-seeking
hinders people from seeking the things of Christ in the word; hereby they
contemn the threatenings of it. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Hos. 12.7, 8. Luke 16.12. Per hoc
quod amant coguntur ad hoc quod vitant. Greg. 1 Timothy 6.9. 2. The commands of
it. Ezekiel. 33.31.
For how have they disregarded all the administrations of it? what have its
threatenings been in allages to them but empty cracks? do they not bless
themselves in the saddest denuntiations of it? placing their prosecutions of
their own things as a skreen between themselves and Gods wrath; These they were
that evermore despised and derided the sharpest Sermons; instifying themselves
because happily men had nothing to say against them, hardening their necks though
often reproved, if the threatenings be severe they care not, they will on in their
pursuits, though the Word tell them, hell, and destruction, and perdition be in
the way.

For the commands of it, they will perhaps give them the hearing; but though
the Ministers be al^vely song, and a pleasant ^^ice, and one that can play well
on an instrument, yet their words they will not do, for their hearts run after
their covetous inquiries; and the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.2. gives the reason
in that place, where he implies that the lusts of men are flatly opposite to
the will of God: A heart s^t upon seeking the world, gives that deportment to
the Word, which Abraham gave to his servants who ^id them stay behind a while,
Genesis 22.5.
till he and his son had gone to sacr^fi^^, but then he comes again unto
them: so these (if they can spare so much time) will for an hour in a week bid
their ^arthly enquiries stay till they have heard what their precise instructor
will deliver, but then they will after ward make up their constrained
in^^^^^ission with a more ^ager prosecution of all the services, and (...) of
self^^ They who (...) not ^e bo^nded in their affections, by the (...) of
health or ^^nength, or (...), or honor, shall we think that these will be
restrained by precep^^ Gods own immediate (...) Bal^^^^, Number. 22.22.
how fr^itlesse was i^^ up he gets him betim^^ in ^he morning, as if his bed
had been at full of thorns as his soul; add though (...) and again, these
^ruell thirstings break through (...) of di^^iculti^^: What be^efit received
Ind^s from him^or his words, who was in his life a visible Sermon, as well as
was his doctrine an audible Sermon against self-seeking?

But perhaps the co^^fo^^ and promises in the word of Christ may find better
entertainment with self-seeking hearers; 3. The comforts and promises of it.
Non invideram Deo coelum s^^^^ Luke 14. Convivae invitantur ad coelum and
saturantur in terris. Concisam and informent creaturar^^^ b^nitatem quae
divinae est vestigium diligunt and ad^rant; august^m ill^m, original^^, imegram
and pulcherrima^ contem^unt. Nier. Litura placet, sed vivum and limpidum
archetypum non delectat.
no, their carnal palats relish none of these delicacies; these things are
(...) Aquavit^ offered to one in a swoon, who shuts his teeth the harder
against it, by how much the more he wants it: what are the precious ^^ings of
^^er^ity to him, but warm clothes to a dead c^^casse? Would God but grant him
(as (...) read of one that pro^est it in words) a thousand (...) respit, to
follow his ^^n things, and to find a certain proportion of honor, wealth, and
pleasure, he would not envy God his heaven: Does not Christ tell us, that they
set light ^y, and desire to be excused from the troublesome participation of
the Evangelicall Supper^ their stomachs are so clogged with these own things,
that the things of Christ have no room left for them; any thing from God
pleases them more then himself; If at any time they commend the good things of
the Gospel, it is not from any ^ast of swee^^esse in them, but it is meer^ly a
commendation upon hearsay, and to comply with the really taken with Christ.
There are some hounds wh^ in hunting make a very loud noise, but it is not from
anysent they have of the Hare, but only in imitation of the rest: A heart
eagerly set upon any lusting for self, in all its seeming deligh^^^^ h^^ve^s,
or Christ, or eter^ity, finds no true sweethes^^in them, but (...) rather in
his estimate lock upon them as very poor things: It thinks the life of faith,
dep^^d^^^^ upon a sword^ to be ^ich in reversion, etc. mere empty spe^^d^tions
and notions.

The third branch of e^phcation.

The inordinate seeking our own things does Possunt manner in e^cle^ia^
sa^^item animarum curare, etc. sed ita ut m^i^rera babeant rationem sui
commodi, etc. Z^nch. in loc.
not hinde^ all manor of seeking the things of Jesus Christ; for self-seekers,
may be employed in governing, preaching, etc. in the Church.

But it hinders from seeking them, 3. Branch of explication. What hinderance of
the things of Christ the seeking of our own things causes. 1. Self-seeking
hinders from seeking the things of Christ Inwardly. Exodus 3.2. Ezekiel. 33.


1. Heartily; inwardly. A self-^^^ker seeks the things of Jesus Christ
seemingly, superficially only; like some men who lifting with others at a
burden, it may be make as great a noise, and as l^^d a cry as the rest, but yet
they put to it no strength at all; A self-seeker commonly makes the greatest
noise, and does the least work; his fir^ is like that in the bush, which Moses
saw, making a great flame but not burning at all. Iehu was in appearance a
great seeker of God, and reformation, he made a great noise; but his heart was
never further from seeking the things of God, then when he was seeking them. He
did but act a reformer. The people that heard Ezekiels Sermons made much out
ward appearance of delight in them, but their hearts went after
self-prosecutions; A Christ-seeker contrarily is more then he can express for
Christ; Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus. Cypr. de pat.
has a heart within whereof all he does for Christ out watdly, like an
Interpreter that reaches not the emphasis of the original, cannot fully
express the love it be a^^th to Jesus Christ. (...) Lord take it, says he,
be it life, limb^, wealth, etc. and oh that they were better for thy sake!

2. 2. From seeking them solely.
Self-seeking hinders from seeking the things of Jesus Christ solely, and by
themselves alone. A self-seeker regards not Christ unless his work has some
attendances of honor, wealth, Christus non dulce, c^t propter seipsum. Bern.
See Hos. 10.11. 2 King. 3.14. Coelum apertum st, and Deum non quaerit, aurum
abscousion est and terrae viscera recludit. 1 Cor. 10.30. Phil. 1.18. Valde
perse^^^rum est sic oftenso opere (...) glori^^ qu^^rere ut de (...) land
priv^^^ n^sciant g^nd^re. Greg. (...).
pleasure; like little children that love not a lesson wherein there is not a
gay; Plain work and service which is not fringed with honor, wealth,
observation of the people, etc. he goes about very listlesly: As Eliah said
to Aha^, that if it were not for Iebeshaphats presence he would not so much as
bestow a look upon him; so thinks the self-seeker, were not rewards present,
renown present, applause present with Christ's service, he would not regard it;
see how different this temper is from that of a Christ. seeker: Could Paul but
save souls, he regarded not his own profit or name, be cared not whether that
were present or no. A Saint says as that noble Commander, who being to
undertake an expedition of danger^ and thereupon diss^^aded, resolvedly
answered, It Is not necessary I should live, but that the work should be done;
and is the work brought about, he cares nor though his industry, fidelity,
parts, prudence, all lie hid; nay he fear^ to discover them for gratifying of
self, as Moses parents were afraid he should be seen, because he was fair, and
therefore hid him in the ark.

3. 3. From seeking them comfortably.
It hinders from seeking Christ's things comfortably and with rejoicing; The
building of comfort is only set upon the foundation of integrity: A
self-seeker is left of God to be comforted, after employment, by him that set
him on work; he has an unpacified spirit, in all the applauses, and
admirations that he meets with from men; he can never be quieted from God,
that is not employed by God; God has reserved this reward of joy, only for
his own service; an unsound crazy heart can never hold that precious liquor.
See 2 Cor. 1.12. (...) fomentum cordis quo dolor omnis a^ceptae levatur
iniuriae. Ambr. in Psalm. 36. praef. 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
If the service go cross, the Christ-seeker is comforted by the integrity of
his aims. David was not permitted to build the Temple, yet he rejoiced at his
own, and his people willingnesses, 1 Chronicles. 29. A self-seeker when he does
effect any thing advantageous to the cause of Christ, leaves all the joy of
that service to him that loves Jesus Christ; the one labors, and the other
enters into his labors.

4. 4. Self-seeking hinders from seeking the things of Christ thoroughly.
It hinders from seeking Christ's things thoroughly. A self-seeker ever sets him
self bounds, thus far he will go, and no further, this abuse (is he a
Magistrate) he will reform, not the other; this man shall be punished when he
refuses the Covenant, not another; He aims not at the doing the work of
Christ to beauty, perfection, and exactness; put case, at the first he
endeavors the reiormation of idolatry, profaneness, heresies, etc. nay
covenants too that he will do so, yet if his own end be served once, and his
own way permitted, let Popery, or the worst of abominations go untoucht
afterward he cares not; so that his studying for a reformation, is like some
Gentlemen's study of the Law, into which they desire to get no further insight,
then only for the saving their own estates; the employment that is easy and
safe he undertakes, Propter Christum and (...) ecclesiam nolunt magna subire
pericula, sed cum Christo volunt esse, coniunctas suas delicias. Zanc. in loc.
Act. 20.24. (...) Cor. 10.33.
withdraws from another more difficult, like to one that has an unsound foot,
who picks out the softest way to travel in, and if he must go in a hard way,
there he hal^s; Many acts of Christ's service are too high for self to carry
us upon, too irrational for self apprehension to submit unto, too dangerous
for selfs tenderness to adventure in; A self-seeker loves not to engage too
deeply, lest he should never come off safe; a heart truly above self is only
above fears, see it in the Apostle Paul; nothing moved him, neither did he
account his life dear so as he might finish his Ministry with joy.

5. Self-seeking hinders from seeking the things of Christ fervently,
zealously, with our might: the cream, and flower of our abilities are taken off
for self; performances that come not from the heart, are done slightly, and
coldly; Psalm. 45.1.
the tongue will be no ready writer, unless the heart be boiling with a good
matter; our services will never be costly, unless the heart be full of
affection; that is the reason that a self-socker whose souls bent is set for his
own things, is so dead, so faint, so listlesse for God. When the spleen swells,
all the other parts decay, and when we are much in satisfying self, out
services for God are but lean, and thin, and slight: a divided heart betwixt
Christ and self, will be a lazy heart. The eye that should look toward Christ,
will never be sharp-sighted, unless that which looks toward self be shut, or
rather put out.

6. It hinders from seeking Christ's things constantly. A self-seeker wants a
principle, a fountain, from whence to issue his services. A standing pool, or a
shallow plash of water will soon dry up, so will his goodness that wants the
heart to feed it. Hos. 6.4.
It Is only a friend that loves at all times; he that seeks the things of
Christ for fear of authority, for love of credit, gain, etc. when these cease,
his search will cease also. The redness of blushing in the face, is soon down
again; Prove. 17.17.
it is that of the natural complexion that only continues; A man that is high
and hot in his services, will soon be low, and cold again, if there be not a
holy naturalnesse, an inward integrity in the soul, for the things of Jesus
Christ.

I have done with the third and last branch of explication, wherein the
hindrances stand, that the seeking of our own things causes: I come to the
second thing I intend in the prosecution of this point, viz. the confirmation.

Every in ordinate lusting after any thing that concerns our selves, takes up,
ingrosseth, and menopelizeth, as it were, 1. Reason. Inordinate lusting for
self takes up the whole man, in what he is, and does.
the whole man, and gives way to it to attend upon nothing but its own
satisfaction, unless by the way, and so far forth as its maine drift may not
be hindered: As in the regular and due bestowing our hearts and searches upon
God and his ways, Qui tua animi cententione in unum Deum defertur, in plura
studia animum non pert^tur. Call. in Matt. 6.^4.
there is an affording the whole man to them, and it there be any other ^eject
comes in the way, Non exhibitione ceremoniarum, sed ob^^^ione
con^upis^enti^rum. Gregor.
a Saint that makes God his chief end gives it but a slight salute, and so
uses it, as if be used it not: Thus it is with those that resign and deliver
their affection to the power of any enquiry, or employment whatsoever: of there
be any (...) lusting in a way of (...) allow^^^^^, it (...) a gh^bi^^ployes the
whole man; Am^^est quida ^ sui e^itus, quaedam a se peregrinati^, v^luntaria
m^^s. E^s. Ni^r. de art (...).
as all our endeavors were made for a god, so they (...) make a god, or find a
god; and if so, what can be expected for the things of Jesus Christ, but that
they should be looked after in the second place, very poorly, if at all, in a
way of ^^^serviencie to self, and at the allowance of lust? If honors for our
selv^^, wealth, pleasures, revenge, be the end we propound, the whole man will
be employed for the accomplishment.

The understanding will undervalue any thing else in compar^^on, 1. The
understanding.
it admire ^that highly which the heart is set upon, ra^sessublime estimates
upon it. Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putas esse Di^^am.
O^hinksit, had ^^ this, or that, I were made for over; (...) thinks there is no
other heaven but wealth, and honor, things suitable to the corrupted faculty.

For the will and affections, 2. The will and affections.
they will be employed about the prosecution of the thing principally sought
after, ^ither wealth, or honor, or the like; that thing will he ^isous spirit
(...), the wings of the af^^ctions will be so besmeared with it, Quando
dulces^it mundus, ama^^s^it Deus.
there will be no soaring Godward. He Will grow bitter when the world is sweet;
and there is such a twisting, and^nt wining of the affections within one
another, that all will be entangled about that object which is principally
pursued; the joy in pleasing it self with it if o^^^ained, (...).
the desire in craving it if wanted, the hope in expecting it if probable, the
anger in overcomming if resisted, the grief in lamenting if removed; And what is
now left for the things of Jesus Christ?

The thoughts they will be busied with, 3. The ^^oughts.
and buried in selfe-employments; God being not sought, he will not be in all
the thoughts; Psalm. 10.4.
the thoughts of remembrance, of contrivance, enquiry, will all be set upon
these own things; these will only busy the brain. The thought^ are like a
mill, always turning, and the affection of love throws in the grain and seed
which they grind; if it therefore be set upon self, what but self and own
things can be put into the thoughts; the afflictions of Joseph will be
forgotten, the welfare of Jerusalem, the safety of Sion will be uninquired
into, these own things will take up all the thoughts.

The tongue which speaks out of the abundance of the heart, 4. The to^ig^e.
will altogether talk of earthly prosecutions; as what kind of goods fill the
shop within, will hang upon the stall without; so if the hearts searches be for
self, the tongues enquiries will be so too; Earthy and speaking of the earth
are put together; Ioh. 3.31.
so if there be self-seeking, speaking for self will follow. The hand of the
Clock does but show how the wheels go within. An unsavory stomach will not send
forth a sweet breath; earthy hearts will send forth a breath in common talking,
like to the breath of dying man, savouring only of the earth: Where then will
be the tongue for the things of Christ, the directing tongue, the encouraging
tongue, the commanding tongue?

The actions will be employed, 5. The actions.
and steerd according to the motions of love. A self-minding-man will do
nothing for Christ; If self have withdrawn the heart, 'twill wither the hand
toe. There will be no contributing hand for Christ, or his truth, or his
members, commonly it is employed in receiving only; If it parts with ought,
commonly it comes by constraint; it gives as a narrow mouthed bottle sends
forth water, with a muttering; If the Law will enforce nothing, truly
conscience will bestow nothing; If any thing prevail with it, 'twill be death,
then perhaps like a poor man's box, when broken, a self-seeker may afford
somewhat; when the cause of God craves his assistance, where is his helping
hand? he had rather the Church should for ever stick in the mire of misery
then lend her it; never will he stretch it forth, though to the raising up the
poor fainting Spouse of Christ; He is so worn out, and wearied in
self-employments, that Christ's things must be neglected; he burns out the
taper of his strength, wealth, parts, in doing his own works, when Christ's
things are to be done, the candle's out.

Thus you see this inordinate seeking our own things, takes up the whole man,
in what he is and does. That Is the first Reason. But,

Secondly, It takes not only in him and of him up all; 2. Reason.
but all this unweariedly, The prosecutions of lusting for self, are incessant.
uncessantly where it is allowed, there is an enlarging without measure,
therefore called (...), an effusion, a rushing out of lustings, an aestus like
the foaming or boiling of the sea. Quitquid propon^tur tanquam finis quaeritur
^ulla adhibita m^^sura. 1. Pet. 4.4. Es. 55.2. Oblitus Dei voluntatem occupas,
non imples; ^reaturae non sunt ad occupandum volumatem, sed ad ^uvandum
memoriam. Admonen^ mentem, non satisfaciunt ^mori.
These sinful searchings can never be carried to any thing in which they may
rest, therefore they will be always in motion; for though there be not enough in
the things they follow to satisfy them, yet there is enough perpetually to
entice them. Desires and searchings are like numbers, one can never go so
far in numbering, but there may be a number named beyond it, and above it; so
there are ever more remaining desires, a reserve of desires (as I may say) in
the heart, fresh supplies new raised, whenever any old ones are cloyd or
clogd; (for so they are rather then satisfied) It may be said of these
lustings, when we endeavor to fill them, as 'twas of the Israelites, when the
Egyptians endeavored to suppress and destroy them, they grew the more in
numbers and strength, the more they were oppressed. God whose commands t^nd not
to the impoverishing of the body (as Chrysostom says) has allowed time and
employment, and wealth sufficient for needful provisions, nay sometime for
delight, and as God says to David, If this had not beenenough, thus and thus
could I have done for thee^ but a man that allows himself in his lusts and
prosecutions for self, breaks over the hedge of sufficiency into the wide
Common of excess, and there loses himself. Oh the prodigious unwearyedness of
a man set upon any searching for self! the carcass, the instrument may be worn
and wearied out, but the lusting is never tired, there is a weariness perhaps of
service in the members, but none of command in the Law; so the Prophet, Thou
art wearied in thy way, Es. 57.10.
yet said thou not there is no hope; though thou art outwardly tired in the
prosecutions of lusts, yet thou say not, Ise give over, my hopes are not yet
at an end; thou still dreamest of satisfaction, and therefore wilt go on with
wonted madness; ^^^^upis^entia non senes^it.
A lust out-lives its faculty; concupiscence never grows crazie in the
weakest body, if the faculty could, lust would still rise up early, lie down
late, ^ab. 2.6.
lade it self with thick clay, how ever it is still wishing, woulding, seeking
these own things; what time is now left for the things of Jesus Christ? Qu^
(...) vi^^ (...) viati^um.
not so much as the dregs of sickness or old age, for the lust is still strong
and young, and craving, when life is ending.

Thirdly, The inordinate allowance of our industries in self-services, Reason
3. Lusting for self, is directly opposite to the things of Christ. Mat. 6.24.
must needs hinder us from seeking the things of Jesus Christ, in regard of the
oppositnes and repugnancie between our cravings and searchings, and the Work
and will of Jesus Christ, the one withstands the pursuit of the other. There
can be no serving these two opposite masters; if one be loved sought, the other
will be loathed; inordinate affection draws one way, the will of Christ
another; like the two women that were pleading for the living child before
Solomon, but with this difference, the things of Christ, and self, both plead,
but neither will admit of a division, a parting of the height of our enquiries;
Phil. 3.19.
there can be no accommodation between inordinate inquiries, and Christian.
Enmity to Christ is in seeking these earthly things; they are like two
balances, if the one go up, the other goes down, the serving of Christ and
of our own bellies cannot stand together. Romans 16.17^
It Is impossible to look heavenward and earth-ward at the same time in this
spiritual sense. Self-enquiries like the woman's disease in the Gospel, bows
us down to the earth, the seekings of Christ require elevation. When the Moon
is at full its directly opposite to the Sun, when our hearts and enquiries are
fully set upon self, they will then oppose Christ; Indeed it is not impossible
to do our own things, or to delight in the blessings God bestows upon us,
Nem^ potest p^rtiri affect^s. Qu^squis se in servitut^m divitiis tradit, Deo se
emancipe^ necesse est. Calv. in 6. Mat.
and at the same to seek Christ's things too, but then the maine aim and scope
of the heart will be for God, and our other desires, and delights will be only
in a way of subordination and reference; as put case, Abraham's steward when he
was in the journey had fair weather and uninterrupted passage, and pleasant
rode, these might have delighted him, and these he might before have desired,
but yet not so as to take off his mind from the maine end, for which Abraham
sent him forth, but so as hereby he might be the more enabled to do his Masters
business; God ownes not services which have not him for the maine scope, at
least which endeavor it not; the inordinate seekings of self are opposite to
those of Christ; Christ may have many seekers, but these seekers cannot have
many Christ's. 3. Application. 1. Inference fro the premises.


The sin and misery of a man enthralled to any one lusting for self, 1. Use.
He is 1. unserviceable to Christ. In mundo superfl^^^ qui honorem Dei non
quaerit. Lzek. 15.3.
he is detained from doing any thing for Jesus Christ; he is a mere useless
Drone, a Cipher, a Mute, a Nullitie; Certainly, a Supersedeas from serving
Jesus Christ, would be to a gracious heart the greatest burden in the world;
This is his condition that is a slave to himself, he is like the branches of a
Vine fit for nouse in building a house, meet for doing no work, good for
nothing but the fire; he is a mere broken Idol, a vessel of no pleasure, no
ways fitted for the Masters use; he is one that diverteth himself from the
scope to which God directs him, one that is drawn from the use agreed upon in
heaven; (nothing in the creature being ordained for it self, as light in the
sun, water in the well, both are for man, and man for God.) When he is about
these own things, he is in Gods account as if he were doing nothing, as Christ
tells his Disciples, they had hitherto asked nothing, because they had only
desired worldly greatness, John 16.24.
honor, promotions, etc. So they that give over themselves to these self
employments work nothing, seek nothing; This would be a hell to a Saint,
though it deserved not another to follow it. But then to leave all the things
of Christ even for lusts sake, this greatens the misery; if it were for
something else, near as good that a man neglected Jesus Christ: If for another
Christ, another Master that could love him as dearly, use him as kindly,
provide for him as plentifully, reward him as liberally, employ him as nobly;
2. A slave to his lustings which are 1. Very many. Multitude of Persecutions.
Quam multos babet Dominos qui unum non babet! (...). Ti^. 3.33. 2. Very vile.
Hab. 2.6. Home ad m^talla damnatus.
the wonder of wretchedness were not so great: But in not seeking Christ, know O
man (if thou do not rather unman thy self by leaving thy God) that thou
addictest thy self to those searchings and servings that thy own lusts impose
upon thee, thy lusts which are in number many, thou must be pestered with many
satanicall swarms of them, when thou forsakest one Lord, all haling and
tugging thy soul to different, and (in a sort) often times opposite employments;
among which thou art but Pila diaboli, the devils Ball, which he by thine own
lustings tosseth hither and thither.

Thy prosecutions are vile and low, and unworthy they are the ladings of thy
self with thick clay, wallowings of a swine, whereas they might have been the
workings a Saint, nay an Angel. Thon art one that invites lust to enter upon
the goods of God himself, one that appropriates to that abomination what is
dedicated to a holy use, worse then Belshazzar carousing in the golden vessels
of the Temple, or one who digs in a dunghill with a golden spade. God has
bestowed a vessel, a spirit of gold, admirable abilities and endowments, and
these are at the devotion of lust, upon which are bestowed Wells that they
never dug, vineyards that they never planted, a soul, and endowments that
they never created.

1. Sam. 5.5. Aguosce dignitatem tuam Christian, and factus consors divina
naturae noli te in tantam vilitatem deijcere. Vbiar^orist^ antiq^us pr^mo
co^^taneus homini cum voluit esse si^ut Deus? Cohaeres Christi, collega
Angelorum, congaudet socictatipecorum, Dei gremio and dulci amplexu se
abjungit. Nier. Praepostera patientia. Mend. Privilegio quodam patientiae
honoramus damna nostra adversus nos. Nunqua^ liber a compodibus que s^mper in
crimenibus. Greg.
The Philistines would not suffer the feet of men to tread upon that threshold,
upon which their but fictitious and supposed Deity had fallen, but thou
admittest that which is baser then a toad, nay a devil (Satan's excrement, as
Bernard calls it) to trample upon that excellent nature which God assumed,
which is capable of the divine nature here, and of participation of the
presence of the great God to eternity; thou go as far beneath thy self,
as a King does in stopping an Oven with his Robes, or in shaking hay with his
Scepter. When a Saint is taking a turn in the Ivorie Palaces, has his heart
and head busied in and for heaven, and walks even hand in hand with Angels, and
is busied in the employments of Christ, then is a sinner toiling in the vile
drudgerie of lust, he is by a preposterous patience a true slavish Cham, a
servant of servants, an embracer of a dunghill, nay, a slave to that which God
did never make, that is now invited to destroy his creature.

3. Very tyrannical. Deus est centrum quietati^um animae. P^^git amor extra
alveare su^m. Isaiah 50.11.
And these prosecutions are as cruel and tyrannical, as they are vile and
abominable, there is never any peace in them. The Be never stings but when out
of the hive; nor the affections but when out of the embracements of Jesus
Christ, this is thy portion to lie down in sorrow; every employment for lust
is an affrightment; no peace from God but in the service of the God of peace.
All searchings for self are Both in their employments which are bitter. And
incessant.
soul-scratchings, they are thorns to rend the spirit, which God has
interwoven in every service of lust; the uncertain profits and pleasures which
thou aimest at, are but appearing huskie goods, but the evils which necessarily
attend, are true and real evils and troubles.

What shall I say of that incessancy of toil which thou undergoest in these
works of cruelty? It Is a true speech, Peccator nunquam feriatur, this cager
pursuer of any inordinate lusting keeps no holy days; when he is upon his bed
of Down, then he is pierced with these thorns of distraction and care, An tu
hunc honun^m seli^^m vocas, qui in suam mo^tem fort is est? cui pro^entuum
fallax umbra prae^entiam aeternas congregat causas maloram? quis beatam d^xerit
validam in su^m ingulum dexteram? Nier. Ultrix misericordia. Bern. Vo^o Domine
irascaris ira qua corrigis devium, non qua extrudis de via. Aug.
he caries a furnace of tortures in his breast: it is true, sometimes Satan
gives (and God in justice permits) a dream of joy, a little of something like
contentment, in the hope or acquiring of some vain gain, or pleasure: but
these are but sick slumbers; how cruel must those sleeps be, which are upon
the knees of a Delilah? and poured upon thee by an enemy? Whatever seeming
good thou at tamest in this way, it is but an angry mercy, thou usest it as a
mere bribe to the arests of conscience, which one day nevertheless will do his
office: The raw-flesh that is laid to the Wolf in the breast, will not always
last, and when it is devoured, then that living disease gnawes upon the tortured
patient; All thy profits, pleasures, honors, do but while-away, and neither
truly intermit, nor to be sure, abolish thy sorrows; there is the root of all
vexation in thee, departure from God in Christ.

And though thy very work be a dismal punishment, and a sufficient torture in
the apprehension of a Saint, yet the wages of all these outgoings of soul from
thy God, shall be punishment even to the height: All those honors, And after
their employments, in respect of their wages.
gains, or pleasures, for the sake whereof thou have toiled and drudg'd so
much in this world, even to a neglect of Christ, will all leave thee, (had
there been as much pains taken for Christ's things, they would have followed
thee) as Absaloms Mule did him, Vitam nostram centies potius opponere debemus,
quam brevem nes^io quot dicrum usuram timi do filentio redimere. Calv ep.
Quisque seipsion prae Deo amat, nec seipsum, nec Deum amat. Aug. Per hoc quod
aman^ coguntur ad hoc quod vitan^. Greg.
when he was hanged in the tree: How much better will it then appear to thee,
if thou had neglected a hundred gains, and undergone as many deaths for the
things of Jesus Christ, then by reason of a short and troublesome prosecution
of thine own things, to lose thy God and self too? how true then will that
speech be found; He that loves himself above Christ, loves neither himself
nor Christ? How gladly would thou then throw back with Judas thy thirty
pieces of silver, all those gains, which thou perhaps did get in betraying
the cause of Christ? then how will thou second Gods condemning thee with
self-condemnation for thy folly, in preferring a childish gay before an
advantageous conveyance; In being so deluded by Satan, who though heretofore he
(like Solomon's buyer) said, It Is naught, it is naught, Christ and Religion, etc.
are nothing worth, yet now he has guld thy soul of them, goes away and
laugheth at thee. Oh that (beloved) you would think what damage it is to lay
out your enquiries altogether for receivings, while you never think of being
received; none buyeth so dear and sells so cheap, Sic recipe ut repiaris.
as he that by seeking his own things, will part with Jesus Christ; my last
inference will more fully clear this, I shall not here therefore prevent my
self.

I have done with the first. A second and a more close one follows. 2.
Inference. 2. Inference.
The seeking our own things has been the cause why the things of Christ have
been neglected in England.

1. The things of Jesus Christ as they respect his servants, 1. In his servants.
his Ministers especially, how have they been neglected? and oh that I could
say but neglected and no more! Has not Christ in his servants and Ministers
been summus Martyr, the greatest Martyr? As Luther once said in respect of the
imputation of their sins, Christ was Summus peccator the greatest sinner; may
not we as confidently affirm that he has ever been the sorest sufferer in his
saints? Has not our English soil been dyed with the blood of the Saints of
Christ? has it not bin the shambles of his innocent lambs in Queen Mary's
days, who was the rod upon the back of this poor Kingdom in the hand of God,
for his Churches wantonness under his indulgencies, in godly King Edwards
Reign? since, though the quiet ashes of those blessed Martyrs could not be
disturbed, yet has not Martyrdom risen again? It Is plain it has, I, and
that sometime even to resistance unto blood; not to doubt but that it was even
in the calmer reign of that cruel Queens two next Successors, (though it
durst not appear so publicly, as in Smithfield) has it not of late showed
it self with an emboldned brow; should I either doubt of, or deny it, you
might ask me whether I am the only stranger in Jerusalem? nay these things
have not been done or suffered in a corner, not our selves at home, but even
all the Protestants in Europe, (and oh that we had never sent the tidings
hereof to America) have with astonishment beheld them; who has not heard of
the whippings, In time of Prelaticall tyranny.
the brandings, the banishments, and imprisonments of many precious Saints? how
frequent was it for a Ceremony which never searc^ could get beyond the
commendation of a tolerable triste, to deprive the most learned and godly
Ministers of not living only, but all livelihood, health and habitation, (the
beggering their wives and children, and the starving of their flocks being
counted but a trifle) and what might be the cause why these things of Jesus
Christ went so to the wrack? did Prelates think we offer these sacrifices to a
dull dry Ceremony a posture of the body, or the table? no there was the
seeking of these own things; higher promotions for self, more gracious looks
from Superiors, a more glittering attendance forselfe, these things put them
upon these furious courses; now Ceremonies and preferments are severed, there
are not more forward men in the world (I speak upon knowledge) then many late
admirers of Prelacie, to cry down what heretofore they so eagerly voyced up;
But have the faithful Ministers of Christ been better used by self seeking
of late? surely no. Diabolus mutat ingenium, non depouit od^um.
Satan changes his colors, never his conditions; now the most strictly pious
and courageous of them in times of Prelacie, who did not (durst not) leave
their flocks to fly for more safety and plenty elsewhere; but stood it out
like David's Worthy against hundreds of oppositions; these (I say) who thorowout
the whole Kingdom have been the greatest instruments of praying, weeping, And
of schismatic fury.
preaching, living down Antichrist, must now be counted and called the limbs
of Antichrist; no disgraces thought enough to asperse them and their doctrine;
But what is the cause of this neglect of the servants of Christ? surely this
self-seeking lies at the bottom; Self things.
either self thinks their doctrine too sharp, their lives too strict, their
respect too great, their maintenance too burdensome, their gifts too eminent,
their preaching too opposite to liberty of Conscience, public exercise of
every ones gifts, or the like, sure I am it is self that is the Enemy (I write
not these things with a bitter, but a bleeding heart.)

2. 2. And in the public Cause of reformation. In the managing 1. of the wa^.
Let us take a sorrowful view of the neglect of the things of Jesus in this
present Cause of Reformation, and that will plainly appear also to arise from
seeking these own things; What if not self-seeking has spun us such alasting
thread of calamities, and made our woes so long lived, not to speak of the
hurt it has done by the professed opposers of Religion, whom it makes little
better then devils in flesh and blood, though to speak only of these would
happily more please us (men commonly taking honey only out of the carcass of
the dead Lion, and delighting only in reproves that meddle not with
themselves.) It Is self-seeking that has not been only the dreyner of our
treasures, but the Leech that has sucked not the bad, but even the best blood
out of English veins, the Moth that has so stilly destroyed us, the rotten
tooth, the broken style of a poor abused nation; self-seeking has betrayed
our Cities, Forts, Magazines, Armies, it is this that has made a trad^ of our
miseries, Mercatur^ humanarum calamitatum.
that has made Commanders over places of greatest Concernment cowardous and
treacherous, I, and perhaps sometime has connived at them too; It Is this that
has revealed our Counsels, and retarded our Expeditions, coveting for self,
revenging for self, ambition for self have done these things, and thereby
undone us. Are there not among us those to be found that desire to keep our
flames still unquenched, Nescio quo inex plicabil^ mode fit ut quisquis se
ipsum, non Deum amet, non se amet; and quisquis Deum non se amet, ipsevere se
amet. Aug.
that so in stead of putting out the fire, they may in a common confusion
steal the goods out of the house for enriching of selves? If England be
buried, may not this be written on her tomb, Self-seeking has laid her here;
It Is no wonder that God has sought us no more, that have sought him so little;
had we sought him, and not out selves, we might have found him and our
selves, but seeking our selves and not him, we lose both; if seeking of Christ
had been here, England had not dyed.

But happily self-seeking has less neglected Christ's things, in respect of the
Church; but here alas I must not renew, In redressing the abuses of the Church.
but redouble my complaints; This monster has aimed mostly at the hindering
the things of Christ in that and all it is malice to the Commonwealth, was but
in a manner in reference to the Church: what but self-seeking has retarded the
Churches Reformation? the which if advanced, would be so great a burden to
malignant self in some, licentious self in others; to whom killing confusion is
more welcome then healing order, and all that self might enjoy a latitude, not
of Conscience but of sinning, like little children that are glad their mother
is sick, that so they might play without controulment, It Is seeking our own
things that opposes a settling of Government, not withstanding the studies, and
prayers, and tears, not withstanding the learned and clear Convictions, which
the godly and Orthodox Divines have expressed. It Is this which (yet) does
cavil away our peace and holiness, our order, reformation, and power of
godliness, and threatens a necessity, whether more woeful or wicked (God
knows) of bearing with all religions. What is it but self-seeking, which
makes us who (in my young remembrance) could weep, and fast, and seek God
against the fears of a toleration of Popery, now to think that it may well be
endured, if separated from tyranny and treason against the State? This it is
that would make Covenanting with God, which the godly in all ages used as a
means to pacifio his wrath, and work reformation of life, a mere politic
Character, only to put a difference between our own private friends and
foes. What but this self-seeking lies at the bottom of all those (damnable
some, distracting other) new opinios with which the Church of Christ is so
pestered? what but this founded and planted them? what but this favors and
waters them? did not seeking of self reputation and gain (which could never
have been attained by preaching or printing, 2 Pet. 2.3.
good honest old Scripture truths in a giddie age) put the Founders of these
opinions upon the first contriving of them? and since can it be any thing else
but the seeking praise of men more then the praise of God that makes the
furtherers to countenance them more then a godly Minister, who when he
preaches them down is not only looked upon with neglect, 3. Self-seeking has
hindered the things of Christ. In his ordinances.
but with the suspect of Semi-Malignancie? Tell me now, are the things of
Christ in the Cause of Reformation beholding to self-seeking?

Thirdly, the things of Jesus Christ in his Ordinances have been infinitely
neglected, 1. In his word. 1. It making Ministers to neglect the word.
by seeking these own things. First, Ministers have neglected the Word, as well
as people; and all through self-seeking.

For Ministers: They have heretofore neglected the preaching of the Word, Tot
quotidie perdimus quot ad gebe^nam, etc. Greg. By sinful fear.
and by their sinful silence, murdered thousands of souls, But was not
self-seeking the cause of self-silencing? sometime self fearing to preach too
often, for displeasing the reverend Father, or his Grace; (holding of ones peace,
being then the strongest, though the basest tenure of holding ones living by;)
Sometime self seeking has caused self-silencing, by a wretched necessity of
non-residencie; (more places then one, Hoskins: s. Tenu^sse silentia clerum? By
sinful nonresiding. Inveniar superbus, ^varus, adulter, homicida, antipapa and
omuium vitiorum reus, modo impii silemii non arguar. Luth. ad Staup. Ut
praesint, non ut pros^nt. Piscatores de^imarum, non animarum. An non limina
Apostolorion plus ambitio quam devotio terit? Bern. In vit. Bonif. 3. Quaeritur
quantum Episcopatus reddat, non quot sint oves. Plat.
requiring presence at the same time,) when 'twas said that Ministers labored
more to fish for tithes, then for souls; and hence principally those terms of
disgrace in their several times, were cast upon them: As peculatores, non
speculatores, robbers, not watchmen; praedatores, non praedicatores, thieves,
not teachers: This kind of self-seeking, made Bernard cnmplain in his time,
That more ambition then devotion, employed those that should have been most
careful of the Church; and Platina to say, That they were wont only to
enquire how many pounds they might get, not how many persons they might teach.
These men checked sufficiently by the very (...).
name of their Office; and this abuse by Pluralities, as severely reproved by
many learned Papists, nay opposed even to eagerness, in the Council of Trent,
is in part redressed, and the reformation thereof will be much furthered, when
Impropriations (the more wealthy theeveries of the two, and as some think, the
only sin established by a Law) shall be suppressed; the neglect of the Word,
by the want of which reformation deserving to be thought with the neglecting
of it by Pluralities, to spring from the same root of self-seeking. Nor has
self-seeking caused timorous ones, and pluralists, to neglect the word of
Christ, but those also whom it puts upon the Ministry for smaller gains;
handfuls of barley, and pieces of bread, though their palpable insufficiency
makes them as unfit for one place, as the other were for two or three; these
make the Word the scorn of profane ones, and keep it as a sealed book from the
ignorant ones: If these can startle some well meaning people into an admiration
of them, or into a contribution to them, By entrance upon the Ministry
ungifted.
they never care for informing their understandings, by principling and
grounding them in the fundamentalls of Religion, but raising by loud voices,
and strange gestures, wonderment and passion in their hearers, leave these poor
ignorant souls as a prey to the subtle adversary, who taking advantage by
their present tenderness and affrightments, (as Simeon and Levi destroyed the
Shechemites when they were sore) abuse and seduce them into ways of error, and
schism, the blind guide mean while, who was followed formerly, no man knew
why, is now left no man knows how. By corrupting the word with p^ausibility of
e^pression.
At other times self-seeking has made the Word suffer by Ministers, through
their corrupting and depraving of it, sometime with the mixtures of a trifling
wittiness, and an empty neatness of phrase, though commonly savouring of as
little learning, as edification; they yet seeking rather hereby to please a few
silly malignants, then to preach Jesus Christ in power and purity. I (...) sit
mibi praed^ (...) non qui (...) plausum sed qui mibi planctum movet. ^ern.
What but self-seeking, has heretofore turned our Churches into Stages, and
Preachers almost into players, when as the Minister who should only account
the tears, the sobs, the groans of his hearers his commendations, was wont to
stop (as at the end of his stage) for a humming at the close of every point?

Has not the Word among us, sometimes been depraved by erroneous glosses, And
with erroneo^^ interpretations.
tortured by violent interpretations? how frequently have men made it speak
according to their minds? not bringing their hearts to the Word, but the Word
to their hearts; has not out of the sweet fountain of truth, the bitter
streams of error been made to proceed? are there not some who have labored to
turn these waters into blood, and to kill those by them, who should have lived
in them? Surely it is so; the most prodigious heresies pretend to a Scripture,
and the worst will be wicked by a Law; But is there not the hand of
self-seeking in all this? Certainly this it is that hereby to draw many
admirers to self, cares not how many it withdraws from God, and so as it may
but be a gainer, cares not though precious souls be the merchandise which it
puts off for base pelf, T^t. 1.11.
for filthy lucre, to Satan himself.

But is the Word beholding more to self-seeking people, 2. Self seeking has
made people neglect the word, by denying sometimes their presence at the
preaching of it.
then to Ministers? Surely the Word in most places can scarce be by them
afforded audience: There are some who say, they are above Ordinances, ('twere
far better if they were fruitful under them) nay that question whether there
be any Ordinances or no? and these are not called self-seekers, but seekers;
others that Hanun-like have cut off the Word by the middle, the old Testament;
By denying the authority of it in their judgments.
and what ever the truth be, that is urged from that, it is branded with the
name of legal, which in their sense is as much as illegal; and the faithful
reprovers of sin, and zealous exhorters to a strict life, are termed but Old
Testament Ministers; like Saul, when David was endeavoring to drive away the
evil spirit with his Harp, they have this javelin, to throw at the faithful
Minister, when he is most employed in reproving of sin: others there are that
happily give the Word their care, and their pen, and their talk, but it is easy
to see how slight and shallow the impressions are, which the Word leaves upon
their consciences, By denying the power of it in their lives.
and conversations: They being like some herbs, which Physicians tell us are,
though hot in the mouth, yet cold in operation; so these are sometime holy in
their tongues, but heathenish in their lives; or like the hill Etna, that casts
forth burning coals at the top, but has at the same time frost and snow at
the foot thereof; so though upon occasion their words are fiery, yet their
lives, their feet, are little better then recantations of the Sermons they
hear, the old solid Christianity, the life of self-denial, faith and the new
creature, being turned into a kind of spruce, slight, notionall, outside
profession; and there must be such a latitude for Christian liberty in
discoursing, trading, eating, drinking, passions, antique habits, that some
begin to think, people may be known by these things, even to be professors.
But what may be the cause of this new entertainment of the Word? surely this
self it is that expects more ease, a milder, and more indulgent religion, such
a latitude as may suffice for Christ and self too.

2. For the Sacraments, how are they in most places almost cast off, and
forgotten, 2. Self-seeking has hindered the things of Christ in the
Sacraments. 1. The Sacrament of the Supper. In Baptism. By abstaining
altogether.
and people are very willing to stay without them? that of the Supper being now
accounted an indifferent thing: the seldomer celebrated (Popery has tackt
about we see) the better; and for that other of Baptism, it is by some esteemed
null, fond, and groundless, who deride, through ignorance, that condescension
of Christ which they should praise with thankfulness. What? is self here too?
yes. This proceeds from the same root with that, 1 Cor. 11.21. a love of
division; from others, an overweening opinion of our selves, and way; or, an
admiring of a selfe-contrived, and unscripturall sanctity, it being the most
pleasing thing in the world to self, to have opinions of out own breed,
especially if they teach and plead for holiness in others; for men may urge
that with much credit, and little cost; and that is the reason that you shall
observe among people forty discourses of the qualifications of the company they
receive withal, for one discourse of the hearts which they themselves should
receive withal.

Others neglect the Sacrament in the manner of their coming, not in their
keeping away, but in coming with little raisednesse of soul, dead affections,
narrow hearts to entertain a great good, (...).
not with empty hands to take Jesus Christ in the Sacrament. What Is the reason?
self-employments have so filled and stuf't their hearts with trash, that
there is no room for pearls.

Others come with impure, unclean souls; with no suitable sanctity to a
glorious God, to whose entertainment they pretend adventuring like
Mephibosheth, who when he went to meet David, went untrimmed, undressed,
unwashed; so these receive with dirty, unwashen hands, lustful, proud,
revengefull, covetous hearts: What Is the cause? they come with the same hearts
in which they were in their self-prosecutions; they love to go so dressed, as
they may be ever in a readiness to serve self. The wedding garment is to them
like Saul's armor to David, too burdensome and heavy, too great a hinderance
from earthly enquiries.

I have done with the second Inference, viz. Self-seeking is the cause why the
things of Christ have been neglected among us.

A third follows: We ought to endeavor the beating down this self-seeking in
all our souls; 3. Inference. Direction.
this immoderate letting the heart run out in self-searches.

Lay the foundation of mortification deep, Romans 6.19. 1. Direction. Lay the
foundation of mortification deep.
even deeper then ever was thy delight in thy most eagerly prosecuted comforts,
not in a mere abstinence from the use of, but in an inward taking off the heart
from any thing that may take thee off from Christ. There are many who think, if
they leave the pleasure, the outward following this or that sinful gain, or
ambitious promotion, that they are mortified souls; alas, what is this, as long
as the heart is uncleansed, the affection uncrucified? A man that desires to
shun sickness, must not only be watchful, in keeping himself from the
sharpness of the air, but must remove the corruption of his stomach. If the
body be distempered, 'twill catch cold with the least blast; and so an
uncleansed soul will be wrought upon by very temptation. The bird which is tied
by the leg with a siring to a stone, Non voluptas relinquenda, sed voluntas
depo nenda, non abscindunt, sed ab scondunt peccata Tert. Quando a me ipso
alienabor (...) perdam? Bern. Revelle ^e ateips^ ut Deo inserari divid^ te a
teips^ ut cum creatore n^iaris, extirpa^^ a te pessimo ut in om^^ bono
radiceris. Tu qui om nia relinquere disponis, te qu^que inter relinquenda
numera^e memento. Bern. Nescivit suis par^ere, quia (...) no. it (...)
perhaps with some struggling gets loose from the stone, to which the string on
the other end was fastened, but then flying with the string about her leg, she
is entangled in the next bough she flies to, more then before. It Is not enough
to leave the use of this, or that way, or object, unless we strive to pull off
the string too, the lust that tied us. Never be at quiet as long as there is
this Mordecai in the gate; entreat God to alienate thee from thy self, to root
up self in thee, to annihilate whatever stands up in thy soul, in a way of
resisting Christ; though the lot fall even upon Jonathan, let him go; Say, Oh
that I could loose my self, to come to Christ! Let the motions of self in the
soul be thy continual sighing; reserve nothing in it from the stroke of
Christ, for if so, provision will at length be made for it, even to a forsaking
of Christ, if occasion require; This imperfect aim at self-subduing, is the
cause of self-seeking, and very dangerous are these semi-renouncings of self;
If there be any lust unsubdued, it will plead its interest, and often so
craftily, as there will be no answering it, carnal will, evermore having
carnal wit, and excuses to further it; Let not the blade of the lusting be
snib'd, but let the root be cut up. If thou would put out the slame, quench
the bottom of it: Levi killed his own nearest kindred, because he had killed
self before.

Secondly, 2 Direction. Make a right discovery of the delights of Christ.
Make a right discovery of the ravishing delights, and the satisfying benefits
which every believer has in Jesus Christ, who infinitely ^^t-bids all that
self is so eager in prosecution of. Behold the comforts of Jesus Christ, in
this sevenfold discovery.

1. 1. View them as ^^all.
View them as realities, not as notions; Self counts all the things of heaven
but empty speculations; A carnal heart says, Look thee here, behold this
pleasure, profit, etc. taste it, touch it, handle it, be enricht with it; a
spirit has nothing for thy body, thy life, etc. for your good things of
heaven, they have nothing but empty names; what talk you of the life of faith?
you might beg if 'twere not for your land. When Moses was in the Mount, Exodus
32.^.
and the Israelites knew not what was become of him, then they made golden
gods; and thus it is with carnal hearts, they know not what is become of
heaven, and Christ; they think they are lost and gone things, and that there is
nothing in them, and then is the time to make gold, and pleasure, and honor our
gods. Therefore, 2 Cor 4 1^.
O Christian, look upon the things of eternity, as real, certain things; not
opinions, but assertions. The Apostle speaks of things, that are not seen; yet
mark, he says, for all that, we look at these things. They are not
imaginary, because invisible; look upon them, Heb. 10.34. Heb. 11.1.
as being a substance; for so they are denoted, more then once, in the
Scripture. I know not how it comes to pass, but these things of self-enquiry
have stolen away the name of substance from Christ's things; men's goods are
called their substance; a wo^ldly rich man, is called a substantial man, etc.
where as all these things below, Ioh. ^.36. (...) Per falla^ia bona nurad vera
mala per fallacia mala ad vera bona. Lactant. Potius som^iamus quam disserimus
de coe^o.
are but shadows, and have only so much of substance, as they have of Christ
in them. Hitherto you have asked nothing, says Christ, though they had asked
honors, and wealth. That which is not, the Wiseman calls them: Therefore when
Christ speaks of himself, and his own things, he calls them, things indeed, as
if other things were but fantastical; but here is the misery, we speak of
the things of Christ, as dreams and sp^culations; and that is the reason, when
something, as we think, more certain comes in the way, our hearts are gone.

2. 2. View them a^ abundant. Gaudtum est si^entium quoddam appetitus, epulum
^ordis, mors desiderit. Pla^^tum est quiesa volun^^s.
View the comforts of Christ, as full, abundant, not as scanty, suitable to all
thy exigencies, so that thou need not go to any thing here below, to eek
them out withal; they are such full things, that they want nothing but wants,
and thirstings after them. View them, as able to satisfy all thy longings, to
quiet thy wishes, to silence thy desires, to kill thy hunger; able to fill thy
soul, Augusta Dei bonitas sun sui^i Christus. Sola in integritate divine
bonitatis (...) satiare po^est apperitus.
like the Water-pots of Galilee, up to the brim; no satisfaction but from these
comforts. The soul can never say, it has enough, till it has an interest in
them. It is enough, said old Jacob, Joseph my son is yet alive. It is enough,
may that soul say in whom Christ lives, for whom Christ died; enough though
God should give me no more; enough honor, though I should always be in
disgrace; enough strength, though my body be weak; enough riches, though I be
otherwise in poverty; there is so much of all good in Jesus Christ, Omnium
inclinationum quibus res ad su^ centus proru^nt, debitra re^ te
exis^imeo-Fortior sit gra^s. tia quam natura-Omnes dispersiones inclinationum,
omnes errores ^^piditatum in te congregare ^^ram in Deum conten^ as. Ioh. Eus.
Nier.
that the soul owes him all the inclinations, and propensities by which all
the things in the world are with greatest vehemency carried to their several
objects, centers, and rests. A Christian should labor to gather together all
his dispersed and scattered desires, that have run out upon other by-comforts,
and fix them alone upon Jesus Christ, who has the sweetness, and the
desirablenesse of them all within himself; there is so much in Jesus Christ,
that the abundance that one Saint receives, can be no cause of repining in
anoother; there is vera (...), so much plenty, that it banisheth envy, Christ
is a Beersheba, a well of plenty and satisfaction for all his Saints; our
vessels will sooner be wanting then his oil.

3. 3. View them as perci^us, not as vile. De^i^it se de ^dmine genera sitatis
qui admirari al^quid post D^um potest. Cypr de spee. Ethrici reliquerum mun
dum. (...) Omnium rerum colliquata vonustas ad divinam pulchritudirem comparata
ri^il (...) mundus amat crux mibi sunt, quae mundus reput^^ ^^ucent illis
affixus ^um toto affect^^. Bern. S^ hunc mundum tuguriolum Adami, crgastulum
pe^^atorum, ca^^am brutorum, ^am adminabi^^m (...) Deus, quid erit d^mus
propria and a al Dei?
View them as precious, sublime, and excellent, not as common, and drossie.
This will heighten thy soul, and put an h^ly generosity into it, and make thee
count the beautifullest things that self admires, unworthy thy stoop, as
Themistocles, who did bid a poor man standing by him, take up a pearl that lay
upon the ground, for thou (said he) art not Themistocles. He that looks
earnestly upon the Sun, will have his eyes so dazzled, that he can see
nothing upon the sudden. Let the eye of thy says be hold the beauties of
eternity, and then other things will not be counted worthy thy regard; there
will be in thee a holy neglectivenesse of them: Thou will say to thy self of
the most glorious buildings, and sumptuous palaces upon earth, as Christ, upon
occasion of his Disciples admiration, of the Temples structure; Are these the
things thou look upon?

4. 4. View them a useful, not as idle and unh^^ping.
View them as useful, and efficacious, not as idle, and unhelping; Even in thy
saddest hours, able to comfort thee; in thy poverty, to enrich thee; in thy
doubts, to direct thee; in thy straights, to enlarge thee: It is therefore by
some thought, that the pleasures of the Saints in Scripture, are said to be at
Gods right hand, Organon roboris
in regard of the strength and power (that being the emblem of strength) which
God bestows upon them, to relieve and uphold their souls. Psalm. 16. ult.
The benefits that God in Christ bestows, are not such as we uphold, but such
as uphold us: the comforts of eternity are living waters; quick, and quickening,
and enlivening comforts. The consolations the Apostle speaks of are strong
consolations, Heb. 6.18. Psalm. 119.54.
i. e. strengthening. David speaks of songs in the house of his pilgrimage;
when he was far from friends, they made a supply. ^ant 2.4.
The love of Christ is said to be a banner, an ensign, to note the courage,
and divine valor, which in apprehending of it, ^ ^am 23.16.
a Saint may gather to himself. Jonathan strengthened David's hand, and so does
Christ his peoples. David comforted himself in his God. Look upon Christ, as
able to sustain thee, casting thy self upon him, though all creature crutches
were removed.

5. 5. View them as those wherein thou have a propriety not as another.
Look upon them, as things wherein thou have a propriety, not as an others
only. Unite, apply, appropriate the benefits of Christ to thine own soul. A
man that views never so much land, or wealth, if he have not an interest
therein, will not be thereby stopped in his poorer enquiries, and desires. Christ
is never good in a souls account, till it has something of him; and the more
it has of him, the less it seeks in any thing else beside him. It Is the
owning of Christ, and taking him as thine, that will make thee contented, when
thou see that nothing is thine else; it is only this which can take thee off
from earthly-prosecutions. In one Christ, Psalm. 16.5.
is comprised every scattered comfort here below. Christ mine, says the soul,
and all mine. An union to Christ, easily disunites from any thing else. The
soul answers the unlawful offers that the world makes to it of honors, riches,
etc. like the contented Shunamite, 2 King. 4.13.
when she had offers of Court courtesies, I dwell with mine own Christ, I
desire not to alter my condition; my Christ has all you offer, and much more.

6. 6. View them as present, not (...) distant.
View them as present, brought near; let thy faith pull them even into thy
soul: What Is the reason that the worlds offers prevail with us more then
Christ's? the world comes with money in hand, we look upon it as near, we think
that God asks too long day for payment; we look not with the Prospective of
faith upon the things of heaven, did we so, we should see them hard by, and a
few months and years would be counted as Jacobs staying for Rachel but a very
short time; faith would present them as at hand, and as their's did them, Heb.
11.13.
would make us to salute and embrace them so, although they should be to sense
afar off; faith even now lays hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.19.
and views the promises as already performed, and therefore David even when he
was crying, Psalm. 57.2.
and praying, tells us 'twas to that God that performs all things for him,
performs now.

7. 7. View them as eternal, not as finite.
View them as eternal, not as finite; comforts that shall triumph over time;
so the word, Psalm. 16. translated (evermore) imports. Time triumphs and
makes a spoil of every thing thou can seek here upon earth, (...)
AEternitas q. victoria temporis.
but Christ's things triumph over time; so shall we ever be with the Lord,
says Paul. There will come a time when as Christ will not say, The poor you
have always with you, and me you have not always; no, me you shall have
always, and poverty no longer; joys always, tears no longer; fullness always,
hunger no longer; glory always, shame no longer: oh study what it is to be for
ever with the Lord; Ever, Ever! Christ has made an Act of Continuation for thy
joys, they shall never break up. The good things of Christ are called in
Scripture frequently a treasure; the word signifies something laid up for
afterward; Jesus Christ and his benefits are only the same, (...).
yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

3. 3. Direction.
I have done with the second Direction to beat down self-searches, which was
to take a right view of the benefits of Christ, I come to a third. Labor for a
sanctified use of all embitterments or stoppages, in thy eagrest self-enquiries
and prosecutions; when the sea stormed 'twas a sign God would have Jonah
return to his work, and leave his eager and unlawful voyage; Does God raise
any storms of disgrace, poverty, sickness, in the following this or that
lusting? use it as stoppage in thy course; as one said once, Vix licet vivere
and licet fornicari? I can scarce live, and should I be unclean, proud,
revengefull, ambitious? The heathen could observe that when men were sick,
they would abstain from former excesses. Look upon Gods more bitter
dispensations, as so many meetings of thee in the narrow way, as he did Balaam
to keep thee from going on in thy eager prosecutions, so many breakings down
of the bridges to hinder thy passage, (...) and (...) pratere^^^ (...).
use holy upbraiding^ of thy self when thou suffer from God. Tell thy
gadding soul, thou may thank it for all thy sorrows; drive home the nail of
affliction further by the self-crucifying hand. Think with thy self when God
makes the things of the world to leave thee, as Joseph did his Mistress when she
would have played the Adulteress; that Gods aim is, thou should not commit
spiritual adultery with the gifts of God, which he only gave thee for thy
servants.

4. 4. D^r^ction. Mother (...).
A holy moderating of thy lusting out-running heart, in the offers and
enjoyments of those lawful objects with which thy lusts have been most taken.
Fire the ships if thou would not be carried away by them, be watchful and
moderate in lawful comforts, use them with a godly jealousy; deny thy self
much even of that which possibly thou may use well, engulph not thy self in
pleasure, employments, profits. A ship in the mud is lanched forth with
difficulty; so is a man's heart allowing himself boldly abundance of outward
comforts, with difficulty carried off to the employments of Christ from
self-attendances. A man should in this case even stop up the wells, as they did
when they would do the enemies a discourtesie, 1 King. 3.19.
and mar every good piece of ground, every naturally bewitching object with a
sober heedfull sparing enjoyment of it, Christian libert^e easily grows ^o
unchristian I ^bertinism.
pare off superfluities and abundance, set this taskmaster of warines over thy
gadding idle soul; Make not provision, Romans 13.14. for the flesh. Let not thy
soul be (as a candle in a stinking filthy lanthorn) in a body wallowing in
sensual pleasures; use the things of the world as Gideons soldiers drank
those waters, not stooping down to them, and lying along, but out of the
palms of their hands; Sint solatia, non negotia. Dent. 25.3.
let these things be thy refreshments, not thy businesses; let not thy life be
the life of a Mushrum, as if thou had no other soul but a vegetative; ever
be willing to deny thy self some what of that thou may do or enjoy, as the
Jews in punishing Malefactors, were allowed to give forty stripes, but they
gave but 39. so let thy care be to cut thy self short in many things thou
may do.

5. 5. Direction. A dear love to Jesus Christ.
A dear love to Jesus Christ; praedominant over all other: Love thy self
only in Christ, and these things only as they are bestowed upon thee as
pledges of his love; As thou can not please Christ by any outside
performances thou give him, Quaedam a se peregrinati^, mors voluntaria. Ios.
Nie. de art vol. Si ista terrena diligitis ut subjecta diligate, ut munera
amici, ut beneficia Domini ut arrham sponsi. Aug. med. Occurrit aliquid
amoenum? statim valadum clypeum oppone Christum. Quale hoc in s^onso meo erit!
nolo occupari in hac mi^a venustatis, in hoc atomo duleoris, sed totam
amoenitalem hauriam in Deo, ita praevaricabere appetitus his veneno, omnia bona
Phylacteria tua sunt, ut Deum ames and nihil adores aliud.
unless thou give thy self; so neither let him please thee, unless he
gives thee himself, though he bestows the world in never such abundance.
Delight not in these things, nor desire them further then as they may either be
seen to proceed from a loving Savior, or returned unto him. If thy love were
principally set upon Christ, thou would only regard these things as they
are tokens of his love, as mercies not as gifts; without his love they would be
as a ceale without fire in it, all dark and black and uncomfortable any further
then thou did see Christ in them; If any thing sweet and amiable presented it
self to thee, thou would presently say and think, Oh what is there in my
beloved if there be so much in these things! I will not be employed in a drop,
in an atom of sweetness, but be raised up in my thoughts, and be infinitely
taken with him that is the fountain of all love and lovelines; these things
below would not fallere, but monere; not be witch thee from him, but admonish
thee of and to him, they would be so many steps to raise up thy soul more to
Jesus Christ; they would be but Phylacteries to make thee mindful of his will
and pleasure in them, and no further would thou be rejoiced in the enjoyment
of them, then that thou might be serviceable to Christ by them.

6. 6. Direction. Occasion of the enquiries from self and earth. Psalm. 119.36.
S^mper tentator te inveniat occupatum.^
Occasion of thy enquiries from self and earth, by spending much time in
heavenly services and employments, praying, reading, hearing, meditating.
Otiosus versatur in desideriis, idle persons are craving often, Pro. 13.4. Tell
thy lustings when they solicit thee, thou art otherwise busied. Let the
tempter never find thee idle; empty table books may have any thing written in
them, if filled before, the writer is prevented; let Satan find thy soul filled
ever with something of Jesus Christ, if thou would shun Satan's temptation to
lustings.

7. 7. Increase of acquaintance with Jesus Christ.
Labor daily to increase thy humble and sweet familiarity with Jesus Christ,
never stand at a stay in taking in his comforts, labor to have them come in
fresh every morning, endeavor that thy flame of loves and desires may daily
be supplied with fresh fuel, please not thy self in any degrees of his
comforts, grace, manifestations; if thou do, he will soon grow less
desirable to thee and them, thou will go els-where for refreshments. Christ
has war^ety of blessed employments, fly from flower to flower, rejoicing in
the variety of his precious promises, deceive thy nauseating nature with
intermixing one holy service with another, sometime hear, other while pray,
frequently meditate, be not seldom in godly company; Christ this way will with
more delight take thee up from self employments; when thy lustings solicit
thee to this or that object, ask thy soul the question that the Prophet did
Ahaziahs messengers; ^ King. (...).
Is there not a God in Jsrael, that thou should go to Baal-z^bub the God of
Ekron? Is there never a promise in the Scripture? never a Saint of my
acquaintance? never a mercy to be thankful for? never a lust to be striving
with? no beauty and glory in heaven to be panting after?

I have done with the third Inference, which was that we ought to endeavor
the remoovall of self-seeking out of our souls.

A fourth and the last follows.

4. 4. Interenc^
We should be dissuaded from the seeking our own things, whereby the things
of Christ are so neglected.

I shall urge this Dehortation upon a twofold consideration, both taken out of
the Text.

1. Be dehorted from these inordinate searches, by considering upon what ground
and reason men take them up; it is upon this ground: They look upon the things
they seek and follow as their own things.

2. By considering whose the things are that will be neglected thereby, even
the things of Jesus Christ.

1. That which puts us upon the eager attendance upon these things, is the
accounting them our own things.

Now in this first consideration, viz. the ground of peoples search, there be
three notable disswasions to take us off from seeking these things, upon that
ground that they are our own.

1. The falsness and deceitfulness of a search and inquiry upon that ground.

2. The lowness and the unworthiness of it.

3. Our liableness and readiness to be overtaken by it, and to offend in it.

1. 1. Consideration, upon what ground men seek these things, viz. because
they are their own containing a 3. fold disswasion. 1. The deceit of this
ground, these things being not our own in a 3. fold respect not our own. Luke
16.12. Hab. 2.6.
To seek other things beside the things of Jesus Christ as our own, is to be
false to our selves, to deceive our selves, (self-seeking is self-deceiving in
this respect) for they are not our own, they want that for the which we so
eagerly prosecutE them; Isaac being blind, demanded of Jacob who came to him
for the Blessing, whether he was his very son Esan, or no; had he not
thought that he had been so, he would not have blessed him; did not people think
that these things below were their very own, they would never bestow their
regards upon them as they do; upon that foundation they set up the building of
all their prosecutions, but alas! what a slender sandy foundation is it? the
Scripture tells us they are not our own.

Here Is self-deceit, when we account them our own, in a threefold respect.

1. 1. They are not our souls, therefore not our own.
They are not our souls things, and therefore not our own things, they are thy
carcasses not thy souls, thy purses, thy shops, thy chests, not thy souls.

They are not proportioned in respect of abundance, or largeness to thy
capacious soul, the whole world is not to thy soul so much as a drop to the
belly of an Elephant; 1. Not large enough for the soul. Concija bonitas
creaturam quae mutatio nostri generis, ut solam divinitat^m ^am fastidiat.
Cupiditas nostra ^amelica omnium niss e^us in quo solo satiart potest.
All fulness that is not my God (says one) is nothing but emptines; all that is
not Jesus Christ is curt and penurious, and scantie; they are not able all put
together to throw in one mite into the treasury of the soul. Hagar when she
was out of Abraham's house, instantly found poverty, and soon was her bottle of
water spent, and so all earthly comforts afford no supply out of Christ.

2. 2. Not good enough for the soul. Opprobria humanae naturae. Genesis 2.20.
They are not proportioned in worth for the soul, they are mean and drossie;
they are not a match fit for thy soul: It again may be said of all the
Creation as 'twas once upon another occasion, Among all the creatures there was
not found an help meet, etc. Among all the things here below there is not to be
found a meet companion for the soul; there is no food here below that thy soul
loves, no clothing to cover thy soul, no coin to enrich thy soul, no
habitation to entertain thy soul; they are all below it of another kind. Thy
soul when it becomes a seeker of these things, is like the excellent trees
that went to the bramble to be their King. Judge. 9.14.15.
These things below that thou set the enquiries of thy soul most upon
deserve more that the tramplings of thy feet should be upon them; there is no
more preciousnes in them then what thy opinion imposes upon them.

2. 2. They are not useful, therefore not our own. Amor infirmi robar
miseriae. Pro. 11.4. Nec plenitadinem continenti, nec (...) inmt^nsi praebent.
They are not thine in respect of usefulnes, when thou stand in greatest
need of them; adversity will try what they things are, they are then but broken
stilts;^ These Baals cannot plead for themselves, if either fire, or thieves,
or sickness, or losses seize upon them, how then should they plead for thee?
There Is nothing that thou here trustest in, but like Micha's gods may be stolen
away; poor gods that cannot defend themselves.

These things profit not in the day of Wrath; we may expect much from them,
but when any come to use them, they are like quagmires that show green, and
seem to be hard, but when thou go to tread upon them they will not bear thy
weight.

3. 3. Not things that will stand by us, therefore not our own. Impatientia
amoris nostri. Quid mag^t agam si re^^nquam pro ^e rem ^am v^^em quae propter
se, aut propter me re^inquenda esser^ Mat. 6.20. (...). Tantum quisque valet
quantum am^t. Quiequid amico accidit ^ibi accidit.
They are not things that will stay with us, therefore not our own, they are
like lo^eph when his Mistress laid hold upon him, be gave her the slip This
night said God to the rich fool shall thy soul be taken from thee, and then
whose shall these things be that thou reckonest upon? All creature comforts are
like those enemies of Christ, that passed by him when he was upon the cross,
all transitory; the fashion of this word passes away, perishing comforts
should be prosecuted with a perishing love, and a vanishing affection; not as
the things for which we do live, but as the things in this state, without
which we cannot altogether live. Christ tells us of a moth that eats into all
earthy treasures; Child, and land, and beauty, nay life, have their moth. The
sweetest comforts like the Rose wither soonest, they are all like poor or
deceitful traders, they will break sooner or later, and then what will become
of thee that have lent them, nay bestowed upon them thy loves and affections,
which are all thou art worth? if they break thou must needs lose too: there is
nothing hereto be loved, but as if thou were always about to leave it, Ama
tanquam (...).
nay to loath it if God require; there is nothing here below dyed in grain, all
their sweetness and beauty will soon wear and wash out.

There Is the first disswasion in the first Consideration, the deceitfulnes of
this principle, that they are our own.

2. The second disswasion in the first Consideration, viz. that they are
sought, because our own is the vileness an unworthines of this principle.

2. 2. Disswasion. Unworthiness of this temper in respect of private
spiritednesse. Matthew. 6.32. Disce perire ut vivat Christi gloria. Mallet pro
aliis occidi quam sibi v^vere. Amb. in obit. Satyri. Aliquid habui ^ui Christum
praeferrepotu^. Moses causam populi apud Deum pre^ibus ^^iamsi causam Dei apud
populum glad^is all^^ ga^it. Greg. Mot. Fa^ aliquando quod si ^elicisstmus
fueris fact^^ us e; in (...).
It argues an unworthy unchristian temper, for a man to lay out his
prosecutions upon his own private employments, is infinitely below a true
Saintlike soul; it is much below the end of a Saint, only to seek the
salvation though of his own soul, but to regard these own things of the
body, Christ tells us it is the disposition of a heathen; the advancing of
Christ's name in the world must be our scope; the making him famous, our work;
our desire must be only to be conduits of Christ's favors, to be stewards of
his goods, to lay out our very selves in his praise, unserviceablenes must be a
Saints greatest burden. The excellency of a pillar is not beauty, but service
and usefulnes in bearing up the building, and so it is with a Saint; his
excellency stands not in wealth, in honors etc. but bearing up the glory and
cause of Jesus Christ; not to live for himself, but even to die for the
Public if God should call for it; the glory of a Saint is to have had
somewhat to which he has preferred, or may prefer Jesus Christ, to set up
Christ a building of glory though upon his own ruins.

The most famous Saints in the world were made so by public spiritednes; how
glorious will Moses be to posterity, that he was not willing to be happy
alone either in Pharaohs Court or Gods favor: so Nehemiah, and David, and Paul
with the r^st, they were all made noble by this being above their own things;
Oh what a vile temper is it for a Christian to be himself the Center of his
own ends, and the gulf of his own comforts? Cast (says Christ) that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, and then there is gurges in gurgite,
one gulf in another; how unlike is this temper to that of the Saints in
heaven, who have no other work but to sing the praises of Christ to ^ternitie?

3. 3. Disswasion in the first Consideration. Our liablenes to offend in
seeking our own things, and that in a threefold regard.
A third disswasion in the first Consideration is this; As there is much
lowness and unworthiness in seeking our own, so there is much readiness in us to
offend God in seeking them. It Is infinitely difficult not to miscarry in
following these own things, and that

1. Jn regard, following our own is a lawful liberty.

2. Offenses in following our own things, seldom are reproved.

3. We are infinitely, and eager, and vehement in prosecutions for self.

1. 1. The seeking our own things, is in a ^ort lawful and allowed, and
therefore we are ready to offend therein. Job 1.
We are liable to offend God in following our own things, because the seeking
of them is in a sort allowed by God as lawful. Satan commonly puts off his bad
wares of sin among these good ones, lawful things; as Satan came in among the
sons of God, so commonly sin comes in in employments in their own natures
lawful enough; Poison is not given to any under that notion, but under the
notion of good food and wholesome diet, and so it is taken unsuspectedly. It Is
easy to sin in lawful things, to seek sinfully our selves, immoderately,
regardlesly of God or his Church, when God allows to seek at all; though indeed
Gods gracious permission herein should rather make us more free in his service,
then full in our own, and be rather a bond of obedience, then a snare of Satan.
The old world was first drowned in the abuse of lawful pleasures and profits,
before 'twas drowned with water: They did eat and drink, they married, etc.
Matthew. 24.38.
'Twas the abuse of lawful things, buying and selling, etc. that kept them
from the Supper; so 1 Cor. 10.7. Luke 14.16.
We see what the people offended in, they sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play. Food, apparel, acquaintance, marriage, callings, recreations all
lawful, and do not thousands miscarry in the sinful using of them? Satan
commonly lies in ambush against out souls, behind our lawful liberties.
Things lawfully gotten, are most commonly unlawfully affected.

2. 2. Difficulty of discovery by others, and therefore we are very liable to
offend in them.
Others cannot easily discover it in us, or reprove and taxus for these
searches, they may think perhaps it is needful provision for family, wife,
children, health, supportation of rank, and place, when yet our hearts are
immoderately bent upon our self-prosecutions; we are not noted for any
scandalous faults; as uncleanness, swearing, sabbath-breaking, etc. and
therefore happily others may have a good opinion of us in the midst of our most
sinful self-seeking, hence the condition of a self-seeker is worse then of one
more openly profane, Est tale monstrum quod est simpliciter impeccab^^e. Luth.
Vbi non timetur reprebensor facilius accedit tentator. Greg. Luke 16.
who like a man that snorts, and makes a noise in his sleep, is jogged, and
pulled, whereas the secret self-seeker, that sleeps quietly, is happily let alone
by all, and never wakes till hell wakes him; the devil can tempt him without
fear. Jesus Christ, indeed who knew the heart bestowed the most of his jogs,
and threatenings, and admonitions, upon these still and sly wretches; and it is
as observable, these justified themselves always, and ever had a most deadly
hatred against him.

3. 3. Our great eagerness in self prosecutions. Per mare pauperiem sugiens,
per saxa, per ignes.
We are infinitely propense and eager to do, and in doing any thing for self.
Lovers of their own selves are particularly mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.^. If our own
houses be burning, our own cause a pleading, our own children a dying, our own
bargains a driving, how earnest are we in suitable affections? Here it is true,
quicquid agimus valde agimus; vehement we are in such prosecutions. The Apostle
speaks of some, that will be rich; and the Prophet of some, that lie down late,
and rise up early, and eat the bread of anxiety; and the Apostle of those, that
loved pleasures more by far then God; we read of some, that load themselves
with thick clay, and of others, that wearied themselves in the abundance of
their way, when they were in these prosecutions for self; in which no bounds of
health, prudence, commands, friendship, relations, place, promise, religion,
Scripture, can keep them in; as we see in Balaam and Judas, the idolaters of
Ephesus, Gebezi; were not all these like a company of swift Dromedaries,
traversing the ways of self? when in performance of any thing for God, how
dull are we? when for self, how nimble? how hearty in begging our daily bread?
how faint in desiring Gods kingdom^ may come? we can more easily give our
blood for earth, then our breath for heaven; when we are about any thing for
God, we do it but as it were fainedly, and faintly, we under-do it; but it is
the hardest thing in the world, when we do any thing for self, not to over-do
it: This is tht common cause of all the sury, and impetuousnesse in the world;
take away meum and tuum, mine and thine, and all will fall to the ground;

There Is the first disswasive consideration, from seeking these things, in
regard of the principle, or ground, upon which we are so eager in seeking them,
viz. these being our own; which argues,

1. 1 Timothy 6.9. Ferventissimi in terrenis, frigidissimi in coelestbus.
Praecep^o non est opus ut se qui^que diligat, quoniam id quod s^mus and id quod
infra nos est inconcussa naturae lege diligimus. Ambr. It a afflcicha^tur
qu^^^ceibus cultum deae reparaturi. (...). Omnia quae horribilia audis,
servire, mori expiata and sa^cta sunt amori. Nier. Tu nisi singeres sic ageres.
Otiamur in quibus laborandum, laboramus in quibus o^iandion
Deceitfulness to our selves in seeking.

2. 2. Main disswasive consideration. The things of Christ himself are
neglected, which argues, 1 Cor. 1^.22. R^m. 16.17. Phil. 3.18. 1. Insincerity
^f aims. (...). quo plus nos qu. in virtu ^e erigimus, ^o in gloriae inanis
soveam prosundius ^ademus. Greg. Gentes ag^nt sub nomine Christi. Tert.
Christian^^ nomen adjudicium, non ad remed^um Aug. Mat. 7.23. (...) Deus non
(...) it obsequiorum speciem sed affectus puritatem. Amb. in 9. Luc. Divina
judi^ia meritum justi ex mentis habitu, non ex actionum eventu metiuntur. Id.
Cum perversa intention si quid vel rectum agatur, quamvis coram hominibus
splendere cer^itur, apud examen tamen interni judicis obscuratur. Greg.
Unworthiness, and lowness in seeking.

3 Liablenesse to sin in seeking.

The second consideration to dissuade us from seeking our own things, is this;
Whose things they are, which the seeking our own, will make us neglect, viz.
The things of Jesus Christ. It Is observable, that Paul commonly greatens
offenses, by showing how they reflect upon Jesus Christ: If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; So, They serve not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but, etc. So, They are enemies to the Cross of Jesus
Christ; so here, They seek not the things of Jesus Christ.

Take this second disswasive branch, as comprehending four weighty
disswasions, every one whereof should take us off from self-seeking; The things
of Jesus Christ will hereby be neglected.

1. It is a neglect of the things of one who is in pretense our Lord and
Master, and whose things we seem to seek, and so it argues insincerity, and
rottenness of intention. A great sin; never to be farther from seeking the
things of Christ, then when we are a seeking them; to make Jesus Christ only
a cloak and shelter for our covetousness, as the Apostle speaks, 1 These. 2.5.
Only to make a show of service, Gal. 6.12. (...), as the worshippers of Diana,
had dolum in idolo, deceit in their service, eager for Diana outwardly, but
their great gains lay under their great cries; only to be a servant in show,
an Angel by name, and a drone in nature, not to serve whom they do serve; this
temper God abhors; this being in the skin a Christian, and in the coar a
heathen; this mere outside complementall Christianity, that bows to Christ,
and yet mocks him, as the soldiers did, shall be one day found to have had
profession for the increasing of judgment, not for a remedy to wretchedness;
The discovery of it, will one day more ashame, then the secrecy of it formerly
has pleased; Christ will uncase, uncloak all these servants; he will
publicly pronounce, that for all their fair shows, he never knew them, Christ
will plainly profess it. Impudency then will be dashed out of countenance. When
the Sun arises, the glow-worme that all night glistered brightly, shines not
at all; no more shall these glowworms in religion, when Christ shall appear in
the brightness of his presence, 'twill then be evident, that Christ never
sought such to serve him, nor ever regarded their performances; he ever
respecting duty, and measuring actions, not from the event, but the affections:
The integrity of the soul, and the singleness of intention, is the sweet of
every service, and sacrifice which is made thereby, sacrificium medullatum, the
only sacrifice with marrow, whereas a service without it, is made up of husks,
and shadows, it has, as we use to say of some meats, no heart in it.

There Is the first; A neglect of Christ's things, argues insincerity of aim.

2. It is a neglect of the things of one, who has sought our things, and
forsook heaven, and the bosom of his Father for us, The second disswasion in
this second consideration, it argues ingratitude. Phil. 2.4.5. Luke 19.10.
and if we will not forsake trifles for him; it notes ingratitude, and an
uningenuous temper. Christ spun out his very bowels, in a way of love to us;
and we spin out our strength, and abilities, in sinful lustings, that are
indeed his only enemies. Christ came to seek, but what? not ours, but us,
that which was lost; Shall he seek us, and not we him? he sought us, when vile
and wretched, shall not we him, that is so glorious and desirable? They can do
no more but neglect Christ, that never had any comfort or benefit by him; Shall
we neglect him, whose industries were all employed for our good? 'twas the meat
and drink of Christ, to seek and save poor lost souls; he went about
continually doing good. Pudeat sub spinato Capite mem^rum latere delicatum.
Be ashamed, O Christian, under such a head, that there should be such a
member, so unprofitable, unusefull as thou art: Christ was crowned with thorns
for thee, and will nothing serve thy turn but a garland of flowers?

There Is the second.

3. 3. It argues infinite folly to to neglect a service, so
It is a neglecting of the things of him, all whose employments deserve so well
at our hands. Every thing that Christ sets us about being,

1. Very honorable. 1. Honorable.
It is greater honor to be about the things of Christ, then to be the head of
an Empire. Paul, when he calls himself so frequently in his Epistles, the
servant of Jesus Christ, is compared by Chrysostom to some great Prince, who
writing to others, in the beginning of his letter, Philem. 1.
assumes some lofty title, the more to move respect in them that should read
it. The highest honor of Paul was to style himself a prisoner of Christ; the
deeper in the things of Christ, the higher in honor: It is observed by some, 2 Samuel 24.12.
when David had sinned in numbering the people, God would not honor him so far,
as to call him his servant; Go says God to Gad, and tell David; (giving him
no title) But when David's heart was set upon building God an house, 2 Samuel (...)
then God bids Nathan go and tell David his servant, etc. It Is a great honor,
for God to call us, and count us his servants. Moses was a Prince Iesurum,
D^^t. 34.5.
and 'twas his highest title to be called, Moses the servant of the Lord.
David principally delights to be styled so, Psa^. 1^.1^
Truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant. The badge of Christ is a badge of
truest honor; Every service of Christ is very honorable, as admission into the
presence of the great King by prayer, praise, (the work of Angels) warring
against sin, and Satan, principalities, and powers, saving of Kingdoms, of
souls, helping the Spouse of the King of Kings, etc.

2. (...) Delightful.
Every thing that Christ sets us about, is full of sweetness, and delight: In
his employments, there are soul ravishing joys. His service is a Map of
heaven, the place of rejoycers. A Christian has never any true comfort in the
services of any other, and if he have not comfort evermore in these, the fault
is not in the services, but in the manner of his performing them; these own
things, other employments, in which he has taken too much liberty, and
sensual content, commonly damp his joy. When a man sweats most out wardly, he
is coldest inwardly; that man who labors most for, and delights most in
outward things, as honor, wealth, etc. (the things that abused self seeks) has
least inward heat of heavenly comfort. There Is more true peace in weeping with
Jesus Christ, suffering for him, in being disgraced, impoverisht, nay in dying
for the things of Christ, then there is in all the sports, and pleasures of the
world. Christ sweetens the sowrest performance, gives his people joy, and
sweetness out of the fiercest, and strongest Lion; and his very rod like
Ionathans, has honey at the end of it; the truth is, Christ has sucked out the
bitterness, and taken away the burdensomnesse of the most unpleasing
sufferings and services; he has labored, and we are entered into his labors:
Our sufferings have now but a quasi, an [as] as dying, as sorrowful, 2 Cor.
6.9.
as chastned, etc. The misery, the painfulnesse of every suffering, is taken
away in the death of Jesus Christ. Death it self is a sword, Gladius retusus.
that has lost its edge, having been stricken against Christ, as against a
R^^k. (...). Chrysostom hom. ad pop. Antioch.
All the woes in the world have left their stings in the sides of Christ. The
common, ordinary, standing employments of Christ, are even in themselves
refreshments, and comforts to nature, as meekness, patience, temperance,
contentation, love, as Chrysostom has excellently observed, in his Sermon
persuading to brotherly love: No man, says he, can pretend, that this command
is destructive to his health, etc.

3. The things of Christ are safe. 3. Safe. Psalm. 91.1, 2, 4, 11.
Christ will keep us in all his ways, as the apple of the eye, as with wings
of warmth and shelter, as with a shield, etc. There was never any miscarried in
his works, unless for not being full, and through sincere, Z^ch. 2.8.
and constant in them, they minding their own things more then his. A Saint may
commit himself to Christ in well doing; How safe even outwardly, 1 Pet. 4.19.
when God sees it safest for their souls, does he keep them, keeping even
their carcasses, which are but the cabinets, (...) Iu medio^aginae.
and cases of their souls, most tenderly from hurt and injury? but how ever,
God will keep the soul which is more endangered in the sweetest employments of
self, then in the hardest of Jesus Christ; In periculis se^^ ri. in securis
peri^litamur.
The keeping of the spirit, is the gracious keeping; and often that, even sees
greatest safety in the approach of outward dangers, mountains full of chariots
and horses of fire; A reserve of mercy, and love, and strength, drawing near to
sustain it, Romans 8.37. (...).
making it more then a conqueror. The very height of danger sends a Saint
beyond danger, even into the bosom of Jesus Christ. A dying Saint may say to
all miseries, as Christ to the Jews, Whither I go, ye shall not come; It Is
possible indeed, there may in the passage be fear, but yet it is certain, there
is safety: Safety though sickness, safety though poverty, though death, etc. A
child of God in greatest worldly unsafenesse, is like a ship upon a boisterous
Sea, and driven with a strong wind, but yet such a wind, which is not so
strong to affright, as it is right set, to carry to the Haven; Matthew. 10.28.
therefore Christ forbids fear.

4. 4. Advantageou^. Psalm. 19.
All the things of Christ, and his employments are advantageous; None shall be
losers by them. Indeed Christ's things should not be sought only for reward,
but Christ will not suffer them to be sought without reward; the things of
Christ, like the seed that Isaac sowed, bring forth an hundredfold, in respect
of recompense. Christ will be beholding to none, they shall be paid to the
full: Indeed sometime he asks day, but when the day of payment comes, he
infinitely more then countervaileth for deferring; All that we do, or suffer,
in the hardest things of Christ, are not worthy the glory that shall be
revealed. They cannot so much as stir that balance wherein glory is, though
all the sufferings and employments in the world were thrown into the other.
Romans 8.18. (...).
Christ takes notice of all the things that are done for him, all are set down
and registered. In the building the wall, and setting up the gates of Jerusalem,
all is observed, even to the making of bars, and locks for the gates. Every
piece of a seemingly mean work, N^h. 3.3. Luke 7.4^.
is rehearsed by Christ. A Saint is like a rich man, that drives a secret
trade, his dangers and slight losses are seen happily, Col. 3.3.
but his close gain^s are invisible. Our life is hid (says Paul sweetly) with
Christ in God; Our happiness is laid up, and secret indeed, but yet it is, and
is abundant too. For the present, so far forth as it is good for them, Saints
shall be rewarded, even in this life; and if it be not for their good, what
reward call you that? (...).
it is an angry reward; it would be a better reward to want it.

4. 4. Disswasion in the first consideration. It argues fearlesnesse of our
account.
The neglecting of the tings of Jesus Christ, is of the things of one, that
will one day call us to an account and reckoning, and require at our hands, all
those neglects of himself, and ways, and servants, and cause; so it argues
regardlesnesse of account, fearlesnesse of reckoning. There Is not one servant
but 'twill be demanded of him, what he has done; he will be called to a
reckoning; and therefore Paul charge Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1.
to look well to the things of Christ, Heb. 13.17.
for he tells him, there will come a reckoning, an answering day: elsewhere the
Apostle tells us of an account that must be made of our looking after the
things of Jesus Christ; You may bribe your own consciences, but never him, that
is to call you to the account; Ta^^mus, sed non ^^tinguim^s.
people may be silent of it, and forget it themselves, but they cannot make
Christ forget it. Seek the things of Christ in his Church, in his Cause, in his
Word, in his Servants; if ever you would have him regard you hereafter, regard
him here. Be a shield to Christ's cause now, if thou would have him to be a
shield to thee hereafter. Paul says, that Onesiphorus sought him out
diligently, 1 Timothy 1.17, 18
and refreshed him, even in his chains, and we see what follows, even a
prayer, that he may find mercy from Christ in that day of account, since he
had sought these things of Christ before.

And thus I have done with the first general part of the Text, the nature of
the offense. 2. The generality of the offenders follows.

The second general head in the Text, is the generality of the offenders. All
(says the Apostle) seek, etc.

An expression, which I conceive, comprehends a threefold reference, or looks
with a threefold Aspect;

1. Upon Paul.

2. Upon Timothy.

3. Upon the generality of whom the Apostle here complains that they sought
their own things.

I shall name all the three respects.

1. As it has reference to Paul, it notes two things.

1. Sorrowful resenting of the neglect of the Church, even as if every one had
forsaken it, and not one left to own it, and the things of Christ. A gracious
person, deeply and sadly lays to heart the neglect of the things of Jesus
Christ. We find (as I said before) Saint Paul once weeping in this Epistle,
Phil. 3.18.
but 'twas because of some that were not friends to Jesus Christ. Sir Fr.
Bacons Not. Hist.
When two strings of an Instrument are tuned one to the other, if the one be
struck upon, and stirred, the other will move and tremble also. A Saints soul is
harmoniously consenting in its affections to Christ; and if he suffer and be
struck, a Saint will tremble, and be moved likewise.

2. 2 Timothy 4.3.
In reference to Paul, it notes courage in reproving zeal in opposing a
spreading fault; Paul dares speak even against all, if all will neglect Christ:
A gracious heart will stand for Jesus Christ, in the midst even of a prevailing
number that oppose him; the multitude and generality of resisters he meets
withal, will not, must not, make him desist; And therefore hence we may gather
a probable mark of a Christians, or a Ministers sincerity; do they oppose the
spreading prevailing sins of the time wherein they live? It Is ordinary to see
and hear men cry down sins that are put down, and discountenanced to their
hand, that perhaps, have few or none to plead for them; but the sins of the
age and place, as suppose it be erroneousnesse in judgment, or contempt of the
public Ordinances, reviling the Saints, slightness in religion, etc. these
sins that are in fashion, and are prevailing, require a courage and a
faithfulness, like to Paul's to deal with them.

There Is the first respect in the word [All,] viz. to Paul.

2. The second respect of this word [All,] is as it concerns Timothy, whose
graces of zeal, and integrity the Apostle does clearly here beautify and
adorn by that foyl of self-seeking in others. In the foregoing verse he had
commended Timothy for his uprightness and zeal for the Churches good, here he
amplifies that commendation, from setting down how opposite the generality was
to him; he was for the things of Christ, though the most were against him; And
thus it notes, The true commendation of a Christian.

That Christians piety and zeal for Christ, is most highly commendable, which
holds up, Phil. 2.15. (...).
in times and places, when, and where Christ is neglected. The darkness of the
night makes the candle, or the star, the more bright and shining:

There Is the second.

3. As this word [all] here refers to the generality; who were Brethren, and
^ellow-labourers, and professors, even together with Paul, and Timothy; it
notes,

Discovery (by difficulties) even of the fairest pretenders to the things of
Jesus Christ: It Is a rare thing, even among great numbers of Christ's seeming
friends, to find those that in straights will cleave to him: Who is it almost
that forsakes him not, and flies, when following him, is followed with dangers?
Very few that continue with Christ in an hour of temptation. Christians for the
most part, take up profession of Religion, as some people go to Sea, upon
pleasure and recreation; when the weather grows stormy, they presently think of
coming back again. Unsound fruit will hang on the tree, in a fair
Sun-shining-day, but in a boisterous windy day, it soon falls off. Outward
troubles will overcome a merely visible and outside professor, but they cannot
^each the soul truly implanted into Christ.

FINIS.

