THE JESUITS CREED: OR, The form of the Profession of Faith, to which all
Popish Priests and Ecclesiastiques, of what Order soever, are fast tied by
oath: by the ordinance of Pope PIUS the fourth, in the fifth year of his
Popedom. Anno Domini, 1564.
1. I.N. Do with a firm faith believe, and profess all, and every one of the
things which are contained in the Creed, which the holy Roman Church does use:
To wit,

1. I believe in one God, etc. Amen. As it is in the Nicen and
Constantinopolitan Creed.

2. I do most firmly admit and embrace Apostolical and Ecclesiastical
traditions, and the rest of the observations and constitutions of the same
Church.

3. In like manner, I admit the sacred Scriptures, according to that sense,
which the holy mother Church, to whom it belongs to judge of the true meaning
and interpretation of the holy Scriptures, has held and does hold: Neither
will I ever receive and interpret it, but according to the unanimous consent
of the Fathers.

4. I do also profess that there be seven true and proper Sacraments of the
New Law, instituted by our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and necessary for the salvation
of mankind, though not all of them to every one; That is to say, Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony:
And that they do confer grace, and that of these, Baptism, Confirmation and
Orders, cannot be reiterated without Sacrilege.

5. I do also receive and admit the received and approved Rites of the
Catholic Church in the solemn administration of all the foresaid Sacraments.

6. I do embrace and receive all and every one of the things, which have been
defined and declared in the holy Synod of Trent concerning Original sin, and
Justification.

7. I do likewise profess that a true, proper, and propitiatory sacrifice is
offered unto God in the Mass for the quick and the dead: And that the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, (together with his soul and Godhead) are
truly, really, and substantially in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist:
And that the whole substance of the bread is converted into his body, and the
whole substance of the wine into his blood; which conversion the Catholic
Church calls Transubstantiation.

8. I do also acknowledge that under one of the kinds only Christ is
received whole and entire, and a true Sacrament taken.

9. I do constantly hold there is a Purgatory, and that the souls therein
detained are helped by the suffrages of the faithful: In like manner also I
hold that the Saints, reigning together with Christ, are to be worshipped and
prayed unto; and that they do offer up prayers unto God for us, and that their
Relics are to be worshipped.

10. I do steadfastly affirm that the Images of Christ, and of that ever
Virgin Mother of God, as also of other Saints, ought to be had and retained,
and that due honor and worship should be given unto them.

11. I do also affirm that Christ has left in his Church the power of
Indulgences, and that the use of them is very wholesome for Christian people.

12. I do acknowledge the Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church to be
the mother and mistress of all Churches: And I do promise and swear true
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of blessed Peter the prince of
the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ.

13. I do likewise undoubtedly receive and profess all other things
delivered, defined and declared by holy Canons, oecumenicall Councels, and
especially by the holy Synod of Trent; and I do with all condemn, reject, and
accurse all things contrary, and all heresies whatsoever, that are condemned,
rejected, and accursed of the Church.

This true Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved, which I do
willingly profess, and truly hold at this present time, the very same I the
said N. do promise, vow, and swear to keep and confess whole and undefiled
most constantly, by the help of God, even to the last gasp of life; and that
I will take care, as much as lies in me, that it be held, taught and preached
of those which are under me, or of those, the care of whom shall belong unto me
in my office. So help me God, and these holy Gospels.

Printed Jan. 26. 1641. on Bread-street-hill.


