A LETTER FROM Captain Jones, To a worthy friend of his dwelling in Bartholmew
Lane.

Being a more full and an exacter Relation of the particular proceedings of Sir
William Wallers Army, then any that has yet been published.

With List of the chief Commanders that were slain and taken prisoners

With a true relation of the taking of Winchester by the Parlioments Forces.

LONDON, Printed by A. Coe and published according to Order, Anno Domini. 1644.

A LETTER FROM Captain Jones:
Worthy Sir,
I Am sorry that my time is so short, that I cannot give a particular account of
this days service, the Lord has extraordinarily delivered, I may say
miraculously, saved us this day, and delivered our enemies into our hands, the
fight began from eight and continued till past five a clock, at the first a
party of Musketeers, about 1000 were sent into a Wood, where they were beaten
by the enemies body, the place being not tenable, which place being so quitted
gave them great advantage: afterward they came down with fury on the right
wing along the hedges, which we had lined, but could hardly keep it; they fell
on with so much courage and resolution, till the Kentish horse took a troop or
two of them at one charge, and our horse fell of their foot, and drove them
from the hedges then they fell down with a great body o(...) horse and foot
in those fields, and our foot seconded with 400 Musketeers, sent to them, who
with three hours fight drove them from the hedges, won the ground, and beat
their maine body: Truly, Sir, J think never was a field fought with more
advantage and valor on their parts, and with more courage on ours: both horse
and foot played their parts so well, but it pleased our God to force them to a
shameful retreat, and pursued them, beating them at least six miles, their
foot and horse totally routed, upon their pursuit toward Winchester and other
places, for Sir WILLIAM WALLER, and Sir WILLIAM BELFORD, with many of our horse
and foot are not yet r^^urned to us: only we have heard from them we being left
to convey the carriage to Alessord, I shall be able to give you antore exact
account of it. Our LONDON Regiments, but above any, our Major General BROWN
has bin a prime means for our present welfare. Captain Lieutenant Milton is
wounded, and carried away prisoner, but we hope to morrow to redeem him by a
strong hand: we have slain the Lord John Brother to the Duke of Lenox, and
Ruthen cannot be found: his Lieutenant General is slain, with many others of
note, taken 150 prisoners, and have not lost 30 men.

I have sent you a List of some of the chief prisoners.

Sir Edward Stonwell Colonel. Colonel Beard. Lie^tenant Col. Kingston. Captain
Prince. Captain Audley. Captain Jaxon. Captain Seamour. Ensigns. Ensign
Corper. Ensign Millis. Ensign Marsh. Cornets. Cornet Middle. Cornet Fr.
Constable. Cornet John Du^ket. Cornet John Morsey, (...) Phisician* a Priest.
Since the beginning of this Letter I have extraordinary good news from ours in
their pursuit of the enemies, by the next I hope J shall give you a pleasing
account, the Cavaliers said as they ran away by Alesford that the Kingdom was
lost, but they gave great vapouring brags what they had done, but believe me
who saw, and was an actor, and since have communicated intelligence, thot our
loss was small our gain incredible. Truly Sir the manner of my relating of
Gods wondrous bringing about this salvation, does fall infinitely short of
what it really was, for all we desire praise be giaen to God through all
congregations, and that Mayor general Brown be always honored as a principal
instrument.

Both the Armies have lain in the fields several nights and days past, the
Enemy lay in Sutton down, we lay in Lumbourne field, we fought in East down
between Cheriton and Alesford, the enemies last field-word was GOD AND THE
CAUSE, and our last field word was JESUS BLESEE US. We have taken Colors,
Ordnance, etc. in the pursuit and a boundhnce of Arms, both there and in the
field. Let this intelligence be communicated to all my friends as that which is
certain, J rest yours

John Jones.
Alford March 29, 1644. Col. Tompson has lost his leg, glory to God alone



April 1, 1644.
THis day a Messenger came from Sir Will: Balf^^^ to my Lord General, informing
him of the proceedings since the late Victory against the Lord Hopton, who by
Letters certifieth that Sir VVilli^^ Waller coming to Winchester on Saturday,
the Major of the Town met him with the Keys, and gave him free entrance into
the City, the ene^ie keeping the Castle; but understanding that the enemies
strength was not fled thither, they refre^^ themselves, and marched away for
Salisbury, and missing of them there, they are gone thence also, and now are
dispersed all the Country over, to make search for the enemy, the same Letter
says, they have taken prisoners as many for number as they can desire,
fetching them out of Woods and by houses every day, sometimes taking a Troop at
a time; the issue I hope by Gods blessing (if the Victory be w^^^ followed
with fresh men) will be the regaining of the West.

Published according to Order.


