TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, BASIL Earl of DENBIGH, WILLIAM Lord MAYNARD, THOMAS
Lord Viscount WENMAN, William Pierpoint, Denzill Hollis, and Bulstrode
Whitlock, Esquires; Commissioners of the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of
ENGLAND, Assembled at Westminster: AND, JOHN Lord MAITLAND, Sir Charles
Erskyne, and M. Robert Barcklay, Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland;
Sent with the Propositions to His MAJESTY, at Oxford.
Right Honorable Lords and Gentlemen;
I Speak my experience, that if a Soldier succeed well upon his first Charge,
he is not to be withheld from a second Adventure: You favored this Sermon so
much, when Preached; that I am confident you will not reject it Printed; nor
this my Dedicatory, although I begin not after the common stamp of Dedication,
with some hoary or gray headed Apophthegme, or some strained sentence out of
Tully; I profess my self a Soldier, during this Cause, as well as a
Scholar, and therefore must crave leave, to speak in such language as
affectionate duty can best express it self by the tongue. I confess, when I
meditate the height of your noble Spirits, and withal the flatnesse of my
poor abilities, as I present this in love, so with much fear, lest my
endeavors convert into a vapor ere they can reach the height of your merit:
sloope but so low as to cherish them, and it shall ever add to your Honor.
The ancient and modern custom of Dedication of Books to the hands of
Emminency, was, and is, either to have them powerfully protected, or in
affection, as devoted; or to appear grateful for benefits received; all these
moved me to hover under your wings; being confident, that you that under God
protected me out of the jaws of the Lions, and Bears, will also protect me
from the greatest Philistims: And therefore have I presumed to prefix your
names, it being none of the smallest hazards I have run, to oppose this Sermon
to the worlds view, whereby I expect to be charged again and again; and it
would conclude me guilty of Poultranisme, to fear the Sciopii and Pacientii
here, when not the Zosimi at Oxford: I well know carping curiosity will have
its lash at me too. Aelian reports, when Diogenes saw certain Rodian Gallants
gorgeously attyred, he laughed, saying, Hic nihil est praeter Fastum: And
after, seeing certain Laconians in sordid apparel, Et hic alius Fastus est,
said he. These poore-clad lines (I fear) will not pass without envy, and
without the censure of pride and ambition; how ever, whilst you keep the Front,
I fear no charge, neither Oxfords sword, nor any other two-edged sword of the
tongue; and the less, because (I perceive) opinions and censures are as
various as the Arguments on which they discourse: Calumny and squint-eyed
detraction violently charging against Christian charity and judgment in these
times. And to save them a labor, I care not to let them know, although that
many a storm and tempest has beat against me, yet God has not suffered me to
be cast down; And whatever they shall say, (with Apollonius) I resolve, they
may trouble themselves, but I will not be troubled at whatsoever the one shall
say, or the other do. I have long before this time Dedicated my life in this
Cause to God, in the Parliaments Service; any thing less then the loss of it
I can easily endure: It must be a long feast to find a dish for every appetite,
and many in these times will find faults, that will not mend one: I never
indeed intended the publishing this Sermon before the preaching of it, nor
could ever gain time to refine it since; only importunity of some friends, and
the mis-report that I heard it had to his Majesty, made me presume (with your
Favor) to show the world the Truth, and implore your Honors to be Judges of
it.

My first thoughts, when I meditated this subject, were only to breath into
your unfurled sails, such a blast as might give you the advantage to make a
saving voyage to your selves, if not, a more prosperous voyage for the whole
Church of God; importunate prayer, being the fairest wind, can blow in the
heavens to carry the Church of God to her safe Port. And as David, rescuing his
wives, and recovering his goods from the Enemy, was never a whit the less
honor to him, because a young man made way for the discovery; so it being your
happiness to be employed in this service so becoming nobility, or any of the
sons of men, to seek peace for the Church of God, in which Gods blessing
Mat. 5. attends you, is it any diminution to your honor, that I, the meanest
of my brethren, pointed you the way to prosper: It being the constant prayer of
my soul daily, that you may reap the fruits of those so brave and gallantly
managed labors: yea I hourly expect and look out for a return of those
adventures from heaven; even when God shall speak by His Majesty (to his three
Kingdoms) Peace, which is the hearty prayer, (as also for all your honors,
that you may still do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem) of him
who is

Yours devoted, even by word and deed, to the loss of his utmost drop of
blood, To serve you, for JESUS CHRIST, Samuel Kem.

The MESSENGERS Preparation For an Address to THE KING For a Well-grounded
PEACE. Delivered in a SERMON, at Oxford, UPON
ESTHER, Chap. 4. Verse. 16. Go, gather together all the Jews that are present
in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or
day: I also and my maidens will fast likewise, and so I will go in unto the
King, which is not according to the Law; and if I perish, I perish.


OUr new practices against the Church proceed from old Principles; and what an
Ocean of Saints blood has streamed out from the fountain of Cains malice, as
if there were a new project to deluge that with blood, which GOD preserved from
water, (his righteous family) the Scriptures plentifully demonstrate: but with
this observable hint of refreshing; that this Red Sea, has in the end ever
devoured the devourers; and although by division) shrunk up it self into
straits, to spare a passage to the Church of God; for it is deliverance: So that
the Church of God is not now to learn to be content to be let blood; it may in
probability prove good for it to be so afflicted; this is not the first plot
intended against it for utter extirpation; nor you the first messengers called
forth by Providence to speak unto Majesty for it is preservation cherish then,
and augment that courage that I seem to see seated in your aspects, most noble
Patriots, although invisoned with Enemies, invellopt with difficulties, to
sense no probability to escape revilings; nor possibility to return prevailing.
You have a sufficient call, you have a good and all-sufficient God, a just
Cause, unjust Enemies; many potent prayers, all impotent curses, a promise of a
blessing, a President of good suceesse in this Book: Put on resolution, and
use importunate prayer as a Preparation, so go into the King, if ye perish ye
perish.

May it please you now, as an Introduction to my Text, to premise with me these
particulars.

1. The utter extirpation of the Church of God plotted; and, if you observe it,
this plot had it is rise from self ends, Esther 3. Verse. 5. and 6. When Haman
saw Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was he full of wrath, he
thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai, wherefore Haman sought to destroy all
the Jews that were throughout the whole Kingdom.

2. The Kings humor observed, a decree for the execution demanded, and an
advance of moneys promised, verse 8. and 9. And Haman said to the King, there
is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among thy people in all the
provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all people, neither
keep they the Kings Law; therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer
them. If it please the King, let it be written, that they be destroyed: and I
will pay ten thousand talents of Silver to the hands of those that have the
charge of the business, to bring it into the Kings Treasuries.

3 The request obtained, Regina pecunia quid non? and the mannaging of the
business solely to Haman committed, Verse. 11, 12, 13. And the King said to
Haman, the silver is given to thee, and the people also, to do with them as
seems good to thee, etc. Then were the Kings sons called, and there was
written according to all that Haman had commanded unto the Kings Lievtenants,
and to the Governors that were over every Province, and to the Rulers of every
People, of every Province, according to the writing thereof; and to every
people after their language in the name of the King was it written, and sealed
with the Kings Ring: and the letters were sent by Poasts into all the Kings
Provinces, to destroy, and to kill, and to cause to perish all the Jews, both
young and old, little children and women, in one day.

4 The activity of the Churches Enemies, for the speedy execution of this plot
observed, Verse. 15. The Post went out being hastened by the Kings Commandment.

5 A double effect of this plot decreed: the Court and Enemies of the Church
are merry, and their spirits elevated, They sit down to drink: The Church of
God is perplexed, Verse. 16. The City Shushan was perplexed.

6 Mordecai's Personal sense of this misery, he is more eminently affected,
Chap. 4. Verse. 1. Perceiving what was done; he rent his clothes, and put on
sackcloth and ashes, and went out into the City, and cried with a loud and
bitter cry, etc.

7 The National sense of this calamity, Verse. 3. And in every Province where
the decree came, there was great mourning, and fasting, and weeping, and
wailing, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.

8. The plot to Esther, discovered by her maids, Verse. 4. and by Mordecai
confirmed, Verse. 7.

9. Some difficulties by sense proposed, Verse. 10, and 11. and by Mordecai
answered, Verse. 13, and 14. and by her faith mastered; she puts on an heroic
resolution, and returns Mordecai my Text for a concluding answer: Go, gather
together all the Jews in Shushan, and fast ye for me, etc.

In the words you have, The Messengers order for preparation, National and
Personal, for her good success in undertaking that great action: Go, gather
together. In which preparation you have two particulars.

1. The suitableness of the duty to the Churches difficulty, or her
prescribing them suitable duty to so great a difficulty. The Church is in a
great strait, decreed to death; a decree also that none shall dare to approach
the Kings presence uncalled; much less to be a Petitioner for life, to reverse
a decree, Verse. 11.

2. Proportionable duty: Fast, pray: nay fast all; pray one and all: nay do
this exactly, strictly, neither eat nor drink; nay do it importunately, ply the
work, ply it night and day.

The Action, these two particulars.

1 The Messengers sensiblenesse of the Churches misery, and her own difficulty:
I also and my maidens will fast likewise. She does not put upon others what she
will not practice her self; nor trust to others duties alone, as a means for
her security; no, I also: if the Church be in misery, she will as a member put
her self on exact duty.

2 The Messengers subsequent independing heroic selfedenying resolution: So
will I go in to the King, If I perish, I perish.

The words are without difficulty; only thus far permit me, that I may
condescend to every man's capacity.

1. The Jews were then the people of Gods love, his heritage, his ear
friends; against these is the decree sealed for death; for these the pit is
dug, the net spread, the sword sharpened: these thus designed for death,
must fast and pray heartily for the Messengers acceptance, as the only
probable means for their deliverance.

2. In Shushan: that was indeed the winter-Palace of the Kings of Persia; but
to it was adjoined a City, which was denominated so from it: Why, the Jews at
the Court may think to escape (as Mordecai intimates Verse 11.) by the Kings
favor; they in the City to be secure, as within Lines of Communication. No,
all must to the work for the Churches deliverance.

3. Fast ye for me. Some read it, Orate prome: The Original has it, Jejunate
supra me: Arm me with your prayers and Fasting, against the strength of malice,
and power of a decree: Jejunium pro suffragio apud summum Deum petit.

4. So will I go in to the King: Magna fidncia Reginae in jejunio monstratur,
magnaque charitas in vitam populi.

5. If I perish, I perish: She submits to God, embracing her own death, rather
then daring to neglect the use of the means for the Churches safety; as
undervaluing, trampling on, and contemning that life, that may outlive the
prosperity of the Church of God.

There are streaming from these fountains many eminent truths: time and your
weighty occasions prohibit me to adventure upon all: I shall therefore at this
present only summon some of them to appear, and pass them by with
observation: one I shall insist on for your present preparation unto the great
work of this day.

First, from the first branch of the order, Go gather together all the Jews,
you may observe,

That unity in duty is a sweet preparation to obtain mercy for the Church of
God in difficulty. Indeed it is the strength of duty, and that which adapts us
for mercy, Psalm. 134. Verse. 1, 2, 3. Behold how good for brethren to dwell
together, so to fast, to pray together: I, there the Lord commands his
blessing, even life for evermore: Act. 2.1. They were all with one accord in
one place: and in the fourth Verse, Then they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost: Indeed there is nothing does so unfit us for mercy, as our divisions; it
is the Basis of the Churches ruins, that we cannot be got to go together unto
the throne of grace for mercy in this our time of need. Unity it is the Portall
at which prayer enters every supplicated mercy: When the Church is thus
together, their desires (like Peter, Act. 12.12.) wait, and knock to enter,
break thorough all bars, shackles, bolts, difficulties; to speak to them the
prevalency of such Saint-like performances. It is observable whilst there was
division betwixt Abraham and Lot, God never appeared, Genesis 13.14. etc. Truly it
is in this case with duty, as with the child in the womb, until all the parts
are rightly framed and composed, the soul quickens it not; nor will any mercy
cordially smile on us, until we are knit together in love: indeed our Savior
prohibits our service to God, until we are at peace with one another: nothing
like this hinders the prosperity of Gods famlly, or blocks up the passage for
the Churches deliverance: and I am confident, nothing so much as this sinks
your spirits, in the expectation of present success in this days employment:
O what an inexpressible evil is it, that all the Church of God cannot be got
together for your good success in this business for peace, whilst we are all
now gathered together (I hope all of one mind) with an importunity to implore
it, and God to soften the Kings heart to incline to it. I wish heartily there
be not some in this Kingdom, professing the same faith, baptized with the same
Baptism, praying God to harden the Kings heart against it, or for selfe-ends
persuading him might and maine to refuse the Propositions conducing to it: But
however, let us that are together, with one accord pray, and I hope the prayers
of the Saints are at this time active for a blessing upon your achievements
this day. And so I shall hold out to your view a second truth wrapped up in the
Text:

Observation 2. Representative Persons interposing for the Church in a strait,
require representative prayers. They are national men, and will need national
assistance. A Kingdoms strength is necessary for those that stand for a
Kingdoms wealth. If Esther personate the Jews to the King for salvation, the
Jews must present Esthers condition to the King of Kings for preservation. All
the Churches Worthies are worthy of the Churches best duties; if Paul be
laboring for the Church, and adventuring for it, he had need have a stock of
prayers going in all the Churches for himself.

The 3. Observation (And neither eat or drink three days or nights together,)
is this;

That in cases of great difficulty there is a pressing necessity for the
speedy and exact performance of importunate duty: A bleeding Church expects a
speedy and speeding prayer: Mariners in great storms are very yareand take
double pains: Soldiers near a quartering enemy are upon serious and constant
duty; then night and day at it: life is on it, as we proverbially express it.
Soldiers grutch not limbs or lives for victory, nor must we think much of
praying and fasting, again and again, for a National mercy: Indeed we must
never give over till we speed; Finis operationis est opus: the end of the work
is the work it self. Truly it will be to little purpose for you to go to the
King, if you go not first to God, to move the Kings heart. For, it is the
masterpiece of his own hand to work the heart of Princes that way, as shall
make most for his glory, and the accomplishing his forethought designs
touching his Churches good, and the Kingdoms of the earth; and when hell has
plotted a design, and found out fit instruments to suggest it to Princes; nay
when corruption has overpowered convicting light, and be-midnighted the
soul, that it consents to be guided, and follows every Ignis fatuus, or
other fading meteor, nay sometime forsaking the more eminent lights of heaven,
doting on very glow-wormes, but indeed composures of corruption, and to follow
what is suggested to it, and is in it self resolved to act what plotted; yet
then, even then, God can alter: And what God can do for any peoples good,
importunate prayer, exactly performed, may prevail with him to do for us his
people, and his Churches good. Truly, such Prayer, with fasting, has been of
old former Messengers Preparation upon the undertaking any great and weighty
action: S. James advises us before we put forth our resolves to say, If God
will, I will do this or that, James 4.15. It is good upon every undertaking to
ask Gods leave, and to consult him, to carry him, or something of him with us,
to effect that which we cannot promise our selves; in the 24. of Genesis 12.
Abraham dispatcheth his servant upon a message of concernment; and it was
concerning, the and winning, persuading of a heart, as appears Ver. 51. It
may be the woman will not be willing to follow me; etc. says his Messenger; so
that it was dubious, whether her heart might, or might not incline to his
Message: well what course does he take? Verse. 12. by way of Preparation,
knowing it was in Gods power, to incline it, he seeks God. And he said, O Lord
God of my Master Abraham, I pray thee send me good speed this day: And the
success you may read in the succeeding Verses.

To come a little nearer to our purpose: Esau had an old grudge against his
brother Jacob, the mess of Pottage was not yet digested, but boiled the second
time in his stomach, and the gaining his Fathers blessing was laid to heart,
and what he secretly thought in his heart before, when the days of his Fathers
mourning were come he begins to act now; and arrayes four hundred men to go
against his brother upon the receipt of this intelligence, Iacab fears
greatly, Genesis 22.7. nay, the Text says, He was distressed. Well, he cannot
avoid a meeting; nor can he expect less then ruin, there is no probability
to shun his Army or to sense possibility to escape his fury: well, what course
takes he? Truly, he goes to God in Prayer: to change his heart, he knew that
it was in the Lords power; and although sencible of his unworthiness and
insufficiency, he chooses rather first to wrestle with a good God indeed, whom
he might overcome and prevail with to change his brothers heart, then merely
to trust to his own policies or complements; or any other way to win upon him.
This is the strength of all other means he uses to pacify his brother: and
Verse 28. you see the excellent consequence of his Prayer: As a Prince have
thou power with God and men, and have prevailed: And I pray observe this for a
truth.

That powerful men with God; are ever prevailing men with Man? If we can but
get strength enough to wrestle with God let us trust God to wrestle with the
hearts of men, 1. Kings 18.37. yea the greatest Princes: Oh had not this Nation
labored under the malignant distempers of sin; nay, did not the
Covenant-Servants of God, such as pass for his own children, lie dangerously
weak under sad divisions; yea so that the whole body is out of joint, and then
what strength? we might have prevailed for the Kings heart it being in Gods
hand, before this day. For why might not we (if rightly quallified) obtain a
heart out of our hands, and in the Lords hand, for the good of a Nation? nay
three bleeding Nations? as well as he, for himself and his family: Genesis 33.4.
you have an encouraging president; where killing is come to kissing, sheding of
blood, to sheding of tears: They both wept: The charging each other is the
embracing each other; It will be an argument against us of National
weakness, and wickedness; that one shall do more then so many with God: And
if this be Truth, we have none, more no cry out of, then our selves, for the
continuation of our sorrow; may not the Lord say as sometimes to Israel,
Perditin tua ex te, we may thank our selves; his hand is not shortened that it
cannot save, nor his care heavy that it cannot hear; but our prayers are
weak, because our hearts are wicked; that cannot hold out a wrestle with God.

Indeed, we act duty, but not proportionable for the Churches necessity; or as
cordially sensible of its misery and speedy calamity, not as if we see no way
but one for it, or beheld it sentenced to death under a dooree; no, we look
most of us, as Eliahs servant, upon the first command, 1 King. 18.4. when
misery was on Germany, Ireland, and Scotland, being often persuaded by the
Eliahs of those times to look out what we could see, the return of our hearts
was, that we saw nothing: Indeed we laid it not to heart, as any thing. Nay,
when at this day commanded to look out, those within Lines of Communication and
fenced Garrisons, can see but a little cloud out of the Sea like a man's hand;
we esteem all the Protestant blood; nay, the Saints blood that has been shed
as nothing; do all the Cruelties, Murders, Woundings, Imprisonings, Fireings,
Plunderings, Deformings, Reproachings, of the Saints, as yet appear as nothing?
How many sighing, groaning, lamentable complaining, sadhearted good Christians
may you see in many parts of this distracted Kingdom, seeking for bread and
glad to part with (their former) pleasant things to relieve their families
pressing necessities? How does many a gallant family sit solitary? How many
beautiful houses forlorn? Yea, how many are aggrevating their misery, by
viewing over the records of their former enjoyments? How in many places does
the Enemy magnify himself against God and his people, having possessed, and
dispossessed our Congregations, and destroyed the place of the Assembly? How
does the blood of the Church spring forth as wine out of the winepresse, and
lies spilt on the ground; abroad the Sword consuming, at home lofty and sad
divisions, even the wills of men, like wild horses, renting limb from limb
the poor Church of God, the Enemy hearing of this trouble and being glad? Nay,
in a word, The cause of God in three Kingdoms, crying with them in the 1
Lament. Verse. 12. Is it nothing to you, O all ye that pass by? Is there any
sorrow like to my sorrow? and yet who, with Mordeoa^, although it be past
beyond a decree, and come to the Haman-like acting of cruelty against the
Church, before your faces, even at the doors and gates of your Cities, in
heart yet says, Is it any thing? Nay let me add something more; Although God be
so angry, as to license his enemies to pull out his own eyes, (for his Church
is as dear to him as the apple of his eye:) and he must be incensed highly,
when he will permit this: yet who lays this to heart as any thing? Nay even
now, although God hearken, and hear who speaks aright at all, or if, but for
a day, and then every man with the day casts off the duty, and returns with
the dog to his vomit, and with the wrinsed sow to wallow in the mire. Had
Mordecai looked thus a squint on the condition of the Jews, he had never laid
it to heart; and if never laid to heart, it had not been communicated to every
one that in probability might conveigh it to Esthers ears; and had she
slightly entertained it as news only, it had never come to the hazzarding of
her life in the Churches cause, or prescribing an order for so serious
preparation for the Churches preservation. Will you license me to advise you? I
know you will: you called me to that purpose to this duty this day: Why then, as
the Prophet, 1 King. 10. Prepare your chariots: so you, and (I wish) the whole
Church of God their hearts; and improve you all your interests, (noble Patriots
of the Cause of God) and let them improve theirs, by proportionable and
importunate duty, for success this day suitable to the Churches necessity and
misery. Esa. 22.4. you have the story of the invading the land of Jewrie by the
Persians, by reason whereof the Church of God, and the Kingdom were like to be
brought into a sad condition; it was like to be a day of trouble, and treading
down, and of perplexity by the Lord; breaking down walls, and breaches seen in
the city of David: mark in the 4. Verse. what the Prophet puts immediately in
practice to divert it. Therefore said I, look away from me; mind me not of any
thing else, I have nothing else comparatively to look after, this is the
business of the time: what? I will weep bitterly: or, as the Original has
it, I will be bitter in weeping: Labor not to comfort me, because of the
spoiling of the daughter of my people: Jer. 8.21, 22. For the hurt of the
daughter of my people am I hurt: I am black, astonishment has taken hold on
me, etc. i. grief to an ecstasy has seized on me, that I am not my self: the
hurt of the Church is his hurt: I, then he seeks propoationably a remedy.
Moses, when God is angry with the people, he falls sensibly to the work: and
being to wrestle out reconciliation, and a diversion of Gods express
resolution against them, he is at it 40. days and nights together. So again
upon another provocation, Numb. 14.11. How long will this people provoke me?
Verse. 12. I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them: and now
God (if Moses had any selfe-ends or aims) proposes something to take him off,
and stop his mouth, for he promises to make him a multiplying nation: (Indeed
selfe-aiming men, that shall look to their own ends; will never stand the
Church in a strait in any stead;) No, he saw the people threatened to ruin: See
how Moses argues, and wrastles with God, Verse. 13, 14, 15, 16. and then
closes, and gains upon God by prayer, giving as it were the other hug in this
wrestle, in the 17, 18, 19. Verses, Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of the
people: See Verse. 20. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy Word.
See 1. Nehemiah, 2, 3, 4. I have loved you, says the Lord, etc. Acts 27. Paul
perceiving the voyage would be exceeding dangerous to those in the ship, Verse.
21. the Text says, he used long abstinence: you have our Savior Christ also
for an example; when he beheld the contraction of his Fathers brow, wrinkled up
with full pleats of displeasure, and pure wrath against our souls, and a
decree against us, to suffer hell and damnation; and none could or durst enter,
to endeavor a reverse, when he beheld the plot against us, and our precious
immortal souls undone for ever, and liable to Satan's fury; he immediately
disrobes himself of glory, and immantles himself with the rags and badges of
poverty, and enters into the veil of flesh, and then and there plies it night
and day, contesting with men and devils; nay wrastles with God, with the deep
groans of his spirit; sweats at this work water and blood, and never quit his
free undertaking until he sweetly breathed it out to us; that the great
business of his Church was done, and that they were delivered from all their
enemies, with an It is finished.

Precious and high-prized mercies must cost us some labor; we must not look
to carry home that which all the treasure in the land cannot purchase, for
nothing: your words, or the Propositions you present, may not take with the
Kings heart; but your suitable performances (by way of preparation to the
Churches present misery) to God, may take with God; and God can take his heart
and dispose of it as pleases him, Ezra 1.1. The Lord stirred up the spirit of
Cyrus to build his house.

There are many Arguments, and persuading Reasons, as sinews to strengthen the
Truth proved by forementioned Scriptures, and Examples.

First, Why exact and proportionable duty to the Churchesmisery is required of
all those that are interested in seeking its delivery.

1. Argument. Thar we may make it appear, we are cordially sensible of its
condition; that we believe indeed it is as miserable as it shows for, and that
God is as angry as he seems to be with the Kingdom, that it complains not
without a cause; we can never yerne in our bowels with compassion to those
(though never so nearly related to us) who we believe not be in passion and
affliction. The sense of the Churches moaning in misery must precede in our
hearts, our groaning for mercy; the tender hearted mother then and not before,
then makes it her work (all things set apart) to send for a Physician, and to
Physic and tend her sick child, when she has laid to heart the symptoms of
its disease, and considered the consequences it. When we imagine slight hurts,
we afford them slight healings, like those 8 ser. 11. but when laid to heart
then, Oh! Is there no Balm in Gilead, no Physician there? ser. 9.1. Oh! that my
head were waters, and eyes fountains of tears, that I might weep day and
night for the slain of the daughter of my people, etc. It was an old fault
which the Prophet complained of, that no man lays to heart the miseries of the
Church.

2. Argument. That we may make it appear, that we set a high estimate on the
Churches safety, that we intend to gain it what ever it cost; that we think
not much, nor repine, no not at any layings out for it: truly we have bid
little or nothing, nationally or personally, for this great mercy as yet.

Object. Why have we not freely offered our superfluous riches; have we not
cashiered our vain pleasures? have not many hazzarded the displeasures of their
eminent friends, procured to themselves many enemies, ventured their lives; nay
have we not made many prayers? observed many Fasts; and is this nothing?

Sol. Truly, as the case may stand, it may be worse then doing nothing: and
God may say to us as to those that professed to be his people, Esa. 1.11. To
what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices: here you hear of many
sacrifices, much cost (God knows) to little purpose or no purpose: we bid very
much, I confess, for mercy; but we would have God take our public fatih for
it; we would still have God take our promises for it, when he expects
performances for it; he is so well acquainted with our backslidings, that he is
unwilling to trust us any more: It Is true, we come often to cheapen mercy, it
may be once or twice a month, publicly or privately, for the Church in
misery, and for a day hold down our heads like a bull-rush, as if we were
undone if we had it not; but when the price is set at a word, and God fallen as
low as he can to save by it, to his glory, and the honor of his justice. For
the most part the most of men are apt to slink away, or to promise to come
again, or the like. What is it to bid, and bid for a rich jewel again and
again, yea a thousand times over; if we under-bid for it; surely it argues a
slighting of the jewel, and must needs be a great provocation to the merchant:
God had as live you bid nothing, as all you have bidden or abidden, if you come
not up to his price; what is that? why it is expressed and set down, Esa. 1.16,
17. Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, etc. also Isa.
58.3. The Jews question God, why though they bid fair for mercy, they cannot
have it: Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? etc. God gives them
account in the last words of the third and fourth Verses, Behold in the day of
your fast ye find pleasure, ye fast for strife and debate, etc. wherefore he
cannot part with it at that rate, and sets down what he resolves to have, Verse.
6, 7.8. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of
wickedness, to deal thy bread to the hungry, etc. you must bid as the
Ninevites did, Jonah 3.7, 8. Let nether man nor beast, herd nor flock taste any
thing, let them not feed nor drink water, but let them cry mightily unto God,
let them turn every one from his evil way, etc. Or as the people in 1 Joel
13.14. God will not part with deliverance and mercy for his Church till we
depart from our sin: Hosea 14.3. Take away all iniquity and receive us
graciously. The sacrificing our dearest sins, will instantly bring in the
greatest mercies for the Church: We may truly say of the Land as David of
himself, Psalm. 38.3. There is no rest in my bones because of my sin: Lay a
man upon never so many soft down beds, if the disease be in the bones the
pains continues; the way to make him rest, is to take the cause of the pain
out of his bones. You may lay the Church at this day, and the Kingdoms on the
soft downebed of Gods promises; on the downe-bed of Counsels, Armies,
Propositions for Peace, Pastings, Prlyings, The way to give the Land rest, is
to tender and make such Propositions to God as may get sin out of the heart,
and pardoned, and God reconciled. To conclude this Reason, I may truly say, we
trouble our selves, and bid much, but this one thing is necessary.

3. Argument. Because the Lord takes no notice of easy performances or lazy
prayers. He expects if the Church be in necessity, and we sensible of it, that
we should use importunity; It becoms His Majesty to be so sought unto for such
like mercies, 36 Ezekiel. Verse. 37. I will yet for this be inquired after, says
the Lord, etc. A man that will have his Vineard to thrive and be fruitful,
must labor and work in it; and a man that will have his prayer thrive, must
labor in prayer, it must be his daily Trade, 2 Cor. 1.11. You also ldbouring
for us in prayers: God will never answer a lazy begging Christian, we must not
be reporters of the Churches necessities, but petitioners: Yea petitioners with
a kind of holy impudency, not to be put off with privitive silence, or positive
denial. Nay, although God seem to affront us for the present, yet must we
give God no rest, no not hold our peace until he make his Church the praise of
the whole carth. Our laboring in prayers will soonest bring the Church to rest
from calamities.

You never found any rich mercy obtained by lazy duty; easy and seldom
performances produce slow remedies; a straightened Church calls for an active and
enlarged heart. And mark it, ever when the Church prays with most ease, it
reapes the least profit, or comfort: when prayer is a penance or irksome
exercise to us, as in 1. Mulachy, many say, what a weariness it is, and snuff
at it, it is never an acceptable service for us. But he that is laborious and
active in duty, cannot long be passive under misery: laboring in prayer is
that which puts God upon expedition: he cannot long delay us, or deny us, if we
industriously ply the work of Prayer. And as a remedy to cure this malady in
prayer, (by the way) take this Recipe: would thou amend thy easy praying,
repent of thy active sinning? You shall never show me a man that is active and
laborious in sinning, but I will show you the man that is, and must of
necessity be easy and lazie-hearted in praying.

4. Argument. Because proportionable duty has Gods promise intailed upon it,
sames 5.16. The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be servent; ever
mark this, the more servency, the more prevalency; David in Psalm. 14.1.
desires that his prayer may come up before the Lord as incense, and you know
incense never went up without fire. Prayers of words are to our and the
Churches necessities, and against our Enemy, as Powder without Ball, which may
make a great noise and terrify for a time, but hurts them not, nor helps us.
Of all the Elements the Naturallists observe, fire gets nearest to heaven; and
of all means, a zealous fervent prayer gets nearest to the God of heaven: Our
earthie cold-hearted prayers are like a Bell, which whilst it lies on the
ground, can make no music; but when steepled, then it sounds loud: cold or
lukewarm water can never fetch out the blood, or rawnesse of slesh, it must
have fire put to it to make it fit for nourishment: cold prayers can never
fetch out the corruption and scum of our filthy hearts: no, a heavenly fire
must prepare our prayers for Gods digestion.

5. Argument. In regard of the Churches mercies and deliverances, that we stand
in need of; mercy appears best when by a proportionable duty we blazon out
our misery: it is a disparagement to National mercy, to come at the summons
of halfe-dutie, or duty performed by halves: rags and torn pieces of duty
are unbecoming mercy, descending from majesty: Every good and perfect gift,
says S. James, comes from the Father of lights: and if upon easy requests, we
would soon slight them: if we could get mercy easily, we would forget it as
easily: who prodigal away their estates sooner then they that never sweat to
gain a penny of it? that penny that is got with most labor and trudging for,
is not so usually rioted away in excess; but hoarded up: That Samuel that
Hanna can with difficulty wrestle out of Gods hand, shall be dedicated to his
service, all the days of his life: the things that cost us dear, we ever
prize most; those Colors we take with hazard of life are charily laid up as
Trophies of honor: truly it much advances friendship, when it appears in
necessity: and it does as much heighten mercy, when we gain it in our
faintings for it: when in the Mount God is seen, he can rarely be forgot.

6. Argument. Because the heart of the King is in the Lords hand, and he is
able to turn it which way soever pleases him; every way of a man is right in
his own eyes, but the Lord orders the heart: Prove. 21.1.2. yea more for your
encouragement, to perform exactly Proportionable duty: the answer of the
tongue is from the Lord, Prove. 16.19.21. There are many devices in man's heart,
nevertheless the counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Job. 33.12. God is
greater then man, and orders him at pleasure; Psalm. 33.10. The Lord brings
the counsel of Princes to naught, he makes the devices of the people, of none
effect. Isaiah 46.11. My counsel shall stand and I will perform all my
pleasure etc. Verse. 12. Hearken unto me you stout-hearted that are far from
righteousness.

I hold out all these Scriptures to you as lights, to show you where the Kings
heart is, and who has the ordering of it, it is out of his own hands; a
decree sealed by the King is nothing to oblige Ahashuerosh, if God will have it
reversed concerning his people. Nay, (although it appear so) it is not in
Hamans hand to dispose on; nay, with comfort I dare speak it, the Kings heart
is not in Digbys or Hydes, or any other such Haman-like hands in the world; no,
it is in the Lords hands. God altered the heart of Abimilech, Genesis 20. Laban
thought his heart to be in his own hand, to act against acob, and he pursued
after him seven days, Genesis 31.23. but read the 24 Verse. God commands him to
speak to lacob nothing but good, and to enter into Covenant, and to bless
them: Balak thought it in the power of his heart to curse the people, Numb. 22.
ult. sends to Balaam a Sorcerer to this purpose, Balaams heart is not in his
own power: In the 8. Verse. Lodge here, and I will bring you word again as
the LORD shall speak unto me: Read what follows Verse. 12. and Verse. 24. Numb.
13. There is no sorcery against acob, See 8. Esaias, 9.10.11. It is not to be
held by counsels; Saul had spent much time in the pursuit of David, and his
heart was set for evil against him, and yet God upon their meeting disposes
of his heart and tongue to bless him: read 1 Samuel 26.25. Princes hearts have
been, nay, they still are there you see; it is but improving of proportionable,
National, and Personal interests and strength, with our God in duty; and
without all question we may gain this eminent mercy, and have his heart with
us before his person; who thinks on, or grudgeth his hazardous voyage to the
Indies, when he considers a probability of getting gold, pearls and
diamonds; we never think of the hardships of warfare, and the difficulty of
duties, when we are bent upon honor: and were we resolved for National mercy,
and such a blessing, as the Kings heart to subscribe to the just desires of all
his Kingdoms, we should not stick at any duty: if we were but a little
lovesick of mercy, it would break a little more out of our lips.

And thus, having given you reasons for this truth, I shall supplicate you for
a little patience, whilst I apply it.

Use 1. for information of us; how much they are to blame that do not at this
day supply the lamentable imploring necessities of the Church of God in both
Kingdoms. But are extreme short in duty; if they consider the length,
height, depth, and breadth of their misery: little water will not quench or
decrease a great fire, no rather increase the flame: the taking away a little
blood will not cure a calenture; the body must in such a case be brought low:
the leaving of a few gross sins not cure the Churches evil: nor the simple
performance of monthly duties: no the Church of God is brought low, but our
hearts are not brought low: no, they must (if we will ever do good on it) be
brought much lower yet.

2 Such as consider not at all, or take no notice, or look a squint on the
Churches misery: Amos 6.1. Woe to those that are at ease in Zion, and trust in
the mountains of Samaria, that put far from them the evil of the Nation,
and lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves on couches, and cat the
lambs out of the flock, and calves out of the shall, and so Verse. 3.6. That
chaunt to the sound of the viole, and invent to themselves instruments of
musiick, That drink wine-in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments; but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph. How many in
the Kingdom, keeping the Churches fasting days as feasting dases; instead of
neither eating nor drinking day nor night, drink (if not cat) day and night.

3 Such as delay the answering the Churclies necessity in misery, by
performance of proportionable duty, like Salemons sluggard: A little more
sleep, a little more slumber, and a little more folding of the hands: and so
misery cats in like a gangrene: it is an old saying, Quod cito fit, bis fit: An
opportune remedy is a double courtesy: he that helps at a pinch helps to
purpose: he that cries spare the child when the stripes are given, gives
little ease, gets little thanks. O that we would know what belongs to the
Churches peace ( Luke 19.41.) in this our day, before these recovering mercies
are hid from our eyes: he speaks too late to the Judge for a reprieve, when the
ladder is turned: It may be God will now hear and grant, to morrow he will
not. In Cant. 2. the Church that drowsily neglected her safety, after, in the
third Chapter, seeks it night and day, but found it not: It Is good stepping
into the poole upon the motion of the waters: if you miss your wind, you may
lose your voyage: the season has pantings and swounding fits already; take
heed it go not away in one of these fits.

Fourthly, they also are much to blame, who proportion their duties to the
measure of their own pressing necessities; and so are injurious to the cause of
the Church of God: Jeremy was not hurt for the hurt of himself, but the
daughter of his people: Many are praying and fasting for their own interests;
no, Esther thinks not of her self, but her people: so it must not be thy life,
or my life, or thine, or my goods, estate, children, etc. or thy personal
suffering that must affect thee, and afflict thee, but the sufferings of all
the members of Jesus Christ: In all their afflictions thou must be afflicted,
and for them all thou have must be hazarded.

And now Right Honorable and wel-beloved, suffer me. to come to you in a word
of Exhortation with some few Motives, and I shall conclude all with
supplications for God to guide your hearts to such personal preparations, that
you may this day find favor in the sight of God and the King, and return (at
least) with hopes of Peace or some small branch, to show the waters are abated,
and that God in due time will cause the Arc, which is the Church of God, to
rest safe upon the mountains of hope.

2. Use of Exhortation: That by way of preparation for your address to His
Majesty, for the Churches preservation, you, and the Church of God, would
learn and practice that lesson, that you may be praisefull, and powerful. You
see Esthers practice for her distressed people: Nay, you see the three
Kingdoms, like that man that fell among thieves, wounded and bleeding to
death: Oh be not like the hard-hearted Priests and Levites, that minded more
the market then their neigbours misery! But put on the good Samaritans
compassion, and go and do likewise; let your bowels yerne toward the poor,
wounded, Lazerated, half dead kingdoms; look out for oil betimes, to pour
into the deep wounds of it; O apply such playsters as may eat out the
putrefying cores; and if yet you cannot heal, yet keep open and sweet the
wounds of the Church of God. I know you are men of skill, and know how to do
it; you indeed, with those Honorable Houses that sent you, under God, are the
Physicians must do it: It is you that must heal up the wounds, make up the
breaches that must bring back God to his people, and fetch the Kings heart to
his God, and your selves, and his People. And I heartily pray there may be
found no Mountebanks amongst you, who are more affected with the goods of the
Nation, then the good of the Nation; such who mount the Stage, to vent old
drugs by fair bumbasted expressions for wholesome and new Physic. The Lord
give you skill also to discover all such (if any) before they too much retard
the Churches cure. The Lord make you all men of affections and bowels, to lay
to heart and pity the Kingdoms wounds. Nay, thirdly, men of diligence,
neglecting no opportunity, the loss of time may be the loss of life.

Now if ever, pray for good success; Indeed, the condition of the three
Kingdoms, does not only require it, but the distressed of the Land expect
that you crowd thorough all difficulties and carnal reasonings, and by any
means represent their condition to the Lord in the way of extraordinary duty;
I could wish we would at last leave mocking and deluding the poor Church of
God, and deal open-heartedly with them, we promise, and profess we will do
any thing for their ease; and yet, more then show, nothing is done to this day,
we are like an idle servant, always going of an arrant, but never go and do
it: For shame, now at last let us lessen and weaken our sinsthat we may
strengthen our prayers: the life of three Kingdoms is at stake: nay, of the
Church of God, for ought you know: pardon my importunity if I solicit you to
be active by a few Motives, it being upon life and death of three famous
Kingdoms.

1. Motive. Yours, and every one of our Relations to it, it is the Church of
God of which you are fellow members, it is the ship of which you are
partowners, in which your lives, nay, the lives of your precious Souls, and
all the provisions for your posterities are embarked. Since the storm began, I
confess, you have rowsed up many a lazy and snorting Jonah; nay, you have
cast most of the unnecessary lumber, that was more burdensome then serviceable
to the ships use, into the Sea; shall I say? nay, some part out of their seas:
and yet all is not well, the poor ship draws much blood yet, swims very deep
in the Red Sea: I beseech you rumedgy the ship once more, and if you find any
seeds-men of Division, S. Paul in the 16 of the Romans 17. entreats you to take
notice of them as monstous; and I have read, it is prodigiously ominous to a
ship to be haunted with monsters. Raising parties in a family, ship or army is
a thing of a very sad consequence; therefore the Apostle dares give it under
his hand, That God is not the author of consusion, but of peace, as in all the
Churches of the Saints. 1 Cor. 14.33. Truly it is a sad thing, to see the
members of Jesus Christ out of joint, for Christ falls not of from his members,
why should the members fall off from one another? There can be no such reason
given, why we should separate one from another, as there can be why Christ
might separate from us: It is the glory of Christ's body, when every member is
serviceable to the whole in its right place. These are also weighty luggedge;
and the Apostle advises, such after admonition to be cast out, for these
extremely prevent the exact performance of proportionable duty.

Lastly, let every one search his own Cabine, whether he have not secretly
brought no unwarrantable goods aboard for his own ends, that may make the ship
liable to forfeiture; If so, over with them; what a shame is it to any man to
forfeit a ship for his own advantage, or the Church should perish for
concealed abominations, unpardoned sinners are dead men, and dead men are
prejudicial to a ship, and therefore to be cast over; else God will say ere
long as to Abimelech, Genesis 20.3. Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman
thou have taken, so for the sin you have committed, and are taken in. Why
should we joy in any thing, whilst the Church may take hurt; the Saints of God
have ever been as tender of it as their selves, and preferred its good before
all enjoyments; If I forget Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its cunning. It
was so dear, and went so near to old Ely (the news of its loss) when the Ark
was taken, that it is disputed whether heart or his neck brake first. Wherefore
I beseech you, let your relation to it make you now in its misery, to put forth
and hazard your selves to the utmost for relieviing Mercy. Mordeca's Motive to
Esther was, it was her Nation, its mine to you, they are your Nations, it is
your Church, your Families, your Houses, your Estates, your Children, Wives,
Selves, Souls, your Gospel, Ordinances, are aimed at; O pray, pray, Fast and
pray, cry mightily, all is at stake.

2. Motive. Because such duty, if the Church be sick or Sentenced unto death
under a decree: Nay, although with Ezekiah it has received a message, That it
shall dye and not live, yet it is of power to procure God to visit it, and one
of his visites is half the recovery of it, Psalm. 8.14. It is some comfort to
men, that are laboring under hard undertakings, that they labor not in vain;
be of good courage, and of good comfort, Your labor is not in vain with the
Lord, for his decreed Church to ruin.

3. Motive. It is your last refuge; it is that besides which you have hardly
any thing left you. If men have nothing left, or have spent all but their
fingers ends, to maintain them and their families, they had need ply them
diligently, and cherish them carefully. If a house stand but on one pillar, it
had need often to be viewed for repaires, and to see that be safe and well
founded; prayer is as it were the only Pillar of the Church, it is as the
fingers ends, we had need employ our fingers ends, for our selves and our
fellow members in misery, if we intend a livelihood.

4. Motive. You are all sentenced, and by your Enemies appointed to dye; I hope
no true member of the Church but will speak a word for himself. (I confess
our own guilt might sow up our lips, and we might be left wordlesse:) but yet
if God offer thee an opportunity, ply him for thy life and the Churches safety
with importunity, for if thou speed not this way, thou art undone for ever.
Your life is on it, there is no trifling with life; do you not know what
condemned men do in point of life for pardon? Improve all their friends, all
their time, all their skill, all for a pardon, so do you and prosper.

5. Motive. Because by this kind of duty, if you cannot prevail with God (and
that for causes best known to himself) for complete redemption out of misery.
Yet you shall for a mittigation of it, and for a sanctified use of it, and for
strength of grace to undergo it, and there is a great deal of difference in
men's sufferings and deaths, all men dye, but some men are killed by death. It
was the saying of a godly man, he did aegrotare vitaliter, so the godly do,
mori vitaliter, for nothing can arm death to hurt us but sin, otherwise thou
art hard, sting-free; we never fear the noise of a Fly, as the humming of a
Be, because it has no sting. So that this kind of duty, though it cannot
keep thee and me from dying by the Sword, it will keep us from dropping into
hell; and it is a sweet mercy, for the members of the Church, with Stephen at
their dearh to see heaven opened, and to die with the sense of Gods love,
though of man's cruel malice.

6. Motive. Your pains in duty for the Church of God in misery, what ever it
be, shall be rewarded to you and yours, unto many generations, this will
entitle you to the most sure inheritance, and lasting legacy you can leave
behind you: The Lord never forgets a cup of cold water given to quench the
Saints thirst in their necessity: how much sooner will it be engraven upon his
heart, the providing of cordial precious portions for his languishing people:
yea God will provide a compensation for you and yours in all your afflictions.

Nay, you shall treasure up praises for your selves, and prayers for your
surviving families, in the ages that are to come; and know this also, that God
has riches enough in his Cabinet to make you amends, for all you can do or
suffer in this way. Indeed I have beheld you with such alacrity and noble
courage expediting your motion, and endeavoring by all means night and day to
find out him whom your souls love and long after, for the Churches good; that
the quaere of the Church in the third of the Canticles and the third, was (to
any whom it might concern) your first salute, Can you tell us of His Majesty?
Yea I have seen so much of your unalterable and prepared patience, digesting
the vulgar curses and affronts; as your diet and content with any thing, that
you might do the Church service, that I shall ever bless God, that he yet
accommodates the Church with such Friends, and the King and Kingdoms with such
Worthies, who will venture through an host of enemies (if possible) to fetch
water to refresh the Church of God; therefore I will spare my self the labor,
by any more Motives to put you in mind to go on, who are ready to run, for the
Churches and Kingdoms peace.

All therefore that now remains, is but to hold out to your view some other
Observations that I had thought to have handled to complete your preparation
for this days great Action; but in regard you have Summons for the action, and
but a small parcel of time before you attend His Majesty: that I may no way be
prejudicial to your private practice of this preparation, or any other,
becoming so great a work; I will briefly show you the jewels, they are ready;
command me to place them inyour ears at your pleasure, and my obedience shall
echo to your order. You have heard,

1 That National and Personal preparation is necessary for the undertaking
any great action for the Church: Gather all the Jews in Shushan, I also, etc.

2 That Representative persons interposing for the Church in a strait, deserve
representative prayer. Fast, pray, for me.

3 Extraordinary and great duty is necessary for the Church in great misery.
Fast, pray, night and day, eat nor drink, etc.

The fourth you should have heard, and I handled, is this:

4 That messengers of such prayers are ever messengers of praise: they are
thriving, prospering messengers.

5 That all self must be denied; that the Church may be saved: We must not
think of our selves and the Church at one time; if we do, we shall never go
thorough stitch with the work, If I perish, I perish: let me assure you this,
if you save the Church, you cannot lose your selves: and if the Church perish,
juggle and Hocus Pocus it as nearely as you can, your sleights will be found
out, and you cannot save your selves: It is no time to feather our nests, and
build to lay our young, when so many strokes have been given at the root of
the tree: seek we great things for our selves? for shame no more of it: what do
we painting our cabines, when so many leakes in the ship: first stop the
leakes, get out the water, there is a time to trim this cabine afterward.

Lastly, The means must be used, although our ends are not obtained; If we
perish, we perish. For, although God can deliver his Church without us, yet his
usual method has been to make choice of some Moses, some Ioshuahs, Gideons,
David's, etc. for the preservation of his Church, nay of Jesus Christ for the
salvation of it. And now give me leave to wind up all with the practice of that
duty for you, which I have in this Sermon commended to you: Go, and the Lord be
with you; yea the God of heaven bless you; and cause the Kings face to shine
upon you, and make you glad, that he speak nothing but good unto you this day:
the Lord avert all whispering flattering Doegs, this day; and return you with
a Message, of hope, at least, if not of present help, for these three bleeding
Kingdoms: yea the Lord make your interposing for the Church, as prosperous as
Abigails, and let the Kings answer be as David's, 1 Samuel 25.31, 33, 34. Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, which sent you this day to meet me: and blessed be
your advice, and blessed be ye which have kept me this day from going on to
shed any more of my Subjects innocent blood, and from avenging my self with my
own hand: and that he may receive at your hands what you have brought him, and
say unto you, Go up in peace to both my Houses of Parliament, see, I have
karkened to your voices, and accepted your persons; and give me but favor to
add one word in prayer after the Apostles directory, 2. These. 3.16. Now the
Lord of peace himself give you peace always; by all means yea now peace, and
let it be the Lords peace; and the Lords free gift of peace, let it be peace
with him; peace with your consciences, peace one with another: such a peace as
all things may prosper with you, yea that public tranquillity and quiet in the
Church may follow, that it be not troubled with Schisms and Heresies within,
or without by persecuting Tyrants, ruinating all by slaughters and cruel
bloody wars, (O let every good heart pray for this peace, for our
Jerusalem,) that there may be tranquillity in the state, and free from
foreign, and civil uncivil wars, that in the peace thereof we may have
peace: that these distracted Kingdoms may be in security, and void of dangers,
free from the noise of terrifying alarums, and other dangers. Yea the Lord give
us such a peace, that there may be an everlasting Covenant betwixt God and the
King; betwixt God, the King, and his people; and let us and the whole Church of
God, heartily cry, Amen, Amen, So be it. And so the Lord be with you all, to
bless you in the great work of this day, and all other your great
employments, for his glory and his Churches good: To whom with all our hearts
be rendered and ascribed, all Honor, Glory, Power and Praise, now and evermore:
Amen.

FINIS.

