SCRIPTURE SECURITY FOR CONSCIENCE. Reconciling the safety of truth with the
safety of persons. By an honest Counterplot to keep off the execution of an
expected Ordinance.

With a Scripture CATECHISM Very useful in these Times.

For Advancing Unity. Suppressing Error. Stating present Controversies.
Vindicating the Covenanted Reformation.


2 COR. 11.3. I fear lest by any means, at the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Bellamie at the three golden Lions
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

SCRIPTURE SECURITY FOR CONSCIENCE. Reconciling the safety of truth with the
safety of persons. By an honest Counterplot to keep off the execution of an
expected Ordinance.

ROMANS 13.3, 4. Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and thou shall
have praise of the same; for he is the minister of God to thee for good.

1 COR. 3.11, 14, 15. Other foundation can no man lay then that is laid. If any
man's work abide which he has built thereon, he shall receive a reward. If any
man's works shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be
saved, yet so as by fire.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Bellamie at the three golden Lions
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

To the honest Reader.
CHristian Reader, having met with a Paper walking in public, entitled an
Ordinance, etc. for the preventing of the growing and spreading of Heresies, (a
Copy whereof is hereto annexed) I conceived that I might without offense, so
far take notice of it in public, as to lay the weights of the words in view,
that those who are skilled in the balance of the Sanctuary, and have their
senses exercised to discern the things that differ, may more readily see which
way the Scales should turn. The good God guide the hands of Authority, and the
hearts of people to those ways which are first pure, and then peaceable: that
those Plants which are of Gods planting may be cherisht, and those which are
not may be rooted up. The love which I bear to truth, and the service I owe to
those that are willing to take pains to find it: has made me take this
familiar way of Catechism to help them; which that they may reap the benefit
of, I must earnestly entreat them, in the perusal of the alleged Scriptures,
to take notice not only of the words, but also of the scope of the holy Ghost
in them; without which they will fall short of that satisfaction which they
might attain. You may make experiment how advantageous this course is, if you
turn to the question concerning Rebaptizing, and find that in the Scripture
there cited, Acts 19. (which place has much exercised the judgment of the
learned) the scope of the Apostle Paul is to show that the Disciples, who were
long before baptized (though still they were so unable to make confession of
their faith, as that they had not so much as heard whether there were any holy
Ghost; nor could well tell unto what they were baptized: yet) ought not to be
baptized again; for as much as they were baptized in the name of Jesus, which
he makes good to them from the Doctrine of John the Baptist, who taught
repentance and faith in Christ. One thing more I must acquaint you with, which
is, that diverse particulars which might be here expected, I have purposely
omitted, having already spoken to them in another Treatise entitled A
Scripture Catechism for the times, to which I refer you for satisfaction;
desiring you to improve your Talent in the same design with me, which is, to
build the safety of persons on the foundation of truth. I shall conclude with
the encouraging conclusion of the Apostle James, Brethren, if any of you do
err from the truth, and one convert him, let him know, that he which
converteth the sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.

SCRIPTURE SECURITY FOR CONSCIENCE.
The first rank of Doctione.
IS God present in all places?

Psalm 139.7, 8, 9, 10.

Is there a God?

Hebr. 11.6.

Is God on in three persons?

John 5.7.

Does God know all things?

manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him
with whom we have to do. Hebr. 4.13.

Is God almighty?

Matthew. 19.26.

Is God perfectly holy?

Isa. 6.3.

Is God eternal?

Psalm. 90.2.

Is Christ God coequall with the Father?

Phil. 2.5, 6.

Is Christ a man?

Tim. 2.5.

Are the Godhead and manhood of Christ several natures?

John 10.33.

Is the manhood of Christ pure, unspotted of sin?

Hebr. 7.26.

Did Christ dye?

Romans 8.34.

Did Christ rise from the dead?

Mat. 28.5, 6.

Is Christ ascended into Heaven bodily?

Acts 1.11.

Is Christ's death meritorious in behalf of believers?

Romans 3.24, 25.

Is Christ the Son of God?

John 5 20.

Is the holy Ghost God?

Acts 5.3, 4,

Are the Scriptures the word of God?

Tim. 3.16.

Shall the bodies of men rise after they he dead?

Acts 24.14, 15.

Is there a day of judgment after death?

Rev. 20.12, 13.

Deuteronomy. 13.6, 8, 9. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or
thy daughter or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thine own
soul, entise thee secretly, saying; let us go and serve other gods, neither
shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him, but thou shall surely kill
him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the
hand of all the people.

2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 15. They entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of
their fathers, with all their heart, and with all their soul: that whosoever
would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or
great, whether man or woman. And all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; for they had
sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was
found of them; and the Lord gave them rest round about.

Concerning Blasphemy and impugning the Word of God.
Exodus 20.7. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in vain.

Levit. 24.11.12, 13, 14. The Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the Name of
the Lord, and cursed, and they brought him unto Moses; and they put him in
Ward, that the mind of the Lord might be showed them. And the Lord spoke unto
Moses, saying, bring forth him that has cursed, without the camp, and let all
that heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the Congregation
stone him.

Dan. 3.29. Therefore I make a decree, that every people, Nation, and Language,
which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Mishach, and
Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill,
because there is no other God.

Job 2.9. Curse God, and dye.

1 Cor. 12.3. No man speaking by the spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed.

Acts 13.10, 11. Thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease to
pervert the right ways of the Lord? and now behold the hand of the Lord is
upon thee, and thou shall be blind.

Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised Moses Law, died without mercy under two or
three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God? etc.

Rev. 22.18, 19. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this Book: and if any man shall take away
from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out
of the Book of life.

The second rank of Doctrines.
SHall all men be saved?

many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13.23,
24.

Has a man by nature free will to turn to God?

Cor. 2.14.

May God be worshipped by Pictures or Images?

Horeb, out of the midst of the fire) least ye corrupt your selves, and make
you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure. Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.

Does the soul of any man after death go to purgatory?

Rev. 14.13.

Do the souls of good men dye or sleep when their bodies are dead?

God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made parfect. Heb, 12.22,
23.

Do the souls of bad men dye or sleep when their bodies are dead?

Mark. 9.44.

Are there revelations or workings of the spirit, as a rule for a Christians
life; though diverse from or contrary to the written word of God?

Pet. 1.18.19, 20, 21.

Is a man bound to believe no more then by his reason he can comprehend?

A Bebold thou shall be dumb and not able to speak, until the day that these
things shall be performed, because thou beleevest not my words, which shall be
fulfilled. Luke, 1.20.

Is the moral Law contained in the ten Commandments a rule of a Christian
life?

the law. For this thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou
shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall not covet:
and if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this
saying, namely, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Romans 13.8, 9.

Does God see sin in the justified?

Psalm. 51.4.

Need a believer repent?

Revel. 2.5.

Is the Sacrament of baptism an Ordinance commanded by the word of God?

Matthew. 28.19.

Is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper an Ordinance commanded by the word of
God?

the same manner also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, this cup is
the New Testament in my blood: this do ye as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11.23, 24, 25.

Is the baptizing of Infants lawful?

Act. 2.38, 39.

Is such baptizing void, or effectual?

Matthew. 28.20.

Is it lawful to baptize a person formerly baptized?

John verily baptized with the baptism of Repentance, saying unto the people,
that they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on Christ
Jesus. When they heard this, they were baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Acts, 19.4, 5.

Is it lawful to join in public prayer?

A. Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer,
being the ninth hour. Acts, 3.1.

Is it lawful to teach Children to pray*

Prove. 22.6.

Is the power of the civil Magistrate by law established in England lawful?

Romans 13.1.2.

Is the use of arms for public defense in a just cause lawful?

Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitans thereof;
because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against
the mighty. Judge. 5.23.

1. King. 15.13. And also Maachah his Mother, even her he removed from being
Queen, because she had made an Idol in a grove.

2. John, 9.10, 11. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed; for he that bids
him God speed, is pertaker of his evil deeds.

2. Pet. 2.10.12. And despise government, presumptuous are they; self-willed;
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. These as natural bruit beasts
made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things that they understand
not, and shall utterly perish in their own corruption.

Revel. 17.16. The ten horns which thou saw upon the Beast these shall hate
the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and shall burn her with fire.

Revel. 2.14. I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them
that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to cast a stumbling block
before the Children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto Idols, and to
commit fornication.

FINIS.
An Ordinance presented to the Honorable House of Commons, by M. Bacon, a
Lawyer in Suffolk, and M. Taet, both of them Members of the same House, and by
their means was twice read, and referred to a Committee. For the preventing of
the growing and spreading of Heresies.
The first rank of Doctrine.
BE it ordained, That all such as shall from and after the Date hereof,
willingly Preach, Teach, Print, or Write, publish and maintain, any such
opinion contrary to the Doctrines ensuing;

Viz. Acts 17.27.28.
That (1) God is present in all places, Psalm. 14.1
That (2) God Is, 1 John 5.7
or that he is (3) One in three Persons, 1 John 3 20.
Or does (4) know or foreknow all things; Job. 42.1
Or that he is (5) Almighty, Ex. 15.11
Or that he is (6) perfectly Holy, 1 Timothy 1.17.
Or that he is (7) Eternal. Or that shall in like manner publish John 10.30.
That Christ is not (8) God coequall with the Father; 1 Cor. 15 47.
Or shall deny the (9) Manhood of Christ, Hab. 2.16.
Or that the (10) Godhead and Manhood of Christ are several Natures, Luke 1.35
Or that the (11) Manhood of Christ, is pure unspotted of sin; Or that shall
publish, Matthew. 27.55.
That (12) Christ did not die, Matthew. 28.7.
or (13) rose from the dead, Acts 7.56
nor (14) is ascended into Heaven bodily, Gal. 3.13 14.
Or that his death is (15) meritorious in behalf of Believers. Or that shall
publish or maintain, as aforesaid, Matt. 3.17.
that (16) Christ is not the Son of God, 1 Cor. 3.16.
Or that the (17) Holy Ghost is not God, 2 Pet. 1.21.
Or that the (18) Scriptures are not the Word of God, Job 19.26.
Or that the (19) Bodies of Men shall not rise after they be dead, Acts 17.31.
Or that there is no (20) day of judgment after death.

Such publishing with obstinacy, shall be judged Felony: Such persons shall by
two witnesses be bound over by two Justices unto the Gayl-delivery, and the
Delinquent shall be indicted for Felony; and upon finding the same indictment,
and that the party be found guilty, and shall not abjure his said Error, Zech.
13.3. Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6, 8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13, 14.
he shall suffer the pains of death, without benefit of Clergy: But upon
abjuring of the said Error, he shall upon two sufficient Sureties be bailed.

And be it further ordained, that if after abjuring the said Errors, he shall
publish it again, he shall be indicted and put to death.

And be it further ordered, that if any person shall wittingly and
presumptuously, or contrary to admonition, blaspheme the Name of God, or any of
the holy Trinity, or shall impugn the Word of God, such offenses shall be
adjudged Felony, and the offender committed without Bayl or Main-prize; and the
party being found guilty shall be branded in the left Cheek, with the letter B.
and upon the like offense the second time Levit. 24 16. Job 2.9. Dan. 3.29.
Heb. 10.28 29.
shall suffer death.

The second rank of Doctrines.
ANd be it further ordained, that all persons who shall publish any of these
several Errors hereafter ensuing, viz. Matthew. 25.41.
That (1) all men shall be saved; Joh. 3.5.
that a man by nature (2) has free will to turn to God; Acts 17.25.
That God (3) may be worshipped by Pictures or Images, Luke 16 22, 23.
or that the (4) soul of any man after death goes neither to Heaven nor Hell,
but to Purgatory; Acts 1.25
or that the soul (5, 6) of man dies or sleeps when the body is dead; Ps.
19.7.
or that the (7) revelations or workings of the Spirit, are a rule for a
Christians life; though diverse from or contrary to the written Word of God; 1
Cor. 2.14.
or that a man is (8) bound to believe no more then by his reason he can
comprehend; Ephesians. 6.2.
or that the (9) Moral Law contained in the Ten Commandments is no rule of a
Christian life, 2 Samuel 12 9.
or that God sees no (10) sin in the justified; or Rev. 3.19
that a (11) Believer need not repent Ps 51.9.
not pray for the pardon of sin; or that the two Sacraments of John 4.1.2.
(12) Baptism, and the Luke 22.19, 20.
(13) Lords Supper, are not Ordinances commanded by the Word of God; or that
(14) the Math. 19.14.
Baptizing of Infants is unlawful; Romans 3.3, 4.
or that such (15) Baptizing is void, and of none effect; Mark 16 16.
or that such persons are to be (16) Baptized again: and in pursuance
thereof, shall baptize any person formerly baptized: Exodus 20.8.
or that the observation of the Lords Day, as it is enjoined by the Ordinances
and Laws of this Realm, is not according, or contrary to the Word of God, 1
Cor. 14, 15, 16.
or that it is not lawful to join in (17) public, 1 Pet. 3.7
or Family Prayer, 2 Timothy 3.15.
or to (18) teach children to pray; Rev. 1.20
Or that the Churches of England are not true Churches; Romans 10 13, 14, 15.
Or that the Ministers or Ordinances, are not true Ministers or Ordinances; 1 Timothy 4.14.
Or that the Church government by Presbytery, is Antichristian, or unlawful; 1
Pet. 2.13, 14.
or that the Magistracy, or (19) power of the Civil Magistrate by Law
established in England, is unlawful; Nehem. 4.14.
or that all the use of (20) Arms for Public defense (be the Cause never so
just) is unlawful.

And in case the party so accused for any of the said Errors, be committed
before two Justices, the party so committed shall be ordered to renounce his
said Error in the public Congregation of the Parish Church whence the
complaint comes; and in case he refuses or neglects the same at or upon the
day, time, and place appointed by the said Justices, Number. 15.34. Tit. 1.10, 11.
Rev. 2.14. 2 Pet. 2.10, 12. Gal. 5.12.
that he shall be committed to prison by the said Justices, until he shall
find two Sureties, of Subsidy men, that he shall not publish or maintain the
said Error or Errors any more.

FINIS.
A Scripture CATECHISM Very useful in these Times.

For Advancing Unity. Suppressing Error. Stating present Controversies.
Vindicating the Covenanted Reformation.


1 COR. 3, 2, 3. I have fed you with milk, and not with meat: for hitherto ye
were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal:
for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not
carnal?

2 COR. 11.3. I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

2 TIMOTHY 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words which thou have heard of me, in
faith and love, etc.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Bellamie at the three golden Lions
in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1646.

To the teachable Reader.
HVmble Reader, who art willing to stoop to the contemned Ordinance of
Catechism, God has promised to teach you; and to that purpose all are yours;
all his Ordinances, all his servants, their gifts, experiences, labors; the
ablest, the meanest, all are yours: amongst which my poor mite is accountable
to you. Some few years since, when diverse of the new Opinions that now have
seized upon many, were first represented to me, and I saw them entertained by
some persons that were precious, in my thoughts, and managed by such arguments,
as at the first sight seemed to carry strength with them: I must confess I
began to stagger thereat: whereupon for my own satisfaction I was inquisitive
after such Treatises on all hands as wrote either for or against them; which I
therefore mention, that I may give you an account of what experience has
taught me; namely; that there is more satisfaction to be gained by a diligent
weighing of some one Scripture, then by reading over many other books; for,
indeed, the Scripture is the supreme judge of controversies; and all that the
ablest men can speak for the opening of Scripture, must be resolved into
Scripture, before it can ground faith and satisfy conscience, which is the
drift of this Catechism, wherewith thou may expect a blessing, if thou
shall pray, read, and study the answers; wherein I have not been so careful,
to give you the form of an answer; as to refer you to such Scriptures as
afford matter for the Answer: which course I find warranted by the like
practice of our Savior, and I judge it the profitablest way in a Tractate in
this nature; for thereby the Reader will be constrained to study the Scriptures
to understand the force of them, before he can satisfy himself with an answer
from them: as for example, in the question concerning Baptism, the Reader must
weigh the circumstances of the text, and compare it with the History in Exodus,
and so he may be enabled to satisfy himself in forming an Answer thus, All
the Israelites presently after their coming forth from Egypt, when many of them
were little children, were Baptized by the cloud which hung over their heads.
Thus much, Reader, I thought good to intimate to thee, that thou might not
take offense at my method.

A Scripture CATECHISM Very useful in these Times. First Question.
WHat speaks the Scripture of the doctrinall errors of these latter times?

Tim. 4.1.

What think you of the ringleaders and teachers of such doctrines?

Tim. 3.8.

But may we not think them sincere, seeing they profess much holiness?

Tim. 3.5.

But so far as we can judge, they are the redeemed of God: how then can you
think so hardly of them, and their doctrines?

Pet. 2.1.

But if they, and their opinions were so gross, would they be followed by so
many professors?

Pet. 2.2.

But the teachers are some of them knowing men; and would they, think you,
teach notorious falsehoods?

Tim. 4.2.

Those which you count the seducers amongst us, cry out upon Antichrist; and do
not they then stand for the truth?

John 2.18.

But is it not strange that you should count these Antichrists, who seem
rather Angels of light, and Apostles?

Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.

But these men allege Scripture for what they urge; and can you say then that
they follow the Devil as his ministers?

Mat. 4.5, 6.

Those whom you count the ministers of Satan, do they not serve God according
to their light?

Romans 16.18.

You seem to imply, that their hearts are corrupt, as well as their judgments:
what corruption makes them seducers?

words make merchandise of you. 2 Pet. 2, 3.

But all of them seem not to be covetous: what corruption then sways the rest?

Tim. 6.3, 4, 5.

What is one maine part of their ambition?

Act 20.30.

Is the want of Learning in some of their teachers any cause of wresting the
Scriptures?

Pet. 3.16.

Do not the affecting of new notions, and other lusts in the hearers, make them
ready to embrace seducing teachers?

Tim. 4, 3.4.

Do not also the weakness, and shallowness of the bearers, together with
other corruptions, make them apt to be seduced by such men?

Tim. 3.6, 7.

Do the false teachers use sleights to inveigle such persons?

they lie in wait to deceive. Ephesians. 4.14.

Are not some honest-meaning persons seduced by their craft?

Romans 16.18.

How come they to seduce them?

Romans 16.18.

If those whom you call seducers use such good language, is there not good
hopes of them?

Tim. 3.13.

How ought we to carry our selves toward the maintainers of heresy? and how
may we esteem of them?

Tit. 3 10, 11.

You seem to hate their ways that hold out the errors of the times; does such
an affection become Christians?

Nicolaitans, which I also hate. Rev. 2.6.

You not only distaste the errors, but those also that teach them: where is
your warrant for that?

Rev. 2.2.

Is it likely that if these courses were so dangerous, God would suffer so many
teachers to stand for them, and prevail so?

King. 22.21, 22, 23.

Seeing it appears that God gives Satan a power to prevail in the mouths of
seducers: what does God intend thereby toward such as walk closely with him?
is it likely that they shall be seduced?

Cor. 11.19.

What is Gods aim therein toward false-hearted professors? are not they in
great danger to miscarry?

These. 2.10, 11, 12.

What use must we make hereof?

Pet. 3.17, 18.

Is there any hope that the errors shall be crushed?

Romans 16.20.

How is that likely, while they carry on their errors with such plausible
pretenses?

Tim. 3.9.

In the mean while may not these men be connived at?

Tit. 1.10, 11.

May the civil Magistrate meddle with those that endeavor to seduce others
into errors in matter of Religion?

revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Romans 13.4.

But though seducing be an evil work, may it not be good Christian policy for
those in authority to refrain from these men, and let them alone?

Jezabel, which calls her self a prophetess, to teach and to reduce my
servants. Rev. 2.20.

Some would have a Toleration of all Religions; What Scripture have you, which
shows that this ought not to be in time of the Gospel?

Zech. 13.2.

In case the false Prophets will neither depart, nor desist; what course may be
taken with them by the civil power?

Zech. 13.3.

Will not this way of suppressing false-teachers increase, and harden them,
rather then remedy that evil?

Zech. 13.4.

Is this restraining of false-teachers by civil punishment, to be accounted
persecution, or friendship?

Zech. 13.6.

It seems you would fain have some course taken to be rid of them; what spirit
does that savor of?

Gal. 5.12.

Some will not be persuaded that the Magistrate may punish for sins against the
first Table; can you show that idolatrous practices are punishable by a civil
power?

Joh 31.26, 27, 28.

What course is to be taken with blasphemers?

Lev. 24.16.

In these times, wherein errors are so rise, what is the Ministers charge?

Tit. 1.9.

Do Ministers well to stir up the people, to withstand the errors of the
times?

Jude 3.

Is it warrantable publicly to brand the names of Heretics and Seducers, that
so men may be shye of tehm?

Hymeneus and Philetus: who concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the
Resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18.

Till some course be taken for their suppression, what course must I take to
keep out of the way of error?

which ye have learned, and avoid them. Romans 16.17.

Besides shunning their company, what else must we do?

John 4.1.

You would have us very suspicious in these times; what general ground have
you, whom to suspect as unsound?

John 2.19.

Many which separate, cry down your ministry for Antichristian, and speak much
of the spirit; what can you say about them?

Jude 17, 18, 19.

They have been very earnest with me to forsake your ministers: what is their
design in that?

Gal. 4.17.

How can you justify against them, your ministry of the Church of England?

Cor. 9.2.

Is then the ordinary conversion of souls a demonstrative argument of a right
ministry?

Romans 10.14, 15.

They deny your Church of England, and say there is no Church visible in the
New Testament, but a particular congregation; how prove you the contrary?

Cor. 12.28.

Have you any further warrant to judge that there may be National Churches in
Gospel times?

Mich 4.1, 2.

Some distaste your assemblies, because they are kept in those places which are
set apart for public worship. What warrant have you for preaching in such
parish meeting houses as are commonly called Churches?

John 18.20.

Others dislike your Ministers, because they do not work for their livings, as
Paul did; what say you to that?

Barnabas, have not we power to forbear working? who goes a warfare any time
at his own charges? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit
thereof? or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? say I
these things as a man? or says not the Law the same also? 1 Cor. 9.6, 7, 8.

But your Ministers are maintained by Tyths: were not they proper to the
Leviticall Priesthood, and therefore to be abolished with it?

Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises, Heb. 7.6.

Others separate only from the Communion, because unworthy receivers are known
to come to the Table: how may their consciences be satisfied, till discipline
be restored more exactly?

Cor. 11.28, 29.

Others take exception chiefly at your administering of baptism: can you show
them by Scripture the baptizing of infants; and that without dipping?

Moses in the cloud. etc. 1 Cor. 10.1, 2.

But you serve God according to a Directory: where is your warrant for that?

John also taught his disciples: and he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our
Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc. Luke 11.1, 2.

But where is your warrant for singing of Psalms together at your meetings?

Col. 3.16.

Others dislike the matter of your preaching generally, as too legal for these
Gospel Times: what general answer will you give them?

Romans 3.31.

Is it our duty then to keep the Law?

James 2.8.

But what if we fail in any point of the Law?

James 2.9, 10.

Should then a child of God take notice of, and lay to heart the guilt of his
sins?

Psalm 51.14.

Some say, David was under another dispensation then we are: can you show them
the like precedent before the covenant from mount Sinai, which gendereth to
bondage?

Job 7.20, 21.

What should a child of God do then to get his sins pardoned?

Luke 11.4.

What must he do besides praying for pardon?

John 1.9.

What further condition is there required of a child of God for the obtaining
of pardon?

Mat. 6.14 15.

Your doctrine implies, that God observes the si^^ of his people: can you prove
that?

Rev. 2.4.

Does God also correct his children for their sins?

with the world. 1 Corinthians. 11.30, 31, 32.

May then a child of God, when he is corrected, look upon God as angry, and
upon sin as the procuring cause?

Mic. 7.9.

Why? must not a Christian look upon Gods love, and not upon his dreadfulnesse?

Heb. 12 28, 29.

Would you have a child of God mourn for his sins?

David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and of
supplications, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his first born. Zech.
12.10.

Would you have Christians to try the goodness of their estates by the work of
grace in them?

Cor. 13.5.

What evident mark can you instance in, for a Christian to try himself by?

John 3.14.

Should we now have legal terrors pressed?

Jude 23.

Are the threatenings useful to the godly?

from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone; for destruction
from God was a terror to me; and by reason of his highness, I could not
endure. Job 31.21, 22, 23.

Is there any farther use of terrors to the godly, besides for restraint from
sin?

Phil. 2.12.

Does fear of Gods threatenings arise from the weakness of the godly, or from
their faith?

Noah being warned of God, of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared
an Ark to the saving of his house. Heb. 11.7.

Some would have the Sabbath to be kept but as other days of the week; What
say you to them?

Exodus 20.8, 9, 10.

They say this is Jewish, and Ceremonial; show them a Sabbath instituted
before there were either Jews as any of their ceremonies?

Genesis 2.2, 3.

Should wicked men pray to God?

Acts 8.22, 23.

Is the usual discourse of hard controversies among weak Christians to be
approved?

Romans 14.1.

If I have a true opinion, which cannot be vented without offense, may I vent
it?

God: happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he allows.
Romans 14.22.

Some press very much for Uniformity; is that according to the Scriptures?

Cor. 1.10.

By what arguments does the Scripture urge this?

Phil. 2.1, 2.

What directions must we follow, that we may attain this Unity?

Phil. 2.3.

What respect ought the strong Christian to bear toward the weak?

Romans 14.3.

What respect ought the weaker Christian to carry toward the stronger?

Romans 14.3.

Some question the lawfulness of keeping public Fasts appointed by the
Magistrate; what have you in Scripture that might satisfy them?

Jehosaphat feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a Fast
throughout all Judah, and Judah gathered themselves together to ask help of
the Lord, even out of all the Cities of Judah they came to seek the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 20.3.4.

Has the Magistrate power also to appoint a day to be kept yearly, to
celebrate some national mercy?

Ester the Queen, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm
these days of Purim in their times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew
and Ester the Queen had enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves,
and for their seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry. Est. 9 29.31.

I perceive you grant much to the civil powers, what if they should take upon
them to do that which belongs properly to Church officers, should that also be
yielded to them?

Vzziah the King, and said unto him, It pertains not unto thee, Vzziah, to
burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests, the sons of Aaron, that were
consecrated to burn Incense; go out of the Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed,
neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God. 1 Chronicles. 26.18.

In these days many private men that are brought up to worldly callings, take
upon them to preach; is this practice to be justified, or disapproved?

Zech. 13.5.

Those Ministers that have spent their estates and times to fit themselves for
that calling, have their maintenance withheld by many, and diverse have
petitioned to have it taken away; how will God take this at their hands?

Mal. 3.8, 9.

You speak of Minister as separated from the ordinary rank of Christians; what
is requisite for the making of a Minister besides gifts?

Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them: and when they had
fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. Acts
13.2, 3.

By whom ought the Ministers to be ordained?

Tim. 4.14.

Is the power of Church discipline in the people or in the Officers of the
Church?

Romans 12.6, 7, 8.

Should the people attend upon the ministry of those whom God has placed over
them? or may they go indifferently to any other profitable Minister?

Heb. 13.17.

Have Synods or Elders of Churches assembled together, power to determine
differences, and make decrees?

Acts 16.4.

I have heard a book written to prove that the soul of man remains not after
death; how will you confute that?

Noah. 1 Pet. 3.19, 20.

They say there is another book out, to prove that a man may put away his wife,
if she be not a meet helper: how may I answer all the arguments there alleged?

for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery. Mat. 5.31, 32.

There are many other new opinions, that men teach and write for, with specious
arguments; I would fain be satisfied about them: how shall I discern the truth?

James 1.5.

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God, etc. John 7.17.

To the Law, and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20.

The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 2.7.

If they be ashamed of all that they have done; show them the form of the
house; and the fashion thereof, etc. Ezech. 43.11.

Postscript to the judicious Reader.
IF thou have read over this Catechism, thou may easily perceive that it
was penned for Christians of the lowest form: to whom the Author intended,
with briefnesse, clearness and Scripture Language, to give general notes for
caution against all the dangerous Doctrines of the times, and special hints
for satisfaction concerning some of the most obvious mistakes and errors. If
the sight of this may occasion from thee a fuller, and exacter Treatise of this
nature, none shall be more willing to study such a Catechism then my self.

Thine and the truths, I. K.

FINIS.

