A Letter from Mr. Robert Iohnston, one of the Elders at Edenborough, directed
to Master William Agard in Cambridge, with a Petition of the English there
enclosed, to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.

Also Master Agards Letter to his friend in London, coneteyning matters of
great moment, tending to the pacification of the miserable distractions of
these Present times.

Keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. portrait

Printed at London for T. B. 1642.

A Letter From Mr. Robert Iohnston, one of the Elders at Edenborough, directed
to Mr. William Agard in Cambridge; with a Petition of the English there
enclosed, to the most excellent Majesty of the KING.
SIR,
I Joy to hear that my good Cosen your wife is already the happy Mother of
two Sons, for whom as for my self I pray daily; desining to have an
opportune meeting, that we may rejoice together in the Lord.

I doubt not of your diligence in doing your God service. You are one of those
Watchmen upon Ierusalems Walls; Never hold your peace, keep not silence,
give him no rest, until he shall establish and make his Sion a praise in the
earth.

There is great cause now, for (with great regreet) I feel a fearful shake
given to the half happy Act of Pacification: Papists and Prelates join with
men (acted by the spirit of Satan) to separate the King from His Parliament in
England; and his loyal Subjects (here and there as in Ireland) to the ruin of
all: would to God they were all gone that so trouble us. We have hope here
(and I pray for the like with you) that their wicked rod shall not long rest
upon your Lot.

Let it please you to peruse the enclosed Petition, it came to me by a good
hand, tends to a right end, from a firm ground, through a midst answerable
your furtherance will do much, but God only can accomplish the work which I
pray for, and am still

Your loving Consen. Robert Iohnston.
Edenborough the 12. of September. 1642.
To the most Excellent Majesty of the King, and to the most Honorable the
Lords and Peers of this Realm. As also to the honorable the Lords and others,
Knights Citizens, Barons and burgesses in the Commons House of Parliament now
ASSEMBLED.
The most humble Petition of the Churches of God in England, and of every
lively member of the same, whereof the Lord Christ Jesus is the Head.
Shows.
THat I am, is the God of Unity and Order, But his enemy (S^than) is the author
of division and disorder; as appears by the first Adams fall, and the second
Adams reparation, when to prevent the malice of Abaddon, God united his Diety
to humanity in the person of his dear son, and him sent to seek and save, al
poor lost sinners believers: That in the hypostaticall union, there are 3.
distinct Offices, of Prophet, Priest, and King, of all which (in his humanity)
the Lord Jesus had possession, yet alleged that his Kingdom (as then) was
not of this world, remaining now and ever since at the right hand of his most
holy Father in glory, until his enemies shall be made his footstool. That in
1642 years from the incarnation, the Almighty has already vindicated the
Prophetique and Priests Offices to his Son, against all Turks, Jews, Papists;
infidels: The Regal Office only remains undetermined: And the axe is now laid
to the root, he that will not take the Lord Jesus Christ for his K. must be
brought out and slain.

That your Most Excellent Majesty (the fountain of piety and justice, and the
life of the Law unto us your most humble Petitioners and obedient Subjects)
have set to your seal and in acknowledgment of Gods truth, have subscribed,
Christo auspice Regno. Posui Deum adiutorem meum, and the like.

That your Lordships and Honors have likewise come into the same Government,
contending against those Laws and Customs, opposite to the Law established by
the Lord Jesus, and which Elutherius prescribed to Lucius first Christian King
of this Nation, and to both the Doctrine and Discipline settled by the Apostles.
when at Antioch the Disciples were first called Christians.

That the recovery of that name Christian will expel the by names, Papists,
Protestants; Lutherans, Brownists, Sectaries, Roundheads, Prickeare, and what
not, disgracefully put upon the Christian Subjects of this Kingdom; Quiet the
present distractions and distempers, clear all fears and jealousies, settle
the true Religion, and fundamental Laws of England, Your Majesty's Prerogative,
the Parliaments privilege, and the Subjects propriety and peace, will so be
all at one, to your general contentment, and the saving of All in all.

May it therefore please Your most Excellent Majesty and your Parliment to
agree speedily upon that one thing necessary, and prevent the malicious
intendments of the Common adversary.

For which your petitioners are daily suppliant at the Almighties throne, and
your laborious servants.

A Letter From one Master Agard to his friend in London.
Sir,
J Have read his Majesty's Declarations at large, printed at Cambridge, as also
his Majesty's vindication, written as I have heard say by a Parliament man, but
without his name thereunto printed and published. I have also seen the
passages (published) between the Scots and the English answering one another,
and agreeing together to a far better end (as I hope) than Sampsons Foxes with
their firebrarnds, for they burnt up only the standing Corn of the
Philistims, who did then Lord it over Israel; these I hope will eradicate all
those Fox-like incendiaries, Papists and Prelates, that have wrought their ends
upon the continent of Europe hitherto, and now are at work in England and
Ireland. Blessed be God, the North Country Scotland, and the parts of England
bordering thereupon, are some in calmer condition for the present, Pray God
continue it, and let the eternal Majesty be pleased to tell his Majesty (our
most Gracious Sovereign) that the Protestant Religion in England is not yet
sufficiently reformed, and that his Majesty may not stand still as the Sun
(albeit Ioshuah should command it) much less go back as in Hezechiahs time;
but he must go forward as a Giant, fight the good fight, and finish his course
in keeping faith, that he may not stagger, but stand fast to his temporal
Crown in this life, and so obtain an eternal Crown of glory: to which my
prayer made in the name and mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ, let the
Almighty God, and all his faithful servants say, A men.

I have sent you here with a Copy of Petition which came from England to
Edenborough, and is thence again returned unto me in a Letter from my Cosen
Johnston, the originalls are here enclosed, you may consider how useful they
may prove, and use them as you please. Pray let me hear from you as you can
with the first opportunity, I will repay it thankfully, and rest

Yours to be commanded. William Agard.
From my house in Land. 24. Sept. 1642.
FINIS.

