A GREAT And Bloody Fight IN SHROPSHIRE: Shrowden surprised by a Troop of horse
for the KING. And the Fight with Coll: Mackworth.

THE Number of the Lord Byrons Army, and their Randezvouz at Brees-Heath.

Prince Charles his Instructions, with Sir Marmaduke Langdales Letter to the
Lord Byron: The Lord Byrons Declaration to the Kingdom, and his Resolutions.
WITH His Lordships Speech in the Head of his Army at Brees-Heath.

London Printed for A. H. near Pye-corner, 1648.

A Great and bloody fight in Shropshire, Shrowden surprised by a Troop of Horse
for the KING.
SIR,
WHen Poyer was reduced in South Wales, some thought all was settled in these
parts, and that Principallity, but it seems not so now, for there is a new
breaking out, and the Cavaliers very bold and resolute, The Lord Byron has
Listed a complete Regiament of Horse, and has Declared for the King, I have
sent you his Declaration, here enclosed, The particulars of this new rising are
thus.

The Lord Byron received Instructions from Sir Marmaduke Langdale, which he
says he had Order from His Highness Prince Charles for. The reason of them
was certified in a letter from Sir Marmaduke Langdale to the Lord Byron, That
His Highness Prince Charles wondered that his Lordship was so backward, and
had already lost so many opportunities, that he expected formerly that he
should have drawn forth his Regiament to have releived Pembroke, or seized
Chester, or some other considerable hold. But that seeing what is past cannot
be recalled, he would have the Lord Byron to take the advantage of Crumwells
going northward and rise and possess himself of what places of strength he
can, and use his utmost power to draw back the Forces with Crumwell, assuring
his Lordship that there shall be assistance come from the North to join with
him, by the way of Lancashire: And that Instructions are given to the Earl of
Derby whereby there is assurance given, that the Kings party will rise there
under his command upon the first opportunity, which he hopes will be suddenly,
hereupon the Lord Byron had several meetings with his Officers, and at last
completed his Regiament of Horse, And appointed a Randezvouze at Breese-Heath,
one Troop of Horse was appointed by his Lordship to march to the City of
Shrewsbury, and secure it for His Majesty; And accordingly a very gallant
Troop marched thither ward which gave an Alarm to Col. Mackworth the
Governor of Salop for the Parliament, who prepared to oppose them, but before
he could be ready, the Cavaliers were entered Shrewsbury and cried out. For the
King and the Lord Byron.

But they were opposed by Captain Allen, from Colonel Mackworth, and forced
out of the Town again, diverse being killed and wounded on both sides, and some
taken prisoners:

At this opposition which they found, they being forced to discert that
attempt, They marched to the Lord Byron, who was then at Breese-Heath, at his
Randezvouze. There were of Col. Mackworthes party some slain, and Capt. Allen
much wounded, a very honest gallant man, for whom there is much sorrow. The
Lord Byron upon the coming of this Troop to him at Breese-Heath, hearing what
was done, is marched with about 500 Horse into Wales, what his Lordship intends
is not known at present, but it is believed he will march toward Carnarven,
though some think he will attempt the taking of Chester, but of that I shall
give you a further account by the next. The well-affected to the Parliament
(hereabouts) are in a great fear of these Cavaliers, not knowing what they may
suffer. But this Troop that came toward this City has so rouzed us, that I
believe the Inhabitants will be more watchful, We have taken the Lady Haris,
and diverse other prisoners, who had an hand in this business. This to
communicate at present, I pray you accept it from

Your Servant, Robert Jones.
Shrewsbury this 6th of August 1648.
The substance of the Lord Byrons Declaration.
THat whereas his Highness Prince Charles, declared unto Coll. Poyer, Coll.
Powel, and others, by Letters under his highness hand and seal: Thus, Viz. We
have seen your Declaration, and received your letter, and are extremely
satisfied with the many expressions we find in them, of your great zeal and
affection to the King our Royal Father, and to us: We have much reason to be
assured of the loyalty and integrity of your intentions, when we consider the
prosent conjunctures and seasonablenesse of your appearing in Arms, and
declaring your selves for his Majesty at this time, when the concurrence of
others with you in the same good design, may give us more then an ordinary
hope of good success, and that you and they may be a mutual support and
assistance to each other. The Answers we have herewith sent to your
Propositions will we hope let you see how ready we are to embrace all things,
that may give you encouragement to proceed cheerfully and constantly in this
cause, and the modesty you have used therein shall invite us to lay hold of all
occasions, to oblige persons that engage themselves in so great an undertaking,
with such reasonable demands for themselves. And we assure you, that we shall
be careful, to supply and assist you in all things to the uttermost of our
power. And if it please God to bless us with success, we shall endeavor by
all real effects of kindness to let you see how truly sensible we are of your
merit, and of the obligation we acknowledge to have to you.

And notwithstanding their endeavors herein, yet by a party of the Sectaries
Army, they have been diverted, and their Forces overpowred; That all such who
will come and join with him, shall be received, and listed for the rescuing of
his Majesty, from imprisonment under the Sectaries, and that his Majesty may be
brought to London, and enjoy his just honors, freedoms, and Rights, the
Parliament be free, and the Kingdoms settled in peace; And that for this purpose
the Scots forces are come into England, under command of Duke Hambleton, with
whom he will join for the ends aforesaid.

BYRON.

INSTRUCTIONS Given to the Lord BYRON.
THat his Lordship complete his Regiament of Horse with all speed, to be full
in every Troop.

That his Lordship have speedily a randezvous of his horse, and settle the
Troops

That his Lordship use his endeavor for the surprisall of the City of Salop,
for the Kings Majesty.

That his Lordship put in a sufficient strength of Foot into Shrewsbury, to
keep it for his Majesty, and make the works substantial, and good.

That his Lordship take advice herein with the Gentlemen appointed for
management of the business of the four Assotiated Counties,

That his Lordship keep correspondency with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and use
all means to make a conjunction so soon as may be.

That his Lordship order the moneys according to his Lordships former
instructions, and make fair and specious pretenses to the Country.

The Lord Byrons Speech in the Head of his Forces at Breese-heath in Shropshire.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers.
I Thank you for your so cheerful and ready coming to me, and I desire you
be courageous, the cause we have in hand, and are to maintain, is for God, and
King Charles, a free Parliament, and the peace of his Majesty's three
Kingdoms, you have the Scots on your side, and the City of London, with all
the well-affected in England; yea, and the Irish also join with you in opposing
his Majesty's Enemies, who have nothing left them but an Army of Sectaries for
their support; And I shall not only lead you on, but stay by you to bring you
off, upon any in^agement against our and the Kings Enemies.

FINIS.

