A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ASSIZES Held for the County of CORNWALL, AT
LANCESTON, MARCH xviii. MDCLXXXV.

By NICOLAS KENDALL, A. M. and Rector of Sheviock in Cornwall.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty; and are
to be sold by George May, Bookseller in Exeter. 1686.

TO THE Right Honorable Sir EDWARD HERBERT Lord Chief Justice of England; AND
Sir ROBERT WRIGHT One of the Judges of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench.
My LORDS,
YOUR Lordships having expressed a desire, that the Discourse You were pleased
to hear with patience at the Assizes in Cornwall, should be made public; I
have adventured it into the World, upon no other ground, but in obedience to
Your Lordships Commands, and in hope of Your favorable Protection; which as it
must wholly proceed from Your own Goodness and Generosity, and is not pretended
unto by any merit either in the Author, or the thing it self; so I trust it
will be a clearer Instance of Your Lordships Endeavors to promote any thing
that may tend to the good of the Public: and it will also lay a greater
obligation upon

April 10. 1686. Your Lordships in all Duty most highly obliged Servant,
Nicolas Kendall.

1 Samuel ii. 25. former part of the Verse. If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for
him?


IT has been observed concerning the Sanctions of humane Laws, that they have
generally respect, rather to the bad Examples of Crimes, and the influence they
may have upon the Public, than to the nature of the Crimes themselves: And
hence it comes to pass that severer punishments are inflicted upon some
Offenders, though their guilt in it self considered, may be less than that of
those who escape unpunished. For the great end of all Laws being the
conservation of the Public Good, and maintaining a Common Interest; as long as
that is secured, men trouble not themselves so much about those things, wherein
the Commonweal is not concerned. Not to give instances of this nearer home,
it is said that in the Eastern Parts of the World, where men live promiscuously
together, and have all things as it were in common; a small theft is thought to
deserve the utmost penalty, because it is impossible they should subsist, in
their way of living, unless they were very secure, that one dared not invade
what was another man's. So true is it what old Eli has observed in the words
before us, That if one man sin against another, if one man touches another in
his Person or Interest, the Remedy is easy, the Law is open, or (as Dr.
Hammond more critically renders (...)) the Assizes are held, they may implead
one another, and the Judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against God, the
case is not so; he is not in a capacity of making any satisfaction to the
Divine Majesty, and few will dare to interpose on the behalf of such an
Offender: If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?

In which Words there is an evident distinction supposed between two sorts of
sins, one, of those whereby one man sins against another, and then they have
their remedy at Law; Est cognitio Civilis aut Ecclesiastica qua res componi
possunt (says Junius in his Notes upon this place): the other is of such sins
whereby a man sins against the Lord, not only as God is the great Legislator
and Governor of the World, for so all sins are against him as transgressions
of his Laws; but sins wherein God is a Party, whereby he is prejudiced or
dishonored in those things that relate unto him: such was the sin of Eli's
Sons, who profaned the Sanctuary of God, and brought his Worship and Religion
into contempt; and in this case they could not hope to escape either by the
mercy and lenity of a Judge, or the skill of an Advocate; not by the
intercession of Friends, or making an interest with Great Persons, or the like:
If a man sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him?

I shall not trouble you with the different ways of rendering these words by
several Interpreters, occasioned chiefly by the ambiguity of the word (...)
which though a Noun of the Plural Number, (yet by a peculiar Idiom of the
sacred Language) sometimes signifies the only one supreme God, and at other
times those whom the Psalmist calls Gods, Psalm. 82.1.
i. e. Magistrates and Judges: but taking our English Version to be most
agreeable both to the Hebrew truth, and to the intent of Eli in reproving his
Sons; I shall in my following Discourse speak distinctly to both these sorts of
Sins: I. Those whereby one man sins against another. II. Those whereby a man
sins against God.


I. Of Offenses between man and man; of which it is said, If one man sin
against another, the Judge shall judge him: Whence I observe these three things.

1. That Courts of Judicature, for the decision of such Causes as might happen
between man and man, was one of God's own Institutions among his people the
Jews. Where if one man sinned against another, the Judge did judge him.

2. That it is the great happiness of any people, when there are such Courts of
Judicature open, and the Laws have their free course, that so if one man sin
against another, the Judge may judge him.

3. That it is the Duty of every private person to submit himself to such
Judgments and Sentences, For when one man sins against another, the Judge must
or shall judge him.

1. That Courts of Judicature, for the decision of, etc. While the Lord was
their Political Sovereign, and their Government was (what Josephus truly calls
it) a Theocracy, In lib. contra Appion.
we find such Courts as these erected among them. At the instance of Jethro,
together with the command of God himself, did Moses choose able men out of all
Israel, and made them Heads over the people; rulers of thousands, rulers of
hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens, and they judged the people at
all seasons: the bard Causes they brought unto Moses, but every small matter
they judged themselves, Exodus 18. Out of these men (as some think) or at least
such as these did Moses again by God's command choose seventy men of the Elders
of Israel, Numb. 11. and God endued them with a Spirit of Prophecy, that they
might be able to instruct the people in the Law, and help to bear the burden
of them, which Moses had complained was too heavy for him: in agreement to
which the Jews had always among them a supreme Court called the Sanhedrim,
consisting of seventy one persons, seventy from the number Moses called unto
him, and one whom they looked upon as his Successor, and therefore called him
(...) Princeps Senatus, or Lord-Chief-Justice: and this High Court exercised
Jurisdiction over them, not only under those extraordinary Judges whom God
raised up at several times, and the Kings that succeeded them; but also in all
vacancies and inter-regnums, continuing (if we believe their Josephus Antiq. l.
14. c. 17.
Historian) until Herod put them down to secure himself of the Kingdom; beside
this, they had inferior Courts or Consistories in every City, from all which
there lay an Appeal to the great Sanhedrim at Jerusalem. I shall not trouble
you with the several places of Scripture that allude to these Courts, it being
sufficient to my present purpose to know that they were instituted at the
command of God, supported by his authority and assistance in cases of greater
difficulty, and that they continued among them Or as Grot. Notis ad Deuteronomy. 17.
usque ad tempora Messiae, quo misso authoritas Synedrii evanuit.
until the Romans came, and took away both their place and nation. Now though
we cannot draw Arguments from every particular Law and Divine Institution among
the Jews, to infer an obligation to the same in any other Nation, (they being
instituted for such peculiar reasons as agree not to other people:) yet I think
in the general an Argument is good, That whatsoever God appointed among them
(the reason continuing the same) is expedient and necessary in any Government
whatsoever. I Am sure Christ introducing the Christian Religion upon that of the
Jews made no alteration as to this Point; our Savior was tried by the
Sanhedrim, and submitted to their unjust Sentence, when he suffered, he
threatened not; 1 Pet. 2.23.
the Apostles were brought before the Council, Acts 4.
and never pleaded to the Jurisdiction of the Court: St. Paul particularly
acknowledges that Ananias sat to judge him, (...), according to Law, Acts 23.3.
and begs pardon of the Court when he had reviled him, alleging his ignorance
for excuse, and adding that he was instructed out of the Law not to speak evil
of the Ruler of God's people. Mark 13.9.
And the first Christians, when they were brought before Councils and
Magistrates and Rulers (as our Savior had foretold of them) though the
accusations were false, and the crimes could not sufficiently be proved against
them, yet they questioned not the Authority of the Magistrate; if the Judge
judged them guilty, they patiently submitted themselves. All this is so plain,
that I should not have mentioned it, but for the Enthusiastic conceits of some
of our Northern Neighbors, who for the erecting of (what they blasphemously
call) the Kingdom of Christ, cry down all Magistrates and Laws, as unnecessary
under the Gospel, and but so many infringements of our Christian Liberty: the
extravagance of which error needs no other confutation, than the horrid
confusions it has, and will always, raise wherever it shall be entertained.
And therefore,

2. It Is certainly the great happiness of a people when there are such Courts
of Judicature open, and the Laws have their free course, that so if one man sin
against another, the Judge may judge him. For either we must suppose men to be
so just and equal of themselves, as to have no need of Laws, or Judges to judge
them; or else we must allow private revenge, and suffer every man to judge for
himself. The first of these, viz. That men should be just and equal without
Laws, we may well talk of, and wish for, as a most happy condition, and most
agreeable to the nature and sublime Excellencies of Mankind; but no man that is
ever so little acquainted with the World will venture to try the experiment.
Among all the diversities of Laws and Governments that have been in the World,
there was no man ever attempted to establish a Society without any at all, as
well knowing that to be wholly impracticable, and those Societies have always
been looked on as the most prosperous and happy, where the Laws have been most
equal, and the execution of them most punctual: for let men be never so well
instructed in the Precepts of Virtue, and let Religion too come in for a new
obligation to Duty, yet still there are hopes and fears, passions natural to
men's minds, and these must be wrought upon by Rewards and Punishments; and all
little enough, God knows, to keep up the face of Order, and the Decorum of a
Society among men. Nunquam tam been actum est cum rebus humanis ut plures sint
meliores, the worse are always the most in number; and should men be let alone
to their own inbred Notions of right and wrong, and good and evil: the few that
would live up to these Rules, would be an easy prey to the many that would
despise them: Without Laws then, and the execution of them, we cannot be happy
or safe. Nor on the other side, can it be less ruinous to permit private
revenge, and suffer every man to judge for himself. This is what no equal man
will desire, and what the unjust will always abuse; it is to give way to force
and violence, and to let Right be determined by the strength of men's Arms, and
sharpness of their Weapons; it is to expose Innocence, which of it self is but a
weak defense against blind rage and brutish passion: We may guess to what a
wretched estate this would reduce us, (if generally allowed) by the evils
caused among us by those, that will avenge their Quarrels in private Combats
and Duels: On what slight accounts do men engage in them? To what an height of
revenge are they carried on? and how does the shedding of Blood stain our
Shores, and the cry of it invade Heaven? Romans 12.19.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay (says the Lord.) The Magistrate has provided
Laws for the punishment of evil Doers, 1 Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well; but these men, as neither fearing
God, nor regarding man, acknowledge no Laws but their own will, no God So
Mezentius in Virgil, Dextra mihi Deus.
but their own right hand. A Barbarity this, that was first introduced into
these parts of the World, by the incursions of the Goths and Vandals: for in
the ancient Greek and Roman Histories we meet with few or no footsteps of this
practice among men of Honor: Not that they wanted either Spirit to resent an
injury, or Courage to right themselves. No men ever expressed a more generous
contempt of life than these did upon all occasions; and if at any time they
thought it Great and Roman-like to dye, the Draught of Poison or the Poniard,
the Barbers Razor or the River, cannot be more ready now than they were then:
but they had not that false Notion of Honor among them, that so prevails now
adays, whereby men persuade themselves that the least affront is not to be
expiated but with the blood of the Offender; that it is beneath a man that wears
a Sword to submit his Cause to the decision of the Law, and therefore they will
be their own Judges and Avengers too: in the first, they usurp upon the Laws of
the Land; in the second, upon the Laws of God. If this be true Courage, if it
be that Fortitude that is recommended as a Virtue, it is what no Moralist has
ever yet acquainted us with; it is rather the dictate of those (...), as Rhet.
lib. 2. c. 14. (...).
Aristotle calls them, those warm Youths, whom he would scarce allow to be fit
Hearers of Morality, so far are they from being fit Teachers of it; it is the
Ethics of a Fencing-School. If this be an evil among us that is grown too
great for a remedy, I hope we may be permitted without affront to lament it as
the unhappiness of our times, that under such excellent Civil Constitutions,
and a Religion so well reformed, as we live; men should yet be given over to
that degree of madness, as to throw away their Souls, for which they are to
give an account to Almighty God; their Lives, which they owe to the Service of
their King and Country; their Estates, for which they are in some sort indebted
to their Posterity; and their Fame and Reputation, for which they are
accountable to the whole World; and all this upon such pitiful and trivial
accounts, as any great or wise man must needs think foolish and beneath him. So
then if we cannot subsist, much less be happy, without Laws, or at the mercy of
every one that will make Laws, and execute them himself; our happiness must
consist (as it does) in that our Laws are in the hands of such men as are
described in Deuteronomy. 1. Men of wisdom and understanding, men of courage and
integrity, that will hear the Causes between us, and judge righteously between
every man and his brother; that will not respect persons in Judgment, but will
hear the small as well as the great, that will not be afraid of the face of
man, for the judgment is God's. And hence it follows,

3. That it is the Duty of every private person to submit to the Judgments and
Sentences of such men; for if one man sin against another, the Judge must judge
him. It Is every man's Duty, as he is Member of a Society, to contribute what he
can to the prosperity and welfare of it. And this prosperity consists mainly in
keeping the Magistrates Authority entire and in repute; which, next under God's
Providence, is the great support of any Government. Now the chief end of the
Magistrates Power is to compose Quarrels and Disputes, howsoever they are
raised; and, when men will neither be persuaded by reason, nor inclined by good
nature, to force them to be just and equal by exemplary Punishments; for a man
then to decline the Sentence of the Judge, and to take any other way to right
himself, is to vacate all Authority, and to dissolve the very Bonds and
Ligaments of Society. Besides the obligations of Oaths and Covenants to
obedience, even moral honesty and gratitude it self should teach us to submit:
for how can we otherwise answer the happiness we enjoy in the protection of the
Laws? Whence it comes to pass that every man calls what he has, his own; that
in the Scripture Phrase, Micah 4 4.
We may sit every man under his own Vine, and under his own Fig Tree, Prove.
5.15.
and drink the waters of his own Cistern; if in return we do not willingly
abide the trial of the Law, and submit to the penalty when we are found guilty.
Saint Paul takes it so much for granted, That an Oath for confirmation is (and
ought to be) an end of all strife, that he thereby illustrates the (...), the
immutability of Gods counsel, Heb. 6.16, 17. And this Oath (says Estius upon
that place) ought to be coram Judice; upon which evidence a Sentence pronounced
has by all civilized Nations been ever reckoned sacred and inviolable. No man
then dares appeal from the Laws to himself, but the lawless and disobedient,
who therefore hate the Laws because they fear them. And thus have I done with
the first sort of sins, whereby one man sins against another; I come now to
consider,

II. The sins whereby we sin against God, of which it is said, If a man sin
against the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Whence I observe these two things:
1. That sins against God leave a man in a more desperate estate, than those
whereby one man sins against another. 2. That therefore a greater care should
be taken to avoid these sins, and a greater degree of sorrow and repentance
when we fall into them.


1. That sins against God leave a man in a more desperate estate, than those
whereby one man sins against another. For in this latter case restitution may
be made to the person wronged, and satisfaction to the Law, and God may also
please to accept of these sufferings, and remit the guilt: But when a man sins
with an high hand, aiming directly at the Person and Majesty of God, what can
he propose to make an atonement? Heb. 10.27.
There remains no more sacricrifice for such sins; but a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation, to devour those adversaries.
These sins are so common among us, that I need not name them, but to wonder
withal how they come to be so little regarded. Such are blasphemy and cursing,
rash and false Oaths, abuse of God's Word, ridiculing the holy Scriptures,
Sacrilege, and contempt of things Sacred, Idolatry, Irreligion and Atheism it
self. These are the causae majores in God's Canon Law, that are reserved for
the highest Tribunal; these too men may punish, as far as concerns the Public,
to hinder the spreading and prevalence of them: but who shall remit, or who can
inflict God's part of the penalty? No man may deliver his Brother, Psalm. 49.7,
8.
or make an agreement unto God for him; for it cost more to redeem their souls,
so that he must let that alone for ever. The dignity of the person offended,
the obligations he has laid upon us, and consequently the Duty we owe him, the
abuse of his mercy, presuming upon his Goodness, and slighting his acts of
Grace, (which single are great aggravations) do all concur here; and though the
sin be thus heightened, yet all the usual methods of atonement fail us too: He
that has dishonored God, can never make amends by his after-endeavours to set
forth his Glory; for this is but his Duty, and can quit no Scores: there is no
hope to palliate or blanch a crime before him that knows not the matter of Fact
only, but the very design and intention of the Actor. He may entreat others to
pray for him: I dare not say their prayers will be altogether in vain: but St.
John has told us, that he can give no encouragement to pray for those that sin
a sin unto death, 1 John 5.16.
i. e. are guilty of any heinous and daring impiety. Thus in the case before
us, the iniquity of Eli's Sons, who had made themselves vile or accursed, 1 Samuel 3.14.
could not be purged with sacrifice, nor offering for ever. And we read in the
History of Job, that while his Sons were feasting one another, and revelling in
all the luxury of a plenteous Fortune, the pious Father was careful to offer
burnt-offerings for each of them: for (said he) it may be that my Sons have
sinned, Job 1.5.
and cursed God in their hearts, and no doubt but the good man had reason
enough to suspect his Sons might be thus guilty: but however that were, his
Sacrifices prevailed little; for they were all destroyed by a very signal
Judgment. Whither then can we fly but to that God whom we have offended? from
his Justice we may appeal to his Mercy: but when we have sinned against that
too, when Mercy it self shall condemn us, Who then shall entreat for us? The
result of all is,

2. That the greatest care should be taken to avoid those Sins, and a very
great degree of sorrow and repentance when we fall into them. For where the
danger is every way so great, and no other means left of escaping it, we need
not be long to determine our selves in the choice; indeed there is nothing so
easy, if we rightly consider it, as to keep our selves from sinning against
God: to fear him as our Lord, to love him as our Benefactor, to obey him as the
supreme Governor of the World, is natural to us as men, and highly becoming us
as his Creatures. We can pretend no temptation to dishonor him; it must be the
effect either of inveterate malice, or gross inconsideration. The Adulterer and
the Drunkard may talk of gratifying their lusts and appetites; the ambitious
and revengeful man may raise himself upon the ruins of his Adversary; the
Thief gets by his stealing, and the covetous man lays up something in store;
but he that sins against God can pretend to none of these; he gratifies no
lust, serves no appetite, gets neither pleasure nor wealth, is not the richer
or the more esteemed, but sells himself to work wickedness at no rate. A man
but of ordinary prudence will not easily provoke an Adversary he knows he can
no way prevail against, 1 Cor. 10.22.
Why then do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he? A man
that shall scorn to do an ill or a low thing, a man that is jealous of his own
Honor to the last Point, and sensible of the least abuse that is put upon him,
shall yet dishonor God in his Day, in his Church, in his Service, in any thing
that belongs unto him, and make light of it: This, as it shows the great danger
of corruption into which we are fallen, so it should likewise show us what we
are to do to recover the Dignity of our Nature, the Perfections of our Being.
We cannot higher advance our selves, than by drawing near unto God in doing him
worship; and he has said it, Those that honor me, I will honor; 1 Samuel 2.30.
and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. Men cannot be so stupid
as to think God's Judgments shall never overtake them, because they are spared
a while: Plutar. de sera Numinis vindicta.
All the wise men in the World have ever dreaded a vengeance that is slow and
long a coming. Whoever then reflecting upon his former life, shall find himself
guilty of those sins for which there is no remedy, unless it shall please God
to accept his sorrow and repentance, let him earnestly repent, and be heartily
sorry for these his mis-doings. It was the Prophet Jeremiah's course, Lament.
1.16. For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water,
because the Comforter that should relieve my soul is far from me. Let his
repentance be as sincere as his fault has been heinous, and then who knows but
God too may return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him.

And thus I have gone through the Severals I observed from the Text: But I
should forget that we are not under the Law, Romans 6.14.
but under Grace, if in conclusion I should not supply the sense that Eli has
left imperfect, by answering the Question here proposed, If a man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Take the Answer in the words of S. John, 1 John 2.1, 2.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the
righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins. We need no other Mediator
to intercede for us, neither do we put our trust in any other; his Merits are
allsufficient, his Intercession is most powerful. Let us therefore beseech him
by his Agony and Bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, by his precious Death
and Burial, by his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, to deliver us from the
wrath to come.

To him, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Praise and
Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

