THE QUEENS Proceedings in HOLLAND. BEING The Copy of a Letter sent from the
Staple at Middleborough to Mr. VANRODE a Dutch Merchant in London. Wherein is
contained these six Particulars following: First, the King of Denmark his
Ambassador coming to the Queens Court at the Hague with a Message to the
States of Holland, accompanied with the Prince of Orange. 2. Colonel Goring
his raising of Forces in Ortoys by Commission from the K. of France, with a
Challenge from Colonel Gage unto Goring for his so doing. 3. What sums of
Money have been raised by Priests, and Jesuits, etc. throughout the Cloisters
in those Provinces, with their several names, etc. 4. What sums already have
bin raised toward the maintenance of the Rebellion in Ireland, as also an
Jrish Ambassador at Bruzels for a second supply. 5. The Bishop of Cullen his
Death. 6. The Prince of Orange his Court at Breda.


LONDON. December 30. Printed by T. F. for I. M. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter from the Staple at Middleborough in Holland, to Mr.
VANRODE a Dutch Merchant in London.
SIR, the sixty odd pounds of Bever amounting near upon 400. Rix Dollers J
lately sent you being intercepted and seized on by the Kings Fleet, J shall be
contented to bear an equal share of the charge of Custom, or by any other
loss you shall sustain through the default of my Ship-master or any of his in
this behalf, more J hope you will not desire considering my unwillingnes in
hazarding it in these troublesome times of danger, etc. we might very well
have stayed the transportation thereof for one Month longer, which then might
be safely transported and convoyed by five or six States men of War, which
are all ready for the bringing over of an Ambassador from the King of Denmark
to the King of England, he came to the Queens Court at the Hague upon the 20.
of December, the Prince of Orange being at Breda, accompanied the Ambassador
all through the Country, and brought him to the Queens Court, who was royally
entertained, and intends forthwith to come for England, his Embassage to his
Majesty is privately concealed, only this the K. of Denmark desires the
States of Holland, that they would be pleased to assist the King with such
forces by Sea as shall be answerable to those which he shall provide by Land,
in warring against Tunis, Argier and other places, concerning a late breach of
Pacification in detaining our Countrymen still Captives and Slaves, though
their Ransomes have bin paid in a very large contribution. Colonel Goring is
traveled into Ortoys and Flanders to raise forces of Men and Armor, he having
a Commission from the King of France to take a certain number from each
Garrison, for the Queen and present supply for England. Colonel Gage who is
Colonel over the English in Flanders, gave Colonel Goring a Challenge for
presuming to beat up his Drums to flock away his Officers and Soldiers,
nevertheless the soldiers being poor and long behind of their contribution
money agreed, and five or 600. English followed Colonel Goring to Dunkirke,
Newport, Ostend, and Graveling, where they now remain, till they be Shipped for
England, there has bin great means to the States that these Soldiers might
be permitted to pass through their Country and so take shipping for England,
but the Queen nor the Ambassador can prevail with the States for their
consents therein. J have also here set you down the sums of money raised
amongst the Priests, Jesuits, Seminaries, Friars, Nuns, and holy Sisters
through the land, and paid in to the Jesuits of St. Omers his College toward
the maintenance of his Majesty's wars. And first as in order the English
Cloister at St. Omers, the Jesuits have raised 3000. pounds, besides the Taxes
they have imposed upon every Scholar 5. l. a man being about 400. and that if
any shall refuse the payment thereof to lose their Degrees in the House, and be
for ever discharged for having any future benesit therein: in which College
the sum collected amounts about 3500. l. Secondly at Airs, the sum
collected amounts unto 500. l. Thirdly, at Beteone, the sum collected amounts
unto 500. l. Fourthly at Arras, the some of 2000. l.

Fifthly at the University of Doway, 1000. l.

Sixthly at Gaunt, between the College of English and Jrish Priests, and the
Matron of the Nuns there, was Collected 500. l.

Seventhly at Durmount, 50. l. Eighthly at Bruzels, from the Countess of
Westmorland, and the Lady Babthorpe, Matrons of the holy Nuns, and the three
Cloisters English, Jrish, and Walloons, 3000. l. Ninthly at Lovain, 1000. l.

Tenthly at Bridges, 300. l. Eleventhlily at Casteele, 200. l. Twelfely at
Newport, 200. l.

Thirteenth at Ostend, 100. l. Fourteenth at Graveling, 100. l. Fifteenth at
Dunkerke, 500. l. all which sums amounts about 15000. l. have bin Collected
and in the hands of Father Brown the Head of St. Omers Colleges, besides
5000. l. more gathered from the Governors of every Town, Village, or petty
Dorpe, which makes the sum of 20. thousand pounds, all which is intended to
be transported to his Majesty from Dunkirke, besides the weekly allowance the
Colleges will disburse toward the maintenance of the five hundred Soldiers
under the command of Colonel Goring, during his Majesty's wars with the
Parliament.

The Rebels of Jreland have had also nere upon sixty thousand pounds already
sent them, and an Jrish Ambassador is again sent to Bruzels entreating the
state for more moneys, which as yet we hear nothing of a second supply. The
great Bishop of Cullen is lately dead, which puts the Country in a great
disorder, an Jtalian is since Chosen. And thus much as J have set down is the
common discourse at the Queens court, and whither her Majesty intends to go
over with the Denmark Ambassador is not certainly known, here is a great
discention between the States and the Prince of Orange, which makes the Prince
leave his Court at the Hague and continues at Breda with One thousand of horse
and foot, and seldom or never comes to the Queens Court though her Majesty
have often sent for him, J cannot certify more as this we shall remoove our
Staple from hence to Delph.

From Middleborough the 19. of December. 1642. Your obliged and trusty friend,
JOSIAS KEELING.


