Herm'aelogium; OR, AN ESSAY At the rationality of the Art of SPEAKING.

As a Supplement to Lillie's Grammar, PHILOSOPHICALLY, MYTHOLOGICALLY, and
EMBLEMATICALLY Offered by B. J.

In rational knowledges to depart from the received partitions, is no
disallowing of the same.

L. Verulam in his Advancement of Learning, p. 330. London, Printed by R. W.
for T. Passet, in St. Dunstans-Church-yard in Fleet Street, 1659.

The Contents.
THE Book analogizing words with things (particularly with Aristotle's
intrinsecal principles of things) is divided into four parts. Whereof,

The first, under three Heads or Chapters, specifieth the analogy Of The word
of Being or Noune Substantive The word of Motionor Verb The word of Quality or
Adjective

with Matter. Form. Privation.

to fol. 10 The second part, subdivided into five Chapters, shows the
variations and affections of the said word of Being, both in its denominative
Entity, and casual qualification, to fol. 39 The third, under the same number
of Chapters, shows the variations and affections of the word of Motion, to
fol. 63 The fourth transiently examineth the state of the four undeclined Parts
of Speech, with their concomitant Mutes. And lastly of the Pronoune, with the
Arts therefrom proceedings, to fol. 73
Whereunto be added the Philosophical and Pedagogical uses of the whole; with
Emblems of the same Mythologiz'd.

The Preface to the Reader.
AS some months sithence (Reader) I was, among my select companions, engaged
in a discourse relating to the Grammatical part of THE ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING,
penned by the renouned Vicecount of St. Albans, I casually fell upon this
fancy: Which I profess to have published out of no design to disgrace, but a
desire to advance the professory way now in use, in some degree toward that
more prosperous State mentioned In Preface to the Instauration, fol. 5.
by his said Lordship, wherein the mind may practice her own power upon the
nature of things. And therefore have I entitled it (...). i. e. (...). Taking
the sighing Adverb for an actuated wish, and the God of Speech for the Art of
Speaking.

I say Art as observing the Creatures to be so far verbigerant as is requisite
both to the preservation and promulgation of their kind, and the paucity of
words in use not only among the Indians, but even that Nation whose language is
recorded to us as most venerable, to evince that Man at first did not herein
excel otherwise than as a distinction between specifical sound rude Part 4. c.
1.
and conformed may easily inform us.

But to what this conformity might be most naturally fansied: how, (a)
why and when graduated to that Part 2. c 5. and part 4. c. 2.
septuple excellency we now find it in, I thought worthy of enquiry. Since that
the Hebrew should be either to all speeches confounded, or that language whence
the rest should be derived; saving the implicit belief I respectfully owe to
the Assertors, I find not so much as the reason either of discord or Symphonie.
As for instance: Admit I granted that the Latin Cauis were derived from (...)
of the Greeks; what were this to the Dog of England or Houndt of Almayne; or
either to KELEB of the Hebrew's?

Moreover I find, that besides the impossibility of reconciling the Part. 3. c.
4.
Idioms, even in the respective refinement of the languages, not only the
Northern and Southern people have run a contray course (the one multiplying
Consonants as learnedly as the other endeavor to baulk them) But even the
neighbor Greeks and Romans; the one expressing the Case of the Noun both by
Article and Termination; and the other usually couching the Article under the
Termination. It being their design as well to express much matter with little
vocality, as to have several vocalities for the same matter or sense.

And I find lastly that the Orthoaepia of that very language is not in all
Countries the same; the Scio, folo, genus etc. of the German being by the
English rejected, the two first as a Plateasmus; and the last as sounding too
much of asperity; the English choosing to pronounce the [G] so placed, like an
[I] consonant; which again the French and Italian do reject; pronouncing it
rather like an [Sb] the [I] consonant sounding with them, and the Germans, much
as with the Greeks; so that they account the English vocal sound thereof as a
Jotacisme.

But as the (...).
REASON is one, so is it observable that the expression thereof in and by man
is in all Countries (quae Reason) the same; In that the Nations, differing in
vocality according to the temperament of the respective climes they live under,
do nevertheless in point of Syntaxe agree as one; thereby also manifesting the
product of words to be more from nature; as of Sentences from Reason;
distinguished nevertheless but as so many gradual emanations of the same See
the wisdom of Solomon, chapter 7. v. 15. and 16.
NATVRING NATVRE; by the first understanding those secret emanations of rude
Nature which the Philosophers of old called Chance; and by the second that
cultivated nature in its several uses, through the Sea Alsted. Arche^ log. l. 1.
Scholastic state of man's life, known by name of Discipline, Science, or Art;
and now going under the general term of Philosophy; or, to speak strictly, The
Philosophic of Grammar: for so, by Mr. Watts, do I find his said Lordship
interpreted.

We will (says he) In advancement of learning, l. 6. p. 260.
divide Grammar into two sorts; whereof the one is literary, the other
Philosophical; the one is merely applied to languages that they may be the more
speedily learned, or more correctedly and purely spoken; the other in a sort
does minister, and is subservient to Philosophy.

In this latter part which is Philosophical, we find that Caesar writ Books D^
Analogia; Suet. in Jul.
and its a question whether those books handled this Philosophical Grammar
whereof we speak? Our opinion is that there was not any high and subtle matter
in them; but only that they delivered precepts of a pure and perfect speech,
not depraved by popular custom, nor corrupted and polluted by overcurious
affection; in which kind Caesar excelled.

Notwithstanding admonished by such a work we have conceived and comprehended
in our mind a kind of Grammar, that may diligently enquire not the Analogy of
words one with another; but the analogy between words and things, or reason.
--

On which words to quibble by questioning how an analogy can be understood
otherwise than as subordinate to its Pattern? And whether it does not follow
that Caesar's design also was to Analogize words with things or reason: I should
think almost as great a piece of incivility as is recorded of See H. L. his
reign of K. Charles. p. 62.
that Doctor who was not ashamed so to disport himself with the brain-pan.

And therefore shall silently trace his Lordship to the next page, where he
conclusively sets down the literary Grammar as a Deficient. Thereby manifesting
his former division meant respectu status perfectionis; as a child is
distinguishable from a man. And so I conceive his divided expression
receptible, as if he had continuately said; There is a sort of Grammar [such as
Lilie's, etc.] composed on the mere score of Authority; no way prying into the
reasons those Authors had for their so speaking; As Caesar in his Books De
Analogia did; and our self thereby admonished have conceived and comprehended
in our mind how to do.

Which conception or intendment is my security, that neither those writings of
Caesar, nor of any else The hereafter so often quoted Tract of Sealiger, De
causis Lingua Latinae, mainly interpreting the Philosophy of that language more
particularly as it flows from the Greek.
precisely on this Subject are extant. Being confident that if any since had
writ thereon it had been of public use; as so tending to a recovery of the
lost rationality of Latin Syntax, now taught by mere observation; concluding
an expression congruous only because its so read in Cicero, Terence, Virgil or
Ovid. As if the knowledge of things by accidents were equally certain to that
which comes by their causes; and that notions entering through the door of the
understanding come no better prepared for retention, then do such as like mere
sounds are only thrust in at the ear-windores.

His Lordships design in his proposed Treatise of the diverse properties of
Languages; That should show in what point every particular language did excel,
and in what point it was deficient; that tongues might be enriched and
perfected by mutual entertraffique one with another; so that a pattern might be
drawn for the true expression of the inward sense of the mind from every part
which is excellent in every language; insomuch that observable conjectures
might be taken touching the natural dispositions of People and Nations even
from their Languages. -- I pretend to no such perfection in language, as to
engage therein further then as the diversity of Idioms shall invite me to their
examination in pursuance only of my first declared intendment.

Wherein so worthy a pattern would have fortified the sedulity of my imitation,
had his Lordship been pleased to declare what course either his Excellency took
or himself designed for the stating of that Analogy, which, at this largeness,
the reasons Viz. in my address to the University.
hereafter manifested invite me to select from Aristotle; with hope only that,
in an age wherein the wildest conceits even of the transcendent entity do find
acceptance, I need not despair of pardon; If by reducing the received parts of
Speech to BEING, MOTION and QVALITY, as their principles analogical to his
Arist. 1. Phys c. 6. text, 42.
MATTER, FORM, and PRIVATION, I do my Countryman but so much service as (in his
passage through the English and Latin Grammers) the easing of his memory from
the trouble of retaining more than has been first digested by his reason.

These Books following are to be sold by The Basset in St. Dunstans-Church-yard
in Fleetstreet.
THe General Practice of Physic.

Orbis Miraculum, or the Temple of Solomon pourtrayed by Scripture Light, etc.
by Samuel Lee, Minister at Bishopsgate, London.

Thirty Sermons preached at Milkstreet, London; by Anthony Farindon, B. D.

Baxters Treatise of Conversion.

-- Reformed Pastor.

Hooles Grammar.

Parnassi Puerperium, or some well-wishes to Ingenuity, in the Translation of
Owen, Martial, and Sir Tho. Mores Epigrams, by Tho. Peck of the Inner Temple,
Gent.

The Life and Reign of King Charles from his Birth to his Burial, by Peter
Heylin.

A Physical Discourse touching the Nature and Effects of the Courageous
passions, written in French by Le chamber, and translated into English by a
Person of Quality.

A Discourse of the Principles of Chiromancy, written in French by Le chamber,
and translated by a Person of Quality.

A Survey of the Law, containing Directions how to prosecute and defend
personal actions usually brought at Common Law, with the Judges opinions in
several cases; by ^illiam Glisson and Anthony Gulston, Esqs and Baristers at
Law.

The Exact Lawgiver, containing the Chiefest grounds of the Laws of England.

The Principles of Christian Religion; by James Usher Archbishop of Armagh.

ERRATA.
PAge 11. line ult for being in a sort, read being a sort. p. 12 l. 19. after
the word right stop thus[;] p. 21. l. 20. blot out the first my. p. 40. l. 25.
for as r. at. p. 44. l. 20. for [i] conceive[.] p. 54. l. 7. for whtch r.
which. p. 58. l. ult. at the word action stop thus[.] p. 59. l. 1. blot out
that. p. 65. l. 1. for quantites r. quantities. p. 66. l. 6. and l. 30. for
proposition r. preposition. Ibid. l. 9. for minis r. nimis. p. 67. l. 4. for my
score r. my own score. p. 68. l. ult. for fo r. for. p. 71. l. 25. for n r. In:
Ibid. in marg. for argumenti r. argumentis. p. 93. l. 24. for quam read quum.
p. 87. l. 4. blot out s.

Herm'aelogium; The first PART.
CHAP. 1. Treating of the said words in their several respective analogies. And
first of the word of Being or noune substantive in its analogy to matter.
IN the first place I offer those words which serve to express the Essence or
Existence of the Universe; basis of motion; even as Matter is of Form. And as
we cannot conceive Form without presupposing Matter; no more may we,
sententiously, express a motion without its precedent Being; all motion
necessarily proceeding ab aliquo quiescente.

Also as matter does appetere catch at or invade form in order to forms formed;
So Being directs Motion toward another Being Quies privatio est and simul
perfectio^ei. See Com. Magyr. l. r. c. 6.
qualified for the complement of a Sentence. The first being the material, and
the last the formal or final cause of the motion.

Wherefore also as in the one place it is terminus a quo, active, and therefore
governing: It follows that in the the other it be terminus ad quem fit motus;
and consequently (sensu receptitiae perfectionis) passive, and so governed.

The same is hinted at by our LILLY, under the questions WHO or WHAT? and WHOM
or WHAT? The first as the nominative case to, and the second as the casual word
of the Verb; which last I hereafter distinguish by name of a word of Sense, in
regard that by its sensuality it compleateth this Phylosophie of a sentence. To
which neither the Verb impersonal, its Latin succedaneum the Gerund with the
Verb of Being, nor the Infinitive Mood can be an exception. While the word or
words mediately following the first, and immedately the second, are, in sense,
as their nominative case; In that they are their material cause or basis; and
the third signifies no other then the essence Part 3. cap 1.
ot indefinit Being of a Motion. Which the Greeks and English observe, while
they denominate their Verbs by the Infinitve mood, as, (...), To love, etc.

Wherefore our Author teaches that when two Verbs meet together, the latter
shall be the Infinitve Mood. That Mood so placed bearing the same signification
with an essential word of sense; as when placed before the Verb it does of a
word of Being; and serves either to govern or be Governed by the Verb
accordingly.

And because it often does this accompanied; not only by words of the same sort
by way of apposition, but by the Infinitive Mood and a word of Being; so
answering both the questions, WHOM and WHAT: Our Author adds, that Aliquando
ratio est verbo nominativus. Which aliquando I suppose he would have understood
as a conditional semper. As if he had said, Whenever you meet with any number
of words without a Verb in a Mood other then the infinitive, know that they all
can amount to no complete sentence; but only to such a Ratio as may serve for a
nominative case to the Verb. And the reason therefore is, that they signify no
more then one word of Being, as is evident even by the example he there
instanceth out of Ovid: -- Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores. --


All which, but for the emphasis and verse, (which are but as the second
intentions of language) might have been as fully expressed by one word of
Being, as if he had said Literatura emollit mores.

CHAP. 2. Of the word of Motion or Verb, in its analogy to Form.
PRoceeding secondly to motion, viz. either going from, or else coming toward
the first sententiously expressed Being: as, I love, or I am loved. Yet
(transpositis terminis) this duplicity will appear to be but so many gradual
expressions of one and the same motion. As when I say, JOHN LOVES JOAN, I
thereby but only express the action of love as barely proceeding from John
toward Joan; and so a Cat may look upon a King. But if I say JOAN IS LOVED BY
JOHN, I then not only express as much, but also manifest the energie of John's
love-motion to be such, as that Joan is therein passionately concerned.

And hence (with submission to my more learned Readers) I conceive the ancients
came todistinguish the one by name of a Verb passive, from that other of an
active. And particularly the Latins (with whom this voice is most Idiomatical)
to form the passive from the active by the only addition of the letter [R]. And
that Magyrus also in his lib. 1. c. 4.
Physiologie comes to declare that Motus in duobus consistit (he does not say
duo motus) in agente scil. and Patiente.

Thereby, however, excluding our Authors Neuter-passives, Common and Deponents;
as products of a vain attempt of reconciling the Latin and English Idioms, not
considering how the first denominate their Verbs a causa causae, and the last a
causa causati.

Which once observed, it will be evident that the Romans were never To multiply
divisions to their lowest particularity is an error in Science. L. Vetu^ ibid.
guilty of troubling us with any such subdivision. As for instance: Vapulo and
Exulo must with them needs be Verbs active: It being their Philosophy that
Nemo laeditur nisi a scipso. And so must Precor and Meditor be passives, since
it was as well their Theology that -- Timor primos fecit in orb Deos. Loquor
likewise and Argumentor, strictly understood, being when we speak or argue the
sense of others. Besides that, admitting of a gradation, it were not
Scholastic to multiply its comparative Arithmetic beyond a third, (a)
(where I state the Verb impersonal) as in the following Chapter is expressed.

CHAP. 3. Of the word of Quality, or Noun-Adjective, in its analogy to
Privation, etc.
OUR Author telling us that the coherence of the former word with its
nominative case is in respect of number and person:

For, although naturally they admit not of comparison, the least drop being
logically as much water as is the whole Sea; Yet being coacervated, as they
take up the rooms of great and little, two being more then one, and three then
two, etc. they become convertible with good and evil; the biggest (as we use to
say, caeteris paribus) being always the best.

And sithence we find dilatation and good to be euqally appetible by all
Beings, the conversion cannot be improper. As is partly demonstrable by a
Cyphon.
Wherefore we call a great house a good house; and so do we complement My very
good Lord, etc.

Which nevertheless to wrest too much to a Political sense, were to make
contentment no other than a lazy patience. Ot if to a Theological, to be
forced with that otherwise thrice learned Campanella in Atheismo triumphato.
Dominican, sometimes of my acquaintance in PARIS, to defend covetousness to be
no sin; and consequently, with some Philosophers of the Neotericks, be seduced,
practically, to confound Honestum with Utile.

Wherefore its observable that both quantity and quality become distinguishers
of good and evil only mediately. The one by coacervation, as aforesaid; and the
other by separation: Unum, verum, bonum, ens, quatenus ens, being always the
same.

But if we apply an Entity or Being to a praeternatural use, Amygdalae amarae
noxiae vulpibus. I. Mart. Met. sect. 6.
then shall we find (as was retorted by the Hollander) that English Ale is no
better to thatch housen, then is Dutch butter to stop Ovens.

Or otherwise, if we contemplate several beings of the same kind or sort, by
the privation of some particle of perfection in the one, we learn to value the
excellency of the other. And in case there be two beings herein compatible;
there the senses immediately summon a Court of Survey; where opinion sitting as
Judge decides the controversy by the line or measure of comparison. Which
subjects all qualities under so variable a construction: it being impossible
that all Beings should be affected to one and the same Quality, more than all
Qualities may be rationally adjectible to one Being. Or to instance that
Elementary Being which is permanent in its affection toward a single Quality
or Being so qualified. Since as the temperament alters, so must the Judgment;
and Affection being to Judgment, as the Cause to the Effect: hence necessarily
proceed both the I meddle not with the supernal alliance of the stars. Only as
my Vernacular Idiome renders it, Kyfanian a G^rthanian.
Sympathy and Antipathy of the Universe.

This we may read most handsomely exemplified in the observations left us by
Hist. Belgic.
Strada on the results of the Council held at Madrid before the Expedition
which the Duke of Alva thereupon undertook for the Netherlands. To which he
adds, That every man while he votes for the public, votes for himself. And the
vote (says he in Sir Philip Stapleton's language) which nature ex^orts, we
thinK we give to the cause, when, indeed, we do it to our own humor.

Nevertheless we find this wise Nature, in order to the preservation of it self
in its respective Individuals, to have stamped certain characters of general
reception on Good and Evil; even as by a number of mysterious lines on the
face, the features are promoted in order to beauty: as we may be more at large
satisfied concerning the one by the Mathematics, as of the other among the
Ethics.

My present part being only by this difficulty to instance how expedite it was
that the degrees of comparison should be carved exactly answerable to the
Hermetical Phylosophie of Virtue; which is, To be multiplied in the second, and
completed in the third. That number being worthily magnified by the Ancients
as most perfect, in regard it is incapable of an equal division; (a)
and so remains of Infinitness the nearest representative imaginable. And this
the French idiome confirms by its expression of most by thrice: as, Grand, Plus
grand, trois grand. Great, Greater, Greatest. M^gnus, Major, Maximus: The rest,
in the Latin, having for the most part their superlative in [issimus] as
faelix faelicissimus: Excepting such as are called Anomola or irregular; or
whose rise is mentioned affectedly: as, M^lior for Mollior, or Maximus for
Maxim optatus. To compare by magis and maxim being proper only to words
ending with a yowel before [us] In regard [besides that the too much overture
of concurrent vowels is in some sort abhorred by all languages] the regular
comparison renders such scarce comprehensible by any Latin verse, except the
Lyric: And therefore do the Romans compare them by their Adverbs; much as the
English more and most.

But to conclude. As Privation became known by contemplation of want, the high
way to nothing: So Quality can, Grammatically, signify nothing, until it be
adjected to that Being whereof it shows the quality; as to say, A fair woman,
a large hawk, etc. and therefore is the Adjective in what degree soever placed
to agree with its Substantive in Gender, Case and Number, as affections which
by it are occasionally varyed as follows.

Herm'aelogium. The Second Part.
CHAP. I. Showing the Rational Variations or Affections of the Noun
Substantive, whether in its Entitative denomination or sensual casuality. And
first of its Articulation.
TO this word do belong first its articles: He, She, or It. The word Genus
being here, as I with the same submission conceive, understood by the Latins
in a mixed sense; For if we look upon it Logically, it will appear to be rather
Species generis than Genus. And if merely Physically a generando: Then must we
take it only as an article manifesting the property of a Being in point of
generation; that is, Whether it be male, female, or neither. The English
understanding it no further, whiles, until they be of years to propagate, they
articulate the noblest of Creatures by this neither or neuter gender, as when
they say: It Is a pretty Girl or Boy.

Whereas the Latins use it not only to distinguish the Sex, but also the active
and passive qualities of Beings in point of use, as; Hic liber, haec Pila. The
book being looked upon as an agent by which we are instructed, and the Ball as
a patient by the tossing whereof we are recreated. Which yet I find to hold
most in the articulation of such words as be radically Latin; such as derive
from the Greek being articulated commonly as most consonant with their
terminations. So, Hic lapis, Haec petra. Which I rather take with De cause.
ling. lat. l. 4.
Scaliger from (...) and (...), than with the Ancients from pedem laedendo and
quia teratur pedibus; or from any experiment of their growth found out by the
Neoterics.

Yet its observable that such Greek words as be Latiniz'd only quoad sonum do
sometimetimes herein outstretch our use of the Being, by a Enallage generis.
trope which the Latins declare themselves not a little enamored with whiles
not only the repesentatives of sometimes living personages, as Statua; but such
dead being as be either actually or potentially but the containers [as the
place and placed] of the living, are by them numbered among the feminines: as,
Manus, Domus, Civitas, etc.

So they articulate the names of all Cities, excepting such as so strictly
follow the names of their Founders, that their termination cannot properly be
advanced to the feminin gender. And only these, being in a sort of more remote
tropical feminines, do they articulate rather according to their termination;
which may be a reason why Londinum may not be declined feminiely as well as
Glycerium.

Derivative Beings, whose names proceed from primitive Latin words, they
decline according to the nature of that word whence the derivation proceeds;
and in case the derivative proceeds from more then one, they take the
denomination a fortiori; whether that be a word of Being, or a word of Motion.
For example, Fluvius if it had its denomination from the water or the fish it
is supposed to contain, must have been articulated femininly: But sithence it
is neither the water nor the fish, but the fierce flowing that makes the
Fluvius of the Latins [for they have their Rivi and Rivuli besides] there it
is known by the masculine gender.

And the denomination is right in regard that as every Spring does not make a
River, no more does every River contain fish. As the River Dulais of Neath
ultra in Glamorganshire, which, until of late years some Trouts were cast into
it, contained no fish but Eels; whose univocal generation being uncertain, are
therefore articulated doubtfully. Supposing always that I latinize them by the
old name of Anguis, [Snakes and Adders being numbered among the Oviparia] and
not Anguilla; for then I make it an Epicaen.

The same rule stands for Hermaphroditical creatures. And not unlike is that
way of articulation they call common, as Hic and Haec Canis. The main end we
keep Dogs for being in order to our pleasure of hunting them according to their
respective kinds, to which since we do not find that distinction of sex does
add any thing, they are properly articulated with caution only that we
distinguish them from dead Being.

As for our Authors Common of three, I observe that as proper only for the
declension of Adjectives; it being impossible a Being should be living and dead
at the same instant.

Vegetives, in regard their multiplication is at a distance, are, when their
termination invites it, content to be articulated neutrally: as, Mas and semina.
Absynthium. Otherwise for the most part we read them promiscuously specified
as well by the masculine as feminine gender. The distinguishment of their sex
being a knowledge peculiar only to Physicians.

So that I dare not induce a reason for our Authors strict muliebrity of Alnus,
quia alatur amne. While I find amnis both masculine and femininely declined.
Neither can his first special Rule oblige me to it; whiles Pinus coming also
within that verge, I find masculinely, and (by Mr. Hollyoak's observation)
as well feminiely declined.

Wherefore where our Author says, that Appellativa arborum erunt muliebria ut
Alnus, I understand him as only telling me he never read it otherwise.

But since its my present undertaking to endeavor to reach the reason of the
Ancients for what our Author delivers on the mere account of observation: The
use the Ancients made of that Tree being mainly for shipping; as appears not
only by the authority of Pliny, but also that the Britains do at this day call
the Shipmast, although consisting of other timber, by name of that G{w}ernen y
Llong.
tree; therefore were I not thereby necessitated to heteroclite it, I should,
after Plinie's example, take the Tree for the Ship that is thereof built, or at
least wise that by it is perfected, and so make it a tropical feminine, as
Domus. And who knows but that in the infant refinement of the language it was
so taken and declined, while Mr. Hollyoake derives it from the same root with
Quercus? Since as In Epist. dedicat.
Dr. Tailor well observes, Voces and familiaris sermo suas habent
vicissitudines; and magis convenit inter linguas Gallicam and Italorum, quam
Latinitati sequioris aevi cum Enniana

CHAP. II. Of the Cases.
THe second variation of this word is according to the respective conditions it
may serve in, whether Genitive, Dative, Accusative, or Ablative. The service it
does Vocatively being barely Salutatorie; and Nominatively, either as apposited
to a word of its own sort, or subjected only to its own motion. And therefore
do I rather adventure on this my own fancyed conditional definition of the
Cases, then comply with the learned Scaligers a Cadendo, (...), as he Ibid. p.
183.
renders it; that extraction too much entrenching on the state of this Case;
whose said employment can be adjudged no more cadent than for one hand to serve
another.

The services it performs in its other conditions are first as it is governed
by another word of Being: And so it serves the English man commonly Genitively:
The house of his father, and the use of his friend sounding to him alike. But
with the Roman the first bearing the sense of a possession, and the second of
an instrument; therefore that shall be governed Genitively, and this
Ablatively; and that for reasons in its motional governance speci^ed.

As for its Dative service, I observe that either to Substantives compounded
with such Prepositions as our Author notes to bring the Verb so governing: as,
Mihi praefectus, advocatus, contu. etc. or else to a Being qua qualitative; as,
urbi pater i. e. Patronus: The English to the Adjective subjecting it all one
way, and in as many conditions as do the Latins, which is in all the four: As,
Novitatis avida, Sis bonus tuis, Dives Nummis Gnomon septem pedes longus,
Greedy of news. Be good to thy own. Rich in money. A line seven foot loog.
Which last only soars up to the Latin rationality; the rest carrying their
signs before them; and so, in my opinion, may excuse the English man from the
trouble of conning our Authors dilatations on this Rule. Sithence as we must
necessarily know before we can compose; so does the English inform what
condition to place the goverened word in the Latin.

And its observable that where the English elevates it self above the pitch of
vulgarity, the Latin, as in disdain of that pride, endeavors to soar higher:
witness that Authority cited by our Author out of Columella: Fons latus pedibus
tribus, altus triginta: Where the lateral measure governs Ablatively, and the
direct Accusatively, by the same tacit reason as does the Verb.

In which Philosophical Concordancie consists the main subtilty of the Roman
language, viz. In subjecting this word in order to the conclusion of a
sentence, according to the respective inclinations of the motion. As;

First, secundum causam causae, and not cousati, as do the English.

A custom which I suppose first grounded on a Metaphysical consideration: The
Metaphysics accounting the first as the more worthy, and therefore fittest for
denomination and government. See jacob. Martin. in part. Metaphysic. Sect. 7.
Quest. 4.

But to come to our Authors instances, Miserere mei, Have mercy of, or [as the
English by their prepositionally noted idiome more properly render it] upon me:
We shall by the said observation find it the same as to say, Let my miser move
your mercy to incline toward me. For by those words we may observe my misery
to be the Causa causae, your mercy the Causa causati; and your inclining of it
toward me to be the Causatum. And so shall we discern How miser^re mei carries
the same rationality of expression as Patris or Paterna domus. For my misery
being come the cause of your mercy makes your mercy to be mine.

I could illustrate this further, not only by the imitation of other languages;
as of the French, Pity du moi, etc. but also by the ^oman denomination of
this motion or verb of Mercy from Misery: Misereo, quasi miseria afflcior; and
Miseric^rdia, quasi aegritudo cordis ex miseria alterius. But I rather choose
yet to explain it by another of our Authors examples: Furti absolutus est.
Where I also find Furti governed Genitively. In regard that if the Prisoner had
not first given some cause of suspicion, neither Jury nor Judge should have
sat on him. Wherefore as the absolution is the Causati, and so the prisoners
own suspicious demeanure is the Causa Causae: which proving but a suspicion,
does lead the Judge to the absolution as of due belonging to the suspected. And
so does Absolve govern Furti Genitively, because the suspected having deserved
no other, has entitled himself to the absolution as his own. And by the like
reason be all those fore-hinted Verbs so fortified.

And as possession does presuppose acquisition, WHY without a WHEREFORE; so no
man damnifieth another but in order to his own advantage, more then it is
possible one should give what he has not received.

As for Verbs moving in order to payments, promises, Negotiations, commands and
obsequies, their end is sufficiently expressed by the old Rithme, So ne do go,
and some do run,
But it is for money when all is done.


And its observable that this acquisitive inclination of the Verb does so badge
its governed case, that not only Verbs compounded with the notes usually
preposited to the governance of other cases do then require this; But also that
we intelligibly can express the word completing their sense by no other case,
without the addition of a Preposition; which his forecited Lordship of Verulam
notes for a Ibid, fol. 262.
loose, he might have said pernicous, way of delivery.

Its unlimited use (as by our Author instanced) rendering both this and the
Genitive cases of the Noun useless Sithence the sense of this case becomes so
expressible by Prepositions serving to the Accusative; as of the other by the
Ablative: Excepting only when the Preposition tenus notes possession without
desired acquisition; as Aurium tenus, it also handing a singular Ablative: as
Pube tenus. The misfortune (as we say in English) being not all a case.

However, that it does not regulate when the casual word is to be expressed by
a Preposition, and when according to the inclination or line of the Verb, I
thought requisite to note for a serious defect in Grammar, and such as could
scarce be supplied without a preliminary examination How the infancy, state and
declination of the language did respectively use it.

The first (having no books by me that inform) I must guess at from Mr.
Robinsons (to our Author annexed) defective Heteroclites; which (leaving the
redundant as enough for his Sors and Authorum placita) I suppose designedly so
passed by the refiners, as a monument to posterity what the language formerly
had been; that so their pains might be the more thank worthy. For did we not
know that Carnu was once under that singl^ termination declined throughout our
Authors six Cases (excepting the Vocative, which no dead Being can stand in,
because incapable of salute) and so no otherwise distinguishable than by
Epithets and preposited notes: Lucan's -- Cornus tibi cura sinistri. Had been
no elegant expression at all; no more were our Authors Patris or Paterna domus
a refined Latin phrase; but for dumo or, as the modern have it, Casa del Padre
of the degenerate Italian.

This evinceth that as much of the art of Latin Grammar was placed in the
variation of the Nounes Termination according to (though seldom as manifold as)
its cases, and of them after the four inclinations or lines of the Verb; so the
end in both was to heighten the language above the laid preposited vulgar way
of speaking. How far then the design fell short in the projection becomes hence
considerable.

Wherein ere I proceed, I must remind my Reader how in the front of this tract
I only promised an Essay at the ^ationality of Speech: If happily some more
literate and ingenious might vouchsafe its fostering to a perfect grandeur. And
on that account shall I here expose such reasons as at present to me occur
dehortative to this intended banishment. The rather being thereto encouraged by
the forecited Noble Lord In motives to his (...) p. 1.
where he says: It is better to give a beginning to a thing that may once come
to an end, than with an eternal contention and study to be enwrapp'd in those
mazes which are endless.

First then I observe that as the Euphonie of the Southern Languages consists
in a smoothness of delivery, See the Preface. f. l. 2.
so must the multiplicity of concurrrent Vowels as well as Consonants be by them
balked as equally disrellishing. Hence comes it that the French do often
pronounce a fansied Consonant between; as when instead of Este il disner? has
he dined? they say Ete til dine? and that the Roman Idiome does interpose a
Preposition; mine host with our Author so answering that Summa cum humanitate
tractavit hominem.

Secondly, Influxus Causae; and consequently indicating rational rather than
material governances. Wherefore I say Amo Virginem, but vado ad eam. And on
this account do I suppose that Scaliger calls the Preposition by name of Motum
ad locum. Scapul.
(...). It being convenient that some expressed note should hand a corporal
motion, faculty or posture both in its Being or Essence. Essentia est
principium motus says I. Mart.
beginning, end and space between the word of Being and word of Sense.

As when I say Lateo in sepe. So denoting rest in the Being.

Curro e sepe. Showing the motions progress from it. Or

Propero ad Sepem. Indicating its advance toward it as its formal cause or
word of sense.

Cum omne corpus (says he) aut movetur aut quiescit: opus fuit aliqua nota
quae (...) significaret, Ibid. c. 157.
sive esset inter duo extrema, inter quae motus fit: sive in altero extremorum
in quibus fit quies.

But (with due reverence to the memory of so renowned a Philosopher) the most
absolute need of the Preposition I find to be when I am to mention the whole
three jointly; as saying Salio trans sepem; so at once both supposing a rest
whence I take my leap; naming the hedge; and tending toward a third place as
the end of my motion. For these lines in their said influx being no other than
as imaginary Hierogliphicks cannot possibly indicate several ways at once.

Else as one Case is preferred to another in governance; so shall we find the
unusher'd cases to the Prepositionally noted ones wherever a material motion
may be reduced to a lineal sense: As when I say Dego Lutetiae; rejecting Apud
Lutetiam as bar (I will not say barbarous) Latin. And yet I say Apud forum
speaking of some Market even in Paris. For, it is possible I may be at the
market, and yet possessed of nothing there saleable; therefore do I hand the
condition of that Noune by the Preposition. But since I cannot properly be said
to be at the City without my implying my pro tempore possession of a Being
there, I condition thar rather after the circular line of the Verb, as when
respecting the Inhabitants I do it after the oblique; my being there so as well
supposing a benefit, were it but to the Tavern and Tailor. Or, if my condition
be mean, that I must have some way of acquisition to subsist my said being
amongst them. Wherefore I then say Parisiis. As when I would intimate both the
place and Inhabitants jointly I express my self Genitively, saying Lutetiae
Parisiorum; that of the two being the most worthy casual Position.

Dr. Tailor has a Rule that (baulking the absurdity of teaching the Latin by
the English Idiome, which in this very particular confounds complete with
imperfect narratives) depends much on the same Philosophy. See his Grammar p.
76.
Says he [of] after a Verb transitive is always expressed by the Preposition
[de] as Loquor de Monarchia.

The reason is that the relation of the Monarchy being not absolute, it falls
short of a transitive; and therefore being comprehensible by none other of the
said lines, the casual word must be ushered by a Preposition.

And so our Authors Mereor cum adverbiis: the desert not reaching the whole
man, the Adverb is used circumstantially to express how well or ill, much or
little; which at most amounting but to a part, leaves the casual word under the
same condemnation.

Where its further observable that motions tending toward fixed Beings have the
circumstance of their failing more elegantly expressed by a note supplying the
sense both of Adverb and Preposition; as Prope Templum, procul urbe, etc.

Thirdly, Causa propter quam of a motion is expressible; Prepter dotem.
as to say, John loves Joan for her dowry. The line of the Verb's governance
reaching but a termino in terminum. And

Fourthly, when the formal cause of a motion is also essicient; the said lines
as they indicate rational rather than material governances; so do they the
formality, and not materiality or essence of the word of Sense. And therefore
says our Author Baccharis prae ebrietate: and Terence, e Davo hoc a^divi; as
if he had said, Davus told it me. And the same it is when the Active voice of a
Verb becomes Passive; where instead of John loves Joan, I say Joan is loved by
John; he so becoming an efficient cause of her passion, as in the second
chapter of the first part of this discourse has been already showed.

These as exceptions premised, 1 Naturam expellas furca licet us^ recurret.
2 Invidus alterius rebns macrescit opimis.
3 Jam veniet tacito curva senecta pede.


As if he had said; The condition of those and the like Ablatives are
rationally obvious without a preposited sign; although the first does sound
alike with the Nominative, as do the other two like the Dative.

For whatever moves from its material cause not attracted by the formal, does
it weakly; and consequently, in order to assistance, laterally. As is
demonstrable either by a Spider or Cyphon. See the Emblem.
Else why cannot the Spider mount directly upwards more than the wine can
continue its ascending motion through a plain instrument as well as a lateral we
such as the Emblem notifies?

Sembl^bly in those examples, the motion having no attraction from the word of
Sense [nature attracting its expulsion no more than another man's prosperity can
naturally my leanness] must make use of a lateral help to reach it.

And this the first of the said examples does instance in lenminis: the
Categorical word of sense in the two last Being umbrated by the Verb: Macre^cit
quasi macrum se r^ddit. So Senecta ve^ict, as if he had said Nos assequetur seu
deprehe^det.

And in like manner do I apprehend the word of Price: Teruncio non emeri^.
Something being necessarily understood that is so bought.

Lastly, Whereas our Author notes certain untransformed passives, by him
called Verbs deponent, that govern and Ablative barely without Preposition or
Categorical word either express or understood: as Fungor, Fruor, Vtor.

I can no way understand this governance as peculiar to their said voices;
while they are also read both with preposited Ablative notes and lineally
casual Accusatives; as of utor Mr. Hollyoake observes out of Gel. l. 15. c.
13. And therefore do I conceive it proper for these and the like Verbs only
when their final cause is incomprehensible by the formal; the casual word so
serving as an Instrument, Cause, or Mode; though commonly of a motion other
than that it immediately depends on, as in the Ciceronian example there
produced Qui adipisci veram gloriam volunt, Justitiae fungantur officiis: where
the motion tends finally toward glory; the office being used but as a
lateral help to reach it.

As for those genitives he notes as led away from this rule; the offense
cannot be impardonable while their Verbs move in order to possession; as, Hujus
indigeo patris, etc,

Saving of his excepted Tanti, quanti, etc. which I submit if I may not as well
understand adverbially. Sithence I can find no reason why Quanticunque may not
b^ so taken as well as Quantumennque; both, and the rest there cited, being
equally circumstantial; and circumstances often duly preferred to
demonstrations, as is Reason to Sense. Whence (although the Commentator
scruples it) I conceive the expression was no way below Petronius; while on the
fall Whence probably our Gallants took up their toss glass fashion.
of TRIMALIO'S Cup he thus sung: Heu heu nos miseros quam totus homuncio nil
est!
Sic erimus cuncti postquam nos auferet Orcus.
Ergo Vivamus dum licet esse been.


Neither do I find the like liberty less Emphatically taken by the English:
Witness that of Dr. Dunne's. Both good and well should in our actions meet;
The wicked is not worse than the indiscreet.


Conclusively, 4. Whether the Introduction be our Authors I question not, since
I find the whole entitled by his name.
our Author in his Introduction tells us, That Verbs transitives are all such as
have after them an Accusative case.

He might have added only] sithence its that governance that makes a verb
transitive.

Other Verbs as well governing it accompanied, as, Aest mo te bujus.
Do litcras tibi.
Imperti^ Parmenonem salute.


Whereas the transitive motion both directly tends toward, and centereth in
its formal cause; except when it runs as it were through it by governing two
accusatives: Posce deum veniam so manifesting a confidence of obtaining.
Whereas we say Veniam Petimus ab ipso. Quia poscimus imperiose; at Petimus
submisse.

As for the word transitive, I do not remember to have read it elsewhere, save
only in Scapula as Latenizing (...). The large signification of whose
praeposited part affords much of reason for the reception of this rule as
general.

Or if I derive it from (...); and then (either in imitation of the
Peripatetick Phylosophie, or the historical consideration of the great City in
its various respective conditions between the sheep-hook and the Crozier) but
form a circle of Cases: I shall find the Accusative, according to its name,
just opposite categorical or adverse to the Nominative.

As when I say John loves Joan; there understanding the action of love
directly transferred from John to Joan; and consequently teaching to place Joan
accusatively.

Or, thirdly, if I look upon this case as it is the center of the variations of
the Noune, because placed in the midst of five; [our Authors six cases making
but five variations] and then observe the natural intendment of all motion
toward the center as its final cause or perfection, I must thence conclude
this governance as natural as that John should love Joan, and consequently
understand our Author, as telling me, That, naturally, all Verbs do expect the
word of sense should serve Accusatively.

But sithence that there be also motions of design; such as the circular, See
the Emblem.
oblique and lateral: and that accordingly some Verbs move in order to
possession: others to acquisition: and others to occasional action. Therefore
this rule is to be so understood, as that the three other forecited may be
received by way of Exception.

CHAP. 3. Of the Declansions of the Word of Being, or Noune Substantive.
THe third variation of this word of Being is according to its respective
Declensions. An accident by which the Latins mainly excel in their fore-noted
See the preface fol. 2.
magnum in parvo of speech. So intelligibly couching the Article under the
condition of the Noune, as they do the person or pronoune under the termination
of the Verb: which compells them so to vary the terminations of both, declining
the first respectively after the five rules mentioned by our Author as
follows.

1. Words Masculine and Feminine terminating in [a] they decline after the
first rule, as Poeta, Musa, etc. But the neutrals in [a] they decline after the
third, as Dogma.

And the observance hereof is of use to the more ready manifestation of the
gender: the Neuter otherwise not so soon occurring, in regard of their
admittance of such dead Beings as contain the living, among the Feminines, as
in the first Chapter of the second part has been foreshewed.

2. Words Identically Masculine and Feminine ending in [us] or [ius] they
decline after the second rule, as, Cibus, Fluvius, Humus: but words Feminine of
quality they decline after the third, as, Salus. And so do they their identical
Neuters, as, Foedus.

But tropical neuters so terminatin^, they decline after the second rule.
Whence ou^ Author notes them among the non-crescents, as Virus, Pelagus -- etc.

Whereof the first is neutrally decline only in regard its operation so taken
tends toward death; Virus.
yet after this rule; To manifest that its killing energie is identical to the
nature of the thing no otherwise than in respect of the Dos, and manner of its
use: there being otherwise among the three natural bodies no greater Cordials
than such as are prepared of Opium, Viper, and Mercuric.

The Naturality of the second's declension I can not well unrevel without some
elongation of discourse. Pelagus.
It being a word besides which the Latin has more appellations for the Sea
then any other language I know. Whereof four be most significant names; viz.
Fretum, Mare, Pontus and Aequor.

The first properly signifying Creeks or Ferries, which at ebbing water be
rough, current, and troublous. Whence Fretum quasi fervidum, says Mr.
Hollyoake.

The second signifying all Seas in general; -- Maria ac terras, caelumque
Profundum
Quippe ferant rapidi -- Aen. 1.

Says Virgil of the winds.

Mr. Hollyoake derives the word from Marath of the Hebrews; which I understand
not quoad gustum, as he there insinuates, but quoad transitum. -- Placataque
venti dant Maria -- Aen. 3.
Says the same Author.

The third denominating vast Seas; and so elegantly formed ab absentia P^ntis.
-- Coelum undique and undique Pontus. Says the Maronian in his fore quoted
book.

And the fourth even or calm Seas; ab aequ^. As he elsewhere notes by Aequora
tuta silent.

The rest being rather Epithites than names, as Salum, i. e. Salsum. Caerulum,
i. e. Caeruleum. Hadria. i. e. Hadriaticum. So Oceanus, i. e. Oceanum mare.

Which Epithites and names so amply denoting the Sea in all respects; I know
not what should induce them to borrow the only name that the Greek had for it
(...) Pelagus.
, save for a more strict note of that Greek side or arm of the Mediterranean,
which over against Galatia and upwards, themselves also called Mare mortuum:
whether for its mourning color, or the deadly fewd betwixt them and the
bordering Greeks: Or else from mor mar{w} of the Britains (said to have since
planted with Brennius their Captain on that Greek side) mor in that language
signifying a Sea, and mar{w} still or dead: that being the stillest (or
according to the British idiome, deadlyest) Sea my Contrymen had e're
before crossed: It was rational this new word of their should be declined
neutrally. Yet with like caution as has been fore-noted of Virus: the
substance thereof speaking it no more neuter than Pontus.

So Vulgus, as it represents a number of living men, must be Masculine: saving
when their joint stupidity is mentioned with scorn by the more ingenuous. And
that Catachrestically beyond the bounds-foot of Dutch Boore, by so much as a
living dog can be supposed better than a dead Lion.

I have dwel't longer on this particular in regard I know not but there may be
more words thus varyed or at leastwise variable according to the Poet or
Orator's occasion. For, The Gender being but an affection of the Noune, becomes
alterable not only according to the use of the thing specified: but also to the
present passion or passionate reception of the same. Accede ad ignem hanc --
says Terence in Eunuchus.

But I return to our declensions: where the mediate Masculines and tropical
Feminines in [us] I observe declinable after the fourth rule, as Potus, Domus,
Ignorami socius.
etc. Whereupon if the Question of Pedantius in the Play should be renewed,
viz. Cur non Potus facit Poti sicut cibus cibi in genitivo?

The answer would be, That the first is supposed to be either water or the
juice of vegetives: but the other properly living creatures: as is observed by
the English, while they call nothing meat but flesh.

Or if it should he asked, Why morbus is declined after the second rule, and
salus after the third?

The answer were, That the second is but a mere qualitative Being, but the
first a substantial one. For, (as the learned Capivaccius In cap. de P^hisi.
has it) Omnis morbus est vel vapor vel minera. Thereby excluding all the
pretended diseases ab inanitione: because until there be a peccant matter, as
there can be no inequality, so no pain. It being a maxim in medicine that
Dolorisica actio fit a proportione majoris inaequalitatis. (a)


There do also belong to this declension all words ending in [um] and [ir] and
likewise some flourishing Masculine in [er]. Others so terminating being
rationally transferred to the third rule: as in the next Chapter shall be showed.

But as for our Author's Satur, I cannot find it substantially posited by any
Latin writer: neither any word so terminating declinable after this rule.

The third claiming both that and all other not forementioned terminations
whatsoever: having of late left none declinable after the fifth. Save only the
monosyllable Res, and such as terminate in [ies].

A fraus bonesta, which I suppose committed in mere order to the quadrupedation
of Heroic verse. Plebs after the old way of declining Being, when obliquely
casual, thereby comprehensible no otherwise than as the myrabolan nut of the
Apothecarie's. Quod nec Virgilius, nec carmine dixit Homerus,
Hoc ex unguento constat and ex balano.


CHAP. 4. Of the sensuality of the casual word: therefore in this Tract called
a word of sense. Also of the declension of the word of Quality.
HAving in the first Chapter of the first part of this Tract showed that the
word of Being becomes sensual by mediation of Quality.

And, in the third, that the signification of this Quality can be sensually
fashioned no otherwise than as either joined or inserted to a Being: It remains
that the manner of this union be yet further examined.

The Angel in the Text (as checking the overcurious enquiry of Esdras) is said
to have bid him measure an handful of wind, Esdr. 2, 4.
and weigh an ounce of fire.

A curiosity which the sons of Hermes yet cease not to pursue; By an unwearied
attempt to losen the fire from its entitative fixation: that so incorporating
it self with the volateeles, it may, by their rule of rotation, so defaecated,
entice those spirits with it inseparably to cohabit Ad perpetrandum miracula
unius rei. In Tab.
Says that Father.

However this be not commonly known to succeed in the practice: The possibility
of the work may, happily, appear less worthily ridiculous: If the forecited
process be but compared with what we may hourly observe in common converse:
viz. How that by declining a word of Being from its denominative state or
condition, the hinges of its otherwise immovable essence are so shaken, that
it becomes thereby fitted for such a coition with incorporeal quality, as does
rationally advance it to an excellency enabling its reception or all the
emanations of Beings whatsoever. Insomuch that the numberless notions of man
are thereby made communicative; although the quality of the word have no
outward appearance therein at all.

As to reinstance: when I say JOHN LOVES JOAN; the very Grammatically casual
position of Joan, as the formal cause of John's love, shows in her some
perfection wanted by John. Whether qua animal for the perpetuation of his
entity; or also qua rationale, in order to future convenience of living. And so
John loves Joan either so fair, young, rich, etc. as his opinion shall adjudge
most for his own felicity. Which to understand is the sum of all Grammar
Syntax. The question and its answer being alike modable: and all definitive,
sentences either resolving a question already propounded; or expecting their
answer, by confirmation, contradiction, or desired illustration from the
confabulant. So that whatever else can be expressed is but ad voluptatem
linguae, and on this depending. Therefore I shall endeavor to render it yet
more plain and perspicuous: Even by a Fable read of old by Diotima to Socrates
Where she feigneth how that as the Gods were celebrating the birthday of
Venus, Porus the son of Providence and God of Wealth should be there amongst
them: and, got drunk, should, as he went forth to case him, fall asleep at the
Gate where Poenia or ^overty waited for an Alms: Which she observing; That the
indigency of her condition overcoming the modesty of her sex, should prompt her
to allure Porus to a congress, whereby she conceived and brought forth Love;
who ever since has been a close companion of Venus; because begotten on her
birth-feast, as aforesaid,

By the same reason is the word of Sense as inseparable from its invisible
quality. And is the visible, I mean worded Quality or Adjective ever declined
according to the substantial naturality of that word: as by our Authors three
first rules for declension of nou^es appears: Bonus dominus, Bona musa, Bonum
regnum: Tristis Pareus, Triste Cadaver, Faelix natalis; liber Magister, libera
Magistra, liberum Magisterium; few or no Adjectives terminating in [er] being
otherwise declinable. Acer, Pauper, Degener and Uber so mentioned by our
Author, being as often read The first Acris; and the second, in no meaner
Author than Plautus, Paupera. So that these are little better than Hetroclites;
as the third is than a degenerate substantive, viz. a Substantive foyld with a
preposition, and so turned Adjective de genere; and the fourth being a mere
derivative Ube ab Ubere. So also proving first that those Substantives in [er]
which be declined after our Author's second rule are naturally excelling those
that be transferred to the third: (a)
which are either Feminine as Matter; or dividing from their unity as frater; or
else in the declination of the vigor of their Masculine perfection as Pater.

Secondly, it proves that our Author's two last rules for declension of
Substantives were by the refiners of the Latin added. (B)
The one to distinguish such words terminating in [us] as they were pleased by
the assistance of their Tropes to advance either from their naturali neutrality
to the Feminine gender, as Domus: or from their muliebrity to the Masculine as
Potus: which as it is water should be declined Femininely: but in regard of its
nourishing use shall be declined Masculinely; yet after the fourth rule: In
order first to a distinction between it and an Identical Masculine: and
secondly for manifestation of its advancing trope.

As for words ending in [U] their Heteroclity pronounces them but vulgarly
regular; and somewhat of a less esteem than the former, in regard they are all
Neuters.

The fist of our Authors rules as it was added so was it repealed. The
celebration of Heroic verse having for the most part rendered it impertinent if
not offensive, as in the foregoing Chapter has been foreshewed.

Therefore have these rules no Adjective declinable after their terminations.
The Latin Quality as well in its declensions as gradual ascentions being
strictly worded after the forecited Phylosophie of Excellentia Ternarii large
videri est apud Gerard. Dorn. in Philosophia Chem. Trithem. in Ep. ad Gnaum
German. aliosque Philosophorum passim. Viz. in the uses.
Virtue; though ^ll three sound alike from vulgar tongues.

Which worthily magnifies the Roman Ingenuity in framing their rules so that
thereby words as well as things should bear their witness.

Of which hereafter --

CHAP. 5. Of number, with the Arts thereout emaning.
THis accident might deservedly have challenged the first place in respect the
others could not be discussed without it: the Genders, Cases, and Declensions
of the Noune being all distinguishable by virtue of number. Yet because of its
small use in Grammar Syntax, I thought fit to marshal it here in the arrear of
the declension of the Adjective: its multiplication so taken amounting to
little more than the Adjective's Even and Odd. For as even and odd cannot stand
together in one number; so may not the same number be both singular and
plurally accounted; the least addition to the singular rendering it plural; and
the most doing no mo^^. Therefore are we glad to ascertain the unities by the
addition of a quantitative quality, As to say, two, three, four, five, and so
to the end of Arithmetic. By the Ancients compiled to an Art according to
their four rules of ADDITION, SUBSTRACTION, MULTIPLICATION, and DIVISION.

Which last they extended even to the division of an unity; and so produced two
arts more: whereof the one they called Geometry, and the other Astronomy; the
word (...) signifying both number, order, and harmony: The last whereof
originally to proceed from the motion of the spheres; and consequently its
knowledge as an Art from the spherical part of Astronomy, I conceive to need
no better proof than what Cicero has left us in his transcendent tract de
Legitur inter fragmenta, Ciceronis.
Somnio Scipionis.

Other notes on this accident observeable find I none. Save that custom does
herein oversway both order, nature and reason. As (to say nothing of the It is
known to every one to what case the royal bloods of Portugal is driven. Los
Sangues -- So Don Emanuel in Reasons for his conversion, p. 8.
received civil difference between personages in point of extraction) when
mentioning the smoke of an hundred Chimneys exhaling, perhaps, from as many
respective combustible materials: Or Latinizing all the sands between Callis
and Gravellin, I must express my self singularly. Whereas traveling but a
little further Eastward, I shall find the damped mudd whereon those Towns
stand called by name of THE UNITED PROVINCES OF THE NETHERLANDS. An Alleotheta
of such particular ornament as I have but small encouragement to endeavor the
disswasion of the English Grandees from owning for good genuine sense, by any
addition of success my experience found the contrary reasoning of their
Scaliger to have gained on his Houghen Moughens there; his words on the place
being these.

Terrae divisionem auspicati sunt a familiaribus occupationibus; Et jus ipsam
injuriam apellarunt; Neque enim m^lius terra d^buit alii atque alii tribui quam
aer. Ibid. p. 176.


I aque natura vindicat sese; and mortuos Tyrannos non majore tegit tumulo,
quam unum ex opressis: sese omnibus aequalem ostendens matrem.

Yet for certain plurally recorded festivals; since on their days there were
also kept Fairs, Revellings, etc. to mention them accordingly, was but
rational. As the old Romans did their Floralia, Bacchanalia, etc. No more is it
to name the coacervation of many into one singularly, as populus, pars, etc.

The Species or Shapes, (...). Specus, uns de species.
and Figures; which are our Author's other accidents of a Noune: finding them
of a mere external consideration, I pass; as not competent to the intrinsecal
design of this discourse.

Herm'aelogium; The third PART.
CHAP. 1. Showing the variations and affections of the word of Motion. And
first of its distinguishment by number and person: Also of the Verb impersonal.
IT descends first from its Anherbhynedig bhod. Themate primario. So Dr. Das
vis, p. 83.
Infinitive Essence in order to an affectionate concordancie with the Being
whence it proceeds, in number and person: I, THOU or HE; WE, YE or THEY; under
whom be comprehended, and by which are personated the Basis of all motion
whatsoever. All Verbs whereby on speaks to a Being, of whatever Gender, being
naturally personable after the second. And all by which mention is made of a
thing or things (except of ones self or of things joined to himself) being
after the third. Wherefore the Latins not only decline the note of the third
person as a Pronoune Adjective; but also manifest the esteem and singularity of
the Being it under that And sometimes also the others, as, Ego ^ste, ^u ipse,
etc.
person represents, by their triplicit distinction of Ille, Ipse, and Iste:
much as the English Thon and You, so much cavil'd at by our zealous Tremblers.

Since then every motion necessarily proceeds from a Being as comprehensible
by these pronominal persons, some or one of them. It follows that there can be
no such thing as a Verb impersonal strictly taken; more then that there may be
Gold without weight and fixation. Wherefore our Author in his Institutions
declares his acceptance of that name in a larger sense: by telling us not of
a Verb that distinguishes none; but that does not vary in point of
personality. Being declined throughout all Moods and Tences in the voice of the
third person singular only.

What might induce the Ancients to the invention of such a Verb, I only guess
as by comparing exterior organick motions with the mental. The perfection of
the first being in its end; and therefore thitherward followed by the eye of
the Spectator, with avidity more or less, as the motion tends toward
acquisition: that, in respect of its grandizing faculty, being appetible
equally with Good: as the contrary is avoydable like hurt or Evil.

Hence comes it not only that young fencers commonly shut their eyes at the
strokes of their (...), and that we enjoy those pleasures which end in loss
with more freedom of delight in the dark; but also do account it a fortitude
not to contract and guard our eyes if a Hawk should but offer to sowce at our
face; although we behold her flight at a fowl with comparative delight. The
like might be instanced by a Shaft or Bowl, etc.

The same it is with the Eye of the understanding. And therefore when the
material cause of the motion is most worthy our observation, the Ancients might
rationally marshal it in the arrear of the formal; as saying, Oportet mendacem
esse memorem: where the two last words are the Basis or material cause of
oportet; which, were they placed in the from of the sentence, would render the
Verb Personal, [for we also read oporteo] and so the attention would be
attracted toward mendacem as the formal cause of a transitive motion: which
were diverse from the intent of the sentence; The memnonic Art being of such
necessary use to a Liar, that without it he could never hope to thrive by his
faculty.

Thus as the Passive voice renders the procedure of its motion comparatively
excelling the Active by mere addition of the letter [R] and transposition of
its extremes, as has been Part. 1. c. 2.
foreshewed, does the fixation of a Verb in this third person with a retirement
of its material cause to the arrear of the formal, declare a vehemence no less
then superlatively notable.

Which leads me to the observation of two like Ceremonies usual in humanity;
whereof the one is our incitation of importunity, or more earnest solicitation,
by a Maiden refusal of what in covert we ambiently affect; like the Bishops Mes
erat apud Anglos ut Archiepiscopo promoventi, Episcopa^^rus ter (vel ob
modestiam) responderet Nolo.
Nolo; or that coy dame of whom Virgil sings: Et fugit ad salices, and se cupit
ante videri. Ecl. 3.
The other is, our manifestation of respect toward our Confabulant by so
personating him according to his attributes. Dominatio vestra being the article
of salute beyond the Seas even between single Gentlemen; which in England is in
fashion only among the greater Nobility. Except while a Paisant, to show his
respective distance, affords the attribute of WORSHIP to the lesser. And to
the same end also is the first Person so convertible; as when for [I am] we say
[Your Servant is]. The dignity of this number being celebrated even by our
natural unpolished gestures. In that the first and second persons of the Verb
be as well digitally as vocally notified; but this third person never digitally,
saving in order to contempt. so that it was not without reason that the old
English usurped it for the heightning of persuasion. As Sir Geoffery Chaucer
when representing the Cheating Alchymist -- Thus said he in his game, The
Chanons yeomans tale.

Stoopeth a down in faith you be to blame.
Delpeth me now, as I did you wylere,
Put in your hond looks what is there.


There is another sort of Verb which Mr. Hoole in his Page 147.
Grammar calls Verbs of an exempt power, as Fulgurat, Tonitruit, etc. These
(says he) (though he is pleased to declare the nature of neither) come near
the nature of impersonals.

The neerness I find to consist merely in their fixation in this Superlative
singularity of the person; and that only by virtue of a reciprocality e
contrario. These last, until their causes were known, being apprehended with a
kind of timorous admiration; and therefore imitating the foresaid shutting of
the eyes.

I heard thy voice in the Garden (said Adam in the Text) and I was afraid and
did my self. Genesis 3.


From all which I conclude that however I read the third person singular of a
Verb Active usurped; I am thereby to understand a vehemence; yet not equal with
our Authors impersonals, unless also the Basis be post-posited as aforesaid.

The Verb Impersonal of the Passive Voice I observe to vary from the sense of
its personality only while it fixes our observance to it self; just as the
fore-quoted noble Chaucer does by a personal Active, where In Assembly of fowls.
he thus sings: As from awd ground MENSAITH comes Corn fro year to year.
So from a^^d Books, by my faith, commen all new Science that men lere.


The Spoke though singular being so rendered more considerable than the
plurality of the speakers.

CHAP. II. Of the Conjugations of the Latin Verb.
THe main end of this and the following variations, as Roman, being In Preface
fol. 2.
already manifested. It remains that their respective both natural and vocal
inclinations be now examined.

The first whereof useless in vulgar tongues, which for the most part express
the Mood and Tense by preposited notes, The Latins, doing it by their various
shaping of the Terminations, were therefore forced, as for the declining of
their Noun, so of their Verb, to invent Rules varying by alike reason,
according to the sound and nature of the word; which rules they were pleased to
make known by name of CONJUGATIONS.

Whether by a Metaphor a Con ugio in regard that without these the conjugated
Pronoun cannot be made a femme covert (as our law renders it) Iscruple not.

Only observe that as all Active Latin Verbs do terminate either in [o] [co]
or [io] the (...) of the language notes no more Conjuga ions i and thence
conclude our Authors third Conjugation to be [even as the Part. 2. c. 4. (B).
forementioned two last Declensions of the Noun] added, merely for a
distinguisher of such Verbs as, by the same or like sor^d, convey a different
signification; whereof the significator of the most worthy action terminating
in [o] shall be of the first, and the less worthy shall be of the third
Conjugation. As for instance, That word Lego.
by which our Author exemplifieth this Conjugation we also read declinable
after the first. But sithence To set a house in order, or to perform an
Embassy be actions so far transcending Reading, Stealing or gathering of
herbs; although the language presents all alike; yet its no small
demonstration of its curiosity that the word is diversely conjugated.

And as Verbs declinable after this Conjugation do, on this and such like an
account, descend to the third; so do others of the fourth ascend to it. How
genuinely then some Authors do confound the Infinitive of both I submit.
As for example: They properly decline Cupio after the fourth; in regard it
denotes want: but Capio because it expresses the recovery or enjoyment of a
thing fore-wanted [although it also ends in [io] they strictly decline after
the third; which moreover I observe so placed, because -- Facile est descensus
Averni;
Sed revocare gradum; bic labor --


Notwithstanding I find that some Verbs derivative from Nounes tetminating in
[io] stick not in their ascent even to the first Conjugation: as, Somnio from
Somnium, etc. And on that score have we also some Ver^s terminating in [eo] so
conjugated, as Calceo from Calceus, etc.

Contrarily Eo, queo, veneo do descend to the fourth. So by their Conjugation
as well as Form proclaiming their Heteroclity: though not defect: as aio, Cedo,
Salve, etc.

CHAP. III. Of the Moods and Tenses.
THe Conjugations lead me thirdly to the Moods; which are modes, shapes or
faces of the Verb carved according to the inclination of the mind for the
stating of a motion under a certain time.

Of whose nature or product finding so full an account rendered by the learned
Ibid c. 114
Scaliger, I shall not show my self so much a Plagiary as to insert it
otherwise than as the sense of his more able pen, which summarily is:

That all things which act must needs be qualified with an appetible energie or
power to desire: that being the cause of motion as PRIVATION is of It; and
whatever it be that desires, does it either inconsiderately by a certain
natural propension, such as is the fires to burn, etc. or else advisedly.

Which last sort o^^esire stands equally inclined to two contraries; as a
man's either to walk or not. In which also there must be a certain
deliberation; that is, an affection of the mind freely reasoning this election;
whether pro or con makes no difference. Sithence he that disswadeth does
persuade not to do.

Whence it was necessary that things thus done should be declared by a
particular shape, face, or figure of words. Therefore things just now done they
called Indicative or Definitive. Things to be done before this election, or on
it depending they called con or Subjunctive. Things absolute or no way
depending and yet in the power of another they distinguished; calling a vote
toward a greater Optative; and toward a lesser Imperative.

Lastly, whereas certain Verbs do barely express the will, power or Inclination
of the agent: as, volo, cup^o, vadeo, etc. The object of those are expressible
either simply, or else under time: thus, Volo cibum, cupio imperium, video
cursum. Meat being simply objected to the will; Rule to the desire; and the
course or race to the sight.

But if I were to manifest these objects under time and action jointly: then
were I forced to find out some word that might express the action Infinitively:
that is, without Positively defining either; as to say: Volo comedere, cupio
imperare, video te currere. Which infinitive way of expression cannot yet
properly be called a Mood; sit^ence no inclination of the mind is by it
manifested.

Thus far Scaliger. So comprehending first the questioning Mood of the Ancients
under the Positive, Definitive or Indicative. Secondly, the Hortative under the
Imperative; and thirdly, excluding the Infit^tive as aforesaid.

Dr. Tailor and Mr. Hoole (whose pardon I shall not despair of, if I transgress
the mode by quoting them in their days, when they know that scribbling this at
my paternal hermitage in Glamorganshire, besides their and the forecited, I
had the sight of no track on this Subject) Although out of compliance with our
Author they retain the Infinitive, yet make but one Mood of the Optative,
Potential and Subjunctive. And in my opinion as tolerably. For if Scaliger
couldmaintain his exclusion for want of a power to particularize a temporal
inclination of the mind: why might not they their reduction, See the
definition.
all three being expressible under one figure or face?

Besides that the two last are not essential to the Philosophy, but
multilocution of a sentence, viz that thereby two sentences might be
expressible at once. The sound of the Potential Latin Mood, when single, being
always expressed by the addition of Possum, Volo or Debeo. And the Subjunctive
elsewhere quot^d by Scaliger, (and that as the sense of an Ancient) to be
Nonita dictus quia subjungeretur, sed quia subjungeret. So implicitly
confessing its defect, until another be joined to it.

The same might be said of the Potential; which, so placed, as it intelligibly
comprehends Possum, etc is thereby made capable of the name. So that as the
Optative Mood is known by its Adverb; and the Subjunctive by its conjunction;
the Potential is manifested by its Subjunctive office, without either Adverb or
Conjunction thereto joined, under the face of an Optative.

But whether the Subjunctive deserves the honor of the name, as Mr. Hoole. Or
the Potential, as Dr. Tailor; Or the Optative added to the Subjunctive, as
Scaliger. Or since we can well explode neither with preservation of the
language from its ancient barbarity, whether it be not safest to retain them
all as we find them ranked by our Author, I shall not undertake to determine.

Only observe that the first intention of Language in and by the whole, but
teaches modably to question, define, require, persuade or wish according to
the three formal differences of time whether present, past, or to come.

The sub-division of the time past into [Did] [Have] and [Had] appearing to
have been invented on the same account with the three last noted Moods. The
Ictus or nick of time being of such quickness as preventeth our notice. So that
fitst; To say an action is imperfectly passed is the same as to say It is
passed and not passed. Wherefore the exactest Latin Writers have used both
promiscuously.

So that as for Virgils authority cited in maintenance of the contrary, where
he sings Hic Templum Junoni ingens Sidonia Dido
Condebat -- Aeneid. 1.

On which our Author comments Erat enim adhuc in opere. I conceive our Author
is there to be understood Cum grano Salis, even as is the Poet. To whose design
then in hand, I think I need not be thought at all to derogate from his known
merit, if I allude a note of Ben. Johnsons, viz. That -- Poet never credit
gained,
By writing truth, but things like truth well feigned.


Chronologers agreeing that Troy was taken in the third year of HABDON, Judge
of Israel. See Hel^.
And a Monument, yet remaining near old Carthage, showing that the builders or
fortifiers of the place were of the sons of Anack, who had thither fled from
the face of that great Robber: So they called Joshua the son of Nun.

Yet the cause of the first Punic war being by See Sir Walter R^leigh's Hist.
of the world. l. c. c. 5.
Historiographers rendered as scarce honorable on the Roman side; It might be
allowable in Virgil so to represent both that Queen, Place and Entertainment.
To the end that, Aeneas his desertion being once believed to have been by an
especial Aeocid (...)
command from Jupiter, he might thereon state a Theme for such a Tract on that
war as should much vindicate the reputation of his Countrymen. For, As the
Greeks, waging against them as Trojans for their usurpation of a Lady,
prevailed. The Carthaginians, grounding their quarrel against them as Romans on
a cause contrary, might by the same Justice be rendered Authors of their own
ruin. And thence might he conclude with very seasonable dehortatives from
effeminacy; and incitements to a perseverance in that prowess which already had
deified their Caesar's.

But be it as the Poet there fansieth. It appears that it was the verse and
not the imperfection of the building that invited him to that expression. The
words following being -- Donis opulentum and numine Divae. Otherwise I submit
it whether he might not have expressed himself by Condidit as properly as
Cicero could write ad Atticum, 4. -- ad Attic.
that Postridie mane ad eum vadebat.

Secondly, HAD (except in certain English expressions of the having motion, as
I had, would have had, etc.) is of no use in a single sentence; And therefore
cannot be more then as a Verbial Conjunction of passed actions.

Nevertheless in order to the foresaid design in Elocution, we shall find both
these Carabines of the Pretertense to be of excellent and precise use. As If I
were to say, When I had spoken I sat down. It were as if I had said Did fit.
But in case the expression of the Action were to antecede the Subjunctive
declaration, then HAVE would be as proper. As to say: He spoke as he had been
an Oracle, i. e. Did speak or has spoken. And if I were to begin with the
supposition; Then were I to express the following action Perfectively; as to
say: Had he been au Oracle he could not have more truly spoken. Which sense in
the Latin must sound Preter-perfectively. As; Si adesset Apollo, rectius loqui
non potuisset.

Where its observable that in that language the anteceding supposition is
expressible by the Preterimperfect as well as the Pluperfect tense, but never
by the Perfect: adfuerit, in that place, sounding more like the Future tense.

So that the conveniencie of these and such like connections advise us here to
understand Plus not as it comes from (...) Before; but from (...) multus

And so may we admit of this Preterpluperfect tense; as being a Tense besides,
or rather by the side of the Perfect, expressing something more: that is;
somewhat else suffered or done before.

CHAP. IV. Of the Participial Variation of the Verb.
THe Participle I take for a sort of Motus per accidens or a moving Quality.
The Verb so coming adjectible to a Being for manifestation of its qualities in
order to Action or Passion, and that in point of time either present or to come.

I say ADJECTIBLE: in regard it must then adhere to the Substantive in all
respects like the Adjective after whose Termination it is declined.

I say IN ORDER TO ACTION OR PASSION: To distinguish it from a Noun Adjective;
whose part is to express the quality of the Being in order to perfection; under
which I comprehend Good and Evil, as all other qualities under them.

I say IN POINT OF TIME: To distinguish it, not only from the Verbial
Adjective, as; Tempus edax rerum; which, if I convert to a Participial
expression, must be Edens res; But also from Participial voices and Nouns. That
is: Not the Gerunds, so called by our Author. But Participles that be so only
Vocally. As when I say: A Loving man: The word Loving is a plain Vocal The same
is Caredig and Carad{w}u in the British.
Participle; there being no such Adjective in the Language.

Or when in Latin I say Legendis veteribus; legendis being Vocally a passive
Participle of the Future tense.

Yet in regard, thus posited, those no^ifie no time, they are in sense no more
then Adjectives.

Wherefore our Author teaches, That a Participle takes part of a Verb, as
Tense and Signification. As if he had said: The Vocality cannot make a complete
Participle, unless also it has relation to a Tense.

Which, lastly, I have here confined to either PRESENT or FUTURE; to manifest
that all Qualities must be understood of Beings either Actual or Potential;
Sithence a third distinction of Being is not to be found in Nature. And
contingencies, whether complex'd or incomplex'd, being but Vel praesentia vel
futura. So Jacob. Martin. in part. Met. Sect. 10.

Thereby clearly excluding our Authors Praetertense Passive. And, in my
conceit, justly. For, in confirmation of Martins said Philosophy, I observe
that this Preter-participle does not answer our Authors definition.

First in respect that, in single sentences, Virgil. Nunc oblita mihi tot
^armina -- As if he had said, Oblita sunt, fuerunt vel fuere.

Secondly: That in multilocutorie or compound expressions the time is not noted
by it, Lustratus urbem rus ibam; or ibo. The latter (being the same in sense,
as if I said Postquam urbem lustratus fuero, rus tho) does manifest that the
time in the former is not specified by Lustratus; but by the Verb tham.

Wherefore I submit to my more judicious Reader whether I may not here close
with the Rythme. (I think it be Sir William Davenants.) Think no more on what
is past,
Since time in motion makes such have.
It has no leisure to descry
The Errors which it passes by.


Thus also becomes the Participle of so covert a cognizance, but most to the
Latin liberty of position; whereas the Northern languages, having the least
radical dependence on the Roman, do mainly so manifest it Viz. By ranging their
words according to their peculiar signification.
yet after the respectively different Idioms following.

The English always places the Adjective in the van of the Substantive; and
the Participle in the arrear either of the Substantive or Verb: as when they
say: A good man loving virtue lives uprightly. The word Loving is sufficiently
known to be a Participle merely because placed after the Substantive man, and
not before it as the Adjective Good. And rationally: A main use of the Partiple
being by the Omission of a Conjunction to bring two motions that accidentally
proceed from one Being expressible also by one sentence.

As for further instance: To read and to write are different actions. Yet its
possible they may at once proceed from the same Agent: At which time, instead
of I write and I read, I may, so, more concinly say that I write reading.

So a good man may be a bad Citizen. But when both capacities well qualified do
meet in one person: whereas verbially I must have said, That good man loves
virtue and lives uprightly; I may participially express all by one sentence,
saying: That good man loving virtue lives, etc.

The same position have all the languages coming from the Schlavonic and
High Dutch which I have heard sundry Gentlemen of those Countries maintain to
be originally but one. Those that were otherwise minded ever disputing the
antiquity of the other language.

Contrarily the British (being a language of more reality then complement) as
it always places the Substantive in the front (it being nonsense to them to
prefer accidents to their substances) so, when the casual word is regular
without a preposited note, does their participial sense follow the Adjective
like a middle gerund of the Latin: G{w}r da in caru rhin{w}edh, etc.

I. e. Vir bonus in amando virtutem. (En aimant says the Frenchman.)

An Idiome fully ratified in the sense of the fore-quoted flower of Leyden
where he says; Iul. Seal. ib. l. 1. c. 143.
Medium gerundiorum servat vires participii: Sed tanto aptiore modo quanto
superabantur a participiis verba.

But we must, with In prafat. ad Ethic.
Dr. Case, confess that Ruina Bangoriensi gloria Walliae nebulata fuit. Ah!
Sceler oedh y Saxon, Schelum.
Scholan,
O'r T{w}r daflu'r Llyfrau'r tan.


The like position have the languages deriving from the British: as Jaith
Gerni{w} and Jaith Luda{w}; i. e. The Cornish and the Armoric, commonly called
Little Britain; which, as Mr. Cambden affirms, was the ancient name of
Ireland. Where (says In descrip. Hyberniae.
he) the Brittsh language was spoken until they were overrun by the Spaniard.

A verity, which, at my being in that Isle, I could discern more by the names
of some places there, then any thing in the language; excepting only this
position. The said sentence being by them thus rendered.

For match in gra du S^elki i gamacht gy direcht. i. e. Vir bonus ex amore
virtutis expres e, seu sine dolo, se gerit. The Substantive GRA, so placed,
being their Succedaneum both of Participle and Gerund.

CHAP. V. Of the variation of the Verb into Gerund and Supine.
THe Gerund I find with our Author going under a twofold cognizance: viz. In
his Introduction by name of a voice belonging to the Infinitive Mood; and in
his Institutions by name of participial voices.

My apprehension is that by his first appellation he chiefly means the third
Gerund; as by his second he notes the other two; but more precisely the middle
its sense being clearly participial, excelling only in that it relates to the
action rather than the person acting; whereas the first, substantially,
expresses the essence of a motion in a middle way between a participle and a
Substantive; being fortified in its governance according. to the rules of the
Genitive of a Substantive, after Adjectives or Substantives; as a verbial
action proceeding from a Being either qua Being, or qua so qualified: as; Amor
habendi, certuo eundi, i. e. Aeneas certus eundi.

As for our Author's design in converting this Gerund to an adjectible
signification by his Virgilian Authority of -- Generandi gloria mellis: I must
submit whether that seeming Gerund be other than as one of the participial
voices forementioned. For were it a Gerund, then should it be governed as the
action of Gloria; and must also govern mellis accusatively. Our Author's own
rules teaching that Participles, Gerunds and Supines do govern by such cases as
do the Verbs that they come of. A domination beyond the verge of those
participial voices, in regard they denote no time, as aforesaid.

Which I instance, to ease may readers memory from the trouble of conning those
many substantives our Author in his Introduction observes to require this
Gerund instead of the infinitive mood. That rule amounting to no more than as
if he had said: When ever the essence of an action proceeds as out of the
possession of a Being, it is more emphatically expressed by this Gerund than
either by its Verb, or Substantive. Amor habendi Cecropias apes sounding with
more vehemence, than either apes possidere, or possessionis apum. So also do we
say Otium scribcndi literas, rather than Scribere, literarum scripturae, or
Scriptionis; although the English seldom express this otherwise than by the
sound of the Infinitive Mood.

Yet sithence sometimes, as well as to write, they manifest their leisure of
writing. Dr. Tailor, Page 9^.
to an English translator, gives an excellent note to this particular, viz.
that The English of the Infinitive Mood, or the Participle of the present Tense
without a Substantive coming after an Adjective, or Substantive which govern a
Genitive with the sign [of] is put in the Gerund in [di].

And (says he again) The English of the Participle of the present Tence coming
without a Substantive, and following an Adjective, Verb, or Participle with the
sign [of] or any sign of the Ablative Case, is made in the Gerund in [do] with
or without a Preposition.

To which [for I pretend not to much reading; and therefore in rules taken from
observation, do wholly submit to more literate heads] I only add: That
preposited signs being badges of the vulgarity of a language (and therefore
industriously avoided by the Latin, Part 2. c. 2.
as has been fore-shewed) may be suspected to have crept in hither with the
familiarity of common converse. The original Latin design, by these and the
following variation of the Verb so merely tending to the heightening of their
Idiome, not probably admitting of such allaies.

And this our Author tacitly observes, while for their governance he picketh
out Authorities free from those clogs: as, Efferor studio videndi paren^es.
Defessus sum ambulando;
Utendum est aetate.
-- Scitatum oracula Phaebi
Mittimus --
Where the Poet, to avoid the said vulgarity, chooses the voice of a Supine
for his expression of a Gerundian sense.

This third Gerund only transcending the Infinitive Mood by stating the cause
along with the action: which our Author confirms teaching: that, The English of
the Infinitive Mood coming after a reason, and showing the cause of a reason is
put in the Gerund in Dum.

Yet Scaliger takes liberty to extend that faculty to the whole three: Saying,
Ibid.
Quoniam causam gerundia statuunt, idcirco plus indicant quam verba aut
participia; His end thereby probably being their Pass under the same
rationality of appellation. Gerundia quia rerum gerendarum causam una indicant.
In order whereunto (this completing the number) what in special belonged to
it, I conceive, he might lawfully attribute to the whole three, by a
Synechdoche a retro.

Whatever may excuse me for this reduction of our Author's parts of speech:
Besides my ignorance why a Gerund should not be accounted a part of speech as
well as a Participle: It being confessed to indicate more; and as well known to
decline into, and Declinatio est Tractio dictionis per casuum seeds. So Dr.
Davis. p. 60.
caroch among, its prescribed Conditions or Cases.

Unless that finding both Participle, Gerund and Supine to be but so many
variations of the word of motion, I may be adjudged pardonable while I so
comprehend them.

Conclusively noting, that as this Gerund does outdo the Infinitive Mood, by
stating the cause along with the action:

So does the Supine transcend it; First in point of Confidence; and secondly,
of security.

Confidence: In that it expresses future actions as if they were already come
to pass. As when I say Venio ad pagnandum: I thereby manifest a future Tence.
But when I express my self by Pugnatum, the futurity appears so certain as
p^^sent. Dictum puta says Socia in Terence. And rationally, in regard all
natural motions, the nearer they approach their end or center, move more
swiftly; and consequently more vigorously. The apprehension of which strength
must necessarily introduce confidence: and that, security; as the end or
perfection of the motion.

So that as the first Supine intimates the said motion in via: the other does
it in fine. Venio Pugnatu, expressing the business so done, that for the future
I may rest securely.

Wherefore Scaliger observes how that the Poet describes Melibaeus as a person
struggling with Fortune, Ibid. Virgil. Eclog, 1.
and managing his aff^irs with more courage than good luck: And Tylyrus lying
under the shade supinely.

Yet he remains dissatisfied with the Quare of the word; slighting Theodors
(...) as too mean, U^ Latinis auribus satisfiat: those are his words.

My sense is, that a higher reason for it is not to be found below the Moon:
(...) signifying carelessly or securely, as well as with the face upwards. And
that posture naturally following security as the effect does the cause.
Wherefore the muscle moving the eye upwards Anatomists do read Superbus, and
that in the sense of Noble or Excellent: and but deservedly; as is easily
demonstrable by a Land-skip. I mean, when we view any place with our head
between our legs, or otherwise inverted. For so shall we find the appearance of
the same object excelling even to admiration.

Hence comes it that when men have once fortified themselves with a settled
fortune of wealth: they naturally look upwards.

A Gentleman of the first head [except while the Spaniard swell's in being the
son of his own right hand] seldom known to refuse the Herald, more then the
Nobles of Rome could Virgil after he had so solemnly sung their extraction from
Aen^id. 6.
Elyztum: And Caesar's from the Gods, -- Deus nobis haec otia secit. Eclog. 1.
Most acceptably compounding the delinquency of that Antonian.

And thus as security banisheth care, does it admit fancies restinguible in no
lower a sphere.

A Naturalism well known to the Egyptian; his reprehension of the Hebrews
importing, They were Idle, Proud, Secure and Careless; Exodus 5.8.
therefore they said, Let us go Sacrifice.

So much for the name and nature of the Supine, which I confess does not
satisfy our Author's last, which follow Adjectives: and he would have
understood passively Neither know I well how the end of a motion may be so
rendered. It being analogical to a Physical Ret. And say the Metaphysics, Finis
and effici^ns entitative ejusdem sunt perfectionis. The only difference being
that Essentia est quod dat esse rei, and est primum principinm motus. So Jac.
Mart. in part Met. Sect. 13.

Shall we then, with the fore-quoted Philosopher, ^cal. ibid. l. 7. c 144.
exclude those as being nominals, rather then verbial Supines? [ Vocatu Drusi,
says he in the same place, i. e. Vocatione: facile expugnatu, i. e.
expugnatione.] Or may we not rather take them at the rebound? i. e. with such
motions as in their end meet with resistance and so become passive? For then
the difference will not be great whether we deduce them from the Noune, or the
Infinitive Mood of the Verb. The Supine being to the Verb much as is the Adverb
to the Noune. Sithence as from Homo we have Humanus, Humaniter, and thence
Humanitas. So from voco, or rather vocare, we have vocand, vocando, vocandum,
vocatum, vocatu. Where the motion end's, unless we begin again with vocatio.

So vocatu, in its passive reception, standing between vocatio and vocari;
[that voice admitting of no Gerund by reason of the impossibility that I should
have more than a guess at the cause of motions than proceed from another
toward me.] Why may not the motion as well be fansied to rebound so far:
especially our Author noting it, facile factu or facile fieri? Which being but
a nicity like the mincing of Cummin attributed of old to Antonius Pius; and of
small use, even by the Latins themselves, Dion, in Ant. pium.
other than to have gradual ways to express the same sense by, I so pass.

Herm'aelogium; The fourth PART.
CHAP. I. Being a transient disquisition of the state of our Author's four
undeclined parts of Speech; with their Concomitant Mutes; and lastly of the
Bronoune.
OUr Author's other four parts of Speech being of the same consideration, as is
before expressed of his Shapes and Figures: Part 2. c. 5.
I conceive it scarce modest for a person of my small reading, to the sedulous
collections and observations of the forecited Gentlemen hereon, toattempt a
Supplement. Yet least it be objected that I might by the same reason have
passed the Adjective; It, although declineable, of it self signifying as
little: and therefore as unworthy to bear a part, much less a Principle, in
speech.

I must add, That notwithstanding it may justly be said of i^ as Virgil sung of
his usurped verses: Sic vos non vobis -- Yet that it is of an intrinsecal
consideration, as being analogical to Privation: which is such a Principle in
nature, without which as MATTER cannot receive form: So Privatio and
ma^eria^dem sunt Re and Ratione. See Com. Magyr. l. 1. c. 2.
Being cannot so subsist. Therefore that QUALITY, so considered, is no way
inferior to BEING. But together with it as the same *.

I say together: as finding the separation, I mean the decision of what it is
in it self, and what to us, to have puzzled as able [though I must confess I
affirm it much as a blind man judging of colours] a Sir Walter Raleigh in his
Skeptic.
Penman as that Age had in England.

But these be only extrinsecal appendants to the first mentioned parts or
principles of Speech; as mere notes either of their connection, temperament, or
circumstance. And this our Author seems to inform us of by his calling of them
UNDECLINED. Declension and Rise in condition belonging properly to the Lord,
See his Grammar, p. 261. etc.
and not the Lacquey. Which servilety of theirs is further probable, in that
the governing power Mr. Hoole attributes them is not of themselves; but of the
Being, Motion, or Quality they so personate or usher. As is exemplary: First by
the Adverb; which suppose invented in order to this threefold use, viz.

1. The abbreviation of Sentences.

2. The gradation of incompatible quantites and qualities. And

3. A prescripion to the innumerable circumstances of Action, Time and Place

1. In the first employment I observe its note to be sometimes rude, and
sometimes conformed. Whereof the first do notify things present; (a)
(and that commonly with the assistance of some exterior sign or gesture) and
do govern by virtue of the Noune or Verb they so obumbrate, as: En quatuor
aras. That is, Vide nunc. Behowld; says the Englishman.

But in case there be two several Verbs couched under this note: and that the
Verb in the following sentence expressed be of the same sort with the last
understood; then does the Adverb govern as by that expressed Verb is
requireable. For example: En Priamus, sunt hic etiam sua praemia laudi. As if
he had said, Vide nunc, Priamus hic est; sunt hic etiam sua praemia laudi.
Whereas if the Verb sunt had been absent, the expression must have been En
Priamum, suaque praemia laudi.

The word of motion vide, in the person of the Adverb, there governing: as in
the the other the governance proceeds from the Verb of Being.

Which manifests the Adverb to be but a mere substitute: besides that sic, and
such other Adverbs as have no representative power either of Noune or Verb,
dare not aspire to that eminence.

2. The conformed Adverbs of this use are numberless, in regard of the nearness
of this notes relation to the word of Being. But the governance is ever on the
same account; as, Pridie Calendarum: i. e. Priori die. Calendarum being there
genitively governed as the latter of two Substantives.

Or if I say Pridie calendas. It will be the same as Dics prae, or antc
calendas. i. e. the day just or directly before. And therefore is Calendas
governed accusatively: the straightness of the motion in the space between its
extremes being so noted by the proposition.

2. The second sort of Adverbs are always expressed along with the Qualities
they so explicate; as, Valde bonus, minis longus, egregie impudens, etc. and
therefore do they not govern at all; the command of the Officer being so
excluded by the presence of the Lord.

3. The other speciously governing Adverbs are generally a sort of dethroned
Adjectives; so officiating in order to their like manifestation of the
accidents of the Verb, as while Adjectives they did of the Substantive. And
therefore do we say Similis cantus; but similiter c. nit; and does our Author
note that canit similiter buic; quia (says he) Dativum adm^tunt nominum unde
deducta sunt. And so of the rest according to the respective casual governance
of the Noune or Verb whence they proceed.

Their pretended governance of Verbs our Author mentions with so many
Interdum's as evinceth its subjection to the reason of the delivery; neither
can I understand his conjunction of similaty and dissimilary Cases, Moods and
Tenses otherwise.

The Proposition I confess our Author himself somewhat seems to promote to a
governing state, while he teaches that Praepositioni accidit casuum regimen;
but he adds, S^ve constructio. As it he had said, Earum regimen, si vis,
constructionem, (...), i. e. orationis structuram appelles. That being the end
of their position before other parts, as has been fore-shewed: Part 2. c. 2.
And [that I may not seem either to expound our Author, or contradict such as
positively affirm the said governance altogether on my score] I find tacitly
ratified by my fore-quoted Countryman Joannes Davidas Rhaesus [known in
England by name of Doctor Davies; and in Italy by a Tract he there writ in the
Florentine Idiome de structu^a Latini Sermonis] who in his Institutiones
Cym^aecae, or Latin Welsh-Grammer, where he mentions these governances, has
no such word as Regunt; but nectuntur, u^ctunt, serviunt; respectively
discoursing of the Adverb, Conjunction and Preposition. The same I also find in
Dr. Taylor's, viz. The first joined, the second joining, and the third serving.

As for the Interjection: To ascribe it a regular governance, were to confound
it with a Parenthesis. And therefore does our Author note it ad Placitum.

O fostus dies.

O fortuna^os nimium.

O formose puer, etc

It rather governing its concomitant Mute; and so from an imperfect, scarce
worded, voice becoming the most absolute ornament of Speech.

As those who have received their education from the sedulous Lectures of
Academick Professors can amply witness: And recommend as worthy of ingenious
consideration, and public. Were not these gestures in most Countries singular;
and therefore best attainable by observation of their attractive effect on the
attention of respective Auditories.

As I remember once merrily hinted at by a no less grave than ingenions
Preachet in Leyden; who to satisfy the importunity of a young Divine of his
acquaintance, having lent him an elaborate and, in that very place, often
approved Sermon to be delivered by this Candidate In order to his admission
into the Pastorship, but not taking, had no shift to disabuse my new Levite,
other than by persuading him That the fault lay in his own forgetfulness, that
he had not borrowed his Bow as well as his Fidle. Both, indeed, proceeding from
the same root: As may be instanced by a Bowler. Whom we shall ever see
shouldering, puffing, stamping, or drawing back, as the condition of his cast
seems devious.

But if he finds it equally running its right measured ground: Then, he either
directly follows, or steadfastly look's on, as in his posture of confidence.

That these Gestures (though accompanied with, or proceeding from, never so
strong incinations of an unfascinating mind) can either take from, add to, or
otherwise direct the motion once passed the Gamesters hand, I shall not suspect.

Yet having often laughed at them in others, and endeavored to forbear them my
self, but with more i^ksomness than success, I cannot but think them natural.

Especially while I observe the same, comparably, to hold with the Orator. And
that according to the perfection of his language. Which as it does least
multiply its attendants with these notes, or (that I may not causlesly vary
from our Authors language) parts of Speech; so requires is fewer outward signs
for its ornament. For example: The Latin Adverbial note Olim, signifying a
rassed as well as future time. The note cum, used both fo an Adverb,
Conjunction and Preposition: As it serves either to declare the signification
of a Verb; to join sentences; or else as a preposited badge to the Ablative
case of a word of Being. Whereas in vulgar languages its sense is expressed by
notes severally differing according to the said respective employments.

And hence probably comes it that the Spanish Reel or French Shrugge be not yet
fashonable among the Italians: whose discourses they render no less magnetic
by the interjection of certain nodds, stops, and change of countenance; which,
the word Blush being too young, I want expression for; The Flavor is still the
Flavor.
Other than (as we say of the Flavor of Wine) that they are becoming the
gravity of an Italian.

Whether there be any Books writ on this subject, I am not certain. But observe
that, before the use of Bandstrings, this gravity has been emulated by the
English. The noble Chaucer, as he encomiat's the deportment of the Arabian
Envoy in the Tartarian presence; thus singing; Accordant to his words was his
chere; The Squier Tale

As teaches art of speech hem that it lere.


CHAP. 2. Of the Pronoune with the Arts from it proceeding.
I Conclude with the note of the Nodd the Pronoune: which our Author calls A
part of Speech much like to, and indeed is the same with a Noune; although it
differs from his Noune Adjective in that it denotes a personal Being; and
from his Substantive, first in respect that this personality is neither proper
nor appellative: and secondly, in that it imply's number: I, THOU and H E.

Under which be comprehended the other twelve: and to whom is added the
officious Relative, as the Gentleman Ipocrifat in Herauldrie.

Wherefore our Author adds that it is used in showing or rehearsing. viz. The
Pronoune in showing: as, I love: and the Relative in rehearsing: as, I who
love. Ille ego qui quondam -- Which also is the office of its Verb And that
either in order to its own being; or Passions; as, I am, or I am called upon;
or else in order to its personal posture: as, I sit, or sleep. All which must
have the casual word nominatively placed, because the motion terminates in it
self: And so remain's a monument of the primitive unity.

I, THOU, and HE living as one, until they came to distinguish MINE, THINE and
HIS.

These introduced Trade; and that the multiplicity of clinshing words and,
tropical sentences in order to persuasion. Insomuch that such is the present
excellency of that Art: as it might be taken for no Paradox (saving the gravity
of a Qui ratio naliterutitur argumentis ad persuadendum Oratoris nomen meruit
etiamsi non persuaserit. Quint.
Qu ntilianist) from the young O^ator while he maintained the moneys he had
promised his Tutor for teaching him the whole Art of Rhetoric were not due,
until he could, by that Art, persuade him to part with the sum he neither yet
had, nor intended for him when he had it And that, he must expect, would create
a dispute. Mercury not recovering his altitude until he does Iater duos
loquentes media currere ut Logice reciprocetur oration N. Comes.
. An Art whose Circumstantials the experience of my short step of travel could
not observe so long d^elt upon beyond the Seas, as in the English Universities
is usual. And therefore cannot sufficiently applaud the Epitome given it by my
most worthily honored friend Sir K^nelme Digbie In Treat. of Bodies. part. 2.
c. 3.
.

^n argument (says he) The assumed Term, unto which the other two are
enterchangeably joined, is either said of them or they are said of it. And from
hence do spring three different kinds of Syllogism. For either the assumed or
middle term is said of both the other two: or both they are said of it: or it
is said of one of them, and the other is said of it. And this is the mysteric
of the three Figures our Clerks so much talk of. Which (having elsewhere
occasionally cleared the Mathematical Spring of A^^) I here mention, to
manifest how that those seven that the civilized part of the world do honor
with the Epithet of Gent: or Liberal be no other than Grammar expanded. And so
proceed to the use of this its present Reduction.

The Use of the whole TREATISE.
THe Text says; There are three that bear witness in heaven? The Father, the
Word, Joh. Ep. I. 5.7.
and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one. There are three that bear witness
in earth; the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood; and these three agree in one.

As I am no quarreller at Scripture; so am I not certain whether the Original
sounds (...) or (...). However, both coming from (...), Spiro.
had the more strict present occasion of the Evangelist permitted the
Translators to have expressed the Blood by name of Wind, they had thereby
saved me the use of faith; sithence I should then have understood the assertion
Philosophically; as knowing the water, wind and Spirit to be one, viz. Submis^^
Religioni Philosoph^^, clavibus son^ sus legitim^ utamini. Verul. ad. Acad.
Cantabrig.
The wind a rarefied water, and the Spirit a rarefied wind. And consequently,
the wind to be a coagulated spirit, and the water a coagulated wind. So
bearing their witness of the infiniteness of the opening and the shutting: Men's
agitans molem, and coeco se corpore miscens. As the Maronian in the fourth of
his Georgicks has it; See the last Emblem.
(probably) out of Thales Milesius, whose sense Cicero in his books De Natnra
Deorum so much depends on; and we find abundantly confirmed in the twelfth
chapter of that admirable Book of Job; and elsewhere throughout the Text.

My intent hence is not, with In Relig. med.
Dr. Brown, to maintain a multiplicity of worlds. But to induce first how
Aristotle's principles of the world do bear the same witness. Form being no
other then a vivified matter, as proportionated Beings be the au^optic
gallantry of that Form formed; and wherein the respective decay of heat is the
recess of the life toward its abscondity. So secondly (the excellency of the
microcosme consisting in its discursive faculty, Plato in Timan.
as the manifested expansion of the unity of man's soul to its trine) How it
must also in its Philosophy bear a like testimony. The word of motion being a
word of Being actuated; as amare is a word essentially declaring the action of
Amor; and modable according to the temporal inclination of the lover toward
whatever Being he therein can fancy perfection.

Whence the Ancients fained Cupid in as many shapes as they do Venus, See the
Emblem.
or (as Pausanias latinized has it) Tot amores quot Veneres. Yet they
comprised all under Greatness and Goodness: which, as says the same Author,
are but one; Quia identidem appetitum alliciunt.

And its observable that the perfection toward which a motion is thus directed
or attracted is often invisible, even as is the fire in water; yet known to be
there by reason of its flowing. For when the ambient cold sorceth the fire to
its center; the water, as it cease its flowing, is no more water, but ice;
until the fire be invited to its pristine expansion by exterior warmth.

Even so, in what ever, whether visible or invisible, quality of a Being my
opinion fanfieth perfection; this perfection but so thence vanishing, the
motion of my love immediately retires to its first essentiality.

And thus as John loves or not loves Joan, be the cogitations of man
expressible by the said Intelligete, movere, and generare essentialiter idem
sunt. See D. Davison in Currie. Chymic. part 2.
TRINE-U NE words occasionally varyed and attended as in this Treatise I have
assayed to manifest. So that I can at present think of no remaining intricacie
saving when, in order to a more copious or concise delivery, I am induced to
compound the termini of a sentence some or one of them; which conjoined
branches, although they contain a Verb respectively in themselves, do yet
amount to no more than either a Supposition, Declaration, Relation, or Reason.

1. Whereof the first is known by its preposited note of doubt; as when, with
our Author, I say: Si cupis placere magistro utere diligentia.

2. The second by its subjoyning office, as to say; ut placeas.

3. The third by the Relative; as Qui cupis placere.

4. And the fourth by the absence of a Verb otherwise than infinitively
posited. As if I were to say Cupiens placere magistro utere diligentia.

In all which the understood Noun Personal or Pronoun [Tu] must be the Being
whence the Verb utere moves toward diligentia as the word terminating the
sentence. And the governance is lateral in regard the Verb m^veth not as
attracted by it, but as a mode of pleasing the Master. See Part. 2. c. 2.

Yet that what has been said may be made more supplemental to our Author, I
shall further partize his Example, after the usual Pedagogick manner, supposing
my self a Pupil questioned by my Tutor what part of Speech is supplied by the
word Cupis?

Answ. The Verbial part.

Quest. How know you it to be a Verb?

A. In that it is a word of motion; that is, moving between the desiring and
the desired Being.

Q. What kind of Verb is it?

A. In that it moves from the said understood Pronoun (which is its material
cause) simply toward its formal: It is a Verb Active. But, that I offend not
my more curious Grammarian, I must also call it a Verb Neuter; in regard
forsooth we do not read Cupior. Although the English love as well to be desired.

Q. After what Conjugation do you decline it?

A. The fourth. And the reason therefore see in Part. 3. c. 2.

Q. What part of speech is Magistro?

A. A Noun Substantive.

Q. How know you it to be a Noun Substantive?

A. In that it manifests a Being; see Part. 1. c. 1.

Q. How do you articulate it.

A. In the Masculine Gender.

Q. Why so?

A. In regard it denotes Rule, which necessarily implies Action See Part. 2.
c. 1.

Q. Aster which of our Authors rules is it declined?

A. The second.

Q. Why so?

A. Because that whether I take the word from (...); which jumps with the
French Idiome thrice more; or from magis and (...) i. e. greater in station; It
follows that it be declined after the most honorable way incident to its
termination

Q. Would you hence infer that such words terminating in [er] as carry the more
honourable^ signification should be declined after this second Rule, and the
less worthy after the third?

A. I thought you had been thereof already so satisfied in Part. 2. c. 4. that
to urge me here to reaffirm it were impertinent.

Q. But how comes it then to pass that Puer is declined after this, and Pater
after that; sithence it is passed question but the last is more honorable?

A. I confess it quoad hominem; but not quoad naturam: For, Propagation being
the eternizor of nature, Naturalists do deservedly state it as the chief of
man's life. Therefore does love follow the offspring; and are the steps from
the womb to the wedding more honorable than those between it and the reduction
of the Creature; and that by so much as life is more desirable then death.
Whence I conclude that such Masculines terminating in [er] as on the wheel of
life be placed between the state and the end are naturally declinable rather
after the third rule. I will not say always declined; for that (as one notes)
Sermo Inter agrestiaing ma primum ortus doctiorum legibus aliquand^ refragatur.

Q. What case conceive you Magistro there to stand in?

A. The Dative.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it stands governed by the acquisitively posited Verb Placere. See
part. 2. c. 2.

Q. How comes Magistro to be gover^^d by the Infinitive Mood placere, it to me
seeming but us only joined with it, by way of apposition, to make up the word
of sense; This answering the (whom) as the other does the (what)?

A. Our Author does not tell us that the casual word must answer the questions
whom and what; but whom or what; and that the word that comes next the Verb as
answering to either of those, is (saving his exceptions) the casual; which
therefore is here due to Placere, as so answering the question. Desire what? To
please. To please whom? The Master. So that Magistro comes hither not by
apposition; but as a word governed of placere. The Infinitive Mood, when so
serving, no way quitting its governing prerogative more than does a Participle
or Gerund. I say so serving; for that as To please by answering the question
(whom) becomes as a casual word; and a word of sense as it denotes a perfection
wanted by the placitor Part. 2. c. 4.
: THOU COVETEST TO PLEASE so making up a complete sentence. Even so, when I
thus particularlize this pleasing, does the sense amount to a Reason; as has
been fore-proved by our Authors Ovidian Authority cited, Part. 1. c. 1. where
the first and third words add nothing to the Reason; only encomiate the quality
of Arts, and express a necessity of fixation in the learner. So that it were
the same if I said Placere magistro requirit diligentiam.

Q. Suppose you were to express placere by an ess^ntial word of Sense; as to
say: If thou covet the pleasure or delight of the Master. How would you
latinize it?

A. Si cupis delectamentum Magistri.

Q. In what case would you conceive the word Delectamentum, so placed, to stand
in?

A. The Accusative.

Q. And why?

A. As governed by the Verb Transitive Cupis.

Q. How know you Cupis to be a Verb Transitive?

A. Because it answers all the expectations of that Verb manifested, Part. 2.
c. 2. It being none of those motions of design; but a down right natural one,
as Amo; whether we take the word from Cap^o, or a cupidine amoris; as Mr.
Holyoake.

Q. Admit you were to define this supposition by one word; as of the Reason
has been fore-noted in Part. 1. c. 1. How would you express your self?

A. Obsequens utitur or (to continue the first hortative mode of speech) Tu
obsequens utere diligentia.

Q. By name of what part of speech would you call Obsequens so placed?

A. Properly by neither of our Authors eight. It there being only a participial
voice, or (as Mr. Hoole would have it) Noun, (...). A Participle signifying no
time; and therefore governing no otherwise than as a Noun Adjective. As in Part
3. c. 4. has been foreshewed.

Q. Pro^eeding with our Authors example where he adds Nec sis tantus cessator
ut calcaribus indigeas: I would in the first place know what part of speech is
Nec?

A. A Conjunction coupling the foregoing and following clauses.

Q. What part of speech is Cessator.

A. A Noun Substantive or word of Being.

Q. How is it declined?

A. Masculinely aster our Authors third rule.

Q. Why Masculinely?

A. In regard the very being Slugge denotes action: as we use to say; Its
better be idle then do nothing. See Part. 2. c 1.

Q. Why is it declined after the third rule?

A. By reason of its termination; as has been showed, Part. 2. c. 3.

Q. what condition or case does it here stand in?

A. The Nominative.

Q. Does it so govern the Verb Sis, or is it governed by it?

A. It is governed by it; and yet cannot properly be called a word of Sense in
regard of its foregoing Conjunction.

Q. From what being then does Sis move toward Cessator?

A. From the Pronoun Tu; which is understood as couched under the personality
of the Verb. See Part. 2. c. 3. and Part. 3. c. 1.

Q. If Cessator stands here as a word governed, why does it not decline its
Nominative condition or case?

A. By reason that the motion governing is a Verb of Being, See Part. 4. c. 2.

Q. What part of speech is Tantus?

A. A Noun Adjective, or word of Quality.

Q. How comes it to be understood as a Quality, si^hence it denotes Magnitude,
and not Bonitude?

A. The identity of quantity and quality has been already showed, Part. 1. c.
3 But for your further satisfaction know that (the slothful being concluded
vicious) its quantitative signification implies so much of evil; as to say
Tantum or tam magnum vitium.

Q. Whnt Case, Gender and Number does it stand in?

A The Nominative Case, Masculine Gender, and singular Number.

Q. How so?

A. In that it is here adjected to Cessator; which is a word of Being at
present, so affected, See Part. 1. c. 3.

Q. What part of speech it ut?

A. A Conjunction causal joining Calcaribus indigeas to the subjunctive
declaration foregoing.

Q. Why call you it not a Sentence?

A. Because the presence of the Conjunction renders it subordinate to another
less clogged Clause or Sentence; as to say ut calcaribus indigeas utere
diligentia. Whence if I take off ut, and so deliver my self definitively, the
first will be a complete sentence as well as the last. As to say: Ego sum
cessator, or Ego calcaribus indigeo; tu uteris or utere diligentia.

Q. Might not these be joined by Quod as well as Ut; It also being a Conjunction
causal, and giving the same English sound?

A. The design of avoiding a multiplicity of these Attendants has been
throughout this Tract so canvassed, that to find them retained by any
recommendation below a precise necessity, or being retained to be mistaken Dick
for Robin, were to epsy a contradiction inconsistent with the Roman ingenuity.
Which induces me to observe that Sentences thus joined necessarily implying
one of the formal differences of time mentioned. Part. 3. c. 3. do require
their Conjunction by notes most suitable to that time. And therefore to join a
futurity by a note sounding so near the Relative as Quod, were such a piece of
vulgarity as would render the expression to be scarce Latin sense. A Relation
being ever understood of things or actions passed, the present being no sooner
mentioned than passed. And that therefore the Latins by Quod do join such
sentences only as imply a past or present tense, as they do those that speak a
futurity by ut; it sounding so near the wishing Adverb Utinam As in this
particular Ut calcaribus indigeas; where the Verb potentially moded manifests
a future need by voice of the present Tense. See Part. 3. c. 3.

All which our Author teaches showing that the reduction of the Infinitive
Mood by Quod and Ut, must be precisely in hunc modum; viz. Quod tu red^^sti
incolumis gaudeo. ut tu fabulam agas volo.

Where I break up School; wishing some thoroughly enabled linguist would so
fabulam agere, that mankind might as no longer speak as Parats; So not want the
fruition of those other advantages in the altitude of such a Venus Verulam,
ibid. p. 261.
of Apelles supposed legible by the noble Origin of this Essay; which therefore
I Corollarily prostrate envelloped by the following Emblem.

The Representors are 1 Caelus or Perfection. 2 Saturn or Beings. 3 Cupid in
Mercuries disguise. 4 Venus Popularis. 5 Venus hortensis. 6 Venator. 7 Venus
Terrestris. 8 Venus Caelestis.



The Huntsman Speaks!
AS I was winding of my morning Call,
(Whether I strained beyond my usual
Force I not well remember) Such a fright
Invaded me when I me saw (poor wight)
Associated and compassed as you see,
That stunned I stood; till viewing Mercury
Thus placed in the round I to him said:
Son of great Jove! my Guide to whom are paid
My constant vows: and to whose flying fame
Be Sacrificed the (a) Tongues of all the Game
That ever yet in forest wild I slew:
Vouchsafe the meaning of this enterveiw
To thy astonished Suppliant.
-- Which Prayer
The son of Main (B) hovering in the Air,
Thus answered. --
-- Courage Woodman! for this shall
Create thee no more trouble than thy call.
The Scheme (C) erected being by the Art
Of thy King Saturn's (D) Son; who make'st his part,
Thus to detect what the ensuing fate
Shall be 'oth' Roman Tongue as well as (E) State.
(a) The Tongues of all Sacrifices the Ancients offered to Mercury; as God not
only of Speech, but also of Reason and Prudence. And therefore does the
Woodman, on this occasion, choose him for his chief rather then Diana. See Not.
Com. Mytholog. l. 5.

(B) Maia the Daughter of Atlas and Pleion: A Nymph on whom Jupiter begat
Mercury. See Virgil Aeneid. 8.

(C) Or Hieroglyphick Schaema. i. e. Orationis externa pars and dignitas. H. O.

(D) Picus most skillful in Augurie, and therefore feigned transformed to a
Wood-pecker. Ovid. Met. 14. Although by the word Augurium the Romans understood
not only the divination particularly taken from the chattering of birds, but
also from all other observable causes or Ostents whatsoever appearing in
Heaven, Air, or Earth; as affirms Dionysius, and out of him Gasper Peucerus
in l. de Auguriis, page 374.

(E) That is, how the state of Rome shall degenerate from its golden condition
in the succession of Provincial Potentates. Who, seeking after their particular
more then the public welfare, shall subject it to want; whose very
apprehension as it ushers all kinds of selfishness, so shall be multiplied the
Mode and Cases of the language. The first being Originally but one, as has
been already showed part. 2. c. 4. And the second but two, viz. The Nominative
and the Accusative, that is, The condition of a substantial Being whence the
motion takes its rise, and of the qualified Being toward which it formally
tends.

The Vocative being comprehensible under the Nominative, as only
distinguishable by our position of the person in the arrear of the Verb, and
the rise of our voice in the close of the period. Or else of this Additional
note of the Writer[?], and the oblique cases answering the respective indirect
motions of the Verb, since invented, as by the division of Venus is here
represented.

Wherefore bright (F) CAELUS over Saturns face
Having the curtain drawn resumes his place.
To show Perfection beneath the sky
Henceforth to seek shall be a vanity.
Save what weak loves by their descent retain
On self-design; (which therefore Poets fain.
From the loins of CAELUS in the (G) third degree)
At which in them to aim this Dietie
In SATURNS bosom leaves the purblind (H) spark.
Opinionately roving at his mark.
(F) By others called CAELIUS son of the Sky and Day; for his excelling and
permanent beauty styled Perfection. Bonum and Pulchrum being convertible; as
has been fore showed. And that these qualities were in him perfect, is
manifest in that from him the Heavens were called Caeli.

He was father to SATURN who was God of Plenty; whence his Age might be called
Golden. His name also coming a Saturando, as well as from the Hebrew SATAR. i.
e. To hide or shut up; both typifying the witnessed in the Philosophical use of
this Tract forementioned. See more of his golden age in Fulgentius his
Mythologie; as of his veil and succession in Sir Walter Raleigh's Historic of
the World, l. 2. c. 24.

(G) VENUS being daughter to JUPITER son of SATURN.

(H) CUPID suppo'^d originally blinded with Saturns veil, and therefore
shooting rovingly as his fancy shall occasionally incite him toward either
VENUS.

He shoots Saturns arrows, as personating the word of motion conveying the
indigent desires of the word of Being toward its formal cause or word of sense
here represented by VENUS. Wherefore also he stands in MERCVRIES's disguise:
SATVRN MERCVRY and VENUS now figuring the remnant of that wisdom which before
the veyling was specified by Celius, Saturn and Mercury; As averreth
Trismegistus. Neither could Mercury represent these several motions in his own
person, he being no Archer.

If any then be so critical as to question how I dare add arrows to Saturn: I
wish he would conceive them to be those which, erst, Mercury, having stolen
from Apollo, hid here under Saturns veryl for the present use of Cupid; and so
pass my application with the same face that HORACE observes PHAEBVS to have
done the theft: Te, boves olim nisi redidisses
Per dolum amotos, Puerum minaci
Voce dum terret, viduus Pharetra,
-- Risit Apollo, l. 1. Od 10.


Which also shows there shall in SATURNS state
Provincial Kings succeed; whose love and hate;
Both politic and corporal shall be
Guided alone by self-conveniencie.
Then may you hear Romes Counsl'ar (I) Orator
Persuading these four Venus's to' adore.
Which I forbear to blazon; since (Sans doubt)
When by such means your state is come about,
(Through various fortunes) from the Sheephook to
The Crozier; they will be so known that so
The world shall speak their language.
-- what to make
Yet of this tail devouring heast the Snake,
Other then as it the vicissitude
Of time and things denotes, I not conclude.
Though when the Crozier is outwor'n of all
Its idolized fukes Canonical,
Some think things shall again turn Saturnine.
But that conceit I pass to my Divine.
(I) Cicero who in his third book D^ Natura Deorum mentions four Venus's.
Three whereof I find sitnamed by Not. Comes Mytholog. l. 4. viz. Caelestis,
Hortensis and Popularis. The first of which typifying the word of sense
answering the direct natural motion of the Verb, I have here placed as the
Accusative case of the Noun. The second as figuring possession, and
consequently answering the circular motion, I have marshalled Genitively. The
third, as carrying an analogy with Romes Political confederacy, I have seated
Ablatively. And lastly, Cicero's fourth (which I conceive to be Venus
terrestris, and so the end of Acquisition) I have ranked Datively.

For which reasons I further distinguish the first by its natural amorous
aspect no way diverted by employment. The second by the Spindle. The third by
the Silkworms; and the fourth by the Cyphon. That so they might distinctly
represent the four respective motions of the Verb in the second Chapter of the
second Part of this Discourse already mentioned.

As for the Vocative Condition of the Noun: Its incapacity of receiving any
shot of Cupid's invited me to represent it by a Huntsman. Whom a sight so
resembling the Sea Mr. Sands Emblem before Ovid Met. 30
Gargaphian might terrify to a religious compellation of his Genius thus to
explicate.

And Reader! now (though Caelus be ascended)
If thou but fain our Venus's contracted;
And Cupid's seat to Mercury resigned,
The Analogy will soon appear completed.
Matter Being Saturn form Motion Mercuri^ Privation or Proportion Quality
Venus



The Ancients as when distinguishing between spiritual and corporeal nature
they likened the one to a Trine and the other to a square; So did they typifie
the whole by water. Finding it, as in its orbicular form to be the Trine of a
square; So in its substance or entity to contain the Fire, Love or Life of all
Beings; like as the Mathematicians Center does his Lines.

This fire, etc. The Greek Philosophers called (...) or (...), i. e. The mind
[or rather mental motion; (...), i. e. mente agito] And the Hebrew Divines
ELOHIM, which our vulgar translation englisheth God. Genesis 1.2.
Upon the face of the waters (says Moses) moved the Spirit of God.

To whom alone in his trin-unity wonderful be the glory for ever.

Rectori magnifico and Professoribus in alma matre inclyta Frisiorum Academia
quae est Franequerae S.
TRactatulum hunc relegenti confiderantia mihi occurrit de communi librorum
fato Censura. Quae quanquam ut cerebri anfractus variegata sit: interim tamen
(dum Vota nihil definiant) necessario, quoad hoc, reducibilis videbam in quid
unum: Number scil. Philosopho, an cum ratione insanienti potius quadret.
Quapropter, and quum judicium omne plenam supponit judicandi cognitionem,
exseminario rem dissecandam censui: Alstedio tradente modum.

In omni disciplina (inquit In ency. clopaed. Philosoph. l. 4.
ill:) oportet spectare primo Cur: and secundo Quomodo sit discenda. i. e.
Finis and modus ad finem tendens.

Finis hujus ex libri epigraphe patet ut sit Sermonis rationalitas. Conamen
quod, dum incomparatum restat, duo imprimis consideranda praebet: Optabilitatem
scil. and Possibilitatem rei.

Prior ex Aristotele c^nfirmari est, ubi docet In rebus eligendis quam
detrahere oportet eligendorum excellentiam. Topic. l. 3. Tract, 2. c. ^.
Quia si honor dignius est optabilius; etiam id quod honor est dignum est
optabile.

Sic enim si per causas scire praestat quam per accidentia, (quod ex Scientiae
definitione patet) etiam rationalis Grammatices authoritativae ut praestet
necesse est; and per consequens, quod optabile quid talis sit. Quia quin ars
Grammaticalis est honor digna Credo neminem inficias ire, vel exinde quo inter
hominem and belluam distinguit.

Ratificatam invenio Posteriorem per Praenobilem Franciscum de Verulam: Heroen
in omni Philosophiae genere e^imie agnitum. Tom. 6. cap. 1.
Qui in magna sua Scientiarum Instauratione (libro per Europam usque adeo
celebrato ut vestra quin in Bibliotheca locum tenet nil moror) non solum
asserit Artem Grammaticalem posse reddi Philosophicam: sed and ipsummet
Grammaticen quandam mente sibi tenuisse conceptam, quae non verborum cum
verbis, sed cum rebus analogian monstraret.

Hocque (Excellentissimi viri) lucubratiunculic hisce m^is ortum dedit. Id enim
cum legeram, mihi potenter aurem vellere fateor. ut qui Romana in lingua
(omniferae doctrinae Brittano maxim necessaria) per nostratis Lelii
Grammaticen e pucritia duntaxat instructus fueram. Donec paulo ante designatam
peregrinationem, cum Nobilibus quibusdam transmarinis, tunc temporis Oxoni^
commorantibus, memet affociando, ea mihi familiaris facta est, ut antea, eodom
solo conversationis medio, Anglicana fuerat. Alia de loquendi ratione ut prius
som^iarem tam procul aberat.

Illiuc vero quasi experrectus: Auxesis uti scientiae maerorem intendit; Eccl.
1.18.
Itidem (quoad voti modum) tunc anxie dolebam Authorem suam siluisse
Prosopopaeian, carum sive institutionem rerum ad quas verba sic aptius
conformart possent.

Donec Doctiss. Hereis Effigiem libro suo praepositem contemplans observaram.
Ut Album in manu tenens, sub libri titulo, in Pagina dextra haec bina verba
quasi scripserat [mundus mens] In sinistraque qui sedac vel addens [connubio
jungam stabili.]

Quod annuere mihi videbatur ad divini Platonis in Tymaeo comparationem animae
boninis cum Triangulo, in cujus apice sit unitas; Ex uno latere se dilatans in
numeros pares, 2.4.8. Ex altero in impares, 3.9.27. Pares numeri (ut notat In
Tym.
Proclus) corruptibilitatem, ut and impares aeternitatem demonstrantes.
Erindeque perpendens Naturam and Rationem, quoad Naturantem, idem esse [quod
and sacra Joh. 1.1.
Pagina probat] ideoque ad Trianguli apicem apprime comparabilem: a quo dein ut
natura in mundum descendens dividitur in Intellectualem and visibilem.
Visibilis suo modo Intelleitualem attestans. Sicque Ratio in mentem prolapsa ut
in cogitativam and loquutoriam partitur; [idam enim docet Aristoteles in libro
de Interpret. Ubiverba esse Cogitationum imagines perhibet] Putabam analogian
adeo facilem; ac si libata [Ut Ulyssen olim per Circen instructum fecisse
fertur] Vmbra dixisset.

Quod voves (Spectator) quam ad ineffabilia non pertinet, hum lori sede quam
Idaeis Platonicis acquiescit. Vnde fit quod cum Aristotelica vel saltem
Hermetica Philosophia [quae Platonicae corporca est] aptius cohaeret. Quamsbrem
sicuti per Aristotelis Materiam, Formam and Privationem tota nobis patefit
natura. Sic per verba Entitatis, Motus and Qualitatis absolvitur loqucla; quum
ceterae parts Orationis vel in ea sunt ^educibiles, aut ut satellites illis
adstant. Unice saltem requiritur alteratio haec: quod scil. (quum Qualitas ut
objectum supponit Perfectionem: ideoque perceptibilis non sit uisi verbo
Entitatis adjuncta, ^^t indelligibiliter inserta) formetur ejus analogiae ad
formam formatam sive Proportionem. Quod enim Privatio in intellectualibus, idem
and Proportio in corporeis quod sit nullus non intelligit.

Ob id vero, ut defectum, si ad Hermeticos te vertere mavis. Innumera little
volumina in Trinunitate hac assentiri percipias, viz. Ut Mercurius purotechnic^
Saturni scintilla impregnatus, coquatur in Venerem quam cognominant Filiis
notam.

Projectio (mi Praestantissimi) utcunque Practicis vix succedere videtur.
Interim tamen si a speoulationibus quae sub sensum cadunt ad eas quae
intelligentia sola percipiuntur ascendamus, quid inde nobis intelligendum erit
aliud quam Entitas movens ad Perfectionem. Ut (licet liber ipse vobiscum
vernaculari non mereatur) vel ex emblematibus cerni est.

Et sic mundus factus est. Inquit Hermes. In Tab.


Quae mea igitur andacia est dum Mentem per trinuna illa verba communicativam
reddere tento, vohis submittitur.

R Reliquus liber horum examinat accidentia and usus; medumque, obiter, quo
ceterae quas liberales vocamus arts ex illis pendent.

De quibus, ^uper, dum apud familiares (inter pocula) pro hac rata
Sermocinabar: Eorum, ut Rhapsodemata ista chartis darem, Vos horter ut
Scientiarum Instaurationi in^umbatis. Et veterum labor; neque nihil, neque
omnla esse putetis. Idem Verul. ad Acad. Oxon.
corrogationes abnuere nolui. Ni Verulamii nostri hortamina (quae Doctiores
nimium jam diu perpessos putaham) ex integro semper neglecta maneant: aut (dum
aegris adstare non arridet) Laurus, quam viginti nunc annis e vobis public
receptam ambio, radicitus mecum st^rilesccre videatur; omnigeno quasi literarum
usu^ decsset vester

Ab eremo paterno in agro Glamorganiae Cambriae Calendis Martii. (...)
Bassertus J^anesius.


