QUAERIES PROPOSD FOR THE AGITATORS in the Army (or their Assistants elsewhere,
who are entrusted, or do intermeddle in those high matters of Peace and War)
more than four Months ago, and now published in pursuit of satisfaction, and
with intent of profit toward all, and the State.
I.
SEeing that they (like former Lawgivers, who painted Religion and Justice
according to the variety of their own passions) are also men and therefore vain
and irresolute Authors, what hopes can they hold forth unto us of any such
general policy, or public provision, as shall subsist without other aid, (than
springs up of his own proper root, by the seed of universal reason, planted
in every man that is not unnatural) and serve to reduce by degrees all our
Laws into such a form of equitable Polytey, that all shall ealy understand,
how it is more for their profit to obey then break them.

II.
Seeing Wisdom will never subordinate her self unto our sense and
understanding, but that we reason rashly and discourse at randum, she engaging
our Consultation in such trouble and incertainty, as staggereth our resolution:
whether is there any one of them, that has such a form of the total frame in
his head, as safely and surely to range into order so many several pieces
without incurring the curse, which by confusion of Languages came upon Babels
Brick-layers, in their frivolous and fantastical Enterprise of raising that
high-towering Pyramid.

III.
When your Complaint against the Laws and Government shall be acknowledged as
just and rational; have you any commodious form of combining society, so
answerable to the rules of equity, that no parties concerned in the alteration
how considerable soever, shall have any just occasion to complain.

IV.
Seeing that in all the Sects which we know, whether Pontifical, Episcopal, or
Presbyterial, Brownist, Anabaptist, or Independent: the rules of our life are
continually ill ordered, with a very partial relation and imperfect description
of our duty; then whether have you any general rule of good education, or
method of moral instruction, which may be admirable to all Opinionists (of how
different inclination and practice soever they be) and sufficient to complete
the virtues and happiness of a common Polyte.

V.
In case they have no such method, what Council will they call or hold so to
discuss the doubt, as without partiality or prejudice (which form of
education has implanted in the spirit) to pitch upon that which is so equal to
all particulars, as never shall exalt ignorance, weakness or hypocrisy, in
envy or competition of sufficiency, knowledge or sincerity.

VI.
Seeing that your exquisite wits and more penetrating spirits are so unsettled
in their opinions and customs, that it is hard to find any of them orderly
and sociable, what more sufficient means have you (then other men) so to
compose the State, as that the diversity of opinions (whereby the mind once
exempted, from the tyranny of custom scatters her self in a thousand diverse
ways) shall conduce to the most noble and pleasant exercise of the spirit,
without any prejudice to public justice, or the common polytes.

VII.
In case some by the extremity of a curious search, after the first and
universal causes do fall into savage opinions, what reason have you able to
regular our customs and manners, or what rule of life and conscience is able
to rancounter or convince them.

VIII.
Seeing that perfidious representatives, for deserting their principles,
disappointing our trust, and destroying our rights and liberties deserves all
opposition and punishment, as the worst kind of traitorous thieves and
murderous malefactors, are they not as sottish and malicious, who from
passion, interest, and opinionative presumption, study how to promote the
distemper and confusion, without any probability of absolute cure or general
amendment of condition. And are not all such much more wicked and pernicious,
as shall abuse their pretentions unto base ends, actively striving in their
cause, to subvert all government without any care of returning the same, or any
further scope than to bind up the breaches of their own estate, by enlarging
those of the body politickes.

IX.
Seeing we have found by the sad experience in the change of men the selfsame
or semblable manners, so that these and those, great and small, past and
present, have all trod in the same steps, aiming only at the fair white of
their own sole interest; how can you assure us, that your greediness is more
capable of moderation, than that of other men, (who of power, riches, or
pleasures embrace more than they can graspe or hold) or that you can better
bridle your passions, than ever could your predecessors, or which is necessary
upon such an exigent, that you will always prefer virtue, truth, and
goodness, before all inordinate appetites for your selves and posterity.

X.
Seeing that envy is no less ordinary in the meaner sort than scorn and
indignation in the great and mighty: how can the Commanders secure us and
themselves against the common Soldiers, viz. that they shall not rebel
against the Law of Nature, in abominating all ability of brain and spirit,
exceeding their own proportion, and so far imitate those brutish Ephesians
(who banished Hermodorus) as by degrees to establish something answerable to
the Ostracisme, when it was so abused in Athens.

XI.
Finding it evident both by our zealous Preachers, and the precisest of
Sectarian Pretenders, that there is small or no correspondency between Precept
and Practice; how can you overcome and encounter this inveterate custom,
wherein men let Precepts and Laws follow their way, whilst they keep another
course, both by iniquity of life and contrariety of opinion and judgment.

XII.
Whether such refined laws of life and rules of conscience, as might suffice
to rectify this base and monstrous deformity, would not also prove the most
compendious way of composing all matters, and determining all differences as
touching land or estate. If so be some of the wisest amongst us were appointed
to decide them at the first sight, without tying them to presidents and
consequences; or what necessity is there that our lives and consciences should
be governed by one Law, and our lands and estates by another.

XIII.
Whether are they so far convinced of their ignorance, weakness, and
irresolution, as to renounce those privileges, viz. to sway, appoint, or
establish, except by the common consent of that society whereof they are
citisens. And whether they conceive this World to be a mere School of
Inquisition, preferring search upon a sense of ignorance and incertainty before
false and mistaken Principles: Or in case the temper of Plebeians (who in
number always exceed the apprehensive) be found unfit for the stronger
nutriment of refined reason, and framed only to common ways, received by
Authority of Law and reverence of ancient custom: whether ought not your more
capacious spirits (as sympathising members of society) if not to move according
to their measure, by stooping to the lure of another bare lesson, yet so far
to condescend as never to provoke them with scorn or insultation? No man (in
my conceit) can imagine any wilful or intended mischief from this Army; for
then of all others they should become most vicious, wicked, and odious, to cast
themselves into examples whereof they both felt and punished the horror and
mischief: but seeing their late Opposites (lead on by the blind fury of some
popular Rabbis and impetuous Plebeians) have bewayed their zealous ignorance
and unheedinesse, in attempting what they understood not. Such Quaeres may
serve to awaken the Armies circumspection, and if they will make plain and open
profession, in answer to prarticulars, methinketh it might prove so
satisfactory to all indifferent men, as may convince moderat opponents, and
becalme the passionate clamours of all spiteful adversaries. A Copy of these
Quaeres I left in the Army, at the desire of one or two amongst them, more than
two months ago. The occasion of composing them was thus, having perused two
Answers to the first Eight Quaeres, the one very brief, but not fully home to
the business: the other large enough, but relying wholly upon our national
Law, without once lanching into the natural, the proper means of satisfying
such Proposals. I then scribbled out my conception in answer to the same,
annexing these as more pertinent, charitable, and impartial, tending to prevent
their steering at hazard, the fate of all such as have no certain or known Port
to sail unto. But fearing in such a super fluity to surfeit the world with so
large a Pamphlet, I forbear to publish any thing besides a certain subitane
apprehension, printed for the better pursuit of more full and ample
satisfaction, both to my self and others in the main.

XIV.
Seeing that Wat Tyler, when waited upon and worshipped, by clownes, fools,
and false knaves, was known to utter words to the same purpose and effect,
which Caesar spoke when he said, debere homines consideratius jam loqui secum,
ac pro legibus habereque dicat, id est, that thence forward men must more
deeply Ponder, How and what they spoke unto him; taking and approving his
answers and sentences, for Laws; and resolutions And considering withal how
the spirit of Kings and Mechanics is cast in one kind of mould; that later in
all likely hood by the baseness of his breeding, being more in bondage to
ignorance cruelty, envy and injustice.

How will you clear it unto us, that none of these, who presume to steer your
counsels, are impatient of and opposite unto all politic superiority?
whenever it refuses to take his instruction? or do serve his turn
industriously laboring the disgrace of al magistrates, one after another
(under which we are placed by ancient custom and unsearchable providence which
he despises) And for this end as a cunning Boutefue casting abroad the
smoking brands of envy hatred and contention, which seldom fail to fill the
minds of neighbors and follows with fierceness, malice and combustion, And
has already so far prevailed, to the subversion of government and Abolition
of order here in England, that it fully inableth not base malignants? but even
the better sort of Royalists, to brave us as yet, with unanswerable reproaches
Or that never a one of them, are aemulous of Caesar in an Antipodian or
opposite kind of Ochlocraticall ambition aiming at eminency and superiority by
popular confusion, as he did by the conquest and ruin of his Country; And as
ready to rejoice in the rubbage of all our ruinous Disorders, as ever was the
other to brag of making that bravest Republique of Rome, A shapelesse Mass,
besides the name or lump receiving neither show nor form of several members,
always distinguished in any wel-ordered Body.

XV.
Have you found out a way or mean of judging by Law, choosing by reason, and
advancing men only by personal merit: so that every one (excepting the fault
of his own idleness, weakness, or debauchery, Lib. ep. 1. epist. 18. Mea
(contendere noli) stultitiam patiuntur opes tibi parvulares est.
may live by Law, and not in such a way of mere recompense and courtesy, as
makes the wise oftentimes to turn fool, to honor him that is so soothing the
defects, and flattering the vices of some proud Worldling, who arrogateth all
to the prerogative of his fortune, as Horace has well expressed; or against
the rights of truth and honesty, to yield all advantages of authority to a
wilful or ignorant Patron, on whom his livelihood chiefly depends.

To my wel-beloved Friends the Agitators with their Assistants in the Army,
City or elsewhere.
GEnerous Soldiers, or Soldiers and Gentlemen having used heretofore, bluntly
to bespeak men of greater state, and higher quality, it would ill beseem me to
make my passage unto men of no-better breeding than my self, by parasitical
addresses and insinuations, a mere ceremony of civility, yet more pernicious to
society, than those other which are now abolished, leaving the same with pride
and hypocrisy both which I hope you do abominate, together with that childish
ambition, of vainglorious men, who by a magistral and tyrannical countenance
make great apperance of more then is in them A copy of these Quaeries, was at
the desire of one or two, left amongst you, more than two Months ago, from a
charitable conceit that without a sad consideration of such particulars, you
could never suffice for those public ends you have pretended; gaining thereby
belief and good will from a miserable People, very apt to mistake; though yet
they never found other than increase of grievances under the change of
Oppressors: for to vindicate our English Nation so deeply engaged in disgrace,
and to free our necks from all manner of yoakes, which fraud and violence has
fastened upon us, requires perfect intelligence of truth, justice, and piety,
together with the happiest Model of external order and humane politey: of
which if you have any knowledge, it must not take its form from your opinion,
more than from that of the Presbyterians, (which you accuse as self
particular, and therefore traitorous and pernicious, though their pretenses be
very parallel to your expressions in your Papers) but from the evidence of
universal reason unto which this inquisition may urge and direct you, pressing
for such an ample expression of your desires, as may not only exclude all
jealousy of your intentions, but almost justify the imitation of Pericles,
who unable to carry the People by persuasion, drive them by force to that which
was best for their own welfare and the common felicity. Now should you once
appear insufficient to speak satisfyingly unto such particulars, your general
professions, would never give so much evidence of public ends, as may acquit
you from being accessory to the prodigal expense of so much money and blood,
(which I am confident was freely powered out by some, without any further aim,
than to the interest of all and the State, for public justice and
preservation) much less approve and justify your knowledge, truth, and
sincerity, as meriting all advantage of Power and Authority to act over us, and
to execute vengeance upon your Opponents. Seeing you have no more appearance of
the best Polity, than had the Author of Plain English, who having imbated the
People with seditious Passages, has for some years space, brought us to play
at Blind man Bufle, almost to the bane of the Body Politic. In which
Tragical Passages, Wherein always Ne majestatis ledentem maneat Pena, majestas
vertenda. Iure enim semil violato secundo at tertio id violandum quod ne nisi
violetur; id ol^m laesum tur p^ habeatur and infame etc.
some of you, siding with you or assistant unto you are coceited by the more
sagacious have slily acted their parts, not only by framing and promoting a
rooting Petition, striking altogether at alteration, but often after, that by
courting the Parliament according to the sense and inclination of those
Members, who intended perchance to employ the Sectaries, as we do outcast
persons in execution, who yet patronize the Parliament in every particular
(during the dread of the Cavaliers, whose bitter hostility at that time united
their minds and divided intention) endeavoring to make all their adversaries
extremely odious: and (as some assert) to imbitter men's minds against His
Majesty more than was either just or reasonable making account thereby to
imbarque the Parliament in such disadvantage, that according to the common
maxim of Policy usual in such cases, they could never return dry-shod: Nor to
their ends have they omitted by partial reasons (savouring of poor smattering
in Apostolical Scriptures) in the common peril, to reconcile the Protestant to
the Puritan, not sparing by calumnious reproaches against the best and
honestest of the Episcopal Preachers to sacrifice unto the spite and envy of
the People, as unto wicked spirits ever ready to accept of such offerings, nor
did they neglect upon any opportunity, to move and urge the Parliament (more
powerfully by the propensity of some flexible parties) to vote and act
according to the emergency of occasion, hoping not only to draw them into
contradictions, but also so far to entrench upon the standing Laws as might
gradatim induce them to trample up on them, in fear of absolute condemnation by
them, and at the worst afford sufficient matter to fetch them over (perchance
sometimes against their affections) to approve and promote further designs,
maugre the reluctance of plain men, and common people (as they call them) who
grew still more distasted with the smart and trouble of alteration. And then
upon appearance of popular disaffection toward the Parliament, like cunning
Orators they dandle them with words, as the only people jealous of their
honor, flattering their persons with parasitical apologies and attributions,
as soothing their authority as never guilty of the least injury to any just
interest either at home or abroad: watchfully keeping in the mean space a
catalogue of all these actions, votes, and ordinances (which in my conceit are
only justifiable, either by supreme reason of state, in resistance of
dangerous innovation, or else by a certain aim at a known, just, and intaxable
constitution) as so many steps of descent toward their design, howsoever
obscure, hazzardous or destructive; so that all they do is under condition that
those at the helm shall steer according to the cunning and direction, of such
as themselves, who stand like Masters on the quarter deck; and only looking on
will needs understand more than the gamesters. And when they distelish their
doings, they urge against them these very votes and actions which were
perchance obtained (if not extorted) by their own instance and importunity,
talking against them as the worst of Tratours now apostatising from the
public, in refusing to act for and according to their purpose, who call
themselves the godly, honest, and well-affected the good and precious of the
land, unto whose interest and satisfaction the ease and estates of all other
men must in some kind or other be always subordinate; which clew of discourse
or consideration, might have carried our self gainsaying Observatour, out of
that Labyrinth of Court Logic, wherein he lost himself to exclamation and
astonishment, for that some Lords and Commons have served the Design of such
as these whilst they only aimed at their own, and that such as these were so
forward in promoting their desires, because they were so vehemently affected to
their own; was the strongest ingredient in Mr. Pyms magical incantation which
carried on the business in contempt of the most mercurial spirits, stupifying
those vigilant wits, and terrifying those resolute hearts, amongst the
Royalists; maugre the Kings Authority, the Commons oppression and the majority
of such a people, who were perchance incapable of any such furious motive, as
is the burning love of novelty, with eager appetite toward alteration. But who
so shall seriously consider the variation of such. One while making the
Parliament the supreme power of this Nation, unto whom as the highest
Authority, by the peoples deputation, the General and the Army (as servants of
the people) are under pain of Treason to be in all things responsible; another
while clamouring against it, as a den of thieves, or nest of Traitors; who
have lost all the essence of Authority, reteining nothing but the mere name,
unto which no obedience is due; but absolute withdrawing of trust, under pain
of being thought partakers with the murderers, he (I say) whoever shall observe
them sometime magnifying and applauding, then again reproaching and threatening
the same Parliament, as if it must go and come, be high or low, base or
honorable, according to the the interest of their business, shall evidently
see that for all their clinging to, or closing with the House of Commons, they
will be found unto the Parliament in a small space no other than as the Ivy
that ruins the wall that it imbraceth. But to speak unto your selves more
particularly, if neither your hearts nor brains, have any thing in readiness
to hold out in way of resolution to the like honest and necessary inquisition
than all your engagements will hardly appear, any other than conspiracy against
the State, as a mere combination of some silly humorists, carried on against
arbitrary power, by the blindness of their own selfewill, to satisfy the
spite of an eager mind and revengeful malice; nor shall your pretense for the
public be otherwise interpreted, than as that of the Apostolical
Purse-bearer, who grudging his Lord and Master the honor and pleasure of so
good and sweet an ointment, handsomely covered his envy and covetousness
under professed affection of charity to the poor, for the still sad experience
of small reality toward the public, has occasioned sundry persons to
conceive, that such kind of flourishes, are but studied pretenses, which may
serve as a stalking horse to some amongst you; who are esntinally aiming at
there own hidden ends, making use of you and others as aptest instruments for
such intent, and having neither care nor fear of burning others houses to roast
their own beef, under the fairest cloak of extreme charity so often
professed. Or if such notions entering into your noddles, were never yet
thoroughly understood it may be thought an insufferable insolence
self-over-weaning, so to ar-e rogate unto your selves and partisans, as if all
were palpablr injustice, and inexpiable treason, which did either oppose, or
might disappoint your ends and purposes. When for ough-that appears, upon the
sitting, you are found so full of partirality, ignorance, and uncertainty, that
it does embolden us you fellows, and abate the fear of these your betters, who
went before you, which will much aggravate those audacious passages (singled
out of several Pamphlets by Squire Pryn, and our Scottish Brethren) that
foolishly did open defiance to Royal Majesty, as if they were but entering an
ordinary quarrel with one of their equals, for though some wise and
high-spirited men, may only mock at their rashness and presumption, yet if
unfit for reply to such Proposals, such frantike ebullitions will be thought to
arise, rather from rancorous spite against Principality, then any rational
hope of better regling our society. Nor upon such supposall shall ye be only
charged with ignorance and presumption, in not feeling the misery of your own
fate or ambitious affectation, to keep a fumbling in State affairs, for which
you are as fit as a mere sculler in the River of Thames to navigate a ship in
the Ocean, without ever studying his Plats-compasse, and opticall or
Geometrical Instruments. For being little verst in political speculations,
and never bred in the school of Experience.

How shall your statizing capacity exceed the measure of your conversation with
able Ministers and Councillors of State, the ordinary mean for a practical
understanding of all Political business? except you prove State
intelligencer, (as some boast of Scripture sense) to flow upon you by
inspiration; you will be found not unlike those infants, whose natural^ (...)
were cut out for the Cart or Plow. Shop or VVarehouse; and yet he the Parents
wealth or ambition, find themselves after, (...) entangled amongst a
distracted multitude of Books and papers, which aggravateth t^^ guilt of
great presumption, in (...) against thy law of nature, and the most brazen
opinion to the sense of that most truly noble, and most pithy Satyrist.

Publica lex hominum naturaque continet hoc fas,
Vt teneat vetitos, inscitia debilis actus.
Navem si poscit sibi peronatus arator
Luciferirudis; clamat Melicerta perisse
Frontem de rebus.
But you shall be accused also of malignity; for if it were the opinion not
only of Plato, but (as Plutarch affirms) of Favonious, that an honest man can
never allow of that Reformation, which disturbeth and hazardeth the whole
estate, or that any malady in a Commonwealth should be encountered with so
deadly a drug, as is the destroying Serpent of Civil war, then how should you
answer the indictment of sottish malignity, in curing Diseases by death and
particular Faults, by universal confusion, still pulling down all persons and
things, not knowing what to plant in their places.

Therefore, in fine, if the shoulders of your sufficiency sink under the
burden of such demands, never think to censure and control, to sway and
appoint. But if I may persuade you, who (in the conscience of my most
essential qualities, ignorance, and weakness) dare not urge any thing quit
ingeniously those usurped Privileges, and discreetly address your selves unto
the conduct of some wise council of peace and war, rather then to reign as a
kindle of chieftaines in the dangerous conduct of staggering troops and
ignorant souls, who are easily excited to audacious enterprises. Always
observed (which you should consider) to be. 1. Prima speci laeta. 2 Tractatu
dura 3. Eventu tristia. First, whatsoever fair hopes may be holden forth unto
you, that the work is Gods, who will carry it on; yet I do not see how any
rational Christian in all your Regiments, can ever in such a case, promise any
succor simply Gods, without and beyond your own cooperation. For though some
has observed, that fortuna facilio^em aliquando praebet actionibus nonnullis
even um, quas ipsa s^la, abditissima ratione propagavit. Yet how should the God
of order, and of the spirits of all flesh, ever espouse that enterprise, which
through the apparent ignorance or malignity of the mannagers, tends only to
confusion, and to the absolute destruction of the best of Creatures, unto which
he has given corporal being and preservation. Therefore, (I think) you may
attribute this confidence to more then Jewish arrogance, or to the
superstitious vanity of some Pharisaicall Zealots, who, by the prolixity of a
battalogious Prayer are still soliciting the great Jehovah (as the worst of
Gentiles did their Jupiter) to interesse himself in their undertakings; never
truly examining their present estate and action. But be it vicious, or
unlawful, they implore his aid) as do also thieves, traitors, and
murderers) whenever their weakness wants assistance; yea, they boldly
promise that unto themselves, which appertains not, but to the humble, wise,
and upright, When they are consideratively active, and impartially affected in
their machinations. Secondly, tractatu dura, State-affaires are so intricate,
that the ablest Statists can never so canvase every seame in the peace
concluded, but that they leave some scope of quarrel, which may by Politicians
be easily picked from some particulars in the Articles. What hope soever then
you have, of fair and ready passage, yet once entered, you shall find them so
several, casual, and confounded, as will dazzle and astonish your spirits,
with the consideration of so many, diverse, and contrary lusters, except it
prove so, I will ever hereafter assert that lesser, vivacious spirits and
vulgar wits, are found more fit and happy for the mannagery of State-affaires.

Therefore if you presume upon the first appearance represented a far off, and
meet not that which is seven times worse then the son of Anak, before you
arrive at your Earthly Chanaan; then let all the people ever look upon me as a
false Prophet, knowing nothing at the present, and yet presuming of the future,
which is indeed but a vehement opinion, though violent in persuasion, and so
transporting me; because I strongly conceit, whatsoever clearenesse of truth,
or form of happy constitution you do fancy, when ever you reach toward it by
actual attempt and resolution, many difficulties will impeach your passage,
and new Quaries will start up, able to stray, lose or beset you. Thirdly,
Eventu tristia, If you glory in any success hitherto, or some of you like him
in the 52 Psalm. You are in that beholden to the worst and vilest of the
malignants. For had not their innovating in Church and State, occassioned
grievous suspicions against his Majesty, in the minds of quiet, moderate; and
truly conscientious men, then had your Army been stop in the current, before
any expense of treasure and blood: you be so taken with their accidental
efficacy (by which you are fand have been of secret esteem) that you will
freely endeavor to fulfill the Prophecy of plain English (who in a godly
manner explodeth Monarchy, when he had administered, both matter and occasion to
the same) And so in way of recompense; kindly gratify how, either by advancing
their tyranny, or (as they scornfully speak) your own, both policy and
dependant Anarchy. Then take heed, that you prove not as a candle burnt to the
socket, flashing with more then its ordinary light, but presently extinct,
leaving also an ill sent, and unpleasant favor behind it. If this be the best
fruit of your first and latest baffling (whereby all Magistrates have been
disgraced, all laws subverted, the Kingdom embroyled, our treasure exhausted,
and now more then ever, the minds of people chafed and imbittered, with almost
in expiable hatred one against one another.) Then sure (in my conceit) neither
your first nor last motion or mannagery was either from God, or according to
him. It Is true, by your passionate stickling, and multiplicity of fantastical
opinions, you have armed them with more arguments for Popery, and tyranny,
then any of them before your stiring did falsely understand. But if you make
them our masters, it will be concluded, that ignorance, envy, pride, and
avarice, rules the stern of your actions, whilst tenderness of conscience is
merely pretended.

Moreover, you are the men chiefly insisted upon, as the only seditious and
turbulent spirits, contemptible in number, inconsiderable in fortune and
reputation But so uni^ed conspiracy against ecular Majesty, as to carry on a
monstrous design to the admiration of Europe, for the which you might
(perchance) have bin lately sacrificed, to pacify the wrath of some kind of
people, and expiate the offense of your selve and others, in hope of
conciliating the King into better conditions, if not unto the National
Covenant.

Had not your active vigilance so opportunely taken occasion by the foretop,
which never since as it is said you wist how to use, or well to improve I.E. so
wisely, honestly, and lawfully, that without injustice or cruelty, you might
accomplish such an alteration, as should not only afford universal
satisfaction, but also exalt our untappy Albion, unto more then pristine repute
amongst all those Nations where she is now despised. Herein you are comparable
into Hanniball, but I hope in heart and spirit, you will at the length prove
parallel to these gallant honest spirits, in ancient and most excellent times,
both Greeks and Romans; That have always lightly esteemed all their own, in
relation to the gen^rall interest of their Country; for else you can never be
framed to any friendly composure. And if you intend to quarrel by standing;
for I suppose, that in condemning all tyranny over the spirit, you do not deny
but that our estate, actions, travel and life, ought to be accomodate to the
service of humane society, and always responsible unto justice, and the common
opinion, when custom and law has confirmed it; for you know not what (besides
the tenderness of your Conscience) then you will (in my fancy) find it a most
dangerous and desperate business wherein you can never secure, much less
exalt your own persons; except your consciences be so far cauterized, as to
adventure your selves for glory and profit, as if it were for the opinion of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and in that vigor of spirit or extravagance, freely to
resolve upon more hellish villainies then ever Matchiavil could devise, or any
tyrant, or traitor put in practice. And all this upon such uncertainty, as can
never yield any undefraimed assurance to the spirit, nor the least of sanctuary
to the person, in every place, with mortal hatred, all ways pursued, except
you hope to captivate all your own Countrymen, of different or contrary minds;
and with remorcelesse cruelty to mortify the distasted, and un^amed spirits of
the English; into more then Turkish stupidity, that they may freely bow, as the
elder Camells, to all burdens which are offered them.

Upon which promises, may I not well say, that so long as you are led on, by
paradoxicall humourists, and philodoxicall opinionists; or much enthrauled to
your own singular, and municipall conceits, you will be found as unmeet for the
mannaging of such matters, as ever was mere soldier to play the medico; and no
more apt or able to deal with the troubled and law-broken state of England;
then is a Shop Prentice-boy, to back, sit, and guide a skittish and loose
broken Jade, when he has neither bridle nor saddle, in which sense, were it
not against my practice to guide and control, I would point you to a certain
Philosophical fancy much fitter (me thinks) for you to ponder on, then for
him, into whom the excellent Poet does apply it.

Optat Ephippia bospiger, Optat arare caballus,
Quam scit uterque libens aequm est exerceat artem.
This going tends something against the grain of my humor, I desire to end as
I began with inquisition, giving you all scope and liberty to lash and correct
me, surely then tell me when I first hear from you; why, I may not justly
denominate all those giddibraind fellows, whosoever upon some appearance of
truth presented at distance to their understanding, are so far transported with
presumption of knowledge, that to promote or establish their opinion, they will
furiously attempt any alteration, without ever considering the danger of
subversion, and difficulty of reducing us to better condition, 2. Whether all
such arrogant simplicians (as thus usurp the authority of judging) are not in
all reason obliged, not only to find the error and fault of what they would
abolish, but also the truth and utility of what they would bring in, and so to
preserve themselves, (as Mr. Burton preffered to the Archbishop Who for all the
wit supposed in him by the superstitious adorers of wealth and dignity, had
neither strength of brain, nor spirit, to avoid the envy of people, in wracking
his malice upon him by a Parliament.
) with ropes about their necks, as it was ordained amongst the Thurians, that
if their device were not approved of all, they should presently suffer due
punishment for their seditious sauciness, and turbulant presumption.

3. What do you think of the conceit of Calavius, that wise Magistrate in
Capus, of whom we read in Sir Water Rawleys, was it not both ingenious and
honest? yea such as the sage and prudent, many years since, might well have
improved, to the curing of many distempers, and preventing of those disorders,
by which we are become so distracted, that England is called the Bedlam of
Europe, and London the Bedlam of England. Or whether you deem it either meet
or possible, yet now to be put in practice. At one mean yet remaining for
preventing the utter subversion of all Magistracy, upon which must follow
great mischief and perdition, or the death of our body politic, by the sudden
operation of our mortal and intestine Diseases. God have mercy on our Land,
and graciously prevent these yet piteous turmoyles, and hideous desolations,
which all your drivers of designs are drawing upon us: So that if we survive
this sickness, I shall not hereafter despair of any political condition, be
the State never so tossed to and fro with all manner of motions and
alterations: for were it not that I conceive the preservation of a State, to
exceed my apprehension, so that we may subsist beyond my imagination, I should
give our body for dead in no possibility of recovering, nor in age of any
policy, to which purpose I have some special arguments as Iopine; the
speculation whereof, makes me often very pensive, And he who can without
perturbation behold the now approaching ruins of his Country, exceeds much
the hight of my spirit mind or constancy. And thus in hope to find you
courteous, pitiful, and compassionate, as all true Christians are and ought
to be, I heartily bid you farewell, And (if I may usurp your now famed
compliment) subscribe my self one of yours and the Kingdoms humble servants.

Richard Jackson.
POSTSCRIPT
WHat an age do we now live in? that a private man must run a double danger, in
endeavoring any thing toward the public, of shame, and pain, reproach and
punishment, the farther in seeming ambitious to be a fool or with peril seen
(...) print, the latter in attempting what is not tolerated by order of the
State, that touches me a little, for so much as I feel no glory, but what is
superficial, and infused by the treason of my complexion; for few there be
from whom I may in reason expect so much as approbation; not from the very
learned, because I am not so pedanticall, as to imitate Mr. Prin, who is ever
honoring his reading and memory, at the charge of his reason and
understanding, not from Plebeians or mere Commoners, who can never discover the
force or comlines, of a quaint, sharp, or solid discourse, perchance amongst
the middle sort, there may be found some well borne minds, or regular wits,
strong enough by their natural temper to take me in the right sense, and then
surely to afford me, either friendly rebuke, or else favor and protection. But
this much troubles me; who am exceeding desirous in such things, to be
directed by the word, order, without further question or inquisition) that I
now come out against it. Know therefore, that in obedience to unto order, I
carried my Papers unto the learned Licenser, who after perusal could not
instance in any particular clause to be expunged, as containing matter either
scandalous, railing, or seditious; much less savouring of heresy, schism, or
superstition. But the timorous old man durst not meddle, because times are so
tickle: and many men of every party so waspish and touchy, with whose spite and
envy I must now wrestle, though unwilling to deal with such an adversary, who
of old was deemed inexpugnable; And unto whom it is to no purpose to speak the
truth Therefore in this rashness, partly occasioned by my sudden departure
into the Country, I appeal and freely submit unto my proper Judges in the
Parliament, which I shall desire to honor, as wisest council or the justest
judicature: so God bless me from the fear of all swearing Gamesters, who get
their damnation by purchase.




Curtious Reader. I desire thee to pass by some faults escaped in Printing, by
reason of the Authors absence.

Imprinted at LONDON, 1647.


