A REMONSTRANCE OF Diverse Remarkable Passages concerning the Church and
Kingdom OF IRELAND, Recommended By Letters from the Right Honorable the Lords
Justices, and Counsel of Jreland, And Presented By HENRY JONES Doctor in
Divinity, and Agent for the Ministers of the Gospel in that Kingdom, TO The
Honorable House of Commons IN ENGLAND:

London, Printed for Godfrey Emerson, and William Bladen, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Swan in Little-Brittain. 1642,

To our very assured loving Friend, Master Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the
Honorable the Commons House of Parliament in the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
THere has been presented unto us, a Remonstrance of the deplorable estate of
this Church of Ireland, and the lamentable Condition of the Clergy therein,
occasioned by the present Rebellion; The Remonstrants desiring our Letters in
the Representing of the same to the honorable House of Commons in England;
unto whose grave and wise consideration they do apply themselves.

We shall not need to say much in a matter, so much speaking it self, and the
experience we have of the true sense they have of this distracted State, gives
us great assurance, that they will take to heart this our miserable Church, and
Gods servants therein, reduced unto unexpressable extremities, both Church and
State being now involved in one common calamity.

The bearer hereof, Henry Jones, Doctor in Divinity, is entrusted by the Clergy
to negotiate in their behalf, and we have entreated him to solicit the cause
of the poor robbed English, expressed in our Letters to you of the fourth of
this month.

We therefore do crave leave to recommend him in this employment to that
Honorable House, he being a Person who is able to say much in this business,
having been some while a Prisoner in the hands of the Rebels, and observed much
of their proceedings, and being entrusted with others, as a Commissioner to
take the examinations out of which the Remonstrance now to be by him offered to
that Honorable House, is extracted.

As for himself, he has suffered much in his private fortunes by these
troubles, and in respect of his Abilities and Learning, and Painfulnesse in his
Ministry, he deserves favor and encouragement; Besides we have found him very
diligent, and forward in attending all occasions, for promoting the public
services here by timely and important intelligence given to us of Occurences,
during his imprisonment with the Rebels; and since especially in his
information made to us of the approaches of the enemy to Drogheda, when we
could not conceive they would rise to that boldness, by which information
(amongst others) we had the opportunity of sending thither the present
Garrison, without whom it might have been in danger of surprising; And so we
remain from His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the seventh day of March, 1641.

Your very assured W. Parsons, Jo. Borlace,

To the Honorable Assembly of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the
Commons House of Parliament, in the Kingdom of ENGLAND.
The undernamed in the behalf of themselves and their brethren, the poor
dispoiled and distressed Ministers of the Gospel in Ireland, with the Widows
and Orphans of such,

Humbly represent their lamentable Condition,

Showing,

THat by the instigation of Popih Priests, Friars, and Jesuits, with other
firebrarnds and Incendiaries of the State; partly such of them as have been
resident here in this Kingdom of Ireland before, partly flocking in from
Foreign parts, of late in multitudes more then ordinary; and chiefly by such
of them as resorted hither out of the Kingdom of England: And out of that
ancient and known hatred the Church of Rome hears to the reformed Religion;
As also by reason of the surfeit of that freedom and indulgence, which through
Gods forbearance for our trial, they of the Popish faction have hitherto
enjoyed in this Kingdom: There has been beyond all parallel of former ages, a
most bloody and Antichristian combination and plot hatched, by well-nigh the
whole Romish sect, by way of combination from parts foreign, with those at
home, against this our Church and State; thereby intending the utter
extirpation of the reformed Religion, and the professors of it: In the room
thereof, setting up that idol of the Mass, with all the abominations of that
whore of Babylon: This also aiming at the pulling down and defacing the present
state and government of this Kingdom under his Sacred Majesty, theirs, and our
undoubted Sovereign; and introducing another form of rule ordered and moderated
by themselves, without dependence on his Highness, or the Kingdom of England,
whence have proceeded such depredations of of the goods, and such cruelties
exercised on the persons and lives of the loyal Subject; such wasting and
defacing of all Minuments of civility, with such profanation of holy places,
and Religion, that by the most barbarous and heathenish Nations, the like could
not in any age be found to be perpetrated.

All which does daily appear unto us your Suppliants appointed to enquire upon
oath of the premises, and other particulars depending thereupon, by virtue of
a Commission to us directed under the great Seal of this Kingdom of Ireland,
bearing Date the three and twentieth day of December, in the seventeenth year
of his Majesty's Reign; and by one other Commission further enlarged concerning
the premises, Dated the eighteenth of January, in the year aforesaid. Copies
whereof, together with the Copies of such and so much of the Depositions as
answer to the particulars of this our Remonstrance we have hereunto annexed;
that both the validity of our proceedings, and the truth of this our said
Remonstrance may the better appear.

Upon view of all which, it does very evidently appear, that in the present
most dangerous design against this Kingdom, the Popish faction therein has
been confederate with foreign States, If we may rely upon the report made
thereof by the conspirators themselves, and their adherents here, whereof the
following examinations are full.

IT being confessed that they had their Commission for what they did from
beyond the Seas. John Day Com. Cavan, exam. Feb. 8. 1641. ex. 1.
That from Spain they did expect an Army before Easter next, consisting, if of
none others, yet of the Irish Regiments, and Commanders serving in Flanders,
and else where, under that King; together with a great quantity of Powder,
Ammunition, and Arms, for a great number of men to be raised in Ireland. This
Kingdom (as they make up their estimate) being able to make up the body of an
Army of two hundred thousand, or more. Lucy Spell, Com. Lowth, ex. Feb. 5.
1641. ex 2. John Biggar, Com Dublin, exam. Ianu. 29. 1641. ex. 3. John
Monatgomry, Com. Monaghan. exam. Ianu. 26. 1641. ex. 4. Patr. Bryan, Com. Fer.
Ianu. 29. ex 5. Doctor Jones, ex. 6. George Cottingham, ex. 78.
From France also they look for aid. John Biggar, and John Montgomery Praed.
Being in all this further encouraged by Bulls from Rome; some of these Rebels
requiring to the Popes use, and in his name, the yielding up of such places of
strength as they had beleaguered. Edmond. Welsh, Com. Rs. January. 22. exam. 7.
In all which respects, and in allusion to that League in France, they terming
themselves the Catholic Army, Lucy Spell praed Feb. 5.
and the ground of their war the Catholic cause. And to this purpose has this
present year, 1641. been among them proclaimed a year of Jubilce, and Pardons
before hand granted, of all sins of what sort soever that shall be therein
committed, tending to this great work. Io. Edgworth Esquire. Com. Lengford, Feb.
23. ex. 8.
Excommunications also thundered against any that shall refuse to join therein.
Edm. Walsh.


It does secondly appear, that they had their correspondents in England, for
raising the like Rebellion there; this not being a report made to us from one
part, but confirmed from all places of this Kingdom, whence the passage has
not been stopped by the present obstructions. Io. Brooks, Com Cavan. Ian. 5.
ex. 9. Grace Lovet, Com. Ferm Ian. 5. ex. 10. Eliza. Coats, Com. Fer. Ian. 4
ex. 11. Nicholas Willoughby, Com. praed. Feb. 23. ex. 12. Thomas Crant. Com.
Cavan Feb. ex. 13. Io. Biggar Com. Dublin, Ian. 29. Eliza. Parker, Com
Catherlagh. Ian. 13. ex 14. Ocker Butts Com. Wex. la. 25. Lucy Spell, ex. 15.


That thirdly, they reported themselves to have had the like party in
Scotland; that the Scots joined with them Edw. Denman, Com. Ca. Ian. 27. ex. 16
and were their friends. Thomas Crant. Com. Cavan, Feb.
That the like troubles were to be raised in Scotland. Thomas Crant, Patr.
Bryan, Com. Fer. Ian. 29. G. Cottingham, ex. 78.
That the Scots were joined with them in Covenant, not to leave a drop of
English blood in England, as they the Irish Rebels would do the like in
Ireland. For which they pretended a writing signed with the hands of the prime
Nobility of Scotland. Geo. Fercher, Com. Per Ian. 4 ex 17 Eliza. Dickinson,
Gom. paerd Ian. 3. ex. 18.
And that the Tower of London, the Castle of Edenborough, and the Castle of
Dublin, were to be surprised all upon one day. Io. Shorter. Com. Fer Ian. 5.
ex. 19.


As for that part of that cursed Faction within this Kingdom of Ireland, the
Actors therein acknowledge it to be a plot of many years, some say two, Thomas
Knowles, Com. Fer. Ian. 3. ex. 20.
some eight, Patr. Bryan.
some 14 or 17 years. Mr John Cardiff, ex. 21.
A plot wherein all the Popish Nobility and men of quality were interessed;
Ge. Cottingham. Edw. How, Com Fer. In 29. ex. 22. Tho Knowls. Geo. Cook, Com
Cavan Ian. 22. ex. 23. Io. Gesso^, Com. Cilk, Ianu. 8. ex. 24.
and by Sir Phelim o Neale; that Arch-Rebell, it is professed, that what he
did, was by the consent of the Parliament of Ireland, John Gregg, Com. Arm.
Ian. 7. ex. 25.
thereby intending the Popish members thereof.

Notwithstanding all which, that this appears to have been a long-laid
conspiracy; yet these Traitors for giving some color to their Rebellion,
pretend as if the occasion moving them thereunto were new, unexpected, and
pressing, so that with the safety of their lives, and duty which they owed God
and their Country; they could not do less then they have done: falsely
pretending that there was a plot laid in this Kingdom, grounded on a pretended
Act passed in the Parliament of England, for the cutting off of all the
Nobility and others the Papists in Ireland, Hen. Reynolds, Com Cavan, Ian. 4.
ex. 26. John Mountgomry. Dr Jones Tho. Crant Charles Crafford, Com. Mead, Ian.
22. ex 27.
and all this to be done in one day; Grace Lovet.
and that to be on the 23 or 24th of November now last past; for preventing
whereof, they laid (say they) this their counterplot a full month before, viz.
on the 23 of October. Dr Jones. Io. Wood, Com Wick. Feb. 17. ex. 28
.

For effecting which their wicked and devilish design, the said Conspirators
and Traitors have entered into a most accursed Covenant, and bound themselves by
an oath of confederation, the same being subscribed by the hands of the
chiefest Rebels, and certain men being appointed to administer the same to all
such as shall either offer themselves, or be pressed to serve as Soldiers in
that cause; others also being sent abroad, and in chief, the Popish Primate
Reily, Henry Style, Com. Monagh, Ianu. 10. ex. 29.
who has compassed far and near, to draw into this conspiracy such as had not
before been there withal acquainted. As also to satisfy any scruples, if any
were that did or might retard any from entering thereinto; the Popish Clergy
being observed for the most forward advisers and putters on of the people in
this way. For whereas many of the Rebels seemed no give ear to a Proclamation
of grace, Dated the first of November 1641. they were forbidden by their
Priests, assuring them it would be their undoing. Kath. Crant. Com. Mead,
Ianu. 5. ex. 30.
Hence it is that these Rebels are so hardened in their course of wickedness,
that they profess against accepting of any quarter, and that they will not
accept of any but a general Pardon. Edm. Walsh.
Others again disclaiming any Pardon, casting out words to the dishonout of his
Sacred Majesty, as if his Royal word and Seal were not to be relied upon.
Patr. Bryan. Hugh Madden, Com. Wickloe, Feb. 23. ex 31.


And yet for making the more plausible introduction into their said wicked
Rebellion; the Conspirators aforesaid, have traitorously, and impudently
averred and proclaimed, that their authority therein is derived by Commission
from his Highness. Sometimes at distance, making offer to show a large Patent
or Commission with a broad Scale, giving out that in that their power did
appear. Io. Wright, Com. Fer. Ian. 12. ex. 32.
Others taking upon them to read (some forged writing) to that purpose. George
French, Com. Kildare, Feb. 1. ex. 33.
All which they stick not publicly in Marketplaces to proclaim; Jane
Mansfield, Com Mead, Ianu. 3. ex. 34. Henry Palmer, Com. Wexford, Ian. 12. ex.
35.
falsely also reporting, that his Highness was among them in the North of
Ireland, riding up and down disguised, and with glass eyes desiring not to be
discovered. Others again pretending their Commission to be from the Queens
Highness, and professing themselves her Soldiers, and that what they did, was
under the hands of the best of the Nobility of England; which yet in favor of
the English, they did not (say they) execute to the full. (G)

All which they falsely reported, to the end, that thereby they might distract
the minds, and discourage the hearts of the true Subject, and that therein
they might gain more upon such as they desire to draw into their party; or if
any should for a time stand aloose as Newters, to win a better opinion with
them, then to be accounted Traitors, or their enterprise a Rebellion.

Whereas it is apparent, that Allegiance or Obedience to his Majesty, is not
the thing they aim at, the contrary being plainly confessed and professed by
themselves; now that they are entered as far as they can into their diabolical
practice; and that their confederates are for the most part declared and drawn
unto an head.

For some of them, to the making way for their Traiterous intentions Ocker
Butts.
have given out, That the King was dead, and that the young King was gone to
Mass: Io. Perkins Com. Cav. I a. 8. ex 36.
That they would have the Prince in Ireland, whom they would make their
Viceroy, tutoring him in the Romish religion; And that the King should live in
Scotland Lucy Spell. Rog. Holland, ex. 77.
: sometimes, That the Duke of York should live with them.

But others more fully unvizard themselves, professing, That they would have a
King of their own, and him Crowned within a fortnight Tho Middleborough Co. Fer
Ia. 4. ex. 37. Alice Tibbs Co. praed. Ia. 4 ex 38. Avis Bradshaw Co. praed. Ia
4. ex. 39.
. That they had him already Richard Knowles Co. praed. Ia. 10 ex. 40.
: And that it was from their new King that they had their Commission so much
spoken of Robert Barton Co. praed. Ia 5. ex. 41.
: Declaring also their new King according to their several fancies; Some being
for the Earl of Tyron Hu. Culm Co. Mon. Ia 22. ex. 42. Marth. Culm Co. praed.
Feb. 14. ex 43.
; others for Sir Phelim o Neal Eliz. Gough Co. Cav Feb. 8 ex. 44.
: If perhaps these two be not intended for one and the same, thus we find the
said Sir Phelim honored with the style of, His Majesty Io. Greg
: Others yet being rather for the Lord Maguire Anne Gill. Co. Fer Ia. 29. ex.
45.
; there being some that said they had a consecrated Crown for the best deserver
George Cottingam. ex. 78.
.

But of His sacred Majesty, how contemptuously do they speak? Let your King
(say they) fetch you out again Eliz Vause Co. Leitrim Feb. 9. ex. 46.
: These being their words to some of His Majesty's Subjects, oppressed by them;
We care not for the King of England, say others Nicholas Michael Co. Cav. Ian.
15. ex. 47.
; a third, That neither King nor Queen shall govern Ireland any longer, for
they would govern it themselves Andr. Foster Co. Wickloe. Feb 17. ex. 48.
; And that their Religion should flourish in despite of King or State (T).

In all which, having broken through the due bounds of their Allegiance, their
vain and ambitious thoughts rove without knowing any limits. It will not now
content them to settle anew, and mold again this Kingdom to their own Model,
by calling of Parliaments, making Laws, and appointing their own Governors
(V). Thus discourse they of the modestest sort: but they will, with the
assistance of Spain and France, set footing in England, and after that in
Scotland Io. Mountgomery. Nath. Higginson, Com. Ferm Ia 7. ex. 51. George
Cottingam. ex. 78.
; where all things being settled to their desires, the whole Forces of Ireland,
in way of retribution, and acknowledgement of gratitude, are intended for the
King of Spain, against the Hollanders Dr. Jones.
.

Unto which their disloyalty to theirs and our most gracious Sovereign, they
have added expressions of unheard of hatred to His British Subjects of this
Kingdom; banishment or slavery are the greatest favors that would be afforded
them; But their general profession is for a general extirpation, even to the
last and least drop of English blood Anne Marshall, Co. Ferm. Ian. 3. ex 52
Iathuell Maw, Co Fer. Ian. 3. ex. 53 Jane Mansfeild.
: Which, that it may be drayned to the full, such of the English as cannot
prescribe a settlement in this Kingdom for two hundred years, are to be cut
off, and that notwithstanding they be of the Romish Sect: It being to that end
provided, That such as do revolt to their part, should, for the present, be
accepted of; yet so disposed, as being drawn into the List of their Army, they
should be set upon the most dangerous Enterprises, so either to be made away,
or to serve their own turns of them: And what the Sword cannot, for the
present, effect, an Inquisition, like that in Spain, for finding out the Jewish
and Moorish blood, shall in time thoroughly accomplish Io. Biggar.
. As for the future, their Covenant is, That no English should ever set footing
again in Ireland Hugh Madden.
; Even the very Language must be forgotten, none being to speak English, under
a penalty John Mountgomery. Hu. Culme. Marth. Culme
. But that which exceeds all, Not an English Beast, or any of that breed must
be left in the Kingdom Rich. Cleybrock. Co. Wex. his exam. taken at the
Council Table, ex. 54
.

And as we find the hearts of these men in their tongues, so in their actions,
doing what they profess; and being in both beyond all measure profane and
heathenish in their impious words and behaviors toward God, and the holy
Scriptures, Religion, and the places of Gods public Worship.

Blaspheming our God, bidding his servants, whom they had first Rich. Witlon
Co. Wickloe. Ia. 11. ex. 49.
Io. Biggar. Tho. Crant. Edw. Tailor. Co. Wexford, Feb. 23 ex. 50
stripped naked, to go to their God, and let him give them clothes Marg.
Farmen, Co Fer. Ia. 3 ex. 55. Marg. Leadly, Co. Fer. Ia. 3.
.

Breaking into Churches, burning Pulpits, Pues, and all belonging thereunto,
with extreme violence, and expression of hatred to our Religion, and triumphing
also in their impiety Hen. Fisher, Co. Wickloe, Ia. 25. ex. 56.
.

Professing, That not one Protestant should be left in the Kingdom Io. Greg.
with infinite others*
: Dragging some Professors through the streets by the hair of the head, into the
Church; where stripping, whipping, and cruelly using them, they added these
taunting words; If you come tomorrow, you shall hear the like Sermon Adam
Glover, Com. Cav. Ia. 4 ex 57.
.

How have our sacred Books of holy Scriptures been used? Gods Book has been, O
horrible! cast into, and tumbled in the Kennell; thence taken up, and dashed in
the faces of some Professors, with these words, I know you love a good lesson,
this is an excellent one; come to morrow, you shall have as good Adam Glover.
.

They have torn it in pieces Eliz. Tailor, Com. Fer. Ian. 8. ex. 58.
, kicked it up and down Io. Mountgomery.
, treading it under foot, with leaping thereon, they causing a Bagpipe to play
the while Hen Palmer, Com. Wex, Ia. 12.
; laying also the leaves in the kennell, leaping and trampling thereupon,
saying, A plague on it, This Book has bred alltne quarrel, hoping within
three weeks all the Bibles in Ireland should be so used, or worse, and that
none should be left in the Kingdom Edw Slack, Com. Fer. Ia. 4. ex. 59.
: and while two Bibles were in burning, saying that it was hellfire that was
burning Edward Dean, Com. Wickloe, Ia. 7. ex 60. Roger Holland, ex. 77.
; wishing they had all the Bibles of Christendom, that they might use them so.

But what Pen can set forth, what Tongue express, whose Eye can read, Ear
hear, or heart, without melting, consider the cruelties, more than barbarous,
daily exercised upon us by those inhumane, blood-sucking Tigers!

Stripping quite naked Men, Women, and children, even children, sucking upon
the Breast Io. Greg.
, whereby multitudes of all sorts in the extremity of that cold season of
Frost and Snow have perished. Women being dragged up and down naked, Katherine
Bellew, Com. Mona. Feb. 5. ex 61
Women in child bed thence drawn out, and cast into prison. Io. Wisdom, Com.
Arm. Feb. 8. ex. 62 Roger Holland ex. 77.
One delivered of a child while she was hanging. Io. Wisdom. (...) Tayl^r,
Com. Arm. Feb. 8 ex, 63
One ripped up, and two children taken away, and all cast unto, and eaten by
swine. Io Mandevile, Com. Dublin, Feb. 3 ex 64
One other stabbed in the breast her child sucking. M^g Stocks, Com. Fer
examined by directions from the Council Bo^rd, ex 65
An Infant cruelly murdered, whom they found sucking his dead mother slain by
them the day before. R^ynold Gri^fith, Co. Arma. ex. 74
A child of 14 years of age taken from his mother, in her sight cast into a
Bog-pit, and held under water while he was drowned. (W) The forcing 40 or 50
Protestants to renounce their profession, and then cutting all their throats.
Alex. Creig^hton.


What should we speak of their murders, Ad. Glover, To. Barton, with infinite
others.
their hanging, half-hanging, and that often times reiterated; they delighting in
the tortures of the miserable. Io. Gregg. Alexander Creig^hton, ex 76. Richard
Skinner, Co. K^^^ore, Feb 8.
Hence some being left wounded, in vain crying out that they might be
dispatched. John Gregg
This being purposely done, that these wretches might languish in their
misery; their tormentors affirming that their Priests commanded them so to do.
Nath. Hi^genson.
What should we speak of those 30 or 40 burnt in one House, and 50 in another.
Thomas Crant
the denying of burial to the dead, Adam Glover. Io. Mountgomery
whereby Christians have been eaten by Dogs, and Dogs tearing Children out of
the womb; the bloody beholders relating such things with boasting and great
rejoicing: Thomas Crant Marga. Stocks
And to make perfect the measure of their cruelty, Two were said to be buried
alive, ^. Mountgomery. Mary Woods, Com. Ki^dare, Feb. ^3 ex 66.
and others that had been long buried, dug up; they saying that the Churches
could not be Consecrated, while Heretics bodies or bones lay therein. Thomas
(...) Kildare, Feb 15. ex. 67. Mary Woods. Reb. Collis, Co. Killed. Feb. 23. ex.
68.


The cruel usage of those 48 poor prisoners in the Jail of Monaghan. ^. ^.
^tile. Hugh Culme.
Of those in the County of Armagh, after drowned in the River of the Ban, to
the number of 80, Io Mountgomry.
or 100. W. Clerk.
or 196, Mr Philip Tailor
as it is diversely reported, those 45 drowned together. Io. Mountgomry.
And those 179 burnt in one house. Cha. Campbell, ex. 75.
All these we refer to the reading of the several depositions concerning them
hereunto annexed.

But how can that be forgotten, or where shall it be believed, which we hear to
have been done in the Church of Newtown in the County of Fermanagh; where a
child of Thomas Strettons was boiled alive in a Caldron: A thing which as one
bare reports we durst not, so neither can we now with confidence enough present
it to that your honorable Assembly, nor can we aver it for true, otherwise
then as by concurring examinations we find them solemnly deposed, whereunto we
desire to be referred. Marga. Parker of Newtown, Com. Fer. Ian. 19. ex. 69.
Elizabeth Bursses of the same. ex. 70.
To which may well be added, the forcing of one Duke Wade to drink unto
drunkenness, and then hanging him therein, to take a full revenge both on body
and soul. (p)

Of which their aforesaid many and barbarous cruelties, each day does afford us
variety of new instances. This City of Dublin being the common receptacle for
these miserable sufferers. Here are many thousands of poor people, sometimes
of good respects and estates, now in want and sickness, whereof many daily
dye, notwithstanding the great care of those tender hearted Christians (whom
God bless) without whom all of them had before now perished.

In all which, as our sufferings are general, the hatred of the enemy being
expressed to the whole Nation, and to all the professors of the truth. So in
chief and above all others Alex. Creighton. ex. 76. Geo. Cottingham, ex. 78.
do we find it with the deadliest venom spit against the persons of us the
Ministers of the Gospel, toward whom their rage is without bounds.

Of this we see enough in the miserable condition of Mr George Cottingham, a
Bachelor in Divinity, and a painful labourer in the Lords Vineyard. Henry
Boyne, Com. Tiron, Feb. 16. ex. 71.
The like we see in the cruel murder of Mr Blyth, slain with sir Pheliom o
Neals safe conduct in his hands, Hugh Culme. Henry Style.
it being lift up by him unto heaven, as a witness of his treachery. Io.
Cardiff.
The same we find in the murder of Mr Thomas Grafford, and Mr William
Fullerton. Eliz. Trafford, com. Long f. Ian. 8. ex. 72. William Cleark.
Lastly, that among a multitude, we may content our selves with a few; We see
it in the cruelty exercised upon Mr Sharp the Minister of Kells. Geo. Cook.
Margery Sharp, com. Mead, Ian. 29. ex. 73.
Of all which, the following examinations shall speak morefully.

Such of us as have best escaped the hands of these Tyrants have been turned
out of all. We, with such other of our brethren, ours and their wives and
children coming on foot hither, through ways tedious and full of peril, being
every minute assaulted, the end of one but leading to the next danger, one
quite stripping off, what others had in pity left. So that in nakedness we
have recovered this our City of refuge, where we live in all extremity of want,
not having wherewithal to subsist, or to put bread in our mouths.

Of those of our brethren who have perished on the way hither, some of their
wives and children do yet remain. The children also of some of them, wholly
deprived of their parents, and left for desserted Orphans. All of us being
exposed to apparent ruin, if not speedily relieved.

This our most miserable condition therefore, and of our Brethren, and of this
our whole distressed Church of Ireland, We do in most humble manner Remonstrate
and lay down at the feet of that your Pious, Charitable, and Honorable
Assembly.

Praying, That we and all of us your Suppliants, together with our Brethren,
may find a place among others in your tender considerations, and never
exhausted bounty. So, and in such manner as to your Wisdoms shall be esteemed
most fitting.

Humbly desiring that we who have borne the burden and heat of the day, may
not be cast off, not having what to eat, or what to put on.

That the Ministry may not in our wants be rendered despicable to our own, as it
has suffered despite from our Adversaries.

And that the rather we may find this Admittance into your Charity, in that
our sufferings are professed by our enemies to proceed (which we glory in) from
that your zeal for the Church of God.

God Almighty bless and further those your Honorable and pious desires and
designs, and Restrai^ the fury of our Adversaries, for which we desire the
prayers of our Brethren. And He grant, that of his goodness all of them may be
long preserved from knowing what we suffer, otherwise then by a Brotherly and
compassionate fellow feeling.

Your Honors Servants Votaries,

The several Commissions whereupon the following examinations are grounded;
out of which the foregoing Remonstrance has been extracted.
CHARLES By the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defendes of the Faith, etc. To Our welbeloved Henry Jones, Dean of Kilmore,
Roger Puttock, William Hitchcock, Randall Adams, John Stern, William Aldrich,
Henry Brereton, and John Watson Clerks, greeting. Whereas diverse wicked and
disloyal people have lately risen in Arms in several parts of this Kingdom,
and have Robbed and spoiled many of our good Subjects, British, and
Protestants, who have been separated from their settled habitations, and
scattered in most lamentable manner. And forasmuch as it is needful to take
due examination concerning the same. Know ye, that We reposing especial trust
and confidence in your care, diligence, and provident circumspection, have
nominated and appointed you to be Our Commissioners; And do hereby give unto
you, or any two or more of you, full power and Authority from time to time to
call before you, and examine upon oath on the holy Evangelists (which hereby we
authorize you, or any two or more of you, to administer) as well all such
persons as have been so robbed and spoiled, as all the witnesses that can give
testimony therein, what robberies and spoils have been committed on them, or
any other to their knowledge, since the two and twentieth of October last, or
shall hereafter be committed on them, or any of them, what the particulars
were, or are, whereof they were or shall be so robbed or spoiled; to what
value, by whom, what their names are, and where they now, or last dwelt that
committed those robberies, or what day or night the said robberies or spoils
committed, or to be committed, were done; what traitorous or disloyal words,
speeches, or actions were then, or at any other time uttered or committed by
those Robbers, or any of them, what violence or other lewd actions were then
performed by the said Robbers, or any of them, and how often: and all other
circumstances touching or concerning the said particulars, and every of them.
And you Our said Commissioners are to reduce to writing, all the examinations,
which you, or any two or more of you shall take as aforesaid: and the same to
return unto Our Justices, and Council of this our Realm of Ireland, under the
hands and seals of you, or any two or more of you as aforesaid. Witness Our
Right trusty and wel-beloved Counselors, Sir William Parsons Knight and
Baronet, and Sir John Borlase Knight, Our Justices of Our said Realm of
Ireland. At Dublin the three and twentieth day of December, in the seventeenth
of our Reign.

Carleton.

CHARLES By the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To Our Wel-beloved, Henry Jones Dean of Kilmore,
Roger Puttock, William Hitchcock, Randall Adams, John Stern; William Aldrich,
Henry Brereton, and John Watson Clerks, Greeting. Whereas diverse wicked and
disloyal people, have lately risen in Arms in several parts in this Kingdom,
and have robbed and spoiled many of Our good Subjects, British, and
Protestants; who have been separated from their settled habitations, and
scattered in most lamentable manner; and many others have been deprived of
their Lands, Rents, goods, and Chattles. And forasmuch as it is needful to
take due examination concerning the same. Know ye, that We reposing especial
trust and confidence in your fidelities, care, and provident circumspection,
have nominated and appointed you to be Our Commissioners; and do hereby give
unto you, or any two or more of you, full power and authority, from time to
time, to call before you and examine upon oath (which We hereby authorize you,
or any two or more of you, to administer on the holy Evangelists) As well all
such persons as have been so Robbed and spoiled, or deprived of their Lands,
Rents, goods, or Chattles, as all the witnesses that can give testimony
therein, what Robberies and spoils have been committed on them, or any other
to their knowledge, since the two and twentieth of October last, or shall
hereafter be committed on them, or any of them; what Lands, Rents, goods, or
Chattles, whereof any person, or persons were or shall be so robbed, spoiled,
or deprived; to what value, by whom such robberies or spoils were committed,
what their names are, and where they now, or last dwelt that committted those
robberies, or spoils, on what day or night the said robberies or spoils
committed, or to be committed were done; what Traitorous or disloyal words,
speeches, or actions were then, or at any other time uttered or committed by
those robbers, or any of them; and what unfitting words or speeches concerning
the present Rebellion, or by occasion thereof were spoken at any time, by any
person or persons whatsoever; what violence or other lewd actions were then
performed by the said Robbers, or any of them, and how often, what numbers of
persons have been murdered by the Rebels, or perished afterward in the way to
Dublin, or other places whither they sled or retired for refuge, either by way
of defense, or otherwise. What person, or persons, Clergimen, or other
Protestants have become Papists since the said two and twentieth day fled or
retired for refuge, either by way of defense, or otherwise. What person, or
persons, Clergimen, or other Protestants have become Papists since the said two
and twentieth day of October last, and all other circumstances and things
touching, or concerning the said particulars, and every of them, either before
the three and twentieth of October, or since. And for the better performance of
this service, all Incumbents, Curats, Parish-Clerks, and Sextons of Churches in
this Kingdom, are hereby required to give in to you Our said Commissioners, to
the best of their knowledge, the names and numbers of the poor so spoiled, who
have been buried in their respective Parishes, and hereafter in and about
Dublin, they are to give in weekly Bills under the hands of the Ministers, or
Churchwardens of such Parishes, of such of the said persons as shall be so
buried in the said Parishes. And you our said Commissioners, or any two or more
of you, as aforesaid; are to reduce to writing all the Examinations which you,
or any two or more of you shall take as aforesaid, and the same to return to
our Justices, and Council of this Our Realm of Ireland, under the hands and
Seals of you, or any two or more of you, as aforesaid. Witness Our right
trusty and wel-beloved Counselors, Sir William Parsons Knight and Baronet, and
Sir John Borlase Knight, Our Justices of Our Realm of Ireland. At Dublin, the
eighteenth Day of January, in the Seventeenth year of Our Reign.

Carleton.

Examinations taken before us His Majesty's Commissioners thereunto appointed,
by virtue of a Commission to us, or any two or more of us, directed under the
great Seal of Ireland: Dated the 23th day of December, in the 17th year of his
Majesty's Reign. And by virtue of one other Commission directed as aforesaid,
bearing Date the 18th day of January, in the year aforesaid.
The examination of John Day of Drumleiff in the County of Cavan, Weaver.
THis Examinate duly sworn deposes inter alia, That the Rebels bad him open
the doors of his House, otherwise they would fire his House; and they said that
they had a Commission from the Queen, and from beyond the Seas for what they
did, And that they would not suffer an Englishman to stay in the land.

Jur. 8. Feb. 1641. John Day. William Aldrich. William Hitchcock.


The examination of Lucy Spell of Drogheda in the County of Lowth.
THis Examinate duly sworn deposes inter alia. That at Ballendary where she
was prisoner three weeks, and lodged in John Parsimers house; during which
imprisonment, she saw one time John Malon a Friar; who takes upon him the
title of Chaplain to the Catholic Army in Ireland; together with Michael
Murffy, Garret Newgent of Drogheda Merchant, John Griffin, and Patrick Griffin
of the same, Merchants, Roger Belin of the same, Merchant, with others in their
company; and heard them in their conference say, we will shortly have the
Prince of England here in Ireland, and make him Viceroy, and we will tutor
him, and bring him up in the Catholic Religion, and the King himself shall
live in Scotland; and before Easter day next, we shall have an Army out of
Spain, and then we will go all into England, and with the help of the
Catholics there (all whose names the said Friar said that he had). we will put
all the Puritans and Protestants to the sword.

The mark -- of the said Lucy.

Jur. 5. Feb. 1641. William Aldrich, William Hitchcock, John Stern, Henry
Brereton.


The examination of John Biggar of Miltown in the County of Dublin, Clerk.
THis Examinate being duly sworn deposes inter alia, That these words were
spoken by the Rebels, especially by Ex. 3.
their Leader. (For the third of December) Edmond Eustace of Ballymore-Eustace,
that they did give us but our own Law. For whereas there was an Act made by
the Council of England, in the abs^nce, and without the consent or knowledge
of the King, for the expelling, banishing, and putting away the Papists out of
England, and seizing of their goods; which when they had there effected, would
have brought the like over hither, for extirpation of the Irish Nation that are
Papists. These considerations for the defense of the Religion, the Queens
person, and by the Kings license, moved them to take Arms, having the Scots for
a president; they have also vowed not to leave an Englishman in Ireland. The
Kingdom they will have in their own hands, Laws of their own, and a Deputy of
their own, without molestation or interruption of any other Nation.

This night, at the Widows house of one Lawrence Purcell, I met with one
George Staples, who for late years had taught the Children of the chief of the
Gentry in our parts. Having been formerly acquainted with him, he began to
examine me what course I intended to take, I told him I could not tell, until
I came to Dublin, and therefore I desired to have his counsel and advise. He
began after this manner. You intend to go to ublin says he, if you do, you
must go speedily; for within two days the Irish Army will be before Dublin, so
that you cannot pass; if you should get so much favor as to pass, yet when
you come to Dublin, you will not be admitted to come within the Gates; and in
the Suburbs there are six or seven score dying daily for want of food, so that
there will be no abiding place for you, If you intend to go for England, the
least child you have will not be carried under twenty shillings, and you
(says he) have not one penny; if you should find so much friendship as to
pass gratis, there are such a multitude of people that are gone out of this
Kingdom, that England being but a small Island, and Populous of it self, is
not able to receive you; if you should be received, there can be no long
continuing place for you, for the Papists are striving in England as well as
here; the Queen being fled into France for some abuses offered her own Person,
her Servants and Chaplains, which indignities the King of France intending to
revenge, has leavied an Army of 40000 men to invade England, and the Cardinal
in Flanders has leavied the like number, to the like end and purpose,
therefore it will be no purpose to go thither. Lord, Mr Staples (said I) what
shall I do then? If you stay here, you must do as they do, and turn to Mass;
yet they will not trust you (said he) fearing least if the King of England
should ever be able to bring an Army into this Country, the turn-coat English
should join with them, and cut the Irish throats in a night, as the English
once did the Danes in England. Therefore whosoever of the English should turn
to the Romish Church, they would also compel to take Arms and place them in
the Front, and eminent place of danger, that so they might fall. And for
hereafter, when they had gotten the Kingdom into their own hands, which they
make no question but to have in a short time (having all the Forts, Castles,
and strongholds in Ireland in their own hands already, but the Castle of
Dublin, and Drogheda; and these two places they would not for many thousand
pounds have gotten, for reasons known unto themselves) but when they have once
obtained them, and the Kingdom; those English that have not fallen by the
sword, the holy Church has so ordered it, that they shall be cut off by the
Inquisition, so that they will not leave an Englishman alive, whose Ancestors
have not been here for 200 years, with many other like words.

Jur. 29. Jan. 1641. John Biggar. John Stern, William Aldrich, William
Hitchcock.


The examination of John Mountgomery, late of Clounish in the County of
Monaghan, Gent.
THis Examinate duly sworn,e deposes inter alia. That in their journey, and
Marching within the County of Monaghan, the Rebels murdered of his knowledge,
at the least fourscore Protestants, and committed a number of other wicked
barbarous and notorious Robberies and actions, and by their own relation,
robbed, stripped naked, killed and drowned 45 of the Scots at one time; and
that the same Robbers also murdered Mr Blyth, and Master Matthew (two constant
Protestant Preachers within the County of Tiron) and murdered one Master
Fullerton, Parson of Loughall in the County of Armagh; and near fourscore
more English more of Protestants, by drowning, and throwing them all over the
Bridge of Portdown in the said County, into the River Bann.

And further says, that the Rebels aforesaid, or some of them confessed unto
him, and so he was told also by diverse Scottish-men, that they the same Rebels
when they came to Armagh, Monaghan, and Dungannon, set all the prisoners at
liberty, and that they broke open and defaced the Church of Armagh, and burned
the pewes, pulpit, and the best things in the said Church.

And this Deponent whilst he was with the same Rebels, saw them to pull in
pieces, kick up and down, deface and spoil all the Protestant Bibles, and other
protestant books that they found in any place where they came; neither this
Deponent, nor any other protestant prisoner nor other, durst so much do as to
save, or look upon any of them in their sight; nor would they willingly suffer
any one to speak the English tongue.

And further, it was pretended that it was agreed in the Parliament House of
England, thet the Nobility and Gentry of Ireland, should be sent for to Dublin,
unde, color of passing Patents of their Lands; and there should be imprisoned,
until such time as they should either go to the Protestant Church, or should
be put to death: And if they should go to the Church, yet not to be released
until they had given security that their followers should go to the Church
also; otherwise, to bring them in to be censured.

And further says, That when the Rebels of the County of Monaghan had
surprised, or had command of all that County, some of them said that they would
be governed by the Roman Law, and some by the English Law, which they knew
better. And said further, That when they had taken Dublin and Drogheda, Derry
and Knockfergus, which they did not doubt but to conquer before Candlemas then
next, they would have a Parliament, and would settle a Government, but would
have no Protestants amongst them; but that they would suffer English or
Scottish to be Deputies, Lords Justices, or Judges, so that one of the Irish
Nation might be joined with them, and so that all should go to Mass.

And the same Rebels publicly and generally also said, That they made no
account but to keep Ireland for ever, in regard they had of their own Soldiers
two hundred thousand fighting men, besides laborers; and they expected from
the King of Spain, according to his promise fifteen thousand soldiers, and
Arms and money fit for them: and from the King of France, some Aid, because the
Queen of England, his sister, was so deprived of liberty of religion.

And the same Rebels also further said, in this Deponents hearing, That in all
foreign parts it was agreed and resolved that all Protestants or others that
would not go to Mass, should be put to the Sword.

And this Deponent further says, That he did hear Neale mac Kenny, Baron of
Trough, near Glaslock, a notorious Captain of the Rebels, say, That the King
had sent directions from Scotland, that Sir Pbelomy Roe o Neale, Knight, should
be General of all His Majesty's Forces in Ireland, against the English; and
that he the said Neale mac Kenny should be Governor of the three Counties of
Tyrone, Armagh, and Monaghan; And that therefore he the said Neale mac Kenny,
and the rest of the Irish Forces would, after their conquest of Ireland, go
into England, and there, by the assistance of the English papists, also conquer
the same; And that from thence they would go into Scotland, and by the like
assistance subdue that Kingdom, and settle their religion in all places.

And further says, That he, this Deponent was in the County of Armagh credibly
informed by some cots, and the same was confessed and confirmed to be true by
some of the Irish, That one ^ Mr Keoon, near Cregance, in the said County, and
his Soldiers, did take a Scottish-man, and a woman, and tortured them, by
hanging them up in a Rope to confess their moneys; but still before they were
dead, let them down again.

And says further; That o^e Bryan mac Erowny, a Ringleader of Rebels in the
County of Fermanagh, and his soldiers, killed one Ensign Lloyd, and Robert
Workman, both of the same County, Gentlemen, and four of their servants; one of
which they having wounded, but not to death, they buried quick. And this
Deponent was credibly informed, That the daughter in law of one Ford, in the
Parish of Clonnish, and County of Monaghan, being delivered of a child in the
Hills; the Rebels, who had formerly killed her husband and his father, killed
her also, and two of her children, and suffered their dogs to eat up and devour
her said new born child, which they found with her in that place. And says
further, That Cole, mac Bryan, mac Mabon the Colonel and his soldiers did
kill and murder at Mellifant, at the Lord Moors house, 18 of the said Lord
Moors servants, and would not suffer the greater part of them to be buried, but
to lie upon the ground, and be devoured by Dogs, Crows, and revenous Creatures.
And this Deponent had, and has seen and observed the like to be done by the
Rebels since this Rebellion began, within the County of Monaghan, to diverse
other Protestants that they had murdered.

Jur. 26 Jan. 1641. John Mountgomery.
John Stern,
William Hitchcocke,
Roger Puttocke,
William Aldrich,
Hen. Brereton.

The Examination of Patrick o Bryan, of the Parish of Galoon, in the County of
Fermanagh.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Donagh, mac Guye, of the
County aforesaid, said, That it was Ex. 5.
against his will that this was begun; but seeing he had put to his hand, he
would not give out; for if I should come in, I should be used like Tyron, who
was persecuted, notwithstanding his many pardons. Con oge mac con mac Hugh, mac
Mabon, of Aghneholagh, and County of Monaghan, said, That the King knew of this
Rebellion, and that it was as hot in England and Scotland as here, at the same
time. And he further said, That all the Nobles of this Kingdom which were
papists, had a hand in this plot, as well as my Lord Maguire, and Hugh oge mac
Mahon, and that they expected Aid out of Spain, by one Owen Roe o Neal, viz.
10000 men, and Arms for as many. Item, the said Deponent further says, That he
heard Colonel Plunckett say; That he knew of this plot eight years ago: but
within these three years he has been more fully acquainted with it: the cause
of this Deponents knowledge is, that he was sent with a Letter unto the said
Colonel Plunckett, from Mr. Nicholas Willoughby, and heard the same from the
said Plunckett as aforesaid.

Patrick o Bryan.
Deposed before us, Ion. 29. 1641. Henry Jones, John Sierne.


The Deposition of Henry Jones, Doctor in Divinity, and Dean of Kilmore.
I Henry Jones, Doctor in Divinity, in obedience to His Majesty's Ex. 6.
Commission; requiring an Account of the losses of His loyal subjects, wherein
they suffered by the present Rebellion in Ireland: Requiring also a declaration
of what traiterous words, projects, or actions were done, said, or plotted by
the actors or abettors in that Rebellion; Do make, and give in this following
report of the premises, to the best of my knowledge. As for the present
Rebellion, howsoever the first breaking out of this fire into a flame, began
first on the 28 of October. 1641, yet was it smoking, as may well be conjectured
for many years before; God having given us many and apparent grounds for the
discovery of it, had they been duly considered, or fully prosecuted to a
discovery, of which kind we find these following four particulars:

1. The first, That about three or four years since, amongst many Books brought
into Limrick from foreign parts and seized upon by the Reverend Bishop of that
Sea, as prohibited, being thereunto authoriz^d by the State, One had a written
addition to the first part, which was printed, the Manuscript containing a
discourse of the Friars of the Augustine Order, sometimes seated in the Town of
Armagh, in Vlster, But by reason of the times, and that Present resident (as
that writing imported) in the City of Limrick in Munster, That while it
flourished at Armagh, it was protected, and largely provided for by the then
Earl of Tyrone: Since whose expulsion out of Ireland, that Convent was also
decayed, and driven to those distresses it did for the present undergo; but
that within three years (this is, as I remember, the time limited) Ireland
should find, that he had a son inheriting his fathers virtues, who should
restore that Kingdom to its former Liberty, and that Convent to its first
luster, or words to that effect. This was related unto me by that zealous and
learned Prelate Doctor Webb, now Bishop of Limrick, who saw and read the said
passage; purposing as his Lordship told me, to send that book to the Lord
President of Munster, to be taken into further consideration.

2 Hereunto was added a second passage, about the same time at Limrick
aforesaid; where a Popish Priest gave out, that within three years there should
not be a Protestant in Ireland, or words to that purpose, with some other
material circumstances which I do not now remember; yet all so concurring with
the former, or the first with this (for which preceded I know not, Both being
about one time) that it was thought fitting to be considered of, the said
Priest being sent unto the Lords at Dublin, and he committed to the Castle.

3 The third, did agree with the two former, and fell out about the same time
in the County of VVestmeath, in the Province of Limster; where Walter Newgent
of Rathaspeck in the said County, eldest Son to Walter Newgent Esquier (a man
of great fortunes) upbraiding an Irish Protestant, who was the Parish Clerk of
Rathaspeck aforesaid, with his Religion; and both speaking Latin, the said
Newgent uttered these words; Infratres annos venient tempus, and potentia in
Hibernia, quando tu long (likely meaning diu.) pendebis in cruce propter
diabolicam vestram Religionem. (The party to which this was spoken feared the
power of the man) durst not speak of it, only in private. Yet being called upon
and examined juridically, upon oath he deposed these words. And being demanded
whether the words were in Hiberniam, or Hibernia; the first importing an
Invasion, the other, an Insurrection at home: He deposed the latter, having
time given him to consider of it. These Examinates were sent to Sir George
Radcliffe; Newgent was sent for, and committed to the Castle of Dublin, and
remained in long durance, but after was dismissed.

4. Hereunto was added a fourth, about the same time near the Naas, about 12
miles from Dublin, where a popish Priest newly arrived out of Flanders, did
make his address to the then Lord Deputy, and informed his Lordship of an
intercourse of Letters between the Earl of Tirone, with others in Flanders, and
the popish Primate of Armagh, Rely; concerning an Invasion within a short time
intended upon Ireland; the said Priest offering (so his person might be
secured) to direct such as should be thereunto appointed to the place, where
the said Letters were in the custody of the said Rely: Rely was thereupon sent
for, together with the popish Vicar general of Armagh, as I remember it; both
were committed to the said Castle of Dublin, but soon after released, and the
Informer dismissed, with x. l. and a suit of clothes, or some such reward.

5. Hereunto may this be further added another, not so plain as the former;
That about the same time the Lord Baron of Dunsany did ride disguised
throughout all the parts of Mounster, pretending to satisfy his curiosity in
the knowledge of places and persons: He not being discovered until his return
at the Birr, where having offered himself to be bound for one in his company, he
writ himself in his own style; being loath to leave under his hand a testimony
of his disguised person, and assumed name.

Hereunto may be added, a motion made by the Recusant party in the Parliament
of Ireland, for hindering the sending away of certain Colonels with their forces
raised in the Kingdom, and pretended to be for service in foreign parts, many
wondering it should proceed from them; but therein, considering these their
former practices, their intentions may be discovered to be far different from
what others conceived thereof, who assented thereunto: The employing of so many
thousands abroad, being a great weakening of the forces they purposed for this
their soon after following Rebellion.

To descend now from the antecedents of this treason, to the falling in
thereupon; and lastly, to the consequents, and what thereby has been intended,
supposing it to succeed, and that it attained the desired effect, which by them
was not doubted of. And first, for the entrance thereinto: Howsoever that the
groundwork were long since laid, yet would they not have it so to seem: But
new occasion must be found, as the sole cause of their breaking out, this being
intended for the satisfying the minds of such of their own, as have not
hitherto bin acquainted with the depth and mystery of this Iniquity, that they
might not stand amazed at the suddenness of the undertaking, or stand off from
joining with them, the worst part of their designs, it being an apparent
Rebellion. The fittest means for this, must have bin by casting aspersions on
the present Government, which if long tolerated, would prove extremely
dangerous, not only to their Religion, but their lives and posterity. For
effecting hereof, reports were cast out, that in the Parliament of England, the
cutting off of all the Papists in Ireland, of what degree soever, was concluded
upon, the execution of that Resolution being committed to the Counsel in
Ireland; The Lords (said they) had laid down a day for this work, being the 23
of Nov. then next following, and now last past, or thereabouts. For the better,
more secure, and more secret managing of this pretended plot, such of the
popish Nobility and Gentry of both Houses as appeared in Parliament at Dublin,
should be secured. And for the drawing together of the rest, amongst other
pretenses, this alleged to be one, That his Majesty's rents were purposely
omitted, and not called upon in Easter-Term with that earnestness as formerly;
and that such as made default should be summoned to appear in Michaelmas-Term
at Dublin, and there surprised; such of them as were in the Country, wanting
the heads, being easily cut off. They say that this pretended plot, was I know
not how discovered to them: So that for the safety of their lives, and
profession, they were enforced to stand upon their guard, and to counter-work
that day of the 23 of Nov. laid for their destruction, by their declaring
themselves in arms on the 23 of October. a month before. The serious part of
this Discourse was related to me by a Friar intimate in their Counsel, and by a
priest a popish Vicar general, thereby to give me satisfaction, and to justify
their proceedings, whose names I do for the present forbear, in respect of his
Majesty's service.

By others also it was informed, That this plot was mainly intended in that
Session of Parliament, next after the Earl of Straffords beheading, and the
manner concluded upon in the popish private meetings, which were then observed
to be frequent, and by some suspected might prove dangerous, and that for
discovery of what provision of arms and ammunition our store of Dublin afforded
(it being by some suspected, that most was sent before to Carrickfergus) one of
the popish faction, in the house of Commons put one of the Protestant members
to move, that some of the Earl of Straffords men had cast out some threatening
words against the Parliament in revenge of his Lord, which could not be
conceived to end in less than a blowing up of the whole Houses of Parliament,
the store lying under them: whereupon a Committee of both Houses, many of them
prime Papists, were appointed to make search in all the corners in the Store:
amongst these the Lord Mac Guire was one who was observed, without occasion to
be liberal in disposing of money to some of the Officers of the Store, in a
way more than was ordinary with him.

The last Session of Parliament being prorogued, and the time drawing nigh for
putting their design in execution, there was a great meeting appointed of the
heads of the Romish Clergy, and other Laymen of their faction, said to be at
the Abbey of Mullifarvan, in the County of Westmeath, where is a Convent of
Franciscans, thereof openly and peaceably possessed for many years last past:
the day of their meeting being also on their Saint Francis day, about the
beginning of October last, but the time and place I cannot confidently affirm,
yet howsoever the several opinions and discussions are as follow, like as I
have received it from the said Friar, a Franciscan, and present there being a
Guardian of that Order, where among many other things there debated; the
question was what course should be taken with the English, and all others that
were found in the whole Kingdom to be Protestants. The Council was therein
divided.

1. Some were for their banishment, without attempting on their lives; for this
was given the Instance of the King of Spaines expelling out of Granado, and
other parts of his Dominions, the Moors to the number of many hundredth of
thousands: all of them being dismissed with their lives, wives and children,
with some part of their goods (if not the most part) that this his way of
proceeding redounded much to the honor of Spain, whereas the slaughter of
many innocents would have laid an everlasting blemish of cruelty on that State,
that the like usage of the English their neighbors, and to whom many there
present owed (if no more) yet their education; would gain much to the cause,
both in England and other parts: That their goods and estates seized upon,
would be sufficient without meddling with their persons, that if the contrary
course were taken, and their blood spilt, beside the curse it would draw from
heaven upon their cause: It might withal incense and provoke the neighbor
Kingdom of England, and that justly taking a more severe revenge on them and
theirs, even to extirpation if it had the upper hand.

2 On the otherside, was urged a contrary proceeding to the utter cutting off
all the English Protestants, where to the instance of the dismissed Moors, it
was answered, that that was the sole Act of the King and Queen of Spain,
contrary to the advice of their Council, which howsoever it might gain that
Prince a name of metcy, yet therein the event showed him to be most
unmercifull, not only to his own, but to all Christendom beside. That this
was evident in the great and excessive charge that Spain has been since that
time put unto by these Moors and their posterity to this day. All Christendom
also has and does still groan under the miseries it does suffer by the
piracies of Algiers, Sally, and the like Dens of thieves. That all this might
have been prevented in one hour by a general Massacre, applying that it was
no less dangerous to expel the English: That these Robbers and banished men
might again return with swords in their hands, who by their hard usage in
spoiling might be exasperated, and by the hope of recovering their former
estates, would be incensed far more than strangers that were sent against
them. Being neither in their persons injured, nor grieved in their estate, that
therefore a general Massacre were the safest and readiest way from freeing the
Kingdom of any such fears.

3. In which diversity of opinions, howsoever the first prevailed with some,
for which the Franciscans (says this Friar, one of their Guardians) did stand,
yet others inclined to the second: some again leaning to a middle way, neither
to dismiss nor kill.

And according to this do we find the event and course of their proceedings.
In some places they are generally put to the sword, or to other miserable ends:
some restrain their persons in durance, knowing it to be in their hands to
dispatch them at their pleasures; In the mean time, they being reserved either
for profit by their ransom, or for exchange of prisoners, or gaining their own
pardons by the lives of their prisoners, if time would serve, or by their death
(if the worst did happen) to satisfy their fury. The third sort, at the first
altogether dismissed their prisoners, but first having spoiled them of their
goods, and after of their raiment, exposing the miserable wretches to cold and
famine, whereby many have perished by deaths, worse then sword or halter.

Hitherto of their Counsels, and the effects of them. Now for their
intentions, all being reduced, which God forbid, into their power; and thereof
do they as by some Law, give such peremptory conclusions, that it may well be
wondered the thoughts of men professing themselves wise, should be so vain: and
herein I do still follow mine Informer.

First, their loyalty to his Majesty shall be still reserved. Thus say they of
the modest sort: But both his Revenues and Government must be reduced to
certain bounds: His Rents none other then the ancient reservations before the
plantation, and the Customs so ordered, as to them shall be thought fitting.

Secondly, for the Government, such as would be esteemed loyal, would have* it
committed to the hands of two Lords Justices, one of the ancient Irish race,
the other of the ancient British inhabitants in the Kingdom; Provided that they
be of the Romish profession.

Thirdly, that a Parliament be forthwith called, consisting of whom they shall
think fit to be admitted, wherein their own religious men shall be ass stants.

Fourthly, Poinings Act must be repealed, and Ireland declared to be a Kingdom
independent on England, and without any reference unto it in any case what
soever.

Fifthly, all Acts prejudicial to the Romish Religion, shall be abolished; and
it to be enacted, That there be none other profession in the Kingdom but the
Romish.

Sixthly, that only the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom shall stand, and of
them, such as shall refuse to conform to the Romish Religion to be removed, and
others put in their room; howsoever the present Earl of Kildare must be put
out, and another put in his place.

Seventhly, all plantation lands to be re-called, and the ancient prepriators
to be re-invested in their former estates, with the limitations in their
Covenant expressed; That they had not formerly sold their interests an valuable
considerations.

Eighthly, that the respective Counties of the Kingdom be subdivided, and
certain bounds or Baronies assigned to the chief Septs and others of the
Nobility; who are to be answerable for the Government thereof: And that a
standing Army may be still in being, the respective Governors being to keep a
certain number of men to be ready at all risings out (as they term it:) They
also being to build and maintain certain fortresses in places most convenient
within their precincts! And that these Governors be of absolute power, only
responsible to the Parliament.

Lastly, for maintaining a correspondencie with other Nations, and for securing
the coasts. That also they may be rendered considerable unto others, a Navy of
a certain number of Ships is to be maintained: That to this end five houses are
to be appointed one in each province, accounting Meth for one of them: That to
these houses shall be allotted an annual pension of certain thousands of
pounds to be made up of part of the lands appropriate to Abbeys: And a further
contribution to be raised in the respective provinces to that end: That these
houses are to be assigned to a certain Order of Knights, answerable to that of
Malta, who are to be seamen: And to maintain this Fleet, that all prizes are
to be apportioned; some part for a common bank, the rest to be divided; to
which purpose the felling of woods serviceable for this use, is to be
forbidden: The House for this purpose to be assigned to the province of
Leinstor, is Kilmainham, or rather Howth, the Lord of Howith being otherwise to
be accommodated, provided be join with them; that place being esteemed most
convenient, in respect of situation, which they have small grounds to hope for.

For effecting of all which, they cast up the accounts of the forces of this
Kingdom, That it is able to make up readily, two hundredth thousand able men,
wanting only Commanders, and some expert soldiers for the present with arms
and ammunition: of all which, they expect a speedy supply out of Flanders,
their own Regiments there exercised, being to be sent over, and some shipping
from Spain allotted for service: That this Kingdom being settled, there are
thirty thousand men to be sent into England, to join with the French and
Spanish forces, and the service in England performed, jointly to fall upon
Scotland, for reducing both Kingdoms to the obedience of the pope; which being
finished, they have engaged themselves to the King of Spain for assisting him
against the Hollanders.

And for drawing their followers to some head, and for giving the fairer gloss
to their foul Rebellion, it is to be admired, what strange and unlikely rumors
of their own devising they cast abroad; sometimes that many sail of Spaniards
are landed now at one port, then at another: That Drogheda was taken at such a
day and hour, with all the circumstances at large, and Letters to that purpose
dated from Drogheda by the Rebels that besieged it: That Dublin was taken: And
being infinitely ambitious of gaining the Earl of Ormond to their part, for the
greater countenance to their cause, giving out that he was their own; which was
so long believed by the said followers, until that noble Earl giving daily
those honorable Testimonies to the contrary, and they finding it to their cost,
though with the hazard of his own person, further then his place might well
allow; they are now otherwise satisfied, and place him in the rank of their
mortal enemies, together with that terror to them, Sir Charles Coot, and
others.

And thus have I laid down all that I have heard to me related, omitting what I
find others more largely to insist upon. All which their treacherous, vain,
and ayry projects God disappoint.

As for my own private sufferings by the present rebellion, I refer them to
another Schedule, this being so far taken up.

Deposed before us, March 3. 1641. Hen. Jones.
Roger Puttock.
John Stern.
John Watson.
William Aldrich.
William Hitchcock.

The Examination of Edmund Welsh of Moylerstown, in the Kings County.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Piers Fitzgerald of
Ballisonan, in the said County, taking his Peternell Ex. 7.
ready cocked, presented the same to this Deponents breast, saying (when this
Deponent offered to draw his sword) that it was in vain for him to strive
against so many, and so disarmed him, and took from him his sword and dagger,
with eight Guns, with certain Powder and Lead, alleging, that there was an
Excommunion from the chief of their Church, against any of his Religion that
would not do the like; and if he had not done so, and that soon, some of his
neighbors would have had his head; and that they would never ask any Quarter,
nor accept of any pardon. And these traiterous words were then and there
spoken, and these hostile and outrageous acts committed as aforesaid: all which
this Deponent upon oath averreth.

Edmund Welsh.
Iur. 22 Ian. 1641. William Aldrich, John Stern.


The Examination of John Edgworth, Esquire, high Sheriff of the County of
Longford.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That he sending abroad to
know what the meaning of this Insurrection Ex. 8.
was, word was brought him by one Thomas Stafford, once a servant to this
examinate, that he heard there was a Commission come from his Majesty to the
Irish, by which they had power to destroy the English in this Kingdom, and in
so doing, to revenge the wrong done to his Majesty by the Puritans of England,
who had not only taken away his prerogative, but had also deposed him, and put
up the Palsgrave in his stead: this examinate discoursing further with the said
Stafford, asked him if there were not a great meeting of Friars and priests
about the the third or fourth of October last, being Saint Francis day, at the
Monastery of Multefarnam, in the County of VVestmeath: to which the said
Stafford answered, There was: and being further asked by this Examinate what
was the meeting for, he answered he did not know; only thus much, That some of
the Friars told him that this was a year of Iubilee, and that there was a
plenary Indulgence or Bull (as he termed it) from the Pope, for all the sins
committed, and all that should be committed this year of Iubilee.

John Edgworth.
Deposed before us, Febr. 23. 1641. Hen. Jones, William Aldrich.


The Examination of John Brooks of Ballyheys, in the County of Ex. 9.
Cavan, Yeoman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That by some of the Rebels
this Deponent, and other English Protetestants were threatened to be presently
murdered, unless they would presently be gone: And if they went to Dublin,
they should find small relief there; if for England, as little there; for
England was in the same case. And further said, That they had long paid Rents
to the English, but they would make them pay it back again: further alleging,
That what they did, they had authority for the same from the King, or words to
that effect.

John C Brooks his mark.
Jur. 5 Ian. 1641. Roger Puttock, John Watson.


The Examination of Grace Lovett, wife to Fran. Lovett of Ballew-hillan, Ex. 10.
in the County of Fermanagh.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Patrick mac Collomac
Donnell, Edmond mac Donnell, and the rest of their company, the 25. day of
October last, entered into several parcells of Land, and outed this Deponent
and her children; as also took away the Lease, Writings, Will, and Escripts
that this Deponent had, that concerned the estate of the several parcells of
Land.

And further deposes, That she heard one of the Company of Captain Rory
Magwire (who, as this Deponent heard, was a Friar) say, That it was well that
this Deponent was come into their Company to save her life; for if she should
go for Dublin, it would be as bad; And if she went for England, it would be
worse (for said he) we have the Kings broad Seal for what we do: And for the
reason of our rising, it is because the Puritans preferred a Petition against
us, and could not let us enjoy our Religion quietly, for we stand for our
lives; And if we should not have done this, we had all lost our lives upon one
day, or words to that effect.

And further this deponent says, That she this deponent, her husband, and four
children, were all stripped naked by the said Rebels, belonging to the said
Captain Rory, the said 25. day of October last, at Newtown alias Castlecool.

Grace ^ Lovets Mark.
Deposed before us, Jan. 5. 1641. Hen. Jones, Hen. Brereton.


The examination of Elizabeth Coats of Drumully in the County of Ex. 11.
Fermanagh Widow.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes, inter alia. That she heard some of the
Rebellious company, say, and ask the English Protestants that were there
robbed, what they intended to do, or whether to go, saving unto them: if they
went for Dublin, that was taken by the Lord Magwire upon Saturday before, and
there they should find small relief, if for England, or Scotland, it was as
bad there, as here; saying further, that what they did, they had the Kings
Commission for it.

Elizabeth M Coats her Mark.
Deposed this fourth of Ian. 1641. before us, Randal Adams, John Watson.


The examination of Nicholas Willoughby of the Carrow in the County of
Fermanagh, Esquire. Ex. 12.

THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That Con oge mac Mabon said,
that all the Counties in Ireland were in action, or rebellion, as well as
Monaghan and Fermanagh, and that there was war in England and Scotland,
between the Papists and them.

And moreover he said, That the Irish were certainly informed that there was a
course to be suddenly taken with them, to make them go to Church, or else to
loose their lives, and that they had seen some writing, or letter to that
effect; and said that Owen mac Art o Neal was come out of Spain, and landed
about Strangford, or that side, and that he had brought store of Arms and men
with him, and that there were many Redshanks come over out of the Highlands in
Scotland, to take their parts.

Nicholas Willoughby.
Deposed before us, Febr. 23. 1641. Hen. Jones, Will. Hitchcock.


The examination of Thomas Crant of Cavan in the County of Cavan. Ex. 13.

THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That the said Donnagh mac
Gwire expressing, that he was not made privy to the general Cause, until two
or three days before the day came, if he had been made of the Council, he
would advise other ways, then to take up Arms; but that now it was so, his
hand was in, and that he would not take it cut, and that if the Lord of
Eveskillin was ill used, we should be far worse; and that if he suffered, we
should all be destroyed, not one should escape, and that for his part he would
never lock for pardon, for that he knew well enough, that they could pick a
fault in any pardon, after that he was come in, to destroy him, for that how
many pardons soever the Earl of Tyren had, as yet they did him no good:
Therefore he would not trust to any, but would stand out to defend his Country
with his blood, Expressing that the Scots were, and had been always their
friends, and that they had a Covenant to show, whereby it might appear the fair
correspondency between them, the Irish, and the Scors in Scotland; which
covenant imported, that the Irish should never take part with the English
against the Scots; and that the Scots should never take part with the English
against the Irish; And that it was so covenanted between many of the Lords of
Scotland, and many of the Lords, and their Gentry of Ireland; and that Hugh mac
Mahon had the Covenant to show;

Saying, That he was more a Papist then a Protestant, and that the Puritan
Parliament of England, was the cause of all this, that they had laid a plot,
that at the next Sessions of Parliament, here in Ireland, that the Papists of
the house should be all committed to the Castle, or murdered, and the
Protestants were to murder all the Papists throughout the Kingdom, and that
they having intelligence of that; Therefore they did begin first, and would now
continue, and that all the whole Kingdom did rise, as they did the self same
day the 23. of October, and that all the Papists in England did so that same
day, rise in Arms against the Protestants; and also that some Papist Earls and
Lords in Scotland, did likewise so too; So that there was wars in England and
Scotland, as there was here in Ireland.

Diverse Women and Children murdered, lying unburied till dogs spoiled their
Corpse, Women with child murdered, and some dyed for cold, after being stripped
forth of their clothes, lying unburied, that dogs gnawed their Children forth
of their Wombs, which this examinate heard some of the vulgar people report
with a cheerfulness.

Also there he heard reported by Con oge mac Con mac Hugh mac Mahon, Patrick
oge mac Rosse Magwyre, that upon Christmas Day, they with a matter of a 1000.
men, went down to Eneskillin fiedge, and there they burnt the house of
Lisgoole, where into was come of Men, Women, and Children, a matter of fifty
souls of Scots, who they burnt all in the house, except Master James Dunbarre
and his Sister, whom they gave quarter to; and took them forth of a Window, and
keep them prisoners; as also they had burnt a Castle called Tullin; wherein
was a matter of thirty or forty souls of Scots, and that as yet they could not
do any good on Moone-Castle, nor of Eneskillin.

A poor Man was met withal, by a couple of Irish Women, who knocked him in the
head, and killed him, the Lord of Dunsany sent for the Women, examined the
reason why they did so, they answered, that Barnaby Reyly was hanged at Dublin,
and they did it to revenge his death, the Lord of Dunsany committed them to
prison, what since is done with them, this examinate knows not.

At my being at Racaine, I heard it credibly reported, that on the Sunday
before Christmas Day, that after Edmund mac Mulmore o Rely had pillaged Bishop
Bedle of Kilmore, and sent him with his two sons to Cloughwater Castle to
restraint; That the Romish Bishop Mac Swine, came to the Church of Kilmore, and
there did consecrate it anew, and set up an Altar there, and so said Mass, and
there lives in the Bishops house.

Thom. Crant.
Iur. 13. Febr. 1641. Roger Puttock, Will. Aldrich.


The examination of Elizabeth Parker late of Battydust in the County Ex. 14.
of Catherlagh, Widow.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That when she and others
were wishing themselves in England? What should you do in England, for it was
as bad as in Ireland; Besides, the Seas were very dangerous; and Comerfords
Wife further said, that the Queens Priest was hanged in England, which was the
cause of the insurrection in this Kingdom, or to that effect.

Iur. 13. Ian. 1641. Coram. Elizabeth Parker. Roger Puttock, John Watson.


The examination of Ockar Butts late of Bollganreagh in the County Ex. 15.
of Wexford, Gentleman.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That one of the Rebels of
the said company, being (as he said) the Leader or Commander over them, spoke
these words, viz. That they had full power and commission from their General,
to execute such and the like exploits against the Protestants; and that we
should have no longer respite to remain in this Kingdom, then until the next
day following; And that then all Protestants should have general warning to
depart this Kingdom upon pain of death. And they then made question, whether we
should be permitted to land in any part of England, or no. And that such
straight Commission was granted, and sent over unto their General by the
Queen, and some of the best Nobility of England. And also that they did not
near execute toward us Protestants, the tenure and rigor of their said
Commission; protesting with great profane oaths, That they showed much favor
unto us.

Oekar Butts.
Iur. Ian. 25. 1641. Coram nobis, John Watson, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Edward Denman of Belturbut, in the County of Cavan,
Merchant. Ex. 16.

THis Examinate du^ly sworn deposes inter alia, That he asking John Rely why
they did not meddle with the Scots, he said the Scots did join with them.

Jurat. coram nobis. 27 Jan. 1641. Edward Denman. John Watson, Randall Adams.


The Examination of Geo. Fercher of Toneheye, in the County of Fermanagh,
Clerk.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Ex. 17.
Con oge mac Mabon, of the County of Monaghan, and Barony of Dartrie, did say,
That what they did against the English, was done by Commission from His
Majesty; and that all the Scottish Nation was joined with them in a Covenant,
for the extirpation of the English; and to that effect he said he was able to
let me see the Earl of Argile his Hand, together with the Hands of the greatest
part of the prime Nobility of Scotland.

Deposed before us, Ian. 4. 1641. Hen. Jones, Randall Adams. Geo. Fercher.


The Examination of Elizabeth Dickinson, near Clounish, in the County of
Fermanagh.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That some of Rory Magwire his
Company did, in the hearing of this Deponent, Ex. 18.
say, That the Scots were to leave never a drop of English blood in England,
and that the Irish had command to leave never a drop of English blood in
Ireland; and that they were the Queens Soldiers. And further says not.

Deposed before us, Ian. 3. 1641. Roger Puttock, Hen. Brereton. Eliz.
Dickinson.


The Examination of John Shorter of Callahill, in the County of Fermanagh.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That they asked this Deponent
whither he would go (to whom he Ex. 19.
answered, For England) then said they, This day Dublin Castle is taken, the
Tower of London, and Castle of Edenborougb; and you have but four and forty
hours to live, and then both English men and women, and children shall be slain.

Deposed before us, Ian. 5. 1641. Roger Puttock, William Aldrich. Iobn
Sborter.


The Examination of Thomas Knowles of Newtown, alias Castle-cool, in the County
of Fermanagh, Yeoman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Hugh mac Mabon, and one
Patrick Magwire told this Deponent, Ex. 20.
That they had Commission from His Majesty for what they did; and that the same
doings was done thorowout the whole Kingdom at that time, their plot having
been working for two years last past; and that certainly God had a great hand
in the same; all places of the Protestants abode being taken and yielded,
except three, viz. Londonderry, Eneskellin, and another Town, this Deponent
now not remembering the name; and that those Towns could not long withstand
their Forces, because the Lord Magwire had taken Dublin Castle (as they said)
the Saturday before, otherwise if it had not been taken, and that their plot
had been discovered, the said Lord Magwire had been with them again upon
Saturday aforesaid.

Deposed before us, Ian. 3. 1641. Hen. Jones, Roger Puttock. Tbo. Knowles.


The Examination of John Kerdiff, Rector of the Parish of Diserte reagh, in the
Barony of Dungannon, and County of Tyrone.
THis Examinate duly sworn, inter alia, deposes, and says, That the
Traiterous actions committed, and words spoken by the Ex. 21.
Rebels against the Protestants, were as follows:

October the 23, and 24, they surprised these Forts, Viz.

Dungannon, Charlemont, Castle Caufield, Mountjoy, Munnymore, Castle Blaney,
Monagban, Newry; in a word, all the chief Forts in the Counties of Armagh and
Tyrone^, and ransackt every Town and house which belonged either to Englishman
or Scottish.

They murdered the very first day Mr Mader, Minister of the Parish of
Donoghmore, by some of the Donellies: within a while after, they murdered Mr.
New, Curate to Mr. Bradley, of the Church of Ardtra, by one of the The Minister
of Dungannon (Mr. Blyth) with eight more, were murdered, being first stripped,
and after driven out of the Town, under color of Conduct; and within half a
mile to the Town murdered Mr. Blyth, holding Sir Phelomies protection in his
hand, as if he would call Gods vengeance down on such treacherous
truce breakers.

It was also related to me, that Mr. Fullerton, Minister of Loughgale, and
Master Morgan Aubery were killed at the Bridge of Port of Down, at which time
about eighty or an hundred of the Inhabitants of Loughgale were cast into the
River and there drowned.

Many more Murders were committed on the English and Scotch.

Robberies.
Master Bradley was robbed to the value of one thousand pounds, and whilst he
was robbing, Sir Phelim o Neal and his company passed by, and soon after he
was turned out naked out of his house; the Rebels neither leaving Dublet,
Coat, Hat, nor Shirt, with him. His Wife is fallen into an extreme frenzey by
these outrages.

Master Dunbarre Minister of Donoghemie, with his Wife, and five or six small
Children, with an old Father and Mother, were all of them stripped and robbed of
whatsoever Goods, or wearing Clothes they had; so that for a while the man was
distracted, and after compelled to tie some straw about his thighs, to cover
his nakedness, and was whipped as I was certainly informed, and what is become
of him, his wife, or children, no man in the County could tell me, though I
lived within three miles of him.

Master Wright, Archdeacon of Dromore, had his house which cost him much,
burnt; I saw himself, his wife, and two children, in extreme misery at
Charlemont, from whence they journied to Kinard.

Master Robinson, Minister of Kinard, and his wife, lived miserably at
Loughgale, having nothing left to satisfy nature, but what they could procure
by others distressed like.

Master Hasting, Minister of Tullaniskin, was turned out of his lodging, and
stripped stark naked, and clad in beggars Clothes, no a Shoe to his Foot, in
which state he came to the house, wherein I was lodged, where the people of the
house durst not give him lodging, fearing least he should be murdered; for
twice the next day, there was search made for him.

Sir William Brumley had his Town and Castle burned, and all his goods taken
away.

What shall I say more, All the English and Scotch in the Counties of Armagh
and Tyrone (a few only excepted) were not left worth a farthing.

At Armagh Archdeacon Maxwell related, That about forty men, women, and
children were drowned at Cor Bridge, near Glaslough; the children going merrily
hand in hand, as to a place of refuge; and one of their company having license
to pray, prayed so effectually, that one of his Executioners went frantic with
the conceit of his impious fact.

The words which I took notice of, were these: Sir Phelim o Neal told, in my
hearing, That he had Commission for what he did, not only from most of the
chief of the Nobility of this Kingdom, but from his Majesty; and had also
Letters to that purpose from the Earl of Argile.

And that their intentions were only for the liberty of their Religion, and
for the recovery of their Lands, which should appear by the Law of the Land to
be unjustly held from them.

Colonel Plunket told us at Armagh, That seeing this exploit was begun, he was
one of the chief plotters thereof, and was seven years emplyed in the
compassing of it.

Friar Malone of Skerries did take the poor men's Bibles, which he found in the
Boat, and cut them in pieces, and cast them into the fire, with these words,
That he would deal in like manner with all Protestant and Puritan Bibles.

At Master Connors house (where the Friar was) they had Hanmors Chronicle, out
of which they animated the Rebels with the Story of the Danes Discomfiture by
the Irish, though for the most part unarmed, and paralelled the History with
these times.

This Friar acknowledged that he was fourteen years employed to bring this
design to pass.

At Donga^non they reported of a Vision seen a little before this Insurrection
began, A woman compassing about the Town with a Spear in her hand; when any
would approach her, she would seem to go from them; when any would go from her,
she would draw near unto them: The like, they say, appeared before Tyrones
former Rebellion.

At Armagh, Colonel Pluncket told us of another Vision seen at Lisneigarvey,
which he and about twenty more beheld, after the Battle (wherein the Irish lost
very many of their men, and most of their Arms) There was an house set on fire
at the end of the Town; by the light of which fire, they discerned a number of
Horsemen riding to and fro; the number seemed to the Colonel, to be about a
Thousand, or Fifteen hundred: Upon which relation, I was bold to enquire
whether they seemed their own, or their enemies: he answered, That sometime
they conceived them their own, other while their enemies.

Yet I believed they could hardly seem their own, because amongst them they had
not near so many Horses. I further desired to know what they supposed them to
be: he said, They were conceived to be Fayries, or such like.

At Ardtra we were set upon by some of the Scots (of whom Robert Stewart,
brother to the Lord of Castle-Stewart was chief*) who took some of the goods
out of the house, and many of our horses and Arms from us.

Jurat. ult. Feb. 1641. John Kerdiff. William Aldrich, John Stern.


The Examination of Edward How, of the Parish of Galoon, in the County of
Fermanagh, Clerk.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That he heard Donagh mac
Quire say (when Hugh mac Mahon, of the County Ex. 22.
of Fermanagh excused my Lord Magwire, and said, that others had persuaded him
of late to stir in this action) That my Lord Magwire knew of it long before,
and all the Nobility and men of quality that were papists in this Kingdom:
Moreover I heard Conoge mac Con mac Hugh mac Mahon, of Aghnebolah, and County
of Monaghan say, That if my Lord Lieutenant had not been put to death, they had
not made this Insurrection. Further I heard him say, That there was an Act made
by the present Parliament of England, That all Papists there, or elsewhere in
this Kingdom, should go to Church, otherwise be hanged at their own doors, and
therefore they would begin with us, lest we should begin with them here, as
they did in England; for he said they had hanged a Jesuit in London, which was
the Queens Chaplain. And further this Deponent cannot say.

Deposed before us, Ian. 29. 1641. Edw. How. Hen Jones, John Stern.


The Examination of George Cook, late of Lissnegney, in the County of Cavan,
Yeoman: And of John Cook his son.
THe Deponent being duly sworn, inter alia, deposes And further says, That as
he and his wife and children Ex. 23.
fled away toward Dublin, they met at Kells with a Protestant Minister, by
name Master Sharp, who had three children, and carried two of them on his
back; whom the Rebels perceiving to be a Protestant Minister, did most
barbarously hack, cut in pieces, and murder, thrusting into his body three or
four pikes together, and threw him into a ditch of water, where they left him:
but because the Deponent fled to save his life, he cannot tell what became of
the said Ministers poor children. And the Depoponent John Cook further says,
That the same night one Tirlogh Brady took away the Deponents fathers goods: he
the said Tirlogh told the Deponent, That that action was a great Rebellion, and
that all the papists in Ireland were in Rebellion against the King and
Counsel, and that the Lord mac Guire had then taken the Castle of Dublin; And
that the Protestants must be banished out of the Kingdom, and the papists would
have the same themselves. And about the same time one Tirlogh o Gowen alias
Smith, a popish priest, demanded the Key of the Church of Lara of this
Deponents brother: which being delivered unto him, he the said Tirlogh said,
that the papists would have their Churches Lands and Kingdom from the English,
and be no more slaves to the English as they had been, or else they would lose
their lives.

Jur. Jan. 22. 1641. George Cook. Hen. Brereton. William Aldrich. John Cook.


The examination of John Jesop of Cloynmoore in the County of Kildare. Ex. 24.

THis Examinate duly sworn, desposeth inter alia. That he has credibly
heard, that all the Papists in the County of Wexford, and Kilkenney, and in all
the Counties of Ireland, are Actors, Abettors, or at least secret well-wishers
unto this Rebellion.

John Iesop.
Iur. 8. Ian. 1641. Coram nobis. Hen. Brereton, W^ll. Hitchcock.


The examination of John Greg of Levileglish in the County of Armagh Yeoman.
Ex. 25.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That His Wife and five small
Children are in the Rebels hands, who were most cruelly stripped before he left
them, even to the child that sucked the breast; further he says, that his said
Wife being stripped to the skin by one of the Donnells, was by him most cruelly
beaten with his drawn Sword in a triumphing and rejoicing manner, and with
singing.

Further he says one Captain Art o Neal, of the Parish of Levileglish
aforesaid, Gentleman, who pretended friendship to him, said that unless he
would take up Arms, and go to Mass, there was no hope of his life, unto whom
he replied, that that was great cruelty, neither to suffer him the said Gregg
to live a slave amongst them, nor suffer him to pass into his Native Country,
unto whom the said Captain replied, that neither of those requests would be
granted, affirming that it was intended by them, not to leave an English
Protestant alive in this Kingdom, and that there was no hope of peace for ten
years to come.

He further says, That in the aforesaid Parish, there were diverse Englishmen,
most cruelly murdered, some twice, some thrice hanged up, and others wounded,
and left half-dead, crying lamentably for some to come and end their misery by
killing them out.

And further he says, That the names of the chiefest of the Rebels in those
parts, are Phelomy o Neal of Kinnard in the County of Tyron, Knight, and
Turlagh o Neal Esquire, his Brother, and one Colonel Pluncket, and Captain
Manus oge o Caban of the County of Armagh, Gentlemen, and Redmond o Mullan, of
the Grange in the County of Tyron, Gentleman, and Patrick o Mullan now of
Armagh, Gentleman, who wrote Proclamations in His Majesty's Name.

And further he says, That he heard by credible Englishmen, that the said
Phelomy o Neal affirmed, that his taking up Arms was by His Majesty, and the
Queens consent, and the Parliament in this Kingdom; and further that one
Captain Shane o Neal, in the County of Tyron, styled the said Phelomy o Neal,
with the title and style of His Majesty.

John Greg.
Iur. 7. Ian. 1641. Coram nobis. Will. Hitchcock, Roger Puttock.


The Examination of Henry Raynolds of Cornemuekley in the County of Cavan,
Yeoman. Ex. 26.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That he heard one whose
name, as he thinks is, Ferdoragh (an Irish Priest) say that they had the Kings
hand for what they did, and the cause of there rising, was because, there was a
Statute made in England, that all papists should go to Church before a certain
time, or be banished.

Hen. Raynolds.
Deposed before us. 4. Ian. 1641. Hen. Jones, Io. Watson.


The Examination of Charles Crafford of Navan in the County of Mead,
Gentleman. Ex. 27.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That the reason generally
given by them for their doing, was, that they had found a Letter, wherein the
English had resolved to hang the Irish at their doors, if they would not go to
Church; and that therefore they would begin with the English first.

Charles * Craffords Mark.
Iur. 22. Ian. 1641. Roger Puttock,
Io. Stern,
Ioh,
Watson,
Will. Aldrich.

The Examination of John Wood of New-Rath in the County of Wicklow, Gentleman.
Ex. 28.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That these words were spoken
by Nicholas Byrne, James mac Cahire, and diverse other of the Rebels, that they
were discontented Gentlemen; and having their Lands unjustly taken away by the
Plantation, could not have any satisfaction, but by the Sword; Therefore it was
their Colonel Luke Tools pleasure, that all Protestants should depart the
Kingdom upon pain of death: And for Dublin if that did stand out long with
them, they made no question to burn it; but if they could take it, and not fire
it, so they might have the head of my Lord Parsons, and three or four more of
the chiefest of the City, all the rest should fare so much the better.

And they further said, That there was an Act of Parliament in England, that
all papists in Ireland, should upon pain of death, either go to Church, or be
banished the Kingdom by such a day of the month, which as I take it, was by
the 24. of November; And therefore they desired liberty of conscience, and to
enjoy all that Land which there predecessors did formerly enjoy. For why should
not they have there demands, as well as the Scots.

John Wood.
Jur. 17. Feb. 1641. John Stern, Randall Adams.


The Examination of Henry Steel, Curate of Cluntubbrid.
THis Examinate duly sworn deposes inter alia. That when they Ex. 29.
were imprisoned in the Dungeon in the County Goal, (all the robbers and rogues
first set at liberty) they remained there in a most miserable estate, there
being in number, about forty eight, more or less, where they had no room to
stand or lie.

And further deposes, That he by Gods great mercy being enlarged, his wife yet
prisoner in Castle-Blaney, he came away with one Master Barnewell, and being in
a place called Cabret, where one Master Fleming lives, whose Daughter is
married to the Lord Magwire, he heard the servants of the house, and other
Irish relating that this Magwire, and the popish Primate, whose Surname is
Rely, were a long space traveling through the Kingdom together, to persuade
them all to condescend to this most inhumane plot, and this Rely was then at
this Flemings house.

Hen. Steel.
Deposed this 10. of Ian. 1641. Will. Aldrich, John Stern.


The Examination of Katherine Grant of Navan in the County of Ex. 30.
Mead, Widow.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That the whole Town and
Corporation of the Navan made good preparation for the entertainment of the
Northern Rebels in victuals and drink for them; very many of them went to the
Rebels before they came to Town, and generally all of them, met them with great
joy, and welcoming of them when they came to Town.

She further deposes, That she heard the Priest that came with the Rebels from
the North, (and the Priest of the Navan, Master Fay among them, as she verily
believes) all charging diverse of the Captains not to go back, nor come in upon
the Proclamation of pardon, that came from the State; for if they did, they
were all undone.

Kath. * Graunts Mark.
Deposed this 5. of Ian. 1641. Roger Puttock, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Hugh Madden, late of Kirreke in the County of Ex. 31.
Wickloe, Gentleman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That after he had been first
besiedged, by at least eight hundred of the Rebels, having conference with some
of them, they then gave out in words, that that business which they had begun,
they would pursue till it were effected, and would not look for a pardon for
the same, or to that effect.

Hugh Madden.
Iur. 23. Feb. 1641. John Watson, John Stern.


The Examination of John Right, late of Newtown, alias Castle-c^ol, in the
County of Fermanagh, Butcher.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Rory Ex. 32.
Magwire showed to him, and others whom he then robbed, a Parchment or paper
with a great Seal affixed, which he affirmed to be a Warrant from the Kings
Majesty for what he did. And he further deposes, That when he and his
neighbors then robbed, complained of their miserable condition, being robbed
and stripped: the said Rory replied, That if they were not content with what
was done, they should see worse within a few days.

John Right.
Jurat. Jan. 5. 1641. coram nobis. Randall Adams, John Stern,


The Examination of George French of Karbery, in the County of Kildare.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That he Ex. 33.
demanded of the Rebels why they dealt so with William Coleman; to whom Luke
Brumingham answered, That they had a Commission from His Majesty for what they
did; and Gerald Fitz Gerald of Carbery aforesaid read the Commission: that was
a supposed Commission from His Majesty to take away all English men's goods.

Geo. * French his mark.
Jur. 1 Feb. 1641. cor. John Stern, Randall Adams.


The Examination of Jane Mansfeild, lately of the Parish of Castle-Jordan,
VVidow.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That she Ex. 34.
coming toward Dublin, in her way coming to one Master Philip Fitz-Gerralds
house, near Miltowne, in the County of Kildare, this Deponent heard him utter
these words: We are like to have great troubles, but we must all rise in Arms,
and not leave an Englishman in Ireland; and that the King was on their side in
the North among them.

Jane Mansfeild.
Deposed 3 Jan. 1641. Roger Puttock, Henry Brereton.


The examination of Henry Palmer late of Fetherd, in the County of Wexford,
Brick-layer.
THis Examinate being duly sworn inter alia, deposes; That Dermot mac Dowling
Cavanagh, Head of the Rebels there, Ex. 35.
and his company, said to this Deponent with others, Be gone you English
dogs; for we do only take your goods now, but worse shall follow: And they
went into the Church, and cut the Pulpit-Cloth and the Ministers Books in
pieces, and strewed them about the Churchyard, and caused the piper to play
whilst they danced and trampled them under their feet, and called the Minister
dog, and stripped him out of his clothes: And that they wounded several persons
that were in the Castle of Fetherd, and the Town there; of which, some, by
reason of their wounds, cold, and want, died. And what clothes this Deponent
had left, being but mean, coming to Dublin, were also taken from him: And the
Irish denied them lodging and relief, insomuch that they were constrained to
lie out of doors naked all night. And further says, That one Welsh of
Killcullen Bridge, in the County of Kildare, Inne-Keeper, after that this
Deponent was robbed and stripped, told this Deponent, That he the said Welsh
knew, that the King was in the North of Ireland, and rode disguised, and had
glassen eyes, because he would not be known.

Henry Palmer.
Jur. 12 January, 1641. Coram nobis, John Stern, William Hitchcock.


The examination of John Perkins, of Sleigkogh, in the County of Cavan.
THis Examinate duly sworn deposes inter alia, That they said that the King
was dead, and that the young King went to Ex. 36.
Mass; and they were the Queens soldiers, and we were Traitors. And the said
words were affirmed by Cormack mac Cloney, Parish Priest of Killan.

John I. P. Parkins his mark.
Deposed before us, 8 Jan. 1641. Roger Puttock, John Stern.


The Examination of Tho. Midlebrook of Leagne Caffry, in the County of
Fermanagh, Yeoman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That on the 26 day of October
last, he heard Cahell Boy mac Dermott say, Ex. 37.
That within one fortnight they should have a new King of Iceland Crowned one
of the o Neals, or words to that effect: which words were spoken by the said
Cahell, in the presence of Alice Tibs, this Deponents sister, and Avis
Braishaw, wife of John Braishaw. And further, that he hoth heard that the
Rebels had murdered about threescore English Protestants (that lived in good
manner within the said parish.) And further says, That there cannot be so few
as one hundred English Protestants (that lived in good manner within the said
parish) perished and dead since the said Rebels did banish and drive them from
their habitations.

Deposed before us, Ian. 4. 1641. Roger Puttock, Henry Brereton. Tho. I.
Midlebrook. his mark.


The Examination of Alice Tibs of Ringvilly, in the County of Fermanagh, widow.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That she heard Cahell Boy mac
Dermott of Killrout, in the County aforesaid, Ex. 38.
Yeoman, say, That Dublin Castle was taken, and that they could afford the
English two or three Barrells of Powder; and that the Irish within one
fortnight would have a new King, or words to that effect: which words he spoke
in the hearing of this Deponent, Avis Braishaw, wife to John Braishaw, and
Thomas Milebrooke, the five and twentieth day of October: And did after hear
another Irish man (whose name she knows not) say, That it was pity that any
of the English or their breed should be suffered to live, for fear they should
grow strong again; or words to that effect.

This deposed before us, Jan. 4. 1641. Roger Puttock, Hen. Brereton. Alict VV.
Tibs her mark.


The Examination of Avis Braishaw, late of Agheruskie Moore, in the County of
Fermanagh.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter aliae, That she Ex. 39.
heard Cahell Boy mac Dermott of Kilrout, in the County aforesaid, say, That
Dublin Castle was taken, and that they could afford the English three or four
Barrells of Powder, and that the Irish would have a new King within a fortnight
after: which words, or to that effect, he spoke in the hearing of this
Deponent, Tho. Midlebrook, and Alice Tibs, the 25 day of October last.

This deposed before us, Jan. 4 1641. Roger Puttock, Hen. Brereton. Avis VV
Braishaw her mark.


The Examination of Rich. Knowles of Newtowne, alias Castle-Cool, in the County
of Fermanagh, Yeoman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That there Ex. 40.
is one hundred of the said parishioners (that lived in good rank and fashion)
since they were driven out of their habitations, and banished by the said
rebellious Irish (being all English Protestants) perished and dead: And this
Deponent is the rather confident that there is one hundred or more dead, by
reason they daily die in such abundance; this Deponent well knowing the said
parishioners, being his neighbors; and this Deponent being a Butcher by Trade,
had some dealing with the most of them.

Deposed this 10 of Jan. 1641. John Watson: William Aldrich. Rich. R. Knowls
his mark.


The Examination of Robert Barton of Newtowne, alias Castle-cool, in the County
of Fermanagh, Blacksmith.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes iuter alia, That some Ex. 41.
Irish Rebels near unto Virginia, in the way toward Rells, did strip this
Deponent, and said, That they had a new King, and Commission from him for what
they did. And further deposes, That he heard that Captain Rory, or some other
of his Company, had murdered of the said parishioners, to the number of
forty, or thereabouts.

Deposed before us, Jan. 5. 1641. John Brereton, William Hitchcock.


The Examination of Hugh Culme of Leitrim in the County of Monaghan, Gentleman.
Ex. 42.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That he was told that one
Art mac Mahown, who lived in the Parish of Tehollan, said that they which spoke
English, should pay 10s to the King; the party to whom he spoke it, desired to
know what King desired it, his answers was, what other King, but the Earl of
Tyrone.

And this Deponent heard one Thomas mac Aleares wife, of the same County and
Parish, say, that Captain Bryan mac Mahon of Tehollan, said he would hang any
that would speak English. And heard the priest mac Clerey of Tehollan say, that
all the English in Monaghan must be hanged, I asked him why, he said, meat was
soarce, and they would not be at the charge to keep us.

And heard more by very honest men, that Mr. Cottingham Minister of Monaghan,
being in a Dungeon bolted, desired for Gods sake to get a little straw to lie
upon, being put to such extremity.

And that Mr. Richard Blaney Justice of Peace in the County of Monaghan, was
hanged in this manner.

Art Roe mac Bryan Sanaght of Hislough in the County of Monaghan, Marshall to
the Rebels, came to Mr. Blaney to the Dungeon, and desired him to come out to
speak with him, when he came out to him, he led him to my Lord Blaneys Orchard
in Monaghan, and said to him, do you remember, how you hanged my Brother, and
made me fly my Country for three years; but I will hang you before you go, but
if you will, you shall have a priest, he said no, but he desired to have Master
Cottingham, the Minister of Monaghan, but they would not, but hanged him there,
and flung him in a Ditch, and he was two days unburied.

And this Deponent heard that there was one Luke Ward a Scotchman, which had
indicted a man, the quarter Sessions before this rising, the same man came to
him where he was in the Goal, and carried him to an Alehouse, and made him
drunk, and when he had done, carried him into the backside and hanged him,
after he was cut down, they flung him into a River, and I could never hear that
he was buried.

Hugh Culme.
Deposed before us, Ian. 25. 1641. Hen. Jones, Hen. Brereton.

I heard Master Mountgomery, Minister, and Master Hollis with several other
men of good worth, report, that the Sunday before this rising of the Rebels,
that there was seen a Sword hanging in the air, with the point downwards, the
half seeming to be red, and the point turned round.

Hugh Culme.



The Examination of Mistress Martha Culme of Leitrim in the Ex. 43.
County of Monaghan.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That she being by the R^bels
forced from her dwelling, and robbed of all her goods, she was enforced to
shift from place to place, for safeguard of her life: particularly at William
Boy, Flemings house, in the Parish of Tehollan, in the County of Monaghan,
where she did hear the said Fleming in detestation of the cruelty of the
Rebels, to relate that while Sir Phelomy o Neal did lie with his forces before
the Ogber, in the County of Tyrone, the Irish women would follow after the
Irish Rebel Soldiers, and put them forward in cruelty, with these and such
words, spare neither man, woman, nor child, God so pity your souls, as you
pity them, intending those words, to cruelty.

This Examinate further says, That in the said Flemings house, one Art mac
Patrick mac Tool Boy mac Mahon of the Barony of Balline Cargy in the said
Parish, speaking to this Examinate in Irish, she desired he would deliver
himself in English, for she understood not Irish, he answered in English, that
such as spoke English, should forfeit ten shillings to the King, what King
says this Examinate have we, that will not allow the speaking of English, what
King says he, but the Earl of Tyrone, she asked where the Earl was, he
answered in the North, where he was landed with 40000. Spaniards, whereof
10000. were then with Sir Phelim o Neal.

Martba Culme.
Deposed before us, Feb. 14. 1641. Hen. Jones, Henry Brereton.


The Examination of Elizabeth Gough late of Ballanenagh in the Ex. 44.
County of Cavan Spinster.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes, inter alia. That the Irish purposed to
have a King of their own in Ireland, and that Phelomy o Neal should be he.

Elizabeth* Gough her Mark.
Deposed before us, Feb. 8. 1641. Hen. Jones, Hen. Stern.


The Examination of Anne Gill of Newtown in the County of Fermanagh, Widow.
Ex. 45.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That when Rory Magwire had
taken the Church at Newtown, aforesaid, he the said Rory (in the presence and
hearing of this Deponent, and a great many of his neighbors, the Kings
Majesty's loving Subjects) gave forth that it was to no purpose for them to fly
to Dublin, for succor, for Dublin was taken by the Lord Magwire, who was to be
King of Ireland.

Anne L Gill her Mark.
Jur. 29. Jan. 1641. John Stern, William Aldrich.


The examination of Elizabeth Vause late of Creigs town Longhfield Ex. 46.
in the County of Leitrim, Widow.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That when this Deponent asked
why the Rebels so robbed them, they asked again who sent you over, and being
answered, that God and the King did it, they the said Rebels, said let your
King fetch you out again.

And says further, That the said Rebels burned diverse houses, and two
Children, and one old Man in them; and that very many Protestants that fled for
safety and succor to the Castle of Sir James Craige Knight, being near them,
were there famished, starved, and dyed, for want of means.

Eliz.* Vause her mark.
Jur. 9. die Feb. 1641. John Stern, William Hitchcock.


The Examination of Nicholas Michael of Farnan in the County of Ex. 47.
Cavan.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That the parties that robbed
this Deponent, said they have an Irish King amongst them, and they regarded not
King Charles the King of England.

Nich. Michaels* mark.
Deposed before us, Ian. 15. 1641. Will. Hitchcock, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Andrew Foster of Mocredin alias Caryetsfort in the County
of Wickloe, Gentleman. Ex. 48.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That the Rebels said, that
they would within a week burn Dublin, and that neither King nor Queen should
govern Ireland any longer, for they would govern it themselves.

Andrew Foster.
Iur. 17. Febr. 1641. William Aldrich, John Stern.


The Examination of Richard Witton of Kilnane in the County of Wickloe, Miller.
Ex. 49.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Luke Burn Gentleman of
Kilnane said, he would have their religion flourish, no thanks to King or
Subject.

Rich. Witton.
Deposed this 11. of Jan. 1641. Will. Aldrich, Will. Hitchcock.


The Examination of Edward Tailor late of Saint Margarets alias Raven in the
County of Wexford, Clerk. Ex. 50.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That one Piers Synnot of
Ballyvodogg in the said County, and his son David, and other their accomplices
before this Rebellion burst out, did dispossess this Deponent of his Goods and
Church livings, into which he was long since invested by His Majesty's
presentation, for which abuse this Deponent impleaded some of them in this last
Parliament at Dublin, and a little before the beginning of this said Rebellion,
he showed the said David an Order from the said Parliament, for this Deponents
quiet enjoying his said Church Livings, and restitution of the profits thereof,
by them wrongfully detained, to which the said David Synnot answered, That he
cared not for that and that it was no Parliament, but meet him at Dublin in
Michaelmas-Term next and question him if he durst, for then they would have a
Parliament of their own, in which Parliament he said, the Deponent durst not
complain, or words to that effect.

Edward Tailor.
Iur. 23. Feb. 1641. Coram nobis, John Stern, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Nathaniel Higginson of the Castle of Knockballymore in the
County of Fermanagh, Gentleman. Ex. 51.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That the Rebels then said,
that they had a Commission, or Broad-Seal from the King for what they did, and
that when they the said Rebels had vanquished, or over run this Kingdom, they
would go over into England, where they would have the assistance of Spain and
France, for over running the same.

Nath. Higginson.
Jur. 7. Ian. 1641. Coram. Roger Puttock, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Anne Marshall of Castle-Waterhouse in the Ex. 52.
County of Fermanagh, Widow.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That some of the Rebels, most
cruelly murdered William Marshall, husband unto this Deponent, giving him
six several mortal wounds, then said, that the Scots were at that time sent
to leave never a drop of English blood in England, and that the Irish now had
authority, and command from the King, to leave never a drop of English blood in
Ireland.

And further deposes, That the common speech of the said Rebels was, that they
were the Queens soldiers.

Anne Marshall.
Deposed before us, 3. Ian. 1641. Roger Puttock. Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Jathniell Mawe of Ferringrin in the County of Ex. 53.
Fermanagh, Gentleman.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That he heard some of the
Rebellious Irish company say, that there should not be one English man, Woman,
or Child, left within this Kingdom, and that they had the Kings Broad-Seal for
what they did.

Iathniell Mawe.
Deposed before us, Ian. 3. 1641. Hen. Jones, Will. Aldrich.


The Examination of Richard Cleybrook of Ballyellis in the County Ex. 54.
of Wexford Farmer.
THis Examinate duly sworn, desposeth inter alia. That he heard Luke Tool
say, that he intended soon after to march to Killeothery, and take it, and
afterward to come to Dublin, and take the Castle there, and that he would not
leave an English Man, nor English Woman in the Kingdom, but they all should be
banished, and that he would not leave any English beast a live, nor any of the
breed of them.

He says also, That he heard the said Luke Tool say, that he would have his
own Religion settled in this Kingdom, And that he would pull the Lord Parsons
Hat from his Head.

Richard * Cleybrook his mark.
Coram me. Ia. VVare

The Examination of Margaret Farmeny, and Margaret Leadly, VViddows, both of
Acrashaniey, in the Parish of Clowish, and County of Fermanagh.
THese Deponents duly sworn inter alia, depose, That on the Ex. 55.
23 day of October last, the Rebels in that County, to the number of an
hundred, or thereabouts, robbed the Deponents of their goods and chattells, and
bound their hands behind them, urging them to confess money. And that the
said Rebels bound one of the Deponents husbands, and led, and dragged him up
and down in a rope, and cut his throat in her own sight with a Skean, having
first knocked him down, and stripped him. And at the same time murdered 14
persons more, all English Protestants; the said Rebels then alleging, That
they had the Kings broad Seal to strip and starve all the English, and that
they were his soldiers. And as the Deponents fled for succor toward Dublin,
they were stripped on the way by the Irish seven times in one day, and left
stark naked, being aged women of 75 years old: and the Rebels that saw the
Deponents naked, bid them go and look for their God, and let him give them
clothes.

Iur. 3 Ian. 1641. John Stern, William Hitchcock.


The examination of Henry Fisher of Powerscourt, in the County of Wicklow.
THis examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That Luke Ex. 56.
Tool, chief of the Rebels in those parts, said, That there was landed at
Wexford nineteen thousand of the Spanish enemy: whereupon they leaped and
danced for joy.

And this Examinate further deposes, That Bryan Linch of Powerscourt, revolted
and fell from the protestant Religion, to Mass; and the said Linch, with
several other Rebels, entered the parish Church of Powerscourt, called
Staggonnell, and burnt up pues, pulpits, chests, and Bibles belonging to the
said Church, with extreme violence and triumph, and expression of hatred to
Religion: And this convert Linch strongly labored to have this Deponent hanged.

Hon. Fisher.
Jur. Ian. 25. 1641. John Stern, Will. Hitchcock.


The Examination of Adam Clover of Slonosy, in the County of Cavan.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That this Deponent and his
company that were robbed, observed, That 30 Ex. 57.
persons, or thereabouts, were then most barbarously murdered and slain
outright; and about 150 more persons cruelly wounded, so that traces of blood
issuing from their wounds, lay upon the high way for 12 miles together, and
many very young children were left and perished by the way, to the number of
60, or thereabouts, because the cruel pursuit of the Rebels was such, that
their parents and friends could not carry them further. And further says, that
some of the Rebels vowed, That if any dug graves wherein to bury the dead
children, they should be buried therein themselves; so the poor people left the
most of them unburyed, exposed to ravenous beasts and fowl, and some few their
parents carried a great way to bury them, after they were dead, and some were
hid in bushes, that the Rebels should not find them. And this Deponent
further says, That he saw upon the highway a woman left by the Rebels
stripped to her smock, set upon by three women, and some children, being Irish,
who miserably rent and tore the said poor English woman, and stripped her of
her smock in a bitter Frost and Snow, so that she fell in labor in their hands
and presence, and both she and her child miserably died there.

And this Examinate further deposes, That James o Rely of, or near to the
Parish of Ballyheys, Yeoman, and Hugh Brady, of, or near the parish of Vrnagh,
and diverse others of the Rebels, did then often take into their hands the
Protestant Bibles, and wetting them in the dirty water, did five or six
several times dash the same on the face of this Deponent and other
protestants, saying, Come, I know you love a good lesson, here is a most
excellent one for you, and come to morrow, and you shall have as good a sermon
as this; and used other scornful and disgraceful words unto them.

And further says, That one Owen Brady, of the parish of Armagh, Gent. being
one of the principal Guard to Philip mae Hugh mac Shane o Rely, did take
diverse protestants (as they went by their Court of Guard to the Church) by the
hair of the head, and in other cruel manner, and dragging them into the
Church, there stripped, robbed, whipped, and most cruelly used them, saying, If
you come tomorrow, you shall hear the like Sermon; or to that effect: with
other scornful and opprobrious words.

Deposed before us, Ian. 4. 1641. Hen. Jones, Randall Adams. The mark of Adam
Glover.


The Examination of Elizabeth Tailor, wife of John Tailor of the Newtowne,
alias Castlecool, in the Parish of Drumuly, and balf-Barony of the Cool and
County of Fermanagh, weaver.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, deposes, That (inter alia) Ex. 58.
she and her said husband, with the rest of their neighbors, fled for the more
safety of their lives, into the Church of the Newtown, being a fair Church, new
built by the inhabitants of that parish, and there remained until the Monday
following, being the 25 of October last, when about ten of the clock in the
forenoon Captain Rory mac Quire, brother to the Lord Magwire, where they so
were, came, accompanied with a great multitude of Irish, to the number of 1000
persons, and upwards; which they not being able to resist, upon his faithful
promises that they should quietly enjoy their own, and receive no harm, they
let him and his company into the said Church; wherein to he had no sooner
entered, but in contempt of God and his sacred Word, he went up into the Pulpit,
and took down the English Bible that was there, and rent and tore the same in
pieces, and he and his company trampled the same under their feet; and then
perfidiously fell upon the English, and rifled and stripped them naked, and
turned them out of the town, and fired and burnt the same down.

Eliz* Tailor her mark.
Deposed before us, Ian. 8. 1641. Hen. Jones, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Edward Slack of Gurteen, in the County of Fermanagh, Ex. 59.
Clerk.
THe Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That on the 24 of October
last, the Rebels in the County of Fermanagh aforesaid, took his Bible, opened
it, and laying the open side of it in a puddle of water, leapt and trampled
upon it, saying, A plague on it, this Bible has bred all the quarrel, and they
hoped that within three weeks, all the Bibles in Ireland should be used as that
was, or worse; and that none should be left in the Kingdom; and also that the
said Rebels burnt this Deponents house, and after some other Rebels cut and
wounded him twice in the head.

Edw. Slack.
Deposed before us, 4. Ian. 1641. Hen. Jones, Will. Aldrich.


The Examination of Edward Dean late of Oghram in the County of Wicklow Tanner.
Ex. 60.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That the Irish Rebels made
Proclamation, That all English men and women, that did not depart the Country
within twenty four hours, should be hanged drawn and quartered, and that the
Irish houses, that kept any of the English children should be burned.

And further says, That the said Rebels burned two Protestant Bibles, and then
said, that it was hell fire that burnt.

Edw. Dean.
Jur. 7. Jan. 1641. Coram nobis. Roger Puttock, John Watson.


The Examination of Katherine Bellew alias Bedlew, late of Blittock Ex. 61.
in the County of Monaghan, Widow.
THis Deponent being duly sworn (inter alia) deposes, That one Mistress
Elcock, who being in Childbed, was nevertheless carried away to prison,
together with the Lady Blaney, and her seven children.

The mark of the said Katherine.
Jurat. 5. Febr. 1641. coram nobis. Will. Aldrich, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of John Wisdom of Ardmagh Parish, Clerk of the Ex. 62.
Cathedral there.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That at Loughgall in the
County of Ardmagh, the Engilsh being promised a safe conduct by the Rebels,
from garrison to garrison, till they came to the next Haven, and there to take
shipping for their own Country, by the way some of them were murdered, viz.
Master William Fullerton, Parson of Loughgall, and two or three others, as the
Deponent heard, the rest which they found at Loughgall, and about the Country
there, to the number of eightscore persons, which they drowned at Port a Down
Bridge, as the Deponent is informed by one William Pitchfork that was present
at their suffering, but escaped himself, being begged by an Irish Rebel to be
his servant, And about the same time, they fired many in one house near Ardmagh.

And this Deponent further says, That Master Roger Holland related to him,
that he was told by one John Babe an Owner of a Boat in Carlingford, That
Mistress Holland was hanged at Carlingford, and delivered of a child while
hanging.

And further this Examinate says, That he was credibly informed by Master
Franklin of Dublin, who came part of the way toward Dublin in the Deponents
company, That at the Newry a man was carried out, and so wounded, that he was
laid for dead, but after recovering, he was again set upon, and murdered, and
his wife also having her belly ripped up, and two children fell out.

And the Examinate further says, That at the Corr in the County of Armagh,
there were drowned at once one hundred and twenty persons, men, women, and
children, which the Deponent heard from Master Holland aforesaid.

John Wisdom.
Iur. 8. Feb. 1641. Coram nobis. Roger Puttock, Hen. Jones.


The examination of Philip Tailor late of Port a-Down in the County of Armagh,
Husbandman. Ex. 63.

THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia. That about the 24. of
October he was taken prisoner at Port a-Down aforesaid by Tool mac Cann now of
Port a Down Gentleman, a notorious Rebel, and a Commander of a great number of
Rebels, together with those Rebels, his soldiers to the number of an hundred
persons, or thereabouts; at which time the Rebels first took the Castle and
victualled it, then they assaulted and pillaged the Town, and burnt all the
houses on the further side of the water: and then the said Rebels drowned a
great number of English Protestants, of men, women, and children in this
Deponents sight, some with their hands tied on their backs.

And this Deponent further says, That the number of them that were drowned
then, amounted to an hundred ninety and six Persons, as this Deponent has
been credibly informed, And the same Rebels then also threatened to shoot to
death one Master Tiffin a zealous Protestant Minister there, and discharged a
piece at him accordingly, but as it pleased God, they mist him, and at length
he escaped from them.

And the Deponent further says, That the said Rebels kept this Deponent in
prison at Port a-Down aforesaid, for the space of seven weeks, and set a horse
lock upon his leg, but at length he got a pass from the said Tool mac Cann,
and so got away from them: But whilst he stayed there, many poor Protestants
were by the Rebels murdered in several places about Loughgall. And they also
that time stripped of the clothes of one Master Jones a Minister at Segoe near
Port a-Down aforesaid, who afterward escaped from them to the Town of
Lisnegarvey.

And the Deponent further says, That he has credibly heard, that one Master
Fullerton a Minister, and another in his company were also murdered by the
Rebels, before the drowning of the Protestants aforesaid, and that the Rebels
aforesaid killed a Dyers wife of Rossetrever at Newry, and ripped up her belly,
she being with child of two childrrn, and threw her and the children into a
ditch, and this Deponent drove a Sow away that was eating one of the children.

Sig: Philip Tailor.
Iur. 8. Febr. 1641. William Aldrich, John Watson.


The Examination of John Mandefield late of Miltown in the County of Dublin,
Barber Surgeon. Ex. 64.

THe Deponent being duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That some of the Rebels in
that County did strike his Wife, and stab her with a Skean ^n the breast, when
she had a young child sucking on her, which wound this Deponent being a
Surgeon with much difficulty healed.

John Mandefield.
Jur. 3. Feb. 1641. Coram nobis. Hen. Jones, Will. Hitchcock.


The Examination of Margaret Stoaks, the wife of Hugh Stoaks Ex. 65.
late of Clonkelly in the County of Fermanagh.
THe said Deponent being duly sworn, inter alia deposes, That whilst she was
in the said County, she heard credibly among the Irish, and observed by their
discourses one with another, That the Castle of Lissegoal near Eniskillin
(which belonged to the Lord Hastings; and wherein one Master Segrave dwelt, was
burned by the Rebels, with all the English and Scots that were therein, which
were very many; and that almost all the English and Scots that dwelt in
Mageryboy, were likewise killed and robbed by the Rebels, and that there was a
woman, who when the said Castle was a fire, let down through a Window her young
child whom she gave suck unto, and after leapt out of the Window herself,
which the Rebels observing, presently killed the said woman, and the next
morning finding the young child alive, sucking the dead mothers breast, they
cruelly murdered the child.

This Deponent further says, That as she was coming on the way to Dublin at
Ballybayes, she heard for certain, that handicraftsmen and tradesmen, and
others of the English that were remaining at Belturbart, were killed and
murdered by the Rebels, about the last of January last past; and the Rebels
hanged the men, and drowned the women and children.

The Deponent further says, That when the Rebels, or any of them had killed
any English man in the Country, many others of them would come one after
another, and every of them would in most cruel manner, stab, wound, and out
him, and almost mangle him, and to show their further malice, would not suffer,
nor permit any to bury them, but would have them to lie naked for the dogs,
beasts, and fowls of the air to devour them.

The Deponent further says, When they had so killed the English, they would
reckon up and account the number of them, and in rejoicing and boasting manner
would often say, That they had made the devil beholding to them in sending so
many souls to him to hell.

The Deponent likewise says, inter alia, That as she was coming toward Dublin
about Dunshaghlin, the Rebels that were in Garrison there, said unto her, That
if they thought she and her children, had but one drop of English blood in
them, they would kill both her and her children.

Margaret Stoakes.
Jurat. coram, Gerrardo Louther.

The Examination of Mary Woods late of the Town and County of Ex. 66.
Kildare, Widow.
THis examinate being duly sworn and examined, inter alia, says That since the
beginning of this present rebellion, she has been stripped and robbed of her
goods by the Rebels in those parts, since which time the bodies of several
deceased Protestants buried in the Church there, were taken up, and thrown away
into filthy places, exposed to be devoured of dogs, and other beasts, which was
done partly by the commandment or direction of James Dempsie a priest, Peter
Sarsfield, Thomas fitz Gerald, James Flatisbury, and John Leighe, Esquires, and
others, whom she knows not.

And further says, That the said Rebels and others about that Town, did of
late first strip her husband of clothes, and after stabbed him, and after that
shot him, and last of all most barbarously buried him alive, where he remained
with earth upon him above an hour before the breath went from him.

Sig: prae: Anne VVoods.
Jur. 23. Feb. 1641. Coram nobis, Joh. Watson, John Stern.


The Examination of Thomas Huetson of the Town and County of Ex. 67.
Kildare.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, and examined deposes, That (inter alia)
about a month, or three weeks since, one John Courtis of Kildare aforesaid,
Weaver, and Martin Courtis his son, Walter White of the same labourer,
Bondventure Berry of the same own, the reputed son of William Berry of the same
town, a popish Priest, and Thomas Berry of Kildare aforesaid, near kinsman to
the said Priest, and diverse other Rebels of the Irish, did in the Cathedral
Church of K^ldare aforesaid, dig the graves of Dominick Huetson, this Deponents
brother, who had bin buried about twenty months before; and Christian Huetson
the Deponents Grandmother, who had bin buried about a week before, and took
their Corpse out of the same Graves, and Church, and laid them both in a hole
which they dug up for that purpose, within a Garden, out of the walls of the
Churchyard; which was done by the command or procurement of Rosse mac Geoghegan
titular Bishop of Kildare, James Dempsie the popish Vicar general there, the
foresaid William Berry Priest, Dominick Dempsie guardian to the Friars there,
James Flanagan a Friar, Bryan o Gormooley a Friar, and other Friars, whose
names he now remembers not.

And the Deponent also says, That the said Berry the Priest brought this
Deponent before the said Titular Bishop, and informed him, that the Deponent
was looking in at the Church Window when the Corpse of his said Brother, and
Grandmother were taking up, and that he there writ down the names of those
parties that so took them up, and so desired to know what must be done with
this Deponent; Who answered, That if he found that report to be true, or that
this Deponent should do any thing against their Catholic cause, he would
imprison and hang him.

And this Deponent further says, That the parties above named with diverse
others of the Town of Kildare, said, that they could not sanctify, nor hallow
the said Church of Kildare, until the Heretics bones were removed out of it.

Thomas Huetson.
Jur. 15. Feb. 1641. Roger Puttock, William Aldrich.


The Examination of Rebecca Collis, late of the Town and County of Kildare.
THis Deponent being duly sworn and examined, deposes, That Ex. 68.
since the beginning of this Rebellion, she and her husband have been robbed
and despoiled of their goods by the Rebels in those parts. And further says,
That about Christmas last, the titular Bishop of Kildare, the Guardian, and
other priests and Friars there, did take away the Chapter-Chest belonging to
the Cathedral Church of Kildare, and did cause the same to be carried to the
house of Peter Sarsfeild of Tully Esquire. And shortly after a consultation had
amongst the said Peter Sarsfeild, James Flatishury, Thomas Fitzgerald, John
Leigh, Esquires, James Dempsie, Vicar general to the said Titular Bishop; By
whose directions or command, the dead bodies of diverse deceased Protestants
were dug out of the Church of Kildare, and cast into a filthy ditch, to be
devoured by beasts and dogs.

Iur. 23 Febr. 1641. coram nobis. Rebecca Collis. John Stern, Will. Aldrich.


The Examination of Margaret Parkin of Newtowne, in the County of Fermanagh,
widow.
THis Deponent being duly sworn and examined, deposes inter Ex. 69.
alia, That by the information of diverse credible persons, she understood that
the Rebels boiled a young child to death in a great Ketle, in the Church at
Newtown aforesaid.

Iur. 29 Ian. 1641. Margaret Parkin. Roger Puttock, William Aldrich.


The Examination of Elizabeth Bairsee of Newtown, in the County of nagh.
THe Deponent being duly sworn, (inter alia) deposes, That Ex. 70.
she was credibly informed by a great number of people of Newtown aforesaid,
That about the 23 of October last, or since, the Rebels did boil a child of
one John Strettons, about 12 years old, to death.

Jur. 19. Jan. 1641. Elizabeth Bairsee. Roger Puttock, John Stern.


The examination of Henry Boyne late of Mullaghtean in the County of Tyrone,
Clerk.
Ex. 71.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, deposes inter alia, And further says, That
as he was come to his own house, he found there an Irish woman that was come
(out of good will) from Donaghmore about six miles distant from his said
house, to tell the Deponents wife, That it were best for the Deponent to be
gone, least he might be killed (for as the said woman related) the Rebels there
had cut of one Master Madders head a Minister, and that there chief malice was
against Churchmen.

Hen. Boyne.
Iur. 16. Febr. 1641. Roger Puttock, John Stern.


The Examination of Elizabeth Trafford, late wife of Thomas Trafford, late
Vicar of Ballincormock in the County of Longford, Clerk.
Ex. 72.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, deposes (inter alia,) That since the
beginning of this rebellion, the Rebels in those parts robbed and stripped her,
and her said husband of all their goods and clothes: And then one of the Rebels
called John Raynolds, stabbed her husband with a sword, whereof he lay
languishing three hours, and then the Rebels stabbed him into the throat, and
wounded him in the head, so that he dyed, and then turned her and her poor
children naked away, exposed to hunger and cold. And at the same time, The said
Rebels or some of them, stabbed and killed one Francis Marshall Merchant,
Matthew Baker Vintner, John Smith, Thomas Allen, John a Butcher, and another
who was a Sadler, another that was a Millner, and by report diverse others.

And further deposes, That the Rebels said, that it was the Kings pleasure,
that all the English should be banished, and loose their goods, because the
Queens Priest was hanged before her face.

Iur. 8. Ian. 1641. Coram, Henry Jones, John Watson. Eliz. Trafford.


The Examination of Margery Sharp, late wife to John Sharp of Kells, in the
County and Diocese of Mead, Minister of Gods Word.
THis Deponent being duly sworn and examined, deposed inter alia, That And Ex.
73.
further deposes, That her said husband was by the Rebels in those parts
wounded, that he was deprived of his life; but in such a blessed manner, that
God gave him strength to pray unto him, and to express himself; and being
ready to die, another company of Irish Rebels came and wilfully murdered him
in the same place where they found him, being coming toward Dublin to seek for
refuge: And after breath was departed from him, this Deponent sought to have
him buried in Christian Buryall, which the Portreiffe or Suffraigne of the
Navan would not admit, but sent to cause the Grave to be made in the same place
where he was murdered. And further says, That before her said husband was
murdered, he carried away, for fear of the Rebels, a good number of his best
Divinity Books, and diverse Bonds, Specialties, and Writings. And she further
says, That the soldiers under the command of the Rebel Capt. o Rely meeting
with him, stripped him of all his clothes, and enforced him, being naked, to
trample and tread upon his said Books and papers in the water to spoil them,
and then the said Rebels threw them away, and tossed many of them in the wind.

Sign. praed. Margery.
Jur. 29 Jan. 1641. John Stern, William Hitchcock.


The Examination of Reynold Griffith, late of Tandergee, in the County of
Armagh.
THis Deponent being duly sworn, deposes inter alia. And further says1, That
near the Newry several Rebels took Ex. 74.
from this Deponents wife a child of hers of 14 years of age, and drowned it
in a bog or pit, and held it down before her face with a sword whilst the said
child was a drowning.

Reynold Griffith, and Eliz. his wife.
Jur. Jan. 6. 1641. John Stern, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of Charles Campbell, late of Shamulloghe, in the Parish of
Clonnlsse, in the County of Monaghan, Gentleman.
THis Deponent being duly sworn and examined, deposes inter alia, That the
said Deponent likewise, whilst he Ex. 75.
was amongst the Rebels, observed these several passages ensuing, viz. First,
the burning of the Castle of Lisgowle, in the County of Fermanagb, containing
the number of sevenscore persons, men, women and children, whereof none escaped
death, except one man who was taken prisoner; which cruelty several of the mac
Mahons, and mac Guires did confess to this Deponent; one Cassedy a Friar,
being the chief instrument thereof. Another priest also, one Philip mac Enany
told this Deponent, that it was no sin to kill all the Protestants, for that
they were all damned already. And the said Deponent was an ocular witness of
the hanging and killing of thirty persons in one day, at Clonnisse, by
Patrickoge mac Rosse mac Guire, Rory mac Mahon, Patrick mac Aperson o Connelly,
and several others, the said Deponent being likewise upon the Ladder, with a
With about his neck, ready to be cast off, but delivered by the intercession of
the said Rory mac Mahon and his wife: Afterward this Deponent, with Robert
Aldrich, and Matthew Brown, being then prisoners with the said Deponent, were
sent unto the siege of Drogheda, by Captain Rory mac Mahon his wife, conducted
by an hundred Rebels, or thereabouts; where they remained for the space of
three weeks, until this Deponents escape: In which time aforesaid, one Ever
mac Mahon, brother to Captain Redmond mac Mahon, told this Deponent, That there
was not a Roman Catholic in Ireland, that could dispend ten pounds per an.
but was accessory to the rebellious plot. This Deponent likewise heard several
of the mac Mahans affirm, That the Earl of Antrim was also guilty of the said
plot. And this Deponent was credibly informed, that with Sir Phelim o Neal were
conversant the Lord of Gurmanston, the Lord Nettervyle, the Lord Lowth, with
many other the chief Gentry of the Pale; and did see the Lord of Dunsany
frequent the said Rebels company; and that the Countyes of Mead and Lowth did
furnish the Rebels there, with all sorts of Victuals, and such necessaries.

Cb: Campbell.
Jur. 2 Martii, 1641. John Stern, William Hitchcock.


The Examination of Alexander Creigchton, late of Glasloghe, in the County of
Monaghan, Gent.
THis Deponent being duly sworn and examined (inter alia) Ex. 76.
deposes. And further says, That when he this Deponent was so robbed by the
Rebels, they imprisoned him and his brother in law, Andrew Lesk, Alexander
Bailie, James Anderson, John Mewrhead his son, Alexander Ballengall, and his
son William, and kept them there in Glaslock Castle for 14 days, or
thereabouts, in great misery, neither suffering their wives or friends to come
and bring them relief: From thence the Rebels sent them to the Jail of
Monaghan for 14 days more, where they were in no lesser misery than before:
From thence they were sent back to Glaslock aforesaid, and there Art mac Bryan
o Samogh mac Maghan, did gather all the whole British prisoners, as well those
aforementioned, as others, to the number of 22 or thereabouts, and sent them to
Corbridge: But in their going, another Company, by the direction of the said
Art mac Bryan, way-layd them, and slew 16 of them, and the next morning
murdered 46 more English at Corbridge aforesaid; where this Deponent escaping
with his life, was admitted to go to Sir Phelim o Neal, who gave him a
Protection for himself, his wife, and child. And then this Deponent heard the
said Sir Phelim say, That he would make no man account for what he did, And
that he had his Majesty's Commission for what he did under the great Seal of
England: And being asked who did put Master Richard Blany, Senescall to the
Lord Blany, and one of the Knights of the Shire to death, because it was
reported that one Art mac Bryan o Samagh mac Maghan put him to death; He
answered, Let not that Gentleman be blamed, for my hand signed the Warrant for
his hanging, for the persecuring of my cosen o Rely. And further says, That
there were killed by the name or Sept of the o Hughes, 12 Families of men,
women, and children of English and Scottish protestants; and that Edmond Boy o
Hugh, Foster-brother to the said Sir Phelim o Neal, did at Kinard, at the entry
of the said Sir Phelims gate, shoot to death with a brace of Bullers, behind
his back, the Lord Cawlfeild: And that night after killed seven Families of
English men, women, and children that lived on the Land of the said Sir Phelim.
And as this Deponent has heard, there were above twenty Families slain betwixt
Kinnard and Armagh by the Rebels: And after the repulse given at Lisnegarvy,
Shane oge mac Canna, and a Company of Rebels under his command, marched through
all the Barony of Trough, in the County of Monaghan, and murdered a great
number of British protestants; amongst others, Ensign Pierce, Gentleman,
Ambrose Blany, Gentleman, William Challengwood, Gentleman, and William his
son; David Draynan, Gentleman, Andrew Carr, Weaver, John Lasley, Labourer,
and his wife.

And this Deponent heard it credibly reported amongst the Rebels at Glaslogh
aforesaid, That Hugh mac o Degan mac Guire, a priest, had done a most
meritorious act in the parish of Glanally, and County of Fermanagh, in drawing
betwixt 40 or 50 of the English and Scottish there to reconciliation with the
Church of Rome, and after giving them the Sacrament, demanded of them whether
Christ's Body was really in the Sacrament or no; and they said, Yea. And that he
demanded of them further, Whether they held the Pope to be supreme Head of the
Church, they likewise answered he was; And that thereupon he presently told
them they were in a good faith: and for fear they should fall from it, and turn
heretics, he and the rest that were with him, cut all their throats.

And this Deponent further says, That the wife of Master Luke Ward told him,
That the Rebels had forced her husband to be drunk in drinking of his part of
3s in drink; and that they when he was so drunk, hanged him: And she showed
this Deponent the place where he was executed.

And says also, That the Rebels pulled up, and took away the (...) in the
Church of Monaghan up to the Quire, and carried them ^^ the Goal, and made
fires with them for the Friars; And that the ^ls did at Glaslock aforesaid,
burn two or three Bibles or Ser^^^ Books: And heard them say, they would never
lay down arms, till their Church were put into its due place, and that all the
plantation lands were given to the right owners; and that if they had once
gotten the City of Dublin taken, they would hold it no rebellion to follow the
Kings sword, in doing any act they pleased: And this Deponent heard Brian o
Hugh, Priest to the said Phelim o Neale say, That they had fifteen hundred
thousand of the Irish blood, to maintain their wars begun: And the said
Alexander further deposes, That about the beginning of Feb. last, one Ensign
William Pew of Glaslogh in the County of Monaghan, being stripped, robbed, and
expulsed by the Rebels, was seven times in one day taken up and hanged on a
tree, and taken down again for dead every time by Patrick Duff, Mac Hugh, Mac
Rosse, a Captain of the Rebels near Monaghan: which cruelty was practiced by
the instigation of Patrick Mother mac Wade, who had informed, that the said
William Pew had moneys; the confession and knowledge whereof was intended to be
extracted by the foresaid hard usage.

Iur. primo Martii, 1641. Alexander Creichton. John Stern. William Hitchcock.


The Examination of Roger Holland of Glaslogh, in the County of Monaghan.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That during his imprisonment,
he was credibly informed, that there were Ex. 77.
38 persons, men, women, and children drowned, being thrown over into the river
of Corr-bridge in the County of Armagh; and also says, That Sir Phelim o
Neale, under pretense of sending a Convoy with many of the English of Loghgall,
and thereabouts, the said Convoy did drown at the Bridge of Pontie-Down, 68
persons, as he is credibly informed: And likewise, that he did see 14 or 15
killed by the Irish as he passed in the country.

And further says, That Friar Malone, when this Examinate arrived at Skerries,
that his Company shot one shot at the Vessel; and that the said Company asked
whether we had a Pass or not, which we told them we had; whereupon they
replied, That if we had not, we should all suffer: But so soon as we showed
them our Pass, they made much of us, and told us that we should take no hurt;
which they performed the next day, being Christmas Day.

The said Friar took a boat, to go to the boat to see whether there were a leak
in our Vessel or not, and searching for the leak, he found some Bibles, and
other Prayer-Books, which said Books he cast into the fire, and wished that he
had all the Bibles in Christendom, and he would serve them all so, and
demanding of him what was the reason, he answered, That it was fitting for
every man to have the Bible by rote, and not to misinstruct them which should
have it by rote: and the said Roger sitting by him alone, demanded of him, what
might be the reason of their going out in such manner, as in killing and
robbing the English, and persuading him to make peace; he replied, unless all
men that had estates lost, by the Kings giving them unto great men, that were
little worth in former times, unless they had their estates given under the
Kings Broad-Seal, that they would never yield; And withal, that it they had
not the Duke of York for their Governor and Ruler in this Kingdom, and to be a
Papist, they would never yield as aforesaid. And further said, That they would
have the whole Kingdom to themselves, and that they have been about this plot
this seventeen years past, but never had so fit an opportunity as now they had.

And the said Roger says further, That being in company with Colonel Pluncket
at Newry and Carlingford, the said Colonel told the said Roger and many
others, that this said plot was for these seventeen years past in plotting, and
that the said Friar Malone and himself, and one of the Lord of Trimbortons
sons, which is a Friar, with many others of the Nobility of the Pale, and in
the North, knew it of long time, but that others of the Nobles knew not of it,
but of late; but as for the rest they have known of it the space and years
aforesaid: And that they said they would have their Religion or not any, or
else that they would loose both their lives and estates, for in strength they
were able enough, for he said all the Irish would not fail, but stick close to
them, for they fought for God and their Country, for certain they knew that
there cause was just, and that God would not see them suffer, and that they
were sure of Dublin, for there was not any thing done, but that they had such
friends, that they heard out of Dublin every day, and as for Sir Phelomy o Neal
he made no account as he said, of all Ireland to be his own, and others, for
that was there intents.

And further says, That at Carlingford, when the foresaid Roger was there
three or four days, Sir Con Magenis sent his Warrant, to send away all such
prisoners as came from Newry over to Green Castle; which Warrant was directed
to one Jo. Babe Provost Marshall, directed by Sir Con Magenis: which Provost
Marshall, according to his direction, sent them away: which prisoners were
sent, for the releasing of some prisoners that were taken at Down-Patrick: but
no sooner came the aforesaid prisoners unto Green-Castle, but they were all cut
off: And the next day following, the said Sir Con Magenis sent a Convoy with
all such prisoners as were there left; and what became of them, this Examinate
cannot tell.

And further says, That an owner of a Boat in Carlingford told him, that one
Mris Holland was hanged; and as she was hanging, was delivered of two children;
and further cannot say.

Jurat: this 4 of March, 1641. Roger Holland. William Aldrich, Hen. Brereton.


The Examination of George Cottingham, Parson of Monaghan.
THis Examinate duly sworn, deposes inter alia, That about Ex. 78.
the 30 day of October, this Examinate, with most of the English, was cast into
the Dungeon, which was a place of that noisomeness, by reason of great heaps
of men's excrements, that had been there a long time, that they were almost
stifled; the Dungeon was so little, and the people so many, being some forty
eight persons, that they were fain to lie one upon another; so that the
Examinate, after he had been some seventeen days, sometimes in the Dungeon,
sometimes in the Goal, got such a looseness, with cold and hard lodging, that
he was not able to go, but as he was carried betwixt men. During their
continuance in this miserable restraint, no meat was allowed the prisoners by
the Rebels, neither would they scarce suffer either their wives or friends to
see or speak with them; but oftentimes, both in the night and day, several of
the Rebels came to the prisoners with swords, and Skeans drawn, with Pistolls
cocked, to the great terror of the prisoners: and some came often and scarched
them; and if they found any silver, either more or less, they took it from
them, and stripped them of their clothes, in the very Dungeon, and left many
almost naked, with few or no rags to cover them: And when these prisoners were
set at liberty, soon after many were murdered with Skeans, some drowned, and
some hanged: Master Richard Blaney, who was prisoner in another place, being
bolted with Irons, was taken forth suddenly, and hanged, and cast into a kind
of a Boggie place, without Burial, stark naked. The same day one Master Luke
Ward was taken and hanged in the same Town of Monaghan; in the beginning of
the night, and was never told he should die; but being taken by one Patr: oge o
Connelley, was brought into a house in Town; and there Patr: gave him worth 12d
or more of drink, as though no hurt were intended, presently went to the back
side, and called out the said Luke Ward, and with others of his company laid
hold on him, and hanged him, and after threw him into a little River, where he
lay naked and unburied: The next morning many of those that were let out of
prison, being almost starved and famished, were murdered with Skeans, and
others drowned: Master Oliver Pierce, Ensign to the Lord Blaney, murdered
with Swords and Skeans; Master John Francis, Edward Lewis, Richard Bollard, and
William Jones, murdered with Skeans and Swords; and many others pursued, who
escaped that night: Thomas West was never heard of since. A poor Englishman
unknown came straggling to the Town, having escaped from some other place, was
hanged.

Some of those that were imprisoned, were sent out of the Town of Monaghan, to
Glaslough, where they had lived formerly; and there they, with others, to the
number of forty, were cast into a River at the edge of the County, men, women,
and children: In the mean time, so many as escaped were in great misery and
fears, daily hearing, that not an English man, woman, or child should be left
alive; that there was the like stir in England and Scotland; and that never a
Protestant must be suffered to live in any of the three Kingdoms; and that the
Seas wre full of Spanish and French Shipping; and that all the Irish in other
parts, were coming homewards to help to subdue the English in Ireland, and then
they were to be in England before May for the same purpose; and the like to be
done in Scotland also. It was usually reported that none must bear rule in
Ireland, but only the Natives; and that all the Lands which were enjoyed by
any of the British, must forthwith be taken from them; which was accordingly
done in all parts hereabouts.

It was frequently noysed and reported, That the Kings Majesty was dead, or not
to be had; and that there was a Crown consecrated for some other that should
deserve it best; and when afterward it was reported His Majesty was in
England, it was said that Sir Phelim o Neal was made General by His Majesty's
appointment; and that there were others that had command by the same
appointment.

We daily heard of most cruel murders of prisoners on all sides of us,
besides what we saw committed in our own Town: in some places near were hanged
sometimes 17, sometimes 22 at a time; as at Clownish, and Carrick mac Rosse.
And within seven miles were murdered some 25 men, women, and children in the
night; and every hour we expected the like usage, being often threatened that
not any English should be left in Ireland. Convoyes were sent with many,
pretending to bring prisoners safe to such places as they were desired to go,
and were most pitifully murdered and drowned by the way by such as conveyed
them, others were turned out without any Convoy, and so murdered.

About six weeks since, I, my wife, and four small children, with some other
English, were turned out of the Town of Monaghan, about three of the Clock in
the afternoon, the Drum beating, and Art Roe mac St Patrick mac Art Moyl, who
is chief Governor there, went before, and declared that we must be gone
forthwith, and not suffered to return, on pain of death; when we were assured,
that not past a quarter of a mile before us, there were men with Swords and
with Skeans, lying in wait to murder and strip us, of which we were fully
assured; but it pleased God we escaped that time, by means of one Bryan mac
Hugh mac Rosse mac Mahon, about a week after we had leave to come as far as
within a mile of Drogheda, called Bewley; near unto which place are encamped
many Rehels, which came from toward Monaghan, and other places of the North;
at which place Sr Phelim o Neal was, where might he perceived by the Speeches
of the Rebels, that they were very confident to take Drogheda, and Dublin, but
during this Examinates remaining there, were driven off the Walls, which they
assayed to assault with scaling-Ladders, on Sunday last was a sennight, in the
morning before day, and many praised be God, run from the Walls, and left some
of their Muskets and Pikes behind them, as they related amongst themselves,
from thence this Examinate was sent into Drogheda, and a Prisoner released
thence for him, and from thence is gotten to Dublin by Sea with his Wife and
four small children, near famished and starved, being left quite destitute of
all relief for the present.

George Cottingham.
Iura. Martij 4. 1641. Hen. Jones, Will. Aldrich.


And whereas the sufferings of the loyal Subjects of this Kingdom of Ireland,
do consist as in the cruelties exercised on the Persons, so in the spoiling and
robbing them of their Estates, Fortunes, and Livelyhoods, whereof the said
several Commissioners, do authorize, and require a strict inquiry to be made.
And whereas in the foregoing Remonstrance, Depredation of the Goods of the
Subjects, is one part of the Charge laid to these Rebels, and humbly offered by
the Remonstrants to be considered off by the Honorable House of Commons in
England.

They the said Remonstrants and humble Petitioners, for the fortifying of that
their Allegation, do here withal present the general Sums of such Counties,
as have answered to that particular from the 30. of December last past, until
the 8. day of March, 1641. The whole amounting unto above six hundred thirty
five thousand three hundred seventy five pounds, four shillings and nine pence;
the Persons thereunto appearing, being in all hitherto examined but six hundred
thirty seven: whereas this by the following considerations may be readily
conceived hardly to be the five hundredth part of the full losses of the whole
Kingdom.

I.
For first, Out of the whole Province of Munster, containing these following
large and rich Counties, viz. Tipperary, Limerick, Cork, Kerry and Clare, no
one has yet appeared.

II.
Out of the whole Province of Connaght, containing these Counties, Roscomon,
Mayo, Galway, Sligoe and Leitrim, There have only eleven out of Leitrim given
in their losses being -- 1352l -- 04s -- 08d

III.
Out of the Province of Vlster, these alone have appeared themselves, viz.

1 s d Out of Lowth, 6. Examinates Their losses 4332 01 04 Cavan, 113.
Examinates 47418 07 00 Fermanagh, 94. Examinates 26947 10 08 Armagh, 8.
Examinates 03802 12 08 Tyron, 2. Examinates 01667 00 00 Londonderry, 1.
Examinate 01911 00 00 Monaghan, 31. Examinates 36181 00 08

None appearing out of the Counties of Down, Antrim, or Donegall.

IV.
Fourthly, For the Province of Leinster, the number of the Examinates is as
follows,

1 s d In the County of Dublin, 72. Exam. Their losses 120032 15 03 County of
Kildare, 57. Ex. 098967 17 04 County of Wickloe, 65. Ex. 132457 14 02 County of
Wexford, 38. Ex. 062519 12 04 County of Catherlagh, 16. Ex. 010270 01 08 County
of Kilkenny, 5. Ex. 008312 00 00 County of Mead, 46. Exam. 033678 14 03 County
of VVestmeath, 7. Ex. 003512 12 00 Kings County, 9. Examinates 011525 04 08
Queens County, 14. Exam. 018884 15 09 County of Longford, 28. Ex. 016440 10 08

V.
Fifthly, Of those Counties that have come in, one being considered with
another, not the five hundred part has appeared, there being of them,

1. Many imprisoned, or besieged by the Rebels. 2. Many gone into England,
before the beginning of this commotion, and since. 3. Multitudes murdered, and
none hitherto appearing for them. 4. Many thousands by reason of the danger of
the ways, not daring to appear. 5. Many being sick and weak, by reason of
their sufferings, so not able to appear. 6. Many there are who (in time)
purpose to give in the particulars of their losses, but for the present forbear
being in many respects not prepared for the doing thereof. 7. Lastly, of such
as have given in their particulars, few can depose to the full of their losses,
wanting the help of their Papers torn from them, or of their Agents, who could
inform them of their Estates, they being remote in the Country, and there
imprisoned, or besieged, or by reason of the danger of the ways, not daring to
adventure from such places of safety, as they have betaken themselves unto, if
perhaps they have not altogether perished by the hand of the enemy.
The same Consideration may also induce any to believe that of the other
particulars in the said Remonstrance, either for words blasphemous against God,
impious against Religion, or traitorous toward His sacred Majesty, or for
Actions, wicked, cruel, or barbarous, or for discovery of the minds and
intents of these conspirators, and their adherents, the least part has been
set forth in the said Remonstrance, and Examinations thereunto annexed; and yet
that alone is sufficient, and more then enough to set forth the miserable
condition of the poor distressed Church, and miserable wasted Kingdom of
Ireland.

Of all which we the Commissioners aforesaid, do herein give up a true report
attested under our respective hands this seventh of March. 1641.

Hen. Jones, Roger Puttock, John Watson, John Stern, William Aldrich, Randal
Adams, William Hitchcock, Hen. Brereton.


FINIS.

