TERRIBLE NEWS FROM YORK SENT In a Letter to London concerning great and
weighty Affairs of high Consequence.

ALLO, A great Mutiny and Uprore, which happened in the City of York, at twelve
of the clock at night by threescore Rogues which rose with Clubs and Bills,
an^mated on by some great person, against 20 men of good quality, who lodged
there on Sunday night.

With some Passages concerning the Kentish Petition.

Togethether with a Declaration from both Houses of Parliament, concerning the
Church of England.

He^. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.

Printed for John (...). 1642.

Strange and fearful NEWS FROM YORK.
SIR,
YOur Country Courtier kisses your hands, for the favor you did him in your
last Epistle, and tells you he is of opinion with the Secretary in my Lord
Newcastles last new play, That the Times are dangerous, and therefore shall say
acthing but Mum: Letters have miscarryed, so may mine; therefore I will send you
nothing but tail-paper. Tell the Lincolnshire Roundheads I am theirs to be
confided in: I know they cover News, therefore J pray tell them the King is
here, and so am I but Mum, no more of that. Several Petitions have bin
delivered to my Sovereign, but what they are, you shall not know. The King
hawks much after the Hiern, its a high flight, but no more of that neither, nor
any thing else at this time, only that I am

April 8. Yours, T. K.

A true Relation of some Remarkable Passages, that happened between Sir Richard
Earl, and (...) and threescore persons with clubs and bills, who assaulted them
in the Housc where they lay, etc.
SIr Richard Earl, and 20 more Gentlemen of quality, presented their Petition
from the County of Lincoln, who were scoffed at by the Courtiers and Citizens,
and called Roundheads; they lay in York on Sunday, and about midnight that
night, about 60. persons with clubs and bills assaulted the house where they
lay, and swore they would have the blood of them, the Gentlemen being up, and
the Rogues got into the House, they were forced to put out their lights and
betake themselves to their swords, which done, the unknown Rascals departed,
giving threatening Speeches, that they would cut the throats that eame came
next; yet I praise God we had reasonable fair quarter with them; the City of
York we perceive offers these abuses to Petitioners, on purpose to deter them
from coming to the King, because they would have reside with them; those that
are well-affected (which are but few in comparison of the multitude) do join
with us willingly and freely, both in judgment and matter; the Court is very
thin as yet, but increases daily; the latter Declaration mentioned in our
Answer, is not yet in print; the Kings first Answer was (He refers us to the
Kentish Petition) but we pressing for a further and more satisfactory Answer,
had as you may here fee, with hopes still of a better.

The Kentish Petition was Ordered to be printed, but speeding so badly at
London, it is stopped as yet; much more I could tell you, but my occasions will
not permit me, therefore with our best a affections to you all, I commit you to
the Lords protection and rest,

Your ever loving Brother while J. Widmerpole.

A DECLARATION OF Both Houses of Parliament, concerning the establishing of
Church Government, throughout the whole Kingdom of England.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, That they intend a due and necessary
Reformation of the Government and Liturgic of the Church, and to take away
nothing in the one or the other, but what shall be evil, and justly offensive,
or at least unnecessary and burdensome: And for the better effecting thereof,
speedily to have consultation with Godly and Learned Divines. And because this
will never of it self attain the end sought therein, they will therefore use
their utmost endeavors to establish Larneed and Preaching Ministers, with a
good and sufficient maintenance throughout the whole Kingdom, wherein many dark
Corners are miserably destitute of the means of Salvation, and many poor
Ministers want necessa^y provision.

FINIS.

