King SOLOMON's Infallible EXPEDIENT FOR Three Kingdoms SETTLEMENT: OR, Better
Men make Better Times.

Delivered In A SERMON Preached in the Renowned and Famous City of Gloucester,
the Lord's Day before their Election of Burgesses for PARLIAMENT.

By Samuel Keme S. S. T. B. Rector of Allbery, near Oxon.

Psalm. 112.4. Unto the Righteous arises Light in Darkness.
And the Righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
His horn shall be exalted with Glory: The Wicked shall see it and be Angry.
I will cloth her Priests with Salvation, and her Saints shall shout for joy.
There will I make the Horn of David to bud; for I have Ordained a Light for
mine Anointed.
His Enemies will I cloth with shame, but on Him his Crown shall flourish,
Psalm. 132.16, 17, 18.
London, Printed by J. S. for G. Sawbridge, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Bible on Lud-Gate Hill, 1660.

To the Honorable Tobie Jordan, Colonel, AND Now Mayor of the Ancient City OF
GLOUCESTER. TO The Honorable the Burgesses Elected; Aldermen, and
Common Council of the said CITY.
Honorable,
I Have ever esteemed Honest Authority the most noble, potent, and approved
Patron, to pitch on; The three Kingdom's Glory, and every particular Person's
best Security.

Now, That I might match my Principle with my Practice; The Compulsion of your
many Civilities, and the prevailing Voice of most of your Importunities, has
not only conquered me to a concession to print these Mushroom-meditations; but
made me, being conscious of the worthlessnesse of any thing that can be called
Mine, (as liable to censure,) to fly to you for Protection; it being a Sermon
formed at as great a distance from my Line and Level, and ordinary Instruments
I make use of, as I am from my own Habitation, and therefore not framed to that
degree of Perfection I could wish for your sakes, or any who may peruse it:
Which I pray may be charitable in their Judgment. For the heaviest Censures
come from men that speak their Interest, and without Judgment: And to them but
a word. Why should you be violent for that, which, but by Violence and
Oppression, you cannot hold, and whilst enjoyed is apt to torment your Souls
with jealousies and fears, and hangs on the twine-thred of the wandering
Judgments of the hurrying Vulgar, more multivarious than Nature's dalliances,
which are every minute fluctuous and returning in their new Varieties? And why
should they not rather acquiesce in the Reason and Determination of Righteous
men in Authority, whose Guide is God's Will revealed in his Word? Take heed
whilst you follow the guidance of your own Interest, though you should enjoy
Mydas's specious Wish, yet, it pay you not with ruin at the last. Truly God
will work alone, and Man must not be of his Counsel: If we can be but patient,
God will be profitable; but for Time and Means we must leave to him, not
interpose our selves. Be tutored by the unexpected Actings of the Times, not to
presume on any Interests, nor despair of God, for he can help thee or cross
thee: Nemo confidat nimium Secundis:
Nemo desperet meliora lapsus.
Policy and Vows have deceived us; let Righteousness and Religion undeceive
us, and let us take out this Lesson, that, Those Kingdoms flourish most, not
where Vice-Royes govern, but the a Lawful Righteous King is personally present;
And, till you arrive here, you will be but vapors transported by unconstant
blasts. And if this word of sincere and loving Counsel shall raise any storm
upon me, it shall but cause me to put the Helma Lee, and pray for them: And
pray, for next under God, protection from you: who are not only Martially
empowered, but Civilly invested, with the Sword of Justice, and divinely
furnished with the whole Armor of God, both to defend his friends; and offend
his, your, and his Church's Enemies. And ever know, that sanctified Wisdom, and
true Grace, is a Sanctuary so safe and sacred, that even Princes dare not touch
the man that is thus protected. Yours, Honorable, has been, in varieties of
difficulties, proved and approved; And, without the lest thought of Flattery I
hint it, You seem to me to be formed and educated of God, in the way and love
of Righteousness, Truth, and Peace, attended on by Moderation, and yet a
Christian Courage and Counsel, to act your parts in such a season as this is: I
must till death crave leave to honor you, and divulge to the World your
Courage, and yet Christian-like Moderation, in the use of your Power very
lately: Violent, rash, bloody Designs and Minds will never bless the owners
with a settled Peace. Tyranny borders near an inevitable ruin: Moderation is a
Spoke in the Wheel of Envy, nor is it safe to Tenter Authority, for that
displayes men: And what bloody mischief was prevented, and what high-formed
stormy Resolutions calmed, and what Peace was in a short space, to admiration,
settled, will never be forgot (to your perpetual honor) whilst Gloucester is a
City, Enemies being Judges. By which means, though many of you being active in
Counsel, enjoyed not a Liberty to hear a part of this Sermon, yet (I bless God)
I enjoyed a peaceable opportunity to preach some of these Notions in the
Public Assembly, the latter part of the Day. Thus have your Actings added one
Argument more to what I in Public delivered, That when Righteous men are in
Authority, the People rejoice; Diligence and Moderation are the best steps
whereby to climb to any Excellency: Go on and prosper; They that by righteous
Actings acquire Honor, will hold it longer than they that have acquired it by
Power or unjust Usurpation. This will make you succeedingly glorious, that you
shall need the Applause of none to add to your felicity. This, this
Righteousness will, in the Exercise of your Authority, Martial and Civil,
attract the hearts of all that hear of you, to you, for Love, Service,
Admiration. I shall dress up no more words in these Paper robes, least I should
seem to stand in need of your Pardon, as well as Protection, for my
Impertinencies. I, knowing real Desert desires more to deserve than to hear of
it, shall, with Prayer to the Lord to make You and Magistracy at unity amongst
your selves, zealous for God's Glory, and his Church's repairing and reforming,
and the Kingdoms Settlement upon the Foundations of Righteousness, Peace, and
Truth, presume ever to subscribe my self,

Yours and the City's most affectionate Servant, in the Labor of Prayer for
all Blessings. SAMVEL KEME.

King SOLOMON'S Infallible Expedient for Three Kingdoms SETTLEMENT: OR, Better
Men make better Times.
PROVE. 29.2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice: But when
the Wicked bear Rule, the People Sigh.


NAtional, and not Notional Righteousness, is, and has ever bin, esteemed the
surest Foundation for National and Personal peace and happiness. The
lastingest Settlement is formed from this Establishment: Shows of it, will and
has produced no other than Mock-showes and Kick-showes of Government. No, no!
Dissembled Piety is double Iniquity; and provokes God to give Men over to
affect mutability and Novelty; as Aristocracy, Democracy, Anarchy, Oligarchy,
Fift-Monarchy; The attempts of all which must be managed by Policy, Power,
Violence, Blood, and Tyranny; Experientia docet. Pretenses of Religion and
Liberty has in all Ages lead the Vanguard, and bin the pretense for most the
unbounded Licentiousness; As in that nefarious and bloody Conspiracy and
Murder of Julius Caesar. When proud Sheba would invite Israel from a just and
lawful Subjection to the bondage of an Usurper, He proclaims a Toleration and
Liberty,; And then the People as Bees, when up in a swarm, and hearing not the
Voice of the Master-Bee, the Monarch, are apt to light on any Bough, yea
Thorns or Briars. So Pride and Interest carry Men to cloze with any Faction.
Psalm. 2.3. The proud Rulers projecting against Christ's Monarchy, declare for
Liberty, Let us break their bonds, say they.

But your experience tells, you, The deadliest Storms attend the smoothest
Calms: Fair Promises are strange snares to entangle the ignorant and
simple-hearted. The cheapest things Men can part with, and yet the strongest
Enchantments: It was the Devils promise to Jesus Christ, to give him Kingdoms.
It is the Jesuit's first lesson; Machiavell's old Rule; And some of late
Authorities practice: John Huss had a fair promise for a safe conduct to the
Council of Constance, yet they cut him off as to Life with a distinction, To
come, but not return: Absolon stood at the Court Gates, and having taken the
People by the Ears with his Gallantry, he leads them by the Nose into slavery,
2 Samuel 15.4. His ear is open to all Plants, Petitions of all Sorts; no Cause he
flatters, no Error he tolerates not. And then, O Valiant, Virtuous, Bounteous
Absolon was the common acclamation, Sed Promissa Tyrannorum finiuntur in ruina
Credentium. They have Arguments in all Moods and Figures, but the last is in
Bocardo. But, Christians, I have to our woeful past-experiment brought you at
this time for your Election Encouragement, Solomon's Judgment as a direction
Expedient. For better time, and a firm Settlement, restore and cry up better
men: For when the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice: but when the
Wicked ^ear Rule, the People Sigh.

The Text is Independent; and yet let me tell you, it is for Monarchy, the very
best Government, for it was penned by a Monarch, King Solomon; Not only in
Defense of Monarchy, as to his own Interest and Glory, but to the People's
Security, Peace, and Indemnity; as he Argumentatively expounds my Text, ver. 4.
A King by Righteousness maintains or preserves his Country; but a man
receiving gifts, destroys it; A man that is necessitated to enforce constant
Taxes, etc. In the words in general you have; 1. Monarchy and Magistracy
asserted. 2. Happiness assured.


First, When the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice.

Secondly, The contrary experimented, When the Wicked bear Rule, the People
Sigh. In the words you have these parts.

First, The Time or Season, in which a Kingdom or People may expect and be sure
of Happiness: When the Righteous are in Authority.

Secondly, A just account of the length of Time, of a Kingdom's misery and
calamity. So long as the wicked bears Rule.

And now I wonder not, that King David, experienced in the Harrassing and
Oppressing of his People under Absolons Rebellion and Usurpation, he and his
Companions being routed and slain, makes such haste to be settled on his Throne
for his People good, 2 Samuel 19.20. Absolon whom we appointed over us is dead,
Ver. 11. Then King David sent to Zadock and Abiathar the Priests; saying, Speak
to the Elders of Juda, and say, Why are ye behind to bring the King again to
his House? See v. 14. He gives Amasa incouraging-hints as to be General in
Joab's stead, Ver. 13, 14. He bowed the hearts of all the men of Juda, as of
one man: Therefore they sent to the King, saying; Return thou with all thy
Servants, v. 15. So the King returned, and came to Jordan. And Juda came to
Gilgal to meet the King, and to conduct him over the Waters of Jordan: Yea,
Shimei faces about, and goes also: And when holy David is in Authority, the
Kingdom rejoices exceedingly, 2 Samuel 22. But when Absolon and Sheba Ruled,
their very hearts were grieved.

I shall clear these particulars, or so much as I shall speak to.

1. What is meant, by Righteous. 2. What, By being in Authority. 3. What, by
the Peoples Rejoicing, and what kinds of joy it is that they express. 4. What,
is understood, by Wicked; and what by their bearing Rule. 5. What by Sighing.
First, What by Righteous.

And really, Christians, there has bin, and is so much spiritual Hocus-pokery
and Hypocrisy in the World, that the Devil in Samuel's mantle has past for the
Prophet. But because Christ has said, The Tree is known by the Fruit,
Affection concluded by Actions: I will tell you what the Scripture says, Is
not to do righteously, and whom God looks upon as unrighteous, that you may in
your choice decline them: And whom he looks upon as righteous, that you may
Elect and Accept them as your Representatives; I shall give you examples in Men
and Actions. These are righteous.

1. Negatively, not such as walk profanely, or countenance or oppose not the
spirit of profaneness in their Relations or Inferiors. Noah in his opposition
to this practice, is called a righteous Man in his Age, for he grieved for the
unrighteous deed, Genesis 6.9, 10. Genesis 24. If there be fifty righteous, etc. v.
25. So Lot is called a righteous man in opposition to his times practice,

Secondly, Such as walk perfidiously, that break Covenants with God and Man:
That keep not their promises, Psalm. 57. In opposition to this, Jonathan is
styled righteous, acting so to David, having made a Covenant with him, 1 Samuel
18. although his treachery might have got him a Crown in all probability.

Thirdly, Such as prefer Policy to Piety, and manage it with the most
notorious Acts of cruelty. In opposition to this practice, David is called
righteous by hi^ very Enemy Saul, 1 Samuel 24. compared with 6.7. Verses, 1 Samuel
26. And it came to pass when Abi^thar the son of Ahimelech, fled to David to
Keilah, that he came down with an Epl^od in his hand. And it was told Saul that
David was come to Keilah, and Saul said, God has delivered him into mine hand;
for he is shut in, by entering into a Town that has Gates and Bars. Contrary to
this, is the unrighteous Actings of Joab and Abner. And our English Historian
Sanderson tells you of one lately that pretended Piety, that by Policy he might
act his Cruelty; Such was Herod's Act, Math. 2. and Judas Kiss to his Master.

4. To walk cruelly and act Tyrannically, merely to fortify Interest; yea,
against convictions of Conscience: Upon this account is it Christ calls Herod
Wicked, who valued not to serve up John Baptist's Head in blood, whom he
delighted formerly to hear, for opposing him in his Interested Herodias; As
cruel Bonner in his time, etc. And as our English Historian mentions one more
cruel to Mr. Love, Gibbons, etc.

5. Such as have broke all Bonds and bounds, Laws of God and Man, to make Laws
to maintain their own Interest, though to the ruining of three Kingdoms, as
Rehoboam, Absalom, and his Renegadoes and young men in Arms, 1 King. 12.11, 14,
15.

6. Such as Profess to be Counselors for National safety, and pull down its
Hedge of Magistracy and Ministry, Eccles. 10.8. He that breaks a Hedge, a
Serpent shall bite him, Verse 9. Apply.

7. As the fag end of this Character, take a Company of them together,
discovered by the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. Lovers of
themselves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud, cursed Speakers, Disobedient to Parents,
Unthankful, Unholy, without natural Affection, Covenant-breakers, false
Accusers, Intemperate, Fierce, No lovers at all of them which are good;
Traitors, heady, high-minded, Lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God,
having a show of Godliness, creeping into houses, leading captive silly Women.

A Righteous man, affirmatively, is such a one as is positively holy, in his
Person and his practices, his Opinion, his Principles, his Aims as well as
Actions: Jehu did drive furiosly, acted highly, but all was to get a Kingdom.
He is such a one as walks by Gospel Rules, not Lights within, or providence
and successes; Impulse of Spirit.

Secondly, What, By being in Authority: And it is explained by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.2. and that Personally or Relatively: I exhort therefore, that first of
all, Prayers and Intercessions be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are
in Authority, that is, all that exercise a lawful Power over us.

Thirdly, What kind of Joy or rejoicing the People act, as the Product of such
Government and Rulers.

Solution, 1. Not carnal, sinful, profane Rejoicing in drinking Healths,
Oaths, or any deboisture, drinking to excess; sinning because God's Mercy
abounds, and have hopes of better times.

2. Not rejoicing as to Self-Interest, Preferment, etc.

3. Not rejoicing in bodily Privileges, but the Soul's Advantages; this is
explained by the Apostle also, 2 Cor. 10.17. In the Lord, in Soul's
Privileges, Gospel-freedom in power and purity, Magistracy and Ministry's
restoration, Anti-christ's disappointments; Rejoice spiritually, yea, in the
Creatures and one another societies, moderately; yea, and make the poor
rejoice with you, charitably.

Observation. A Righteous Magistracy forms a People's hearts in all their
Conversations to rejoicing and alacrity. A righteous King. Lords and
Parliament, is the Kingdom's All-agreement. Good men create good times; Good
Superiors, good Inferiors; Regis ad Exemplum.

I shall give you Scriptures and Examples, and divine Arguments, to prove it,
and so apply it. And because the word King is out, I shall rather confirm it
than recall it; and assert Monarchy, not only as most agreeable to the Nation's
well-being, but God's Order. To omit Himself being President, and Oeconomical
Government, natural Instinct: I pray you read Exodus 18.13. Moses sat and
judged the People; 21. Moreover, provide amongst all the People Men of Courage,
fearing God, men dealing truly, hating Covetousness, and appoint them to be
Rulers, Nobles, but every great matter let them bring to thee: 23. So shall the
People go quietly to their place: 25. ver. And Moses chose able men out of all
Israel, and made them Heads over the People. Exodus 19.6. Ye shall be to me a
Kingdom. Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15, etc. read 17. Bring it to me and I will hear it.
And pray see Romans 13. Where commanding to obey Magistrates for Conscience,
whoever resists the Power: 4. ver. For he is the Minister of God. 6. ver. For
this cause ye pay Tribute, that is only due to Kings; Give to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's: Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. God's Institution, Then thou shall
make him King, whom the Lord shall choose. Josh. 1.^0. 1 Samuel 16.1. I have
provided me a King. 2 Samuel 14.17. Prove. 11.10. In the Prosperity of the
Righteous, the City Rejoices, Prove. 16.15. In the Light of the Kings
Countenance, is Life, and his favor as a Cloud of the latter Rain, Prove. 20.8.
A King that sits on the Throne of Righteousness, chaseth away all evils with
his Eyes, This contains Divine reason also. Prove. 25.3. The Heaven for height,
and the Earth for depth, and the heart of Kings is unsearchable: Prove. 29.14.
The King that faithfully judges the poor, His Throne shall be established for
ever.

Examples. How cheerful, and with what joy did the People manage their Affairs
in the Days of righteous Kings and Magistrates. As in godly David's,
Solomon's, Josia's, Ezekiah's, etc. Again, under wicked Kings as Absolon,
Jeroboam, etc. Richard III. Henry VIII. Queen Mary, etc. what astrange
alteration in the faces of People? But in Edward the Sixth Days, after in Queen
Elizabeth's, so at present, what Rejoicing? what a Life in hope of Trade? what
Demonstrations of joy in all places, amongst all Degrees, Sexes, Ages, even
whilst but in expectation of Restoration?

1. Arg. Because Righteous men constitute and enact none but righteous laws;
righteous Superiors cannot, dare not, do any other then righteous things for
Inferiors. Now this creates joy in the heart: Prove. 12.10. A righteous man
regards the life of his Beast, Prove. 16.17. The path of the Righteous is to
depart from evil, Prove. 20.26. A righteous King scatters the wicked, and
causes the wheel to turn over them.

2. Arg. Because righteous Superiors bring multiplied blessings on their
Inferiors, and keep evils from them; and seek God much for them, Prove. 11.11.
By the blessing of the Righteous, the City is exalted, Prove. 10.21. The lips of
the Righteous feed many. Righteousness delivers from Death, Prove. 10.11.
Prove. 12.28. Life is in the way of righteousness, and in that pathway there
is no Death.

3. Arg. Because all such things as usually create joy in us, wait on their
endeavors, by God's appointment; and the relishes of them expected by the
People are performed to the People: As Righteousness, Peace, security, dwelling
under their Vines and Figg-Trees, enjoying the Fruits of their own Labors.
They shall dwell safely, and be quiet from all evil, Prove. 1.33. Prove. 2.7. He
Preserves the Estates of the Righteous, He is a Shield to them that walk
uprightly, Prove. 2.21. The just shall dwell in the Land. They have the promise
of all Temporals and Spirituals, Health to their Navel, Marrow to their Bones,
Prove. 3.24. When thou sleep, thy sleep shall be sweet: 33. Ver. He blesses
the habitation of the Righteous, Prove. 28.10. Whosoever causes the Righteous to go
astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright
shall have good things in possession: Prove. 6.11, -- 16. A naughty person, a
wicked man walks with a froward mouth. He winketh with his Eyes, he speaks
with his Feet, he teaches with his Fingers. Frowardness is in his heart, he
devises mischief continually, he sows discord. Therefore shall his calamity
come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. Blessings are on the
head of Righteous, Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation: Prove: 16.6.
By Righteous men's Actings, Iniquities shall be forgiven: Prove. 21.12. The
Righteous teaches the House of the Wicked.

Use 1. Of Information in these particulars following.

1. That National felicities and happiness consists in Righteousness and
Holiness; not only in greatness, but goodness.

2. The true cause of the sad aspect of the three Kingdoms for some years
past, is, a want of Righteous men in Authority, and unrighteous Actings: I need
not be your Remembrancer of them. It would take up all my time, and revive your
trouble to rake in the puddle of noisome stinking mire and dirt.

3. It informs us of a National Remedy for the malady, viz. to endeavor to
have Righteous men in Authority.

4. Whom we are to look upon as Friends of the Nation, and Keepers of its
Liberty. Not a Committee of Safety, not I know not who; but Righteous Rulers,
and Righteous Men in Authority: For they form joy of Heart, and introduce every
Mercy.

Use of Exhortation. I am come from the Lord to beg this one thing from you in
this your Opportunity: To Elect and endeavor to fix Righteous men in
Authority, as your Representatives. And observe the severe directions that God
has sent me withal to you this Day.

1. Men that prefer Piety before Policy, and not Men that prefer, Private
Interest before National Good; that prefer God and his Churches Settlement,
before their own Advancement. That will build his House before their own, 1
King. 5.5. The People returning from Captivity did so. Ezra 4. And although it
was obstructed by force some years, yet in the next opportunity they fell to it
with Swords in one hand, and Trowels in the other, manger all opposition, Ver.
23. Oh! Choose Men that keep Faith and a good Conscience.

2. Men of known Integrity, and Fidelity to God and Man, and not of discovered
Apostasy and Hypocrisy: Men that will lose their Lives and Preferment rather
then not keep their Covenant, and seek a Settlement. Armor of Proof, forms
security; men that can endure Banishment, Imprisonment, etc. A Weathercock in
Church or State is fitter to hang in the Wind, than to be in the House.

3. Men that prefer Mercy before Cruelty, Prove. 14.21. The Wicked despises
his Neighbor, but he that has mercy on the Poor is Blessed, Math. 9.13. 1 Samuel 24.7. And he said unto them, The Lord keep me from doing the thing to my
Master the Lord's Anointed, to lay my hand upon Him, for He is the Lord's
Anointed.

4. Men of Courage and Activity, that prefer Public Good before Personal
Safety; such as Hester, If I perish, I perish. Not such who in the Duke of
Alva's time of Tyranny, are pictured in Holland with their Fingers on their
Lips: but such as will venture Life and Liberty, to Speak and Act, to redeem the
People out of Slavery, that dare say, Mori possum, tacere non possum.

5. Men of Gravity and Majesty, yet preferring Humility to Self and Vainglory;
and the just Cause of Poverty before the unjust Cause of great Men in
Authority: Mordecai before Haman.

6. Men that prefer Verity before Heresy, Christ before Antichrist;
Gospel-Reformation before former, Interest-sake, or abominable Toleration.

7. That prefer Unity and Order in all the Churches of Christ and his Members,
before Separation or Division.

8. Men of Grandeur, and experienced in Authority; with whom is Wisdom,
Sobriety, Moderation; good Education and Ability: the Head, and not the Tail of
the People: The list or fag-end may patch, but never can make a beautiful
Garment.

Lastly, Choose Men of sensible and tender hearts, that Sympathize with the
Nation, and your Selves; in and under all your Greivances and misery, that may
be sensible to call home the Banished; relieve the Oppressed, Injured, the
unjustly imprisoned, Sequestered: And now I shall give you some means by which
you may gain such righteous Men to be in Authority, and some motives, and a
word to the Elected, and so I have done.

1. Means. Be very frequent and fervent in prayer to the Lord, who gives
righteous hearts to men, to give them so qualified to you, and that He would
providentially show who are so indeed. So the Disciples prayed, Acts 1. and
pray much for them; Show us whom thou have chosen.

2. Means. Be very Circumspect as to secret guilt of gross and habitual sin;
God does often punish the sins of a People, by giving them unrighteous
Superiors in his wrath, Prove. 28.2. For the transgressions of a Land, many are
the Princes thereof: but, by a man of understanding and knowledge, the state
thereof shall be prolonged.

3. Means. Exactly to observe the Character and Rules I have set before you,
whom to Choose.

4. Mean. To set a high value on righteousness, to bring it in fashion, to cry
it up, to exemplify it, teach it to youth, etc. by daily instruction and
Chatechising to diffuse it; every one to each otherby examplary life.

Last Means. To repent in this joint of Time, Nationally, Personally; I shall
say (as Mr. Bradford, in flames of fire, so I) to you and the Kindgom, in
flames of affection, Repent, O England, Repent; Do not obstruct God in his work
of Mercy, by omitting this Duty: you can expect no good or righteous Actings
for time to come, till you repent of all your unrighteousness past. Repent of
all pretended holiness; of omitting to practice righteousness. Repent of all
sin, yea, the very appearances of evil, but especially National sins, for
which you have never bin grieved, nor troubled, in the powerful Actings of it.
For although you could not prevent it, you ought not to connive, nor comply
with it, but complain to God of it: I shall tell you of some sins, which, if
you would be righteous, God expects you should Repent of.

1. National dissatisfaction with our real Mercies that God afforded to us; I
mean not, at the dressing of our quails, after the Romish mode, but at quails
themselves; our opposing Moses and Idolizing Calves of our own making and
approving. This sin you have pencilled out, 1 Kings 12. 9, 16. Let all such
Enemies repent of their unrighteousness, that offered violence to the
Parliament, that they might carry on more cleverly the King's death.

2. Repent of your Solemn League and Covenant-Fraction as to God and Man, in
all the branches of it, Numb. 30.3. If a man Vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear
an Oath to bind his soul with a bond; saying, This is the thing which the Lord
has commanded: Deuteronomy. 29.24, 25. Even all Nations shall say, Wherefore has the
Lord done thus unto this Land? what means the heat of this great anger? Then
men shall say, Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God of their
Fathers, which he made with them, when he brought them forth out of the Land of
Egypt.

3. Repent of countenancing all Errors and Factions against Scripture-Truths,
or besides, or above them, or without them, Gal. 2, 4.5. The Apostle gave not
way to this sin for an hour.

4. Repent all that have had a hand in Ministery-Deformation, Defamation, that,
under pretense of probation, and trying them as to gifts and grace, and a
Ministry-Reformation; had, if the Lord had not prevented it by a miracle of
mercy, brought it nigh to the brink of desolation; I being able to account with
any (upon good proof, and men of known integrity) of two hundred Tradesmen,
Lawyers, Clerks, Chirurgions, and the like, tried, approved of, admitted into
Livings, and of good Value, besides those in the Army and Navy. Many more
without Ordination, such as have rendered us ridiculous to reformed Churches
abroad: The fairest and fattest was ever for the Lord.

Such, with Jeroboam, have made themselves guilty of that cursed sin of making
Priests of the lowest of the People, which were not of the Sons of Levi, 1
King. 12.31. 1 Timothy 4 15. God required men should give themselves wholly to the
Ministry. In this City of Gloucester I see a man, two, or three, cutting out
shoos, and others clearing Guns, forming up Swords, etc. on the week-dayes,
that have Rectories with Augmentations, within 6 or 7 miles off this City. 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. 1 Timothy 3.6. Not a young Scholar; and
then not on one that is no Scholar.

5. Repent of Interest-extollation before Righteousness and Truth and Peace,
Settlement and Preservation, and all Profaneness and Error's Extirpation; with
profane Esau, preferring a glorious Mess of Pottage, to fill their greedy
bellyes, before a Birthright.

6. Repent of all formalities, Hypocrisies, as to that sacred and solemn
excellent Ordinance, to divert Judgments and procure Mercies (when sincerely
and heartily performed,) I mean, days of Fasting and Humiliation; when
immediately the fruit has been, Opposing Superiors in Authority: against
Oaths and solemn Covenants, dethroning, beheading, Magistracy and Ministry. Oh!
This is for a Lamentation, and let it be to us surviving a cause of cordial
Repentance and Humiliation.

Lastly, Let us all repent of all our Un-betterness under all God's Judgments
that have been several years upon us; our Unteachableness under all the
Lectures, which by his variety of eminent Providence and Dispensations, he
has read to us; and for all our Unfruitfulness under Gospel Ordinances to this
day, the very best of us; and that to prevent that sad Doom, Matthew. 21.43. The
Kingdom shall be taken from you, and given to a People bringing forth the fruit
of it. God has other Nations under Promise will be glad of it; He is not
beholding to England for Professing his Gospel, if we practice not, nor then
neither; for it is our duty: And, do all we can, we are unprofitable Servants.
Therefore, as a demonstration of thy fruitfulness and betterness, Repent; and
seeing you expect a completing of Mercy to you, in this day of hope; Omit not
your duty of real Repentance from sin, all sin, before the Lord; Cease to do
evil, learn to do well, put away the evil of our Doings, and by this means you
will become Righteous men, fit for Government, and so shall the Nation become a
Kingdom of Righteous men, wherein the Lord will delight to dwell.

Motives. To be curious in your Choice, as to righteous Men.

1. Because such are the Favourit of the great God, the King of Kings, they
have an Interest in Heaven, they can do much for you there, as to your Felicity
here: Prove. 15.29. The Lord is far from the Wicked, but He hears the prayer
of the Righteous: Prove. 10.24. God grants the desire of the Righteous.

2. They are interested in the Value of Princes, and excellent in the sight of
all good Men: They shall stand before Kings, Prove. 12.26. He is more excellent
then his Neighbor.

3. That you may reap the Fruit and Benefit of their Actings, and relish it in
Peace, Plenty, Holiness, and all Happiness.

And now a word to you who may be elected. I come to you in the words of Jesus
Christ, Fear not them that kill the body; Trust that God that has kept you to
this day. Be gallant still, show it by your Humility, and let God alone with
the Proud; count it more honor to be sifted like Wheat, than settled on the
Lees, and at last found bottomed with much Dreggs. And as a poor Pledge of my
sincere Love, accept of this Motto to subscribe your Blazons,

Crescit in Adversis Virtus. and for your encouragement know more,

Saepe telo Jovis quercus adusta viret.

and again, for your practice,

Tu ne cede malis, sed contra ardentior ito.

And, I beseech you, have the Afflictions and unjust Sufferings of poor Joseph
in your minds, when you are advanced, Genesis 40.14, 23. Yet the Butler remembered
not Joseph, but forgot him. Oh, remember bought and sold, wounded, divided,
oppressed, and impoverished England, Scotland, and Ireland; and say, as David
speaks of the Children of Israel in Captivity, Psalm. 137.6. If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; let my right hand
forget its cunning; if I prefer not thee to my chief joy. Be not like the
Priest to the man wounded, Luke 10.30. robbed of his raiment, half dead; the
Levite passed by when he saw it: but like the good Samaritan, ver. 33. he had
compassion on him, went to him and bound up his wounds, powered in Oil and Wine,
put him on his own beast, brought him to an Inn, made provision for him, etc.
35. defrayed his charges; Oh go and do likewise: Methinks I seem to see the
three Kingdoms, at this day, as this poor man, robbed by thieves of the
beautiful garment of Religion in purity, as to Doctrine and Discipline; all
tattered and torn, stark naked in many places, as in Wales, robbed of Ministers
and Maintenance, and robbed of intended Charity for their good, collected to
buy Bibles, but cannot hear of any distributed, for there are none hardly to be
found in Wales, unless they are in Mr. Craddock's Library, and there by his
propagating Chimistry converted into a great Trunk full of Coin, with a
Crucifix at top, as was lately discovered, and by eminent persons attested.
Wounded to astonishment, and for her wounds am I wounded, etc. Is there no Balm
in Gilead, no Physician there? Yes, God has formed us a Gideon, a Joshua,
Blessed be his Name: and will put it (as a return of many solemn days of
sincere Fasting and Prayer, in that famous City of London, by his faithful
Ministers and Servants there, and elsewhere in the Nation) into the hearts of
all, to choose righteous Physicians, that may not skin over only, but perfectly
heal our Wounds: wounded within, without; in repute abroad, in condition at
home; half, yea almost, dead, after a cold winterly season of blasting, biting
trouble: Oh, be ye not like the Lady to her Almoners, who pitied them whilst
in the cold her self, but in the house forgot who, with hungry bellies, and
naked bodies, waited at the door: But do as good Nehemiah, in delivering the
oppressed of his time, Nehem. 5. that you may say, as he in the 19th Verse,
Remember, me O my God, in goodness, according to all I have done for this
People. And as in the 13. Chap. Neh. 10.11. Verses, When I perceived the
Portions of the Levites had not bin given, and every one fled: then reproved I
the Rulers, and said, Why is the House of God forsaken; and I in the next
Assembly set them in their Places: And then may you say, as in Neh. 13.15.
Remember me, O God, herein, and wipe not out my kindness I have showed to the
House of my God, and the Officers thereof. I conclude all with that Scripture,
Isa. 16.3. Gather a Council, Execute Judgment, hide them that are chased out,
bewray not him that is fled. Let my banished dwell with thee, be thou the
Covert from the face of the Destroyer; For the Extortioner shall end, the
Destroyer shall be consumed, the Oppressor shall cease out of the Land. And in
mercy shall that Throne be prepared, and he shall sit on it in steadfastness
and judgment, seeking Judgment and hastening Justice. The yoke of the burden,
the staff of the shoulder, the Rod of the Oppressor have thou broken, as in the
day of Midian.

And the mighty God, the Prince of Peace, whose name is Counselor, guide, and
furnish you all, with Wisdom and Counsel, that all the Foundations that are out
of course may be once again Centred; the Fences of God's Vineyard repaired; the
Walls of our Jerusalem builded; all Phanaticks whatsoever discouraged, and the
Gospel in Power and Purity countenanced; a boundless Toleration annihilated,
yet sincere and tender Consciences considered; that we be no more a Reproach
abroad, not a grief to the Reformed Churches in other Nations. The Lord
strengthen all your hearts and hands for good; and, by You, do all the Three
Kingdoms good.

AMEN.

