THE KENTISH PETITION: TO THE HONORABLE, The Commons now sitting in
PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of diverse well-affected in the County of Kent,
the City and County of Canterbury, together with the Cinque Ports, in the
behalf of themselves and others.
Humbly shows,
THat we cannot but with all thankfulness take notice of, and acknowledge those
Votes that passed this Honorable House, December, 13, 1648, for the disanulling
of certain Votes formerly made, and now appearing to be dishonorable and
destructive to the public good, viz. for the nulling of those Votes which were
made for the recalling those former Votes of Non-addresses to the King; and
also for the nulling of those Votes which were for the approbation of the Kings
answer to the Propositions as a ground for peace; and for Voting the whole
Treaty in the Isle of Wight, as dishonorble, and destructive to the public,
etc. As being fully convinced of the justice, honor and necessity of the said
Votes: and forasmuch as we are confident that justice is the best foundation of
a Nation, and the punishment of offenders a chief branch of justice.

We do therefore humbly beseech this Honorable House according to the Armies
Remonstrance (that great and best expedient hitherto proposed for the public
settlement) to proceed to a speedy bringing to justice (that grand Author of
all our miseries) the Person of Him, who as a King ought to have defended us,
but as a Tyrant has actually levied. Arms and waged War against us, together
with all other great Delinquents, both in the first and second War, as well
those of your own House as any others.

And to continue in a speedy vigorous and undaunted acting, with that ever
faithful Army, in all things that tend to the welfare, safety and settlement
of the well-affected people.

And your petitioners resolving with their lives and all that is dear to them,
to stand by you, shall ever pray, etc.
THe Gentlemen of Kent presented this Petition unto the House on Saturday the
23 of December, 1648, The House called them in, and Master Speaker told them,
the House looked upon the honest men in Kent, had ever proved faithful to the
Parliament, especially the Eastern part: And for the things petitioned, the
House was now in consideration of them: and for the Subscribers, who now show
their good affection, the House gives them thanks.

Printed for Hanna Allen, at the Crown in Popes head Alley, 1648.


