Lieut: General Jones's LETTER To the Council of State, Of a Great VICTORY
Which it has pleased God to give the Forces in the City of Dublin under his
Command, on the Second of this instant August, against the Earl of Ormond's and
the Lord Inchiquin's Forces before that City.

Together with the List of all the Prisoners and Ammunition taken, and the
Narrative of Captain Otway, who was in the Fight.

Die Saturni, 11o Augusti, 1649. At the Council of State at White Hall;
ORdered, That the Letter from Lieutenant General Jones from Dublin of the 6th
of this instant August, relating the Victory which it has pleased God to give
the Forces of the City of Dublin under his Command, against the Army of Ormond
before that City; together with the List of Prisoners and Ammunition taken, and
the Narrative of Captain Otway, be forthwith printed and published: And that it
be sent to the Lord Major of London, to be sent to all the Ministers within his
Jurisdiction; who are hereby required to publish the same to morrow, being
Lords day, the 12th of August in their public Congregations, That there may
be upon this occasion, an Acknowledgement of the goodness of God to this
Commonwealth, in so seasonable a Victory; and that it be also sent to the rest
of the Ministers within the late Lines of Communication to be published as
aforesaid.

GUALTER FROST Secr'



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of England,
August 11. 1649.

Right Honorable,
THe Lord has blessed this your Army with good success against Ormond and his,
for which Gods most holy Name be ever glorified. The account of that service is
thus briefly: On the first of this instant, the Enemy began his approaches to
this place more then formerly, and that night was Ormond, Preston, and the
chiefest of that Army, at a Work begun at Baggotsrath, about a quarter of a
mile hence Eastward of the City, upon the Sea, thence they purposed to run
forward to our Trenches on the Land-side, and to raise their Forts toward the
Water, for hindering the landing of those supplies and Forces expected. They
had before cut off the water-running from the higher grounds into the City,
whereby our Mills had been driven, and in their present work would they have
cut us off from all forage for our cattle: To this end was that very night, a
Brest-work by them made cross the highway, near Baggotsrath, whereabouts was
the only grazing-place left for us. As for the Castle of Baggotsrath,, I
caused it to be before demollished, so as it was not capable of a Garrison,
foreseeing what our prejudice might be in their possessing it.

On thursday the second, we discovered a party of the Enemies, drawn to
Baggotsrath, about fifteen hundred foot, besides horse. We found a necessity
for removing them, and that speedily: and seeing the nearness of the Enemies
camp at Rathmynes, (less then a mile from Baggotsrath) where they might be
readily relieved with greater force as occasion might require; therefore did I
advance with so much a greater strength, about twelve hundred horse, and four
thousand foot.

The Enemies work at Baggotsrath we soon entered, yet not without strong
dispute: most of the Enemies foot there were slain and taken, their horse
having deserted them, after the first charge.

Our horse and foot pursuing their advantages, we became at last wholly engaged
with their whole Army, whom after two hours fight, we totally routed.

We slew on the place, and in the chase, about four thousand; and have two
thousand five hundred and seventeen prisoners, most of them Inchiquines
English, and of our run-aways. We got one whole Cannon, three Demi-Cannons, one
long-square gun, carrying a ball of twelve pound, one Saker-drake, and one
Morter-piece, (all these brass) and some Trayn-carriages, and about two hundred
draught Oxen for the Trayn.

The Strength of the Enemy was by themselves since acknowledged Nineteen
thousand; Ormond narrowly escaped: Of our men there are not twenty missing,
many wounded. The greatest loss fell on the horse, wherein my Regiment has
much suffered, which I humbly desire may be considered, together with my former
losses in the same kind in former Services, and therefore that larger Recruits
may be given me: To which end I have employed thither this Gentleman Captain
Otway, one faithful and forward, whom I make bold to recommend unto your favor.

This whole work is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: By whose
especial providence it was that we should thus engage, we our selves at first
not so far intending it: Neither did the Enemy expect our so doing; nor would
they have willingly engaged with us, if it might have been by them avoided,
they reserving themselves for the coming up of Clanricard with his Connaght
forces about Three thousand, and the Lord of Ardes with his Seven thousand
Scots, all ready for marching; Inchiquine also being looked for, who had the
week before gone toward Munster, with two Regiments of horse, for appeasing
some stirrings there by Owen Roe, raised in his absence. Never was any day in
Ireland like this, to the confusion of the Irish, and to the raising up the
spirits of the poor English, and to the restoring of the English Interest,
which from their first footing in Ireland was never in so low a condition, as
at that very instant, there not being any one considerable landing place left
you, but this alone, and this also (without this the Lords timely and most
gracious goodness and providence to us) almost gone.

Yet is not all this any ground of Security, whereby may be kept back or
delayed the Supplies designed us; for most of our Garrisons are yet to be taken
in, and the Enemy to be speedily followed, that they recover not (which yet
they may do to a considerable number) and that they either possess not
themselves of this Harvest, or hinder us of it. For our selves as at present,
we are not in condition to prosecute this great Victory as we should and would,
wanting pay for our men, and necessary provisions, which would be now made over
to us speedily and plentifully, this being the time, and the occasion being now
offered for a full ending of this War, by its vigorous prosecution, the
opportunity whereof is not to be in any case omitted; besides the security
therein rendered to your affairs there, whereunto all these movings might have
been dangerously carried, as they were by Ormond and his Party intended. All
which I leave to your most wise consideration, and as ever, remain

Your Honors most faithful Servant, MIC: JONES.
Dublin, Aug. 6. 1649.
Prisoners taken the second of August, 1649.
Field-Officers.
COl: Christopher Plunket Earl of Fingal. Col: Richard Butler the Lo: of
Ormonds brother. Lieut: Col: Michael Searl Adjutant General. Lieut: Col:
Aldworth. Lieut: Col: Standley. Lieut: Col: Tho: Fortescu. Lieut: Col: Jesper
Taaff. Lieut: Col: Gerard, Lieut: to the Fuiseers. Major Roger Garland. Major
Oliver Fitz Simons Major Comin. Major Henry Littell. Major Charles Norwood.
Major Riddar, Major to Col: Blunt. Major Fleetwood, Sergeant to the Fuiseers.
Major Shalop. Sir George Bingham Baronet.
Captains.
Daniel. Leston. James Fleming. Dunn. Geoghegan. Henry Fitz Gerrald. George
Cusacke. Christopher Barnewell. Balthazar Newgent. William Whittly. Harbert
Lewis. Petty. Cosby. Jackson. May. Graynier. Thomas Bourke. Daniel Mac Nemara.
Pierce Mac Kee. Fergus Mageins. Thomas Pluncket. Povey. Morris Harbert.
Townsen. George Darcy. Milemay. Ofield. Aims. Roger Flangherty. Ben: Pierce.
Arthur Asten. Dun. Fitz Gerrald. Dillon. Cap: Lieut: James Wade. Cap: Lieut:
Dawning Barret. Cap: Lieut: Foacks. Cap: Lieut: John Alexander. Barth: Fitz
Gerrald. Reformadoes.
Holmes Cornee
41

Lieutenants.
Robert Coin. Arthur Reynolds. William Dallon. Robert Lack. Nicholas Raw.
Francis Coin. Richard Andrews. John Crisp. Tho: Whitely. James Gislyne. Henry
Moss. William Merrill. Paul Symons. Math: Brown. Edward Coats. Rich:
Betsworth. Thomas Power. Clement Green. Francis Hill. Thomas Hill. Fox.
Barret. Hamilton. Searle. Alexander. Illwell. Mevet. Gibs. Harris. Brown.
Nevet. Andrews. Street. Roe. Reynolds. Thomas. Towsen. Lock. Barnes. Gilborn.
Fay. Ross Dempsey. William Bourk. Francis Fox. Dutton. Thomas Darcy. John
Pollet. Garret Harbert. John O Teige. Miles Bourk. Walter Hussy. John Andrews.
George Welsh. Richard Pluncket. Carbery Higgin. Thomas Pierce. Edward Dowdal.
Garret Reeves. 58.

Ensigns.
Henry Colepease. Southwood. Nicholas Mayl. William Jewel. Simon Pordon.
William Sanderson. William Pope. William Crosby. Peter Bulkley. Harbert
Whitefield. Morton Vaughan. Henry Leigh. Robert Dreakin. George Green. Henry
Bannester. George Giles. Samuel Floyd. Robert Fitz-Gerrald. Edward Jans. Palyn.
Dickson. Lillies. Langford. Willonton. Bradley. Rogers. Brisby. James Ennis.
Peter Smith. Peter Walsh. James Finis. Richard Mealey. Patr. Bolan. Michael
Taaff. Patr. Boy Key. Mortogh Mac Hary. Owen Mahany. Jo: Tirrel. Edm. Mullegan.
Daniel Kevanagh. Daniel Wire: Tho: Street. 42

Cornets.
Williams. Jolliff. George Mettam. George Borray. 4

Quartermasters.
Jones. King. Smith. James Woods. Edmund Stacy. Blackwal. 6

Troopers:
Mr: Lewis Richards. Mr: John Salman. Mr: Henry Wilkinson. Mr: Griffith Cox.
Mr: Edward Heald. Mr: Gore. Mr: Richard Bealing. Mr: Baggot. Francis
Witherington. Mr: Miles Gyncks. [Gent:] 10.

Robert Hamilton Minister. Ten Servants. Six Gunners. John Bellew Lieutenant of
the Ordinance. The Clerk of the Store. Six Trumpets. Six Chyrurgions. Ten
belonging to the Train of Artilery. Sixty nine Sergeants. Twenty Drums. Fifty
six Corporals.

Fuiseers.
William Pets. William Fitzgerald. John Farling. William Dowdal. Rich.
Maudsley. Matthew Simple. Bethel Vaughan. William Rowlandson. Captain Hooker.
William Boyce. John Gulston. Edmund Pooley. Edward Garing. John Briars. Thomas
Tobe. John Jennings. Tho: Barrow. Christopher Sherman. William Blake. William
Hopkins. Edw: Jones. John Williams. Peter Cropper. John Jackson. Robert
Calvect. Ralph Goodwin. Robert Pain. Gerard Russel. Richard Ellis. Tho:
Ellison. William Dextet. Stephen Foxwist. Henry Finch. Robert Dalvin. Thomas
Stanly. Francis Needham. Robert Dalligeed. Mat: Cardy. Mat: Righby. Morris
Nangley. Nicho: Allen. Tho: Kemp. Henry Booker. Peter Bogerd. Dennis Lord.
Robert Gardner. Edward Gore. Robert Gneens. John Farehurst. Thomas Farrer.
Christopher Perkenson. William Windesler. (...) Halliwary. (...) Brass. George
Moor. John Murfy. 56

A List of Artillery, taken from the Irish at Ramnies, the second of August,
1649.
ONe brass Cannon, weighing seven thousand three hundred twenty one pounds, her
length ten foot, her bullet weighing forty four pound. One brass Demi-Cannon
eldest, weighing five thousand four hundred twenty eight pound, her length
eleven foot and an half, her bullet weighing thirty two pounds. Two brass
Demi-Cannon of one mould, each weighing forty four hundred, their length nine
foot and a half, their bullet weighing twenty six pound. One square brass
Demi-Culverin, weighing two thousand eight hundred pound, her length eleven
foot, four inches, her bullet weighing twelve pounds. One small brass
Saker-Drake, weighing six hundred pound, her length four foot and a half, her
bullet weighing six pounds. One brass Morter-piece, weighing nine hundred and
twenty seven pounds, her shell weighing one hundred pounds.
JA. MOLYNEUX Mr. Gunner.

Two thousand one hundred private Soldiers, whereof six hundred Irish, the rest
being of Inchequines party, and have taken up arms for the Parliament,
promising faithfulness. These had quarter on the surrender of the Castles of
Rathgar and Ramaynes, whither for gaining conditions, they had betaken
themselves.



More Prisoners taken.
William Cunningham, a noted Rebel. Mr. Buggot, Deputy Play Master. Mr. John
Harbert, Servant to the pretended King, who landed at Galway about six days
since with the Kings Houshold-goods.
Slain.
SIr William Vaughan, Sir Edward Verney, Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Brother in
Law to the Lord Taaff, Colonel Gerrard, Lieutenant Colonel Matthews, Brother in
Law to the Earl of Ormond, Major Bretain, Lieutenant Colonel Beverly, Usher.
Captain Otway, The Messenger that brought this dispatch who was an Actor in
that Service, further relates, That the Enemy marched away with such haste, as
they left their whole Camp which was very well furnished of all provisions of
Victual, store of Wine, Silks and Velvet, Scarlet and other cloth, both woollen
and linen, and some money, all the Cattle left in the Quarters about Dublin as
they found them there.

The Enemy has quit several Garrisons upon their marching off; viZ. Manouth,
Naas, Donahadee, and Richardstown.

Wednesday the Eighth was appointed to be a day of Thanksgiving in Dublin for
this great Victory.

Thursday, Lieut: General Jones intended to march out again with his Army
toward Drogheda.

FINIS.

