AN EXAMINATION OF THE OBSERVATIONS Upon His MAJESTY'S ANSWERS.

Wherein the absurdities of the OBSERVATORS Positions, and Inferences are
discovered.

-- Nunquamne reponam
Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri?
Juvenal. Sat. 1. Printed in the Year of our LORD. M.DC.XLIII.

AN EXAMINATION OF THE OBSERVATIONS Upon his MAJESTY'S ANSWERS.
WE shall for methods sake, first take a general examination of the
Observators chiefest Positions, and their supposed properties: then fall to a
stricter examination of them, upon a particular survey of the whole discourse:
not omitting the least argument materially urged by him; which we purpose to
discuss in that order, the nature of the thing examined and examination does
prompt us to; not limiting our self to any particular government, but looking
upon all in their efficients and ends: descending to particulars only and as
often as the Observator goes before us: The principal subject of his
discourse is, That power is originally inherent in the people, page 1. and
transferred by them always upon certain limitations and conditions of
reentry, page 4, 5. he takes this admitted and then urges the following
properties incident to the people.

The people more noble than the King, page 3. He proves this by two reasons.

1. From the end. The King is for the people instituted, not the people for the
King. page 3. 2. From the cause. Quod facit tale est magis tale, page 2. The
King is singulis major, universis minor, page 2, 44.

What Parliaments be, and the praises of them, page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Hothams resisting the Kings entrance into Hull is justified, page 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30, 31.


These opinions are maintained, saving that of the Parliament and Hothams act
by Cardinal Bellarmine, with all the reasons used by the Observator. L 1. de
pont. c. 7. et de Clericis. c 28. and Theologically answered by our late
British Solomon of happy memory; the first that I observed of English
Protestants that seems to favor this opinion, is the Gentleman who delivered
upon the Earl of Straffords trial these words, If a King by the right of a
Conqueror gives laws to the people, shall not the people by the same reason be
restored to the right of the conquered, to recover their liberty if they can:
if indifinitely meant for all people; if by conquered is meant the people, it
seems to me that he supposes the original of all governements to proceed
from the people.

The Observators arguments pretend to be drawn from the fundamentals of
nature, which shall be discussed in their proper places, a Christian Writer in
a business of this weight, should have had his recourse to Scripture, and
measured nature by it, which is the true Lydian stone, to distinguish spurious
from genuine principles of nature, the sacred book is copious and evident in
this matter, but because not urged by the Observator, I shall content my self
to pass by the great advantage Scripture gives me, and touch it only with
that caution I limited my self in the ensuing Treatise.

Power you say is originally inherent in the people. You say so, but offer no
proof of it.

What power? to make Kings? all Kings? or some Kings? at all times? or some
times? and is this power originally inherent in them de facto or de jure, if de
jure is it divino, naturali, or jure Gentium.

De facto, Ignorance it self has not the face to aver it, dominion is the
chief ingredient of Royalty: Adam had it, and used it over man and beast, a
gift not of man but of God, Genes. c. 1. v. 28. (...) after his likeness,
after his image God created man: his image in the substance, especially soul
of man, his likeness in the qualities he endowed man with (...) like God, as
he was (...) strong powerful: strength and power being essential properties
of sovereignty, the posterity of the first man before the law, when they were a
law to themselves, had potestatem vitae et necis derived to their first borne
in their generations, the holy book averreth this: no modern, no ancient
authority oppugneth it. Potestas vitae et necis, are infallible marks of
Sovereignty, constantly exercised by the first borne before the Law, without
limitation without condition or contract had with them over whom they exercised
this authority, how then is Power originally inherent in the people, did the
constant practice of the first age run a course contrary to nature in moral
businesses for the space of sixteen hundred years: for from the creation to the
deluge about so many years are reckoned by the best Chronologers: neither is
this birthright of sovereignty during that time suspended, interrupted, or
crossed in the line of Seth, for ought I ever heard or read of: no man I believe
is of that unbelief, to say, that nature from its cradle was dispossessed of
this birthright, and could not regaine it in so many ages, it is said Naturam
expellas furca licet usque recurret, less time than this might make custom
nature, unless this custom did cross (...) prima naturae, which we shall
examine in its proper place: the purity of nature probably in moral actions,
grew more corrupted in process of ages; witnesses the increase of laws,
occasioned by the increase of vice: After the Deluge, Nimrod put up the first
Monarchy; the People had not the chief hand to elect him; but you reply, he
was a Hunter of men, a Tyrant, an Inverter of Natures Institutions. what Nature
meant, or assented to, shall be examined in one consideration of Inherent
power, De jute naturali: that he was a Monarch and not elected by the People,
fully satisfies our present purpose: he is branded with Tyranny, not so
properly for usurpation of Sovereignty, but for the unnatural and inordinate
exercise of his Dominion; for he in whom Sovereignty is lawfully vested, be it
from People, or Patrimoniall and inheritable from his Ancestors, by the
unnatural exercise of his power is ordinarily and properly styled a Tyrant:
the World being Peopled, several Dominions arose of several natures, one man
sometimes, and in some places engrossing Sovereignty, and some times the
people: the passions of depraved Nature still breaking our for their seeming
best advantage: to run upon particulars is needless, nor much to the purpose,
examples of both natures are numerous; though questionless unequal: the four
Monarchs, and the practice of the first age own not their births to popular
elections: examples parallel to these for antiquity, and fame the continued
voice of History assures me cannot be found in any election made by the
people: hence it is evident, that it cannot without much Immodesty or Ignorance
be alleged, that Power is originally inherent in the People, de facto, in
respect of practice in the People, to make all Kings, and at all times.

Whether this power is originally inherent in the People de jure of right,
falls next to be examined: if this power is originally inherent in the people
de jure, it is then so inherent in them jure Divino, by Divine right, naturally
by the law of Nature, or jure Gentium, by the law of Nations; to aver the
people entitled to this power by any Civil law; that is, by the law of any
particular Nation, comes not to the purpose: for your tenent is indefinite,
not limited to any particular government; and endeavored to be maintained by
indefinite arguments: therefore if the people has any right to this power we
must find it out in one of the three rights proposed by us, and we will here
first enquire after this power in the Divine law.

God is donour of all Dominions witnesses your self, page 1. therefore not
the people. but you will say God and the people: to prove this, I find not one
argument drawn from Scripture in all your Observations, and if any text had
the least color of advantage for you, without doubt it had been urged: and
sacred History is most energeticall and too frequent in the mouth of conscious
Heterodoxy, we shall to keep closer to you, decline to examine your
Observations according to the rule of Scripture, and keep our discourse to
run within the Channels of natural Reason; touching only Divinity as we
pass along, so far as it descends to communicate it self with reason: if
you must needs therefore justle in man to share with God in the constitution of
Royalnesse, reason (reason and nature being the Idols of your discourse)
forces you to confess, that God is either the mediate, people immediate; or
the people mediate, God the immediate, or both immediately concur as
immediate efficients of principalities: no other sort of operation or influx
can be assigned to efficient Causes, and reducible to the Observations
advantage: if God is made to be mediate, people immediate efficients, it
follows of necessity, that the people must either be a mere instrument, or a
free Agent enabled by the first cause, to settle this power in whom they
please; and that in an absolute or conditional estate: a mere isntrumental
Cause, I am assured you will deny the people to be, for Instrumentum non movet
nisi motum: and the effects of it, are properly and usually called the effect
of the mover, I mean by mover, not the final cause, but efficient or Agent,
which indeed has the most influence upon the effect, and whose quality still
specificates and denominates accordingly this efficient, and not the
instrument: he that kills a man with a Sword, is called the manslayer, not
the Sword: a virtuous or vicious exploit is attributed to the man, not the
sword wherewith he did it: to take God and people in this state, is to allow
God to be the Well from whence does flow principality, and the people the
Conduitpipe: and he that has the least drop of Reason, will not aver the
water to have its being from the Conduit-pipe, that conveyeth it: people in
this notion have not the powers dreamed of by the Observations, either
original or inherent in them; nor can your quod fecit tale, est magis tale be
applied to them, that have not sufficiency fit to denominate them tale; we
shall look then upon the people as free Agents, enabled by God, the mediate or
remoter Cause, with power by them grantable and transferrable upon whomsoever
their public voice and consent electeth; this power is by them grantable
absolutely, or conditionally; or both, if they may do it both ways; we will
for methods sake look upon them in their first capacity; if they make an
absolute grant, they are irrevocably concluded; neither is it of any purpose to
urge, that the nature of the thing granted is incompatible with an absolute
conveyance of it, this is to deny our supposition: neither does the nature of
the thing granted, gainsay an absoluteness of grant; for power ever lives and
estates, is at most the thing conveyed; which was and may be absolutely and
irrevocably given; a free man by the law of this Land, may by confessing
himself a villain in a Court of Record, bind himself and his heirs to
servitude and estate to the disposal of their Lord: a man sui juris in the
Roman Law, usually called the Civil law, may subject himself and posterity
to another man, over whom and fortunes he has an absolute Dominion, Gell. l.
11. c. 8. and Instinian. Institut: de servis; the Jewish Law has an express
testimony for this addition in 21. Chapter of Exodus, verse 6. his Master,
speaking of Servant, he shall boar his ear through with an Awle; and he shall
serve him for ever; the Logic of these examples is evident; by the same
reason, that one, so many that are sui iuris, may convey to one or more
absolute dominion over themselves and posterity. And though I would admit unto
you, that it is, page 20. Unnatural for any Nation to give away its own
propriety in it self, and yet this gift is both natural and necessary to the
being of all Societies and States; for if every man reserveth to himself the
power given him by nature to resist violence and injury; though offered by a
Magistrate; then every man would be a law to himself, to the extirpation of
all Societies and civil Justice.

The inconveniency arising from the supposition of such absolute grant objected
by the observator faleth to the ground, for conditional as well as absolute
tralation of power is obnoxious to inconveniences, neither is it insisted so
much by us, whether this power is ever or more usually granted; but whether
rightfully grantable irrevocably, which no reasonable judgment will deny by
the examples urged by us, drawn from the Constitutions of those three most
considerable Commonwealths, neither is this absolute subjection, as the
Observator falsely urges, contrary or dissonant to the Law of Nature: by the
Law of Nature he understands that which right reason assenteth unto, page
44. Natural reason many times approves and consents to this irrevocable
conveyance: poverty sometimes, or inability to defend themselves by the
strength of their own Laws, compels the people irrevocably to subject
themselves to another power; and right reason assenteth to this grant, induced
thereunto by these or the like exigences of State. Campani (said incomparable
Grotius) olim necessitate subacti, populo Romano se subiecerunt in hunc modum:
populum Campanum vrbemque Capuam agros, delubra Deum, Divina Humanaque in
vestram ditionem P. C. dedimus; here is an absolute conveyance over lives and
fortunes by the people, without reservations or conditions: neither stands
this example single in History: Learned Grotius in his exquisite book De Jure
Belli and pacis fol. 49. reckons many Conveyances of the same nature, which
for brevitie we pass over, referring the scrupulous, if any can be in a matter
so evident, to the foresaid cited Author to be fully satisfied, and shall
further view the superstructure of your discourse upon the foundation your
self have laid: Admit Supremacy derived from the people, hence Quod facit
tale est magis tale, The people more noble than the King, because he is for
them, not they for him instituted. Salus populi Suprema Lex, and the Law of
prerogative is subservient to this: the King, singulis major universis minor;
the right of conquest cannot be pleaded to acquit Princes of that which is due
to the people, as the authors and ends of all power; for mere force cannot
alter the course of Nature, or frustrate the tenor of Law, and if it could,
there were more reason why the people might instisie force to regaine due
Liberty, then the King might subvert the same. And this is all I find in your
Observations reducible to maintain the principal subject of your observation:
the residue being either matter of fact, admonitions or reprehensions, I shall
not meddle with, being Heterogencous to our present purpose, Quod facit tale
etc. Wine makes a man drunk, therefore Wine it self is more drunk than man:
the inference holds not you see in causes by accident. Sol and homo generant
hominem; therefore the Sun is more man then the man generated; this I am
assured you will confess to be a very bad consequence; so then the Maxim is
not current in partial efficients; and the people are at most but partial
causes; for you allow God also a sharer of this Supremacy: but I will admit
further unto you; Supremacy wholly derived from the people: the maxim is not
true in all total causes: Adam was the author or cause of sin; God was the
total Author or cause of Adam, therefore God was more Author or Cause of
sin: your Religion will not allow this Logic; the axiom therefore holds
not in total free agents, and though I admit you the people to be whole cause
of this power, yet I know you will say they are free Agents in conferring of
it; and if you allow them that freedom, your Axiom you see is ill applied. To
come yet nearer unto you, a Servant gives the Master the title of Master:
Relatives as these are, are Causa sibi invicem does it follow therefore that
the servant is more Master, then he that is made master by him: the passage
between Valentinian and his Soldiers recorded by Sozom. in his
Ecclesiastical History clears the point, Vt me ad imperandum vobis
eligeretis, in vestra situm erat potestate o milites; at postquam me elegistis,
quod petitis in meo est arbitrio, non vestro; vobis tanquam subditis competit
parere, mihi quae facienda sunt cogitare: That I was chosen your Emperor lay
in your power, Soldiers, but after I am so chosen by you, what you demand of
me, lies now in mine, not your power, it befits you as subjects to obey, and
me to consider what I am to do. Your Quod facit iale in point of government
holds true in him or them, whose power continually depends upon the will of
him or them that gave it, not in them who have it transacted by one Act, be it
absolute or with certain limitation, that this power is transactable is
allowed by your self, and that absolutely, some thing is already proved; the
conditional relation of it we shall refer to be further examined, in the
second member of the division of immediate efficients; and here we will sift
the second property you annex to the subject of your discourse, this supposed
popular Supremacy. The People more noble than the King, because he for them,
not they for him is instituted: that universally taken, is apparently false:
some Government is only for the Governor, not the Governed erected; as that
between the Master and Servant; whom the Master takes for his own, not his
Servants profit; and though the Servant gains by the service, yet his gain
was neither the cause nor end of this dominion; not of that gained by conquest,
the end and efficient of some Government are both the Governor and Governed;
as that between the Husband and the Wife, whose subjection still refers to
her and her Husbands goods. So the Campani subjected themselves to Rome for
their own safety, and the Roman Honor and greatness; both you see proved the
object of this Government; the Conqueror is the efficient and end of his
Government; by his contract with the people to limit his power with certain
caution over them, makes them thereby a partial end of his Supremacy; it is
false then that all Kings are erected for the people, and not the people for
them; but that you may perceive the weakness of your inference, I shall admit
unto you, that all Kings are for the people, and not the people for them; does
it follow therefore, they are more noble than the King: tutorage is instituted
for pupillage, not pupillage for it; is the pupil therefore more noble than
the tutour that has power over him; the tutour upon misusage of his power over
the pupil I confess is removed; but by a positive Law made by those above
him; where that positive Law is, and by whom made, appears not in any
considerable Monarch of the world. some but sew and inconsiderable Antiquity
make mention of Mezentius in Virgil seemed to be of such conditional powers.

Ergo omnis furiis surrexit Etruria justis,
Regem ad supp^^sium prasenti morte reposcunt.
This pretended Nobi^itie we have quitted the people of by what is already
said. Next your Salus populi, suprema lex, comes to be discussed: if you mean
by People a Commonwealth with all the parts of it, I allow you that Salus
populi suprema lex, but if you understand by people the Subject contra
distinguished fom the King, if you take people for the Members without the Head
of a Society, your Salus populi is not Suprema lex: if you take Members apart,
the worthier Member challenges the first respect, and consequently the King,
who is the Head of the Commonwealth, claims in reason the pre-eminence of
the inferior Members: Art imitateth Nature; and if the Reason of Nature gives
it so, Reason of policy being grounded upon that of Nature cannot deny this
prerogative: and so much concerning that adjunct. Rex singulis mayor, universis
minor: you understand mayor and minor in respect of Supremacy; and by
universis, singulis simul sumptis, all the Subjects, and the representation of
them the Parliaments, for they you say are essentially the same, page 5. He can
command all singly, but all jointly can command him. This of all your opinions
carries most absurdity with it. The people you say give a power over them to
the King, and yet reserve it to themselves. In the Oath of Supremacy you
confess the King supreme next under God; but by this you introduce an
interposition of the people; the representative Body of the Kingdom the
Parliament which is the Kingdom it self, so you term it, page 5. do jointly
and universally in most acts preface the King, with May it please your most
Excellent Majesty, if it proceeds from an inferior to his superior, he
cannot choose but take it as a jeare, or at least a complement of ignorance:
mistakes and ignorance are incompatible with that infallibility you deifie the
Parliament with; the King in respect of the universi, all the Subjects, must of
necessity be considered as Head of them, or a subordinate Member. If a Head,
Supremacy must be incident to it; the Head commands the parts to obey; if a
Member, He must obey them, to be cut off or left according to the Head, the
universi'es Judgment: this is to meet more than half way with the Jesuits;
let not your popular Kinglinesse stoop to a dishonorable league with the
children of Belial. I shall not more enlarge my self to confute this
absurdity, though I conceive this enough to any unpreiudicated man. Another
has gone before me upon this subject, who did very rationally discover the
silliness, nay contradiction of this paradox. I shall pass over that of the
holy Text, Statuam supra me Samuel, and urge some authority drawn from
Heathens, to shame this opinion from a Christian Head; Marcus Aurelius,
Magistratus de privatis principes de magistratibus, Deum de principibus
judicare, Hor. Regum timendorum in ipsos greges, and in ipsos reges imperium
est Jovis.

(...). Hom. Il. 1. Otanes in Heredotus, (...), to do what he will, and not
bound to give an account to any, Dion Penseensis, (...), So to govern that he
is not accomptable to another, Dion lib. 5.3. (...), He is free, having power
over himself and Law, so what he pleases he does; what displeases him he
does not; this indefinitenesse of power few Kings at this day have; time and
experience upon occasional reasons of State bring Kings to descend to limit
their power to certain rules agreed upon by themselves and people: and these
rules have diverse degrees of latitude, which the positive Laws of many
Countries do manifest and distinguish, but to whom the King is to yield his
account for breach of his Covenant, we shall touch hereafter; and here fall to
discuss the last remarkable property your observation attributed to this
supposed Ochlo-Supremacie. The right of Conquest cannot be pleaded to acquit
Princes of that which is due to the People as the Authors and ends of all
power, for mere force cannot alter the course of nature, or frustrate the tenor
of Law, and if it could there were more reason why the People might justify
force to regain due liberty, than the Prince might to subvert the same. People
are not the sole end or Authors of this power, and if they were, the nature of
the thing granted may be absolutely transferred by them, without express or
tacit condition, as is fully proved already: then it follows, the right of
Conquest may be pleaded, to acquit Princes of that which is due, you mean to
acknowledge the people the end and Author of Government, to acknowledge them
the Authors of it, with power to cancel the Authority given when they
please, to acknowledge a supremacy in the Prince derived from the People, and
nevertheless still to reside in the People: how then does mere force alter the
course of nature or frustrate the tenor of Law, the Law of Nature you intend,
if a Prince gains a Principality from him upon whom it was absolutely
conferred, suppose from People? the Conquerours Title stands firm against
all, but the rightful Owner: and the People if they have a Title or interest
in this power, more than seldom conclude them for ever: the examples we have
already urged questionless force any impartial Judgment to believe it. The
most considerable Monarchies, (and the greatest Govenments were Monarchies) the
present or past age presents to us were begun and settled by Conquests; and
that these Monarchs descended to covenant with their Subjects to regulate
their power by certain limitation desired and approved by the People, has more
of the Princes bounty than obligation in it, being a free donative bestowed
upon the people, and if the Covenant in part or in all is infringed or broken
by the King, what advantage the people has by it, passes my understanding to
apprehend; a Title of re-entry cannot be reserved by them, from whom no estate
passed; and if it did, this reservation must be expressed or implied; we have
no expression of it urged by you, and we are assured you cannot produce any
popular Charter with this express reservation; and if this is implied, this
impliednesse you must discover unto us either by reason or authority: this
Supremacy is of that indifferency, that may be transferred conditionally or
absolutely: and I demand of you whether a tacit condition is ever annexed
naturally, (I mean by the Law of Nature to take off the Constitutions of
municipall Laws therein) to a business conveyable with such indifferency; to
affirm it destroys the nature of all absolute grants. The Jews claimed
themselves free from all Pagan Jurisdiction, and Caesar was their King by that
right the sword did give him, if that right was not warrantable, the edicts
grounded upon that right, might justly be disobeyed by the Jews: Christ
preached obedience to them, for he paid the general taxation imposed by Caesar
upon the Jews and others in the Roman dition, exhorted those to the same
actual obedience, who came with an intent to entrap him; where then is your
frequent distinction? All lawful Powers come from God, and are to be obeyed;
unlawful are not of God, and therefore not to be obeyed; this power is
unlawful I am assured you are ready to aver in most respects, in respect of
title, and in respect of the thing enjoined, for a free Nation to pay a
tribute, to part with their goods to a Pagan, to a stranger in Israel; yet
though the thing commanded, though the title is by your own confession
unlawful, it is enjoined not only not to be resisted, but unfainedly obeyed
by the supreme Lawgiver, and the last Expositour of it our blessed Savior.
The Christians of the first age sealed this obedience with their dearest blood,
here then falls your example of the Generalissimo, page 4. to be considered,
his soldiers are exempted from his subjection, if he turns the Cannons upon
his own people; I grant it, his Commission is derived from the King, who gives
him power over his Soldiers, to destroy or punish them only, and as often as
they do transgress positive edicts; but they are not his Soldiers or his
Subjects in so large a manner as they are to their King; and if they were, the
one is entitled to them by God, at least partially, the other wholly by man.
Sir Edward Cook a strong Champion for the English Liberty in his
Institutions, l. 1. fol 1. says, that the King holds the Lands hehath as
King immediately from God, because he has, says he, no superior but the
Almighty. Bracton is of the same language, Omnis quidem sub eo, ipse sub nullo
nisi tantum deo: Omnis not singuls, to take off your singulis mayor universis
minor: and tantum sub deo, spoken negatively, to exclude this eclipse, this
interposition of the people. But of this sufficiently already is spoken. It
cannot be objected to the Martyrs of the first age, that they could not resist
the torture they were at the least seemingly willing to undergo. Tertullian in
his Apology tells the Emperor, the Christians were more in number, and
stronger, and able to defend themselves: his Scholar Cyprian is of the same
Language, Quamvis nimins and copiosus noster populus, non tamen adversus
violentiam se ulciscitur. Lactantius confirms him, lib. 5. and August. in
many places of his De Civitate Dei. Of all other the passage between the
Thebean Legion is most considerable, and the Emperor Maximian they consisted
of 6666 Soldiers, the Emperor sent unto them upon pain of death to commit
formal idolatry; they refused to obey his command, they were able enough to
resist him and his power, they knew and confessed it, they laid their heads to
the block, and lifted no hand against him: his command was injust, was
impious; by natures dictates they were to conserve themselves; yet they
relinquished nature, yielded to die. Let us compare Hothams action to this
primitive passage, the King would have entered the gates of Hull, a Town within
his Dominion, Hotham being within, the Kings allegiance shut the gates against
him, resisting his entrance with armed men; Hotham conceived his entrance would
put his life in jeopardie, and the Kingdoms safety endangered; he conceived
it probably not inevitably to follow thereupon; suppose the ruin of both had
inevitably ensued; yet it is not so far pressed. The Thebean example does not
warrant the resistance, they obeyed to the loss of life: this desire to enter
the Town came from the Cavaliers and ill Councillors, not from the King
himself. Caesar's taxation was by his ministers assessed, collected, and
probably invented. Maximians servants brought the command to the Thebean Legion
to commit idolatry, they brought the punishment and executed it, and it was
very probable they were the authors of both: yet no resistance made against
the Emperors command, though delivered by his ministers; yet our King in
person, and viva voce demanded entrance, and was resisted; and resistance of
the Kings authority is to resist the King, as was declared by this present
Parliament, upon the Earl of Strafford; trial: you will object, the Emperor
had a more absolute Dominion, than our King has, over his Subjects persons and
estates; I confess it, the Emperors power was in most things illimited; the
Kings limited by our municipall Laws, obliged by a solemn Oath to keep them;
and if he commands any thing opposite to these Laws, we are not bound to
obey this command; but we are not warranted by this Law to resist the King with
force of Arms, if other Christians made a conscience actually to resist their
Kings command even in things contrary to the Law of Nature and the divine Law,
and those that concerned salvation, and can the conscience of our Christianity
allow us to raise Arms to resist the Kings commands, supposed by inferences to
prove destructive to our positive Laws? Our Law does not warrant us, and if it
did there is no warrant for that Law given by the supreme Lawgiver. But this
resistance is approved by Parliament; by Parliament is meant by you the
representative Body of the Lords and Commons, assembled by the Kings
Authority. I deny this to be Parliament by the Constitution of this Kingdom
without the concurrence of the King, and if it were, I deny that the greater
part is conscious of this resistance; and if the greater part were, I deny an
infallibility tied to them; and if they were infallible, I deny that they
alone without the King are competent Judges, makers and declarers of Law; if
they were, then they should be both parties and Judges, and disposers of that
which belongs to the King, jure personae, without his consent, himself being
neither there in person, nor represented by them or any of them; an opinion
dissonant to reason or conscience, and the institution of nature for the
Members to raise Arms against the Head. Aesop gives us an example, and the
effect of such War; and hereupon we will digress a little to examine the
definition and properties given by your Observations to the Parliament, which
you define, page 5. to be the essence of the Kingdom, that is false, for a thing
cannot be separated from its essence; the Kingdom and Parliament can. A thing
has no being when the essence is destroyed; the Kingdom has its being when
the Parliament is suppressed, dissolved, or not in rerum natura, as in the
vacancie of a Parliament: the same numericall qualities that inhere in the
Parliament do not inhere in the Kingdom, and so e eontra: the Parliament may be
sick at the time the Kingdom is well, the Parliament may err, when the
Kingdom does not: in the same manner, that general Councels the representative
Body of the militant Church may err when the Church general does not. This
representative Body is a select number of men entrusted for a greater, with a
large Commission to treat and conclude for the trusters good: the trusters are
men and subject to ercour, unless a supernatural assistant spirit of
infallibility is necessarily pinned to their sleeves: that they are remoter
than ordinary Courts from erring I allow you, but not absolutely free from it,
as you aver, page 8. The praises you give to Parliaments swell up most of
your Observations: and much are I confess deservedly attributed. For mine own
part, as I was borne under the English Government, so I conceive it without
affectation the exquisitest I know of: and in these the Parliament shines
above other Constitutions, ut inter ignes Luna minores. Let a Parliament run
within its own channel, if it break the banks it overwhelmes, it destroys
public Liberty, and loses its being, and the end for which it was
instituted. I love the fundamental Liberty of this Kingdom, as well as the
Observatour does, but without dotage, as the Observator professes to love
monarchical Government, page 41. Parliaments have done wrong, witnesses the
deposall of Richard the Second, therefore it is good Logic to say they may do
wrong. But you say, they were forced by Henry the Fourth his victorious Army,
p. 32. I say so too, then they may be forced, and force we know are of several
nature, I pray God the present be not conscious of it; I leave to the effect
ofevery Parliament to elogize it self. Parliaments are of a sovereign good,
but as in natural so in politickes, I believe, Corruption optimi est pessima:
and so much for Parliaments. We shall now reflect upon the next member of our
division that falls next in order to be discussed: that this Supremacy is
grantable and granted by the people upon what condition and limitation best
pleases them, they are so enabled by express or tacit causalitie of the first
cause mediate and remoter God: if tacitly, it is an instinct contracted with
them, and then it falls properly to be discussed in the Law of Nature, which
we shall consider in its due place; if expressly, either it is committed to
writing, and so in the sacred Book, or else traditionally practiced by all ages
and confessed by all or most Nations: neither of these is pressed or can be
justly by you: hence we have clearly evinced, that the people by the divine Law
cannot be the immediate efficient of this Supremacy, whether you will consider
them as mere instruments or free agents enabled by God the mediate Cause to
settle and convey this Principality upon whom and in what manner they please.
Next we shall enquire, whether the people is the mediate, God the immediate
Cause of this power; if you so consider God and man, it follows that the
people works through God as a mere instrument or free agent receiving his
authority from man. To averr either is hardly distinguished from blasphemy;
therefore we will pitch upon the last consideration of this Supremacy in the
divine Law, and see whether God concurreth as a partial immediate cause with
the people to produce and convey this power upon one or many, I shall admit
unto you as your last refuge this mutual and immediate concurrence, the people
being but a partial cause cannot in reason divest; as they did not alone
invest this power, without the concurrence of God the sociall cause: unless
you will say, the forfeiture and power of re-entrie to be only reserved to the
people or accruing to them by Survivership: either of these portents of
opinions madness it self will not own. Again, the Creator and Creature
cannot have the same numericall influence, and if it could, the effect still
denominateth the worthier cause, therefore unless the people be held the
worthier cause they cannot properly or justly be called the author or cause of
this Supremacy. Hence is undeniably inferred, that the people are not nor
cannot be styled properly and justly the Cause mediate or immediate of
Principalities. God is the Donor of Aristocracie and Monarchy, page 1. but few
lines after of the same page you retract that opinion; disseize him of the
title of Donor, holding God well repaid with the title of a Confirmer of
Principalities: -- Quo te mutantem Protea nodo.

First, a Donor to give a being, then rob him of that, only a Confirmer to
give a well being at most; the confirmation of a Charter presupposes a
Charter: God is a free Agent, suppose he suspendeth or not at all confirms
the popular conveyance, Is the conveyance void, or voidable? if void, then
either the people gives no being at all, or this being still flows, and not
otherwise from them at that instant that God confirms it: and if it must
always flow from them at the same instant that God confirms it, and not
before, escapes (I believe) any man's reason to find out. If voidable, then
they give a being before God confirms it, and then popular election is
supposable without divine concurrence; and if it be, the people prove
efficients, and fall to be considered under one of the branches of efficients
discussed before, and that they have not there the least shadow to this
pretended Soveraigntie is already and clearly evinced. Whether Nature
entituleth them to this Royalnesse rests next to be examined, Ignoratis
terminis ignoratur scientia; we shall therefore explain what we mean by the Law
of Nature: what dominion arises by this Law of Nature, and in whom this
dominion is naturally resident, by the Law of Nature we understand (...)
statutes, but (...), right, and this is not in so large a sense as the Roman
Lawyers use it, for that which is common to man and beast, is improperly
applied to beasts, according to that of Hesiod.

(...)
(...)
(...).
God gave mankind a Law, which is
Denied to beast, winged foul, and fish.
These when ere their nature need
Do out upon another feed.
But we restrain this to mankind, and this restrained we consider that which
is properly the Law of Nature, which we conceived to be the dictate of right
reason commanding or prohibiting an Act by the congruitie or incongruitie of
the Act with rational nature and consequently enjoined or forbidden by the
Author of Nature: Order and Subornation is assigned by most Astronomers to
celestial Bodies, the Inhabitants of Heaven, I am assured by divine
Authority, the Angels, Archangels, Principalities and Dominions; the Earth and
the parts of it are created with subordinate Dependencie; the meaner Creatures
of the Earth as Bees discover in themselves and actions Order and
Subalternation in place and Authority; to deny this to Man, to whom all
earthly Creatures were given; that Anarchie should only run in Mankind,
cannot be imagined to be intended by Nature or the Author of it. The Word is
(...), so called for Order and Decency, and shall this be denied to
Microcosmos the little world, Man? whose parts are guided by the Head, from
thence proceed commands to all the Members. The contemplation of these
Subordinations and Offices invite us to consider the World and the things
therein with respect to the Head and Monarch of it Man; and in Man the worthier
to whom Nature gave a respect and prioritie; the Son as Son owing his being to
his Father, owed him also Honor: hence Honor thy father, etc. is re-written
in the heart the characters that Nature first impressed, being by the corruption
of it blotted and defaced. Hereupon, Basil wittily styles a Parent, (...), a
visible Deity, the Patriarchs of the first age, as we have already urged,
derived from their Father Adam Supremacy, and left to the firstborne
successively in their Generations. The contemplation thereof induces me to
believe that had Adam stood in the state of innocence, one had been subject
and subordinate to one another, but without tyranny or oppression on the
Commanders part, or reluctancie on the Subject. When rapine and violence the
issue of corrupted Nature broke forth, necessity of safeguard forced men to
draw into societies, the easier to protect themselves; and from thence you say
sprung all Principalities: but whether the People chose over themselves
Governors or Kings, or those Governors and Kings made themselves so at first
over the People, seems to me not so evident, as the confidence of your
Observations would have me believe: to lay aside Authorities that speak of
either, we will enquire after the Truth of this, especially the Principality
of the first Age by all the means reason can discover to us. When oppression
appeared, probably it began in one, then more, and so in multitudes, and
proportionably the number of the oppressed did increase: the oppressor in case
he prevailed was Lord over his Captives lives and estates, whose increase and
number increased his Dominion, swelling by degrees to the extent of a
considerable Monarchy: the oppressed whether one or more (it began with few)
being not able to resist violence fled without question for succor to him whom
they thought was able to defend them: and that he made himself King over them
seems to me more probable, than that he was made by them; for it will be
admitted on both sides, the oppressed has power to subject himself, and the
protector power to command it; for the oppressed sheltreth himself probably
under a stronger patronage than himself: without question then the Patron
would erect and enlarge his Dominion with more speed and will, than the
oppressed would undergo perpetual slaverie, the one being dissonant to Nature,
the other congruous to humane ambition: hence we gather by our consideration of
the probable actions of the first oppressors, and oppressed, Principality
forced by oppression cannot claim in any likelihood its original from the
People: and Dominion thus gained whilst it is not accompanied with tyranny
cannot be called unnatural, or to cross the dictates of reason, reason
embraces that which it forseth best to prevent violence and settle quietness;
and that which Nature delights most in, can no way be held unnatural,
witness the works of it, all woven in subjection and dependencie, only
oppression too frequent a companion of Soveraigntie in corrupted Nature is that
which is contrariant to Nature, and the chief cause of all contracts between
King and people. Lastly, let us see what footing your popular Supremacy has
in the Law of Nations which is defined to be a humane voluntary Law and
obligative among all or most Nations, that Law Supremacy was acknowledged by
all or most Nations to be the end and efficient of all powers is neither
affirmed nor proved by you. Their constant practice as we have touched already
disallowing your opinion, and if you join this issue with me, you will never
be able to give in evidence any convincing testimony, but we shall expect your
palinodia, with Tu vicisti me and ego errorem, orthodoxally concurring with our
opinion, that power is not originally inherent in the people de facto, or by
any Law. The result of our discourse is that Monarchies and all other
Govenments owe their original to God, who is the Donor efficient and ultimate
end of them, the people are by him made the instrument to convey this, but not
all people, nor at all times. The King and people are the subordinate end of
the Government they live in. Kings contracts with their Subjects in a
Government, gained by Conquest is more the Princes bounty, than a discharge of
his duty; and if otherwise, Princes so settled cannot be removed or forcibly
resisted by the people without traitorous Rebellion against God and his
Deputy. The residue of your discourse is either matter of fact, admonitions,
or sarcasmes. for the matter of fact, as I do not disallow the truth of any of
them, so I do not much credit a single testimony, especially of him whose eyes
are infected with (...) Jandize, sees the Kings actions all of one color.
Sarcasme^ are disallowed by the holy Text against the sacred person or a King,
Ne maledices principi in populo tuo, Deuter. 22.28. or foment Rebellion with
malicious paradoxes against Gods Anointed; and if by a Pythagorean (...),
Thersites lives in your Antipathie to Regal Government, most English hearts
will with me return unto you the check Thersites had; (...).

FINIS.

