GOOD NEWS FROM IRELAND: From these several Places.

NAMELY, Kimsale, Bandum, Clarakelty; with the valarous resolution of Captain
Weldam.

ALSO The taking and burning of the Town of Temo League, wherein was destroyed
1000. Barrel^ of Corn of the Enemies.

Expressed in a Letter sent from Ensign JONES to his Brother Master Alexander
Polington in Lumberstreet, London.

London printed for Robort Howes and Thomas Bates, are to be sold in the Old
Bailey, 1642. August the 4.

Good News from IRELAND.
THe 28. of June we set sail from Deal, the 29. and 30. we had along the
Channel most miserable weather, and were of several Ships of our several
designs 70. sail; by contrary winds, our fleet was forced into Mount Bay in
Cornwall the first of July, and the 2. of the same we set sail from thence
toward Ireland, but through a crewel mist, and stresse of wind, we were
almost brought upon the Rocks of Sille, and was within a stones throw upon them
(with a full sail) ere we perceived them, and that by one man was spied also,
this was at two of the clock in the morning, when every man (but the watch
appointed) was asleep, the report of two Guns which were shot by us to warn the
rest of our fleet, wakened us sleepers, then did we perceive how great a danger
God delivered us from; upon the fourth of the same, we made two sail of Ships,
and bore up to them, and found one a Flemming, the other a Bristow-man, both
laden with salt from Rochell, who told us that at Rochell was an Irish vessel
of some 50. Tun, laden with Amonition, who as they thought only stayed till
all the English, and the Dutch were gone from thence, and they then would
venture forth (...) that there were two small men of war Irishmen, that were
upon buying up the French and Spanish prize, some eight pieces of Ordnance, and
so take what English they could, that might be to weak for them; and so either
that they may furnish themselves, or by that disfur^^^^ (...) both which will
be but little God knows. The (...) of July we got into Kimsaile, though in
most mi^ weather, where we had the knowledge of my Lord ^r^sident of Munsters
death, and some things suspected, to have had foul play form his Physician his
son: The (...) In^^quin has had a great conquest, for with a few men he killed,
500. Rebels, took 6. Cullers, 4. Drumes; the Rebels five several ways
undermined Limbrick-Call, and at last were Masters of it, now that the Town and
Casstle is theirs as yet, our two longstay, lost it; for they kept it till
Midsomer. I hope we shall go upon some design suddenly, that will conduce much
to out prosit, and honor; the rebels lost seven score Arms, the other day to
my Lord of Insiquen, and their want of that, was more loss to them by report,
then three thousand men, so few they have of Arms. I question to Gods
blessings in our Conquest: they call us the Parliaments Rebels, and say they
would once feign see a pressed man come over. I have not else at present any
thing worth your observation.

Friday the 16. of July, we marched from Kimsaile to Bandum with nine Colors,
two of which were all Seame^, sever of Land-men, and all, some seven hundred;
from Kimfaile to Bandum seven miles, which showed their joy in meeting us and
complelating guarding us into the Town, whom we saluted both by displaying
Colors, and also a full valley shot: well billeted we were, we had on the
Saturday following two Companies of Foot of these Bandum men, and some sixty
Horse with many others, which they called and we found Pillagers, who only
minds in all Actions their game, but considered not our loss.

From Bandum we marched with these aforesaid to Cl^nna-kellie, and sound in
the town not above twenty men, women and children, which our troopers killed
all and ranged about, and found some hundred more hid in gardens, and killed
all; there might you have seen every sex discovered, and some lying on their
backs, old, young, none spared: at some sights I could have pitied, but
consider that pity spoils a City; I durst not cherish that charity. From
Clannakelltie on the sunday forenoone we marched to relieve Raple
Barley-Castle, some three miles from thence, where one Master Freake lives in
much distress for want of help, we found him yet well: but I should have told
you moreover that our Lieutenant Colonel Lord Fuerbrush in our march from
Clannokelte to the Castle, considered the booty we had taken, which was some
eighteen hundred sheep, some two hundred Oxen and Cowes, and some fifty
Horse; he thought good to send three Companies back from us, to guard them at
the Town; they went, and the Enemies had notice of it, and by three Scouts had
notice of their strength, and came upon them; one of our Captains was somewhat
refractory, and would not hear of retreating to any place of succor; valor,
but not discretion, was cut off Lieutenant and Ensign, with some forty more,
but did sight very valiantly to the last, and his Ensign with some Soldiers
in the one part of the town retreated into a house, and suffered himself and
Colors to burn, and arms also, rather then the Rebels should have them: the
Captains name was Weldon, his Ensign one Bridges, my Lord Furbrush his
Secretary also. Some six of the Bandum men were killed besides, and some four
of Captame Price his Company, which was one of the three; but of the Rebels was
killed some six or seven hundred men, and many more would, if they were not so
base an Enemy to run away; for after we had sent these three Companies back
from us to the Town to guard the Castle, while we went to relieve the Castle,
never came to us (the Major Patys) to let us know that the Enemy was near our
three Companies; we left some aid with them in the Castle, and marched back to
the Enemy, in great hope they would have stood one onset, but they basely fled,
though six nay seven times our number; which I believe was well near four
thousand men: we also fast pursued them with our Troop that they embraced
death to shut it; for one hundred Rebels leapt into the water, hoping to escape,
but our Horsemen so eagerly followed them, that they in the water killed most,
and one of our Troopers was in the exploit drowned, not giving his horse way
enough.

That night, we marched back some miles beyond the Town (where we lost our men)
and lodged in a fair field, the enemy I think being fled far enough from us.
To Bandum on Monday at night, ws came and stayed all Tuesday there, and that
day drove all the Cattle, which was some 2000. into the Town, and let whose
will take what he could get; for our Souliers and the Townsmen, were so unruly
that they would not have patience to stay till they were parted equally.
Wednesday the 20. we marched to Kilbrittan-Castle, now in possession of the
English, and quartered there all night, and the next day we marched some three
miles beyond it, to Temoleague-Castle, and sounded a Peale to the Lady of it;
offered quarter, but refused, we presently fell upon it, and with our small
field pieces, broke down the first wall, entered in the first gate, where they
paid us with great stones, killed some 8. men, and when all was done, we could
not take it, for our field pieces were to small to batter down the Castle about
their ears, which I hope we shall ere long; for we shall march thither again
one of these days better provided: We burnt all the Town, and their great
Abbey, in which was some thousand barrels of corn: we expected the Enemy
would have come and set upon us there, but he did not. He is treacherous and
cruel in advantage, but base in flight. If the other Army were come, I believe
we might march through the Kingdom: on Friday we marched back to Kinsaile to
our Ships, and took two Spies by the way, but the roagues slight death, for we
could get nothing out of them; so our men mangled them to pieces.

And received here the 29. of July 1642. from Isaac Jones, brother in Law to
Alex. Pallington.

FINIS.

