A TRUE Relation of the taking of the City of YORK By Sir John Hotham for the
King and Parliament, Sept. 16.

With the Description of the Battle fought between Sir John Hotham and the
Earl of Cumberland, and the number of men slain on both sides.

Likewise how the Earl of Cumberland, (being pursued) escaped out of the City
disguised like a Shepherd.

Sent in a Letter (by one that was an eyewitness) to a Friend in
Thames Street.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cook, Sept. 20. 1642.

A True Relation of the Taking of York by Sir John Hotham.
THe 12. day of September we marched with our Army toward York, where we
being no sooner approached with in sight, but the Inhabitants of the City with
great and unspeakable joy, flocked toward us, that we believed that (afar
off) they came to withstand us; whereupon Sir John Hotham sent 50. horse and
100. Foot, to know what was their intent, where being n^ sooner met, but they
cried out, God bless the King and Parliament, God bless the King and
Parliament; so after some time spent, they all went to Sir John Hotham, and
informed him how that they are disturbed both night and day, and their Gates of
the City kept shut, that scarce any could pass with security of his life, and
how the Cavaleers had put the City into defense against any that shall come to
molest them; whereupon Sir John Hotham gave command that we, as soon as we
came against the Town, should every man stand to their Colors, and not
stir, so when we came to the Gates we found them shut and Ordnance planted
before the Gates; whereupon Sir John Hotham demanded enrrance, but they
refused, and said they kept it for the King, and for the peace of the County,
Sir Jo. Hotham seeing the Gates thus shut against him, and hearing the answer
made him, he presently commanded the Drums to beat, and prepared his soldiers
for Battle against those Cavaleers in the Town, and made a vow to his
soldiers to the great encouragement of them all, that he would have the City
before the Sun went down, or else he would lose his life; upon which words the
soldiers all gave such a shout, that they thought long to speak with the
Cavaleers; all this while the Gentry of Yorkshire sat in consultation in the
Deanery with the Earl of Cumberland, and other of his Majesty's Commissioners
for Array, who hearing that sir John Hotham was come to take possession of
York, for the Parliament, because he is made Lieutenant of Yorkshire by the
Parliament, and the Earl of Cumberland had it in possession for the King, and
made Lieutenant thereof also, whereupon the Earl of Cumberland was very hot,
and bid them shoot and cut them off, what came they there for.

All this while, Sir John Hotham and his Somldiers were making all possible
means for the taking of it. For afterward he had word sent him from some in
the City, that he should have it; and that without any bloodshed at all; and
that they would keep the Earl of Cumberland in the City? and he shoulg come
in for all that the pieces was before the Gates. Therefore Sir John Hotham with
the rest of his Company, began to eutrench themselves against the City, as if
that they would besiege it; because the Cavaleeres should not mistrust the
Citizens.

The Earl of Cumberland with his forces salied out of the Town, toward Sir
John Hotham, and came into the field with about a Hundred Horse, and five
Hundred foot which was raised by some of the County, and kept in Garrison
there.

So leaving the CITY with small gaurd, besides the Inhabitants thereof; So in a
Warlike manner came marching toward us, but we seeing him coming, prepared
our s^lves, and withstoode him and his Mal^gnant Caveleers, for all they were
more in number.

The Caveleers were v^ry unmannerly, for they fell upon us and would not as
much as speak to us; but we were so mannerly as to beat them, and take away
their Arms; for indeed we fought an houer and a half by the Cl^cke, before we
could obtain the Victory, for the weather was so hot, that we could not well
tell how to dispose of our selves.

At last, the Caveleers retreated back, and fled away as fast as they could to
YORK, and shut the Gates after them, but we pursued them so close that we
took away their pieces of Ordnances that lay before the Gates, and we brought
them from the Gates, and planted them against the Town.

And, in the mean time, the Caveleers fled away out of the City, at the other
Gates; at the same time Sir John Hotham entered the City the Caveleers fled
away, The Earl of Cumberland and the rest of the Commissioners, being in the
Town, the Inhabitants would have stopped them, but they swore (Dam them) if
they had not free leave, they would take leave, and make way too; The Earl of
Cumberland could not tell how to pass or get from them, made an excuse to go
to the house of Office, And there liveing a poor Sheepherd at the next back
door, so the Earl of Cumberland went in thither, (and by the Sheepherdrs
leave) put on his Clothes and Coat, and his Sheep hook with the Tarr-box
hanging at the end thereof, so (it is reported) he passed through the Town,
and no body knew him, and so is fled to His Majesty, but the poor Sheepherd
lost nothing by it, and now Sir John Hotham keeps York for the King and
Parliament, and so for the present I rest,

Your loving Brother S K.
From YORK, Septtmber 17. 1642.
EINIS.

