A LETTER FROM THE HEAD-QVARTERS, At St. Albanes, Communicating, the
Proceedings of the General Council of the Army the week past: Setting down
such Queries by the Officers and Soldiers, as were presented to the General
and Council.

Written to a Friend in London, November, 10.

Printed in the Year 1648.

A Letter from the Head Quarters.
Sir:
IT is fit my service should last as long as your commands; and since your
desires are but the discharge of my engagements to you, it being my positive
promise to communicate to you the Debates, Results, and desires of the
Counsel, and private Soldiery, and Officers of the Army; I here send you
what has been transacted since Saturday, which transactions are very high,
and may do much good for this Kingdom, if God be but pleased ^o own us in
Counsel as he has owned us in the Field: the Regiments have delivered in
their desires, and some Queries to the Counsel, and we do daily expect some
more from the Lieftenant Generals Army, which we conceive will be as high as
our Armies; the Soldiers are grown to a great dislike of the Parliament, and
much doubt their own safety under the hands of them, and conceive they have
great reason, considering the mutabillity and unconstancy of their ^esolutions,
and are ready to say, that the Majo^ part of the now sitting Commons, and the
whole House of Peers are as changeable as the Camelion; vote an affirmative,
and as contrary with the same breath, which we believe is very dangerous to
both Kingdom and Army, and much tends to the ruin and destruction of both;
knowing very well that instabillity and changing is bid to be ware of by the
wisest of men; Meddle not with them that are given to change, for their
calamities shall be great, and who shall know the ruins of them? but you shall
receive the Queries and desires here enclosed, which we conceive to be both
reasonable and honest* and much tending to the happiness of both Kingdom and
Army: I am something in haste, and cannot enlarge my self at present, but in
my next you shall receive a full account of all the pr^ceedings of the Counsel
and Army; from him who is, Sir,

Your Friend to serve you, R. Johnson.
Let my service I pray salute all our friends in Holburne, Queen Street, and
Savoy.



Honorable:
WE should, and are worse be witched then the Galatians, if we should
believe that this Treaty were any thing other then a snare to enslave and
ruin, and truly we cannot but think a spirit of madness has possessed the
hearts of all those who believe this Treaty, or a Treaty with those we have
conquered twice, can any way prove propitious to us, or this Kingdom, there is
none so blind as those which do not see slavery and bondage coming upon us,
and our Posterity, as travel upon a woman with child, which we cannot escape
if this Treaty take effect; therefore we present our sense of it, with all
humbleness to this Honorable Couns^ll in a few Queries, desiring that they
may be speedily taken into consideration, as things that are the sole good, and
in which all our happiness is wrapped up in.

First, Whether an Ordinance made by Parliament in a time (unquestionable) of
freedom, and liberties, and in a full House upon mature deliberation, and
after many days debate, and after all objections made against no Addresses to
the King, and a full Vote passed in the House to govern without Him: Let it be
judged whether the safety of a Kingdom can be free in the hands of such, when
they vote the contrary upon a tumultuous Petition, and treat with, and court
our conquered Enemy.

2. What is an Ordinance of Parliament worth, or will be accounted of by any,
if as soon as its granted, or upon any Rebellion or Insurrection, though at a
hundred miles distance it may be recalled? what a slender ground and
foundation, nay upon what a broken reed, do, and will men say they have built
on all this while, in venturing their lives, and hazarding all that is dear
unto them, or in acting for the Parliament, or by an Ordinance? therefore we
cannot think our selves in safety, so long as things are thus carried.

Whether or no in the judgment of any indifferent men it can stand with the
honor, justice, authority, and gravity of the supreme Court of judicature,
and the great Counsel of a Kingdom, when upon mature deliberation, and
weighty reasons in the most legal way, when noe addresses have been voted in
a full House to the King, and now addresses made, and he courted as one that
has not had the least finger in all that innocent blou^ that has been shed,
when he himself has confessed to be the Author of all, and guilty of that
blood that has been spilt in these 3 Kingdoms.

3. Whether the Army can be in safety when those their known Enemies have the
managing of this Treaty, and are most forward to support that which will ruin
us and our posterity.

4. Whether the Army can be in safety, when the Counsel of the Citizens are
the sole guide of the Parliaments transactions, and the absolute influence into
the Counsels of the same, and those of the Citizens too, which are our professed
enemies.

5. Whether the Army and Kingdom can be in safety, when the desires and
requests of the Malignants are so frequently granted, and the only men put in
places of trust.

6. Whether the Kingdom and Army can be in safety, or we ever expect a
blessing from heaven, so long as the chief abetter, and maintainer of these
wars live without punishment, and be not brought to justice.

7. Whether there can be safety for the Kingdom and Army, so long as the
Kings friends go abroad, and are suffered to wear arms, and pistols, and
murder our friends, and are not put to death, and brought to condign
punishment.

And now we conceive that it is the sense of your Excellency and this Council,
that the Kingdom is in danger, if these things be not taken in your serious
consideration, and by your wisdom and care prevented: and we present unto you
our humbledesire.

First, that those which have been the princip^l of the first and second war,
may be tried by a Coun^cil of war, as prisoners at war.

2. That all those of both Houses, who v^ted with those that would have further
addresses may be ^questred the House, as well those of the Peers as th^^e of
Commons.

3. That those Citizens which endeavored the raising of an Army, when we were
at Colchest^r may be forthwith apprehended, and brought to ex^mpla^y
punishment* being they endeavored to rai^e without any Authority or Ordinance
of Parliament.

4. That the Treaty may not go on any further, but may be speedily broke off,
and a course taken that no terms may be h^^kened to, or offered to that Party
but that speedy justice may be done upon Him and His adherents.

FINIS.

