A BROTHERLY EXHORTATION FROM THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND,
To their BRETHREN in ENGLAND.

EDINBURGH, Printed by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1649.

Edinburgh 6. Aug. 1649.
A Brotherly Exhortation from the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland,
to their Brethren in England.
THe many and great obligations which lie upon us in reference to our Brethren
in England, who hold fast their integrity, and adhere to the Solemn League and
Covenant, together with the desire which we have to testify our Sympathy with
them in their afflictions, and to preserve so far as in us lies that
fellowship and correspondence that has been entertained betwixt the Church of
Scotland and England these years past, do call upon us and constrain us not to
be silent in this day of their trouble and distress.

Albeit the Lord (who has his fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem) has
now for a long time past, afflicted these Kingdoms with many and sharp rods,
and that his wrath seems not yet to be turned away, but his hand stretched out
still; yet in all this, it becomes us who live in these Lands to stop our
mouths, neither can any impute iniquity to the most High.

It is rather a wonder, that any mercy should be continued, and that England
and Scotland are not cut off from being Nations, seeing the backslidings and
provocations of both has been so many and so gross; Although the Solemn League
and Covenant was sworn and subscribed by both, yet have many in both despised
the Oath of GOD, as appears by the late unlawful Engagement against the
Kingdom of England, contrived and carried on by a prevailing party of
Malignants in this Land, and by the proceedings of the Sectaries in England, in
reference to Religion and Government.

We shall not insist upon what has been the condition and carriage of the
Lords People in this Land in reference to the late unlawful Engagement: As we
desire to magnify the power and loving kindness of the Lord, who enabled all
the Judicatures of this Church, and a considerable part of the Parliament, and
the body of the Land, to dissent from, and bear Testimony against the same,
which made the House of Commons in their Letter directed to the last General
Assembly or their Commissioners, to declare, that that Engagement could not be
looked on as a National breach; So we look upon it as a wonder of his Wisdom
and Mercy, that he has disposed and directed the same for the furtherance of
his Work in our hand, and purging his House amongst us. All this comes forth
from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in
Working. Neither was it the least part of the Lords goodness to us, in that
day of our strait that we were led in a plain path, and kept from compliance
with Sectaries on the one hand, no less then with Malignants on the other. We
have obtained this mercy to be steadfast to our old principles, in bearing free
and faithful Testimony against their proceedings, both in reference to
Toleration and Government, and the taking away of the Kings life.

And as the danger and judgment which threatens the Authors and Abettors of
these things, does affect our Spirits with horror, and makes us desire that
it may be given to them of God to repent: So we should conceive our selves void
of Christian affection and compassion toward those in England, who suffer for
the truth and Cause of God, if we were not very sensible of all their present
troubles and calamities. It is no small grief to us, that the Gospel and
Government of Jesus Christ are so despised in that Land, that faithful
Preachers are persecuted and cried down, that Toleration is established by
pretext of Law, and maintained by Military power, and that the Covenant is
abolished and buried in oblivion. All which proceedings, cannot but be looked
upon as directly contrary to the Oath of God lying upon us, and therefore
cannot eschew his Wrath when he shall come in Judgment, to be a swift witness
against those that swear falsely by his Name.

These things are the more grievous to us, because (beside many other woeful
evils brought forth by them) they have interrupted the building of the Lords
House in England; the foundation whereof was laid by Oath and Covenant with the
most High God, and followed for some years with many Declarations and
Protestations of Faithful adhering thereto, and with great expense of blood
and Treasure: Which things were to all the godly in these Nations a branch of
hope, that the Lord would bring to perfection the Work of Uniformity (so far
advanced in all the parts thereof) in these three Kingdoms.

But the great obstructions and sad interruptions that have been made therein,
by the strange and unexpected practices of many now in place and power in
England, are to all the welaffected in both Kingdoms, and in all the Churches
abroad, the matter of their sorrow and humiliation. And it there be any place
left for admonition, we Warn such as have forgotten the Covenant, and despised
the Oath of God, and turned aside to lies and error, to consider whence they
are fallen, and to repent. Prosperity and success for a time are no warrantable
evidences of a good Cause, nor sufficient guards against the wrath of God; It
is no good use of the Lords mercy for such men under pretext of Liberty to make
both themselves and others slaves to corruption, and to make all men both in
Church and State like the fishes of the Sea, o^ the creeping things that have
no Ruler over them. Are these things according to the Word of God, and the
pattern of the best Reformed Churches? Or is that the endeavor to bring the
three Kingdoms to the nearest uniformity that may be in Doctrine, Worship,
Government, and Discipline; Or is that the maintaining of the union betwixt the
three Kingdoms, when the straitest bond thereof is utterly dissolved and quite
taken away, and the fundamental Government by King and Parliament wholly
overturned? The just God who is of pure eyes beholds these things, and shall
with no less sury and indignation break the horn of these men, then he has
broken the power, and brought down the pride of Malignants before them, if
repentance prevent not.

Amidst those fears and griefs, it is unto us matter of rejoicing, that there
be many in England who mourn for all these abominations, and labor to keep
their garments pure by refusing to comply with that course of backsliding, and
by bearing testimony against the same. And we hope the expectation of such,
shall not be disappointed, but that the Lord will open to them a door of hope
for carrying on of his work, and making the lying spirit to pass out of that
land.

And albeit many think no otherwise of the Covenant and work of Reformation,
then as a mean to further their own ends; yet we are confident, that none who
holds fast their integrity, have so learned Christ, but are careful to make
conscience of the oath of God lying on them; And we are sure (whatever be the
base thoughts and expressions of back sliders from the Covenant) it wants not
many to own it in these Kingdoms, who (being called thereto) would seal the
same with their blood.

Although there were none in the one Kingdom who did adhere to the Covenant,
yet thereby were not the other Kingdom nor any person in either of them
absolved from the bond thereof, since in it we have not only sworn by the
Lord, but also covenanted with him. It is not the failing of one or more that
can absolve others from their duty or tie to him; Besides, the duties therein
contained, being in themselves lawful, and the grounds of our tie thereunto
moral, though others do forget their duty, yet does not their defection free
us from that obligation which lies upon us by the Covenant in our places and
stations. And the Covenant being intended and entered into by these Kingdoms, as
one of the best means of steadfastness, for guarding against declining times;
It were strange to say that the back sliding of any should absolve others from
the tie thereof, especially seeing our engagement therein is not only
national, but also personal, every one with uplifted hands swearing by
himself, as it is evident by the tennor of the Covenant.

From these and other important reasons, it may appear that all these Kingdoms
joining together to abolish that oath by law, yet could they not dispense
therewith; Much less can any one of them, or any part in either of them do
the same. The dispensing with oaths has hitherto been abhorred as
Antichristian, and never practiced and avowed by any, but by that man of sin;
therefore those who take the same upon them, as they join with him in his sin,
so must they expect to partake of his plagues.

As we shall ever (God willing) be mindful of our duty to the faithful that
adhere to the Covenant in England, having them always in our hearts before the
Lord, so we desire to be refreshed with their singleness and boldness in the
cause of God, according to their places. This is the time of their trial, and
the hour of tentation among them; blessed shall they be who shall be found
following the Lamb, and shall not be ashamed of his testimony. We know in such
dark hours, many are drawn away with the multitude, when the Lord will again
purge and make white; And we doubt not but many such are in England, whom the
bold and clear preaching of Christ may reclaim; Much therefore lies upon the
Wath-men at this time, that their Trumpet may give a certain and distinct
sound, warning and exhorting every one, as those that must give account; And
blessed shall those servants be, who shall be found faithful in their Lords
house, distributing to his household what is meet for this season, and can say
they are free of the blood of all men, having shown them the whole Counsel of
God, being in nothing terrified of the threats of their adversaries; And
blessed and happy shall that people be, that walk in the light holden forth by
them, and stay upon the Lord in this dark time, harkning to the voice of his
servants, and walking in the light of his word, and not in the sparks of their
own kindlings, which will end in sorrow. How inexcusable will England be,
having so foulie revolted against so many fair testimonies, which the Lord
Christ has entered as Protestations to preserve his right, in these ends of the
earth long since given unto him for his possession, and of late confirmed by
Solemn Covenant. Christ's right to these Kingdoms is suer then that he should
be pleaded out of it by pretended liberty of Conscience, and his begun
possession is more precious to him, then to be satisfied with a dishonorable
toleration. All that yet we have seen, does not weaken our confidence of the
Lords glorifying the house of his glory in these lands, and of his sons
taking unto him his great power, and reigning in the beauty and power of his
Ordinances in this Island. His name is wonderful, and so also are his works,
we ought not therefore to square them according to our line, but leave them to
him who has the government laid upon his shoulder, all whose ways are
judgment, and whose ruling these Kingdoms had never yet reason to decline. It
is good for us to be steadfast in our duty, and therein quietly to wait and hope
for the salvation of God. The word of promise is sure, (and has an appointed
time) that he that will come shall come and will not tarry. There is none has
cause to distrust the Lords word to his people; It has often to our experience
been tried in the fire, and has ever come forth with a more glorious luster.
Let not therefore these that suffer in England cast away their confidence,


