AN OLIVE BRANCH Found after A Storm in the Northern Seas. AND Presented to
his MAJESTY in a Sermon at the Court in New Castle.

By SAMUEL KEM, a little before his Majesty's going to HOLMBEY.

GENESIS 8.10,11. And he stayed yet other seven days and again he sent forth the
Dove out of the Ark: And the Dove came into him in the evening, and lo in her
mouth was an Olive sprig plucked off: So Noah knew the waters were abated

HAGGAI 2.9. Thus shall the glory of the latter House be greater then the
former says the Lord of Hoasts, and in this place will I give peace says the
Lord of Hoasts.

Published according to Order.

LONDON. Printed by J. D. and R. I. for Andrew Kembe, and are to be sold at
his shop, at Margaret Hill, next door to the Talbot-Gate in Southwark. 1647.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
May it please your Majesty,
WHen the King of Kings had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered: (although assisted by the deity) and then for any
within knowledge of it to neglect administering to him a morsel had really
concluded them guilty of the highest ingratitude and inhumanity. Man lives not
by bread alone but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God* Which
your long abstinence from, in relation to public administration; has put me
upon this bold attempt, in tender compassion to your better part; as to present
you with a branch the fruit whereof will, if savoured sensibly, procure an
appetite, to those delicates, which by more excellent hands are ready at your
call to be served in unto you: which degree of recovery will disrobe thousands
of Gods people, and your faithful Subjects of their sad and sable thoughts,
and serve up their hearts to the highest degree of praise that has, in
relation to his glory, and your good, so far heard their prayers.

Thus, thus Sir, if your Majesty please to forsake your nets that entangle you;
deny your self, and your self-reasoning audience that assault You, and follow
Jesus Christ in his ordinances the Prince of peace, whose name is Councellor to
advise you. You may yet create all good men your cordial friends; and admit
none to repine at your return, but the Gospells and Religions enemies.

Great Sir, If this plainness be an error it is my affection to your
Majesty's soul makes me to err, and the prosperity of one fault, has made
me confident to commit a second; for I profess I long after it, and make it
one part of my design, at the throne of grace, that God would so sanctify all
your experiences for the time past; that you may be a gracious Instrument for
the advancing of his glorious will for the time to come: And now the Lord grant
you useful profit, in perusing my poor endeavors so as shall best sort both
for the accomplishment of your own eternal good, and the Kingdoms just
desires, yea the Lord grant that as this sermon received grace from you in
hearing it with reverent attention; so it may increase grace in you by your
serious intention. And the Lord of peace peaceably salute you by it: and grace
you with all spiritual blessings till he bring you to enjoy his, and your
peoples firm love; your Parliaments council; and Heavens Glory: which is and
shall be the daily prayer of

Gods Majesty's poor Ambassador to You in this Treatise of Peace, and Your
Loyal Subject SAMUEL KEM.

TO THE Right Honorable PHILIP Earl of Pembroke, BAZILL Earl of Denbeigh and
the rest of the Honorable Commissioners with His Majesty at Holmbey.
Right Honorable,
I May not (without your leaves obtained) approach his Majesty in person or
paper; It is my duty to beg it; May it please your Lordships to grant it; I
call God to record, and my conscience is clear, I neither have, nor will
speak one word but for his glory and the furthering, (if possible) the
Kingdoms Peace and his Majesty's good. I ingenuously confess, if you search,
you may find about me one Epistle superscribed to his Majesty, but it is
unsealed, and on purpose for your perusal; For my self I am unworthy to come
under that roof, being the meanest servant in my Masters Family; yet this
Testimony I have in Heaven; I have ever desired to do the best service I could
in these sad times, to promote the Peace of Church and State; and although I
have observed many men to have been thought rare at an easy rate; yet it has
been a piece of my infelicity to multiply enemies by acting and speaking to my
power to settle Peace and Truth. Therefore as I implore your Lordships favor
for your lilence; so I humbly Petition your pardon for my boldness; and
present all your conditions daily to the Throne of Grace; that as you have
been Pillars of Gods Truth; so you may be prevailing Counselors with His
Majesty, and be honored in your generations, which is the hearty and constant
prayer my Noble Lords and Gentlemen Of

Your Obliged and Immutable Servant, SAMUEL KEM.

TO THE Truly Noble, Faithful, Vigilant and Valiant, William Batten Esquire
Captain of His Majesty's Ship the St. Andrew, and Commander in Chief of the
Fleet at Sea; for the service of the King and Parliament.
Most Honored and Noble Sir,
I Shall desire to wave all Apologeticall expressions in relation to my self
and the weakness of this piece: You know that the quiet repose of the spiirit
is the means to produce to the world, such births as may enrich it with
admiration and delight, which my floating condition denied me the happiness to
enjoy, having my intellectualls so Searummaged that they returned me but dark
and unrefined notions: the product whereof are these poor expressions, void of
all perfection, unles the heat of your affection and Noblenes please to hatch
them to some formed beauty worthy acceptance: and to reduce the Chaos of my
confusions to a serenity worthy the worlds meditation: Hover therefore (I
beseech you) with the wings of your protection over these feeble, but sincere
endeavors, to promote, in this Iuncto of time, with his Majesty for a settled
and well grounded Peace: for which I have esteemed my life as a trifle in way
of purchase, and have for some years past; waded through variety of
difficulties to this end. And although the inacountable and uncontroleable
waters, with their independent ragings, sunk me to the eye of sense; yet God
provided something like a Whale, that by a strange providence, cast me on shore
(to behold) that which I believed; and believing maintained; Our Brethren of
Scotland their integrity to Our mutual Covenant and the Kingdoms safety: and
to act that which I never expected, as a poor messenger from the Prince of
Peace, to salute his Majesty just before the coming of our Right Honorable
Commissioners, as a providentiall preparation to their invitation of him to
take the Covenant, and in this now of time to accept of the Olive Branch of
Peace, the best fignall betwixt King and Parliament; if well grounded. For
whose experience does not inform him, what dismal confusion is, as the worst
of plagues, upon us? Even amongst those I mean, who profess themselves to be
Children of Gods own Family? Since the breach of the bond of Love amongst our
selves how dispicable are Pastors to their sheep? how are the profane and
Irreligious strengthened in their impiety? how does the common adversary of Gods
Truth jeare at this our folly? and secretly as spectatours behind the curtain,
make themselves sport to see us so violently and industriously acting for them
what they could never effect, with all their hellish plots for themselves to
this day, ruin (if God prevent not) to our selves; and open a gap for them to
enter and enjoy prosperity. It has several times affected and afflicted me to
see so many dying and wounded bodies conveying out their souls in streams of
blood; but it has lately afrighted me to see the very heart of true Piety
vulturated since our fiery zeal to Christ's honor is Monopolized into a
consuming fire of envy, malice and undermining (in zeal to our own private
ends) each others honor. And although I have never made Arithmatick my study,
yet I easily may sum up what all our divisions, subdivisions, and sad
contentions amongst our selves (when all profess to be Children of him of whom
the whole Family in heaven and earth is named) will amount unto. viz. To
Christ's Kingdoms disbeautifying; Satan's enlarging by impiety, superstition,
aad heresy. For what ever it cost, I would not have the Family want solid and
sweet-refreshing fire; yet would I not have any to be affected merely with
such blazes as are not serviceable but to set the whole house on fire: which to
prevent let us open the floud-gates of our souls, and turn the sluices of our
eyes heavenward; and implore the great God to settle Gospel Peace and Truth
in his Majesty's three Kingdoms; and his Majesty in Truth, to be an happy
instrument for the speedy settling that peace, which may be for Gods glory; his
peoples settlement, his Kingdoms enlargement; his own felicity and all good
to his posterity; This Sir is the prayer of him, who is

Yours faithfully, In the service of the Gospel, and for the good of his
country as obleiged SAMUEL KEM.

AN Olive Branch, found after a Storm in the Northern Seas.
2 THESSALONIANS. 3.16. Now the Lord of peace himself give you peace always, by all
means.


IT is the happiness of the Church of God, that although they cannot give
peace, yet they may get it: and although they cannot settle it on earth, they
may seek it from heaven: and they have this of Gods own mind, for their
encouragement; that he thinks thoughts of peace toward them, and to give them
an expected end, Esa. 29. ver. 11. and what is at any time most improbable to
sense is visible to faith. And my present vision is a ladder reaching from
heaven to earth, and this ladder is Christ, by whom all our prayers have their
passage to the Throne of grace: and their rich and faithful returns made from
Gods Treasury to supply all our wants. Which has put me upon this design in
the travel of my soul, and I wish my words might have their passage through a
river of tears, and every sentence be swadled up in sackcloth; and one, and
all of us appear on this ladder as vile as dust and ashes: that in his
glorious interest we might in this season be found prevailers with God for this
sweet mercy of Peace, in relation to Your Majesty, and your three poor
lasserated, distracted Kingdoms: And as I have not valued my life, so will I
never think much of my labor, although Pioneer-like to cast in any matter as
rubbish, and my self as dirt and clay to make up these National breaches.

And of all effective means I find none more speeding then prayer, Esaias
29.11,12,13. Then shall you call upon me, and you shall go and pray unto me,
and I will hearken unto you: and you shall seek me, and find me, when you
shall search for me with all your heart.

And if ever it were seasonable, now, yea now is Gods time, now your time, now
its our time, now its high time, now, or it may be at no time. Now then if
ever: and now although never: now what ever you do, nay, now what ever you
leave undone, let all that have interest in God through Jesus Christ, become
importunate petitioners, and heartily pray, Now the very God of peace, give
you, with him, with us, Peace, always, by all moanes.

Thus hovering up and down upon the waters, I have at last made discovery of an
Olive Branch; and what we see by faith, the Lord assist us, as upon
instruments in our several actings, to convey on the wing of prayer to the
poor Ark, the Church of God, blown up and down by the tempestuous winds of
Heresy, and Malignancy, that it may at last have hopes to settle on mount
Ararat: and be firmly established as mount Zion.

And having this Olive branch in my mouth, give me leave to show you the
several sprigs of it: which will yield fruit, to provoke our spiritual
appetites; and such oil as will not only replenish our lamps, to light us to
Christ, the Prince of Peace, but possess us of such inward enjoyments as hence
forward to walk with a cheerful countenance: as possessed with it.

This Olive branch has two more eminent sprigs: The first is, Peace its
opportunity, Now The second is Peace its gaining, in this season: by
importunity, by all means.


Or if you please to have it in smaller parcels, you have First, its season to
be prayed for, Now. Secondly, the Donor, The Lord of peace give you Peace.
Thirdly, the Donum, Peace. Fourthly, the Excellency of Gods peace above all
other peace it is an always peace, and an everlasting peace.


Observation,

And now I hope you see that seasonable and importunate prayer to God by Christ
is a sure way to obtain a well-grounded and lasting, yea, an everlasting Peace.

The learned can tell you that there is no bodily action betwixt hic and nunc:
and therefore the acting this duty will admit of no delay. Now, that is the
season.

Quere, I but why such haste?

Sol. When I shall but tell you what peace is in the general, and show you the
distinct members, you will be satisfied; nay, not satisfied without it.

In the general, Peace is the well-being of all other enjoyments; all other
mercies suck their liveli-hood at the breast of peace: It is the Mother of all
prosperity, in relation to Arts, Sciences, Trades, all flourish or wither in
peace her presence or absence. It is the Milchnurse of Religion, it thrives not
in divisions nor contentions, Act. 12. When the Church had peace, it increased
exceedingly, did you ever know a body with all the members out of joint,
thrive? when one is for Paul, another for Apollos, and a third for Cephas, few
or none, more then formally, follow Jesus Christ. It is but one word, but it is
big-bellyed with many, many mercies, Peace crowns the years with goodness,
and her paths drop fatness. It is, or should be, the felicity of the Saints on
earth, and the glory of the Angels in Heaven. The Jews custom was, when they
wished all happiness, they used only this expression, Peace be with you.

There is something in this to affect us toward it, that all our endeavors,
Counsels, Examples may act to this end. I am sure it was David's practice to
pray for peace for the Church: when he might have preferred his own ease, and
Kingship, Psalm. 51.18. Be favorable to Zion, build up the walls of Jerusalem,
then shall thou accept the sacrifices of righteousness. q.d. he will accept of
no services in divisions. Moses practice was for this, David's counsel, Paul's
studies were bent to remove divisions, and settle order and peace in the Church
of God, 2 Timothy 2.23,24. Avoid foolish questions, the servants of the Lord must
not strive: Satan is best known by his cloven foot: And the Pythagorians have
set a note of infamy on the figure of two: because it first parts from unity.
To conclude in general, as the life of old Jacob was laid up in the life of
the lad Benjamin, so all our happiness is inmantled in this: Peace with our
God, and with one another.

More Particularly, Peace is distinguished by these three notions, External,
Internal, Eternal.

It is of very large extent in Scripture.

First, I find it used to express the making up of that great breach betwixt
God and Man, Christ reconciling us to God, is styled our Peacemaker: For he is
our peace Ephesians. 2.14. Who has made both one, 15 having abolished in his flesh
the enmity. Romans 5.1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God.

Secondly. For quietness in conscience which is a fruit of this peace. Romans
14.17. when the commings of his smiling mercyes on the soul, when the storm
of our contracted guilt is over, and a sweet calm in the Spirit that we may
see his face.

Thirdly For mutual concord betwixt man and man. Phil. 4.2,3. Forbearing one
another in Love, Endeavoring to Keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. Psalm. 34.14. Depart from evil, do good, seek peace and pursue it. And
had I time whilst I am on this subject I could desire to melt into tears, and
present You with the sad actings of these times, obvious to my own experience.

Fourthly. For the presence of all outward blessings and mercies to a people.
Ephesians. 6.23. Peace be to the brethren. Which how far from us we all know: and
therefore full time to make toward them in the travels of our souls.

Fifthly, For the public tranquillity and quiet estate of a Church when not
troubled within, by blasphemies, schisms, and heresies, nor without by
persecuting enemies, Psalm. 122.6. O pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Acts 9.31.
Then had the Churches rest (or peace) throughout all Judea and Gallile and
Samaria and were edefyed, walking in the fear of the Lord and comfort of the
Holy Ghost, and were multiplied.

Sixthly. For the Tranquillity of the State when free from foreign and civil
war 2 Kings 20.19. said good King Hezekiah is it not good if Peace and Truth
be in my days; Ier. 9.7 seek the peace of the City. etc.

Seaventhly. Security from alarms, all Arms, and dangerous effects of war:
In the peace thereof you shall have peace.

Eighthly, For an happy union by way of Covenant before God betwixt the King and
his people. 2 Chro. 15. And they entered into Covenant to seek the Lord God of
their Fathers with all their heart, and soul, and all Judah rejoiced at the
oath and he was found of them, and the Lord gave them peace round about, which
the Lord persuade your heart unto, this day, for Jesus Christ sake.

And thus have I shown you the spriggs of this branch: and the pathway for a
sound peace and the extent of Peace in the duty of prayer in this opportunity.

First* Now God be friends with every one of you in jesus Christ. Secondly. The
Lord give you peace in conscience; a demonstration of it, make your conscience
friends with you. Thirdly. make you friends one with another. Fourthly.
Multiply all blessings on you inward and out ward. Fifthly send quieT in the
Church. Sixthly send quiet in the State and Kingdom from enemies. Seaventhly.
Send freedom from alarms and ease from taxes etc. Eighthly. A mutual agreement
and covenant betwixt King and people.
And thus have you the spriggs extended, I now come to the season fore-goeing
all; this prescribed: Now you may review the Observation.

That seasonable and importunate prayer to God through Christ is a sure way to
obtain the gift of a firm settled and well grounded peace with God and man.

You are to know; I therefore add seasonable prayer, because there are as well
unseasonable, as unreasonable prayers abroad in the world: it was the folly of
the Virgins that they cried Lord Lord open unto us so late: there is a season
wherein God gives this gift and there is a season wherein he will not give it.

There is a time for every thing, but there is an end of that time: There is a
time when God is near, and a time when he is far off. Esaias. 55 Omnia tempus
habent, and as true in this season omnis qui querit invenit, The Prophet
preaching before King Manasses prays him to seek while he may be found, call
whilst he is near, in some time if Moses, Noah, Santuel, should pray he will
not grant. Oh that we had the art to hit this (...) this joint of time, I pray
consider that place in Luke 19.41,42. If thou had known, even thou at least
in this thy day, but now these things are hid from thine eyes. You cannot have
roses in winter, when the Angel moved the waters then was the nick of time to
step in: else they might lie long enough for a healing: when the Lord said
seek my face, then King David's soul Ecchoed Lord thy face do I seek. To
miss a tide or a wind, is to loose a voyage; in the 2 Cant. The Church
drousily neglecting her season in the 3 Chap. Seeks it night and day, but ver.
1,2. found him not, Stephanus is his apology for Herodotus reports the
practice of the warlike Scythian upon his tender of quarter aptly. Truly our
season and time of prayer for Peace is but like the Jews feasts some lasted
longer then others, yet none all the year. Sentences have their periods: I and
ut sententiae, sic regna.

The old world had a season of one hundred and twenty years, Israel in the
Wilderness but forty years was he grieved with that generation in Luke 13.
but three years to the fig tree under the Gospel: so you see as means has
been more excellent; the season has been shorter. Not that it is in the power
of man to shorten it, but in sin to provoke God to do it. Our season has
pantings, and yet life in it, although not health, the Lord hear our prayers
to recover it out of its fits of convulsion: Is there no Balm in Gilliad, that
will do it? 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people which are called by my name, shall
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways, I will forgive their sin and heal their land.

1. Argument

The season of Peace, and the seasonable praying for Peace, has been
prescribed, limited, and terminated to all that have gone before us, in
relation to Persons, Kings, or Kingdoms: Esaus season past, he could never get
a return of the blessing although sought with tears: The Gadarens could never
get Christ over their water more; Nor the Jews a second season as yet to
learn Christ, lo I go to the Gentiles Esa. 6. Osea 3.4. I have forsaken my
house, I have left my heritage: The Monarchy of the Babilonians and Syrians was
transferred to the Medes and Persians, The Macedonians to the Romans, The
Empire of Constantinople to the Ottoman Family: Joshua took ten stones out of
Jordan and put other ten in the room of them.

Secondly, It is but just with God, if none find any want of this precious
Jewel, to shut up his cabinet, and see who will seek after it: God always
substracts his mercies when they prove not useful to us, or we ungrateful
for them: God knows as well how to take them from us, as tender them to us,
Hosea 2.3.9.

Thirdly, In relation to the Giver there can be but a season expected: It is
the Mighty God King of Kings, unto whom all the Nations of the earth are but as
a drop of a bucket, etc. It becomes not Majesty to wait long upon the tender
of their favors, the Lord will give inward peace, and outward peace; but he
will seasonably be sought to for it: It is no dishonor for the greatest
Monarch to attend his Majesty, but unbecoming him to wait a moment, on the
greatest earthly Prince: David esteemed it the height of his ambition to be a
door keeper, under-value not then; to be a receiver and in capacity to enjoy
his favor,

Use of Exhortation

If this be so that we have but a Now for it: I beseech you support your
drooping souls, because although near yet is not our season past, for yet we
hear of peace from the cryers of peace in public: God has not yet forbid us
with Jeremiah not to cry peace unto you: cry for peace with me.

Nay secondly, by a strange kind of working on the heart, his messengers day
and night seek peace for the three Kingdoms and your Majesty at the throne of
grace, you are heartily presented by many thousands of religious conscientious,
holy, faithful, Subjects in both Kingdoms for peace to your soul etc. nor has
the Lord stopped our mouths as Jeremiah's 11.14. as yet to say to us pray not etc.

Yea, Thirdly, the conditions of Peace, and the Lords Propositions to be
reconciled to him, are by his faithful messengers presented and by many
accepted of; the Lord incline your Majesty's heart to sign for ever, his and
your Kingdoms good.

Yea, it is your peoples hopes that you will with the Sun of righteousness
gloriously arise with healing and peace under your wings, to your three
Kingdoms, all sore wounded, and in blood. This door of hope opened let all
our seasonable prayers be presented for this blessing of Peace: ply this work
heartily I beseech you.

1. Motive, you have but a Now sor it, much of the season spent; a great
journey and little time puts upon expedition and design; David's former
experience of the misery of war puts him upon the design of of Prayer for
Peace: Psalm. 122. O pray, says he, for the peace of Jerusalem, and he plies it
night and day, Finis operationis est opus.

2 Motive, There is yet Peace to be had for his people, and although with
Joseph, for a time, he has spoken ruffely unto us, Genesis 45.1. yet I am
consident he yernes in his bowels to us; he cannot contain himself longer,
ere he reveal himself unto us; and although the Cup of affliction has been
for a time inour sacks mouth, yet in the end it shall produce good, to us Isa.
63.8,9. He will not cast off his people; when they rebelled he was wrath, yet
he said, Surely they are my people, I am their Savior: Wherefore I beseech you
as the dumb son of Croesus when he saw his Father about to be slain, though
never before brake silence, and cried out violently, the strings of his tongue
being loosed, Kill not King Croesus; so upon the vision of the sad actings of
these times, break silence and seasonably, every one cry out, Now the Lord of
Peace himself give you peace always, by all means.

Thirdly, Because we are all sharers in the Church and Kingdoms peace, more or
less: every owner prays and looks after the safety of the ship, the Church
of God is the ship, wherein our great joint stock of Religion is imbarqued, and
we all bear a great adventure. It is at this day on a hazzardous voyage, many
seeming friends by their colors, ready to betray it: and what betwixt the
Rocks of superstition and Idolatry, and the quicksands of blasphemy, schism,
and heresy, it steeres sadly, we, nor our posterity, cannot stand after the
loss; it will be their undoing for ever: therefore now pray. Think it sad to
poison a pond, but a river much more: Oh think of your posterity what truths
streamed to us in our Fathers blood, the Martyrs, let it run to our posterity
in ours, or tears: and let us protest against blasphemy and errors: for jarring
in Jerusalem is a sad and prodigeous Omen: when the worshippers in Jerusalem
were divided, the common enemy prevailed, Jer. 7.28. This is a Nation that
receives not discipline, truth is perished from them, clean gone out of their
mouths: then read ver. 33. Then I will cause to cease from the Cities of Judah
and Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and gladness, the land shall be desolate.
Jer. 8.19. The cry of the daughter of my people is great, for fear of them of
a far Country: Nay further, that you may see the necessity of seasonable
prayer, you may observe, our Savior makes it a sign of the eternal ruin of
the world, Mat. 24.1,2,3. They say, Master what sign will thou give us? Take
heed none deceive you, for many shall come in my name, and deceive many. Many
shall betray one another, hate one another, etc. See Deuteronomy. 28.47,48,49,50. The
divisions amongst the Primitive Christians in the Eastern Churches, gave the
Turk an opportunity to make them his vassals: when the Divines of Bohemia, and
Germany, fell to discord, it proved a sad time, and when the Pelagians had made
their faction strong, they set the whole Kingdom in a combustion: The Lord
give us deliverance from all factions and fractions from the truth of Jesus
Christ.

Fourthly it is an honorable design, and such become Christians, it is noble
to do good to one with the Samaritan; but to do good to a nation; nay three
nations, is Heroical and well becomes Majesty. Therefore now pray, yea excite
all from Dan to Bersheba, and let it be your motion to set apart a day of
fasting and prayer that no apple of contention may grow in our Paradise of God
his Church. Every blessed action becomes you; this is not only blessed in it
self, but makes you blessed: Beati pacifici is intailed upon you. Now as peace
in Religion is the greatest blessing to a Kingdom, so to beget or conserve
this peace makes a man most blessed in a Kingdom: and it is my souls desire
you may be yet blessed of God and of your faithful people.

Fifth Motive.

Our relation, yea near relation to the Church and State, it is of us, we of
it: The hurt of it will be our hurt: the blood shed in war, our blood, wounds
our wounds. It is a sad spectacle and moves much for a Captain or Commander in
Chief to see but a forlorn hope or a few scouts come off in blood; but to see
a field spread with dead bodies like dung as of late times, a piercing
calamity. For a tender mother to see, not a child, but all her children sick,
puts her to an extacy of grief, and importunity to seek remedy: and that is
the second sprigge of this Olive Branch: viz. That seasonable and importunate
prayer to God, through Christ, is a sure means to obtain a firm lasting and
well grounded peace.

And first I should discover to you what I mean by importunity, and in a word,
it is a prayer that will take no nay of God; that if bare asking will not serve
we will seek, if that do not obtain; we will be so bold as to knock; that
will not be put off with primitive silence, or positive denial, or any
contumelious reproach; knowing well, as I said before, that Finis operationis
est opus for Sions sake will not hold his peace, nor for Ierusalems sake give
God no rest, till he make it the praise of the earth.

And truly we had sped sooner had we prayed better; not that prayer merits it,
but it is Gods means to obtain it.

There are several defects in prayer; and there are six, or seven sorts which
will stand us in little stead.

First, A Lazy prayer, God cannot away to have men reporters, when they should
be Petitioners.

Secondly, Empty Prayers that are not full, for prayer is a pouring out of the
whole hearth to God. Psalm. 62.8. Now many power out their wants, but not their
sins, men should power out their prayers like water not like Tar, the greatest
part sticking behind.

Thirdly, Snatched prayer, many give God a ragg of prayer, fitting your prayers
to your businesses, not a Kingdoms miseries: or pressing necessities, etc.

Fourthly, Silent prayers, neglecting that in our prayer which God looks we
should insist on, Ps, 32. David is said to roar for the disquietnesse of his
heart and and yet was silent in relation to his bloodshed.

Fifthly, Seldom prayers, An Hypocrite can sometimes pray, but a good
Christian prays continually, Dan. 3.

Sixthly, Lukewarm prayers, Prayers that can never boil out the scumme of sin
or take away the rawnesse of our fleshly part, Quifrigide orat oupit negari,
though you make many, Esa. 7.

Seventhly, By-thoughted Prayers, like that unworthy Orator, invocating
heaven, looking to the Earth, but in this case do as Abraham, Genesis 15.11. when
the birds peck't his sacrifice, he hushed them away, so do thou, that thy
prayers may prove an acceptable service through Jesus Christ.

Quere, Sir, pray what need so much importunity?

Sol. First, in relation to Gods Majesty, as in Ezekiel 36. from ver. 23. to
ver. 27. The Lord shows his people in misery, rich mercies, and full
compensations, that he has in his hands, but yet read ver. 27. Thus says the
Lord God, I will yet for all this be inquired after by the house of Israel to
do it for them, etc.

We have an homely Proverb, It is an ill dog that is not worth a whistle. We
find little want of, and less esteem, that mercy we omit in prayer. Princes
freely contribute their favors, but to Petitioners. And God is the King of
Kings: and I am yet boy'd up with hope, having hitherto rid out this storm, on
a good ground, with the Sheare-Anchor of Faith, that God will by all our evils
refine us, not ruin us; correct us, not destruct us; and bring us all a
precious and refined people, out of all our devouring flames, both gracious and
glorious.

Secondly, in relation to mercy: mercy appears best when we blazen out our
misery: it is a disgrace to mercy to come on the wing of lazy prayer, Herculii
duri celebrant Labores: Samuel shall be dedicated to God, that is, obtained by
prayer, and that mercy made much of, and hugged in the bosom, that is obtained
with the passion of the heart.

Thirdly, In relation to our selves: we would soon slight mercy if easily
granted, Esa. 44.23. Soon gotten, soon forgotten: who prodigal away their
estates sooner then they that never swet to gain a penny? Ier. 31.9. They
shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead them: as a
gentleman leads a beggar: that penny that a man has begged for all day, is not
commonly idly spent away: so if your Majesty and your three Kingdoms can but
work out their peace with God by prayer it will be the sweetest mercy that
ever lay upon the pallates of our souls: It will relish our spirits after all
our bitter potions we have taken to physic us.

2 Quere Why are not men more importunate in prayer?

Sol. Because most are Romanists in this point and esteem prayer a penance,
an irksome thing: Mal. 1.13. Behold you say what a weariness it is? ye have
snuffed at it says the Lord. A man can never be found abounding in that is
tedious to him to perform, we must count prayer a blessing if ever we will do
good on it. Blessings are highly prized: I beseech you set a high price on this
kind of prayer.

2 Many are Formalists, and like the Peach, that has a ragged stone under a
smooth skin: so many, under fair and specious shows and pretenses, have
strange self ends, sinful ends and much raggedness of Spirit. Now if I
regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear my prayer.

Thirdly, Men are gentlemen-beggers, they are loath to have the world know they
want, or would be beholding to any, stand often upon this punctilio of Honor
till they starve, so of old; have not we Abraham to our Father why should we be
beholding to this Carpenters son? Men are loath to be beholding to God
through Christ: and truly none are so miserable as they that hide their
misery: now it is good to move pity to spread our miserable condition before
the Lord, and if ever there were more miserable visions since man's fall then
the evils of our times, I appeal, to urge God to heal and help us.

Fourthly, Men have strange conceits of prayer: mean conceits of sin, a wrong
conceit of God, and a base conceit of importunity, which I am enforced but to
hint in relation to my time and this presence.

3 Querie, Whither our prayers have beeue, or are prayers of Importunity?

Sol. If thou in the fashion and Image of thy soul have the stamp of Jesus
Christ. It is in all petitioning a great matter who petitions: the Spirit of
supplication is called the Spirit of Grace: Vnumquodque operatur ut est. The
prayer of Moses a man of God: mala conscientia been spirare non potest.

Secondly, It is the prayer of a pure conscience: it was of old writ over the
door of the Temple, let no impure conscience enter here: all such petitioners
were to weak to wing it above the clouds, their prayers might well beat the
air but never arive to Knock at the throne of Grace: the activity and
strength of prayer, as grounded on Christ's merits, still runs strongest in the
channel of a good conscience.

Thirdly, It is a prayer full of reason, Job 23.1,2,3,4. I will fill my mouth
with arguments. A good Orator before God is a good Logitian: show God reason
either from himself, in relation to his promises, or faithfulness, or in
Jesus Christ etc.

4. It is a stout courageous prayer that will never give over but in victory,
either with supply or support: In Scripture it is called Wrestling with God, it
is such a prayer as has its affections rather inflamed then a bated by
disdaines and denyalls, Mark 7.24. It may in a holy sense be called an
impudent prayer, Luke 5.19. That man sees such necessity that being crowded out
will come to Christ, or untile the house.

And thus have I given you the reasons why we must pray for peace seasonably,
Secondly, why we must pray importunately, and what importunity in relation to
prayer is in its imperfections; and perfection: I come now to show you the
fountain from whom we must, by this prayer, fetch this great mercy of a safe
and well grounded peace. It is from the God of peace, or Prince of peace: from
God through Jesus Christ: Note I pray. It is Jesus Christ is the sweet rise of
all our rich mercies; especially of this of peace, Esaias 11.1. and Chap. 12. all
those mercyes in the 11 and 12 Chapter. which they were to enjoy, flourish and
spring forth of the root of Jesse: And indeed peace is not a mercy if it come
not from this fountain: you may call meteors stars, but they are of a more
viscous substance that fire by an (...) in and out immediately: you, if
ignorant may think a skinning over to be a cure but it will break out again. 2 Samuel 11 Amnon thought he enjoyed prosperity when he was feasting, but then
death was present. 2 Samuel 3.27. Abner thought all was peace when Ioab took him
aside and spoke quietly to him, but then he smote him under the fifth rib that
he dyed, For Asabel his brother.

It is a sweet thing when afflictions arise from Gods love, and lead us to
Jesus Christ for deliverance from them. There are varieties of mercies, and
degrees of those varieties: Christ is the first step and the highest of those
degrees: and we ought not to be satisfied till we have them from the love of
God in Christ. It was a great and rare vision, Jacobs ladder. Every step was a
mercy above another, but that which ravished Jacob was, that they came from God
by the way of Jesus Christ the Ladder.

First, in relation to Reallity of Peace in him, it is Yea and Amen, and an
always Peace. Other peaces are mere Spectrums, shaddows, apparitions, like
Sodomes apples, appear beautiful to the eye, touch it, it vanishes to dust.
Like a candle, gives light for a time, but goes out in a stinck. This is as a
house built on a rock, others as on a foundation of sand. I beseech you now lay
a good foundation on Gods Peace.

Secondly, in relation to the discovery of peace; there is no light but the
light that ^mes from the Sun of righteousness, by which we can see the
excellency of it, as to desire it, or to receive it, In his light we see light.
If we see it not come streaming in his blood, it is not a well-grounded Peace.
It comes as from an enemy to an enemy. And as heaven it self would not be
heaven, if Christ were not present: so will Peace be no peace, if Christ be not
the Original of it. The glory of the Mount was Christ's presence.

Thirdly, we have no right or title to Peace, but by him. There was no mercy
founded for us before Jesus Christ. All that share in it are usurpers: now what
is it to wear rich apperell and owe for it liable to arrests every moment? and
to enjoy peace and to account for it to God for eternity?

Fourthly, If we look to the workings of mercy; for unless we have them from
this fountain, no mercy can be sanctified unto us. Peace it self will harden,
not soften: we shall abuse it, not rightly use it: it fats us to wrath, not
feeds us to perfection. Men may rise from a sick bed, and a bed of war, but
they cannot go away and sin no more: They cannot take up their couch and
follow Christ: they may promise fair, but are not able to perform but upon
this ground.

Fifthly, He made it his design from all eternity to be so; and all the
accumulated excellencies and riches, that he received in the Godhead of his
father, he laid out and expended to this very end; that he might be the
means to convey peace from God the father to us, for he needed none for
himself.

Use of Exhortation.

To all in the practice of this duty of seasonable and importunate prayer to
design by the activity of faith: First to discover Jesus Christ, look out for
Christ as Mariners at Sea for a Landmark to their Port: Where they are to lade
Riches for a good Voyage: If you can see the Fountain, water is at hand. If you
can see the Sun, there is light to guide you in the way: See Christ, Peace will
come easily: you need not question lower favors. God will never stick to give
your Majesty, or England Peace, if he give you the Prince of Peace, this is but
as the Earnest to the Bargain: Settle, Christ in the three Kingdoms, and you
settle Peace I Will warrant you, and all blessings needful below him: This will
make Gospel, Peace, and Truth, Staple Commodities: But if Naomi go out of the
Country, Ruth will not stay behind. If Christ ascend in a Cloud, the Disciples
will be gazing upward, and restless till they be with him. Riches, honor,
etc. all are at his heels, and there are that follow the Lamb where ever he
goes.

Use of Direction

Why are ye so dejected? why are your souls cast down and disquieted within
you? what is it you want? in this juncture of time would any of you have peace?
would you have it? seek it seasonably, and importunatly in the way of Jesus
Christ: I dare assure you your wants: if you can but get to this Joseph, fear
not in a famine thy sacks filling: his love, (although disquieted with frowns
at present,) cannot send defiring hungery souls after peace empty away. Col.
1.19. Its Gods pleasure we should come to this fountain for them, they have
taken up their abode there, nor can you show me in any time a seeking soul
that ever lost his labor, He ever affords us supplement or supportment. He
may try us for a time but at last, with Joseph, will long to manifest his love
and self to us.

Does your Majesty want council what to do in cases of difficulty? how to
steer the great ship in this storm? I direct you to him whose name is
Counselor. Do you want pardoning mercy? in his fulness is all you want.
Does any man want grace to carry him through temptations? why his grace is
sufficient for thee. Truly the defect is not in God, nor in Jesus Christ,
goodness, kindness, but in our unfaithfullnesse: That Hagar thirsted the
fault was not in the well, but in her eyes that could not see it: There was no
want in Gods assistance to his people, but the Prophets servants eyes, that
could not see more with them, than against them. There was noe less Love,
Peace, Glory, Beauty, and Riches in Jesus Christ when Saul persecuted him, then
when he preached him; but the scales were on his eyes.

Illust. As there is the same light and heat in the Sun at all times,
although dead men feel it not, nor blind men see not. So there is the same
love in Christ to give us peace. Why then should we neglect so great
salvation. I beseech you follow after it with holiness, without which you
cannot see God.

First Motive

He does not only permit us as Laban permitted Jacob to love fair Rachel, but
commands us to seek after him; call upon me in the day of trouble and I will
deliver you: you shall glorify me, Ask, seek, knock: If a child ask a
father a fish will he give him a Scorpion? nay he expects, invites,
intreates, etc.

First Illustration

Yea: as the visible Sun touches every thing with its lively heat, and as the
common lover of that below, does impart unto them requifite vigor to produce:
so does Jesus Christ. I confess of our selves we can never attain to get
peace: For naturally it is with us as with Aristotle's reported bird called
Apodes, whose legs are so short they cannot use them, if once they light on the
ground, they are not able to take flight, or to raise themselves on their
feet: but remain puling and dying; unless the power of some wind, with a
favorable blast, bear them up; and then they make use of their wings. We are
naturally like these birds in relation to our flight to Jesus Christ for any
mercy, till his spirit as wind act us to him.

Second Illustration

Then as the unhooded Hawke, having got her prey in view, does suddenly launch
her self upon the wing, and being held in her leach struggles upon the hand
with extreme ardour. So faith, having drawn the veil of ignorance, and got a
discovery of the sovereign good of peace, cannot be satisfied but in seeking
after it in Christ: and as tears, were David's practice so long as God seemed
to be absent: so prayer is their daily practice, their obedience ecchoing to
Gods command, till they do enjoy this peace.

2 Motive, Because if you practice seasonable and importunate prayer this way;
you may be sure although you presently have not a return of your prayer in the
present enjoyment of a settled peace; if you have it not, he will be with you in
your trouble and afflictions as he was in the flaming bush and with the three
children in the furnace. They lost nothing by it, they appear most glorious in
it: If the waters increase, the Arc and all in it get nearer heaven by it,
there is all the inconvenience. Yea the time shall come that you shall say with
David, It is good for me that I was so afflicted; All this shall work for the
best, when once you are interressed in the Prince of Peace. Therefore now if
ever, I beseech you with the pressing desires of my soul to lay this sure
foundation of peace, through Jesus Christ, with your God; and heartily, and
joyfully incline to spell out Gods own meaning in all the actings of his
providence, that shall as means be presented to you from your great and
faithful Counselors, for the framing out and perfecting that glorious
Architect that may make you as glorious to posterity, as Solomon for building a
house for his God, and may be a shelter for the people of God in your three
Kingdoms; and the defense of you and your posterity from the violent storms
of foreign enemies; which that you may with all cheerfulness act, as an
Emminent Instrument in this opportunity, Let us all with all importunity seek
God with humble and sincere Spirits.

FINIS.

