BAPTISM Without BASIN.

OR, Plain Scripture Proof AGAINST INFANT BAPTISM,

I. By way of Answer to Mr. BAXTER's Arguments, and to the Exercitations of Mr.
SIDENHAM, Teacher to a Church a Newcastle, concerning Infants Baptism: for
which that their pretended Consequences are from Concessions not to be granted,
and from Scriptures as mistaken, and absolutely wrested, is clearly discovered.
With

II. Several Questions and Answers, positively holding out the mind of Christ
in Baptizing of Believers only; and that the MAGISTRATES may be induced more
and more to encourage the preaching thereof in public.

III. A DECLARATION written to the Election of grace, who for want of
information are of contrary judgment.

Written by William Kaye, Minister of the Gospel at Stokesley.

And Jesus being baptized, and praying. Luke 3.15. -- And the eunuch said, See,
here is water; what does hinder me to be baptized? And Philip said, If thou
believe with all thine heart, thou may. -- And they went both down into
the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptized him. Acts 8 36, 37.
Read, and then judge: withhold not the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.
London, Printed by Ja. Courel, for Rich. Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's
Churchyard, near the great North-door. 1653.

To all the brethren of the MINISTRY within the Election of Grace, which
unfeignedly desire to preach Christ, and baptize in his Name, in Truth and
Sincerity; Truth and Peace be multiplied.
It Is very well known, that though the stumbling block which some have cast in
the way of Gods people (occasioned through the falling away of some stars from
the heaven, or fellowship of the Churches, is now so gloriously removed, that
diverse Saints are returned to their first love; and those that like Caleb and
Joshua (the faithful Churches, which never backslided) have kept their garments
of Gospel-profession adorned with such meekness, truth, and moderation; so that
they cannot shut out Christ, as though no Prophet could come out of Nazareth.
And now though they may look home, and see some of their own plants so baptized
into one body, 1 Cor. 12.14. and kept in such union with Christ the Head, and
his Body his Churches, as not to walk a step, without a step of their
forerunner going before them, 1 Pet. 2.21. Heb. 9.20. And that their
consequences also will not uphold Pedo-baptism, though they should be granted
them; being like the Old Covenant on which they are grounded, waxen old, as
ready to vanish away: Yet for all this, you know, that all (the Election of
grace excepted) must needs ve^i^e the Proverb, Can the leopard change his
spots? Jer. 1^.23. And therefore they are so blind, and cannot see; deaf, and
cannot hear; and are so set on the lees of obstinate Resolution, that they Hate
to be Reformed, until their fleshly confidence which they had in the
Service Book (the Treasure of some men's knowledge, and to which they stick) be
crucified with an Order to the contrary: Therefore it is to no more purpose to
speak to such, then to few a piece of New cloth upon an Old garment.

It Is to you therefore, ye successors of the noble Bereans, that will search
the Scriptures, and try the spirit whether it be of God or no, 1 John 4* 1 ye
that prefer Conscience before Custom, and preach unto the people, Come out of
Babylon; it is you that God has stirred me up to persuade; and Oh that you may
be persuaded to lay to heart, and to consider, That in the business of
Infant-sprinkling, you do not only contradict your own pretended ^ight:
Sprinkling is not Baptizing.
for Sprinkling is not so much Baptism, as the Picture is the man it
represents, though we should pretend, as we have been taught, that the child
should by its G -- fathers and G -- mothers believe all the Articles of the
Christian faith. But for you to sprinkle (as some of you pretend) only the
children of believers, and yet to sprinkle the children of all your
Parishioners, etc. does declare, that you have not either preached the Gospel
within your Parishes, Christ truly preached, makes Parishes to be divided.
etc. or that it has not been powerfully received; for the true preaching of
Christ will separate your people to be called out of the world, to be gathered
into the fellowship of the Church of Christ. Therefore as there is any love to
Christ's name, let us not, I beseech you, withhold (though it were the tenure of
all our estates) the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. For tell me, I pray,
ought we to walk by the Glo-worm-light of Consequences, or sparkles of our own
kindling? Isa 50 11 (though the world be confederate, and comply with you) to
uphold that darkness, against the known light, or command and example of the
Word of God to the contrary? Or shall we exclude Bishops Government, and
Service Book, and by consequences contend for Infant Baptism, the greatest
obstacle to the reforming, gathering, and planting of Churches within your
Parishes, Churches to be gathered within Parishes.
that can be? for if we would not content our se^ve^ rather with he fleece then
the flo^k; if we were acquainted with the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven,
we might clearly see, That as Bishops Government was useful, to hold on a light
of Profession to such as were altogether in ^he darkness of Romish Babylon; and
as the Presb^terial Wa^ is useful to reform Episcopacie, Episcopacy,
Presbytery, and Independency, compared.
in respect of Go^ernment, Traditions, and Ceremonies, as Independency reforms
Presbytery in the point of gathering of Church Members; and all of them (as
David ^i^ for the Temple) make preparations for the most glorious Apostolical
Government: so that out of all the materials of Truth therein discovered, ^he
golden Candle^^ick of Christian profession may be molde^, to vanish out the
smoke out of the Temple. Let us but then abolish Infant Baptism out of the
Church, and the work of Unity, Truth, The abolishing of Infant-sprinkling, in
the union of all Churches.
and Peace, will be fully completed. For let Presbyterians gather what they
can, if they gather in Christ's way, to make none of their Church but such as
they baptize, upon the profession of faith, as believers: And if the
Independents gather none into their Church, but such as believe, and are then
baptized; then they shall all be united, and centred upon one and the same
foundation of Christianity, in their observation of the Gospel-Ordinance of
Baptism, with baptized Churches (commonly, though unjustly) called Anabaptists:
so that as Christ in his wisdom foresees but one way, to baptize all nations;
so this is the only way, to make all Churches out of all nations, to be one in
the profession of faith and obedience. It Is no marvel then, if Antichrist stand
so violently for Pedo-baptism; for as all darkness came in with it, so all
light shall shine, as this darkness shall vanish away, in the administration of
bapti^ing and governing of the Church of believers. And therefore though when
darkness began to appear after the times of the Apostles, the brass and copper
of Infant Baptism being double gilt over with glistering pretenses, passed,
like Bishops government, and other traditions, for current Coin; yet this being
the time when every plant which our heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted up, whereby the Saints may be restored to the primitive profession of
the Churches in the time of the Apostles; Therefore the double-gilded
consequences which are or shall be produced, to make an Infant a baptized
disciple, can expect no better entertainment then Toittis the gray friar found
in Scotland, Book of Martyrs, p. 1451. Hen. 8.
who endeavored by consequences to prove that the Paternoster might be said
to the Saints: which though he did gloss over, pretending, in that we called
aged men father, and that the Saints are in heaven, that therefore we may say,
Our Father which art in heaven: and because their names are holy, we might say,
Hallowed be their names, etc. But for all his wit, the time of light being
come, the Popish Church was upon this absolutely divided, and the Friar was
much derided for his pains. The Lord make us seers and followers of his Truth;
which, as soon as the Lord was pleased fully to reveal unto me, I was
constrained to bear witness of it, as I was formerly acted to bear witness to
the Truth in the time of Innovations, when too many were serving at the Altar;
by which said power, I was stirred up to declare at the first, I do not say,
the first that declared, for Reformation: And now I am also constrained to use
this plainness of speaking (think of me as you please) wherein I beseech you to
consider, See a Book entitled, the church Register.
that Mr. Spering and Mr. Barrow, etc. could not enjoy this liberty to gather
Churches, as we may do. This is our day, shall we not see it? or shall we be
dead-hearted, sullen, or not willing to go about our Fathers business, except
we were countenanced or backed out with common approbation? by which we may be
thought rather to be driven to our work, then to be that people that shall be
willing, in the day of his power, to worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness, Seed of Martyrs.
Psalm. 110.4. Alas, consider, may not our hearts bleed to see, that that seed
which our Martyrs did sow with their blood, which did but then peep out with
the head, is now white already unto harvest, and much of it almost lost for
gathering into Church Fellowship? We must not now think to feed all the flock
with the pap-milk of ordinary principles; nor will Traditions or Consequences,
which shall contradict the command and example of Christ and his Apostles, as a
strange voice, be possibly heard any longer. As we are therefore heirs apparent
to all the light which has shined, and have been spectators in the time of
judgment, of the Lords overturning both of Church and State, because his
fore-prophesied time is now fulfilled, New heaven, New Earth.
to have a New heaven, or a reformed Church, according to the very example of
Christ and his Apostles; and a New Earth, or a people, through opposing the old
earth, or world, are reformed from Popery, See Mr. Brightm. Exposit. on 21
chap. of Revel. in part discovering it.
and affecting civil righteousness; which I am able (though I have not here
time) to make fully appear, without Allegorizing of the Scripture. Let then all
that are Saints, in that the Lord is risen start fair, and see who can first
run to the Sepulcher; let us see who will approve themselves Aurum igne
probalum, is est, cujus fides, rebus adversis splendet.
(...), tried gold in the fire, that patronize not a partial, but a perfected
inward and outward Reformation; that as wax and seal, so our faith and
obedience may be found indeed agreeable to the doctrine and example of Christ
and his Apostles. The Lord ravish your hearts with the love of this Truth, and
remove all prejudice, until you have read, and so may judge, whether I have
fully and truly, as far as I have undertaken, answered these two men of parts,
whose faces I never saw, and against whom (I bless God) I have not the least
prejudice or acrimony nor do desire to put their light under a bushel, as far
as it appears to be light unto me: but only, as I have been much provoked,
desired, and partly challenged, I have used that liberty which Mr. S. has done
with Mr. T. etc. And therefore I desire you my dear friends, to commune with
your own hearts, and see, upon examination on both sides, what ground you have
for Infant Baptism: And, until the Lord in mercy open your eyes, despise not
the counsel of Doctor Gamaliel, to let this alone: for if this be of God. But I
have my check; for there is not an If in this business, Christ-like to go about
our Fathers business, No difference with the Churches of Saints, but in
Infant-sprinkling.
in submitting to the Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism: for, I hope, as soon as
Truth shall be heard to speak, prejudice being removed, and the moderation of
gathered Churches, and their full compliance with all the Saints, except in the
unwarranted tradition of sprinkling, being made to appear, the Election of
grace (and further we cannot expect) will receive satisfaction, to submit to
this so much despised Ordinance of the Lord Jesus.

To conclude therefore, Jesus Christ could not in wisdom have excluded
children by name, more then in commanding to baptize believers only.
concerning this great matter in controversy, which fills the ears of the
whole Country with the report, and is so much scandalized, belyed, and opposed,
by the profane and ignorant, this I have to hint unto you, That if Jesus Christ
himself should come again, and were to reveal himself concerning the baptizing
of believers only, he could not in wisdom exclude children by nome, they being
already excluded by Christ, in commanding to baptize a taught disciple: for
without mentioning of the female, in commanding the male to be circumcised, the
female was expressly prohibited. For it is, I say, against the wisdom of Christ,
to command to baptize those that are caught, and thereby are discipled, and
then to say. But baptize not an Infant; seeing in wisdom all men know, that a
child cannot be taught or profess the faith of the Gospel. And besides, God
has made man judge of Baptism, not to proceed as he pleases, but according to
the express Rule and Commission which God has appointed him. And therefore it
is not in man, in favor to the world, and in opposition to the Saints of the
most High, to raise Consequences, Allegations, and Reasonings, to interpret and
wrest the express commission and command of Christ to the contrary: but Man if
he will be faithful to his Commission, without gainsaying, he must baptize none
but those that are taught. And therefore it being found, that a child cannot
be taught unless man will presumptuously (after due information) break the
commandment, he cannot meddle with children, until they be called to the
profession of the faith of the Gospel. And yet though the sun of Truth shine
never so clearly, though there be no Truth more fully discovered, by express
command, and many thousand examples of baptized disciples; None but a Saint
will receive any truth, but as it is commanded by man, or received by custom.
yet in regard none but the election of Grace can faithfully receive any Truth,
but as it is commanded by Authority, or received by Custom or common
Approbation, in regard the Election of Grace themselves are like a seeing man
in a dark dungeon which cannot see, till the light of seeing be revealed unto
them, in taking off their objection or scruples to the contrary; I humbly
therefore refer you to the ensuing Treatise, to judge as the Lord shall teach
you. And as for the Shining Stars, men of parts etc. that shall abet against
the light of Christ, to uphold the tradition of Antichrist the Tail of the
Beast (which they will not have discovered) shall draw them, The tail of the
beast strikes down the stars.
and cast them to the earth: for the seventh Vial being in part poured out Rev.
17.1. the smoke must vanish out of the Temple, Rev. 15. ult. Kick not then
against this prick lest ye fight against God in his discoveries; but let us
contend for the faith, and submit to the Old truth this step of Christ and
Christian profession, that it may not seem strange in our days, which Christ in
imitation of himself has said to all succeeding ages, Matthew. 3. expounded,
with application to all Christians.
Thus that is, according to the example that I your Lord and Master was
baptized; it becomes us; that is, as it was mine, so it is all Christians duty
to be baptized to fulfill all righteousness. That grace therefore, that calls
out of Babylon, that takes away the envy of Judah and Jerusalem by which the
Saints are baptized into one spirit, be with your spirits now and evermore.
Amen. Amen.

Written by your fellow labourer in the Gospel, Will. Kaye.

A Word, by the way, to the presumptuous Scandalizers and Persecutors of the
gathered Churches, or of all that are called out of Babylon.
THough the Prove. 29.27.
Proverb be verified, The upright in the way is an abomination to the wicked,
for which cause, they hate, scorn, and persecute all that profess Holiness; and
though those Acts 9.2, 3, 4, 5.
persecuting spirits are as nigh unto salvation, as some, that are civilly
righteous; Yet at This time God has only stirred me up, to hint thus much unto
you, as the Monument of your Remembrance; That if a visible Reformation shall
not follow the gentle Correction wherewith England has been lately summoned,
so that all visible evils, Levit. 26.23, 24. Isa. 1.26.
dross and tin, shall not be removed, to the punishment of those that do evil,
and for the praise of those that do well; God shall so renew his Controversy
against You, for your profaneness, scandaliZing, and plowing furrows upon the
backs of the Saints, that you shall once more experience, that the same God
which punished your Prelatical forefathers, that persecuted the most eminent
Christians, and hated to be reformed; who led the blind into the ditch,
whereby they, with thousand of families (their confederates) smarted for it,
Dan. 2.34, 35.
Shall also cause a little Stone to he cut out without hands, which shall smite
the Image upon his feet, even your great Diana, which shall be broken all to
pieces, and the little stone shall become a great mountain. If I should not
have told you this, I should have been guilty of the blood of some of you:
Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. Ezekiel. 2.5.
Whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, yet shall you know, that
there has been a Prophet amongst you. And to as many of you as are of the
Election of Grace, Rev. 18.4.
God will call, Come out of her, my people, and be ye separate, says the Lord
Almighty. Until this work of saving grace be manifested in you, Phil. 1.28.
you are the objects of the Saints pity, and Tim. 2.26, 27.
evidences of their salvation; and such instruments as Satan has Tim. 2.26, 27.
captivated, by which you are acted to oppose no profession but that which
upholdeth the power of Godliness, and is the downfall of Antichrist. In meekness
also I desire to instruct you, that you may not kick against this prick of
Gospel-information, but be forewarned to flee from the wrath to come; which,
Chorazin-like, in slighting the means of Gospel-information, has been, and may
be occasioned.

An ANSWER TO Mr. BAXTER 's ARGUMENTS in his Book entitled Plain
Scripture Proof for Infants Chruch-membership and Baptism.
FOr the orderly proceeding in the discovery thereof, I shall endeavor to
show, 1. That Mr. Baxters title to his book is impertinent. 2. His exposition
of Christ's commission, is erroneous. 3. His Arguments, whereby he would prove
infant baptism, are groundless. 4. And that he has contradicted himself, in
speaking evil of the Ordinance of Baptism.


1. That the Title of his book, Plain Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism, etc.
is impertinent, Mr. Baxter cannot but very well (I suppose) know, that Mr.
Rogers, Art. 27. confesses that the Church of England does not pretend any
plain or express Scripture Proof for Infant Baptism; and that he himself has
produced nothing but consequences, which he has hammered out upon the Anvil of
Logical Arguments; and that he has left it so mysterious and difficult, that
it is not made so plain, that he that runs may read; or that he can tell us, in
all the Scripture, in what chapter and verse we may find any thing, plainly or
expressly spoken for Infant Baptism: though on the contrary, we have plain
Scripture Proof, or the command and example of Christ and his Apostles, for the
baptism of believers only. Neither has Mr. B. for all his distinctions,
dispelled the darkness, or opened the difficulty, concerning infants
sprinkling, which has brought in all the smoke into the Temple: And therefore
I cannot imagine why Mr. B. should three hundred forty and six times print his
Title, Plain Scripture Proof, etc. except he had some design to satisfy the
gazing multitude, to sacrifice to his net, as the Athenians were moved, upon
the inscription upon the Altar, to prostrate themselves to superstition: And
therefore this title, Plain Scripture Proof, etc. proves like blue and yellow
flowers, making a greater flourish, then they are any way advantageous to the
reaper. For the true discovery thereof, let us see what Divinity may be found
in Mr. Baxter's exposition of Christ's commission for Baptism.

Mr. B. chap. 1. page 1. Matthew. 28. Go ye therefore, and disciple unto me all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost, etc. Answ. That, as a Scholar, he has ingenuously acknowledged the
original, Go ye therefore and disciple unto me, that is, Go and teach, I do
agree with him; and so I shall, if with the like ingenuity he appear in the
interpretation of the words, thus rightly translated unto us.

Mr. B. p. 4. Before I come to argue, I will tell you what is meant by a
disciple. A disciple may be taken in the larger sense, as those that are
actually believers; and then to the making of a disciple, some things may
concur effective, and some things conditionaliter. Answ. If Mr. B. had gone the
plain way to work, as his title so often proclaims, then he would have
lightened one candle by another, the first being lightened from the fire of the
Altar; I mean, he would have explained the Scripture, or commission of Baptism,
by some other Scripture: but failing herein, he has supplied the want with
Logical distinctions, a strange voice which the sheep cannot hear; and
therefore, as not acquainted with conditionaliter, and effective, they cannot
give the right hand of fellowship to Mr. B's (as being none of Christ's)
disciple: and therefore while I had thought to have returned an answer to those
distinctions, Mr. B. having reconciled himself, in telling us what disciple he
will pitch upon in his next chapter, there you may expect a further discovery.

M. B. chap. 3. p. 3. By Disciple, I mean as in the text, those that are de
jure, or incompleatly Disciples. Answ. If this be the Disciple you pitch upon,
out of the great choice that you afforded us, Its strange that Christ that is
most glorious in all his works, and in whom the Saints are complete, should
command to baptize an incomplete Disciple; truly, M. B. it were well you had
found some other master for him, and not Christ; As if Christ should say, Go
and make incomplete Disciples, which indeed is no less then an implicit
contradiction, all being complete in Christ, Col. 2.10. And I wonder M. B.
should think a Child an incomplete Disciple, if he will walk by his own
pretended light, in that p. 132. he says, that indirectly, and remotely, the
discipling of the parent is the discipling of the seed, and yet the seed for
all this, though upon his account it be twice discipled, yet it is still
incomplete, and will be so for all M. B. can do, though he had his desire that
Children should be cofirmed, that is (to speak plain English) Bishopped, p.
120. And therefore M. B's distinction may suit with the Poets fiction, which by
casting of stones created Disciples, which at first were in complete or rude,
but afterward, were more completed: and therefore it would too much savor of
partiality, to admit of his Logical distinctions, seeing in stead of
expounding, we find the text by M. B. so confounded, and overvailed with blind
and impertinent distinctions; for indeed to tell you the naked truth, baptism
does not make a Disciple, or a believer, though believing Disciples so called
by grace, ought to be baptized, that is buried, or covered over, or humbled to
God in water, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: so that to be a
Disciple, and baptized, are two distinct things, though both are united, or
married together in the same Gospel-Ordinance; and therefore M. B. ought not to
imagine, as the blind world conceiteth, that baptism makes a Disciple or
believer, or as they say, a Christian; for to be a believer, and Disciple, is
to be a Christian, who as a Christian, he cannot be so adjudged, except he be
baptized: And therefore all the course that M. B. takes, in sprinkling or
pouring water upon the face of the Child, will not do the feat. Neither can
that which M. B. says p. 14. be approved of, that the matter of a Disciple in
a natural way is nothing, but our being, be granted him, for if by nature, or
as we have a natural being, we are Disciples, then the work is done to our
hand, and Christ might have saved his Disciples a great deal of labor in
commanding them, first to disciple, by teaching; and then to baptize: And if by
nature, or our being, we have that miraculous privilege, why are we called by
nature the Children of disobedience? so that for any thing I can find, as none
of M. B's distinctions are proved by Scripture, he cannot prove that his
incomplete disciple, either in matter, or form, is the taught Disciple, that
is commanded by Christ to be baptized. And therefore I would not have troubled
my self any further, but that I find M. B. so averse against the way of
discipling according to the express command of Christ in his text, which he
pretends to explain unto us, as like the envious man, he denies his own
discipling, saying, He was discipled by education, p* 133. whereby he puts out
both of his own eyes, whereby we might lose one of our eyes, or he might have a
sandy foundation, to raise an argument against discipling by teaching:
therefore I have this further to tell him, If education made him a Disciple,
then baptism did not: and questionless, if he were well educated, he heard the
word, and was Timothy like taught the Scriptures of a Child, which through the
Spririt of grace are able to make us wise unto salvation: and though a work of
grace cannot be discovered, yet all education, and knowledge, and waiting, are
little enough; or it is but the means that God has appointed for discipling,
and yet with M. B's leave, whatsoever he thinks, yet we judge in the rule of
truth, that to attain to common knowledge of the outward profession of Christ,
does not make a Disciple, except the day star has so risen in his heart, and
his judgment be so brought unto victory, that he, as is prophesied, Psalm.
110.4. be willing as well as able, in the day of power to submit, as called, or
desire as the Eunuch did in his own person to be baptized: till this work be
wrought, we judge one is not (as before baptism they ought to be) fully
discipled: for such a discipling as M. B. speaks of, unto which he had
attained by education, suits with or may shake hands with his incomplete
Disciple; And therefore if the Disciples of John, being ignorant of the holy
Ghost, were discipled again, and rebaptized, for any thing I can see, the work
through disaffection is not so complete, but that Priscilla and Aquila may
school great Apollo, and most may learn to be Disciples; seeing the incomplete
Disciple, which M. B. speaks of in his interpretation, or rather
prevarication of the commission of Christ, cannot be approved of. And here M.
B. giving over his text, I mean, speaking no more of it then of the first
words, Go and disciple, he not as I expected proceeding to baptize them,
therefore in regard our difference lies very much concerning the right use of
the element of water, which by sprinkling, etc. is not observed; that I may
therefore show the mind of Christ, it being my desire to give satisfaction to
my Neighbors, etc. where M. B. left off, I shall therefore proceed to
interpret the Text, [And baptizing them] that is, first disciple by teaching,
and baptize them, that is, do not pour or sprinkle a little water in the face
of the Child, or partially dip in the head with the heels upwards, for this is
not to baptize, nor is the Child the Disciple that is to be baptized, but the
Text tells you whom you must baptize; that is, baptize those that are by
teaching first discipled, so that their bodies may be buried, or covered over,
and humbled upon the acknowledgement of faith and obedience, or upon the
pronouncing, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, etc. in the lowest
element of water prostrated, Abraham-like, before the presence of his Infinite
grace and glory. Thus Christ himself being baptized, and praying, was
prostrated with lowest subjection: and therefore its no marvel M. B. was
silent in speaking of baptism, for indeed this contradicting practice in
sprinkling or pouring water upon the face of the Child, would not give liberty
to make a handsome interpretation, with application to a Child, concerning
baptizing, or the right use of water in baptism. To leave then the
interpretation of which M. B. was silent, let us return to see his Arguments,
which from his unwarranted distinctions he endeavors to make his incomplete
Disciple to be baptized.

Mr. B. chap. 3. p. 15. I come now to my first Argument, which from my Text is
this: All that are Christ's disciples, ordinarily ought to be baptized. But some
Infants are Christ's disciples: Therefore some Infants ordinarily ought to be
baptized.
Answ. If Mr. B. had kept to his text, he would not have made this Argument;
the minor whereof I deny, that Infants are Christ's disciples, until, as the
text says, they be by teaching made disciples. And yet Mr. Baxter so labors
to make children disciples, that when the text fails, he is resolved it
seems, by Logical Fallacies, and wrested Scriptures, to try what can be done;
and therefore thus further argues: Those on whose necks the false teachers
would have laid this yoke, were disciples. But some of those were Infants on
whose necks they would have laid this yoke: Therefore some Infants are
disciples.


Answ. That the fallacy in the minor Proposition may appear, the light that
shines Acts 15.1. compared with verse 10. will fully discover, that false
teachers did endeavor to pervert the brethren to be circumcised, Act. 15.10.
which said brethren were called disciples, not by Circumcision: And therefore,
that false teachers would have had the disciples, which from Baptism were
called disciples, to have been circumcised, this proves nothing to make
children disciples. If therefore they that pin their faith on Mr. B's sleeve,
will not wilfully close their eyes, they may see, that Mr. Baxter, in stead of
producing Scripture to prove a child a disciple, it proves to be the brethren
which had been baptized, which were called disciples, whom false brethren would
have seduced to be circumcised, Act. 15.1, 10. upon which attempt, or the
tampering of the false teachers, with the brethren which were disciples, Mr. B.
catches hold of a shadow, or wrested consequence, to make a child a disciple.
As if a Preacher were seduced, as some disciples were, to be circumcised;
therefore all that are circumcised must be Preachers, or disciples. And that
the fallacy may now clearly be discovered, take this Argument: Those that the
brethren would have converted, are Jewish Rabbis, and Popish Priests. But the
Brethren would have Children converted: Ergo, some children are Jewish Rabbis
and Popish Priests.


Therefore, my dear friends that know not Logic, and yet have boasted of Mr.
Baxter's Arguments, you may see, if you please, that as there is a fallacy a
dictu simpliciter, ad dictum secundum quid, in this Argument, whereby children
seem to be proved Rabbis, and Popish Priests: so the like fallacy is in Mr.
B's Argument, whereby he would, from false teachers attempting to circumcise
Christians, which are called disciples, conclude from thence that children may
be called disciples. And now, behold the Scriptures fulfilled; He takes the
wise in their own craftiness, Job 5.13. in that those that are of contrary
judgment, would not, till of late, grant that none but a disciple should be
baptized: and now not being able to prove their children disciples, nay, not so
much as an incomplete disciple, must therefore, if they will make conscience to
submit to the command of Christ, let their children and themselves stay until
they bed iscipled, that so they may be baptized; and so the controversy may be
ended, and, according to the intention of Christ, all Christians may be united,
in the Gospel-profession of the Ordinance of Baptism.

And yet Mr. B. to back out or strengthen his Argument, produces several
Reasons, to prove a child a disciple.

Mr. B. ^. Because children are partakers of Gods protection.

To which I answer, That God, as God of providence, to children and all
creatures, making his sun to shine on the evil and on the good, does not make
children and all creatures disciples, whose duties is to learn to know and
follow the said God which is so good and merciful, in learning to know God, and
following of God, and in not being protected by God, are called disciples,
Matthew. 16.24.

2. Mr. B. says, Children are devoted to learning, therefore they may be
disciples.

Answ. Though children be devoted to learning, and may learn, yet I hope Mr. B.
would not have them to commence before their time; nor upon this account, while
they are a learning, and the seeds of a disciple sown in them, reap the corn,
before it be grown up, and white unto the harvest.

Mr. B. p. 18. If Infants be not Disciples, it is because they are not capable,
or because God will not show them mercy: but neither of these can be the cause.
Answ. To ask the reason of God thus in point of salvation, why have have thou
made me so? is liable to that reproof, which upon the like account Paul said,
What art thou O man, that that thou reply against God? has not Christ
already told Mr. B. That he that will be his Disciple, must deny himself, take
up his Cross and follow him? Mat. 16.14. must not every thing be as God has
determined by his will, and not as the thing is capable? for so a poor man is
capable to be rich, and a sick man to be healthful, and yet while poor and
sick, they are not said to be rich and healthful: but to answer Mr. B. datur
tertium, a Child cannot be a Disciple, because it is an implicit
contradiction, as to say a wise fool, for a Disciple is not a Child, nor a
Child a Disciple: and besides, that Disciple which is to be baptized, must not
be hid or secret, but man must so see and judge of him, as from full
satisfaction proceed to baptize him, when by teaching the party is discipled;
and therefore God in his wisdom, that gives every thing its name, does not
approve of calling a Child a Disciple, neither can baptism make a Child or any
man a Disciple: how would Mr. B. then make a Child a Disciple, but because by
grace as any is taught to profess to follow Christ, and is so discipled as a
Disciple, and as a believer, we do baptize them? Thus having answered Mr. B.
first Argument, and reasons whereby he would have proved a Child a Disciple,
his enterprise failing to prove a Child a Disciple, to make work for
Poedo-baptisme, he produces this his second Argument.

Mr. B. 2 Argu. chap. 4. p. 23. My second Argument, and therefore the chief I
make use of, is this. All that ought to be admitted visible Church Members,
ordinarily ought to be baptized. But some Infants ought to be admitted visible
Church Members: Therefore some Infants ordinarily ought to be baptized.
Answ. Of this second Argument, Mr. B. gives this superlative encomium, that
this is his chief: but believe me, if he could have made his first Argument
good, whereby a Child might have been discipled, he then had had commission for
what he had said; and therefore he failing to make his incomplete disciple to
be baptized, he would now see what he can do to make a consequence from his
first Argument, whereof this second is but a shadow: for if Children be not
Disciples, they can be no members of the Church visible: but they are not
Disciples; for indeed, to be a disciple, a member of a visible Church,
differs no more, then that a man that intends to list himself to be a
Soldier, and is approved of, only wants an opportunity to have his
admission or approbation: so a Disciple, as soon as he declares himself, and is
willing to yield himself up to serve God with his Saints, is made a visible
Churchmember: but that this work of wonder did ever appear in Infants, that
they were ever heard thus to declare their good affection to the government of
Christ's church, I never yet heard; and as soon as I hear them, I will submit to
Mr. B's. Arguments, and say, that those Children thus declaring themselves for
Christ and his Church, must needs be admitted visible Church Members: but till
this appear visibly, I desire Mr. B. would content to forbear to intrude them,
since Christ's commission will not give leave for such to be baptized, in his
name, that know not Christ, or yet have not named him; and yet Mr. B. to prove
his second Argument, forgetting his promise, that he would not meddle with
other men's Arguments, has scraped up all the thredbar'd impertinent
consequences, that any before had pretended, to have blocked up the mouth of
the Cannon, or to make the work more tedious to gainsay or oppose him: while
therefore I was intending to have lighted a Candle to have discovered, or
rather dispelled this great cloud of darkness, Providence so ordered it, that a
book, entitled A Christian, sober, and plain Exercitation on two grand
practical controversies of this time, Baptism and singing of Psalms, written
by C. Sidenham teacher to a Church of Christ in New Castle, being brought unto
me, and I finding upon perusal thereof, that it treated as sufficiently of all
Mr. Baxters consequences, and with no less advantage to his cause; and in that
Mr. Sidenham with his party, has as powerful an influence to stop an ear;
Therefore I thought that I might bear better testimony to the truth, to, answer
Mr. Baxter, in Mr. Sidenhams book: in which way I take no more liberty then he
has done with the right worthy and Apostolical Mr. Tombs. And yet before I
proceed, according to my promise, I desire to hint something to Mr. Baxter,
upon the fourth particular, which I first mentioned.

4. That Mr. B. has contradicted himself in speaking evil of the Ordinance of
Baptism, as by his two Arguments will appear, is to be discovered.

Mr. Baxter chap. 12. p. 134. his first Argument. That which is a plain breach
of the sixth commandment, is no Ordinance of Jesus Christ, but a most heinous
sin. But the ordinary practice of dipping the head in cold water, is a breach
of the sixth commandment. Ergo, it is a most heinous sin.
Answ. It is impossible that an effectually called Child of God, can raise this
Argument, without check of conscience or contradiction, he approving of the way
of baptism in Brasill, and yet in his Argument contradicts the same practice
of Christ, upon the pretense of the cold climate, and custom of the Country.
Alas, Alas, this needs no answer: for hereby the Scripture is experienced,
their o^n ^ongues shall make them fall, or at least Mr. B. I hope is ashamed,
or may be ashamed of this cavilling scandalous Argument, in making a Christians
submission to the Ordinance of Christ a heinous sin, and in telling us it is
good for nothing but to dispatch men out of the world, and to ripen
Churchyards, these be his words. What if he had lived in the time of
circumcision? he that can dispense to prevaricate Christ's command in baptism,
by pouring a little water, or sprinkling a Child's face with two or three drops
of water, certainly, if acted with the same Spirit, he would have thought the
ripple of a pin, or a drop or two of blood to be spilt, to have been sufficient
to have answered the command in circumcision.

Mr. Baxter 2 Argument. If it be a breach of the seventh commandment, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, ordinarily to baptize naked, then it is an
intolerable wickedness, and not Gods command. But it is a breach of the seventh
command to baptize naked: Therefore it is an intolerable wickedness, and not
Gods command.


Answ. I am ashamed to name Mr. Baxters lightness in mentioning (upon
supposition only) the Maids of Bewdley, though we have no example for being
baptized naked, nor any thing against it: and therefore as an indifferent
thing, a Saint may as well be baptized naked, as Saints prophesied naked; yet
it is well known that Garments with decency are approved of. And will Mr.
Baxter argue against an Ordinance, because some probable evil may ensue? why
then does he administer the Lords Supper, seeing probably so administered, many
eat and drink their own damnation, not discerning the Lords Body? or why does
he allow of marriage, meat, drink, and apparel, seeing abuse has been found
in them? why does he therefore upon uncertain conjectures, speak evil of the
way of God, in the administration of baptism? may he not be ashamed thus to
contradict himself? what is Christ's command to be observed in a hot Country,
and not in a cold? when were any killed with any one of the diseases that he
has reckoned? though to some thereof baptism has been a present remedy.

In regard therefore Mr. Baxter has so presumptuously, shamelesly,
scandalously, and malignantly spoken evil against the express command of
Christ, and that very way which Christ had submitted unto, when he like the
Eunuch went down and came out of the water after he was baptized, I can say no
more, but without any acrimony declare my Christian judgment as by the fruits
does appear, that so many Scriptures are fulfilled in Mr. Baxters
self-expressions, that herein he has like the troubled Sea cast not only mire
and dirt on the face of the Saints, but has calumniated the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ, so that in these two Arguments the smoke in the Temple has
blinded his eyes: and as he is looked upon by the common people, and cried up
in defending this practice of popery, the tail of the beast has stricken him
as a star to the earth, or brought him to a compliance or friendship with the
world, where I leave him to God that can raise him, not doubting but if he were
further discipled, then by education, he will see that all that he has spoken
against the Ordinance, and renowned Mr. Tombs, as hay and stubble shall suffer
burning. However, I leave all men to judge, how unjustly he has alleged a
Child to be a Disciple, and therefore leaving Mr. Baxter, I do friendly betake
my self to answer Mr. Sidenham.

An Answer to Mr. Sidenham 's Book, ENTITLED, A Christian, Sober, and Plain
Exercitation, on two grand Practical Controversies of these Times;
Infant Baptism, and Singing of Psalms.
Mr. S. chap. 1. page 1. BEfore I enter into the main Questions handled in this
Discourse, first, let this be considered, that there is nothing in all the New
Testament against baptizing of Infants, no^ any hin^ from any express word
dropping from Christ nor his Apostles, nor any phrase, though never so much
strained, does forbid such an act. Answer. If you will understand nothing in
Scripture to be expressly against any thing, except it do by name exclude ^t,
then Ships, Bells, and unbelieving Gentiles, etc. are not expressly prohibited
to be baptized: for this is repugnant to the wisdom of God and man, to express
the prohibiting of any thing by name, when the same thing, as not spoken unto
in another thing, is excluded: and therefore when Christ bade Thomas put his
finger into his side, Peter and John, they not being Thomas which was spoken
unto, without naming of them, were expressly by Christ's word prohibited: And so
the female, though never named, was expressly prohibited, when the male was
commanded to be circumcised. Upon the same account, Infants (though not named)
are expressly prohibited to be baptized, or to partake of the Lords Supper,
though thereby the Church is made one body, 1 Cor. 10.26. in that none, but
those that have faith, and examine themselves, are commanded to receive the
Ordinances, Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.16. Acts 8.36, 37. 1 Cor. 11.28. And
therefore, as by confession of those that are of contrary judgment, there is
express Scripture to keep Children from the Lords supper; so we have express
Scripture to keep them from Baptism, until they shall, according to the command
of Christ, be discipled, by teaching, and shall profess the faith in the Gospel.

Mr. S. endeavoring, page 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. showing by diverse Reasons, why
Consequences are to be approved of; to this I answer.

Answ. We do allow of Consequences, provided they be not (as in case of
Baptism) brought in to contradict an express command or example of Christ and
his Apostles to the contrary. And yet though Mr. S's Consequences be such as
oppose the express command of Christ, as not to deny his Plea, for information,
and trial of the Truth, I shall not deny to answer them.

Mr. S. chap. 2. page 9. The first great thing in this controversy, is, to
consider the nature of this covenant, which is the first foundation of the
privilege of believers, and their seed; and as it was first made to Abraham
and his seed, both Jews and Gentiles. And if we find the same Covenant
reaching Gentile believers and their children, as Abraham and his, we cannot be
denied the new external sign and seal of the said Covenant. Answ. That the
nature of the Covenant should be the foundation-priviledge of beleivers and
their seed, though I should, as others have, grant him; yet how justly upon
trial I conceive it will appear, that the Covenant which Mr. S. and Mr. B.
looks at, if it be truly according to its nature discovered, they will come
short of their expectations: for it appears unto me, that the Covenant only
relates to temporal promises, in which it had so large extent, that all the
Nation claimed it: yea circumcision was a means whereby every one was made of
the Nation, or endenized, Exodus 12.48. so that the Nation claimed it as their
distinguishing fleshly character, Genesis 17.11. being their entayl to an earthly
inheritance: for the discovery whereof, and that we may see the true rise and
motive cause of the institution of this covenant whereof circumcision is a
sign, which Mr. S. I suppose would have to be the foundation of the privilege
of believers; thus it appears, Genesis 15.1. that God telling Abraham upon his
complaint of being childless, and asking God what he would give him, God said,
he would multiply his seed as the Stars of Heaven for number, ver. 5. which
Abraham believing, it was imputed unto him for righteousness, ver. 6. upon
which same day God made a Covenant with Abraham, ver. 18. so that Genesis 17.12.
God relates again the same covenant with Abraham, that his seed, and all that
should relate to Abraham, should possess the land of Egypt, and to the great
river Euphrates, and therefore as a sign and token of this temporal Covenant,
God ordained circumcision as his token thereof betwixt God and his people, Genesis
17.11. and however Mr. S. and Mr. B. etc. have wrested the Scripu^e, as I shall
by and by show, in making this temporal Covenant a Covenant of grace, and as
relating unto the admission into the Church, yet I hope fully and clearly to
prove the contrary: for as though the Lord would undeceive and satisfy the
Jews, why he took away the first old Covenant, on which Mr. S. and Mr. B. etc.
like the Jews do too much dote, he declares himself, Heb. 8.7. saying, that if
the first Covenant had been good, that is, if it had related to the good of
their souls, then there had been found no place for the second, ver. 7. So that
the covenant which was taken away, was the covenant of temporal promises, as
the contents to Heb. 8. calls it, whereof circumcision was the sign, Genesis
17.11. for the cause that God alleges, why he took away the old Covenant,
is fully and plainly declared, Exodus 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. by which it does
appear, that that Covenant of which circumcision was a token, was abolished in
all intents and purposes: and the new Covenant, not made according to the old
Covenant, is only established, Heb. 8.9, 10. and therefore the old Covenant
which is abolished, upon which Mr. S. would build a foundation, is fallen to
the ground: and how then shall his doctrine for which he has no foundation, to
make the seed of believers Church Members by virtue of the Covenant of which
circumcision was a token, be able to stand, seeing it is so absolutely
condemned and taken away. M. S's and M. B's consequence for circumcision cannot
be admitted of, that Children upon that pretense should have baptism, of which
Mr. S. is much mistaken, in that he calls baptism the new external sign,
and seal of the Covenant, he having no Scripture to prove what he says,
neither can he prove that baptism is a seal at all; neither is there any such
thing in the covenant, to be signed or sealed, he as conceiteth: Yet,

Mr. Sidenham p. 10. Says, First and chiefly we affirm, this (meaning
circumcision) was the same in substance with the Covenant administered under the
Gospel, since Christ's coming in the flesh and spirit. Secondly, It was founded
on pure grace. Answ. First then, and chiefly, I answer, that here is a
confounding of things that differ, circumcision being called a Covenant, but
figuratively, Genesis 17.10. It being in its own Nature the token of the Covenant,
Genesis 17.11. so that Mr. Sidenham saying, that circumcision is the same in
substance with the Covenant in the Gospel, is partly mistaken, as also in
comparing circumcision with baptism; he being not able to find any proof in
Scripture, that baptism is either Covenant, or Seal. Secondly, And that
circumcision is not the same in substance with the Covenant under the Gospel,
Heb. 8 expressly declares, that when the Covenant whereof circumcision is a
token, and the new Covenant, are compared, that the new Covenant is established
upon better promises, Heb 8.6. then a temporal inheritance. And yet Mr.
Sidenham would have the best of promises in circumcision, as in the next place
does appear, in that he says, that circumcision was founded on pure grace, and
that it was a pure Covenant of grace, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, 19, 29.

Answ. That it may truly and clearly appear, First, that the Scriptures he
produces, witness against him; And secondly, that he has not rightly applied
them, let us observe,

1. That that which he alleges Gal. 3.16. that the promises were not made to
Abraham's seeds, as of many, but as of one, to thy feed, which is Christ: though
we take this for Christ mystical, as Mr. Sidenham would have it, yet here is
nothing relating to circumcision, in which, if we mind, it is said, the
promises were made not to the seeds, which was of Hagar and strangers, as well
as of Isaac, which promise had respect to circumcision: therefore those
promises being excluded, which had respect to the seeds of many, there is
nothing of circumcision spoken in the 16. ver. but of the promise which relates
to Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. and that ver. 17. speaks nothing of circumcision:
there are three things mentioned in the said verse, Covenant, Law, and Promise,
the first two whereof, the Covenant, and Law, are only named, as that they
could not, or cannot disannull the Promise, which is made, as I have proved
before, unto Abraham, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. and unto Abraham's seed, which are the
children of God, by grace and faith, called to walk in the steps of Abraham,
Romans 4.11, 12. as I shall presently more fully declare: therefore in that God
made a gracious promise to Abraham, because Abraham did believe in God when he
should have sacrificed his son Isaac, therefore this promise has respect to
Genesis 22.18. for you see this is not called a Covenant, but a promise, which was
made to Abraham, ver. 16, 17. and therefore that all that is spoken by the
Apostle, ver. 18. as is above mentioned, as the verses are alleged by Mr.
Sidenham, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, 19. does not hold forth any thing to make Mr.
Sidenhams pretense, that circumcision is founded on pure grace, or to be a
Covenant of pure grace, is fully discovered: And therefore,

2. That in the next place, I may make it appear, that Mr. S. has not rightly
apprehended these Scriptures, in calling circumcision from thence a Covenant of
pure grace; This I say, To be founded on pure grace, or that God of his pure
grace or good will was pleased to look on Abraham so as to give him a temporal
promise, or a seed according to the flesh, is not to be denied; yet this makes
not the gift to be pure grace: as if God in his pure grace give the wicked
meat, drink and clothing, does not prove that their meat, drink, and clothing
is pure grace. Therefore however circumcision, the sign of temporal mercies,
was given on Gods part of his pure grace, it makes not the Covenant to be pure
grace, which, as I said, in the contents of the 8. chap. to the Hebrews, is
called a Covenant of temporal promises: for all spiritual promises which were
made to Abraham, were not by virtue of circumcision, but in that, as the
Apostle says, Gal. 3.8. God foreseeing that he would justify the Heathen
through faith, preached the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all
Nations be blessed: which words are expressly mentioned, Gen 22.18. and cannot
be found Genesis 17. circumcision relating to Nations that should come of Abraham's
seed, in which temporal promise the Gentiles had no Interest, but as they
submitted to the Jews; Therefore its clear enough, or the Sun cannot shine more
clearly, then that the seed of Abraham, being believers, or walking in the
steps of Abraham, Gal. 3.7, 9. Romans 4.12. circumcision the token of a temporal
covenant, did not hold forth this spiritual mercy, which God upon Abraham's
sacrificing of his Son, promised Abraham, even to bless all Nations in him,
as has been at large discovered. And therefore that which Mr. Sidenham says,
that the Apostle uses the same expression in Heb. 8.10. where he speaks of
the new Covenant, which was, as Mr. Sidenham pretends, used Genesis 17. I will
be thy God, and the God of thy seed; In this he may see how partially he is
blasted to favor his own imagination. For first, God does not only say, as in
Genesis 17. I will be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee, but in the new
Covenant he says not only, that He will be a God unto them, and they shall be
a people unto him: but to show that this new covenant is upon better promises,
God shows that he will work a work of grace, even to write his Laws in their
hearts, etc. this God never promised in circumcision: and that God in
circumcision did only (it relating to all the world) promise no more, then to
be a God in providence unto them, or to make good his promise or covenant to
give them the promised Land, read Levit. 26.44, 45. 2 King. 13.22, 23. and
there you shall fully be informed: and therefore you may see, that circumcision
is no covenant of pure grace, or equivalent with that new covenant under the
Gospel, Heb. 8. which is said to be established upon better promises, ver. 7.
which could not be, if Mr. Sidenham might have liberty to exalt it above
measure, and plead a false title, or uphold that which by Christ and his Church
has been totally taken away, Heb. 8. Act. 15. And further, I must tell Mr.
Sidenham, which it may be may seem to him strange, that God having made man
judge of baptism, whereby man must look at what is visibly revealed, and not
contradict his commission upon the uncertain consequences of secret pretenses,
therefore the old covenant, as altogether made void and impertinent, is not
only waved, but also the gracious new covenant which is in force, except it
should be revealed or manifested, so that through discipling and profession of
faith, we could judge of it, (secret things belonging unto God) were no ground
or consequence of baptism, nor to proceed upon the promise, Act. 2.38. until
that time that they should be called.

Mr. S. chap. 3. p. 16. The next thing which must have its place of
consideration, is that question of Abraham's seed, with whom the promise was
made: and on this bangs all the main weight on both sides. And if we make
Infant believers to be in Covenant, as Abraham 's seed, the controversy will
be at an end. There is a carnal and a spiritual seed, under the New Testament,
as our opposites must acknowledge. Answ. The first great thing (as Mr. S. is
pleased to call it) the nature of the Covenant, his foundation being thrown
down, I cannot see how the door of hope, in this third chapter, can have a
hinge to hang upon: neither can your opposites, in your sense, acknowledge your
distinction, if by spiritual seed you understand the children of believers,
before they be, by being called, and made actual believers, made Abraham's
seed, in walking in the steps of Abraham, Romans 4.12, 16. Therefore as the
promise was made to Abraham, both the seed and the promise must be
distinguished. As Abraham had a natural seed, it was either that which he had
of Hagar, called the seed according to the flesh; or of Sarah, called the seed
according to the promise, because God gave it by promise: both which seeds
spoken of, Gal. 4.23. are both of them to be accounted the seed according to
the Law, Romans 4.16. and so the promise made unto them upon this account, was
the Covenant of which Circumcision was a sign; that is to say, temporal
promises, Genesis 17. as I have before fully proved.

2. But Abraham has also a seed of faith, Romans 4.16. that is, all believers,
both of the Circumcision, and of the Gentiles, Romans 4.12. which as they walk in
the steps of Abraham, are the seed of Abraham; he is their father, Romans 4.12,
16. Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. compared with Psalm. 22.23, 30. And therefore if in this
sense Mr. S. understand a spiritual seed, which the Scripture calls a seed of
faith, Romans 4.16. I shall grant him: but if he imagine that the seed of faith
came by Circumcision, or that it is, as he says, Infant-believers, then I deny
it: for I do affirm, that the seed of faith came by the promise and oath which
God made to Abraham, upon the attempting of sacrificing of his son Isaac,
whereby Abraham to be father to the seed of faith, both those that are
circumcised, and of the Gentiles, was then promised, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18.
compared with Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. Heb. 6.13, 14. So that Mr. S. and I do not so
much differ about Abraham's seed in a spiritual relation, which properly
called, is Abraham's seed by faith, Romans 4.16. as we differ, that he would make
a spiritual seed by Circumcision, and in Infants, which till they be believers,
are not so called: so that Infant-believers as considered to be Infants, were
not in covenant, as M.S. pretends, further then in that covenant whereof
circumcision was a sign, whereby only the Infants of Jews, or such as were
made Jews by circumcision, had as Abraham's seed the temporal promises, made
good unto them, of Canaan, etc. so that here again Mr. S. stumbles upon
circumcision: neither had I said this, but that Mr. S. will not let us be
quiet. But, which is worse, with reflection upon circumcision, and to get a
consequence to maintain the dotage of popery, etc. whereby they hold Children
damned if they be not baptized; Mr. S. thus far further advances his cause
with hay and stubble, saying, p. 21. there is a secret distinction and vein of
election, carried through the administration, which takes hold of some, and not
of others; as if the election or promise were made, it should not be
effectual, without that administration: but blessed be God, he has not
produced any Scripture, to sow this piece of old cloth on the new garment of
the Gospel: of which I thought to have made a farther discovery, but that
circumcision being again brought upon the stage, I am called to answer in that.

Mr. Sidenham p. 14. Says, Let us come to circumcision the seal of the
covenant. Answ. That the vail of flesh, which through circumcision hangs over
M. S's eyes, may be removed, that he may look above circumcision, the Scripture
may inform him that circumcision is not a seal of the covenant, but it is only
a Token of the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. and though it is called a seal of the
righteousness of Abraham, Genesis 15.6. compared with Romans 4.11. yet this makes
not circumcision a seal of the covenant; and if it were, it could not seal more
then is in the covenant, that is, temporal mercies: and as it was the seal of
Abraham's righteousness, which he had before circumcision, and not given by
circumcision, Romans 4.10. with whom the covenant was first made. To this I
answer, that circumcision as a seal relating to Abraham, holds forth Gods
approbation of Abraham: as signs and miracles did confirm the approbation of
the faith of the Apostles, Mark 16.17. and the conversion of the people is the
seal or approbation of the Ministry, 1 Cor. 9.2. that therefore every ones
faith must be so confirmed, God not beginning an administration, or not making
an original covenant with them, but doing for Abraham's sake, or choosing these
Apostles to be chosen witnesses, is neither consonant to Scripture, or reason:
so that the Scripture in the old Testament never speaks more, then that
circumcision is a sign of the covenant made in the flesh, Genesis 17.11. and as
it relates with respect of a particular application to Abraham, it was the seal
of his righteousness, which, as I proved before, was not by means of
circumcision: and though we do disclaim Abraham to be our Father by
circumcision, in that thereby he was but a Father of some Nations, all being
Jews, or made Jews by circumcision, Exodus 12.48. Genesis 17.15. yet we do own
Abraham as to the example of faith, as Mr. Sidenham rightly states it, to be
our Father, from the Oath and Promise God made to Abraham, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18.
compared with Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. Romans 4.12, 16.

Now that Abraham was a believer before, Genesis 17. so that God did bless
Abraham, and that circumcision did seal his Faith he had though not as the
Apostle says by circumcision, Romans 4.11. I do grant: but that God gave Abraham
in circumcision, more then Abraham begged of God, Genesis 15.3, 48. or that God
did give Abraham more then an inheritance of which circumcision was a token,
Genesis 17.4, 11. this I defend: and that therefore circumcision was not an
administration to make Church Members, I desire (this being so much mistaken)
to produce these reasons to the contrary.

1. Because they did not circumcise in the Temple, or by a Priest, but a woman,
Exodus 4.25. and others did circumcise, Josh. 5.3.

2. A stranger by circumcision, was not said to be of the Church, but as one of
the Nation, Exodus 12.48, and if any refused to be circumcised, they were not to
be excommunicated out of the Church, but to be cut off out of the Nation, Genesis
17.14. and that the Church is not the Nation, Reason the seventh proves.

3. The Female was not circumcised, and yet Hanna and other Women were of the
Church: and if in the Man the Woman might be admitted into the Church, why
might not the Woman in the Man be baptized, and receive the Lords Supper? since
they would have baptism to succeed circumcision,

4. Because God said, that the Covenant of which circumcision was a sign, Genesis
17.11. was a covenant in the flesh, Genesis 17.13. and God did never promise more
then a temporal inheritance in that covenant, Genesis 15.3.18. compared with Genesis
17.3, 4, 5, 8.

5. In the case of Dinah marrying with Sichem, all that was desired of him, was
this, that they should be one people, if Sichem, etc. would be circumcised:
which was done without any change of religion, Genesis 34.22, 24. and though it
might be supposed (as we do with our children) they would endeavor to learn
them, and make them submit to their Religion; yet all this endeavoring, like
the pains that we take in the nurture and admonition of our Children, did not
admit or make them visible Church Members, but only made preparation for their
admission: as the next reason will fully clear it.

6. Because to the Jews God said, Gather my Saints together unto me, those that
have made a covenant with me, by sacifice. Psalm. 50.5. and Zeph. 3.9. its
prophesied both of Jews and Christians, that they should serve God with one
consent; Therefore Children not sacrificing, whereby there might be a visible
appearance of Faith and Repentance, and they not being willing or knowing to
serve God with one consent, could not be of the visible gathered Church, or
they were not visible Church Members: for to make a visible Church member,
there must be something appearing in the party that is to be admitted, so as to
give his consent: but in a Child we have or see nothing, that represents the
face of a Churchmember.

7. Children by circumcision were not made Church Members, because after they
had been circumcised, they were presented unto the Lord in the Temple: and our
Savior did no more for them, when they were brought unto him, then bless them,
by praying for them, Mat. 19.

8. God was said to have a Church in the Wilderness, Act. 7.38. and yet for
forty years together they were not circumcised: and therefore circumcision made
not a Church, if baptism, as Mr. Sidenham says, does not make one; for so he
says, page 166. Baptism does not form a Church.

9. Because the Gentiles had a Church, as Mr. Baxter has notably proved by
Job, etc. and Abraham was of the Church before, and yet the Gentiles were never
circumcised, and Abraham had not been circumcised, but that God made
circumcision a sign of the covenant, which was to give him a seed by Sarah,
and to make him a Father, and Sarah a Mother of diverse Nations, Genesis 17.6, 16.
for as all Nations whether Jews or Gentiles, are blessed in Abraham, this was
not by circumcision, but by oath and promise made to Abraham, Genesis 22.^6, 17,
18. as the Apostle, Gal. 3.9. compared with Heb. 6.13, 14. fully declares: and
therefore we do not look at circumcision, that it did admit unto the Church, or
that baptism should succeed it, circumcision relating to temporal promises.

10. Because these words in the covenant whereof circumcision is a sign, I
will be thy God, and o thy seed after thee, were only spoken of God, that he
might manifest himself to be a God in providence, to make his temporal promise
good to Abraham, and such strangers that should sojourne with him: God
excepting against none in circumcision, as he does in point of salvation: and
therefore God expressly declared his meaning, that in respect of the covenant
whereof circumcision was a sign, he was their God to make good his promise to
give them the Land of Canaan, Levit. 26.44, 45. and in that he condemned and
took away this circumcision, making a new covenant, not according to the old
covenant, declares that the old covenant had no spiritual promises, Heb. 8.6,
7, 8, 9.

11. That Mr. Sidenham and Mr. Baxter making circumcision to bring Children
into the Church, is but from their own wrested consequences, for there is no
such Scripture that says, Circumcision makes a Child a member of the Church,
neither is there any Scripture that can prove circumcision a covenant of pure
grace, or that baptism does succeed it, upon which they ground their conclusion
or consequence.

12. If baptism should succeed circumcision, then it could not be said, that
baptism is the like figure of Noah's Ark, 1 Pet. 1.21. in which there was no
Children, nor did any enter into it, but such as believed the word preached
unto them.

13. They were debtors to the Law, not by covenant or contract (the Law being
made four hundred and forty years after circumcision, Gal. 3.17.) and therefore
they were debtors to the Law by consequence, as a thing that followed, and was
after imposed upon the people; so that they were not circumcised upon that
account.

14. They were twice circumcised. The first time, in token they should inherit
the promised Land. And the second time, as being come to possess it, Joshua
5.2. therefore circumcision did not make them Church Members.

The great thing then which Mr. Sidenham page 9. speaks of in this
controversy, the nature of the covenant being fully and plainly discovered,
its too apparent that he has been too much discipled by the Jewish rabbis, in
making the Covenant by their traditions and doctrine, greater then ever God
intended it, whereby the promise and oath God made to Abraham, whereby he is
the Father of the faithful, has been over-looked; Therefore Mr. Sidenham
failing to make good his hinge and maine weight, in thinking to make all
promises to Abraham as Father to the faithful, to be held out in circumcision,
and that it was a seal of the covenant, and baptism a seal of the new covenant,
in all which his errors and mistakes have been plainly discovered: yet I would
not have Mr. Sidenham or any of his judgment, to think, that I have denied him
that which may be some have, or he has expected to have granted him (as I
should readily have done, if it had been Gods truth) in relation to the
covenant whereof circumcision was the sign: as though, if Mr. Sidenhams and
Mr. Baxters consequences were granted him, he could thereby prove his
infant baptism; for this I say, that though he were certain that a Child were
in the new covenant of the Gospel, yet no visible fruit of holiness, of
profession, of faith, coversation, and willing desire of baptism being made to
appear, secret things belonging unto God, and we being commanded as any shall
be discipled to baptize them; its not in Mr. Sidenham, etc. to gainsay Christ's
will and power, to make the admission into the Church, according as he fancieth
by any pretended pretenses, consequences, or precedents, or to admit a Child,
or ignorant person, not being by Christ tolerated, seeing according to his own
pretended light, he did not regulate circumcision to a former administration,
neither is there any Scripture to prove that baptism succeeds circumcision,
but both by command and example the Scripture does prove the contrary;
therefore in the simplicity of the Gospel, except Mr. S. will flee from
Scripture, and justify the falling away from the faith, so that in this point
of Infant Baptism, he should comply with the tradition of Popery, he has
hitherto produced nothing to uphold his controversy in this great thing,
foundation and hinge, which I have answered. To proceed then.

Mr. S. p. 22. Infants, if believers, were never cast out of the visible Church
of Christ, of which they were once in. Answ. According to that maxim, Omnis
privatio implicat habitum, you know that every dispossession implies a
possession: Infants cannot therefore be cast out of the Church, before he can
prove them admitted: and if Mr. S. or any man living can tell us by what
visible administration, Children were admitted visible Church Members before
the time of Abraham, or in the Gentiles Church, or by what Scripture they are
said to be admited members by cirumcision; I shall admire him and them, and
acknowledge their discovery, desiring him till then not to conclude, that we do
cast them out, or deny them any thing, that can be conscientiously granted them.

Mr. S. chap. 4. p. 30. In that Mr. Sidenham does make a twofold distinction,
of being in covenant, in relation to the election of grace: and secondly, to be
in covenant, in facie visibilis ecclesiae;

Answ. To this I answer, first, that only the elect are in covenant of saving
faith, which is called as he says, by Divines, intentionally in covenant, as
God intending only to save them. I agree: only this may be observed, 1. That
the election of Grace is not by the Covenant whereof Circumcision is a sign.
2. That if upon this account, that is, Predestination, we should look on
children, then children of believers, as well as believers, Papists, Turks, and
Infidels, may be in the Election, even before they be called; and yet this will
give no liberty to children, until their secret election be made visibly
appearing, through a gracious call, Act. 2.38.

2. In that Mr. S. tells us that there is a being in Covenant in facie
visibilis Ecclesiae, in the face of a visible Church; I confess, that a visible
Church should have a race, so that they may see, hear, and speak with one
another, to yield up themselves to serve God with one consent, Zeph. 3.9. but
how he will make Infants in swadling-clouts such visible members, I know not.
For want of such a face of the Church, Mr. S. I suppose excludes Infants from
the Lords Supper, though he confesses that thereby the Church is made one
body, page 169. and so does the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.17.

And I do absolutely deny that ever there was any such Covenant, by virtue of
which God said a child should be counted a member of the visible Church.
Therefore Mr. S's Scriptures to prove that by Covenant children were brought
into the Church, are to be examined.

1. As to that place, Romans 9.4. which Mr. S. produces;

I answer, that it only holds forth the several privileges belonging to the
Jews, but does not hint so much as one word, that by Circumcision children were
brought in facie visibilis Ecclesiae, or made members of the visible Church.

2. To that place, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12, 13, 14.

I answer, It is not at all proved that Circumcision did at all relate to
Religion, but that God said that he would make them a people, as he promised,
Genesis 17.6, 16. to make Abraham a father of many nations, and so Sarah should be
a mother of many nations, as I have proved before of which Covenant
Circumcision was the sign.

3. To that place, Joh. 15.2. and Job. 1.11. I cannot see the least conjecture
of a Covenant.

4. To the last place, Psalm. 50.5. Gather my saints together, that is, make a
visible Church; This I acknowledge: but that any children were gathered, the
next words tell him who they be that God would have gathered, even such as have
made a covenant with sacrifice: not such as are of the covenant whereof
circumcision is but a sign, but such as have made a covenant with me (says
God) in sacrifice: so that we find no shadow of proof in the places produced
by M. S. that children are of the visible Church. To another relation.

Mr. S. chap. 5. page 35. endeavors to open that place, Acts 2.39. For the
promise is made unto you and your children, etc.

Answ. In the pretended opening of which Scripture, Mr. S. indeed has so
over-veyled the same, and shut it up in Logical Distinctions, Critical
Questions, and Wrested Applications, that I may say of this Scripture, as the
parents said of their son, It so clearly shines, that it is able to answer for
it self. These be the words: Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ: for the promise is made unto you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall
call. Now the promise here, which Mr. S. omitted, as the antecedent to be
related, was to receive the holy Ghost, by such as did repent and were
baptized, and who are here said to repent, to be baptized, and to receive the
holy Ghost: but such of them, and of their children, and them that are afar
off, and of their children, with this restriction, even to as many, and no
more, then the Lord our God shall call. So that here is a plain restriction,
and application to whom this promise is made, even to as many as the Lord our
God shall call. And therefore no heart could desire a more full and plain
expression of the mind of God. And therefore Mr. S. has not opened, but shut
up, or turned the stream of those gracious expressions of Scripture. And yet
upon conclusion, after a great deal of discourse, this chapter consisting of
almost a sheet of paper, he concludes, that however this Scripture holds forth
the promise of believers of the Gospel, both Jews and Gentiles, and their
children: which is true, if the last words, wherein all the main business
depends, be applied, whereby we may see to whom this promise is made, even to
as many as the Lord our God shall call.

Mr. S. chap. 6. page 45. having hitherto endeavored to plead his own cause,
by the strongest Arguments which by consequence he could produce, now
endeavoring to throw down our foundation in this sixth chapter, he tells us,
that our great plea from Mat. 3.8, 9. is made vain.

These be Mr. S's words:

That we may still take off the Objections, let us view that place so much
stood on, Matthew. 3.8, 9. When John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come
to his Baptism, he says, O generation of vipers, who has forewarned you to
flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. And think
not to say that you have Abraham to your father: for I say that God is able of
these stones to raise up children unto Abraham. From this text they gather, The
pretense of being Abraham's children could not give them a right to Baptism. And
if John denied Abraham's seed upon that account, much more would he the adopted
children.

That this is no such ominous place against Infant Baptism, consider who they
were he spoke unto, the Pharisees and Sadduces, men of age, and degenerate from
Abraham's faith, persons that lived in their own works and righteousness:
therefore he calls them a generation of vipers, which was not as they were
Abraham's children, but as they walked not in Abraham's steps, and were quite
degenerate.

Answ. To which I answer, that the plea is not vain (as Mr. S. in the contents
of his chapter pretends) that is by us made from Matthew. 3.8, 9. though to
obscure the light that therein shines, or for Mr. S. to light his candle, or
gloss, or interpretation, to darken the sun-light of express Scripture, is
labor in vain, in that,

1. I say, that Matthew. 3.8, 9. in the general, is directly against
Infant Baptism, in that none but such as have faith and repentance must think
to be baptized, is as clear a place as can be desired or pleaded for.

2. That the pretense or consequence from Circumcision, from this of Mat. 3.8,
9. Think not to say you have Abraham to your father, is also condemned, it
appears that John did not judge them to have any benefit or privilege as being
Abraham's seed according to the Law, Romans 4.16. whereby Abraham was their father
by circumcision, Genesis 17.5, 16. And therefore John apprehending the Pharisees
and Sadduces (as Mr. S. etc. do) to style themselves, through this pretended
privilege from Abraham, without looking home for faith and repentance, which
every child of Abraham should have, which calls Abraham father by faith, as
only they that believe ought to do, Gal. 3.7. therefore, to undeceive the
Pharisees and Sadduces, and to unbottom them, and to throw down their sandy
foundation, that John in the simplicity of the Gospel might be downright with
them, (though it is true, that Mr. S. says, that he did not call them a
generation of vipers, as they were Abraham's seed, yet) that they might not
through fleshly confidence make their plea, or rest upon this account, that
they might be baptized, being but Abraham's seed according to Law, and not by
faith, he tells them (to undeceive them) saying, Think not to say that you have
Abraham to your father, as that you should think upon this account, that I
should baptize you; therefore John, without as much as taking notice (which he
would have done, if there had been cause) of any legal privilege they had by
Abraham to plead for Baptism, only exhorts them to faith and repentance, by
which they are the children of Abraham by faith, Romans 4.12, 16. Gal. 3.7. which
John makes the ground of his admittance unto Baptism: unto which
Gospel-ordinance, none but a taught disciple, by the express and plain words of
Christ, ought to be admitted. And therefore our plea, that the pretense of
being Abraham's children by Law, or Circumcision, could not give a right to
Baptism, as has been before often proved, is very warrantable: so that John
did not desire to dispossess them, or question them as the Legal seed, or
children of Abraham; but only let them know, that they ought not to have so
much as a thought to get Baptism, though they should think to say, We have
Abraham to our father: which in other respects, it was both lawful for them to
think, profess, and affirm, that they were Abraham's children according to the
Law, but yet not to plead it as a consequence for Baptism, much less for their
childrens. And, but that I strive not to take advantage upon every occasion,
it is an easy thing to prove by the words of Christ, in that he did approve of
the Pharisees to sit in Moses chayr, and of their doctrine; and ^n that they
(as the word Pharisee signifies) did expound the Scripture; and that the
Sadduces were strict living men, that gave much to the poor, though they
(admitting of nothing but the letter of the Scripture) denied the resurrection:
yet, as Authors testify, they were the best of the Jewish Church, and did
uphold circumcision, though, as many that pretend to the Church, they stood for
traditions, and had their failings, and, through unbelief in Christ, were a
generation of vipers: yet that they were quite cut off, and degenerated from
Abraham's seed by the Law, he cannot prove, as may appear by Christ, Joh. 8.37,
39. And therefore John not approving of them upon this account, as being
Abraham's seed according to the Law, makes it clear, that John did object both
against them for their evil lives, and for pretending that they should have
Baptism, from the pretense that Abraham is their father according to the Law,
as before said. Therefore we stand to our plea, that Matthew. 3.8, 9. is not
only against Infants baptism in the general, but also against the very
consequence which (from Circumcision, whereby Abraham is a father according to
the Law) is pretended, to uphold the same. And therefore children were not
baptized by John, as though, as Mr. S. says, p. 47. they were neglected by
John, as though he could not have got time to attend to baptize them; but, John
did not baptize them, because they were not Abraham's seed according to the
faith, Romans 4.12, 16. Gal. 3.7, 9. that is, they were not actually believers,
otherwise John would not have been guilty of such partiality and injustice; for
John refused none but such, and all such whatsoever, as in whom there was not
the appearance of the fruits of faith and repentance, Acts 15.1, 2, 3, 4. And
seeing, by Mr. S. children were not baptized by John, and yet all Judea and
Jerusalem, and all the regions round about Jordane, came to John's Baptism, Mat.
3.5. I hope he may be persuaded that country and households may be baptized,
and yet children, ignorant, and profane, according to Christ's command, may
justly be debarred of the said Gospel-Ordinance.

Mr. S. chapter 7. p. 49. 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean, but now are
they holy.

Answ. All that are of Mr. S's judgment, are so partial, and do so apparently
contradict themselves in the application of holiness, as pretending it relates
unto childrens Baptism; in that, as they pretend to bring children into the
Church, in that they say they are holy; so on the contrary, they excommunicate
them out of the Church, from being partakers or members of the Body or Church
in the Lords Supper, because they want says and holiness, which is required in
all communicants. Therefore I care the less to trouble my self or others in
further answering this wrangling consequence: for they themselves show
sufficiently, that it is not relative holiness, as being appropriated to God,
as the vessels in the temple, 1 Samuel 21.5. but, it is the holiness of
conversation; which we nor they cannot see in a child; the ground, with faith,
of admission into an Ordinance: which rule as they walk by in admission unto
the Supper; so, by the same rule they ought to walk, in the admission into the
Ordinance of Baptism. And therefore Mr. T. is not (as Mr. S. says) too
critical, to enquire whether children holy inherently, imputatively, or
invisibly: for unless there be a manifestation of holiness, as the fruit of the
inward grace, we see not a disciple: and therefore man being judge of Baptism,
cannot, by the rule or commission of Christ, judge a child to be baptized. And
therefore as Friar Toi^is consequence, That because Angels were holy, we may
pray, Hallowed be thy name: so Mr. S. pretending children are holy, ergo we may
baptize them, is equally to be condemned.

Mr. S. chap. 8 and 9. In which he endeavors, from the cutting off the Jews,
and ingraffing in of the Gentiles, to relate to a visible Church Membership, in
answering Mr. Tombs eight Arguments to the contrary.

To which I answer, That, without any partiality, I cannot see but that Mr. T's
eight arguments are so unanswered by Mr. S. that it were to eclipse Mr. T's
light, and to take upon me an unnecessary task, to answer Mr. S. Mr. Tombs's
eight Arguments shining more glorious, through the opposition made against
them. That I may therefore only hint something that may further discover the
mystery of cutting off and graffing in, etc. I conceive it cannot be understood
of visible Church Membership, which is but a consequence and effect of
Preaching; but hereby God has declared, in a more general way, his total
withdrawing away of his presence, as denying the Jews, and affording of the
Gentiles the means of salvation. So that we may understand root and branch, as
root and rush or branch is explained, Isai. 9.14. And therefore as Paul, Acts
13.46. says, It was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken unto you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles; thus, there was a cutting
off, and ingraffing in; rejecting the Jews, and affording of the Gentiles of
the means of salvation.

To proceed, Mr. S. chap. 10. page 88. shows the harmony of Matthew. 19. with
Mark 10. and Luke 18. concerning the bringing of Infants to Christ, and his
acts toward them.

Answ. Not to occasion discord to such a harmony, the ground of Mr. Philipus
consequence, which I though (thought many are not of that opinion) the
strongest consequence that is pretended for Infant Baptism; therefore that Mr.
S. etc. may see, that we do desire to declare, that we are so acted with the
Spirit of Christ and his Apostles, to follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. who is our
forerunner, Heb. 9.20. in every thing; whereby the reign of Christ, in raising
men up in the spirit of the Apostles and Prophets, Rev. 20. may be made
visible: that we may profess to imitate Christ, (Miracles excepted) in all
things, in that Christ in all things: was the great servant of God in obeying,
Isai. 42.1. Therefore, I humbly conceive, they are not to be judged, that are
made willing to imitate Christ, as in praying for a blessing for meat and
drink, and to bless the elements of bread and wine in the Lords Supper, if they
also shall in imitation of Christ bless children, by praying for them: yet in
this we have not the least ground at all for the Gospel-ordinance of baptism;
though herein our Hannab-like love and care of children, to seek God for them,
and that they may be brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is
discovered.

Mr. S. chap. 11. page 103. wherein the method of God in the Old Testament, of
a administering Ordinances in families, and baptizing households, in the New
Testament, how far it contributes to Infants baptism.

Answ. Though I acknowledge, as Mr. S. has declared, that Abraham and his
house was circumcised, and might allege that Abraham had no children in his
house, Ishmael being thirteen years old, and Isaac as yet unborn, when Abraham
was circumcised; yet this needs not to be alleged, for Mr. S. cannot prove
that Abraham was brought into the Church, he being in the Church before: and
Israel his son, if he were called to offer, or bring his offering unto the
altar, was also a visible member of the Church, Psalm. 50.5. And besides,
Circumcision being but the sign of a temporal covenant, Genesis 17.8, 11. as I
have before fully proved, therefore I see no ground, from Abraham's household
being circumcised, to be a president or method (as you call it) for bringing of
children which cannot profess; seeing, upon profession, Christ has ordained
all to be called to the Ordinance of Baptism. And that, which puts all out of
doubt, the Scripture it sel^ clearly removes this scruple or supposition, in
that when whole households were baptized, as in Acts 10. Cornelius and all his
house feared God: and of the Jayler and his household that was baptized, it is
said, that he and all his house heard the word of God: Acts 16.32. was
baptized, ver. 33. believing in God with all his house, verse. 34. And when Paul
baptized the household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1.16. it is said in the same Epistle,
chap. 16. verse. 15. that the household of Stephanus addicted themselves to the
ministry of the Saints: so that there is a constant method to the contrary. If
there then had been a child in Lydia's house, she going to hear, not knowing
of Baptism (a thousand families not having little children, as either not being
married, barren, or ancient) I conceive the like would have been mentioned. And
therefore I do not say, as Mr. S. says, chap. 6. page 47 that children were
neglected: for if it had been the will of God, the Apostles would have readily
baptized them, and would not have neglected their duty; nor would the holy
Ghost so fully have declared the exclusion of children; or nominated, that all
in the house believed, etc. when households were baptized.

Mr. S. chap. 12. page 109. in which Circumcision and Baptism are compared.

To which I answer: Mr. S. having pleased himself to roll over the same stone,
(I may say, a stone of offense) in tumbling it back again, we being fully
troubled with it, chap. 1.2, 3. So that Mr. S. I suppose, will not find it
useful for his building: therefore I much admire, that he would compare Baptism
and Circumcision, and yet make them both look so like themselves, as that, page
114. the one (he says) cutting away sin, as with a knife; and the other
washing it away with water. In which words of Mr. S. there appears so much
smoke in the temple, in this blind Popish doctrine, as that I need not further
confute it. And yet it is so precious in his eyes, as that the darkness of
Uncharitableness has so far possessed his spirit, (as I am constrained to say)
that he further has judged his brethren, saying, That if they did with more
sobriety weigh such considerations, they would not with such foolish contempt
write and speak of Infant baptism.

To which words of Mr. S. in soberness, plainness, and in the simplicity of the
Gospel, I say unto him, Brother, first take out the moat out of your own eyes,
which makes you imagine you see your brethren want sobriety and wisdom, in that
they cannot with you see that knife and water that cutteth off and washes away
sin. Who is most inconsiderate, I pray you? It is the blood of Christ, and not
that of Circumcision, which is the fountain; and not of water, that is set up
for sin and for uncleanness, Z^ch. 13.1. Did not Popery hold forth this
doctrine, in teaching that Original sin is washed away in Baptism? Certainly
upon second thoughts, I hope Mr. S. will not condemn his despised brethren of
foolish contempt, it upon this account, as Popery has corrupted and perverted
the Ordinance, they deny your doctrine concerning Baptism and Circumcision,
being thus by you made enemies to the cross of Christ: and therefore there
neither wants wisdom nor sobriety in those, that upon this account do zealously
oppose the ascribing of Justification to Circumcision and Infants baptism;
seeing Circumcision did never cut off sin, and that Infant baptism is repugnant
to the command of Christ in the Scripture. And though I am tired, to meet again
with Circumcision, which was so silenced by the first General Assembly, Acts
15. as methinks it should not be received by us that succed them;

To answer further: That Circumcision, as Mr. S. pretends, has no
correspondency with Baptism, we may observe,

1. That Baptism is upon profession and prayer: but Circumcision without any
prayer or profession was instituted.

2. Baptism has relation to the Church called out of the world: but
Circumcision was only the token of an entayl of inheritage, in which the world
were gathered, or made a nation, Exodus 12.48.

3. Baptism brought in both men and women into the Church: but Circumcision had
no relation to the female. And therefore I know not in what Baptism and
Circumcision may justly be compared.

Mr. S. chap. 13. page 116. tells us, that Col. 2.11, 12. is a famous place
holding forth correspondencie betwixt Circumcision and Baptism.

To which I answer. You see Circumcision has got upon the stage again, to
plead its correspondencie betwixt it and Baptism, from Col. 2.11, 12. from
which you cannot expect any great applaudet, first, in that M. S. confesses
that some Divines are of contrary judgment. And if all be not, they may see
cause of better information, if they consider, that it is circumcision made
without hands which precedeth, verse. 11. which Baptism cannot succeed, v. 12.
And therefore this place which Mr. S. produces, cannot be famous, except
thereby, that Mr. S. produces a place, whereby he is cast with his own
witness. But I hasten.

Mr. S. chap. 14. page 122. In which is a clear explication of Matthew. 28.19.
with Mark 16.15, 16. wherein their Arguments from the first institution are
opened and confuted.

Answ. Mr. Baxter's Arguments, and explanation of the commission of Christ, Go
and disciple unto me, and baptize, is I hope so fully answered, that all the
mists, scruples, wrangling, and criticisms, whereby Mr. S. has endeavored to
over-veil the commission of Christ, are there so answered, that it will further
appear, that Mr. S. is either under delusion, or does prevaricate the command
of Christ, in that he would have the express and most plain words of Christ, Go
teach and baptize, to mean sprinkle an untaught disciple: An implicit
contradiction to the Gospel-Ordinance, as in Mr. S. next chapter will more
appear.

Mr. S. chap. ^5. page 130. In which the signification, or what it is to be
baptized, is discovered.

Answ. That you may see what Mr. S. has done in this business, and how little
his Humane authority, which page 131. li. 1. he says, are the best guides in
this case: It cannot be denied, but that after Mr. S produced Scapula, Pasor,
and Grotius, to show their judgment of Baptism, out of his ingenuity he
confesses (which is all which we desire to be granted) that those Authors, in
the strictest sense, acknowledge, and do interpret baptism for immersion, that
is, to be covered all over, or, as the Scripture says, to be buried in
baptism, Romans 6.4. Now behold how Truth prevails! when Mr. S. set himself,
and all his learning, to find some scruple or doubt against the known received
practice of Christ and his Apostles in baptism, to try the test, and to see how
it may be judged by man; his own witnesses, Budeus, Scapula, and Grotius,
confess, that in the strictest sense, baptizing is to be understood as we would
have it. Yet notwithstanding, Mr. S. does with this Ordinance, as the Heathens
(as Josephus tells us) did with Christ, in that they would not acknowledge him
to be God, because the Synod and common people had not seen him before his
resurrection. For, to deny the right use of water in baptism, Mr. S. flees to
the Oracle of the Athenians. O^ wonderful! how gropes he, or stumbleth for
light on the noonday! or how hardly would he admit of Baptism? In that he
says the Athenians baptized pots or cups; what then? do you think them so
slovenly, that they would only sprinkle their pots and cups, which are usually
put into, or washed all over in the water? Alas, Mr. S. alas, this running
under the fig tree for shelter, discovers Eve's nakedness. Truly, these
critical fancies, and wrested allegations, will not hold water. You are
deceived, if you think to blind a seeing eye from beholding the right use of
the element of water; into which Christ descended, was buried, and for this
cause they chose Jordano, for that there was much water there, to be the place
for baptism. And therefore though at the beginning of the Chapter, p. 130. and
in the last lines but two, you have promised to clear up the mist; yet indeed
you have done nothing less. But it is no matter; the sun of Truth can shine
through your darkness, which cannot comprehend it. And that which makes me
humbled, is this, that I see you do much endeavor to put a veyl upon the Word;
so that p. 134. you say, Let us view (your veyl being cast over) the Scriptures
which they bring for maintaining of this signification, that is, to be covered
over in baptism, Matthew. 3.13. Act. 8.36, 37, 38. What think you, Mr. S. have
not those Scriptures satisfied you against sprinkling, or pouring water on the
face of a child? Not to trouble you how much Mr. S. strives to evade with his
distinction, ab and ex, that Christ came not out of the water: as though Philip
was not baptized as Christ, whom he confesses to have come out of the water.
Oh lamentable cavilling! what would he do? would he with his ab or ex deny the
gonig into the water? or what would Mr. S. mean, saying, p. 135. that Philip
was as much in the water as the Eunuch? what, was Philip buried in the water as
much as the eunuch? Lord make us truly humbled. How gladly would man uphold
his sandy foundation! or how loath is a lofty spirit to become humbled! Cannot a
man baptize, or put another man into the water, but he must go as much into the
water as the party that he baptizeth? How Mr. S. should be able to answer to
the third place, where it is said, John was baptizing in Enon, near Salim,
because there was much water there, in regard his sprinkling ceremony speaks
his contradiction, I shall not spend time to no purpose, to answer more then I
have said, to what he can allege against the baptizing because of much water;
seeing that as Reason Janus-like has two faces, some men have a face to object
against any thing.

Mr. S. page 138. The last pretense commonly urged for this dipping, is from
the analogy it has with Christ's burial: Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Buried with him
in baptism. Hence they say it is most clear, we must be dipped under water, else
it will not represent a burial. In this they put all their confidence.

Answ. Our confidence is in God and his Truth; and therefore we shall be ready
to answer, if you can, more seriously then before, object any thing from
Scripture to prove the contrary practice: And therefore let us hear what Mr. S.
has to say, page 138. in these words:

Plunging the whole body in water, does not represent burial: for the custom of
the Jews was, to cut out a place like a cave, or den, out of a rock, to lay
their dead bodies: and, as it is observed by a man of great learning and
diligence, Thus when we sleep in our houses we may be said to be buried, having
something over our heads.

Answ. In that Mr. S. has acknowledged, that to be covered over head,
represents burial; or to be buried in baptism, is to have the water covering
us; in this he has, whether he intended or no, justified our proceeding, and
condemned his own sprinkling business or ceremony. To what Mr. S. says further
in this particular.

Mr. S. page 139. relates, Secondly, the manner of burying in Europe, is not by
plunging the body in a pit of dust, but by casting dirt or dung on the person:
so that the pouring out water on the face of an infant, as a passive subject,
seems more to answer the similitude of burying, then the casting into the
water, wherein there is some motion of the party himself, contributing to his
baptism. Answ. In that Christ went into the water, and prayed in the water; and
that in imitation of Christ it is said, Act. 22.16. be baptized -- calling upon
the Name of the Lord; the mystery of a burial is held forth, not so much from
passive deadness, as in being separated and covered in the water, whereby
deadness in that act is declared. And this Mr. S. page 138. that to be covered,
is employed in burial, and that this covering in water is not by sprinkling: for
in stead of covering the child, to represent a burial, Mr. S. takes another
course, or the Good-wives, by his permission; for they take off the cloth, and
make the child's face, that before was covered, to be uncovered, that he may
sprinkle a drop or two, or pour a little water on the face. Now hereby that he
should represent a burial, when he seems only to rantize the face; it is known
that the child is so far from being covered, or hid from the people, or
separated, that the Goodwives hold it up in their arms, to be rantized in the
face of the Congregation. Which methinks Mr. S. should not fancy to represent
a burial: for in this he is as much mistaken, as he is by the book, in that he
tells us, page 141. that the Jailer was baptized in prison: for Acts 16.30. the
Jailer brought out Paul out of prison, and after Paul had preached to the
Jailer, and to all his house, then the Jailer was baptized: and that this was
not in prison, as Mr. S. dreamed, it is said after he was baptized: he brought
them into his house, verse. 34. But this mistake is not so great, as that Mr. S.
has thus far suffered his passion to be predominant, as to say, page 142. that
if there be any absolute need of dipping, it is to cool the heat of these men's
spirits, who deny baptism to be true, because they have not been plunged.

Answ. Oh strange! if this vox populi should come from Christ, what is that he
tells of cooling the heat of spirits? Alas, Physician, cool your self. But I
hope he has his check, as I am troubled for his levity: for that fire of zeal
that is in the Saints, to own the due administration of the Ordinance in
Baptism, is such a fire of zeal, that Mr. S. is not able to quench it. And if
there could be an outward remedy for hot spirits, it were a mercy that the
sparkles of Mr. S's youthfulness were so far quenched, that it might not be his
recreation to contradict the mind of Christ in the right use of the element of
water in baptism; which we do not, as Mr. S. says, ascribe to plunging, but to
be covered over, or buried with Christ in baptism.

Mr. S. chap. 16. page 148. endeavoring, that the washing of the body, Heb.
10.22. was not meant by baptism; and his summoning up his former principles, as
he calls them, chap. 17. p. 154. and his business in troubling himself about
the administration of baptism, chap. 18. being things that are not either
granted, or denied, prejudicial to the cause, no more necessary then his
recapitulation of his former principles, which does spend time, and make him
tedious to the Reader, as what he has alleged in Christ's being baptized by
John, chap. 19. page 162. with his conceited Question, Whether Christ did
preach before he did baptize: All these Chapters being but strife of words, and
doubtful disputations, I not striving for mastery, but only, as engaged,
endeavoring to undeceive the deluded people, in holding forth the Truth; I
seeing no edification for me to follow the flying shadows of needless
conjectures, altogether as unedifying as endless genealogies: Therefore only
to the last Chapter, wherein Mr. S. holds forth, page 166. That Baptism does
not form a Church;

I answer, That though Baptism does no more form a Church, then it forms a
believer, no Church has been found or acknowledged, which has not been
baptized. Therefore, though through the falling away from the Faith, Christians
can experience, that the work of grace, in giving a seal to the Ministry, and
thereupon there has been a yielding up of one another to serve God with one
consent, whereby a Church has been gathered, before these members (as in the
Churches of all Independents) they have been baptized: yet if the said
Independent Churches should in mercy have their eyes opened (as some can
experience) to see and submit to the mind of Christ in the Order of the
Gospel, whereby the first that is in baptism be last discovered, then in this
extraordinary work of grace, the work of grace upon full trial being approved
of, that the said Church be found to be gathered Saints, and the seal of the
Ministry, then the said Church, as a household of faithful, without breaking
their relation of Pastor and Flock, they may be baptized. For we must not build
upon another man's foundation; Christ himself owning the man that cast out
devils, though he followed not the Apostles: And though the Spouses sister want
two breasts, yet was she owned for their sister, Cant. 8.8. So that whatsoever
work of God is wrought, it is to be acknowledged; provided that the Pastor of
the said Church be baptized by such a Pastor of a Church that is under the
practice of Baptism.

Thus much in answer to Mr. S's book, as it relates unto Baptism.

To conclude, I shall only make answer to that which Mr. S. first objected
against the doctrine of Baptism, and concerning the denying of singing of
Psalms, in his Epistle Dedicatory.

Mr. S. Epist. Dedic. I have treated upon these two subjects, [viz. denying of
Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms] which eat men's affections, and creep at
the heart like a gangrene, insensibly: An Opinion that has been always
ominous, and of a wonderful strange influence, accompanied with the most
dangerous retinue of Errors, since the first Embryo of it was brought forth;
whether by the judgment of God, or from its natural and secret connection with
other principles of darkness, I will not determine; only God has showed some
black characters upon it, in every nation where it has prevailed: though we
cannot but say, Many Saints are innocently under the power of it. To which, I
return this answer:

That Hypocrites drawn out of the element of the world, receiving the new wine
of the doctrine of the kingdom of heaven, into the old bottles of their hearts,
Hymenius-like, have made shipwreck of their profession, makes not the Opinion
always ominous: nor does the abuse of drink condemn the lawful enjoyment of the
creature. For, if you had but tasted, you might have experienced, that the
doctrine of baptizing of believers does, like all other Truths, Joh. 17.17. so
sanctify, and work, through Christ, such a spiritual union with Christ and all
his Saints, that indeed a blind and profane soul cannot live in the element of
it. And therefore, if any such appear, that have owned it, they either forsake
the Church, or they are cut off by the Church, as withered branches: however,
the evil complained of (if ever it be visible) though a Gangrene, may be cured
with the knife of Excommunication.

Yet on the contrary, such inevitable evils attend Infant Baptism, that it is
the very heart-blood and pulse of the soul of Antichrist, and the only
partition wall, which hinders the communion of Saints, and the greatest let to
the gathering and uniting of all Saints, into Truth and Church Fellowship, that
can be: So that as long as it is in practice, the smoke shall not fully vanish
out of the Temple. And therefore such black characters do point it out, it
being built upon the foundation of wrested consequences, implicit faith,
blind charity, and pretended antiquity, that Antichrist himself, and all the
profane sons of the world, plead their own birthright-priviledge in it, and
rest under the cover or shelter of it: Though I must with Mr. Sidenham
conclude, that many Saints do acknowledge it, and as owned by the world do
decry it. And therefore it is to be hoped, that, as the Saints shall be more
fully informed, Saint-like, they will renounce it, and will submit, Christ
like, unto the Ordinance of Baptism.

The second thing in controversy, is the denying of singing of Psalms; of
which Mr. S. says thus:

I hope when men's Hearts come in tune, their Voices will likewise. The former
denies more fundamental principles, as the Covenant in its extent and subjects,
the freeness of grace, the riches of it working in the New Testament, and
contracts the Gospel, leaving more grace visible in the Legal and Old
Testament-dispensation, then in the New. Answ. As concerning Singing of Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, though I hope to make these to appear to be
distinct, which Mr. S. conceives to be individually united; yet, as to the
point in controversy about Singing, this I have to say, That as Christ shall
more and more reign, he shall rouse up and gather his Saints to be baptized
into one body, 1 Cor. 12.14. and united into, and acted with the Spirit of
Christ and his Apostles, that their hearts will be in tune: That as Independent
Churches cast off Infant-sprinkling, so Churches of Christ under baptism will
return (as some of them for the present are) unto singing. And yet I find,
that those that are not under the present practice, dare not deny their title
to the Ordinance of Singing. But that denying Infant Baptism is worse, or that
there is any evil at all, but a submission to the Ordinance and Commission of
Christ, in denying of Infant baptism; I must needs therefore further say, That
to pretend baptism of Infants to be helpful to exalt free grace, is absolutely
to deny the grace of God to be free, which is conveyed without the Ordinance of
baptism. And that the child of a reprobate may be as soon under the Covenant
of Free Grace, as the child of a believer: And that no man can judge who are
under the Covenant of Free grace, and who are not. And therefore we do not
baptize upon this account, but as we see grace, faith, and consent visibly
appearing. And therefore their pretended light, that will baptize the children
of believers only, as from free grace pretended, is most full of darkness. And
if free grace had been a ground of baptism, man could not have been the judge.
And that God does require man to do nothing ignorantly, or doubting: and
therefore has expressly commanded (though hypocrites may falsely pretend to
submit unto the Rule; and in admitting them upon that account, man is no
offender) who we shall baptize, even every one that is discipled by teaching.
And therefore we leaving to act upon the pretense of the Covenant of
Free Grace, we do not deny children any outward warrantable privilege, that
was granted them before Abraham's days, in his days, or ever was done by Christ
or his Apostles, in presenting them to God, in praying for a blessing for them,
and to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; that as soon as
ever this secret will of God, in his free grace, shall be revealed, They may,
according to the command and example of Christ and all his Churches, pass the
Gospel-Ordinance of Baptism.

QUESTIONS and ANSWERS concerning the baptizing of Believers only, the manner
of the administration of the Ordinance, with the reasons that may induce the
Magistrate to encourage the preaching thereof in Public.
Question 1. WHether is Baptism a Gospel-Ordinance?

Answer. In that Mat. 28.19.
Christ himself is the author of it, and did after his Mat. 28.7, 16.
resurrection from the dead immediately command it, and that all the Saints
upon their profession of says were accordingly baptized: Therefore Baptism
does appear to be a Gospel-Ordinance.

Quest. 2. Whether may baptism be called a Seal?

Answ. In that man is judge of baptism, and that it is against the wisdom and
truth of God to seal to a blank, or Romans 7.4, 5.
uncertain condition; therefore baptism is no Seal, though commonly so called.

Quest. 3. What do you call Baptism, if it be not a Seal?

Answ. Baptism is a Heb. 6.1, 2.
principle of the foundation of the doctrine of Christ, a Gospel-Ordinance, the
1 Pet. 3.21.
answer of a good conscience toward God and man, and a 1 Pet. 3.21.
figure of salvation.

Quest. 4. What is the end for which baptism was ordained?

Answ. In that Christ commanded to Mar. 16.15.
preach the Gospel to every creature, and yet only to baptize such as are Mat.
28.19.
discipled, or are taught the word of God, or believed; it does therefore
clearly appear, that God in Christ did ordain Baptism, to this end, that Christ
might 2 Cor. 6.16.
separate the election of grace, by Mat. 28.19.
calling them out of the world, into the Acts 9.19, 27.
fellowship of the Church, and to unite all so called, in the profession of
says, in their baptism, and Act 9.39.
breaking of bread, in which they communicate.

Quest. 5. How can you prove, that by these words of Christ, Go and preach the
Gospel to every creature, Go and make disciples, and baptize them, He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, is so to be interpreted, Acts 2.41.
compared with 46, 47.
that none but those that believe are to be baptized?

Answ. Because the Apostles and Church of Christ did thus understand them, as
by their doctrine and practice does appear.

Quest. 6. Where have the Apostles taught, that none but those that hear and
believe, should be baptized?

Answ. In that the Apostles have taught, that those that are baptized, ought to
Acts 2.38.
repent, be Act. 2.39. Rev. 18.4.
called out of the world, have the 1 Pet. 3.21.
answer of a good conscience toward God and man; and have declared that Act.
8.37.
unfaithfulness hinders baptism: therefore by their doctrine it does appear,
that none but such as hear and believe, should be baptized.

Quest. 7. And did the Apostles only baptize believers?

Answ. Yes verily, they only baptized visible professors; as, when they Act.
8.12.
believed Philip, preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the
Lord Jesus, they were baptized, both men and women: and when Act. 10 2, 44, 48.
households were baptized, the Scripture does declare, that they all Act. 10 2,
44, 48.
feared God, received the Act. 10 2, 44, 48.
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 1.16 with chap. 16.15.
gave themselves to the ministry of the Word of God, Act. 26 32, 34.
heard the word of God, Act. 26 32, 34.
rejoiced in God, and Act. 26 32, 34.
believed.

Qu. 8. If this be so, then neither children nor unbelievers ought be baptized.

Answ. It Is true indeed: for as in Circumcision, when the male was only named,
the female was excluded; so when Christ only ordained that those that hear and
believe should be baptized, unbelievers, and children, must needs be excluded.

Quest. 9. How comes it then to pass, that this doctrine of baptism has not
been before revealed?

Answ. Though the doctrine of baptism has been always professed, yet it has
not been generally received, for these reasons. 1. Because there was 2 Thessalonians.
2.1, 2, 3.
a falling away from the faith, whereby all the Ordinances of Christ were
perverted and corrupted, by the Rev. 15.8.
smoke which was to continue till the Lamb's soldiers should procure the free
course of the Gospel. 2. The tail of the beast is to strike down the Rev. 12.4.
third part of the stars, even learned men, etc. (not under the powerful means
of information) which shall walk under the sparkles of their own Consequences.
3. Because that though Antichrist, before these times, has been revealed, as
opposing the person and merits of Christ, yet the Ordinances are but beginning
to be cleared; in discovery whereof, the Church begins to be restored to the
purity of the primitive time of Christ and his Apostles. 4. In such a case as
this, where things are admitted, as Infant Baptism, being the religion men were
brought up in (though godly) yet it is not questioned, till men be put upon it,
or otherwise by God extraordinarily called: for which cause, Infant Baptism
has not been much questioned.

Quest. 10. What will become of all the world, the unbelievers and children, if
they be not baptized?

Answ. Christ must be preached to all the Mark 16.15. Gal. 6.6
world, to every Parish, even to capable children, and unbelievers, etc. And as
they shall have an ear to hear, and be Rev. 18.4
called out of Babylon, they ought to be baptized, and receive the Act. 2.42.
Lords supper, with the gathered Churches of believers.

Quest. 11. How shall we be able to judge believers?

Answ. By the Joh. 15.8. Mat. 5.16.
fruits of their profession, or holy conversation; and in that they are willing
to be united unto, and 1 John 3.14.
love the Saints, and submit unto the Mat. 18.17. Act. 2.41.
government of Christ under the Gospel.

Quest. 12. But may not unbelievers, like Simon Magus, come to be baptized?

Answ. Yes. a garden may have weeds, and Mat. 13.
tares may be sown with the good seed; yet, as the Church is to 1 Cor. 6.2, 3,
4.
judge of her members, to receive them into communion; so has the Church power
to exclude them also out of her communion.

Quest. What is the way of the administration of baptism?

Answ. The Christian disciple that is to be baptized, must, Luke 3.21. Mat.
3.15.
Christ-like, upon the profession of faith and obedience, descend to be Romans
6.4.
covered or buried in water, Act. 12.16 comp. with Luke 3.21.
calling upon the Name of the Lord, being baptized in the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost: which being done, those Christians which are baptized, are
(as brethren) to be received by the Act. 9 26
Church, by the Gal. 3.9.
right hand of fellowship.

Quest. 14. But may not sprinkling of water suffice in baptism?

Answ. No: there can be no baptism in sprinkling or partial dipping: for in
sprinkling, the right use of water is as much perverted, as when 1 Samuel 15.15.
Saul spared part of the sheep, though he intended them for Gods service. And
besides, in the Romans 6.4.
burying of the whole body in water, the mystery of being buried with Christ
unto his death; and the raising out of the water, to be conformable to the
resurrection of Christ, is not only revealed, but in the baptized, humbling of
themselves, prostrated Abraham like before God in the lowest element, there is
a submission to the acknowledgement of the profession of Christ in the Gospel;
which cannot be done or demonstrated in sprinkling, which neither sense,
reason, Scripture, nor any Author, profane or divine, can judge to be baptism.

Quest. 15. Whether is it not then a sin to baptize Infants?

Answ. That we may judge no man but by visible appearance, it is without
controversy, that they which baptize the children of all the Parish, or other
men's Parishes without exception, sin against the light of their own pretended
consequences.

Quest. 16. But may not God accept of the good meaning and intention of man,
though the rule or command be not altogether observed?

Answ. In the sprinkling of an Infant, there is nothing at all, either in the
taught disciple, that ought to be baptized, or of the use of water in baptism.
And therefore intend or imagine what we please, the Ordinance is so totally
perverted, that after information, I do not know how the Lord can be said to
Acts 17.30.
wink at such ignorance.

Quest. 17. Whether is the child damned, if it die unbaptized?

Answ. It is not in man to judge, that any child that dies is either saved or
damned: Deuteronomy. 29.29.
secret things belong unto God, and if in Gods election it be saved, want of
baptism cannot hinder, nor the pretended enjoyment thereof alter the decree of
Gods Predestination.

Quest. 18. But may not consequences be admitted, to prove Infants baptism?

Answ. In such a case as this of Baptism, where there is (as Quest. 5, 6, 7.
has been proved) an express command and example to the contrary, Consequences
cannot be admitted of, lest we should Romans 9.20
reason against God, and resist his commandment.

Quest. 19. Wherein do we resist or reason against the command of Christ in
Infant-sprinkling?

Answ. In baptizing of an Infant, when we are commanded to baptize a taught
disciple, 1. We bring the wisdom of Christ in question, as though he should
forget to except against a child by name, having in the taught disciple
already excepted against both the ignorant and infants; as in wisdom God, in
only commanding the male to be circumcised, the female, though not otherwise
excepted against, was expressly excluded.

Again, when Christ says, Baptize a taught disciple; for us by consequence to
interpret this command to belong to sucking children, is to make Christ guilty
of an implicit contradiction, or to deny, confound, gainsay, or confute
himself, as to say, A wise fool: Therefore no Consequences, whereby we would
uphold Infant-sprinkling, ought, in contradiction to Christ's command, be at all
pretended; but as Christians, in this Ordinance of baptism, we must have the
faith of Abraham, or believe according to the example of Abraham, to submit to
Christ's express Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Mat. 3.15.
command, as has been declared, without any reasoning to the contrary.

Quest. 20. Why do men then usually, for the most part, rage against the
baptizing of believers only, seeing it is according to the express command and
example of Christ and his Apostles?

Answ. Because the election of grace (before, through powerful information,
they have the means of seeing) oppose the Truth of which they are ignorant. 2.
The world, which is the multitude of unbelievers, neither will nor can
acknowledge to receive any Joh. 17.
truth which does sanctify, but as it is commanded by Law, or acknowledged by
custom. 3. The baptism of believers only, is such a strict way or profession
of godliness, that the generality do rage against it, so that the Papists and
most licentious cannot endure to profess it.

Quest. 21. But may not the Magistrate stint or limit the public Preachers to
observe an Uniformity, and suppress this doctrine of Baptism, as being against
the tradition and present practice of the Church of England?

Answ. All formerly-received Doctrinal Truths and Traditions of the Churches,
ought not as a Foundation (which is Christ in his Word) be so peremptorily and
forcibly enjoined, as that the authority and truth thereof may not be
questioned, or, upon a true and full discovery thereof, be altered or reformed;
seeing, to limit and force public Uniformity, so that none may buy or sell
without that mark, was and is the design of Antichrist, whereby he tyrannized
over the Saints, and their most glorious lights were put under a bushel:
Therefore all private and public Preachers, etc. are to be 2 These. 3.14. 2
Cor. 10.14.
limited only to the Word of God, and not otherwise. And therefore, if the
Lord shall be pleased to reveal himself to any public Teacher, more and more
to pull off the veil from off the Word, and to bless his endeavors in calling
the Election of grace out of Babylon; this work of grace, as it shall appear in
any Parish, is to be owned and encouraged: provided, that the Word be not so
wrested, or pretended to be interpreted, as may deny the Fundamental Truth,
which Christ after his resurrection did immediately command to be preached to
all Nations, that is to say, to teach and baptize them, in the Name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and to observe all things whatsoever he has
commanded, with belief of his Mat. 2^.19, 20.
presence to this way, and faithfulness to make good all other his promises,
the inheritance and privileges of all faithful Christians.

Quest. 22. But may it stand with the honor of the Magistrate, to countenance
the professors of this doctrine?

Answ. In that, for diverse years, we have experienced, that the Lord is Isai.
1.26.
fulfilling of his prophecy, to send Magistrates to take away the dross and
tin, and to restore the Dan. 7.25
dominion of the Saints, in the enjoyment of their Laws and Languages, which
were taken from them by the fourth Beast, or last Monarchy: Rev. 17.1, 14.
and that they are the Lamb's soldiers that shall pour out the seventh Vial;
that as former Monarchs brought in smoke or darkness into the Temple, so
Gospel-Magistrates, by their approbation of public shining lights, shall be
glorious instruments to restore again the light into the Temple, or public
Meeting Place for Gods Worship. And in that the Magistrates have also,
according to their duty, so far opposed visibly appearing 1 Timothy 1.9.
unsound doctrine, having put their hand to Gods Plough, in cutting down the
Episcopal tree, and in abolishing the Service book; it must needs be then their
honor, crown, and glory, so to finish the good work begun, so that Parochial
sprinkling, the root of the Episcopal tree, having its life and moisture in the
old Service Book, which is abolished, may not in this great light of the Gospel
be replanted, or so suffered to take root again, so as to shoot out more wild
olive-branches, or sons of opposition, under which the most ignorant and Popish
party are still nourished; or so to favor it, as not to suffer the
Gospel-Ordinance to grow beside it.

Quest. 23. But is it consisting with the peace of this Nation, (so many
opposing, and being disaffected to this doctrine) for the Magistrate to
tolerate it in public?

Answ. As no Ordinances (the fruits of faith) are to be forced; so there is
little appearance of God in them, or they are not at all considerable, that
being not forced to this doctrine, become the troubled sea, to be offended with
such Saints that receive this Gospel Truth that is preached unto them, and that
the peace by any such shall be disturbed or broken; the Lord, which has so
promised his presence, and has so blessed these and other Saints in procuring
the peace of this Nation, that the Saints of Gathered Churches are ready to
sacrifice their lives to maintain the peace of the Nation, under the present
Government. And therefore the Magistrate may expect, in the promised presence
of Christ to this Way really submitted unto, the blessing of God unto
themselves, and the establishing of the Peace and Righteousness of the Nation.

A Declaration to the Election of Grace, who, for want of information, are
either ignorant of, or enemies unto the Gospel-Ordinance of Baptizing of
BELIEVERS only.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
WHen the falling away from the faith (which was foretold by the ^ These. 2.
Apostle) was fulfilled, the man of sin as it is said, or popish Antichrist,
did not only sit in the temple of God opposing himself above all that is
called God or is worshipped; but as foretold he brought the smoke of ignorance
and strong delusions into the Temple: and though he pretends infallibility, yet
Satan like, that abode not in the truth, he cannot receiv the love of the
truth. And therefore the Master-peice, or great design of the man of sin, was
and yet is to endeavor by lying wonders and all deceivableness, to corrupt all
the Ordinances or commands of Christ and his Apostles. The Pope or Antichrist
did corrupt all the Ordinances, but especially Baptism.
And therefore though Antichrist had a great design against fasting, which he
has perverted and corrupted in respect of set days, and ordering a white
meal, or to eat and drink when they fast; as prayer by him is also corrupted
and perverted in the Popish use of ungodly forms, pictures, and invocation of
Saints and Angels singing with an unknown voice; as he has also made the Lords
day of no effect by sporting and playing, and the observation of holy days:
and though he has blasphemed the doctrine, and deprived the people of the cup
of the Lord, in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and has totally perverted
the gathering and government of the Churches of Christ, as far as his
persecuting power extends; yet in all these he has no such malicious
design, as in the perverting of the Gospel-Ordinance of baptizing of believers
only. And yet behold the power of God, how by weak and contemptible means the
Son of God is manifest, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, in that,
though Infants sprinkling past the muster of a notable outward reformation, and
was almost endenized into the profession of some Saints, and that great
Champions threw down the Gantlet of Arguments, to fight with the Weapons of
consequences and traditions to defend the same; yet behold, the Lord makes the
flock, or common people, to see the truth when almost all public teachers were
overvailed, and could not burst through the cloud of delusion: until at last the
Lord saw his time to trouble and thereby make the discovery of his light unto
the public Ministry by calling some of them to trim up their lamps, that they
may shine in the discovery of the mind of Christ in baptizing of beleivers
only. Do not then question, why not before now you are called to witness your
profession: the Kingdom of Heaven is not got by observation. What are we, that
we should withstand God, or hate to be reformed? Arise, why sleep ye? the light
shines, the Bridegroom calls: search the Scriptures, and try whether it be
of God or no. Do not overlook Christ in the Manger: the Star shines, let us
with the wise men worship and present our selves unto him, unto whom it does
direct us. What is the Egypt. Reed of humane Tradition, or obstinate
resolution, that you should rely upon? or do you fear to be put out of the
Synagogue? Is not the Rigteous as bold as a Lion? Great indeed is Diana of the
Ephesians, great is the power of the Prince of darkness: but greater is the
truth of God, and his light, which is able to dispel the darkness both of Pope
and people. Did not the truth always when it was revealed, and think you it
shall not now as well as ever (if God intend mercy to England, etc.)
marvailously prevail? Did not the Doctrine of Baptism cause the Pharisees and
people, yea the whole election of grace, to follow John into the Wilderness?
And did not those that were bewitched with Simons Sorceries, when they believed
Philip concerning the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Lord Jesus, become baptized,
both men and women? Shall not then, if Christ be fully preached indeed,
overturn, overturn your parochial legal, worldly union, and gather the
election of grace out of every parish, to be members of the church of Christ
your Savior? You know, or may come to experience the truth thereof, that his
people shall be willing in the day of his power: his sheep shall hear his
voice; but that strange voice of baptizing Infants, never spoken of in the
Scripture, shall they not hear. Come, let us reason the case: can Pedobaptism
be a plant that our Heavenly Father has planted, that spreads forth its
luxurious branches, and makes a shadow for the world to rest themselves under,
in the Cradle of security? Baptized disciples falsely slandered.
Close not your eyes, nor shut your ears against the revelation of truth,
though common fame would afright you, as some did the Israelites, to obstruct
their marching into Canaan, telling them, that there were great Zamzummims
there: and therefore if you will believe them, they will tell you what
monstrous people the Anabaptists are: if you look that way, you shall lose your
selves in the midst of darkness and delusions; they will draw you away from all
Scriptures and Ordinances: but try before you trust, and search into their
profession, and you shall see the contrary, that there was ever any way of God,
but it was ever evil spoken of. Did they not say of John the baptist, that he
had a Devil? The way of God ever evil spoken of.
Did not the world cast spots of reproaches in our Masters face, who was
without sin, or any spot or wrinkle? If they do these things to the green
Tree, what will they do to the dry? Were not the old professors, shortly after
the times of the Apostles, in that they called one another Brother and Sister,
accused of incest and fornication? and when they were forced to forsake the
world and went into caves, did not the Troubled Sea, the Sons of Belial, cast
mire and dirt into their faces, saying, That they laid lurking there to rob and
spoil those that passed by? Just. Mart. Apol.
so that Justin Martyr was forced to make an Apology for their justification.
And thus Luther and Martin Bucer, etc. were slandered with them by reproaches:
and yet they were no more troubled, Ex Guibert Genebrard.
then Luther was with the Popes Bull, of which he said, O Bulla vere Bullarum
filia! Be not then discouraged, you know this is an evidence of their
condemnation, but of your salvation. Its enough to give an account of faith,
and that in the name of God, to assure you, that there is nothing to be owned
but Christ and his Commandments; whereby he is our Savior, and has made
himself an example for us to imitate him in all things, (Miracles excepted.)
But alas all the pretenses and consequences that the most learned can produce
cannot make the delusion of sprinkling children to be baptism: God that never
lied, did never require an action to be done against sense and reason; nor can
representations or intentions alter an express command to the contrary. Were it
enough, think you if any of you bid should your servant give a cup of water to
a thristy soul; were it enough for that servant to put his hand into the cup,
and sprinkle the man in the face with two or three drops of water? were this to
obey his Masters command? I trow not: and yet no more is done in sprinkling of
children, in answering the Command of Christ in Baptism. And though this might
be reformed, and that you might say with the Eunuch, Lo here is water, what
lets that the Child may not be baptized? To this, the same answer must be
returned, that Philip made to the Eunuch. If the Child can believe with all its
heart, it may: but let the Child alone, though it may be pretended to be the
Child of a believer, We know, or may know, that believers themselves,
Rebaptization, Acts 19.1, 2, 3, 4 In the case of ignorance of the fundamental
truth, or of the commission for Baptism.
which were really and fully baptized, because they were at that time ignorant
of the holy Ghost were upon that account (all the fundamentals being not
revealed without which baptism cannot be warrantable) rebaptized: when we were
sprinkled, great darkness, in comparison of the light of Gospel-reformation
that now shines, was then as a cloud over-veiling the Word. What hole can
cavil find to seek evasion, unless we say we are not believers? Is it not then
the duty of Disciples to imitate their Lord and Master, who in submitting to
this glorious Gospel-Ordinance made himself our example, in which he was said
to fulfill all righteousness? This is the way to humble a soul to give
satisfaction of the profession of Faith, and the testimony of a good
conscience; to this the presence of Christ, our peace light, and life, and
protection is promised. Tindal's wick^d Mommon, fol. 25.
That you intend no evil, is easily to be believed: But as Tindall the blessed
Martyr said, That though Peter of a good mind or intention would persuade
Christ not to have suffered yet Christ for all that called him Satan. Its one
thing to have a good intention, and another to do of knowledge. God (says he)
has made a testament between him and us, wherein is contained both what he
would have us to do and what he would have us to ask of him: see therefore thou
do nothing to please God withal, but what he commands. And that they might
be good and Godly men, and Martyrs, that were never more then sprinkled, Ten
Martyrs in Eng. Hen. 8. anno 1553.
it may be granted; but then it was the time that the smoke was in the Temple.
Martyrs have suffered for the profession of the baptizing of believers only,
but never any Martyrs have suffered in the defense of Infant pretended baptism.
If we would look on humane example, It not for us to say as those obstinate
unbelievers that the Maryr Stephen reproved, who said, As our Fathers did, so
will we do. Can there be any more precious in our eyes then to be led by the
example of Christ and his Apostles? If you be not of the election of grace, if
you would you ought not to be baptized. And if God have elected us, and we live
under the means, our hearts and judgments shall be changed, we shall be the
people that shall be made willing in the day of Christ's power, whether you will
or no. Cease then, poor souls, be humble and patient, and wait till you see
that God will do with you: shoot not your bolt to wound your Savior, through
the sides of his despised Members: Be ye the Disciples of Doctor Gamaliel,
until Christ make you his. It was the Pharisees and Lawyers that rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, and would not be baptized, Luke 7.30. but
the election of grace must needs submit. As they are under the means of
information, they have a promise to be effectually called: they cannot close
their eyes, All the election of grace, as they shall be under the means, shall
profess Baptism.
as the means of seeing is revealed unto them: and if they have light already,
and yet see not in something that is newly discovered, then they are like a man
in a dark Dungeon that sees as soon as the window or interpretation of the
Scripture is opened unto them. But no light, no means can make a blind man see,
whom God will not call, though the heavenly Lamp were never so resplendent: And
though a natural man shine as a Star in the Church, yet shall the tail of the
Beast cast him down from the new Heaven or the Church, into his proper place or
earthly Element: he cannot finish his course, he cannot (like his tempter)
abide in the truth; he cannot receive the love of the truth that he might be
saved. But on the contrary, Joh. 4.44. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
all the election of grace, they cannot (though with Paul they have commission
to persecute the Saints, nay though they have renounced the truth as diverse
Archbish. C. Io. Bayaham Lawyer.
Martyrs did) rest till at length they return to their first love, and to the
profession of the Gospel from whence they are fallen. Let us then content our
selves (if our Master be pleased to call but a few to serve him) if we be in
the number of that few that are called. Let the election then wait on the
means, and see what God will do or dispose of them, and not trouble themselves
like Zobedee's Mother, to desire that for her Children, that cannot be granted
her.

To conclude therefore, either to stop the mouths of opposers, or to open the
heart, (as the Lord is pleased) if at this time you will hear his voice, that
has commanded to baptize believers; if reason may be heard, or true
information may not be despised, you may see in the confession or practices of
contrary judgments, as much as may raze down the foundation of Infant
pretended baptism, Artic. 27. Church of England.
in that it is acknowledged, that there is no express terms in the Scripture
for Pedobaptism; and that by experience it may be sufficiently evidenced in our
hearts and consciences, as is made visible, that such inevitable evils follow
Infants sprinkling, as that it brings all the World into the Church, which
should be called out of the World, and is the only obstacle or cause of the
division of all gathered Churches, they differing nothing, but in Infant
sprinkling, in which the Church of Rome, or rather the World forced into order,
is in present practice; and from which, all the Churches of Christ ought to be
totally separated, or effectually called out of Babylon: the very consequences
by which Infants-sprinkling, a mere delusion and prevarication to the command
of Christ, as men's inventions, being altogether groundless and unwarrantable,
and though proved, are of no force or validity, to contradict the express
command or example of Christ and his Apostles to the contrary.

Let then all real, zealous, sincere, converted Christians hear Christ's voice,
who has commanded to teach and baptize all Nations; and let them with all
their old fellow servants, desire to imitate Christ their Master, who was
baptized to make himself an example to fulfill all righteousness. And let us
not think that his arm is shortened, that he cannot help; or that he is not
faithful, who in this Gospel-Ordinance has promised his presence, in which
all the Saints have found, and ever unto the end of the World shall most surely
find their only protection, comfort, peace, and glory.

FINIS.

