TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland. The
Humble Petition of Nathaniel Jones of Bridgewater, in the County of Sommerset
Clerk.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner was most illegally sequestered in the Year, 1648. without
any Charge of Delinquency, or the least Testimony against him.

That your Petitioner appealed to Haberdashers Hall for relief, but they being
not empowered to give any in such Cases, your Petitioners name was inserted into
the Act of Parliament for sale, bearing date the 18. of Nov. 1652. whereby he
was forced to prosecute his Complaints before the Honorable Committee for
Petitions, in the last Parliament, who sent several Orders to the Committee of
the County of Sommerset, Commanding them to Certify how your Petitioners Case
stood, and the grounds of his Sequestration.

That the Committee of Sommerset accordingly Certified, That you Petitioner was
clear from any matter of Fact against the State, and was only sequestered as a
Scandalous Minister, not as a Delinquent, there being never any such Charge
against him; Whereupon the Committee of Petitions ordered your Petitioners Case
to be reported to the Parliament for his relief; but they dissolving before his
Case was reported, your Petitioner petitioned his Highness for relief, who
granted your Petitioner a Reference to the Commissioners of Haberdashers Hall,
for them to certify the grounds of your Petitioners sequestration; and they
have likewise certified, That your Petitioner had never any Delinquency charged
upon Record against him; but this present Parliament soon after assembling, His
Highness pleasure was not known thereupon.

In tender consideration of the Premises, And for that your Petitioner never
Committed the least Act of Delinquency against the State; Nevertheless has
been deprived, not only of his Spiritual estate, and his own temporal means
sold from him, but had lately a Copyhold Estate, held only by the life of his
wife, sequestered and sold also, to the utter ruin of your poor Petitioner, his
wife and family.

Your Petitioner most humbly beseeches this High and Honorable Court to do
him Justice, and restore unto him his Temporal Estate, so unjustly sold and
detained from him; And the Lord will not only bless your immediate proceedings,
but you will highly engage the oppressed soul of your Petitioner to bless the
Lord also on your behalf.

And be bound for ever to pray, etc. Nathaniel Jones.
September: 1654

