Exceeding good News From the NEWERIES in IRELAND.

BEING, The true Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin the 20. of April, 1642. To
Sir William Adderton, now resident in London, from Mr. Stephen Ioh^son Merchant.

Wherein is declared the Victorious Proceedings of the Protestant Army in the
Neweries.

Likewise the true Description of a famous Victory obtained against 5000 of the
Rebels, by Sir Christopher Loftus on the 16. day of April, where he slew
almost 4000 of them, putting the rest to flight.

Also a true Relation, how and by what means Sir Charles Coote, Captain
Daniel Bartlet, and Sir Christopher Loftus. on the 18. day of April, took a
great Castle where Philomy Oneale was quartered, and where great store of
Victual and Ammunition was found, to the great relief of our English Army,
With a true intelligence that there was that day 3000 more of the Rebels slain.

Sent over by the last Post, And now by entreaty printed for the comfort and
consolation of all true hearted Protestants, that are Well-willers to their
Brethren in JRELAND.

London, Printed by T. F. for I. H. 1642.

THE True Copy of a Letter sent from DVBLIN. the 20. of April, 1642. directed
to Sir William Adderton resident in London, from a Merchant in Dublin.
SIR,
AFter my service remembered unto you, These are to give you a true and Real
Relation of all the Victorious proceedings of the Protestant party, who are now
in the Neweries, under the Command of Sir Christopher Loftus and Sir Charles
Coote, likewise 1. Regiment of Scotch, under the Command of Captain Daniel
Bartlet, a Noble and forward Gentleman, all which forces by the Assistance of
God, have obtained diverse glorious Victories against the Rebels, the first of
which was obtained in the Neweries on the 16. day of this present month, where
Sir Christopher Loftus gave battle to 5000 Rebels, he having in his whole
command, but 1500 men, the rest of his forces being left at Waterfoord in
Garrison, which 1500. he divided into four divisions, charging the Rebels on
all sides at once, which unexpected assault did so confuse their Order, that
they knew not how to make resistance, but took them to their Heels, but our
Bullets was nimbler then they, and soon ended their Journeys, for of 5000.
Rebels there escaped not above one thousand, as we might guess by the dead
Bodies which they left behind to intombe the ground, which should have been
their graves, which being done Sr. Christopher retreated to his Quarters.

On the 18. day, He joined with Sr. Charles Coote, and Captain Daniell
Bartlet, who marched abroad with intent to take a Castle, which was the
Quarters of Philomy Oneale, General of the Rebels, most of their Victual and
ammunition was stored there, wherefore they joined all their forces, it being a
design of great difficulty, most of the Rebels Forces being intrenctht about
the Castle to secure it, that being their greatest and chiefest Magazine, which
intent was put in execution, for with a general consent they drew their Forces
to a head, and marched unto the Castle, carrying with them eight great field
Pieces, which was planted upon a Hill on the North side of the Castle, both to
command the Trenches and the Castle.

Likewise they divided their Forces into two parts, out of which they chose,
three hundred able men for Pioners, to undermine the ground toward the Castle,
which was done with as much secrecy as expedition. Likewise Captain Daniell
Bartlet drew out two hundred, and gave a false alarm, which the Rebels seeing,
bent all their force to make resistance, in the mean time Sir Charles Coote
entered the Trenches on the other side, and got unto a Canon that was mounted
upon a running Carriage, and turned it full upon them, being charged with slugs
of Lead, which made them fall like so many rotten Sheep.

Likewise the Castle let fly their Ordnance upon us, but as it happened they
killed more of their own men, then Ours, in this time Our Pioners had
undermined the ground quite through the Castle walls, so that four men might
march on a breast, which being done without the least suspect, our men seemed
to retreat, as fearing of their Ordnance which caused the Rebels to draw to a
new head, some 500. Rebels marching out of the Castle, to strengthen those that
had before been worsted, likewise Philomy Oneale with 200. Horse marched out
upon us, leaving not above a hundred men to guard the Castle, which being done,
Sir Charles Coote with a soft Countermarch, charged and retreated, by that
means endeavoring to draw the Rebels further from the Castle, which quickly
took effect, for the Rebels seeing him charge so faintly, and retreat, fell
on most fiercely, leaving of the Trenches and followed on pursuit of a
supposed victory, for so it was to them, for all their hopes were frustrate and
their Victory was turned to an overthrow.

In the mean time, Captain Bartlet with his two hundred men entered the Castle
and ceaz'd upon the Ordnance, putting both man woman, and child to death, which
being done, Captain Bartlet went up to the highest Turret and hung up an
English Ensign, withal discharging all the Ordnance at once upon the Rebels,
making such a slaughter as has not been since the Rebellion, Sir Charles
Coote and Sir Christopher Loftus seeing the Ensign knew what good success
their plot had taken, then they charged them fiercely, so that had not Philimy
Oneales horse been nimbler then his hands he had been higher by the head then
he is, part of their horse escapt, and some small number of foot, only there
was slain about 3000 Rebels, and of the English some 800 and 100 maimed, thus
was this Castle surprised by the valor and Policy of these Valiant and
Judicious Commanders, being stored with all sorts of Victual and Ammunition to
the great encouragement of our men. God be thanked we are gotten almost forty
Jrish miles into the Neweries, God send us some more aid, and then we make no
question but that we shall soon tame these Rebels, and bring them to obedience
unto our Royal Sovereign, many other skirmishes we have ^ad, which time will
not permit me to write, but the next opportunity that I have, I will give you
further intelligence, till which time I rest,

Your friend to be commanded, Stephen Johnson.
From Dublin the 20. of April, 1642.
FINIS.

