Orders given out; the Word, Stand Fast.

As it was lately delivered in a farewell SERMON BY Major Samuel Kem, to the
Officers and Soldiers of his Regiment in Bristoll.

November. 8. 1646.

For now are we alive if ye stand fast in the Lord.

Finally my brethren be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.

Put on the whole Armor of God that ye may be able to stand, etc.



LONDON, Printed by I.M. for Michael Spark, and are to be sold at the sign of
the blue Bible in Green Arbor. 1647.

TO the Noble and Experienced faithful Officers of my Regiment, Captain Heart
senior, Capt. Grig, Capt. Pope, Capt. Roe, Capt. Lieut. Richards.
Noble Gentlemen,
IT was your love first engaged me to take the charge of the City Regiment, and
I appeal to you, whether my private gain, or the public service was my ends,
in accepting of my Commission; since which received; I have put you in a
posture, whereby you are enabled to defend your selves, or offend the Kingdoms
Enemies; it is my happiness I can say and none dare gainsay, the faithful
acting my part, Yet am I a debtor to your Love; and in regard the chamber stock
of my abilities fail me to discharge what I owe; yet were it dishonesty not to
keep promise, what therefore you heard with so much patience; and importuned
(with more hope to be granted) I have here presented to your charity. Do but
believe it, and stand fast in the Truths of Jesus Christ, and it shall be a
complete compensation for all my labors with you.

And since I must leave you, give me leave to comfort you, and to tell you my
heart: that I think you are the happiest Garrison in the Kingdom maugre you
semi-Reducement, whilst you possess within your line, that real piece of
Valor, humility, and sincerity, and no less Noble then Cordial Patriot of
his Kingdom, your Governor: Who, abhors all self ends, and denies attendance
only for the public good, and should I here that he were Charioted from you
either by discouragement or engagement, I should sadly cry out, Oh my Father,
my Father, the horsemen and chariots of Israel and pray for a double portion
of his Spirit on all his public aiming scholars in this Kingdom.

Yea, give me leave to council you: the word is, Stand Fast, I beseech you do
so to God and his Glory; to Jesus Christ and his Truths, to your Covenant in
its naked true primitive intentions, as at first before the All-seeing-God; to
both the honorable Houses of Parliament who have adventured all for you, to
the worthy assembly of Divines who seek God continually for you and attend his
Will to declare it to you, and to me the most unworthy of the Kingdom and your
servants who flies to you for protection; yiedling my Commission and
subscribing myself, Noble Gentlemen,

Yours and the Kingdoms faithful, although mean, Servant Samuel Kem

Upon his much honored friends Farewell Sermon M. D. these few lines.
KNow Soldier, these ensuing pages tell
The properties of a true Sentinel;
Orders are given out, The word Standfast,
Which intimates true valor first and last
For let me tell thee if thy heels prove light
What ere thy Colors be, thy Liver's white,
Therefore be steadfast, Though the giddy rout
Wear windmils in their heads and wheel about
Keep thou thy Posts, though others Hedghog like
Shrink up their courage in some narrow Dike
Of self respects, there is no such liberty
In Truths plain field either to squat or fly.
Such as outrun the Truth may here well know
They can have no good ground for what they do;
Stand to your Arms then (Christians) and advance
To beat all falsehood out of Countenance,
And rout the infantry of new raised Crimes
And Troops of Hobby-horses of these Times;
This is the only way to get to be
Captain Lieutenant to Integrity*
Now to the Author of this Book one word,
Who speaks and then maintains it by the sword,
Still crop the peaking Errors which appear,
That Malobus like not one may show its ears.
Still preach the truth, although some Gadarens
Have made thee quit their Coasts by hoggish means
Still fight for truth fear not a squint-eyed troop
Of false opinions, rather make them stoop
To sense and truth, or else so rout their train
That they may never Rally up again.
Well have thou left the Land to put to Sea
Where you will not find so much inconstancy;
Fisher of men, cast out thy net once more
It Is like you will catch at Sea, more then a shore.
To his friend the Author:
SIR, will you leave us, and is this your last
Orders given out, the word stand fast,
We Will you obey, and seeing we must part
Who ever comands our persons you the heart:
Farewell dear Major, this we are forced to say
You put us in a posture, and we wish your pay
Yours in Truth, R. R.

1 CORINTHIANS. 16.13, 14. Stand fast in the Faith: quit you like men: Be strong.
Let all things be done in love.


THE words of departing friends, if seasonable, make sensible not the head, but
the heart, of those in Relation; These are my last, and I am come to take leave
of you, for action, but never in affection; Communions below, howbeit lasting
are not everlasting; The stakes of the Tabernacle must be removed; And every
Member of the Church Militant must be joging on: The Temple is our type of a
settled condition above: In a word I am to leave you; and therefore desire to
leave such orders (becoming my Trust with you) as may secure you for Gods glory
and your mutual comforts. The Alarm beats Christian soldiers, to your arms,
take heed (as the case stands) of facing about, but as you were; to yout ground
of Scripture foundations, and so stand fast in the faith. And although
reducable, in regard of humane Actings, yet never in this life must you expect
a discharge from spiritual millitary undertakings, for when you were listed in
Jesus Christ muster-role it was not for a day less or more then your life, And
therefore I beseech you stand fast.

The grand General against your precious souls has taken the field with a vast
Army, as subtle, as powerful, as cruel to execute, as malicious to prosecute
his designs; his main body is sinful flesh, and the more dangerous because so
nearly related unto us. And I must tell you that Relations in War are of
dangerous consequence: This Body is flankt on the right and left with potent
Troops of prevailing Enemies; And Self Ends has under hand Commission to be
Scout-master General; whose sub-undertakers are acting under various shapes;
all specious; yet all servants to Self Ends. Avoid his Ambushments, when
falling on, and you may, standing fast, come off with honor. These thing
premised (as that there is no further use of me in this City, and I being
designed for other service; and knowing that errors in battle are
irrecoverable; I could do no less, but heartily wish I could do more, then
direct you, and counsel you; Especially upon the discovery of a late, large,
and numerous Recruit on the Enemies Party; for the most part all consisting of
such as have revolted from our own Party; and have quit their ground of
truths: The Commander in chief of this Regiment is Error, whose Colors are
fresh, and of glorious resplendency; but changeable; and therefore stand fast,
for his fairest quarter is ruin; which appears by his free quarter in your
families, when his first actings are to division, yea betwixt those of the
nearest and deared relations, and a house divided cannot stand. I by Commission
am engaged for your relief, and therefore for your future security I shall
entreat you to strengthen your selves by this Recruit consisting of three
Divisions.

First, Fidelity, or Constancy. Stand fast in the truth: quit your selves like
men, be strong. Second, Spiritual Gallantry. Stand fast in the truth: quit your
selves like men, be strong. Third, Unity. Let all things be done in love.


The first of these will keep you from being Routed.

The second from being Conquered.

The third from being Ruined.

The first will argue you men.

The second will report you gallant men, or men of men.

The third will demonstrate you holy and humble Christian men.

And therefore now beloved Officers and Christian fellow Soldiers, take
Courage; take you the Field to scare not to face your Enemies, and give me
leave to show you your General, completely accoutred in John's vision, observe
his ordering the Field; and give me leave (leaving the issue to God) to fall on.

First, let Constancy in the Faith, and all the Truths of Jesus Christ have the
Battalia.

Secondly, let spiritual Courage have the right wing.

Thirdly, let Love have the lest, and overcome all.

I shall adventure to fall on with Constancy; second me with Courage; and I
beseech you that all may be done, and suffered by the conquest of Love.

First, of the first.
Stand fast that is the Word; Faith in the heart, not in the head, is the
signal; Stand fast not a while and then revolt or give ground. To walk a while
in the truth, and after for any ends to desert it, is base, it argues not a
Soldier to list his name, and to purchase a feather (shows are light things in
military actings) or wear a sword, or to appear on the march, if they either
take hedge or windmil for a shelter, or quit their ground, or trust in the
shock of Battle. Truly we say a drunken man never made good Soldier; nor a
reeling headed man a good Christian Soldier.

Secondly.
In the Faith, not in falsehoods, in the truths, not shows; zeal and
steadfastness are right, when the one is a sharp weapon for Truth, and the
other is stiff and unbending for the Faith. Now you are to know there is a
twofold Faith; One by which we believe. Secondly, Is, that which is believed;
and this is called Doctrinall Faith. Now when Christians are zealous, resolute,
and will dye in the Truths, and for the Truths of Jesus Christ, this is to
stand fast in the Faith,

Observation.
Standing fast to the Truths of Jesus Christ strenuously with constancy, is a
notable piece of spiritual Gallantry,

This you shall find hinted to the Angel of the Church of Smirnians, Revel.
2.10. Fear none of these things which thou shall suffer for the truth; and in
the 11. verse and latter end, Be faithful to the death, and I will give thee a
crown of life; The Spirit of God records this point of Gallantry in the Church
of Pergamus, verse 13. I know thy works, where thou dwell, where Satan has
his seat; i. e. where wicked men are in authority, and heresy prevails; yet
thou hold fast my name, and have not denied the faith, even in those days
wherein Antipas my faithful Martyr suffered, etc. Rev. 3.10, 11, 12. 1 John
2.23, 24. Let that therefore abide in you which ye have heard from the
beginning; If that shall abide in you, ye shall continue in the Son, und in the
Father, now to be in God, is to be Heroic indeed, 2 Pet. 1.12. That ye be
established in the present truth; 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist steadfast in the
Faith: 2 These. 2.15. Therefore brethren stand fast. It was Gallantry in the
Grecian women, who when their sons put on their sheilds, gave them in charge
either to bring them back or dye: It is storyed of Epaminondes that he was so
addicted to his buckler, that he was wont to say, I will either hold thee, or
dye with the loss of thee.

It was the gallant resolution of a Roman Officer either to keep his ground or
lose his life. Truly Christian friends it is gallantry in you in these sad
times of Alaruming Truth in its quarters; and upon the several charges is given
the men of truth, daily to stand or fall with it in our hearts.

Quaere.
But Sir I pray what is truth? one says he is for truth, and this is truth,
another says that is, and is for it; what is the truth you council us to stand
fast unto.

Solut.
There are humane moral Truths, rules in secular Arts, such as Paul held fast
until his conversion, but then let go, not the use of them but the abuse of
them, he left glorying in them, counted all dung for the excellent knowledge of
Jesus Christ.

Secondly.
There are Divine truths called Scripture truths, these are either Imaginary or
Real; I do not say it is gallantry to stand fast to all that every man delivers
to you for truth, or propounds, or conjectures to be so, but such as Scripture
determines to be so; such as the word will own, and will own the word upon
demand, in the evidence of his, not our own spirits. For truly it is with Truth
at this day, as with the Infant brought to Solomon, the false mothers cry
divide it, and let every one share in that limb, which his own conscience
(which indeed is no conscience) guides him unto, which is to profer themselves
to posterity, the founders of an intolerable Toleration of all Errors; and by
this way, Antichrist himself (against whom we have solemnly protested, and
before God so unanimously covenanted) must be in equity admitted a child's
portion; The LORD direct our Solomon's to that height of surpassing wisdom, as
to give the child of Truth to its own Parents that cry a whole, and one or none.

To stand fast to this whole truth of God, and for it, is indeed Spiritual
gallantry.

Athanasius and others of the Nicene Fathers would not add one jot about the
Diety of Jesus Christ, no not in any time; Times may differ, men may change and
vary, but Truth never; whether in prosperity, as in Constantines days, or in
adversity, as in Neroes, truth is the same; The fixed stars shine in the
coldest nights, yea then brightest.

Josephus reports of the Samaritans that if any good befell the Jews, then they
would claim their kindred, and boast that they came from Jacob; but if in any
misery, or under a cloud with the state they gave out, they had no relation to
them. Many there are that vary their respects to truth according to the savor,
the eminent persons in it set on it. But give me the men that will stand their
ground on assault, and make up the breach although they fall man by man in the
gap; yea under the sword, own truth as Paul, or in a Den of Lions, or a fiery
furnace, that pish at all the barkings, bitings, frownings, fawnings of currish
heretics, that have Peter's gallantry better managed, Although all forsake thee
I will not.

Quaere.
I pray Sir inform us how we may quit our selves like men, and stand fast to
Truth?

Solut.
First, get a solid sound judgment; so made by the light of a clear and
sanctified understanding of Scripture principles, admit not of a reeling head,
a revolting Soldier is a base man, unworthy the name or society of soldiers;
never to be trusted more; Ephesians. 4.14. the Apostle exhorts them that they be
henceforth no more children tossed to and fro with every blast of doctrine by
the slight of men; take heed of such a judgment as is carried up and down with
the current. The Primitive times yielded more sound judgments; Athanisius held
fast in his Judgment the diety of Christ against the Arrians; Augustine the
doctrine of grace against the Pelagians; Truly I confess it is an honor to a
man to confess an Error, but a horrid shame to suffer for any self ends any
truth to be supplanted, by any Innovation or Error.

Secondly.
Labor to have a stubborn and stout will in relation to what is surely known to
be the truth of God; take heed of a flexible coming will; yea hold it fast in
affection, that which we love dearly we stick close too. A child will hardly be
weaned from the breast it has found sweetness and strength from, and is
experienced in nourishment; you that have found God present with much
sweetness in his Ordinances by the public administration, I beseech you do
not now trample on them and despise them, whilst they and theirs is the same
for sweetness, for holiness.

Thirdly.
Stand fast to the Truth in profession, Philip. 2.18. holding forth the word of
life, not only to believe Truths, but to confess them before men, not with
Peter to revolt and effect to say we know not the man.

Fourthly.
In conversation practice Truth, Saint John calls it walking in the Truth, when
men hold on in the Truth against all discouragements; although they lose by it
apparently, yet they hold it forth courageously.

Quaere.
But pray Sir why do you so far engage us in this service, in these days of
Liberty.

Solut.
It is worthy thy engagement, for it is more excellent then the excellentest of
the creatures, Prove. 3.14, 15. you cannot pitch on such an excellency; Revel.
3.11. Hold fast, says the Spirit, let none take thy Crown; the Crown is the top
of Royalty; who would not keep his ground, if a Crown were the stake.

But its excellency will further appear if you consider these two particulars:
First the holiness of it; The more holy, the more excellent; Corruptions are
diminutions of excellency; the more mixed things are, the more base they are; as
the mixture of Gold and Tin, Wine and Water, Silver and Dross; ever the more
pure, the more glorious. Now the Truths of God are holy, not as men with
mixtures of Corruption, but as the Light at Noonday, without any mists, fogs,
mixtures of darkness; and although Truth may be in a fog as the Sun, yet not
foggy.

Secondly.
The more God is in any thing the more excellent but God, is altogether in his
Truth: He is there in the brightness of his wisdom; in the greatness of his
power; in the Riches of his mercy, in the honor of his justice; yea in this
Word is his Christ and our Jesus, therefore worth standing fast unto.

Thirdly.
Truth is made over to us under terms of Constancy and perpetuity, and
therefore in Scripture termed our heritage, personal estates are often sold,
those that are out by descent hereditary ought to be kept for posterity; God
forbid, said Naboath, I should sell the inheritance of my Fathers: Psa. 119.111.
They are my heritage, says David, for ever. Let me tell you, posterity is
worthy our thoughts, and what we shall leave to them in point of Truth.

Fourthly.
God trusts us with his truths, 2 Timothy 1.14. It is by the Apostle called the
good thing committed to us to keep; now in matters of trust we should be
faithful; It is the most vilest and unworthyest thing in the world to betray a
Trust, especially where truth is on their side; In matters of trust we should
be faithful to the death. It is observable Trust must be redelivered: 2. wholly,
not less then delivered: 3. Only to the Truster; and truly otherwise it is
extremely injurious to God; For although they are ours for efficacy, yet they
are Gods for the authority. Truths are Gods Jewels of trust; and he will call
all of us to an account what use we have made of them; what we have done with
them; what unto them; what mixtures of our own heads with them.

Fifthly.
It concerns you to keep your ground, for your eternal wel-being depends
on it: You can no more live spiritually without pure truths, then corporally
without bread; you cannot be convinced without Truth; you cannot be contrite,
and have your corrupt hearts pricked, but by the Truth, Acts 2. When they heard
those Truths they were pricked at their hearts etc. Conversion is from Truth,
Psa. 19.7. Converting souls, etc. Faith is brought into the soul by hearing the
Truth; Augmentation is from it, in grace; Jesus Christ is united to the soul by
faith, Perseverance is from it; Romans 1.16. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. vid.

Use 1. Information.
Of the unworthy walking of this age for the most part in relation to this duty
of standing fast to the Truth; yea of many that are eminently furnished with
common gifts and excellent parts, there is much slipperinesse and base
unsetlednesse of spirit upon them, even to truth it self, both in doctrine and
conversation, for truth in doctrine we may complain as the Apostle to the
Galatians in the 1. and 6. I wonder you are so soon removed from him that
called you into the grace of Jesus Christ unto another Gospel; it is grown no
wonder in our times; for how do the most, for most base ends, quit their
ancient grounds which they received and believed, and gloryed in for truth; and
for preferment-sake show truth a fair pair of heels, and a foul heart. The
ancient Disciples left ships, nets, custom house, for to follow truth; but now
professed Disciples leave Christ for places of Excise and Custom-house. Some
turn sneaking Anabaptists; some fall off to Socinian blasphemies; some to
Antinomians fancies; and many Seekers. Seek you any of you great things for
your selves, seek them not; It is no time to be furnishing your Cabins, when
the boults and butt-ends of the very planks of the ship are started out. The
Lord pity us, what a spirit of giddyness is upon us* and if any old errors
which is unknown to most, with some quaint expressions and hye-flying
Phylosophical notions are delivered, how cowardly do we start off from the old
truths of Jesus Christ, and are invassail'd by upstart errors; It is a sad
time, but this a more sad omen of worser times, even the rabble of opinions in
this City of Bristol; of which I may say, that as the sword has slain many, so
has error many more in a few months time. One while such a man preaches
truth, and you are willing to pull out your eyes to do him good; a little after,
you are ready to pull out his eyes, and he is a low man, and not worthy your
presence, and so discouraged. How many ways do you make to heaven in this
place? I beseech you where I am related unto, to look to your Guards; Keep a
strict watch, double your Guard, eye your sallyports; and put on the whole
Armor of God, that you may be able to stand fast to the Truth in the day of
assault; that you may quit your selves like men.

Use 2.
Informs us of the causes of this lowerlinesse, and baseness of Spirit; and
inconstancy to Truth.

First.
When men are ignorant, they may easily prove inconstant; True men have
abundance of indistinct knowledge, much head knowledge, little heart knowledge,
Now the one makes men talk admirably, but the other to stand to it gallantly:
Truly Ignorance is the sponge to suck in all Errors; and spiritual Pride the
bawd to vent them; that which is weak is light; chaff may be tossed any way.

Secondly.
When men's apprehensions are very large, but their affections very foul; when
men know much of truth, but withal love much of the world, or self, or sinful
Liberty: Now you know a foul stomach ever makes an il head, and a secret love
of sin works out a love of truth: Men easily grow erroneous when they affect
Liberty, and wax Irreligious.

Third Cause.
Men are strangely infected with a base and late predominant Epidemical disease
the Itch of spiritual Pride, which was caught of our first Parent; The greatest
Errors ever drop from those that are most proud, and are taken up by those that
are most ignorant.

Fourth.
Many have Athenian wits, and long after Novelties; and although old Wine be
best, yet they love to drink in fashion.

Fifth Cause.
A Colloging slavishnesse, many giving up their faith and souls to opinions of
other great men, or to Relations.

Sixth.
An eminent love of the world, this made Demas and Hymenaeus forsake truth. A
slave to the world will never be a faithful servant to truth; he that dares pawn
their souls, will in time venture to sell the Truth.

Seventh.
Licentious hearts, when men affect pleasure, for corrupt doctrines gives more
scope, then truth, to a libertinious heart; and we are apt to believe that
soonest that pleases us best. Erroneous points are more for pleasure and ease,
yea and purse too; Divine truths are for strictness. Now there are many
Grecian-like give up their weapons for their sports; many forsake the truth,
that they may more freely enjoy their Liberty, in those ways are most pleasing
to their spirits.

Use Exhortation.
I am come heartily to beg of you this one thing, to lay a solid foundation in
the knowledge of the truths of God. Confused brains cause unsettled hearts,
rest not with Pilates quere, where art thou? or with Israel to halt betwixt two
opinions, nor to take up any truth on trust for any man's sake whatsoever, or
any self ends or aims; but with the honorable Bereans search the Scripture,
receive truth upon the evidence of truth; be sure of the Word, there is little
difference betwixt shiboleth and siboleth; yea and in the last days many shall
say lo this is Christ, and here is Christ; yet try: yea, the Enemy has got
the word, therefore be strict upon examination, bring the most specious
expressions to the Standard, try all there.

Quaere.
How shall we know the truth upon his march, there being so many gone out under
his banners to deceive; and all is not gold that glisters, Try the spirits, for
every spirit is not of God.

Solu.
You may make a discovery First, by its Unity. Second, by its Purity Thirdly,
its Efficacy. Fourthly Antiquity. Fifthly, Simplicity.


For the first observe it, you shall find it one as God is one, Unum et verum
convertuntur; There is but one way to heaven, many to miss it. It is an unisone
with its principles. Erroneous doctrines want no outward harmony, and outward
consent; but truth, as it is one in itself, so it works men to oneness, to be
of one mind; truth is of a binding up nature.

Secondly.
Truth is comprehended in Purity, Errors are much in outward beauty (like
Curtizans little in honesty; Truth is pure in its self and unto us; It is an
adversary to all sin, because all sin is an adversary to Jesus Christ and to
Gods glory; It is pure likewise in its operations, it sets it self against all
baseness; Titus 1.14, 15. It is truly pure, not counterfeitly pure.

Thirdly.
By the efficacy of truth other doctrines add to our Notions, but never meddle
with our corruptions, they swel our heads, but never mend our hearts; they work
in the brain, but never meddle with the spirit; increase much wit to talk well,
but conveigh little strength to walk close with God. In a word, they never
bring grace or peace from Jesus Christ: The truth that comes from God, leads
to God. It makes the bad good, and the good better. Truth works the heart, not
only from grosser, but lesser sins, even the spots of the world; 1 These. 5.22.
vid. Truth works the heart to a liking of nothing unlike it self, or unbecoming
the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly.
By the Antiquity, Id demum verissimum quod antiquissimum; and truly as it was
sometime replied to those of Rome, that we can look beyond Luther, So may we to
the rabble of Heresies in these times, we can look and see the time when they
had not a being; indeed they are comparatively but of yesterday: and it is
possible for an easy Herald to drive the pedigree of the Anabaptist,
Brownists, Antinomians, Pelagians, Socinians, Arians, Antetrinitarians,
Seekers, etc. and to demonstrate them to be all subservient, although active
actors for Scout master general, self ends or aims, when truth like the Sun
has run its course through all ages, not that all have embraced it, but some
have received it.

Fifthly.
By its Simplicity it will endure handling, it is found; Erroneous doctrine like
unfound flesh, or sore eyes, abhors a touch, or the light; and therefore is
more in private then public; not that I oppose private duties, but prise them,
but resist those that oppose public Ordinances; For if what any deliver in
their private conventions be good and sound truth, I beseech them let it come
to light, Bonum quo communius eo melius; Truth fears no trial; although il
faced women would have al glasses broken but such as they have got made to
flatter them; Truth put it self upon proof; yea in public, Veritas non querere
argales, especially in days of Liberty of the Gospel, and when truth is
pallizadoed with so many oaky fortifications: It is not now accusation enough
to be a Christian; no, be as holy as David, as muke as Moses, as wise as
Solomon; walk with God, and be upright before him with Abraham, yea let every
man be followers of Jesus Christ, and enjoy his Liberty in the Truths of Jesus
Christ; for, blessed be God, there may be some pretenses (but no just ground
for the least fear of persecution for conscience sake.

Lastly.
Having found out the truth, I beg heartily of you, yea (more then for my
Arrears) to love the truth, do the truth, suffer for the truth, this will be a
sure boult to keep out all Errors; when Truth is still stirring in your ears,
and Sin ruling in your hearts, you can never do good on it; he must needs have
a meek hand to hold fast truth, or foot to stand fast that has a wicked heart;
Hymenaeus let go faith and a good conscience together, 1 Timothy 1.19. Wherefore I
beseech you be doing Christians, as well as knowing ones; And now should I fall
on with the reserve, and show you the beauty and honor of a resolved spirit
for the truths of Jesus Christ; And have given a through and through charge to
the sad, yet bold divisions of these times with my left wing under the
prevailing Banner of Love and Unity; and shown you how good a thing it is, for
brethren to live in Love and Unity, but I am prevented in managing this
onslaught at present, and shall take leave of you, praying you that all things
may be done amongst you in love; And praying for you, That the God of truth
would lead you on from this day, and fix and establish you in the Truth.
Finally brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live
in love and peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you; yea, now the
very God of peace sanctify you all throughout. And now the Lord of peace
himself give you peace by all means; The Lord be with you all.

FINIS.

