A Perfect Relation of THE Beginning and Continuation of the Irish-Rebellion,
From May last, to this present 12th. of January, 1641.

With the Place where, and Persons who, did Plot, Contrive, and put in
Execution that Romish damnable Design.

As also their inhumane Cruelties which they have, and still execute, with
divellish hatred, upon the Protestants.

Written by a worthy Gentleman, and sent over by a Merchant now dwelling in
DUBLIN.

Whereunto is annexed the Merchants letter who sent the Copy of this Relation:
With another letter wherein is truly related, The Battle fought betwixt our
English, and the Rebels, on the tenth of January, at a Town called Swords,
eight Miles from DUBLIN.

London, Printed by J. R. 1641.

Sir,
I Received your kind Letter from your friend, whose presence I have not yet
had the happiness to enjoy; I shall show him what courtesy and respect I can.
I have now herein made bold to trouble you with a Relation written by an honest
Gentleman of these parts. I will pass my word the work is truly written, and
not like those scurrilous things printed concerning this Kingdom. God help us,
we are in a miserable condition, there will be no safety here without the
destruction of vile Popery. Our Army consisting of about 3000. men, is again
gone abroad this day to fight with the enemy, God give them good success.
Yesterday they burnt some Villages about seven miles off that harbored the
Rogues, and brought in 3000. Sheep, and 80. Cowes, with other pillage: Our
Ships being four snall ones, one great one, of a 190. Tuns, are gone yesterday
well provided to releeve Droghedath, which I hope they have done, the wind
being to their desire. This in exchange of your news, which I pray impart to
our friends. Thus with my hearty good wishes to you, and your Wife, I take
leave,

Your very loving friend, P. G.

A perfect Relation of the Rebellion in Ireland, from the beginning thereof,
till this present January.
SInce the Irish Army in May last was disbanded, (which was done with much
reluctation of the multitude, being very unwilling to lay down their Arms,) and
the Romish plot for civil Wars (and bloody battle practiced by the lurking
Jesuits, and their adherents, the Romanists in general) between our gracious
Sovereign, and his Subjects of Scotland took none effect; and the opportunity
and means of taking away root and branch of the Protestants, both English and
Scottish in Ireland was avoided. It is clear and manifest, that this new way of
Treason and Rebellion, was by the disloyal and perfidious Romanists, the
Incendiaries of all Christendom, at some frequent Conventicles and meetings,
principally at a Friary called Multifornam in the County of Westmeath, where
many hundreds of them met and consulted for many days together this last
Summer (provision being brought in unto them by the Country) where they thus
plotted, contrived, and put in execution as follows, videlicet. That on the
23. day of October last, most of the Kings Forts and Castles throughout the
Realm, should be by select men set out and allotted to every particular Fort
and Castle to be by them surprised; and the Governors and Keepers thereof
slain, or kept prisoners.

Accordingly many Castles and Forts were then surprises; the Surprizers under
color of neighborhood and friendship, inviting themselves to breakfast or
dinners to the Governors and keepers thereof, where themselves, their Wives,
Children, and Servants were robbed, spoiled, and stripped of all their moneys,
plate, jewels, goods, corn, Cattle, Housholdstuffe, and Apparel, and some
slain or hanged, and some kept prisoners, and barbarously handled.

For surprisall of his Highness principal Castle and City of Dublin; where
the residence of this Princely government is, was allotted and assigned the
Lord Macguire Baron of Eneskelim, the two Macmoghans, and others. The Lord
Macguire to that purpose repaired to Dublin some few days before; and the
Macmoghans, and the rest, the two and twentieth of October, with intent to
surprise the Castle on the morrow at the opening of the Gates, and letting
down the Drawbridge, and to act their intended tragical massacre of the
Protestants, on the twenty fourth day of October being Sunday.

To that purpose had they gathered together a multitude of desperate savage
barbarous fellows out of their remote Countries into Dublin: of whom (upon the
discovery of the conspiracy) the Lord Macguire, the Macmoghans, and many
others were apprehended and took the Castle the same day; but not so early in
the morning as they intended, and are yet there in durance. And many hundreds
more were near approaching to the City of Dublin on the three and twentieth
day of October; but upon the noise of the discovery, Retreated.

And moreover about four hundred men having diverse Months lien on Shipboord
in the Port of Dublin in two of the best Ships furnished with Guns, frequenting
that Port, hired under pretense of transporting those four hundred men, being
levied and Shipped by his Highness Letters of License for Spain were upon the
discovery neglected, and no further care taken for their transportation, or
victualling. But the Friar, one Mallun, that had been the chief agent in
victualling, and for the pretended transportation of those four hundred men,
hid himself from further examination and inquiry; and the men were thereupon
set on shore.

What the secret intended intended Plot was, as well touching those four
hundred men, as also touching those two armed Ships, the occurrences and
consequence being compared, I leave to the judicious to discern; many delays
being made against Articles of Charter-party, to hinder the Masters and
Navigators of the said Ships from hoising sail when the wind served.
Notwithstanding, it pleased that Almighty and omniscient God, that has been
always propitious, benign, and gracious to our gracious King, in rescuing and
delivering him; as also his gracious Father of famous memory, and famous Queen
Elizabeth their predecessor, from many malicious, wicked, and bloody Romish
designs; As the Queen from pistolls, poisons, and poniards, and the Armado of
Spain, in the year 1588. King James, and our gracious King Charles from the
Gunpowder-Treason, and since, in bringing back our gracious Sovereign Lord,
and King, out of the jaws of Spain, and Rome; by defeating, and preventing the
massacre of his Majesty's Royal Sister, and her Royal issue in Holland; from
the Spanish Armado, in the year 1639. overthrown by the Hollanders, without his
loss or costs. From intestine and civil wars between him and his Subjects of
Scotland, labored by that Arch-devill, Arch-juggler. So now by his secret and
mighty power and providence (as the manner of discovery will make appear) to
prevent the imminent ruin, and utter destruction and loss of the whole Realm
of Ireland, and his Highness people the Protestants, which must have followed;
if the Castle or Dublin, whereby all his Highness stores and provisions of all
manner of Arms, Ammunition, and instruments for War, being then no small
quantity had been surprised. Yet the rest of the Conspirators in most of the
Counties throughout the Realm being confident of the good success of the Lord
Macguire in surprising the Castle, and City of Dublin. (And well they might be
confident thereof, for the good success of the Catholic cause was prayed for
at their Masses;) went on with their traitorous and bloody resolutions; and the
neighboring Irish in most Counties, slew the neighboring English; Debtors
their Creditors Tenants their Landlords, some Lords of lands their Tenants,
Mortgagers their Mortgagees, Servants their Masters, and severally possessed
themselves of their several lands and goods, Money, plate, jewels, apparel,
housholdstuffe, corn, and cattle, and thrust them, that they let live, out of
doors naked. Many great men's servants being Irish, ran away from their Masters
with their best Horses to the Rebels. The Rebels further prosecuting their
traitorous and rebellious designs; surprised every day more and more of his
Highness Forts, Castles, and Towns, partly by fraudulent and treacherous
insinuation, partly by force, partly by promises of fair quarter to those his
Highness Subjects, who had upon the noise of the Rebellion betaken themselves
thereunto for safeguard of themselves and their goods, that upon rendition they
should carry away bag and baggage. Behold, all ye that pass by, and read this
relation, how these promises of quarter were performed!

No sooner came his Majesty's subjects out of those Holds, but they were all,
by the Rebels, stripped naked; some bloodily wounded, even to death, but left
alive languishing; their bellies being ripped, and guts issuing, cast upon
dung-hils; some butchered and cut into gobbets; some men, some women hanged,
yea many hanged, or otherwise put to death by them, when they returned from
some skirmishes with less.

No degree of Laity, or of, or belonging to the Clergy spared; but Ladies,
Gentlewomen, women great with child, yea, children, very infants and
sucklings, as well as men, all robbed, and stripped naked, and exposed to
extremity of wind and weather, in a cold winter season, and forced to lie on
the cold earth in the fields, in their travel toward Dublin; over whom, being
driven together in Herds and Flocks, the Salvages insulted, and upbraided them,
saying, Now are ye wild Irish as well as we, and ye may go to Dublin, if ye
will; but ye will find little succor there, for we are sure the Castle and
City are taken. Whither thousands of them repairing from far, being sore
smitten with hunger and cold before they came thither; many of them, after
several reliefs upon the high way, having been thrice stripped by the
unmercifull Salvages (it is true) found but slender succor; for indeed it is
not there to be had, howsoever some particular men have been very bountiful in
their Alms and contribution.

For the one half of the City and Suburbs are Papists, and will not, or dare
not relieve a Protestant for fear of Romes curse, which is denounced against
them, if they do relieve. Of the other half two parts of three, are poor, and
not able to give; and half a third part are departed with their estates into
England for safety; insomuch as the distressed poor robbed people dye there on
heaps, as before they did in the fields upon their travel.

It is now little more than two months since this Rebellion burst out, during
within, and since which time the Traitors and Rebels have so bestirred
themselves, that they have not left an Englishman subfisting in any part of the
Realm, except in the Province of Conhaught; where they are beholding the
goodness, loyalty, and fidelity of the noble Earl of Clenricard, and the care
and vigilancie of the Right Honorable the President of the same Province, for
their being: And in some parts of the Provinces of Munster and Vlster; the
first whereof is in part planted with English, being the portion of the noble
Earl of Cork, and the last with Scots, being the portion of diverse noble and
generous Scots (who have behaved themselves bravely, and stoutly against the
Rebels; as also some of the English Chiefe^ains have, who (I doubt not) shall
reap the due merit of their courage and valor;) and in some other few
fortified Towns, Castles, and Forts, able for a while to defend themselves from
the rage and fury of the multitude, who have dared to stop up all the
highways and passages from Dublin to remote parts, thereby to prevent all
postage of Letters, and messages from the State to any Town, City, or County,
Governor, Lieutenant, or Commander, to lay ambushes for his Highn^sse Forces,
Men, Arms, and Ammunition, and to surprise the Arms, and slay the men, to rob
and spoil all the English within two miles of the City of Dublin, and to bring
up their forces so near, and to skirmish with his Highness Forces, they
having gotten at least 3000, or 4000 Arms of his Majesty's by force, or fraud,
but most by treachery.

They have dared above a whole month to besiege his Majesty's Town of
Drogheda, both by Sea and Land, the same being but twenty miles remote from
Dublin; insomuch as both Towns are already straightned for victuals: Drogheda
having had for all that time no market at all, and Dublin a very slender and
thin market; therein appeering now scarcely either pound of fresh butter, or
cheese, Turkey, Goose, Hen, Capon, Chick, Egg, or Pigge, or any manner of
Sea-foul^; and little Fish; all which were wont to be very plentiful, and at
cheap rates. It is supposed that most of the Fishermen are become Rebels. The
prices of Corn, Beife, Mutton, Veale, and Porke are already doubled to that
they were at the beginning of the Rebellion. For in very deed, the Rebels have
surprised, or do detain from market, or are possessed of all the Corn and
Cattle almost in the whole Realm.

At the first, and for one months space after the Treason and Rebellion brake
out; it seemed to be none other, but such as was plotted, stirred, and
enterprized only by some Male-contented old Irish, against the English; whose
Ancestors and themselves* had poss^ssed their Ancestors lands, and Revenues,
and the cause not Romish, and universal; but it had been possible to have been
conceived, that if the Castle of Dublin had been surprised; the cause would
have proved not only discontent for dis-inheritance, but the Catholic Romish
cause a Kingdom, and a new Cath^like King.

As soon as those of the vicinity of Dublin, Lords, knights and Gentlemen of
the Pale, the old English, had by their cautelous insinuations, and
protestations of loyalty and fidelity to the King, and Crown, severally
obtained from the Right Honorable, the Lords, Justices, several Arms and
Ammunition out of his Highness Storehouse, in his Castle of Dublin, for their
pretended private defense against the Rebels: and had afterward declared
themselves, by laying aside those several Arms and Ammunition together, for a
public offense against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and dignity,
to be their confederates, Then it apperred manifestly that the cause was not
only private discontent of some particular men, but Universal, Romish, and
devilish, even for a Kingdom. For what did, or could the last Committee of
Parliament crave of his Highness for enlargement of their jurisdictions,
immunities, and liberties, which was not liberally of his free Grace granted.
Let the whole World behold, and see the free Grace, and bounty, of a Royal,
Virtuous, and pious King; and the disloyal ingratitude, and heathenish
immanity, of a perfidious, and Rebellious people, who have so Traitorously
requited his King-like clemency and benignity. For they have not only
destroyed, and made desolate his Kingdom in two months, which has been
forty years implanting since the last civil Wars; but they have also robbed
him of his Rents, Revenues, and Customs, and part of those Subsidies which
themselves had helped to confirm by Act of Parliament, and robbed, spoiled, and
murdered many of his Liege-people, which should, and would have cheerfully
paid those Subsidies. For they have destroyed all Merchandise and Trade
throughout the Realm, whereby even many of themselves, and their impions
faction, must of necessity suffer infinitely; millions of gold will not
countervail the damage on all sides. One thing more in particular, touching
those of the Pale near the City of Dublin, and the confines is worthy to be
related, videlicet, that when some of them had obtained Arms, and Ammunition
for 500. men, with pretense to resist the Rebels: besides those a forementioned
for their private defense, they returned answer, that they could not levy so
many men, who would fight against the Rebels: and therefore they would return
the Arms, and Ammunition, and so did, but not to the Castle of Dublin, whence
they received them, but to the Town Droghedath, which is now besieged, between
which and Dublin, the some men nowly with an Arm^, expecting doubtless,
shortly to have all those Arms again.

For the best of them, who appeared most in getting forth those Arms, have
since refused to come in upon Proclamation, they have joined themselves with
the Rebels, they have taken the Kings Subjects prisoners, they have again
r^leased them, and given them passes from the Irish Army, colored with
pretended authority in the Kings Name, with their own names, and a Romish
Priests, or Fry^rs subscribed. Was not this a neat Romish trick? Let all these
conveyances, and occurrences be laid together, and then let all the Princes,
and Nations of Europe judge, and censure, whether Religion can warrant such
fraud, and treachery, treason, and rebellion, robbery, spoil, rapine, bloody
cruelty, and murders.

The primitive persecutions were exquisite torments of diverse kinds full of
tyranny, and cruelty; but they were short, and made a speedy end of life; but
this new found way of persecution by cold, and hunger, much more terrible, and
exceeds them all, because it is a long lingering, and languishing torment, and
so much the more cruel, because exercised on women, yea women great with
child, Infants, and Sucklings.

These tyrants, and bloody minded men, certainly are not Kings, nor Governors;
by what authority then exercise they such cruelty upon their fellow Subjects?
What can they say for themselves, if they should answer before their King? If
they pretend religion, though there be a mulct of ninepence, each Sabbath upon
every person of competent age absenting himself from Divine Service by a
Statute Law enacted in the Realm, they cannot allege that it was put in
execution, or that they had not freedom for their Romish superstitions, which
to endeavor to convince them of by argument is but folly. For their pretended
Catholic cause, which already appears to be the mother of treason, and
rebellion, the sin of witchcraft, murder, and all other abominations, and will
shortly appear, even to themselves to be the daughter of Antichrist, and
Antichristianisme, must by an inevitable divine decree, be convinced by fire,
and sword. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory,
for thy loving mercy; and for thy truths sake.

For if the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may we, that survive
since the day of discovery of their abominable treason, and rebellion, say,
when they rose up against us; they had swallowed us up quick, they were so
wrathfully displeased at us. Praised be the Lord, which has not given us over
as a prey unto their teeth. The snare is broken, and we are delivered. It may
be collected that King David, in these precedent words of his, prophesied of
these later times, and the Romish persecution. For how were the snares broken,
and we delivered, when there was but ten hours left unrun out from catching
us in their snare? Merely by the providence of God, as the many formerly
mentioned deliverances were. It appears manifestly, that the conspiracy had
been long in hatching, and contriving with true Romish secrecy. For the honest
man Owen O-Connely, the discoverer being an Irish man, but a Protestant (as he
has declared to diverse of his familiar friends) having observed by discourse
among the Irish, that there was some enterprise in hand prayed for, at their
Masses, in furtherance, and good success of the Catholic cause, Although he
had dissembled his Religion, and frequented their Masses in places remote from
his habitation, where he was not known, could never obtain a true discovery of
the particular, until the very evening of the two and twentieth day of
October, when Hugh Mac-Moghan, one of the conspirators, intending to express
his love to Owen O Connely, and to rescue him out of the approaching danger,
and to that end having invited him by Letters, and an express Messenger to
ride with him a long journey to Dublin, upon earnest affairs, they with the
rest being thither come; opening his mind to Owen, told him what the
enterprise was, videlicet, the surprizall of the Castle of Dublin, and Massacre
of the Protestants, and enjoined him secrecy, and fidelity.

Owen could do no less for his own safeties sake, then give consent, and
promise fidelity, and secrecy. But withal he diswaded Hugh Mac-Moghan from the
enterprise, but did not prevail. For Hugh Mac-Moghan answered, that it was too
far gone, he was so deeply engaged, that he had vowed perseverance, or to
that effect. If it be so, replied Owen, let us go on, I will do my best, or to
that effect.

Notwithstanding his verbal consent, the good man moved with the fear of God,
love of his King and Country, and commiseration of his fellow Subjects,
Christians, and Protestants, whom he well saw, and knew were sure to be lost,
and ruined if the plot succeeded, wisely reserving to himself his compunction
of heart, and loyal affection, kept company with the Traitors, ahd revelled
with them in Taverns, until he had drunk too much; but in the end watching his
opportunity, slipped away, from them, into one of the Lords Justices houses, and
discovered unto the Lord Justice the conspiracy; to which the Lord Justice gave
little credence at first, because he perceived that Owen had drunk too much.
But the vehemence, and importunity of Owen, moved him to embrace, and take the
information to heart, and immediately it being then late in the night to go to
council with his Peers, and to take course for prevention of that wicked, and
damnable Treason, and for apprehension of the conspirators, who were eight or
nine of them attached, within eight or nine hours after; a little before the
prefixed hour of their intended mischief, and the Lord Macguire about the midst
of the same day.

For every particular of the manner of discovery, it is not material to set
out; Owen O-Conney best can, and has already told his own tale.

Herein is given only a brief touch of it, whereout may be gathered, that the
finger of God was in it, in framing the heart of Hugh Mac-Moghan toward Owen
O-Connely, and to discover that to him in the very point of time, which he had
so busily, and industriously long sought after. Therefore let glory be given to
God the principal discoverer.

Dated at Dublin the fourth of January. 1641.
Worthy Sir,
By the last weeks P^ste I writ unto you, certifying you of our lamentable
condition, craving your favorable advice, and charitable help in our affairs;
whereof I doubt not, it being Gods cause, and our dear Countries, for which we
all suffer. I have herein sent a Letter from a very good friend of mine, and
kinsman, Master Dean Jones, of Kilmore, who has miraculously escaped with
life: Of which I humbly crave the careful delivery to our worthy K. Attorney.

As for our affairs in general, or otherwise, here is no difference or
amendment since my last; only, I thought meet to write unto you a short
relation of our late skirmish. On monday night last, we sent out a Party of
about 2000 foot, and 200 horse, to a Town called Swords, eight miles off; where
they came about six of the clock next morning, and found the Enemy, being a
thousand men, Entrenched in the Town, on whom they shot for the space of half
an hour; and at last brake in upon the Trenches, but found strong opposition.
But our Division or Party coming another way upon them, put them to flight; and
pursuing them about half a mile, reterned, plundered the Town. Our new English
Soldiers spared neither man, woman, or child therein, they got store of good
booty; among which, about 400 Cowes, a great part whereof should that morning
have been killed for the Rogues breakefast, they expecting a supply: Our men
also took four Colors, and slew in the Town and pursuit 179 men, besides
those the Enemy conveyed away during the fight, on horseback, and otherwise,
whose number or quality is not yet known: The Town also was burnt, and great
store of Corn unthrashed. But alas! our victory is nothing, if we consider the
loss of a brave Spirit on our part, Sir Lorenzo Carry, brother to the Lord
Falkland, who with three more were killed in the fight on our part. Until we
have a good supply we are able to do little, which God send unto us speedily,
and preserve us till then, and evermore.

Laus Deo. In Dublin, Jan. 1641. Your humble and affectionate servant, P. G.

FINIS.

