A DISCOURSE Consisting of MOTIVES FOR The Enlargement and Freedom OF TRADE.

Especially That of CLOTH, and other Woollen MANUFACTURES, Engrossed at present
Contrary to the Law of Nature, Contrary to the Law of Nations, Contrary to and
the Laws of this Kingdom.


By a Company of private men who style themselves Merchant-Adventurers.

The First Part.

Imprimatur, NA. BRENT.

April. 11. 1645

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for Stephen Bowtell, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Bible in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

To the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT assembled.
Right Honorable,
THE scope and substance of this following Discourse, is to demonstrate by
clear and unanswerable Arguments, the Illegality of the Incorporation of those
who soly ascribe unto themselves the names of Merchants Adventurers, though
they Trade but unto two Towns only, and those hard by: and to show further how
their Patent trencheth upon the native Rights of the freeborn subject: which
Patent has been often complaind of and clamord against from time to time, as
an universal greevance to Town and Country, tending to the diminution of
Trade, and of all sorts of Manufactures at home, and to the dis-repute of the
Policy of this Nation abroad, the said Patent being accounted no less amongst
all people, then a Monopoly, a word odious all the world over. This
Incorporation has bin like an Ulcer upon the Body politic of this Kingdom a
long time, which has been often rubbed and lanc'd, yet it closed again and
gatherd more corruption then formerly, and now requires a greater cure then
ever.

Therefore in all humbleness it is prayed, that this Honorable Court and
highest Council of the Kingdom, who have already done so many glorious things
for the public Liberty, Rights and Immunities of the free borne Subject, would
be pleased to peruse the ensuing Discourse, and poise the weight of the
Reasons, Arguments, and proofs therein produced, which are derived from true
fountains, and so to do therein what in their high wisdom and justice they
shall think expedient for the redress of such a National grievance.

A DISCOURSE Consisting of MOTIVES FOR The Enlargement and Freedom of Trade,
Especially That of CLOTH, and other Woollen Manufactures, Engrossed at present
Contrary to the Law of Nature, the Law of Nations, and the Laws of this
Kingdom.

By a Company of private men who style themselves Merchant-Adventurers.
THe Terrestrial Globe in cut out into Islands and Continents, both which are
created to be a Mansion for men; and although they be severd by the work of
Nature, yet they may be said to be joynd together by Commerce, which is that
great link of humane Society, that golden chain which unites all Nations; And
though the Earth and Sea be of themselves, as differing Elements as any of the
rest, yet the Divine providence by a special foresight has so indented as it
were, and embosomd them one in the other, that they make but one perfect Globe,
to render them thereby more apt for the mutual Commerce and Negotiation of
Mankind.

Of all parts of the Earth, Islands (which by the violence of the Sea are torn
off from the rest of the world) stand most in need of Commerce, as well for the
increase of shipping, whereon their security and strength does principally
depend, as for diverse other advantages conducing to wealth, to the expense of
the superfluities of their own native Commodities, and the importation of
foreign, to intelligence, and prevention of dangers, and lastly to the
improvement of civility and knowledge.

And this our Island (for ought any one knows) might have remaind to this day
in her first simplicity and rudeness, had she not refined and civilized her
self by Commerce with those of the next Continent, and they of the next
Continent, had they not crossed the Alps to Italy; and the Italians themselves,
had they not had practice with the Levantines, and other Eagle-eyed Nations who
dwell nearer the Sun rising.

Amongst the Islands of the old world, Great Britain has been cried up for
the biggest, and best replenished with those Commodities that are most
material and useful for the life of man, whereof she has not only a
competency for her self, but enough to spare her neighbors, which by way of
surplusage she uses to disperse to most Countries, whereby she beats a
general Trade, and makes rich returns with her own home-growne goods: which
Trade may be termed the prime sinew, and chiefest support both of her strength
and riches.

Now there is nothing so advantageous and commendable in a Trade, as Community
and Freedom; for in this particular (as in most things else) the topique
Axiom holds, Bonum quo communius, co melius; the more common and diffusive a
good thing is, the better it is.

The most substantial and staple Commodity that our Country affords for the
maintenance of Trade is Cloth, with diverse Manufactures besides arising from
Wool, which makes other Nations call Wool, Englands Golden Fleece: and
(questionless) the principal reason why in time of Parliament our Judges (who
are the Oracles of the Law) do sit in the House of Peers upon Wooll-Sacks, was
to put them in mind of preserving and advancing the Trade and Manufactury of
Wool: Therefore to bar any freeborn subject from the exercise of his
Invention and Industry, to convert this universal native Commodity to his best
advantage at home, or abroad, is to deprive him of part of his birthright, and
of that which God and Nature ordaynd for his subsistence; and not only so, but
it is to set a mark of strangeness, or rather, of a kind of slavery upon him
in his own Country.

Hence it may well be inferrd, that for one Company, or Incorporation to
arrogate to it self, and to engrosse the mannaging, expense, and vending of
this necessary inmated Commodity, is an injury to public right, and no less
then a mere Monopoly: And it is held an undoubted principle of State, that
there is nothing more pernicious and destructive to any Kingdom or
Commonwealth, then Monopolies, which like Incubusses do suck the very vital
spirits, and drive into one vein that mass of blood which should cherish the
whole body: Nor does this word Monopoly (according to its true Etimology)
refer only to one individual person, but also to any one Town, where many
men are incorporated or aggregated into one body, who have hooked to themselves
the sole exercise and emolument of such and such a trade, whereby they only
enrich themselves, and admit no others to enter into their Society without some
exaction.

The fellowship and Charter of them that term themselves Merchant-Adventurers
(under favor) is a Monopoly of this kind, and is repugnant both

1. To the Law of Nature, 2. To the Law of Nations, 3. To the positive Law of
the Land.
First, it is repugnant to the Law of Nature, in regard that Wool, and the
draping and merchandising thereof, being the Cape Commodity wherewith Nature,
the handmaid of God Almighty, has furnished this Island, and wherein she has
given every freeborn Inhabitant equal interest, as matter for his industry to
work upon; Surely she never intended that a thin handful of men, a small
contemptible number in comparison of the whole (being but a few trading
members, though their Company consists of a greater number) should appropriate
to themselves the disposing and venting of the two thirds of this general
grand Commodity, as by diligent computation the Merchant-Adventurers are
observed to do.

Secondly, it is against the Law of Nations, in regard that no Monarchy or
Kingdom, whether elective or successive, nor any other Commonwealth or State
throughout Europe has the like example. What a hubbub would there be in
France, if the vent of Wines were passed over to some peculiar men to furnish
England withal? or in Spain, or Naples, were the fruits and oils of the one,
and the silks of the other (being their prime Commodities) engrossed by a few
hands? But admit there were some extraordinary restraints in trading to remote
Countries, and that there were joint stocks, it makes nothing to justify the
Company of Merchant-Adventurers. We know our East India Company Which yet has
been lately questiened in Parliament as a Monopoly, and their Charter there
disclaimed by themselves at illegal.
here, and in Holland, have limitations, and have a Bank of their own, because
the Purses of private men cannot extend to set forth Ships for making of such
long, adventurous, costly, voyages. But the Trade which is beaten by our
Merchant-Adventurers to Hamburgh and Rotterdam, is of another nature, for it is
hard by home, and as it were at our doors, and may be performed by Ships of
any seize, the transfretation being short; so that thought they seem to
arrogate soly to themselves the names of Merchant-Adventurers, there are none
that deserve it less, their hazard being so small, and their voyage so short.

Thirdly, this Incorporation is repugnant to the positive Laws of this Land,
as manifestly appears by Magna Charta, Petition of Right, Statutes of
Monopolies, and several others; but for brevity sake let it suffice to insert
here that famous Statute which was enacted by one of our wisest Kings, Henry
the seventh, which continues yet in full force unrepealed, and runs thus.

Lo the discreet Commons in this present Parliament assembled, (...). H. 7.1.6.
shows unto your discreet wisdoms the Merchant-Adventurers inhabiting and
divelling in diverse parts of this Realm of England out of the City of London,
that where they have their passage, resort, course and recourse with their
goods, wares, and merchandise, in diverse coasts and parts beyond the Sea,
as well into Spain, Portugal, Britain, Ireland, Normandy, France, Civil,
Venice, Dansk, Eastland, Freezland, and other diverse and many places, regions,
and countries, being in league and amity with the Kingour Sovereign Lord, there
to buy and sell, and make their Exchanges, with their said goods, wares, and
merchandises, according to the Law and Eustome used in every of the said
Regions and places; and there every person freely to use himself to his most
advantage, without exaction, fine, imposition, or contribution, to be had or
taken of them, or of any of them, to, for, or by any English person, or
persons. And in semblable wise they before this time have had, used, and of
right owen to have, and use their free passage, resort, and recourse into the
coasts of Flanders, Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and other places thereto nigh
adjoining under the obeisance of the Arch Duke of Burgoyn: In which places the
universal Marts be commonly kept and holden four times in the year, to the
which Marts all English men, and diverse other Nations in time past have used to
resort, there to sell and utter the commodities of their Countries, and freely
to buy again such things as seemed them most necessary and expedient for their
pofit, and weal of their Countries, and parts that they be come fro, till now
of late, that by the Fellowship of the Mercers and other Merchants and
Adventurers dwelling and being free within the City of London, by confederacy
made among themselves, of their uncharitable and inordinate covetousness, for
their singular profit and lucre, contrary to every English man's Liberty, and to
the Liberty of the said Mart there, which is, that every person of what Nation
that he be of, should have their free liberty there to buy and sell, and make
the commutations with the Wares, Goods, and Merchandises at their pleasure,
have contrary to all Law, Reason, Charity, Right, and Conscience, amongst
themselves, to the prejudice of all English men, made an Ordinance and
Constitution, that is to say, That no English man resorting to the said Mart,
shall neither buy nor sell any goods, wares, or merchandises there, except he
first compound and make fine with the said Fellowship, Merchants of London, and
their said Confederates, at their pleasure, upon pain of forfeiture to the
said Fellowship, Merchants of London, and to their Confederates, of such
merchandises, goods, or wares, so by him bought, or said there: which Fine,
Imposition, and Exacion, at the beginning when it was first taken, was demanded
by color of Fraternity of Thomas Becket Bishop of Canterbury, at which time
the said Fine was but the value of an old Noble sterling, and so by color of
such feigned holiness, it has been suffered to be taken for a few years
passed, and afterward it was increased to an hundred shillings Flemish, and
now it is so, that the said Fellowship and Merchants of London take of every
English man, or young Merchant, being there at his first coming, forty pound
sterling for a fine, to suffer him to buy and sell his own proper Goods,
wares, and Merchandises that he has there: By occasion whereof, all Merchants,
not being of the said Fellowship and Confederacy, withdraw themselves from the
said Marts, whereby the woollen Cloth of the Realm, which is one of the
greatest Commodities of the same, by making whereof the Kings true Subjects be
put in occupation, and the poor people have most their living, and also other
diverse Commodities of diverse and several parts of this same Realm is not sold
ne uttered as it was in times past, but for lack of utterance of the same in
diverse parts, where such Clothes be made, they be conveyed to London, where
they be sold far under the price that they be worth, and that they cost to
the makers of the same, and at sometime they be lent to long days, and the
money thereof at diverse times never paid; And over that, the Commodities and
Merchandises of those parts, which the said Fellowship, Merchants of London,
and others their Confederates bring into this Land, is so said to your said
Complainants and other the Kings true Subjects, at so dear and high exceeding
pr^e, that the buyer of the same cannot live thereupon, by reason whereof, all
the Cities, Towns, and Buroughs of this Realm in effect be fallen into great
poverty, ruin, and decay, and as now in manner they without hope of comfort,
or relief, and the Kings Customs and Subsidies, and the Navy of the Land
greatly decreased and minished, and daily they be like more to decay, if out
reformation be not had in this behalf. Be it therefore enacted by the King our
Sovereign Lord, by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the fame, that every English man, being the Kings true Leigeman,
from henceforth have free passage, resort, course and recourse into the said
coasts of Flanders, Holland, Zealand, Brabant, and other places thereto nigh
adjoining, under the obeisance of the said Archduke, to the Marts there her
easter to he holden, with his or their Merchandises, Goods, and wares, there to
buy and sell, and make their exchange freely at his or their pleasure, without
exaction, fine, imposition, extortion, or contribution to be had, leavied,
taken, or perceived of them, or of any of them, to, for, or by any English
person or persons to his or their own use. or to the use of the said Fraternity
of Fellowship, or of any other like, except only of ten Mark sterling. And that
no person English, as is before rehearsed, hereafter take to his own use, or to
the use of the said Fraternity or Fellowship thereof, any other English person
of what estate, degree, or condition that he be of, so always that he be the
King our Sovereign Lords true Leigeman, any fine, exaction, imposition, or
contribution for his liberty or freedom to buy and sell Goods, wares, or
Merchandises in or at any of the said Marts, more or above the said sum of
ten Mark sterling only, upon pain of forfeiture to our Sovereign Lord for
every time that he does the contrary of this Act 20. l. and also to forfeit to
the parties so grieved in this behalf ten times so much as he contrary to
this present Act, takes of him: And that the parties so aggrieved shall have
in this behalf an Action of debt for the said forfeiture of ten times, in
any of the Kings Courts within this Realm by writ, Bill, Plaint, or
Information, and such process to be made in the same, as is or ought to be
made in or upon an Action of debt at the Common Law, and the trial thereof to
be had in such Shire, City, or Place, where the said Action is commenced or
sued; and that the Defendant in any Action be not admitted to wage his Law,
nor none Essoine or Protection be for such Defendant admitted or allowed in
that behalf.

This Act of Parliament is in full force and validity to this day; for there is
none can deny, that the virtue of an Act of Parliament is such, that no Power
can repeal or abrogate it, but the same Legislative Power that made it. now
that a private Charter procured by gratuities, favor, and other clandestine
ways (as shall be proved) should have power to suspend and stop the execution
of an Act of Parliament, we believe no Judge in the Land will affirm,
especially considering that this Charter does authorize a few men to exercise
both at home and abroad an extrajudiciall sway both over the consciences, the
bodies, and estates of his Majesty's liege people, by oaths, imprisonments,
amercements, and taxes.

Touching the Oath they use to impose, it runs thus, being couched in this odd
form.

YOu swear by Almighty God, to be good and true to our Sovereign Lord the King
that now is, and to his Heirs, and Successors, Kings of this Realm. You
shall be obedient and assistant to Mr Governor or his Deputy, and Assistants
of Merchant-Adventurers in the parts of Holland, Zealand, Brabant, Flanders,
and within the Towns and Marches of Calais, as also in East Freezland, or any
other Country or place on this or that side the seas, where the said Company
are or shall be privileged. All States and Ordinances not repealed, which have
been made, or shall he made by the said Governor, or his Deputy and
Fellowship you shall to your best knowledge truly bold, and keep no singular
regard to your self in hurt or prejudice of the Common wealth of the said
Fellowship, or else being condemned, and or derly demanded, shall truly from
time to time content and pay unto the Treasurer for the time being, all and
every such mulcts and penalties which have and shall be limited and set for the
transgressors and offenders of the same. The secrets and privities of the
aforesaid Fellowship you shall heal, and not bewray: and if you shall know any
person or persons that intend any hurt, harm, or prejudice to our Sovereign
Lord the King, or unto his Lands, or to the Fellowship aforesaid, or the
privileges of the same, you shall give knowledge thereof, and do it to be
known to the said Governor or his Deputy. And you shall not color or free
any Foreigners goods, which are not free of this Fellowship of
Merchant-Adventurers of England. So help you God.

By the words of this extravagant Oath, one may see what high, illegal and
transcendent power they assume to themselves to make Statutes, which is proper
and peculiar only to Parliaments: Moreover, they style themselves a
Commonwealth, in so much that though they cannot be termed Regnum in Regno,
they may be well termed Dominium in Dominio. Besides this Oath there is another
called the purging Oath, whereby one is bound to confess whether he has
offended in such and such particulars, and to accuse himself, which is point
blank against Law, being a thing abhorring to nature; and for which, kind of
Oath some of our Courts were lately put down by this present Parliament; and
touching their Impositions and Fines, they lay them ad libitum, which they
convert afterward to their own benefit, whereas the King de jure partakes of
all Fines: but they passed an Order, by which (to use their own words) they
were pleased to allow him the one moity; The true copy of which Order shall be
inserted here with others, by which one may guess at the rest.

At a Court holden March 4. 1603.
THe Brethren of this Company assembled together, do bold it very requisite,
for the better carriage of their Trade, that suite should be made unto the
Kings Majesty, by the means of my Lord Chancellor to be perferred, that in the
confirmation of the Companies Charters of Privileges, this also might be added
and inserted, that the Company, in their Courts as well in England as beyond
the Seas to be holden, may impose reasonable fines and penalties upon such
Subjects of this Realm, not free of this Company, that shall ship Woollen
Commodities into the Countries and Places where they are privileged, thereby
to cause such intruding subjects to desist from that trade, which properly
appertains to the Company of Adventurers. In consideration whereof, and in hope
of the more favor in some other suites they mean to move hereafter, they are
pleased that the Kings Majesty may have and receive the one moity of all such
fines and penalties as shall be imposed upon such intruders; and further they
agreed to yield to his Majesty, in respect aforesaid, an anuuall Rent of 50. l.
or 100 Marks per annum.

As before by the recited Act, so likewise by this order it appears that
Merchants would not submit nor come into their Company (as they had just cause
so to do) therefore suit must be made to suppress them, but the illegal
power which the Company used, begat a Petition for free Trade in Parliament
against the Company, in Anno 1606, which was judged in that Supreme Court so
just and right, that there passed a Bill for a general liberty of trade, with
great applause of the House, scarce forty dissenting from it. But the Company
finding that the said Bill would have dissolved their Patent, they made a
cross presumptuous Order, which for that they have dared to do, they may be
truly termed Adventurous Merchants.

At a Court holden April 5. 1606.
THe Bill of general liberty of Trade was now read, and this Court has
consented that learned Council shall be entertained, and the enormities of the
Bill laid open, with a manifestation of the necessity of a government in Trade.
It is also further agreed, that all reasonable charges expended about the
crossing of that Bill shall be defrayed by the Treasurer here.

The transcript of this oath and orders were truly extracted out of their own
Register, and is concordant with the original. Touching the first, which is a
kind of oath of allegiance unto them, and has touched the consciences of
some, it is worth the observing how they mention a power they have to make
Statutes, and it is proper for them so to do, if they be a Commonwealth, as
they term themselves in the same Oath. And for the orders by these and the
following, one may find upon what a tottering foundation their Charter stands,
and by what indirect means they support it, being borne by strength of Purse
and Court Donatives, which in true English are but complementall bribes, which
dare not appear among their public accounts, as is obvious by the following
order.

At a Court holden December. 23. 1622.
ACcording to the Order of the general Court, this day they took into
consideration the business of the Account required by the Commissioners, which
this Court conceiving to be a matter that may concern divert occasions
presented with gratuities: It is not thought meet to give any such account as
may any way touch the said great Personages, but rather to a void the account
by some good courses, to which end it is agreed that Master Governor and
Master Deputy, or one of them, do take some such course as they shall think
convenient.

At a Court holden November. 16. 1623.
THe Court had consideration according to the season of the year, of their
yearly presents to such Honorable Personages as they have received favors
from; and first forasmuch as they have been extraordinarily bound to the
favors of the Lord Treasurer, the remembrance is now to be enlarged at
Newyeares tide, and that they shall present his Lordship with 200. pieces of
22. s. in gold, and a piece of Plate, as an acknowledgement of his Lordships
special favors.

Moreover, to the Lord Duke of Buckingham.

To the Archbishop of Canterbury. To the Lord Treasurer. To the Lord Keeper. To
the Lord President. To Mr. Secretary Calvert. To Mr. Comptroller, etc.
Having made it apparent by the premises how this fraternity of Ingrossers is
repugnant to all Laws both of Nature, of Nations, and of those of this
Kingdom, as not being able to produce any municipall right thereunto; it
remains now to prove further, that this selfe-enriching society derogates from
the repute and honors of the English Nation abroad, for they are esteemed (as
indeed they are) no other then a Monopoly, which being odious every where makes
them lose both love and respect as well in Germany as the Netherlands, for
though they enjoy some immunities where they come for their diet and lodging,
it is not for any love unto them, but for the increase of Customs and other
advantages they bring along with them to that particular place. And it is
observed, that they settled themselves no where yet, but there has been
jarring betwixt them and the Town at last, which has made them remove their
Tents so often, and shift from place to place: besides there is commonly ill
blood bred, and matter of contestation and envy betwixt that Town where they
seat themselves, and other circumjacent Towns, as happened of late years
betwixt Rotterdam and Amsterdam. Out of the precedent discourse and the
circumstances thereof, this Inference does necessarily follow, That the Company
of those who style themselves Merchants Adventurers (in statu quo nunc) take
them in the condition they are now in, is not only against the hereditary
privileges, but also a pressure and a grievance of a high nature to the
freeborne Subjects of this Realm of England. But in regard it is a common
laying, that one tale is good till the other be told, let us examine and answer
the arguments they produce for their own vindication and defense.

The Arguments which the Merchants Adventurers allege for their justification,
may be all reduced to these three heads.
First, they cry up the Antiquity of their Company. Secondly, the Ability of
it. Thirdly, the Necessity of it.
1. Touching the Antiquity thereof, they affirm their Charter to have been
granted them above 250. years past.

2. Touching their Ability, they allege that they are of sufficient wealth to
take up and buy all the White Clothes yearly made in this Realm for ready
money; therefore there is no need to have a greater number added to them.

3. Touching the necessity of their Company, they declare how by means of the
same, and by their discreet government, the commodities issuing from Wool have
been highly advanced, alleging that Clothes in the time of King H 7. being
worth but 3. l. are now sold for twice as much. Moreover they say, that if
liberty should be granted every man to trade as he preaseth, the
unskilfulnesse of the traders meeting with the subtlety of the people with
whom they are to deal, great loss would ensue thereby to the Subjects of this
Kingdom, besides the confusion that would inevitably follow.

To the first of these concerning their Antiquity it is answered, that

As it is a rule in Divinity, that Prescription cannot privilege an error,
no more can it do in civil government. It is true, when Edw. 3. by his
extraordinary wisdom had procured Cloth to be made so plentifully within
this Realm, he incited and stirred up his subjects to the venting of those
Clothes by transportation of them to foreign parts, whereby he granted them
many favors: and Henry the fourth erected them to a Company that went by the
name of a Brotherhood of Tho: Becket, Bp. of Cant. yet with this proviso, that
any man paying the Haunce of an old Noble might freely consort and trade with
them. But in the reign of Henry the seventh the said Company out of self-love
and desire of lucre sought to appropriate the said privileges so granted to
all soly unto themselves, and attempted to exclude their Neighbors and
Countrymen from the benefit of that trade, contrary to the freedom and orders
of all Mart Towns, which being complained of in Parliament, that famous
Statute before inserted was made by that wise Legislator Henry the seventh;
whence if one look backward, he will find that they cannot plead above 100.
years antiquity.

The Staplers were far more ancient, yet we know to what a reformation they
submitted themselves; besides, in the carriage of all mundane affairs, the
quality of the times, and the face of things do alter ever and anon. Those
Immunities which were granted in the Infancy of trade, to incite people to the
increase and improvement of it, are not so proper for these times, when the
Trade is come to that height of perfection, and that the mystery of it is so
well known: and it is daily found by experience, that what was good and
profitable to a State, by the alteration of times becomes prejudicial; as for
instance, it was lawful for the Company of staplers to transport Woolls, but
when we attained to the knowledge of making Cloth, it was not good, and
therefore prohibited.

Touching the second allegation, that their ability can extend to buy and vend
all the Clothes that are made yearly. For the first part of this Argument that
concerns their ability, it is too well known by what extrajudiciall, and
monopolizing ways they have thus enabled themselves to swallow up the market;
for it has been by a constant engrossing of the Trade so many years, to the
impoverishing and prejudice of their fellow Subjects, and to the feathering
only of their own nests. The strength of a Kingdom consists in the riches of
many Subjects, not of a few, in so much that were this Trade enlarged, it would
tend to the multiplying of able and wealthy Merchants, it would disperse it to
a greater latitude, and further ennobling the Trade, and prevent the increase
of poor men and beggars up and down the Land: for it is one of the maine
reasons why there are fewer beggars seen in Commonwealths then in Kingdoms,
because of community and freedom of trading, by which means the wealth of the
Land is more equally distributed amongst the Natives. But suppose they be able
to buy all the Clothes, is it not against common reason, and the Subjects
birthright, that therefore they should be permitted so to do and others
debard.

Concerning the necessity of this Incorporation, it is enforced by a twofold
reason.

First, they pretend that the sale of our Manufactures is more advanced, and
the esteem and price thereof borne up by their guidance and government, which
is now double from what it was.

For answer, it is true that the rates of our woollen Commodities, as of all
other sorts of Merchandise, are much raised from what they were, but this is an
act of time, as in all other Countries where Trade is free, in so long a tract
of time, the prizes of all things change, especially since the discovery of the
West-Indian Mines, which have so exceedingly increased the plenty of money
through all parts of Europe.

There be diverse other reasons why the rates are raised, as the alteration of
value in Coins and exchanges. Secondly the raising of Rents. Thirdly the
endearment of victuals, which rise still with the increase of people. And
lastly the chief reason is, because there has been such vent for our Cloth
abroad, and that is the maine cause why our Cloth and other woollen Commodities
are so much risen; but grant the Company bear up the prices of commodities
abroad, may they not by the same power and policy keep up the prices of
foreign commodities at home, by which means the Kingdom suffers both ways?

Secondly they say, that if Trade were free, all would suddenly fall to decay,
both Merchant and Clothier would be beaten out of trade by the Dutch; for if
our Merchants who transport Cloth were not ordered by the Company, they would
send such abundance into all parts, as they would not be able to gain thereby:
and so the Merchant would be discouraged to send any more, or if he do send he
will be sure to give the Clothier every time less for his Cloth, so that the
Clothier nor Merchant will be able to live by it; and by this overclogging of
the market, our Cloth will be brought into dis-esteeme and not so regarded, as
it is now by this Government.

This Objection at first sight carries a specious show, but if it be cast into
the balance of truth, it will bear no weight at all, it is rather a conceit
then an Argument, for they cannot prove it by any act of experience, only they
imagine such a thing. It is confessed that regularity and government is
commendable in all things, otherwise disorders and a promiscuous kind of
confusion will follow. The French and Spanish Companies sang the same note
before Tertio Iacobi when they were dissolved. There be general Laws to
regulate trade, and to preserve it from confusion; we desire still a
government, but not a Monopoly, that so few should engrosse the whole mass and
bulk of the prime trade of England to two Towns only. Trade (though the
comparison be homely) is like Dung, which being close kept in a heap or two
stinks, but being spread abroad, it does fertilize the earth and make it
fructify; nor need we any foreign hands to spread it, we have enough of our
own were they permitted. Touching the over-glutting of the market, it might
well fall out, that if free Traders were confind to two Towns only, they would
peradventure surcharge them, but having the choice of so many Ports, and such a
variety of places, there is no such fear of a glut. As touching the esteem
and rates of our Cloth, which they pretend would be prejudiced, let them know,
that it is not the high price but plenty that propagates Trade; and for the
high rates of our Cloth, we may impute that not so much to their Government, as
the policy of the Dutch themselves, who to make Dutch Cloth more vendible,
hoise up the price of ours, and that our Cloth and other woollen Commodities
are endeared by the Company here, shall be proved afterward.

There are two main things that conduce to make a trade flourish, plenty of
Merchandise and multitude of Merchants. Now it can be proved that in the year
1633, before that strict Proclamation for restraint came out, there were near
upon 600 Traders in those commodities: and in the year 1639 not above 180; and
in Holland before that Proclamation when they made most, they made not above
two thousand Clothes yearly, but since they have made some years twenty
thousand, and they fell also to the making of Perpetuanoes, which they had
never done before; so that trade is insensibly stolen away form us, our workmen
by hundreds doing over to set up their manufactures in other Countries, because
they were discouraged to exercise their ingenuitie at home, and have freedom
to make away to their best advantage any new-fashioned stuff, by reason of the
said Proclamation of restraint, whereat there was much coffeehouse abroad,
as well as at home, for Amsterdam and other Towns did stomach extremely, that
his Majesty of Great Britain should exclude them, and that Rotterdam should
be only privileged to be Mistress of the Trade.

But they seem to object further, that such a general freedom of trade might
give liberty to become Merchants without an apprenticeship, which is an
injury to them that have served, and may hurt them who have not served, who
adventuring unskilfully shall be sure of loss.

It is answered, that the loss of the new Merchant may be conceived to be more
the hopes then the fears of this Company. They that have served have the
advantage of knowledge and skill for their time and moneys. And touching
capacity and skill it might be urged, that by the same reason young Gentlemen
should be kept from their sands for want of experience to manure them. But
touching apprentices, it is not the least abuse amongst them, that taking such
a considerable sum, as two or three hundred pounds with some, it makes the
masters less careful to expect duty from them, and it makes the Apprentice
more presumptuous, and take greater liberty. And on the other side we hope it
will appear, that were there a freedom of trade permitted and published for
Holland, Zealand, Flanders, Brabant, East Freezland, West Freezland, Hamburgh,
and the territories of the same, and into all Germany, it would not only be a
great benefit to this Kingdom in general, but also an extraordinary
encouragement to all active and industrious spirits, to seek more Ports, and
make quicker returns, and wind the penny sooner; whereas the affections of many
are now dampt, because they must be subject to the Company in a servile kind
of obedience, and are illegally sworn to obey all their unjust and unorderly
Orders, whereof we shall here insert a few.

First, let us take notice of the Taxes and Impositions, which the Merchants
Adventurers do lay or leavie upon all Woollen commodities which they
transport, viz.

All Loner white Clothes pay per Cloth -- 4 s. 6. d. Short white Clothes per
Cloth -- 3. 0. Loner colored clothes Saffron, Kentish and Redding per Cloth --
2. 0. Clothes died and dressed forth of Whites per color 2. 0. Plunkets -- 2. 3.
Clothes died and dressed of Spanish making. -- 2. 0. Kerseys cont -- 0. 6.
Elbroad Perpetuanoes per piece -- 0. 6. Yardbroad Perpetuanoes -- - 0. 4.0b
Double Bays -- 0. 9. Single Bays -- 0. 4.0b Devons dozens single -- 0. 4.0b
Northern dozens double -- 0. 9. Northern dozens single -- 0. 4.0b Short
Worsted hose for men pay per dozen -- 0. 4.0b Long Worsted hose -- 0. 6.
Woollen hose for men -- 0. 5. Woollen hose for children -- 0. 1.0b Short Kersey
stockings -- 0. 1.0b Long Kersey stockings -- 0. 6. Meniking bays and Friz^does
per piece -- 0. 1.0b Buffins narrow, Moccadoes, and Norwich Grograns per piece
-- 0. 1.0b Buffins broad Philip and Cheaney -- 0. 2.q. Carols of Norwich making
-- 0. 1.0b Buffins double -- 0. 4.0b Cottons the hundred goads -- 0. 9. Double
Durances and Cameleons -- 0. 5. Single of the same cont: 14 yards. -- 0. 2.0b
Flannell the hundred yards -- 0. 7.0b Freezes -- 0. 9. Venetian Fustians -- 0.
3. Parogans of Norwich mixed and plain -- 0. 4.0b Pyramides and Floramides --
0. 2.q Porops Damosolos, broad Damas -- 0. 6. Middles Says broad -- 0. 9.
Narrow -- 0. 4.0b Narrow Linsey Woolsey dressed the hundred yards -- 0. 5. Cloth
Rashes broad per piece -- 0. 9. Narrow -- 0. 4 ob
Now it must be confessed that these taxes do endear the goods, and therefore the
Company cannot afford as cheap as other Merchants might do.

Secondly, their order for stinting or limiting their members to transport but
a certain quantity of Cloth, runs thus.

At a Court holden October. 11. 1606.
Letters from the Brethren of Middleburgh of the fourth of October 1606. were
now made public, they give knowledge that they have agreed to the
augmentation of the general stint, and of the yearly and monthly number of
Clothes to be shipped out upon the free license, referring us to the
specification of every man's proportion of stint sent with their letters, and
now read; which proportion of stint all the trading Brethren are enjoined not
to exceed within the compass of any one year, upon the penalty of 40. s. per
Cloth. And to prevent abuse, they ordain every Brother that shall ship any
woollen commodity, shall be yearly purged upon his oath, the form whereof was
now sent and read also: and in case any should refuse or neglect to take the
said Oath by the last day of August every year, then be to pay 20. pound
sterling, and to have no benefit of the free License till he has taken the
said Oath.

Much might be said of this stinting Order, but we shall say but little for
brevitie sake: how prejudicial it is for any man to be stinted that would
trade more freely if he were permitted, is best known to the members of that
Company, and what an injury it is to the Clothiers, their Petitions depending
in this Parliament can sufficiently witness.

Thirdly, their order for shipping in no other ships then the Companies Ships,
the substance of which Order is as follows, viz.

27. April 1605. restraint of shipping but only in two ships, upon pain of
forfeiture of 40. s. per Cloth.

Orders of stint revived, and no news to be sent over of any more Cloth to be
sent till hereafter, and men should forbear wholly shipping for a time.

27. Aprilis 1605. Richard Fox Cloth-worker, condemned to pay 40. s. a Cloth
for mis-shipping.

At a Court holden the 11. of September 1605. diverse masters of ships made suit
for taking in of goods, and were refused, and if any of the Company would lade
as could, were restrained by order.

This order tends to the destruction of the Navigation of this Kingdom, and
the undoing of seafaring men, and this is the language of the Parliament in
his late Majesty's reign, and the general complaint of the Mariners now;
moreover, to ship in the Companies ships will cost almost double freight, which
is no small matter.

Fourthly, their order for shipping but thrice a year is to this effect.

At a Court holden the 9 of February 1604. no shipping out of Cloth to
Middleburgh but three times in a year, February, May, September.

This order is of a threefold prejudice, in general to the Kingdom, in
particular to the Merchant, and especially to the Clothier, who cannot sell but
when the Merchant will buy, and the Merchant will not buy but when he may
transport, and if he may not transport when he pleases, the cloth must lie
unsold either upon the Clothier or Merchants hands, which loss of time
endeareth the commodities. It is to be feared this Company might for their
private lucre also make an Act, that the members of their Company should be
stinted in the price they should give for cloth, as well as the quantity they
must buy or transport, and indeed they are come very near to it, as manifestly
appears by this following Order.

At a Court holden April. 19. 1634.
MAster Whithers did exhibit two several Papers to this Court to be considered
of, concerning what abatements should be made for all defects of Cloth, whether
in weight, length, or breadth, as also some points for the ordering of tar,
which he desired might be commended to the Courts of Hamburgh and Delph, that
they might consider thereon, and further advise of any other course, and it was
accordingly ordered; but the Court of Hamburgh is to be desired to make no Act
in this business, till they have acquainted this Court with their opinion
therein. As for that Mr Withers desired might be considered here, to wit, that
no brother should buy any white cloth that is made in Gloucestershire,
Wiltshire, Oxfordshire, and the Eastern limits of Somersetshire, without
abatements for all faults in which they shall be found defective: It was now by
general advice and approbation ordered and enacted, that every brother of the
Company who does buy cloth contrary to that effect, shall forfeit 20. s. upon
every cloth so bought, toties quoties without favor or pardon; and to the end
that every brother may be acquainted with the contents of the said Draught now
published, and whereupon this Order is made, it is thought fit that the said
Draught be printed, and one given to each brother; but this is to be done after
the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council shall have by their Order given
countenance to this Act, to which end they Lordships are to be petitioned, and
Mr Deputy accompanied with some of the Committees for trade, is appointed to
present the same: After these things the Court did take into consideration the
pains which Mr Withers has taken in their business the last year, and have
gratified him with 500 Marks, his time being to end with his account the 25 of
March, he did now thankfully accept thereof.

It is worth the observing when this Order was made, even about that time when
they had by their often gifts at New years tide, and other left handed means,
got their Authority to be proclaimed for restraining all Merchants, not free of
their Company, from transporting any woollen Commodities, or to pay 100. l. and
come in to the Company; then they make this Order to curb the poor clothier to
abate for defects as much as they please; and though that Order was not to be
enacted by them before the Lords of his Majesty's privy Council had given
countenance thereunto, yet notwithstanding at a Court holden the 21 of May
1634, the said Order was confirmed without consent of the Lords. Thus we see
how illegally the Company proceeds in their own Courts, against their own
Orders, and molested the Clothiers by many suites in Law, and not only them,
but also others, and were at vast expenses to get their own ends.

At a Court holden March. 4. 1634.
THe Committees that were appointed to deal with Mr Withers touching his
entertainment, now brought back that business to this Court, for that they
found his account of charges to be such, as they conceived it meet the Court
should be made acquainted therewith before any resolution were taken touching
his allowance of the same; for they find in one year, viz. since our Lady day
last, being now almost one whole year, a matter of 270. l. laid out upon
ordinary charges, and about 150. l. laid out in charges of Law suites, whereof
some 100 Marks in a Star Chamber suite against Sir Edward Bainton, whereupon
the Court had consideration, and conceiving that the Company might be brought
into some disrepute by suits against clothiers, or taking the benefit of
forfeitures of penal Statutes, but especially might perhaps be brought into
some danger for maintaining that suit in the Starchamber, it was for present
ordered, that the allowance of Mr. Withers said account should for a while be
held in suspense until the Company were well satisfied what to resolve
therein. In the mean while because Mr Withers is forthwith to go into the
Country, it was ordered that Mr Treasurer should impressed unto Mr Withers 200.
l. upon account of his ordinary charges, until further audit of his account,
and Mr Deputy and Mr Peter Jones are desired to counsel in the Companies
behalf with Mr Attorney General, what is safe and fitting for the Company to
do in bearing or forbearing the meddling with the charge of Lawsuits, upon
return of whose opinion the Court will resolve herein as they shall find
cause.

Here we see the cunning dealing of this Company, that when they had done
their worst in Law, and perceived they could not prevail, then they seem to
be very cautious to meddle with the account of charges.

At a Court holden the 29. of August 1635.
THis Court did proceed to consider of the gratification of Mr. Withers for his
last year, and for payment of his bills of charges in the same, as also for
his entertainment for the year to come, in which they desired to include his
further charges whatsoever, and he not to account as hitherto he has done; and
having found that his bill of charges for the last year came to 420. l.
whereof 150. l. was for Lawsuits in the Star Chamber, and other Courts of
Justice, it was agreed and consented unto, that the 270 l. for ordinary charges
should be paid, but for the other 150. l. they would defer the payment
thereof until the cause between him and Sr Edward Baynton were ended; and if
then Mr Withers were loser thereby, then he should have recourse to this Court,
who would then further consider thereof.

Note the precedent order, the 150 l. expended in Law and Star Chamber suits,
Mr Withers must not have until the Company does see which way the scale will
turn, and if Sir Edward Bainton be cast, then the Company will own the cause,
if not, they will seem to disclaim it, and find out some back door or
private way to pay or gratify Mr Withers.

Fifthly and lastly, the Company tieth their Members to trade to two Towns only,
viz. Hamburgh and Rotterdam. First, it is well known that to go to Rotterdam
is but the entrance of Holland and other parts, and although the Merchant may
transport his commodities as far again and deeper into the Country for the
same freight, yet he may not; nevertheless before the commodities do come to
the Retailers hands it must be transported from Rotterdam, and then it costs
more freight and other charges then is paid from London to Rotterdam: thus
unnecessarily they charge our commodities.

Secondly, it is prejudicial in the highest nature to the sale of our
commodities, for the petty Shopkeepers and Retailers will not come so far to
buy our Commodities. It is too chargeable, costly, and sometimes dangerous
traveling, and will not quit cost to travel so far to buy small quantities.
Now this inconvenience is fallen upon it, that the great traders or buyers of
our Cloth, which the Dutch call Grossiers, (and it is a proper name for them,
because they are engrossers of our Commodities) do come and buy great
quantities together, and when these men are come to Amsterdam and other remote
places, then they furnish all those smaller Shopkeepers and other Chapmen with
our commodities, and these men get a competent gain thereby; which if trade
were free, our Merchants might gain so much the more, or afford our Cloth so
much the cheaper unto the Retailer, and by cheap selling we should the sooner
beat the Dutch from making. But there is a greater harm in it then this; for
the chief makers of Cloth in Holland and those parts thereabouts be those great
buyers or Grossiers, who aim at engrossing our cloth for two reasons; first,
because they get good gain upon our commodities in selling them, as aforesaid,
to smaller tradesmen; but secondly and principally, to advance the sale of
their own home-made cloth before our English, which is easily done having the
sale of both in their own hands, none can hinder them; and seeing it is so,
that the Dutch do make great quantity of cloth and other woollen commodities,
there is a far greater necessity of a free trade and selling cheap then
heretofore, when the Hollanders made none, or but few; for then it was easy to
make them give what price we pleased for cloth; but now we must not only
endeavor to sell our commodities, but should chiefly aim to sell so cheap,
as might cause the Dutch to desist from making of cloth

The greatest bane which ever the commerce of this Kingdom received, was, that
the Hollanders and others fell to the making of cloth, and other woollen
manufactures; and if the Flemming should come to set up woollen Loomes as the
Hollander does, to what a low ebb our trade of cloth would sink unto, it is
an easy thing to be a Prophet.

Therefore there is no one thing that requires the policy of England more,
then to draw the one, and prevent the other from making of cloth and other
woollen commodities in that abundance. Now there is no way under Heaven to do
it but by devising ways to sell our Manufactures at cheaper rates, and
disperse them more up and down the Country, which cannot be otherwise
effected then by a free Trade, and multitude of Merchants, and by fitting all
places and remote parts with such kind of Manufactures as are most proper for
them: These reasons no doubt will give good satisfaction to indifferent men,
who (under favor) cannot deny but this Company of Merchant-Adventurers is as
prejudicial to this Kingdom as ever the French or Spanish Companies were, and
to prove they were so, it will be requisite here to insert an Act of Parliament
in tertio Jacobi, by which they were dissolved; the Act runs thus.

Whereas diverse Merchants have of late obtained from the Kings most excellent
Majesty under the Great Seal of England, a large Charter of Incorporation for
them and their Company to trade into the Dominious of Spain and Portugal, and
are also most earnest suitors to obtain the like from his said Majesty for
France, whereby none but themselves and such as they shall think fit, as being
mere Merchants, shall take the benefit of the said Charter, disabling thereby
all others his Majesty's loving Subjects of this Realm of England and Wales,
who during in diverse respects greatly charged for the defense of their Prince
and Country, and therefore ought indifferently to enjoy all the benetits of
this most happy peace, and also debarring them from that free enlargement of
common Traffic into those Dominions, which others his Majesty's Subjects of
his Realms of Scotland and Ireland do enjoy, to the manifest impoverishing of
all owners of Ships, Masters, Mariners, Fishermen, Clothiers, Tuckers,
Spinsters, and many thousands of all sorts of Handy-crafts men, besides the
decrease of his Majesty's Customs, Subsidies, and other impositions, and the
ruin and decay of Navigation, together with the abatement of the prices of our
wools, Cloth, Corn, and such like commodities arising and growing within this
his said Majesty's Realm of England, and the enhancing of all French and
Spanish commodities, by reason of the insufficiency of the Merchants, they
being few in number, and not of ability to keep the great number of our Ships
and Seafaring men a work, and to vent the great store of commodities which this
his Majesty's Dominion of England, does yield. And by means that all Owners
and Mariners with diverse others (if these Incorporations should continue) shall
be cut off from their ordinary means of maintenance and preserving their
estates. And finally, by reason that all French and Spanish commodities shall
be in a few men's hands: In respect whereof, as for many other manifold
inconveniences growing thereby, much hurt and prejudice must needs redound to
all his Majesty's loving Subjects of this his Highness Realm of England, if
reformation for the prevention of so great an evil be not had in due time: For
remedy whereof, be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That it shall and may be lawful to and for all
his Majesty's Subjects of this his Highness Realm of England and Wales, from
henceforth at all times to have free liberty to trade into and from the
Dominious of Spain, Portugal, and France, in such fort, and in as free manner
as was at any time accustomed sithence the beginning of this his Highness most
happy Reign in this his Realm of England, and at any time before the said
Charter of Incorporation was granted, paying to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, all such customs, and other duties, as by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm ought to be paid and done for the same.
The said Charter of Incorporation, or any other Charter, Grant, Act, or any
thing else heretofore made, or done, or hereafter to be done to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein
contained shall not be of force to enable, or give liberty to any person or
persons to go over Seas without license, who by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, or by any Statute hereafter to be made, shall be restrained from going
beyond the Seas without license, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Were there nothing more said then what this Act of Parliament relates, it is
sufficient to convince any rational man of the unsufferable wrong the Kingdom
receives by such illegal Incorporations: several Parliaments have found and
adjudged them so, and particularly this Company of Merchant-Adventurers,
against which there passed also two Votes in full Parliament a little before
his late Majesty's death, extracted out of the Parliament Records as follows.

Die Veneris 30. Aprilis, 22 Iacobi.
UPon a Report this day made to the Commons House of Parliament from the
general Committee for Trade, concerning the impressed money set by the Company
of Merchant-Adventurers of London upon Cloth, and after long debate thereof in
the House, It is resolved and declared by the said House of Commons, that the
opinion of the House is, that such setting of the said impressed money upon Cloth
is unlawful, unjust, and a grievance to the people, and is to be taken off,
and no longer to be continued by them: And upon further Report from the said
Committee, and like debate in the said House, It is further declared, that the
House thinks fit, that as well the Merchant Adventurers, as all other Merchants
promiscuously, may transport to all places all Northern and Western Dozens,
Kersies, and new Manufactures.

H. Elsyng Cler. Dom. Com.

Die Lunae 10. Maii. 22. Iacobi.
UPon a Report this day made to the House of Commons from the grand Committee
for Trade, concerning the freedom of exportation of died, and dressed, and all
colored Clothes into the parts of Germany and the Low Countries, by other
Merchants besides the Merchant-Adventurers, and after long debate thereof in
the House, It is resolved and declared by the said House of Commons, that the
opinion thereof is, that other Merchants besides the Merchant-Adventurers, may
freely trade with died, and dressed, and all forts of colored Clothes into
Germany and the Low Countries.

H. Elsyng Cler. Dom. Com.

But to this they seem to object the Ordinance of this present Parliament for
the continuance of their Company: This, under correction, cannot hold plea, for
the said Ordinance passed with this proviso and clause of reservation by the
wisdom of both Houses, That all rights confirmed by Act of Parliament, or
ancient Charters, should be thereby saved; so that it is rightly conceived that
that Ordinance is not binding nor of a restraining nature.

Therefore it is most humbly desired, that the aforesaid Patent of the Company
of Merchant-Adventurers may not be binding to others not free of their Company,
in regard it is

Illegal, Unuseful, Prejudicial, Abusive.
It is illegal, because it is repugnant to express Acts of Parliaments.

It is against the natural right and privilege of free born Subjects, as
appears by Magna Charta, and Petition of right. It is a mere Monopoly both in
the intention and the execution, for by paying money the Subject enjoyes his
right, and denying payment he is debard of it.

it is a grievance of the highest nature, in regard it gives an extrajudiciall
power to imprison the Subject without bail or mainprize, to take away his
goods, to contrive and impose oaths, to lay and levy taxes without
limitations, and convert them to private profit to the prejudice of others,
which is the truest badge of a Monopoly.

It is grounded upon Prerogative, not warranted by Common Law, or Act of
Parliament, but directly opposite to all.

The pretense of it is the same that all monopolizing Patents have, viz.
Regularity and Conformity, but indeed to usurp a right, and liberty, and to
restore it again for money.

The Patent is obtained by some particular men, without the knowledge or
consent of others; and it is a rule that no man is bound to observe that Law,
which himself consents not to be made against him.

It is Unuseful, because that this Trade, and every other profession in
England, is subject to regularity, either by laudable customs confirmed by
Acts of Parliaments, or by Statute Laws; and it is strange that a Projector
should see a better way for regularity of trade, then ever was thought on by
Act of any Parliament.

That other Merchants have no such need of regularity, only they are subject
in general to the Laws and Customs of the Land, yet they flourish and
prosper; and in Flanders, Brabant, Artois, Henegow, and other Provinces under
the King of Spain, there has been no government by the Company for about
fourscore years together, yet the trade of our Manufactures thrive far
better there, then in Holland, or Germany where regulation in trade has been,
and our Nation is far more beloved and respected.

That those moneys which are leavied, are not any ways employed for the
benefit of King or Kingdom, or for bettering the Trade, but serve only for
bribes to perserve the ill-begotten Patent, and punish such as endeavor to
enjoy their natural right against the said Patent, which ends with this odd
clause, That every thing in it shall be taken, construed, and adjudged most
strongly against us (that is the King) our Heirs, and Successors, and most
benignly, favorably, and beneficially for the said Governor, Assistants, and
Fellowship of Merchant-Adventurers.

The Patent is prejudicial and abusive, for that they have done and do this
Kingdom the greatest detriment that ever befell it in point of trade, by
instigating the Dutch to make a virtue of necessity, by making them fall to the
draping of Cloth and other woollen Manufactures, out of the hatred they
conceive to their Monopoly. It is too well known what clashings and
contestations have happened from time to time between them. To instance in one
amongst others, about the year 1634 there was such a contention betwixt them
and the Dutch about Tare, that the Company kept their warehouses shut up about
seven or eight months, which made the Dutch, in mere despite, to set up his
looms and to fall a draping, and so continues.

But were it not for the restraint they make, and the power they arrogate to
themselves of appointing the place where, the proportion what, the manner how,
the time when our woollen Manufactures should be transported, the Gentleman
would have more Clothiers for his wools, the Clothier would have more Merchants
for his cloth, and the Merchant would have more chapmen for his ware.

And although the Company receive some Immunities from the Town where they
seat themselves, yet are they prejudicial to the Kingdom in general, for in
lieu thereof those Dutch in London and other places, who term themselves
members of the Intercourse, receive the like Immunities here. And observable it
is, that though the Company have such privileges both at home and abroad,
whereby they engrosse the trade of the Kingdom in such a high measure, yet are
they liable to pay no greater taxes then others that have neither Charter nor
privilege. If they will have all the trade, it is reason they should pay all
the taxes; but they are far from paying more then ordinary taxes, although
the taxes which the Company receives from their members are extraordinary; for
as it is extracted out of their own books, that from the year 1616 to 1641
they received in taxes 182295. l. and odd moneys, besides what they received
beyond the seas.

The Company of Merchant-Adventurers do keep up their Patent for one of these
three reasons,

Either for the general good of this Kingdom, Either for the benefit of
merchants in general, Either for the profit of their particular members.
To the first, if it were good for this Kingdom in general, it is almost
impossible but this Company would have been established by Law, the
conveniences and inconveniences thereof having been so often debated in
Parliaments, as is clearly proved for above 150 years past; but on the
contrary, it never was complained of, but it still was condemned by the wisdom
of the Kingdom, and freedom declared for all Merchants to trade.

To the second, if it were for the benefit of Merchants in general, then for a
certain those Merchants of old time, and the succeeding ages, and the
Merchants of these times would not have opposed and complained of them (as it
appears they have) but they would have soon discerned the benefit, which
would have been sufficient inducement for Merchants to have joined with the
Company, and needed not to have been forced or beaten into that which is for
their own profit, nor need the Company constrain Merchants to grow rich
against their will, especially by indirect means.

To the third, if it be for the profit of their particular members (as it
cannot be otherwise conceived) then no doubt, but the Company will speed as
informer Parliaments, which God grant.

For were there a freedom of Trade, it would be the only means to cause the
Dutch to desist form making of Cloth; and there is nothing that conduces more
to the enlargement of selling any commodity then cheapnesse, for the Dutchman
always goes to the cheapest, though from a Christian to a lew.

All the premises impartially considered, it is humbly conceived, that it will
stand with the policy of this Kingdom to disanull, and cancel the Patent of
those that ascribe unto themselves the sole name of Merchants-Adventurers, in
regard it is already proved illegal, unusefull, prejudicial, and abusive.

To conclude, this is not a new Complaint, but an old grievance, having been
petitioned against above 150. years ago, and complained of since from time to
time, and in this present Parliament there are Petitions depending against the
Company, as a National grievance, of Merchants of London, the Clothiers of
Worcester, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Kent, Colchester, Norwich, etc. Whereupon
it pleased the Honorable House of Commons to appoint a Committee to consider of
the Pattent of the said Merchants Adventurers, who being permitted to bring in
their learned Counsel, yet they could not prove the legallity thereof.

Thus without any aim of particular interest, but for the general welfare of
the Kingdom, with sincere hearts, and out of the deepest sense of sorrow and
grief of mind, having long observed their miscarriages, we are emboldened to
present this general grievance, as being thereunto bound by a twofold tie of
duty. First, as freeborn Subjects of this Kingdom our birthright and
hereditary Privileges are nearly concerned, and therefore we ought in
conscience to endeavor to preserve them for our posterity, as they have been
transmitted to us.

Secondly, for that by the Protestation and Covenant lately taken by us at
command of this Parliament, we are again engaged so to do: And truly those
two vows (if remembered) will cause every true-hearted man at least to pray for
that which he is bound to defend and maintain with the utmost hazard of his
life and fortunes.

FINIS.

