THE Kentish Conspiracy: OR, AN ORDER and NARRATION Declaring The late Plot for
the Surprising of DOVER CASTLE:

And the setting on foot of a Commission of ARRAY in the County of KENT.

Taken and extracted out of the Examination of the several Conspirators.

Published by Order of the Committee at Alesford, Janua. 9. 1645.

LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Michael Spark, Junior. 1648.

AT THE General Committee AT ALESFORD, 1 January, 1644.
SVch has been the restless spirit of Malignity in some amongst us, as if
they meant to outvie the manifold providence and goodness of God by an
unwearyed reiteration of new experiments, whether the Watchman of Israel be
yet awake, for the protection and preservation of his people: from which
Atheistical principle, ungodly and unreasonable men, have roused up their
almost despairing spirits, to new and more vigorous actings of their mischief.
And hence was it that notwithstanding the manifest hand of God in discovering
their former wickednesses, and bringing them upon their own heads, once and
again in this County, and in other parts of the Kingdom;

Yet has not the fear of God or man wrought upon them to desist: witness
this last design for the betraying of Dover Castle, and the setting on foot of
Commissions of Array, whereby they were not afraid to imbroyle this County, as
they have done the rest of the Kingdom in a most cruel, unnatural and bloody
war: The preventing whereof, by the mercy and goodness of Almighty God, who
has still brought to light the hidden things of darkness, and has yet
graciously lengthened out our tranquillity and peace, does call aloud unto us,
for our unfeigned thankfulness, and praise to the God of our Deliverances,
wherein this Committee, in regard of that public Trust, which lies upon them,
being sensible, how deeply they are concerned, to stir up themselves and
others, have Ordered as follows.

That upon the Lords day, being the six and twentyeth day of this instant
January, in the morning before the Sermon, the Ministers of the several
Parishes throughout this County shall openly read this Order and Narration of
the late design, and of the discovery thereof, hereunto annexed, and shall lay
open unto the people the vileness of the same, and the miseries and calamities
which would inevitably have followed, if God had suffered it to take effect:
And shall withal presently after the reading of this Order, and the said
Narration, openly declare their own abhorring of the said Plot, and detestation
against it.

And to the end that the people likewise may not be wholly wanting in some
visible testimony of their thankfulness for this Deliverance, and of their
abhorring and detestation of this wickedness; It is desired, that at such time
as the Minister shall so declare himself; All, who are of a willing mind then
present, do in token of joining with the Minister, stand up from their seats.

And it is further Ordered that the several Ministers do often upon the Lords
day, and at other times, but more specially upon that day, take occasion, both
in their Prayers and Sermons, to praise God, as for all former Discoverings,
and Defeatings of Plots, and mischiefs intended to this County, during this
present Parliament, so in particular for the Discovering and Defeating of this
by name; and that they do hence likewise take occasion to stir up the
people, as to all Christian duties answerable to such mercies, so particularly
to a constant adhering to the Cause of God, in the present work of Reformation,
and in the just defense of the Subjects Liberties, and to inform the people
thoroughly, that in comparison of these things, their estates and lives, which
they owe to God, and to their Country, ought not to be valued or esteemed by
them; And whereas diverse ignorant persons, not knowing the danger and penalties
in the several Ordinances of Parliament, have been made instruments of this
and the like mischiefs, by carrying, and bringing Intelligence, Messages, or
Letters to or from Oxford, or any part of the Enemies Quarters, All persons are
therefore hereby required to take notice at their perils, that whosoever shall
hereafter be found culpable in that kind, shall be dealt withal as a Spy,
according to the severest punishments inflicted by the said Ordinances: and the
Churchwardens of the several Parishes are hereby required by the Thursday
next following the said Lords day appointed, as aforesaid, for the publication
and execution of this Order, to bring in returns under their hands unto the
next Deputy Lieutenant, thereby certifying how this present Order has been
executed in their several Parish Churches, and by what Minister: And it is
Ordered, that the said Deputy Lieutenants do within eight days after the
receipt of the said Certificates, send in the same unto this Committee, or do
certify the names of such Churchwardens who shall make default of bringing in
unto them the said Returns, that so a due Account may be taken thereof, as is
requisite in a matter of so great importance.

A BRIEF NARRATION Of the late PLOT: FOR The Surprise of Dover Castle; and the
setting on foot of a Commission of Array in the County of Kent: taken and
extracted out of the Examinations of the several Conspiratours; and published
by Order of the Committee of the said County.
THE Castle of Dover being about two years since possessed by Mr. Daux of Dover
to the use of the Parliament, he probably not finding his expectations of
preferment answered by that subordinate charge which was committed to him under
a worthy Knight and Member of the House of Commons, bethought himself of
making a Party in the Town and Castle; and of holding the Castle for the King,
and to this end communicates his Counsels to one Chandler Belton, Dennis
Tillet, and others of Dover, whom he made choice of as fit instruments for
that purpose.

But this design soon proved abortive by discovery, neither was the first
Contriver of it, Daux, much longer lived.

Yet had this project taken such impression in the surviving Confederates, that
they resolve to carry on the work: To which end they associate to them,
Tomkins, Startup, Bray, Stoakes, Wellard, Mr. Thomas Grant, and others of
Dover, and the parts adjacent. And after several consultations, at length
resolved to send Bray to Oxford about Midsummer last, for further directions
and advice from thence: Bray undertakes the journey in the Habiliments of his
profession, and with his Carpenters rule and leathern apron, easily passes the
Courts of Guard, without being suspected any where of any further Journey then
to, or from the next neighboring Town or Village, to his work or home.

Bray thus got to Oxford, makes himself and his business known to Captain
John Jacob late of Dover, and by him gains access to Sir Edward Nicholas, his
Majesty's chief Secretary of State, to whom he imparts his Errand; which the
Secretary very well approves of, but for the present advised to defer it,
till his Majesty's nearer approach to these (...) he being then with his Army
about Buckingham.

With this answer Bray returns to Dover, but is upbraided by his companions
there, as having cheated them of their moneys, which they had collected among
themselves to bear his charges: To clear himself from which aspersion he
undertakes three several journeys more successively to Oxford, but all without
effect; his Majesty being not all that while returned.

In this interim those at home had gained to their party, some Gentlemen of
Note and substantial Yeomen in and about Dover, and others of meaner rank, to
the number of sixty or thereabout, some of whom they thought fit to be
entrusted with the more special contrivance and manage of the business, who
had by this time projected it as follows.

Startup, Hayes and others should have used means to be entertained as
Soldiers in the Castle, who at a time appointed, should have a merry day with
the other Centinells and Soldiers, at the drinking of some bottles of wine, to
be sent in as a present to them by Mr. Grant, the operation of which Wine to
be compounded by Mr. Grant himself, should have been to cast such as drunk of
it into a sleep for six hours space, but if this failed, whilst the rest were
at their cups, the new come Soldiers should have let in a Party, some with
scaling ladders, to be provided against the time, and others at the Barbicans,
a sally Port, near one of the Platformes: At which instant the Prisoners in
the Castle, by the help of a false key, which was made by one Onion formerly
the Castle Smith, and was in the hands of one Colonel Haggaster, a Papist,
then a Prisoner; should have broken out upon the Soldiers, and together with
the rest have seized upon the Guns and Guard: At which time likewise a
sufficient strength from the Town and neighboring parts, should be ready for
an entrance: And upon an advertisement supplies of Ammunition and provision
should be sent in from Dunkerk and from France, for which Mr. Web Secretary to
the Duke of Riehmond, had engaged himself, as did likewise Captain Jacob, to
be in a readiness at Margate, with a vessel fraught with necessaries for the
Castle; This done, Bray should post to Oxford with the news, which should be
forthwith seconded by an invasive power to be brought into the County under the
command of Mr. Richard Thornhill now made High Sheriff by the King, and
Commander of the Earl of Clevelands Brigade of Horse; in which interim, or
rather instant of the surprisall of the Castle, by the confession of Captain
Jacobs brother, three Commissions of Array to be set on foot, and thereby the
County in a flame, for a complement, of which mischievous design, nothing was
now wanting but the Royal stamp and name to a Commission, though Mr. Graunts
opinion was, that delays were dangerous, and it were better do the work
without, or before the Commission fetched.

But this advise did not find reception, whereupon Bray is the fifth time
dispatched to Oxford for a Commission, and by the way takes with him several
affectionate recommendations, to Mr. Thornhill, Captain Jacob, Secretary
Nicholas, and others at Oxford, prime actors in this business, from Sir
Anthony Percivall, Mr. Richard Masters of Langden, Mr. Thomas Tuck, Mr. Edward
Kempe of Dover, Mr. Reading and diverse others in return to several salutes
respectively received by them from those at Oxford by the hands of Bray, who by
each of these Gentlemen (Mr, Kempe excepted) had money given him, at his
parting out of Kent, as a gratuity; or to bear his charges.

Bray being come to London finds out Captain Collins being directed to him by
Mr. Edward Kempe, and acquaints the Captain with the business; whose forward
apprehensions of it were such as represented him at Oxford, the fittest man to
whom the Commission of Array should be directed (though it were once moved that
it might be sent down in to the County with a blanke, that if one man should
refuse, any who should accept it, might have his name inserted: but this advise
was rejected by Secretary Webb, upon this reason, that if the Commission should
come into the hands of the Parliament by mischance, they might then insert
whose name they pleased, and show the Kings hand for what they did.)

This success hasteneth Bray to Bostol house within six miles of Oxford, where
Sir William Campion, Mr. Edward Masters, Captain George Kingesly, Mr. John
Trowtes, one Mr. Chute and diverse other Kentish Gentlemen, receive him gladly,
Sir William himself, and one Mr. Mills a Sussex Minister accompanying him to
Oxford, where they bring him to Secretary Webb who forthwith repaires to
Secretary Nicholas, and speeds the draught of the Commission against the next
morning; at which time Secretary Nicholas brings Bray within view of his
Majesty, when he presented to him the Commission to be signed, and the same
day, being the 29 of November last, dismissed Bray with the Commission under
hand and seal.

Bray thus armed returns to London, and applies himself again to Captain
Collins, who whether touched in conscience at the horridness of the
enterprise, or doubting the success, or indeed (as he pretended) that his
bail upon whose security he enjoyed his enlargement out of Prison might not be
brought in trouble, declined the Commission; yet wished that the business night
proceed.

The Commission thus waived by Captain Collins; and Bray, returned to Dover, at
a full meeting of the Conspirators, the Commission is tendered to Captain
Holman, whose cheerful resolute acceptance, adds new life unto the
business; three days after, Captain Holman, whether upon any intimation of
the discovery of the Plot, (which indeed the Providence of God had brought to
light, by the free and voluntary confession of one whose heart God had touched,
so as to make it his very errand to come to Alesford, and reveal the whole
design to the Committee there) or whether the hand of God had overpowered the
spirit of this new elected Captain; who confessed himself restless in his
thoughts while he kept the Commission for three days space; He returns to
his Companions and discharges his hands and pockets of the Commission, but not
his heart of the villainy intended, which he still kept close without
discovery; This ill Omen of two failing Captains notwithstanding, the
Conspirators proceed, and encourage one another upon the strength of the
Commission, and hopes of a rising party, and ceased not riding up and down the
Country, to incite their adherents to an open avowance of their authority and
enterprise, until the certain news was spread of the surprise of the
Commission, and commitment of those Gentlemen on whom they fixed their
expectations to head the party, so that now all hopes cut off, they bethink
themselves where to shroud their heads, and to sit down with shame and sorrow,
and a conscious expectation of being found out by the hand of Justice, which
can only vindicate the honor, and secure the peace, both of Parliament and
County.

FINIS.

