THE RESOLUTION OF The Gentry and Commonalty in the County of Nottingham,
presented to his Excellence the Earl of Essex, the 12. of September.

VVherin they declare the innumerable oppressions that they have suffered by
the Cavaliers, since the setting up of His Majesty's Standard at Nottingham.

Likewise manifesting their intentions to join with his Excellence, and to be
assisting as far as in them lies, to bring these Cavaliers and evil Counselors
to condign punishment.

Also the true proceedings of his Excellence, since his Arrival in
Nottinghamshire.

Whereunto is annexed, The substance of a Letter sent from one of the Kings
servants, declaring His Majesty's great want of money, insomuch that he has
not paid his servants any board-wages since the beginning of this war.

LONDON, Printed for HENRY FOWLER.

Septem. 15. 1642.

THE RESOLVTION OF The Gentry and Commonalty In the County of NOTTINGHAM.
HIs Excellence the Earl of Essex having passed the several Counties betwixt
this and Nottingham, with great joy and honorable welcome was entertained at
Lurgyshall, within fifteen miles of Nottingham, on Monday the twelfth of
September, where besides his own Forces, the Trained Bands that were within
five or six miles came in, to express their faithful affections to the said
Earl, proffering their service for his security, which was with thanks
graciously accepted, the Earl bearing himself so nobly, and affable to all,
that even those that burn with malice against him inwardly, are won to
express an outward love, and to extol his actions.

Having taken that nights repose, on the morrow came in all the well affected
Gentry and Commonalty of that County, who in a decent order (their Horses being
rallied in the manner of a Troop, five abreast) waited the coming forth of his
Excellence, who had that morning appointed all those Commanders that were in
that part of the County, to attend his directions.

His Excellence being mounted, and leaving his quarters, was by a Gentleman
presented with a stately horse, cole black, a rich saddle, embroydered with
black, and gold, with a rich pair of pistols. Likewise three other Gentlemen
presented a schedule, wherein was contained the joint and real resolution of
all the well-affected Gentry and Commonalty of that County, wherein they
protested to join with his Excellence in any service he should please to
command them, promising that their lives and estates should rest to be
commanded by him for the service of the King and Parliament.

Likewise declaring the innumerable oppressions that they had suffered by the
Cavaliers, who daily pillage men's houses, drive away their cattail, take away
their Arms and moneys, cut and spoil their goods, taking away all means of
living and subsisting; all their endeavors tending to the destrustion of
Religion: King, and Kingdom.

For which cause (they seeing the authors of such horrid mischiefs, protected
by His Majesty, who should preserve them from such outrages and punish the
Authors) they hold themselves bound both in conscience to God, in loyalty to
His Majesty, and in obedience to the Parliament, to use their utmost force to
suppress and utterly to extinguish and bring to confusion, all those that for
the maintenance of their own develish design, seek the ruin both of King and
Kingdom: In which service they were resolved to live and dye with His
Excellence the Earl of Essex, and his Excellence with large expressions of joy
returned them thanks; promising that all his endeavors should by Gods
protection and blessing, answer their expectation, withal encouraging them to
continue constant in their Resolution, the King and Kingdom lying now at the
stake, and Religion running an equal hazard.

Afterward his Excellence repaired into the field attended by his own Troop,
the trained bands, and all the Gentry and Comminalty of the County, where he
gave directions what should be done for the furtherance of the present service:
Also he took order that those foore companies that were bilited in
Leicestershiere, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Hartfordshire, and other
adjoining Counties; should advahce nearer to Nottingham, so that his Forces
might be knit and united into a complete body.

Since the arrival of His Excellence, the Cavaliers begin to hide their heads,
and to keep close, so that the Countries are free from pillaging now.

It is reported that since the Earl of Essex came so naere Nrttingham, that
the King is secretly gone to Westchester, but I question the truth of it, it
being no way probable.

The King is in great want of money, for a letter came from one of his
servants, wherein was declared that his Majesty weyes his plate by the ounces,
and gives his soldiers for their pay, being in great want of money, and that
since the beginning of this war, His Majesty has not paid his Servants their
board-wages, by which means many of them are so necessitated that they
wouldcome home, if they could get so much money as would bear their charges.

The Earl of Lindsey having been at York, in his return from thence to
Nottingham, was set upon by some foot soldiers who did it more in hope of
money then anything else, but their hopes were frustrated, for having taken him
and bound him they searched his pockets and found but poor seven groats,
amongst him and his followers, for which the poor soldiers were so vexed that
after they had cudgeld him soundly with their battoones, they threw him into a
ditch, and away they went, not knowing who it was: but on the way they happened
to meet with one of the Earls men; who asked them whether they met the Earl
of Lindscy on the way toward Nottingham, describing him to them, they told him
that they did meet him, and that they would conduct him to his Lord, so
seizing upon the fellow, they with as much speed as possibly they could, made
to the place where they had left him, intending to take him prisoner, but
before they came there, (by what accident is not known, but he had got loose
and was out of their reach, only the fellow they carried before a Just: of
peace; who examined him of many particulars, and of the Estates of His
Majesty's Army, who confessed that he thought the greatest part of his
Majesty's Army are Papists, which bear their own charges; yet for all this
his Majesty's treasure was almost spent, and the Lords and Papists hardly able
to procure any further supplies.

This is the chief news hereabout; I doubt not but that you have enough every
day. I pray impart some to me the next return. So I rest.

Lurgyshall this 13. of Sept. 1642. Your friend to be commanded, Will: Johnson.

FINIS.

