Die Mercurii ultimo Martii. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament: That Sr Henry Mildmay, do from
this House give thanks unto Mr Johnson, for the great pains he took, in the
Sermon he Preached on this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of
Commons (it being a day of Public Humiliation) and that he do desire him to
print his Sermon. Wherein he is to have the like Privilege in printing thereof
as others in like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge,
Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LVX and LEX, OR THE LIGHT AND THE LAW OF Jacobs House: HELD FORTH IN A SERMON
Before the Honorable House of COMMONS at St Margarets Westminster March 31.
1647. being the day of public Humiliation.

By ROBERT JOHNSON Eboraicus, One of the Assembly of Divines.

ISAIAH 8 20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is because there is no light in them. 1 PETER 1. 19. We have also
a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a
light that shines in a dark place. (...). Chrysostom LONDON, Printed by A.
Miller, for Philemon Stephens, at the Sign of the Gilded Lion in Paul's
Churchyard. 1647.

(...) privileges of Jacobs spiritual household, and to draw from you (in
these humbling times) expressions of sorrow most suitable to those who walk so
unsutably to celestial favors; (many priding themselves in an imaginary title
to the beneficium Jer 7. 9. 10 Putant e^im Hypocritae si modo externas ^u'tus
divini cer^^^ni^^ quas^an observent, tunc onnia tecte babere, quamvis ipsi in
sceleribus praefra^te per^gu it Os^ and in loc.
of the family, who are wholly neglective of the officium) this being of
concernment to all Christians (to whom -- are also some directions hinted) so
chiefly to governors and all Reformers, that they partake not in other men's
sins. 1 Timothy 5 22. (...) Neque te participem constitue ali^rum peccat^ ^um.
I have endeavored to incite you who are Masters in our Israel, to improve
your diligence in the discharge of that trust and office in this family,
wherewith above others you are honored by God; who having 1 Samuel 2 30.
manifested his bounty to this household no less, if not much more then to
Exodus 10 23. ^s^^. 8 19. psul. 147 19. Act. 14. 16.
those our forefathers, in vouchsafing light to us, when others of our Allies
sit in darkness blacker then Egyptian, is pleased to direct us to our work and
walk by a pillar at his own charges, holding forth to us a light so much the
more necessary, by how much the Princes of this world, who know not the Gospel,
crucify 1 Cor. 2. 8.
to themselves the Lord of glory: And as those venomous serpents in Sardinia,
Solin. poybist. cap 9. Accendunt quotidie lucernas, quib^^ nulla lux est: illis
co^petunt test imonis te^ebrarum. Te^t. Apol 10. Igne^ fatunm qui sequmuntur in
avia abducuntur and in pr^cipitia fossa^ que saepe numero run^t. Kek Syst.
Rhys. lib. 6.
mentioned in stories, either hate and fly the light, or like those in
Tertullians time, bear a lanthorn profession without light, or as another sort
by an ignis fatuus, are led into dangerous precipices and by-waies, and with
Ixion in the Poet, embrace a cloud for the true Juno, shadows in the room of
orthodox and substantial truths. The scope of all is to undeceive you in
pointing to that only light of truth which is able to lead you to eternal
light, and in the interim to afford direction in managing the whole business
of this house, by which all other lights are to be examined, whereto if
disagreeing, it is Isa. 8. 20.
because there is no light in them. Lo Cook. jurisdiction of Courts.
According to which that you may act to the houses welfare, Go^s glory; and
therein as your Noble predecessors, appear Doctum, pium and benedictum
Parliamentum, and not otherwise, to your own comfort in the great day, when the
great Bishop and King of heaven and earth shall appear clothed with the robes
of glory, as it is the endeavor, so the prayer of

Yours

Lux and Lex, OR THE LIGHT AND THE LAW OF Jacobs House.
ISAIAH 2. 6. O house of Jacob, Come ye and let us walk in the light of the
Lord. WHilst I read this Scripture, I cannot forget Pes enim Ille in quo
claulicabat, Iudaeos qui in Christum non crediderunt, figurabat, ille vero qui
sanus remansit, illorum typum gessit qui Christum Dominum reciperunt.
to remember that of divine Austin in one of those Sermons de tempore, which
go under his name (though indeed the author is doubtful,) who speaking of
Jacobs halting, understands by his feet two sorts of people among the Jews. By
his halting, the unbeleevers, who in faith did not receive Christ. By his going
upright, he conceives In co quod vincit Jacob, Iudaeos Christum persecuturos
significabat: in co quod benedictionem petebat, illum populum figurabat qui in
Christum Domioum credituru^ erat. Sermon. 80. de Temp.
is meant those which believed in him. Jacob overcoming (says he) signifies
the Jews who prevailed against Christ in putting him to death. In being
blessed, he shows those who worshipped him, and were of him blessed. We will
not contend with Austin (or who ever is the author) for the propriety of the
allusion; the truth of this assertion is clearly manifest. Jacobs family had
Mep^i^osheths halters in it. Those who came of Jacobs loins were foully tainted,
yea overgrown with unbelief. When Christ came they did not receive him. His own
household, Jacobs posterity, did not acknowledge him. They putting falvation
away from themselves, he turns to the Gentiles, who embrace him. The Jews,
Jacobs posterity, for a long time of blindness, stand back through unbelief.

This our Prophet Isaiah, a noble man's son, extraordinarily raised to reform
the house of God, does observe what should Propheta igitur vere regi^s ex regio
ut ple^^que veterum tradiderunt genere oriu^du^, etc Ep Nu^ cup. ad H. Mo^.
Com. in sl. and Hieron.
come to pass in these latter days of the Gospel, when Gods Mountain, the
Church, was to be advanced in the top of mountains, and all Nations, even the
Gentiles (heretofore an abject people) (the partition wall being pulled down)
should flock unto it. This he mentions as a strong argument to persuade the
Jews Abraham's seed, Isaacks posterity, Jacobs house, to come in and receive
Christ. Which (says he,) shall the Lords Mountain be advanced in the top of
^ountains? shall many Nations flock unto it? shall it repent them of their
rigor against Gods people? that they shall break their swords into plowshares,
and spears into pruning hooks; if strangers be so inclinable to conformity,
surely children of the family should manifest themselves in actions of so high
concernment much more zealous. The Prophet seems to ^ewail the Jews, as Monica
her son Austin before his conversion with many tears: or as the Apostle Paul
Aug. confessed. Romans 9. 3.
his contrymen and kindred after the flesh, who remained in natural impiety
and obstinacy; or as our Savior Christ his auditors, that Publicanes and
Harlots should receive the kingdom, Matthew* 8. 11, 12. Mat. 2^. 31, ^^.
and the children of the household be shut out. Oh house of Jacob.

Here is a holy Apostrophe. He turns himself to the Jews, who were
(notwithstanding what ever plenty of ordinances God vouchsafed them) obstinate
and re^ellious, though Jacobs house. Nor is that meant only of those in after
ages, when Christ came in the flesh: The particular applications mentioned, the
kinds of sinners reprehended, the nature of duties whereto they are exhorted,
manifest his scope is to teach the people of his own time.

In the words you may ^ote three particulars.

1. The persons concerned in the duty required. viz. The house of Jacob. 2. The
nature of the office from them expected, which is 1prefaced, Come ye, let us.
2Expressed, walk. 3. The certainty of that directory, whereby every thing is to
be managed. The light of the Lord.
From which he draws three arguments of persuasion to godliness.

1. A fontibus honesti. You are the house and family of father Jacob, who
prophesied of Christ's manifestation in the flesh, of Theod. Snepf. in locum.
whose line he was to come; you have been educated ab incunabulis in the laws
and statutes of the Lord: Shall you suffer Gentiles to go before you, O house
of Jacob?

2. Ab inhonesto. How unseemly and base is it, that others who are strangers to
God and Christ, without knowledge, hope, all, should walk in the Lords way, and
you stand idle all the day long? O come let us.

3. Ab occasion^ facili. You have now a more fair opportunity of Reformation
then ever. You cannot pretend ignorance, through want of means to instruct you.
You cannot deny but the Lord has kindly invited you with tender of himself
and salvation. You cannot allege that you are strangers and in darkness: Here
is a light of truth, a light of Scripture manifestation, a light of Gospel
revelation sent and set up by God himself, that Light of the Lord.

O house of Jacob. Why house? why house of Jacob? It were too tedious and
happily not countervail the charge and labor, to rear up a large structure of
the various significations and acceptions of the word, House. In Scripture
language it is a work Flac. Illiric^^, in verbo do^.
perfected already by our Divines in their writings; you may please to take
notice only, how it is squared to our present purpose. That the Church of God
is often deciphered by this name, is not unknown to those who are competently
versed in facred writ; which because used both materially and formally, be
pleased to remember, that its taken speci^lly for sons or a posterity of those
whom God would make happy with such a blessing. As when God is said to be
favorable to the Egyptian Midwives, that he made them a house, concerning
Exodus 1. 21.
which, though in several glosses there be variety of opinions, occasioned by
the changing of the gender masculine for feminine, and feminine for masculine.
As also that some of the Hebrew Doctors conceive it meant of their preservation
from the rage of Pharaoh; Others with Tostatus take it for her incorporating
into the Nation and Commonwealth of Israel, as Rabab, though its not improbable
they were Hebrew women. Others with Hierom and Rupertus, think it meant of the
Heavenly mansions in future glory. And some with Theoderet and Augustine apply
it to those houses of wealth and riches the Lord for that service gave them. In
this variety we may not exclud^ that sense which the foregoing words do read,
of a numerous family and posterity wherewith God blessed them, notwithstanding
Pharaohs rage very great against them. To the like purpose is that phrase, in
Genesis 16 2. in the story of (...)
Sarah when she gave Hagar to Abraham. I may (says she) be builded by her. So
Rachel and Leah are said to build the house Ibbanerb. Fortassis aedificaborex
ea. Fortassis liberos consequar ex (...). Ju. Tr.
of Israel, Ruth 4. 11. And in David's story you have that, 2 Samuel 7. 11, 27.
and in other places. The reason whereof is manifest by the Etymology. The
Hebrew word (...) signifying a son comes of the word (...) Banah, and is of
the same root with (...) Eben a stone, and (...) Beth a house, that as one
stone built on another, arises up to a house or building, so of one son or
child (by the blessing of God on the parents) a family arises. Neither is it
to be restrained to this posterity as such only: He mentions them as a select
house, a chosen people amongst 1 Cor. 3 9. Heb. 3. 6.
whom God had set his name and worship, as the Church of God is set forth often
in the new Testament, Heb 3. 16.

But Why Jacobs house? You know (beloved) that Abraham had but one son by
Sarah. Isaak indeed had two sons, but one of them was rejected and cast out of
the family. But Jacob was honored with twelve sons, all which as they were
members, so were they sharers in the heirship and benefits of the temporal and
spiritual family, and did join in enlarging his house: whence it is that
Abraham and Isaak are silenced, and so often mention is made of Jacob or
Isreal's posterity, doubtless they did much glory in this prerogative: the
prophet therefore being to deal with them takes his rise hence to persuade them
to duty.

A privileged people should walk suitable to those privileges God vouchsafes
them. Doctr.


To which purpose its observable in Scripture how frequently we are exhorted to
walk worthy of the Lord: which shows, Col 1. 10. 1 These. 2. 12.
that when God has made large manifestations of favor to his Church, it ought
to correspond in behavior to those benefits. Hence are those connexions, Deuteronomy.
6. 10, 11, 12. And it shall be when the Lord thy God has brought thee into the
land which he swear unto thy fathers, to Abraham to Isaac and to Jacob, to give
thee great and goodly cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full of all
good things which thou filledst not, and wels dug which thou diggedst not:
Vineyards and olive trees which thou plantedst not: When thou shall have eaten
and be full, then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee forth out
of the land of Egypt from the house of bondage. You see their privileges are
many: And the last wherein he instanceth, is deliverance from Egypt, of which
the Jews made yearly mention, when Deur 16. 5, 6.
they presented their first fruits unto God: the intent of all which is to
endear then, that seeing the hearts of men are so Deuteronomy 3^. 13, 14, 15, 16.
corrupt, as easily to abuse Gods bounty to wantonness, that they would be so
much more heedfull (being a privileged people) that they forget not the
service of the Lord, his worship and Religion: that's his meaning surely, for in
Scripture men Judge. 37. Psalm 44. 21. Ps. 106. 20, 21. Jer. 3. 21. Jer. 18. 25.
are said to forget the Lord, when they corrupt Religion, or suffer it to be
corrupted also, in 1 Samuel 12. 29. only fear the Lord and serve him in truth
with all your heart, for consider how great things he has done for you. He
might have said as the men of our times. God has done great things for us,
great deliverances, great preservations, he will not now fail us, though we be
not so holy. Oh says he, this privilege must bind you to Exodus 19 4, 5. Heb.
13, 1.
duty, consider what he has done for you. This is the constant language of the
Scriptures. But I need not compass this truth with a greater cloud of
witnesses.

You will say, what were the privileges of Jacobs house, that Object.
he insists so much upon them?

Truly they were great and many, both to Church and state, Resol.
and in them as in a map we may behold our own privileges represented, as St
Austin says, priores omnei quotquot (...) Aug.
habuerunt Christiani dicendi sunt. Israelites were Christians (in his sense)
Christians Israelites.

1. They came of Jacob eternally famous for his great strength manifested in
his wrestling by faith, with Christ, and overcoming Tenes in lacta (...) h^c
tibi ^ono Deus est. Hilar. ^ 5 de Tr^nit Ephesians. 2. 18. ^. 12.
him, as Hilary notes; for his familiarity with God, talking with him face to
face, Genesis 32. 30. That he was to God a consilijs, and long before the
incarnation of Christ revealed to him that mystery. Nor do we come short in
this favor, we have by Christ access to the throne of grace, we have power
with Christ, and by our faith conquer the world, and are of Gods counsel, Heb
4. 16. 1 Co^. 2 ult.
knowing the mind of Christ.

2. God did separate Jacobs family as a peculiar people to himself, from all
the nations of the earth, on whom he would choose to set his love and do them
good, Deuteronomy. 7. 6. they were a peculiar Exodus 19 ^. Peculium Abules in locu^^,
as the. C^ldea. observes. Speed.
treasure of Jewels, in which God took pleasure. In this happiness are we also
sharers as children of the spiritual family: who knows not that we were a
wild and barbarous people, who painted and flashed our flesh? God vouchsafed
at that time to send his word amongst us to reclaim us of that barbarous
paganism, after that we fell to popery and superstition, the Lord was pleased
by a further manifestation of his son Christ Jesus to call us to himself, that
we should be a peculiar people to him, zealous of good works. Titus 2. 11.


3. Of Jacobs family Christ came as the Apostle witnesses, Rom 9. 5. It was no
small honor to that house, from which the Lord Jesus as man descended. Is not
Christ our kinsman, our elder brother? is he not flesh of our flesh, bone of
our bone? did he take the nature of Angels on him? No, he is made Heb. 2 16,
17. Heb. 4. 15. Aug. in Joh. 3. 16. 17.
like to us in all things, finne only excepted. I cannot but with divine
Austin admire the incomprehensible love of God to us in this, of clothing his
divine nature with the rags of our humane flesh, when he came to make himself a
sacrifice for sin.

^. It was a great privilege of this family that God committed to them, only
the keeping of his Oracles, as the Apostle Theophil^^ vir Senatorij ordinie
Aret. (...) Act. 1. 1.
speaks, Romans 3. 2. if it were an honor to Theophilus, though a Sena^our, as
a learned Divine does style him, that Luke the author of the holy story
containing the birth, preaching-life, and death of Christ in the Gospel of Luke
and the Acts of Apostles, after Christ's departure to heaven, was dedicated Hac
lege evangelium (...) Theopb nu^^upat Lu^as ut sideliter ejus custodiam
suscipiat. Calv. in loc.
to him, that he should faithfully preserve it for the Church of Gods use and
benefit: how great a favor was it to the Jews, Jacobs house, to have the
sacred story, mysterious books of the Prophets in their keeping? Nor are
Christians behind in this mercy, and we of this Land being a part of the
family, have experienced this bounty in a very great measure. Time was, when
our condition resembled theirs in Samuels days; that the word 1 Samuel 31. Sermo
Iehovae suerat rarus temporibus illis, Tremel. and Jun Heb pretiosus. Nan omne
rarum (...). See John (...) his story in Act. and Mon. of the Church page 1941.
of God was exceeding precious: Time was, when we had small vision and the
blind lead the blind, and through lack of it, people were in a perishing
condition: Time was, when to have an English bible, or any part of old or new
Testament in our own language without license was capital. But God of his
infinite mercy has for many years showed us in this particular the light of
his countenance: We have the sacred Oracles (notwithstanding the projects and
plots of all Atheistical and popish men) in a large and plentiful measure. We
have Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, holding out the doctrine
of the covenant in the Lord Jesus for the foundation of our faith, direction of
our manners; if by our unworthiness we provoke him not to deprive us Exodus 10.
4. Psalm. 91. 4. Psalm. 10^. 14. Deuteronomy. 7. 17. Jer. 30. 10 12. 13.
of them.

5. This family had the Lord his special protection against foreign and
domestic enemies, he did bear them on Eagles wings, he covered and defended
them under the feathers of his providence, he suffered no man to do them wrong:
but reproved Kings for their sakes; though as it seems, they were in a Isa. 16.
19. Psalm 8. (...) Sol qui re^reat pios beneficij^ s^is, ut sol plantas and
animalia suo calore and splendore: scutum nostrum, id est, quod defendit nos,
nempe me and comitatum meum Pilcat.
low condition, having seven mighty states to deal withal. Beloved we are
equally partakers (as members of the family) in this favor. God has been a
Sun to us, inlightning our understandings with the knowledge of himself, a
shield, a protection to us against the most nefarious and bloody assaults of
homebred and foreign enemies: How has he turned the counsels of crafty
Ahitophels into foolishness? How has he shattered the forces of bloody Esaus?
How has he discomfited yea routed the Annies of proud Philistines and
confounded swelling Pharaohs in the red sea? He has broken their bow, and
knapt their spear in sunder, and burnt their chariots in the fire: He has
raised up the Heroic spirits of those worthies (not as the heathen fain by
transmigration of souls) but by redoubling the same spirit on them more
powerful then a drum of dead Ziscaes skin: on one he has put Sampsons spirit,
on another, David's spirit, on another Samuels spirit: He has for us men and
our safety, subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, performed promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, made us escape the
edge of the sword: of Heb. 1^ 34. 35.
weakness made us strong, we have waxed valiant in fight; has turned to
flight the Armies of the Alions, both in this and in other Kingdoms. I pray
God, our private differences (after the influence of so great mercies) which
has in several ages of Saxons, Danes, Normans, been fatal to this Nation,
prove Quantos videmus humiliatos sed non humiles Bern
not a sad omen to us, who live no better, if not worse then formerly; in
blasphemies, in contempt of ordinances, and abominable idolatries, as if with
Theramines in the story, we judge our selves reserved to some further evil of
misery, by our trading 1 Pet 4. 3.
in that of sin.

6. God seated Jacobs family on a most fertile soil. The ground sometimes is of
much advantage to that people, which Exodus 3 8. Deuteronomy. 8. 7, 8, 9. Deuteronomy 11. ^^.
12. Ezekiel. ^0. 6. called Jehova's land, Hos. 9. 3. and the holy land, Zac. 2^2.
the land of Immanuel, that is, of Christ, Isa 8 8. a figure of an heavenly
country, Heb. 11. 9 10. being accuntrey in Asia the less, possessed by Canaan
the son of Came the son of Noab, and his sons, but for their wickedness the
Land was to spue them out, Lev. 18. 25. Genesis 12. 5.
does inhabit such a piece of earth: It Is observed by our learned historian Mr
Camden, that the Religious houses so called (built by our predecessors, in the
founders intentions, nurseries of learning and piety) were placed in the most
fruitful parts of the country: And may not Christians, and more particularly
we of this Nation, say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 16. 6. The lines are fallen to us
in a pleasant place, or as the Greek, (...), in optimis seu praestantissimis.
We have a goodly heritage, or, as is fair for me, or unto me, it pleases me
well, such an heritage as is a little paradise on earth, to the admiration of
our friends and emulation of our enemies.

Worthy patriots, you have heard the beneficium and privilege of Jacobs
family; having been somewhat large in it, I shall now briefly show the
officium or duty on our part, correspondent to so high a favor.

In opening whereof I tremble to tell you; I may (...) indeed, vox faucibus
haeret. I shall rather (such is our ungrateful Accipiendis beneficijs indignus
est qui suer^t de accept^ ingratus Bern Sermon. 4. in (...) 90. Isa. 1. v. ^.
behavior) point at the unworthy carriage of this generation to our heavenly
father (as Polycarpus said) that ever has followed us with good, never did us
evil. May I not take up Isaiahs complaint, he has nourished up children, and
they have rebelled against him? may I not too truly lament our times, in the
language of Ezekiel, that we are a rebellious house? may I not as Moses,
complain of this family in that sad expression, Ezekiel. 2. 5.
Oh foolish nation and unwise, do we thus requite the Lord? He sharpens his
speech with an Interrogation, to show the grievousnesse Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
of their offense, that it might work in them a deeper impression: And in the
Hebrew he uses the word Nabal, signifying a fool that has his judgment and
understanding faded from him, whereupon he becomes wild and wicked,
notwithstanding the riches of his heavenly fathers bounty toward him: Such
Nabals, such arrant fools, are we of this Jacobs house; as may be manifested,
if we make an impartial scrutiny.

1. How do children of this house undervalue the benefits conferred on them? At
how low and mean a rate do they set them? how vilely do most men esteem them?
As he in the Proverbs, it is naught, it is naught, says the buyer. It Is mean,
it is not of that worth, says a carnal heart, there is not that excellency
Prove. 20. 14. Pessimum est Trem. and. Iun.
in the favors that men talk of. If a man should set a poor rate on a Shop
commodity, how would the owners frown at him? Think you when God has bestowed
all his cost and labor on us, his enemies by nature, he will take it well we
so underprize his bounty, and yet of his family? O that any could so value the
Lord and his goodness, as they ought to do! But as those in the Gospel, being
invited to the feast (says the text) they made light of it, and went their
way: Matthew. 22. 5. (...), illi vero haec non curantes abicrunt.
the Greek signifies a disdainful neglect, as some base thing not worth the
while, and therefore bestow themselves otherwise: So do we disesteem (chiefly)
spiritual favors: the people of God may by experience find it in themselves
too true, that of the two, their hearts are most inclined to beat down the
price of soul-mercies, whereas God looks we should prize mercy t^ its worth.
Hence, Psalm. 150. 2. praise him according to (...) (...), propter amp^^ (...).
his excellent greatness, as he rises to us in favors, our hearts should be
raised to him in Magnificates. I may not unfitly in this case phrase it with
Moses, Numb. 16. 9. Seems it a small thin^ unto you, that the God of Israel
has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to
himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before
the congregation to minister unto them? His intent is to show the Levites their
sin, in undervaluing the kindness of God in the function he had put them.
As Israel was separated from all other people to be the Lords peculiar,
Leviticus 20. 26. 1 King. 8. 33* 34, 36. So were the Levites separated from the
sons of Israel to be the Lords, as Numb. 8. 19 hereupon the Scripture speaks of
them as distinct from the Israelites, 1 Chronicles. 9. 2. Psalm. 135. 19, 20. And
this was their sin, that they bore so mean thoughts of it: So God having
taken us Gentiles, wild Olives by nature, put us into the true Olive, called
us to Romans ^^. ^4.
himself, and of all people, us of this nation, by several remarkable acts of
providence, has he severed to be his peculiar portion. Shall we suffer our
hearts now to be low in regard of him? this is the way to forfeit all: Oh take
heed of a scornful undervaluing Gods mercies. Hos. 2. 6.


2. How is it that our affections are not drawn to God by his favors? We love
and rejoice in him nothing the more since we received them. These would (if our
spirits were rightly tempered) be as a lodestone to draw us to God the donor
of them, as it was with David, Whom have I in heaven but thee, and in earth
none in comparison of thee: As St Austin his heart Psalm 7^. ^^. I^qu^^^um est
cor (...) do nec in^e requies^^t A^^. Spe^^ in ^^ (...) of R^samon^. Gen 32 ^0.
could not be quiet, but on all occasions of Gods dispensing his bounties
mounts up to heaven. Were our souls in right frame, these bounds of God would
be to us as that clew or thread (pardon the expression) to carry us thorough all
mazes and labyrinths to find out the Lord. So were they to Jacob in a
straight: he called to mind the promise, that God had past his word to him, he
would do him good, he with that sets before his eyes his own unworthiness of
the least of all Gods mercies, he considers how God brought him over Jordan
with a staff only, he remembers also, how great the goodness of God had made
him, having now two complete bands, and like Moses, looks on him that's
invisible, through all these perspectives, Heb 1^ 27. (...). Gen ^^. 11.
and so gathers assurance of Gods assistance against the rage of his merciless
brother Esau, who is ready to slay the mother upon the child: So the Apostle
in that place to the Hebrews, where he sets down the goodness of God to our
fathers, besides other things, in making the promise to them (says) they
embraced the promises, the Original word signifies as much, as they saluted
the promises, not in a vain frothy (...). Heb. 11. 13.
complement, as gallants of the times, but in earnest, heartily, drawn in
affection to him, and affiance for him that made the promises. Its an evil
verily to be lamented, that this goodness of our heavenly father is no more
prevalent to allure our hearts to Godwards: this being one special means to
engage God, as in Jacobs case. God is by Jeremy setting forth the return of the
Israelites from Captivity, Jer. 30. 2. See how he does it, in the 10th verse
you read, fear not O my servant Jacob, says the Lord. In the 18th verse,
Behold I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs tents, and have mercy on his
dwelling-places, and their nobles shall be of themselves (strangers shall not
be their masters) And their Governors shall proceed from the midst of them,
and I will cause him to draw near and he shall approach unto me, for who is
this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord. It Is an
heart-engagement, not tongue only; when Pellioi^t vel devovebit cor suum ut
mea^ semper perficiat voluntatem. Osiand and Vatab. in loc.
the very soul of a man is devoted to the Lord. I know some take it to be meant
of Christ, but it must be extended also to his members, the spiritual
posterity of Jacob, as the scope of the words show. O if we could engage our
hearts to God on mercies received, he would count no favor too dear for us.

Why do we not employ and improve our time and abilities to the benefit and
advantage of the family? Is any man born Cicero. Cato cujus mores erant, Lucano
reserente, toti genitum se credere mundo. Gerson.
for himself? Do we enjoy gifts of nature, learning or fortune (as I may so
call them) for our ease, honor, wealth only? The heathen will, if we look into
their writings, teach us another lesson: A good man, says our English Seneca,
should be a common fountain, at which all may freely come to receive water of
comfort and assistance: those who are in a family should be isntrumental to
the advantage of all, chiefly of the Gal. 6. ^0. Genesis 4^. 35. Genesis ^7. ^^, ^2,
13, 14. Ambr. in vita Theodos.
family and household of faith, as Joseph in Pharaohs house. What a world of
good did he upon every occasion to those who stood in need of his help? what an
admirable testimony is it which Ambrose gives of Theodosius the Emperor, who
to his last, was solicitous for the public with neglect of his own private
interests? God has put (Noble Senators) such a price into your hands, has
given you so many, so great opportunities (besides the deliverances vouchsafed
beyond expression) for raising and making happy Church and state, as never to
any Parliament under the cope of heaven. He looks for more (without doubt) from
you then others: It will not satisfy him in the great Assise, that any of you
have been quiet and Seneca Aliud a^^re, ^ale age^e.
forborne to meddle much, as the heathen complained of some; Nor that others of
you have been doing some other work then family business; Least of all that
any of you should do evil offices though never so closely to this family: As
if you according to that opinion of the Florentine, should imagine, that great
persons were made for their pleasures only. He has betrusted Ma ^^av, de
inst^^u^^one principis. Aetrus Hadria the Emperor used to say, Non m^bi sed
popu^o praees, nunqu^d ut de subdetis ^res cas^^equaqua^^ se^ ut ipse de ^e
Ber. de consed l. 3.
you with his house, be not deceived, no pretenses will satisfy him when he
calls his stewards to an after reckoning. Saul you know was taken of God and
employed about this house, but came short in his improvement. He perhaps prided
himself in his greatness, and thought his Psalm. 30 6. 7. 1 Samuel 15 23, 26, ^7,
2^ 1 Samuel 15, 33.
mountain, like David sometimes, so strong as never to be moved: made light of
admonitions, sieighted opportunities, lost advantages, pleased himself, but
provoked God to the confusion of himself, and rending of the Kingdom from him:
yea though, perhaps in tenderness or policy, he spared Agag and the fat
cattle (it being contrary to the word of the Lord) God makes Samuel his
executioner to do his pleasure on him in Gilgal: that as his sword had made
many mothers childlesse, so should his mother be childlesse. Jehu you know
(honorable and beloved) was advanced to govern the family, he had a price put
into his hands, and did something in the Lords cause: He set on a parcel
Reformation, and God therefore assures him the kingdom to a fourth generation.
He went so far as by-ends and self principles would 2 King. 10. 16.
carry him, but he did not all that the necessities of Gods family, and the
high calling he was honored with, challenged at his hands: Jehu took no heed
(says the holy Ghost) to walk in all the Law of the Lord God of Israel, as
Hezekiah did with all his heart (it was but in a corner of his heart) for he
departed 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. 2 King. 10. 29.
not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel sin: and therefore you
read in Hosea of him (though it may be at first Hos. 1. 4.
sight you would take him to be a true Israelite of the family in whom is no
guile) how God is resolved to repay his partiality and insincerity in that very
service, the matter of which so far as he went, God approves; for yet a little
while (says he) and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu,
and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel. Think with your
selves (beloved) what a terrible curse it is that lies on Coniah a broken
despised vessel wherein God takes no pleasure, such was his disrespect of Gods
house in which he lived: the Prophet Jeremy opens it fully, thus says the
Lord, write this man Jer. 22. ^4. 28.
childlesse, a man that shall not prosper in his days, for no man of his seed
shall prosper sitting upon the throne of David and ruling any more in Judah.
You know that, ut crescunt dona, sic crescunt donorum rations, where the Lord
bestows great gifts he will call for a proportionable account, and will exact
it in one kind or another, he looks we should walk suitable to favors; if we
do not, Hear what he says by his messengers: The glory of Jacob Isa. 17. 4.
Jer. 33. Amos 6. 8, Lament. 2. 3.
shall be made thin. Hear Jeremy, I will cast away the seed of Jacob; Hear
Amos, it will make God abhor the excellency of Jacob; yea further he will burn
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which shall devour round about.

Surely we desire not that Jacobs house should be worn thin, that it be cast
off, or the excellency abhorred and burnt round about with fire from God, who
(being angry) is no less^ then a consuming Heb. 12 29.
fire; Oh then how are we concerned to be careful, being thus privileged (as
we have heard) that the house of Jacob walk in the light of the Lord.

Let us now consider the nature of the duty that's presented to us, with its
introduction and description, the former in, Come ye, the latter in the words,
Let us walk.

Some perhaps conceive this spoken by the Jews mutually exhorting one another
as the Gentiles who were without the Church, do in the precedent verses
persuade their fellows to go up to the mount of the Lord. No they are within
the Temples view, they want hearts to go, rather then an opportunity. I suppose
their Prophet Gods vicegerent would mould into a better form.

The Papists and Arminians abuse this and the like places to establish the
power of free will; but who knows not the several S^ul^um ess^t (...) aut
(...) ei qu^ (...). Arb ^. 6. cap 10.
ends God has in expressions of this nature, as

1. To show what is our duty, rather then our natural ability to perform.

2. To humble men in consideration of their present condition of opposing and
standing out against the Lord.

3. That such as are elect (the holy Ghost setting on the exhortation) may by
grace perform what is required of them in nature.

4. That all excuse may be taken away from profane persons, who cannot deny but
a Prophet has been amongst them, and has invited them to return.

5. Hereby God would show that we are not moved as stocks Calv instit l. 2.
cap. 5. Austin.
and stones; but as such who work ex consilio, by consent of will, God having
made us ex nolentibus volentes.

Is it not remarkable, think you, that I say a reformer of the Church and
state, setting to the work, calls on himself as on them? he does not as the
Scribes and Pharisees bind heavy burdens on other men's shoulders, himself not
touch them with one of his fingers: he is not as those sea Marks pointing a
passage to Mariners, and themselves move not: he, as a good General, says in
effect to them, you are not to go one foot further then your leader shall break
the way before you. He puts on the same resolution in Jacobs house, as Joshuah
did in his own, I and my house will serve the Lord. Josh 24. 15.


Teaching us, that those who are reformers of others, must not exempt
themselves from Reformation; it is not enough Observe. Matthew 8. ^. Facere recte
cives suos princeps optimus sa^endo docet. Paterculus.
that you be such as the Centurion to those under him, saying go and he goes,
come and he comes, do this and he does it. You should as Admirals in a fleet
be as examples in the voyage, as one says, teaching others to do right by your
own examples, which clearly is the reason why God would have us punctual in
the choice of rectors, Exodus the 18. 21. Moreover thou shall provide out of all
the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness. The
Hebrews describe them in this manner, Men of ability and such as be mighty in
the commandments, exactly look to themselves, and subdue their affections, so
that there be no dishonest or contemptible thing in them. And generally able
men are such as have a strong (or courageous) heart to deliver the oppressed
out of the oppressors hands; as it is said of Moses, he stood up and defended
or saved them. To the same purpose is that charge, in Numb. 11. 17. Exodus ^. 17.
Gather unto me (says God) seventy Elders, and I will take the spirit which is
upon the^, and will put it upon them: thereby God shows that none without the
gifts of the spirit, are fit for government, as is frequently taught in Gods
book: By the Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
spirit here is meant spiritual gifts, as in Scripture language frequently,
neither was Moses his spirit hereby diminished. 2 King. 2. 15. 1 Cor 14 12. 32.
Joh 7. 30. Act. 19. 2. 6.
Moses in that hour was like unto the lamp left (burning) on the candlestick in
the Sanctuary, from which all the other lamps were lighted, yet the light
thereof was not lessened any whit. A like place you have, in 2 Samuel 23. 30. He
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; he must have
justice both of the first and second table, that his Act^ons may read a lecture
of both to the people; and may in sincerity with comfort give the like charge
which the Apostle does to his Philippians; those things that you have learned
and seen in me, do, and the God Phil. 4. 9^
of peace shall be with you. Give me leave (honorable Senators) (being one of
your remembrancers from the Lord this day) to stir up your pure minds,
though happily you have been taught in the present truth; Isaiah was a Noble
person and Prophet of Gods sending, he was not ashamed to interesse himself in
the work of Reformation: it is your duties (as Abimelech did in another case)
(that I may use the holy Ghosts Judge. 9. 48.
words) to invite the people, propounding your selves a pattern, as you have
seen us do, so do you as we have done. I must confess that natural
abilities are of great advantage in government and state-policie, and where men
are defective in them, they are exposed to contempt and hazard; Learning is of
great worth, and without it, counsels are (in some sort) blind and lame. But
what if we have abilities of both very eminently? what trust can we repose in
such? If there be not upright lives, integrity, godliness, we may truly say of
such men, as of him in the story; He has navim bonam, Gubernatorem Qui (...)
in (...) ^idel^s esse non^ ossunt. (...). ap (...) 1. cap. ^.
malum, a good ship, but an evil pilot, and on the other hand, probe doctus est
qui probus est, he is entirely learned, who to his learning has added
integrity.

Oh that all the Magistrates, Committees, Commissioners, Benches of justice,
which are under you, were of this constitution? how well should it be then with
Gods people! this is no more then what we have covenanted in the very setting
See National Covenant.
on the work of Reformation, and yet its strange to see and hear in all places,
pretenders to the settlement of the common wealth, sticklers (as they would
persuade us) for regularity and government in the Church, Antagonists of
Heretics, Sectaries, and Scismaticks, zealous against Malignants, as the
Covenant obliges them: Yet how few are there that conscientiously make use of
that other branch, touching Reformation of our own ways, without which what is
the best even in Reformers but mere hypocrisy?

Worthy Senators, let this sink into your hearts, as men by imploiment in
Reformation, and obligement in covenants draw nearer to God then others; so
should they manifest more holiness in their conversation to God and his people.

1. Reformers (such as I say here) do stand in a nearer relation to the work,
it being the fruit of their own womb: that it be not defective or ill shapen:
it is very requisite themselves be of an handsome and comely feature, when
parents are deformed, children oftimes resemble them; if Reformers be
licentious and loose, the product of their endeavors will be a loose
Reformation.

2. Reformation takes best with the people, when those who commend it to them
are themselves active in what is good, common people look much into the lives
of their rulers, how they move, what course they stear, and are not persuaded
that you are in earnest, if your selves act not: And indeed if we intend a
Reformation to the purpose, it must be laid in the great ones, that are or
should be the Reformers of Israel: when in the Counsel of Constance, there was
a speech had concerning Reformation, some saying, quod oporteat incipere 4
minoritis, M Fox Hist of the council of ^onstanc^ Anno 14^4.
the Reformation must begin at the Friars, no says Sigismond, Non a Minoritis,
sed a Majoritis incipienda est Reformatio, signifying that the Reformation
should first begin with the Pope, Cardinals and Bishops, and so descend to
inferiors: and indeed mutato nomine, de nobis, change but the name and it is a
good history, showing us a rule of our Reformation, as he in the comedy said,
Loquere ut videam, so speak as I may see it abroad, so express in words, that
our conversation give not a lie to our language, least we be not unjustly
taxed, as those who say and do not.

The Lords expectations are higher and greater from Reformers then others.
Where God gives much of power, honor, estate, opportunities, of them he
requires the more duty, Primum videndum, quid sit* quod sacrum appellat ^^st
autem illud sacrum quod sacris ufibus vel Dei instituto and jussa vel hominum
voluntaria and ^ spontanea la^gitione ad lictum and devotum est. Ob eamque
causam horum aut sublatio, aut etiam imminutio, sacrilegij ^rimine damnatur,
Deuteronomy. 23. 21, 22, 23.

Hec corruptela cum omnibus saeculis ^h^^^uit, tu^ ex omni memoria nunquam
magis grassat^ est quam hoc nostro ta^ infaelic^ sae^ulo, in quo p^erique non
mo lo (...) largiuntur sed etiam, qu^* adpossunt, da^t operam ut ex illo
aliquid resecent and arr^dant, quod a su^^ major bus ad (...) Dei and scholarum
and pauperam suste^ a^ionem collatum est.

Exaggeratur hoc scelu^ apud Prophet. Mal. 3. 8, 9. qui hanc injuriam ^on tam
hominibus quam ^psi Deo sactam esse queritur.

Quod si illis mortale and perniciosum sit qui bis bonis fr^untur, quid illis
fie^ qui alioru^ Av^^ rit^^ tantum a ^ainistri fugruat, qui ipsi^ullum inde
fractum perceperunt, and qui spe tantum praedae deiuceps consequendae a^ hoc
sacrilegium pertracti sunt. M Cart. on Prove. 20. 2^.


Romans 2. 21. Thou that say a man should not steal, do thou steal? thou
who professest to abhor Idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Thou who framest
to the Nation a Covenant, for preserving Gods worship in purity, settling the
Church in a doctrine and discipline agreeable to the word, reforming thy own
ways, do thou by starting aside, throwing it behind thy back, as an
obsolete ceremony, or using it as an engine for a particular project, to
advance the designs of a deceitful heart, not to make thee more humble, holy,
or watchful in thy walk, Jer 7. 24. Jer. 17. 9. 2 Samuel 1. 20.
before God and man, dishonorest thou the Lord? O tell it not in Gath, publish
it not in the streets of Askelon. Let not the Philistines triumph: All
Christians (Hon.) are bound to walk with God, you more as being Reformers of
Church and state. Isaiah is a good pattern, who prescribes to others what
himself is ready to perform, requiring not profession only but action. O house
of Jacob (says he) come ye, let us walk in the light of the Lord. And so I
pass to the next words, setting forth the nature of the duty, Walk ye.

There are two sorts of walkers our law mentions. 1. Night Walkers, And those
the Scripture names such as walk in the flesh, Romans 8. 2. and in darkness, 1
These 5. 3. 2. Day Walkers, who move to Godward after the direction of the word,
and strength of grace received from Christ, the Son of God, and Ad Deum non
acceditur passibus corporalibu^ cum ubique sit, ped affectibus mentis: and
codem modo ab eo ^eced tur and sic accsssus and recessus sab fimili udine
localis motus defignunt spiritualem affectum. Tho. Aquin. ^ q. ^. 5. m.
light of the world, of such the Prophet here speaks. He persuades not the
Jews to speculation, painted profession, vainglorious, empty ostentation:
reality and active walking in Gods ways, is that to which they are invited.

Real holiness consists in action, not profession only. The Apostle
prescribing rules to servants, how they should as Observe. Ephel. ^. 6.
Christians behave themselves to their Masters, says; it must not be (...),
service to the eye. If men will not accept a perfunctory performance, much
less can we expect that God take such feigned holiness well at our hands, it
being simulata Cypr. Sermon de Mortal.
sanctitas, and so duplex iniquitas, which occasioned Cyprian to cry out: Quid
prodest verbis proferre veritatem, and factis destruere virtutem? To hold out
this truth more fully it is that the holy Ghost makes use of such phrases as
require a most industrious Luke 13. 24. (...). Phil. 2. 12. (...) 1 Cor. 9. 24.
(...). Revel. 3. ^.
and solicitous behavior to Godward; strive to enter in at the strait gate;
sometime, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; sometime, so run
that you may obtain: all which do show the earnestness of endeavor after that
godliness which should be in all Christians. Its not enough that we be as
those St John mentions, who have a name to live and in truth are dead; Nor as
such St Hierom remembers, Qui sub Christiano nomine, under the vizard of
Christians, in all their deportments toward Church and state, walk as
Gentiles; Nor as that Indian figtree in Pliny, having leaves as large as
Targets, the fruit ^o bigger then a bean.

O Honorable and beloved, consider there must be reality in our godliness,
verbal shows are not sufficient: My request to Zanch. 9.
you is (that with more certainty and comfort you may walk in this way of the
Lord) the ordinary tract, the terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem (being
passed by,) frequent in our Divines, treating on this subject, you would give
me leave to propound to you some objects, on which in this walk all Gods people
must fix their eyes; within which limits I shall bound my discourse; Take them
in these succinct following considerations.

1. Let your aim be in every undertaking to honor your heavenly father, whose
will is, that we should in these Scripture revelations of duty, glorify him.
And whilst I say so, take notice, that we must honor God for himself: We may
not seek him for base ends; We should see an excellency in him, above all
persons, and things else, so as we can rest satisfied with God alone, yea with
outward crosses and troubles: In a word, honor him not as those, who sought
after, and followed Jesus, induced thereto, by mercinary, base, and by respects
of loaves and fishes and perishing things; as the Gloss says, Quaereb^nt Joh.
6. to. Ord. Gloss. in loc.
Jesum sed non propter Jesum.

2. In our walk we must propound to our selves this likewise, to help forward
the salvation of our brethren, by exhortation, example, or what way providence
offers; after the Apostle Paul's president. It Is a vain imagination of those
who conceive 1 Cor. 9. 22.
that we must walk only to our own ends and interests, to our own honor, vain
pleasure, observance of carnal friends, with neglect of the Saints, and their
common cause: Woe be to such a man, when his Master comes, and shall find him
so walking. It Is one of the saddest spectacles our times presents us with, and
which does threaten and may draw down a greater judgment then we are aware of,
that men will not walk nor stir one foot (be the affair of never so great
importance to the public,) unless the golden ball run before them. I have
read of a bloud-stone, which having an excellent quality to stanch blood, the
Jewellers say, it seldom or never exerts Mazarinus. Psalm. 50.
its force, if not set in or covered over with silver. We have too many who
have good parts, but if not silvered, you shall be poorly helped, perhaps
rather mischieved by them.

Another object in our walk, we are to look on; is Gods likeness, that we may
come as fully up to it, as possible. We are children of a holy and heavenly
father, and endeavor to bear his image; that as when the question was, whose
is this 1 Pet. 1. 16.
image and superscription, they answer, Caesari; so, when one shall say, whose
is such a statesman, such a Divine, such a Magistrate, Matthew. 22. 20.
such a Councellor? it may be answered, he has Gods image in all his
deportments, he walks up to God, he breaths out piety in all his enterprises
and imploiments. But alas that evil which a father complained of in his time,
is too rife among us, Omnes ad Deum, pauci post Deum ir^ volunt, All men would
go to God that they may receive glory, few Bern.
would go after him in a holy and divine imitation. Let us that have given our
names to Christ; ^^minate on this: As we are called to a state of grace, let us
walk answerably. The Philosopers used to say, if thou be a Philosopher, thou
must live Philosophores? Philosoph^^e i gitur tibi vivendum est.
as such an one; So I, if thou be a Saint, walk up to Gods image and
likeness, show what thou art.

There is another mark on which we must set our eyes, in this walk, viz, to
ascertain our selves that we are in Christ, and so shall with him partake of
future glory; which is that very lesson the Apostle Peter so plainly teaches
the Saints. Although 2 Pet. 1. 11.
(as the learned Zanchius observes) holiness and good works are not requisite
ad promerendam, that we can by them merit everlasting happiness, yet ad
possidendem vitam aeternam, they are necessary.

5. The increase of grace received (in this walk we now treat of) is also
carefully to be looked unto; and is one end that in our heavenly course we must
aim at. You know diverse after sickness by moderate walking do get strength:
use hands (we say) and have hands; its a very useful lesson that of employing
graces, philosophical habits are augmented by putting them forth into
exercise, and the spiritual endowments God vouchsafes us, if we suffer not,
what we have received, to impair Gen 5. 24. with Heb. 11. 5.
by disuse, will receive much advantage; if we would learn with Henock, to walk
with God, I doubt not but we should gain much strength by that divine exercise
of spiritual walking.

6. Briefly this must be our scope and desire to please God; in which as we are
to imitate the Lord Jesus; so ^s our parts to draw power from Christ,
strengthening us to walk acceptably Phil. 4 13. 1 Cor. 7. 32.
before him; that of us it may be said truly in some sort, as he of himself,
Joh 8. 20. I do all things that please him* and indeed otherwise to what
purpose is our walk? God has coupled, walk, and pleasing him together, 1 These.
4 1 how you ought to walk, and please God; It Is possible to walk and not to
please (...).
him; many walk and are enemies to Christ, but then we are not in Christ or
walk not with God, holily and in faith; without 1 These. 2. 4.
which it is impossible to please God. It was (...) his care in his walk to
please God, and should be ours also; he Rom 8. 8. Heb 6 11. Genesis 5 22. Heb. 1^
5.
behaved himself as in Gods sight, had a regard to the rule, that all
performances were warranted by it, and with the eye of faith looked on Christ,
who was to come, his desires were to advance the Lord in every thing; whom that
we may please, take heed of,

1. Pleasing our selves in satisfying our own corrupt humors: as Christ
pleased not himself in his walk, otherwise then might Col 1. 10. Col. 3. ^0.
Romans 15. 3.
stand with Gods pleasure: So neither may we as Brutus and Cassius, wedded to
our own wills and corrupt lusts.

2. Of pleasing men, to whose vain fancy it is a sin for us to comply. When God
calls us to him; if so, we are not the servants of Christ. This of pleasing
God in our walk, is both a duty and a special prerogative of Gods people, that
when ungodly Gal. 1. 10. 1 These 3 4.
natural men with the richest habiliments, and sweetest accommodations nature
can afford them, are distasteful, yea odious to God; yet the upright (their
actions being died in Zancby.
the blood of Christ) being acted by Gods own spirit, their works are Gods in
them, their walking in a holy sutablenesse to his word, intending sincerely his
glory, their persons being in Phil. 2. 13. 1 John 3. 22.
Christ, their performances please him; mistake me not, as if in every thing a
child of God, pleased God; though his person be accepted, yet not all his
actions, as in David and Peter case, though the person as in Christ be well
pleasing, yet not as in a trade of sin; for which God does justly correct such
with the 2 Samuel 7. 14. 15.
rods of men, from whom he takes not his mercy for ever.

That we may please God in our walk before him, observe only these three rules.

1. Walk so as to avoid every extreme, not to fall into one evil whilst we
decline another: as some even of the primitive Fathers and Modern Divines
through inanimadvertency in the heat of disputation have not avoided; John
Wickliffe though a good and learned man, seeing the abuse of Church goods to
Scieba^ horrid^us scripturu^ Letherum quam sent^^. Phil. Melanct ^. ep ad
A^^cum. Anno 1544. Fox Martyr.
excess, riot, wantonness, and Gods dishonor, cries down Church revenues,
and opens unawares a gap that he never intended, to sacrilegious practices of
covetous worldings, who soon after took the advantage of his error to enrich
themselves, to the discountenancing of learning, and discouragement of the
Ministry, and their own ruin; Others there have been endeavoring to shun the
pressures of Episcopal tyranny, giving too much the rains, to novell opinions,
self conceits and interests, unawares run headlong into confusion and
irregularity. And some there be who so highly advancing the love and free grace
of God to man; Others pleading strongly for Christian liberty (forgetting the
golden mean) treading the moral law under foot, as an useless ceremony after
men are in Christ, hurry themselves from Christian liberty into Antichristian
libertinisme.

2. Walk cautelously that we be not consened with the falsities and deceits of
the devil, oftentimes changing himself into an 2 Cor. 11. 14.
Angel of light, sophisticating his wares, and dying vice with virtues colors,
suggesting under glorious shows, such notions, of which we may say, as Osiander
of the German Interim, there Osiander. Ep. cen^.
was plus veneni, more poison by many degrees then wholesome nourishment in it.
I desire not to raise old errors from the dead, to engender new ones.
Westminster Hall, every street in London buy and sell them; so as we may say of
those Cities Land. Westminster.
as sometimes of Rome, omnia vaenalia Rome, there is not an old fashion but its
new dressed and set to sale, not an ancient error in Austin or Epiphanius his
time, which is not set forth as gainful Merchandise: every country town
almost in the land, is thereby infected. Nor would I be mistaken in this, as if
no distinction were to be made betwixt fundamentalls and prater-fundamentalls,
if that difference take not place, it may be prejudicial Polan. B. Hell. ^.
D^vena^^.
to the foundation upon which we all are builded.

3. Walk providently, so to manage things present as to have an eye behind to
discern what may follow, how by such an enterprise much good may be hindered,
enemies of the truth may gain advantage, thou may unwittingly play thine
adversaries game: there is a time (says Solomon) for all purposes: Christ
himself did not many things which afterward he put in Eccles 3. ^.
practice, his hour was not yet come; Mary was deceived, and for it justly by
Christ blamed, in hasting him to turn water into Joh. 2. 4.
wine before the time; The Disciples were in an error, requiring fire from
heaven as Elias did, it was not time; The tares in the Gospel (says he) are
to be rooted up, but not at all Luke 9 54. Matthew. 13. 30.
times, if more detriment come to the good corn by taking them away (though in
themselves unsufferable) then by their awhile standing, let them alone to a fit
harvest; All actions are not fit for all times. (...) in Greek is tempus, and
temporis opportunitas, Gal 6 10. (...).
time and the seasonablenesse of it: We must in our proceeding look to both
significations, if we mean to be conformable to the rule, or profitable to our
selves or others; Cyprians advise is of good use here, who reproved some
Christians that would needs intempestive profess the faith, Confiteri nos
vol^it (says he) magis Christus quam profiteri. Let us (Honble) in this case
walk providently, or as the Apostle has it exactly, (...): which that we may
do, go to the light, for to walk in Ephesians. 5. 15.
darkness is dangerous; And the rather let us be induced hereto by the
consideration of Gods bounty to us, no less then to our forefathers of Jacobs
house, who had a light fiery pillar to direct them through the wilderness to
Canaan; So we have a light here sent from the father of lights with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of turning; it is the Lords light (says the James 1.
17.
text) Oh house of Jacob, come ya, and let us walk in the light of the Lord.

Having much ground to walk over, I shall spare needlessely to stay my self or
you in a review of the various acceptations of this word Light in holy writ,
this task having been performed I lliricus.
frequently by the Learned: its observable that the Hebrew word. (...) for
light here used, is of near kin to the word (...) thereby showing it to be a
metaphorical expression, in which the Lord would let himself down to man's
capacity. Nor need we be curious in this variety of significations whether to
choose, the ten Commandments delivered by Moses, or the Gospel of Christ, or
indeed the whole word of God. Neither is this to 2 Pet. 1. 19.
be omitted, that the Prophet speaking of the word, calls it the Lords light,
as the Hebrews) used by way of emphasis to entitle, things of more then
ordinary worth; or else as Oecolampadius notes, to show that there is one God
of the Jews and Oecolampad. in locu^^
Gentiles; Yet he says not your Lord, nor Jacobs Lord, nor thy Lord, as
in^some other Scriptures; but the Lord; happily for that they having forsaken
him, would not with that assurance and confidence of interest go to him as
their Lord.

The holy Scriptures (this is that Isaiah would teach them) are a light to all
Gods people, and that it is so, there are these evidences. Observe. Spa^bem dub.
E^ang part 3. dab minima 94


1. The Scripture is a full and perfect light, there is no defect in it, no
rules wanting, none insufficient, we cannot say as of the Orators works desunt
nonnusla, nor as the Schools, of Tully.
P. Lombard, hic Magister non tenetur; No, the law of the Lord is perfect, it is
sine vitio, it has no faule in the least measure. Psalm. 19 ^. Piscat. in loc.


2. It is a clear and shining light, manifesting a sufficiency of instruction
and direction in all the ways of God, so as the man of God may be made
perfect; As it has light in it self; So does 1 Timothy 3. 16.
it convey the same to others, making them wise to satuation* if you say there
be many in darkness and ignorance to this very hour, who walk in by-waies. I
desire you to consider, M. Downames warf^re part 4 lib. ^. cap. 4.
that God is pleased to clear to such as be his people, all truths necessary to
salvation; if any of his children be in an error against fundamentalls, God
who has promised to lead his Joh. 16. 13. Phil. 3. 15.
Saints into all truth, will discover this unto them in due time.

3. As light is pure and clean, you cannot fasten any dirt or uncleanness on
it; So is the word of God, there is no dross in it, so thoroughly is it purged,
says a learned Divine. Men may Psalm. 11. 140. Piscat. Pu^gaturur anrum in
catino.
cast disgraceful speeches and aspertions on it, as do Papists, Atheists, and
Enthusiasts, but there you can fasten no evil.

The word, as the light, is a comfortable creature, how pleasant is it to
behold the light (says the wise man) the expressions Eccles. 11. 7.
of Gods free grace, the promises of mercy, the doctrine of the covenant in
Christ made with Gods people, the future glory and happiness herein held
forth, and reserved to all Gods elect. How does the hearing, reading,
meditating of the same, put life into the hearts of Gods children in the midst
of their hottest afflictions: as David; I had fainted in my trouble, but thy
Ps. 119 50. 93.
word has quickened me.

Light is smart and painful to all blear-eyed persons, who cannot endure the
force and efficacy of it; which comes to pass by reason of the weakness or
imperfection of the eyes: So the word of God (especially when powerfully
preached) does exasperate and enrage ungodly men, desirous to sleep in the dark
dungeon of hellish sins, who like Cerberus Plutoes dog drawn from hell, belch
and vomit at the light; So were the Pharisees at Christ's Sermon, They were
scandalized Matthew 1^ 12. (...).
at him.

Lastly as the light has its being and rise from the Sun the fountain and
original of it (there is lux and lumen, as the Philosophers distinguish, as
cause and effect:) So God who is light it self and dwells in light, in whom
is no darkness at all, the father and fountain of light, is the original of
this Scripture light, which is a ray or beam of his sun in heaven. It is of
his enspiring: holy men (says the Apostle) spoke, as moved by the Spirit, the
word is not (...) of their own 2 Pet. 1. 20.
interpretation; but as they were moved by the holy Ghost.

Honorable and beloved, seeing it is the light of the Lord that has all this
day, this day said I? yea so many Sermon days, Use.
yea so many scores of years shined to this Nation: Let us to whom of late more
fully God has vouchsafed so imparallelld a mercy (our forefathers, and many of
our dear brethren in other countries, as those in Egyptian darkness, desiring
to see Exodus 10. 23.
one of these days of the son of man and cannot enjoy them) let us (I say)
endeavor to walk answerable to so high a favor. Oh that I were worthy to
fasten on you the exhortation of the prophet Isaiah cap. 60. 1. 2. wherein is a
promise also and seems in our times to be fullfilled. Arise, shine, for thy
light is Gloria Iebovae doctrine evangelij per quam glorificatur Ievab. Piscat.
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; for behold the darkness
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be upon thee.

Take notice therefore of these rules.

Bring your actions to this light and make trial whether or no they be wrought
in God, both your private emploimen^ Joh. 3. 21.
as men, and your public undertakings in your respective ^^ions to Church and
state. The King (as we read, in Deu^. 17. 18, 19.) When he sat upon the throne
of his Kingdom, was to write him a copy of the Law in a book ont of that
which is before Some read it his Deuteronomy. H Airsworth.
the Priests the Levites, and it was to be with him, and he was to read therein
all the days of his life, that he might learn the fear of the Lord his God, to
keep all the words of this law, and these statutes to do them.

Yea say some Hebrew Doctors, he was so carefully to look to this rule, that if
his fathers had left him none (viz no book of the law) or if that be lost, he
is to write him two books of the law, the one he is to reserve in his house,
for so he is commanded, as every one of Israel: the other is not to depart from
before him; if he goes out to war, it goes with him, if he sit in
judgment, it is to be with him. They knew of old this most certain principle
(as Luther calls it) that Gods word will not attemper it self or condescend
to Princes and states; but they are to frame themselves and imploiments unto
it, though never so cross to their malignant and corrupted humors: which
gives me occasion to remember that worthy speech of famous Queen Elizabeth,
when passing in royal state to her coronation through the streets of London,
the Bible being presented to her, which with both hands taking she kissed, and
laying to her breast, she said that the same had ever been her chiefest
delight, and should be a rule by which she mean to frame her government. In
this case it is true what Casuists teach concerning the Cannon law, that in
materia ad acclesiam pertinento, where the civil and Canon law disagree, We
must Sartily Fu^^^ vill. uren c^^lex. Legs civi les sequuntur canonum
disi^io^em. Gal 4. 16. (...).
be ordered by the Canon: So if we could be willing (when laws fright and
oppose one the other) to stand to the determination of Gods Canon without
prejudice or partiality, suffering our selves to be directed by the light of
holy Scripture, it would soon put a period to the most unkindely differences.

2. Beware of the pretended new lights so much sought after by these times,
that our holy zeal for God is almost extinct. When God sets up a pillar as a
direction to his people, he expects that Jer. 6. 16.
no ignis fatu^s or lanthorn-man should steal away his followers, yet such is
the mad instability of these times, that what ever presents it self new to us
is welcome, though unsound and rotten. God has shut up the Canon of Scripture,
your expectations Gal. 18.
will be frustrate if you look for another Gospel. There may be new lights
respectu actus revelandi, enlightening both the organ and the object, but these
revelations are not new, respectu doctrinae revelatae: this were to set up
another Gospel then what you have received; which whosoever shall presume to
bring, we may not (says John) bid him God speed, least we Ioh. 2. 10, 11.
partake of his evil deeds. We must as Martin Luther said he would do, if any
spirit suggest to us any opinion, for which he has not Scripture, spit in his
face, yea if an Angel from heaven (as the Apostle long since taught us) should
preach any Gal. 1. ^.
other Gospel (let him prate as much as he will of new lights) he is accursed.

3. Suffer not men in these times of light, to walk in darkness, compel them
to come in at least to an outward observance Bald cas. lib. 2. cap. 6 p. 104.
in horum locum adigantur ad sacra Christianorum i e. jubeantur templa ipsorum
i^gredi, Concionibus and precibus interesse, etc.
of ordinances. Some have doubted, though all are not of that opinion, whether
the Jews living in a Christian commonwealth, ought not to be forced to an
outward conformity; but that such as are Christians by profession should not by
the civil Magistrate be brought to ordinances, seems to be out of question. I
move not this as supposing an outward compliance sufficient to the completing
of a Christian, which is done in the work of grace upon the heart, however when
men come to, and live within the reach of the word solidly preached, they are
more like to be enlightened and converted. Bishop Latimer used to say, he would
have men come to the Church In his Sermon.
though to take a nap, it may be God would take them n^pping; who knows Gods
time of saving souls? We read of one in those bloody Marian times, who when the
Protestants had a M. Fox in the life of Q Mary.
meeting in Tems-street in London to hear a Sermon, came in with a purpose to
have informed the persecuting Bishop B^nner against them; he went away by that
Sermon converted, and became one of them. And who knows what God may do,
though men come to his word out of bie respects? We have many good and
wholesome laws made by former Parliaments to this very purpose; it were much to
be wished, they were revived and put in execution, that those mulcts and
punishments in them were inflicted: that so ungodly men might not dare with
that frequency and audaciousnesse to disfrequent the public places of Gods
worship (where the light is set up) under specious and colored pretenses, when
perhaps much worse employed to the corrupting their weak minds by seducers,
whose labor and ambition is to draw disciples after them and subvert unstable
souls.

4. Let it be your chief care (ever Honored Senators) to set up and maintain
this light of the Lord in all places of the Kingdom, there being thousands of
Parishes in England and Wales, which are miserably destitute of this light,
wanting able Preachers to hold it out to them; as Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmorland, the Bishopric, yea and a very great part of Yorkshire, who like
Pagans scarce know whether there be a God, a Christ, a holy Ghost or no. Take
therefore good King Jehoshaphat for an example, who sent Priests and Levites in
great plenty throughout all Judah, and they had the 2 Chronicles. 17 9.
Law of the Lord with them, and went about throughout the Cities of Judah, and
taught the people. He was careful to advance the light of the Lord, that his
subjects might not remain in darkness; and you see in the following part of
the story, how the Lord remembered him for it, and (says he) the fear of the
Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the land that were round about Judah, so
that they made no war against Jehoshaphat. And verily had more care (since
all the opportunities of advancing light from the beginning of these distracted
times, till now) been taken, had the people been taught by 2 Chronicles. 17. 11.
Phil. 2* 21.
Learned, Orthodox, Godly, discreet, painful Divines, in the dark corners of
this nation, where very little or no light shines; by Gods blessing we should
not have lost by that charge, Speed in the succession of Saxon Monarks. lib. 7.
cat 21. B^de hist Angl. lib. 3. cap. 3.
what ever covetous self-ended persons (who seek their own, not God or his
people) may suggest to the contrary. Famous Oswald King of Northumberland gave
testimony of his zeal for Gods glory, and love to his people in the same sort,
by setting up a light of truth in those very dark times, he sent for one Aiden
a Scottish Bishop (says Beda) to instruct his people, who not well
understanding nor pronouncing our language, was not so intelligible to the
hearers, the King himself therefore used to interpret his Sermons as the Bishop
preached. But it is not said that the King presumed to take on him the Preachers
office, he did not preach, only (which indeed was an excellency in him) he
interpreted to them the Preachers Sermons. He well apprehended how much it
concerned himself and Kingdom to advance the light of life, without which they
should all remain in darkness and irregularity. Which light of the Lord, that
it may be set up and become useful, I commend to your consideration four short
directions.

1. Be regardfull of the nurseries of good learning, that by the means of them
such students as shall de futuro be sent abroad, may be completed with
knowledge in languages, skilfullnesse Isa. 49. 23.
of arts and sciences, well read in story political and ecclesiastical, and
indeed accomplished in all good literature requisite to so high an imploiment,
that he may show himself a 2 Timothy 2^^ 5. Sir Hen. Sp^d. Tom. 1. Council. Britan.
1 Timothy 5 17* (...).
workman which needs not be ashamed; Let these Schools of the Prophets receive
their due revenues, and other encouragements which their pious founders and
benefactours vouchsafed them: Let no man have just cause to divert his childs
studies to secular imploiments, either for want of means, conveniences or
honor by which the minds of men are much invited to study. Let that other
sister which has no breasts be timely remembered, of which I may say, as King
James said in the star chamber King James his speech in star chamber.
to the Judges, in that of Paul's steeple, that in time may be done at a less,
which afterward cannot be at a greater charge.

2. See that the places of Gods worship be maintained; the neglect of which as
it gives occasion to our Roman adversaries to speak evil, so does it not pass
without suspicion amongst the vulgar sort, as if with the outward fabric and
structure your intention was to demolish worship and Religion it self. Truth
Ridley his view of the civil law. p. 19^.
is, the complaint now is no less just (and I hope free from Romish tincture)
then it was in King Alured his days, when in most places they were exceedingly
gone to wrack; I am confident you conceive me not to persuade to a popish
supe^sitions garnishing of Churches, walls, nor of a foolish opinion that
prayers are heard propter s^nctitatem loci, which yet was the Th. Aqui^.
fancy of some Schoolmen: but only that such places should be conveniently
repaired, and where they want, more built for receiving the people of God to
worship him, for neglect of which we are justly culpable, as they who did not
build the Temple of Jerusalem, a type of the Church, Gods people. So is it time
for us to mend our own houses demolished by war, and Hab. 1. 9.
shall these houses lie wast?

3. Let the Discipline of the Church, according to the word of God, best
reformed Churches and fundamentalls of our own Nation be established; it will
be a notable means to preserve the light, and to keep of such as endeavor
(like as they did that candle, Luther, in the beginning of the German
Reformation lighted) to blow it out. The goodness of God (says one in his
book wherein this controversy of Discipline is purposely and largely
discussed) has provided in his word a To this purpose M. Tham. Carthwright in
his cont. with Arch B. Whit-gist.
Discipline for his Church, which if he had not done, he should have been less
careful of it then of the commonwealth, of which in that regard he is not
unmindfull. Neither is this any other then you have covenanted, and was there
ever a Parliament as of more prayers, fastings, preachings, deliverances,
victories, so of more vows, covenants, leagues, and solemn protestations, with
eyes hands and all lift up to heaven, then this is: Well, of all sins, to
falsify Covenant is one of the greatest, Eccles. 5 5. D^ut 23. 21.
better not promise, then having vowed, not perform.

In your first Declaration there is this memorable passage. It is far from our
purpose or desire to let loose the golden reins of Discipline and government in
the Church, to leave private persons or particular congregations, to take up
what form of divine service they please, for we hold it requisite that there
should be through the whole realm a conformity to that order which the laws
enjoin according to the word of God. O that we had not started aside from this
like a deceitful bow, then surely had we wounded the hairy scalp of many
Church enemies, that break the bonds asunder and cast the cords away from them.
O that the husbandman had not slept, the enemy could not with that advantage
have sown so many ^ares of errors in Gods field. O that this guard were set,
so the foxes might be taken, even those little foxes which do spoil the vines
that are full of grapes.

4. Take order that such Divines as in several parts of the Kingdom have or
shall conscionably hold forth this light of truth in their charges respectively
to the edification of their people 1 Cor. ^. ^.
and not to yours or the Commonwealths disadvantage, be plentifully provided of
comfortable maintenance and due encouragement; Gal. 6. 6. Sir Ed. Cook in
second part of Just on Magna Charta. page 3, 4. So in the story of Lucius,
E^belbert Eghert. Alfred E^helwol^. Edgar Edward the confe^^our with diverse
others more in old Histories. Numb. 4. 14.
else how can you expect an exact performance of that trust of beating the
light you require from them, you may not muzzle the Ox that treads out the
corn. The labouror is worthy of his hire. He that is instructed must make him
that instructs him, partaker of all good things. Our forefathers brought
honor to God, happiness to the Church, to themselves a glorious name by their
foundations and contributions to the maintenance of his light. Oh let not us
grudge that the oil bestowed at their charge, should run in the same pipe to
keep in his lamp and not into our private cruses. You (Honorable) are the
repairers of our breaches in Church and state; You are the Physicians of the
body politic and ecclesiastic. We dare not prejudge you.

Of all injustice its the worst when men take wrongfully from Mala^ 3 8, 6. Dan
Ethic. Christ. 12 c 15. Princeps jure non potest res sacra^, and bona cu^t^
divino etiam in genere desti^^ra etiam ea quae ^ul^^i superstitioso forvi^^t in
^sum profanu^ transferere. Ke^h Syst Po^. l. 1 cap 21. sic polan. in Synt. and
in Dan 5. 4, 5. Isa. 50. 4.
the public charge of commonwealth, and that wrong done to the Church is a
sin greater then that which is against the commonwealth, the Church of the
two standing in a nearer relation to God, and to injure the Church, though it
be a very great sin under the law, as may appear by the expression in Malachy,
Will a man rob God? Ye have robbed me, even this whole na^ion: Yet is it more
heinous, if committed in the light of the glorious Gospel, by how much the
Gospels Ministry is more excellent then that of the law: which is the reason
why some learned and godly Divines have concluded it unlawful to alienate the
revenus of Gods worship, though given in superstitious times much of it, and
happily to some superstitious uses, but rather conceive it ought to be employed
to the service of God, encouraging of learning and godliness, which was the
main scope of the donours, though some of them might fail in particular, Circa
fundamental tenets. But certainly it must needs heighten the sin of those
who detain the revenue of the Church, under the specious show of lay-tenements.
In the mean while there is none to bear the light of truth before the people,
none to instruct them; the key of knowledge being wholly taken away, some aumb
dog is set over the flock of Christ for a mean salary, whereas they should be
instructed by one, as Isaiah says that has the tongue of the learned. And to
deprive the people of such tongues that we may enrich our selves with the
revenue that should maintain them, is a sin no less, if not much more,
culpable, then that of Achan, who stole a wedge, or as the Hebrew Qui causam
(...) ipsum dam^^n d^^isse vid^^ur Io^^ph ^^. de beno ^u^aic^o
has it, a tongue of gold, but in the end paid a rate dear enough for it, as
many of his successors have since done, and more (if timely repentance and
restitution prevent not) may buy the gold of the Temple at a high price. It
seems the very heathen, who had no other pilot then natures law, stood in fear
to run this hazard, of splitting themselves on this rock of sacrilege, and
so make shipwreck of a good conscience to Gen 47. 2^, Pu^^herri ^us igitur his
tex^s est ed nos non sequ^mur nec a ^^ittim^s in Germania, etc Phara b Rex
aegypti conju^get in judicio prox i^o and contra priacipes and magistra^us
Germany, propterea quod ille suos sacerdo^es coluit alu^t and abstieu it a
ho^is (...) ea ^u^^ssino contracta in su^^ pote^latem re^i gere patu^sset. Luth.
the loss of the soul, the most precious lading, which if once gone, is
irrecoverable. Do we not read of Pharaoh King of Egypt, in that great famine
mentioned by Moses, how that when all the people were necessitated to sell
their lands to make provision for themselves and families that they perished
not in the dearth, that he provided a portion for the Priests, that so their
lands might be preserved to the uses they were dedicated? He might with as much
ease, as little charge, have entered on the Priests possession, as the whole
land, and so have been sole Lord, that no man (as our great Landlords use to
say) should have a foot within his territories. No, he durst not enterprise it,
Wherefore the Priests land became not Pharaohs: He does not drive them (as some
have done) to an exigent that he might gain the more by them, he provides, to
prevent that mischief, portions, at his own charges for those who are disabled
by the penury of the times, to make provision for themselves. And in that
general seizure of all estates there is this clause of exception in the deed
concerning the Priests, to except before excepted, the land of the Priests
only, which became not Pharaohs. I know that some do endeavor to evade this
place alledgeing the Hebrew word, (...) Cohen signifies a Prince, and so take
it of the chief officers about the King; but Hieronymus. Chrysostomus. Seb
Munster. Ar. Montanus. Vatablus. Ant. Honcala. Leon Marius. Sel^eccerus. Stella.
the word signifies both Priest and Prince, and because in one person it sets
forth both, happily by one word, and the circumstances show a distinction betwixt
them and the rest of the land, which occasions the Learned generally to read it
as our Translatours have done. So the Chaldee, the Septuagint, Tostatus,
Pererius, Cornelius a Lapide, Mercerus, Calvin, Musculus, And all our English
Translatours I have met with.

Noble Senators, let it be your honor (as he said) to leave M. Lutherus. Luc.
Osiander. Ioh. Brentius. Dav. Paraeus. H. Ainsworth. Doway Bib. Hen 4. 0. Engl.
the Church in a richer condition then you found it, yea though in most places
it complains of poverty (it being torn and beggarly) endeavor to restore it;
it will be your comfort when you lie on your last pillow, if in this case you
can sincerely say to God, as Augustus of Rome repaired by him, inveni
lateritiam, reliqui marmoream. Remember that this light, the word, held forth
to the people is not maintained (since that extraordinary apostolical gifts
are ceased) without vast expense; those who are in this imploiment (that their
office may be more acceptable, graceful and profitable) have several lights,
none of them to be suffered to die, which they must maintain at great expense.

1. A light of knowledge in the study by books of all kinds 2 Timothy 2. 13.
Floreatissima Anglia, ocellas ille ecclesiarum peculium certismi gulare.
Deodatus.
of learning, that so they may be able Ministers rightly dividing the word in
truth; this (blessed be God) is one cause why the Divines of this land have
been so famous to the admiration of foreigners: whereas if this light be
extinct, there will be a want of the other light in knowledge and doctrine
also; as one, a great Scholar, long since observed: poor beggarly Ex tenuitat^
beneficiorum necessar^o sequitur ignorantia sacerd^tum. Panermit.
maintenance will have but a poor contemptible Ministry; Scandalous
maintenance, scandalous Ministry.

2. A light in the family: he must maintain those whose subsistence is from
him: which sometimes are exceeding many; if he should be deficient in providing
for them, you would condemn him worse then an infidel: It is a pretty
observation that one has, The Table of show bread (says he) was set in the
midst of the Temple to signify thus much, Quod Sacerdotes in Templo
servientes, de Templo victum habere debent. Is it not Aquin.
much to be lamented think you, that the oil in the first institution of it
appointed to preserve light to Gods people, is powered Indicandus est fur
s^erilegu^ qui ^as^ fuerit non uudequa. que tollere, sed de ecclesia tollere
Aug tr 50 in Joh
out to other purposes, Ye that are Lords and Burgesses of the Parliament
house, I require of you in the name of all my poor brethren that are English
men and members of Christ's body, that ye consider well (as ye will answer
before the face of Almighty God in the day of judgment) this abuse, and see it
amended. When as antichrist of Rome durst openly without any vizard, walk up
and down thorowout England, he had so great favor there, and his children had
such cra^ty wits (for the children of this world are wiser in their generation
then the children of light) that they had not only almost got ^ all the best
lands of England into their hands, but also the most part of all the best
benefices, both parsonages and vic^raged, which were for the most part all
impropred unto them. And when they had the gifts of any not impropered, they
gave them unto their friends, of the which always some were learned, for the
monks found of their friends children at school. And though they were not
learned, yet they kept hospitality, and helped their poor friends. And if the
personage were improprated, the monks were bound to deal alms to the poor, and
to keep hospitality, as the wri^ings of the gifts of such personages and lands
do planly declare in these words, in puram ele^^of^^om. And as touching the
^l^es that they deal and the hospitality that they kept, every man knows
that many thousands were well releeved of them, and might have been better, if
they had not had so many great men's horses to feed, and had not been
overcharged with such idle gentlemen, as were never out of the abbeys. And if
they had any vicarage in their hands, they set in sometime some sufficient
(...) (though it were but seldom) to preach and to teach. But now that all the
abbeys with their (...) goods and impropriated personages be in temporal men's
hands, I do not here tell, that one halfepenny worth of alms, or any other
profit comes unto the people of those parishes. Your pretense of putting down
abbeys, was to amend that was amiss in them. It was far amiss that a great
part of the lands of the abbeys (which were given to bring up learned men, that
might be Preachers to keep hospitality, and to give alms to the poor) should
be spent upon a few superstitious monks, which gave no^ forty pound in alms,
when they should have given two hundred. It was amiss that the monks should
have personages in their hands, and deal but the twentieth part thereof to the
poor, and preached but once in a year to them that paid the tithes of the
personages. It was amiss that they scarcely among twenty set not one
sufficient vicar to preach for the t^thes that they received. But see now, how
^t that was amiss, is amended for all the godly pretense. It is amended even
as the devil amended his dames leg (as it is in the proverb) when he should
have set it right, he br^ke it quite in peecet. The monks gave too little ^lm,
and set unable persons many times in their benefices. But now where twenty
pound was given yearly to the poor, in more then in a hundred places in
England, is not one meal^ m^^t given. This is a fa^^ amendment. Where they had
always one or other vicar, that tither preached or hired some to preach, now
is there no vicar at all, but the farme^ is vicar and parson altogether, and
only an old castaway monk or (...) which can scarcely say his mattens, is
(...) for twenty or thirty shillings meat and drink, yea in some places for
meat and drink alone without any wages.

I know, and not I alone, but twenty thousand more know more then five hundred
vicarages and parsonages, thus well and gospelly ferved, after the new Gospel
of England. And if a man say to the farmers, why have the people no preachers?
seeing ye have the tithes and offerings ye should find Preachers. They will
answer, we have hired the personages of this or that Lord, and he or he is
parson or vicar, we pay for the tithes and offerings to the Lord that is
person. Well then, I say unto thee my Lord, parson, and vicar, thou do
wrong, to have personages and vicarages, to have the tenth pig, the tenth lamb,
goose, fleece, and so of all other things, seeing that thou art no Minister nor
no priest of Christ's Church; teach, nor do any office of a parson or of a
vicar, but polle and pille. What can thou say of thy self my Lord parson and
vicar? thou will say peradventure, the King gave me the abbey and all that
belongs thereto, which had then given him by the Parliament, Therefore if
thou speak against my being person and vicar though I neither preach nor teach,
nor yet procure none to do it for me, thou art a traitor, for this the
thirteenth article of our creed added of late, that whatsoever the Parliament
does, must needs be well done, and the Parliament, or any proclamation out of
the Parliament time, cannot err. But to you my Lord parsons, how can ye defend
your selves if a man should bring this argument against you, and prove you all
the thieves, that have personages and vicarages in your hands, and cannot
preach. Christ says John 10. he that enters not into the sheepfold by the
door, but climbeth in an other way is a thief and a murderer, but ye entered in
an other way, wherefore ye are thieves and murderers. That you come not in by
the door, I will prove it thus, Christ is the door, but by Christ ye came not
into the sheepfold, that is, to be parsons and vicars, for ye grant that ye
came in by the act of Parliament, and the act of Parliament is not Christ, for
it is not confirmed by Christ's word, therefore ye came not by Christ, and so be
ye thieves and murderers, as your works proved of late, in shedding of the
blood of so many true preachers and shepherds, which spent their lives for
their sheep. If this argument be not strong enough, what say you by this? All
they that come before me (says Christ) are thieves and robbers, ye come into
the sheepfold, before Christ, ergo ye be thieves and robbers. To come in before
Christ, is to be a parson or a vicar before Christ send him* and ye came in
before Christ sent you, for he sends none to be sheepheards, but such as he
knows to be able to feed his flook, ergo he never sent you, for he knows
you unable to do that office. And thus to conclude, ye be thieves and robbers,
for a thief comes not but to steal and to kill. Wherefore give over your
parsonages to learned men, and enter not into other men's vocations, to rob the
Ministers both of their office and of their living, that ye be not punished of
God. But if ye will needs be parsons and vicars still, and have all the profits
of the parsonages, and will have all, even to the tithe egg of a poor woman
that has but two hens, ye must have the pains that belong to such persons as
you be. Hear what Almighty God says unto you, my Lords. which will be parsons
and pastors, Ezekiel ^3 If I say unto the wicked thou shall die the death, and
thou speak not unto him, to keep the wicked from his way, the wicked his own
self shall dye in his wickedness, but his blood shall I require of thy hand.
Mark well, Lord parson, for this is said to all them that are parsons, and take
wages, and living of the people, as tithes and offerings, for feeding of them
with Gods word, or else by what title can thou challenge the tithes? look
well upon this matter, and build thy conscience upon Gods word. The complaint
of Roderick Mors to the Parliament in Edw 6. time.


as former times have complained, lusts of men, yea the worst lusts of the
worst men that are enemies to God and the Church. In the mean time those and
their posterity, who attend on his light, whilst others have food enough and to
spare, are in hazard to perish with hunger.

3. A light in the town and country where they live: its a light of good
works, in showing mercy to the poor, being helpful to the needy, as Job says
of himself, he was eyes to the Job 29, 15. Job 31. 20
blind, feeet to the lame; this would have covered them, to the credit of
Religion, inciting others to the like, he did not put his light under a
bushel, So (praised be God) in this nation, where the revenues of the Church
were great (though some did spend much in vanity and excessive courses as the
profuse vulgar) all did not so: much has been given by Divines to Colleges,
Hospitalls, Libraries and other pious works. And indeed D. Willet, the end of
his Synopsis.
Scholars best knowing to set a price on learning, have been most beneficial
this way.

The Apostles exhortation to Ministers is that they be given to hospitality.
Surely then they must have ability else they should 1 Timothy 3. 2.
stand in need of other men's hospitality, be fitter to receive then give, as
God knows it is the case of many a learned, godly and painful Divine at this
day (as sometimes it was the condition of learned men, beware the fears where
Church revenues Musculus. Io. Drusius. Amesius. H. Ainsworth. John Knox. August
3. 1571.
are devoured) who have great charges of children and nothing wherewith to
bring them up, or place them out, while the ancient Church-revenue is in the
hands of many that worse deserve it. This made the mighty godly Divine of
Scotland (as I am informed) lying on his death bed (and the words of The mighty
spirit of comfort wisdom and concord remain with you Dear brethren, if
ability of body would have suffered, I should not have troubled you with this
my indictment. I have not forgot that was laid to my charge by famous libels
the last Assembly, which I pray you patiently to hear, and judge of me as you
will answer to God: for unto you that hear I submit my self, being assured that
I neither offended God nor good men in any thing that hitherto has been laid
to my charge. And now, brethren, because the daily decay of natural strength
threatens unto me certain and sudden departing from the misery of this life, of
love and conscience I exhort you, yea in the fear of God I charge and command
you, that ye take heed to your selves and to the flock over the which God has
placed you Pastors. To discourse of the behavior of your selves I may not,
but to command you to be faithful to the flock I dare not forget Unfaithful
and traitors to the flock shall you be before the Lord Jesus, if that with
your consent, directly or indirectly ye suffer unworthy men to be thrust into
the Ministry of the Church, under what preten^e that ever it be. Remember the
judge before whom you must make an account, and resist that tyranny as you
would avoid hell fire; this battle I grant will be hard, but the second part
will be harder, that is, that with the like uprightness and strength in God,
ye gain-stand the merciless devourers of the patrimony of the Church: if men
will spoil, let them do it at their own peril and condemnation, but
communicate not ye with their sins of whatsoever estate they be, neither by
consent, nor yet by silence; but with public protestation, make this known to
the world, that ye are innocent of such robberies, which will, ere it be long,
provoke Gods vengeance upon the committers thereof, whereof you will seek
redress of God and man* God give you wisdom, strength and courage in so just
a cause, and me a happy end. Of St Andrews, Aug 3. 1571. sic subscribitur, Your
brother in Christ Jesus, Knox.
dying men should make a deeper impression) so earnest in his exhortatory
letter writ from St Andrews to the Assembly at Sterling. There are two branches
of his exhortation, one to keep out of the Church scandalous Ministers, the
other to prevent a scandalous maintenance.

Noble Patriots, as it belonged to Eliazer to provide oil for Isa. 49. 23.
Magni rege ac principes non solum Christi jugum subierunt, sed etiam facultates
suas contu^erunt ad erigendam and fovendam Christi Ecclesiam ut se patronos and
tutores ejus praestarent. Call. in loc.
the lights of the Temple, so to you it appertains, as nurserers of the Church,
to see that these lights of the Church have oil to feed them as Hezekiah did, 2 Chronicles. 31 4. I can present you with no arguments more constringent then those
in the text before you.

1. You have many privileges, God expects this as a testimony of
thankfulness. Those who gain by sea-trade are not unwilling to be at the
charge of land-light. The children of light should be as wise as the men of the
world.

2. You are reformers in Israel, this is one special point of your work, to
see that Gods house be not as a dark room, the light removed.

3. You know that Religion is not in show, but in deed, it is A brief repetition
of the heads of the Sermon. James 2. 16.
not sufficient to say as those St James mentions, go and be warmed, unless
also you make provision for them.

4. It Is the Lords light that affords direction to your souls for the obtaining
eternal light, which by how much the more excellent it is then that under the
law, so much the more liberal we should be in providing for it, as that famous
servant of God long since taught us, with whose words B. Babington on Genesis 47
7. except the land of the Priests. page 146.
I shall crave leave to close this imploiment.

Had the Priests of the law the tenth part, and shall not the Ministers of a
better testament have any part? Such maintenance will have such Ministers in
time out of question, to the utter decay of learning piety and Religion, and to
the bringing of all barbarism and error as Satan wishes. Worthy is the
virtue of Nehemiah touching this matter, everlasting remembrance and imitation
of them that have like authority and fear God; he finding that the Priest
Eliashib Nehem 13. 14.
(who had the oversight of what belonged to the maintenance of the Priests,
being joined in affinity with Tobiah the Ammonite, an enemy of the Jews, the
portions of the Levites were not given them, but every man was fled to shift
for himself amongst his friends) most zealously reformed it as you may see;
threw out Tobias vessels, thrust out Eliashib, and placed them that were
accounted faithful, and brought the tithes of corn and wine and oil into the
house of the Lord: again mark the state of our times, and see if such Tobias be
not yet amongst us, and such Eliashibs, who dealing in all unrighteousness,
convey the portions of the Levites by little and little from the Church that
all may come to ruin and utter confusion in time. They must have the tithe
corn and gleab land, peradventure the house also for a dairy, and then cosen
Eliashib the Minister shall have the tithe geese, and the eggs at Easter: But
shall not God visit this great impiety? O Lord, O Lord, in mercy forgive the
sins of the land, and the iniquity of thy people deserving justly the loss
of thy word and sweet liberty of their consciences, and yet, yet show favor,
for thy mercy raise up men that are able to feed thy people as they ought, and
either convert or confound Church-robbers that savor nothing but their own
gain, that take thus daily away the reward of knowledge, endeavor the death of
thousand thousands of souls, which thou have created. Stir up Nehemiah thy
faithful servant to redress this sin, and to settle things carnal as shall
be fit for them that sow spiritual, that God be not mocked: So we that be thy
people and the sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee praise for ever, for so
great a mercy.

Amen, Amen.

