Aedes Christi in Academia Oxoniensi
blazon of Christ Church, Oxford surmounted by red cardinal's hat and tassels
(originally that of Cardinal Thomas Wolsey) blazon surmounted by bishop's miter

WE do Allow the Printing and Publishing of this Book, Entitled, An Assistance
to Justices of the Peace, for the Easier Performance of their Duty. By Jos.
Keble of Grays Inn, Esquire

Fr. Pemberton Fra. North. W. Mountagu. Hugh Wyndham Tho. Jones. W. Dolbin.
Tho. Raymond. Edw. Atkins. VV. Gregory. J. Charlton. Creswell Levinz. T.
Street.


AN ASSISTANCE TO Justices of the Peace, FOR THE EASIER PERFORMANCE OF THEIR
DUTY.

By JOS. KEBLE, of Grays Inn, Esquire

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, S. Roycroft, and H. Sawbridge Assigns of
Richard and Edward Atkins Esquire

For Samuel Keble at the Turks Head over against Fetter Lane End in
Fleet Street. MDCLXXXIII.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
GOOD and Lawful men was the Character of those first assigned to Keep the
Peace in every County, 1 Ed. 3. c. 16. and by 4 Ed. 3. c. 2.. 1. N. 3. And to
this day that Phrase does most properly show, the Intendment of this
Commission, was either to find, or to make men such; for before this time,
Sheriffs, and Leets, and other particular Franchices, had so divided this
Jurisdiction, that it is a hard Question, Whether it were more difficult to
procure a Beneficial Law of Public Good to be made, or to be put in Execution,
neither of which could then be done without much Self-denial: wherefore they
who say the former days were better than these, have doubtless not rightly
considered this matter; for as uncertain as our Laws yet seem to be, I have not
yet read of any more certain, tho I have used some endeavors of Comparison,
Chiefly with the Roman Civil Laws, whereof in such as are of General Reason
different from ours, as in Villinage, Bastardy, Discents, Tenures, Customs,
Aprentices, Judicatures, Marriage, Stews, and many other particulars they are,
our Legislators have ever preferred the Reason of our own Laws before them, and
indeed they are in the main point of Government, rather Flatterers of Power,
than Maintainers of Justice: Whereas ours have ever been Intent upon Public
Good, as appears in many particular Laws for the due preservation of the Peace,
the Management and Care whereof is placed in such men in every County, that may
be able to hinder the Oppressions of the Great, and the Insurrections and
Disturbances of the Poor, almost Habitually practiced before this Statute; for
whose Service I have endeavored this present Assistance: Wherein, First are
placed such Clauses of the last Edition of the Statutes in Paragraphs or
Sections and Numbers that give to the Justices any express power to Act; some
of which alone are only mentioned in the end of Lambert, and the last Edition
of Dalton, but here fully: So that the Justice need only look the Statute Book
to see whether it be in Force or not. But the nature and limits of his Power
appears in each Clause, and is generally pointed to in a Marginal Note of the
Matter, whereby Justices may soon discern the Circumspection of their Duty, and
what it is that is required of them, with the manner of it. After which
Foundation laid, it will be necessary, 2. To consider the Nature and Extent of
their Commission, wherein there will some difficulties arise, as well from the
Commands of Superiors, as from the Irregular Motions of Inferiors; and
therefore for the better understanding of this Commission in tit. Justices, I
have divided that also by Paragraphs or Sections and Numbers for easier
Intendment of, or reference to any part of it; the due consideration whereof,
will something facilitate the work, whether in Sessions or out of Sessions. And
Thirdly, that doubts about particular matters may at least be lessened, if not
resolved, I have added such Heads of Common Place as seemed convenient, wherein
the former Treatices about Justices of Peace are mostly reduced to the proper
Authors, or at least the Statutes (they mention only in General) are more
particularly Cited, whereby any Justice of Peace may by help of a Statute Book,
be able to make a much readier Judgment than before; and he that desires fuller
satisfaction, must take more pains to search the Tables, Abridgements, and
other Books of Law, not so fit here to be inserted; for I have only aimed at
what more immediately refers to Keeping of the Peace, not at the particular
nature and Extent of the Head or Common Place it self: and in each Citation,
Clause, and Reference, I have added in the Margent, a Notice or Head of the
matter thereof, and this being but as a Table or Common Place it self, I think
needs no other Table to it. And therefore in the Fourth Place, I have only made
a Recapitulation or Recital of the lesser and larger Heads as they refer each
to other, or rather as they may be referred each to other. And in the last
place, I have acquainted you with the manner of my Quotations, which are thus,
Lambt. Lamberts Irenarcha. Crompt. J. P. Crompton's Justice of Peace. Crompt.
J. Cromptons Jurisdiction. Dalt. Daltons Office of Justice, Edit. 1630. Boult.
Boultons Justice of Peace of Ireland. Lambt. Precedts. Lamberts Precedents.
Lambt. Constable Lamberts Office and Duty of a Constable The Laws etc. The Laws,
etc.against Jesuits, Recusants, etc. By Mr. Cawley Abr. The Abridgement
thereof, placito 1. Pract. Preced. The practick part of the Office of a Justice
Anonym. Kilb. Kilbourns Precedents. West. Symb. Wests Symboleography or
Precedents. Poult. Poulton de Pace Regis and Regni Stanff. Stanffords Pleas of
the Crown


In the rest there will not be much difficulty, and therefore I thus leave it
to your Perusal and Censure.

Grays Inn, Nov. 15. 1682. Jos. Keble.

A TABLE FOR THE Ready finding the PRESIDENTS contained in Keble's Justice of
Peace. * Note that such Presidents as are not under their proper Heads, may be
found under the Titles Indictments, Warrants and Mittimus.
Alehouse-keepers.
REcognizance for keeping good rule in Alehouses, etc. Page 151, 152 License to
sell Ale Page 159 to keep an Alehouse Page 160 to Brew and keep an Alehouse
Page 160 Warrant to Convent all Victuallers, etc. to put in Sureties for
observing Fish-days ibid. for Alehouse-keepers to renew their Recognizances
Page 161 for the suppressing an Alehouse ibid. to levy money forfeited by
Alehouse-haunters ib. to levy the Forfeiture for not selling a Quart of the
best Beer for a penny Page 162 for one who keeps an Alehouse without License
ibid. for an Innkeeper, etc. selling under measure ib. to levy the Forfeiture
for not paying the Excise Page 683
Mittimus to send to the Gaol an Alehouse-keeper, who Victual. contrary to
Commandment Page 162 Warrant to levy the penalty for being Drunk Page 163
Indictment for keeping an Alehouse, etc. Page 163 for selling Ale in Kilderkins
Page 164 for keeping an Alehouse or Victualling-house Page 164 against a Tipler
on 33 Hen. 8. 9. for keeping a Bowling-Alley Page 165 of Misrule Page 165 of
Disorders ibid. for keeping a disorderly Alehouse ibid. against a common
Drunkard ibid.

Apprentices, Servants, Laborers, etc.
Testimonial for a Servant, etc. departing from his Master Page 168 Warrant for
a fugitive Servant Page 175, 176 ad capiend' serv' qui recessit ante finem
termini Page 167 ad deliberandum servientem extra Geolam ibid. versus
servientem recessum de villa ubi moribatur in hyeme. Page 177 ad deliberand'
prisonar' capt' pro transgr' tangent' Statutam de Servient'. ibid.
Mittimus to the House of Correction for disorderly Servants, or other idle
persons ibid. Warrant for a Servant which departs from his Master Page 178 for
paying of Wages Page 179 against a Master for abusing his Apprentice Page 179
for discharge of a Servant within the time Page 179 against a disorderly
Apprentice Page 180 Discharge of an Apprentice Page 180 for sending a Servant
to his service Page 181 to levy 40 s. on the Master for putting away his
Servant before the end of his term ibid. for relief of a man Servant that is
out of service Page 181
Indentures for Apprentices Page 178 Indictment for using the Art of a Mercer
against 5 Eliz. 4. Page 179 of petty Treason against a Servant Page 180 against
a Servant for Stealing Page 181 upon Stat. 21. H. 8. c. 7. etc. 5 Eliz. c. 10.
Page 182 for using more Arts than one Page 182 for using Trade not being
Apprentice Page Page 183 for procuring a Servant to depart Page 183 for petty
Treason in a Servant, and Felony in the Procurers thereof Page 247 for Stealing
his Masters Goods committed to his keeping Page 253

Bail.
The Form of Baylement Page 191 Recognizance of Bail Page 191 Condition for
Felony, or suspicion of Felony Page 192
Bastardy and Bawdery.
Warrant for the reputed Father of a Bastard-Child Page 198 where a
Maidservant is got with child, and from thence sent to her place of birth Page
199
Mittimus to the Gaol, of the reputed father of a Bastard-child ibid. Mittimus
to the House of Correction, for one that runs away, leaving her charge to
the Town ibid. Mittimus to the House of Correction of the Mother of a
Bastard-child ibid. Another Page 200
Indictment for Murder of a Bastard-child, against the Mother and Midwife as
principally, and against the reputed father as accessory before, and against
others as accessory afterward Page 247 Condition for the reputed Father of a
Bastard-child Page 200 An Order for a reputed Father of a Bastard-child to
discharge the Town Page 200, 201 An Indictment for keeping a Bawdy House Page
202 An Order for relief of the Parish touching a Bastard-child Page 202, 203
Certiorari.
A Certiorari to remove into Chancery an Indictment of a Riot, taken before
Justices of the Peace in the County, with the return Page 210 A Writ out of
Chancery to certify a Recognizance that is taken by a Justice in the Country
for Conservation of the Peace Page 211
Church. ( See Popery.)
Indictment for Burglary in the Church in the nightime, and taking a
Communion Cup Page 215 Burglary or Sacrilege for taking away two
Communion-Cups ibid. for drawing a Dagger in the Churchyard with intent to
strike ibid. for fighting in the Churchyard with a weapon ibid. for omitting
the words signing with the Cross in Baptism Page 642 Another ibid. for
Blasphemy Page 243
Presentment for Sacriledg or Robbery in a Church, and taking two Communion
Cups, etc. Page 215 Warrant against an Incumbent for not Officiating Page 628
Record of a Conventicle Page 629 Warrant to levy the penalty on the Teacher in
a Conventicle Page 630\ for Witnesses to prove a Conventicle ibid.
A Certificate where the Offenders live in Corporations Page 631 Warrant to
levy the Money on the offenders Page 633 Condition of a Recognizance in case of
Appeal made touching Conventicles ibid. Warrant to levy the money on the
offenders Page 634 Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle Page 636 Mittimus
thereupon Page 637 upon the second and third offense ibid. Page 638
Certificate to the Militia for aid Page 638
Force-Entry, Riot, etc.
The Record of a Force Page 284 The Form of a Mittimus to the Jailer upon the
Force ibid. The Precept to the Sheriff in nature of a Venire Facias Page 286
The Inquiry or Verdict of the Jurors ibid. The Warrant to the Sheriff for
making restitution, if the Justice himself will not make it Page 287 Writ of
restitution granted by Justices of Assizes Page 290 Precept to the Sheriff for
enquiry upon a Riot Page 258 An Entry of the Presentment or Enquiry ibid.
Traverse taken in a Town-corporate Page 660 Indictment upon a Rebellious
Assembly Page 663 for a Riotous fray at the Sessions Page 664 for a Riot and a
Rout Page 665, 666

Forest, Chaces, Parks, Deer, Hunting, etc.
Indictment for Hunting by Night in a Park, and for concealing the same Page
296 for Hunting Conies Page 297 for unlawful Hunting in another Park ibid. for
Hunting in a Park, and using a Net Page 299
Warrant to levy 20 l. for stealing Deer Page 297, 298 to the House of
Correction against a person not able to pay Page 298 to search for
Setting-dogs, Guns, Greyhounds, etc. Page 299
Mittimus to the Common Gaol for want of Distress Page 298
Forgery.
Indictment of Forging a Bargain and Sale on 5 Eliz. 14. Page 301 of
Counterfeiting Letters-Pattents of Protection Page 302

Good-Behaviour.
A Writ for the binding to the good-Behaviour Page 316 Precept of the Good
Behavior Page 319 Recognizance and Condition Page 319, 320, 321 Supersedeas of
the Good Behavior Page 320
Highways.
A License to dig in another Parish Page 703 An Order what damages to pay ibid.
Warrant against Surveyors for not accounting ibid. for not paying over what is
due on account Page 704 to collect the Tax for repairing Country-Bridges Page
705 for not paying the same Tax collect. for Br. Page 706
Indict. for enclosing a Common Highway ibid. Presentment for a Bridge in
decay ibid.
Hue and Cry.
Hue and Cry Page 310 Indictment of a Constable for not prosecuting the Hue and
Cry Page 311 Examination of a person praying an Hue and Cry Page 310
Justices.
The Form of the Commission of the Peace for each County Page 339 The Oath of
Office of a Justice of Peace Page 342 A Precept to summon the G. Sessions of
Peace Page 357 The Style of the Sessions Page 362 The Form of a Precept for a
Special Sessions Page 372 Dedimus out of Chancery to swear a Justice, with the
Return Page 402 Where there must be ^. 2. 3. 4. 6 344.
Indictments.
Indictment against the Stealer of a Horse, and his Accessory after Page 142
against the Stealer of a Cow, and his Accessory before Page 142 pro Icendio
Domus with an Accessory before and after 143. For receiving, aiding, and
comforting a Felon, knowing him to have done a Felony Page 143 For stealing of
four Oxen, and of the Accessory before and after ibid. for procuring Burglary,
etc. ibid. For an Affray made at the time of the Assiz. Page 150 For an Affray
and beating at the Assizes Page 151 For breaking a safe Conduct granted by the
King 162. For taking away a Woman with her Husbands Goods Page 194 For Marrying
two Wives Page 194 For Enclosing of a Common Page 217 For killing a man by
Witchcraft Page 220 For Bewitching a Horse ibid. For conspir. to indict one for
steal. a Horse Page 221 For a conspiracy of diverse Bakers touching making
Bread, etc. Page 222, and 237 Against a Constable for neglecting to execute a
Justices Warrant Page 233 For not Watching with a Constable Page 234 For
breaking a Barn, and taking Corn Page 236 For breaking a Mill Page 236 For
murder of a Child with accessaries, etc. Page 247 For wilful Poisoning in a
Potion Page 248 For murder by poisoning wherein the Statute is recited ibid.
for petty-Treason against a Wife for poisoning her Husb. 249. For Murder
committed by two ibi. For killing a Man by chance-medly Page 250 For Murder ex
malitia prepensa Fact. ibid. For Murder the Murderers flying ibid. For Murder
Page 250, 251 Against one for suffocating a Man Page 251 For pulling out a Man's
Eyes Page 251 For burning a House Page 262 for Burglary Page 252 for a Robbery
on the Highway Page 252 for the taking a Purse privately from a pers. Page 253
against the Stealer of a Horse, and his accessory after, ibid. For Cozening of
Clothiers Page 259 of a Priest for keeping a Concubine Page 261 of a Spiritual
person for buying and selling ibid. for not wearing a Surplice ibid. of
Embracery and taking Money Page 264, 265 against a Jailer for suffering of one
committed to him upon suspicion of Felony to escape Page 267 against a Jailer
for suffering a Woman committed on suspicion of Felony and Murder, etc. ibid.
against diverse for suffering one which had confessed a Felony before a Justice
of Peace, and delivered to them by the same Justice to be by them conveyed to
the Goal, negligently to escape Page 268, 269 against two for suffering a Felon
suspected wilfully to escape Page 269 against a Jailer for letting one
committed on suspicion of Felony to escape out of Prison ibid. against those
that negligently permitted a Felon to escape Page 270 of escape, or commitment
for contempt Page 270, 271 for a Rescue ibid. for Extortion against a Coroner
Page 276 for Extortion against an Escheators Servant Page 277 for Extort.
against a Regist. in the Spir. Court Page 277 for Fishing in a Mill-pond Page
279 in Trespass in Fish-growth ibid. for taking Phesants and Partridges with
nets ibid. for not keeping watch in a Town Page 308 for not keeping watch at
Seaside Page 308. Against Inhabitants for not answering a Rob. Page 309 for
keeping unlawful play and playing, etc. Page 314 for converting Tillage into
Pasture, and Decaying Houses of Husbandry Page 325, 326 for a wilful Rescuing
of one Imprisoned in the Stocks for Felony Page 329 for Breaking of Prison
ibid. for Maintenance in an Assize Page 382 for Maintenance in an Assize of
fresh force ib. for giving a Livery ibid. for receiving and using a Livery Page
383, 385 of Maintenance in a formedon in discendre contra 20 Ed. 3. etc. ibid.
Page 384. for Maintenance in Debt, on 32 H. 8. c. 9. ibid. of Champerty. Page
386 for regrating Corn in a Market Page 390, 391 for engrossing Corn to sell it
again Page 391 for Regrating of Fish, Butter, etc. Page 391 against a Goldsmith
Page 394 for Counterfeiting Money Page 399 for acknowledging a Recognizance of
the name of another without his privity Page 401 of a Common Barrator Page 428
for words spoken against the Queen Page 671 for slandering of a Nobleman ibid.
for words of the Queen ibid. of hearing words of one and not publishing of them
to the Sheriff Page 672 for slandering of a Jury ibid. for Libelling of a
Justice of Peace ibid. for Usury Page 695 for a Common Bridge that is in decay
Page 699 for not working upon the High ways ibid. Page 700 for repairing the
Pavement of a Highway, which ought to be repaired by a Bishop ibid. against a
Bishop and Churchwardens for not repairing a Broken Bridge ibid. for stoping
and enclosing the Kings Highw. Page 701 for not choosing Surveyors of the
Highways ibid. for not paying a Tax for the Highways ibid. for not sending in
Teames Page 702 for not working on the Highways Page 702 for shooting Hailshot
in a Hand-Gun Page 711 for not keeping of a Light Horse ibid. for a Rape of a
Woman-child under ten years of age Page 718 for the Rape of a Maid of above 10
years old ib. for taking away a Widow against her will that has Lands ibid.
for a Rape on 3 Ed. 1. Page 719

Laborers. ( See Apprentices.) Mittimus s.
Mittimus for Felony after Examination taken Page 330 for such as take up
Uncustomed Goods Page 387, 388 for refusing the Oath of Allegiance Page 404 for
one that Impresses a Cart, etc. under pretense of power from the Green-Cloth
for Carriage of his Majesty's Provisions, not having lawful authority to do the
same Page 607 for disturbing a Collector of Chimny-mony Page 682 where there is
not sufficient to pay Excise Page 685 for unlawful shooting in a Cross-bow, or
Hand-Gun. Page 709

Oaths.
Oath of a Constable Page 404 Oath of an Undersheriff and Bailiffs touching
Juries Page 405 Oath of him that craves the Peace Page 404, 414 Oath to
Informers or Witnesses Page 404 Oath of Churchwardens Page 405 Oath of a High
Constable Page 405 Oath of a Commissioner of Sewers Page 667 Oath of an
Excise-man certified Page 685
(Peace.) Surety of the Peace, etc.
Writ de Securitate Pacis in Chancery Page 409, 410 Certiorari Page 411 Warrant
or Precept for the Peace Page 414 Recognizances for the Peace Page 420, 421,
611, 612 Condition to keep the Peace. Schedule, etc. Page 422 Rel. of the
Justice, and release of the party Page 423, 614 The usual Recogniz. for the
Good Behavior Page 615 Recognizance with a Condition to be entered into by one
that informs against a Felon Page 616 The Form of a Return of a Writ touching a
Riot into Chancery Page 648 Record of a Riot by the Justices and Sheriff Page
655 A Supersedeas of the Peace Page 674, 677, 678, 679, 680, 681
Poor.
War. for Overseers to give up their Accounts Page 520 to new Overseers to
take their Charge ibid to put poor Children out Prentices Page 522 Against them
that refuse Apprentices ibid. to remove one come to a Parish Page 524, 525
against one for not returning Page 525 for apprehending one for returning to
the Parish from which he was removed ibid. and Mittimus for one who runs away
and leaves his family upon the Parish Page 526 To Distrain for the Poors Tax or
Rate Page 526, 528
Mittimus where there is not sufficient to Distr. Page 527 Warrant to allow
poor Prisoners relief Page 528 to make general search for a Rogue or Vagab.
Page 529
Presentment of a Rogue or Vagabond ibid. Warrants for a general search for
Rogues Page 530 for apprehending and committing a dangerous Rogue Page 531 to
pay 2 s. for apprehending a Rogue Page 533 for non-payment Page 533, 534 to
send a Wife and Child to her Husband Page 535 Testimonial or passport for a
poor man to travel 531. For such as have suffered Shipwreck Page 531 for a
Vagrant where the place of his Birth is not known Page 533 the like where
neither the place of his Birth, nor last abode is known ibid.
Mittimus to the house of Correction of a dangerous Rogue Page 532 Another
ibid. to the house of Correction of Rogues apprehended by the Watch Page 531
Certificate for allowance to the Wife or Orphan of a maimed Soldier Page 532
of apprehending a Vagrant in the Confines of another County Page 534
Indict. against a Rogue, a Vagabond, and against him which lodges and
relieveth him Page 543 against Vagrants selling Linen Cloth ibid. for
Maintenance of Inmates Page 544

Popery. ( See Church.)
A Commission in the County Middlesex for Administering the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy to Popish Recusants, or so reputed Page 545 Oath of Abjuration 35
Eliz. Page 560, 559 License for a Recusant to Travel Page 582 Presentment for
absolving from the Kings Obedience Page 582 for a Jesuit and his Retainers Page
583 for saying and hearing Mass Page 583, 625 for being absent from Church Page
625, 641 for Celebrating private Mass Page 626
Indict. for extolling the Authority of the Pope Page 582 for keeping a Servant
that goes not to Chapter Page 585
Certificate for receiving the Sacrament, and taking the Oath 25 Car. 2. Page
584 of receiving the Sacram. according to 25 C. 2. ibi.
Testimonial upon Receiving ibid. Warrant for not coming to Church. Page 627 to
levy the forfeiture for not coming to Chur. ib.
Mittimus to the Gaol of one not repairing to Church for want of a Distress
ibid.
Passes. ( See Poor. Presentiments. ( See Popery.)
Presentment for breaking and burning a Barn with Corn 236. Of a Rogue or
Vagabond 529. For unlawful Purveyance Page 606 Process upon Indictments of
Trespass Page 596
Rogues. See Poor. Servants. See Apprentices. Testimonial, See Poor. Vagrants,
See Poor. Warrants.
Warrant for the making a new Constable Page 233 for bringing forth Corn in
time of Dearth Page 236 for forfeitures on several Statutes Page 254, 255
against a Butcher for killing meat on Sundays ib. to Parish-officers for their
negligence in suffering the Lord's Day to be profaned by gaming, etc. Page 256
for committing several persons upon a Force, with a Record of the Force Page
284 to search for Nets and setting-Dogs Page 304 against those that abuse the
Officers, etc. Page 387 against taking Uncustomed Goods ibid. on complaint
touching Coals Page 397 for delivering a moiety of Coals forfeit Page 398 to
pay 1 s. for Swearing in the presence of a Just. of Peace 404. For providing
Carriages for the King, etc. 607. To levy the penalty for not appearing with
Carriages for the K. upon notice Page 607, 609 for Rates for Lodging, and
Horsemeat Page 608 for levying the penalty forfeited, for not observing the
Rates aforesaid ibid. for the levying the forfeiture for not paying the Excise
by Alehouse-keepers and Brewers Page 683 for not Entering the Duty of Excise
ibid. for not fuffering to Gage the Vessels Page 684 for loss of Allowance for
making false Ent. ibid. upon complaint of a false Entry 685. Against one for 10
l. for bribing, etc. Excise-Officer Page 685
Mittim. against the offender for not paying it Page 686 Warrant to Distrain
for the Duty of Excise ibid. for a Rate charged on the Hund. for a Rob. Page 690

Wood.
Warrant to search for stolen Wood Page 713 A general Warrant to search for
stolen Wood Page 714 An Order against a person apprehended with bundles, etc. of
Wood, etc. to make satisfaction, etc. for the same to the owner, the 1st
offense Page 714 Warrant for not obeying the Justices Order Page 715 Mittimus
to the House of Correction for the second like offense Page 716 Order against
the buyer of stolen Wood ibid. Warrant to levy money on the buyer of stolen Wood
ibid. -- Mittimus against the buyer of stolen Wood for want of Distress Page 717
London, Printed for Tho. Dring at the Harrow, Charles Harper at the Flower de
luce, and Sam. Keble at the Turks-Head; all in Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXIX.

THE PARTICULAR CLAUSES OF STATUTES OF THE Order and Introduction of the Power
of keeping the PEACE.
Statuta H. 3.
Leet.
THE View of Frank-pledges shall be so done that our Peace may be kept. Crompt
J. p. 7. 9 H. 3. 35. 1. N. 4.


Distress.
And if one Neighbor do so to another (viz. drive distress out of the County)
of his own Authority and without Judgment, he shall make Fine, 52 H. 3. 4. 1.
N. 2.
etc. As for a thing done against the Peace.

Statuta Ed. 1.
Justice.
FIrst the King wills and Commands that the Peace of holy Church and of the
Land be well kept and maintained in all points, 3 Ed. 1. 1.
and that common right be done to all as well poor as rich without respect of
persons.

Able.
And they that have done the trespass (viz. lodged in Religious Houses) shall be
likewise punished etc. and if none will sue, 1. N. 11.
the King will have the suit as for thing Committed against his Commandment and
against his Peace.

Election.
The King Commands upon great Forfeiture that no man by force of Arms, Cap. 5.
nor by malice or menaceing shall disturb any to make free Election.

Fresh suit.
And forasmuch as the Peace of this realm has been evil observed heretofore
for lack of Quick and fresh suit making after Felons in due manner, Cap. 9.
and namely because of Franchises where Felons are received etc.

Bail.
It is provided, etc. that such Prisoners as before were outlawed, Ca. 15. 1. N.
3.
and they which have abjured the Realm, Provers and such as be taken with the
manner, and those which have broken the Kings Prison, Thieves openly defamed,
and known, and such as be appealed by Provers so long as the Provers be living,
if they be not of good fame, and such as be taken for House breaking
Feloniously done, or for false money, or for Counterfeiting the Kings Seal, or
Persons Excommunicate taken at the request of the Bishop, or for manifest
offenses, or for Treason touching the King himself, shall be in no wise
replevisable by the Common Writ nor without Writ. 1. N. 4.


Bail.
But such as be Indicted of Larcency by Enquests taken before Sheriffs or
Baylifs by their office or of light suspicion, or for pety Larceny that
amounts not above the value of twelve pence, if they were not guilty of some
other Larceny aforetime, or guilty of receipt of Felons, or of Commandment, or
Force, or of aid in Felony done, or guilty of some other Trespass for which one
ought not to lose Life or Member: and a man appealed by a Prover after the
death of the Prover (if he be no common Theif, nor defamed) shall from
henceforth be let out, by sufficient Surety, whereof the Sheriff will be
Answerable, and that without giving ought of their Goods.

Cap. 18.
Forasmuch as the Common Fine and Amercement of the whole County in Eyr of the
Justices for false Judgments or other Trespass is unjustly Assest by Sheriffs,
and Barretors in the Shires, Amercement.
so that the sum is many times increased, and the Parcels otherwise Assessed
then they ought to be, to the Damage of the People, which be many times paid
to the Sheriffs and Barretors that cannot acquit them etc.

Cap. 33. (32.)
It is Provided, that no Sheriff shall suffer any Barretors, Peace.
or Maintainers of Quarrels in the Shire, neither Stewards of great Lords, nor
others (unless he be the Attorney for his Lord) to make Suit, or to give
Judgments in the Counties, nor to pronounce the Judgments, if he be not
specially required and prayed, of all the Suitors, and Attorneys of the Suitors
which shall be at the Court.

4 E. 1. St. 2. p. 28. 1. N. 3. de off. Coronat.
A Coroner also ought to enquire of Treasure that is found, Coron.
who were the Finders, and likewise who is suspected thereof, and that it may
be well perceived where one lives Riotously, haunting of Taverns, and has
done so of long time; hereupon he may be Attatched for this Suspicion, by four,
or six, or more Pledges if he may be found.

7 E. 1. p. 33. Of Armor.
And now in our next Parliament at Westminster, after the said Treaties, War.
viz. Upon Sundry Debates, had between us and certain great men of our Realm,
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of our Realm there Assembled to
take advice of this Business, have said, that to us it belongs, and our part,
is through our Royal Seigniory straightly to defend force of Armor and all other
force against our Peace at all times when it shall please us to Punish them
which shall do contrary, according to our Laws and Vsages of our Realm.

1. N. 3.
And hereunto they are bound to aid us as their Sovereign Lord, Parliament.
at all Seasons when need shall be.

13 E. 1. C. 34. (35) 1. N. 2.
And likewise where a man Ravisheth a woman, Married, Lady, Women.
Damosel, or other with force, although she Consent after, he shall have such
Judgment (viz. of Life and Member) if he be Attainted at the Kings Suit, and
there the King shall have the Suit.

C. 39. (10) 1. N. 25.
And if they (viz.) whom the Sheriff returns Resisters of Process etc. be
Convict of such Resistance, they shall be punished at the Kings Pleasure,
Process.
neither shall any Officer of the Kings meddle in Assigning the Punishment; for
our Lord the King has reserved it specially to himself, because that Resisters
have been reputed Disturbers of his Peace, and of his Realm.

13 E. 1. St. 2 Cap. (2) 4. 1 N. 4.
And if they (viz. the Watch) do find any that have Lodged, Watch.
or received any Strangrs, or Suspicious Person against the Peace, the Bailiffs
(viz. of the Tow) shall do right therein.

C. 6. 1. N. 1
And further it is Commanded, that every Man have in his house, War.
Armor for to keep the Peace after the Ancient Assise.

1. N. 12.
And the Constables aforesaid, shall present before Justices Assigned, Constable.
such defaults as they do see in the County about Armor, and of the Suits of
Towns, and of Highways; and also shall Present all such as do Lodge Strangers
in Vplandish Towns, for whom they will not Answer.

Statuta Ed. 2.
33 E. 1. St. 2. p. 69. 1. N. 8. Of Conspirators.
AND it was further Ordained, that Justices Assigned, viz. by 13 Ed. 1. Justices.
St. 1. (2.) Cap. 29. (30.) to the hearing and determining, of Felonies and
Trespasses, should have the transcript hereof (viz. of this Statute of
Conspirators.)

34 E. 1. St. 2. p. 71. 1. N. 11. Articles on Winch.
(Viz.) To enquire of all between the age of fifteen and forty, be sworn to
keep the Peace. Oath.


War.
Also if they have Weapons in their houses according to the Quantity of their
Lands and Goods, for maintenance of the Peace, 1. N. 12.
according to the Statute (viz.) 13 Ed. 1. Stat. 2. Cap. 5. (6.)

Wine.
(viz.) Shall enquire upon Oath of such as continually haunt Taverns, 18 E. 2.
p. 84. 28. Fr. Pledge.
and no man knows whereon they do Live.

Poor.
Of such as Sleep by day, and Watch by night, and fare well, 29.
and have nothing.

Statuta Ed. 3.
Justices.
ITem, For the better keeping, and maintaining of the Peace; 1 E. 3. St. 2. C.
16. 1. N. 2.
The King will that in every County, Good men and Lawful, which be no
Maintainers of Evil, or Barraters in the County, shall be Assigned to keep the
Peace. (18 H. 6. Cap. 11.)

Justices.
And that the Oyers and Terminers shall not be granted, 2 E. 3. C. 2. 1. N. 6.
Northampton.
but before Justices of the one Bench or the other, or the Justices Errant, and
that for great hurt, or horrible Trespasses, and of the Kings special Grace
after the form of the Statute thereof ordained in the time of the said
Grandfather, ( viz. 13 Ed. 1. West. 2. Cap. 29. (30.) and none otherwise.

Riot.
Item, It is Enacted that no man, great or small, Cap. 3.
of what Condition soever he be (except the Kings Servants in his Presence, and
his Ministers in Executing of the Kings Precepts, or of their Office) and such
as be in their Company Assisting them. And also upon a Cry made for Arms to
keep the Peace, and the same in such places where such Acts happen) be so hardy
to come before the Kings Justices, or other of the Kings Ministers during their
Office, with Force and Arms. (2 R. 2. Cap. 7.)

Force. Market Overt.
Nor bring no Force in a fray of Peace. 1. N. 2.


Nor to go, nor ride Armed, by night nor by day, in Fairs, Markets, 1. N. 3.
nor in the Presence of the Justices or other Ministers; nor in no part
elsewhere, upon pain to forfeit their Armor to the King, and their Bodies to
Prison at the Kings Pleasure.

Offices.
And that the Kings Justices in their Presence, Sheriffs, 1. N. 4.
and other Ministers, in their Bailywicks, Lords of Franchises and their
Bailiffs in the same, and Mayors and Bailiffs, of Cities and Buroughs, within
the same Cities and Buroughs, and Burrough-holders, Constables and Wardens of
the Peace within their Wards, shall have Power to Execute this Act.

Justices.
And that the Justices Assigned, at their coming down into the Country, 1. N. 5.
shall have Power to enquire, how such Officers and Lords, have Executed their
Offices in this Case, and to punish them whom they find that have not done that
which pertained to their Office.

Peace.
Item, As to the keeping of the Peace in time to come, Cap. 6.
it is Ordained and Enacted, that the Statutes made in times past, with the
Statutes of Winchester, (viz.) 13, Ed. 1. St. 2. Cap. 1. etc. Shall be observed
and kept in every point.

Prerog.
And where it is Contained in the end of the said Statute of Winchester, 1. N. 2.
( viz. 13. Ed. 1 St. 2. (3.) Cap. 6. 1. N. 15.) That the Justices Assigned
shall have Power to Enquire of Defaults, and to report to the King in his
Parliament, and the King to Remedy it, which no man has yet seen; the same
Justices shall have Power, to punish the Disobeyers and Resisters.

Justices.
Item, It is Ordained, that good and discreet Persons, 4 E. 3. Cap. 2.
other than of the Places, if they may be found sufficient, shall be Assigned
in all the Shires of England, to take Assizes, Iuries, and Certifications, and
to deliver the Goods.

Days.
And that the said Justices shall take the Assizes, 1. N. 2.
Iuries and Certifications, and deliver the Goods at the least, three times a
year, and more often if need be.

Peace.
Also there shall be Assigned, 1. N. 3
Good and Lawful men in every County to keep the Peace.

Indictments
And at the time of the Assignments mention shall be made, 1. N. 4.
that such as shall be Indicted or taken by the said Keepers of the Peace,
shall not be let to mainprise by the Sheriffs, nor by none other Ministers, if
they be not mainprisable by the Law.

1. N. 5.
Nor that such as shall be Indicted shall not be delivered but at the Common
Law. Certirorari.


1. N. 6.
And the Justices Assigned to deliver the Goals shall have power to deliver the
same Goals of those that shall be Indicted before the Keepers of the peace.

1. N. 7.
And that the said Keepers shall send their Indictments before the Justices, and
they shall have power to Enquire of Sheriffs, Goalers and other, in whose Ward
such Indicted persons shall be, if they make deliverance or let to mainprise
any so Indicted which be not mainprisable and to punish the said Sheriffs,
Goalers and others if they do any thing against this Act.

5 Ed. 3. Cap. 11. 1. N. 2.
It is Enacted that the Justices Assigned to hear and determine such Felonyes
(viz.) of persons Indictable in one County that dwell in another) shall direct
their Writs to all the Counties of England where need shall be to take such
persons Indicted. Process.


Ca. 14. 1. N. 3.
It is accorded that if any may have any Evil suspicion of such ( viz. Robedsome
Wasters and Drawlatches) be it by day or by night, Coron.
they shall be incontinently arrested by the Constables of the Towns.

10 Ed. 3. Ca. 3. 1. N. 3.
And they that will aid themselves by such Charters ( viz. of pardon) and have
not found mainprise ( viz. of such) as above is said, Pardon.
or after the mainprise found bear themselves otherwise against the peace than
they ought, their Charters shall be holden for none.

18 Ed. 3. p. 09. 1. No. 3.
(An Exigent etc.) against Conspirators, Outlary.
and Confederators of Quarrels, and deceivers of Customs and false money.

1. N. 4.
And against them that Commit Routs in Affray of the people. Riot.


18 E. 3. St. 2. Cap. 1.
Commissioners of new Enquiries shall cease serving Indictments of Felonies and
Trespasses of Wools carried out without Subsidies, Enquest.
Customs etc.

Cap. 2.
Item, Justices.
That two or three of the best of Reputation in the Counties shall be Assigned
Keepers of the Peace by the Kings Commission (18 H. 6. Cap. 11.)

1. N. 2.
And at what time need shall be, the same with other Wise and Learned in the Law
shall be Assigned by the Kings Commissions to hear and determine Felonies and
Trespasses done against the peace in the same Counties, and to inflict
punishment reasonably according to the Law and Reason and the manner of the
deed.

Cap. 5.
Item, Outlary.
That from henceforth no Exigent shall go out in case where a man is Indicted
of Trespass, Unless it be against the peace or of things which be contained in
the declaration made in this case at the last Parliament holden at Westminster
(18 Edw. 3. Sta. 1. pa. 109).

25 Ed. 3. Cap. 8.
The Justices shall hold their Sessions four times in the year, Duties.
and at all times that shall be needful (12 R. 2. Cap. 10. 1. N. 2. and 2 H. 5.
Cap. 4. 2. N. 2.

27 Ed. 3. Sta. 2. Ca. 20. 1. N. 2. Of the Staple.
We have ordained, Merchants.
etc. that if any outrage or Greivances be done to them ( viz. To Merchants
Strangers) in the County out of the Staple, the Justices of the Peace, where
such Outrages shall be done, shall do speedy Justice to them after the Law
Merchant from day to day and from hour to hour without sparing any man, or to
drive them to fue at the Common Law.

C. 21. 1. N. 5.
And that the said Major and Constables ( viz. of the Staple) shall have power
to keep the peace, etc. Peace.


34 Ed. 3. p. 139.
These be the things which our Lord the King, the Prelates, Parliament.
Lords and the Commons have ordained in this present Parliament holden at
Westminster the Sunday next before the Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul to
be holden and published openly through the Realm.

Cap. 1.
That in every County of England shall be assigned for the keeping of the Peace
one Lord, Justices.
and with him three or four of the most worthy in the County, with some Learned
in the Law.

1. N. 2.
And they shall have Power to restrain the Offenders; Rioters, Riot.
and all other Barrators, and to pursue, arrest, take, and chastise them
according to their Trespass or offense.

Imprisonment.
And to cause them to be Imprisoned, and duly Punished,. 1. N. 3.
according to the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and according to that which to
them shall seem best to do, by their Discretion and good Advisement.

Poor.
And also to Inform them, 1. N. 4.
and to Enquire of all those that have been Pillors, and Robbers in the parts
beyond the Sea, and be now come again, and go wandering, and will not Labor as
they were wont in times past.

Process.
And to take, and arrest all those that they may find by Indictment, 1. N. 5.
or by Suspicion, to put them in Prison.

Bayl.
And to take of all them that be not of good Fame, 1. N. 6.
where they shall be found, sufficient Surety and Mainprize of their good
behavior toward the King and his People, and the other duly to punish, to the
Intent that the people be not by such Riotors, or Rebels, troubled, nor
endamaged, nor the Peace blemished, nor Merchants, nor others passing by the
highways of the Realm disturbed nor put in the peril, which may happen of such
Offenders. 1 R. 3. 3. 1. N. 2.

Coron.
And also to Hear, and Determine at the Kings Suit, 1. N. 7
all manner of Felonies and Trespasses, done in the same County, according to
the Laws and Customs aforesaid.

Justices.
And that Writs of Oyer and Terminer, 1. N. 8.
be granted according to the Statutes, ( viz. 2 Ed. 3. Cap. 7.) thereof made,
and that the Justices which shall be thereto Assigned, be named by the Court,
and not by the Party.

Enquest.
And the King will, that all general Enquiries, before this time granted, 1. N.
9.
within any Seigniories, for the Mischeifs and Oppositions, which have been
done to the People by such Inquiries, shall cease utterly, and be repealed.

Amerciaments.
And that Fines which are to be made before Justices for a Trespass done by any
Person, be reasonable and just, 1. N. 10.
having regard to the quantity the Trespass, and the causes for which they be
made.

Measures.
Item, It is Accorded, that they which shall be Assigned to keep the Peace,
Cap. 5.
shall have Power to Enquire of Measures, according to the Statute thereof made
the five and twentieth year of the Reign of our Lord the King, ( viz. 25 Ed. 3.
St. 5. Cap. 9.)

Days.
Item, That in the Commissions of Justices of the Peace, 36 Ed. 3. C. 12.
and of Laborers, Express mention be made, that the same Justices make their
Sessions four times by the year, that is to say, one Sessions within the Utas
of the Epiphany, the second within the second week of Lent, the third between
the Feasts of Penticost, and of St. John Baptist, the fourth within the eight
days of St. Michael. (2 H. 5. Cap. 4. 2. N. 2.) 25. Ed 3. Cap 8.

Enquest.
It is Assented etc. that etc. in all Enquiries within the Realm, 42 Ed. 3. C.
4. 1. N. 2.
Commissions shall be made to some of the Justices of the one Bench etc. or
Justices of the Peace, with others of the most worthy of the County etc.

Accountant.
And that he ( viz. that will Complain of Sheriffs, C. 9. 1. N. 4.
Leavying of the Kings Debt, etc.) have his Suit as well before Justices of the
Peace, as before other Justices.

Statuta Rich. 2.
Peace.
ITem, 1 R. 2. Cap. 2.
Our Lord the King greatly desiring the Tranquillity and quietness of his
People, Wills, and straightly Commands, that the Peace within this Realm of
England, be surely observed and kept, so that all his Lawful Subjects may from
henceforth, Safely, and Peaceably, go and come, and dwell according to the Law,
and Usage of the Realm.

Pleading.
And that Justice, and Right, 1. N. 6.
be indifferently Ministered to every Person.

Riot.
Commissions shall be awarded to arrest Rioters, 2 R. 2. C. 7.
and other persons Offensive to the Peace, and to Imprison them.

A Repeat of the Statute of 2 Rich. 2. Cap. 7. touching Riots. 2 R. 2. St. 2.
C. 2


Justices.
A profitable Act not Printed. 4 Inst. 176. 3 R. 2. N. 39. Rot. Pat.


Treason.
It shall be Treason to begin a Riot, or Rumor 1 Ed. 6. 5 R. 2. C. 6. 1. N. 2
Cap. 12.

Cap. 7. 1. N. 2.
And in such case ( viz. where entry is given by Law) not with strong hand nor
with multitudes of people, Force.
but only in peaceable and easy manner (15 Ric. 2 Cap. 2.)

7 Ric. 2. Ca. 5.
Justices etc. shall Examine Vagabonds, Poor.
bind them to their good abearing or Commit them to prison.

Cap. 13.
Item, It is ordained and assented, Riot.
and also the King does prohibit that from henceforth no man shall ride in
Harness within the Realm Contrary to the form of the Statute ( viz. 2 Ed. 3.
Cap. 3.) of Northampton thereupon made neither with Launcegay within the Realm,
the which Launcegayes be clearly put out within the Realm, as a thing
prohibited by our Lord the King upon pain of Forfeiture of the said
Launcegayes, Armours and other Harness in whose hands or possessions they be
found that bear them within that Realm, Contrary to the Statutes and Ordinances
aforesaid, without the Kings special Lycene (20 Rich 2. Cap. 1.)

12 Ric. 2. Ca. 2
Item, Chancery.
It is accorded that the Chancellor etc. and all others that shall be called to
ordain, name, or make Justices of Peace etc. shall be firmly sworn that they
shall not ordain, etc. for any gift or Brocage, Favor or Affection.

Cap. 10.
Item, It is ordained and agreeed, Justices.
that in every Commission of the Justices of Peace there shall be Assigned but
six Justices with the Justices of Assizes (14 Ric. 2. Cap. 11.)

1. N. 2.
And that the said six Justices shall keep their Sessions in every Quarter of
the Year at least, and by three days, if need be, Days.
upon pain to be punished according to the Discretion of the Kings Counsel at
the suit of every man that will Complain, (25 Ed. 3. Cap. 8. and 2. H. 5. Cap.
4. 2. N. 2 14 H. 6. Cap. 4. N. 4.)

1. N. 3.
And they shall enquire diligently among other things touching their Offices, if
the said Majors, Bailiffs, Stewards, Constables, Enquest
and Goalers have duly done Execution of the said Ordinances ( viz. 12 R. 2.
Cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.) Of Servants and Laborers, Beggars and Vagabonds,
and shall punish them that be punishable by the said pain of an hundred
shillings by the same pain, and they that be found in default and be not
punishable by the same pain, shall be punished by their Discretion.

1. N. 4.
And every of the said Justices shall take for their wages four Shillings the
day for the time of their said Sessions, Fees.
and there will be two shillings of the Fines and Amerciaments rising and
coming of the same Sessions by the hands of the Sheriffs.

1. N. 5.
And that the Lords of Franchises shall be contributory to the said Wages after
their rate of their part of Fines and Amerciaments aforesaid. Franchise.


1. N. 6.
And that no Steward of any Lord be Assigned in any of the said Commissions (13
Ric. 2. Cap. 7. Ability.
)

1. N. 7.
And that no Association shall be made to the Justices of the Peace after their
first Commission. Joynder.


1. N. 8.
And it is not the Intent of this Statute, Appearance.
that the Justices of the one Bench or of the other, nor the Sergeants of the
Law, in case that they shall be named in the said Commissions, shall be bound
by force of this Statute to hold the said Sessions four times in the year, as
the other Commissioners, the which be Continually dwelling in the County, but
that they shall do it when they may best attend it.

13 Ric. 2. Ca. 7.
Whereas it is Contained in the Last Statute made at Canterbury (viz.) 12 Rich.
2. Cap. 10. 1. N. 6. Ability.
) that no Steward of any Lord shall be Assigned in the Commission of the
Justices of Peace, nevertheless for certain causes showed in this Parliament,
it is accorded, and assented, that Justices of the Peace shall be made of new
in all the Counties of England, of the most sufficient Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen of the Law, of the said Counties, notwithstanding the said Statute
(18 H. 6. Cap. 12.)

1. N. 2.
And that the said Justices be Sworn duly, Justices.
and without favor to keep and put in Execution all the Statutes and
Ordinances touching their Office.

Cap. 8.
Item, Victuals
It is ordained etc. that the Statutes and Ordinances made in the last
Parliament holden at Canterbury (viz. 12 Ric. 2. Cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.) as
well of Servants, Labourors, Artificers and Victualers, as of all other things,
saving the Exception ( viz. 12 R. 2. Cap. 10. 1. N. 6.) in the next Article
before ( viz. 13 Rich. 2. Cap. 7.) touching Justices of Peace, etc. shall be
firmly kept, and duly executed.

Coron.
But forasmuch as a man cannot put the price of Corn, 1. N. 2.
and other Victuals in certain, it is Accorded etc. that the Justices of Peace
in every County in two of their Sessions to be holden betwixt the Feast of
Easter and St. Michael, shall make Proclamation by their discretion according
to the Dearth of Victuals, how much every Mason, Carpenter, Tyler and other
Craftsmen, Workmen and other Laborers by the day, as well in Harvest, as in
other times of the year, after their degree shall take by the day, with meat
and drink, or without meat and drink, between the two Sessions beforesaid,
notwithstanding the Statutes ( viz. 23 Ed. 3. Cap. 6. and 12 R. 2. Cap. 4.)
thereof heretofore made, and that every man obey to such Proclamations, from
time to time, as a thing done by Statute.

Fees.
And in the Right of Victualers, it is Accorded, 1. N. 3.
that they shall have reasonable gains, according to the Discretion, and
Limitation of the Justices, and no more, upon pain to be grievously punished
according to the Discretion of the said Justices, where no Pain is limited in
certain before this time.

Drapery.
And that the Workers, Weavers, and Fullers, C. 11. 1. N. 3.
(viz of plain Clothes of Somerset, etc.) shall put their Seals to every Cloth
that they shall work, upon a certain Pain, to be limited by the Justices of the
Peace, etc.

Forest.
And that the Justices of Peace have Power to Enquire, C. 13. 1. N. 4
(viz.) of Laymen that have not forty shillings a year, and Clerks not advanced
to ten pound a year, that Hunt, or keep Dogs, Nets, etc. and shall enquire of
the Offenders in this behalf, and punish them by the Pain aforesaid, ( viz.
Imprisonment a year.)

Justices.
Item, that in eyery County, be Assigned eight Justices of Peace, 14 R. 2 C. 11
as is contained in the Statute of Canterbury, (viz. 12 Ric. 2. Cap. 10.)
besides the Lords Assigned in this Parliament.

Records.
And that the Estreats of the said Justices be doubled, 1. N. 2.
and the one part delivered by the said Justices to the Sheriff, to Leavy the
money thereof rising, and thereof to pay to the Justices their Wages by the hand
of Sheriff, by Indenture betwixt them therereof to be made.

Sheriffs.
And that the Sheriffs have allowance in their account in the Exchequer, 1. N. 3.
by the same Indenture.

Dignity.
And that no Duke, Earl, Baron or Baronet, 1. N. 4.
albeit they be Assigned Justices of the Peace, and hold their Sessions with
the other Eight, shall take any wages for the said Office.

Justices.
And that the Justices put their names in the same Estreats, 1. N. 5.
together with the number of the days of their Session, to the intent that the
Sheriffs may know to whom to pay Wages, and to whom not, and the Barons of the
Exchequer, to whom to allow, and to whom not.

Seals.
And that the Seals be made for the Servants, 1. N. 6.
and delivered to the keeping of some good man of the Country, after the Puport
of the said Statute of Canterbury, (viz. 12 R. 2. Cap. 11. N. 4.)

Measures.
Which Statute, ( viz. 12 R. 2. Cap. 10. 1. N. 7.
) with the notification of the same made at the last Parliament, ( viz. 13 R.
2. Cap. 7) and the Statute of Weights and Measures.

And all other good Statutes and Ordinances made heretofore, and not repealed,
shall be holden and kept, and put in due Execution.

Force.
Item, It is Accorded and Assented, that the Ordinances and Statutes, 15 R. 2.
C. 2.
made and not repealed, of them that make Entries with strong-hand into Lands
and Tenements, or other Possessions whatsoever, and them hold with force; and
also of these that make Insurrections, or great Ridings, Riots, Routs or
Assemblies, in Disturbance of the Peace, or of the Common Law, or in affray of
the People, shall be holden and kept, and fully executed. (8 H. 6. Cap. 9.)

Process.
Joined to the same, that at all times, 1. N. 2.
that such forcible entry shall be made, and Complaint thereof comes to the
Justices of Peace, or to any of them, that the same Justices or Justice, take
sufficient Power of the County, and also the Place where such force is made.
(13. H. 4. Cap. 7.) (8 H. 6. Cap. 9. N. 2.)

1. N. 3
And if they find any that hold such Place forcibly after such entry made,
Imprisonment.
they shall be taken and put in the next Gaol, there to abide Convict by the
record of the same Justices or Justice, until they have made Fine and Ransom
to the King. 18 H. 6. Cap. 9. 1. N. 3.

1. N. 4.
And that all the People of the County, as well the Sheriff as others, Process.
shall be attendant upon the same Justices, to go and assist the same Justices
to Arrest such Offenders, upon Pain of Imprisonment, and to mak^ Fine to the
King, (8 H. 6. Cap. 9. 1. N. 4.)

1. N. 5.
And in the same manner it shall be done of them that make such forcible Entries
in Benefices, or Offices of holy Church, (8 H. 6. Cap. 9. 1. N. 5. Church.
)

17 R. 2. C. 8.
The Sheriffs, and all other the Kings Officers, Riot.
shall Suppress Riots and Imprison them, and all others Offending against the
Peace, 4. Inst. 51. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7.

C. 9. 1. N. 7.
Wherefore it is Accorded etc. Fish.
That the Justices of Peace of all the Counties of England, shall be
Conservators of the said Statutes, ( viz. 13 Ed. 1. St. 1. (2.) Cap. 47. (48.)
and 13 Ric. 2. Cap. 19.) in the Counties where they be Justices, and that they
and every of them, at all times when they may attend, shall Survey the
Offenses, and Defaults attempted against the Statutes aforesaid.

1. N. 8.
And also shall Survey, and Search all the Wears, in such Rivers, Sewers.
that they shall not be very strait for the distinction of such Fry, and Brood,
but of reasonable widenes, after the old Assise used and accustomed.

1. N. 9.
And that the same Justices, or any of them which shall find Default, Process.
or Abuse against the Statutes aforesaid, ( viz. 13 Ed. 1. St. 1. (2.) Cap. 47.
(48.) and 13 Ric. 2. Cap. 19.) shall make due Punishment of them which be found
in default, after the Content of the same Statute.

. 1. N. 10.
And that the same Justices, Deputy.
shall put good and sufficient Vnder-Conservators of the same Statutes, ( viz.
13 Ed. 1. St 1. (2.) Cap. 47. (48.) and 13 Ric. 2. Cap. 19.) under them, which
shall be sworn to make like Surveying Search and Punishment, without any favor
thereof to be showed.

1. N. 11.
And moreover that the same Justices in their Sessions shall Enquire, Enquest.
as well by their Office, as at the Instance of the under-Conservators
aforesaid, of all Trespasses, Misprisions and Defaults made against any of the
Points aforesaid.

1. N. 12.
And shall cause them which be thereof Indicted, to come before them. Process
Imprisonment.


1. N. 13.
And if they be thereof Convict, they shall have Imprisonment, and make Fine
after the discretion of the same Justices.

C. 10.
Item, Forasmuch as Thieves notoriously defamed, Enquest.
and others taken with the manner, by their long abiding in Prison after that
they be arrested, be delivered by Charters and favorable Enquests, procured to
the great hindrance of the People.

1. N. 2.
It is Accorded and Assented, Justices.
that in every Commission of the Peace through the Realm, where need shall be,
two men of Law of the same County where such Commission shall be made, shall be
assigned to go and proceed to the deliverance of such Thieves and Felons, as
often as they shall think it expedient, (18. H. 6. Cap. 11.)

20 R. 2. p. 186.
The King at his Parliament holden at Westminster in the Feast of St. Vincent
the twentieth year of his Reign, by the Assent of the Prelates, Parliament.
Lords and Commons of his Realm of England, assembled in the same present
Parliament for the Quietness and Tranquillity of his People, has made certain
Statutes and Ordinances, in the form which follows.

Cap. 1.
First, Peace.
whereas in a Statute made the seventh year of the Reign of the King that now
is, ( viz. 7 R. 2. Cap. 13.) It is Ordained and Assented, that no man shall
ride Armed within the Realm, against the form of the Statute of Northampton,
(viz. 2 Ed. 3. Cap. 3.) thereupon made, nor with Launce-gays within the same
Realm.

1. N. 2.
And that the said Launce-gays shall be utterly put out within the said Realm as
a thing prohibited by the King, War.
upon pain of forfeiture of the same Launce-gays, Armors or any other Harnes,
in the hands and possessions of them that bear them, from henceforth within the
same Realm, against the same Statutes and Ordinances, ( viz. 2 E. 3. Cap. 3.
and 7 Rich. 2. C. p. 13.) without the Kings special License.

Riot.
Our Lord the King,. 1. N. 3.
considering the great clamor made to him in this present Parliament, because
that the said Statute is not holden, has ordained and established in the said
Parliament, that the said Statutes, ( viz 2 Ed. 3. cap. 3. and 7. Rich. 2. cap.
13.) shall be fully holden, and kept, and duly executed, and that the said
Lance-gayes shall be thereby put out, upon the pain contained in the said
Statute of Northampton (viz. 2 Ed. 3. cap. 3.) and also to make fine and ransom
to the King.

Officer.
And moreover, that no Lord, Knight, nor other, 1. N. 4.
little nor great shall go nor ride by night nor by day armed, nor bear Sallet
nor Skull of Iron, nor of other Armor, upon the pain aforesaid: Save and except
the Kings Officers and Ministers in doing their Office.

Maintenance.
And moreover the King will and has ordained, 1. N. 5.
that the Statute made the first year of his Reign ( viz. 1 Rich. 2. cap. 7. Of
Liveries of Hats) shall be holden and kept upon the pain contained in the same
Statute, and upon pain to be imprisoned, and make Fine and Ransom to the King.

Statuta Hen. 4.
Justices.
Joined thereto ( viz. to 1 H 4 Cap. 7. 2 H. 4. Ca. 21. 2. N. 3.
Of Liveries) that the Justices of the one Bench and of the other, and the
Justices of Assizes, and of the Peace, have power and authority to enquire hear
and determine in this case by Record in their presence, or by inquiry to be
made from time to time.

Force.
And if such Disseisor be attainted of such Dissessin made in such forcible
manner, he shall have one years imprisonment, 5 H. 4. Cap. 8. 1. N. 3.
and yield to the party greived his double damages.

Justices.
And that in the Commissions of the Peace hereafter to be made, 4 H. 4. Cap. 3.
1. N. 2.
this Article be put in, that the Justices of the Peace have power thereof
(viz. of Watches on the Seacoasts) to make inquiry in their Sessions from time
to time, and to punish them which be found in default after the tenor of the
said Statute, ( viz. 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. (3.) cap. 4. Of Winchester.

Imprisonment.
Item because that diverse Constables of Castles within the Realm of England be
assigned to be Justices of Peace by Commission of our Lord the King, Cap. 10.
and by color of the said Commissions they take people to whom they bear evil
will, and imprison them within the said Castles, till they have made fine and
ransom with the said Constables for their deliverance.

It is ordained and established, 1. N. 2.
that none be imprisoned by any Justice of Peace, but only in the common Gaol:
Saving to Lords and other their Franchise in this Case.

Peace.
And that the Peace within the Realm be holden and kept so, 7 H. 4. cap. ^ 1. N.
4^
that all the Kings Liege people and Subjects may from henceforth safely and
peacably go, come, and abide, according to the Laws and Vsages of the same
Realm.

Games.
And the Justices of Peace in every County of England, C. 7. 1. N. 6.
and also the Mayor, and Sheriffs, and Bailiffs of Cities and Boroughs within
the same Cities and Boroughs shall have power to inquire of all such deceitful
makers of Heads and Quarrels, (viz. of Arrows,) and to punish them as aforesaid.

Riot.
None shall be punished for repressing the late Riots. Cap. 18.


Justices.
Item, It is ordained and established, that if any Riot, Assembly, 13 H. 4.
Cap. 7
or Rout of People against the Law be made in parties of the Realm, that the
Justices of Peace, three or two of them at the least, and the Sheriff or
Undersheriff of the County where such Riot, Assembly, or Rout, shall be made
hereafter, shall come with the power of the County if need be to arrest them,
and shall arrest them, (2 H. 5. cap. 8. and 19 H. 7. cap. 13.

1. N. 2.
And the same Justices and Sheriff, or Under Sheriff, Record.
shall have power to record that which they shall find to be done in their
presence against the Law (2 H. 5. cap. 8. 1. N. 2. and 19 H. 7. cap. 13. 1. N.
2.)

1. N. 3.
And that by the Record of the same Justices and Sheriff, Sheriff.
or Undersheriff, such Trespassers and Offenders shall be convict in the
manner and form as is contained in the Statute of forcible Entries, ( viz. 5 R.
2. Cap. 7. 1. N. 3. and 15 R. 2. Cap. 2. 1. N. 3.) 2 H. 5. Cap. 8. 1. N. 2. and
19 H. 7. Cap. 13. 1. N. 3.

1. N. 4.
And if it happen that such Trespassers and Offenders be departed before the
coming of the said Justices, Sheriff and Under Sheriff, Enquest.
that the same Justices three or two of them, shall diligently enquire within a
Month after such Riot, Assembly or Rout of people so made, and thereof shall
hear and determine, according to the Law of the Land, (2 H. 5. Cap. 8. 1 N. 3.
and 19 H. 7. 13.. 1. N. 4.)

2. N. 1.
And if the truth cannot be found in the manner as is aforesaid, Certificat.
then within a Month then next following, the Justices three or two of them,
and the Sheriff or Under Sheriff, shall certify before the King and his
Counsel, all the Deed and Circumstances thereof, (2 H. 5. Cap. 8. 1. N. 4 and
19 H. 7. Cap. 13. 1. N. 9.)

2. N. 2.
Which Certificat shall be of like force as the Presentment of twelve, Judgment.
upon which Certificat, the said Trespassers and Offenders shall be put to
Answer, (2 H. 5. Cap. 8.. 1. N. 4.)

2. N. 3.
And they which shall be found guilty, Execution.
shall be punished according to the Discretion of the King and his Counsel, (2
H. 5. Cap. 8. 1. N. 5.)

3. N. 1.
And if such Trespassers and Offenders do Traverse the matter so certified, the
same Certificat and Travers, Travers.
shall be sent into the Kings Bench, there to be tried and determined, as the
Law requires.

3. N. 2.
And if the same Trespassers do not appear before the King and his Counsel, or
in the Kings Bench at the first Precept, Process.
there shall be another Precept directed to the Sheriff of the County to take
the said Trespassers and Offenders if they may be found, and to bring them at a
certain day before the King and his Counsel, or into the Kings Bench.

3. N. 3.
And if they cannot be found, that the Sheriff, Notice.
or Under Sheriff shall make Proclamation in his full County next ensuing the
delivery of the second Precept, that they shall appear before the King and his
said Counsel, or in the Kings Bench, or in the Chancery in time of Vacation,
within three weeks then next following.

3. N. 4.
And in case the same Offenders come not as before is said, Attainder.
and the Proclamation made and returned, they shall be Convict and Attainted of
the Riot, Assembly, or Rout aforesaid, notwithstanding any Article or Ordinance
made to the contrary.

4. N. 1.
And moreover that the Justices of Peace, 2 H. 5. C. 8. 1. N. 6.
dwelling nighest in every County where such Riot, Assembly, Justices.
or Rout of people shall be made hereafter, together with the Sheriff or Under
Sheriff of the same County, and also the Justices of Assizes for the time that
they shall be there in their Session, in case that any such Riot, Assembly or
Rout be made in their presence, shall do Execution of this Statute, every one
upon pain of an hundred pounds, to be paid to the King, as often as they shall
be found in Default of the Execution of the same Statute.

Statuta Hen. 5.
2 H. 5. C. 4.
ITem, Forasmuch as the Servants and Laborers, Apprentice.
of the Shires of the Realm, do fly from County to County, because they would
not be Iustifiby the Ordinances and Statutes by the Law for them made, to the
great damage of Gentlemen and others to whom they should serve, because that
the said Ordinances and Statutes for them ordained, be not Executed in every
Shire. Trades.
1. N. 2.


Our Lord the King willing in this case to provide a Remedy, by the Advice and
A^sent aforesaid, and at the request of the said Commons, has ordained and
established, that the Statute of Laborers made at Canterbury, (viz. 12 R. 2.
Cap 3. etc.) and all other good Statutes of Laborers made and not repealed, be
firmly holden and kept, and put in due Execution. Process.
1. N. 3.


And moreover that the Justices of Peace have power to send their Writs for
such fugitive Laborers to every Sheriff of the Realm of England, and to make
Process as the Statute requires, to bring them before them to answer to our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to the parties, of the Contempts and Trespasses
made or done against the Ordinances and Statutes aforesaid, in like manner as
the Justices have power to send to every Sheriff for the Felons before them
Indicted.

Apprentice.
And also that all the Statutes and Ordinances of Laborers, 1. N. 4.
Servants and Artificers before this time made and not repealed, be Exemplified
under the great Seal, and sent to every Sheriff of the Realm of England,
thereof to make Proclamation in the full County, and after this Proclamation so
made, that every Sheriff shall cause the said Exemplification to him directed,
to be delivered to the Justices of the Peace in his County named of the Quorum,
or to one of them, to remain with such Justices, which be or shall be, for the
better putting of the foresaid Statutes and Ordinances, in due Execution.

Sheriffs.
And in Shires where diverse Commissions of the Peace be made, 1. N. 5
there shall be so many Exemplifications of the Statutes and Ordinances
aforesaid made as be Commissioners of the Peace in the same Shires, and sent to
the Sheriffs to make Proclamation, and to deliver the same as is aforesaid.

Justices.
And that the Justices of Peace in every Shire named of the Quorum, 2. N. 1.
be resident within the same Shire, except Lords named in the Commission of the
Peace, and also except Justices of the one Bench and of the other, the chief
Baron of the Exchequer, Sergeants at the Law, and the Kings Attorney, be
attending and occupied in the Kings Courts, or otherwise in some other place
occupied in the Kings Service.

Days.
And make their Sessions four times by the year, 2. N. 2.
that is to say, in the first week after the Feast of St. Michael, and in the
first week after the Epiphany, and in the first week after the Clause of
Easter, and in the first week after the Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr,
and more often if need be, (36 Ed. 3. Cap. 12. and 25 Ed. 3. Cap. 8. and 14 H.
6. Cap. 4. 1. N. 4.

And that the same Justices hold their Sessions throughout the Realm of
England, in the same weeks every year from henceforth 12 Rich. 2. 2. N. 3.
Cap. 10. 1. N. 2.

Apprentice.
And also the Justices of Peace from henceforth have power to Examine, 2. N. 4.
as well all manner of Laborers, Servants and their Masters, as Artificers by
their Oaths of all things by them done contrary to their said Ordinances and
Statutes, and upon that, to punish them upon their confession, after the effect
of the Statutes and Ordinances aforesaid, as though they were Convict by
Enquest.

Sheriffs.
And that the Sheriff in every Shire of the Realm of England, 2. N. 5.
shall do well and duly his Office in this behalf, upon pain to loose and to
forfeit to our Lord the King twenty pounds.

Religion.
And moreover that the Justices of the Kings Bench, Cap. 7. 1. N. 9.
and Justices of the Peace, and Justices of Assise have full power to enquire
of all them which hold any Errors or Heresies as Lollards, and which be their
Maintainers, Favorers and Sustainers, Comon-writers of such Books, as well of
the Sermons, as of their Schools, Conventicles, Congregations and
Confederacies, and that this Clause be put in Commssions of the Justices of the
Peace.

Riot.
Item, Cap. 8.
Whereas it is contained in the Statute made the thirteenth year of the noble
King Henry, Father to our Lord the King that now is, ( viz. 13 H 4. Cap. 7,)
amongst other things, that if any Riot, Assembly or Rout of people, against the
Law be made in any part of the Realm, then the Justices of the Peace, three or
two of them at the least, and the Sheriff, or under Sheriff of the County where
such Riot, Assembly or Rout shall be made hereafter, should come with the power
of the said County if need were to arrest them, and them should arrest (19. H.
7. Cap. 13.)

1. N. 2.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 1. N. 2.) the same Justices, Record.
Sheriffs or under Sheriffs, should have power to record that which they find
so done in their presence against the Law, and (...) ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 1.
N. 2.) that by Record of the same Justices, Sheriff or under Sheriff, such
Trespassers or Offenders, should be Convict in manner and form as is contained
in the Statute of forcible entries, (19 H. 7. Cap. 13. 1. N. 2. 3.)

1. N. 3.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 1. N. 4. Enquest.
) if it happen that such Trespassers or Offenders, were departed before the
coming of the Justices, Sheriff or under Sheriff, that the same Justices three
or two of them, shall diligently enquire within a month after such Riot,
Assembly or Rout of people so made, and the same hear and determine according to
the Law of the Land.

1. N. 4.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 2. Certificat.
N. 1) if the truth could not be found in manner as before is said, within a
month then next ensuing, the said Justices three or two of them, and the
Sheriff or under Sheriff, shall certify before the King and his Counsel, the
Deed and circumstance of the same, ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 2. N. 2.) which
Certificat shall be of like force as the Presentment of twelve men, upon which
Certificat, the said Trespassers and Offenders shall be put to Answer.

1. N. 5.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 2. N 2. Judgment.
) they which be found guilty should be punished according to the discretion of
the King and his Counsel.

1. N. 6.
And ( viz. 13. H. 4. Cap. 7. 4. N. 1. Justices.
) moreover that the Justices of Peace, dwelling nearest in every County where
such Rout, Assembly, and Riot of people should be made hereafter, together with
the Sheriff or under Sheriff of the same Counties, and also the Justices of
Assise for the time that they shall be in their Sessions, in case that any such
Riot, Assembly, or Rout be made in their presence, shall make Execution of this
Statute every one of them, upon pain of 100 l. to be paid to the King, as often
as they shall be found in default of Execution of the same Statute.

1. N. 7.
And forasmuch as many Riots, Routs, Process.
and Assemblies have been made in diverse parts of the Realm, since the making
and proclamation of the same Statute, viz. 13. H. 4. Cap. 7.) because that the
same Statute has not been put in due Execution, as our Sovereign Lord the King
perceived by diverse and grievous complaints to him made in this present
Parliament.

1. N. 8.
The same our Lord the King willing hereof to provide a better remedy, Riot.
by the advice and assent aforesaid, and at the suit of the said Commons has
ordained and established, that if default be found in the said two Justices of
the Peace, or Justices of Assise, and the Sheriff or under Sheriff of the
County, where such Riot, Assembly or Rout shall be made, touching the Execution
that they ought to make by Virtue of the said Statute, ( viz. 13. H. 4. Cap.
7.) and whereof the said Statute makes mention, that then at the instance of
the party greived, the Kings Commission shall go out under his great Seal, to
enquire as well of the truth of the Case, and of the Original matter for the
party Complainant, as of the Default or Defaults, of the said Justices, Sheriff
or under Sheriff in this behalf, supposed to be directed to sufficient and
indifferent persons, at the nomination and by the direction of the Chancellor
of the Realm of England.

1. N. 9.
And that the said Commissioners presently shall return into the Chancery, the
Enquests and matters before them, Return.
in this behalf taken and found,

1. N. 10.
And moreover that the Coroners of the same County for the time being, Enquest.
in which Country such Riot, Assembly and Rout shall be made, shall make the
Panel upon the said Commission, returnable for the time that the Sheriff so
supposed in default shall continue in his Office.

Enquest.
Which Coroners shall return no persons, 1. N. 11.
but only such which have Lands, Tenements or Rents, to the value of ten pounds
by the year at least.

Coron.
And also that the same Coroners shall return upon every of the said persons
impanelled at the first day when Issues be to be left, 20 s. at least, 1. N. 12.
and at the second day, 40 s. at least, and at the third day, 100 s at least,
and at every day after the double at the least; which Issues so returned in
respect of nonappearances of such persons Impanelled, shall be adjudged as
forfeit to the King and Liable to his use.

Return.
And if default be found in the said Coroners, 1. N. 13.
touching the return of such persons to be Impanelled, or touching the return
of such Issues as before is said, that every of them shall forfeit to the Kings
use Forty pounds.

Sheriff.
And if it happen the said Sheriff, so reputed in default, 1. N. 14.
be discharged of his Office at the time that such Commission shall be awarded
out of the Chancery, that then the new Sheriff of the same County, his
Successor mediat or immediate for the time being, and not the Coroners of the
same County shall make the Panel upon this Commission retornable, in manner
and form as the said Coroners should do in time when the Sheriff, so reputed in
default Continued in his Office.

Sheriff.
And that the same new Sheriff, 1. N. 15.
shall incur like pain of Forty pounds to the King, if any default in him be
found, touching the return of other person by him Impannelled, which have not
Lands, Tenements or Rents, to the valve of Ten pounds by the Year, or of
returning such Issues, which the Coroners be above charged to return, as the
said Coroners are to lose to the King in this behalf.

Chancery.
And that the Chancellor of England, 1. N. 16.
for the time being as soon as he may have knowledge of such Riot, Assembly or
Rout, shall cause to be sent the Kings Writ, to the Justices of the Peace, and
to the Sheriff or under Sheriff of the County, where they be so made, that they
shall put the Statute, ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7.) in Execution upon the pain
Contained in the same.

Execution.
And though that such Writ come not to the said Justices, 1. N. 17.
Sheriff or under Sheriff, they shall not be excused of the pain aforesaid, if
they make not Execution of the said Statute, ( viz. 13. H. 4. Cap. 7.)

Fees.
Provided always that the said Justices, 2. N. 1.
and other Officers aforesaid shall execute their offices aforesaid, at the
Kings costs in going and Continuing in doing their said Offices by payment
thereof to be made by the Sheriff of the same County, for the time being by
Indenture betwixt the Sheriff and the said Justices and other Officers
aforesaid, to be made of the payment aforesaid, whereof the said Sheriff upon
his account in the Exchequer may have due allowance.

Riot.
And that such Rioters attainted of great and heinous Riots shall have one whole
years Imprisonment at the least without being let out of Prison by Bayl,
Mainprise, or in other manner, 2. N. 2.
during the year aforesaid.

Imprisonment.
And that the Rioters, attainted of pety Riots, 2. N. 3.
shall have Imprisonment as best shall seem meet, to the King, or to his
Counsel.

Americament.
And that the Fines of such Rioters attainted, 2. N. 4.
shall be by the said Justices increased and put to greater sums then they were
wont to be put in such cases, before the time in aid and Supportation of the
Justices and other Officers aforesaid in this behalf.

Process.
And that the Kings Liege people being sufficient to Travel in the County, where
such Routs, Assemblies or Riots be, 2. N. 5.
shall be Assistant to the Justices, Commissioners, and Sheriff or under
Sheriff, in aid to resist such Riots, Routs and Assemblies upon pain of
Imprisonment, and to make Fine and Ransom to the King.

Franchise.
And that the Bailiffs of Franchises shall cause to be Impannelled sufficient
persons as before, 2. N. 6.
upon pain to loose to the King Forty pounds in case that such sufficient
persons may be found within the same Franchises.

2. N. 7.
And that like Ordinances and payments shall hold place and take effect in
Cities, Buroughs and other places and Towns, Corporation
Infranchised which have Justices of the Peace, within the Cities, Buroughs
Towns, and other places aforesaid.

2. N. 8.
And that this Statute shall begin to hold place presently after the
Proclamation thereof made. Days.


Cap. 9. 2. N. 1.
Provided always that the suggestions of such Riots (viz. by persons fled to
places unknown) be testified to the Chancellor of England, Riot.
by Letters sealed under the Seals of two Justices of Peace at the least, and
the Sheriff of the County where such Riots shall be made, before that the Writ
of Capias be granted (8 H. 6. Cap. 14. 2. N. 1.)

2 H. 5. St. 2. p. 217.
Our Lord the King at his Parliament holden at Westminster the Monday next after
the Utas of St. Martin, the second year of his Reign, Parliament.
by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the
special Instance and request of the Commons of his Realm then there Assembled,
has ordained and established, diverse Ordinances and Statutes, in the manner
and form as follows.

Cap. 1.
First, Justices.
that the Justices of the Peace from henceforth to be made within the Counties
of England, shall be made of most sufficient persons dwelling in the same
Counties, by the advice of the Chancellor, and of the Kings Counsel, without
taking other persons dwelling in Foreign Counties to execute such Office,
except the Lords and the Justices of Assizes, now named and to be named, by the
King and his Counsel; and except all the Kings chief Stewards of the Lands and
Seigniories of the Duchy of Lancaster, in the North parts, and in the South
for the time being.

3 H. 5. St. 2. C. 7. 1. N. 3.
And that the Justices of Peace through the Realm, Money.
shall have power by the Kings Commissions, to enquire of all such matters,
(viz. as well of Counterfeiting and of bringing of false money into the Realm,
as of clipping, washing and every other Falsity of the said money) and thereupon
make Process by Capias only against these which before them, shall be thereof
Indicted.

8 H. 5. C. 3. 1 N. 4
And the Justices of Peace shall have power to enquire thereof, Mettle.
(viz. of Guilding or Silvering of Mettles, etc.) and that to determine.

Statuta Hen. 6.
2 H. 6. Cap. 8. 2. N. 2.
AND that the Justices of Peace within the Counties, Ireland.
and the Mayors and Bailiffs within Cities and Buroughs Enfranchised, have
power to take before them, (viz. of Irish men that enter this Realm) such
manner of Surety of good abearing, and to do Execution upon them which shall
abide, or do against the said Ordinances, from henceforth.

C. 11. 1. N. 5.
And the Justices of Peace in all Counties of England and Mayors and Bailiffs
having power to enquire of the Peace, shall enquire, Measures.
hear and determine all the same defaults, ( viz. in the Contents of Vessels of
Wine, Eels, Herring, Salmon, etc.)

C. 14. 1. N. 8.
And the Justices of Peace, Mayors and Bailiffs, Mettle.
and all others having power as Justices of Peace, shall hear, enquire and
determine, (Viz. of Goldsmiths, and others not working Silver by the touch or
Sterling allay) by Bill, Plaint or in other manner, all that do contrary to the
said Ordinances, and thereof make due Execution by their discretions.

6 H. 6. Cap. 3.
The Justices of Peace, and chief Officers in Cities, Apprentice.
etc. shall make Proclamation, what every Artificer and Workman shall take for
Wages, and the Penalty of a Servant, Artificer or Labourer, that takes more.

8 H. 6. Cap. 5. 2. N. 7.
And that the Justices of Peace, Mayors, Measures.
Bailiffs and Stewards of Franchises, have power by Authority aforesaid, to
Examine the Trespassers in this Case, (viz. of false Weights) and to enquire in
special of Offenders against this Ordinance, and to do Execution of them that
be found faulty by Enquests, or by Examination to be made by the said Judges,
or Officers in this case, in the manner as before is said.

Force.
Item, Whereas by the noble King Richard late King of England, Cap. 9.
after the Conquest the second, at his Parliament holden at Westminster, the
Morrow after All Souls, the fifteenth year of his Reign, ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap.
2.) amongst other things it was Ordained and Established, that the Statutes and
Ordinances made and not repealed, of them that make Entries with strong hand
into Lands or Tenements, or other Possessions whatsoever, and them hold with
Force; and of them that make Insurrections, Riots, Routs, Ridings and
Assemblies, in disturbance of the Peace, or of the Common Law, or in affray of
the People, should be holden and fully Executed.

Justices.
And moreover it is ordained by the same Statute, ( Viz. 15 R. 2. 1. N. 2.
Cap. 2. 1. N. 2.) that at all times that such forcible Entries be made, and
complaint thereof come to the Justices of Peace, or any of them, that the same
Justices or Justice, shall take the power of the County, and shall go, or one
of them shall go to the place where such force is made.

Force.
And ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap. 2. 1. N. 3.) if they find, 1. N. 3.
or he finds any holding of such place forcibly after such Entry made, they
should be taken and put in the next Goal, there to remain convicted by the
Record of the same Justices or Justice, until they have made Fine and Ransom to
the King.

Process.
And ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap. 2. 1. N. 4. 1. N. 4.
) that all the people of the County, as well Sheriffs as others, shall be
attending to the said Justices, and assist them to arrest such Malefactors,
upon pain of Imprisonment, and to make Fine and Ransom to the King.

Church.
And ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap. 2. 1. N. 5. 1. N. 5.
) that in the same manner be done of them that make forcible Entries into
Benifices or Offices of holy Church, as in the same Statute is contained more
at Large.

Collusion.
And for that the said Statute, ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap. 2. 2. N. 1.
) does not extend to Entries in Tenements in peaceable manner and after holden
with force, nor if the persons which enter with force into Lands or Tenements
be removed or voided, before the coming of the said Justices or Justice, as
before, nor any Pain ordained, if the Sheriff do not obey the Commands and
Precepts of the said Justices, for to execute the said Ordinances, many
wrongful and forcible Entries be daily made in Lands and Tenements by such as
have no Right, and also diverse Gifts, Feoffments, and Discontinuances sometimes
made to Lords, and other puissant Persons and Extortioners, within the said
Counties where they be conversant, to have Maintenance; and sometimes to such
persons as be unknown to them, so put out, to the intent to delay and defraud
such rightful Possessions of their right and recovery for ever, to the final
Disherison of diverse of the Kings faithful Leige-people, and likely daily to
increase, if due remedy be not provided in this behalf.

Assurances.
Our Lord the King considering the Premises, 2. N. 2.
has ordained that the said Statute, ( viz. 15 R. 2. Cap. 2.) and all other
Statutes of such Entries of Alienations made in times past, shall be holden and
duly Executed.

Force.
Joined to the same, ( viz. to 15. R. 2. Cap. 2.) that from henceforth where any
does make any forcible Entry in Lands and Tenements, 2. N. 3.
or other Possessions, or them hold forcibly, after Complaint thereof made
within the same County where such Entry is made to the Justices of Peace, or to
one of them, by the party grieved, that the Justices or Justice so warned
within a convenient time, shall cause, or one of them shall cause the said
Statute, ( viz. 15. R. 2. Cap. 2.) duly to be Executed, and that at the costs
of the Party so grieved.

Enquest.
And moreover,. 3. N. 1.
though that such persons making suh Entries be present, or else departed
before the coming of the said Justices or Justice, in some good Town next to
the Tenements so entered, or in some other convenient place, according to their
discretion shall have, or either of them shall have Authority and power to
enquire by the people of the same County, as well of them that make such
forcible entries into Lands and Tenements, as of them which the same hold with
force.

3. N. 2.
And if it be found before any of them that any does contrary to this Statute,
then the said Justices or Justice, Justices.
shall cause to be reseised the Lands and Tenements so entered or holden as
aforesaid, and shall put the Party so put out, in full possession of the same
Lands and Tenements, so entered or holden as before.

3. N. 3.
And if any person after such entry into Lands and Tenements holden with force,
make a Feoffment or other Discontinuance, Assurances:
to any Lord or other person to have Maintenance, or to take away and defraud
the Possession of his recovery in any wise; if after in Assise, or other Action
thereof to be taken, or persued before the Justices of Assizes or other the
Kings Justices whatsoever, by due enquiry thereof to be taken, the same
Feoffments and Discontinuances may be duly proved to be made for Maintenance as
before is said, that then such Feoffments, or other Discontinuances so as before
made, shall be Void, Frustrate and holden for none.

4. N. 1.
And also when the said Justices or Justice, Process.
make such Enquiries as before, they shall make, or one of them shall make
their Warrants and Precepts, to be directed to the Sheriff of the same County,
Commanding him of the Kings behalf, to cause to come before them and every of
them, sufficent and indifferent persons, dwelling next about the Lands so
entered as before, to enquire of such Entries.

4. N. 2.
Whereof every man which shall be impannelled, Enquest.
to enquire in this behalf, shall have Lands or Tenements of the yearly value
of forty shillings at the least by the year, above Reprises.

4. N. 3.
And that the Sheriff return Issue upon every of them at the day of the first
Precept returnable twenty shillings, Sheriffs.
and at the second day forty shillings, and at the third an hundred shillings,
and at every day after the double.

4. N. 4.
And if any Sheriff or Bailiff within a Franchise, Return.
having return of the Kings Writ, be slack, and make not Execution duly of the
said Precepts to him directed to make such Enquiries, that he shall forfeit to
the King twenty pounds for every Default, and moreover shall make Fine and
Ransom to the King.

5. N. 1.
And that as well the Justices or Justice aforesaid, Justices.
as the Justices of Assizes and every of them, at their coming into the County
to take Assizes shall have, and every of them shall have Power to hear and
determine, such Defaults and Negligencies of the said Sheriffs and Bailiffs, and
every of them, as well by Bill at the Suit of the Party greived, for himself as
for the King, to sue by Indictment only to be taken for the King.

5. N. 2.
And if the Sheriff or Bailiff be duly attainted in this behalf, by Indictment
or by Bill, that he which sueth for himself and for the King, Sheriffs.
have the one Moiety of the Forfeiture of twenty pounds, together with his
Costs and Expenses.

5. N. 3.
And that the same Process be made against such persons Indicted, or sued by
Bill in this behalf, Process
as should be against Persons Indicted or sued by Writ of Trespass, done with
force and Arms against the Peace of the King.

6. N. 1.
And moreover if any Person be put out or disseized of any Lands or Tenements in
forcible manner, or put out peaceably, Disseisor.
and after holden out with strong hand, or after such Entry any Feoffment or
Discontinuance in any wise thereof be made, to defraud and take away the Right
of the Possessor, that the Party grieved in this behalf shall have Assise of
Novel Disseisin, or a Writ of Trespass against such Disseisor.

5. N. 2.
And if the Party grieved, Force.
recover by Assise or by a Action of Trespass, and it be found by Verdict, or
in other manner by due form in the Law, that the Party Defendant entered with
force into the Lands and Tenements, or them after his entry did hold with
force, that the Plaintiff shall recover his treble Damages against the
Defendant.

6. N. 3.
And moreover that he make Fine and Ransom to the King. Amercement.


6. N. 4.
And that Mayors, Justices or Justice of the Peace, Sheriffs and Bailiffs of
Cities, Justices.
Towns and Boroughs having Franchise have in the said Cities, Towns and
Boroughs, like power to remove such Entries, and in other Articles aforesaid
rising within the same, as the Justices of Peace and Sheriffs, in Counties and
Countries aforesaid have.

Force.
Provided always, 7. N. 1.
that they which keep their Possessions with force in any Lands and Tenements,
whereof they or their Ancestors, or they whose Estate they have in such Lands
and Tenements, have continued their Possessions in the same by three years or
more, be not endamaged by force of this Statute.

Riot.
Our Lord the King, etc. has ordained etc. that the said Statute, C. 14. 1. N.
15.
( viz. 2 H. 5. Cap. 9.) shall now be kept, and firmly holden for a Statute for
ever, etc.

Certificat.
Provided always, 2. N. 1.
that it be testified by two Justices of Peace of the Counties where such Riot
shall be supposed that the common Fame and Voice runs in the same Counties
of the same Riots, before that the Writ of Capias shall be awarded. (2 H. 5.
Cap. 9. 2. N. 1.)

Indictment.
Item, 11 H. 6. C. 6.
Our Lord the King considering the great Losses and Damages which often times
have come, and be like co come hereafter, as well to himself as to many of his
Leiges, for that where as well diverse Indictments and Suits for our Lord the
King, as other Suits between party and party, have been taken before diverse
Justices of the Peace Assigned by several Commissions of our said Lord the King
in diverse Counties of England, and diverse Pleas and Processes upon these
Indictments have been often made, and hanging before the same Justices not
determined, the which Pleas and Processes have been often Discontinued, by
making new Commissions of the Peace in those Counties, to the great Loss of our
said Lord the King and of his Subjects, in delay of the same Pleas and Suits,
and of the Deliverance of his said Subjects.

Abatement.
And upon that our Lord the King willing to provide remedy of the Assent and
Authority abovesaid, has Ordained and Established, 1. N. 2.
that in all such Pleas, Suits and Processes, in them to be taken and to be
made before Justices of Peace in any County of England, the said Pleas and
Processes in such Suits to be done, shall not be discontinued by such new
Commissions of the Peace to be made, but these Pleas and Processes shall stand
in their force.

Justices.
And the Justices in the same new Commission so Assigned, 1. N. 3.
after that they shall have the Records of the same Pleas and Processes before
them, shall have Power and Authority to continue the said Pleas and Processes,
and the same Pleas and Processes and all that depend upon them, to hear and
finally to determine, as the other Justices might and ought to have done of and
in the same, if no new Commission had been made.

Wax.
And that as well every Justice of Peace in the County where he is Justice, as
Mayors and Bailiffs within Cities and Boroughs, C. 12. 1. N. 4.
Stewards of Lords within the Franchises of their Lords, have Power and
Authority, to Examine and Search, (viz. those that sell Wax-Candles too dear) as
well by Weights of such Candles, Images, Figures and other Works of Wax, as in
other manner by their Discretion, and all them that any thing shall hereafter
do against this Statute, and to punish them that by such Examination and Search
shall be found guilty in the form abovesaid.

Days.
Item, Whereas it was Ordained by a Statute, ( viz. 12 Rich. 2. 14 H. 6. C. 4.
Cap. 10. 1. N. 2.) that the Justices of Peace of all the Counties of England
for the time being, should sit and hold all their Sessions four times by the
year, to Enquire and Execute all Charges contained in their Commission, which
they be sworn to do according to the form of the Statute, upon a great pain, as
by the same Statute more fully appears.

Justices.
Our Lord the King considering that all the high Courts be set and holden in the
County of Midlesex, 1. N. 2.
continually during all the four times of the Term, by which time of Term, the
Commons Inhabiting in and of the same County, must attend from time to time to
Enquire of all the Articles to the said Courts belonging, as Reason and Law
requires, and that presently after every of the said Terms ended, the said
Justices of the said County do sit and hold their Sessions in the same County
as they ought to do by force of the said Statute, ( viz. 12 R. 2. Cap. 10. 1.
N. 2.) more to avoid the said Penalty than for any other necessary thing there
to be required, at which Sessions they cause to come before them, a great part
of the Inhabitants and Commons of the said County of Midlesex, to enquire of
all manner of things, as to them is given in charge, and by that means they be
charged and vexed throughout all the year, as well out of the time of Term as
in the time of Term, so that they have no rest nor time to do their Husbandry
and their Labor, to get their Living in any wise, to their utter undoing, if
they be not releived in this behalf.

1. N. 3.
Therefore the same our Lord the King willing in this case to provide for them a
Remedy, has Ordained, by the Advice and Assent aforesaid, Peace.
and at the Request of the said Commons of the Realm, that the Justices of
Peace which now be, and all other hereafter for the time being in the said
County of Midlesex, shall be clearly discharged of the said Penalty by
Authority of the same Parliament from henceforth, the Court of Kings Bench
being set in the said County of Midlesex.

1. N. 4.
Provided always that the said Justices of Peace of the said County of Midlesex
for the time being, keep, Force.
observe and execute the Court of the Sessions of the Peace, two times in the
year at least, and more often if need be, for any Riot, or forcible Entry made
within the same County of Midlesex, and that upon the Pain and Forfeiture of
such Sums as be for that ordained, by any Law made before this time, to the end
and intent, that the said Commons and Inhabitants of the said County of
Midlesex, be not enforced nor compelled to appear before the Justices of Peace
of the same County for the time being, but at such time which shall seem by the
Discretion of the same Justices of Peace necessary and behoofeful, 25 Ed, 3.
Cap. 8. and 36 Ed. 3. Cap. 12. 12 R. 2. Cap. 10. 1. N. 2. and 2 H. 5. Cap. 4.
2. N. 2.

18 H. 6 cap. 11.
Item, Whereas by Statutes, ( viz. 1 E 3. Cap. 16. 1. N. 2. Justices.
18 E. 3. St. 2. Cap. 2. and 13 R. 2. Cap. 7. and 17 R. 2. Cap. 10. N. 2.) made
in the time of the Kings noble Progenitors, it was Ordained that in every
County of England, Justices should be Assigned of the most worthy of the same
Counties to keep the Peace, and to do other things as in the same Statutes
fully is contained, which Statutes notwithstanding now of late in many Counties
of England, the greatest number have been Deputed and Assigned, which before
this time were not wont to be, whereof some be of small Behavior, by whom the
People will not be Governed nor Ruled, and some for their necessity do great
Extortion and Oppression upon the People, whereof great Inconveniences be
likely to rise daily, if the King thereof do not provide Remedy.

1. N. 2.
The King willing against such Inconveniences to provide Remedy, Ability.
has Ordained and Established by Authority aforesaid, that no Justices of
Peace within the Realm of England in any County, shall be Assigned or Deputed,
if he have not Lands and Tenements to the value of 20 l. by year.

1. N. 3.
And if any be Ordained hereafter to be Justices of Peace in any County, which
has not Lands or Tenements to the value aforesaid, Justices.
that he thereof shall give knowledge to the Chancellor of England for the time
being, which shall put another Sufficient in his place.

1. N. 4.
And if he give not the said knowledge as before, Notice.
within a Month after that he has notice of such Commission, or if he sit, or
make any Warrant or Precept by force of such Commission, he shall incur the
Penalty of 20 l. and nevertheless be put out of the Commission as before.

1. N. 5.
And the King shall have one half of the said Penalty, Forfeiture.
and he that will sue for the King the other half, and he that will sue for the
King and for himself, shall have an Action to demand the same Penalty, by Writ
of Debt at the Common Law.

2. N. 1.
Provided always, that this Ordinance shall not extend to Cities, Corporation.
Towns or Boroughs which be Counties Incorporate of themselves, nor to Cities,
Towns or Boroughs, which have Justices of Peace of Persons dwelling in the same
by Commission, or Warrant of the King or of his Progenitors.

Ability.
Provided also, 2. N. 2.
that if there be not sufficient Persons having Lands and Tenements to the
value aforesaid, learned in the Law, and of good Governance within any such
County, that the Chancellor of England for the time being, shall have power to
put other discreet persons learned in the Law in such Commissions, though they
have not Lands or Tenements to the value aforesaid, by his Discretion.

War.
And if it be found by Enquiry before Justices of Peace and proved, C. 19. 2. N.
5.
that they, (viz. Soldiers) have so mustred of Record, and departed from their
Captains aforesaid, (viz. within the term of retainer) without License as before
is said, (viz. under Seal of Captain for Sickness etc.) that then they shall be
punished as Felons.

Sheriffs.
And that the Justices of Assizes in their Sessions, 23 H. 6. C. 10. 2. N. 13.
etc. and Justices of Peace in their County, shall have power to enquire, hear
and determine of Office without special Commission, of and upon all them, (viz.
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Coroners, etc.) that do contrary to these Ordinances, in
any Article or point of the same.

Fees.
And the Justices of the Kings Bench and of the Commonplace, C. 11. 3. N. 1.
Justices of Assizes and Jail-delivery, and Justices of Peace in every County,
shall have power to enquire, hear and determine of all the said Defaults, as
well by Enquiry at the Kings Suit as by Action at the Suit of the Parties,
(viz. for undue levying of Wages of Knights of Shires of Parliament.

Attorney.
And if any Person or Persons usurp, 33 H. 6. C. 7. 3. N. 8.
or presume to be Atturneys in Courts of Record in the said Counties, ( viz. of
Norfolk or Suffolk) or City, ( viz. of Norwich) otherwise then before is
specified, (viz. by Election of the Justices, etc.) and that found by
Enquisition taken before the Justices of Peace in the said City or Counties,
(which shall have power by Virtue of this Ordinance to enquire thereof in their
Sessions) or in any other manner lawfully proved, that then he or they that so
presume, if they be thereof lawfully Convict, shall forfeit twenty pounds, etc.

Statuta Ed. 4.
Sheriffs.
BUT that the said Sheriffs and their Under Sheriffs, 1 Ed. 4. C. 2. 3. N. 4.
Clerks or Bailiffs and their Ministers, shall bring, present, and deliver all
such Indictments, (viz. of Felony. Trespass, etc.) or Presentiments taken before
them or any of them, in their Towns or Law-days aforesaid, to the Justices of
Peace, at their next Sessions of the Peace that shall be holden in the County
or Counties, where such Indictments and Presentiments shall be taken before the
Justices of such County or Counties for the time being.

Indictments.
And that the said Justices of Peace shall have Power and Authority to Award
Process upon all such Indictments as the Law does require, 3. N. 6.
and in like form as if the said Indictments and Presentiments were taken before
the said Justices of Peace in the said County or Counties, and also to Arraign
and deliver all such Person or Persons so Indicted and Presented, before the
said Sheriffs, Under Sheriffs, their Clerks, Bailiffs and their Ministers or
any of them, in their Towns or Law-days.

Amercement.
And all such Person or Persons which be Indicted or Presented of Trespass, 3.
N. 7.
shall make such a Fine as shall seem lawful by their Discretions.

Drapery.
And that every Justice of Peace for the time being of every County of this
Realm, throughout the same County out of Cities, 4 Ed. 4. C. ^. 6. N. ^.
Boroughs and Towns where any Mayor, Master, Warden, Bailiff or Bailiffs is or
be, and shall have Power and Authority by this Ordinance, to hear and determine
the Complaints of every such Cloath-maker and Labourer, as well for Non-paymnt
of the said Laborers wages, as of the said Forfeiture and Dam ageseby due
Examination of the Parties in this behalf, thereupon for nonpayment of the said
Duties and Forfeiture, and for the said Damages, to commit the said Offenders in
this behalf, to the next Goal within the same County, there to remain till the
said Duties, Forfeitures and Damages be fully paid to the said Labourer or
Cloath-maker.

6. N. 4.
And also that every of the said Justices of Peace, Justices.
etc. upon the Information or Complaint of any other Person which is not
grieved in this behalf, shall have power by the said Authority within his
Jurisdiction, to cause the Party to come before him against whom such
Information or Complaint shall be made for Offending this Ordinance, and to
examine him in and upon the matter contained in the same Information or
Complaint.

6. N. 6.
And that every of the said Justices of Peace, Process.
etc. within his Jurisdiction upon every of the said Informations or
Complaints, shall have full power to make like Process against the Party upon
whom any such Information or Complaint as before is rehearsed, shall be made, to
cause him personally to appear before him, thereupon to be examined, as
Justices of Peace have upon Information or Complaint made to them for surety of
the Peace, without any Fee or Reward, to be taken or had by any of the said
Justices, etc.

12 Ed. 4. C. 9. 6. N. 14.
And the Justices of Peace in every place Corporate, Corporation.
and the Justices of Peace in every other place having Justices of Peace within
them, shall have power to hear and determine every such Forfeiture, ( viz. of
Escheator not having twenty pound a year, or Letting to Farm, etc.) upon
Presentment thereof had before them in their Sessions.

6. N. 15.
In which Presentment like Process shall be had as is used upon Indictments of
Trespass, Process.
done with Force and Arms against the Kings Peace.

17 Ed. 4. C. 4. 1. N. 13.
And also that the Justices of Peace for the time being within any County of
this Realm, and every of them shall have full power to enquire, Masons.
hear and determine by their discretions, as well by Examination or otherwise,
the Defaults Offenses and Trespasses which shall happen to be committed contrary
to this Ordinance, (viz. of Tile-makers) as well at the Kings Suit, as at the
Parties which shall fell himself greived in that behalf.

1. N. 14.
And if it be found or may appear, Justices.
to the Justices of Peace or any of them, by Examination or otherwise by their
Discretion, that any Person or Persons has offended contrary to this
Ordinance, that then the same Justices before whom it shall be found or appear,
shall assess upon the Offenders in this behalf, no less Fine than for every M.
of plain-Tile set to sale contrary to this Ordinance V s. and for every C. of
Roof-tile VI s. VIII d. and for every C. of Corner-tile, or Gutter-tile II s.
sold contrary to this Ordinance, etc.

1. N. 15.
And that the same Justices shall have full power to call before them or any of
them, at any time and place requisite, Process.
such and so many persons as by their Discretion have or shall have best
experience in the Occupation of making of Tile, to search or examine in the
digging, casting, turning, parting, making, whitning and anealing aforesaid.

1. N. 18.
And if the same Searchers or any of them do find, Indictment.
that any person or persons exercising the Occupation of Tile-making, do offend
contrary to this Ordinance, that then the same Searchers shall present such
Defaults before the Justices of Peace at their next Sessions.

1. N. 19.
And that every such Presentment shall be as strong and effectual in the Law, as
the Presentment of twelve men. Enquest.


1. N. 12.
And that the Justices of Peace shall have power to examine, Justices.
Enquire and determine the Defaults of such Searchers in the Premises, in like
form as above is ordained for the Defaults of Tile-makers.

Statuta Rich. 3.
Bayl.
BE it enacted, 1 R. 3. Cap. 3. 1. N. 2.
etc. that every Justice of Peace in every Shire City or Town, shall have
Authority and Power by his or their Discretion, to Let such Prisoners and
Persons so arrested, (Viz. on malice, or light Suspicion of Felony) to Bail or
Mainprize in like form as though the same Prisoners or Persons were Indicted
thereof, of record before the same Justices in their Sessions, 3 H. 7. Cap. 3.
1. N. 7. and 34 Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. 6.

Coron.
And that Justices of Peace have Authority to Enquire in their Sessions, 1. N. 3.
of all manner Escapes of every person Arrested and Imprisoned for Felony.

Fines.
And it is Ordained etc. that a like Transcript of the same Fine, Cap. 7. 2. N.
1.
(viz. in C. B.) shall be sent to the Justices of Peace of the County where the
said Lands. etc. be, they to cause open and solemn Proclamation of the said
Fine to be made, at four general Sessions of the Peace to be holden the same
year.

Statuta Hen. 7.
Forest.
THE King our Sovereign Lord etc. Ordained, 1 H. 7. Cap. 7. 1. N. 3.
that at every such time as Information shall be made of any such unlawful
Huntings, (viz. in Forests, Parks and Warrens) by night, or with painted faces
hereafter to be done to any of the Kings Counsel, or to any of the Justices of
the Kings Peace of the County where any such Hunting shall be had, of any
person to be suspect thereof, that then it shall be lawful to any of the said
Justices of Peace or Counsel, to whom any such Information shall be made, to
make a Warrant to the Sheriff of such County, or to any Constable, Bailiff or
other Officer within the same County, to take and arrest the same person or
persons of whom any such Information shall be had, and to have him or them
before the Maker of any such Warrant, or any other the Kings said Counsel, or
Justice of his place of the same County.

Justices.
And that the said Counselor or Justice of Peace before whom such person or
persons shall be brought, 1. N. 4.
by his Discretion have power to examine him or them, so brought before the said
Counselor or Justice, of the said Hunting, and of the said Defaults in that
behalf.

Amercement.
And if he then confess truth, 1. N. 6.
and all that he shall be examined of and knows in that behalf, that then the
said Offenses of Huntings by him done, be against the King our Sovereign Lord,
but Tresspass Finable, by reason of the same Confession at the next general
Sessions of the Peace, to be holden in the same County, by the Kings Justices
of the same Sessions there to be Sessed.

Enquest.
And over that, 3 H. 7. C. 1. 1. N. 4.
(viz. besides the Star Chambers Jurisdictions) it is Ordained etc. that the
Justices of Peace of every Shire of this Realm for the time being, may take by
their Discretion an Enquest, whereof every man shall have Lands and Tenements
to the yearly value of forty shillings at the least, to enquire of the
Concealments of other Enquests taken before them, and before other, of such
matters and Offenses, as are to be enquired and presented before Justices of
Peace, whereof Complaint shall be made by Bill or Bills, as well within
Franchis as without.

Amercement.
And if any such Concealment be found of any Enquest as is before rehearsed, had
or made within the year after the said Concealment, 1. N. 5.
every person of the same Enquest to be Amerced for the same Concealments, by
Discretion of the same Justices of the Peace, the said Amercements to be Sessed
in plain Sessions.

. 1 N. 21.
And also Justices of Peace have Power to enquire of such Escapes, Escape.
(viz. of Murderers in the Day) and that to certify before the King in his
Bench.

1. N. 26.
And also it is Ordained by the same Authority, Peace.
that every Justice of Peace within this Realm that shall take any Recognizance
for the keeping of the Peace, that the same Justice do certify, send or bring
the same Recognizance, at the next Sessions of the Peace where he is or has
been Justice, that the party so bound may be called.

1. N. 27.
And if the party make Default, Justices.
the same Default then there to be recorded, and the same Recognizance with the
Record of the same Default, be sent and certified into the Chancery, or before
the King in his Bench, or into the Kings Exchequer.

Cap. 3. 1. N. 3.
Wherefore the King, etc. has ordained. Bail.
etc. that the Justices of Peace in every Shire, City or Town, or two of them
at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, have Authority and Power to Let
any such Prisoners or persons mainpernable by the Law, that have been
Imprisoned within their several Counties, City or Town, to Bail or Mainprize
unto their next general Sessions, or unto the next Jail-delivery of the same
Goals in every Shire, City or Town, as well within Franchises as without, where
any Goals be, or hereafter shall be, 1 and 2 Ph. and Mary 13. 1. N. 2.

1. N. 4.
And that the said Justices of the Peace or one of them, Certificate.
so taking any such Bail or Mainprize, do certify the same at the next general
Sessions of the Peace, or the next Jail-delivery of any such Goal, within every
such County, City or Town, next following after any such Bail or Mainprize so
taken, upon pain to forfeit unto the King for every Default thereupon recorded,
10 l.

1. N. 7.
And that the foresaid Act, ( viz. 1 R. 3 Cap. 3. 1. N. 2. Joynder.
) giving Authority and Power in the Premises to any Austice of the Peace by
himself, be in that behalf utterly Void and of none Effect, by Authority of
this present Parliament.

4 H. 7. C. 12.
Item, The King our Sovereign Lord considers, that by the negligence,
Justices.
misdemeaning, favor, and other Inordinate Causes of Justices of Peace in
every Shire of this his Realm, the Laws and Ordinances made for the
politick-weal, peace and good-rule of the same, and for the profit, surety, and
restful living of his Subjects of the same, be not duly Executed, according to
the tenor and effect of that they were made and ordained for.

1. N. 2.
Wherefore his Subjects been greivously hurt, Prerog.
and out of surety of their Bodies and Goods, to his great displeasure; for to
him is nothing more joyous, than to know his Subjects to live peaceably under
his Laws, and to increase in Wealth and Prosperity.

1. N. 3.
And to avoid such Enormities and Injuries, Peace.
so that his said Subjects may live restfully under his Peace and Laws to their
Increase.

1. N. 4.
He will that it be Ordained and Enacted by Authority of this said Parliament,
Days.
that every Justice of Peace within every Shire of this Realm within the Shire
where he is Justice of Peace, do cause openly and solemnly to be proclaimed
yearly, four times a year in four principal Sessions, the tenor of this
Proclamation to this Bill annexed.

1. N. 5.
And that every Justice of Peace being present at any of the said Sessions,
Justices.
if they cause not the said Proclamations for to be made in form abovesaid,
shall forfeit unto our Sovereign Lord at every time twenty shillings.

2. N. 1.
Henricus Dei Gratia, etc. The King our Sovereign Lord considers, Execution.
how daily within this Realm his Coin is Traitorously Counterfeited, Murders,
Robberies, Felonies been greivously committed and done, and also unlawful
Reteyners, Idleness, unlawful Plays, Extortions, Misdemeanings of Sheriffs,
Escheators, and many other Enormities and unlawful Demeanings, daily grown more
and more within this Realm, to the great Displeasure of God, Hurt and
Impoverishing of his Subjects, and to the Subversion of the Policy and good
Governance of this his Realm; for by these sad Enormities and Mischeifs, his
Peace is broken, his Subjects troubled, inquieted and impoverished, the
Husbandry of this Land decayed, whereby the Church of England is upholden, the
Service of God continued, every man thereby has his sustenance, every
Inheritor his rent for his Land.

Process.
For repressing and avoiding of the said mischeifs sufficient Laws and
Ordinances been made by Authority of many and diverse Parliaments holden within
this Realm, to the great cost of the King, 2. N. 2.
his Lords, and Commons of the same, and lacks nothing, but that the said
Laws be not put in due execution which Laws ought to be put in due execution by
the Justices of Peace of every Shire of this Realm, to whom his Grace has put
and given full authority so to do since the beginning of his reign,

Justices.
And now it is come to his knowledge, 2. N. 3.
that his Subjects be little cased of the said mischeifs by the said Justices,
but by many of them rather hurt than helped, and if his Subjects complain to
these Justices of Peace, of any wrongs done to them, they have thereby no
remedy, and the said mischeifs do increase and be not subdued.

Peace.
And his Grace considers, 2. N. 4.
that a great part of his wealth and prosperity of his Land stands in that,
that his Subjects may live in surety under his Peace in their bodies and goods,
and that the Husbandry of this Land may increase and be upholden, which must be
had by due execution of these Laws and Ordinances, charge and commands the
Justices of the Peace of this his Shire, to endeavor them to do and execute
the tenor of their Commission, and the said Laws and Ordinances ordained for
the subduing of the premises, as they will stand in love and favor of his
Grace, and in avoiding of the pains that are ordained if they do the contrary.

Process.
And moreover he charge and commands, 2. N. 5.
that every man what degree or condition that he be of, that let them in word
or deed to execute their said authority in any manner and form abovesaid, that
they shall show it to his Grace, and if they do it not, and it come to his
knowledge by other than by them, they shall not be in his favor, but taken as
men out of credence, and be put out of Commission for ever.

Execution.
And over this he charge and commands all manner of men as well the poor as
the rich (which be to him all one in due ministration of Justice) that is hurt
or grieved in any thing, 2. N. 6.
that the said Justice of Peace may hear determine or execute in any wise, that
he so grieved make his complaint to the Justice of Peace, that next dwells
unto him, or to any of his fellows, and desire a remedy.

Justices.
And if then he have no remedy, 2. N. 7.
if it be nigh such time as his Justices of Assizes come into that Shire, that
then he so grieved show his complaint to the same Justices.

Chancery.
And if then he have no remedy, 2. N. 8.
or if the complaint be made long before the coming of the Justices of Assize,
then he so grieved come to the Kings Highness, or to his Chancellor for the
time being and show his grief.

Process.
And his said Higness then shall send for the said Justice to know the cause why
his said Subjects be not eased, and his Laws executed, 2. N. 9.
whereupon if he find any of them in default of executing of his Laws in the
premises according to his Highness commandment he shall do him so offending to
be put out of the Commission, and further to be punished according to his
merits.

Justices.
And over that his said Highness shall not let for any favor, 2. N. 10.
affection, cost, charge, nor other cause, but that he shall see his Laws to
have plain and true execution, and his Subjects to live in surety of their
lands, bodies, and goods, according to his said Laws, and the said mischeifs to
be avoided, that his Subjects may increase in wealth and prosperity to the
pleasure of God.

Measures.
And that the Justices of Peace of every Shire of England have full authority
and power to inquire, hear, 7 H. 7. cap. 4. 1. N. 12.
or determine the said defaults ( viz. in Weights and Measures, etc.)

Games.
And that the Householder, where Dicing, Carding, Tennis-playing, 11 H. 7. C. 2.
1. N. 14.
Bowls, Clash, or any other unlawful games before rehearsed shall be used owise
than is before rehearsed, (viz. in Christmas in the presence of the Master) and
that lawfully be presented before the Justices of Peace, the Mayor, Sheriff in
his Turn, or Steward in his Leet, or by examination had before the said Justices
of Peace, that Process be made upon the same, as upon Indictment of Trespass
against the Kings Peace, 19 H. 7. cap. 12. 2. N. 4.

1. N. 15.
And that the said Misdoer be admitted to no Fine under the Sum of 6 s. 8 d. 19
H. 7. cap. 12. 2. N. 4. Amercement.


1. N. 16.
And that it be lawful to two of the Justices of the Peace, Justices.
whereof one shall be of the Quorum, within their authority, to reject and put
away common Ale selling in Towns and Places where they shall think convenient,
19 H. 7. cap. 12. 2. N. 5.

1. N. 17.
And to take surety of Keepers of Alehouses, Ale.
of their good behavior by the discretion of the said Justices, and in the
same to be advised and agreed at the time of their Sessions, 19 H. 7. Cap. 12.
2. N. 6.

Cap. 3.
The King our Sovereign Lord calling to his remembrance, Riot.
that many good Statutes and Ordinances be made for the punishment of Riots,
unlawful Assemblies, Retainers, and giving and receiving of Liveries, Signs and
Tokens unlawfully, Extortions, Maintenance, Imbracery, excessive taking of
Wages contrary to the Statute of Laborers and Artificers (viz. 23 Ed. 3. cap.
1.) the use of unlawful Games, inordinate Apparel, and many other great
inconveniences and offenses, which been committed and done daily, contrary to
the good Statutes for many and diverse behooful considerations, severally made
and ordained, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, and the great let of the
Common Law and Weal of this Land, notwithstanding generally by the Justices of
the Peace in every Shire within this Realm in the open Sessions is given in
charge to inquire of many Offenses committed contrary to diverse of the said
Statutes, and diverse inquests thereupon there straightly sworn and charged before
the said Justices to inquire of the premises, and therein to present the Truth,
which is let to be found by embracery, maintenance, corruption and favor,
by occasion whereof the said Statutes be not, nor cannot be put in due
execution, 1 H. 8. Cap. 6.

1. N. 2.
For reformation whereof, Enquest.
for so much that before this time the said Offenses, Extortions, Contempts,
and other the premises might not, nor as yet may be conveniently punished by
the due order of the Law, except it were first found and presented by the
verdict of twelve Men, thereto duly sworn, which for the causes before rehearsed
will not find, nor yet present the truth, 3 H. 7. Cap. 1. 1. N. 2.

1. N. 3.
Wherefore be it by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temparal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, Justices.
and by authority of the same Enacted, Ordained, and Stablished, that from
henceforth, as well the Justices of the Assize in the open Sessions to be
holden before them, as the Justices of Peace in every County of the said Realm,
upon Information for the King, before them to be made, have full power and
authority by their discretion to hear and determine all Offenses and Contempts
committed and done by any person or persons, against the form, ordinance, or
effort of any Statute made and not repealed, 1 H. 8. Cap 6.

1. N. 4.
And that the said Justices upon the said Information, Process.
shall have full power and authority to award and make like Process against the
said Offenders and every of them, as they should or might make against such
person or persons as been presented and indicted before them of Trespass done
contrary to the Kings Peace, and the said Offender and Offenders duly to punish
according to the purport, form and effect of the said Statutes.

1. N. 5.
Also be it Enacted by the said authority, Information.
that the person which shall give the said Information for the King, shall by
the discretion of the said Justices content and pay to the said person or
persons, against whom the said Information shall be so given, his reasonable
costs and damages in that behalf sustained, if that it be tried or found
against him, that so gives or makes any such Information, 11 H. 7. Cap. 7. 1.
N. 18.

1. N. 6.
Provided always that any such Information extend not to Treason, Treason.
Murder, or Felony, nor to any other Offense, wherefore any person shall lose
Life or Member nevertheless, by nor upon the same Information, any Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to the Party making the same Information.

Lieu.
Provided also that the said Information shall not extend to any Person dwelling
in another Shire than there, 1. N. 7
as the said Information shall be given or made.

Franchise.
Saving to every Person and Persons, Cities and Towns, 1. N. 8.
all their Liberties and Franchises to them and every of them of right
belonging and appertaining.

Measures.
And two Justices of Peace, Ca. 4. 1. N. 13.
whereof one shall be of the Quorum have authority as well by examination as by
inquiry, to hear and determine the faults of the said Mayors, Bailiffs, and
other Head Officers in that behalf (viz. Of Weights and Measures) And also of
all Buyers and Sellers doing contrary to this present Act and Ordinance, and to
set Fine and Amercement upon the Offenders by their discretion, 34 Ed. 3. Cap.
5. and 7 H. 7. Cap. 4. 1. N 12.

Process.
Be it also ordained, etc. 1. N. 16.
That the Justices of Peace abovesaid have authority to make like Process
against all Persons found, as is abovesaid defective, and for such Fines and
Amercements as upon them shall be assess'd, as if they were Indicted before them
for breaking of the Kings Peace.

Riot.
Prayen the Commons of this our Land in this present Parliament assembled, Cap 7.
that where for the great rest and tranquillity of your said Commons, true
Liege-men and Subjects inhabited in this your Realm, diverse and many good
Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances have been made in times past, ordained and
stablished to subdue and punish Riots, for the unlawful raising and leading of
People, Riots, Routs, and other unlawful assemblies, whereby many evil Deeds,
Ieoperdies, Perils, Fear, and Dread to your Subjects have grown, and thereupon
great Penalties set upon the said Rioters and Offenders, as in diverse remembered
Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, in the days of your noble Progenitors, at
several times made, ordained, and provided, more at large does and may appear.

Franchise.
Yet the same Acts notwithstanding, some Persons, not dreading God, 1. N. 2.
their Sovereign Lord, nor the punishment of the Laws, made and had in this
behalf, often times as well by color of such Offices as they have obtained, as
Receivers, Stewards, and Bailiffs of Lordships, and other Officers, as by penny
Reteiners, by Oath, Promise, Covenant, and otherwise, and claiming also duty of
their Tenants and Servants, where none such duty is to go with them, when such
Assembly, Riot, or Rout shall be.

Riot.
And after the same diverse of the said Servants and Persons often times retreat
and absent themselves by the agreement, coviy, 1. N. 3.
and counsel of the said Masters, and of the said principal Rioters, so that
they may not be taken, nor brought to answer to the Law, as the Laws require.

Indictment.
And if any Indictments be had, 1. N. 4.
it shall be made upon such Persons as so retreat and absent themselves, and
nothing founden against the said principal Rioters in deceit and fraud of the
said good Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances thereof made to the great courage, and
boldness, and comfort of the Evil Doers, most Danger, Ieopardy, and Peril of
your said well disposed Subjects, and to the worst example, that thereby may
ensue, if hasty remedy therein be not provided.

Riot.
It may therefore please your Highness of your most loving disoosition, 1. N. 5.
that you bear and owe to the Commonweal of this your Land, and to the great
Surety of your Subjects of the same, by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same to Do, Ordain, Enact, and Establish, that whatsoever
Person or Persons within the Realm, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition he be,
that hereafter unlawfully raise Assemblies, or lead your People within this
your Realm, without your Commandment or Authority of your Laws, and commit any
Riot, that then if the Party greived, or any other Person in the Kings behalf,
complain to the Justices of the Peace within the County where such Riot is
done, or to any of them having authority to inquire of the same, where such
Riot or unlawful Assembly shall be made by Bill containing the Riot, and the
circumstance of the same, and of what Town, Shire, Mystery, or Condition every
of the Persons against whom the same Complaint be made is dwelling, or else if
the said Roiters be Indicted thereof, then, thereupon the said Justices, and
every of them have authority and power in the next general Sessions of the
Peace within the same County to be holden after the Complaint so to them made,
or Indictment thereof, had before the same Justices to do, make Proclamation,
that the said Master or Masters, Principal or Principals, Leader or Leaders,
that unlawfully cause the said People to gather or rise, that they appear
Personally at the next general Sessions of the Peace after the said
Proclamation so made.

1. N. 6.
And every other Person or Persons, Accessory.
that were present and attendant upon him or them by his or their commandment,
procuring, or assent, contained in the said Proclamation at the said Riot,
Rout, and Assembly, and every of them personally to appear at the said next
Sessions of Peace, next after the said Proclamation to be holden within the
said County.

1. N. 7.
At which day if the said Master or Masters, War.
Principal or Principals, Leader or Leaders, or any other of the foresaid
Offenders appear, then he or they to be put to answer thereunto, if it seem to
the said Justices reasonable, and to be put to sufficient Bail by Recognizance
before the said Justices to appear personally from Sessions to Sessions unto
the time the Complaint be discussed.

1. N. 8.
And if he or they refuse so to do, then he or they be committed to ward,
Imprisonment.
there to remain till they will.

1. N. 9.
And if any of the Persons against whom such Complaint or Indictment is had or
made, dwell in any other County, Process.
than in the same County, where such Riot, and Assembly is made, that then the
Justices to or before whom the same Complaint or Indictment is had or made do
send a Transcript of the same Complaint or Indictments, to some Justices of the
Peace in the County where such Person is dwelling, desiring him to cause
Proclamation to be made in the next general Sessions of the Peace in that
County to be holden, that the same Person or Persons appear at the next
Sessions of the Peace in the Shire, where the said Riot is done next after the
same Proclamation to be holden.

1. N. 10.
And if the same Person or Persons dwelling in a foreign Shire appear, Leiu.
then like order to be had for he or them so appearing, as is before specified,
for and to them, that been dwelling in the said Shire, whereby the said Riot is
supposed to be done.

1. N. 11.
And if the same Person or Persons, Notice.
or any of them against whom such Proclamation is made in the County where the
said Riot is supposed to be done, and they be dwelling at the time of the same
Proclamation making, in the same County, make default and appear not at the
said general Sessions to him or them limited in the large Proclamation, and often
soones after that make default, and appear not at the next general Sessions
after that, so that like Proclamation be made, as is aforesaid, and if any of
the said Rioters against whom Proclamation is made in a foreign Shire where
they be dwelling, make default at the day and place in the said Proclamation to
them limited, then he or they, in whether of the said Shires they dwell that so
make default, to stand and be adjudged and convict upon the same defaults of
the said Riot and unlawful Assembly, as if he or they were thereof convict by
the due Order of the Law, without he or they can make such lawful Excuse, as
the said Justices shall think reasonable by their discretion.

1. N. 12.
And thereupon such process to be awarded, Process.
as is accustomed upon Condemnations of Trespass in your Common Bench at the
Suit of the Party.

1. N. 13.
And that the said Justices of Peace have authority to hear and determine the
rehearsed causes, Justices.
as well upon Bill before them as by Indictments, and upon the same Bill or
Indictments to proceed and determine the same by Inquest according to the
course of the Common Laws, and the Party thereby and thereupon to stand
convict, as perfectly as if they were thereupon convict by due process of the
Law.

War.
And if the said Master or Masters, Principal or Principals, 1. N. 14
Leader or Leaders, or any other before rehearsed Offenders be convict upon the
premises, then he or they be committed to prison, there to remain and abide
without Bail or Mainprize by such time and space as shall be thought reasonable
by the discretion of the said Justices, and then e're he or they depart out of
their prison to pay their Fine, sessed after the descretion of the said
Justices, his or their behavior and Offenses considered.

Peace.
And that it be enacted by the said Authority, 1. N. 15.
that by the discretion of the said Justices, and as they see need, every of
the said Master or Masters, Principal or Principals, Leader or Leaders, and
other the said Offenders so convict be bound to the Kings peace from thence
forth in such Sums of money as shall be considered by the said Justices, and the
said Surety to stand by the discretion of the said Justices.

Riot.
And if it be so, 1. N. 16.
that if the said Riot and unlawful Assembly be committed with the number of
forty persons, or above, or with less number than forty, and that by discretion
of the Justices it be thought heinous, that then, if the said Master or
Masters, Principal or Principals, Leader or Leaders, that have appeared and so
thereof be convict, that then they remain in Prison unto the time that they
have found sufficient Surety to appear before the King and his Council at a
certain day by the said Justices to be limited.

Records.
At the which day or before, 1. N. 17.
the Keeper of the Gaol Rolls of the said Records shall do to be sent under his
Seal the said whole Record of the convictiton to the King our Sovereign Lord
and his Council, to the intent that his Highness and his Council may award such
Imprisonment and Fines of the said Master or Masters, Principal or Principals,
Leader or Leaders, as by his Highness and his said Council shall be thought
convenient.

Damages.
And if the Party Complainant, 1. N. 18.
as is aforesaid cannot prove the matter of his said Bill to be true, then he
to pay reasonable costs and damages of the Party vexed, as shall be thought
reasonable by the discretion of the same Justices, and they to make against the
same Complainant, not proving the matter of his said Bill to be true, such
Process against him for the said Costs and damages as is before limited against
the said Rioters convict of the said Riot for the payment of their said Fines.

Imprisonment.
And if the said Complainant or Complainants have not sufficient whereof to
restore the party and parties so vexed and troubled in form aforesaid, 1. N. 19.
that then he immediately be committed to the common Goal by the said Justices,
there to remain the space and time as shall be thought by the said Justices
convenient and reasonable.

Continuance
And that this Act endure but unto the next Parliament, 1. N. 20.
1 Mar. 1. St 2. Cap 12. and 19 H. 7. Cap. 13 1. N. 4 1 Eliz. Cap. 16.

Sheriffs.
And over that the Justices of Peace in the same Counties, C. 15. 1. N. 10.
and every of them shall have Authority upon complaint made by the Party so
unlawfully grieved (viz. by several Plaints in Sheriffs Courts in names of
Persons unknown or never summoned, etc.) to examine the said Sheriffs,
Undersheriffs, or their Clerks and Plaintiffs.

Process
And if the said Justices of Peace or one of them find by their examination
default in the said Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, 1. N. 11.
or their Clerks in entering of the said Plaints deceitfully for his or their
advantage, as is before rehearsed contrary to this present Act, that then the
said Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, and their Clerks shall be convict and attaint of
the same offense without further inquiry, or examination.

Justices.
And the said Justices of Peace, that so shall take the Examination,. 1 N. 13.
shall certify the same Examination within a quarter of a year into the Kings
Exchequer, upon pain of 40 s.

Sheriffs.
And (viz. The Bailiffs of Hundreds for default in Summons, 1. N. 16.
etc.) to be attaint and convict thereof by the Examination of the Justices of
Peace or any of them as before is rehearsed.

1. N. 17.
And that the same Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, Amercement.
their Clerks and their Deputies for the time being shall make no Estreats to
levye the said Sheriffs Amerciaments, until such time that two Justices of
Peace, whereof one shall be of the Quorum, have had the veiw and oversight of
their Books.

1. N. 18.
And that the Estreats be indented betwixt the said Justices of Peace, Records.
and the said Sheriffs and Undersheriffs, and sealed with their Seals, the one
part to remain with the said Justices, and the other part with the said
Sheriffs or Undersheriffs, to the intent they may understand, if any deceit
be, or untrue demeaning in them in making of their Books.

1. N. 19.
And that these Persons which shall gather the same Amercements as Bailiffs or
other Officers, be sworn by the said Justices, Officer.
that they take no more money than is forfeited, and contained in the Estreats
sealed with the Seals of the said Justices of Peace, upon the same pain of
forfeiture as before is rehearsed, ( viz. 40 s.) thereof the same gatherers to
be convict by Examination of the same Justices of Peace, or one of them, as
before is rehearsed.

1. N. 20.
Provided always that the said Justices of Peace shall be appointed and named at
the general Sessions after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, by him that
is Custos Rotulorum of the said Counties, Justices.
or else by the eldest of the Quorum in his absence, to have the oversight and
controulment of the said Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, and their Clerks, and other
of the said Officers, and of the said Sheriffs Amercements.

1. N. 21.
And the said Justices of Peace, Informant.
upon Suggestion or Information of the Party so grieved, shall make like
Process as in action of Trespass, against the said Sheriffs, Undersheriffs, or
their Clerks, and other the aforesaid Officers misdealing, as before is
rehearsed, for to appear before them to answer to the said Suggestion or
Information.

C. 17. 2. N. 4.
And that the Justices of Peace have authority by this present Act to hear and
determine such matters (viz. Of taking Eggs, Hawks, Swans, Fowl.
etc.) as well by Inquisition as Information and proofs.

2. N. 10.
(Viz. None to take Hawks in their Warren, etc.) Upon pain of ten pounds,
Forest.
one half to the Party that will sue for the same by Action of Debt, by
Examination before the Justices of the Peace, Information or otherwise, etc.

19 H. 7. Ca. 5. 1. N. 6.
And if the said Mayor, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Money.
or other chief Officer or Governor refuse to take any such Coin (viz. Having
the print of the Kings Coin) in payment, as it is above rehearsed, that then he
so refusing the said payment to be compelled by the Justice of Peace of the
same County, where such payment shall be so refused, to accept and take the
said payment, and he so refusing the same to be further punished for the said
refusing by the discretion of the same Justice.

C. 6. 1. N. 15.
And over this the Justices of Peace within every Shire at their general
Sessions holden at Michaelmas, Mettle.
shall assign and appoint two certain Persons having experience therein (viz.
in deceitful Pewter and Brass, etc.) to make search in the Premises in every
part of that Shire, as well within the Franchise as without, saving in Cities
and Boroughs where Searchers be appointed by the Heads and Governors of the
same.

C. 11. 1. N. 9.
And that the Justices of Peace in their Sessions shall have Authority to take
before them any Person suspected of the Premises, Forest.
(viz. Of Dear-hayes, Buckstails, or taking of Herons) and by their discretion
to examine them in the premises.

1. N. 11.
And that these Justices, Justices.
that so examine them shall have the tenth part of every such forfeiture for
their Labor in that behalf.

Ca. 12. 2. N. 8.
Furthermore be it enacted by the said Authority, Poor.
that Justices of the Peace, or two of them at the least, within their Shires,
and every Mayor, Sheriff, and Bailiff, within their Cities, Towns, and
Boroughs, shall have full power and authority to make four times in the year,
that is to say, every quarter once or ofter, as by their Discretion shall be
thought necessary throughout all their Shire, a due and a diligent secret
search, and if they or any of them find, by reason of the said Search any of
the said mis-ruled Persons (viz. Vagabonds, etc.) the said misruled Persons so
found to have like punishment and correction as is aforesaid, (Viz. at
discretion.)

Riot.
Whereas in the Parliament holden at Westminster the Tuesday the morrow next
after All Souls, Cap. 13.
13th. year of the reign of King Henry the fourth ( viz. 13. H. 4. Cap. 7.)
Among other things it was Enacted, Ordained, and Established, that if any Riot,
Assembly, or Rout of People against the Law, were made in any part of the
Realm, that the Justices of the Peace, three or two of them at the least, and
the Sheriff, or Undersheriff of the County where such Riot, Assembly, or Rout
should be done after the same Statute, should come with the power of the Shire,
if need should be, to arrest them, and them should arrest, 2 H. 5. Cap. 8.

Records.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4 Cap. 7. 1. N. 2. 1. N. 2.
) the same Justices and Sheriff or Undersheriff should have power to record
that, that they should find so done in their presence against the Law, 2 Hen.
5. Cap. 8. 1. N. 2.

Process.
And ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 1. N. 3. 1. N. 3.
) that by the Record of the same Justices, and Sheriff or Undersheriff, the
same Trespassers and Misdoers should be convicted in manner and form as it is
contained in the Statute ( viz. 5 R. 2. Cap. 7. 1. N. 3. 15 R. 2. 1. N. 3.) Of
Forcible Entries, with diverse and many other Articles touching and concerning
the Premises, as in the same Statute made the said thirteenth year ( viz. 13.
H. 4. Cap. 7.) more plainly at large it appears, 2 H. 5. Cap. 8. 1. N. 2.

Riot.
Which Statute, ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7.) is thought good and necessary, 1. N. 4.
wherefore by the advice and assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same be it therefore ordained, established and enacted, that the said Act made
in the said thirteenth year of King Henry the fourth ( Viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7.)
concerning Riots, Assemblies, and Routs of people, and all and every Article
and Articles comprised in the same, and also all other Statutes ( viz. 2 H. 5.
Cap. 8. etc.) before this time made concerning the punishment of Rioters, at
the time of making this Act, being in force, from henceforth stand in their
force, and be duly put in execution, after the tenors and purports of the same.

Enquest.
And for as much as in the said Statute made in the said thirteenth year ( viz.
13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 1. N. 5.
) It is not expressed of what sufficiency the Jurors impanelled should be, or
what Issues they should lose, if they appear not, nor no mention thereon made
of any punishment of the Maintainers and Embracers of the Jurors that so shall
be Impanelled, should have for their misdemeanors if any be.

Ability.
It is therefore furthermore Enacted by the said Authority in this present
Parliament, That if any Riot, Rout, 1. N. 6.
or unlawful Assembly be committed and done at any time after the first day of
May next coming within this Realm of England, that the Sheriff having a Precept
directed to him, shall return one and twenty Persons dwelling within the Shire,
where such Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly shall be so committed and done,
whereof every of them shall have Lands and Tenements within the same Shire, to
the yearly value of twenty shillings Charter land or Freehold, or twenty six
shillings and eight pence of Copyhold, of both over and above all charges, for
to inquire of the said Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly.

Return.
And shall return upon every Person so by him impanelled in Issues, 1. N. 7.
at the first day twenty shillings, and at the second day forty shillings, if
they appear not, and be sworn to enquire of the premises at the first day.

Sheriff.
And if default be in the Sheriff or Undersheriff, 1. N. 8.
for returning of other Persons, not being of the said sufficiency, or return
not Issues in form aforesaid, that then the said Sheriff shall forfeit to our
Sovereign Lord the King for either default therein twenty pound.

Riot.
And if the said Riot, Rout, 1. N. 9.
or unlawful Assembly be not found by the said Jury, by reason of any
Maintenance or Embracery of the said Jurors, then the same Justices and
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, over and above all such Certificate, that they must
and be bound to make according to the said Statute made the said thirteenth
year ( viz. 13 H. 4. Cap. 7. 2. N. 1,) shall in the same Certificate, certify
the names of the Maintainers and Embracers in that behalf, if any be, with
their misdemeaners that they know, upon pain of every of the said Justices, and
Sheriff or Under Sheriff to forfeit 20 l. if the same Justices and Sheriff or
Under Sheriff have no reasonable Excuse for not certifying the same.

1. N. 10.
Which Certificate so made, shall be of like force and effect in the Law,
Certificate.
as if the matter contained in the same were duly found by the Verdict of
twelve men.

1. N. 11.
And every Person duly proved to be a Maintainer or Embracer of the same, shall
forfeit to our said Sovereign Lord, Maintainers
20 l. and as well the same Maintainers as the Embracers shall be committed to
Ward, there to remain by the discretion of the Justices.

Statuta Hen. 8.
1 H. 8. cap. 6.
A Repeal of a Statute made, 11 H. 7. Cap. 3. Oyer.
giving Authority to Justices of Assize, and Justices of Peace in their
Sessions, to hear and determine all Offenses and Contempts committed against
any Statute in force, saving Treason, Murder or Felony.

Cap. 7. 2.
And that the Justices of Assizes, and Justices of Peace, Justices.
within the County where any such Default of the Coroners be, (viz. taking any
thing for Enquiry of Body slain by Misadventure etc.) have Authority and Power
to enquire thereof and determine the same, as well by Examination as by
Presentment.

Cap. 8. 7.
Provided also that this Act, Inquest.
(viz. of Returning Offices and Inquisitions by Commission or Escheator etc.)
extend not nor be prejudicial, to any Justices of the Peace, for any thing done
concerning the Commission of the Peace.

3 H. 8. C. 5. 3. N. 2.
And that it be Ordained etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Shire where
any such Offenders, War.
(viz. that depart from Captain without License during War, etc.) be taken,
have Power to inquire of the said Offenses, (viz. Departure, Retainer and
Payment of Soldiers) and the same hear and determine, as they do and may do of
Felonies, Trespasses and other Offenses, expressed in the Kings Commission to
them made, as though the said Offenses were done in the same Shire.

C. 12. 1. N. 4.
Wherefore be it Enacted, etc that all Pannells to be returned, Inquest.
which be not at the Suit of any Party, that shall be made and put in by every
Sheriff and their Ministers, before any Justice of Jail-delivery or Justice of
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, in their open Sessions to inquire for
the King, shall be reformed by putting to and taking out of the names of the
Persons which so be Impannelled by every Sheriff and their Ministers, by
Discretion of the same Justice before whom such Pannells shall be returned.

4 H. 8. Cap. 1-
Bulwarks, Brays, Walls and other Fortifications, War.
shall be made by the Seaside in Cornwall, by the Justices of Peace Assignment.

14 and 15 H. 8. Cap. 6. 4. N. 2.
And that the said two Justices of Peace and twelve other discreet Persons, (
viz. of the Hundred, Ways.
where oldway is in Close and new one laid out in Kent) by whose Overfight and
Assent the said new way etc. by Virtue of this Act, shall be hereafter
Assigned, limited and laid out, shall within three Months next after the
Assignment, limitation and laying out of the same, make Certificate into the
Kings most Honorable Court of Chancery under their Seals, of the length and
breadth of the same new Way or Street, and of other things adjoining or
concerning the same, as by their Discretions shall be thought most expedient or
requisite for the Commonwealth of that County to be certified.

C. 10. 1. N. 3.
And that the Justices of Peace within every Shire, Forest.
at every Sessions of the Peace, etc. shall have full Authority and Power to
inquire of such Offenders, (viz that trace Hares in the Snow etc.)

1. N. 4.
And after such Inquisitions found, Forfeiture.
the said Justices of Peace etc. for every Hare so killed, shall Sess upon
every such Offender 6 s. 8 d. to be for feited to our Sovereign Lord, that
shall be so found by the Justices of Peace in their Sessions.

Riot.
The President of the Kings Council shall be associate with the Chancellor, etc.
(viz. 3 H. 7. Cap. 1.) in examination of Riots, etc. 21 H 8. C. 20.


Ways.
And that the Justices of Peace in every Shire of this Realm, 22 H. 8. C. 5. 9.
N. 3.
Franchise City, or Borough, or four of them at the least, whereof one of them
to be of the Quorum, within the limits of their Commissions and authorities,
shall have power and authority to enquire, hear, and determine in the Kings
general Sessions of Peace, all manner of annoyances of and in such high ways,
so being and next adjoining to any ends of Bridges within this Realm, distant
from any one of the Ends of such Bridges, three hundred foot, and to do in
every thing and things concerning the making, repairing and amending of such
Highways, and every of them, in as large and ample manner as they might and
may do, to and for the making, repairing, and amending of Bridges by virtue and
authority of this present Act.

Treason.
( Viz. No Convicts of Pety Treason, Murder, or Felony, 23 H. 8. C. 1. 4. N. 2.
etc. shall make any purgation, but abide in Prison during life;) Except only
such Person or Persons so being within such holy Orders (viz. Of Subdeacon or
above) and convict of and for any of the offenses aforesaid, and delivered to
the Ordinary for the same, do find two sufficient Sureties by Recognizances
before two of the Kings Justices of his Peace within the same Shire where the
petit Treason, Murder, or Felony, whereof he was convicted, was committed and
done, whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, that such Convict shall be of
good abearing against the King our Sovereign Lord, his Laws and Subjects; Every
such Convict to be bound in the Sum of 40 l. and every his Sureties in 20 l.
(26 H. 8. Cap. 12. 4. N. 1.)

Bayl.
And that no Surety be taken unless such as may dispend in Lands, 1. N. 3.
Tenements, or Hereditaments yearly above all charges, of Estate of
Inheritance, of Charter-hold, 26 s. 8 d. or else be worth 20 l. in movable
substance at the time of the taking of such Recognizance.

Justices.
And that two Justices of Peace, 1. N. 4.
whereof one to be of the Quorum by Authority aforesaid have power and
authority to take such Recognizances.

Certificate.
And that the said Justices before whom any such Recognizance shall be taken, 1.
N. 5.
shall certify the same into the Kings Bench within four months next after the
taking thereof upon pain to lose and forfeit 100 s. for every such default
thereof.

Imprisonment.
It may therefore please your Highness, C. 2. 1. N. 2.
etc. (viz. For necessity and emendation of Strong Goals) to enact, that the
Justices of Peace, of every of the Shires of Essex, Suffolk, Dorset, Sussex,
Surrey, Nottingham, Gloucester, Bedford, Buckinghem, Huntington, Wiltshire,
Kent, Warwick, Stafford, Oxon, Berkshire, Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln,
Hereford, Northampton, Salop, Norfolk, and Cornwall, or the most part of the
said Justices of Peace, in every of the said Shires within the limits of their
Commission, shall have full power and authority, to limit and appoint at any
time, within the term of one year from the end of this present Parliament, the
Towns and Places wherein they shall think most necessary to have a common Goal
newly edified and made, 2 Inst. 705, 706. and 5 Eliz. 24. cap. 3. N. 1.)

Notice.
And be it further Enacted, 4. N. 1.
That several Commissioners under the Kings great Seal, with this present Act
thereto affiled, shall be directed to the Justices of Peace, of the Shires
aforenamed, authorizing them to accomplish and execute this present Act
according to the tenor thereof in every behalf.

Imprisonment.
Be it further Enacted, etc. 7. N. 1.
That like Provision in every behalf be had for a new Goal to be made within
the County of Derby, in like form as is provided for other Shires aforesaid.

Ale.
And that every Beer-Brewer and Ale-Brewer shall not take over and above, for
every such Barrel, Kilderkin, C. 4. 5. N. 1.
or Firkin of Ale and Beer, but after such Prizes and Rates as shall be thought
convenient and sufficient by discretions of the Justices of Peace within every
Shire, where such Beer-Brewer and Ale-Brewer shall dwell, without any City,
Borough or Town Corporate, where no head-Officers, as Mayors, Bailiffs,
Sheriffs and other head-Officers, have no Authority or Rule, 8 Eliz. 9. 5. N. 1.

Cap. 5. 5. N. 2.
And before he (viz. Commissioner of Sewers) shall take upon him the Execution
of the said Commission, Sewers.
he shall take a Corporal Oath before the Lord Chancellor, or before such to
whom the said Lord Chancellor shall direct the Kings Writ of Dedimus Potestatem
to take the same, or before the Justices of the Peace in the Quarter Sessions
holden in the Shire where such Commissions shall be directed, etc.

Cap. 8. 2. N. 2.
And if it shall happen any person, Mettle.
etc. for prosecuting any Suit or Action upon this Statute, (viz. against
Tinners, that do not make sufficient Hatches and Ties for Gravel, etc.) or by
occasion of the same hereafter, to be imprisoned by any manner of person, etc.
being Officers or Ministers of the Stannery, their Deputies or Substitutes,
that then every of the Justices of Peace, within any of the Counties aforesaid,
( viz. Devonshire or Cornwall) wherein the said Prisoner shall happen to be
Committed to Prison, upon credible Information thereof, taking Surety by his
descretion for Appearance of such Prisoner at the next general Sessions of the
Peace, shall have Power, etc. as well to direct his Warant to the Jailer, etc.
as to any other Person, to whom the said Prisoner shall be committed unto,
commanding him, etc. upon pain, etc. of 40 l. to deliver and put at large the
said Prisoner, etc. 27 H. 8. Cap. 23. 4. N. 1.

2. N. 6.
And if it shall appear upon the Appearance of such Prisoner at the Quarter
Sessions, by examining of the Justices of Peace there being, Justices.
that he was imprisoned contrary to the form of this Statute, then he shall be
forthwith dismissed and thereby discharged, and if he were lawfully Imprisoned
for any other just Cause, then to be remanded to Prison by the discretion of
the said Justices, 27 H. 8. Cap. 23. 4. N. 3.

Cap. 1^. 3.
And be it Enacted, etc. that the Lord Chancellor of England, Sewers.
etc. at all times, etc. upon request to him to be made by the Mayor and
Commonalt^ of the said City, (viz. of York) and Town, (viz. of Hull) or by any
other Citizen and Burgess, of the said City and Town, etc. or other person by
them under the common Seals of the said City and Town Authorized, shall have
Power and Authority by his discretion, to make and direct like Commission,
(viz. as for Surety) unto eight sad and discreet persons, whereof four of them
be of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City and Town, and the other
four to be Justices of Peace, whereof two to be of the West Riding, and the
other two of the East Riding of the County of York, not of Fee, nor retained
with the said City or Town, that they, eight, seven, six, five or four of them,
whereof two of them shall be of the said City and Town, and the other two
Justices of Peace, the one of the East Riding, the other of the West Riding of
the said County, by Virtue of the said Commission, shall and may, the said
Owners assign and appoint, to pull up and redress (viz. in the River of Ouse
and the water of Humber) or cause to be pulled up and redressed within thirty
days after monition given to the said Owners by the said Commissioners, or by
such of them taking the charge of the Execution of the said Commission, such
and as much of the said Fish-gart his and other Impediments to be made in the
said Waters, (viz. of Ouse and Humber) to the Let, Disturbance, Damage or
Ieoperdy of any Ships, Keyls, Boats or any other Vessels, passing or repassing,
to or from the said City of York to the said Town of Hull, as by them shall be
thought meet and convenient

24 H. 8. C. 1^. 2. N. 4.
And if the Offense, Foul.
(viz. not endeavoring to destroy Crows Rooks and Choughs) be done contrary to
this Statute by any person, etc. which shall dwell and have the Manurance of
and in such Manors, Meases, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whereunto such
Leets, Law-days, Rapes and Courts do not belong, or by reason whereof any such
Courts be not holden, that then upon a Presentment thereof had before the
Sheriffs, etc. or Justices of Peace in their Sessions, etc. the Justices of
Peace or two of them at the least, if the Presentment be before them in their
Sessions, shall assess and set the said Amerciament after the quantity of the
Offense, by their discretions, etc.

Justices.
And further be it Enacted, 5. N. 1.
etc. That as well the Justices of the Peace in their Sessions, etc. to be
hereafter holden before them or any of them* shall give in Charge to the
Tenants and Inhabitants, and all other appearing before any of them, that they
shall duly inquire and put in execution the effect of the Premises in due time,
(viz. yearly) so that this Act may be fully executed, and Choughs, Crows and
Rooks, thereby destroyed in all parts of this Realm, etc.

Foul.
And if any such Owner or Farmer (viz. on whose Grounds Rooks, 7. N. 2.
Choughs or Crows be killed) refuse to pay the said money accordingly as is
aforesaid, (viz. two pence for twelve, a penny for six, a halfpenny for three
old Rooks, Choughs or Crows killed) then upon Complaint and Proof thereof made
to any of the Justices of Peace or High-Constable, the said Justice of Peace or
High-Constable shall cause the said money to be levied by distress of the Goods
and Cattels of every such Farmer or Owner refusing to pay the same, according
to the Tenor and Effect of this Act.

Coron.
And that Justices of Peace shall have Power and Authority within the limits of
their Commissions and Jurisdiction, 25 H. 8. C. 6. 1. N. 5.
to hear and determine the said Offense, (viz. of Buggery with Mankind or
Beast) as they do use to do in Cases of other Felonies.

Foul.
And be it Enacted, C. 11. 3. N. ^.
etc. that all Justices of the Peace within the limits of their Commissions,
shall have Power and Authority to inquire, hear and determine the Offenses
aforesaid, (viz. taking Wild-fowle with Nets between the last of May and the
last of August, or their Eggs, etc.) like as they commonly use to do in Cases
of Tresspass.

Cattle.
And it is further Enacted, C. 13. 5. N. 1.
that the Justices of Peace of every Shire shall have Power and Authority to
inquire of the Offenders of this Act, (viz. keeping above two thousand Sheep)
as well by the Oaths of twelve men as by Information of any of the Kings
Subjects, and to make such like Process upon every Presentment or Information
concerning this Act, as they use commonly to do upon Presentiments before them
of Trespass.

Bayl.
Or else in their (viz. the Ordinary's) default if they refuse, C. 14. 8. N. 2.
etc. (viz. to Bail an Heretic) then by discretion of two Justices of Peace of
that Shire, where such persons so accused or presented shall inhabit, by four
sufficient Sureties to be bounden to the Kings use by Obligation or
Recognizance, to appear before the Ordinaries at such days, etc. as shall be
limited in the said Bonds, etc.

Sewers.
And that the Kings Justices of Peace within every of the said Counties of
Gloucester and Sommerset, at their Quarter Sessions, 26 H. 8. 5. 2. N. 1.
shall have full Power and Authority to call before them, all such persons
which hereafter shall keep any of the said Passages, or any other Ferry or
Passage over the said Water (viz. the Severn) into Wales, or the said Forest,
(viz. of Dean) or out of Wales, or the said Forest into England, and to bind
them with sufficient Sureties with them in Recognizance, in such sums of money
as it shall seem to the discretion of the said Justices of Peace, that they and
every of them being Passengers, and Keepers of Ferries and Passages as is
aforesaid, from henceforth shall not after the said times before limited and
appointed, (viz. beeween Sun setting and Sunrising) convey or carry, or cause
to be conveyed or carried, any manner of person or persons, or any kind of
Cattle, but such persons as they do know and will answer for, and know where
their Abidings, Dwellings and Habitations be, and upon request made to them or
any of them as is aforesaid, shall from time to time disclose as well the same
person or persons, as the Goods and Cattels so passing the said Passages, upon
fresh suit made or hereafter to be made, upon any Felony, Murder or Robbery,
committed and done in the Borders of the Counties aforesaid, or in any other
place within this Realm or South Wales.

Behavior.
Be it therefore Enacted, 26 H 8. C. 12. 4. N. 1.
etc. that every such person and persons within such Orders of Subdeacon, or
above, being convict of any pety Treason, or of any Murder, of Malice
prepensed, or of any the said Felonies above rehearsed, ( viz. 23 H. 8. 1. 4.
N. 2.) or of any accessory to pety Treason, etc. before any Lord Marcher,
Steward, Lieutenant, Deputy, or other Justice or Officer within Wales, or
within any other place, City, Town, Honor, Lordship or Manor within the Kings
Dominion, where no Justices of the Peace and of the Quorum be, and thereupon
the same Convict admitted unto his Clergy, that the same person or persons so
being within such holy Orders and Convict, etc. and delivered unto the Ordinary
as Clerk Convict for the same, shall or may find two Sureties by Recognizance
for his good abearing before two of the Kings Justices of Peace, whereof one to
be of the Quorum, in the Shire where the said Convict is or shall be kept in
the Ordinaries Prison, if the same Prison be within the Shire-ground where
Justices of the Peace, and of the Quorum be: or else before two of the Kings
Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum in the next Shire adjoining
unto the same Prison.

27 H. 8. C. 5. 1. N. 2.
For redress and amputation whereof (viz. Of the Increase of Robberies, Coron.
etc.) and to the intent, that one Order of ministering his Laws should be had,
etc. as in other places of this Realm of England, etc. It is Ordained, etc.
That the Lord Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, for
the time being, from time to time, and all times, shall have full power and
authority by his discretion to nominate and appoint Justices of the Peace,
Justices of the Quorum, and Justices of Goal delivery, in the said Counties of
Chester, Flint, Anglesey, Caernarvan, Pembroke, and Glamorgan, by Commission
under the Kings Great Seal, which shall have full power and authority, to
inquire, hear, and determine all manner of thing and things inquirable,
presentable, or determinable before Justices of Peace, Justices of Quorum, and
Justices of Goal delivery, in other Shires of the Realm of England, by force or
virtue of any Statute or Statutes made or to be made, or by the course of the
Common Laws of this Realm.

C. 16. 1. N. 2.
Or else (viz. Bargain and Sale to be enrolled) within the same County or
Counties, where the same Manors, Lands, Inrolment.
or Tenements so bargained and sold lie or be, before the Custos Rotulorum, and
two Justices of the Peace, and the Clerk of the Peace of the same County or
Counties, or two of them, at the least, whereof the Clerk of the Peace to be
one.

C. 20. 1. N. 5.
And in case the Ordinary of the Diocese, or his Commissary, Tyths.
or the Archdeacon, or his Official, or any other competent Judge aforesaid
(viz. in Suit for Subtraction of Tithes) for any contempt, contumacy, or
disobedience, or other misdemeanour of the party defendant, make information
and request to any of the Kings most honorable Council, or to the Justices of
the Peace of the Shire, where such Offender dwells, to assist and aid the
same Ordinary, Commissary, Archdeacon, Official or Judge, to order or reform
any such Person in any Cause before rehearsed, that then he of the Kings said
honorable Council or such two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, to whom such Information or request shall be made, shall have full
power and authority by virtue of this Act to attach or cause to be attached the
Person, or Persons against whom the Information or request shall be made, 32 H.
8. cap. 7. 4. N. 1.

1. N. 6.
And to commit the same Person or Persons to ward, Imprisonment.
there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, till that he or they shall have
found sufficient Surety to be bound by Recognizance or otherwise before the
Kings said Counselor or Justice of Peace, or any other like Counselor or
Justice of Peace to the use of our said Sovereign Lord the King to give due
obedience to the Process, Proceedings, Decrees, and Sentences of the
Ecclesiastical Court of this Realm, wherein such Suit or matter for the
Premises shall depend or be.

1. N. 7
And that every of the Kings said Counselors, Justices.
or two Justices of the Peace; whereof the one to be of the Quorum, as is
aforesaid, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, to take,
receive, and record Recognizances and Obligations in any of the Causes
above-written.

C. 24. 2. N. 1.
And be it also Enacted, etc. That no Person or Persons of what estate, Deputy.
degree, or condition soever they be, etc. shall have any power or authority to
make any etc. Justices of Peace, etc. Lambert. 25.

2. N. 2.
But that all such Officers and Ministers shall be made by Letters Patents under
the Kings Great Seal, Patents.
in the name and by the authority of the Kings Highness, and his Heirs, Kings
of this Realm in all Shires, Counties, Counties Palatine, and other places of
this Realm, Wales, and the Marches of the same, or in any other of his
Dominions at their pleasure and wills, in such manner and form as, etc.
Justices of the Peace, etc. commonly made in every Shire of this Realm, any
Grants, Vsages, Prescription, Allowance, Act or Acts of Parliament, or a^ other
thing or things to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Indictment.
And that in every Writ and Indictment, 4. N. 1.
that shall be made in any such County Palatine or Liberty, etc. whereby it
shall be supposed any thing to be done against the Kings Peace, shall be made,
and supposed to be done only against the Kings Peace, his Heirs and Successors,
and not against the Peace of any other Person or Persons whatsoever they be,
any Act of Parliament, Grant, Custom, Usage, or Allowance in Air before this
time had, granted, or used to the contrary notwithstanding.

Franchise.
Provided always, that, 5. N. 1.
etc. Justices of Peace to be made and assigned by the Kings Highness within
the County Palatine of Lancaster, shall be made and ordained by Commission
under the Kings usual Seal of Lancaster, in manner and form as has been
accustomed, any thing in this Act to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Corporation.
Provided also that all Cities, Boroughs, 6. N. 1.
and Towns Corporate within this Realm, which have liberty, power and authority
to have Justices of Peace, etc. shall still have and enjoy their liberties and
authorities in that behalf, in such like manner as they have been accustomed
without any alteration by occasion of this Act, any thing in this Act, or in
any Article therein contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Justices.
And it is Enacted, etc. That all such Justices to be made, 16. N. 1.
as is before rehearsed in this Act, shall have authority and power to keep and
hold their Sessions of Peace, etc. from time to time, only within the same
Liberties and Franchises, and in such places, and in none other places, by
reason and authority of that Commission, and to do and execute all other things
within the same, in as ample and large manner, as any other Justices of Peace,
etc. in any Shire within this Realm may do, and have authority to do, any Act,
Grant, Use, Custom, and Allowance heretofore had, made, or used, or any
Article in this present Act made to the contrary notwithstanding.

Franchise.
Provided always, That all and singular Justices of the Peace, 17. N. 1.
etc. hereafter to be made, named, and appointed by the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and Successors within any Liberty, where any such Justice of Peace, etc.
have been made by any person or persons by virtue or authority of any Letters
Patents of the Gift or Grant of our Sovereign Lord the King, or his most noble
Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, or otherwise shall sit and keep their
Sessions, etc. only in such place and places, as the Justices of the said
Liberties lately have commonly used within the said Liberties.

Corporation
And that no Person or Persons within the said Liberties, 17. N. 2.
or any of them, shall be hereafter in no wise compelled by authority of this
Act to appear out of the said Liberties before any other Justices, etc. of the
Peace, then before such Justices as shall be named and assigned, to sit and be
by the Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors within the said Liberties in
form aforesaid.

Cinque Ports.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, 20. N. 1.
that Thomas now Bishop of Ely and his Successors, Bishops of Ely, and their
temporal Steward of the Isle of Ely, for the time being, and every of them,
shall from henceforth be Justices of Peace within the said Isle and shall use
and exercise all manner of things within the same Isle, that appertain or
belong to any Justice of Peace within any County of this Realm of England, to
do, exercise, and use, by virtue and authority, that they be Justices of Peace
in as ample and large manner, as any other Justices of Peace, in any County
within this Realm have or might do, exercise, or use, any thing or things in
this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Eccles. Persons.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, 21. N. 1.
that Cuthbert now Bishop of Durham and his Successors, Bishops of Durham, and
their temporal Chancellor of the County Palatine of Durham, for the time being,
and every of them shall from henceforth be Justices of the Peace within the
said County Palatine of Durham, and shall exercise and use all manner of things
within the same County Palatine, that appertains or belongs to any Justice
of Peace within any County of this Realm of England, to do, exercise, and use,
by virtue and authority, that they be Justices of Peace, in as ^^^^ple and
large manner, as any other Justices of Peace in any County within this Realm
have, or might do, exercise, or use, any thing or things in this Act contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

22. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, Justices.
That Edward now Archbishop of York, and his Successors, Archbishops of York,
and their temporal Chancellor of the Shire and Liberty of Hexam, otherwise
called Hextoldsham, for the time being, and every of them, shall from
henceforth be Justices of Peace within the said Shire and Liberty of Hexam,
etc. and shall exercise and use all manner of things within the said Shire and
Liberty, that appertains or belongs to any Justice of Peace within any
County of this Realm of England, to do, exercise, and use, by virtue and
authority, that they be Justices of Peace, in as large and ample manner as any
other Justice of Peace in any County within this Realm have or might do,
exercise, or use, any thing or things in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Cap. 28. (27.) 11. N. 1.
And over that it is Enacted, Husbandry.
That all Justices of Peace in every Shire where every such offense (Viz. Of
not using Husbandry on dissolved Monastery, etc.) shall be committed and done,
contrary to the true meaning and intent of this present Act, shall in every
quarter and general Sessions within the limit of their Commission, inquire of
the Premises, and shall have full power and authority to hear and determine the
same.

28 H. 8. C. 14. 4. N. 1.
And it is also Enacted, Wine.
That the Justices of Peace in every Shire of this Realm, and all Mayors, etc
and every of them, within the limits of their Commissions and authorities, as
well within Franchises as without, shall have power and authority to examine,
hear, inquire, and determine the defaults of such, as shall attempt to sell any
Wines in gross contrary to this Act, and to punish the Offenders by
Imprisonment or otherwise by their discretions.

31 H 8. Ca. 8. 9. N. 1.
Provided also, Prerog.
That if any Proclamation or Proclamations hereafter shall be directed by
virtue of this Act (viz. For any thing not concerning Inheritance, etc.) to the
Justices of Peace of any Shire or County, that then within fourteen days after
the receipt thereof, the same Iusties shall and may by their discretions divide
themselves (viz. As on Act of Parliament) in sundry parts and places within the
limits of their Commission, for the due and speedy execution of the contents of
the same Proclamation or Proclamations.

C. 14. 17. N. 3.
And also, That Justices of Peace in their Sessions, Religion.
and every Steward, Vnder-Steward, and Deputy of Steward of any Leet or
Law-day, in their Leet, or Law day shall have like power and authority by
virtue of this Act to inquire by the Oaths of twelve lawful men, of all and
singular the Heresies, Contempts, and other Offenses (viz. Against the six
Articles, etc.) done, perpetrated or committed within the limits of their
Commissions and Authorities, 1 Ed. 6 Cap. 12 4. N. 1.

32 H. 8. Cap. 7. 4. N. 1.
And further be it Enacted, etc. Tithes.
That if any Person or Persons after such Sentence definitive given against
them (Viz. In suit by Ecclesiastical or Layman seized of Parsonage, etc. For
tithes.) obstinately and wilfully refuse for to pay their Tithes, or such Sums
of Money so adjudged (viz. By the Ordinary) wherein they be condemned for the
same, that then two Justices of the Peace of the same Shire, whereof one to be
of the Quorum, shall have authority by this Act, upon Information, Certificate,
or Complaint to them made by writing by the said Ecclesiastical Judge, that
gave the same Sentence, to cause the same Party so refusing to be attached and
committed to the next Goal, and there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, till
he or they shall have found sufficient Sureties to be bound by Recognisance, or
otherwise-before the same Justices, to the use of our Sovereign Lord the King,
to perform the said definitive Sentence and Judgment, 27 H. 8. Cap. 20. 1. N 5.

C. 13. 8. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, etc. Cattle.
That the Justices of Peace in every Shire, Riding, and other Place in their
Quarter Sessions to be kept and holden by virtue of the Kings Commission of the
Peace to them directed, and all Stewards of Leets, etc. shall have authority by
this Act to inquire of all defaults, Contempts, Omissions, and Offenses
contrary to the effects above written, etc. (viz. Of putting in Horses not
measure or infected into Forest, Common, etc.)

Common.
Which Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions of the Peace shall have power
and authority by this Act to hear and determine every such Presentment before
themselves found, 8. N. 3.
or in any of the said Leets or Lawdays to be presented and certified, etc. as
well by Examination as otherwise.

Franchise.
In consideration (viz. of the traveling too often of the Gentry, etc.) be it
Enacted, etc. C. 43. 1. N. 8.
That from henceforth the Law and Administration of Justice, and all other
things in the said County, (viz. of Chester) in times past used to be had at
the said Shire days, shall be holden, had, made, done, and executed by the
Justices of the said County for the time being, at two times in the year only,
that is to wit at the Sessions next after the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and at the Sessions next after Easter yearly for ever, during so
many days of every of the said time or times, as need shall require, in like
manner and form as it is now used in the County Palatine of Lancaster.

Parliament.
Henry the Eighth by the grace of God King of England, France, and Irelend,
Defender of the Faith, and of the Church of England, 33 H. 8. pa. 532.
and also of Ireland, in Earth Supreme Head, to the honor of Almighty God, and
for the concord, quiet, and wealth of this his Realm and Subjects of the same,
held his most high Court of Parliament, begun at Westminster the sixteenth day
of January and continued until the first day of April, the three and thirtieth
year of his most noble and virtuous Reign, wherein were established these Acts
following.

Collusion.
Forasmuch as many light and evil disposed Persons, not minding to get their
livings by Truth, according to the Laws of this Realm, Cap. 1.
but compassing and devising daily how they may unlawfully obtain and get into
their hands and possession, Goods, Cattle and Jewels of other Persons for the
maintenance of their unthrifty living, and also knowing, that if they come to
any of the same Goods, Cattles, and Jewels by stealth, that then they being
thereof lawfully convict, according to the Laws of the Realm, shall die
therefore: have now of late falsely and deceitfully contrived, devised and
imagined privy Tokens, and counterfeit Letters in other men's names, unto diverse
persons their special friends and acquaintances, for the obtaining of Money,
Goods, Cattels and Jewels, of the same persons their friends and acquaintances,
by color whereof the said light and evil disposed Persons have deceitfully and
unlawfully obtained and gotten great substance of Money, Goods, Cattels, and
Jewels into their hands and Possessions, contrary to right and Conscience.

Coron.
For reformation whereof, 2. N. 1.
be it ordained and Enacted by Authority of this present Parliament, that if
any person or persons, of what estate or degree soever he or they be, at any
time after the first day of April next coming, falsely and deceitfully obtain
and get into his or their hands or possession, any Money, Goods, Cattle, Jewels
or other things, of any other Person or Persons, by color and means of any
such false token or counterfeit Letter made in any other man's name, as is
aforesaid, that then every such Person and Persons so offending, and being
thereof lawfully convict by Witnesses taken before the Lord Chancellor of
England, for the time being, or by Examination of Witnesses, or Confession
taken in the Star Chamber at Westminster before the Kings most honorable
Council, or before the Justices of Assize in their Circuits for the time being,
or before the Justices of Peace within any part of the Kings Dominions in their
general Sessions, or by Action in any of the Kings Courts of Record.

Imprisonment.
Shall have and suffer such Correction and punishment by Imprisonment of his
Body, sitting upon the Pillory, or otherwise, 2. N. 2.
by any Corporal Pain (except pains of death) as shall be unto him or them
limited, adjudged or appointed by the Person or Persons before whom he shall be
so convict of the said Offenses or any of them

Process.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 3. N. 1.
that as well the Justices of Assize for the time being, as also two Justices
of the Peace in every County, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, shall have
free Power and Authority, to call and convent by Process or otherwise, to the
said Assizes or general Sessions, any person or persons being suspected of any
of the Offenses aforesaid, and to commit him or them to Ward, or let him or
them to Bail till the next Assizes or general Sessions, there to be examined,
and further to be ordered by their discretions, as is abovesaid.

4. N. 1.
Provided always and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
Franchises.
that Justices of Peace within every City, Borough, Town and Franchise within
this Realm, or other the Kings Dominions, shall have like Jurisdiction, Power
and Authority at their general Sessions, and otherwise to do and execute, all
and every thing and things in all points, as other Justices of Assizes in their
Circuits, or Justices of the Peace in the Counties, by Virtue of this Act be
limited and appointed, to do and execute for the Punishment and Correction of
like Offenders, as by this foresaid Act is specified and declared.

4. N. 2.
Saving to the Party greived by such deceit, Collusion.
such Remedy by way of Action or otherwise, of and for the same Money, Goods,
Cattels, Jewels or other things so obtained, as he might have had if this Act
had never been had ne made, anything in the same contained to the contrary, in
anywise notwithstanding.

5. N. 1.
Provided always, France.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Kings Highness
Council of his Town of Calice, or three of them for the time being, shall have
such and like Authority for the Examination, Bailment and Punishment of such
Offender or Offenders, and for such Offenses hereafter to be committed and
done, within the Town and Marches of Calice, and County of Gui^nes, as the
aforesaid Justices of Assize or Justices of Peace have by force of this Act,
whithin their Jurisdictions and Authorities.

C. ^. 16. N. 2.
And that the same Justices of Peace, Games.
(viz. before whom any is brought for using Cross-bow, Hand-gun, Hagbut or
Demyhake not measure, etc.) upon a due Examination and Proof thereof before him
had or made by his disretien, shall have full Power and Authority, to send or
commit the same Offender or Offenders, to the next Goal, there to remain till
such time as the said Penalty or Forfeiture, ( Viz. of 10 l.) shall be truly
contented and paid by the same Offender.

19. N. 1
And be it further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that it shall be lawful to all Justices of Peace in their Sessions, etc.
to inquire, hear and determine every such Offense, etc. committed and done
contrary to the tenor of this present Act.

C. 9. 10. N. 3
And that Justices of Assize, of Jail-delivery, Justices of Peace, Games.
and Stewards of Franchises, Leets and Law-days, have Power to inquire of all
the Premises (viz. of Archery) in their Sessions, Leets and Law-days, and hear
and determine the same, and also by their discretion, examine all persons
lacking and not having Bows, Shafts and Arrows according to the form aforesaid.

14. N. 1.
Be it further Enacted, Process.
etc. that it shall be lawful to all and every the Justices of Peace in every
Shire, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other head-Officers, within every City,
Town and Borough within this Realm. from time to time as well within liberties
as without, as Need and Case shall require, to come, enter and resort, into all
and every Houses, Places and Alleys where such Games (viz. Bowling, Coyting,
Cloysh, Cayls, half-Bowl, Tennis, Dicing, Table or Carding, or any unlawful now
Game hereafter to be invented, etc.) shall be suspected to be holden,
exercised, used or occupied contrary to the form of this Statute.

14. N. 2.
And as well the Keepers of the same, as also the persons there haunting,
Imprisonment.
resorting and playing, to take, arrest and imprison, and them so taken and
arrested to keep in Prison, unto such time as the Keepers and Maintainers of
the said Plays and Games, have found Sureties to the Kings use, to be bound by
Recognizance or otherwise, no longer to use, keep or occupy, any such House,
Play, Game, Alley or Place.

14. N. 3.
And also that the persons there so found be in likewise bound by themselves, or
else with Sureties, by the discretion of the Justices, Mayors, Recognizance.
Sheriffs, etc. no more to play, haunt or exercise from thenceforth, in, at or
to any of the said places, or at any of the said games.

Parliament.
Forasmuch as before this time diverse and sundry good Laws, Statutes, Cap 10.
Provisions and Ordinances have been made, by the Kins Majesty our Natural
Sovereign Lord and other his most Noble Progenitors, for the Increase and
Advancement of the Public and Commonwealth of this Realm of England, and of
his Highness Subjects of the same, amongst which some special, notable and
profitable Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Provisions be very requisite,
convenient and expedient for the same Commonwealth, duly and diligently to be
put in daily Exercise and Execution.

Process.
And such as have been and be Authorized to put in due and just Execution such
special and notable Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, 1. N. 2.
and to correct and punish the Infringers and Contemners thereof, in such wise
as is limited by the same, have been very remiss and negligent in doing their
Offices, to the great detriment, hurt and prejudice of the Commonwealth.

Days.
For Reformation whereof, 1. N. 3.
be it Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by Authority of the same, that all and singular the Justices of Peace,
within any Shire, City, Borough or Place within this Realm of England, Wales,
or any other the Kings Dominions, shall yearly at the general Sessions of the
Peace to be holden next after the Feast of Easter, assemble themselves
together, that is to say, every Number of them within the limits of their
Commissions wherein they be named Justices of Peace. 37 H. 8. Cap. 7.

Peace.
And at and upon such their Assembly, 1. N. 4.
shall diligently together amongst themselves, peruse, examine, study and know,
the Effects and true Intents of the Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Provisions
hereafter specified, that is to say, the Laws and Scatutes heretofore made and
provided, concerning or in any wise touching, Vagabonds, Retainers giving
Liveries, Signs, Tokens or Badges, Maintenance, Imbracery, Bowstaves and
Archery, unlawful Games, Forestallers and Regrators, Victual-Victualers and
Inn-holders and every of them, and of all Statutes and Laws made in this
present Parliament touching the same, or any of them, and after the perusing
and deliberate understanding of the said Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, they
shall devise among themselves. how the same may be best put in due and just
Execution, 37 H. 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 2.

Lieu.
And for the better proceeding therein, 1. N. 5.
they shall divide and sever them selves, limiting and assigning alway^s the
number of two of them at least, or more, into Hundreds, Wapentakes, Rapes,
Commotes or number of Towns and Villages by their discretions, 37 H. 8. Cap. 7.
1. N. 4.

Justices.
And that the said Justices so divided, 1. N. 6.
or two of them at the least shall in every Quarter of the Year, from and after
the said Feast of Easter next coming, hold and keep within the limits of their
Division one Session, besides the general Quarter Sessions for the Peace, the
said one Session to be kept and holden always within the limits of their
Division, at and in one such day as by them shall be appointed, so that it be
always six weeks at the least before the Quarter Sessions, 37 H. 8. Cap. 7. 1.
N. 7.

Days.
And that all Process and Proceedings in every of the said Sessions so to be
holden, shall be continued from Sessions to Sessions, 37 H. 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 7.
1. N. 6.

Enquest.
And that the said Justices or two of them at the least, 1. N. 8.
at and in every such Sessions, shall have power and authority to enquire as
well by the Oaths of twelve men, Inhabitants within the limits of their
Division, as by any Information, given to them by any Person or Persons, of all
defaults, offenses, or contempts done or committed, or hereafter to be done or
committed against the Form of any of the Statutes aforesaid, and to hear and
determine the same, 37 Hen. 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 7.

Outlary.
And shall also have power and authority upon any Presentment or 1. N. 9
Information touching the Premises or any of them, to make Process by Venire
Facias, one Capias, and an Exigent, under the Seals of the same Justices or two
of them, against every such Person and Persons against whom any such
Information or Presentment shall be had for their appearance before them in
their Sessions to be holden, as is aforesaid, to answer to such Information or
Presentment as shall be there had or made, 37. H 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 8.

. 1. N. 10.
And if the Person or Persons accused by Information or Presentment shall be
convict upon any such Information or Presentment by Confession or Verdict of
twelve men, that then the said Justices of Peace, Execution.
or two of them, before whom such conviction shall be had, shall have power and
authority to give Judgment against every such Offender and Offenders so
convict of such pains by imprisonment, or such Pains, losses, and forfeitures
of money, or both, or any of them, as are limited in the said several Statutes,
for such offenses whereof they shall be so convict, and cause Execution thereof
to be made and had accordingly. 37 H. 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 9.

1. N. 11.
And also the said Justices of Peace or two of them, Inquest.
at and in their said Sessions to be holden, as is aforesaid, shall have power
and authority to correct and reform the Pannels of Iuries, for any Inquiries to
be made before them, touching the said Statutes or any of them, in like manner
or form as Justices of Jail-delivery, and of Peace may do in their Sessions by
virtue of a Statute thereof made in the third year of our most dread Soverign
Lord the Kings Reign that now is, ( viz. 3 H. 8. 12.) 37 H. 8. Cap. 7. 1. N. 10.

1. N. 12.
And that the Sheriffs and other Ministers having power to return Pannels,
Return.
shall make his and their Returns according to such Reformation and Correction
of the Justices aforesaid, upon the Pain limited by the same Statute, ( viz. 3
H. 8. Cap. 12.) 37 H. 8. 7. 1. N. Cap. 11.

2. N. 1.
And it is ordained and enacted by Authority aforesaid, Prerog.
that if any person or persons be Convict as is aforesaid, by any Information
before the said Justices, or two of them, within the limits of their Division,
that then the Moity of the Pains, Losses and Forfeitures of Money of the
Offenders so Convict, shall be to the Kings Majesty's use, and the other Moity
thereof to the Party that persueth such Information, according to the tenor and
effect of the said several Statutes.

2. N. 2.
And if any Conviction be had by reason, or upon any Presentment, Forfeiture.
that then the Kings Majesty shall have the whole Pains, Fines and Forfeitures
of the Offenders, all which Pains, Fines, Losses and Forfeitures of Money, to be
due to the King by reason of any Conviction as is aforesaid, together with all
Issues, Fines and Amercements before the said Justices within the limits of
their Division, shall be levied by the Sheriff or his Ministers, by a Schedule
Indented, to be made between such Justices or two of them, before whom such
Pains, Losses and Forfeitures, Fines Issues and Amercements shall be lost and
forfeit, and the said Sheriff.

2. N. 3.
The one part of which Schedule, Certificate.
shall be certified by the said Justices or two of them, yearly in the Term of
St. Michael into the Kings Exchequer, to the intent that the Sheriff shall
there answer the same to the Kings use.

3. N. 1.
Provided always and be it Enacted by Authority aforesaid, Fees.
that every of the said Justices of Peace, shall have for holding of every of
their said Sessions as is aforesaid, 4 s. for their Costs.

3. N. 2.
And the Clerk of the Sessions by them to be appointed for the making and
writing of the Process and Extracts of the Sessions, Offices.
for every Sessions 2 s. to be paid by the hands of the Sheriff of the Kings
part and Portion of the Pains, Losses and Forfeitures, and of the Issues, Fines
and Amercements aforesaid.

4. N. 1.
Provided always, that Justices of Peace in Cities, Corporat.
Boroughs and Towns Corporate, not being Shires or Counties of themselves,
shall assemble once in the year with the Justices of Peace of the Shire where
such Cities, Boroughs or Towns Corporate be and shall be limited to execute
this Act within the City, Borough or Town Corporate where they shall be
Justices of Peace, and not elsewhere.

Indictment.
Provided also, that no Information or Presentment, 5. N. 1.
shall be had or taken by the said Justices of Peace so divided by Authority of
this Act, but for such Offenses, Defaults or Contempts as be or shall be done
within the limits of their Division.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, 6. N. 1.
that the said Justices of Peace so divided or two of them, within the limits
of their Division, shall have full Power and Authority to examine, inquire, hear
and determine by Information and Trial as is aforesaid, all Defaults and
Contempts, which after the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord next coming shall
be done or committed by any Servants commonly called Yeomen or Grooms,
Husbandmen, Laborers and Artificers or any of them, against the tenor, form
and effect of the Statutes and Laws made for excessive Apparel, and to correct
and punish the Offenders, therein being thereof Convict before them as is
aforesaid, according to such Pains, Forfeitures and Punishments as is limited
by the said Laws and Statutes of Apparel, to be levied, paid and certifyed, as
is aforesaid.

Wales.
And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 7. N. 1.
that as well the Justices of Assize, as the Justices of Chester, and the Kings
Justices of North Wales and South Wales in all and singular their Circuits,
shall have full Authority and Power by the force of this present Act, to
inquire as well by Information as by Presentment before them, of the Defaults,
Contempts, Omissions, Negligences, Favors, Affections, Corruptions and other
things whatsoever they shall be, of all and singular the said Justices of Peace
which shall not diligently, truly and duly see, put and cause the said good
Laws and Statutes, Ordinances and Provisions to be put in due Exercise and
perfect Execution, according to the effects as well of the said Statutes
heretofore made, as of this present Act, and to hear, examine and determine the
same, as is aforesaid.

Amercement.
And to assess such Fines upon the said Justices of Peace, 7. N. 2.
and upon every of them being Convict of any Defaults, Negligences and Offenses
as is aforesaid, as to their discretion shall be thought expedient for the
Quality and Quantity of their Offenses.

Officers.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Sheriffs, 8. N. 1.
Bailiffs, Constables, Head-Boroughs, and all and singular other Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, as well within Liberty as without, shall be attendant,
aiding and assisting to all and singular the said Justices of Peace, in and for
the due Execution of this Act, upon Pain to make such Fines as by the said
Justices of Peace or two of them, shall be assessed to the Kings use by their
discretions.

Justices.
Provided always, 9. N. 1.
that this Statute shall not bind any Justice of Peace or of Quorum, to
assemble or execute any thing in this Act, or in any other Shire, City, Borough
or place, then in such Shire, City, Borough or place where he shall be resident
and dwelling at that time when such Assembly shall be made by virtue of this
Act,

Appearance.
Provided also, 10. N. 1.
that such Lords and others which being Justices of Peace or Quorum, be or
shall be of the Kings Privy Council attendant upon his Royal Person, or any
Principal Officer of his Highness House attendant upon his Office, and other
which shall happen to be appointed in his Highness Service by his Majesty's
Commandment, shall not be compelled to assemble with the Justices of Peace or
Quorum, in any Shire, City or Borough, or otherwise bounden to do or exercise
by Authority of this Act, than they be bound to do before the making of this
Act, any thing or things contained in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Prerog.
Provided also, that the Justices of either Bench, 11. N. 1.
Barons of the Kings Exchequer, the Kings Attorney and Solicitor, and all other
Justices, Officers and Ministers being bound to attend at the Terms, shall not
during their such attendance, be compelled to hold or keep any Sessions in the
limits divided to them upon the Assembly of the Justices of Peace as is
aforesaid.

Days.
And to the intent that the said Justices, Barons, 12. N. 1.
and all other Officers and Ministers aforesaid, may the better be once in the
year at every Assembly aforesaid, it is therefore Ordained by Authority of this
Act, that the Quarter Sessions holden after Easter, shall be yearly kept upon
the Tuesday next after Low-Sunday, in every Shire of this Realm, Wales, and
other the Kings Dominions.

13. N. 1.
Provided always, Franchise.
that this Act or any thing therein contained shall not in any wise extend to
the County Palatine of Hexam within the County of Northumberland, ne to the
County Palatine of Ely within the County of Cambridge, nor to any
Town-Corporate or Liberty within either of the said Counties Palatine, having
Justices of Peace for or concerning the extracting, returning, certifying or
levying of any Issues, Fines, Forfeitures, Amercements or Penalties, to be
assessed or taxed, upon any person or persons in any Sessions to be holden
within the said Counties Palatine, or either of them, or within any
Town-Corporate, situate and being within either of the said Counties Palatine.

13. N. 2.
But that the same Issues, Fines, Forfeitures, Amercements.
Amercements and Penalties and every of them, may be assessed, taxed,
extracted, returned, certifyed and levied from time to time hereafter, in such
manner and form to all intents and purposes, as they and every of them have
been used to be assessed, taxed, extracted, returned, certifyed and levied at
any time before the making of this Act, or should be assessed, taxed,
extracted, returned, certifyed and levied, if this Act had never been had or
made, this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

14. N. 1.
Provided always and be it Enacted by the Authority abovesaid, Days.
that Justices of the Peace within any Shire of this Realm of England and
Wales, shall not be compelled by virtue of this Act to assemble themselves for
the Execution of this Act for this present year, before the next general
Assizes to be holden within every such County before the Feast of St. Michael
the Archangel next coming, but that they and every of them shall be compelled
upon like pain mentioned in this Act, to assemble themselves at the said
general Assizes for the execution of the same for this present year only,
according to the Purport, Tenor and True meaning of this Act, any thing in this
Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

15. N. 1.
Provided always, that this Act nor any therein contained, Cinque Ports.
shall not in any wise extend, nor be prejudicial or hurtful to the County
Palatine and Duchy of Lancaster, or any Town-Corporate within the same County
Palatine and Duchy, having Justices of the Peace, for or concerning the
extracting, returning, certifying or levying of any Issues, Fines, Forfeitures,
Amercements or Penalties, to be taxed or assessed, upon any person or persons,
in any Sessions to be holden within the said County Palatine and Duchy of
Lancaster, or Towns-Corporate parcel of the same Duchy by virtue of this Act,
but that the same Issues, Fines, Forfeitures, Amercements and Penalties, shall
and may be extracted, returned, certifyed or levied from time to time, in such
manner and form to all intents and purposes, as they have used to be extracted,
returned, certifyed and levied at any time before the making of this Act, this
Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

16. N. 1
Provided always and be it Enacted by Authority aforesaid, Forfeitures.
that all Issues, Fines, Amercements and Forfeitures, rising and growing by
virtue of this present Act within any of the general Liberties, Franchises or
Temporal-Iurisdictions, which been severally appointed and assigned to the
Survey, Order and Governance of the King our Sovereign Lords several Courts of
the Augmentations of the Revenues of his Crown, and of the general Surveyors of
the Kings Lands, shall be claimed and allowed, and also collected and levied,
by the Kings Bailiffs or other Officers of the same Liberties, Franchises and
Jurisdictions for the time being, and shall be severally answered to the King
in the same several Courts, after and according to such sort and order, as
other Issues, Fines, Amercements and Forfeitures within the same several
Liberties, Franchises and Jurisdictions, as this present time been or ought to
be claimed, allowed and answered, any thing in this present Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Wales.
Provided always, 17. N. 1.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Justices of
Peace in every of the Shires in South Wales and North Wales, and County
Palatine of Chester, according to their limitation, shall and may certify all
the Estreats by them to be made in manner and form as is aforesaid, to and
before such Chamberlain or Chamberlains, Chancellor or Chancellors, Auditor or
Auditors, in such place or places, as by the Kings Majesty is or hereafter
shall be appointed or assigned for hearing and determining of the Sheriffs
accounts in every of the said Shires in Wales, or County Palatine aforesaid,
any thing in this Act mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

Franchise.
Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained, 18. N. 1.
shall not in any wise extend to the County Palatine, and County of Durham, or
to any Town Corporate within the same County Palatine, or County having
Justices of Peace, for and concerning the extracting, returning, certifying or
leavying of any Issues, Fines, Forfeitures, Amerciaments, or Penalties to be
assessed or taxed upon any person or persons in any Sessions to be holden
within the said County Palatine or County of Durham, or within any Town
Corporate, situate and being within either the said County Palatine or County,
but that the same Issues, Fines, Forfeitures, Amerciaments or Penalties, and
every of them, may be assessed, taxed, extracted, returned, certified and
levied from time to time hereafter, in such manner and form, to all intents and
purposes as they and every of them have been used to be assessed, taxed,
extracted, returned, certified, and levied at any time, before the making of
this Act, or should be assessed, taxed, extracted, returned, certified and
levied, if this Act had never been had or made, this Act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Cinque Ports
Provided always, and be it Enacted, That this Act, 19. N. 1.
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to the Barons and Inhabitants
of or within the Cinque Ports, or their members, or to any of them, to compel
or constrain them or any of them, to assemble themselves with any of the
Justices of the Peace out of their said Ports and Members, and the liberties of
the same, or for and concerning the Estreating of Fines, Issues, Forfeitures,
and Amerciaments, to be set, lost, or assessed by virtue of this Act, within
the liberties aforesaid.

Appearance.
But that they and every of them shall and may assemble themselves together at
such place and places within their liberties for the executing of this Act, as
to them shall be thought most convenient, 19. N. 2.
and to divide themselves after such fashion, as they shall think best and most
requisite for the executing of this Estatute in this Act mentioned.

Amercement.
And may and shall take such Fines, Issues, Forfeitures, 19. N. 3.
and Amerciaments, and every of them as shall be set, lost, and assessed by
virtue of this Act, in such manner and form, and to such uses, purposes and
intents, as they or any of them lawfully should, might, or ought to have had
before the making of this Act, this Act or any thing therein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Franchise.
Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein contained, 20. N. 1.
be not at any time hereafter in any wise prejudicial or hurtful to any person
or persons, Bodies Politic or Corporate, to their Heirs or Successors, or to
the Heirs or Successors of any of them, for or concerning any their lawful
rights, titles, interest or claims, of, in or to any manner of Issues, Fines,
Amerciaments, Penalties, or other Forfeitures in any wise to be assessed, lost,
and forfeited before any Justices of Peace, at their Sessions hereafter to be
holden, or kept in any Shires, City, Borough, or Town Corporate, within this
Realm of England, by virtue and authority of this Act.

But that every such Person or Persons, 20. N. 2.
Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs and Successors, and the Heirs and
Successors of every of them, and their lawful deputies in such behalf, shall
and may at all times hereafter, assesse, tax, extract, return, levy, claim,
have, and enjoy all manner such Issues, Fines, Amerciaments, Forfeitures, and
other penalties, and every of them to all such uses, and purposes, and in like
manner and form in every behalf, as they or any of them have lawfully used to
do, and have or might have done and had at any time before the making of this
present Act, by virtue of any Grant to them or any of them heretofore made or
granted, or otherwise by virtue of any Custom or lawful Usage thereof
heretofore used in every behalf, this Act, or any therein contained to the
contrary notwithstanding.

21. N. 1. 34 and 35 H. 8. C. 1. 3. N. 4.
This Act to continue to the latter end of the next Parliament. Days.


And (Viz. if any Printer, etc. or any Person, Books.
etc.) be of any the Offenses aforesaid, (viz. printing, uttering or using
Books or Religion in Interludes Prohibited, etc.) Convicted by sufficient
Witness before any two of the Kings Council, or the Ordinary of the Diocese
where any such offense shall be committed, and two Justices of the Peace of the
same Shire, where any such Ordinary shall sit within his Diocese for that
purpose, etc.

3. N. 5.
Shall have for the first time Imprisonment, Forfeiture.
etc. for three months and also lose, etc. 10 l. etc.

19. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, That if any Spiritual Person, etc. Preach, Religion.
Teach, Defend, and Maintain any Matter, etc. Contrary to the godly
Instructions or determinations which since ( viz. 1540.) is or shall be set
forth by his Majesty, etc. being thereof convicted before the Ordinary of that
Diocese, within the which the said offense shall be committed, and two Justices
of the Peace, etc. shall before the first time be admitted to recant, etc.

25. N. 2.
And in case any such Justices being so required, Justices.
etc. (viz. by the Ordinary, on notice of time and place of sitting, etc.)
having convenient and reasonable warning and knowledge in writing from the said
Ordinary, etc. do not come to such place and at such time as shall be so
appointed, having no lawful and just Impediment to the contrary, shall forfeit
and lose to the Kings Highness for every such Offense 40 s. to be Estreated,
etc.

C. 3. 1. N. 11.
And the said Offender, (viz. in false measure of Coals, Talwood, Measures.
Faggots or Billets, etc.) out of the said City, Borough or Town, to be
punished by the discretion of two Justices of Peace inhabiting within the Shire
where the Offense shall be committed or done.

C. 14. 2. N. 1.
In Consideration whereof, Records.
(Viz. of the Incertainty where to have Records of Justices of Peace,
Jail-delivery, Oyer and Terminer, etc.) Be it Enacted, etc. that the Clerk of
the Crown, Clerks of Peace and Clerks of Assize, etc. where any such Attainder,
Outlary or Conviction, (viz. of Murder, Robbery or other Felony, etc.) shall so
be had, shall, etc. not only certify a Transcript, etc. before the King, etc.
in his Bench at Westminster, in the County of Midlesex, there to remain of
Record forever, etc. but also shall deliver a Transcript of every such
Indictment whereupon the said person, etc shall fortune hereafter so to be
convicted, or Clerks attainted to the Ordinary, to whom the body of the said
person, etc. shall be committed.

4. N. 1.
And be it Enacted, Certificate.
etc. that the said Clerk of the Crown in the Kings Bench etc. shall at all
such times as the Justices of Jail-delivery or Justices of Peace in every
County within this Realm of England, do write unto him for the names of such
persons which be so attainted by Outlawry, or Clerks attainted, or convict and
certified in the said Bench of our said Sovereign Lord the King, shall
incontinently without delay, certify the said Names and Sirnames of the said
persons, with the Causes why and wherefore they were convict or attainted, unto
the Justices of Jail-delivery or Justices of Peace upon the pain, etc. to
forfeit for every Name of such persons which shall be so written for, and not
certified by the said Clerk of the Crown in the Kings Bench to the said
Justices, forty shillings.

35 H. 8. Cap. 5. 1. N. 6,
Or ( viz. none to be arraigned for Offense against 31 H 8. Cap. 14. 9. Religion.
N. 2. etc. but on Presentment, etc.) before the Justices of Peace sitting in
their Sessions, or three of them at the least.

C. 17. 7. N. 2.
And if the Lord (viz. that would enclose Wood of Common, Woods.
etc.) and the said Tenants and Inhabitants, or the most part of them cannot,
will not, or do not assent, consent and agree, for and upon the severing,
dividing, setting out, meeting and bounding of the said fourth part of the said
Woods and Underwoods, (Viz. to be left out, etc.) or of as much thereof as
shall amount to the full fourth part thereof, that then two Justices of the
Peace not being of the Kin, Alliance, Council or Fee, of or to the said Lord or
Owner, being thereto appointed by the more number of the Justices of Peace of
the Shire where the said Ground or Soil lies, in their open Quarter Sessions
upon Request and Suit made unto them by the Lord or Owner, or by his or their
lawful Depuy or Deputies of the said Woods, Underwoods, Grounds or Soil, shall
have full Power and Authority to call before them, upon such Pains and
Penalties as the said Justices shall limit, and appoint such twelve of the said
Commons and Inhabitants nigh unto the same Woods or Underwoods, as by the
discretion of the said two Justices shall be thought meet and convenient.

Common.
And upon or after the appearante of the same Lords, Owners, 7. N. 3.
Commons and Inhabitants, or the most part of them, the same Justices shall
open and declare unto the same Lord, Owner, Commons and Inhabitants, the Cause
of their Assembly and Appearance, and that done, shall by the Advice and Assent
of the said Lord, Owner, Commons and Inhabitants, or their lawful Deputy or
Deputies or the most part of them, effectually proceed to the severing,
dividing, meeting and bounding of the said fourth part of the said Woods and
Underwoods, or of so much thereof as shall amount to the fourth part thereof.

Justices.
And if the same Justices, Owners, 7. N. 4.
Commons and Inhabitants or the most part of them, cannot or will not agree
upon the Division, etc. that then the said Justices shall have full Power and
Authority by this Act, to sever, divide and set out by meets and bounds, the
fourth part of the said Woods and Underwoods, or so much thereof under the
same fourth part of the said Woods and Underwoods, as shall by the Discretions
and Wisdoms of the said Justices, be thought necessary and requisite to limit
and set out.

Parliament.
Statutes made in the Parliament holden at Westminster, 37 H. 8. pa. 605.
in the seven and thirieth year of the most renowned H. 8. by the Grace of God
King of England, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith and of the Church of
England, and also of Ireland, in Earth Supreme Head.

Chancery.
Where before this time the Lord Chancellor of England for the time being, has
by reason of his Office of the Chancellorship, Cap. 1.
the Nomination and Appointment of the Custos Rotulorum within all and every
Shire of this Realm of England and Wales, and other the Kings Dominions,
Marches and Territories of the same, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. Cap. 1 2. N. 3.

Peace.
And yet in like manner all and every person which had enjoyed the said Office
of the Custos Rotulorum, has had until now of late, 1. N. 2.
the nomination and appointment of the Clerk of the Peace, within such Shires
where he or they had and enjoyed the said Office of Custos Rotulorum.

Officer.
And where now of late diverse and sundry persons within this Realm being not
learned, 1. N. 3.
nor yet meet ne able for lack of Knowledge and Learning, to occupy and
exercise the said Office of the Custos Rotulorum and of the Clerk of the Peace,
have of late years by labor, friendship and means attained and gotten for term
of their lives, of the Kings Majesty, several Grants by his Highness Letters
Patents to them made of the Clerkship of the Peace, by reason whereof, and for
that the Parties to whom the said several Grants have been so made and granted,
have not been sufficiently learned to exercise and occupy the same Office and
Offices, many and sundry Indictments as well of Felony, Murder and other
Offenses and Misdemeanors, and the Process awarded upon the same Indictments,
have not only been by reason thereof made clearly frustrate and void, sometime
by reason of the negligent engrossing and keeping of the said Indictments, and
sometime by reason of the Imbezelling or Razure of the same Indictments.

Inrollment.
But also (viz. by ignorant Clerks) diverse and sundry Bargains and Sales, of
diverse and sundry Manors, Lands and Tenements, 1. N. 4.
had and made between party and party, have been made frustrate and void for
lack of sufficient Inrolment of the Bargains and Sales, to be had and made by
the Clerks of the Peace, to the great hindrance of Justice, and to the
Disinheritance of diverse of the Kings most Loving Subjects.

2. N. 1.
For Reformation whereof, Ability.
to the intent that Justice may be the better hereafter preserved, and that the
same Offices may hereafter be occupied and exercised by such persons learned in
the Laws of this Realm, as shall be able to exercise and supply the same.

2. N. 2.
Be it Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, Prerog.
with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same, that no person
or persons shall from henceforth be nominated and appointed, to the said Office
and Offices of the Custos Rotulorum within any Shire of this Realm of England,
Wales and other the Kings Dominions, Marches or Territories of the same, but
such as shall have a Bill signed with the Kings hand for the same, 3 and 4 Ed.
6. Cap. 1.

2. N. 3.
Which Bill signed, Chancery.
shall be a sufficient Warrant by the Authority abovesaid, to the said Lord
Chancellor of England and the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being,
to make from time to time Commission or Commissions, assigning and authorizing
thereby, the same person to be Custos Rotulorum, until the King has by
another Bill assigned with his own hand, appointed and ordained one other
person to have, occupy and exercise the same Office of Custos Rotulorum, 3 and
4 Ed. 6. Cap. 1. 1. N. 2.

2. N. 4.
And that the said person appointed and Assigned to be Custos Rotulorum as is
abovesaid, shall and may, occupy, Patents.
exercise and enjoy the same Office of Custos Rotulorum by himself, or by his
sufficient Deputy learned in the Laws of this Realm, and meet and able to
supply the said Office, according to the tenor of the said Grant or Commission,
3 and 4 Ed. 6. Cap. 1. 1. N. 3.

3. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, Peace.
that every Custos Rotulorum for the time being, shall at all times hereafter
in every Shire of this Realm, Wales, and other the Kings Dominions, Marches and
Territories of the same, nominate, elect, appoint and assign, all and every
person and person which hereafter shall be Clerks of the Peace within any of
the said Shires of this Realm of England, Wales, and other the Kings Dominions,
Marches and Territories of the same.

3. N. 2.
And to give and grant the said Office and Offices of Clerkship of the Peace,
Officer.
to such able persons instructed in the Laws of this Realm as shall be able to
exercise and occupy the same, to hold and enjoy the same, during the term that
the said Custos Rotulorum shall occupy and exercise the said Office of Custos
Rotulorum, so that the said Clerk demean him in the said Office justly and
honestly.

3. N. 3.
And that it be lawful to every such Grantors of the said Clerkship, Deputy.
to occupy and enjoy the same Office of the Clerkship of the Peace by himself,
or by his sufficient Deputy instructed in the Laws of this Realm, so that the
same Deputy be admitted, taken and reputed by the said Custos Rotulorum, be
sufficient and able, to exercise, occupy, keep and enjoy the same Office of the
Clerkship of the Peace.

4. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Patents.
that all such as now have any of the said Offices of Custos Rotulorum, or
Clerkship of the Peace by the Kings Letters Patents of Commission to them made,
shall and may enjoy, have and exercise their said Offices by virtue of the same
Letters Patents or Commission, by themselves or by their sufficient and able
Deputy instructed in the Laws of this Realm, any thing in this present Act had
or made to the contrary notwithstanding.

5. N. 1.
Provided also and be it Enacted by Authority abovesaid, Franchise.
that the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Ely and
every of their Successors, and all and every such person and persons,
Corporations and Bodies Corporate to whom the Kings Majesty or any of his Noble
Progenitors, by his or their Letters Patents have given and granted any Liberty
and Authority, or otherwise have Authority by other lawful means or ways, to
ordain, make and constitute any of the said Officers of Custos Rotulorum, or
Clerk of the Peace within any County Palatine or other place, and may have and
enjoy the same Liberty and Authority according as they have enjoyed the same,
any thing in this present Act had or made to the contrary notwithstanding.

Parliament.
Where in the Parliament begun at Westminster the sixteenth day of January, in
the three and thirtieth year of the Kings Majesty's Reign, Cap 7.
( viz. 33 H. 8. Cap. 10. 1. N. 3.) it was Enacted amongst other things, that
all and singular Justices of the Peace within any Shire, City, Borough or place
within this Realm of England, Wales or any other the Kings Dominions, should
yearly at the general Sessions of the Peace to be holden next after the Feast
of Easter, assemble themselves together, that is to say, every number of them
within the limits of their Commissions wherein they be named Justices of the
Peace, etc.

Justices.
And forasmuch as the Kings most loving Subjects are much Travailed and
otherwise Encumbered, 2. N. 1.
in coming and keeping of the said six weeks Sessions, to their Costs, Charges
and Unquietness.

Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, 2. N. 2.
with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that the said
former Act made in the said three and thirtieth year of the Kings Majesty's
Reign, ( viz. 33 H. 8. Cap. 10.) and all Ordinances, Articles, Provisions and
things therein contained, shall be from henceforth repealed, Inquest.
annulled, and utterly void and of none effect, to all Intents, Constructions
and Purposes. 2. N. 3.


And that all and every Article therein contained, ( viz. in 33 H. 8. Cap. 10.
Justices.
) shall be by virtue hereof, inquired of before all Justices of Peace, at their
August Quarter Sessions. 2. N. 4.


And that the same Justices of Peace at their said Quarter Sessions, shall have
like Power and Authority by virtue hereof, to punish and reform all and every
such Offense and Offenses, in like manner and form as they might have done by
virtue of the said former Act made in the said three and thirtieth year of the
Kings Reign. ( viz. 33 H. 8. Cap. 10.)

Statuta Edw. 6.
Religion.
AND for full and effectual Execution of, etc. this Act, 1 Ed. 6. C. 1. 1 N. 7.
(viz. against Reviling the Sacrament, etc.) be it furthermore Enacted, etc.
that, etc. the Justices of Peace or three of them at the least, whereof one of
them to be of the Quorum, in every Shire of this Realm and Wales, and all other
places within the Kings Dominions, shall have full Power, etc. as well to take
Information and Accusation by the Oaths and Depositions of two able, honest and
lawful persons at the least.

Days.
And after such Accusation or Information so had, 1. N. 8.
to inquire by the Oaths of twelve men, in every their four Quarter Sessions
yearly to be holden, of all and singular such Accusations or Informations, to
be had or made of any of the Offenses abovesaid, etc. within the limits of
their Commission.

Indictment.
And that upon every such Accusation and Information, the Offender, 1. N. 9.
etc. shall be inquired of and indicted before the said Justices of Peace or
three of them at the least, etc. of the said Contempts and Offenses, by the
Verdict of twelve honest and indifferent men, if the matter of the said
Accusation and Information shall seem to the said Jury, good and true.

Justices.
And it is also further Enacted, 2. N. 1.
etc. that the said Justices of Peace or three of them at the least, etc.
before whom any such Presentment, Information and Accusation shall be made or
taken, etc. shall examine the Accusers, what other Witnesses were by and present
at the time of the doing and committing of the Offense, etc. and how many
others than the Accusers have knowledge thereof?

^ecogni^^nce.
And shall have Power, etc. by their discretions, 2. N. 2.
to bind by Recognizance to be taken before them, as well the said Accusers as
all such other persons whom the said Accusers shall declare to have knowledge
of the Offenses by them presented and informed; every of them in five pounds to
the King, to appear before the said Justices of the Peace, before whom the
Offender, etc. shall be tried at the day of the trial and deliverance of such
Offenders.

3. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, Process.
etc. that the said Justices of Peace or three of them at the least, etc. shall
have full Power, etc. to make Process against every person and persons so
Indicted by two Capias and an Exigent, and by Capias Utlagatum, as well within
the limits of their Commission as into all other Shires and Places of this
Realm, Wales, and other the Kings Dominions, as well within Liberties as
without, etc.

3. N. 2.
And upon the Appearance of any of the Offenders, shall have full power,
Religion.
etc. to determine the Contempts and Offenses aforesaid, viz. in reviling the
Sacrament, etc.) According to the Laws of this Realm and the effects of this
Act.

3. N. 3.
And that the said Justices, etc. or three, etc. at the least, Bayl.
etc. shall have full Power, etc. to let any such person, etc. so Indicted upon
sufficient Sureties by their discretions, to Bail for their appearance to be
tried, etc.

4. N. 1.
Provided always and be it Enacted, Ordinary.
that the said Justices of the Peace or three of them at the least, at their
Quarter Sessions where any Offender, etc. shall be, etc. Indicted etc. shall
direct and award one Writ in the Kings Name to the Bishop of the Diocese
wherein the said Offenses, etc. are supposed to be committed or done, willing
and requiring the said Bishop to be in his own person, or by his Chancellor, or
other his sufficient Deputy learned, at the Quarter Sessions in the said County
to be holden, when and where the said Offender shall be arraigned and tried,
appointing to them in the said Writ, the Day and Place of the said Arraignment.

C. 5. 2. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that it shall be lawful, Merchants.
etc. to all and every the Kings Justices of Peace in every Shire, as well in
England as in Wales in their Quarter Sessions, to inquire of all and every
Offense or Offenses hereafter to be perpetrated, committed or done contrary to
this Act, (viz. In conveying Horses, Mares or G^ldings, into Scotland or beyond
the Seas.)

C. 7. 4. N. 1.
And also be it Ordained, etc. that albeit any, Abatement.
etc. Justice of the Peace within any of the Kings Dominions, etc. shall
fortune to be made, etc. Duke, Archbishop, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, Baron,
Bishop, Knight, Justice of the one Bench or of the other, or Sergeant at the
Law, or Sheriff, yet that notwithstanding he shall still remain Justice, etc.
and have full Power, etc. as he or they might or ought to have done before the
same.

6. N. 1.
And over that no manner of Process or Suit made, etc. before any, Justices.
etc. Justices of Peace, etc. shall ne in any wise be discontinued, etc. by
altering of the names of the, etc. Justices of Peace, 11 H. 6. Cap. 6. 1. N. 2.

C. 12. 19. N. 3.
And that the same Accusation, etc. so to be had, made and declared, Treason.
(viz. with^n thirty days after Treason spoken, etc.) shall be made to one of
the Kings Council, or to one of the Kings Justices of Assize, or else to one of
the Kings Justices of the Peace being of the Quorum, or to two Justices of the
Peace within the Shire where the same Offense, etc. shall happen to be done or
committed, any thing in this Act contained to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

2 and 3 Ed. 6. C. 2. 4. N. 1.
And if such Soldiers so offending, War.
(viz. departing or selling their Harness, etc.) fortune to escape from the
Lieutenant, etc. without the Punishment (viz. of Imprisonment till
Satisfaction) and Restitution aforesaid, that then the same Soldier upon
complaint made by the Party grieved, or his Executors or Administrators, upon
due Proof thereof to made to any Justice or Justices of the Peace in the parts
where such Soldiers so offending shall be found, shall be by such Justice or
Justices committed to Ward, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until he
have satisfied the Party grieved, his Executors or Administrators, of and for
such Horses, Geldings or Mares and Harness, so by any such Soldier wilfully
lost, exchanged, altered or otherwise purloyned.

Process.
And that the Justices of every Shire where any such Soldier (viz. Departing
without License) shall be taken, shall have full Power to inquire, 6. N. 2.
hear and determine in all and every the said Offenses concerning every such
Departure, as they do and may do in all other Cases of Felony committed in the
Shire where such Soldiers shall be taken.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, C. 10. 4. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace in every of their Sessions, and also the
Steward in every Leet shall have full Power, etc. to inquire, hear and
determine, as well by Presentment of twelve Men, as by Accusation or Information
of two honest Witnesses, of, for and upon all and every the Offenses and
Forfeitures, etc. (viz. of not well drying sifting or mixing of Malt, etc.) as
well for the King as for the Party that shall sue, procure or cause the same to
be presented as is beforesaid.

And if any of them (viz. Constab^es, Bailiffs, etc.) shall thereupon (Viz. on
Search) find any Malt so put to Sale, Coron.
being evil made, 4. N. 3.
or mingled with evil Malt, etc. that then the said Bailiff or Constable so
finding any such Malt, etc. with the advice of one Justice of Peace within the
same Shire, shall cause the same to be sold to such person, etc and at such
reasonable price, etc. and under the common price of the Market, as to his
discretion shall seem necessary and expedient.

And that all and every other person Authorized to shoot or otherwise, if he
inhabit in any Town-Corporate be presented by the Mayor or other Officer of the
same, Games.
and inhabiting in the County, C. 14. 2. N. 2.
be presented within one Month after the publishing of this Act, to the next
Justice of Peace adjoining.

In which Cases, the said Mayor, Justice or other Officer so taking their names
as is aforesaid, Corporation
2. N. 3.
shall again present and record the same before a Justice of the Peace at the
next Quarter Sessions, to the intent the Clerk of the Peace of the County may
keep a certain Book or Roll of the names of all such persons, by the which the
Kings Majesty may from time to time be ascertained how many sheet and able men
exercised in that Feat be in every County, that the same may be employed in his
Graces Service, as need and occasion shall require.

And it is further Ordained, etc. that all and singular Justices of Assize,
Victuals.
Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs and Stewards of Leets, C. 15. 3. N. 1.
at all and every their Sessions Leets and Courts, shall have full Power and
Authority to inquire, hear and determine, all and singular Offenses committed
against this Statute, (viz. of Conspiracy by Victualers, Artificers, etc.) and
to punish or cause to be punished, the Offender according to the Tenor of this
Act (viz. by Fine, Imprisomnent, Pillory, etc.)

Fish.
And furthermore it is Ordained, etc. that Justices of Goal delivery and
Justices of Peace, in all and singular Counties, Cities, C. 19. 4. N. 1.
Towns-Corporate and other places within this Realm of England and other the
Kings Dominions, shall have full Power and Authority to inquire hear and
determine all manner of Offenses that shall be committed or done contrary to
this Act, (viz. Eating Flesh on Fridays, Saturdays, Embringdays and Fish-days)
in like manner and form as they may inquire, hear and determine, any Trespass or
other Offense against the Kings Peace committed or done, within the limits or
place where they then shall be Justices, etc.

For redress, etc. be it Enacted, etc. that where any person, C. 24. 2. N. 5.
etc. shall be Feloniously stricken or poisoned in one County, Coron.
and dye of the same, etc, in another County, that then an Indictment thereof
found by Jurors of the County where the death shall happen, whether it shall be
found before the Coroner, etc or before the Justices of Peace, or other
Justices or Commissioners etc. shall be as good, etc. as if the Stroke or
Poisoning had been committed or done in the same County where the Party shall
dye, or where such Indictment shall be so found, etc.

And further be it Enacted, etc. that where any Murder or Felony hereafter
shall be committed and done in one County, Lieu.
4. N. 1.
and another person or more shall be accessory, etc. in any manner of wise,
etc. in any other County, that then an Indictment found, etc. before the
Justices of Peace, or other Justices or Commissioners, to inquire of Felonies
in the County where such Offenses of Accessory, etc. shall be committed, etc.
shall be as good and effectual in the Law, as if the said principal Offense had
been committed, etc. within the same County where the same Indictment against
such Accessory shall be found.

4. N. 2.
And that the Justices of Jail-delivery, or Oyer and Terminer, Accessory.
or two of them, of or in such County where the Offense of any such Accessory
shall be hereafter committed, etc. upon suit to them made, shall write to the
Custos Rotulorum, or Keepers of the Records where such Principal shall be
hereafter attainted or convicted, to certify them whether such Principal be
attainted or convicted, or otherwise discharged of such principal Felony, who
upon such Writing to them or any of them directed, shall make sufficient
Certificate in Writing under their Seal or Seals to the said Justices, whether
such Principal be attainted and convicted, or otherwise discharged, or not.

3 and 4 Ed. 6. p. 667.
Acts made in the Session of this present Parliament, Parliament.
holden upon Prorogation at Westminster, the fourth day of November in the
third year of the Reign of our most Dread Sovereign Lord Edward the sixth, by
the Grace of God King of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith and
of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, in Earth the Supreme Head, and
there continued and kept to the first day of February, in the fourth year of
the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord as follows.

Cap. 1.
Where in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the seven and thirtieth year
of the Reign of the most excellent Prince of Famous Memory King Henry the
eighth, ( viz. 37 H. 8. Cap. 1. 2. N. 2. Patents.
) it was Enacted that no person or persons should from the making of the said
Act, be nominated and appointed to the Office or Offices of Custos Rotulorum,
within any Shire of this Realm of England, Wales or other the Kings Dominions,
Marches or Territories of the same, but such as should have a Bill signed with
the Kings hand for the same.

1. N. 2.
Which Bill signed ( viz. 37 H. 8. Cap. 1. 2. N. 3. Chancery.
) should be a sufficient Warrant by Authority of the said Act, to the Lord
Chancellor of England and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, to
make from time to time Commission or Commissions, assigning and authorizing
thereby the same person to be Custos Rotulorum, until the King had by another
Bill assigned with his own hand, appointed and ordained another person to have,
occupy and exercise the same Office of Custos Rotulorum.

1. N. 3.
And ( Viz. 37 H. 8 Cap. 1. 2. N. 4. Peace.
) that the said person appointed and assigned to be Custos Rotulorum as is
abovesaid, should and might, occupy, exercise and enjoy the said Office of
Custos Rotulorum by himself, or by his sufficient Deputy learned in the Laws of
this Realm, and meet and able to supply the said Office according to the Tenor
of the said Grant or Commission, as by the same Act among other things more at
large it does and may appear.

2. N. 1.
Since the making of which Statute ( viz. 37 H. 8. Cap. 1. 2. Patents.
) diverse and many persons being in the said Offices of Custos Rotulorum in
diverse Shires of the Realm, have departed this present Life and dyed, so that
there has not come to the hands of the Chancellor of England or Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal, any Bill or Bills assigned with the Kings Majesty's hand, for
the naming, appointing or assigning of any new Custos Rotulorum in the same
Shires, and so the said Offices have remained void for a long time to the great
let of Justice.

2. N. 2.
And also for that it shall be very tedious and much to the molesting of the
Kings Majesty upon every avoidance of such Custos Rotulorum by death or
otherwise, Officer.
to move his Majesty for the signing of Bills for other persons to be elected,
named, chosen and appointed to supply the said Offices of Custos Rotulorum
being void.

2. N. 3.
And for that the nomination and appointing of the said Office of Custos
Rotulorum long before the making of the said Statute, etc. (viz. 37 H. 8.
Chancery.
C. 1.) did appertain and belong to the Office of the Chancellor of England, or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being.

3. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, Prerog.
with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, that the
Chancellor of England, or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being,
shall at all time and times hereafter, and from time to time without any Bill
or Bills to be assigned with the Kings hand, name elect, assign and appoint
such person and persons to be Custos Rotulorum within every Shire of this Realm
of England, Wales, and other the Kings Dominions, Marches and Territories of
the same or by any of them, as by the discretion of the said Lord Chancellor or
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being, Deputy.
3. N. 2.
shall be thought able and meet to have and exercise the same.

And that the said person or persons so to be appointed, elected, named and
assigned by the said Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal for the
time being, shall and may, occupy, exercise and enjoy the same Office of Custos
Rotulorum by himself, or by his sufficient Deputy or Deputies, Patents.
in as ample, and large manner and form, as if the said Act ( viz. 37 H. 8.
Cap. 1.) had never been had ne made, 4. N. 1.
the before rehearsed Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary
hereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such
as now have any of the said Offices of Custos Rotulorum by the Kings Letters
Patents or Commission, to them or any of them made, shall and may enjoy,
Franchise.
have and exercise the said Offices, by virtue of the same Letters Patents or
Commission, by himself, 5. N. 1.
or his sufficient and able Deputy instructed in the Laws of this Realm, any
thing in this present Act had or made to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that it be Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the
Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Durham, the Bishop of Ely and every of their
Successors, the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster for the time being, and
all and every Person and Persons, Corporations and Bodies Corporated, to whom
the Kings Majesty or any of his Noble Progenitors, by his or their Letters
Patents or Act of Parliament, have given and granted any Liberty and Authority,
or otherwise have Authority by other lawful means or ways, to ordain, make and
constitute any of the said Officers of Custos Rotulorum, within any County
Palatine or other place, Peace.
Cap. 5.
shall and may have and enjoy the same Liberty and Authority, according as they
have had and enjoyed the same, any thing in this present Act had or made to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Treason.
Forasmuch as it is most necessary in a Commonwealth to provide that
Tranquillity and Peace may be continued in this Realm, 1. N. 2.
and that all things being contrary thereto, may by foresight be eschewed.

Therefore it is Ordained and Enacted by the King our Soverain Lord, with the
assent of the Lords and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by
Authority of the same, that if any persons to the number of twelve or above,
being assembled together at any time after the twelfth day of February next
coming, shall intend, go about, practice or put in ure with force of Arms,
unlawfully and of their own Authority to murder, kill, slay, take or imprison
any of the Kings most honorable Privy-Counsel, or unlawfully to alter or
change any Laws made or established for Religion by Authority of Parliament, or
any other Laws or Statutes of this Realm or any of them, the same number of
twelve or above, being commanded or required by the Sheriff of the Shire, or by
any Justice of Peace of the same Shire, or by the Mayor, Sheriffs, Justices of
Peace or Bailiffs of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate where any such
Assembly shall be unlawfully had or made by Proclamation in the Kings Name, to
retire and repair to their own Houses, Habitations or Places from whence they
came, and they or any of them notwithstanding such Proclamation, shall remain,
or make their abode or continue together by the space of on whole hour after
such Commandment or Request made by Proclamation, or after that, shall
willingly in forcible and riotous manner, attempt to do or put in ure any the
things above specifyed, that then as well every such abode and continuing
together, as every such Act or Offense, that after such Proclamation,
Commandment or Request had or made, shall be attempted to be done, practiced or
put in ure by any persons being of the number aforesaid, shall be judged
High Treason in all and singular those persons that so shall make their abode
or continue together, or shall attempt or commit any such Act, and the
Offenders therein, their Aiders, Abetters and Procurers, to be adjudged
Traitors to the King and the Realm, and shall suffer Execution of Death as in
Case of High Treason, 1 Mar. 1. Stat. 2. Cap. 12.

2. N. 1.
And furthermore be it Enacted, Coron.
Ordained and Established by the Authority aforesaid, that if any persons to
the number of twelve or above, after the said twelfth day of February, shall
intend, go about, practice or put in ure in manner and form aforesaid, to
overthrow, cut, break, cast down or dig up the Pales, Hedges, Ditches or other
Closure of any Parks, Park or other Grounds or Ground Enclosed, or the Banks of
any Fish Pond or Pool, or any Conduits for Water, Conduit-heads or
Conduit-pipes having Course of Water, to the intent that the same or any of
them from thenceforth should remain open, not enclosed or void, or unlawfully
to have Common, or a Way in the said Parks, Park or other Grounds or Ground
enclosed, or in any of them, or to destroy the Deer in any manner of Parks or
Park, or any Warrens or Warren of Connies, or any Dove-houses, or any Fish in
any Pond or Pool, or to pull or cut down any Houses, Barns, Mills or Bays, or
to burn any Stacks of Corn or Grain, or to abate, defalk or diminish the Rents
or yearly Value, of any Manners, Lands or Tenements, or the Price of any
Victual, Corn or Grain, or any other things usual for the sustenance of Men;
and being required or commanded by any Justice of Peace, or by the Sheriff of
the County, or by the Mayor, Bailiff or Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers of any
Head-City or Town-Corporate where such Assembly shall be had, by Proclamation
to be made in the Kings Name, to retire or return in peaceable manner to their
Habitations, Places and Houses from whence they came, and they or any of them
notwithstanding such Proclamation, shall remain or make their abode, or
continue together by the space of one whole hour, after such Commandment or
Request made by Proclamation; or after that shall in forcible manner attempt to
do or put in ure, any of the things last before mentioned, that then as well
every such abode or continuing together, as every such Act, that after such
Proclamation, Commandment or Request had or made, shall be done, practiced or
put in ure by any persons being above the number of twelve, shall be adjudged
Felony, and the Offenders therein to be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer
Execution as in Case of Felony, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 2. N. 1.

2. N. 2.
And every of the same persons, Clergy.
to lose the Benefit of his Clergy and Sanctuary.

3. N. 1.
And also it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority abovesaid, Riot.
that if any person or persons after the twelfth day of February, unlawfully
and without Authority by ringing of any Bell or Bells, sounding of any Drum,
Trumpet, Hornor other Instrument whatsoever, or by firing of any Beacon, or by
malicious speaking or uttering of any words, or making any outcry, or by
setting up or casting any Bills, Bill or Writing whatsoevever, or by any other
deed or act shall raise or cause to be raised or assembled, any persons to the
number of twelve or above, to the intent that the same persons should commit
and put in ure any of the acts or things above mentioned, and that the persons
to the number of twelve or above so raised and assembled, after Commandment had
or given in form aforesaid, shall make their abode, or continue together as is
aforesaid, or unlawfully perpetrate, do, commit, or put in ure any of the acts
or things abovesaid, that then all and singular persons by whose Speaking,
Deed, Act or any other the means above specified, any persons to the number of
twelve or above shall be raised or assembled for the doing, committing or
putting in ure any of the acts or things above mentioned, shall be adjudged for
his so speaking or doing, a Felon, and shall suffer Execution of Death as in
Case of Felony, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. C. 12. 3. N. 1.

3. N. 2.
And shall lose his Benefit, and Sanctuary, and Clergy. Clergy.


4. N. 1.
And over that, it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Treason.
that if any persons to the number of forty and above, after the said twelfth
day of February shall be assembled together in forcible manner, unlawfully and
of their own Authority, to the intent to do, exercise or put in ure any of the
things above mentioned, or to do any other Traiterous Felonies or Rebellions,
Act or Acts, and so shall continue by the space of two hours, that then every
person so being willingly assembled in forcible manner, and so continuing by
the space of two hours, shall be adjudged a Traitor to the King and to the
Realm, and shall suffer Execution of Death as in Case of High Treason, 1 Mar.
1. St. 2. C. 12 20. N 1.

Bar. and Fem.
And also that if any Wife or Servant of any of the same persons, 5. N. 1.
or any other person whatsoever, shall willingly and without Compulsion, bring,
send, deliver or convey, any Money, Harness, Artillery, Weapon, Meat, Bread,
Drink or other Victual to any person or persons so being assembled as is
aforesaid, during such time as he or they shall so be assembled or be together
as is aforesaid, that then every Wife, Servant or other person so bringing,
sending, delivering or conveying, any Money, Harness, Artillery, Weapon, Meat,
Bread, Drink or Victual to the same persons, so being assembled together in
forcible manner, or to any of them, shall be adjudged a Traitor to the King and
to the Realm, and shall suffer Execution of Death as in Case of High Treason. 1
Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 4. N. 1.

Forfeiture.
And furthermore it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority above said, 6. N. 1.
that every person that at any time hereafter shall be attainted of or for any
of the Treasons or Treason above mentioned, shall upon his said Attainder
forfeit his Goods and Cattels, Interests for term of Life, and of years, Lands,
Tenements and other Hereditaments, in like manner and form as any person
attainted for Felony only should or ought to forfeit by the Common Laws of this
Realm and not otherwise, that is to say, the King to have the year and day and
wast of such Lands and Tenements whereof any person so attainted shall at the
time of the Treason committed, or at any time after have an Estate of
Fee-Simple, and also the Goods and Cattels real and personal.

Franchise.
And that the Lords of whom the said Lands and Tenements or any part thereof
shall be holden, 6. N. 2.
to have and enjoy the Lands or Tenements holden of him or them for ever, in
such the same manner and form as in Cases of Attainder of Felony at the
Common Law.

Tail.
And that every person that at any time hereafter shall be attainted of any of
the Treasons aforesaid, 6. N. 3.
shall forfeit the Lands and Tenements and other Hereditaments whereof he shall
be seized of any Estate in Tail, or for term of Life or Lives at the time of
any such Treason committed, or at any time after, during his Life only and no
longer, unless the person so attainted shall be thereof seized in his demean as
of Fee at the time of the said Treason committed, or at any time after.

Heir.
And that after the decease of the same person so attainted, 6. N. 4.
all and singular such person and persons as should have had and enjoyed such
Lands Tenements and other Hereditaments, as any person that at any time
hereafter shall be attainted of or for any Treason above specified, shall
fortune to be seized of any Estate in Tail, or for term of Life at the time of
any such Treason committed or at any time after, shall after the death of the
same person that so shall fortune to be attainted, have and enjoy the said
Lands Tenements and other Hereditaments, in like manner and form as though no
such Attainder had been had, any Law or Usage to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Riot.
And furthermore it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority abovesaid, 7. N. 1
that if any persons above the number of two and under the number of twelve,
being assembled together at any time after the said twelfth day of February,
shall intend, go about, practice or put in ure, with force of Arms unlawfully
and of their own authority to murder, kill or slay any of the Kings Majesty's
Subjects, or to overthrow, cut, break, cast down or dig up the Pales, Hedges,
Ditches, Wall or other Closure of any Parks, Park or other Ground enclosed, or
the Bank of any Fish Pond or Pool, to the intent that the same or any of them
from henceforth should remain open, not enclosed or void, or to have Common or
Way in the same Parks, Park or other Grounds or Ground enclosed, or any of
them, or to destroy any manner of Parks or Park, or Fish Pond or Pool, or any
Warrens or Warren of Connies, or any Dove-houses, or to pull or cut down any
House, Barn, Mill, or to burn any Stacks of Corn or Grain, or alter, defalk or
abate the Rents or yearly Value of any Manors, Lands or Tenements of any of
the Kings Subjects, or the price of any Victual, Corn or Grain, or any other
things usual for the Sustenance or Apparel of Men, and being required or
commanded by any Justice of the Peace, or the Sheriff of the County, or by any
Mayor, Bailiffs or Bailiff, or other Head-Officer of any City or Town-Corporate
where such Assembly shall be had, by Proclamation to be made in the Kings Name,
to retire or return to their Habitations, Places or Houses, and they so
required by such Proclamation shall not so do, but after that shall in forcible
manner in form aforesaid, attempt to do or put in ure any of the things last
above mentioned, that then every of the same persons being above the number of
two and under the number of twelve, shall suffer Imprisonment of his or their
bodies by the space of one year without Bail or Mainprise, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2.
Cap. 12. 5. N. 1.

7. N. 2.
And shall make Fine and Ransom at the Kings Will and Pleasure Amercement.


7. N. 3.
And also that if any person or persons at any time after the twelfth day of
February, shall be damnified or hurt by the doing, Damages.
committing or putting in ure, of any unlawful act or thing above mentioned,
that then all and singular persons so damnified or hurt, shall recover and have
Damages with the Costs of their Suit sustained in that behalf trebled against
the Offenders therein, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 6. N. 1.

8. N. 1.
And forasmuch as such evil disposed persons which of late time made Commotions
and Rebellion in certain places within this Realm, War.
being but few in number at such time as they did begin the same Commotion,
were not in short time after the beginning thereof suppressed by strength, for
that the Kings loving Subjects for fear to incur the danger of the Laws of this
Realm durst not take upon them so to do, a greater number of evil disposed
persons did come and join themselves to the said small number, whereby the same
evil disposed persons took upon them such boldness, that they would not be
reduced to obedience without much blood shedding, to the great danger of the
Kings Majesty's person, where if the Kings loving Subjects durst have taken
upon them to have suppressed them at the beginning, such inconvenience of
bloodshed should not have followed, 1 Mar. 1. St 2. Cap. 12. 7. N. 1.

8. N. 2.
Therefore it is also Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Justices.
that if any persons above the number of two, that at any time after the said
twelfth day of February shall be unlawfully and of their own authority
assembled together, to the intent with force of Arms to do, practice or put in
ure any of the things above mentioned, that then it shall be lawful to every
Justice of Peace, and to every Sheriff in any County being within the Kings
Dominions, and to every Mayor, Bailiff and other Head-Officer of any City or
Town-Corporate for the time he shall be in Office, or any other person or
persons having the Kings Commission, or Letters from his Highness or his Privy
Council, as well to raise and assemble the Kings loving Subjects in manner of
War, to be arrayed in such great number as he or they then shall think meet or
able, to the intent by Violence and Strength, to suppress, apprehend and take
the said persons that so shall be unlawfully assembled, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap.
12. 7. N. 2.

8. N. 3.
And that if the said persons so unlawfully assembled, Process.
after such Commandment or Request by Proclamation or otherwise made, shall
continue together and not endeavor themselves to return toward their
Habitations, Houses or Places from whence they came, in such short time as they
may conveniently, that then it shall be lawful to every Justice of Peace,
Sheriff, and also to every Mayor, Bailiff and other Head-Officer of any City or
Town-Corporate, and to every other Person having Authority as aforesaid, after
such Commandment or Request by Proclamation made, and to such persons as shall
be assembled with any Justice of Peace or Sheriff, or with any Mayor, Bailiff
or other Head-Officer of any City or Town Corporate, and with every other
person having Authority as is aforesaid, to suppress, apprehend and take those
persons so unlawfully assembled, which after such Request made shall continue
together and not endeavor themselves to return toward their Habitations or
Places from whence they came, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 7. N. 3.

Coron.
And that if the said persons so unlawfully assembled together or any of them,
shall fortune to be killed, slain, maimed or hurt, 8. N. 4.
in or about the suppressing or taking of them, that then every such Justice of
Peace, Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff and other Head-Officer, and every other person
having Authority as is aforesaid, and all and singular persons by him or them
assembled, shall be free, discharged and unpunishable, as well against the King
as against all and every other person and persons, of, for or concerning the
killing, slaying, maiming and hurting of any person or persons so unlawfully
assembled, that shall fortune to be killed, slain, maimed or hurt, about or by
occasion of suppressing or taking of them, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 7. N. 4.

Copyholder.
And furthermore be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 9. N. 1.
that all and every Copyholder or Customary-Holder, being Artificer,
Husbandman or Laborer, and being of the age of eighteen years or more, and
under the age of forty years, not sick, impotent, lame, maimed ne having any
other just or reasonable excuse or cause to the contrary, and being required by
the Sheriff, Justice or Justices of the Peace, or other having Authority by
this Act, or by Commission or Letters as is aforesaid in that behalf, they
declaring their said Authority, or being required by the immediate Lord or
Lords of whom such Copy-holds or Customary holds then shall be holden, to serve
the Kings Majesty for any the causes above rehearsed, and refuse so to do,
shall only during the Life of such person or persons so refusing, forfeit and
lose to his or their Lord or Lords of whom such Copy or Customary-holds then
shall be immediately holden and should be holden, during the Life of such
person or persons so refusing, in Case he or they had not so refused, all their
Copy-holds and Customary-holds, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 8. N. 1.

Seizure.
And that it shall be lawful to every such Lord or Lords, 9. N. 2.
their Heirs or Assigns of whom such Copy-holds or Customary-holds shall be
immediately holden and should have been holden, in case such person or persons
had not so refused, by virtue of this present Act, to enter and take into his
or their Hands or Possession, all such Copy-holds and Customary-holds so holden
of them or any of them immediately, and to retain the same during only the Life
of every such Offender or Offenders, in such manner and form as he or they
should have had the Rents or Services of such Copyhold or Customary-hold, in
Case such person or persons so refusing had not refused, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap.
12. 8. N. 2.

^orfeiture.
And that all and every Farmer being a Yeoman, Husbandman, 9. N. 3.
Artificer or Laborer, and being of the age of eighteen years or more, and
under the age of forty years, not sick, impotent, lame, maimed ne having any
other just or reasonable excuse or cause to the contrary, and being required by
the Sheriff, Justice or Justices of the Peace, or other having Authority by
this Act, or by Commission or Letters as is aforesaid in this behalf, they
declaring their said Authority, or being required by their Landlord or
Landlords for the time being, to whom the Rents of such Farms shall be then
rising, coming or growing, to serve the Kings Majesty for any the Causes above
rehearsed and refuse so to do, shall during only the Life of such Farmer or
Farmers so refusing, forfeit and lose to such Landlord and Landlords as
should have had the Rents of such Farmers, during the Life and Lives of such
person or persons so refusing, all their said Farms, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12.
9. N. 1.

Entry.
And that it shall be lawful to every such Landlord and Landlords, 9. N. 4.
their Heirs and Assigns to whom the Rents of such Farms should have been due,
during the Life of such person or persons so refusing, in case such person or
persons had not so refused, by virtue of this present Act to enter and take
into his or their Hands or Possession all such Farms, and to retein the same
during only the Life of every such Offender or Offenders, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap.
12. 9. N. 2.

^^^r.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 9. N. 5.
that after the death of every such Copyholder, Customary-holder or Farmer, as
so shall offend and forfeit any of their said Copy-holds, Customary-holds or
Farms as is aforesaid, that then all and every such person and persons as
should or ought to have had the said Copy-holds, Customary-holds or Farms,
after or by the death of such Copyholder, Customary-holder or Farmer, in case
such Copyholder, Customary-holder or Farmer had not so offended ne forfeited,
shall and may have the same Copy-holds, Customary-holds and Farms by Entry,
Action, Admission or otherwise in like Manner, Form and Condition, and by such
Ways and Means as they and every of them should, might or ought to have had, if
no such Forfeiture or Offense had been had, done or committed, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2.
Cap. 12. 10. N. 1.

10. N. 1.
And furthermore it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if
any person or persons after the said twelfth day of February, Coron.
by open Word or Deed shall procure or stir any other person or persons, to
arise or make any Traitorous or Rebellious Assembly, to the intent to do,
exercise or put in ure any of the things above mentioned, that then every
person so procuring, moving or stirring any other, shall therefore be deemed
and adjudged a Felon, and suffer pains of Death, and forfeit his Goods,
Cattels, Lands and Tenements as in Cases of Felony, 1 Mar. 1. St 2. Cap. 12.
19. N. 1.

. 10. N. 2.
And shall also lose the Benefit of his Clergy and Sanctuary. Clergy.


11. N. 1.
And also be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Imprisonment.
that if any person or persons which at any time after the same day shall be
spoken unto, moved or stirred to make any Commotion, Insurrection or unlawful
Assembly for any of the intents above mentioned, and do not within twenty four
hours next after he or they shall be so spoken unto, moved or stirred, unless
he shall have a good and reasonable cause of excuse, declare the same to one
Justice of Peace or Sheriff of the said County, or to the Mayor, Sheriffs,
Bailiff or Bailiffs or other head-Officer of any City or Town-Corporate where
such speaking, motion or stirring shall be had, shall suffer Imprisonment until
he shall be discharged by three Justices of Peace of the same Shire where the
Offense shall be, whereof one of the said Justices shall be of the Quorum, 1
Mar. 1. Stat. 2. Cap. 12. 11. N. 1.

12. N. 1.
And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority abovesaid, Imprisonment.
that if any person or persons being above the age of eighteen years and under
the age of forty years, being able to serve and not sick, lame or impotent,
shall be required by any Justice of the Peace, or any Sheriff of any County
where any such Assembly shall be, or by any Mayor, Bailiff or other
Head-Officer of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate, or by any other by the
Commandment of any such Justice of Peace, Sheriff, Mayor, Bailiff or other
Head-Officer to go with him or them to suppress the persons unlawfully
assembled in manner and form aforesaid, that then every person so being able
and required, do willingly and obstinately refuse so to do, shall suffer
Imprisonment of his Body for one year without Bail or Mainprize, 1 Mar. 1.
Stat. 2. Cap. 12. 12. N. 1.

12. N. 2.
And make Fine and Ransom, at the Kings Will and Pleasure. Amercements.


13. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if the King
shall by his Letters Patents make any Lieutenant in any Countiy or Counties of
this Realm for the suppressing of any Commotion, Rebellion or unlawful
Assembly, War.
that then all Justices of Peace of every such County, and the Sheriffs and
Sheriff of the same, as all Mayors, Bailiffs and other Head-Officers, and all
Inhabitants and Subjects of any County, City, Borough or Town-Corporate within
every such County, shall upon the Declaration of the said Letters Patents and
Request made, be bound to give attendance upon the same Lieutenant, to suppress
any Commotion, Rebellion or unlawful Assembly, unless he or they being so
required have any reasonable excuse for his not attendance, upon pain of
Imprisonment of one whole year, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 13. N. 1.

14. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Notice.
that the Order and Form of the Proclamations that shall be made by the
Authority of this Act, shall be as hereafter follows, or with the like order
and words in effect, that is to say, the Justice or other person Authorized by
this Act to make the said Proclamation, shall make or cause to be made in Oyes,
and after that shall openly pronounce or cause to be pronounced, these words or
the like in effect, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 14. N. 1.

Peace.
The King our Sovereign Lord, 14. N. 2.
charge and commands all persons being assembled, immediately to disperse
themselves, and peaceably to depart to their Habitations, or to their lawful
Business, upon the Pains contained in the Act lately made against unlawful and
rebellious Assemblies, and God save the King, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 14. N.
1.

Forfeiture.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 15. N. 1.
that if any person or persons do or shall molest let, hinder or hurt any
person or persons that shall proclaim or go to proclaim, according to the
Proclamation and Order made in the Statute aforesaid, whereby such Proclamation
shall not be made, that then all and every such person and persons so
molesting, letting, hindering or hurting, and all and every such person and
persons, Offender or Offenders to whom any such Proclamation or Proclamations
should or ought to be made to the intent aforesaid, shall incur and be in like
Danger, and suffer like Pain or Pains and Forfeitures as aforesaid, in every of
their Degrees, as though the Proclamation had been made, any Clause, Article or
Sentence heretofore in this Act included made to the contrary notwithstanding,
1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 15. N. 1.

Days.
And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 15. N. 2.
that this Act shall be openly read at every Quarter Sessions, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2.
Cap. 12. 16. N. 1.

Franchise.
Saving to the Bishop of Durham, and Bishop of Ely, 15. N. 3.
and all other that have Charter of the County Palatine, and to their
Successors the year, day and waste, in such sort as by the said Charter they
had or ought to have had the same, if this Act had never been had ne made, this
Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, 1 Mar. 1.
St. 2. Cap. 12. 17. N. 1.

Forfeiture.
Saving also to all and every person and persons and Heirs in Tail, Bodies
Politic and Corporate their Heirs, 15 N. 4.
Successors and Executors and to every of them, other than to such person and
persons only as shall be attainted, convicted or outlawed for any of the
aforesaid Offenses of Felony or Treason, and their Heirs or the Heirs of any of
them claiming by descent in Fee-simple from them or any of them, all such
Right, Title, Entry, Interest, Leases, Possessions, Rents, Conditions, Profits,
Commodities and Advantages, as they or any of them has, or hereafter shall
have or of right ought to have, in or to any Honors, Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services or Hereditaments whatsoever, or
in or to any part or parcel thereof, to be forfeited for any of the Offenses
aforesaid, as if such attainder or Forfeiture had never been had ne made, any
thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Corporation.
And Saving to every Body and Bodies Politic and Corporate, 15. N. 5.
and their Successors, their Liberties and Franchises in such manner and form,
as if this Act had never been had ne made, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. 18. N. 1.

Days.
This Act to continue to the end of the next Parliament, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. 15. N.
6.
Cap. 12. 23. N. 1.

Pope.
And for better Execution of the same Act, C. 10. 4. N. 1.
(viz. of destroying Popish Books and Images) be it Enacted, etc. that as well
Justices of Assize in their Circuits, as Justices of Peace within the limits of
their Commission in the general Sessions, shall have full Power and Authority
to inquire of the Offenses aforesaid, and to hear and determine the same in such
form as they may do in other such like Cases

Religion.
And, etc. it is now further Enacted, that if any person, etc. shall, 5 and 6
Ed. 6. C. 1. 6. N. 1.
etc. willingly or wittingly, hear and be present at any other manner or form
of Common Prayer or Administration of the Sacraments, of making of Ministers in
the Churches, or of any other Rights contained in that Book anexed to this Act
( viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. Cap. 12.) than is mentioned and set forth in the said
Book, or is contrary to the form of sundry Provisions, etc. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. Cap.
1.) and shall be thereof convicted according to the Laws of this Realm, before,
etc. Justices of Peace in their Sessions, etc by the Verdict of twelve men, or
by his or their own Confession or otherwise, shall for the first Offense suffer
Imprisonment of six Months, etc.

C. 4. 3. N. 1.
And also it is Enacted, etc. that if any person, Church.
etc. shall maliciously strike any Person with any Weapon, in any Church or
Churchyard, or, etc. shall draw any Weapon in any Church or Churchyard to the
intent to strike another with the same Weapon, that then every such person so
offending and thereof being convicted by verdict of twelve men, or by his own
confession, or by two lawful Witnesses before the Justices of Assize, Justices
of Oyer and Terminer, or Justices of Peace in their Sessions, by force of this
Act shall be adjudged by the same Justices before whom such person shall be
convicted, to have one of his Ears cut off.

C. 14. 10. N. 1.
Be it also further Enacted etc. that the Justices of Peace in every County
within this Realm, or Wales at their Quarter Sessions, Market Overt.
shall have full Power, etc. to inquire, hear and determine, all and every the
Defaults and Offenses perpetrated, etc. contrary to this Act, (viz. of
Forestalling, Regrating, etc.) within the County where any such Sessions shall
be kept, by Inquisition, Presentment, Bill or Information before them
exhibited, and by Examination of two lawful Witnesses, or by any of the same
ways or means by the discretion of the said Justices.

. 10. N. 2.
And to make Process thereupon as though they were Indicted before them, Process.
by Inquisition or by Verdict of twelve men or more.

10. N. 3.
And upon the Conviction of the Offender by Information or Suit of any other
than the King, Execution.
to make Extracts of the one Moity of the Forfeitures to be levied to the Kings
Use, as they use to do of other Fines, Issues and Amercements grown in the
Sessions of the Peace.

10. N. 4.
And to award Execution of the other Moity for the Complainant or Informer
against the Offender by Fieri fa. or Capias as the Kings Justices at
Westminster may do and use to do. Forfeiture.


10. N. 5.
And if any such Conviction or Attainder shall hereafter happen to be at the
Kings Suit only that then the whole Forfeitures to be extracted and levied to
the Kings use only. Indictment.


17 N. 1.
Provided always that such License of Justices of Peace, License.
(viz. of Drover, etc.) shall not endure above one year, unless the same be
yearly renewed by so many Justices, Viz. three at the least-

C. 21. 1. N. 3.
And that, (viz. Tinkers, Pedlers, etc. by License only to sell, Market Overt.
etc.) in such Circuit or Compass as shall be to him, etc. assigned by two
Justices of the Peace or more of the Shire where he or they shall dwell, by
Writing under their Hands and Seals, 1 Jac. 25. 42. N. 1.

1. N. 4.
Upon Pain that every person which shall offend, Poor.
etc. shall by any Justice of Peace where the same shall be committed upon
Complaint and due Proof had by Witness or otherwise, be imprisoned by the space
of fourteen days at the least.

C. 24. 5. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if the Mayor, Recorder, Drapery.
Steward or (viz. two) Justices of the Peace of the said City (viz. Norwich)
for the time being, or any of them, shall take any Sum of Money or Reward for
admitting of any person to occupy or use any of the Arts or Mysteries, etc.
(viz. of making Thrummed Hats, Dornicks or Coverletts) that for every such Time
and every such Case, the person so offending shall forfeit five Pounds, etc.

Cap. 25.
It is therefore Enacted, etc (viz. for Increase of Disorders, Ale,
etc.) that the Justices of Peace within every Shire, City, Borough,
Town-Corporate Franchise or Liberty within this Realm or two of them at the
least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have full Power, etc. within
every Shire, etc. where they be Justices of Peace to remove, discharge and put
away common selling of Ale and Beer in the said common Ale houses and
Tipling-houses in such Town, etc. and Places where they shall think meet and
convenient.

License.
And that none, 1. N. 3.
etc. shall be admitted or suffered to keep any common Alehouse or
Tipling-house, but such as shall be thereunto admitted and allowed in the open
Sessions of the Peace, or else by two Justices of the Peace whereof ene to be
of the Quorum.

Recognizance.
And that the said Justices of the Peace or two of them, 1. N. 4.
whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall take Band and Surety from time to time
by Recognizance, of such as shall be admitted and allowed hereafter to keep any
common Alehouse or Tipling-house, as well for and against the using of
unlawful Games, as also for the using and maintenance of good Order and Rule to
be had and used within the same, as by their discretion shall be thought
necessary and convenient.

Certificate.
And the said Justices shall certify the same Recognizance at the next Quarter
Sessions of the Peace to be holden within the same Shire, 2. N. 1.
etc. where such Alehouse or Tipling-house shall be.

Records.
The same Recognizance there to remain of Record before the Justices of Peace of
that Shire, 2. N. 2.
etc

Forfeiture.
Upon pain of Forfeiture to the King for every such Recognizance taken and not
certified, three pounds six shillings and eight pence. 2. N. 3


Justices.
And it is further Enacted, etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Shire, 3.
N. 1.
etc. where such Recognizance shall be taken, shall have Power, etc. in their
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, by Presentment, Information or otherwise by
their discretion to enquire of all such persons as shall be admitted and
allowed to keep any Alehouse or Tipling-house, and that be bound by
Recognizance, etc. if they or any of them have done any act or acts whereby
they or any of them have forfeited the same Recognizance.

Process.
And the said Justices of every Shire and Places where they be Justices, shall
upon every such Presentment or Information, 3. N. 2.
award Process against every such person so presented or complained upon before
them, to show why he should not forfeit his Recognizance,

Justices.
And shall have Power, 3. N. 3
etc. to hear and determine the same by all ways and means as by their
discretion shall be thought good.

Imprisonment.
And it is further Enacted, etc. that if any person, 4. N. 1.
etc. other than such as shall be hereafter admitted or allowed by the said
Justices, shall, etc. obstinately and upon his own Authority take upon him,
etc. to keep a common Alehouse, etc. or shall contrary to the Commandment of
the said Justices or two of them, use commonly selling of Ale and Beer, that
then the said Justices of Peace or two of them, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, shall for every such Offense commit every such person, etc. to the
Common-Goal, etc. there to remain without Bail or Mainprize by the space of
three days, 3 Car. 1. Cap. 3. (4) 1. N. 6.

Certificate.
And the said Justices shall make Certificate of every such Recognizance and
Offense at the next Quarter Sessions, 5. N. 1.
etc. where the same shall be committed or done.

Process.
Which Certificate shall be a sufficient Conviction in Law of the same Offense.
5. N. 2.


Execution.
And the said Justices of Peace upon the said Certificate made, 5. N. 3
shall in open Sessions assess the Fine for every such Offense at twenty
shillings.

Wine.
Nor that it shall be lawful to any person, etc. to keep any Tavern, 7 Ed. 6. C.
5. 3. N. 1.
or to sell or utter any Wine by Retayl, etc. in any City, Borough, Port, Town
or Market Town not Corporate, within the Realm of England or Wales, or in the
said Towns of Gravesend, Sittingborn or Bagshot, but only such person, etc. as
thereto shall be assigned, etc. by all or most part of the Justices of Peace
for the time being of such Shire or County where such Tavern or selling of Wine
by Retayl shall be had or allowed, as shall be present at the general Sessions
for the time being to be holden in every of the said Shires or Counties, 12
Car. 2. Cap. 25.

3. N. 7.
The said Assignment, License.
etc. to be had and made in full Session by writing under the several Seals of
every of the said Justices, and to be continued, altered or changed, etc. (viz.
at the pleasure of the Majority.

6. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Shire or County City and
Town-Corporate in their several Sessions, and the Stewards in every Leet, and
the Sheriff in his Turn, and every Escheator shall have full Power, etc. to
inquire by the Oaths of twelve men, of all and every Offense and Offenses
perpetrated or done, contrary to the form of this Act.

C. 11. 11. N. 4.
And be it further Enacted, Coron.
etc. (viz. because good and beneficial) that all etc. the said several Acts,
etc. (viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 5. Of Riots, etc.) and all Clauses, etc. shall be
revived, etc. until the last day of the next Parliament.

1 Mar. 1. St. 2. C. 3. 5. N. 2.
And that the said Justice of Peace (viz. before whom any is brought for
disturbing Preacher, Religion.
breaking Altar etc.) upon due Examination thereupon had and made by the
Apprehendor, etc. or other person, etc. of any of the said persons, etc.) so
offending, forthwith shall commit the said person, etc. so apprehended to safe
keeping, etc. as by the discretion of the said Justice shall be thought most
meet and convenient.

5. N. 3.
And that within six days next and immediately after the said Accusation so had
and made to the said Justice, Process.
the said Justice with one other Justice of the said Shire, City, Borough,
Liberty or Town-Corporate, shall diligently examine the act or acts offense or
offenses aforesaid.

Cap. 8.
Where in one Act of Parliament, etc. (viz. 1 Ed. 6. 7. 4. N. 1. Dignity.
) It is Ordained, etc. that albeit any person or persons being Justice of
Assize, Justice of Jail-delivery or Justice of Peace within any of the Kings
Dominions, or being in any other of the Kings Commissions whatsoever, shall
fortune to be made Duke, Archbishop, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, Baron, Bishop,
Knight, Justice of the one Bench or of the other, or Sergeant at the Law, or
Sheriff, yet that notwithstanding he and they should remain Justice and
Commissioner, and have full Power and Authority to execute the same, in like
manner and form as he or they might and ought to have done before the same, as
in the said Act more plainly appears,

1 N. 2.
Sithence the making of which Act, ( viz. 1 Ed. 6. 7. 4. N. 1. Sheriffs.
) diverse persons being in the Commission of the Peace in one County, have been
made Sheriffs of the same County, and have exercised either of the said
Offices, which seems not to be convenient.

2. N. 1.
Wherefore be it Enacted; Abatement.
etc. that no manner of person or persons having, using or exercising the
Office of the Sheriff of any County or Counties, shall use or exercise the
Office of Justice of Peace by force of any Commission or otherwise, in any
County or Counties where he or they shall be Sheriff, during the time only that
he or they shall use or exercise the said Office of Sheriff-wick, any thing in
the said former Act ( viz. 1 Ed. 6. 7. 4. N. 1.) to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

2. N. 2.
And that all and every act and acts to be done by any such Sheriff and
Sheriffs, Sheriff.
by Authority of any Commission of the Peace during the time abovesaid, shall
be void and of none effect, the said former Act ( viz. 1 Ed. 6. 7. 4. N. 1.)
notwithstanding.

Cap. 12.
Forasmuch as it is most necessary in a Commonwealth to provide that
Tranquillity and Peace may be continued in the Realm, Peace.
and that all things being contrary thereunto may by foresight be eschued, 3
and 4 Ed. 6. 5.

1. N. 2.
Therefore it is Ordained and Enacted, Riot.
etc. that if any persons to the number of twelve or above, being assembled
together at any time after the twentieth day of December next coming, shall
intend, go about, practice or put in ure, with force of Arms unlawfully and of
their own Authority, to alter or change any Laws made or established by
Authority of Parliament, which shall stand in force after the said twentieth
day of December, or any other Laws or Statutes of this Realm or any of them,
the same number of twelve or above being commanded or requested by the Sheriff
of the Shire, or by any Justice of Peace of the same Shire, or by the Mayor,
Sheriff, Justices of Peace or Bailiff of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate
where any such Assembly shall be unlawfully had or made, by Proclamation in the
Queens Name, to retire and repair to their own Houses, Habitations or Places
from whence they came, and they or any of them notwithstanding such
Proclamation shall remain and make their abode, or commune together by the
space of one whole hour after such Commandment or Request made by Proclamation,
or after that shall willingly in forcible and riotous manner attempt to do or
put in ure any of the things above specified, that then as well every such
abode or continuing together, as every such act or offense that after such
Commandment or Request by Proclamation had or made shall be attempted to be
done, practiced or put in ure by any persons being of the number aforesaid,
shall be adjudged Felony in all and singular those persons that so shall make
their abode or continue together, or shall attempt or commit any such act, and
the Offenders therein to be adjudged Felons, and shall suffer only execution of
Death, as in Case of Felony, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 5. 1. N. 2.

Coron.
And furthermore it is Enacted, 2. N. 1.
Ordained and Established by Authority aforesaid, that if any persons to the
said number of twelve or above after the said twentieth day of December shall
intend, go about, practice or put in ure in manner and form aforesaid, to
overthrow, cut, break, cast down or dig up the Pales, Hedges, Ditches or other
Enclosure of any Parks, Park or other Ground or Grounds enclosed, or the Banks
of any Fish Pond or Pool, or any Conduits of water, Conduit-heads or
Conduit-pipes having course of water, to the intent that the same or any of
them from henceforth should remain open and unclosed or void, or unlawfully to
have Common or Way in the said Parks or Park, or other Grounds or Ground
enclosed or any of them, or to destroy in manner and form aforesaid, the Deer
of any manner of Parks or Park, or any Warrens or Warren of Conies, or any
Dove-houses, or any Fish in any Fish Pond or Pool, or to pull or cut down any
Houses, Barns, Mills or Bays, or to burn any Stacks of Corn or Grain, or to
abate, defalk or diminish the Rents or yearly Value of any Manors, Lands or
Tenements or the Price of any Victual, Corn or Grain, or any other thing usual
for the Sustenance of Men, and being required or commanded by any Justice of
Peace, or by the Sheriff of the County, or by the Mayor, Bailiff or Bailiffs,
or other Head-Officers of any City or Town-Corporate where such Assembly shall
be had, by Proclamation to be made in the Queens Name, to retire or return in
Peaceable manner to their Habitations, Places and Houses from whence they came,
and they or any of them notwithstanding such Proclamation shall remain, or make
their abode or continuance together by the space of one whole hour after such
Commandment or Request made by Proclamation, or after that shall in forcible
manner do or put in ure any of the things last before mentioned, that then as
well every such abode and continuing together, as every such act that after
such Commandment or Request by Proclamation had or made shall be done,
practiced or put in ure, by any persons being above the number of twelve, shall
be adjudged Felony, and the Offenders therein to be adjudged Felons, and shall
suffer only the Execution of Death as in Case of Felony, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 5. 2.
N. 1. etc.

Notice.
Provided always and be it Enacted, etc. that if any person or persons, 15. N. 1.
do or shall molest, let, hinder or hurt any person or persons that shall
proclaim or go to proclaim, according to the Proclamation and Order made in the
Statute aforesaid, whereby such Proclamation shall not be made, that then all
and every such person and persons so molesting, letting, hindering or hurting,
and having knowledge of his Message, shall incur and be in such Danger, and
suffer such Pain or Pains and Forfeitures, as the persons assembled to whom the
Proclamation should have been made, should by this Act incur for not obeying
the Proclamation if it had been made, or for doing after the Proclamation of
any the things before in this Act expressed, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 5. 15. N. 1.

15. N. 2.
And that also all and every such person and persons being assembled to the
number aforesaid, to attempt or do any of the things aforesaid, Forfeiture.
to whom Proclamation should or ought to have been made if the same had not
been setted as is aforesaid, shall likewise in case they do afterward commit,
put in ure and do any of the things aforesaid, having any manner of ways
knowledge of the let so made, or by any means procuring the same let, incur and
be in danger, and suffer like Pain or Pains and Forfeitures aforesaid, in every
their degrees as though the Proclamation had been made, any Clause, Article or
Sentence heretofore in this Act encluded, made to the contrary notwithstanding.

17. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Heir.
that all and every the Heir and Heirs of all and every the Offender and
Offenders in any the Cases aforesaid, and all and every person and persons,
Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs, Successors and Executors and every
of them, other than such person and persons only as shall be attainted,
convicted or outlawed of any the aforesaid Offenses of Felony, shall have, hold
and enjoy all such Right, Title, Entry, Interest, Leases, Possession, Rents,
Conditions, Profits, Commodities and Advantages, as they or any of them have,
or hereafter shall have, or of right ought to have in or to any Honors,
Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services or
Hereditaments whatsoever, in or to any part or parcel thereof, in as large and
ample manner and form, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes, as if such
Attainder had been had ne made, any thing in this Act to the contrary, in any
wise notwithstanding.

21. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted by the said Authority, War.
that no Lieutenant or Lieutenants that shall be appointed or made by Authority
or Color of this Act, or for to execute this Act, shall in any wise make, put
or constitute under him or them, or in his or their place any Deputy or
Deputies, nor shall call convent or appoint to appear before him or them by the
only Authority of Lieutenancy, or of Commission of Lieutenancy, any person or
persons for any Cause or Matter whatsoever, save only for the Causes and
Matters expressed in this present Act, and for none other.

22. N. 1.
And that no person or persons shall be put to any Loss, Forfeiture, Accessory.
Pain or Punishment of Life, Lands or Goods as Accessory to any person or
persons that shall commit any of the Offenses contained in this present Act,
for receiving, comforting or aiding of any such Offender after such Act
committed or done.

22. N. 2.
And that no Attainder or Conviction of any person or persons, Heir.
for any Offense or Offenses herein contained, shall be any manner of
Corruption of Blood between the Offender and any of his Ancesters, or such
person and persons as should have been Heir to such Offender, if no such
Attainder or Conviction had been had.

22. N. 3.
Saving to all and every Person and Persons, Franchise.
Body and Bodies Politic and Corporate and their Successors, their Liberties
and Franchises, in such manner and form as if this Act had never been had ne
made.

23. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted by the said Authority, that one Act, ( viz. 3 and 4
Ed. 6. 5.) etc. and all and every Branch, Clause, Sentence and Article therein
contained, shall be from the twentieth day of December next coming utterly void
and of no force, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes.

23. N. 2.
And this Act only to be put in Execution for and concerning the Offenses
mentioned in the said former Act, ( viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 5.)

23. N. 3.
This Act to continue unto the end of the next Parliament, 1 Mar. 1. Days.
St. 2. Cap. 12. and 1 Eliz. 16.

Statuta Ph. and Mar.
Riot.
BE it therefore Enacted, etc. (viz. because good and beneficial) that all, 1
Mar. 1. St. 3. C. 12. 12. N. 2.
etc. the said several Acts, etc. (viz. 1 Mar 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. etc.) and all
Clauses, etc. shall be revived, etc. until the last day of the next Parliament,
1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Cap. 16. 1. N. 15

Slander.
And be it also Enacted, etc. that all Justices of Over and Terminer, 1 and 2
Ph. and Mar. Cap. 3. 7. N. 1.
etc. Justices of Assize, etc. Justices of Jail-delivery and Justices of Peace,
as well within the Liberties as without, within the limits of their several
Commissions in their several Sessions or other Sessions which they or two of
them, whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, may and shall appoint at their
pleasure where and when need shall require, and shall by virtue hereof have
full Power, etc. to inquire, hear and determine all and every the Offenses, etc.
(viz. of false News) aforesaid, as in Cases of Trial of Felony.

Corn.
And for the better Execution of this Act, C. 5. 6. N. 1.
(viz. against Transporting Wheat, Barley, Rye or other Corn, Malt, Beer,
Butter, Cheese, Herring, Victual or Wood, etc. be it further Enacted, etc. that
all and singular Justices of the Peace as well within the Liberties as without,
within their several Authorities and Commissions at any time within three years
next after such Offenses committed, shall have full Power and Authority to
inquire, as well by the Oaths of twelve lawful men, as also to hear and examine
the Master, Masters and Mariners of the said Ships, Crayers and other Vessels,
and all and every other person and persons of all and singular the Offenders
against this present Act, and to hear and determine the same Offenses as they
may and ought to hear and determine any other Trespasses or Offenses.

Bail.
Where in the Parliament, etc. viz. (3 H. 7. Cap. 3. 1 N 3. Cap. 13.
) it was amongst other things Ordained and Enacted, that no Prisoner arrested
for Felony should be letten to Bail or Mainprize by any one Justice of Peace,
but by the whole Justices, or at least by two of them whereof one to be of the
Quorum.

Justices.
Since the making of which Statute, ( viz. 3 H. 7. Cap. 3. 1. N. 3. 1. N. 2.
) one Justice of Peace in the name of himself and one other of the Justices his
Companion, not making the said Justice party nor privy unto the Case wherefore
the Prisoner should be Bailed, has often times by sinister labor and means,
set at large the greatest and notablest Offenders, such as be not replevisiable
by the Laws of this Realm.

Certificate.
And yet the rather to hide their Affections in that behalf, 1. N. 3.
have signified the Cause of their Apprehension to be but only for Suspicion of
Felony, whereby the said Offenders have escaped unpunished, and do daily to the
high displeasure of Almighty God, the great peril of the King and Queens true
Subjects, and encouragement of all Theives and Evildoers.

Joynder.
For Reformation whereof, 2. N. 1.
be it Ordained and Enacted by the King and Queens Majesty's, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament Assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, that from and after the first day of April
next coming, no Justice or Justices of Peace, shall let to Bail or Mainprize
any such person or persons which for any Offense or Offenses by them or any of
them committed, be declared not to be Replevised or Bailed, or be forbidden to
be replevised or Bailed by the Statute of Westminster, 1 etc. (viz. 3 Ed. 1.
Cap. 15.)

Coron.
And furthermore that any person or persons Arrested for Manslaughter or Felony,
3 N. 1
or Suspicion of Manslaughter or Felony being Bailable by the Law, shall not
after the first day of April be let to Bail or Mainprize by any Justices of
Peace, if it be not in open Sessions, except it be by two Justices of Peace at
the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the same Justices to be present
together at the time of the said Bailment or Mainprize.

3. N. 2.
Which Bailment or Mainprize, they shall certify in Writing, Certificate.
subscribed or signed with their own Hands at the next general Jail-delivery to
be holden within the County where the said person or persons shall be arrested
or suspected.

4. N. 1.
And that the said Justices or one of them being of the Quorum, Proof.
when any such Prisoner is brought before them for any Manslaughter or Felony
before any Bailment or Mainprize, shall take the Examination of the said
Prisoner, and Information of them that bring him of the Fact and Circumstances
thereof, and the same or as much thereof as shall be material to prove the
Felony, shall put in Writing before they make the same Bailment, 2 and 3 Ph.
and Mar. Cap. 10.

4. N. 2.
Which said Examination together with the said Bailment, Certificate.
the said Justices shall certify at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden
within the limits of their Commission, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 10. 1. N. 2.

5. N. 1.
And that every Coroner upon any Inquisition before him found whereby any person
or persons shall be Indicted for Murder or Manslaughter, Inquest.
or as Accessory or Accessaries to the same before the Murder or Manslaughter
committed, shall put in Writing the effect of the Evidence given to the Jury
before him being material.

5. N. 2.
And as well the said Justices as the said Coroner, Recognizance.
shall have Authority by this Act, to bind all such by Recognizance or
Obligation as do declare any thing material to prove the said Murder or
Manslaughter, Offenses or Felonies, or to be Accessory or Accessaries to the
same as is aforesaid, to appear at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden
within the County, City or Town-Corporate where the Trial thereof shall be,
then and there to give Evidence against the Party so Indicted at the time of
his Trial, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 10. 2. N. 4.

5. N. 3.
And shall certify as well the same Evidence, Certificate.
as such Bond or Bonds in Writing as he shall take, together with the
Inquisition or Indictment before him taken and found, at or before the time of
his said Trial thereof to be had or made, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 10. 2. N. 5.

5. N. 4
And likewise the said Justices shall certify all and every such Bond taken
before them, Bail.
in like manner as before is said of Bailment and Examination.

5. N. 5.
And in Case any Justice of Peace of Quorum or Coroner, Justices.
shall after the first day of April offend in any thing contrary to the true
intent and meaning of this present Act, that then the Justices of Jail-delivery
of the Shire, City, Town or Place where such Offense shall happen to be
committed, upon due Proof thereof by Examination before them, shall for every
such Offense set such Fine on every of the same Justices of Peace and Coroner,
as the same Justices of Jail-delivery, shall think meet, and estreat the same
as other Fines and Amercements assessed before Justices of Jail-delivery ought
to be.

6. N. 1.
Provided always, Coporation.
and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that Justices of Peace
and Coroners within the City of London and the County of Middlesex, and in
other Cities, Boroughs and Towns-Corporate within this Realm and Wales, shall
within their several Jurisdictions have Authority to let to Bail Felons and
Prisoners, in such manner and form as they have been heretofore accustomed,
this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

6. N. 2.
And also shall take Examinations and Bonds as is aforesaid, Proof.
upon every Bailment by them or any of them to be made.

6. N. 3.
And shall certify every such Bailments, Certificate.
Bonds and Examinations by them or any of them taken or made, at the next
Jail-delivery to be holden within the Shire, City, Borough or Town where their
several Jurisdictions extends, upon like Pain and Forfeiture as is before
limited in this present Act.

7. N. 1
And be it also Enacted, Certirorari.
etc. that no Writs of Habeas Corpus or Certiorari shall be hereafter granted
to remove any Prisoner out of any Goal, or to remove any Recognizance, except
the same Writs be signed with the proper hands of the Chief Justices, or in his
absense one of the Justices of the Court, out of which the same Writs shall be
awarded or made.

Officer.
Upon Pain, 7. N. 2.
that he that writes any such Writs not being signed as is aforesaid, to
forfeit to our Sovereign Lord the King and the Queen, for every such Writs five
pounds.

Riot.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. (viz. because good and beneficial) that all, C.
16. N. 15.
etc the several Acts, etc. (viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. etc. of Riots and
all Clauses, etc. shall be revived, etc. until the last day of the next
Parliament, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar Cap. 21. 10. N. 2.

Husbandry.
The one half of which said Forfeitures (viz. twenty shillings a month, 2 and 3
Ph. and Mar. Cap. 3. 3 N. 2^
that one Cow is not kept for every threescore Shere-sheep, and one Calf for
every six score) shall be to the use of, etc. the King and Queens Majesty's,
and the other half to the use of the Party that within one year after the
Offense committed will sue for the same, in any, etc. Courts of Record, or
before the Justices of Peace in the same Shire where any such Cause of
Forfeiture shall be had, at the general Sessions, who by Authority of this Act,
shall have Power to hear and determine the said Offenses by Bill, Information,
Presentment, Action of Debt or Detinue, in which Action or Suit no Essoyn,
Protection, Wager of Law or License to the contrary shall be allowed.

Cattle.
And be it Enacted, C. 7. 7. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Place and County as well within
Liberties as without, shall have Authority in their Sessions within the limits
of their Authority and Commission, to inquire, hear and determine all Offenses
against this Statute (viz. of selling Horses, Gueldings, Mares and Colts in
Fairs and Markets Overt) as they may do any other matter tryable before them.

Ways.
And in default of such Inquiry or Presentment, C. 8. 2. N. 10.
( viz. in Leet of not amending Highways, etc. the Justices of Peace for every
Place or County, shall have Authority to inquire of the same the Offenses which
shall be committed within the limits of their Commission at every their Quarter
Sessions, and to assess such Fines therefore as they or two of them, whereof
one to be of the Quorum, shall think meet.

Account.
And the said Churchwardens shall have Authority to call the said Bailiff and
Head-Constable to Account before the Justices of Peace or two of them whereof
one to be of the Quorum, by Bill, 4. N. 2.
Information or otherwise

Bail.
And forasmuch as the said Act ( viz. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 13. 4. N. 1.)
does not extend to such Prisoners as shall be brought before any Justice of
Peace for Manslaughter or Felony, C. 10. 2. N. 1
and by such Justice shall be committed to Ward for the Suspicion of such
Manslaughter or Felony and not Bailed, in which Case Examination of such
Prisoner and of such as bring him, is as necessary or rather more, than where
such Prisoner shall be let to Bail or Mainprize.

Proof.
Be it therefore Enacted, 2. N. 2.
etc that from henceforth such Justice or Justices before whom any person shall
be brought for Manslaughter or Felony, or for Suspicion thereof, before he or
they shall commit or send such Prisoner to Ward, shall take the Examination of
such Prisoner, and Information of those that bring him of the Fact and
Circumstances thereof, and the same, or as much thereof as shall be material to
prove the Felony, shall put in Writing within two days after the said
Examination.

Certificate.
And the same shall certify in such manner and form, 2. N. 3.
and at such time as they should and ought to do, if such Prisoner so committed
or sent to Ward had been Bailed or let to Mainprize, upon such Pain as in the
said former Act viz. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 13. 5. N. 5.) is limited and
appoin^ for not taking, or not certifying such Examinations, as in the said
former Act is expressed.

Recognizance.
And be it further Enacted, 2. N. 4.
that the said Justices shall have Authority by this Act, to bind all such by
Recognizance or Obligation, as do declare any thing material to prove the said
Manslaughter or Felony, against such Prisoner as shall be so committed to Ward,
to appear at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden within the County,
City or Town-Corporate where the Trial of the said Manslaughter or Felony shall
be, then and there to give Evidence against the Party.

2. N. 5.
And that the said Justices shall certify the said Bonds taken before them,
Certificate.
in like manner as they should and ought to certify the Bonds mentioned in the
said former Act ( viz. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 13. 5. N. 3.) upon Pain, as in
the said former Act is mentioned for not certifying such Bonds as by the said
former Act is limited and appointed to be certified.

Cap. 18.
Where the King and Queens most Excellent Highness, Coporation.
and their Noble Progenitors Kings of this Realm, have heretofore granted their
several Commissions directed as well unto the Mayors, Recorders and other Grave
Men and Inhabitants, of certain Ancient and Famous Cities and Towns-Corporate
within this Realm of England not being Counties in themselves, as also unto
diverse other worshipful and learned men dwelling out of the same Cities and
Towns-Corporate, as well for the keeping of their Peace, good ordering of their
People and executing of their Laws and Statutes within the same Cities and
Towns-Corporate, as also for the Delivery of their Majesty's Prisoners
remaining in the Goals there, and after the granting of such Commissions their
Majesty's have granted diverse other like Commissions unto certain worshipful
and learned men of the Shires, Laths, Rapes, Ridings and Wapentakes of this
Realm of England for the Confirmation of their Peace, and also delivering of
their Prisoners remaining in their Goals within the same Shires, Laths, Rapes,
Ridings and Wapentakes.

1. N. 2.
Which Commissions so bearing a later date, Supersedeas.
have been a Supersedeas and clear Discharge unto all and singular the said
former Commissions granted unto the said Cities and Towns-Corporate, not being
Counties in themselves.

1. N. 3.
So that the said Mayor, Commission
and other grave and chiefest Officers of every such City and Town-Corporate,
have been charged to sue for the renewing again of such Commissions, both for
the Peace and Jail-delivery, to the great Expenses, Cost and Charges of the
said Mayor, and other the Inhabitants of such Cities and Towns-Corporate, and
to the great protracting and delay of Justice therein in the mean time, for
Reformation whereof, and for the better Advancement of Justice in the Premises.

2. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, Franchise.
etc. that all and singular Commission and Commissions granted or to be granted
to any such City or Town-Corporate not being as is aforesaid a County in it
self, for the keeping of their Peace and delivery of the Prisoners remaining in
the Goals of any such City or Town-Corporate, not being a County in it self,
shall stand, remain and be Good and Available and Efectual in the Law, to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes, the granting of any like Commission of the
Peace or Jail-delivery, to any Commissioner or Commissioners for the
Conservation of the Peace, or Delivery of the Prisoners remaining in the Goal
of any Shire, Lath, Rape, Riding or Wapentake within this Realm of England,
bearing date after the said Commission or Commissions granted as is aforesaid,
to any such City or Town-Corporate not being as is aforesaid a County in it
self, to the contrary notwithstanding.

C. 21. 10. N. 2.
Be it therefore Enacted, Riot.
etc. (viz. because good and beneficial) that all the said several Acts, etc.
(viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12, etc.) and all Clauses, etc. shall be revived,
etc. until the last day of the next Parliament, 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 9.
14. N. 2.

4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 2. 8. N. 2.
And be it further Enacted, War.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Shire, shall have Power and Authority
by virtue of this Act, from time to time to make search and view, of and for
the said Furnitures of Horses, Gueldings, Armor and Weapons to be found
maintained and kept by any person, etc having Lordships, Manors, Houses,
Lands, Meadows, Pastors or Woods, to the clear yearly value of two hundred
pounds or under, and not above the yearly value of four hundred pounds, or to
be found maintained or kept by any person chargeable, etc. by reason of his or
their Goods, Cattels, Annuities, Fees or Copy-holds, etc. 1 Jac. Cap. 25. N.

Justices.
And to hear and determine at their Quarter Sessions, 8. N 2
all and every the Defaults committed or done contrary to this Act. (viz. of
finding Horses or Armor) within the County where such Session shall be kept, by
Inquisition, Presentment, Bill or Information before them exhibited, or by
Examination of two lawful Witnesses at the discretion of the same Justices, and
to award Process thereupon, as though they were indicted before them by the
Verdict of twelve men or more.

War.
And be it furtheer Enacted, C. 3. 5. N. 1
etc. that all Justices of Assize in their Circuits, and all Justices of Peace
within the limits of their Commission in their Assizes and Sessions, and
Stewards of Leets, Law days and Liberties at their Leets and Law-days, shall
and may from time to time, enquire, hear and determine every of the said
Offenses (viz. of Non-payment or Departure of Soldiers, etc.) committed or
done contrary to this Act, within the Premises of their Commission, Leet or
Liberty

Process.
And if any person, etc. shall be before the said Justices of Assize, 5. N. 2.
Justices of Peace or any of them, presented or indicted of any the Offenses
aforesaid, (viz. Non payment or Departure of Soldiers) that then the said
Justices of Assize or Justices of Peace, before whom such Indictment or
Presentment shall be taken or had, shall, etc. award such Process against every
such person, etc. as upon Indictments of Trespass is used and accustomed to be
made.

Riot.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. (viz. because good and beneficial) that all, C.
9. 14. N. 2.
etc. the said several Acts, etc. (viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12. etc.) and all
Clauses, etc. shall be revived, etc. until the last day of the next Parliament,
1 Eliz. 16. 2. N. 2.

Statuta Eliz.
Drapery.
AND be it further Enacted, etc. that, 1 Eliz. C. 12 2. N. 1.
etc. all Justices of Peace in every County and Place of this Realm, or three
of them at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have full Power
and Authority to inquire, hear and determine the Offenses aforesaid, (viz. of
Deceit in Linen Cloth) in their Sessions, by Information, Indictment or upon
Traverse of any Presentment or Indictment found before the said Justices or any
of them.

Riot.
And forasmuch as the said Act and Statute, C. 16. 2. N. 1
( viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12) during all the time aforesaid, has been
proved by Experience to be a very good and beneficial Law, and meet to be
continued and kept in force as well for the preservation of the Peace, as also
for the Commonwealth and Quietness of this Realm.

Peace.
Be it therefore Enacted, 2. N. 2.
etc. that the said Act and Statute ( viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12.) and every
Branch, Clause and Article therein contained, shall stand, remain, continue and
be in full force and strength, to all intents and purposes, for and during the
Natural Life of the Queens most excellent Majesty that now is, etc. and to the
end of the Parliament then next following.

Prerog.
And that the said Act and Statute, 2. N. 3
( viz. 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. Cap. 12.) and the Words and Sentences mentioned and
contained in the said Act, shall extend unto the Queens Highness that now is,
as fully and amply as ever the same did extend to the said late Queen Mary.

Fish.
And it is further Enacted, etc. that if the Offenses, C. 17. 11. N. 1.
etc. touching the taking, killing or destroying of Fish, or Fry and Spawn, be
not presented at the Leet where they shall be committed within one year next
after the Offense committed, that the Justices of Peace in their Sessions,
Justices of Over and Terminer, and Justices of Assize in their several
Circuits, shall have full Power and Authority to inquire thereof, and to hear
and determine all the Offenses committed contrary to the Tenor of this Statute.

Pope.
And it is also Enacted, 5 Eliz. Cap. 1. 3. N. 1.
etc. that as well Justices of Assize in their Circuits, as Justices of Peace
within the limits of their Commission and Authorities, or two of every such
Justices of Peace at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have
full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act in their quarter and open
Sessions to inquire of all Offenses, etc. (viz. Extolling the usurped
Jurisdiction of Rome) done contrary to the true meaning of the Premises, in
like manner and form as they may of other Offenses against the Queens Peace.

3. N. 2.
And shall certify every Presentment before them or any of them had or made
concerning the same or any part thereof, Certificate.
before the Queen her Heirs and Successors, in her or their Court commonly
called the Kings Bench, within forty days next after any such Presentment had
or made if the Term be then open, and if not, at the first day of the full Term
next following the said forty days.

3. N. 3.
Upon pain that every of the Justices of Assize, Forfeiture.
or Justices of Peace before whom such Presentment shall be made, making
default of such Certificate contrary to this Statute, to lose and forfeit for
every such Default, 100 l. to the Queen her Heirs and Successors.

C. 4. 15. N. 1.
And, etc. Be it Enacted, Justices.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of every Shire, Riding and Liberty within the
limits of their several Commissions, or the more part of them being then
resiant within the same, and the Sheriff of that County if he conveniently may,
and every Mayor, etc. within any City, etc. wherein if any Justice of Peace
within the limits of the said City, etc. shall, etc. yearly at every general
Sessions first to be holden and kept after Easter, or at some time convenient
within six weeks next following every of the said Feasts of Easter assemble
themselves together, 39 Eliz. 12. 2. N. 1.

15. N. 2.
And they so assembled, Apprentice.
calling unto them such discreet and Grave persons of the said County, City or
Town-Corporate as they shall think meet, and conferring together respecting
Plenty or Scarcity of the Time, and other Circumstances necessarily to be
considered, shall have Authority by virtue thereof within the limits and
Precincts of their several Commissions, to limit, rate and appoint the wages as
well of such and so many of the said Artificers, Handy-Craftsmen, Husbandmen or
any other Laborer, Servant or Workman, whose wages in time past has been by
any Law or Statute rated and appointed.

15. N. 3.
As also the wages of all other Laborers, Artificers, Fees.
Workmen or Apprentices of Husbandry which have not been rated, 39 Eliz. 12.
2. N. 1.

15. N. 4.
As they the same Justices, Days.
Mayor or Head-Officers within their several Commissions or Liberties shall
think meet by their Discretions to be rated, limited or appointed, by the year
or by the day, week, month or otherwise, with meat and drink or without meat
and drink.

15. N. 5.
And what wages every Workman or Labourer shall take by the Great for Mowing,
Reaping or Threshing of Corn and Grain, Husbandry.
or for Mowing or making of Hay, or for Ditching, Paving, Railing or Hedging by
the Rod, Perch, Lugg, Yard, Pole, Rope or Foot, and for any other kind of
reasonable Labor or Service.

15. N. 6.
And shall yearly before the twelfth day of July next after the said Assessments
and Rates so appointed and made, Certificate.
certify the same engrossed in Parchment, with the Considerations and Causes
thereof, under their Hands and Seals, into the, etc. Court of Chancery, 39
Eliz. 12. 3. N. 1.

17. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that if all the said Justices of Peace resiant within the Counties where
they are or shall be Justices of Peace, and Mayors and Head-Officers, do not
before the tenth day of July, etc. yearly appear and assemble at the said
general Sessions, or within six weeks next after the said general Sessions, and
limit and rate the wages, etc. or be negligent or remiss in the Certificate
thereof, etc. that then every Justice of Peace, etc. in whom any such default
or negligence shall be found, being within the said County, etc., at the time
of the said Sessions, or at the times of the said rates of wages to be set
within six weeks next after every such Sessions, and not visited with any such
Sickness as he could not travail thither without peril and danger of his Life,
or not having any other lawful and good Excuse to be allowed by the Justices
then assembled for the rating and taxing of wages, or by the more part of them
upon a Corporal Oath, etc. by some credible person assessed, etc. in the Book
of Subsidy, to the clear value of five pounds, etc. or by such other person as
the most part of such Justices shall allow, etc. shall for such default or
negligence forfeit, etc. ten pounds, etc. 39 Eliz. 12.. 2 N. 4.

Apprentice.
Provided always and be it Enacted, etc. that in the time of Hay, 22. N. 1.
or Corn-harvest, the Justices of Peace and every of them, etc. shall and may
cause all such Artificers and Persons as be meet to labor by the descretions
of the said Justices, etc. to serve by the day for the Mowing, Reaping,
Shearing, Getting or Inning of Corn, Grain and Hay, according to the Skill and
Quality of the Person.

Women.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that two Justices of Peace, 24. N. 1.
etc shall and may by virtue hereof, appoint any such Woman as is of the age of
twelve years and under the age of Forty years, and unmarried and forth of
Service, as they shall think meet to serve, to be retained, or serve by the
year, or by the week or day for such wages, and in such reasonable sort and
manner as they shall think meet.

Husbandry.
And be it further Enacted,. 35. N. 1.
that if any person shall be required by any Householder, having and using half
a Plowland at the least in Tillage, to be an Apprentice, etc. and shall refuse
so to do, that then upon Complaint of such Housekeeper made to one Justice of
the Peace of the County where the said Refusal is or shall be made, etc. they
shall have full Power and Authority by virtue hereof, to send for the same
person so refusing.

Justices.
And if the Justice, 35. N. 2.
etc. shall think the said person meet and convenient to serve as an Apprentice
in that Art, Labor, Science or Mystery wherein he shall be so then required to
serve, that then the said Justice, etc. shall have Power, etc. if the said
person refuse to be bound as an Apprentice, to commit him unto Ward, there to
remain until he be contented and will be bounden to serve as an Apprentice
should serve, according to the true intent and meaning of this present Act.

Apprentice.
And if such Master shall mis-use or evil entreat his Apprentice, 35. N. 3.
or that the said Apprentice shall have any just cause to complain, or the
Apprentice do not his Duty to his said Master, then the said Master or
Apprentice being grieved and having cause to complain, shall repair unto one
Justice of Peace within the said County, etc. who shall by his wisdom and
discretion take such order and direction between the said Master and his
Apprentice, as the Equity of the Cause shall require.

Process
And if for want of good Conformity in the Master, 35. N. 4.
the said Justice of Peace, etc. cannot compound and agree the matter between
him and his Apprentice, then the said Justice, etc. shall take Bond of the said
Master to appear at the next Sessions then to be holden within the said County,
etc. to be before the Justices of the said County, etc. if the said Master
dwell within any such.

Apprentice.
And upon his appearance and hearing of the matter before the said Justices, 35.
N. 5.
etc. if it be thought meet unto them to discharge the said Apprentice of his
Apprentice-hood, that then the said Justices or four of them at the least,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, etc. shall have Power by Authority hereof in
Writing under their Hands and Seals, to procure and declare that they have
discharged the said Apprentice of his Apprentice-hood, and the Cause thereof.

Justices.
And if the Default shall be found to be in the Apprentice, 35. N. 7.
then the said Justices, etc. with the Assistance aforesaid, shall cause such
due Correction and Punishment to be ministered unto him, as by their Wisdom and
Discretions shall be thought meet.

Fees.
And in Consideration of the Pains and Travail of the said Justices of Peace, 38
N. 1.
etc. shall take and sustain in about the Execution of this Statute, it is
further Ordained, etc. that every Justice of Peace, etc. for every day that he
shall sit in and about the Execution of this Estatute, shall have allowed unto
him five shillings, to be allowed and paid unto him, etc. of the Fines and
Forfeitures of the Pains and Penalties that should be forfeited and due, etc.
by force of this Estatute, in such manner, etc. as the said Justices have been
heretofore commonly paid for their coming and charges at the Quarter Sessions,
so that the sitting of the said Justices, etc. be not at any one time above
three days, and for the matters contained in this Estatute.

39. N. 2.
And that the said Justices or two of them, Justices.
whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have full Power and Authority, to hear
and determine all and every Offense and Offenses that shall be committed or
done against this Statute or against any Branch thereof, as well upon
Indictment to be taken before them in the Sessions of the Peace, as upon
Information of Debt, or Bill of Complaint to be sued or exhibited by any person.

39. N. 2.
And shall and may by virtue hereof, Process.
make Process against the Defendant, and award Execution as in other Case they
lawfully may, by any the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

39. N. 3.
And shall yearly at Michaelmas Term certify by Estreat, Certificate.
the Fines and Forfeitures of every the Offenses contained in this Estatute
that shall be found before them into the Court of Exchequer, in like sort and
form as they be bound to certify the Estreats for other Offenses and
Forfeitures to be lost before them, etc.

47. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any Servant or Apprentice, etc,
Apprentice.
unlawfully depart or flee into any other Shire, that it shall be lawful to the
said Justices of Peace, etc. for the time being Justices of the Peace there, to
make and grant Writs of Capias, so many and such as shall be needful to be
directed to the Sheriffs of the Counties, or to other Head-Officers of the
Places whether such Servants or Apprentices shall so depart or flee, to take
their Bodies returnable before them at what time shall please them, so that if
they come by such Process that they be put in Prison till they shall find
sufficient Surety, well and honestly to serve their Masters, Mistresses or
Dames from whom they so departed or fled, according to the Order of the Law.

C. 5. 30. N. 3.
And for all and singular such other of the Offenses before mentioned (viz. of
Transporting or Buying Fish on the Sea purveyance, Fish.
etc.) as shall be done in the Land, or within any Haven or Peer, all Justices
of Peace in their Sessions, and Mayors, Sheriffs and Bailiffs, and other
Head-Officers in Cities and Towns-Corporate in their Sessions or other Courts,
within the limits of their Commissions or Authorities, shall have full Power
and Authority to inquire of the Offenders of this Act, (viz. of Increase of the
Navy) as well by the Oaths of twelve men as otherwise by Information, and
thereupon to hear and determine the same.

31. N. 1.
And if any person shall be presented, Process.
etc. within the limits of their Authorities, or any Information given to them
of any Offender of this Act, that then they shall have full Power and Authority
upon any such Presentment or Information, to make Process against the Offenders
of this Act, like as is commonly used upon Indictment of Trespass.

33. N. 1.
And all such Forfeitures as according to the Tenor of this Act shall be
determinable before the Justices of the Peace, Forfeiture.
shall be to the use of the Queens Majesty her Heirs and Successors.

43. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, Admiral.
that no Fisherman using or haunting the Sea, shall be taken by the Queens
Majesty's Commission to serve her Highness as a Mariner upon the Sea, but that
the said Commission be first brought by her Highnesses Taker or Takers to two
Justices of Peace next inhabiting to the said Seacoasts, Towns or other Places
where the said Mariners are so to be taken, to the intent the siad Justices may
choose out and cause to be returned, such sufficient number of able men as in
the said Commission shall be contained to serve her Majesty as is aforesaid.

C. 9. 9. N. 1.
And be it also Enacted, Oath.
etc. that as well the Judge and Judges of every of the said Courts where any
such Suit ( viz. for Perjury or Subornation, etc. is or shall be, and whereupon
any such Perjury is or shall happen to be committed, as also the Justices of
Assizes and Jail-delivery in their several Circuits, and the Justices of the
Peace in every County within this Realm or in Wales, at their Quarter Sessions
both within the Liberties and without, shall have full Power and Authority by
virtue hereof, to inquire of all and every the Defaults and Offenses
perpetrated committed or done contrary to this Act, by Inquisition, Presentment,
Bill or Information before them exhibited or otherwise, lawfully to hear and
determine the same, and thereupon to give Judgment, award Process and Execution
of the same, according to the Course of the Laws of this Realm.

License.
In Consideration whereof, C. 12. 4 N. 1.
(viz. of the Decay of Husbandry and high Prices by too great number. etc.) be
it Enacted etc. that no Drover of Cattle, Badger, Lader, Kidder, Carrier, Buyer
or Transporter of Corn or Grain, Butter and Cheese be, etc. licenced, admitted,
assigned or allowed to those Offices or Doings, or to any of them, but only in
the general and open quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden in the Shire
where such person, etc. shall dwell, and has or shall have dwelled there by
the space of three years next before the Test of his said License, 5 and 6 Ed.
6. Cap. 14. N.

Justices.
Which said Licenses and every of them, 5. N. 1.
shall bear date of the Day and Place where the said Sessions shall be holden,
and shall be signed and sealed with the proper Hands and Seals of three of the
said Justices of the Peace being present at the sa^^e Sessions, at the least,
whereof one to be of the Quorum.

Process.
Be it also Enacted, 8. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace in every County within this Realm or Wales at
the quarter Sessions, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this
Act, to inquire, hear and determine all and every the Defaults and Offenses
perpetrated committed or done contrary to this Act within the County where any
such Sessions shall be kept, by Inquisition, Presentment, Bill or Information
before them exhibited, and by Examination of two lawful Witnesses, or by any of
the same ways or means by the discretion of the said Justices, and to make
Process there upon as though they were indicted before them by Inquisition or
by Verdict of twelve men or more.

Amercements.
And upon the Conviction of the Offender by Information or Suit of any other
then the Queen to make Extracts of the Moity of the Forfeitures to be levied to
the Queens use, 8. N. 2.
as they use to do of other Fines and Amercements grown in the Sessions of the
Peace, and to award Execution of the other Moity for the Complainant or
Informer against the Offender by Fieri facias or Capias, as the Queens Justices
at Westminster may do.

Forfeiture.
And if any such Conviction or Attainder shall hereafter happen to be at the
Queens Suit only, 8. N. 3.
that then the whole Forfeitures to be extracted and levied to the Queens use
only.

Ways.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that, C. 13. 8. N. 1.
etc. all and every such Supervisor and Supervisors for the time being, (viz.
of Highways) within one Month next after Default or Offense made, done or
committed by any person, etc. contrary to the Provision, etc. (viz of 2 and 3
Ph. and Mar. Cap. 8.) or contrary to the Provision, etc. of this present Act,
shall present every such Default or Offense to the next Justice of Peace for
the time being, ( viz. on Forfeit of 40 s.)

Certificate.
And that every such Justice of Peace to whom any such Default or Offense (viz.
of Highways) shall be presented as is aforesaid, 8. N. 3.
shall certify the same Presentment so to him made, at the next general
Sessions within the said County then next after to be holden.

Certificate.
Upon Pain to forfeit for not certifying of every such Presentment of every such
Default or Offense as is aforesaid, 8. N. 4
100 l.

Process.
And that the Justices of Peace of every County where the said Defaults or
Offenses (viz. of Highways) shall be committed, 8. N. 5.
shall immediately have Authority to inquire of any such Default or Offense
committed within the limits of their Commission at every their quarter
Sessions, and to assess such Fines for the same, as they or two of them,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall think meet.

^ustices.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that every Justice of Peace, 9. N. 1
shall have Authority by this Statute of his own Proof, Knowledge in the open
general Sessions, to make Presentment of any Highway not well and sufficiently
repared and amended, or of any other Default or Offense committed and done
within the County and limits of his Commission contrary to the Provision and
Intent of this Statute, or of, etc. (viz. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 8.)

9. N. 2.
And that every such Presentment made by any such Justice of Peace upon his own
knowledge as is aforesaid, Inquest.
shall be as good and of the same force, etc. as if the same had been
presented, found and adjudged by the Oath of twelve men.

9. N. 3.
And that for every such Default so presented as is aforesaid, Amercement.
the Justices of the Peace of the said County, shall immediately at the said
general Sessions, have Authority to assess such Fines as to them or two of
them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, shall be thought meet.

9. N. 4.
Saving every person, Pleading.
etc. that shall be touched by any such Presentment, to have his or their
lawful Traverse to the same Presentment, as they might have upon any Indictment
of Trespass, or forcible Entry by the Laws of this Realm before the making of
this Statute.

10. N. 1.
And that all such Fines, Forfeitures.
Forfeitures and Amercements to be assessed by the said Justices of the Peace
at their general Sessions in any of the Cases aforesaid, shall be Estreated by
the Clerk of the Peace of the said County, and shall be levied in such m^nner
and form, and employed to such uses and intents as in the said Statute, etc.
(viz. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 8. 6. N. 1.) is limited and appointed.

C. 15. 4. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that all and every Justice of Assize, Slander.
etc. of Oyer and Determiner, and Justice of Peace, shall have full Power and
Authority by virtue hereof, to inquire, hear and determine all and every
Offense, etc. (viz. of false Prophesies on occasion of War, etc.) committed or
done within the limits of their Commission, contrary to the Tenor and Meaning
of this Act.

C. 21. 6. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Forest.
etc. that the Justices of Oyer and Determiner, etc. of Assize in their
Circuits, and Justices the of Peace and Jail-delivery in their Sessions, shall
by virtue hereof, have Power and Authority to inquire, hear and determine all
and singular the Offenses, etc. (viz. of cutting Heads or Dams of Ponds,
breaking Parks or Ground enclosed, stealing Fish, Hawks or Eggs, etc.) and to
make and award Process thereupon, as well upon Indictments taken before them,
as by Bill of Complaint, Information or any other Action, in which Suit or
Action, no Essoyn, Wager of Law nor Protection shall be allowed.

8 Eliz. Cap. 3. 4. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Cattle.
etc. of Jail-delivery, and Justices of the Peace in every County and Shire
within this Realm of England and Wales, and other the Queens Majesty's
Dominions, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act to inquire
of every Offender, etc. (viz. that Ships any Sheep to be conveyed out of any
the Queens Dominions, etc.) contrary to the form and effect of this Act, and to
hear and determine, etc. according to the Course of the Laws of this Realm,

C. 9. 5. N. 1.
And where such Vessels (Viz. Barrel, Measures.
Kilderkin or Firkin for Ale or Beer) shall be made or sold out of any City,
Borough or Town Corporate, the Prices thereof shall be rated and taxed by the
Justices of Peace or the more part of them, being present in the general
Quarter Sessions, yearly next after Easter, at such reasonable prices as they
shall think reasonable by their discretions, the said Statute, etc. (viz. 23.
H. 8. Cap. 4. 5. N. 1.) or any other Law, etc. notwithstanding.

13 Eliz. Cap. 2. 8. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, and be it further Enacted, Pope.
etc. that if any person to whom any such Agnus Dei or other the things
aforesaid, (viz. Crosses, Pictures, Beads, etc.) shall be tendered and offered
to be delivered, shall apprehend the party so offering the same, and bring him
to the next Justice of the Peace of that Shire where such tender shall be made,
if he shall be of power and able so to do, or for lack of such ability, shall
within the space of three days next after such Offer made, etc. disclose the
Name and Names of such person, etc. as so shall make the same Offer, and the
Dewlling Place or Place or Resort of the same person, etc. (which he shall
endeavor himself to know by all the means and ways he can) to the Ordinary of
the Diocese, or to any Justice of Peace of that Shire where such person, etc.
to whom such offer shall be made, etc. shall be resiant.

Days.
And also if such person, etc. to whom such offer shall be made, 8. N. 2.
shall happen to receive any such Agnus Dei, etc. and shall within the space of
one day next after such receipt, deliver the same to any Justice of Peace within
the same Shire, where the Party so receiving shall be then resiant, or shall
happen to be.

Forfeiture.
That then every such person and persons doing any the Acts or Things in this
Provision above mentioned, in form above declared, 8. N. 3
shall not by force of this Statute incur any Danger or Penalty, etc.

Justices.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted, 10. N. 1.
etc. that if any Justice of Peace to whom any Matter or Offense before
mentioned, shall be uttered, showed or declared as is aforesaid, do not within
the space of fourteen days next after it shall be to him showed or uttered,
signify or declare the same to some one of the Queens Majesty's Privy Council,
that then the same Justice of Peace shall incur the Danger, Pain and Forfeiture
Provided by the said Statute, etc. (viz. 16 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. 2. N. 6.)

Usury.
And be it further Enacted, C. 8. 6. N. 1.
that Justices of Oyer and Terminer and Justices of Assize in their Circuits,
Justices of Peace in their Sessions, etc. shall also have full Power and
Authority to inquire, hear and determine of all and singular Offenses (viz. of
Usury) committed against the said Statute ( viz. 37 H. 8. Cap. 9.) now revived.

Sewers.
And that the Justices of Peace in the Shire, C. 9. 2. N. 2.
etc. where the same Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions, (viz. of Sewers) are
to be executed within their several Commissions or Limits, or six of them,
whereof two to be of the Quorum, shall have Power and Authority by the space of
one whole year next after the expiration of every such Commission, to execute
the same Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions and every of them, as fully and in
as ample manner and form, as the Commissioners or any of them named and
appointed in every or any Commission so expired, might or should have done to
all Intents and Purposes, as if the said Commission or Commissions had
continued in force.

Justices.
Provided always, and be it nevertheless Enacted, 3. N. 1.
that if any new Commission of Sewers shall be made within the said year, that
then immediately from and after such Commission newly made and published, the
Power of the said Justices of Peace and every of them in any wise concerning
the Execution of any such Laws, Ordinances and Constitutions of Sewers, shall
utterly cease, any thing or things in this Act to the contrary expressed, in
any wise notwithstanding.

Corn.
Provided nevertheless, C. 13. 2. N. 1.
that neither any of the said Presidents and Councils, nor the said Justices of
Assize, nor the said Justices of Peace, etc. shall publish any their
Determinations, etc. (viz. for Permission or Prohibition of the Transportation
of Corn) until the same shall be first by Writing notified to the Queens
Majesty or to her Privy Council, and by her Majesty, or her Privy Council shall
be liked or allowed.

Imprisonment.
And by the said Justice or Head-Officer, 14. Eliz. Cap. 5. 2. N. 3.
(viz. before whom sturdy Beggar, etc. above fourteen shall be brought) to be
presently committed to the Common Goal of the said County, being apprehended
within the County, or else such other place as by the Justices of Peace of that
County or three of them, at their general Sessions shall be appointed.

License.
Be it also further Provided, that no License, 10. N. 1
etc. (viz. of Pasport or to beg, etc.) shall give any manner of liberty, or be
of any manner of force, but only in the Shire whereof the Grantor, etc. of such
License, shall be Justice, etc. of the Peace.

Taxes.
And that done, (viz. the numbe of Poor registered, 14. N. 7
etc.) they the said Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers,
within every their several Commissions, etc. shall by their good discretions,
tax and assess all and every City, Borough, Town, Village, Hamlet and Place
known within the said Limits and Divisions, to such weekly charge, as they and
every of them shall weekly contribute toward the relief of the said poor
people.

Account.
And further be it Enacted, 18. N. 1.
that the said Collectors (viz. for the Poor) and every of them, etc. shall
make their just Account half yearly, etc. to two Justices of the Peace dwelling
next the said abiding place or places, not being within any City, Borough or
Town-Corporate.

21. N. 1.
Provided, etc. and be it further Enacted, Poor.
etc. that three Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of and
with the Surplusages and Forfeitures (the said Poor, etc. provided for) shall
by their discretions in such convenient place, etc. within their said Shires as
they shall think meet, place and settle to work the Rogues and Vagabonds, etc.

24. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Justices.
etc that three Justices of Peace within all the Shires of this Realm, whereof
one to be of the Quorum, shall have full Power, etc. to hear and determine all
Causes (Except Forfeitures of Justices of Peace) that shall come in question by
reason of this Act.

33. N. 1.
Also be it provided, that if any, Taxes.
etc. shall find him or her self grieved with any Taxation set upon them by
virtue of this Act, it shall be lawful for them at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be holden within the same Shire where their Taxation shall be, to
make Complaint thereof to the Justices of the Bench, and to be eased of their
excessive charge by the discretion of the whole Bench or the most part of them.

18 Eliz. C. 3. 2. N. 2.
It is Ordained, etc. that two Justices of the Peace, Bastardy.
whereof one to be of the Quorum, in or next unto the limits where the Parish
Church is, within which Parish such Bastard shall be born, upon examination of
the Cause and Circumstance, shall and may by their discretion, take order as
well for the punishment of the Mother and reputed Father of such Bastard Child,
as also for the better relief of every such Parish in part or in all, 39 Eliz.
Cap. 4. 1. N. 1. 3 Car. 1. Cap. 4. (5.) 15. N. 2.

2. N. 3.
And shall and may likewise by like descretion, Poor.
take order for the keeping of every such Bastard Child, by charging such
Mother or reputed Father with the payment of money weekly, or other sustentation
for the relief of such Child, in such wise as they shall think meet and
convenient.

2. N. 4.
And if after the same Order by them subscribed under their hands, Imprisonment.
any the said persons (viz Mother or reputed Father) upon notice thereof, shall
not for their part observe and perform the said Order, that then every such
party so making default in not performing of the said Order, to be committed to
Ward to the common Goal.

5. N. 3.
And that likewise in every other Market Town or other Place (viz. not
Corporate) within every County of this Realm, Justices.
whereto the Justices of Peace or greater part of them, in their general
Sessions next after Easter, within every limit shall be thought meet and
convenient, a like competent store and stock of Wool, Hemp, Flax, Iron or other
Stuff as the Country is most meet for, by Appointment and Order of the said
Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them in their general Sessions, of
all the Inhabitants within their several Authorities, to be taxed, levied and
gathered, shall be provided (viz. for the Poor.)

6. N. 1
And moreover be it Ordained, Poor.
etc. that within every County of this Realm one, two or more abiding houses or
places convenient in some Market Town, or Corporate-Town or other place, etc.
by Purchase, Lease, Building or otherwise, by the appointment and order of the
Justices of Peace or the more part of them in their said general Sessions (of
Inhabitants within their several Authorities, to be taxed, levied and gathered)
shall be provided, and called the house or houses of Correction.

7. N. 1.
And be it also further Enacted, Officer.
etc. that the said Justices of Peace or the more part of them in their said
general Sessions in every County, shall and may appoint from time to time,
persons which shall be Overseers of every such house of Correction. etc.

7. N 2.
And shall also, Taxes.
etc. appoint others for the gathering of such money as shall be taxed upon any
person, etc. toward the maintenance of the said houses of Correction.

15. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, Justices.
etc. that if any Justice of the Peace assembled at any the said Sessions next
after Easter, shall from thence depart before conference had touching the
Execution of this Statute, he shall for every such Offense forfeit 5 l. to be
recovered and levied as a Fine, upon Indictment and Conviction of Trespass, etc.

Information
And that Justices of Oyer and Terminer, C. 5. 4. N. 4.
Justices of Assize in their Circuits and Justices of Peace in their quarter
Sessions, shall have full Power and Authority to hear and determine, all
Offenses to be committed or done (viz. in Suits upon any Penal Statutes)
contrary to the true intent and meaning of this present Act.

Ways.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that all and every Justices of Assize, C. 10.
9. N. 1.
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Peace in the Sessions and Stewards
of Leets and Law-days in their Leets and Law-days, shall hear and determine all
and every Offense, Matter and Cause that shall grow, come or rise by reason of
this Statute. (viz. of amending Highways.)

Pope.
And be it likewise Enacted, 23 Eliz. C. 1. 8. N. 1.
that all and every Offenses against this Act, or against the Acts, etc. (viz.
1 Eliz. Cap. 1. and 5 Eliz. Cap. 1. and 13. Eliz. Cap. 2. etc.) touching
acknowledging her Majesty's supreme Government in Causes Ecclesiastical, or
other matters touching the Service of God, or coming to Church, or
Establishment of true Religion in this Realm, shall and may be inquirable, as
well before Justices of Peace as other Justices named in the same Statutes,
within one year and a day after every such Offense committed, any thing, etc.
notwithstanding.

Justices.
And Justices of Peace in their open quarter Sessions of Peace, 9. N. 2.
shall have Power by virtue of this Act, to inquire, hear and determine of all
Offenses against this Act, except Treason and misprision of Treason.

Slander.
And also that all Justices of Peace as well within Liberties as without, C. 2.
8. N. 1.
within the limits of their several Commissions in their general or quarter
Sessions, shall by virtue hereof, have full Power and Authority to inquire of
all and every the Offenses aforesaid, (viz. of false News and Prophesies
against the Queen, etc.) and to cause the Offender, etc. therein, to be
indicted without any further proceeding therein.

Imprisonment.
And that also every Justice of Peace within the limits of his Commission, 8. N.
2.
shall have full Power and Authority to commit any person being vehemently
suspected of any of the said Offenses, to Ward, unless he do put in Sureties to
make his personal appearance at the next quarter Sessions or Jail-delivery, etc.

Days.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, etc. that no manner of person, 10. N. 1.
etc. shall be molested or impeached for any the Offenses concerning speaking
or reporting, etc. unless he or they be thereof accused within one Month next
after such words so spoken or reported, before some one Justice of the Peace,
and the Witnesses therein to be used, named to the same Justice.

Proof.
And the same Accusation and Witnesses Names, 10. N. 2.
put in Writing by the said Justice, and certified at the next quarter Sessions
or Jail-delivery.

Drapery.
For Reformation, etc. be it Ordained, C. 9. 2. N. 1.
etc. that all such Log-wood alias Block-wood, in whose hands soever the same
shall be found, etc. shall be forfeited and openly burned by Authority of the
Mayor, etc or of two Justices of Peace of the County where it shall be found.

Fowl.
The same Bond (viz. not to take Fesant or Partridge in two years) to be taken
by some Justice of Peace of the County where the said Offense (viz. of undue
taking with Nets, etc.) shall be committed, C. 10. 2. N. 6.


Justices.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, 5. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Assizes in their Circuits, and Justices of Peace in
every Shire, County and Town-Corporate within this Realm, in their Sessions
within their several limits of their Commission, and Stewards of Leets,
Liberties and Law-days within their several Jurisdictions, shall and may by
virtue hereof, hear, inquire and determine of all and every Offense or Offenses
(viz. of taking Fesant or Partridge in the Night with Nets or before Corn
Shockt, etc.) which shall be committed within the precinct of their Liberties,
Jurisdictions or Franchises against the Tenor of this Act.

Leet.
And further, 5. N. 2.
that every Justice of the Peace within every County of this Realm, shall
within the limits of his Commission, have Power and Authority by virtue hereof,
to examine all Offenders in the Premises (viz. taking Fesant or Partridge in
the Night with Nets or before Corn Shockt) within the County where he is or
shall be Justice, if so be that the said Offense or Offenses shall not before
be heard or determined by the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, or by the
Stewards of Leets, Liberties or Law-days within their said several
Jurisdictions.

5. N. 3.
And also take Bond with good Sureties for his and their Appearance that shall
so offend, Recogniz.
to appear at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the same
County where the same Offense shall be committed, to answer the said Offense,
and to pay the Penalties or receive the Punishment by this Act appointed or
limited.

27 Eliz. C. 2. 13. N. 2.
And that if such Justice of Peace, Pope.
etc. to whom such matter shall be discovered, (viz that Jesuit-Priest, etc.
remain in this Realm) do not within eight and twenty days then next following
give Information thereof to some of the Queens Privy Council, or to the
Presedent of the Queens Council established in the North, or in the Marches of
Wales for the time being, that then he or they so offending, shall for every
such Offense forfeit the sum of two hundred Marks.

C. 7. 3. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Inquest.
etc. Justices of Assize, etc. and Justices of Peace as well within Liberties
as without, within the limits of their Commission, shall by virtue of this
present Act, have full Power and Authority to inquire, hear and determine all
and evrey the Offenses aforesaid, (viz. Abuses in collecting Issues lost by
Jurors of the same Name not summoned) committed, etc. within the several
limits, circuit and precinct of their several Commission, etc. and to award
forth Process of Execution for the levying of the Forfeitures

C. 12. 6. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Sheriffs.
etc. that the Justices of Assize and Justices of Peace in their open Sessions,
shall have full Power within the limits of their Authority, to hear and
determine the Defaults done contrary to this Act, (viz. of Under-Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Clerks, etc. not taking their Oaths, etc.) as well by Presentment and
Information as Indictment.

C. 13. 2. N. 7.
And that the same Moity (viz. against Hundreds that do not make Fresh-Suit
after Robbery) shall and may be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Fresh suit.
Plaint or Information in any of the Queens Majesty's Courts of Record at
Westminster, by and in the Name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time being,
of or in every such County within this Realm where any such Robbery and
Recovery by Party or Parties robbed shall be, without naming the Christian-name
or Surname of the said Clerk of the Peace.

. 5. N. 1.
For Remedy, Execution.
etc. (viz. of Contribution for Party on whom Execution is done, etc.) be it
Enacted, etc. that after Execution of Damages by the party or parties so
Robbed had, it shall and may be lawful upon complaint made by the party or
parties so charged, to and for two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of
the Quorum of the same County, inhabiting within the said Hundred or near unto
the same where any such Execution shall be had, to assess and tax rateably and
proportionably according to their discretions, all and every the Towns,
Parishes, Villages and Hamlets, as well of the said Hundred where any such
Robbery shall be committed, as of the Liberties within the said Hundred, to and
toward an equal Contribution to be had and made for the Relief of the
Inhabitant or Inhabitants against whom the Party or Parties robbed before that
time had his or their Execution.

C. 24. 2. N. 1.
For Remedy, etc. be it Enacted, Sewers.
that etc. the Justices of Peace within the County of Norfolk, shall and may
yearly at any general Sessions to be holden within the said County, for and
toward the making and amening of the said Sea-banks or Sea-works now being, or
that hereafter shall be in ruin or decay, limit and appoint so many of the
aforesaid Day-works ( viz. by 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. Cap. 8. and 5 Eliz. Cap. 13.
N. and 18 Eliz. Cap. 10. N. Appointed for the Amendment of Highways) as by
their discretions shall be thought superfluous and not needful to be employed
toward the Amendment of the aforesaid Highways within three Miles of the said
Sea-banks or Sea-works, which shall needfully require any such reparation or
amendment.

Information
And that all Suits, 31 Eliz. C. 5. 7. N. 2.
etc to be persued upon any Statute for using any unlawful Game, or for not
using any lawful Game.

Games.
Or for not having Bows and Arrows according to the Law. 7. N. 3.


Apprentice.
Or for using any Art or Mystery in which the Party has not been brought up,
according to the Statute ( viz. 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. 31. N. 1. 7. N. 4.
) in that behalf made,

Justices.
Shall be sued and prosceuted in the general quarter Sessions of the Peace or
Assizes of the same County where the Offense shall be committed, or otherwise
inquired of, heard and determined in the Assizes, 7. N. 5.
or general Quarter Sessions of the Peace of the same County where such Offense
shall be committed, or in the Leet within which it shall happen and not in any
wise out of the same County where such Offense shall happen or be committed,

Poor.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that all Justices of Assizes, C. 7. 4. N. 1.
Justices of Peace in their open Sessions and every Lord within the Precinct of
his Leet and no others, shall have full Power and Authority within their
several Limits and Jurisdictions, to inquire of, hear and determine all
Offenses contrary to this present Act, (viz. of Cottages) as well by
Indictments, as otherwise by Presentment or Information.

Execution.
And to award Execution for the levying of the several Forfeitures, 4. N. 2.
etc. by Fieri facias, Elegit Capias, or otherwise as the Cause shall require.

Poor.
Nor (viz. this Statute shall not extend) to any Cottage to be made, 6. N. 4.
which for any just respect upon Complaint to the Justices of Assize at the
Assizes, or to the Justices of Peace at the Quarter Sessions, be decreed to
continue for Habitation, or for and during so long time only as by such Decree
shall be altered and limited.

Force.
Be it Ordained, Declared, and Enacted, etc. (viz. on 8 H. 6. Cap. 9. C. 11. 3.
N. 3.
7. N. 1.) that no restitution upon any Indictment of forcible Entry or holding
with force, be made to any person or persons, if the person or persons so
indicted has had the Occupation, or has been in quiet Possession for the
space of three whole years together next before the day of such Indictment so
found, and his, her or their Estate or Estates therein not ended or determined.

Restitution.
Which the Party indicted shall and may allege for stay of Restitution, 3. N. 4.
and Restitution to stay until that be tried, if the other will deny or
traverse the same.

Market Overt.
The one half of all which Forfeitures (viz of not Tolling, C. 12. 2. N. 9.
or Vouching or Entering Sale of Horses in Market, etc.) to be to the Queens
Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, and the other half to him or them that will
sue for the same, before the Justices of Peace, or in any of her Majesty's
ordinary Courts of Record, by Bill, Plaint, Action of Debt or Information, in
which no Essoyn or Protection shall be allowed.

Cattle.
And be it further Enacted, 3. N. 1.
that the Justices of Peace in every Place and County, as well within Liberties
as without, shall have Authority in their Sessions within the limits of their
Authority and Commission, to inquire, hear and determine all Offenses against
this Statute (viz. of selling Horses in Fairs and Markets) as they may do any
other matter tryable before them.

Pope.
And that the Justices of Peace before whom any such Abjuration shall happen to
be made, etc. (viz. by Party absent a Month from Church, 35 Eliz. C. 1. 2. N. 3.
or at Conventicle, etc.) shall cause the same presently to be entered of Record
before them, and shall certify the same to the Justices of Assizes and
Jail-delivery of the County, at the next Assizes or Jail-delivery to be holden
in the same County.

Pope.
That in every such Case, C. 2. 8. N. 4.
(viz. where a restrained Papist exceeds five Miles of Home, and is unable to
pay Fine, and does not reform) every such Offender being thereunto warned or
required, by any two Justices of Peace or Coroner of the same County where such
Offender shall then be, shall upon his or their Corporal Oath before any two
Justices of the Peace or Coroner of the same County, abjure this Realm of
England and all other the Queens Majesty's Dominions for ever.

Justices.
And that every Justice of Peace and Coroner before whom any such Abjuration
shall happen to be made as is aforesaid, 9. N. 1.
shall cause the same presently to be entered of Record before them, and shall
certify the same to the Justices of Assizes or Jail-delivery of the said County
at the next Assizes or general Jail-delivery to be holden in the same County.

C. 4. 1. N. 1,
Be it Enacted, Poor.
etc. that every Parish within this Realm of England and Wales, shall be
charged to pay weekly such a sum of money toward the relief of the sick, hurt
and maihmed Soldiers and Mariners, that, etc. shall lose their Limbs, or
disable their Bodies, having been pressed and in pay for her Majesty's Service,
as by the Justices of Peace or the more part of them in their general quarter
Sessions to be holden in the several Counties, etc. about the Feast of St. John
Baptist, yearly shall be appointed.

1. N. 3.
So as no Parish be rated above the sum of six pence, Taxes.
nor under the sum of one penny weekly to be paid.

39 Eliz. C. 2. 9. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Husbandry.
etc. that the Justices of Assize or Justices of Peace in every County within
this Realm, at the Assizes or quarter, or general Sessions, shall have full
Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, to inquire, hear and determine all
and every the Defaults and Offenses committed or done contrary to this Act,
(viz. Husbandry and Tillage) within the County where any such Assizes or
Sessions shall be kept, by Inquisition, Presentment, Indictment, Bill or
Information, or by any of the same ways or means.

9. N. 2.
And upon the Conviction of the Offender, Forfeitures
by Information or Suit of any other than her Majesty, her Heirs or Successors,
to make Extracts of one third part of the Forfeitures to be levied for the
Queens Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, as they use to do of other Fines,
Issues and Amercements grown in the Sessions of the Peace.

9. N. 3.
And to award Execution of the two other third parts, Execution.
the one for the Complainant or Informer, and the other to the Poor, by the
discretion of the Justices of Peace of the general Sessions against the
Offender, by Fieri facias and Capias, as her Majesty's Justices at Westminster
may do and use to do.

9. N. 4.
And if any such Conviction shall hereafter happen to be at her Majesty's Suit
only, Process.
that then the Forfeitures to be Extracted and levied for her Majesty, her
Heirs and Suecessors, to the uses aforesaid.

9. N. 5.
And it is also further Enacted, Husbandry.
that if any person shall hereafter be punished by virtue of this Act, (viz. of
Husbandry and Tillage) that the same person shall not otherwise be vexed,
troubled, sued or put to any pain or punishment for the thing wherefore he or
they shall have been so punished.

C. 3. 1. N. 1.
Be it Enacted, etc. that the Churchwardens of every Parish, Poor.
and four substantial Householders there being Subsidy-men, or for want of
Subsidy-men, some other substantial Householder of the said Parish, who shall be
nominated yearly in Easter week, under the Hand and Seal of two or more
Justices of the Peace in the same County, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
dwelling in or near the same Parish, shall be called Overseers of the Poor of
the same Parish, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 1. N. 1.

1. N. 4.
And also to raise weekly or otherwise, Taxes.
(by Taxation of every Inhabitant and every Occupier of Lands in the same
Parish, in such competent, etc. sums of money as they shall think fit) a
convenient stock of Flax, Hemp, Wool Thread Iron and other necessary Ware and
Stuff to set the Poor on work, and also competent sums of money for and toward
the necessary relief of the same impotent, old, blind and such other among
them, being poor and not able to work, and also for the putting out of such
Children to be Apprentices to be gathered out of the same Parish, according to
the ability of the same Parish, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 1. N. 4. 5.

1. N. 10.
And be it also Enacted, Justices.
that if the said Justices of Peace do perceive that the Inhabitants of any
Parish are not able to levy among themselves sufficient sums of money for the
purposes aforesaid, that then the said Justices shall and may tax, etc. any
other of other Parishes, or out of any Parish within the Hundred where the said
Parish is, to pay such, etc. sums of money to the Churchwardens and Overseers
of the said poor Parish for the said purposes as the said Justices shall think
fit, according to the intent of this Law, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 3. N. 1.

Poor.
And if the said Hundred shall not be thought to the said Justices, 1. N. 11.
able and fit to relieve the said several Parishes, nor able to provide for
themselves as aforesaid, then the Justices of Peace at their general Quarter
Sessions, or the greater number of them, shall rate and assess as aforesaid,
other of any other Parishes, or out of any Parish within the said County for
the purposes aforesaid, as in their discretion shall seem fit, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2.
3. N. 2.

Process.
And that it shall be lawful for the said Churchwardens and Overseers or any
of them, by Warrant from any two Justices of the Peace, to levy, 2. N. 1.
etc. by distress and sale, etc. 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 4. N. 1.

Justices.
And the said Justices of Peace or any one of them, 2. N. 3.
to send to the House of Correction such as shall not employ themselves to
work, being appointed as aforesaid, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 4. N. 3.

Imprisonment.
And also any two Justices, 2. N. 4.
to commit to Prison every one of the said Churchwardens and Overseers which
shall refuse to account, etc. 43. Eliz. Cap. 2. 4. N. 4.

Apprentice.
And be it further Enacted, 3. N. 1.
that it shall be lawful for the said Churchwardens and Overseers or the
greater part of them, by the assent of any two Justices of the Peace, to bind
any such Children as aforesaid, to be Apprentice where they shall see
convenient, etc. 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 5. N. 1.

Error.
Provided always, that if any, etc. shall find themselves aggrieved, 3. N. 4.
with any Sess or Tax, or other Act done by the said Churchwardens, etc. or by
the said Justices of Peace, that then it shall be lawful for the Justices of
Peace at their general Quarter Sessions or the greater number of them, to take
such Order therein as to them shall be thought convenient, and the same to
conclude and bind all the same Parties, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 6. N. 1.

Franchise.
And be it also Enacted, 6. N. 1
that if it shall happen any Parish to extend it self into more Counties than
one, or part to lie within the Liberties of any City or Town-Corporate, and
part without, that then as well the Justices of Peace of every County, as also
the Head-Officers of such City or Town-Corporate, shall deal or intermeddle
only in so much of the said Parish as lies within their Liberty, and not any
further, 39 Eliz. Cap. 4 8. N 1. and 43 Eliz. Cap 2, 9. N 1.

Taxes.
Which sums so taxed, (viz. not above six pence on every Parish weekly, 10. N. 3.
and not under a halfpenny) shall be yearly assessed by the agreement of the
Parishioners within themselves, or in default thereof, by the Churchwardens
and Constables of the same Parish or the more part of them, or in default of
their agreement, by the Order of such Justice or Justices of Peace as shall
dwell in the same Parish, or if none be there dwelling, in the Parts next
adjoining, 43. Eliz. Cap. 2. 12. N. 3.

Imprisonment.
And be it also Enacted, 11. N. 1.
that the said Justices of the Peace at their general Quarter Sessions to be
holden at the time of such taxation, shall set down what competent sum of money
shall be sent Quarterly out of every County or Place Corporate for the relief
of the poor Prisoners of the Kings Bench and Marshalsey etc. so as there be
sent out of every County yearly twenty shillings at the least to the said
Prisoners of the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, 14 Eliz. Cap. 5. 37. N. 1. and 43
Eliz. Cap. 2. 14. N. 1.

Account.
And every such Constable shall pay over the same viz. Collections of Tax for
the Poor) to two such Justices of the Peace or to one of them, 11. N. 3.
as shall be by the more part of the Justices of Peace of the County elected to
be Treasurers of the said Collection, which Treasurers in every County so
chosen, shall continue but for the space of one whole year, and then give up
their Charge, with a due Account of their Receipts and Disbursements at their
meeting in the Quarter Sessions to be holden after the Feast of Easter in every
year, to such others as shall from year to year in form aforesaid, successively
be elected, 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 14. N. 3. 4.

Justices.
And that, etc. from time to time it shall and may be lawful, C. 4. 1. N. ^
to and for the Justices of the Peace of any County or City in this Realm, or
the Dominions of Wales, assembled at any Quarter Sessions of the Peace within
the same County, City, Borough or Town Corporate, or the more part of them, to
set down order, to erect or cause to be erected one or more Houses of
Correction within their several Counties or Cities.

1. N. 3.
For the doing and performing whereof, Imprisonment.
and for the Providing of Stocks of Money and all other things necessary for the
same, and for the raising and governing of the same, and for the Correction and
Punishment of Offenders thither to be committed, such Orders as the same
Justices or the more part of them shall from time to time take, reform or set
down in any their said Quarter Sessions in that behalf, shall be of force, and
be duly performed and put in Execution.

3. N. 1.
And be it Enacted, Poor.
etc. that every person which is by this present Act declared to be a Rogue,
Vagabond or sturdy Beggar, which shall be, etc. taken begging, vagrant wandering
or misordering themselves in any part of this Realm or the Dominions of Wales,
shall upon their Apprehension, by the Appointment of any Justices of the Peace,
Constable, Head-borough or Tything-man of the same County, Hundred, Parish or
Tything where such person shall be taken, etc. be stripped naked from the
Middle upwards, and shall be openly whipped until his or their Body be bloody.

4. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, Imprisonment.
if any of the said Rogues shall appear to be dangerous to the Inferior sort of
People where they shall be taken, or otherwise be such as will not be reformed
of their Roguish kind of Life by the former Provisions of this Act, that in
every such Case, it shall and may be lawful to the said Justices of the limit
where any such Rogue shall be taken, or any two of them, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, to commit that Rogue to the House of Correction, or otherwise to
the Goal of the County, there to remain until the next Quarter Sessions to be
holden in that County.

8. N. 1.
Provided always, Franchise.
that the Justices of Peace within any County of this Realm or Wales, shall not
intromit or enter into any City, Borough or Town-Corporate where be any Justice
or Justices of the Peace for any such City, Borough or Town-Corporate, for the
Execution of any Branch, etc. of this Act, for or concerning any Offense,
Matter or Cause growing or rising within the Precincts, Liberties or
Jurisdiction of such City, Borough or Town-Corporate, 39 Eliz. Cap. 3. 6. N. 1.
43 Eliz. Cap. 2. 9. N. 1.

12. N. 1.
And be it also further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that any two or more Justices of the Peace within all the said several
Shires, Cities, Boroughs or Towns-Corporate, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
shall have full Power by the Authority of this present Act, to hear and
determine all Causes that shall come in question by reason of this Act.

C. 11. 2. N. 2.
And if upon the same Examination they (viz. any Justice of Peace) shall find
any person, Drapery.
etc. to have used or caused to be used in the dying or coloring of any Cloth,
Wool, Yarn, Grograin, Buffins or Silk, or any thing made of Woolen-Yarn or
Silk, any Logwood alias Block-wood, or now or heretofore reputed and taken for
Log-wood alias Block-wood, then the said Justices or Justice, Mayor, Bailiffs
or other Head-Officer being a Justice of Peace, shall not only bind with Surety
all such, etc. whom they shall find so suspected to have offended, and such
others as may discover the same Offense to the next Quarter Sessions, or
Jail-delivery which shall happen to be holden for that County, City or
Town-Corporate, but also to certify all such Examinations and Depositions as
tend to the finding out or discovery of the said Offenses, at the Jail-delivery
or Quarter Sessions.

C. 12. 1. N. 9.
( viz. that 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. 15) has not been duly executed, Apprentice.
etc. by reason of Ambiguity, and Question have risen and been made, whether
the raising of all manner of Artificers, Workmen and Workwomen, his or their
Wages other than such as by some Statute and Law have been rated, or else such
as did work about Husbandry, forasmuch as the said Law has been found
beneficial for the Commonwealth, 1. Jac. Cap. 6. 2. N. 2.

2. N. 1.
Be it Enacted, that the said Statute ( viz. 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. 15. N. 3. 4. Fees.
) and the Authority by the same Statute given to any person or persons for
assessing and rating of Wages, and the Authority to them in the said Act
committed, shall be expounded and construed, and shall by force of this Act,
give Authority to all persons having any such Authority to rate wages of any
Laborers, Weavers, Spinsters, and Workmen or Work-women whatsoever, either
working by the Day, Week, Month, Year, or taking any Work at any person or
persons hand whatsoever, to be done, 1 Jac. Cap. 6. 3. N. 1.

And whereas in diverse Shires within this Realm, 2. N. 2.
the Justices of Peace have not usually kept their general Sessions in one
Place of the Shire together, but the general Sessions have been kept in several
Places for several Divisions, by reason whereof, the most part of the Justices
of the Peace coming not together, nor rating of wages could well be made in the
said Shire where such general Sessions have been used, 1 Jac. Cap. 6. 4. N. 1.

Justices.
Be it Enacted, etc. that the most Justices of Peace, 2. N. 3.
or the more part of them resiant in such Division in any Shire within this
Realm where such Sessions have been usually severally kept, shall at the same
Sessions, or at such time of rating of wages as is limited by the said Act,
etc. (viz. 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. 15. N. 6.) have as full Authority and Power to rate
all manner of wages to be rated within the limits of such Division in any such
Shire, as if the same were done in the general Sessions for the said County, or
by the most part of the Justices meeting for the rating of wages by the said
Act, 1 Jac. Cap. 6. 5. N. 1.

Certificate.
And be it further Enacted, that no person, 3. N. 1.
etc. shall incur any Danger or Penalty for not making Certificate into the,
etc. Chancery, of any rates of wages appointed to be Certified by the said Act,
( viz. 5 Eliz. Cap. 4. 15. N. 6.) 1 Jac. Cap. 6. 8. N. 1.

Fees.
But the said Rates engrossed in Parchment and sealed, etc. shall, 3. N. 2.
if the same be in any Shire, be kept by the Custos Rotulorum of the said
County amongst the Records in his Custody for the said Shire, and in any City
or Town-Corporate amongst the Records of the said City or Town Corporate, 1
Jac. Cap. 6. 8. N. 2.

Corn.
Whereas greater quantity of Malt is daily made than either in time past was or
is now needful, Be it Enacted, etc. that from time to time, Cap. 16.
and at all times hereafter, it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of
Peace within this Realm in their open Quarter Sessions, to suppress discharge
or restrain the superfluous and unnecessary number of Malsters in part or in
whole, and also to restrain such, etc. as to their Discretions shall seem meet,
from the buying of Barley to convert into Malt in part or in all, for such
time, etc. as to their discretions shall seem meet.

Poor.
And be it further Enacted, C. 17. 4. N. 1.
that it shall be lawful for the Justices of Assizes, Justices of Jail-delivery
and the Justices of Peace of every County, and all Justices of Peace in
Towns-Corporate having Authority to hear and determine Felonies, to hear and
determine all such Offenses (viz. of wandering idle Soldiers and Mariners
hereby made Felony without Clergy) in their General Sessions.

Mettle.
The same (viz. three shillings forfeit by carriage from Iron Mills between the
first of May and the twelfth of October) to be levied after default of payment
thereof (viz. to Justice of Peace near adjoining to Annoyance of way) by such
Justice of Peace, C. 19. 3. N. 2.
or assignee by way of distress of any of the Goods and Chattels remaining in
the said County of such person as so should have paid such sums.

Drapery.
And, etc. it may be also Enacted, that every Justice of Peace, C. 20. 8. N. 1.
Head-Constable or other the Overseers, etc. (viz. of Northern Cloths) shall
have full Power, etc. to enter in or upon any the Messuages, etc. of any
person, etc. to search for any such Tenters of what sort or kind soever, or any
manner of Ropes, Rings, Heads, Wrinches or other Engines whatsoever, whereby
any falsehood or deceit may be used in or about the stretching and straining of
any the said Cloths, Kerseys, Dozens, Frizes, Cottons, Pennistones, Kighley,
Whites or any other Cloth by what name or names soever they be called, or any
of them.

Process.
And that the said Justices of Peace in the Quarter Sessions, 10. N. ^.
shall and may inquire, hear and determine every Fault or Offense, etc. except
the Offenses, etc. made by the Justices of Peace, by Presentment, Bill or
Information, and upon proof thereof made by two sufficient Witnesses openly
given to the Jury, and then to give Order for the Execution of this Statute.

43 Eliz. C. 7. 1. N. 2.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. that all and every such lewd person, Trespass.
etc. which, etc. shall cut, or unlawfully take away any Corn or Grain growing,
or rob any Orchards or Gardens, or break or cut any Hedges, Pales, Rails or
Fence, or dig, or pull up or take up any Fruit-Tree or Trees in any Orchard,
Garden or elsewhere, to the intent to take and carry the same away, or shall
cut or spoil any Woods or Underwoods, Poles or Trees standing, not being
Felony by the Laws of this Realm.

1. N. 3.
And their Procuror and Procurors, Accessory.
Receiver or Receivers knowing the same.

1. N. 4.
Being thereof lawfully convicted by the Confession of the Party, Proof.
or by the Testimony of one sufficient Witness upon Oath, before some one
Justice of Peace, Mayor, etc. of the County, City or Town-Corporate.

1. N. 5.
Which said Justice or other Head-Officer, Oath.
shall have Power by force of this Statute, to minister the said Oath where the
Offense shall be committed, or the Party offending apprehended.

1. N. 6.
Shall give the Party, etc. such recompense and satisfaction, Damages.
etc. as by any one Justice, of Peace etc. shall be ordered and appointed, and
the same to be only for the first Fault.

1. N. 8.
And for every such Offense, etc. Eftsoons committed, the person, Justices.
etc. so offending, to receive the said punishment of whipping, (viz. if the
Justice think him unable to satisfy, etc.)

2. N. 1.
And be it Eniacted, Process.
etc. that if any Constable or other inferior Officer do refuse, or do not at
the Commandment of any Justice of Peace or other Head-Officer, execute by
himself or some other to be by him appointed, upon the Offender, the Punishment
limited by this Statute, that in that Case it shall and may be lawful for the
said Justice of Peace, to commit the Constable or other inferior Officer so
refusing, etc to the Common Goal, etc. there to remain without Bail or
Mainprize until the said Offender, etc. be by the said Constable, etc. punished
and whipped, etc.

3. N. 1.
Provided always, Justices.
that no Justice of Peace or other Head-Officer do execute this Statute for any
the Offenses aforesaid done unto himself, unless he be associated and assisted
with one or more other Justices of Peace whom the Offense does not concern.

C. 13. 4. N. 1
Be it, etc. Enacted, Outlawry.
that every Clerk of the Peace within every of the said Counties, (viz.
Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland and Durham) shall within the space of
two Months next after any Outlawry within any of the said Counties, deliver or
cause to be delivered by Writing under his Hand, the Names of all and every
such as are or shall be hereafter outlawed within their several Counties, to
all and every the Sheriffs of the said several Counties.

6. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Coron.
that the Justices of Assize within any of the said Counties, Justices of
Jail-delivery, Justices of Oyer and Terminer or Justices of Peace within any of
the said Counties, at any of their General Sessions, shall have full Power and
Authority by virtue of this Act, to inquire, hear and determine of the Offenses
and Defaults of the said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Aldermen and other
Officers, and of the Clerks of the Peace within the said Counties (viz. in
proceeding against Robbers, Felons, etc.) and proceed against them by
Information or Indictment, and punish them by Fine, Imprisonment or otherwise,
as they shall think fit.

Statuta Jac.
Drapery.
AND that if the said Offense, 1 Jac. 6. 7. N. 2.
etc. of not paying so much or so great Wages to their said Workmen, etc. (viz.
Clothiers, etc.) shall be confessed by the Offender, or that the same shall be
prooved by two sufficient and lawful Witnesses before the Justices of Peace in
their Quarter Sessions of the Peace, the Justices of Assize in their Sessions
or before any two Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, that then
every such person shall forthwith stand and be in Law convicted thereof

Justices.
Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, 9. N. 1.
etc. that no Cothier being a Justice of Peace in any Precinct or Liberty,
shall be any Rater of any Wages for any Weaver, Tucker, Spinster or any other
Artizan that depends upon the making of Cloth.

Fees.
And in Case there be not above the number of two Justices of Peace within such
Precinct or Liberty, but such as are Clothiers, 9. N. 2.
that in such Case the same Wages shall be rated and assessed by the major part
of the Common Council of such Precinct or Liberty, and such Justice and
Justices of Peace (if any there be) as are not Clothiers.

Ale.
(Viz. Innkeeper, C. 9. 2. N. 6.
Alehouse Keeper or Victualler to forfeit Ten Shillings for suffering Tippling,
etc.) The same Offense being viewed and seen by any Mayor, Bailiff or Justices
of Heace within their several Limits, or prooved by the Oath of two Witnesses,
to be taken before any Mayor, Bailiff or any other Head-Officer, or any one or
more, etc. Justices of the Peace, who by virtue of this Act shall be authorized
to minister the said Oath to any, etc. that can or will justify the same,
being within the limits of their said Commission.

Imprisonment.
And for want of sufficient Distress, (viz for the Penalties, 3. N. 3.
etc.) the Party, etc. offending, to be by the Mayor, Bailiff or other
Head-Officer, or Justice, ( etc. committed to the Common-Goal, there to remain
until the said Penalty, etc. be truly paid.

Franchise.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, 6. N. 1.
etc. that the Correction and Punishment of such as shall offend against this
Act or any part thereof, within either of the two Universities of this Realm,
or the Precincts or Liberties of the same shall be done upon the Offenders, and
Justice shall be administered in this behalf, according to the intent and true
meaning of this Law, by the Governors, Magistrates, Justices of the Peace or
other Principal Officers of either of the same Universities, to whom in other
Cases the Admission of Justice, and Correction and Punishment of Offenders, by
the Laws of this Realm and their several Charters does belong or appertein.

Leather.
And for the better Execution of this Act (viz. of Tanners, Curryers, C. 22. 5.
N. 1.
Cord wayners, Shoe-makers, Sadlers Coachmakers, etc.) be it further Enacted,
that all Justices of Assize, Justices of Jail-delivery, Justices of Peace and
Stewards of Franchises, Leets and Law-days within their several Jurisdictions
and Liberties, Precincts, Offices and Authorities, shall inquire of all the
Premises in their Sessions, Leet or Law-day, and hear or determine the same,
and also by their discretions examine all persons suspected to offend this Act
or any parcel thereof, 5 Eliz. Cap. 8. 40. N. 1.

Fowl.
And the same Offense, etc. (viz. destroying Phesant, Partridge, C. 27. 2. N. 1.
etc. with Guns, or Bows, or Nets, or Setting Dogs, etc) being prooved by the
Confession of the Party, or by the Testimony of two sufficient Witnesses upon
Oath before two or more Justices of the Peace of the same County, City or
Town-Corporate wherein the Offense shall be committed, or the Party offending
apprehended, shall be by the said Justices of Peace for every such Offense,
committed, etc. for three Months, etc. unless the said Offender do, or shall
forthwith upon the said Conviction pay, etc. to the use of the Poor of the same
Parish, the sum of 20 s. for every Phesant, Partridge, House-dove, Pidgeon,
Hern, Mallard, Duck, Teale, Widgeon, Goose, Heath Rook, More-game or any such
Foul, and for every Egg of Phesant, Partridge or Swans, and for every Hare
which any and every such person, etc. shall take, kill, or wilfully destroy
contrary to the true purport, etc. of this Statute.

5. N. 2.
And that all Justices of Assize in their several Circuits, Justices.
and all Justices of Peace in their general Quarter Sessions, and any two
Justices of Peace or more together out of any Sessions, shall and may by force
of this present Act, have full Power and Authority to examine, hear, punish and
determine all Offenses to be committed against this present Statute, and to
administer Oath as aforesaid, and perform and execute all and every Act and
Thing, fit or requisite for the due Execution of this present Act.

7. N. 1.
And be it also further Enacted, etc. that it shall and may be lawful, License.
to and for every person, etc. keeping any Hawk, etc. which at the general
Quarter Sessions of the County where he and they shall dwell, and shall be
licenced to shoot Hail-shot in Hand-guns or Birding pieces, at Crow, Chough,
Pie, Rook, Ringdove, Iay or smaller Birds, for Hawks meat only, to shoot and
kill Hawks meat, according to the said License only.

C. 29. 3. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, that all Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Fish.
Bailiffs, Head-Officers and Constables, as well of Cities and Towns-Corporate
as in every Counity of this Realm, shall have Power and Authority by force of
this Act, yearly in the time of Lent, to enter into all houses of Victuallers
and common victualling houses within their Jurisdictions where such Offenses (
viz. dressing Flesh contrary to 5 Eliz. Cap. 5, 4. N. 1.) shall be committed.

C. 31. 2. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. that the Mayors, Bailiffs, Poor.
Head-Officers and Justices of Peace of every City, Borough, Town-Corporate and
Places privileged, where any, etc. are or shall be, or any two of them, shall
have Power and Authority from time to time, to tax and assess, all and every
Inhabitant and all houses of Habitation, Lands and Tenements within the said
City, etc. or the Liberties or Precinets thereof, at such reasonable Taxes and
Payments as they shall think fit, for the reasonable relief of such persons
infected, or inhabiting in houses and places infected in the same Cities,
Boroughs, Towns-Corporate and Places previledged.

3 Jac. 4.. 3. N. 5
And (viz the Forfeiture for Recusants not receiving the Sacrament, Religion.
etc.) to be recovered in any of the Kings Courts of Record at Westminster, or
before Justices of Assize or Jail-delivery, or before Justices of Peace at
their general Quarter Sessions, by Action of Debt Bill, Plaint or Information,
wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

4. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Indictment
etc. that the Churchwardens and Constables of every Town, Parish or Chapel
for the time being, or some one of them, or if there be none such, then the
Chief Constables of the Hundred, where such Town, Parish or Chapel is or shall
be, or one of them, as well in Places Exempt as not Exempt, shall once in every
year present the Monthly absence from Church, of all, and all manner of Popish
Recusants within such Towns and Parishes.

4. N. 2.
And shall present the Names of every of the Children of the said Recusants,
being of the Age of nine years and upwards, Infant.
abiding with their said Parents, and as near as they can the Age of every of
the said Children, as all the names of the Servants of such Recusants at the
general or Quarter Sessions of that Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty.

5. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Peace.
etc. that all such Presentiments shall be accepted, entered and recorded in the
said Sessions, by the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk for the time being, or
his Deputy, without any Fee to be had, asked or taken for the same.

7. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Pope.
etc. that the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery at their Assizes, and the
said Justices of Peace at any of their said Sessions, shall have Power and
Authority by virtue of this Act, to inquire, hear and determine of all
Recusants and Offenses, as well for not receiving the Sacrament, etc. as for
not repairing to Church according to the meaning of former Laws, in such manner
and form as the said Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, do or may do by
former Laws in Case of Recusancy, for not repairing to Church.

Justices.
And also shall have Power at their Assizes and Jail-delivery, 7. N. 2.
and at the Sessions, (in which any Indictment against any person, either for
not repairing to Church according to former Laws, or not receiving the said
Sacrament according to this Law, shall be taken) to make Proclamation, by which
it shall be commanded, that the Body of every such Offender shall be rendered to
the Sheriff of the same County, or Bailiff, or other Keeper of the Goal of the
Liberty, before the next Assizes and general Jail-delivery, or before the next
general or Quarter Sessions respectively to be holden for the said Shire,
Limit, Division or Liberty.

Process.
And if at the next Assizes and general Jail-delivery, or Sessions, 7. N. 3.
the same Offender so proclaimed shall not make appearance of Record, that then
upon every such Default Recorded, the same shall be as sufficient a Conviction
in Law of the said Offense whereof the Party shall stand Indicted as aforesaid,
as if upon the same Indictment a Trial by Verdict thereupon had Proceeded, and
been found against him or her and Recorded.

Certificate.
And that every Conviction recorded for any Offense before mentioned, 9. N. 1.
shall from the Justices before whom the Record of such Conviction shall be
remaining, be certified into the Kings Majesty's Court of Exchequer before the
end of the Term following, such Conviction in such convenient certainty for the
time and other Circumstances, as the Court of Exchequer may thereupon award out
Process for the Seizure of the Lands and Goods of every such Offender, as the
Cause shall require.

Ordinary.
Be it also Enacted, etc. that,. 13. N. 2.
etc. it shall be lawful to and for any Bishop in his Diocese, or any two
Justices of Peace, whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, within the limits
of their Jurisdiction out of the Sessions, to require any person of the Age of
Eighteen years or above, being, or which shall be convict or indicted of or for
any Recusancy, other than Noblemen or Noble-women, for not repairing to Divine
Service, according to the Laws of this Realm.

Religion.
Or which shall not have received the said Sacrament twice within the year then
next past, Noblemen and Noble-women excepted. 13. N. 3.


Oath.
Or any person passing in or through the County, 13. N. 4.
Shire or Liberty and unknown, except, as is last before excepted, that being
examined by them upon Oath, shall confess or not deny him or herself to be a
Recusant, or shall confess or not deny that he or she had not received the
Sacrament twice within the year then last past, to take the Oath hereafter
following, etc. (viz. of Allegiance.)

Certificate.
Which said Bishop or two Justices of the Peace, 13. N. 5.
shall certify in Writing subscribed with his or their Hands, at the next
general or Quarter Sessions for that Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty within
which the said Oath shall be so taken, the Christian-name, Surname and Place
of abode of every person which shall so take the said Oath, which Certificate
shall be there recorded by the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk, and kept
amongst the Records of the said Sessions.

Imprisonment.
And be it further Enacted, that if any such person, 14. N. 1.
etc. other than Noblemen or Noble-women, shall refuse to answer upon Oath to
such Bishop or Justices of the Peace examining him or her as aforesaid, or to
take the said Oath (viz. of Allegiance) so duly tendered unto him or her by
such Bishop, or two such Justices of Peace out of Sessions, that then the said
Bishop or Justices of Peace, shall and may commit the same person to the common
Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next Assize, or
General or Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said Shire, Division, Limit or
Liberty.

Oath.
Where the said Oath (viz. of Allegiance) shall be again in the said open
Assizes or Sessions, 14. N. 2.
required of such person by the said Justices of Assize or Justices of Peace
then and there present, or the greater number of them.

14. N. 3.
And if the said person or persons, or any other person whatsoever, Forfeiture.
other than Noblemen or Noble-women of the Age of eigteen years or above,
shall refuse to take the said Oath, (viz. of Allegiance) being tendered unto him
or her by the Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery in the open Assizes, or the
Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them in their said general or Quarter
Sessions, every person so refusing, shall incur the Danger and Penalty of
Praemunire, ( viz. ^6. Rich. 2. Cap. 5. 2. N. 6)

14. N. 4.
Except Women Convert, who upon refusal of the said Oath, Women.
(viz. of Allegiance) shall be by the said Justices of Assize in their open
Assize, or Justices of Peace in their general or Quarter Sessions for the said
Offense, committed only to the Common Goal, there to reman without Bail or
Mainprize till they will take the said Oath.

24. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, that the last mentioned Clause, Pope.
etc. (viz. of Reconcilement to Rome) shall not extend, etc. to any person or
persons whatsoever, which shall hereafter be reconciled to the Pope or See of
Rome, etc. (for and touching the point of so being reconciled only) that shall
return into this Realm, and thereupon within six days next after such Return,
before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices of the Peace jointly or
severally, of the County where he shall arrive, submit himself to his Majesty
and his Laws, and take the Oath, etc. (viz. 1 Eliz. Cap. 1. 19. N. 4. of
Supremacy) as also the Oath before set down, etc. (viz. of Allegiance.)

24. N. 2.
Which said Oaths, Oath.
(Viz. of Supremacy and Allegiance) the said Bishop and Justices respectively,
shall have Power and Authority by this present Act, to minister unto such
persons as aforesaid.

24. N. 3.
And the said Oaths so taken, Certificate.
the said Bishop and Justices before whom the said Oaths shall be so taken
respectively, shall certify at the next general or Quarter Sessions of the
Peace to be holden within the said Shire, Limit, Division or Liberty wherein
such person as aforesaid shall submit himself and take the said Oaths as
aforesaid, upon Pain of every one neglecting to certify the same as aforesaid,
the sum of forty pounds.

25. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, that all, Justices.
etc. that shall offend contrary to this present Branch of this Statute, shall
be indicted, tried, and proceeded against, by and before the Justices of Assize
and Jail-delivery of that County for the time being, or before the Justices of
the Court of Kings Bench, etc.

27. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, that if any Subject of this Realm, Religion.
etc. shall not resort or repair every Sunday to some Church, Chapel or some
other usual Place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service
according to the Statute, etc. (viz. 1 Eliz. Cap. 2. 14. N. 1.) that then it
shall and may be lawful, to and for any one Justice of Peace of that Limit,
Division and Liberty wherein the said Party shall dwell, upon proof unto him
made of such Default, by Confession of the Party or Oath of Witnesses, to call
the Party before him.

27. N. 2.
And if he or she shall not make a sufficient Excuse and due proof thereof, to
the satisfaction of the said Justice of Peace, Proof.
that it shall be lawful for the said Justice of Peace to give Warrant to the
said Churchwarden of the said Parish wherein the Party shall dwell, under his
Hand and Seal, to levy 12 d. for every such Default by distress and sale of the
Goods of every such Offender, etc.

27. N. 3.
And that in default of such distress, Justices.
it shall and may be lawful for the said Justice of Peace, to commit every such
Offender to some Prison within the said Shire, Division, Limit or Liberty
wherein such Offender shall be inhabiting, until payment be made of the said
sum or sums so to be forfeited.

36. N. 2.
And all Offenses other than Treason, shall be inquired, Offense.
heard and determined before the Justices of Peace, in their general or Quarter
Sessions to be holden within the Shire, Division, Limit or Liberty wherein such
Offense shall happen.

C(...) 1. N. 5.
And such person so discovering the same, (viz. any Recusant, Pope.
or other which shall entertain or relieve any Jesuit, Seminary, Popish Priest
or any Mass, to any Justice of Peace) after Conviction of the Offender, shall
have a Certificate from the Judges or Justices of Peace before whom such
Conviction shall happen to be, directed to the Sheriff or other Officer of the
same County, Limit or Place that shall seize the Goods or levy the said
Forfeiture, commanding the said Sheriff or other Officer to pay the same (viz.
Fifty Pounds) to him that so discovered the same, out of the moneys to be
levied by virtue of the said Forfeitures, etc.

License.
And if any of the persons which are so confined (viz. Popish Recusants) etc.
shall have necessary occasion or business to go and travail out of the compass
of the said five Miles, that then and in every such Case, 7. N 2.
upon License in Writing in that behalf to be gotten under the Hands and Seals
of four of the Justices of Peace of the sane County, Limit, Division or Place
next adjoining to the Place of abode of such Recusant, with the Privity and
Assent in Writing of the Bishop of the Diocese, or of the Lieutenant, or of any
Deputy Lieutenant of the same County residing within the said County or
Liberty, under their Hands and Seals.

Oath.
It shall and may thereupon be lawful for every such person so licenced, 7. N. 4.
to go and travail about such their necessary business, and for such time only
for their travailing attending and returning as shall be comprised in the said
License, the said Party so licenced first taking his Corporal Oath before the
said four Justices of Peace or any of them, (who shall have Authority by virtue
of this Act to punish the same) that he has truly informed them of the cause
of his Iourny, and that he shall not make any causeless stays.

Ouster le mere.
Be it further Enacted, 17. N. 2.
etc. that if any of the said persons (viz. Popish Recusants, no Merchants,
Factors, Apprentices, Soldiers nor Mariners) so gone beyond the Seas without
License which are not yet returned, shall not within six Months next after
their return into this Realm, then being of the Age of eighteen years or more,
take the Oath, etc. (viz. of Allegiance) before some Justice of Peace of the
County, Liberty or Limit where such person shall inhabit or remain, that then
every such Offender shall take no Benefit by any Gift, Conveyance, Descent,
Devise or otherwise, of or to any Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or
Chattels, until he or they being of the said Age of eighteen years or above,
take the said Oath.

Justices.
And that it shall be lawful for any two Justices of Peace within the Limits of
their Jurisdiction or Authority, and to all Mayors, 26. N. 1.
Bailiffs and chief Officers of Cities and Towns-Corporate in their Liberties,
from time to time to search the Houses and Lodgings of every Popish Recusant
convict, or of every person whose Wife is or shall be a Popish Recusant
convict, for Popish Books and Relics of Popery.

Pope.
And that if any Altar, Pix, Beads, 26. N. 2.
Pictures or such like Popish Relics, or any Popish Book or Books shall be
found in their or any of their Custody, as in the Opinion of the said Justices,
Mayor, Bailiffs or Chief-Officer as aforesaid, shall be thought unmeet for such
Recusant as aforesaid, to have or use the same, shall be presently defaced and
burnt, if it be meet to be burned.

Religion.
And if it be a Crucifix, or other Relic of any Price, 26. N. 3.
the same to be defaced at the general Quarter Sessions of the Peace in the
County where the same shall be found, and the same so defaced to be restored to
the Owner again.

War.
And be it also Enacted, etc. that all such Armor, 27. N. 1.
Gunpowder and Munition of whatsoever kinds, as any Popish Recusant convict
within this Realm of England has or shall have in his house, etc. or
elsewhere, or in the Hands or Possession of any other, at his or their
disposition, shall be taken from such Popish Recusant by Warrant of four
Justices of Peace at their general or Quarter Sessions to be holden in the same
County where such Popish Recusant shall be resident (other than such necessary
Weapons as shall be thought fit by the said four Justices of Peace) to remain
and be allowed for the defense of the person or persons of such Recusant, or
for the defense of his, her or their house or houses.

Justices.
And that the said Armor and Munition so taken, 27. N. 2.
shall be kept and maintained at the Costs of such Recusants, in such places as
the said four Justices of Peace at their said Sessions of Peace shall set down
and appoint.

28. N. 1.
And be it further enacted, etc. that if any such Recusant, Forfeiture.
etc. which shall have any such Armor, etc. shall refuse to declare or manifest
unto the said Justices of Peace or any of them what Armor he she or they have
or shall have, or shall let, hinder or disturb the delivery thereof to any of
the said Justices, or to any other person, etc. Authorized by their Warrant to
take and seize the same, then every such person so offending, contrary to this
Statute in this behalf, shall forfeit and lose to the Kings Majesty his Heirs
and Successors, his and their said Armor, etc. and shall also be Imprisoned by
Warrant of or from any Justices of Peace of such County by the space of three
months, without Bail or Mainprize.

C. 10. 1. N. 2.
Be it Enacted, etc. that all, Imprisonment.
etc. that etc. shall be Committed to the Common or usual Goal, within any
County or Liberty within this Realm by any Justice or Justices of the Peace for
any offense or misdemeanor to any such Goal, that the said person, etc. so to
be committed, etc. having means or ability thereunto shall bear their own
reasonable charges for so conveying or sending them to the said Goal, and the
charges also of such as shall be appointed to Guard them to such Goal, and
shall so Guard them thither.

1. N. 3.
And if any such person, etc. so to be committed, Process.
etc. shall refuse at the time of their commitment, and sending to the said
Goal to defray the said charges, or shall not then pay or bear the same, that
then such Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall and may by writing under his
or their Hand and Seal, or Hands and Seals, give Warrant to the Constable, etc.
of the Hundred, or Constable, or Tythingman of the Tything or Township where
such person or persons shall be dwelling and Inhabit, or from whence he or they
shall be committed as aforesaid, or where he or they shall have any Goods
within the County or Liberty to sell such, and so much of the Goods and
Chattels of the said persons, so to be committed as by the discretion of the
said Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall satisfy and pay the charges of
such his or their conveying and sending to the said Goal, the appraisement to
be made by some of the honest Inhabitants of the Parish, or Tything where such
Goods or Chattels shall remain and be, and the overplus of the money which shall
be made thereof to be delivered to the party to whom the said Gooods shall
belong.

2. N 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if the said person, Taxes.
etc. so to be committed, etc. shall not have or be known to have any Goods or
Chattels, which may be sold for the purpose aforesaid within the County or
Liberty, that then an indifferent Tax or assessemement shall be made by the
Constables and Churchwardens, and two or three other the honest Inhabitants of
the Parish, Township, or Tything, where the said Offender, etc. shall be taken
or apprehended, the said Taxation being allowed under the hand of one or more
Justice or Justices of the Peace, if there be such Constables or Churchwardens
there Inhabiting, and in default of them, by four of the principal Inhabitants
of the said Parish, Township or Tything, where such Offenders shall be taken or
apprehended.

2. N 2.
And if any so Taxed or assessed, Justices.
shall refuse to pay their said Taxation, then the Justice or Justices by whom
the said offenders shall be committed, etc. or any other Justice of Peace near
adjoining shall and may give Warrant as aforesaid, to the Constable,
Tythingman, or other Officer there, to distrain the Goods of any so assessed,
which shall refuse to pay the same, and to sell the same.

C. 12. 2. N. 3.
The said forfeitures, Fish.
(viz. For Fishing within five Miles of Haven with Net under three Inches
meash, etc.) to be levied, etc. by the Mayor, Bailiff, or other Head-Officer of
every City, Borough or Town Corporate, and by Warrant of one or more Justices
of Peace, etc.

C. 13. 3. N. 1.
And be it likewise Enacted, Forest.
etc. that the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize in their
Circuits and Justices of Peace and Goal delivery in their Sessions, shall by
virtue hereof have power and Authority to enquire hear and determine all and
singular the said offenses (viz. Of breaking Grounds enclosed in the day, or
killing Deer or Connies in the night) by Examination of the Offenders, and to
make and award Process thereupon, as well upon Indictments taken before them,
as by Bill of Complaint, Information or any other Action, in which Suit or
Action, no Essoyn, Wager of Law or Protection shall be allowed.

Damages.
And be it also Enacted, 4. N. 1.
etc. that it shall and may be lawful to the Party grieved, to sue and take his
further remedy against all and every such Offender, etc. (viz. in breaking
Grounds enclosed in the day, or killing Deer or Conies in the night, etc.) for
his loss and damages, and to recover the treble value of the same in that
behalf, as well before the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Justices of Assize in
their Circuits, and Justices of Peace and Goal delivery in their Sessions or
elsewhere in any other the Kings Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

Behavior.
And that upon true satisfaction of the said treble Damages to the Party
grieved, 4. N. 2.
or upon the Confession or Acknowledgement thereof by the said Party offending,
before the Justices in open Sessions holden for the County wherein the same
Offense shall be committed, it shall be at the liberty of the said Party
grieved to whom the said Offense shall be committed, to release at his pleasure
the Surety-ship of the Good-behavior at any time within the said seven years or
before, etc.

Release.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any, 6. N. 1.
etc. at any time hereafter shall fortune to be bound before any the Justices
before mentioned, to the King his Heirs or Successors for his or their good
abearing for seven years, etc. and the same Party so bound, shall afterward
within the said seven years come before the Justices of Peace of the said
County where the Offense was committed or some of them, in open Quarter
Sessions, and there in the said Sessions confess and acknowledge his or their
said Offense, etc. and that he or they is or are sorry therefore, and satisfy
the Party or Parties grieved according to the tenor of this Act, that then the
same Justices before whom the said Confession shall be so made, shall and may
have Power, etc. in the same open Sessions, or in any other Sessions afterward
to be holden before the said Justices in the said County within the said Term
of Seven Years, if it shall seem good in their discretions to discharge the
said Recognizance and Bond so taken, and also the said Party and Parties so
bound, etc.

Ways.
And that the Justices of Peace or any four of them in either of the said
Counties, whereof one to be of the Quorum, C. 23. 4. N 3.
severally and respectively, shall have Power and Authority by this Act, to
tax, assess and rate all and every the Inhabitants of the said several Counties
of Gloucester and Monmouth, severally and respectively as well within Liberties
as without, to such reasonable sum and sums of money from time to time as to the
said Justices or any four of them in either of the said Counties severally and
respectively, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall be thought fit, needful
and convenient for the building, new making up and erecting of the said Bridge,
(viz. of Chepstow) and for the continual reparation thereof.

Ways.
And be it further Enacted, C. 24. 3. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of the said County of Worcester, or any three,
four or more of them to be nominated and agreed on by the Justices of Peace of
the said County or the more part of them in their general Quarter Sessions,
shall have full Power and Authority from time to time as often as need shall
require, until the said Bridge (viz. over the Severn near Upton) shall be
fully reedified, etc. to rate, tax and assess the said County of Worcester, and
the several Hundreds, Towns, Parishes, Villages and Hamlets within the same,
and every Inhabitant or Dweller within any the said Hundreds, etc. other than
the said City of Worcester and the Citizens aforesaid concerning their Lands,
Goods and Chattels aforesaid, to such reasonable sum and sums of money, as to
the said Justices so nominated as aforesaid, or any three, four or more of them
shall be thought fit and convenient.

Scotland.
And be it further Enacted, 4 Jac. Cap. 1. 28. N. 1.
etc. that every Justice of Peace of the Counties aforesaid (viz. of
Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland, etc. unto whom Complaint shall be
made, (viz. of Offenses in England by Scots, or in Scotland by English) shall
have full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, to bind over by
Recognizance in a convenient Sum taken to his Majesty's use, as well the Party
prosecuting, as any Witnesses which he shall desire to produce, so as the said
Witnesses may have their reasonable charges first tendered unto them, to
prosecute and give in Evidence before such his Majesty's Justices as aforesaid,
as the Case shall require, 7 Jac. Cap. 1. 3. N. 1.

C. 4. 2. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Ale.
etc. that all Offenses to be done or committed contrary to the true meaning of
this Act, (viz. of selling Ale without License, etc.) and all Penalties
aforesaid, shall be inquired of, sued for, heard and determined in the Sessions
of the Peace for the County, City or Borough, Town or Liberty, or in the Court
of Record of the City, Borough, Town or Liberty wherein such Offense shall be
committed, by Action of Debt, Information, Indictment or Presentment wherein no
Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed to the Defendant.

C. 5. 2. N. 2.
And if the said person, Ale.
etc. so convicted (viz. of being drunk) shall refuse or neglect to pay, etc.
(viz. 5 s.) then the same shall be from time to time levied of the Goods of
every such person, etc. so refusing or neglecting to pay the same, by Warrant
or Precept from the same Court, Judge or Justices before whom the same
conviction shall be.

2. N 3.
And if the Offender, Imprisonment.
etc. be not able to pay the said sum of five shillings, then the Offender,
etc. shall be committed to the Stocks for every Offense, there to remain by the
space of six hours.

3. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any Constable, Constable.
or any other inferior Officer of that Parish or Place where the Offense shall
be committed, to whom that shall be given in Charge by the Precept of any
Mayor, Bailiff, other Head-Officer or Justices of the Peace within their
several Limits, do neglect the due Correction of the said Offender, or the due
levying of the said Penalties where Distress may be had, then every person so
offending shall forfeit the sum of ten shillings, etc. to be levied by way of
distress by any other person, etc. having Warrant from any Mayor, Bailiff, or
other Head-Officer, Justices of Peace or Court where any such Conviction shall
be, etc.

5. N. 2.
Be it further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that all the Offenses in this and the said former Act ( viz. 1 Jac. Cap.
9.) mentioned, (viz. selling Ale without License, being drunk, etc.) shall be
from time to time diligently inquired of and presented before the Justices of
Assizes in their Circuit, Justices of Peace in their Quarter or Ordinary
Sessions, and before the Mayors, Bailiffs or other Head-Officers of every City
or Town-Corporate who have Power to inquire of Trespasses, Riots, Routs forces
and such like Offenses, and in every Court Leet, and thereupon such due
proceeding shall be against the Offender, etc. for their due Conviction in that
behalf as in such like Cases upon any Indictment or Presentment is used by the
Laws of the Realm, or Customs of the City, Town or Place where such Presentment
or Indictment shall be inquired of and found.

7 Jac. Cap. 1. 3. N 1.
For the preventing, Scotland.
etc. (viz. of not sending English into Scotland for Offenses there and Contra)
Be it Enacted, etc. that if any time, etc. any person, etc. shall commit, etc.
pety Treason, Murder, Manslaughter, Felonious burning of Houses and Corn,
Burglary, Robbing of Houses by day, Robbery, Theft or Rape, and do or shall fly
or escape into the Realm of England, and be or shall be apprehended, etc.
within the Parts, etc. lying on the North-side of the River Tyne, etc. that
then it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of Assize or any one of
them in the absence of the other, the Justices of Jail-delivery at their
Jail-delivery or any four of them, or the Justices of Peace in their General or
Quarter Sessions or any four of them upon due and mature Examination of the
said Offense, etc. in open Sessions, and pregnant proofs of the same by Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to remand and send all and every such Offender,
etc. into the Realm of Scotland, there to receive their Trial for any the
Offenses aforesaid by them there committed, any thing in the said Statute (
viz. 4 Jac. Cap. 1. 37. N. 1.) to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Apprentices
And for the better Execution of this Act, be it further Enacted, C. 3. 6. N. 1.
etc. that all, etc. appointed by this Act to have the employing and disposing
of any sum or sums of money so given or to be given as aforefaid, (viz. for
binding out Apprentices, etc.) within any Town or Parish not Corporate, shall,
etc. once every year in the Easter week, or within one Month next after Easter
day, make a true and perfect Account before four, three or two Justices of the
Peace dwelling in or next to every of the said Towns or Parishes, of all such
sum and sums of money as they or any of them have employed, in binding of
Apprentices by virtue of this Act, and of all Bonds and Obligations taken for
the payment thereof, and also of all such sums of money as then shall haypen to
be remaining in their hands not employed.

Poor.
Which houses (viz. of Correction) shall be purchased, C. 4. 2. N. 2.
conveyed or assured unto such person or persons as by the Justices of Peace or
the more part of them in their Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden
within every County of this Realm of England and Wales upon Trust, to the
intent the same shall be used and employed for the keeping, correcting and
setting to work of the said Rogues, Vagabonds or sturdy Beggars, and other idle
and disorderly persons.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, 4. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace of every County within the Realm of England
and Wales at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden before their
several Counties (next after the erecting, providing or building of the said
house or houses, and from time to time) or the most part of them, shall elect,
nominate and appoint at their Will and Pleasure, one or more honest, fit person
or persons, to be Governor or Masters of the said house or houses, so to be
purchased, erected, built or provided.

Process.
And be it further Enacted, 5. N. 1
etc. that the said Justices of Peace of every County within every of their
several Divisions, twice in every year at the least, and oftener if there be
occasion, shall assemble and meet together for the better Execution of this
Statute, and that some four or five days before their Assembly and meeting, the
said Justices, or the more part of them, shall by their Warrant, command the
Constables and Tything-men of every Hundred, Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet
within their several Divisions, which shall be assisted with sufficient men of
the same Places, to make a general privy search in one Night within their said
Hundreds. Towns, Villages and Hamlets for the finding out and apprehending of
the said Rogues, Vagabonds, wandering and idle persons.

Poor.
And that such Rogues, Vagabonds, 5. N. 2.
wandering and idle persons as they shall then find and apprehend in the said
search, shall by them be brought before the said Justices at the said Assembly
or Meeting, there to be examined of their idle and wandering Life, there to be
punished, or otherwise by their Warrant to be sent or conveyed unto the said
House, etc. of Correction within the said County, or to his Deputy, or assigned
to be set to labor and work

Constables.
At which days and times of Assembly and Meeting so to be held by the said
Justices of Peace, 5. N. 3.
the Constables and Tything-men of every Hundred, Parish, Town, Village and
Hamlet, shall then appear in every their several Divisions before the said
Justices of Peace at the said Assemblies or Meetings, and there shall give
Account and Reckning upon Oath in Writing, and under the Hand of the Minister
of every Parish, what Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering and disorderly persons
they have apprehended, both in the same search, and also between every such
Assemblies and Meetings, and how many have been by them punished or otherwise
sent unto the Houses of Correction, which if the said Constables or Tything-men
shall neglect to perform, as also to convey safely all such Rogues, with all
other idle and disorderly persons at the Charge of the Hundred, as by the
Justices of Peace their Warrants shall be sent unto the houses of Correction in
the same County, that then they shall forfeit such further Fines, Pains and
Penalties as by the said Justices of Peace or the most part of them shall be
thought fit and convenient, not exceeding the sum of 40 s. for every Offense.

6. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, Poor.
etc. that the said Masters or Governors of the said houses of Correction,
shall have such sums of money yearly as shall be thought meet by the most part
of the Justices of Peace within the said County at the Quarter Sessions of the
Peace, the same to be paid Quarterly beforehand by the Treasurers, appointed,
etc. (viz. 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. N.) during the time they the said Masters and
Governors shall be employed in the said Service, the said Master and Governor
giving sufficient Security for the continuance and performance of the said
Service.

7. N. 1.
And because great Charge arises upon many places within this Realm, by reason
of Bastardy, Bastardy.
beside the great Dishonor of Almighty God. Be it therefore Enacted, etc. that
every lewd Woman which, etc. shall have any Bastard, which may be chargeable to
the Parish, the Justices of Peace shall commit such lewd Women to the house of
Correction, there to be punished and set on work during the term of one whole
year.

7. N. 2.
And if she shall Eftsoons offend again, Imprisonment.
that then to be committed to the said house of Correction as aforesaid, and
then to remain until she can put in good Sureties for her good behavour not to
offend so again.

8. N. 3.
And if either such Man or Woman (viz. having Children likely to charge the
Parish) being able to work, Process.
and shall threaten to run away and to leave their Families, etc. the same
being proved by two sufficient Witnesses upon Oath before two Justices of Peace
in that Division, that then the said persons so threatening, shall by the said
Justices of Peace be sent to the houses of Correction, (unless he or she can
put in sufficient Sureties for the discharge of the Parish) there to be dealt
with and detained as a sturdy wandering Rogue, and to be delivered at the said
Assembly or Meeting, or at the Quarter Sessions, and not otherwise.

9. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, Amercement.
etc. that if they (viz. the Masters of houses of Correction) shall not every
Quarter Sessions yield a true and lawful Account unto the Justices of Peace of
all such persons as have been committed to their Custody; or if the said
persons committed to their Custody or any of them, shall be troublesome unto
the Country, by going abroad or otherwise, shall escape away from the said
house of Correction before they shall be from thence lawfully delivered, that
then the said Justices shall set down such Fines and Penalties upon the said
Master and Governors, as the most part of them in their Quarter Sessions shall
think fit and convenient.

C. 6. 6. N. 1.
All and every Temporal Judge, Justices of Peace, Oath.
and every other person, etc. that does or shall receive any Fee of your
Highness, your Heirs and Successors (viz. shall take the Oath of Allegiance)
before the Lord Chancellor, etc. Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral, Lord Warden of
the five Ports for the time being, or one of them, or before one of the Chief
Justices, etc. or before the Justices of Assize of the same County where the
Parties reside, or other such persons as the Lord Chancellor, etc. shall
thereunto Authorize.

26. N. 2.
And (viz. it shall be lawful) to and for any two Justices of Peace within any
County, City or Town-Corporate, whereof one to be of the Quorum, Justices.
to require any person or persons of the Age of eighteen years or above, under
the degree of a Baron or Baroness, to take the said Oath.

26. N. 4.
And if any person or persons whatsoever of and above the said Age, Pope.
and under the said Degree, etc. shall stand and be presented, indicted or
convicted for not coming to Church, or receiving the Holy Communion, etc.
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, before the Ordinary, or any
other having lawful Power to take such Presentment or Indictment, or if the
Minister, Pety-Constable and Churchwardens or any two of them, shall at any
time hereafter complain to any Justice of Peace near adjoining to the Place
where any person complained of shall dwell, and the said Justice shall find
cause of Suspicion, that then any one Justice of Peace within whose Commission
or Power such person shall at any time hereafter be, or to whom Complaint shall
be made as aforesaid, shall upon notice thereof require such person or persons
to take the said Oath.

Imprisonment.
And that if any person or persons being of the Age of eighteen years or above,
26. N. 5.
shall refuse to take the said Oath duly tendered to him or her according to
the true intent and meaning of this Statute, that then the persons authorized
by this Law to give the said Oath, shall and may commit the said Offender to
the Common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until the next
Assizes or general Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said Shire, Division,
Limit or Liberty, where the said Oath shall be again in the said open Sessions
required of such person by the said Justices of Assize, or Justices of the
Peace then and there present, or the greater number of them.

Oath.
And if the said person, 26. N. 6.
etc. shall refuse to take the Oath being tendered to him or her by the said
Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery in their own Assizes or Jail-delivery, or
the Justices of Peace or the greater part of them in their general or Quarter
Sessions, every person so refusing shall incur the Danger and Penalty of
Praemunire mentioned in a Statute, etc. (viz. 16 Rich. 2. Cap. 5. 2. N. 6.)
except Women Covert, who shall be committed only to Prison, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize till they will take the said Oath,

Drapery.
For the preventing and reformation, etc. (viz. of Deceits, C. 7. 2. N. 1.
etc.) be it Enacted, etc. that all, etc. who shall, unjustly, falsely or
deceitfully convey away, imbezil, purloyn, sell or detain any part of the Wool
or Yarn delivered by any Clothier, Maker of Bays, Says,, or by any other
person, etc. making such Cloths or Stuffs, to any such Sorter, Carder, Kember,
Spinster or Weaver of Wool or Yarn, that in every such Case and Cases, as well
the Sorter, Carder, Kember, Spinster and Weaver so offending, as the Buyer,
etc. Receiver, etc. of the same, knowing the same, being thereof lawfully
convicted by Confession of the Party, etc. so offending, or by one sufficient
Witness upon Oath before two or more of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the same County or Liberty where the same Offense, etc. shall be
committed, or if it be within a Town-Corporate, before the Mayor, Bailiff or
Chief-Officer and one more of the Aldermen, or most substantial persons of the
said Town.

Justices.
Who shall by force of this Act have full Power and Authority to minister the
same Oath, 2. N. 2.
and finally to hear and determine all and every the Offenses aforesaid.

Damages.
Shall give and make to the Party, etc. grieved, 2. N. 3.
such recompense and satisfaction for such their damage and loss, as by the
said Justices or Chief-Officers shall be ordered and appointed.

Fowl.
For the preventing, etc. (viz. of Destruction of Corn, C. 11 2. N. 1.
Partridge and Phesants, etc.) be it Enacted, etc. that all, etc. which, etc.
does or shall hawk or destroy, or kill any Phesant, etc. or Partridges with any
kind of Hawk, etc. or Dogs by color of hawking, between the first day of July
and the last day of August, and the same Offense or Offenses being proved by
the Confession of the Party, or by the Testimony of two sufficient Witnesses
upon Oath, before two or more Justices of Peace of the said County, City or
Town-Corporate wherein the Offense shall be committed, or the Party offending
apprehended, shall be by the said Justices of the Peace for every such Offense,
committed to the Common-Goal of the said County, City or Town-Corporate where
the Offense shall be committed or the Parties apprehended.

Days.
Provided that no Offenders shall be impeached or punished by virtue of this
Act, 4. N. 1.
unless he or they be accused as delinquent before the said Justices of Peace,
within six Months next after the said Offense, etc. committed or done.

Imprisonment.
Be it therefore further Enacted, etc. that all, etc. which, etc. shall take, 8.
N. 1.
kill or destroy any Phesant or Partridge with setting Dogs and Nets or
otherwise, with any manner of Nets Snares or Engines, and the same Offense or
Offenses being proved by the Confession of the Party, or by the Testimony of
one sufficient Witness upon Oath before two or more Justices of the Peace of
the same County, City or Town-Corporate wherein the Offense shall be committed,
or the Party offending apprehended, shall be by the said Justices of the Peace
for every such Offense committed to the Common-Goal of the said County, City or
Town-Corporate where the said Offense shall be committed, or the Party
apprehended

8. N. 5.
And further to become bound by Recognizance in the sum of twenty pounds to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, Recognizance.
with Condition that they the said Party so offending, shall not at any time
hereafter take, kill or destroy any Phesant or Partridge.

8. N. 6.
Which said Recognizance shall be taken by any one or more Justices of the Peace
of the said County, Justices.
City or Town-Corporate where the said Offense shall be committed as aforesaid,
and shall be returned to the next Quarter Sessions, and there to remain of
Record as other Recognizances taken for the Peace.

9. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Constable.
that every Constable and Head-borough in every County, City, Town-Corporate
and other Place where they shall be sworn Officers, shall and may by virtue of
this present Act, (bringing with them to that purpose, a Lawful Warrant under
the Hands of two Justices of the Peace of the County, City Liberties or
Town-Corporate) have full Power and Authority to enter into and search the
house, etc. of any person, etc. other than such as by this present Act are
allowed to take Phesants and Partridges with Nets as aforesaid, being suspected
to have any setting Dogs or Nets for the taking of Phesants and Partridges.

21 Jac. Cap. 7. 3. N 1.
And be it further Enacted, that any Justice of Peace in any County, Ale.
and any Justice of Peace or other Head-Officer in any City or Town-Corporate
within their Limits respectively, shall from henceforth have Power and
Authority upon his own view, confession of the party or proof of one Witness
upon Oath before him, which he by virtue of this Act shall have Power to
administer, to convince any person of the Offense of Drunkenness, whereby such
person so convict shall incur the Forfeiture of five shillings for every such
Offense, and the same to be levied, or the Offender otherwise punished, as in
the said Statute is appointed.

3. N. 2.
And for the second Offense, Behavior.
he shall become bound to the Good-behavior as if he had been convicted in open
Sessions, any thing in the said former Statute, etc. (viz. 4 Jac. Cap. 5.) to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Cap. 8.
Whereas diverse turbulent and contentious persons, Peace.
some out of Malice and others in hope of Gain by way of Composition, do
oftentimes upon their Corporal-Oaths peremptorily and corruptly taken, or
otherwise upon false Suggestions and Surmises, procure Process of the Peace or
Good-behaviour out of his Majesty's Courts of Chancery and Kings Bench, against
diverse of his Majesty's quiet Subjects, whose dwellings and abodes are for the
most part in Counties far distant and remote from the said Courts, to their
intolerable trouble and vexation, whereas they might upon good cause showed,
receive Justice at the hands of the Justices of Peace in the Counties where
they dwell.

2. N. 1.
For remedy whereof, be it Enacted, Process.
etc. that all Process of the Peace or Good-behaviour after the end of this
Session of Parliament to be granted or awarded out of the same Courts or either
of them against any person or persons whatsoever, at the Suit of or by the
Prosecution of any person or persons whatsoever, shall be void and of none
effect, unless such Process shall be so granted or awarded upon motion first
made before the Judge or Judges of the same Courts respectively fitting in open
Court, and upon Declaration in Writing upon their Corporal Oaths to be then
exhibited unto them by the said Parties which shall desire such Process of the
Causes for which such Process shall be granted or awarded, by or out of any of
the said Courts respectively, and unless that such motion and declaration be
mentioned to be made upon the back of the Writ, the said Writings there to be
entered and remain of Record.

2. N. 2.
And that if it shall afterward appear unto the said Courts or either of them
respectively, Damages.
that the Causes expressed in such Writings or any of them be untrue, that then
the Judge or Judges of the said Courts or either of them respectively, shall
and may award such Costs and Damages unto the Parties grieved for their or any
of their wrongful Vexations in that behalf, as they shall think fit, and that
the Party or Parties so offending, shall and may be committed to Prison by such
Judge or Judges, until he or they pay the said Costs and Damages.

Supersedeas.
And whereas diverse turbulent and contentious persons deservedly fearing to be
bound to the Peace or Good-behavior by the Justices of Peace of the Counties
where they dwell, 2. N. 3.
do oftentimes procure themselves to be bound to the Peace or Good-behavior in
the said Courts or one of them, upon insufficient Sureties, or upon colorable
Prosecution of some person or persons who will be ready at all times to release
them at their own pleasure, whereupon his Majesty's Writs of Supersedeas are
oftentimes directed to the Justices of Peace and other his Majesty's Officers,
requiring them and every of them to forbear to arrest or imprison the Parties
aforesaid for the Causes aforesaid, by means whereof the said turbulent and
contentious persons misdemean themselves amongst their Neigbours with Impunity,
to the great Offense and Disturbance of their Neighbors amongst whom they
converse and live, and to the affront of the Justices of Peace, and to the evil
Example and Encouragement of like evil disposed persons.

Oath.
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 3. N. 1.
that all Writs of Supersedeas after the end of this present Session of
Parliament to be granted by or out of either of the Courts aforesaid, shall be
void and of none effect, unless such Process be granted, likewise upon motion
in open Court first made as aforesaid, and upon such sufficient Sureties as
shall appear unto the Judge or Judges of the same Court respectively upon Oath,
to be assessed at five pound Lands, or ten pounds in Goods in the Subsidy-book,
at the least.

Record.
Which Oaths, and the Names of such Sureties, 3. N. 2.
with the Places of their abode, and where they stand so assessed in the
Subsidy-books, shall be entered and remain of Record in the same Courts.

Process.
And unless it shall also first appear unto the said Judge or Judges before whom
such Supersedeas is desired, 3. N. 3.
that the Process of the Peace or Good-behavior is prosecuted against him or
them, desiring such Supersedeas bona fide by some Party grieved in that Court
out of which such Supersedeas is desired to be so awarded and directed.

Bail.
And whereas diverse lewd and evil disposed persons commonly called
Common-Bailers, or Knights of the Post, being base or beggarly persons, 4. N. 11
do oftentimes procure themselves to be assessed at high rates in the
Subsidy-books, and sometimes do falsely take upon them the names of other men
of good ability, of purpose to enable themselves to be accepted for Bail, which
persons being of small or no ability or worth, are ready for Lucre and Gain, to
become bound by Recognizance as Sureties for such persons as shall procure
themselves to be bound to the Peace, or Good-behavior as aforesaid, by means
whereof the Judge or Judges of the said Courts not knowing them, may be easily
abused and Justice deluded.

Coron.
Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, 5. N. 1.
that the Judge or Judges of the Courts aforesaid respectively or either of
them, upon proof of any the misdemeanors aforesaid, to be committed in the
obtaining of the aforesaid Writs of Supersedeas, or procuring such Sureties as
aforesaid, shall and may likewise punish the false and insufficient Sureties
and Bailers aforesaid, and the Procurors thereof according to their
discretions, so as such Punishment extend not to the loss of Life or Member.

Indictment
And whereas diverse Bills of Indictments of Riot, 6. N. 1.
forcible Entry or of Assault and Battery being found before the Justices of
Peace at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace or otherwise, are oftentimes removed
from the Counties where such Indictments are found by Writs of Certiorari unto
them directed out of the said Courts, by, or by the means of the persons so
indicted, who well know that few or no persons grieved by such their Outrages
and Misdemeanors whereof they stand so indicted, will undergo the travail or
charge of Prosecution of such Indictment so removed by bringing the Parties so
indicted to trial, by means whereof such Offenders for the most part escape
unprosecuted or unpunished, and the King loses the Fines which ought and
should have been imposed upon them, if such Judgments had been prosecuted and
not removed.

7. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, Certiorari.
that all such Writs shall from and after the end of this present Session of
Parliament, be delivered at some Quarter Sessions of the Peace in open Court

7. N. 2.
And that the Parties indicted, Bail.
shall before the allowance of such Certioraries, become bound unto such person
or persons which shall prosecute such Bills of Indictment against them, in the
sum of ten pounds, with such sufficient Sureties as the Justices of Peace at
their Quarter Session of the Peace shall think fit, with Condition to pay unto
the said Prosecutors of such Bills of Indictment, within one Month after the
Conviction of such Parties indicted, such reasonable Costs and Damages as the
said Justices of Peace of such Counties where such Bills of Indictment shall be
found, in the said Sessions of the Peace shall assess or allow.

7. N. 3.
And that in Default thereof, Certiorari.
it shall be lawful for the said Justices to proceed to Trial of such
Indictments, any such Writs of Certiorari to remove the same Indictments
notwithstanding.

C. 12. 4. N. 1.
And whereas notwithstanding the said Statute ( viz. 7 Jac. Cap. 5. 1. N. of
Justice of Peace pleading the General Issue, Justices.
and giving special matter in Evidence.) the Plaintiff is at liberty to lay his
Action which he shall bring against any Justice of Peace or other Officer in
any Foreign County at his choice, which has proved very inconvenient unto
sundry, etc. that have been impleaded by some contentious and troublesome
persons in Counties far remote from their place of Habitations.

5. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. that if any Action, Bill, Information
Plaint or Suit upon the Case, Trespass, Battery or false Imprisonment shall be
brought, etc. against any Justice of Peace, Mayor or Bailiff of City or
Town-Corporate, Head-borough, Portreeve, Tythingman, Constable, Collector of
Subsidy or Fifteens, Churchwardens and persons called Sworn-men executing the
Office of Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, and their Deputies or any of
them, or any other which in their Aid and Assistance, or by their Commandment
shall do any thing touching or concerning his or their Office, etc. for or
concerning any Matter, Cause or Thing by them or any of them done, by virtue or
reason of their or any of their Office, etc that the said Action, etc. shall be
laid within the County where the Trespass or Fact shall be done and committed,
and not elsewhere,

Cap. 15.
Be it Enacted, etc. that such Judges, Force.
Justices or Justice of Peace as by reason of any Act, etc. (viz. 5 Rich. 2.
Cap. 7. 15 Rich. 2. Cap. 2. 8 H. 6. Cap. 9. 31 Eliz. 11. etc.) now in force are
authorized and enabled upon Inquiry, to give Restitution of Possession unto
Tenants of any Estate of Freehold of their Lands or Tenements which shall be
entered upon with Force, or from them witholden by force, shall by reason of
this present Act, have the like and the same Authority and Ability from
henceforth upon Indictment of such forcible Entries or forcible witholdings
before them duly found, to give like Restitution of Possession unto Tenants
for term of years, Tenants by Copy of Court-Roll, Gardians by Knights Service,
Tenants by Elegit, Statute-Merchant and Staple, of Lands or Tenements by them
so holden, which shall be entered upon by force, or holden from them by force.

C. 18. 4. N. 3.
It shall be lawful for any two or more Justices of the Peace within the County,
or within the City, Drapery.
Borough or Town-Corporate where such deceivable Cloth (viz. with Flocks,
Thrums, Noyles and Hairs, etc.) shall be made or suspected to be made, upon
Information or Complaint of any of the said Overseers, etc. Searchers, or any
other of their Knowledge or Suspicion of any such Offense, to grant their
Warrant to call before them any person or persons whatsoever that shall be
thought in their discretions fit to discover any such Offense.

Proof.
And to examine upon Oath such person, 4. N. 4.
etc. for the trial and better finding out of the Offense aforesaid, and if
upon Examinations it shall be found by Testimony of two Witnesses or more, or
by the Confession of the Party or Parties offending, that any such Offense,
etc. have been committed as aforesaid, then the Party, etc. that shall so
confess his or their said Offense, etc. or who shall be found to have offended,
shall remain convicted of such his Offense, etc.

Certificate.
And that then it shall and may be lawful for the said two Justices, 4. N. 5.
to certify such Offense, etc. unto the Churchwardens and Overseers for the
time being of the Poor of the Parish, etc. where such deceivable Cloth, etc.
shall be made under the Hands and Seals of the said Justices.

Process.
And be it further Enacted, 5. N. 1.
etc. that immediately from and after such Certificate shall be delivered to
any of the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of any Parish, etc. where
such Offender, etc. shall dwell, and Warrant by them (viz. the two Justices)
made to the said Overseers and Churchwardens for the levying of the said
Forfeiture, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Churchwardens and
Overseers for the time being or any of them, or for the Successor, etc. of
them, etc. to levy the sum, etc. which by the said Certificate and Warrant
shall appear to be forfeited by way of Distress and Sale, etc.

Imprisonment.
And in defect of such Distress, 5. N. 2.
it shall be lawful to and for the said two Justices of Peace, to commit the
Party, etc. so certified to have offended, to the Common-Goal, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprize until Payment shall be made of the said sum, etc.

Pleading.
And that if any Action, etc. shall, 5. N. 3.
etc. hereafter happen to be brought or commenced against any person, etc. for
taking of such Distress, etc. or for or about any matter or thing concerning
the same, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for every such person,
etc. against whom such Action, etc. shall be brought, etc. to plead the General
Issue, and give in Evidence, and to be allowed double costs in every respect
and degree, as by the Statute, etc. (viz. 7 Jac. Cap. 5.) is already Provided
and Enacted.

Forfeitures.
And be it further Enacted, 12. N. 1.
etc. that all Penalties and Forfeitures for want of length, breadth and weight
of Cloth, etc. limited by any former Act now in force, or by this present Act,
shall be distributed into three equal parts, whereof one third part shall be
unto the said Overseers and Searchers finding and certifying the said Default
of length, breadth and weight as aforesaid, to be recovered by them, at or in
the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the County, City or
Town-Corporate where the Offense therein shall happen to be done or committed
by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection,
Previledge or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Bankrupts.
And be it further Enacted, C. 19. 7. N. 1.
etc. that if any Bankrupt shall upon his or her Examination or Examinations to
be taken before the said Commissioners executing the said Commission, be found
fraudulently or deceitfully to have conveyed away his or her Goods, Chattels,
Lands, Tenements, Offices, Fees, Rents or Annuities or other Estate, or any
part thereof to the value of twenty pounds or above, to the end and purpose to
hinder the Execution of this Statute, or of any other the aforesaid Statutes, (
viz. 13 Eliz. Cap. 7. and 1 Jac. Cap. 15. etc.) or thereby to defraud, delay or
hinder his or her Creditors of the same, and shall not upon his or her
Examination discover unto the said Commissioners, and if it lie in his or her
Power, deliver unto the said Commissioners all that Estate, Goods and Chattels
so fraudulently and deceitfully conveyed away as aforesaid, or by him or her,
his or her means kept or detained from the said Commissioners, or that cannot
make it appear unto the said Commissioners that he or she has sustained some
casual loss whereby he or she is disabled to pay what he or she then owed,
shall or may be indicted for such fraud or abuse, at the Assizes or General
Sessions to be holden before the Judges of Assize or Justices of Peace, of the
County or Place where he or she shall become Bankrupt. 7. N. ^.


Coron.
And if upon such Indictment or Indictments the Bankrupt be thereof convicted,
he or she so convicted, shall be set upon the Pillory in some public place for
the space of two hours, and have one of his or her Ears nailed to the Pillory
and cut off.

C. 20. 1. N. 2.
And that if any, etc. shall, etc. offend herein, Oath.
(viz. in profane swearing or cursing) either in the hearing of any Justice of
Peace of the County, or of any Mayor, Justice of Peace, Bailiff or Head-Officer
of any City or Town-Corporate where such Offense is or shall be committed, or
shall thereof be convicted by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by the Confession
of the Party before any such Justice of Peace, etc. where such Offense is or
shall be committed, to which end every Justice of Peace and every such
Head-Officer shall have Power by this Act to minister the same Oath, that then
every such Offender shall for every time so offending, forfeit and pay to the
use of the Poor of that Parish where the same Offense is or shall be committed,
the sum of twelve pence.

1. N. 3.
And it shall also be lawful for the Constable, Process.
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of that Parish, by Warrant from such
Justice of Peace or Head-Officer to levy the same, etc. by Distress and Sale,
etc.

1. N. 4.
And in discharge of such Distress the Offender, Infant.
if he or she be above the Age of twelve years, shall by Warrant from such
Justice of the Peace or Head-Officer, be set in the Stocks by three whole
hours, but if the Offender be under the Age of twelve years, and shall not
forthwith pay the said sum of twelve pence, then he or she by Warrant of such
Justice of Peace or Head-Officer, shall be whipped by the Constable, or by the
Parent or Master in his presence.

2. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Pleading.
that if any such Offender shall commence any Suit in Law against any Officer
or other, for such distraining Sale of Goods, whipping or setting in the
Stocks, the Defendant, etc. may plead the general Issue, and give the special
Matter in Evidence, etc. and if it be found against the Plaintiff, or that the
Plaintiff be nonsuit, the Defendant, etc. shall be allowed good costs to be
taxed by the Court.

3. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, Days.
that every Offense against this Law shall be complained of, and Proved as
abovesaid, within twenty days after the Offense committed.

C. 21. 4. N 1.
And be it further Enacted, Corn.
etc. that if the Horse-bread which any of the said Hostlers or Inholders shall
make, be not sufficient, lawful and of due Assize, according to the Price of
Grain and Corn as abovesaid, or that if any of them shall offend in any thing
contrary to this Act, then the Justices of Assize, Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, Justices of the Peace in every Shire, Liberty or Franchise within
this Realm, Sheriffs in their Turns, and Stewards in their Leets and Law-days
shall have full Power and Authority, to inquire, hear and determine the said
Defaults and Offenses, of the said Hostlers and Inholders hereafter to be
committed against the form of this present Statute.

C. 22. 7. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, and be it Enacted, Victuals.
etc, that if the Justices of the Peace of any of the Counties of this Realm of
England or the Dominion of Wales, at their Quarter Sessions of any of the said
Counties, shall declare and publish in open Sessions, that the Traders
aforesaid in Butter and Cheese, (viz. from London, etc.) shall forbear to buy
any Butter and Cheese for any time within the said County or Counties, or
within any Parts or Places of the same, that then for and during the time of
such Restraint, the said Traders in Butter and Cheese that shall buy any such
Butter (viz. above a Barrel) or Cheese, (viz. above a Weigh) and sell the same
again by Retail, contrary to the Acts aforesaid, ( viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. Cap. 21.
2. N. 1. and 5 and 6 Ed. 6. Cap. 14. 3. N. 1.) shall not be freed of or from
any Penalties of the said Acts, but shall be subject to the same as if this Act
had never been made.

Statuta Car. 1.
Games.
AND that any one Justice of the Peace of the County, 1 Car. 1. Cap. 1. 1. N. 5.
or the Chief Officer or Officers of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate where
such Offense, (viz. of resorting to Sports on the Sunday etc.) shall be
committed upon his or their View, or Confession of the Party, or Proof by one
or more Witness by Oath, (which the said Justice, or Chief-Officer or Officers
shall by virtue of this Act have Authority to Minister) shall find any
offending in the Premises, the said Justice or Chief-Officer, etc. shall give
Warrant under his or their Hand and Seal to the Constables and Churchwardens
of the Parish, etc. where such Offense shall be committed to levy the said
Penalty so to be assessed by way of Distress, and Sale, etc. rendering to the
said Offenders the overplus, etc. and in default of such Distress, that the
party offending be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of three hours.

Religion.
The said Offenses (Viz. Travailing, 3 Car. 1. C. 1. 2. 1. N. 4.
or Killing or Selling Victual on Sunday) and every of them, being done in view
of any Justice of Peace, Mayor or other Head-Officer of any City or
Town-Corporate within their Limits respectively, or being proved upon Oath by
two or more Witnesses, or by the Confession of the Party offending, before any
such Justice, Mayor or Head-Officer within their several Limits respectively
wherein such Offense shall be committed, to which end every such Justice, Mayor
or Head-Officer shall have Power by this Act, to minister an Oath to such
Witness or Witnesses.

Forfeitures.
All which sums, etc. (viz. of twenty shillings forfeit for travailing, 1. N. 5.
and six shillings and eight pence for killing or selling Meat on Sunday, etc.)
shall or may be levied by any Constable or Churchwarden, by Warrant from any
^uch Justice or Justices of Peace, Mayor or other Head-Officer, etc. within
their several Limits where such Offense shall be committed or done, by distress
and sale of the Offenders Goods, etc. or shall be recovered by any person, etc.
by Bill, Plaint or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record in any
City or Town-Corporate, before his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in their
General Sessions of the Peace.

Poor.
All which Forfeitures shall be employed to and for the use of the Poor of the
Parishes where the said Offenses shall be committed or done, 1. N. 6.
saving only that it shall be lawful to and for any such Justice, Mayor or
Head-Officer out of the said Forfeitures, to reward any such person, etc. that
shall inform or otherwise prosecute any person, etc. offending against this
present Act, according to their discretions, so that such Reward exceed not the
third part of the Forfeiture.

Ale.
Which Law ( viz. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. Cap. 25. 4. 5.) has not wrought such
Reformation as was intended, C. 3. 4. 1. N. 6.
for that the said Fine of 20 s. is seldom levied, and for that many of the
said Offenders by reason of their Poverty, are neither able to pay the said
Fine of 20 s. nor yet to bear their own charges of conveying them to the Goal,
and moreover do leave a great charge of Wife and Children upon the Parishes
wherein they live, in regard whereof, the Constables and other Officers are
much discouraged in presenting them, and the Offenders become obstinate and
incorrigible.

License.
For remedy whereof, be it Enacted, etc. that if any, 2. N. 1.
etc. shall upon his own Authority, not being thereunto Lawfully licenced, take
upon him or them to keep a Common Alehouse or Tipling-house, or use commonly
selling of Ale or Beer, Cider or Perry, that then every such, etc. shall for
every such Offense forfeit and lose, etc. 20 s. to the use of the Poor of the
Parish, etc. the same Offense being viewed and seen by any Mayor, Bailiff, or
Justices of Peace or other Head-Officer within the several Limits, or confessed
by the Party so offending, or approved by the Oath of two Witnesses to be taken
before any Mayor, Bailiff, or other Head-Officer, or any one or more Justice or
Justices of the Peace who by virtue of this Act shall be authorized to minister
the said Oath to any, etc. that can or will justify the same being within the
limits of their said Commission.

2. N. 2.
The said Penalties to be levied by the Constables or Churchwardens of the
Parish, etc. where the said Offense shall be committed, Forfeiture.
who shall be accountable therefore to the use of the Poor of the said Parish,
by way of distress to be taken and detained, by Warrant or Precept from the
said Mayor, Bailiff, Justice or Justices or other Head-Officer by whom the said
Offense shall be viewed, or before whom the same shall be confessed or proved
as aforesaid.

2. N. 3.
And for default of satisfaction within three days next ensuing, Process.
the said Distress to be by the said Constables or Churchwardens apprised and
sold, and the overplus to be delivered, etc. and this to be only for the first
Offense.

2. N. 4.
And if such Offender, Imprisonment.
etc. shall not have sufficient Goods and Chattels whereby the said 20 s. may
be levied by way of distress as aforesaid, or shall not pay the said sum, etc.
within six days after such Conviction as aforesaid, that then the said Mayor,
Bailiff, Justice or Justices or other Head-Officer before whom the said
Offender shall be convicted as aforesaid, shall commit all and every the said
Offender, etc. to some Constable, etc. or other inferior Officer, etc. of the
City, Borough, Town, Parish or Hamlet where the Offense shall be committed or
the Party apprehended, to be openly whipped for the said Offense, as the said
Justice or Justices shall limit or appoint.

3. N. 1.
And be it Enacted, Constable.
etc. that if any Constable or inferior Officer shall neglect to execute the
said Precept or Warrant, or do refuse, or do not execute by himself or some
other to be by him appointed upon the Offender the Punishment limited by this
Statute, that in that Case it shall and may be lawful for the said Mayor,
Bailiff, Justice or Justices of Peace or other Head-Officer, to commit the
Constable or other inferior Officer so refusing or not executing, etc. to the
Common Goal of the said County City or Town Corporate, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprize until the said Offender, etc. shall by the said Constable,
etc. be punished and whipped as is above limited and declared, or until he or
they so neglecting or refusing, shall have paid the sum of 40 s. etc.

4. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, that if the said Offender, Ale.
etc. being an unlicenced Ale-house-keeper, shall offend in any the Premises
the second time and be thereof lawfully convicted in manner and form aforesaid,
that then the said Mayor, Bailiff, Justice or Justices of the Peace or other
Head-Officer shall commit him, her or them unto the house of Correction, there
to remain for the space of one Month, and be dealt withal as idle and
disorderly persons.

4. N. 2.
And if such shall again offend and be thereof convicted as aforesaid,
Imprisonment.
that then the said Offender, etc. for every such Offense shall be committed
unto the said House of Correction as aforesaid, there to remain, until by the
Order of the Justices in their General Sessions for the County, City, Borough
or Franchise, he, she or they shall be delivered from thence.

5. N. 1.
Provided always, that such, Process.
etc. as shall be punished by virtue of this Act, shall not be punished again
for the same Offense by the former Act, etc. (viz. 5 and 6. Ed. 6. Cap. 25. 4.
N. 5.

5. N. 2.
And that such, Information
etc. as shall be punished by virtue of the before mentioned Act, (viz. 5 and 6
Ed. 6. Cap. 25. 4. N. 5.) shall not be punished again for the same Offense by
virtue of this present Act, nor any thing there contained.

C. 4. 5. 15. N. 1.
And so much of an Act, Bastardy.
etc. (viz. 18 Eliz. Cap. 3. 2. N. 1.) as concerns Bastards begotten out of
lawful Matrimony (viz. continued to the next Parliament, etc.

. 15. N. 2.
With this, Justices.
that all Justices of Peace within their several Limits and Precincts, and in
their several Sessions may do and execute all things concerning that part of
the said Statute (viz. 18 Eliz. Cap. 3. N.) that by the Justices of Peace in
the several Counties are by the said Statute limited to be done.

Apprentices
And be it Enacted, 22. N. 9.
that all persons to whom the overseers of the Poor shall according to the said
Act (viz. 43 Eliz. Cap. 2. N.) bind any Children Apprentices, may take, receive
and keep them as Apprentices, and also the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor mentioned in the said Act, etc. may by and with consent of two or more
Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, within their respective
Limits wherein shall be more Justices than one, and where no more shall be than
one; with the Assent of that one Justice of the Peace, set up, use and occupy
any Trade, Mystery or Occupation only for the setting on work and better relief
of the Poor of the Parish, Town or Place of, or within which they shall be
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, any former Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Measures.
(Viz. Keeping of Measures) Or Weights other than according to the Standard of
Exchequer, forfeits five shillings, 16 and 17 Car 1. C. 19. 2. N. 4.
being thereof lawfully convicted by the Oath of one sufficient Witness before
any Justice of Peace, Mayor or other Head-Officer, etc. respectively, where the
said offense shall be committed, who by virtue of this Act shall have Power to
administer an Oath in that behalf.

Imprisonment.
And in default of such distress, 2. N. 3
it shall be lawful for any Justices of Peace, Mayor or other Head-officer,
etc. to commit the said Party to the Prison or Goal, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprize, until he shall pay such sums of money forfeited as aforesaid.

Justices.
Provided also, that no Justice or Justices of the Peace, Mayor, 8. N. 1.
Bailiff or other Head-officer, etc. or any other authorized by this Statute
for the due Execution thereof in any point, shall be sued, impleaded or
otherwise impeached, for doing or executing their said Offices respectively.

Pleading.
And if any Suit, etc. shall be commenced against them, 8. N. 2.
their Agents and Assistants touching the Premises, that then it shall and may
be lawful for them, etc. to plead the general Issue, not guilty, and to give
this Statute in Evidence, or any other special matter in Evidence.

Statuta Car. 2.
Ale.
PRovided always, etc. that the Lord Treasurer, 12 Car. 2. C. 23 29. N. 1
etc. shall not within six Months after the commencement of this Act (viz. of
Excise on Beer, Ale, Syder, etc. to his Majesty for Life) treat, conclude or
agree with any etc. touching the farming of this duty upon Beer and Ale in any
the respective Counties or Places of this Realm or Dominions thereof, other
than with such persons, etc. as by the Justices of Peace of the said Counties
or Places, or the major part of them at their public Quarter Sessions shall be
nominated and appointed in that, behalf, which person, etc. is to have the
first refusal of any such Farm respectively, and may take the same, any thing,
etc. notwithstanding, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24 43. N. 1.

Leases.
Provided,. 30. N 1.
that the said Duty shall not be let to any other person or persons than to the
person or persons recomended by the Justices under the rate that it shall be
tendered to and refused by such person, etc. so recomended, 12 Car. 2 Cap. 24.
44. N. 1.

Forfeiture.
And all such Forfeitures and Offenses made and committed within all or any the
Counties, Cities, 31. N. 3.
Towns or Places within this Kingdom or Dominions thereof, shall be heard and
determined by any two or more of the Justices of the Peace residing near the
Place where such Forfeitures shall be made, or Offense committed, 12 Car. 2.
Cap. 24. 45. N. 3.

Justices.
And in Case of neglect or refusal of such Justices of the Peace by the space of
fourteen days next after complaint made and notice thereof given to the
Offender, then the Sub-Commissioners or the major part of them, 31. N. 4.
appointed for any such City, County, Town or Place, shall and are hereby
empowered to hear and determine the same.

Error.
And if the Party find himself aggrieved by the Judgment given by 31. N. ^.
the Sub-Commissioners, he shall and may appeal to the Justices of the Peace at
the next Quarter Sessions, who are hereby empowered and authorized to hear and
determine the same, whose Judgment therein shall be final, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24.
45. N. 5.

31. N. 6.
Which said Commissioners for Appeals and regulating of this Duty and the
Chief-Commissioners for Exercise, Process.
and all Justices of Peace and Sub-Commissioners aforesaid respectively, are
hereby authorized, and straightly enjoined and required, upon any Complaint or
Information exhibited and brought of any such Forfeiture made, or Offense
committed contrary to this Act, to summon the Party accused, and upon his
appearance or contempt, to proceed to the Examination of the Matter of Fact,
and upon due proof made thereof, either by the voluntary Confession of the
Party, or by the Oath of one or more credible Witnesses, which Oath they, or
any two or more of them have hereby Power to administer, to give Judgment or
Sentence according as in and by this Act is before ordained and directed, and
to award and issue all Warrants under their Hands for the levying of such
Forfeitures, Penalties and Fines as by this Act is imposed for any such offense
committed, upon the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, and to cause sale to be
made of the said Goods and Chattels if they shall not be redeemed within
fourteen days, rendering to the Party the overplus if any be, and for want of
sufficient Distress, to imprison the Party offending till satisfaction be made,
12 Car. 2. Cap. 24 45. N. 6.

32. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
respective Justices of Peace, Justices.
Commissioners for Excise or any two of them from time to time where they shall
see cause, to mitigate, compound or lessen such Forfeitue, Penalty or Fine as
in their discretions they shall think fit, etc. so as by such Mitigation the
same be not less than double the value of the Duty of Excise which should or
ought to have been paid besides the reasonable costs and charges of such
Officer, etc. or others as were employed therein, to be to them allowed by the
said Justices, any thing etc. notwithstanding, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24 46. N. 1.

33. N. 1.
And be it Enacted, etc. that no person, Oaths.
etc. shall be capable of intermedling with any Office or Employment relating
to the Excise, until he or they shall before two or more Justices of Peace in
the County where his or their Employment shall be, etc. take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, which Oaths they have hereby Power to administer
together with this Oath following, etc. 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24. 47. N. 1.

34. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, etc. that every such Justice of Peace shall certify
the taking of such oath to the next Quarter Sessions, Certificate.
there to be recorded, 12 Car. 2. Cap. 24. 48. N. 1.

36. N. 1.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, that no Writ or Writs of Certiorari shall
supersede Execution or other Proceedings upon any Order, Certiorari.
etc. made by the said Justices aforesaid in Pursuance of this Act, but that
Execution and other Proceedings shall and may be had and made thereupon, any
such Writ, etc. or allowance thereof notwithstanding, 12. Car. 2. Cap. 24. 50.
N. 1.

C. 24. 14. N. 3.
And if any, etc. shall make Provision or Purveyance for his Majesty, Purveyance.
his Heirs or Successors, or any the Queens or Children aforesaid, or impress
or take any such Carriages or other things aforesaid, on any pretense or color
of any Warrant aforesaid, under the Great Seal or otherwise contrary to the
intent hereof, it shall be lawful for the Justices of Peace or such two or one
of them as dwell near, and to the Constables of such Parish or Village, where
such occasion shall happen, at the request of the Party grieved, and they are
hereby enjoined to commit or cause to be committed, the Party, etc. so doing or
offending to Goal till the next Sessions, there to be indicted and proceeded
against for the same, and that the Officers and Inhabitants of the Village or
Parish where such offense shall happen, shall be assistant therein, 13 Car. 2.
Cap. 8. 2. N. 1.

C. 34. 2. N. 1.
And it is hereby further Enacted, that all Sheriffs, Husbandry.
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables and every of them upon
Information and Complaint made unto them or any of them, by any of the Officers
of the Customs, or by any other person, etc. that there is any Tobacco set,
sown, planted or growing within their Jurisdictions or Precincts contrary to
this Act, shall within ten days after such Information or Complaint, cause to
be burnt, plucked up, consumed or utterly destroyed all such Tobacco so set,
sown, planted or growing.

Wages.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, etc. that no person, etc. shall be capable of
having, using or exercising the Office of Port-Master General, C. 35. 1. 3 N. 1.
or any other employment relating to the said Office, unless he or they shall
first take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, before any two Justices of
the Peace of the respective Counties wherein such person, etc. are or shall be
resident, which said Justices are hereby Authorized to administer the said
Oaths accordingly.

Peace.
Whereas it has been found by sad Experience, 13 Car. 2. C. 5.
that tumultuous and other disorderly soliciting and procuring of Hands by
private persons to Petitions, Complaints, Remonstrances and Declarations, and
other Addresses to the King, or to both or either Houses of Parliament for
alteration of matters established by Law, redress of pretended Grievances in
Church or State, or other public Concernments have been made use of, to serve
the ends of factious and seditious persons gotten into power to the violation
of the public Peace, and have been a great means of the late unhappy Wars,
Confusions, and Calamities in this Nation for preventing the like mischiefs for
the future.

Process.
Be it Enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, 2. N. 1:
etc. that no person or persons whatsoever, shall from and after the first of
August one thousand six hundred sixty and one, solicit, labor or procure the
getting of Hands, or other consent of any persons above the number of twenty or
more, to any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance, Declaration or other Address to
the King, or both or either Houses of Parliament for alteration of matters
established by Law in Church or State, unless the matter thereof have been
first consented unto and ordered by three or more Justices of the County, or by
the major part of the Grand-Iury of the County or Division of the County where
the same matter shall arise, at their public Assizes or General Quarter
Sessions, or if arising in London, bp the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in
Common Council assembled.

Joynder.
And that no person or persons whatsoever, shall repair to his Majesty, 2. N. 2.
or both or either of the Houses of Parliament, upon pretense of presenting or
delivering any Petition, Complaint, Remonstrance or Declaration, or other
Addresses accompanied with excessive number of people, not at any one time with
above the number of ten persons.

Forfeiture.
Upon pain of incurring a Penalty not exceeding the sum of one hundred pounds in
money and three Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize, for every
Offense. 2. N. 3.


Days.
Which Offense to be Prosecuted at the Court of the Kings Bench, 2. N. 4.
or at the Assizes or General Quarter Sessions within six Months after the
Offense committed, and proved by two or more credible Witnesses.

Parliament.
Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein contained, 3. N. 1.
shall not be construed to extend to debar or hinder any person or persons not
exceeding the number of ten aforesaid, to present any public or private
Grievance or Complaint to any Member or Members of Parliament after his
Election, and during the Continuance of the Parliament, or to the Kings Majesty
for any remedy to be thereupon had.

Prerog.
Nor to extend to any Address whatsoever to his Majesty, 3. N. 2.
by all or any of the Members of both or either Houses of Parliament during the
sitting of the Parliament, but that they may enjoy their freedom of access to
his Majesty as heretofore has been used.

Purveyance.
Be it therefore Enacted, Cap. 8. 2. N 1.
etc. that the Clerk or Chief-Officer of his Majesty's Carriages, shall three
days at least before his Majesty's Arrival by Warrant from the Green-Cloth,
give notice in Writing to two or more of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
next adjoining, to provide such a number of Carts and Carriages from the Places
next adjacent as his Majesty shall have present use of, expressing the
certainty, etc.

Forfeiture.
And that in Case any, 2. N. 2.
etc. shall refuse to provide and furnish his Majesty that now is, or his Queen
that shall be, or his or her Household in their Progress for Removals, etc.
that then upon due Proof and Conviction, etc. by the Oath of the Constable or
other Officer, or two other credible Witnesses before the said Justices of
Peace of the County, or Mayor or other Chief-Officer of the City or Corporation
where he or they inhabit, which Oath they shall have Power to administer, the
Party so refusing, shall, etc. forfeit the sum of forty shillings to the Kings
Majesty's use, to be fortwith levied by Distress and Sale, etc. by Warrant from
the said Justices of the Peace, Mayor or other Chief-Officer.

3. N. 2.
And in Case any Justice of the Peace, Mayor, Fees.
Chief-Officer or Constable, shall take any Gift or Reward to spare any, etc.
or shall impress more Carriages then he shall be directed, etc. that then upon
due Proof and Conviction thereof, the Party so offending, shall forfeit the sum
of ten pounds to the Party thereby grieved, or any other who shall sue for the
same, etc.

5. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, Justices.
etc. that any two or more of the Justices of the Peace near adjoining to the
Road through which his Majesty is to pass, shall immediately after notice in
Writing from the said Green-Cloth and Avener under their Hands and Seals, set
down and appoint such reasonable Rates and Prices, to be paid during his
Majesty's abode there, both for Hay and Oats, and other Accomodations for
Horses, as they in their discretion shall think meet; which Rates, one day at
the least before his Majesty's coming to such Place, the said Justices shall
cause to be proclaimed in the Market Town next to such place, and in such of
the Neighboring Towns and Villages as to them shall seem meet, to the end that
notice may be taken of such Rates and Prices.

5. N. 2
And if any person shall take any other sum than what is or shall be so limited,
either for Lodging, Horse-meet, Forfeiture.
Stable-room or other such Accommodations, and be thereof convicted by
Confession of the Party, or by the Oath of one credible Witness before any one
Justice of the Peace, (which Oath, the said Justice of the Peace is hereby
authorized to administer) that then in such Case every person so offending,
shall forfeit and pay to the Party grieved the sum of 40 s. the same to be
levied by Distress by Warrant from the said Justice of the Peace, and Sale
there of, etc.

C. 10. 1. N. 3.
(Viz. The Forfeiture of 20 l. by Deer-stealer) to be levied by the way of
Distress upon the Goods and Chattels of every such Offender, Forest.
by Warrant under the Justices Hand before whom such Conviction shall be made.

1. N. 5.
And for want of sufficient Distress, Imprisonment.
the Offender shall be committed to the House of Correction for six Months, and
there to be put to hard Labor, or to the Common-Goal for one whole year
without Bail or Mainprize, at the discretion of the Justices of the Peace
before whom such Conviction shall be, and not to be discharged from thence,
till he or they have given sufficient Sureties for their Good-behavior, for one
whole year next ensuing, after his or their Enlargement.

13 Car. 2. St. 2. C. 1. 10. N. 2.
And from and after the Expiration of the said respective Commissions,
Coporation.
(viz. for regulating of Corporations, March 25. 1663.) the said three Oaths,
(viz. of Allegiance, Supremacy, and against taking up Arms against the King,
etc.) and Declaration (viz. that no Obligation lies on any by the solemn
League and Covenant) shall be from time to time administered, etc. by such, etc.
persons respectively, who by the Charters or Vsages of the said respective
Cities, Corporations and Boroughs, and Cinque Ports and their Members, and
other Port-Towns ought to administer the Oath for due executing the said
Places, etc. (viz. of Mayor, Alder-men, Recorder, Bailiffs, Town-Clerks,
Common-Council-men, etc.

10. N. 3.
And in default of such by two Justices of the Peace of the said Cities,
Justices.
etc. for the time being, if any such there be, or otherwise by two Justices of
Peace for the time being of the respective Counties where the said Cities, etc.
are.

11. N. 1.
And be it likewise Enacted, etc. that the said Commissioners, Oath.
Justices of the Peace and other persons hereby authorized to administer the
said Oaths, and tender the said Declaration respectively, shall cause
Memorandums or Entries to be made of all Oaths taken before them, and
subscriptions made as aforesaid, and deliver the same once in a Year to the
respective Town-Clerks or other Register or Clerk of the said respective
Cities, etc. who shall cause the same to be fairly Entered into the Books or
Registries belonging to the said respective Cities, etc.

Religion.
And it is Ordained, etc. that all and every Justice of Oyer and Terminer, 13
and 14 Car. 2. C. 1. 3. N. 1.
Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery, and the Justices of the Peace, shall
have full Power and Authority in every of their open and General Sessions, to
Inquire Hear and Determine all and every the said Offenses, (viz. of Quakers
refusing Oath lawfully tendered; or assembling above Five for Religious
Worship, etc.) within the limits of their Commission to them Directed, and to
make Process for the Execution of the same, as they may do against any Person
being Indicted before them of Trespass, or lawfully Convicted thereof.

Imprisonment.
And be it also Enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice
of Peace, Mayor or other Chief Officer of any Corporation, 4. N. 1.
within their several Jurisdictions to Committ to the Common Goal, or bind over
with sufficient Sureties to the Quarter Sessions any Person, etc. offending in
the Premises, in order to his or their Conviction aforesaid.

Ways.
And for the more speedy reformation, C. 2 24. N. 1.
etc. (viz. of Paving the Streets hanging out Lights, carrying away Dust, and
Hackney-Coaches, etc.) Be it further Enacted, etc. That every one of his
Majesty's Justices of either Bench, and Barons of the Exchequer, and every
Justice of Peace of the said Cities of London and Westminster, etc. within
their several Limits respectively, shall have Power and Authority upon his own
Knowledge or View, confession of the Party or proof of one credible Witness
upon Oath before him, which Oath by virtue of this Act such Justice shall have
Power to Administer, to Convict any Person or Persons of any the Offenses
aforesaid, whereby such Person or Persons so Convict shall Incur the Penalties
and Forfeitures aforesaid, one Moiety whereof shall be disposed and employed
for and toward the Reparation, Paving and cleansing of the Streets or Place
where the Offense shall be Committed, and as much or all of the other Moiety as
the Justices shall think fit for him or them that shall discover and prosecute
the same, in case the said Conviction be by such Discovery and Prosecution.

Process.
And if the Conviction be by the View or Knowledge of such Justices, N. 2.
then the said whole Penalty to go and be Employed for and toward the
Repairing, Paving and Cleansing of the said Street or Place, and shall be
Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offender, by
Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any such Justice, to be directed to the
Constable or any other Officer of the same Parish, rendering the overplus to the
Party: and in default of Distress or not payment of the said Penalties within
six days after demand thereof, or notice in Writing left at the House or
Dwelling place of the Offender by the said Constable or any other Officer, (the
said Offender not being a Peer of this Realm,) shall be committed to the Common
Goal of the said County or City respectively, by the Warrant of any such
Justice under his Hand and Seal, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise
until payment.

Taxes.
And be it further Enacted, 26. N. 1.
etc. That within Twenty days after the Election and Confirmation of the said
Scavengers, etc. the Constables Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor, and
of the Highways of the said Parishes and Places respectively, or the greater
number of them, giving notice unto or calling together such Inhabitants of
their respective Parishes, as have formerly born the like Office therein; they
or the greater number of them then present, shall make and settle a Tax, Rate
or Assessment, according to a pound rate to be imposed or set upon the
Inhabitants of the said Parish, Ward or Division, for the Year following for
the purposes aforesaid, which being allowed and confirmed by any two of the
Justices of the Peace of the Places aforesaid respectively, shall be Quarterly
paid by every respective Inhabitant upon demand made thereof by the Beadle of
the Parish, or other Officer appointed to Gather and Collect the same.

Process.
And in case of refusal or neglect, N. 2.
shall by Warrant of any two Justices of the Peace under their Hands and Seals,
be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, and for want of
Distress, by Imprisonment of the Offender, etc.

War.
And the said Account so to be taken (viz. by the Lieutenants, C. 3. 12. N. 2.
etc. of the Militia of the Treasurers, Receivers, etc.) shall be forthwith
certified to the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and a
Duplicate thereof shall be Certified to the Justices of Peace at the next
General Quarter Sessions.

19. N. 2.
Which Oaths (viz. of Allegiance, and Supremacy, Oaths.
and against taking Arms against the King, etc.) any one Justice of Peace of
the respective Counties and Places aforesaid, is Enabled to Administer to such
respective Lieutenant, (viz. of the County before he act in Militia, etc.) as
is not a Peer of this Realm, and the said Lieutenant or any one Justice of the
Peace of the respective Counties and Places aforesaid, is Enabled to Administer
to the respective Deputy Lieutenants not being Peers, etc.

C. 4. 7. N. 2.
(Viz. Parson having Curate, shall in Person read Common Prayers, Religion.
etc.) upon pain to forfeit the Sum of Five Pounds to the use often he Poor of
the Parish for every Offense, upon Conviction, by Confession, or Proof of two
credible Witnesses upon Oath before two Justices of the Peace of the County,
City, or Town Corporate, where the Offense shall be committed, which Oath the
said Justices are hereby Empowered to Administer, and in default of payment
within ten days, to be levied by Distress and Sale, etc. by the Warrant of the
said Justices, etc.

21 N. 1.
And that any two Justices of the Peace of any County of this Kingdom,
Imprisonment.
etc. and the Mayor or other Chief Magistrate of any City, or Town Corporate
within the same, upon Certificate from the Ordinary of the Place made to him or
them of the Offense Committed, shall and are hereby required to Commit the
Person or Persons so Offending (viz. Preaching Lecture or Sermon, while
dissable by this Act of Uniformity) to the Goal of the same County, City or
Town Corporate accordingly.

C. 5. 3. N. 3.
Which Bylaws, Rules, and Ordinances, Drapery.
(viz. by the Wardens and Assistants of the Weavers of Norwich Stuffs, etc.)
being Ratified and Confirmed by the Mayor and two Justices of the Peace of the
said City and County of Norwich, for the time being, and three other Justices
of Peace of the said County of Norfolk, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall
be published four times in the Year at the least, at four public Assemblies
for the said Trade and Manufacture, and shall be obeyed and kept by the several
Persons within and under the said Regulation.

14. N. 1.
And that if any Person shall Counterfeit any Seal of the said Trade, Forfeiture.
(viz. of Norwich Stuffs weaving, etc.) or shall Seal any piece of Stuff under
the Regulation with any counterfeit Seal, or shall remove a Seal off one piece
and set it unto another piece which has not been Sealed by the Wardens, etc.
and being thereof Convicted by his own Confession, or by the Oath of two or
more Witnesses to be taken before the Mayor of the said City, or his Deputy, or
any one Justice of the Peace of the City of Norwich or County of Norfolk, who
respectively have hereby power to Administer an Oath for that purpose, shall
forfeit, etc. xx l.

19. N. 2.
And that if any Person etc. shall refuse, hinder, Process.
or will not permit the said Wardens or Assistants, or any two or more of them
to Exercute their Office according to the Tenure of this Act, etc. being
thereof Convicted, by the Oath of one or more credible Witnesses before the
Mayor, etc. or his Deputy, or any one Justice of Peace of the said City of
Norwich, or County of Norfolk respectively, who are hereby Authorized to
Administer such Oath, shall forfeit the Sum of xl s. etc.

20. N. 2.
Which said Penalties and Forfeitures, Forfeiture.
together with all other Fines and Penalties, which are appointed to go to the
Poor of the Trade and Manufacture, or for the use thereof mentioned in this
Act; the means of recovery of which is not already, otherwise herein provided
and set forth, shall be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods and
Chattels, by Warrant to be granted by the said Mayor, or his Deputy for the
time being, or any one Justice of Peace of the City of Norwich, or County of
Norfolk, etc.

C. 6. 3. N. 5.
And every such Assessment so made, (viz. by the Surveyers of Highways, Taxes.
with two Househoulders of the Parish Vill. etc.) shall within six days after
be presented to some Justice of the Peace near adjoining to the Parish where it
is made, to be seen, allowed, and signed by him.

N. 6.
And after such allowance, every Person so Assessed, Process.
etc. That shall not within twenty days after demand made by the Surveyers, or
one of them pay such Sum, etc. shall forfeit and pay double, etc. unless upon
complaint made to the said Justice of wrong done to such Person by that
Assessment, the said Justice shall think fit to alter the same.

Justices.
And if any Question shall arise about the value or worth of such work, 4. N. 3.
or labor, or Man, and Team (viz. in Highways, etc.) some Justice of the
Peace near adjoining, and not living in the said Parish, shall determine what
is fit to be allowed for such work.

Ways.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That it shall and may be lawful, 6. N. 1.
to and for the said Surveyers of the Highways for the time being of every
such Parish, Town, Village, or Hamlet, within their several Precincts, from
time to time, by Order from the Quarter Sessions, and upon the View, and by the
Allowance and Consent of two or more Justices of the Peace of the County,
Authorized thereunto by the Sessions; wherein such Parish, Town, Village, or
Hamlet, shall lie, under their Hands and Seals in Writing, where any Common or
Public Highway is not of the breadth of Eight Yards, from the Shores and Banks
of the Ditches on either side, or from the Banks and Hedges where there are no
Ditches, to assign and lay out so much of any Man's several Lands next adjoining
to the said Common and Public Highway, where they shall think it needful, and
it may conveniently be done as shall enlarge the said way to the full breadth of
Eight Yards, or so much broader toward the breadth of Eight Yards then now it
is, as conveniently the place will bear from the said Shores, Ditches, Banks,
or Hedges, by the consent of the owner or owners of the said Lands, according
to his or their respective Interests therein, or otherwise by Order of the
Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, after a Writ of ad quod Damnum
first Issued out and returned, to assign and lay out a more near and commodious
way in and over the said Lands near adjoining to the said common and public
Highwayes, the said Surveyers first giving such satisfaction for the said
Ground unto the respective Owners of the same, according to their several and
respective Interest, in the whole not exceeding twenty years purchase.

Forfeitures.
And (viz. all Assessments, Fines, and Penalties for the Highwayes, 12. N. 2.
etc.) be Levied, Collected, and Gathered, by the said Surveyers, or any of
them, by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of any two Justices of the Peace
within the County, City, Riding, Town Corporate, Liberty, or Limit, wherein the
same lies by Distress and Sale of the Goods. etc.

Account.
And if the said, etc. Surveyors shall not make such an Account, 13. N. 3.
and Payment, etc. (viz. within the year following, new Election, etc.) any two
Justices of the Peace living near to, or in the said Parish, shall and may upon
Complaint unto them made, Examine the business upon Oath, and upon default
found in the Surveyor, etc. shall and may commit him or them to the Common Gaol
of that County, City, Riding, Town Corporate, Liberty or Limit, there to remain
until be has made a true and perfect Account and Payment, etc.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, That all and every Justices of Assize, 14. N. 1.
Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of the Peace, etc. are hereby Enabled and
Empowered, to Inquire after, Hear and Determine all matters concerning
charitable Gifts, for the Making, Amending, and keeping in Repair any Common,
Highways, Pavements, Streets, and Caus-wayes, within the Limits of their
Commisson, and to make Orders therein, for the due Employment of such
Charitable Gifts, according to the true intent and meaning of the Donors
thereof, except Gifts to the aforesaid Uses, made in any College, Hall,
Free School, or Hospital, which have Visitors of their own, and also to Hear
and Determine all Offenses, Defaults, and Defects in Surveyors, or others
concerning the Premises.

Error.
Provided, that if any Person be agrieved with such Order,. 15. N. 1.
they shall have Liberty to appeal to the Court of Chancery, as in the Case of
a Decree made upon the Statute (viz. 43 Eliz. 4.) of Charitable Uses.

Certiorari.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That, 16. N. 1.
etc. no Certiorari shall be allowed to remove any Information, Indictment,
Presentment, Order or other Proceedings in the Quarter Sessions, of for or
concerning any matter or thing in this Act, unless the Party or Parties against
whom any such Information, Indictment, Presentment, Order, or other Proceeding
shall be had by Virtue of this Act, shall before the Allowance of such
Certioraries, become bound to the Person or Persons prosecuting in the Sum of
xl l. with sufficient Sureties as the Justices of Peace at their said Quarter
Sessions of the Peace shall think fit, with Condition to pay unto the said
prosecutors within one month after the Conviction of such parties Indicted,
their full Costs and Damages, to be ascertained upon their Oaths, and that in
default thereof, it shall be lawful for the said Justices to proceed to Trial
of such Indictments, any such Writs of Certiorari to remove the same
Indictments notwithstanding.

C. 7. 7. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That it shall and may be lawful, Leather.
to and for the Masters and Wardens of the Cordwainers, Sadlers, Girdlers, and
Curriers of the City of London, etc. and to and for all Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, and Chief Officecs of Corporations within this Realm, etc. Wales, etc.
as well by Land as by Water, to search for and seize any Leather or raw Hides,
wrought or unwrought, cut or uncut, packed up or unpacked, intended or purposed
to be Transported by any person, etc. Into any parts beyond the Sea, or into
Holland, other then Calves skins, and Sheep skins, etc.

C. 9. 2. N. 6.
And the said two Justices (viz. next Parish of Poor and maimed Officer in the
late Wars, etc.) upon the Examination of the truth of such Certificate, Poor.
(viz. of Captain or Commission Officer, etc.) which the said two Justices are
hereby Empowered to take upon Oath of the Party, and of such Witnesses as he
shall produce, shall by Warrant unto the Treasurer Assign him relief, until the
next Quarter Sessions to be holden for that County or Liberty, at which time a
yearly Pension shall be by the said Justices or the major part of them granted
in manner and form, and with power of Revocation or Alteration, as by the said
Statute (viz. 43 Eliz. 3. N.) is further declared and directed.

C. 10. 4. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that the several Constables and other Officers,
Taxes.
who are hereby Authorized to take the Account of the aforesaid Hearths and
Stoves, within their particular Limits as aforesaid, shall at the next Quarter
Sessions, after the last day of May to be holden for their respective Counties,
deliver all such Accounts in Writing, as they shall receive, reform or take by
their own view, unto the Justices of the Peace in their respective Quarter
Sessions of the said Counties, together with a true note of the Names of all
such Persons, who shall refuse or neglect to give unto them an account, under
their Hands of such Hearths and Stoves, within their respective Houses,
Edifices, Chambers, and Lodgings as aforesaid.

5. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, That the said Justices of the Peace shall cause all
the said Accounts of the several Hearths and Stoves, Account.
within the respective Counties, to be Enrolled by the Clerk of the Peace of
the said respective Counties, Ridings in Yorkshire, and Divisions in
Lincolnshire, and also a Duplicate thereof in parchment under the Hands and
Seals of three or more of the Justices of Peace of the respective Counties and
Places aforesaid, who are hereby required to sign the Sum to be returned into
His Majesty's Court of Exchequer, within one month next after such Account
delivered unto them at their respective Quarter Sessions aforesaid.

N. 2.
Upon pain that the Clerk of the Peace of every such County, Riding, Forfeiture.
or Division, respectively offending therein, shall forfeit to his Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, the Sum of two Hundred pounds for the first month, and
for the second month he shall so neglect, every such Clerk of the Peace shall
forfeit and lose his or their Place and Office, and the same shall become void
accordingly, etc.

18. N. 1.
Provided always* and be it hereby Enacted, Poor.
That if the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, together
with the Minister of the same or any two of them, whereof the Minister to be
one, shall in Writing under their Hands yearly Certify their belief, that the
House wherein any Person does Inhabit, is not of greater value then of twenty
shillings per Annum, upon the full Improved Rent: and that neither the Person
so Inhabiting, nor any other using the same Message, has, uses or occupies
any Lands or Tenements of their own or others of the yearly value xx s. per
Annum, nor has any Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels of the value of Ten
pounds in their own possession, or in the possession of any other in trust for
them, that then in such Case, upon such Certificate made by the two next
Justices of the Peace, and allowed, for which Certificate and Allowance no fee
shall be paid, the person on whose behalf such Certificate is made, etc. shall
not be returned by the Constable or other Officer, and the said house is hereby
for that year discharged, of and from all the Duties by this Act Imposed.

Merchants.
Be it Enacted, etc. That where any Officer, C. 11. 6. N. 5.
etc. (viz. in Execution of this Act against concealing of Customs, etc.)
shall be by any person, etc. Armed with Club or any manner of Weapon, forcibly
hindered, afronted, abused, beaten or wounded, etc. either on Board any Ship or
Vessel, or upon the Land or Water in the due execution of their Office, all and
every person, etc. so refusing, afronting; abusing, beating or wounding the
said Officer, etc. or their Deputies, or such as shall act in their Aid or
Assistance, shall by the next Justice of Peace or other Magistrate, be
committed to Prison, there to remain till the next Quarter Sessions.

Process.
And the Justices of Peace of the said Quarter Sessions, N. 6.
shall and are hereby Empowered to punish the Offender by Fine, not exceeding
one Hundred pounds, and the Offender is to remain in Prison till he be
discharged by order of the Exchequer, both of the Fine and of the Imprisonment,
or discover the Person that set him on work, to the End he may be legally
proceeded against.

Merchants.
And further, that in Case any Carman* Porter, Waterman or other Person, 7. N. 3.
etc. shall assist in the taking up or Landing, Shiping off, or carrying away
any such Goods, Wares, or Merchandise, (viz. not Landed in the presence of an
Officer of the Customs, etc.) that then such Carman, Porter, Waterman, or
other person or persons so offending, being apprehended by Warrant of any
Justice of the Peace for that County, City, or Borough, which the said Justices
and every of them, are hereby Authorized, to Issue, and to Examine Witnesses
upon Oath concerning that fact, and the same being proved by the Oath of two
Witnesses, the said Offender for such first Offense, shall and may by such
Justice of the Peace be committed to the next Goal, there to remain till he and
they find sufficient Surety, to be of the good Behavior for so long time,
until he and they shall be thereof discharged by the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, under Treasurer, and Barons of the Exchequer.

Imprisonment.
And in Case he or they (viz. Carmen, Porters, or Watermen, etc.) so Convicted,
shall afterward at any time Offend in like kind, N. 4.
(viz. taking up Goods landed without presence of Customer, etc.) that then he
and they shall and may by any Justice of Peace as aforesaid, be committed to
the next Goal; there to remain for the space of two months without Bail or
Mainprise, or until he shall pay unto the Sheriff of that County the Sum of
five pounds to the use of his Majesty, or until he shall by the Lord Treasurer;
Chancellor, under Treasurer, or Court of Exchequer be thence discharged.

Poor.
Be it therefore Enacted, C. 12. 1. N. 4.
etc. That it shall and may be lawful upon complaint made by the
Churchwardens, or Overseers of the Poor of any Parish, to any Justice of Peace
within forty days after any such person, etc. (viz. Vagrant) coming so to
settle as aforesaid, in any Tenement under the yearly value of ten pounds, for
any two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the Division
where any such person, etc. that are likely to be chargeable to the Parish,
shall come to Inhabit, by their Warrant to remove and convey such person or
persons to such Parish, where he or they were last legally settled, either as a
Native, Householder, Sojourner, Apprentice, or Servant, for the space of forty
days at the least, unless he or they give sufficient Security for the
discharge of the said Parish, to be allowed by the said Justices.

Error.
Provided always, that all such persons who think themselves agrieved by any
such Judgment of the said two Justices, 2. N. 1.
may appeal to the Justices of the Peace of the said County at their next
Quarter Sessions, who are hereby required to do them Justice according to the
merits of their Cause.

Husbandry.
And in such Case (viz. of Harvest work, etc.) if the person, 3. N. 2.
etc. shall not return to the place aforesaid, (viz. of last abode,) or shall
fall sick or impotent whilst he or they are in the said work, it shall not be
accounted a settlement, etc. but that it shall and may be lawful, for two
Justices of the Peace, to convey the said person, etc. to the place of his or
their Habitation, etc. under the pains and penalties in this Act prescribed.

Poor.
And if such person, etc. shall refuse to go, N. 3.
or shall not remain in such Parish where they ought to be settled, etc. but
shall return of his own accord to the Parish from whence he was removed. It
shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the Peace of the City, County, or
Town Corporate, where the said Offense shall be Committed, to send such person,
etc. to the House of Correction, there to be punished as a Vagabond, or to a
public workhouse in this present Act hereafter mentioned, there to be
Employed in Work or Labor.

N. 4.
And if the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, Justices.
to which he or they shall be removed, refuse to receive such person, etc. and
to the provide work for them as other Inhabitants of the Parish, any Justice of
the Peace of that Division, may and shall thereupon bind any such Officer, etc.
to the Assizes or Sessions, there to be Indicted for his or their contempt in
that behalf.

5. N. 1.
And for the said places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality in the said
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey respectively, Corporation.
there shall be elected and chosen by the major part of the Justices of the
Peace for the said Counties in their respective Quarter Sessions Assembled, out
of the most able and honest Inhabitants and Freeholders of every of the said
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey respectively, a President, a Deputy President,
a Treasurer, and Assistants for the Corporation, etc. or Workhouses, etc. and
that upon the vacancy by death or otherwise, etc. the power to Elect others in
their Rooms, be in the major part of the respective Justices of Peace, who in
their General Quarter Sessions from time to time, shall accordingly supply such
vacant places.

N. 2.
And that at every Quarter Sessions, Account.
they shall require and take an Account in Writing of all the Receipts, Charges
and Disbursements of the Officers and Treasurer of such Corporation, etc. or
Workhouses, how and how many poor People have been Employed and set to work in
the year last past, and what stock there was and is remaining.

6. N. 2.
And it shall and may be lawful for the major part of the Justices of Peace in
their Quarter Sessions, Justices.
to signify unto His Majesty's Privy Council the Names of such Rogues,
Vagabonds, Idle and Disorderly persons, and sturdy Beggars, as they shall think
fit to be Transported to the English Plantations.

N. 3.
And upon the Approbation of His Majesty's Privy Council to the said Justices of
Peace, signified what persons shall be Transported, it shall and may be lawful
for any two or more of the Justices of the Peace them to Transport or cause to
be Transported, from time to time, during the space of three years next ensuing
the End of this present Sessions of Parliament, to any of the English
Plantations beyond the Seas, there to be disposed of in the usual way of
Servants, for a term not exceeding seven years.

7. N. 3.
With which Tax (viz. made by Justices of Liberty or County for stock for the
Poor,) if any, etc. find him or themselves Agrieved, Error.
supposing the same to be unequal, he or they shall and may make their
Complaint known to the Justices of Peace at the next Open Sessions, who shall
take such open order therein, as in like Cases is already by the Law provided.

8. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, etc. That it shall and may be lawful, Taxes.
to and for any two Justices of the respective Counties of Middlesex and Surrey
by their Warrant under their Hands and Seals, to Authorize the Churchwardens
or Overseers for the Poor, etc. to demand, gather and receive of every person,
etc. such Sum, etc. as shall be Assessed upon them, etc.

N. 2.
And for default of payment within ten days after, Process.
etc. demand thereof made, or notice in Writing left at the dwelling House or
Lodging, etc. to levy the same by Distress and Sale, etc.

12. N. 1:
Provided the said Orders and Bylaws, Corporation.
(viz. made by the Corporations for the Poor, etc.) shall from time to time be
presented to the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions Assembled, to be
allowed by the major part of them, and confirmed by order of the said Court.

15. N. 1.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. That in case any Constable, Headborough or
Tithingmen, shall dye or go out of the Parish, any two Justices of the Peace,
Constable.
may make and swear a new Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, until the said
Lord (viz. of the Leet) shall hold a Court, or until next Quarter Sessions, who
shall approve of the said Officers so made and sworn as aforesaid; or appoint
others as they shall think fit.

N. 3.
And if any Officer shall continue above a year in his or their Office, Justices.
that then in such Case the Justices of Peace in their Quarter Sessions may
discharge such Officers, and may put another fit person in his or their place,
until the Lord of the Manor shall held a Court, etc.

Poor.
Be it therefore Enacted, 16. N. 2.
etc. that it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace to
whom any Rogue, Vagabond or sturdy Beggars so apprehended shall be brought, to
reward any, etc. that shall apprehend any Rogue, Vagabond or sturdy Beggar, by
granting, etc. an Order or Warrant under his Hand and Seal to the Constable,
Headborough or Tithingman of such Parish where such Rogue, etc. passed thorough
unapprehended, requiring them to pay such person, etc. the Sum of two shillings
for every Rogue, etc. which shall be so apprehended.

Constable.
And if such Constable, etc. refuse or neglect to pay the two shillings, N. 3.
etc. that then the said Justices of the Peace, or any other Justice or
Justices of Peace shall proceed against any such Constable, etc. according to
the said Statutes (viz. 39 Eliz. 4. and 1 Jac. 7.) and to compel him to pay,
etc. by, etc (viz. 1 Jac. 7. N.) and to allow out of the said Forfeiture the
said two shillings, and such reasonable means and allowances for the loss of
time, as they shall think fit.

Forfeiture.
And if any, etc. shall apprehend any Rogue, etc. at the Confines of any County,
which passed thorough any Parish of another County unapprehended; 17. N. 1.
it shall be lawful for such person, etc. to go to some Justice of Peace of
that County through which such Rogue, etc. passed unapprehended, who is hereby
required upon a Certificate under the Hand of some Justice of Peace of the
County where such Rogue, etc. was apprehended, to grant his Order or Warrant
under his Hand and Seal, requiring the said Constable, etc. to pay, etc. the
Sum of two shillings; which if he shall refuse or neglect to do, then such
Justice is hereby required to proceed against such Constable, etc. and to cause
him to pay x s. or so much thereof for his expenses and loss of time, as the
said Justice of the Peace shall think fit to such, which he has forfeited by
the Statute. (viz. 39 Eliz. 4.)

Taxes.
Which rate (viz. by Constables, Churchwardens, etc. for Charges, 18. N. 3.
etc.) being confirmed under the Hands and Seals of any two Justices of the
Peace, etc. the said Constable, etc. shall have power by Warrant under the
Hands and Seals of two Justices of Peace, to Levy by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of any person refusing to pay the same, etc.

Bastardy.
Be it therefore Enacted, 19. N. 2.
etc. That it shall and may be lawful for the Churchwardens and Overseers for
the poor of any Parish where any Bastard-Child shall be born, to take and seize
so much of the Goods and Chattels, and to receive so much of the Annual rents
and profits of the Lands of such pu^ative Father or lewd Mother as shall be
ordered by any two Justices of Peace, etc. for or toward the discharge of the
Parish, to be confirmed at the Sessions, for the bringing up and providing for
such Bastard-Child.

Process.
And thereupon it shall be lawful for the Sessions, N. 3.
to make an Order for the Churchwardens or Overseers for the poor of such
Parish to dispose of the Goods by sale or otherwise, or so much of them for the
purposes aforesaid, as the Court shall think fit, and to receive the rents and
profits, or so much of them as they shall be ordered by the Sessions as
aforesaid, of his or her Lands.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, 22. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of Peace within the said Counties, ( viz. of
Lancashire, Cheshire, Derbyshire, York shire, Northumberland; Durham,
Cumberland, and Westmerland, etc.) shall have and enjoy such and the like
Powers and Authorities to raise and Levy Moneys, and to do and execute all and
every such other act and thing whatsoever within every Township or Village
within the said County where they are Justices, as is given, etc. within any
Parish, etc. in and by the said Act, etc. (viz. 43 Eliz. 2.) under such and the
like pains and penalties, etc.

Merchants.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that, C. 13. 3. N. 1.
etc. upon Complaint and Information given to the Justices of Peace, or any or
either of them within their respective Counties, Cities and Towns Corporate at
times reasonable, he or they are hereby Authorized and Required to Issue forth
his or their Warrants to the Constables of their respective Counties, Cities
and Towns Corporate; to enter and search for such Manufactures in the Shops
being open, or Warehouses and Dwelling-houses of such person or persons as
shall be suspected to have any such Foreign Bonelaces, Imbroyderies, Cutwork,
Fringe, Band-strings, Buttons or Needlework, within their respective Counties,
Cities and Towns Corporate, and to seize the same, any Act, Statute, etc.
notwithstanding.

C. 15. 2. N. 2.
(Viz. None to be Silk-Thrower, unless seven years Apprentice,) Drapery.
upon pain that every person so Offending contrary to this Act shall pay, etc.
forty shillings for every month, etc. the one Moiety, etc. to the use of his
said Majesty, etc. and the other, etc. to such, etc. as shall sue for the same
in any of the Courts of Record within this Realm, etc. or before any the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter
Sessions of the Peace by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, etc.

6. N. 2.
Be it further Enacted, etc. That every such silk winder and doubler, Collusion.
who shall at any time hereafter unjustly or deceitfully and falsely Purloin,
Imbezil, Pawn, Sell or Detain any part of Silk delivered, etc. by any
Silk-thrower or other person to them or any of them to wind or double, that in
every such Case, etc. as well the Winder or Iourneyman so offending as the
buyer, etc. receiver, etc. of such Silk being thereof lawfully Convicted by
confession of the party, etc. or by one Witness upon Oath before one or more of
the Justices of Peace of the County or Liberty where the same Offense, etc.
shall be committed; or if it be within any City or Town Corporate, before the
Mayor, etc. who by force of this Act are Empowered, etc. to minister the same
Oath, and finally to hear and determine all and every the Offenses aforesaid,
and to give and make to the party, etc. Grieved such recompense and
satisfaction for such their Damage, and Loss and Charges thereabouts, as by the
said Justice or Justices or chief Officers shall be ordered and appointed.

7. N. 1.
Provided, that no more Damage be given, Damages.
etc. then the party grieved shall prove he is damnified and has expended in
looking after the same; and if the party, etc. so offending shall not be able,
etc. to make recompense, etc. within fourteen days next after such Conviction,
etc. as by the Justice, etc. or chief Officers shall be ordered, etc. then the
party, etc. so offending for the first Offense shall be apprehended and
whipped, or set in the Stocks, in the place where the Offense is Committed or
in some Market Town in the said County near unto the place, etc. as shall be
limited and appointed by the said Justice or Justices of the Peace, or chief
Officers; and for the second Offense to incur the like or such further
punishment, by whipping or being put in the Stocks, as the said Justice or
Justices of the Peace or chief Officers shall in their Discretion think fit and
convenient.

C. 18 12. N. 1.
And for the better execution of this Act, Merchants.
(viz. against Exportation of Sheeps Wool, Woolfels, Mortlings, Shorlings, Yarn
made of Wool, Wool-flocks, Fullers Earth, fulling Clay or Tobacco-pipe Clay,
etc.) Be it further enacted, That all Justices of Assize, etc. and Justices of
Peace shall Inquire of all the Premises in their General Quarter Sessions, and
hear and determine the same.

C. 20. 1. N. 2.
Be it notwithstanding (viz. 12 Car. 2. 24. 13.) Enacted, etc. that, Purveyance.
etc. as often as the Service of his Majesty's Navy or Ordnance shall require
any Carriages by Land, etc. upon notice given in Writing by Warrant under the
Hand and Seal of the Lord High Admiral, etc. of two or more of the principal
Officers or Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, etc. the Master, etc. the
Lieutenants of his Majesty's Ordnance, for the providing of Carriages for the
respective Service of the Navy or Ordnance unto two or more Justices of the
Peace dwelling near unto the place where the said Carriages shall be required,
the said Justices of the Peace may and shall immediately Issue forth their
Warrants unto such of the adjacent Parishes, Hundreds or Divisions, as they
shall judge fit within their respective Counties and Divisions, not being above
Twelve miles distant from the place of Lading, for the sending to a certain
place and at certain times, to be specified and appointed in the said Warrants
such numbers of Carriages with Horses or Oxen sufficient for the said service,
as by the Lord High Admiral, etc. or by the Master or Lieutenant of his
Majesty's Ordnance, etc. or by the principal Officers or Commissioners of his
Majesty's Navy respectively, etc. shall be by writing under their Hands and
Seals required.

Cap. 22.
Whereas a great Number of lewd, Scotland.
disorderly and lawless persons being Thieves and Robbers, who are commonly
called Moss-Troopers, have successively for many and sundry years last past
been bred, resided in and frequented the Borders of the two respective Counties
of Northumberland and Cumberland, and the next adjacent parts of Scotland; and
they taking the opportunity of large wast Grounds, Heaths and Mosses, and the
many Intricate and Dangerous ways and bypath in those parts, do usually
after the most notorious Crimes committed by them, escape over from the one
Kingdom into the other respectively, and so avoid the hand of Justice, in
regard the Offenses done and perpetrated in the one Kingdom, cannot be punished
in the other, 29 and 30 Car. 2. 2.

War.
And whereas since the time of the late unhappy Distractions, 2. N. 1.
such Offenses and Offenders as aforesaid, have exceedingly more increased and
abounded, and the several Inhabitants of the said respective Counties have been
for diverse years last past necessitated at their own free and voluntary Charge,
to maintain several Parties of Horse for the necessary defense of their
Persons, Families and Goods, and to the end the aforesaid evil and pernicious
members might be apprehended and brought to Judgment.

Taxes.
And whereas the most part of the Inhabitants of the said Counties, N. 2.
being more remote from the Borders then other persons, and consequently not so
much exposed to eminent dangers as others, are therefore unwilling to
contribute their proportionable parts of the aforesaid Charge, and yet
notwithstanding it cannot probably or possibly be Avoided, but that those
Inhabitants of the respective Counties who hold themselves most secure, most
certainly sustein much Damage and Detriment in their Goods and Estates, in case
the aforesaid Moss-Troopers be not timely suppressed, but suffered to grow
numerous, strong and potent; which they must needs do in case there be no
restraint upon them.

Scotland.
Be it Enacted, N. 3.
etc. That from and after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, which shall
be in the year of our Lord One thousand six hundred sixty and two, for and
during the term of Five years next ensuing the date of this present Act, it
shall and may be lawful for the respective Justices of Peace of the said
respective Counties; or the major part of them, at any General Sessions of the
Peace to be holden for the said Counties respectively, on the behalf of the
said Counties or either of them, from time to time as they shall see occasion,
to make an Order in open Court of Sessions for charging according to their
several proportions, all and every the several Inhabitants of the said
respective Counties, for the safeguard and securing of the said several
Counties and Inhabitants thereof from all injury, violence, spoil and rapine of
the Moss-Troopers aforesaid.

Taxes.
Provided that the said County of Northumberland be not by force of this Act at
any time charged above the Sum of Five hundred pounds in the year, 3. N. 1.
nor the said County of Cumberland charged above the Sum of Two hundred pounds
in the year.

Justices.
And for this end and purpose the said several Justices of the Peace of the
respective Counties aforesaid, N 2.
are hereby Empowered and Authorized at their General Quarter Sessions
aforesaid, to appoint and employ from time to time, if occasion require, any
person or persons to have the Conduct and Command of a certain Number of men,
not exceeding the number of Thirty men in the County of Northumberland, and
Twelve in the County of Cumberland, whereby the Malefactors aforesaid may be
searched out, discovered, persued, apprehended and brought to trial of the Law.

Justices.
And all and every the said Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties
aforesaid, or the major part of them, N. 3.
at any General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said Counties or
either of them respectively, are hereby further Empowered and Authorized by
force of this present Act, to make and issue forth their respective Warrants
under their Hands, for the levying and collecting any Sum or Sums of Money
ordered to be paid for and toward the safeguard and securing of the said
Counties respectively as aforesaid, and to give full power to the several
Constables and other Officers to Raise, Levy and Collect the said money, and
all and every the Inhabitants of the said several Counties, according to their
respective proportionable Estates in Lands or Goods, by Distress and Sale of
Goods, rendering the overplus, if there be any, to the respective Owner or
Owners.

Peace.
And the said Justices of Peace in the said several Counties, N. 4.
or any one of them respectively, are hereby also Authorized to Examine any
complaint made against the Collectors and Constables, or any other Officers or
Ministers of Justice whatsoever, or any of them; or any other refractory person
or persons whatsoever, that at any time hereafter shall neglect, refufe or fail
to give obedience to this Act, or shall do any act or acts in disturbance or
obstruction thereof, and to bind over such person or persons to the next
Quarter Sessions according to the known Laws of the Land, to the end such
person or persons may be proceeded withal according to Justice.

4. N. 1.
And the said respective Justices of the Peace as aforesaid, Account,
are hereby further empowered and authorized on behalf of the said several
Counties respectively, to appoint a Treasurer to receive from the said
Collectors the Moneys by them Collected, and to pay over the same according to
the Orders they shall receive from the said Justices at their General Sessions
of the Peace to be holden for the said respective Counties.

N. 2.
And the said Justices are also empowered to agree and article with such person
or persons yearly as they shall think fit to Employ in the said Service,
Justices,
and to take sufficient security of them for the faithful and most effectual
performance thereof for the best safeguard, advantage and benefit of the People
according to the true intent and meaning of this Act.

5. N. 1.
And in case any person or persons shall in pursuance of this Act be employed in
the border Service, and shall at any time hereafter wilfully and corruptly, War.
or for any sinister respect whatsoever, neglect or forbear to discover or
apprehend, or to bring to Trial any of the said persons called Moss-Troopers as
aforesaid, and shall be Convicted thereof according to Law; he or they shall
from thenceforth be disabled and made incapable for ever after, to manage or
take upon him or them the said Employment; and to suffer such Fine and
Imprisonment according to the Quality of his or their Offense, as the Justices
of Peace at their General Sessions shall think fit to inflict.

6. N. 1.
Provided nevertheless, and be it hereby declared, Taxes.
that it shall be lawful for the Justices of Peace of either of the said
Counties as aforesaid respectively, at any time hereafter, to moderate or
lessen the said Charge, if they see cause.

7. N. 1.
Provided, that this Act shall continue and be in force for Five years, Days.
and no longer. 18. Car. 2. 3. 1. N. 2.

8. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, Scotland.
etc. That for better suppression and punishment of the said Moss-Troopers
flying out of England into Scotland, or out of Scotland into England, the
Statutes made in the several Sessions of Parliament in the Fourth and Seventh
years of King James. (viz. 4 Jac. 1. and 7 Jac. 1.) shall be renewed and put in
execution according to the true Intent.

C. 26 6. N. 4.
All and every of which said Offenses (viz. want of weight and mark of Vessels,
and ill salting and packing of Butter) are to be inquired of, sued for, Victual.
heard and determined in the Sessions of Peace for the County, City, Borough,
Town or Liberty, or in the Court of Record of the City, Borough, Town or
Liberty wherein such Offense shall be Committed, by Action of Debt, Indictment,
Information or Presentment; wherein no Essoin, Protection or wager of Law shall
be allowed to the Defendant.

C. 28. 5. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any Idle or Suspicious person, Fish.
etc. shall in the night assemble and flock together about the Boats, Wells or
Cellars belonging to any Pilchard Coast, upon any the Coasts of Cornwall or
Devon. having no business there to do, and being warned by the Company or Owner
of such Boats or Cellars to be gone, that then upon complaint made to any one
Justice of the Peace, every such person or persons refusing so to do, shall pay
Five shillings to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense was committed; or
shall be set in the Stocks for the space of five hours.

C. 32. 2. N. 1.
For prevention of all which abuses, Drapery.
and deceits (viz. in broad Woollen Cloth.) It is Enacted, etc. that, etc. there
be and shall be a Corporation to continue forever within the said West Riding
of the County of York, consisting of all the Justices of the Peace of the said
West Riding, for the time being two Masters, ten Wardens, twelve Assistants and
Commonalty.

N. 6.
And the said Wardens, Masters and Assistants respectively, Oath.
shall within Eight days after their first Choice and Election, take the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, which any two Justices of the Peace within the
West Riding, whereof one to be of the Quorum, have hereby power to administer,
etc.

13. N. 2.
And for want of such distress, (viz. in him that forfeits xx l. for
Counterfeiting, Forfeiture.
Seal, etc,) such person, etc. to be committed to the Common Goal of the County
where he or they shall be found, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any one
of the Justices of the Peace of the said County, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprise for the space of six months; or until such person, etc. shall have
paid the Fine, etc.

Books.
And if any Iourneyman, etc. Printers, or Founders of Letters for Printing; C.
33. 14. N. 4.
shall refuse Employment being offered to him or them by any Master Printer, or
Master Founder of Letters respectively, or neglect it when he or they have
undertaken it; he or they so refusing or neglecting, shall suffer Three months
Imprisonment at the least without Bail or Mainprise, upon Conviction of such
his said refusal or neglect by Two Witnesses before any one or more Justice or
Justices of the Peace, who are hereby Empowered to hear and examine the said
Offenses, and to commit the said Offender, etc. to the Common Goal of the
County where he or they shall be apprehended.

License.
And if the said Books (viz. found by Searchers, etc.) so Imprinting, 15. N. 2.
Binding or Stiching, shall not be Licensed, then to seize upon so much thereof
as shall be found Imprinted, together with the several Offenders, and to bring
them before one or more Justices of the Peace, who are hereby Authorized and
required to Commit such Offenders to Prison, there to remain until they shall
be tried and acquitted, or convicted and punished for the said Offenses.

Apprentice.
And for the second Offense (viz. by Printers or Founders against this Act, 18.
N. 2.
they etc.) shall forever thence after be dissabled to use or exercise the Art
or Mystery of Printing, or of Founding Letters for Printing, and shall also
have and receive such further punishment by Fine, Imprisonment, or other
Corporal punishment not extending to Life, or Limb, as by the Justices of the
Court of King's Bench, or Justices of Oyer, and Terminer, or Justices of Assize
in their several Limits, or Justices of the Peace in their several
Quarter Sessions, shall be thought fit to be Inflicted.

Justices.
The which said Justices of the Peace, in their several Quarter Sessions, N. 3.
shall have full power and authority to hear and determine all and every
Offense, etc. that shall be committed against this Act, (viz. of Printing,
etc.) or against any branch thereof, upon Indictment or Information by any
person, etc. to be taken before them in their Sessions of the Peace
respectively, and shall certify into the Court of Exchequer, as in other like
Cases they are bound to do, the Fines by them Imposed, etc. and shall and may
also by virtue hereof Award Process and Execution for the taking or punishing
such Offenders, as in any other Case they lawfully may do, by any the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm.

Statuta 15 Car. 2.
Ways.
ANd, etc. the Justices of Peace at the Sessions of the Peace to be holden next
after Easter every year for the said respective Counties (viz. Hertford, 15
Car. 2. C. 1.
Cambridge and Huntington) from time to time, shall and are hereby Empowered to
nominate and appoint nine sufficient and able Persons residing and Inhabiting
within the said several and respective Counties, to be Surveyers in the several
Places in the said Highwayes for the year from thence next ensuing, 16. and 17.
Car. 2. Cap. 10. 4. N. 1.

Forfeiture.
And be it further Enacted, That if any, 8. N. 1.
etc. not having any lawful cause to be allowed as aforesaid, shall neglect or
refuse to take upon him or them the said Office of Surveyer, being thereunto
Nominated and Chosen according as by this Act is appointed, or to do or perform
his or their duty in the due and speedy Execution of this present Act, the said
Justices of the Peace for the several and respective Counties where such
Surveyer, etc. dwell at their Quarter Sessions shall and may hereby have power
to Impose, etc. such Fine, etc. not exceeding Ten pounds, upon Each Person so
refusing or neglecting, as to them shall seem meet, and to cause the same to be
levied by Distress and Sale of his or their Goods, etc.

Officer.
And in Case of refusal, or if any, etc. so Chosen, etc. shall happen to dye, 9.
N. 2.
or shall for any lawful Impediment be discharged, etc. that then some other
fit Person, etc. within that County shall be appointed by two or more Justices
in the said County living near the said Highway, etc. and the person, etc. so
Chosen shall and are hereby upon notice thereof to him or them given under the
Hands and Seals of the said Justices, by whom he or they shall be so Chosen, to
take upon him or them the said Office of Surveyer, etc. and under such and the
like penalties, as if he or they had been Chosen by the Justices at their
Sessions of the Peace in manner as aforesaid, 16. and 17. Car. 2. 10. 4. N. 1.

C. 2. 2. N. 3.
And (viz. any Person, etc.) by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any one
Justice of the Peace directed to any Officer, Woods.
such Officer shall have power to enter into and search the Houses, Outhouses,
Yards, Gardens or other places belonging to the Houses, of all and every
Person, etc. they shall suspect to have any kind of Wood, under-Woods, Poles or
young Trees, or Bark or Bark of any Trees, or any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales,
Rails or Hedgewood, Broom or Furze.

3. N. 2.
And if such Offender, etc. do not make recompense, etc. to the said owner,
Imprisonment.
etc. and also pay the said Sum (viz. set by the said Justice not exceeding x
s. for Breaking, Cutting or Stealing, etc.) to the Poor, etc. then the said
Justice shall Commit the said Offender, etc. to the House of Correction for
such time as the said Justice shall think fit, not exceeding one month, or to
be whipped by the Constable or other Officer, as in his Judgment shall seem
expedient.

C. 11. 7. N. 1.
Be it Enacted, That, etc. two able Artists (viz. Gagers, Measures.
etc.) shall be appointed, etc. which, etc. shall take an Oath; which Oath any
one Justice has hereby power to administer, to take and compute the Just
Contents and Gage of all Coppers, Fatts, Tuns, Backs and Corters, and all other
Brewing Vessels of that nature, etc.

8. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, that no Commissioner, Farmer, or sub-Commissioner
for the Excise, or Common Brewer of Ale or Beer to sell, Justice.
or Innkeeper whatsoever, shall, etc. have power to act in or execute as a
Justice of Peace any of the Powers, Clauses or things contained in any of the
Laws made for and concerning the Excise or in this present Act; and if any,
etc. shall presume to act or Execute any thing contrary hereunto, it is hereby
further declared, that all such things so acted or executed by any of them, are
and shall be utterly void and null to all intents and purposes.

. 15. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that, etc. no Person or Persons shall be
permitted to Sell of Retail any Coffee, Chocolet, Sherbet or Tea, License.
without License first obtained and had by order of the General Sessions of the
Peace in the several respective Counties, Certificate being first showed that
they have given good Security for the due payment of their dues to the King, or
the Chief Magistrate of the Place in whose Jurisdiction he or they do or shall
Inhabit or Dwell, for the selling or retailing of the same.

16. N. 3.
All and every of which said respective Offenses (viz. of Bribery of Gagers or
other Officers of Excise) shall be proved by the Oaths of two Lawful and
Credible Witnesses before two Justices of the Peace or chief Magistrate of the
Place where such Offense shall be Committed; Proof.
which said Justices or Magistrates respectively have hereby power to
administer the said Oaths, and also to examine, adjudge and determine the same,
and to cause such Penalties by Warrants under their Hands and Seals to be
levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders goods, rendering to the Party the
overplus; and for want of such Distress, to commit every such Offender to the
Common Goal of such County or Place, there to remain by the space of three
months without Bail or Mainprise.

19. N. 1.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted, Error.
etc. That no appeal in any Cause of Excise whatsoever shall be admitted, until
the party appellant shall have first deposited and laid down the single duty of
Excise in the Hands of the Commissioners, Farmers or sub-Commissioners of
Excise, within whose Jurisdiction or Division the said Cause was originally
heard and determined, and have given Security to the Commissioners of the
appeal, or Justice of Peace respectively, where such Cause is to be finally
adjudged, for all such Fine, Forfeiture and Penalty as upon such hearing and
determination was adjudged against him.

N. 2.
And that if upon the hearing and determining of any such appeal, Costs.
the said original Judgment shall happen to be reversed and made null, then and
in every such Case the said Commissioners, Farmers or Sub-Commissioners of
Excise in whose hands the said single duty of Excise was deposited, shall
restore and deliver back the same, or as much thereof as shall be adjudged by
the Commissioners of Appeals, or Justices of the Peace respectively to the said
appellant, and the Party originally prosecuted shall pay him the double Costs.

Lieu.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, That all Differences, 22. N. 1.
Appeals and Complaints that shall happen and arise between party and party in
order to the payment of the duty of Excise, shall be heard and determined in
the proper County, or in the several Ridings and Divisions of Yorkshire and
Lincolnshire where they shall arise, and not elsewhere.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, 24. N. 1.
etc. That the Justices of the Peace or any two or more of them, or Chief
Magistrates in the several Counties, Cities, Divisions and Places within
England and Wales respectively, shall meet once in every month in there
respective Divisions, or oftener if their shall be occasion, to hear and
determine, and to adjudge all matters and offenses against this or the
aforesaid Acts, (viz. 12 Car. 2. Cap. 23. 24.

Taxes.
Be it therefore Enacted, C. 13. 1. N. 2.
etc. (viz. against obstructions of 13. and 14. Car. 2. 10.) That the Justices
of Peace of the respective Counties, Corporations, Places and Limits within
their respective Jurisdictions, at the next Sessions to be held after the Feast
of St. Michael the Archangel next ensuing or the major part of them then
present, shall Issue out Warrants under their Hands and Seals to the respective
High Constables or other like next Officer, who shall Issue the like Warrants
unto the petty Constables, Headboroughs and Tythingmen, requiring them on the
next Sunday after Morning Service ended, to give public notice in the Church
or Chapel, Generally to all the Inhabitants, and also to give notice publicly
in the Church, and particularly as aforesaid to every Inhabitant within their
respective Precincts that shall then be occupier of any House, Edifice, Lodging
or Chamber, that within ten days next after such notice, he give a true and
just Account in writing under his Hand of all Hearths and Stoves in such
respective House, Edifice, Lodging and Chamber, to such respective Constable,
Headborough and Tythingman.

Certificate.
Which (viz. the Account of Hearths taken and received by Petty Constable, N. 5.
Headborough and Tythingman,) being so received by such respective High
Constable or other like Officer as aforesaid, and compared together, shall
within six days after such receipt be transmitted to the two next respective
Justices of the Peace, who are hereby Empowered to examine the said respective
High Constable, or other like Officer as aforesaid, Petty-Constable,
Headborough or Tything-man, upon Oath, concerning the truth and faithfulness of
their Actings in the Premises; which being done, the said Justices shall
within ten days after such Examination, sign and transmit the said Book and
Roll, together with the said original Accounts so endorsed as aforesaid and
filed, together unto the respective Clerk of the Peace, who shall within Twenty
days next after the receipt thereof, engross the said Book or Roll in
Parchment, to be still kept in the respective County and Places aforesaid, and
shall also within two months engross in Parchment a true Duplicate of the said
Book or Roll, which being signed by him and by two Justices of the Peace at
least of the respective County and Places aforesaid, shall be transmitted
within one month after such Engrossment into his Majesty's Court of Exchequer.

Alien.
And all Foreigners that shall really and bona fide set up and use any of the
Trades and Manufactures aforesaid, (viz. Weaving, C. 15. 3. N. 1.
Hemp-dressing Netts and Tapestry hangings, etc.) shall, etc. taking the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy before two Justices of the Peace near unto their
Dwellings, who are hereby Authorized to administer the same, enjoy all
privileges whatsoever as natural-born Subjects.

Common.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted, etc. That if any, C. 17. 53. N. 1.
etc. having a right of Common in any of the Manors, Wastes, Commons or Lands
within the said Great Level of the Feus called Bedford Level, or any other
Person or Persons whatsoever at any time after such Division or Enclosure made
or set out as aforesaid, (viz. by Commissioners, etc.) shall break, throw down,
disturb, obstruct, or by any means hinder or lay open the said Improvements and
Enclosures, at, in or after the making thereof, or the Hedges, Ditches or
Fences of the same or any part thereof shall destroy, and shall be thereof
Convicted by two Credible Witnesses upon Oath, before two Justices of the Peace
of the County where such disturbance or destruction shall be made; every such
person, etc. shall forfeit for every such Offense xx l. to be Levied by
distress upon the Goods and Chattels of every such Offender, etc. by Warrant
under the Hands and Seals of the said Justices of the Peace before whom such
Conviction shall be made, etc. or for want of sufficient Distress, the Offender
shall be Committed to the House of Correction or Common Goal for Three Months
without Bail or Mainprise, at the said Justices discretion.

Statuta 16 Car. 2.
16. Car. 2. 3. 2. N. 7.
ANd if they (viz. the Officers for search and view of Fire-Hearths, etc.) shall
find any Variance in the Number returned, both the Officer, Taxes.
etc. and the Constable or Tythingman, etc. to certify the same under his and
their Hands to the Clerk of the Peace; which Certificate they are hereby
enjoined to make.

N. 8.
And after approbation thereof by the Justices of Peace at their Sessions,
Certificate.
the same shall be Certified to his Majesty's Remembrancer in the Exchequer.

4. N. 2.
And in Case of violent opposition or Injury done by any, Peace.
to any such Officer or his Deputy in the due Execution of this Act, and the
same proved by Oath before any one Justice of the Peace or Chief Magistrate,
etc. of the City, Town or Place Dwelling near unto the Place, who are hereby
Authorized to Administer the said Oath. It shall and may be lawful to and for
such Justice of the Peace, etc. or Magistrates, to punish such Offender, etc.
if he shall find cause, by Imprisonment in the Common Goal for any time not
exceeding the space of one month.

^ 8. N. 1.
And if any Question or difference, shall arise about the taking any distress or
levying any Money by Virtue of this Act, (viz. of Fire-Hearths, Process.
etc.) the same shall be heard and finally determined by one or more of the
Justices of the Peace near adjoining, or Chief Magistrate of the Place
respectively upon complaint in that behalf.

9. N. 2.
And the Justices of Peace and Chief Magistrates, Constables and other his
Majesty's Officers within their several Limits and Jurisdictions, Justices.
are hereby Authorized and required to give assistance from time to time to
such Officers as shall be appointed, etc. for the Collecting of the said Duty,
etc.

10. N. 1.
Provided, that no person, Taxes.
etc. shall be questioned for any Arrears due on or before our Lady day, etc.
(viz. 1664.) who shall produce to the Collector a Certificate approved or to be
approved of by the two next Justices of the Peace, for their Exemption from the
said duty for that time, according to the rules prescribed in the said first
recited Act. (viz. 13, and 14. Car. 2. 10.)

N. 2.
Nor any Person who has truly paid the said duty, and shall, if it be required,
Proof.
make proof thereof before any one Justice of the Peace or other Chief
Magistrate of the Peace, etc.

C. 4. 3. N. 1.
Be it Enacted, Religion.
etc. That if any Person of the Age of Sixteen years or upwards, being a
Subject of this Realm, etc. shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or
Meeting, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion, in other manner
then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, etc. at
which Conventicle, etc. there shall be five Persons or more Assembled together
over and above those of the same Household, then it shall and may be lawful to
and for any two Justices of Peace of the County, Limit, Division or Liberty,
where such Offense aforesaid shall be Committed, or for the Chief Magistrate,
etc. if it be within a Corporation where there are not two Justices of the
Peace, and they are hereby required and enjoined upon proof to them or him
respectively made of such Offense, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath
of Witnesses, or notorious Evidences of the fact (which Oath the said Justices
of the Peace and Chief Magistrate respectively, are hereby Empowered and
required to administer) to make a Record of every such Offense and Offenses
under their Hands and Seals respectively.

N. 2.
Which Record so made as aforesaid, Process.
shall to all Intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full
and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such Offense, and thereupon
the said Justices and Chief Magistrate respectively, shall commit every such
Offender so Convicted as aforesaid, to the Goal or House of Correction, there
to remain without Bail or Mainprise for any time not exceeding the space of
three months, unless such Offender shall pay down to the said Justices or Chief
Magistrate such Sum of Money not exceeding Five pounds as the said Justices or
Chief Magistrate, who are thereunto Authorized and required as aforesaid, shall
fine the said Offender at for his or her said Offense, etc.

Indictment.
And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any, 4. N. 1.
etc. shall at any time again Commit the like Offense, etc. then such Offender
so Convict of such second Offense, shall Incur the penalty of Imprisonment in
the Goal or House of Correction for any time not exceeding Six months without
Bail or Mainprise, unless such Offender shall pay down to the said Justices or
Chief Magistrate such Sum of Money not exceeding Ten pounds, as the said
Justices or Chief Magistrate, etc. shall Fine the said Offender at, etc.

Imprisonment.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That if any such Offender so Convicted of a
second Offense, etc. shall at any time again Commit the like Offense, 5. N. 1.
etc. then any two Justices of the Peace and Chief Magistrate, etc. shall
Commit every such Offender to the Goal or House of Correction, there to remain
without Bail or Mainprise, until the next General Quarter Sessions, Assizes,
Goal delivery, great Sessions or sitting of any Commissioner of Oyer and
Terminer in the respective County, Limit, Division or Liberty which shall first
happen.

Indictment.
When and where every such Offender shall be proceeded against by Indictment,
etc. and shall forthwith be Arraigned, N. 2.
etc.

Process.
And if such, etc. shall be lawfully Convicted, etc. either by Confession or
Verdict, or if such Offender shall refuse to plead the General Issue, N. 3.
then the respective Justices of the Peace at their General Quarter Sessions,
etc. are hereby enabled and required to cause Judgment to be Entered, etc. that
such Offender shall be Transported beyond the Seas to any of his Majesty's
Foreign Plantations, (Virginia and New England only excepted) there to remain
seven years.

Ouster le nere.
And shall forthwith under their Hands and Seals make out Warrants to the
Sheriff, N. 4.
etc. of the same County where such Conviction or refusal to plead, or to
confess as aforesaid, shall be safely to Convey such Offender to some Port or
Haven nearest or most Commodious to be appointed by them respectively, and from
thence to Imbark such Offender to be safely Transported, etc.

Process.
And the said respective Court shall then also make out Warrants to the several
Constables, N. 6.
Headboroughs or Tythingmen of the respective places where the Estate real or
personal of such etc. shall happen to be, Commanding them thereby to sequester,
etc. the profits of the Lands, and distrain and fell all the Goods of the
Offender, etc. for the reimbursing of the said Sheriff, all such reasonable
Charges as he shall be at, and shall be allowed him by the said respective
Court.

Forfeiture.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, That in case the Offender, 7. N. 1.
etc. shall pay into the hands of the Register or Clerk of the Court or
Sessions where he shall be Convicted, before the said Court or Sessions shall
be ended, the Sum of one Hundred pounds, that then the said Offender shall be
discharged from Imprisonment and Transportation, and the Judgment for the same.

Certificate.
Be it further Enacted, That the Lieutenants, 10. N. 2.
etc. and also the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, etc. or any of them
jointly or severally, etc. with such other Assistance as they shall think meet
or can get in readiness with the soonest, on Certificate made to them
respectively under the Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace, etc. of
his particular Information and Knowledge of such unlawful Meetings or
Conventicles held, etc. and that he with such Assistance as he can get together
is not able to supprese or dissolve the same, shall and may, etc. repair unto
the place where they are so held, etc. and by the best means they can to
dissolve and dissipate or prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into
their Custody such of those Persons so unlawfully Assembled, as they shall
judge to be the readers and seducers of the rest, etc.

Force.
Provided also; and be it Enacted, etc. That the Justices of the Peace, 15. N. 1.
etc. shall and may with what aid, force and assistance they shall think fit
for the better Execution of this Act, after refusal or denial, enter into any
House or other place where they shall be Informed any such Conventicle, etc. is
or shall be held.

16. N. 1.
Provided, That no dwelling House of any Peer, Privilege.
etc. whilst he or his Wife shall be there resident, shall be searched, etc.
but by Immediate Warrant from his Majesty under his Sign Manual, or in the
presence of the Lieutenant or one of the Deputy Lieutenants, or two Justices of
the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County, etc.

N. 2.
Nor shall any other dwelling House of any Peer or other Person whatsoever be
entered into with force, Justices.
etc. but in presence of one Justice of the Peace etc. except in London, etc.

17. N. 1.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, Imprisonment.
etc. That no Person shall by virtue of this Act be Committed to the House of
Correction, that shall satisfy the said Justices of the Peace, etc. that he or
she, or in Case of a Feme Covert, that her Husband has an Estate of Freehold
or Copyhold to the value of Five pounds per Annum, or personal Estate to the
value of Fifty pounds.

16 and 17 Car. 22. 1 N. 4.
( Viz. Coals to be xxxvi. Bushels Guildhal Measure, Measures.
or cxii l. Aver du Pois weight, etc.) upon pain of Forfeiture of all the Coals
which shall be otherwise Sold or exposed to Sale by any Woodmonger or Retailer
of Coals, and the double value thereof, to be recovered by any, etc. in any
Court of Record, or by way of Complaint made unto the Lord Mayor of London for
the time being, and the Justices of Peace within the City of London and
Liberties thereof, or to any two of them, or to the Justices of Peace of the
several and respective Counties and Places where such Coals shall be exposed to
Sale, or any of them, who are hereby Empowered and required to call the Parties
before them, and to hear and Examine such Complaint upon Oath, which by virtue
of this Act is to be Administered by them or any two of them, and upon due proof
thereof made to their satisfaction, to Convict the Offenders and to give
Warrant under their Hands and Seals for levying the Forfeitures accordingly.

N. 6.
And the said Lord Mayor of London and the Court of Aldermen for the time being,
and the Justices of Peace of the several Counties respectively, Fuel.
or any three or more of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, are hereby
Empowered to set the Rates and Prices of all such Coals as shall be sold by
Retail, as they from time to time shall Judge reasonable, allowing a Competent
profit to the said Retailer beyond the Price paid by him to the Importer, and
the ordinary Charges thereupon accrewing.

2. N. 2.
And in Case of refusal (viz. by Woodmonger, etc. to sell at Prices set, Process.
the Officer appointed by the Lord Mayor, or by the Justices, to enter, etc.)
taking a Constable to force entrance, and the said Coals to Sell or cause to be
Sold at such Rates, etc.

4. N. 2.
And if any Action shall be Commenced against any Justice of Peace, Constable or
other Officer or Person for any thing done by color of this Act, Pleading.
the Defendant in every such action may plead the General Issue, and give the
special matter in Evidence.

N. 2.
And if the Verdict be found for him, or the Plaintiff become Nonsuited,
Damages.
shall recover his Damages and double Costs of Suit for his unjust vexation in
that behalf.

C. 3. 3. N. 1.
Be it further Enacted, that every Sheriff shall on the first day of every
General Quarter Sessions yearly held next after the Feast of Easter, Inquest.
deliver and cause to be delivered unto the Justices of Peace sitting at the
same Sessions the names of all Persons of such Estates ( viz. xx l. per Annum
in England, and viij. l. per Annum in Wales) as are by the true meaning of this
Act to be Returned for Iury-men, to the end the Estates of such Persons may be
enquired after, and such Persons approved by the said Justices of Peace, or the
greater number of them then present, to be Persons of such Estates to be
retornable for Iurymen for the year then next ensuing.

N. 2.
And the said Justices shall have power to add such Persons having Estates of
the respective values before mentioned, Justices.
as they shall find to be omitted by the Sheriff amongst the Names by him
delivered, and such a Competent number, and no more of such Persons as
aforesaid, shall be retornable to serve of Iuries for the year next Ensuing, as
the said Justices, or the greater number of them as aforesaid, shall think fit.

Statuta 17 Car. 2.
Religion.
(VIz. Nonconformist Parson not to come within five miles of City, 17 Car. 2.
2. 3. N. 4.
Town Corporate or Borough that sends Burgesses to Parliament, or of place
where he was Vicar or Preacher, etc.) before he or they have taken and
subscribed the Oath aforesaid (viz. against taking Arms against the Kings
Commissioner) before the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions to be
holden for the County, Riding or Division, next unto the Corporation, City or
Borough, Parish, Place or Town, in open Court; which said Oath, the said
Justices are hereby Empowered there to Administer.

Forfeiture.
Upon Forfeiture, etc. of xl l. etc. one third, etc. to the King, N. 5.
etc. the other third, etc. to the use of the Poor, etc. and the other third,
etc. to such etc. as shall or will sue for the same, etc. before any Justices
of Peace in their Quarter Sessions, etc.

Imprisonment.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted, 5. N. 1.
etc. That it shall be Lawful for any two Justices of the Peace of the
respective County upon Oath to them of any Offense against this Act; which Oath
they are hereby Empowered to Administer, to Commit the Offender for six months
without Bail or Mainprise, unless upon or before such Commitment he shall
before the said Justices of the Peace swear and subscribe the aforesaid Oath
and Declarations, (viz. of Conformity, and against taking Arms, etc.)

Statuta 18 Car. 2.
Cattle.
(VIz. any Constable, etc. may seize Cattle alive or dead, fat or lean
Imported, 18 Car. 2. 2. 1 N. 4.
etc.) and keep the same during the space of Eight and Forty hours in some
public or convenient place where such seizure shall be made; within which time
if the owner, etc. or any for them, etc. shall make it appear unto some Justice
of the Peace of the same County where the same shall be so seized, by the Oath
of two credible Witnesses, which Oath the said Justice of Peace is hereby
Empowered and required to Administer, that the same were not Imported from
Ireland, or from any other place beyond the Seas not herein after excepted,
after the said second day of February; then the same upon the Warrant of such
Justice of the Peace shall be delivered without delay, 20 Car. 2. 7. 5. N. 3.

Scotland.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. That the said Act, C. 3. 1. N. 2.
(viz. 13 and 14 Car. 2. 22.) and every Clause, etc. therein contained, and all
and every the Powers and Authorities thereby given, be, continue and remain in
force until the end of seven years from the Expiration or Determination of the
forementioned Act, 29 and 30 Car. 2. 2.

Clergy.
And be it further Enacted, 2. N. 1.
etc. That the benefit of Clergy shall be taken away from great, known, and
notorious Thieves and Spoil-takers in the said Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, or either of them during the continuance of this present Act, who
shall be duly Convicted for theft done or committed within the said Counties,
or either of them.

Ouster le nere.
Or otherwise, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of the
Assize and Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer or Goal Delivery, N. ^
before whom such Offenders shall be Convicted within the said Counties, or
either of them, to Transport or cause to be Transported the said Offenders and
every of them, into any of his Majesty's Dominions in America, there to remain
and not to return, etc.

C. 4. 1. N. 3.
(None to be Buried but in Woollen only, Drapery.
etc.) upon pain of the Forfeiture of the Sum of Five pounds, etc. to be levied
by the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, etc. by Warrant from any
Justice of the Peace, or Mayor, Alderman or Head Officer of such City, Town or
place Corporate respectively within their several Limits, by Distress and Sale
of the Goods of the Party Interred contrary to this Act, etc. or in default
thereof, by Distress and Sale of the Goods of any that had a hand in the
putting such Person into such Shift, Shirt, Sheet or Coffin, contrary to this
Act, or did order or dispose the doing thereof.

Statuta 19 Car. 2.
19 Car. 2. 3. 3. N. 2.
ANd if any, etc. shall presume to build Contrary, London.
etc. (viz. against the rules for Rebuilding the City of London,) and be
Convicted of the same by the Oaths of two or more Credible Witnesses to be
taken before the Lord Mayor for the time being, or any two or more of the
Justices of the Peace for the said City, who are hereby Empowered to Administer
the same Oaths; that then, and in such Case the said House so irregularly
built, etc. shall be deemed as a Common Nuisance.

C. 4. 1. N. 2.
For remedy, etc. be it Enacted, Poor.
etc. That the Justices of the Peace of the respective Counties, (viz. where
Poor Prisoners have no Work, etc.) at any their General Sessions, or the major
part of them then there Assembled, if they shall find it needful so to do, may
provide a stock of such Materials as they find convenient for the setting Poor
Prisoners on work, in such manner and by such ways as other County Charges by
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm are and may be levied and raised, and to pay
and provide fit Persons to oversee and set such Prisoners on work.

N. 3.
And make such Orders for accounts of and concerning the Premises as shall by
them be thought needful, and for punishment of neglects and other abuses,
Justices.
and for bestowing of the profit arising by the labor of the Prisoners so set
on work, for their relief, which shall be duly observed and may alter, revoke
or amend such their Orders from time to time.

N. 4.
Provided, Taxes.
That no Parish be rated above Six pence by the Week toward the Premises,
having respect to the respective values of the several Parishes.

2. N. 2.
For some remedy, etc. Be it etc. Enacted, Imprisonment.
That any Sheriff of the respective Counties (viz. where numbers of Prisoners,
Plague, or Diseases are, etc.) having the Custody of the Goal, or such Persons
who have the Custody of the Goal, with the Advice and Consent of three or more
Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, may, if they shall on
Inquiry or Information find it needful, upon Emergent occasions in the
respective Counties, provide other safe Places for the removal of Sick or other
Persons from and out of the ordinary and usual Goals.

Statuta 20 Car. 2.
20 Car. 2. 3. 5. N. 2.
ANd whenever any Wood or Timber shall at any time, Wood.
etc. be directed to be fallen in any part of the Wastes of the said late Forest
( viz. of Dean in Gloucestershire, Enclosed or not Enclosed, the same shall be
first viewed and allowed to be fallen by two or more of the Justices of the
Peace for the said County unconcerned in the Premises, and shall not be Cut or
Fallen until the same be viewed and allowed by such two or more Justices, as
fit and convenient to be Cut and Fallen, and that the said Justices shall have
marked with a broad Arrow and Crown, that it may remain to be seen, as they are
hereby required and Empowered to do) so many and such Trees as are the most fit
to be preserved for growth for Timber upon every Acre intended to be Fallen;
and also shall have Certified, as they are hereby likewise required to do, unto
the Lord Treasurer, or Lords Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being;
the names of the Places and number of Trees so viewed and allowed to be fallen;
and so marked to be preserved as aforesaid.

Cattle.
And also that it shall and may be Lawful to and for any Justice of Peace of the
County, C. 7. 5. N. 5.
or Chief Officer of the Port-Town in or near the place where such Importation,
(viz. of Irish Cattle, etc.) shall be made, or where any of the Cattle, Sheep,
Swine, Beef, Pork or Bacon so Imported, shall be driven or brought by Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of such Justice or Chief Officer, to cause to be
apprehended all and every the Masters, Mariners and Seamen, having Charge of or
belonging to such Ship or Vessel in which such Importation shall be made, and
all and every other Person and Persons acting or employed in the landing,
driving, attending on or taking care or charge of the said Cattle, Sheep,
Swine, Beef, Pork or Bacon Importer as aforesaid, and them to Commit to the
Common Goal of the said County, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise for
the space of three Months.

Statuta 22 Car. 2.
Religion.
BE it Enacted, etc. That if any Person of the Age of Sixteen years or upwards
being a Subject of this Realm, 22. Car. 2. 1. 1. N. 2.
etc. shall be present at any Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under Color or
Pretense of any Exercise of Religion in other manner then according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, in any Place within, etc. (viz.
England, Wales, or Berwick,) at which Conventicle, etc. there shall be Five
Persons or more Assembled together, over and besides those of the same
Househould, etc. It shall and may be Lawful to and for any one or more Justices
of the Peace of the County, Limit, Division, Corporation or Liberty wherein the
Offense aforesaid shall be Committed, or for the Chief Magistrate, etc. and he
and they are hereby required and enjoined upon proof to him or them
respectively made of such Offense, either by Confession of the Party, or Oath
of two Witnesses; which Oath the said Justice and Justices of the Peace and
Chief Magistrate respectively are hereby Empowered and required to Administer,
or by notorious Evidence and Circumstance of the Fact, to make a Record of
every such Offense under his or their Hands and Seals respectively.

Certificate.
Which Record so made as aforesaid, N. 3.
shall to all Intents and purposes be in Law taken and adjudged to be a full
and perfect Conviction of every such Offender for such Offense, and thereupon
the said Justice, etc. and Chief Magistrate respectively, shall Impose on every
such Offender so Convict as aforesaid, a Fine of Five shillings for such first
Offense; which Record and Conviction shall be Certified by the said Justice,
etc. at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the County or Place where
the Offense was Committed.

Amercement.
Which Fine, etc. for the first and every other Offense, shall be Levied by
Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods and Chattels, 2. N. 2.
or in the Case of the poverty of such Offender, upon the Goods and Chattels of
any other, etc. who shall be then Convicted in manner aforesaid of the like
Offense at the same Conventicle at the discretion of the said Justice, etc. so
as the Sum so to be Levied on any one Person in Case of the poverty of other
Offenders, amount not in the whole to above, etc. Ten Pounds upon occasion of
any one Meeting, etc.

And every Constable, Headborough, Tythingman; N. 3.
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor respectively, Constable.
are hereby Authorized and required to Levy the same accordingly, having first
received a Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the said Justice, Justices or
Chief Magistrate respectively so to do.

N. 4.
The said Moneys so to be Levied to be forthwith delivered to the same Justice,
Forfeitures.
etc. and by him or them to be distributed the one third part thereof to the
use of the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors to be paid to the
High Sheriff of the County for the time being in manner following; That is to
say, the Justice, etc. of Peace shall pay the same into the Court of the
respective Quarter Sessions; which said Court shall deliver the same to the
Sheriff, and make a Memorial of Record of the payment and delivery thereof;
which said Memorial shall be a sufficient and final discharge to the said
Justice, etc. and a Charge to the Sheriff: which said Discharge and Charge
shall be Certified into the Exchequer together, and not one without the other;
and no Iustite shall or may be questioned or accountable for the same in the
Exchequer or elsewhere, then in the Quarter Sessions, etc.

3. N. 2.
And if the said Preacher or Teacher so Convicted be a Stranger, Process.
or his Name and Habitation not known, or is fled and cannot be found, or in
the Judgment of the Justice, Justices or Chief Magistrate before whom he shall
be Convicted, shall be thought unable to pay the same, the said Justice, etc.
are hereby Empowered and required to Levy the same by Warrant as aforesaid upon
the Goods and Chattels of any such Persons who shall be present at the same
Conventicle, any thing in this or any other Act, Law or Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding, etc.

6. N. 1.
Provided also, and be it further Enacted, Error.
That in all Cases of this Act where the Penalty or Sum charged on any Offender
exceeds the Sum of Ten shillings, and such Offender shall find himself
agrieved, it shall and may be lawful for him within one Week after the said
Penalty or Money charged, shall be paid or Levied, to appeal in writing from
the Person, etc. Convicting, to the Judgment of the Justices of the Peace in
their next Quarter Sessions.

N. 2.
To whom the Justice, Justices.
etc. that first Convicted such Offender shall return the Money Levied upon the
Appellant, and shall Certify under his and their Hands and Seals the Evidence
upon which the Conviction past with the whole Record thereof and the said
Appeal.

N. 4.
And in Case such Appellant shall not prosecute with Effect, Costs.
or if upon such Trial he shall not be acquitted, or Judgment pass not for him
upon his said Appeal, the said Justices at the Sessions shall give trebble
Costs against such Offender for his unjust Appeal.

N. 5.
And no other Court whatsoever shall Intermeddle with any Cause or Causes of
Appeal upon this Act, Certiorari.
but they shall be finally determined in the Quarter Sessions only.

7. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it further Enacted, Recognizance.
That upon the delivery of such Appeal as aforesaid, the person Appellant shall
enter before the person, etc. Convicting, into a Recognizance to prosecute the
said Appeal with effect.

N. 2.
Which said Recognizance, the Person, etc. so Convicting, Certificate.
is hereby Empowered to take and required to Certify the same to the next
Quarter Sessions.

N. 3.
And in Case no such Recognizance be Entered into, Bail.
the said Appeal to be null and void.

9. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That the Justice, etc. of the Peace and Chief
Magistrate respectively, or the respective Constables, Process.
Headboroughs and Tithingmen, by Warrant from the said Justice, etc. shall and
may with what aid, force and assistance they shall think fit for the better
Execution of this Act, after refusal or denial, to enter, break open and enter
into any House or other place where they shall be Informed, any such
Conventicle as aforesaid is or shall be held as well within Liberties as
without.

N. 2.
And take into their Custody the Persons there unlawfully Assembled,
Imprisonment.
to the Intent they may be proceeded against according to this Act.

N. 3.
And that the Lieutenants, or Deputy Lieutenants, or any Commissioned Officer of
the Militia or other of his Majesty's Forces, War.
with such Troops or Companies of Horse and Foot, and also the Sheriffs and
other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of them jointly or
severally, within any the Counties or Places within, etc. (viz. England, Wales,
or Berwick,) with such other Assistance as they shall think meet or can get in
readiness with the soonest, on Certificate made to them respectively under the
Hand and Seal of any one Justice of the Peace, or Chief Magistrate of his
particular Information or knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle
held or to be held in their respective Counties or Places, and that he with
such Assistance as he can get together, is not able to suppress and dissolve
the same, shall and may, and are hereby required and enjoined to repair unto
the Place where they are so held or to be held, and by the best means they can
to dissolve, dissipate or prevent all such unlawful Meetings, and take into
their Custody such and so many, etc. as they shall think fit, etc.

Privilege.
Provided always, that no Dwelling House of any Peer of this Realm,. 10. N. 1.
where he or his wife shall then be resident, shall be searched by virtue of
this Act, but by Immediate Warrant from his Majesty under his Sign Manual, or
in the presence of the Lieutenant, or one Deputy-Lieutenant, or two Justices of
Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of the same County or Riding.

Constable.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That if any Constable, Headborough, 11. N. 1*
Tythingman, Churchwarden or Overseer of the Poor, who shall know or be
credibly Informed of any such Meeting, etc. held within his Precincts, Parishes
or Limits, and shall not give Information thereof to some Justice of the Peace
or the Chief Magistrate, and endeavor the Conviction of the Parties according
to his duty, but such, etc. or any, etc. lawfully called in aid, etc. shall
wilfully and wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the Execution of
this Act, and be thereof Convicted in manner aforesaid, he shall forfeit, etc.
Five pounds, etc.

Justices.
And that if any Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate shall wilfully and
wittingly omit the performance of his duty in the Execution of this Act, N. 2*
he shall forfeit, etc. one hundred pounds, etc.

Certificate.
And in Case any Person offending against this Act, 13. N. 3.
shall be an Inhabitant in any other County or Corporation, or fly into any
other County or Corporation after the Offense Committed, the Justice of Peace
or Chief Magistrate before whom he shall be Convicted as aforesaid, shall
Certify the same under his Hand and Seal to any Justice of Peace or Chief
Magistrate of such other County or Corporation wherein the said Person or
Persons are Inhabitants, or are fled into.

Process.
Which said Justice or Chief Magistrate respectively, N. 4.
is hereby Authorized and required to Levy the Penalty, etc. in this Act
mentioned, upon the Goods and Chattels of such Person, etc. as fully as the
said other Justice of Peace might have done in Case he or they had been
Inhabitants in the place where the Offense was Committed.

Measures.
(Viz. the xl s. forfeit by Selling Corn or Salt, etc. by unsealed Measures, C.
8. 2. N. 3.
etc.) to be Levied in such manner, and such other Penalties; for want of
Distress, to be inflicted, as in and by the said former Act, (viz. 16. and 17.
Car. 2. 19. 3. N. 1.) is directed by the Warrant or Order of any one or more of
his Majesty's Justices of Peace within the County* City or place where such
Offense shall be Committed; which said Justices respectively are hereby
required and enabled to see this Statute duly Executed.

Forfeiture.
(Viz. if Mayor or Head Officer knowingly permit Sale by false Measures, 3. N.
4.
or reform not on Complaint, etc.) then he or they so offending, for every such
Offense upon due Proof and Conviction thereof by Presentment or Indictment
before the Justices of Peace of the County where such Offense shall be
Committed, at the General Sessions, etc. held for the same, shall forfeit the
Sum of Five pounds.

Ways.
And every Constable or Surveyer of the Highways refusing or neglecting to put
the said Acts (viz. heretofore made) in Execution, C. 12. 1. N. 3.
or wilfully fuffering any Wagons or Carts to pass through his respective
Limits with any more Horses or other Cattle, or in other manner then by this
Act is allowed, shall upon Complaint thereof made to any Justice of the Peace
of the Place or Division where such neglect shall be proved to be done by the
Oath of any one Credible Witness, which Oath such Justice is hereby Empowered
to Administer, or upon view of the Justice himself be thereof Convicted.

Amercement.
And shall incur such Fine as the same Justice shall think fit to Impose on such
Officer, not exceeding the Sum of xl s. for any one Offense; N. 4.
the same Fine to be Levied by the High Constable of such Place or Division, or
any other Officer by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of such Justice of the
Peace upon the Goods and Chattels of the Person so offending, rendering the
overplus to the owner thereof, all necessary Charges in Levying the same being
first deducted, to be Employed for the Amending of the Highways of the Parish
or Place where such neglect shall be found, as the said Justice or Justices
shall appoint for the doing thereof.

2. N. 2.
And that the Justices of Peace in their open Sessions shall and may enquire by
such ways and means as they think fitting, Justices.
into the value of all such Lands so given or to be given, and order the
Improvement and Employment of the Rents and profits thereof according to the
Will and direction of the Donor of such Lands, if they find that the Persons so
entrusted have been negligent or faulty in the performance of their Trust,
except such Lands as have been given to the uses aforesaid to any College or
Hall in either of the Universities of this Kingdom which have visitors of their
own, any Law, etc. notwithstanding.

3. N. 3.
And in Case he (viz. the rescuer or resister, etc. do not pay the said Sum viz.
xl s.) within seven days after notice of such Conviction, Forfeiture.
that it shall and may be lawful for any Justice of the Peace where any such
opposition or rescue shall be made, to Commit such Person, etc. to the Common
Goal of the County where such Offense shall be Committed, there to remain until
the said Forfeiture shall be paid to the Surveyor, etc. of the Highwayes for
that Parish where the Offense was Committed, etc.

5. N. 2.
And that where any Ground shall lie at the end of any of the said Streets or
Lanes, Ways.
or any other place of which there may be a dispute who ought to Pave or Amend
the same, that in such Cases the Justices of Peace for the said Places
respectively, shall have hereby full power and authority in their
Quarter Sessions to order and determine the same; which order, etc. shall be
binding to all Persons whatsoever therein concerned, any Law, etc.
notwithstanding.

9. N. 1.
Provided also, and it is further Enacted, etc. That if any Person, Forfeiture.
etc. shall fail or make default to make their respective days labor in every
year for and toward the Repairing of the Highwayes, or neglect to send their
respective Carriages, Horses and Carts according as by Law they are
respectively required, it shall and may be Lawful for the Surveyor, etc. of
every Parish, and they are hereby required to make Complaint thereof to the
next Justices of the Peace; who are hereby authorized and required upon proof
of any such default or neglect made before them by the Oath of one Credible
Witness, (which Oath they are hereby Empowered to Administer) to Levy by
Distress and Sale of the Goods of every Person failing or neglecting as
aforesaid, and not having a reasonable Excuse to be allowed by the said
Justices the several Penalties hereafter mentioned, etc.

10. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That where the Justices of the Peace of any
County, City or other Place, Taxes.
or the major part of them at their General-Quarter-Sessions, shall be fully
satisfied that the Common Highways, Causeys or Bridges within any Parish,
Township or Hamlet within their respective Jurisdiction, may not or will not be
sufficiently Amended, Repaired and Supported by means of the Laws now in force,
without the help of this present Act in all such Cases one or more Assessment,
etc. upon all and every the Inhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands, Houses,
Tenements and Hereditaments, or any personal Estate usually ratable to the Poor
within any such Parish, Township or Hamlet, shall be made, Levied, Collected
and Allowed by such Person, etc. and in such manner as the said Justices by
their order at such Sessions shall direct and appoint in that behalf.

12. N. 3.
And the said Surveyors and Orderers (viz. of Highwayes) shall make return of
the Defaulters and every of them, Certificate.
within one Month after every default made, to some neighboring Justice of the
Peace of the same County, and the said Justice shall present the same at the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace-held next after such return made unto him.

13. N. 2.
Therefore (viz. Because of great Rivers in Cheshire and Lancashire.) Be it
further Enacted, etc. That for Ten years next following, and no longer, Sewers.
the respective Justices of the Peace within the said respective Counties,
shall upon the Presentment of the Grand Jury at their respective and General
Quarter Sessions, have Power and Authority by Order or Warrant under the Hands
and Seals of all or the major part of the said Justices, being six at the least
then Present, to cause to be Erected and Builded any new Bridge or Bridges in
such Place, etc. in any of the said Highwayes over any of the said Rivers
within their respective Jurisdictions, as they shall Judge fit and necessary,
and so declare by such Order as aforesaid, and likewise to repair or rebuild
such other Bridges as were demolished in the late War.

Ways.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, 14. N. 1.
etc. That it shall and may be lawful for any six or more Justices of the Peace
of the County of Monmouth, whereof two to be of the Quorum, at their General
Sessions of the Peace to be held for that County, at any time hereafter during
ten years, and no longer, to Impose and Levy any Sum, etc. upon the said County
for the Repairing and Amending of Uske and Basaley Bridges which are Situate
upon great Rivers, and lie on very public Rodes of the County, so as the Sum,
etc exceed not, etc. xl l. etc.

Statuta 22 and 23 Car. 2.
Corn.
ANd be it further Enacted and Declared, That in Case any Person, 22 and 23 Car
2. 7 4. N. 1.
etc. who shall be Convict or Attainted of any the Offenses, (viz. that in the
Night time maliciously, unlawfully and willingly burn or Cause to be burned or
destroyed any Ricks or Stacks of Corn, Hay or Grain, Barns, or other Houses or
Buildings, or Kilns, or shall, etc, kill or destroy any Horses, Sheep or other
Cattle, etc.) made Felony by virtue of this Act as aforesaid, to Avoid Judgment
of death or Execution thereupon for such Offense, shall make his Election to be
Transported beyond the Seas to any of his Majesty's Plantations, that then the
Justices of Assize, Oyer and Terminer, Goal delivery, or Justices of the Peace
before whom such Offender shall be Convict or Attaint by virtue of this Act and
every of them respectively, shall cause Judgment to be Entered against every
such Offender, that he be Transported beyond the Seas to some of his Majesty's
Plantations, in the said Judgment to be particularly mentioned, etc. there to
remain for the space of Seven years.

Trespass.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That upon the Complaint or request of the
Party, etc. Injured in any such manner (viz. by maiming Cattle, 6. N. 1.
or destroying Plantations of Trees or Enclosures, etc.) any three or more
Justices of the Peace for the County, Division, City, Town Corporate or Place,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall and may, and they are thereunto
Authorized and required by virtue of this Act to enquire as well by the Oaths
of twelve lawful men or more of the same County, as by Examination of Witnesses
upon Oath, or by any lawful ways or means which to them shall seem meet, of
and concerning any the Offenses before Incurred, and Offenders therein and in
order thereunto to Issue out Warrants as well for the Summoning of Jurors, as
for the apprehending of all such Persons as shall or may be thereof suspected,
and to take their Examination touching the same; as also to cause all such
other Persons as to them shall seem likely to make discovery thereof, to appear
before them, and to give Information upon Oath, of and concerning their
knowledge of the Premises, so as no Person so to be Examined by the said
Justices of the Peace shall be Convicted, or in any wise proceeded against for
or by reason of any Offense concerning which he or they shall be so Examined as
a Witness, and shall upon such his Examination make a true discovery thereof.

Process.
And in case any Person or Persons, N. 2.
who by the said Justices be thought likely to make discovery as aforesaid,
shall refuse to appear or to be Examined as a Witness, being duly Summoned by
the said Justices in pursuance of this Act, it shall and may be lawful for the
said Justices of the Peace to Commit the party so refusing to the Common Goal
for the said County without Bail or Mainprise, until he shall submit to be
Examined upon Oath of and concerning his knowledge touching the same Offense,
or the Offenders by whom the same was Committed.

Drapery.
(Viz. all Fines, Forfeitures and Penalties for defective Kidderminster Stuffs,
C. 8. 15. N. 2.
etc.) shall and may be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the Offender, etc. by Warrant under the Hands and Seals of the Bailiff, and
one of the Justices of the Peace of the said Borough, etc.

22 and 23 Car. 2. St. 2. C. 12. (2.) 3. N. 2.
Be it further Enacted, Corn.
That upon Complaint made to any one or more Justices of the Peace, that any
kind of Corn ground or unground, or Salt, has been sold or bought, or
delivered contrary to this Act, the proof shall lie upon the Defendant to make
it appear by the Oaths of one or more Credible Witnesses, that he or they did
sell or buy the same in every respect according to this and the said former
Act, ( viz. 22 Car. 2. 8.) wherein if such Person complained of shall fail, he
or they shall forfeit and lose as is by this Act before directed (viz. the
Corn, etc. or the value, etc.) to be Levied by Distress and Sale of his or
their Goods or Chattels, restoring the overplus, by Warrant under the Hand and
Seal of one or more Justice before whom he or they shall be so Convicted; which
Penalties, by this Act appointed to be Levied, shall by the said Justice or
Justices be distributed one half to the Poor of the Parish where such Offense
was committed, and the other half to the Informer or Prosecutor.

C. 16. (10) 4. N. 1.
And likewise that all Judges and Justices of Assize and General Goal delivery,
Poor.
and all Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions shall in open Court
give in Charge to the Grand Iuries to enquire of and present such Offenders
(viz. as conceal or defraud Gifts to poor of London burnt or infected.)

5. N. 1.
And that upon Complaint made to any Justice of Peace in any County, London.
City or Town Corporate by the Chamberlain of the City of London, or his
Attorneys, Solicitors, Receivers, Agents or any of them, made or appointed by
him by any Writings under his Hand and Seal for prosecuting the recovery, or
for recovering the said Manors or any of them against any Person or Persons
for their unjust detaining of any Moneys Collected for the uses aforesaid or
any of them, that then such Justice of Peace shall grant his Warrant against
such Persons so complained of, for the bringing of them before him.

N. 2.
And upon their Appearance before him, Recognizance.
if it shall seem probable to the said Justice upon Examining of the Matter and
Evidence given by any Witness upon Oath, which the said Justice may Administer,
or other Evidence that the Person complained of does unjustly detain any Moneys
Collected or appointed for the uses aforesaid or any of them, then such Justice
shall by sufficient Recognizance bind him to appear at the next General
Quarter Sessions, to answer the matter complained of, and to observe and abide
such Order touching the same as the Justices shall then make, and upon his
refusal so to be bound, to commit to the Goal, there to remain without Bail or
Mainprise until he shall become bound by such Recognizance.

N. 3.
And at the said Quarter Sessions whether he shall there appear or make default,
Process.
yet the Justices then shall summarily proceed to the Examination of the matter
complained of, and if upon Oath of one or more Witness or Witnesses, or any
other Evidence the Court shall be satisfied, that he does unjustly detain any
such Moneys, the Court shall adjudge and order the payment of the same
presently, together with the penalty hereby appointed for not paying thereof,
and such Costs for the prosecution of the same as the Court shall think fit,
and if he shall not presently pay the same accordingly (to the said Chamberlain
of London, or his Attorneys or Agents or some of them) shall Commit him to the
Goal if he be there present, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise until he
shall observe the said Order of Sessions.

N. 4.
And if he shall be absent, That then they shall grant their Warrant for the
Apprehending or Committing of him to the Goal, Imprisonment.
there to remain until he pay the Money so ordered, and that if he cannot be
taken, then for the distraining of his Goods and Chattels and sale of the same,
rendering the overplus whereby the Moneys so ordered, may be answered and paid.

N. 5.
And that the definitive Order of the said Justices shall be final as touching
the matter complained of or contained in such Order, Certiorari.
from which there shall be no Appeal or Review, nor shall any Writ of Error or
Certiorari lie for the Removal or Reversal of the same, nor shall the same be
any ways Impeached.

C. 17. (11) 6. N. 1.
And that the Parties offending therein (viz. not yielding obedience to Orders
in London for Drayning, Paving, and other works, etc.) contrary to this Act,
London.
shall and may be proceeded against, and thereof Convicted by Indictment at the
next Sessions of the Peace to be held for the said City and Liberties thereof,
according to his or their several Offenses, unless they shall submit to the
Judgment and Censure of the Persons so to be Authorized and Appointed as
aforesaid, or any Seven or more of them, and shall satisfy and pay such mulct
or penalty as by them shall be Set and Imposed for such Offense into the
Chamber of the City of London, etc.

Poor.
And that the Officers of the said Corporations Erected and Constituted ( viz.
for the Poor by 13 and 14 Car. 2. 12.) in pursuance of the said Act, C. 18.
(12) ^. N. 3.
and their Treasurers shall make and give Quarterly Accounts to the Justices of
the Peace, who are hereby required to demand and call for the said Accounts and
are not to raise any more Moneys upon any new Certificates whatsoever, until
there be a just Account given to; and allowed by the Justices of the Peace
aforesaid, according to the true Intent and meaning of the said former and this
present Act.

License.
And be it further Enacted, that no Drover from and after, etc. (viz. 24 June,
Cap. 19. (18.)
1671.) shall be licensed, appointed or assigned by the Justices of Peace in
their Quarter Sessions or otherwise within London and Westminster, or fourscore
Miles, etc. and that all such Licenses shall be null and void, any former Law,
etc. notwithstanding.

Justices.
And that, etc. (viz from 24. June, 5. N. 1.
1671.) It shall not be lawful for any Justices of the Peace at their
Quarter Sessions or otherwise to License any Person to be a Drover, who does
use or Exercise the Profession or Trade of a Grasier or Butcher, nor any other
Person or Persons whatsoever, unless the Person or Persons so Licensed, shall
become bound to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors with two sufficient
Sureties of the same County, Division or Place where such License shall be
obtained, by a Recognizance in such Sum as the said Justices shall think fit,
not to sell any Cattle by him or them to be bought within the distance of sixty
miles from the place where he bought the same.

Recognizance.
And that the Person so Licensed shall be known to the said Justices or some of
them to be of sufficient Estate and Ability to answer the Penalty of such
Recognizance in case he shall Incur the forfeiture thereof. N. 2.


Information.
But nevertheless, for preventing of vexatious Informations and Prosecutions by
Color of this Act. 7 N. 1.


Costs.
Be it further Enacted, N. 2.
That if upon any Information or other Prosecution grounded upon this Act, it
shall appear to the Justices before whom the said Cause shall be brought, that
any such Information or Prosecution was promoted only for vexation and without
any reasonable Cause, the said Justices shall and are hereby required by virtue
of this Act, to Award to the Party so unjustly accused or prosecuted, treble
Costs to be occasioned by such vexatious Prosecution; the same to be recovered
by Action of Debt or upon the Case; wherein no Essoin, Protection or Wager of
Law shall be allowed.

Cattle.
And be it further Enacted, 8. N. 1.
etc. that the Justices of the Peace in every County, Riding, Division, City or
Town Corporate within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed, at their Quarter Sessions shall have full Power and
Authority by virtue of this Act to enquire, hear and determine all and every
the Defaults and Offenses in buying or selling of Cattle, committed contrary to
this Act or any other Law or Statute now in Force within the County, Riding,
Division, City or Town Corporate, where any such Offense shall be Committed, by
Inquisition, Presentment, Bill or Information before them exhibited, and to
make process thereupon.

Execution.
And upon Conviction of the Offender, to make extracts of the one moiety of the
Forfeitures to be Levied to the Kings use, as they use to do of other Fines, N.
2.
Issues and Amercements grown in Sessions of the Peace, and to award Execution
of the other moiety to the Informer or Prosecuter by Fieri facias or Capias, as
the King's Bench at Westminster may do, and use to do.

Certiorari.
And be it Enacted, 9. N. 1.
etc. That no Certiorari shall be allowed to remove any Information or other
proceedings in the Quarter Sessions for or concerning any matter or thing in
this Act or before recited Acts ( viz. 2. and 3. Ed. 6. 15. and 3. and 4. Ed.
6. 20. and 15. Car. 2. 8.) or any of them, but the Justices of the Peace then
present shall proceed thereupon, any Writ or Writs of Certiorari
notwithstanding.

Imprisonment.
Be it therefore Enacted, C. 20. (7.) 1. N. 2.
etc. That it shall and may be Lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace of
any County, City, Town or Liberty within, etc. (viz. England, Wales or
Berwick,) by Warrant under his Hand and Seal to require the Sheriff, Jailer or
Keeper of any Prison within his respective Jurisdiction, to bring without delay
the body of any Person being in Prison for Debt, etc. (viz. on 14 April, 1671.)
or Damages, and petitioning such Justice to be discharged to some Convenient
place within the Distance of one mile from the said Prison.

N. 3.
And shall certify the Cause and Causes of the Imprisonment before the same
Justice. Certificate.


2. N. 1.
And in Case such Prisoner coming before such Justice, Oath.
shall take an Oath to this effect, etc. I A. B. upon my Corporal Oath solemnly
profess and declare before Almighty God, that I have not any Estate real or
personal in Possession, Reversion or Remainder, of the value of Ten pounds in
the whole, or sufficient to pay the Debt or Damages for which I am Imprisoned.

N. 2.
And that I have not directly or Indirectly sold, leased, Collusion.
or otherwise conveyed, disposed of or entrusted, all or any part of my Estate
thereby to secure the same to receive or expect any profit or advantage
thereof, or defraud or deceive any Creditor or Creditors whatsoever to whom I
stand Indebted.

3. N. 1.
Then after the taking of such Oath, Poor.
the said Justice shall remand the Prisoner to Prison, and shall give a
Certificate thereof in Writing under his Hand and Seal to the same Prisoner, to
be served upon such Person, etc. his or her Executors or Administrators, or to
be left at the place of the usual abode of such Person, etc. at whose Suit the
Prisoner stands Charged and Imprisoned, thereby appointing as well the said
Person, etc. as the said Prisoner to appear before the Justices at the next
General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same County, City,
Town or Liberty.

N. 2.
When if it shall appear upon Oath, Execution.
(which Oath the said Justices are Empowered to Administer) that the said
Certificate was so served or left xl days or more before the said Sessions,
and that the said Oath taken by the said Prisoner be not disproved by good
Testimony of any Credible Person, etc. upon Oath to be Administered by the said
Justices by virtue of this Act, then the said Justices being satisfied
therewith, shall direct their Warrant under their Hands and Seals, commanding
the said Sheriff, Jailer or Keeper of the Prison, to set at Liberty and
Discharge the said Prisoner if Imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, and no
other, without paying any thing for Fee or Chamber Rent.

N. 3.
Which Warrant shall be a sufficient Discharge to the same Sheriff, Escape.
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, and no Action of Escape or other Action shall be
brought against them or any of them for the same in any wise.

4. N. 1.
Provided also, and be it Enacted, etc. That (viz. after xl days Process and
Oath not disproved) then if such Creditor, etc. will not be satisfied
therewith, Poor.
that the said Prisoner, etc. may be set at Liberty, or will Insist to have the
said Prisoner continued in Goal, that then the said Creditor, etc. shall at his
and their own proper Costs and Charges allow and pay Weekly a reasonable
maintenance to the said Prisoner, etc. such as the said Commissioners of the
Peace or any three of them in their respective Divisions shall order and
appoint not exceeding xviii d. a-Week.

8. N. 1.
Provided, and be it Enacted, etc. That in Case any Sheriff, Sheriff.
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, shall refuse or delay to bring or discharge or set
at Liberty any Prisoner according to the Order of the Justice or Justices to be
made in manner as aforesaid, every such Sheriff, etc. shall forfeit and pay to
such Prisoner detained contrary to such Order, the Sum of One hundred pounds,
to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of Record, and shall be also
subject to any Fine and punishment as the said Justices shall order or Award.

9. N. 5.
Nor (viz. Sheriffs, Goalers or Keepers of Prisons, etc. shall not) take nor
receive any other or greater Sum, etc. (viz. of Persons Arrested for Debt,)
Fees.
for each Nights lodging or other Expenses then what is reasonable and fitting
in such Cases, or shall be so adjudged by the next Justice of the Peace, or at
the next Quarter Sessions.

10. N. 2.
Nor shall demand, take or receive of the said Person, etc. any other or greater
Fee or Fees whatsoever for his, her or their Commitment, Imprisonment.
Release or Discharge; or for his or their Chamber Rent, then what is allowable
by Law, until the same shall be settled by three Justices of the Peace whereof
one to be of the Quorum, of each particular County, City and Town Corporate in
their several Precincts, and for the City of London and Counties of Middlesex
and Surrey the two Lord Chief Justices of the King's Bench and Common Pleas, and
the Lord Chief Baron, or any two of them, and the Justices of the Peace of the
same in their several Jurisdictions.

Poor.
And likewise that the said Lord Chief Justices, Lord Chief Baron, 11. N. 1.
and Justices of Peace in their several Jurisdictions, and all Commissioners
for Charitable uses, do their best endeavors and diligence to Examine and find
out the several Legacies, Gifts, and Bequests bestowed and given for the
benefit and advantage of the poor Prisoners for Debt in the several Goals and
Prisons in this Kingdom, and to send for any Deeds, Wills, Writings and Books
of Accounts whatsoever, and any Person, etc. concerned therein, and to Examine
them upon Oath, and to make true discovery thereof, which they have full Power
and Authority hereby to do; and the same so found out and ascertained, to order
and settle in some manner and way that the Prisoners hereafter may not be
defrauded, but receive the full benefit thereof according to the true Intent of
the Donors.

Fees.
And that these Accounts of the several Legacies, 12. N. 1.
Gifts and Bequests given and bestowed upon the several Prisoners for Debt
within this Kingdom, and the several Rates of Fees and the future Government of
Prisons be signed and Confirmed by the Lord Chief Justices, and Lord Chief
Baron, or any two of them for the time being, and the Justices of the Peace in
London, Middlesex and Surrey, and by the Judges for the several Circuits, and
Justices of Peace for the time being in their several Precincts, and fairly
written and hung up in a Table in every Goal and Prison before the first day of
November, 1671. and likewise be registered by each and every Clerk of the Peace
within his or their particular Jurisdiction, and after such Establishment, no
other or greater Fee or Fees then shall be so Established, shall be Demanded or
Received.

Games.
And moreover, that the said Game-Keeper, Cap. 25. (17.) 2. N. ^.
etc. (viz. made by Lord of Royalty, that is Esquire etc.) or any other Person,
etc. being thereunto Authorized by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any
Justice of the Peace of the same County, Division or Place, may in the day time
search the Houses, Outhouses or other places of any such Person, etc. by this
Act prohibited to keep or use the same, as upon good Ground shall be suspected
to have or keep in his or their Custody any Guns, Bows, Greyhounds,
Setting-dogs, Ferrets, Cony-dogs, or other Dogs, to destroy Hares or Conies,
Hayes, Tramels or other Nets, Lowbels, Hare-pipes, Snares or other Engines
aforesaid, and the same and every or any of them to Seize, Detain and keep to
and for the use of the Lord of the Manor or Royalty where the same shall be so
found or taken; or otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy as things by this Act
prohibited to be kept by Persons of their Degrees.

Forest.
For remedy, etc. be it Enacted and Declared, 4. N. ^.
that if any etc. shall at any time enter wrongfully into any Warren or Ground
lawfully used or kept for the breeding or keeping of Conies, although the same
be not Enclosed, and there shall take, chase or kill any Conies against the
will of the Owner or Occupier thereof, not having lawful Title or Authority so
to do, and shall be thereof lawfully Convicted in manner hereafter following;
the Parties so Offending shall yield to the Party grieved treble Damages and
Costs, and suffer Imprisonment by the space of three Months and after till they
shall find Sureties for their good abearing.

Damages.
(Viz. None to take or kill Conies in the Night, 5. N. 3.
etc.) upon pain that every Person so Offending and being thereof lawfully
Convicted in manner hereafter following, shall give the Party or Parties
injured such Recompense or Satisfaction for his or their Damages, and within
such time as shall be appointed by the Justice before whom such Offender shall
be Convicted, and over and above pay down presently unto the Overseers for the
use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offense shall be Committed such Sum of
Money not exceeding Ten shillings, as the said Justice shall think meet.

Imprisonment.
And if such Offender, N. 4.
etc. do not make Recompense or Satisfaction to the said Party or Persons
Injured, and also pay the said Sum to the Poor in manner and form aforesaid,
then the said Justice shall Commit the said Offender, etc. to the House of
Correction for such time as the said Justice shall think fit, not exceeding One
month.

Forest.
And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared, etc. That if any, 6. N. ^.
etc. shall be found or Apprehended Setting or using any Snares, Harepipes or
other like Engines, and shall be thereof Convicted in manner following, the
Person, etc. so offending shall be liable to the Penalties in the Immediate
foregoing Clause of this Act in manner as aforesaid.

7. N. 2.
Be it therefore further Enacted, etc. That if any shall at any time use any
Casting Net, Thief Net, Drag Net, Tramel, Shove Net, Fish.
or other Net whatsoever, or any Angle, Hair noose, Troll or Spear, or shall
lay any Wears, Pots, Nets, Fish-hooks, or other Engines, or shall take any Fish
by any means or device whatsoever in any River, Stew Pond, Mote, or other water
as aforesaid, or shall be aiding or assisting thereunto without the License or
Consent of the Lord or Owner of the said Water, and be thereof or of any other
the Offense or Offenses mentioned in this Act, Convict by Confession of the
Offender, or by Oath of one sufficient Witness within One month after the
Offense Committed, before any Justice of Peace of such County, Riding, Division
or Place wherein such Offense as aforesaid shall be Committed; which Oath the
said Justice of Peace is hereby Empowered to Administer, every such Offender,
etc. in stealing, taking or killing Fish, shall for every such Offense give to
the Party, etc. Injured such Recompense or Satisfaction for his or their
Damages and within such time as the said Justice shall appoint, not exceeding
treble Damages.

N. 3.
And over and above pay down presently unto the Overseers for the use of the
Poor where the said Offense shall be Committed, Poor.
such Sum of money not exceeding x s. as the said Justice shall think meet.

N. 4.
And in default of payment as aforesaid, Process.
the same to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods, by Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of such Justice before whom the Offender shall be
Convicted, rendering the overplus, if any be.

N. 5.
And for want of Distress the Offender, etc. shall be Committed to the House of
Correction for such time as the Justice shall think fit, Imprisonment.
not exceeding One month, unless the Party offending shall enter into Bond with
one competent Surety or Sureties to the Party injured, not exceeding the Sum of
Ten pounds, never to offend in like manner.

8. N. 1.
And be it further Enacted, That it shall and may be Lawful for every Justice of
the Peace before whom such Offender as aforesaid shall be Convict, to take,
Justices.
cut in Pieces and destroy all and every such Angles, Speers, Hairs, Nooses,
Troles, Wears, Pots, Fish-hooks, Nets or other Engines whatsoever, wherewith
such Offender as aforesaid shall be taken or Apprehended,

9. N. 1.
Provided always, and be it Enacted, etc. That if any, Error.
etc. shall find him or themselves agrieved by any Judgment which shall happen
to be given by any Justice of the Peace by virtue of this Act, it shall and may
be Lawful for such Person or Persons so agrieved, to appeal unto the Justices
of the Peace in their General Quarter Sessions which shall happen to be held
next after such Judgment given, who or the greater number of them are hereby
Authorized and Empowered to give such relief and make such Order therein as
shall be agreeable to the Tenor of this Act.

N. 2.
And such Judgment Order or Determination as by the said Justices shall be made
upon the said Appeal, Certiorari.
shall be final to all Intents and purposes whatsoever, if no title to any
Land, Royalty or Fishery be therein concerned.

Cap. 26. (18.) 2. N. 1.
And forasmuch as the Remedies and Provisions by those Laws, Husbandry.
(viz. 12 Car. 2. 34, and 15. Car. 2. 7. 18.) are found not large enough to
obviate and prevent the Planting thereof (viz. of Tobacco.)

N. 2.
Be it therefore Enacted, etc. That, Justices.
etc. all Justices of the Peace within their several Limits and Jurisdictions,
shall and do a month before every General Quarter Sessions to be holden for
their respective Counties, Issue forth their Warrants to all High-Constables,
petty-Constables and Tythingmen within their several Limits thereby requiring
the said High-Constables, petty-Constables and Tythingmen, and every of them,
to make diligent Search and Inquisition what Tobacco is then Sown, Set,
Planted, Growing, Curing, Cured or made within their several and respective
Limits and Jurisdictions, and by whom; and to make a true and Lawful
Presentment in writing upon Oath at the next General Quarter Sessions to be
holden for such County, of the Names of all such Persons as have Sown, Set,
Planted, Cured or made any Tobacco, and what the full Quantity of Land is or
was Sown, Set or Planted therewith, and who are the Immediate Tenant or
Tenants, or present Occupiers of the Land so Sown, Set or Planted, who are and
shall be deemed Planters thereof to all Intents and purposes.

Husbandry.
Which said Presentment upon Oath shall be received and filed by the Clerk of
the Peace of the said County in open Sessions, 3. N. 1:
and after such receipt and filing, shall be a sufficient Conviction in Law to
all Intents and purposes of all such Persons as shall be so presented for the
Sowing, Setting, Planting, Improving to Grow, making or Curing Tobacco either
in Seed, Plant, Leaf or otherwise, contrary to the said recited Acts (viz. 12
Car. 2. 34. and 15 Car. 2. 7. 18.) or either of them; unless such Person or
Persons so presented having notice given to him or them of such Presentment
made by the delivery of a Copy of such Presentment to him or them, or by
leaving a Copy of such Presentment at his or their dwelling House or Houses, or
usual place of abode in the presence of one or more Credible Witnesses, Ten
days at the least before the next Quarter Sessions, shall at the
Quarter Sessions next after such notice shall be given to him or them, Traverse
such Presentment, and find sufficient Sureties for the prosecuting and trying
such Traverse at the Quarter Sessions to be holden for the said County next
after such Traverse shall be entered or made.

Process.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That all Constables, Tythingmen, 4. N. 1.
Bailiffs and other public Officers, shall and do within their respective
Jurisdictions from time to time as often as occasion shall require, within
Fourteen days after Warrant from two or more of the Justices of the Peace
within such County, Town, City or Place to them, calling to their Assistance
such Person and Persons as they and every of them shall find convenient and
necessary, pluck up, Burn, Consume, Tear in pieces and utterly destroy all
Tobacco Seed, Plant, Leaf, Planted, Sowed or Growing in any Field, Earth or
Ground.

Forfeiture.
And if any such Tobacco shall be suffered or permitted to Grow or be unconsumed
in Seed, Plant, or Leaf in any Township, Tything, Parish, 5. N. 1.
Hamlet or place by the space of Fourteen days after the receipt of such
Warrant or Warrants by the said Constables, Tythingmen, Bailiffs or other
public Officers of the respective Townships, Tythings, Parishes or Hamlets as
aforesaid, that then such Constables, Tythingmen, Bailiffs or other public
Officers respectively shall for every such Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of
Five shillings for every Rod, Perch or Pole of Ground so Set, Planted or Sowed
with Tobacco, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser Quantity of Ground
one moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, and the other moiety thereof to him or
them that shall sue for the same, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

Process.
And it is hereby further Enacted, That in Case any, etc. shall refuse or
neglect to Aid or Assist, being thereunto required, any Constable, Bailiff, 6.
N. 1.
or other public Officer in the due Execution of this Act, that every such
person, etc. for every such Offense upon Conviction thereof made before two of
the Justices of the said County where such Offense shall be Committed, shall
forfeit and pay the Sum of Five shillings, to be Levied by Warrant from the
said Justices by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods; and in Case no
Distress can be found, then every such Offender shall be Committed to the
Common Goal of the said County, there to remain for the space of One week
without Bail or Mainprise.

Process.
And if any person, etc. whatsoever shall forceably resist any Constable, 7. N.
1.
Baliff, or other public Officer or other person, etc. whatsoever in the due
Execution of this Act, That then every such person for every such Offense upon
Conviction thereof made before two Justices of the Peace of the said County
where such Offense shall be Committed, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five
pounds, to be Levied by Warrant from the said Justices by Distress and Sale of
the Offenders Goods; and in Case no Distress can be found, then every such
Offender shall be Committed to the Common Goal of the said County, there to
remain for the space of Three months without Bail or Mainprise.

Pleading.
And be it further Enacted, etc. That if any Action, Plaint, 8. N. 1.
Suit or Information shall be Commenced or Prosecuted against any* etc. for
what he or they shall do in Pursuance or Execution of this Act, or either of
the recited Acts, (viz. 12 Car. 2. 34. and 15 Car. 2. 7. 18.) such Person, etc.
so Sued in any Court whatsoever shall or may plead the General Issue, Not
Guilty, and upon any Issue joined, may give this Act and the said recited Acts
or either of them and the special matter in Evidence.

N. 2.
And if the Plaintiff or Prosecutor shall become Nonsuit, or forbear further
prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if a Verdict shall pass against him,
Costs.
the Defendant, etc. shall recover their Costs for which they shall have the
like remedy as in Case where Costs are given by Law to the Defendants.

Statuta 25 Car. 2.
25. Car. 2. 2. 2. N. 2.
ANd that all and every such Person, etc. (viz. Officer, or Patentee under the
King, etc.) to be admitted after the first day of Easter Term, Patents.
etc. (viz. 1673.) not having taken the said Oaths viz. of Supremacy and
Allegiance, in the said Courts aforesaid, (viz. B. R. or Chancery) shall at the
Quarter Sessions for that County, or place where he or they shall reside, next
after such his Admittance, etc. into any of the said respective Offices or
Employments aforesaid, take the said several and respective Oaths as aforesaid.

Statuta 29 Car. 2.
29. Car. 2. 7. 2. N. 2.
ANd that no person, etc. shall use Employ or Travel upon the Lords Day with any
Boat, Wherry, Lighter or Barge, Religion.
except it be upon Extraordinary occasion to be allowed by some Justice of the
Peace of the County, or head Officer, or some Justice of the Peace of the City,
Borough or Town Corporate where the Fact shall be Committed.

N. 3.
Upon pain that every Person so Offending shall forfeit and lose the Sum of Five
shillings, for every such Offense. Forfeiture.


N. 4.
And that if any person Offending in any of the Premises, Days.
shall be thereof Convicted (viz. for Trading on the Lords Day, etc.) before
any Justice of Peace of the County, or the Chief Officer or Officers, or any
Justice of Peace of or within any City, Borough, or Town Corporate where the
said Offenses shall be Committed, upon his or their View or Confession of the
Party, or proof of any one or more Witnesses by Oath (which the said Justices,
Chief Officer, or Officers is by this Act Authorized to Administer) the said
Justice, or Chief Officer or Officers shall have Warrant under his or their
Hand and Seal to the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish, etc. where
such Offense shall be Committed, to Seize the said Goods cried, showed forth,
or put to Sale as aforesaid; and to Sell the same, and to Levy the said other
Forfeitures and Penalties by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of every
such Offender distrained, rendering to the said Offenders the overplus of the
Moneys raised thereby.

N. 5.
And in default of such Distress, or in Case of Insufficiency or Inability of
the said Offender to pay the said Forfeitures or Penalties, Imprisonment.
that then the party Offending be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of
Two hours.

N. 6.
And all and singular the Forfeitures or Penalties aforesaid (viz. for Trading
or Traveling, Forfeiture.
etc. on the Lords Day) shall be Employed and Converted to the use of the poor
of the Parish where the said Offenses shall be Committed, saveing only that it
shall and may be lawful to and for any such Justice, Mayor or head Officer or
Officers, out of the said Forfeitures or Penalties to reward any person, etc.
that shall Inform of any Offense against this Act according to their
Discretions, so as such reward exceed not the third part of the Forfeitures or
Penalties.

Statuta 29 and 30 Car. 2.
Scotland.
BE it therefore Enacted, 29 and 30 Car. 2. 2. 1. N. 2.
etc. (viz. because found necessary) that the said two former Acts (viz. 13 and
14 Car. 2. 22 and 18 Car. 2. 3.) and either of them, and every matter Clause
and Clauses therein contained, and all and every the Powers and Authorities
thereby given, shall be, continue, and remain in full force from henceforth for
and during the space and time of Seven years, and also from thence until the
End of the first Session of the next Parliament.

Peace.
Be it further Enacted, 2. N. ^.
etc. that the said several Justices of the Peace of the said respective
Counties, shall from time to time at the respective Quarter Sessions take good
and sufficient Security of the Person or Persons by them Employed in the said
Service for the preservation of the said respective Counties from Theft and
Rapine, to answer the Damages sustained by any person or persons by his or
their neglect or default therein, and to pay and satisfy the same within Four
months after that proof thereof shall be made by the Oath of one or more
Credible Witnesses before the Justices of the Peace of the said respective
Counties, at the next Quarter Sessions in the respective County.

Oath.
Which Oath or Oaths the said Justice or Justices are hereby Authorized to
Administer, N. 3.
so as the Goods stolen be entered in one of the Books to be kept for that
purpose within the space of xlviii hours after the same shall be stolen or gone.

Record.
And that Books shall be kept for that end in every Market Town of the said
respective Counties, and at such other Convenient places therein, N. 4.
and by such person or persons as the said Justices of the Peace in the said
respective Counties at their General Sessions of the Peace shall order or
appoint.

Justices.
And be it further Enacted, 3. N. 1:
etc. that the said several Justices of the Peace of the said respective
Counties at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace for the said County
respectively, shall yearly or every two years at the furthest in open Court
make choice thereof, and appoint such Person or Persons as they shall
respectively think fit for the said Counties respectively to be Employed in the
said Service.

Religion.
Provided that every Person and Persons employed for the preservation of the
said respective Counties from Theft and Rapine, 4. N. 1.
or as Treasurer for the said Service, do receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper according to the usage of the Church of England in some public Church
upon some Lords Day commonly called Sunday, within the space of Three months
after they shall enter upon such Employment, and deliver a Certificate thereof
to the next Quarter Sessions in the respective County where they shall be so
Employed, and take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and make and
subscribe the Declaration appointed to be made and subscribed in and by one Act
in this present Parliament, etc. (viz. 25 Car. 2. 2.) etc. under the Penalties
and Forfeitures by the said Act appointed.

Statuta 30 Car. 2.
30 Car. 2. 3. 4. N. 4.
( VIz. The Five pounds Penalty for not Burying in Woolen, Drapery.
etc.) to be Levied by way of Distress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of the
Chief Magistrate, in any Town Corporate, or any Justice of the Peace, etc.

5. N. 1.
And it is hereby further Enacted, etc. that the said Affidavit, Oath.
(viz. of Parties being Coffined in Woollen only) shall be made or taken before
some Justice of the Peace, or Master of the Chancery, Ordinary or
Extraordinary, Mayor, Baliff, or other Chief Officer of the City, County,
Borough, Corporation, or Market Town in the County where the said Party was
Buried, who are hereby Authorized and required to Administer the said Oath, and
to attest the same under their Hands upon such Affidavit gratis.

N. 2.
And in Case no such Affidavit shall be brought to the Person, Church.
etc. where the said Party was Buried, etc. within the said Eight days, that
such Person, etc. shall forthwith, etc. cause notice thereof to be given in
Writing under his Hand to the Churchwarden or Overseers of the Poor of such
Parish, who shall within Eight days after such notice repair to the Chief
Magistrate in any Town Corporate, etc. or else to any Justice of the Peace who
upon the Certificate thereof from the said Person, etc. shall forthwith grant a
Warrant for the Levying of the said Forfeiture on the Goods and Chattels, etc.
rendering the overplus, etc.

6. N. 3.
And in Case such Chief Magistrate or Justice of the Peace shall neglect his
Duty, Process.
in not Issuing his Warrant for the Levying of the said Forfeiture.

N. 4.
He or they so neglecting or Offending shall forfeit for every such Offense the
Sum of Five pounds. Forfeiture.


10. N. 1.
And it is further Enacted, etc. that, Justices.
etc. the said Justices at their respective Assizes, and the Justices of the
Peace at their respective Quarter Sessions shall give this Act in Charge.

C. 4. 3. N. 1.
And all Justices of the Peace within their several Counties and Divisions, Poor.
are hereby Authorized and Empowered to put in Execution all such Powers,
Directions and Authorities for the full Release and Discharge of such Persons
as were in Prison, etc. (viz. on 14 April, 1671.)

N. 2.
And of all such other Persons as have been since that time Committed to Prison,
and are in Prison, etc. (viz. on 29 May, Imprisonment.
1678.) as the said former Act, ( viz. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap. 20. (7) has made
and provided for the Release and Discharge of such who were in Prison for Debt
or Damages, etc. (viz. on 14 April, 1671.)

4. N. 3.
And if within the space of Three months after such Weekly allowance by any
Creditor, Execution.
no Estate of the Prisoner shall be discovered or made out before two Justices
of the Peace of that County and Division where the said Prisoner is kept in
Prison, then the said Prisoner shall forthwith be Discharged by Warrant under
the Hands and Seals of any two Justices of the Peace of the same County and
Division where the said Prisoner shall be so in Prison, to the Keeper of such
Prison in that behalf directed as fully and amply as if such Prisoner had been
Discharged by the Justices of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions, as in the
said recited Act ( viz. 22 and 23 Car. 2. 20. 7.) is mentioned.

Sheriffs.
And be it Enacted, etc. That in Case any Sheriff, Jailer, 7. N. 1.
and Keeper of Prison shall refuse and delay to bring and discharge, and set at
Liberty any Prisoner, etc. according to the Order of the Justice or Justices of
the Peace made in pursuance of this Act, or of the said former recited Act, (
viz. 22 and 23 Car. 2. 20. 7.) every such Jailer, Sheriff, or Keeper of Prison
shall forfeit and pay to such Prisoners so detained contrary to such Order the
Sum of xx l. to be recovered by Action of Debt in any of his Majesty's Courts
of Record.

Justices.
And shall also be subject to such Fine and Punishment as the said Justices of
Peace shall upon Complaint thereof to them made order and Award. N. 2.


Poor.
And in Case the profit of his Labor (viz. of Prisoner kept at Work on request
of Creditor, etc.) shall exceed the value of his maintenance, 13. N. 2.
one moiety of the overplus shall go toward the payment of his Debts for which
he remains in Execution, the other moiety shall be paid to the Hands of the
said Prisoner, the said moieties to be distributed accordingly by the two next
Justices of the Peace.

Imprisonment.
And be it Enacted, 15. N. 1.
That any Judge of such Court whereto such Debtor is a Prisoner, or the two
next Justices of the Peace to such Workhouse shall and may have power to
Commit such Debtor being brought before him or them by Habeas Corpus, or Order
under the Hands and Seals of such two Justices unto any Workhouse within the
County where such Prison is there to remain according to this Act.

Debt.
But such Prisoner (viz. upon mean Process not giving Warrant of Attorney before
any Justice of Peace that is applied to for discharge, 18. N. 2.
etc.) shall in Case of his refusal to give such Warrant of Attorney, lose the
whole benefit of this Law.

Oath.
Provided always, that no Prisoner shall be discharged by virtue of this Act,.
20. N. 1.
until he shall before the Justices of Peace who are by this Act Empowered to
discharge him, declare upon his Corporal Oath, which Oath the said Justices are
hereby appointed to Administer, what Estates are belonging to him, or what Debt
or Debts are then owing to him within any of his Majesty's Dominions or
elsewhere, and by whom, and for what Cause, and upon what Security.

Debt.
Of all which a Schedule shall be made in the presence of such Justices, N. 2.
and Subscribed by the Prisoner, and shall be by such Justices returned to the
next Sessions there to be kept for the better Information of the Creditors of
such Prisoner.

Measures.
And it is hereby further Enacted, C. 8. 6. N. 1.
etc. That in Case after the Admeasuring or Marking of any Boat, or Keel, or
Cart, or Wain, (viz. for Measuring Coals at New Castle, etc.) the Marks shall
be removed or altered, that every person or persons who had a hand in the doing
thereof, shall upon proof thereof by one or more credible Witnesses before any
Justice of the Peace, forfeit the Sum of x l. to be Levied upon his Goods and
Chattels by Distress and Sale thereof, by Warrant of such Justice of the Peace,
rendering the overplus, and for failure of such Distress to be Committed to the
Common Goal, there to remain for the space of Three months without Bail or
Mainprise.

Fish.
And to the Intent that a perfect Execution may be had of this present Act, C.
9. 3. N. 1.
(viz. against Fishing, and destroying fry of Fish in the Severn, etc.)

Justices.
Be it Enacted, N. 2.
etc. That the Justices of Peace within the said respective Counties of
Worcester, Salop and Gloucester wherein they shall be Justices, shall be and are
hereby appointed Conservators of the said River, and to make one or more
under-Conservators within their respective Limits.

Process.
And that the said Justices of the Peace shall Issue forth their Warrants urder
the Hands and Seals of any two of them, N. 3.
directed to such under-Conservator or Conservators, or to any Constable,
Tythingman, or Headborough where any such Offense shall be Committed, upon
their own Knowledge or Information to them given, to search in the day time in
all suspected Houses and places for all such Nets, Instruments, Devices, and
other Engines, and the same to Seize and bring before the said Justices or in
their open Quarter Sessions, that the said unlawful Nets, Instruments, Devices,
and Engines may upon the View thereof be burnt, or made useless.

4. N. 1.
Provided always, That no Person or Persons Offending as aforesaid, Fish.
(viz. in Fishing or watering Hemp in the Severn, etc.) shall be punished for
any of the Offenses aforesaid, unless by Information or Indictment before his
Majesty's Justices of Assize, and Nisi prius, Oyer and Terminer, and General
Goal Delivery, or in the General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the
said County respectively wherein the same shall be Committed.

N. 2.
And upon Conviction of any Person, etc. for any of the Offenses aforesaid,
Execution.
(viz. Fishing or watering Hemp in the Severn,) the said respective Courts
shall Award Execution for the said Forfeitures, the one moiety thereof to the
use and benefit of the Poor of the Parish where the said Offense shall be
Committed, and the other moiety to such person or persons as shall prosecute
the same by Fieri facias, or Capias ad satisfaciendum, as the Kings Majesty's
Justices at Westminster may and use to do.

Statuta 31 and 32 Car. 2.
31 Car. 2. 2. 21. N. 2.
BE it therefore Enacted, Imprisonment.
That where any person shall appear to be Committed by any Judge or Justice of
the Peace, and charged as Accessory before the Fact, to any Petty Treason or
Felony, or upon suspicion thereof or with suspicion of Petty-Treason or Felony,
which Petty-Treason or Felony shall be plainly and specially expressed in the
Warrant of Commitment, that such person shall not be removed or Bailed by
virtue of this Act, or in any other manner then they might have been before the
making of this Act.

Statuta 32 Car. 2.
32 Car. 2. 1. 3. N. 1.
BE it therefore Enacted, etc. (viz. to avoid Travel, etc.) That, Drapery.
etc. where no Justice of Peace shall reside, or to be found in any Parish
where any Party shall be Interred, the Oaths and Affidavits ( viz. 30 Car. 2.
3. 4. N. 2. of Burying in Woolen, etc.) may be Administered not only by any
Justice of the Peace, or Master of Chancery, Ordinary or Extraordinary, Mayor,
Bailiff or other Chief Officer of the City, County, Borough, Corporation, or
Market Town in the County where any Party was Buried. But also that the
Parsons, Vicars and Curates in every Parish or Chapel of Ease within the
County where any Party shall be Interred, except only the Parson, Vicar and
Curate of the Parish or Chapel of Ease where the Party is Interred (concerning
whose Interment in Woollen such Affidavit is to be made) be and are hereby
Authorized and required to Administer the said Oaths or Affidavits, and to
attest the same under their hands Gratis.

C. 2. 6. N. 2.
The same (viz. xl. s. for every great Cattle, Ireland.
and x s. for every Sheep or Swine Import from Ireland not Seized, Killed and
Distributed by Seizors, Churchwardens, and Overseers failing of their Duty,
etc.) to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels, of the
Person, etc. so Offending, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any Justice of
Peace of the said County or place where the said Offense shall be Committed,
upon Confession of the party, View of the said Justice, or Oath thereof made
before such Justice by one or more Credible Witness, etc. other then the
Informer, which Oath the said Justice has hereby power to Administer,
rendering the overplus to the Owners thereof, necessary Charges of distraining
being first deducted.

And for want of such Distress the said Offender, N. 3.
etc. to be Committed to the common Goal of the said County or place, there to
remain for the space of three months without Bail or Mainprise.

Several Heads wherein Lambert, Crompton, and Dalton are Reduced, and the
Particular Statutes accommodate to present use.
Abbey.
Monestries, Religious, Houses, Chantries.
1. ON 27 H. 8. 27. (28.). 11. N. 1. the Quarter and General Sessions shall
Hear and Determine the not keeping Houses of Husbandry and Tillage by the
Patentee of the Site etc. and this is given in Charge Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page
463. Crompt. 96. see 21 Jac. 28.. 11. N. 39. 69. Husbandry.


Abettors, see Accessory and Appeal.
Abjuration.
Oath, Sanctuary, Exile.
I. DAlt. J.P. cap. 68. A man that is abjured, may have the surety of the Peace
granted to him, or against him; Surety of the Peace.
for notwithstanding the Abjuration, he owes the King his Legiance, and
remains within the Kings Protection, and the King may pardon and restore him
again: Qui abjurat Regnum amittit Regnum non Regem, 7 Co. 9. b. Calvin's case.

II. Dalt. J.P. cap. 92. also to kill a man that has abjured the Realm,
Homicide.
is Felony, 7 Co. 9. b. and Dr. and Stud. 133.

III. By 9 H. 3. St. 2. cap. 10. Charta de Foresta, Deer-killer that cannot
find Sureties after a year and a days Imprisonment, shall abjure the Realm.
Forest.


IV. By Westminster. 1. (3 Ed. 1.) cap. 15.. 1. N. 3. the Sheriff shall not let to
Bail those which have abjured the Realm. Bail.


V. By 3 Ed. 1. ( W. 1.) cap. 20. 1. N. 2. if Trespassers in Parks after three
years Imprisonment cannot find Sureties, he shall abjure the Realm. Forest.


VI. By 9 Ed. 2. cap. 15.. 1. N. 2. a Clerk submitting to the Law,
Ecclesiastical persons.
and taking Sanctuary, shall not be forced to abjure.

VII. By 21 H. 8. 2. Persons abjure to be marked with an hot Iron on the Thumb.
Pain.


VIII. By 22 H. 8. 14.. 1. N. 6. Persons taken out of Sanctuary after
Abjuration, to be Hanged, 3 Inst. 115. Sanctuary.


IX. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 200. one Justice of Peace may take out of Sanctuary
certain persons abjured thither, and others being Indicted of some kind of
offenses done after they became Sanctuary-men, 22 H. 8. 14.. 3. N. 2. so Crompt
J. p. 195.. 7.

X. By 35 Eliz. 1.. 2. N. 3. the Abjuration of a Seditious Sectary (being made
in the open Quarter Sessions of the Peace) ought to be certified from thence to
the Justices of Assize at the next Assizes. Certificate.


XI. By 35 Eliz. 2.. 8. N. 4. Popish Recusant (unless Feme Covert) not having
twenty Marks per annum, shall abjure before two Justices. Pope.


XII. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 414. Article of Charge at the Sessions of the
Peace, on 35 Eliz. 1.. N. and cap. 2.. 8. N. 5. If any Popish Recusant, or
other Seditious Sectary, which is by any of the Statutes to be abjured this
Realm, and all his Majesty's Dominions, have either refused to make such
Abjuration, or making it have not gone to such Haven within such time as was to
him therefore appointed, and have not from thence departed this Realm, or after
such departure have returned into any his Majesty's Dominions without his
special license.

Sessions.
XIII. Lamb. 4. cap. 19. page 619. the Abjuration of a Seditious Sectary ought
to be made in the open Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and there to be entered of
Record; and the place certain, and name of a Popish Recusant, (limired by the
Statute unto a place) ought to be certified by the Minister and Constable that
took and entered it, to the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and there be
entered of Record in the Rolls of the Sessions by the Clerk of the Peace, 35
Eliz. 1.. N. 35 Eliz. 2.. 9. N. 1.

Sanctuary.
XIV. 3 Inst. 115. cap. 51. Abjuration was so intricated by 22 H. 8. 14. and
other Statutes, that all stood repealed by 1 Jac. 25.. 14. N. 1. whereby the
ancient Common Law concerning Abjuration for Felony was revived, but by an Act
( viz. 21 Jac. 28.. 7. N. 1.) no Sanctuary shall be allowed, by which Act such
Abjuration as was by the Common Law founded upon the Privilege of Sanctuary,
is wholly taken away.

Abjutation.
XV. Poult. de pace 189, 190.. 2, 10, etc. and in Stamf. 2. cap. 39, fol. 116*
the manner of Abjurations, Bract. 135. b. 136. e. 3 Inst. 217.

Absolution, see Pope.
Accessory.
Accessory, Abettors, Principal, Coron.
Bail.
I. STamf. 2 cap. 18. fol. 71. the Accessory is Repleviable by the Common Law
until the Principal be Attaint, but not afterward by some Books, as appears by
Bract. 2.

And Britton 43. and the Register 270. which say that the Accessory shall be
left to Mainprise until the Principal be Attaint, Ergo after the Principal is
Attaint he shall no more be let to Mainprise but detained in Prison, and with
this agrees 27. Ass. Coron. 200. Trin. 28. Ed. 3. Mainprise 3 where one of the
Principals was Attaint, the other not also it was after Plea Pleaded, and yet
Mainprise would not be granted, but yet since this time the Law has been put
in use to the contrary M. 40 Ed. 3, 28. and P. 43 Ed. 3. 16. and the reason
seems to be one 3 Ed. 1. ( W. 1.) cap 15.. 1 N. 4.

Exposition.
II. Stamf. fol. 71. ibid. which Statute viz. 3 Ed. 1. ( W. 1.) cap. 15.. 1. N.
4. is taken o favorably as to the Accessory that they let to Bail those who
are Indicted of Abetment, Consent, and Procurement, and yet such manner of
Accessaries are not expressly contained in the said Statute, as it is noted also
in the Register 270. And so note that the Accessory as well in case of the
Death of a Man, as in case of any other Felony, is to be let to Mainprise.

Coron.
III. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 281. But for as much as it is evident by many Books
( viz. 7 H. 4. 27. 11 H. 4. 13. and 10 Ed. 4. 14. and 21 Ed. 4. 71. and Coron.
309. 314. 350. 433. etc. that the Law is otherwise taken, viz. then Stamf. 7.)
at this day touching them that to be of Society with the Principal, and be also
present with him that does perpetrate the offense, etc. eased of that labor,
Poult. de pace 144.. 23.

Statutes.
IV. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. pap. 282. and albeit the first of these Questions, (viz.
Whether there may be Accessaries to such Felonies as were not at the
Common Law, but were afterward created Felonies by Statutes, unless the same
Statutes do especially appoint it,) might have received the more easy
resolution, for that all such as do Evil, or procure any Felony to be done, are
the very cause thereof, so as without them it is to be thought that it should
not have been committed; yet they of the Parliament House have in the making of
sundry new Felonies, thought it convenient for the avoiding of all doubt to
comprehend in plain Speech the Accessaries both before and after, So 1. Mar. 1.
St. 2. cap. 12.. 22. N. 1 of Rebellious Assemblies, and 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.
4.. 8. N 2. of Egyptains etc. Poult. de pace 144.. 25. 26. 8. 14. Eliz. 5. 7 N.
1.

V. Lamb. 2 cap. 7. page 282. ibid. and this caused Mr. Stamford. 44. to write,
Intendment.
that there could be no Accessaries after the Offense to the Felony 8. H. 6.
12. of Imbezeling Records, nor to 33. H. 8. 8. of Conjuration, because those
two Statutes have no express mention but only of the Accessaries before the
offense committed, and that there could be no Accessaries at all 3 H. 7. 2.
because thereby the procurers, Abbettors, and Relievers, are adjudged to be
Principal Felons, Poult. de pace 144.. 24.

VI. Stamf. 1. cap. 2. fol. 3. the words of the Statute 25. Ed: 3. St. 5. cap.
2.. 1. N. 5. And if a man Counterfeit the Grand Seal, Exposition.
or the Privy Seal of the King, or his Money. In these Words there is no
mention made of any Consenters or Aiders to this Counterfeiting, and yet the
Consenters and Aiders are taken to be within the perview of the said Statute,
as appears M. 19. H. 6. 47. Treason Br. 9. and 3. H 7. 10. in Treason Br. 19.
makes nothing against this, for there wanted the word proditorie 1. Inst. 57.
Dyer. 296. pal. Poult. de pace 144.. 22. and 3. Inst. 138.

VII. Stamf. 1. cap, Intendment.
46. fol. 44. it seems that if an offense be made Felony by a Statute, though
the said Statute does not speak expressly of Abettors, Procurers, Counselors,
and Relievers, yet they shall be taken to be within the Compass of the Statute,
as appears fol. 3. etc. the same Law in case of Rape; where one does the Act,
and the other asists him and aid him, he by this is a Ravisher as well as his
companion that did the Rape in fact, as appers, M. 11. H. 4. 13. Coron. 228.
and yet the words of the Statute 13 Ed. 1. ( W. 2.) cap. 34. are, if a Man
Ravisheth a Woman, etc. but these were causers of the Rape, without whom
perhaps the offense had not been done, and the principal Actors being present
when the Act was done; and therefore as Guilty as the Principal, etc.

VIII. Stamf. 42, Exposition.
ibid. Some will argue in this case that though Accessaries before the offense
perpetrated shall be taken to be within the compass of a Statute that makes a
Felony, though they be not expressed for the reason aforesaid, yet this does
not prove that Accessaries after the offense committed, shall be within the
compass of such a Statute if they be not express; But however that be, they of
the Parliament in the time of H. 8. provided for it, as appears well by 31. H.
8. 12.. 6. N. 1. of Hunting, and other Statutes that are not now in force, as
by 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12.. 22. N. 1. against Unlawful and Rebellious
Assemblies, and the Statute 1. and 2 Ph. and Mar. 4.. 8. N. 2. against
Egyptians, yet also in force, which Act provides as well for the Accessory
before the Fact, as after.

IX. Stamf. 44. ibid. Quaere, Intendment.
If this Statute ( viz. 8 H. 6. 12.. 3 N. 1. of Imbezeling Armor) extends to
any Accessaries after the Principal Fact committed, because it has expressed
no other Accessaries, but before the Principal Fact committed? and it seems
not, because a Man cannot say that the Makers of the said Statute intended
them, no more then the Makers of the Statute 33 H. 8. 8.. 1 N. 7. against
Conjurations intended to touch any other Accessaries, but those before the
Principal Fact committed, which Statute is not in force at this day, 3. Inst.
73.

X. Stamf. 44. Note, that it seems that there is not any Accessory in the
offense, on this Statute ( viz. 3 H. 7. 2.. 1. N. 3.) because that the words
are (be R^puted and Adjudged Principal Felons,) which makes them as it seems,
all Principals.

Rape
XI. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 283. for a more certain Rule in all these Points I
will use this one Case, 3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. in B. R.

As Judge Dalison reports it. Two Men were Indicted upon 3. H. 7. 2. for the
taking a Woman against her Will Feloniously, and two other Men were then also
Indicted, for that knowing the Felony, they did Relieve the Offenders, and
Comfort, etc. In this case, albeit the Statute does make as well the Procurers
and Abettors of the Felony, as also the Relievers of the Woman, knowing the
matter, to be Principal Felons, and thereby these two persons, which Relieved
the Felons only, (and not the Woman,) can be deemed no Principals; yet all the
Judges of that Court were then of opinion that these Relievers be Accessory to
this Felony, by the Statute 3 H. 7. 2.. 1. N. 3. no less than if it were to a
Felony at the Common Law; for when a Statute (say they) makes a Felony, it is
Felony, and has Accessory to it, even in the same manner as it had been Felony
at the Common Law, as in a Rape which is declared by 13. Ed. 1. ( W. 2.) cap.
34. If a Man Ravish, etc. yet if another knowing of the Fact, shall relieve the
Ravisher, he shall be an Accessory no less then if it were to a Felony that had
been by the Common Law, 3. Inst. 61. vouch accordingly.

Intendment.
XII. 3 Inst. 61. 62. by this Act ( viz. 3 H. 7. 2.. 1. N. 3.) not only the
takers, but the Procurers, Abettors, of the Felony, and Receivers of the said
Woman, willingly knowing the same, be all adjudged as Principal Felons; the
like whereof we find not in any other Statute that we Remember, but by a
Construction of the Common Law, they that receive the mis-doers, and not the
Woman, are Accessaries; for this Act makes the Receivers of the Woman, etc.
Principals, Poult. de pace 144.. 22. and 145.. 27.

Armor.
XIII. 3 Inst. 72. 73. this Act (viz.) 8 H. 6. 12.. 3. N. 1. of Imbezeling
Armor expressly extends to Accessaries before, and leaves Accessaries after
to the Construction of Law, yet may there be Accessaries after the Fact; for
whenever an offense is made a Felony by Act of Parliament, there shall be
Accessaries to it, both before and after, as if it had been a Felony by the
Common Law; And therefore tho this Act expresses Accessaries before, yet it
takes not away Accessaries after, but leaves them to the Law contrary to the
opinion of the Justice, Stamf. 44. supra Polut. de pace 142.. 22. Hales Pleas
of the Crown. tit. Accessory.

Treason.
XIV. Stamf. 113. But yet it seems that the Accessaries to Petit Treason,
shall have Sanctuary. (viz.) notwithstanding the General words of 28 H. 8. 7..
20. N. 1.)

Admiral.
XV. Stamf. 113. It seems also that the Accessaries in these cases (viz.) 27
H. 8. 4.. 3. N. 1. and 28 H. 8. 15.. 3. N. 1.) of Piracy shall not be Excluded
of their privilege of Sanctuary because, they are not expressly in the letter
of the said Statutes.

Money.
XVI. Mich. 11 and 12 Eliz. Dyer 296. Pl. 21 Memorandum, that John Conyers Gent.
was Indicted of the Traterous Reception and Comforting, of one John Fayrfax
Gent. knowing him the said John F. Falsely and Traitorously to have Made and
Counterfeited diverse pieces of Money, of false Mettle to the likeness of Good
and Lawful Money of England (called Shillings,) and upon his Arraignment, he
was found Guilty, and the Justice, did not proceed to Judgment of Treason upon
this Indictment, because it was only Misprision of Treason, and sic videbatur
Postea etiam diversis aliis, and at length he was pardoned, 3. Inst. 138.

XVII. 3 Inst. 138. cap 64. on Dyer 296. A. does Counterfeit the Kings Coin,
viz. Shillings, and C. knowing the same, does receive A. and Comfort and Aid
him, this Counterfieting is High Treason by the Common Law in A. and yet it
has been holden, that in this case C. has not committed Treason, ( Stamf. 3.)
for then in Judgment of Law he must be a Counterfeiter of the Kings Coin
within 25 Ed. 3. St. 5. cap. 2.. 1. N. 5. which he is not; and therefore (say
they,) this is Casus Omissus; but all agree, that procurers of such Treason to
be done before the Fact done, (if after the Fact be done accordingly in Case of
Treason) are Principals, for that they are Participes Criminis in the very Act
of Counterfeiting; but saving reformation, we hold, that if any Man commiteth
High Treason and thereby becomes a Traitor: If any other Man knowing him to be
a Traitor, does Receive, Comfort, and Aid him, he is Guilty of Treason; for
that there be no Accessaries in High Treason, and so it was resolved by the
Justices Pasch. 4 Jac. In the case of Abingdon, who Received, Comforted, and
Aided Henry Garret Superior of the Jesuits, knowing him to be Guilty of the
Powder Treason, and accordingly Abingdon was Indicted and Attainted of
High Treason. See 1 Ed. 6. 12.

And whereas it is said Dyer 296. that the said Offense in Conyers was
Misprision of Treason. That cannot be because there was a consent, and not a
concealment only: otherwise High Treason being the highest Offense, should have
more favor then Felony, for the Releiver and Comforter in Case of Felony is
punnished by death, and so is not he that committed Misprision of Treason; And
lastly, this is no new Treason but a partaking and a maintaining of the old,
Poult. de pace 141.. 1.

XVIII. Dalt. cap. 108. in High Treason there be no Accessaries for all the
Advisers, Counselors, Persuaders, and Assistance therein be Principals,
Treason.
etc. they being the very cause of the Fact may well seem as Culpable, or more
then the principal Actors, for plus peccat Author quam Actor, so 3. Genesis of the
Serpent, and 2. Sam. 12. 9. of David etc. But yet it seems that this is to be
understood of Accessaries before the Treason for Receiving, Aiding, and
Comforting a Traitor after the Offense, knowing the same was holden to be but
Misprison of Treason, Dyer 296. and yet by some other Authorities, the
Receiving of Tarytors after the Offense, knowing thereof, is holden to be
Treason, 3 H. 7 10. Treason Br. 19. per Hussy Chapter J. so Boult. J. P. cap. 24.
page 103.

XIX. Terms del ley verbo Accessory, Statutes.
that Accessory by the Statute is such a one that Abetteth, Counsels, or
Relieveth any Man which commiteth, or has committed any Offense made Felony by
Statute; for although the Statute does not make mention of Accessaries,
Abettors, etc. yet they are included by the interpretation of the said Statute,
Stamf. 42. Lamb. 282. and 3. Inst. 61. 62.

XX. Cromp. J. P. fol. 42.. 13. see Lamb. 283. that Justice Dalison said,
Statutes.
that 3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. it was held by the Court in B. R. that an
Accessory shall be to an Offense of Felony given by Statute, though it be not
so limmitted by the said Statute, as an Accessory shall be to a Felony by the
Common Law, and Stamf. 44. accords, and 19 H. 8. 47. accords in case of
Counterfeiting of the Kings Seal or Money, etc. And so it shall be of Trial by
Peers, where a new Statute makes Treason etc.

XXI. Dalt. J. P. cap. 108. page 284. Note also when a Statute makes an Act to
be Treason or Felony, Intendment.
which was not so before by the Common Law, and yet the Statute says not, that
the Abettors, Aiders, Comforters, or Consenters to the doing thereof, shall be
also Felons yet it, shall be Felony in them, for that they were the causes of
the doing or committing of the Offense, which it may be otherwise, had not been
committed, Lamb. 279. 280. 19 H. 6. 47. and 11 H 4. 13. Coron. 228. and so it
seems of Recievers, etc. after the Offense, Lamb. 281. For where a Statute
makes any thing Felony, it is made as Felony to all Intents and purposes.

Exposition.
XXII. Poult. de pace 145.. 28. Note, that in all the cases aforesaid on ( viz.
8. H. 6. 12. and 1. Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. and 1. Jac. 12. of Conjuration and
3. H. 7. 2.) touching Offencess made Felony by Statute, the Aiders, Abettors,
and Counselors, be made Principals by the Special words of the same Statute,
and not Accessaries to the same Felonies.

Fresh Suit.
XXIII. Dalt. 288. cap. 209. If the party Robbed; or if he that shall have any
Goods Stolen from him after complaint made by him of the Felony to the Justice
of Peace, or to the Constable, shall then take his Goods again, or otherwise be
compounded withal, and will not prosecute this matter against the Felon any
further, but will suffer him to escape after he was once so charged, and
perhaps Arrested for the same; Quaere, If this makes not him an Accessory.

Agreement.
XXIV. Crompt. 41.. 7. A man says to me that he will Kill another; and I say I
am content; Quaere, If this makes me Accessory if he Kill him, for it is a
sufferance in me and no Commandment, etc. 21 H. 7. 35. Distor. Br. 15. 39. 38.
Ed. 3. 18. Tresp. Br. 113.

Indictment.
XXV. Lamb. 4. cap. 5. 492. Neither is it good in an Indictment against an
Accessory, to say that he received the Goods without telling that he received
the Felon, 27. Ass. 69. 9 H. 8. 41. and 25 Ed. 3. 39. nor to say that he (
scienter Felonem Domini Regis apud Arecepit,) without showing what Felony he
committed, 7 H. 8. 65. nor without telling that he knowing it, received him
Feloniously, 7 A. 8. 42. unless he receives one that is Attainted of Felony in
the same County, for then he must at his Peril take knowledge of the Attainder,
8 Ed. 4. 3. but Quaere Crompt. 108.. 1. 2. 3.

Joynder.
XXVI. Lamb. pred. 10. pl. 27. An Indictment against the Stealer of a Horse and
his Accessory after.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. nuper de
C. in dicto Com. Gelder XXIX. die Aug. Anno dicti Dom. Nostri Regis, etc.
quoddam Stabulum in Domo mansionali Cujusdam J. S. infra Parochiam de C.
predict. in Com. predict. existens fregit and intravit and unum Equum spadonem
Anglice vocat a Guelding Coloris Albi pretii XXX s. de bonis and Catalis ipsius
l. ibidem existentes inventos Felonice cepit and abduxit contra pacem dicti
Dom. Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Ed quod K. H: nuper de C. predicta in Com. predicto Horse-Courser sciens
prefatum A. B. Feloni preamdictam apud C. predict. modo and firma predictis
fecesse and perpetrasse eundem tamen A. B. apud C. in Com. predicto XXX. die
dict. mensis Aug. Anno supradict. Felonice recepit and hospitio accepit post
Feloniam predictam sic per ipsum A. B. ut preferter facta and Commission.
contra pacem dicti Dom. Regi nostri nunc and contra Coronam and Dignitatem
West. suas Sy. mt. 2. part. 130. Sect. 204.

Joynder.
XXVII. Lamb. Prisidents. 10. pl. 29. An Indictment against the Stealer of Cow
and his Accessory before.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Dom. Rege, etc. presentant quod A. B. de C. in dicto com.
Shoemaker primo die July Anno Regni Dom. nostri etc. Regis etc. in quodam loco
infra parochiam de C. predict. si com. predict. vocat the Cow Pasture vi and
Armis Clausum Cujusdam I. S. de D. in com. predict. yeoman fregit and entravit
and quandam Vaccam coloris Nigri pretii X l. s. bonis and Catallis predicti I.
S. tunc ibidem existent invent. Felonice cepit furatus est and abduxit contra
pacem dicti Dom. Regis nunc Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Et quod quidem G. H. de C. predict. in dicto com. Butcher ante Feloniam
predictam scilicet eodem primo die July Anno supra dicto eundem R. apud C.
predict. in com. predicto ad Feloniam predict. faciendum and perpetrandum
malitiose and Felonice excitavit persuasit and procuravit contra pacem dicti
Dom. Regis Corronam and Dignitatem suam West. Symt. 2 part 130.. 206.

XXVIII. Crompt J. P. 245. pl. 41. And Indictment pro Incendio Domus, Coron.
with an Accessory before and after.

Inquiratur pro Dom. Rege si W. S. nuper de O. in com. predict Smyth. Staff. ss;
XII. die October. Anno Regni Regis etc. circa horam XII. in nocte Ejusdem diei
vi and Armis viz. Gladiis etc. apud S. in com. predict ad domum mansionalem
cujusdem I. C. simul cum aliis venebat ea intention ad spoliandum dict. I. C.
de bonis and Catallis suis in eadem domo tunc existentes si idem in nuper
tecturam ejusdem domus vulgariter nuncupat the Covering of the House ad tunc
and ibidem cum una scula ascendebat and seandebat ea intention pertecturam
predict ad intrandum and ingrediendum in domum illam.

Ac si dict. W. simul cum alliis predict. I. G. R. C. M. P. and Eliz. G. in
eadem domo tunc and ibidem inferebant ita quod de vitis tunc desperabatur ac si
dict. Willielmum simul cum aliis predictis ad tunc and ibidem ex malicia tua
precogitata eandem cum igne tunc and ibidem Felonice comburebant predict I G. R
C. M P. and Eliz. G. in eadem domo existentes contra pacem etc.

Ac si W. R. de B. in com. predict yeomam and W. S. de S. in com predict
generos. ante feloniam predict' per ipsum I. G. and alium factum and
perpetratem predict W. S. predict. XII. die October. Anno supradict' apud B.
predict in com. predict' ad Feloniam predict' sic in fronta predict' faciendum
and appetrandum Felonice exitaverunt procuraverunt and abettaverunt contra
pacem etc.

Ac si predict W.R. and W.S. scientes predictum W. S. simul cum aliis supradict
felonium pred. in firma pred. sic fecisse and perpetrasse eundem W. S. postea
scilicet XIII. die or to be Anno predict' apud B. predim' in com. predict
Felonice receperunt comfortaverunt hospitaverunt and concelaverunt contra pacem
dicti Dom. Regis etc.

XXIV. West. Sym. 2 part 145.. 285. An Indictment for Receiving, Coron.
Aiding, and Comforting of a Felon, knowing him to have done a Felony.

Inquiratur pro Dom. Rege etc. si R. S. sciens prefatum I. R. Felon. pred. in
forma pred. fecisse and perpetrasse eundem IX. die and c. Anno etc. in commitat
pred. Felonice recepit auxiliatus fuit and comfortavit contra pacem' etc. Staff
ss.


XXX. West Sym. 2 part 147.. 299. An Indictment for Stealing of 4. Oxen and of
the Accessaries before and after. Joynder.


Inquiratur pro Dom. Rege etc. si A. B. de F. in com. N. pred. Yeoman 4. die.
etc. Anno Regni etc. VI. bonis pretiis etc. de bonis and Catallis I. S. de W.
in com. pred. invent. Felonice fuerat. cepit and abducit. Norff. ss.


Et si W. de B. de N. in com. pred. Yeoman 7. die etc. Anno Regni etc. apud N.
in com. pred. fuerant consentientes and abbettant. pred. A. B. ad Feloniam'
predict in forma predict. faciend contra pacem etc.

Et si H. W. and P. R. nuper de etc. scientes predict' A. B. Feloniam predict'
in forma pred. fecisse apud T. predict' and alibi in com. predict' predict' X
die etc. eundem A. B. Felonice receptaverunt contra pacem, etc.

XXXI. West. Symp. 2. part 157.. 353. An Indictment for procuring Burglary etc.
Coron.


Juratores pro Dom. Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod I. W. nuper de
L. clericus alias dictus, Middles^x. ss.
etc. X die May Anno Regni etc. apud parochiam de M. magna infra sanctuarum
Ibidem in Warda de A. London maliciose and Felonice abettavit and procuravit P.
W. de etc. ad Felonice frangendum and intrandum in domum W. prioris hospitalis
sancti Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia apud St. James Clarkenwel in predict' com.
M. infra predict hospitalem predict' Prioris ibidem and ibidem Felonice furatum
capiend' and asportandum unum Cyphum Argenteum and de auratum vocat a Goblet
predict prioris ad valent etc. and unam olam argent perecel de aurat ejusdem
prioris ad valentiam etc. and alia bona predicta prioris ibidem existent quam
quidem abbettationis and procurationis pretextu predict R. X die, etc. Anno
supradict etc. vi and Armis etc. Domum and mansionem dicti prioris apud etc:
intra hospitionem predict: etc: cura horam secundam in Turrora and ante
meridiem ejusdem die Burglariter and Felonice fregit and predict cyphum de
Argent de Aureat vocat a Goblet ad valentiam C: S: and predictam ollam Argent
percel de Aureat ad valent X li: ac alia bona ejusdem priores viz. duo
saliseria de Argent and de Aureat ad valentiam X l: S: etc. de bonis and
catallis dicti prioris ad tunc and ibidem invent Felonice furat fuit cepit and
aspertavit contra pacem etc.

Action see Information.
Account.
Churchwardens, Collectors, Surveyors, Overseers, Ways, Poor, Taxes.
Poor.
1. BY 5 Eliz. 3.. 6. N. 1. the Gatherers or Collectors for the Poor, shall make
their just account quarterly to the Mayor or chief Officers of the said Cities,
Buroughs and Towns Corporate, and in every Parish of the said County, to the
Parson, Vicar, or Curat, and Churchwardens of the Parish, at which account
such of the Parish as will may be present.

Officers.
II. 5 Eliz. 3.. 6. N. 3. and if the said Collectors or any of them, do refuse
to make their said account, within eight days after request made to them for
the same; then the Bishop of the Diocese, or the Ordinary of the place,
Chancellors or their Commissaries, together with a Justice of Peace and the
Churchwardens of the said Parish or one of them, shall have Authority by
virtue of this Act upon complaint to them made; to commit the said person or
persons so refusing to Ward, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until
he or they so refusing shall make their said accounts before such persons as
the said Bishops, Ordinary, Chancellors, or Commissaries and Justices of the
Peace shall appoint; and so make immediate payment of the Sums, wherewith by
determination of the said account they shall be charged.

Days.
III. 14. Eliz. 5.. 18. N. 1. the Collectors for the Poor, shall make their just
account half-yearly of their Collection and Gathering to two Justices of the
Peace dwelling next to the abiding place, not being within any City etc.

Contempt.
IV. Eliz. 5:: 18. N: 4. and if any Collector for the Poor refuse or Neglect, to
make his account by the space of 14 days after request to him therefore made,
then the said two Justices or one of them, to commit the said Collector to the
next Goal for the said County, there to remain without Bail or Mainprise till
he have made his said account, and immediate payment of all such sirplusage as
he has received.

Ordinary.
V. 14 Eliz: 5.. 30. N: 4. and that it shall be lawful to the Bishop of the
Diocese for the time being, where such Hospital ( viz. that has no local
visitor) is or shall be, or his Chancellor upon complaint or other intelligence
of just cause, to take account how the Rents, Revenues and Profits, of any such
Hospital has been bestowed and spent to call before him or them at the said
Hospital to account all such persons as have had the Collection or Reciept of
any the said Rents, Issues, Revenues, Profits, Cromp. pl. J. P, 200.

Process.
VI. 14 Eliz: 5. 30 N. 5. and If any so called shall refuse to account or
entering into account shall refufe forthwith to employ or answer to the use of
the said Hospital, such sum or sums of Money as upon the same account shall
appear to be due by him, that then he shall forfeit and lose such sums of Money
as to the said Bishop or Chancellor, and to two Justices of the Peace next
inhabiting to the said Hospital shall be thought meet.

VII. By 39 Eliz: 4.. 13. N: 2. Chancellor may award Commission to any,
Chancery.
to call all and every person and their sureties, and every of their Executors
or Administrators, to an account for the Poors stock, And to compel them by
Attatchment of their Goods or Bodies to appear before them to hear and
determine the same.

VIII. 43 Eliz: 2., 2. N: 2. the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor shall
within Four days after the end of their year, Chapter Ward.
and after other Overseers nominated, etc. make and yield up to two Justices of
Peace, one of the quorum in or near the Parish, etc. a true and perfect account
of all sums of Money by them Received or Rated, and Sessed, and not Received;
And also of such Stock as shall be in their hands, or in the hands of any of
the Poor to work, and of all other things concerning their said Office,

Addition.
Nosine, alias Dictus.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 5. page 480. the name and Surname of the party Indicted must
be certainly expressed, Nosine.
and if the Indictment be of an Accessory Felony, the name of the Principal
must be set down also; for if the Indictment be quid A. mandavit Cuidam ignoto
Occidere B, etc. this is vicious, but in Treason Trespass or maigim where all
be Principals, it may be quod procuraevit personas ignotas to do it: Marrow.

II. Lamb. 486. ibid. the certainty of the name of the Person to whom the
Offense is done, is also in most cases requisite, Averment.
but yet quod bona cujusdam ignoti cepit Felonice or quendam ignotum Felonice
depredavit its good, because of the Kings advantage of forfeiture thereby,
Indictment 12, and Dyer 285. pl an Affray and Assault in quendam ignotum is
good enough being at no mischief, but a verrable that the new Indictment by
name is for the same Offense and none other.

III. Lamb. 460. ibid. Besides the Name and Surname of the party Indicted, Lieu.
there ought also by the Statute of 1 H. 5. 5. in every presentment wherein
Process of Outlary lies, to be added, his Estate, Degree, or Mystery, and the
County, Town, Hamlet, or place where he is, or was Conversant; and even so
ought it to have been at the Common Law, Also as touching names of Dignity made
by Creation, as Duke, Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Archbishop, Bishop, Knight, or
Sergeant at Law, because every of these Titles were accounted parcel of the
name. But it was not so for the names of Baron, Bannaret, and Esquires, which
are but names of Dignity without Creation, nor for Chancellor, Treasurer,
Chamberlain, Chief Coroner, Eschaeter, Bailiff, Dean, Archdeacon, Prebend, or
Parson, which are Names of Dignitaries by reason of Office only, unless the
presentment did charge them in respect of their Office, for then the name of
Office also, as Bailiff, or Eschaeter ought to be used in the Indictment.
Crompt. J. P. 120.. 23.

IV. Lamb. 4. cap. 5. page 481. but Borough Knight, Esquire Gentleman, Nosine.
Alderman, Widow, Single-woman, Dean, Archdeacon, Parson, Doctor, Clark,
Parish-Clark; are good Additions of Estates, or Degree, (as I take it) within
the meaning of this Statute, 1 H. 5. 5.

V. Lamb. 481. ibid. but Farmer, Servant, Butler, or Chamberlain, Nosine.
are no good Additions, because they be common to Gentlemen and Yeomen, and
therefore uncertain, Crompt. 104.. 44.

Trades.
VI. Lamb. 481. ibid. so Chop-Church, Merchant, Grocer, Mercer, Tailor, Broker,
Husbandman, Hostler, Labourer, Lighterman, Waterman, Spinster, etc. be good
Additions of Mystery, Cromp. 109.. 2.

Misnorum.
VII. Lamb. 281. ibid. But Citzen is no good Addition, because it is no Mystery,
Act, or Degree, Cromp. 101.. 11. neither is Extortioner, Maintainer, Vagagond,
Heretic, Dicers, Carders, or such like, any good Addition, because they are
every one against the Law.

Lieu.
VIII. Lamb. 481. 482. Also by 1 H. 5. 5. the Addition ought to comprehend the
County, and the Town, or Hamlet, or place known out of the Town or Hamlet,
whereof the party is, or was, so that if there be diverse Hamlets in one Town,
he may be named either of the Town or Hamlet: But if he be named of a place
known, and the place be within a Town, then he must be named of the Town, 35 H.
6. 30.

Variance.
IX. Lamb. 482. And if both the Town and the Parish, do bear one Name, he may be
named of the one, or of the other of them, but if there be two Towns in one
Parish, then he ought to be named of the Town, and not of the Parish, L. 5 Ed.
4. 129. and 22 Ed. 4. 2. and 22 H. 6. 41.

Alias dictus.
X. Lamb. 482. As for an alias dictus, which is often put in the Addition, the
use thereof is Chiefly in Writs grounded upon Especialties, and to make the
Writ and Writing to agree; for as touching Indictments, if the party be not
well named, both for his Name, of Baptism, Surname, Mystery, or Degree, and
place at the first, then cannot the alias dictus make that good which was evil
before, Cromp. 102. 25.

Trades.
XI. Lamb. 482. 463. it appears 1 Ed. 4. 2. and 2 Ed: 4. 16. that the Addition
of the Degree or Mystery, must always be such as the party has at the very
time, but the Addition of the place may be of such where he was at any time
before, so that then the Word Nuper be used with it.

Days.
XII. Lamb. 283. furthermore the Indictments must contain the Day, Year, and
Place, in which the Offense was committed, 8 Ed. 4. 8. 2 H. 7. 2. and 25 Ed. 3.
43.

Information.
XIII. Lamb. 4. cap. 6. page 502. In Informations, 1 H. 5. 5. seems upon the
bare words to have no place for Informations, be not mentioned in it, and upon
that reason the Court (13 H. 7. 21. Addition Br. 67.) did hold it clear, that
if Rescues be returned by the Sheriff against certain persons without their
Additions, yet in that case they may well be Outlawed upon it.

Inquest.
XIV. By 27 Eliz. 7.. 2. N. 1. No. Shiriff, Coroner, or other person to whom it
shall appertain to make return of any Writ, shall return a Juror dwelling out
of any Liberty, without the true Addition of the place of his dwelling or
abode, at the time of the sald return, or within one year next before the
making of any such return, or some other Addition by which the party returned
may be known, Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 427.

Franchise.
XV. 27 Eliz. 7.. 2. N. 2. Nor any Juror within any Liberty, with other Addition
then such as shall be delievered to him by the Bailiff of the said Liberty, or
his Deputy, certifyed under his or their Hand.

Return.
XVI. 27 Eliz. 7.. 2. N. 3. Nor any Bailiff of any Liberty, nor any of his or
their Deputy, shall of himself return any Juror, or Deliver to the Sheriff, his
Undersheriff or other Deputy, the names of any persons to be returned upon any
Panel or Jury, without the true Addition certified under his or their Hands,
to the Sheriff of the place of the dwelling, or the abode of every person to be
returned at the time of the said return, or within one year next before the
said return, or some other Addition, by which the party returned, may be known.

Issues.
XVII 27 Eliz. 7.. 2. N. 4. And that no extract of Issues against any Juror
returned as aforesaid, shall be delivered out, received, or put in ure, without
such Addition as is put in the Original Panel or Tales, wherein such Juror
shall be so returned.

XVI. Cromp. J. P. 101.. 10. a Person was Indicted Mich: Incumbent.
25 Eliz. in B. R. by the name of A. B. Parson of Dale, and it was Ruled to be
a void Indictment because he may be Parson of Dale, and yet he may abide
elsewhere Lamb. 4. cap. 5. page 482. Cromp. 110.. 25.

XIX. Cromp. J. P. 102.. 25. the Addition and other things according to the
Statute of 1 H. 5, 5. shall be in the premises of the Bill, Nosine.
and not in the alias dictus, 1 Ed, 4. 1. Cromp. 109.: 5. 13. 17. 36 H 8. 28.

Affearment, see Amerciament.
Affray.
Assault, Trespass, Battery, Force, Menace, Riot, Threats, Violence, Striking,
Quarrels, Behavior.
I. LAmb. 2. cap. 3. page 125. Affray signifies to terifie, Menace.
or bring fear, which the Law understands to be a common wrong; and therefore
it is (3 Inst. 158.) inquirable, and punishable in the turn of the Sheriff, and
in a Leet, 4 H. 6. 10. and 8 Ed. 4. 5. Dalt. J. P. 35. otherwise it is of an
Assault, as it seems by those very Books.

II. Lamb. 126. Ibidem. Yet may an Affray be, Peace.
without word or blow given; as if a man shall show himself furnished with
Armor or Weapon which is not usually worn, it will strike a fear upon others
that be not armed as he is; and therefore both the Statutes of Northampton (2
Ed. 3. 3.) made against wearing Armor, do speak of it, by the words, Affray
del pais and in terrorem populi, surety. Br. 12. Bolt. J. P. 249.. 14.

III. Lamb. 126. But an Assault, Trespass.
etc. cannnot be performed without the offer of some hurtful blow, or at the
least of some fearful Speech.

IV. Lamb. 127. Menacing, Affrays, Assaults, Menace.
and injurious and violent Handlings and Mis-intreatings of the person,
Batteries and malicious Strikings; etc. be breaches of the Peace, and do draw
after them the forfeiture of a Recognizance knowledged for the keeping of the
Peace. Lamb. 111.

V. Lamb. 2. cap. 3. page 130. A Justice of Peace is undoubtedly for this
purpose endowed with no less Power than every private man Master, Justices.
Kindred, Schoolmaster, or any Constable has, as it is plain by 14 H. 7. 8.
and 9 Ed. 4. 3.

VI. Lamb. 130, 131. The Law looks that every private person who shall happen
to be present at an Affray, Assault, or Battery, A^id.
(for now I will, with other men, confound their names) should do his part to
part them that fight together; and it does to that end enable him also with
some portion of Authority.

VII. Lamb. 131. If two be fighting, every stander-by may lawfully, Action sup.
Cas.
and shall do well to put them in sunder; and if he take hurt thereby, he shall
have his remedy by action against him that did the hurt: but yet he being but a
private man, may do no hurt, if they resist, for they also shall then have
action against him, wherein his Case differs from the Case of an Officer,
Lamb. 133. Dalt. 33. cap. 1.

VIII. Lamb. 131. Ibid. If an Affray be in the high street, Officer.
and one comes toward it with Harness or Weapon, to join with the one, or
other party, every one that sees it may stay him till the Affray be ended.
Dalt. 33. cap. 8. Cromp. 146.

Imprisonment
IX. Lamb. 131. Ibid. Any man also may stay the Affrayers until the storm of
their heat be calmed, and then may he deliver them over to the Constable to
Imprison them till they find surety for the Peace, but he himself may not
commit them to Prison, unless the one of them be in peril of death by some
hurt, for then may any man carry the other to the Gaol, tillXX it be known
whether he so hurt will live or die, as appears by 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 7. Dalt.
33. cap. 8. Infra 16.

Arrest.
X. Cromp. J. P. 147. Dicitur 38 H. 8. Faux Imprisonment Br. 6. 41. That a man
cannot arrest him that made an Affray, after the Affray is past, without a
Warrant contrary, before the Affray, and in time of the Affray.

Fresh Suit.
XI. Lamb. 131. And if he which did the harm in Affray do fly into another man's
House, yet may any man that follows him, upon Hue and Cry made, break open
the House, and enter, and take him, 7 Ed. 3. Bar 291. 5. Co. 95. Cromp. 146

Officer.
XII. Lamb. 2. cap. 3. page 132. Now that it is not only lawful, but commanded
also, that the ^ander-by do show his best endeavor in these Cases, it
appears in Coron. 395. that one which stood by and looked on whilst a man was
slain, was Imprisoned till he made Fine, because he did not bestir himself to
attach the Murderer.

Constable.
XIII. Lamb. 132. Ibid. If a Constable, or such other Officer, do see a man
endeavoring to make an Affray, he may command him to avoid upon pain of
Imprisonment, and if the Affray be great or dangerous, he may make
Proclamation, and may command the parties to Prison for a small time, till
their heat be passed over, and then he must deliver them, without any Fine
taking, Dalt. 33. cap. 8. Cromp. 146.

Slander.
XIV. Lamb. 2. cap. 3. page 132. But if two do use only hot words one against
another, the Officer may lay no hands upon them, unless they do also draw
Weapon, or do otherwise offer to strike. Cromp. 146. per Marwood. Dalt. 34.
cap. 8. infra.. 30. and Lamb. 77.

Officer.
XV. Lamb. 132, 133. If they once fight together, then may the Officer depart
them, and if he hap to be hurt in that doing, he shall have an Action of
Trespass for it: But if any of them be hurt by him in the resistance, no Action
lies for them; for the Officer ought to do his best to depart them; Insomuch
as if it be presented at the Sessions of the Peace, That he was present at an
Affray, and did not use his endeavor to put them assunder that fought
together, he shall be deeply fined for it: otherwise it is if he were not
present, but were only told of the Affray, per Marwood. Cromp. 146. Dalt. 33.
cap. 8.

Arrest.
XVI. Lamb. 133. If any of the parties be in danger by reason of a hurt received
in the Affray, then ought the Officer to arrest and carry the other to the Gaol
until he shall find surety to appear at the Jail-deliver. 22. Ass. 56. 38. Ed.
3. 6. Faux Imprisonment. Br. 6. Fitz. J. P. 72. Dalt. 33. cap. 8. see 3 H. 7.
1.. 1. N. 7. supra 9.

Officer.
XVII. Lamb. 133. If two men be fighting in a House, the door shut, then may the
Officer break open the door to see the Peace kept, though neither of them have
taken hurt, Cromp. 146. b. Dalt. 34. cap. 8.

Justification.
XVIII. Mich 5 H. 7. 6. Pl. 12. A man counted in Trespass, Br. 272. That the
Defendant such a day and year, with Force and Arms, had assaulted the
Plaintiff, and beat him, and imprisoned him by the space of a day, etc. And the
Defendant justified the beating, because the Plaintiff made assault on the
Defendant the same day, year and place; de son tout, Br. 18. And as to the
Imprisonment, he said he was Constable in the same Vill, and because he made an
assault upon him, and broke the Peace, he took and carried him to the Gaol, for
preservation of the Peace, and this was held a good Plea by all the Court, quod
nota; notwithstanding he was the same person on whom the Plaintiff would have
broken the Peace, because he was Constable, and in preservation of the Peace,
and of his own Person, he may arrest him; And the Plaintiff said, de son tout,
etc. and this was held a good Plea, because no matter of Record was alleged in
the Plea, as that a Capias came to him as Sheriff to take the Plaintiff, etc.
Lamb. 134. Dalt.

XIX. 5 H. 7. 6. Faux Imprisonment, Constable.
Br. 41. If a man makes an assault upon the Constable, he may justify to
arrest him that made the assault, and to carry him to Gaol for breach of the
Peace, though he himself be party ( viz the Constable) on whom the assault was
made, quod nota; and yet contra 14 H. 7. 8. Peace Br. 7. that the Justices of
Peace cannot award a Warrant to arrest a man because he has broken the Peace;
but they may award a Warrant to arrest him for fear that he will break the
Feace in futuro. Kell. 41. pl. Cromp. 147. Dalt. 34. cap. 8.

XX. Cromp. 147. The Constable ought to take surety by obligation of such as he
finds making Affrays. Fitz. J. P. 157. Bail.


XXI. Lamb. 134. If one do make an Affray upon a Justice of Peace, Process.
Constable, or such other, he may not only defend himself, but may also
apprehend the Offender, and send him to the Gaol till he will find surety, of
the Peace. 5 H. 7. 6. supra. 18. And the Justice or Constable may, if need be,
command assistance of the Kings People for the pacifying of an Affray. 3 H. 7.
10. Dalt. 35. cap. 8.

XXII. Lamb. 133. And yet when the Constable has taken an Affrayer,
Imprisonment
he may not Imprison him in his House, but in the Stocks; and that not above
such reasonable time as he may provide to convey him to the Gaol till he find
surety for the Peace, 3 H. 4. 9. 22 Ed. 4. 35.

XXIII. Lamb. 134. If he that makes an Affray do fly into a House when the
Justice of Peace or Constable comes to arrest him, Fresh Suit.
they may also in fresh Suit break open the doors, and take him, per Marwood:
or if he fly thence, they may make fresh Suit, and arrest him, though it be in
another County, by the opinion of some men, 13 Ed. 4. 9. And it should seem by
the reason of that Book, that in this Case also they may break open the doors
to apprehend him, because the King has an Interest in the matter, and then a
man's House shall be no refuge for him, as it should be in Debt or Trespass,
where the Interest is but only to some particular Subject, Cromp. 146. b. and
112. Dalt. 34. cap. 8. Com. 37. Plat's Case, and 3. Co. 52. Ridgway's Case 10
Co. 31. b.

XXIV. Cromp. 146. b. An Affray was in the Vill where the Sessions were held,
which is Corporate, Corporation.
and has Justices of the Peace within themselves, the Justices of the Peace
shall not intermeddle there, see 2, and 3 Ph. and Mar. 18. Otherwise it is at
the Assizes; for within Cities and Vills they have the Fines and Amerciaments,
and commonly pay a Fee Farm for their Liberties and Profits to the King.

XXV. Cromp. 146: b. If an Affray be made in one County, Lieu.
and is continued in another County, the Constable of one County cannot pursue
him in another County, and take him there, as Constable; and yet any man may
pursue him into another County, but not to bring him out of it. But if an
Affray be made in a Vill, and he flees into a Franchise which is in the same
County, the Constable of the first Vill may pursue him, and take him out of the
Franchise by fresh Suit, Dalt. 34. cap. 8.

XXVI. Cromp. 172. b. it was touched, If a man makes an Affray, Justices.
and the Justices of Peace or Constable seeing him so making Affray come to the
same Affray, and would arrest him, and he flees into another County, the other
may freshly pursue him there; but in case of Felony, fresh Suit is not
material, by 13 Ed. 4. 8. b. Pl. 4. per Coke.

XXVII. Cromp. 172. b. 173. If a man be arrest to the Peace, Fresh Suit.
and he flies after the arrest into another County, the Officer may follow him
upon fresh Suit, and there take him, see 2 Ed. 4. 6. b. Pl. 15. in Trespass 94.
Br. 296. where a Sergeant of London arrested one in London, and he drew his
Weapon, and fled to Mile-end, and the Sergeant followed him, and arrested him
there, and well.

Arrest.
XXVIII. Pasch. 13. Ed. 4. 8. b. Pl. per Croke, it was also touched, If a man
makes an Affray, and the Justices of Peace or Constable seeing him so making
Affray, come to the same Affray, and would arrest him, and he flies into
another County, and the other freshly pursues him, if he can arrest him in the
other County, etc. And some said this is not like a distress driven into
another hand, which may be there taken, etc. otherwise it is here query, for
some conceived all one; and for an Affray fresh Suit is material; but if it
were for Felony, it is not material, for he may take him in any County: But it
was debated, whether he should carry him to the Gaol where the Felony was done,
etc. and it seems he should, for he may be best delivered there, etc. (Brian)
to the contrary, that he must be carried to the Gaol where he was taken, etc.
and for his deliverance he may be removed by a Writ, etc.

Constable.
XXIX. Lamb. 2. cap. 3. page 134, 135. Now if the Constable does arrest one that
has hurt another, and do voluntarily suffer him to escape, and then he that
was hurt dies thereof within the year and day, the Constable shall make a
great Fine, and that to the value of his Goods in the opinion of some, 11 H. 4.
12. and Stamf. 35. but yet the Offense shall not have such relation to the time
of the stroke, as to make the escape become Felony thereby, 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N.
7. and Com. 263.

Slander.
XXX. Dalt. 35. cap. 8. Every Justice of Peace in his own discretion, and ex
officio, may bind all such to Peace as in his presence shall strike another, or
shall threaten to beat another, or shall contend only in hot words, see. 14.
supra Lamb. 77.

Peace.
XXXI. Lamb. 77. A Justice may cause a common Barreter, Rioter, one that makes
Affray, or other person to him suspected, to find surety of the Peace, 9 Ed. 4.
3. per Curiar. And if he see men contending in hot words, and threatening the
one to hurt or kill the other, he may of discretion, and ought of duty, (as I
think) to command them to find surety of the Peace, and thereby provide for
their mutual safety, Lamb. 132. supra Dalt. 35. cap. 8. Cromp. 136.

Bar. and Feme.
XXXII. Cromp. 136. b. 137. a. A man correcting his Wife, Servant or Child,
reasonably, is no breach of the Peace, etc. Marrow, Lect. 7. and 21 Ed. 4. 6.
23. A Master may beat another in defense of his Servant, for fear of loss of
his Service; and so may he do in defense of his Wife and Children; and so may a
Servant in defense of his Master beat another, and no breach of the Peace, etc.
ibid. see 21 H. 7. 41. and 35 H. 6. 56. and 9 Ed. 4. 51. A man may beat another
in defense of his Father or Mother, and no breach of the Peace. ibid. A man may
beat another in defense of his Goods, and no breach, etc. ibid. and 9 Ed. 4.
Trespass: the Case is, that if a man will take another Goods, he may lay his
hands on him, and disturb him, and if he will not let them go, he may beat him,
rather then suffer him to carry them away, lib. int. 553.

Justices.
XXXIII. West. Sym. 2. part 98.. 77. An Indictment for an Affray made at the
time of the Assizes, etc.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si C. P. and W. C. etc. vi and armis viz. Gladiis,
etc. apud C. pred' arrayat' and illicite congregat' tempore assizarum dicti
Domini Regis, etc. ad tunc apud C. pred' tent' necnon infra precinct' ejusdem
villa R. W. and R. H. Earund' assizarum Justiciar' ac Justiciar' dicti Dom'
Regis ad Gaolam de J. in eodem Comitat' de prisonariis in eadem existent'
deliberand' assignat' curia deliberationem ejusdem Gaolae tunc apud C. pred'
exist' insult' and affragam invicem fecerunt ad magnam perturbat' curiae dict'
Dom' Regis ac justiciar' suorum pred' tunc and ibid' exist' ac interrorem and
perturbationem diversorum subditorum ejusdem Domini Regis tunc and ibidem
exist' and in malum and pernitiosum exemplum omnium ligeorum dicti Dom' Regis
ac contra pacem dicti Dom' Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc.

XXXIV. West. Sym. 2. part 98. Sect. 78. An Indictment for Affray and beating
in time of Assizes, etc. Justices.


Inquiratur pro Dom' Rege si F. F. etc. 11. die, etc. vi and armis, Middlesex
ss.
etc. Justic' dict' Dom' Regis ad assizas in Com' pred' capiend' necnon ad
Gaolam ejusd' Comitat' apud W. in eodem Comitat' deliberand' assignat' ad tunc
judicialiter sedent' and exist' in quend' W.C. in pace Dei and dicti Dom' Regis
apud W. pred' exist' ex malitia sua precogitata insult' fecit and ipsum W. cum
quodam Gladio quem idem F. in manu fua dextra ad tunc and ibidem habuit and
tenuit percussit super caput suum dans eidem W. C. diversas plagas per quas
ipsum W. in magno periculo vitae suae posuit ita quod de vita sua desparabatur
in magnum Justic' and Legum hujus Regni Angliae contempt' and pernitiosum
exemplum aliorum and contra pacem dicti Dom' Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas
etc.

Or thus; ibid. Sect. 79. Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si O. P. etc. 10. die,
etc. apud T. pred' in Com' S. pred' tempore assizarum and generalem Gaolae
deliberat' ad tunc and ibidem tent' and sedent' ad tunc and ibidem Justiciar'
dicti Dom' Regis ad assizas capiend' necnon ad Gaolam dicti Domini Regis castri
de C. pred' in Com. pred' deliberand' assignat vi and armis and ex malitia sua
precogitata in and super quendam J. C. de S. in Com' pred' Yeoman in pace dei
and dicti Dom' Regis ad tunc and ibid' exist' insult' and affrayam fecit and
ipsum J. C. verberavit uneneravit and male tractanis and prefatus O. ad tunc
and ibidem cum quodam Gladio valoris 3 solid' and 4 denar' quem idem O. in manu
sua dextra adtunc and ibid' habuit and tenuit pred' J. C. ad tunc and ibid'
percussit and pupugit dans eidem J. C. ad tunc and ibid' quoddam vulnus sine
quandam plagam in latitu dive unius pollicis and profunditate quatuor pollicium
ita quod idem J. C. de vita sua maxim periclitabatur in magnam perturbationem
tam pred' Justiciar' dicti Dom' Regis ad tunc and ibid' in curia pred' sedent'
quam totius populi and lige orum subditorum dicti Dom' Regis de Com' S. pred'
ad tunc and ibid' confluent' and attendent' ac in magnum contempt' dicti Dom'
Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc. The like at the general Sessions of the
Peace, ibid' sect. 184, 185.

Administrators, see Executors.
Admiral.
Mariners, Ships, Seamen, Captains, Piracy, Poor, Soldiers, Rogues, Navy.
I. 2 Rich. 2. 4.. 1. N. 3. The King wills and commands all Sheriffs, Seamen.
Mayors and Bailiffs, within Franchises and without, That at the certification
of the said Admirals, or their Lieutenants, by their Letters thereof, (viz. Of
Mariners departing the King's Service, after Wages received) to be made
testifying the said proof (viz. Before them) shall incontinent, without
tarrying, make another Commandment of the King our Sovereign Lord, to take and
attach all Fugitive Mariners by their body, within their Bailywick, within
Franchise and without, and put them in Prison, there to abide in good and sure
keeping, till they have made gree to the King, etc. 18 H. 6. 19.

II. By 18 H. 6. 19.. 1. N. 2. And that the Justices of Peace shall have power
to enquire of Soldiers that depart from Captains beyond Sea, Justices.
after Wages received, etc. and to hear and determine the same.

Ships.
III. 5 Eliz. 5.. 27. N. 2. That 18 H. 6. 19. in all Pains, Forfeitures and
other things, did, does, and hereafter shall extend as well to all and every
Mariner and Gunner taking Wages of the King, etc. to all intents and purposes,
etc.

War.
IV. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 422. In charge to Jury at Sessions; If any Soldier
(entered a Soldier of Record, and having taken part of the Kings Wages; or any
Mariner or Gunner having taken pressed Wages to serve the King on the Sea) have
not accordingly gone to his Captain (unless he were let by notorious
Sickness, etc.) or have departed from his Captain without his License under his
Seal, 18 H. 6. 19. and 2, and 3 Ed. 6. 2.. 4. N. 1. and 4, and 5. Ph. and Mar.
3.. 2. N. 1. and 5 Eliz. 5.. 27. N. 2. But consider whether this entering of
Record have any use now.

Jurisdiction.
V. 5 Eliz. 5.. 30. N. 1. That all Offenses of Transporting Seafish, Prices,
Purveyans, etc. done upon the main Sea, or Coasts, being no part of the body of
any County of this Realm, and without the Precinct, Liberty and Jurisdiction of
the Cinque Ports, and out of any Haven or Pier, shall be tried and determined
before the Lord Admiral of England, or his Lieutenant, or Deputy, according to
28 H. 8. 15. for causes of Piracy.

Justices.
VI. 5. Eliz. 5.. 30. N. 3. And for all Offenses of Transporting Seafish;
Prices, eating Flesh, Purveyans, etc. as shall be done in the Land, or within
any Haven or Pier, all Justices of Peace in their Sessions, and Mayors,
Sheriffs, and Bailiffs, and other head Officers in Cities and Towns Corporate,
in their Sessions, or other Courts, within the limits of their Commissions,
shall have full Power and Authority to enquire of the Offenders of this Act, as
well by the Oaths of 12 men, as otherwise by Information, and thereupon to hear
and determine the same.

War.
VII. 5 Eliz. 5.. 43. N. 1. Provided, etc. and be it enacted, That no Fisherman
using or haunting the Sea shall be taken by the Queens Commission to serve her
Highness as a Mariner on the Sea, but that the said Commission be first brought
by her Highness Taker or Takers to two Justices of Peace next inhabiting to the
Seacoasts, Towns or other places where the said Mariners are so to be taken,
to the intent the said Justices may choose out, and cause to be returned, such
sufficient number of able men, as in the said Commission shall be contained to
serve her Majesty, etc. Lamb. 355. Dalt. 86. cap. 34. Cromp. 200.

License.
VIII. West. Sym. 2. part 128. Sect. 195. An Indictment for breaking of a safe
Conduct granted by King H. 6. to Merchant-strangers of Genoua, see 20 H. 6.
cap. 1. Cromp. J. P. 240. b. Pl. 30.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod eum
illustrissimus Princeps Henricus Rex Angliae sextus post conquestum per literas
suas patentes sub salvo conductu suo concessit licentiam and salvum conductum
suum dedit A. B. and D. and aliis alienigenis mercatoribus de Genoua pro eis
and quadam Nav' vocat' a Carick and pro bonis rebus and merchandizis suis infra
eandem Navem exist' de transitu Portus Southampton in Anglia per mare versus
parts Genoua transfretand' and eadem abfque aliquibus Roberiis fractione
impeditione perturbatione aut captione ipsorum alienigenorum bonorum and
merchand' sine mercimoniorum suorum predict' per aliquos ligeos dicti Dom'
Regis infra Regnum dicti Regis Angliae gaudend' sine impeditione ibid' quidem
H. de D. in Com' E. pred' Armig' and alii fractores salvi conductus Dom' Regis
de ligeis ipsius Dom' Regis infra Regnum Angliae exist' ignot' vi and armis
viz. Gladiis, etc. and aliis armis tam invasinis que defensibilibus armati
salvum conductum pred' minime verentes and spernentes in pred' A. B. and alios
alienigenos ad tunc and ibid' insult' fecerunt and ipsos verberaverunt
vulneraverunt and male tractanerunt and ipsos in Nav' pred' tanque eorum
prisonarios ad tunc and ibid' ceperunt and custodierunt and eos in Prisona sub
custodia sua Diu' viz. per spatium 4 dierum quousque Iidem A. B. and D. and
alii alien igine in eadem Navi existent' finem and redemptionem pro salvo
conductu and deliberatione suis habend' pro sexcent marcis cum prefat' H. and
aliis predict' fecissent detinuerunt contra salvum conductum Dom' Regis
predict' and contra form' Stat' in hujusmodi casu promisi ac editi and contra
Dignitatem Regiam ac in malum exemplum aliorum, etc.

Agait or Await see Coron. Agnus Dei see Pope.
Ale.
Liquors, Wine, Beer, Brewers, Hostler, Victuallers, Inholders, Excise,
I. 9 H. 3. 25. Magna. Carta One Measure of Wine, Measures.
shall be through Our Realm and one Measure of Ale.

II. Cromp. J.P. 94, Nota, Exchequer.
that Popham Chapter J. said that the Measure of Wine and Ale should be all one,
and that it had been so agreed by the Justices, viz. according to the Standard
of the Exchequer, see Magna Carta 26, (25,) and 15. R. 2. 4. see 1 Jac. 9.
Alter for Ale Dalt. 148. infra. 80.

III. Cromp. 94 b. ibid. But note, that the Ale Quart is the greater, Wine.
because the Froth will amount to a little, and Wine Froths not, and therefore
there shall be a nick in the top of a Wooden Can whereby the Measure shall be,
to which nick the Beer shall come; and this was told me by Mr. Wallis Clark of
the Market to Queen Eliz. 25 Jac. 1588.

IV. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 349. The authority of some two Justices of Peace,
(the one being) of the Quorum, License.
may prohibit and remove Common-Ale-selling, and may also allow the same,
taking Bond with surety by Recognizance for good rule to be kept in such
Alehouses, etc. by their discretion; and they may also Commit and Imprison for
three days those that keep Common-Ale-selling of their own heads against
prohibition, or without allowance thereof, and may after take Recognizance of
them with two Sureties that they shall keep none, Dalt. cap. 7. page 28. and
373. etc. Cromp. 198. b. 199.

V. 2. Role 398. Anonym. Mich. 21. Jac. in B. R. per Haughton Justice,
Indictment.
A man cannot be Indicted for keeping of an Alehouse without License, for the
Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 4. N. 1. is, that if any one hold an Alehouse
without License that he shall be committed, and by this the Justice of P. if
they please to take notice of this, may Imprison the party, Palmer 388. 6.
Dalt. cap. 7 page 31.

Lamb. 346. Seeing that the order of the Conditions of these Bonds is partly
reserved to discretion, Recognizance
I will for the better bridling of these Nurseries of naughtiness leave with
you that form of them which I have known practiced by that Honorable Justice
the late Lord William Cobham Lord Warden of the five Ports, Lord Chamberlain of
the late Queen Elizabeth's Household, and one of her Privy Council.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, whereas the within Bounden A. B.
is admitted and allowed by the within named Lord Cobham and J. Lenison Knight,
two of the Queens Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County of Kent
within Written, to keep a common Alehouse or Tipling-house, and to use common
selling of Ale or Beer, only within the now house of him the said A. B. and not
elsewhere, situate in the High Street of the Town of M. within Written, and
called the Sign of the Heart. If therefore he the said A. B. during such time as
he shall keep such Common Alehouse there, shall not suffer any unlawful Play,
at the Tables, Dice, Cards, Tennis, Bowls, Cloysh, Coits, Loggets, or other
unlawful Games to be used in his said House or in his Garden, Orchard, or other
his Ground or Place, nor dress, or cause, or suffer to be dressed, any Flesh to
be eaten upon any day forbidden by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of
England, nor wittingly and willingly admit or receive into his said House or
any part thereof, any person notoriously defamed, of or for Incontinence or
Drunkeness, or that shall be before hand notified to him the said A. B. by the
Constable or Borsholder of M. aforesaid for the time being, or by the Deputy,
or either of them, to be an unmeet person to be received into a common
Alehouse, nor Keep or Lodge there any strange person above the space of one
Day and one Night together, without notice thereof first given to the Constable
or Borsholder, or the Deputy, the one of them there, and finally if the said A.
B. during all the time that he shall keep common selling of Ale or Beer in the
said house, shall and will there use and maintain Good Order and Rule; then
this present Recognisance to be void, or else to stand in full force, power,
and virtue, etc. Dalt. 373.

G^mes.
VII. Dalt. cap. 123. page 374. In the condition not to suffer Play, etc. adds
especially by men's Servants, Apprentices, Common Laborers, or Idle persons,
etc. nor shall keep or Lodge there any strange person above the space of one
day, and one night together, without notice thereof first given to the
Constable or his Deputy there.

Recogn.
VIII. Dalt. cap. 123. page 376. Memorandum quod die Anno Regni Dom. Caroli,
etc. Coram T. P. and H. D. Armig. Justiciar. dicti Dom. Regis ad pacem in
Commitatu predict. conservand. assignat. etc. A. B. de etc. and C. D. de etc.
manuceperunt pro W. S. de etc. Victualler, viz. uterque manucaptores predict.
sub pena Quinque libar. and predict. W. S. assumpsit pro se sub pena X. li.
quas concesserunt se debere dicto Dom. Regi, etc. sub condition sequenti.

Recogn.
The condition of this Recognisance is such, that whereas the above (or within)
Bounden W. S. is admited and allowed by the said Justices to keep a common
Alehouse and Victualling-house, until the first of April, or for the space of
one whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and no longer in the house where
he now dwells, at (...) in the said County of (...) and not elsewhere in the
said County; If therefore the said (...) shall not during the time aforesaid,
permit or suffer, or have any Playing at Dice, Cards, Tables, Coits, Loggets,
Bowls, or any other unlawful Game or Games, in his House Yard, Garden, or
Backside. 2. Nor shall fuffer to be or remain in his House any person or
persons, not being his ordinary Household Servants, upon any Sabbath day, or
Holy day, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon; 3. Nor shall suffer any
person to Lodge or stay in his house above one Day and one Night, but such
whose true Name and Surname he shall deliver to some one of the Constables, or
in his absence to some of the Officers of the same Parish the next day
following, unless they be such person or persons as he or she very well
knows, and will answer for his or their forthcoming. 4. Nor suffer any
person to remain in his or her house, Tippling or Drinking contrary to the Law.
5. Nor yet to be there Tippling or Drinking after Nine of the Clock in the
Nightime. 6. Nor buy or take to Pawn any stolen Goods. 7. Nor willingly
harbor in his said House, or in his Barns, Stables or other, where any Rogues,
Vagabonds Sturdy-Beggars, Masterless-Men, or other notorious offenders
whatsoever. 8. Nor suffer any person or persons to sell or utter any Beer, or
Ale, or other Victual by Deputation, or by color of his or her License. 9. And
also if he shall keep the true Assize and Measure in his Pots, Bread, and
otherwise in his uttering of his Ale, Beer, and Bread. 10. And the same Beer
and Ale to sell by sealed Measure, and according to the Assize and not
otherwise. 11. And shall not utter or sell any Strong Beer or Strong Ale, above
a penny the Quart, and Small Beer or small Ale above a half penny the Quart,
and so after the same Rates. (12.) and also shall not utter, nor willingly
suffer to be Uttered Drunk taken, or tippled any Tobacco within his said
house, shop, cellar, or other place thereunto belonging, that then, etc.

IX. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 351. In some Shires the Justices of the Peace do
condescend upon certain Articles framed by their discretions, Justice
and generally to be propounded to all common Ale-sellers taking the Bond for
the performance of the same Articles, a Copy whereof they do usually deliver to
every of them, which manner is avowable also, though not so assured as the
former, Lamb. 350. supra Dalt. cap. 123. page 377.. 5.

X. Dalt. cap. 123. page 375. For the manner of this condition supra. 8. It is
by the Statute 5. and 6. Ed. 6. 25.. 1. N. 4. partly referred to the discretion
of such Justices of Peace as take such Reocgnizance or Bonds, Recogn.
etc. but Note, that now there be diverse Articles of far better direction
published touching Alehouses by Proclamation at New Market the 19. of January
16 Jac* Anno 1618.

XI. Dalt. 123. page 375 First, that the Justice of Peace of every County,
Justice.
City, or Town Corporate within this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales, do once
every year in the Months of April and May, Assemble themselves either at a
special Sessions, or such other Meeting as they shall appoint for that purpose,
respecting the ease and convenience of the people of the Country, and there
call before them or any of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, all such
persons as do sell Ale or Beer by retail in any place, as well within Liberties
as without, within such County, City or Town Corporate, and then and there
taking some Certificate and Information from men of trust, who be persons of
honest conversation, and who not; and to give License to such persons as they
in their discretion shall think meet to keep common Alehouses, or
Victualing-houses within the places where such persons dwell.

XII. Dalt. 375. ibid: 2. That in Licencing of the said Victuallers and
Ale-house-keepers, License.
the form of the Recognizance and Condition (. 8. fupra) be used and none other.

XIII. Dalt. 376. ibid. 3. that every Ale-house-keeper and Victualer, Bail.
so to be Licensed do inter into Recognizance with two able Sureties to be
bound in 5. l. a piece; and the Principal, 10. l. at the least for the
performance of the condition of the said Recognizance which shall endure but
for one whole year, and then to determine unless, it shall seem fit to the
Justices of Peace to renew the same again by taking a new Recognizance of the
same condition, whatsoever date the Recognizance shall have, it is to endure
but until the said Months of April and May, or one of them.

XIV. Dalt. 377. ibid. 4. That the Clarks of the Peace, Town-clarks, Peace.
or their Deputies respectively, be called to attend the Justices of Peace at
their meetings or Assemblies, and that they do there take the Recognizance
aforesaid, of every Victualler, or Ale-house-keeper Licensed, and do duly enter
them amongst the Records of the Sessions of the Peace in their charge whereby
his Majesty may be duly answered of the Forfeitures that shall be made of the
Parties so bound.

XV. Dalt. 377. ibid. 5. That the Clarks of the Peace, Officer.
and Town-Clarks aforesaid, or their Deputies, shall within some convenient
time after the taking of the said Recognizance, fairly ingross the said
Recognizance and Condition in Parchment, which they shall keep as the Original,
and send a true copy of the said Recognizance examined with the said Original
to every Ale-house-keeper allowed, whereby he may the better inform himself
what he and his Sureties are bound to observe Lamb. 351. supra.

XVI. Dalt. 377. ibid. 6. that the Clark of the Peace, and Town Clarks or their
Deputies, do write out, and bring with them to every Sessions of the Peace, or
other meeting of the Justices, a Register-book containing the true names,
surnames, and places where every Ale-house-keeper, or Victualler that is
Licensed does dwell, and to the end it may appear to the Justices of Peace who
be Licensed, and by whom, and who be not, and what other alterations have been
from time to time, for the placing of men of honest and good conversation, and
displacing of others of ill behavior.

Fees.
XVII. Dalt. 377. ibid. 7. That the Clarks of the Peace, and Town-Clarks and
their Deputies, may take of every Ale-house-keeper for their Fee, for
performing the service aforesaid, at the time of the acknowledgment of the said
Recognizance, the Fee of 18 pence, and no more over and above the Fee of 12
pence, allowed for the Justices Clarks, by the Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 1.
N. 5. which shall be paid to the said Justices Clarks, Lamb. 365. 431.

Appearance.
XVIII. Dalt. 377. ibid. 8 that in case the Ale-house-keeper not knowing of the
Justices meeting, or being hindered by sickness, or other such like impediment,
shall fail of admittance at the General or Public Assemblies, and shall
notwithstanding be admitted or Licensed by two Justices of the Peace, whereof
one to be of the Quorum, the Recognizance with Condition fairly engrossed in
Parchment, in the Form prescribed as aforesaid shall forthwith, or at the next
Sessions at the farthest, be returned to the Clark of the Peace, or the
Town-Clarks respectively under the Hands of the Justices, under whom. 29 such
Recognizances were taken, together also with the said fee of eighteen pence for
the entry, registring, making, and delivering of a copy under his hand to the
Ale-house-keeper as aforesaid.

Licene.
XIX. Dalt. 378. ibid. 9. That none be licensed or allowed to keep an Alehouse,
that has not one convenient Lodging at least in his or their Houses, for the
lodging of any Passenger or Traveller; and to have always in her or their
Houses good and wholesome small Beer or Ale of two quarts for a penny, for the
relief of the Labourer, Traveller, or others that call for the same, Dalt. 28.
cap. 7.

Justices.
XX. Dalt. 378. ibid. 10. That the Justices of Peace within their several
Precincts do not permit or suffer any unlicensed Alehouse-keeper or Victualler
to sell Beer or Ale, but that they proceed against them by all due and lawful
means whatsoever; and that they be very careful from time to time to cause the
Brewers to be proceeded against in their General Quarter Sessions, for
delivering Beer or Ale to such unlicensed person, according to the Statute.

Recognizance
XXI. Dalt. 378. ibid. 11. That the Clerks of the Peace, or Town-Clerks,
respectively, do once every year, in Trinity-Term, make and bring in a brief of
all such Recognizances as shall be taken within every County, City, or
Town-Corporate, into the Office of the Patentees appointed by them to that
purpose, to the end all the concealments of Recognizances in that behalf may be
discovered, and the benefit accruing to His Majesty by such as wilfully break
the same may be more duly prosecuted; Of which, that His Highness be not
defrauded, order is given to the Patentees, that (with the allowance of the
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,) there be appointed Committees in every
County for the recovery thereof from time to time.

Justices.
XXII. Dalt. 378. ibid. 12. That the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, and
the Justices of Peace at their General Sessions of the Peace, do from time to
time enquire of the due execution of these presents, and of all other abuses,
disorders and misdemeanors whatsoever, committed or suffered against the
provisions aforesaid, and the true meaning of them.

Fees.
XXIII. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 431. Articles of Charge in Sessions; If the Clerk
of any Justice have taken above 12 d. for a Recognizance of an Alehouse-keeper
or Tippler, 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 1. N. 5. supra. 17. Cromp. 176.. 10.

XXIV. Lamb. 4. cap. 8. p. 516. The Statute of 5, Process
and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 3. N. 2. gives power to the Justices of Peace to enquire of
Alehouse-keepers, whether they have done any act to the breach of their
Recognizance; And if any matter be presented, then to award Process against the
Offender, to show why he should not forfeit his Recognizance: But what this
Process shall be, I will not determine; for I do not find that in any other
case, though it appear that a man has forfeited his Recognizance, the Justices
of Peace can award any Scir' Fac' or other Process to call him in upon it, but
rather to certify the same into higher Courts, that from thence Process may
issue out to call the party to his Answer, Cromp. 196. b. f. 9.

XXV. Lamb. 521. And upon Information made unto them, Forfeiture.
( viz. the Sessions) that an Alehouse-keeper has done any act whereby he has
forfeited his Recognizance, they may (as I said) award Process against him, to
show why he should not forfeit his Recognizance, by 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 3, N.
2. but learn if it be meant Scir' Fac' or of some other Process, Cromp. 126. b.
and 151. b. infra 36.

XXVI. Lamb. 4. cap. 15. page 563, and 564. Certificate.
And upon Certificate made at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace by two
Justices of the Peace, the one of them being of the Quorum, (which Lamb. 530.
is a Conviction against him that shall obstinately keep an Alehouse, contrary
to the Statute, 5, and 6. Ed. 6. 25. 4. N. 1.) the Justices are to assess the
fine of 20 s. the which I do purposely rehearse, because they are there
warranted to assess the Fine, without process first made against the Offender,
unlike the common order of assessing Fines, etc.

XXVII. Cromp. 151. b. Process shall be awarded (by 5, Suggestion.
and 6. Ed 6. 25.. 3. N. 2.) against him that has broken his Recognizance
taken to keep an Alehouse, to show why it should not be forfeited, etc.

XXVIII. Dalt. cap. 7. page 26. And yet note, Process.
that wheresoever any Conviction shall be before the Justices of Peace, (by 1
Jac. 9.. 2. N. 6.) by or upon the Oath of any other person than the Delinquent
himself, then the Justice of Peace must first send for, or convene the
Delinquent before him, to make answer, etc. infra. 43.

XXIX. Lamb. 565, 566. Fine.
Where the Conviction is for trespass against the Peace, Riots and such other
Contempts and Offenses against the Commission or Statutes, for the which no
certain Fine is appointed, there the judgment is that the party shall be taken
to satisfy the King for his Fine, and thereupon the Capias pro fine; and if
the party cannot be found, other judicial process goes out, till he be
outlawed, unless it be in very few Cases, where by the words of the Statutes
themselves, they may proceed to assess the Fine in the absence of the parties,
without calling them to it by any Process; for so it stands in the Statute,
5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 5. N. 3.

XXX. Lamb. 569, 570. Forfeiture.
I have heard that even in Cases where the Statutes do appoint a certain
forfeiture, as fine of 10 l. yet the practice is to mitigate the same by
discretion, if so be the party will come in upon the Indictment, and put
himself in gratiam Regis, with or without confession of the fault; so that the
fine shall be small where the fault was great, and the penalty of the Law it
self not small. But this manner of doing (in my mind) is so void of sound
reason, that I cannot recommend it to the Justices of Peace, but do rather
condemn it, as a mockery of the Law; Yea, I find that sundry Statutes (fearing
be like some such thing) have specially prevented it, commanding, That Justices
of Peace shall assess no less fine then is in those Statutes themselves
beforehand appointed. Such is 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 5 N. 3.

Justices.
XXXI. Lamb. 4. cap. 19. page 588. Neither may I well omit that this doing (
viz. holding the Quarter Sessions in two places of the County, etc.) may breed
danger to the Justices themselves, whilst any of them having taken the
Recognixance of a Tippler, does not certify it until the Sessions happen to be
in his own part, and in the mean season, the next Session of the Peace within
the Shire chances to be holden in the other part, whereof what may follow, the
Statute will tell you, 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 2. N. 3.

Enquest.
XXXII. Lamb. 599. The enquiry whether Alehouse-keepers have forfeited their
Recognizances ought (by 5, and 6 Ed. 6.. 3. N. 1.) to be at the Quarter
Sessions.

Certificat
XXXIII. Lamb. 620. If the Justices of Peace, having taken Recognizance for an
Alehouse, do not certify it at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, they
shall lose five Marks, 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 2. N. 3. so Cromp. 167. a. b.

Games.
XXXIV. Cromp. 77. Item, (viz. enquiry at Sessions shall be) whether any that is
allowed to keep a common Alehouse use any unlawful Games, or keep any misrule
in the same House, against their Recognizance? Cromp. 125.

Hostler.
XXXV. Cromp. 77. a. b. Nota, That it has been agreed that such Inns that have
been newly erected, since 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and were not Inns before, ought
to have Licenses as Alehouses ought to have; and this was in ure upon an
Indictment traversed, and tried at the Assizes in Sussex, about 16 Eliz. as I
heard by him that was of Counsel with the party indicted, Dalt. cap. 7. page
31. Hutt. 99. and 8. Co. 32.

Process.
XXXVI. Cromp. 126. b. The Sessions may hear and determine by Information,
Presentment or otherwise, by their discretion, the forfeiture of a Recognizance
taken of Alehouses, by 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 3. N. 2. and they may make process
upon this Presentment or Information, Lamb. 516, and 521. supra 25. Dalt. cap.
7. page Cromp. 151. b.

Certificate.
XXXVII. Crompt. 130. b. The Certificate to the Sessions against him that keeps
an Alehouse against the Statute of 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 5. N. 2. being made by
two Justices of the Peace, (whereof one shall be of the Quorum) shall be a
Conviction to the Offender, Lamb. 530. Cromp. 172.

Bail.
XXXVIII. Cromp. 154. b. Nor he that is committed for keeping of Alehouses
contrary to the Statute, 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 4. N. 1. shall not be by Bail ^r
Mainprise, Cromp. 172. b.

Recogn.
XXXIX. Cromp. 196.. 6. The Justices of Peace shall take a Recognizance of such
that have License to keep Alehouses, to keep good rule, and that they shall not
use unlawful Games there, 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 1. N. 4.

Process.
XL. Cromp. 196. b.. 9. A Justice of Peace cannot award process upon
Recognizances before they be forfeit, as it seems by 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26.
but must certify it into the Chancery, Kings Bench, or Exchequer, if it be not
in Case where a Recognizance is forfeit for an Alehouse, by 5 Ed. 6. 25.. 3. N.
2. whereupon he may award process, as appeared by the said Statute, Lamb. 516.
supra.

License.
XLI. Cromp. 198. b. two Justices of the Peace, whereof one shall be of the
Quorum, may license one to keep a common Alehouse, and take Recognizance of him
with one surety, to keep good rule, and that he shall not suffer unlawful Games
to be used there, as to their discretion shall seem necessary and convenient,
5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 1. N. 4. Lamb. 431. infra 82.

Proof.
XLII. Dalt. 26. cap. 7. and not that the voluntary Confession before the
Justice of Peace, or other person authorized to minister the Oath, of any
Offender against any of the Statutes, 1 Jac. 9. and 4 Jac. 5.. 2. N. 1. shall
suffice to convict the person so offending; and after such confession, the Oath
of the party so confessing shall be taken, and be sufficient proof against any
other offending at the same time, 21 Jac. 7. Measures.


XLIII. Dalt. 26. cap. 7. If any Taverner, keeping also an Inn or victualling
in his House, or any Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, or Victualler, shall at any
time utter or sell, within his House or without, less than one full Ale-quart
of the best Beer or Ale for 1 d. and of the small two quarts for 1 d. (the said
Offense being proved before any Justice of the Peace, by one witness upon Oath)
then every such Taverner, Innkeeper, etc. shall forfeit for every such Offense
20 s. 1 Jac. 9.. 3. N. 1. And yet note That wheresoever any Conviction shall be
before the Justice of Peace, by or upon the Oath of any other person then the
Delinquent himself, then the Justice of Peace must first send for, or convene
the Delinquent before him, to make answer, etc. For it may be that he can make
sufficient defense or excuse of the Fact; And this was the direction of Sir
Nicholas Hyde, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, etc. Dalt. 67, 155, and
362.

XLIV. Dalt. 27. cap. 7. Every Taverner, keeping also an Inn, Hostler
or victualling in his House, and every Innkeeper, Alehouse-keeper, and other
Victuallers, which shall suffer any person (wheresoever his dwelling house be,)
to tipple in the said house, shall be adjudged within the Statute 1 Jac. 9.. 2.
N. 1. Dalt. 361. and 1 Bulstr. 109.

XLV. Dalt. 27. ibid. So that now by these Statutes 5, Hostler.
and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and 1 Jac. 9. and 4 Jac. 5. and 21 Jac. 7. and 3 Car. 1. cap.
3. (4) No person may come to tipple in any such Tavern, or in any Inn,
Alehouse or Victualling-house in the same Town where he dwells, not dwelling
within two miles thereof; And so Sir Francis Harvey Knt. delivered it in his
Charge at Cambridge Summer-assizes, Anno 1629.

XLVI. 1 Bulstr. 109. Pl. 90. Note by Yelverton Justice, Hostler.
That if an Inn do use the Trade of an Alehouse, this shall be within the
Statute of Alehouses, 5. and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. and
21. Jac. 7. and 3. Car. 1. cap. 3. (4) Croke Justice no person is for to erect
an Inn without a License from the King. Finner Justice, the Statute for
Alehouses include all, excepting only Booths in Fairs, not to keep an Inn and
an Alehouse, but to be suppressed; to keep an Inn only for the relief of
Travelers in this, Pasch. 9 Jac. Anonym.

Dalt. 28. cap. 7. Hostler.
If a common Inn-holder or Ale-house-keeper will not Lodge a Traveller, any
Constable or Justice of Peace may compel them thereto, but how the Officer
shall compel him quere? It seems that all the Officer can do, is either to
cause such Ale-house-keeper to be suppressed, or else to present or prefer such
offense of an Innkeeper or Ale-house-keeper, at the Assizes or Sessions of the
Peace, that so the Offender may be thereupon Indicted, Dalt. 17. 378.. 9.
supra. 19. 39 H. 6. 18. Actio super Casus. Br. 76. and 5 Ed. 4. 2. Actio super
Casus. Br. 92. Dyer 158. pl. and 9. co. 87.

XLVIII. Dalt. 28. cap. 7. And at Lent Assizes Anno 1622. Indictment.
Sir James Lee Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench delivered it in his
charge, that an Innkeeper or Ale-house-keeper, offending herein, might be
Indicted, Fined, and Imprisoned for the same; or else that the party grieved
might have his Action super Casus against the Innkeeper or Ale-house-keeper
refusing to Lodge him. 14 H. 22. b. Kell. 50. pl.

XLIX. 28. ibid. But no Inn-holder, Payment.
Ale-house-keeper or other Victualler shall be compelled to sell, or let any
Traveller or other, to have any Victuals or Lodging except the party shall
first tender and pay ready Money for the same, if it be required, 10 H. 7. 8.

Hostler.
L. 2. Roll. 345. 21. Hill. or Pasch. 21. Jac. per Chamberlain Justice by the
putting of a Sign upon his door, and Lodging Guests, he Charge himself to the
commonwealth; And if I come to an Inn, and require him to give me Lodging,
and he refuses, an Action upon the Case lies if he refuses me, and Mr.
Justice Dodridge, and Sir James Lee, Chief Justice, accorded, etc.

Hostler.
LI. Dalt. 30: cap. 7. Common Inns are appointed for Travelers, and Way-fairing
men 8. Co. 32. And therefore if any Innkeeper shall suffer persons inhabiting
in the same Town, or any other persons contrary to the Statutes 5. and 6 Ed. 6.
25. 1 Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. and 21 Jac. 7. and 3 Cor. 1. cap. 3. (4) to be
usually Tippling in his House, such an Innkeeper may be accounted as well an
Ale-house-keeper as an Innkeeper; And such Innkeepers may be bound by
Recognizance with Sureties for keeping good Orders as Ale-house-keepers are,
and so Judge Warberton delivered it in his Charge at Cambridge Assizes Anno
1613. and therewith also agreed Sir James Lee, and Sir John Dodridge in their
several Charges at Cambridge Assizes Anno 1621. For such Innkeepers, said
they, do pervert the end for which they were appointed first, or else it
seems they may be committed as Ale-house-keepers without License by two
Justices of Peace as aforesaid, or they may be Indicted therefore at the
Assizes or Sessions of the Peace as it seems by the Commissioners of the
Peace.

Lisence.
LII. Dalt. 31. Also it has been agreed for Law, that such Inns as have been
Erected since the Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and were not Inns before, ought to
have Lisence and that such Innkeepers are to be bound by Recognizance with
sureties for keeping of good Orders as Ale-house-keepers are, (so Crompt. 77.
supra. 35.) And yet at Lent-Assizes Anno 1621 Sir James Lee delivered in his
Charge, that Inns were Hosteries by the Common Law, and that every man might
erect and keep an Inn or an Hostrey so as they were probi homines, and dwelling
in meet places; but yet that they were not worthy of any allowance, or Lisence
under the Kings Great Seal, etc. Hutt. 99.

Nuisance.
LIII. Dalt. 31. ibid. And he delivered further in his said Charge, that if such
Inns or Hosteries be used ad nocumentum populi Dom. Regis, etc. scil. do keep
any disorderly house contrary to the Law, or be more in number then are
needful, and to the hindrance of other ancient and well governed Inns, that
then they may be thereof Indicted at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, and
there may be either fined or suppresed; and Sir James Lee told me after at his
Lodging in Trinity College, that this was the opinion of all the other Judges
upon a late Conference had amongst themselves, Fult. 99.

Justices.
LIVE. Dalt. 31. ibid. But such Inns or Hosteries, if they be inconvenient or
disordered, in respect either of the Innkeeper, or of the resort thither, or
that the place be unmeet, they are to be supressed, upon an Indictment found at
the Assizes or Sessions; And if they shall suffer Townsmen or other persons
usually to tipple there, they are to be punished as Alehouse-keepers without
license, for these Inns or Hosteries are to be allowed only for Travelers,
Hutt. 100.

Hostler.
LV. Hutt. 99. Pl. 151. Memorandum, That upon a Conference at Serjeants-Inn in
Fleet Street, 19 June, 22 Jac. it was resolved and agreed by the Lord Chief
Justice, Sir James Lee, the Lord Hobbard, Baron Bromly, Baron Denham, Justice
Hutton and Justice Jones, That any one may erect an Inn for lodging of
Travelers, without license or allowance, as well as any one before, 5, and 6
Ed. 6. 25. might have kept a common Alehouse, etc. Dalt. 31. cap. 7.

License.
LVI. Hutt. 99. ibid. By the like reason ( viz. being not restrained) all men
may use the Trade of Inn-keeping, unless it could be brought to be within the
Statute 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25. which has never been taken to be subject to that
Statute in point of License.

LVII. Dalt. 31. ibid. His Majesty ( viz. Hostler.
King James) in his late Speech in the Star Chamber, Anno 1616. has justly
excepted against the abundance of Alehouses, and more especially against the
infamous and blind Alehouses, as being haunts and receipts for Robbers, Thieves,
Rogues, Vagabonds, and other idle and sturdy Fellows; and therefore here I
thought good to put the Justices of Peace in mind, that in allowing of
Alehouses they have a regard as well to the person as the place; for all
persons are not fit to be allowed to be Alehouse-keepers, neither are all
places meet for an Alehouse, infra 62.

LVIII. Dalt. 29, 32. cap. 7. Justices.
Any two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quorum) may remove,
discharge and put down any Alehouse where they shall think meet, 5, and 6 Ed.
6. 25. and the Alehouse-keeper put down and discharged by any two such Justices
of the Peace, cannot be allowed again by any other two or more Justices of the
Peace, except it be in open Sessions, as Sir Peter Warberton delivered in his
Charge at Cambridge Assizes, Anno 1613.

LIX. Dalt. 32. ibid. License.
An Alehouse-keeper convicted and supressed for any of the former Offenses, (
viz. tippling, disorder, etc.) if he shall be licensed or allowed again by two
or more Justices of the Peace within three years, such License is void, and he
is to be punished as one victualling without License; And so it was delivered
by Sir Nicholas Hyde at Cambridge Assizes, Anno 3 Car. 1. And so it seems if
he were convicted, rhough he were not suppressed, if he be after licensed again
within three years after such Conviction, such License is void.

LX. Dalt. 31. If the party be in Livery, or a retainer to any man, Ability.
Bailiff of a Hundred or Liberty, Constable, etc. or be one that is not of good
Fame, Conversation or Government, such persons are not fit to be allowed to be
Alehouse-keepers; see Fitz. N. B. That no Victualler ought to sell Victual so
long as he is in Office, etc. infra 89. N. 2. 12 Ed. 2. 6.

LXI. Dalt. 31, 32. again dicitur, Trades.
That no person using any Trade ought to be allowed to keep an Alehouse, for
that were to take away the means, and so the life of another, tam quaere inde;
for that by the Common Law no man is prohibited to use diverse Trades, Dalt. 81.
375.

LXII. Dalt. 32. Lieu.
Also in the Towns which are no thorow-fare the Justices shall do well to be
sparing in allowing of any Alehouse, except it be at the suit of the chief
Inhabitants there, and to supply the necessary wants of their Poor, and then
Canakers (only to sell to the Poor, and out of their doors) would suffice, if
they were enabled by a Law, Dalt. 375. supra 57.

LXIII. Dalt. 32. ibid. Lieu.
also the Alehouses to be allowed are meetest to be about the midst of the
Town, but not to be in any blind corners where Thieves and Rogues may be
harbored; nor in places out of, or distant from the Town, except upon the
Riverside, and where there is great need, Dalt 375. supra.

LXIV. West. Presid. 1 part.. 557. A License to sell Ale.

W. K. and E. D. two Justices of Peace of our Sovereign, etc. Warwick. ss.
in the County of W. to all Bailiffs, Constables, and other the Queens
Majesty's Officers, Greeting, etc. Know ye, That we the said W. K. and E. D.
have licensed, and by these presents do license G. J. of etc. to sell Ale in
his House at G. aforesaid, for one whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and
have bound him by Recognizance, with Sureties, to the Queens Majesty's use,
That they shall maintain good rule, and not to use any unlawful Games or
Meetings in his House, but to do according to the Statute provided in that
behalf. In witness whereof we have subscribed our Names, and hereunto have put
our Seals, the (...) day of etc. in the 34th. year, etc.

License.
LXV. West. Presid. 1 part.. 558. A License to keep an Alehouse.

Berks. ss.
To all Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and all other the Queens
Majesty's Officers and Subjects to whom it may appertain, J. W. and R. P. Fsque
two Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign, etc. in the County of B. Greeting.
Know ye, That we the said Justices, of good and credible report to us made, as
well by men of Worship as by other honest persons, That J. W. of etc. is a man
meet to keep a common Alehouse in the House where he now dwells, have
licensed, allowed and admitted, and by these presents do license, allow and
admit the said J. W. to keep a common Alehouse or Tippling-house at M.
aforesaid, for one whole year next ensuing the date hereof; so that the said J.
W. suffer not any unlawful Games to be used within his said House, nor any evil
rule or order to be kept within the same, during his time of the said License;
for the using of which License accordingly, we do you to wit, that we have
bound the said J. W. and two other sufficient Sureties, in a hundred Shillings
a piece by Recognizance to the Queens Majesty's use. In witness, etc. Dalt.
378. cap. 124. infra.

License
LXVI. Dalt. 379. ibid. or thus. J. C. and M. D. two Justices of the Peace of
our Sovereign Lord, etc. To all Bailiffs, Constables, and other the Kings
Majesty's Officers, Greeting. Know ye, That we the said Justices have licensed,
and by these presents do license J. W. of etc. to keep a common Alehouse in L.
aforesaid, for one whole year next ensuing the date hereof, and have bound the
said J. W. by Recognizance, with Sureties, to the Kings Majesty's use, that he
shall maintain good rule, and further to do and behave himself therein in all
things, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, etc.

License. Cambr. ss.
LXVII. Dalt. 379. or thus. We whose Names are hereunto underwritten, Justices
of Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, within the County of Cambridge, do
license and allow J. W. of L. aforesaid, for and during one whole year next
ensuing the d^te hereof; so as he does not sufier any unlawful Games to be used
in his House, nor any evil rule to be kept there, but do behave himself therein
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, in that behalf made and
provided. In witness, etc.

License.
LXVIII. Dalt. 379. cap. 124. A License to Brew, and keep an Alehouse.

Derby. ss.
Whereas A. M. of W. in the County of D. Husbandman, has come before us J. C.
Knt. and F. B. Esquire two of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the
said County, and bound himself in a Recognizance, with sufficient Sureties, to
brew, and sell, and keep a common Alehouse, according to the Statute made in
the 5th. year of the Reign of our late Sovereign King Ed. VI. Now know ye, us
the said J. C. and F. B. to have licensed the said A. M. to brew, to sell, and
to keep a common Alehouse, according to the said Statute.

Given under our Hands, July 13. in the (...) year of, etc.
West. Presid. 1 part sect. 554.

Victuals.
LXIX. Dalt. 361. cap. 121. A Warrant to convent all Victuallers, etc. to put in
Sureties for observing Fish-days, according to Proclamation.

To the High-Constables of the Hundred of R. and to either of them.

Fish.
These are in the Kings Majesty's Name to command you to warn all the
Inn-holders, Taverners, Cooks, Alehouse-keepers, Butchers, and other
Victuallers whatsoever within your Hundred, personally to appear before us at
L. on Thursday being the 20th. day of this instant Febr. at the Sign of the
Griffin there, and to bring with them Sureties that shall enter into Bond with
them to His Majesty's use for the due observation of the Orders lately
published for the restraint of killing, dressing and eating Flesh in Lent, or
upon Fish days, according to His Majesty's Proclamation in that behalf; and
that you, or one of you, be then and there with us, to deliver us a Note in
writing of the Names, Sirnames and Dwelling-places of every of them, and of all
other that victual without license within your Hundred, as you will answer the
contrary at your perils. Dated at Westminster, 1 Feb. etc.

LXX. Dalt. 360. cap. 121. Recogn.
For Alehouse-keepers to renew their Recognizance. To the Bailiff, etc.

R. H. Knt. one of His Majesty's Justices, etc. These are in the Kings
Majesty's Name to require you, That you direct your Precepts to every
Petty-Constable within your Hundred, requiring them that they warn all
Alehouse-keepers and Victuallers within your said Hundred to be, and personally
to appear before us at L. upon Thursday, etc. then and thither bringing with
them their Licenses; And further, That every of them bring with them a
Certificate of their fitness and honest behavior in keeping of their Alehouses
and Victualling-houses, under the hands of four at the least of the most
substantial honest and discreet Inhabitants of the Parishes where they so keep
or dwell; and hereof fail you not, etc.

LXXI. Dalt. 360. cap. 121. A Warrant for the suppressing of an Alehouse.
License.


Cambr. ss. J. C. and E.H. Knts. two of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the
Peace within the said County of Cambridge, to the Constables of B. and to
either of them, Greeting.
Whereas we are credibly informed, that R. D. of your Town Victualler is
himself a man of evil behavior, and besides does suffer evil rule and disorder
to be kept in his House, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: These
are therefore in His Majesty's Name to will and command you forthwith to repair
to the House of the said R. D. and to charge him to cease from keeping any
longer any Alehouse or Tippling-house, and from common selling of Ale or Beer,
at his peril: And withal, that you cause his Sign to be pulled down. Hereof
fail you not, as you, and either of you, will answer to the contrary at your
peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals at B. the (...) day of (...) in the year, etc.
LXXII. Dalt. 361. cap. 1. Forfeitures.
A Warrant to levy money forfeited by Alehouse-haunters.

R. S. one of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County
of C. to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish of W. and to every of
them, Greeting.

FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before me (according to the Statute in
that behalf provided) that all and every the persons hereunder named, Cambr. ss.
being Inhabitants within your Parish of W. upon the 12th. day of this instant
November have been and continued drinking and tippling in the House of G. W. of
your said Town (Innkeeper or Alehouse-keeper, etc.) contrary to the form of
the same Statute: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and
command you, and every of you, forthwith to levy by distress and sale of the
Goods of every the said persons hereunder named, the sum of three Shillings and
four pence a piece (which several forfeitures shall be bestowed and employed by
you to the use of the Poor of your said Parish;) and that you render to every
of the said Offenders the overpluss that shall remain upon your sale of their
said Goods; And if the said Offenders, or any of them, shall refuse or neglect
to pay their said several forfeitures, and that you can find no sufficient
distress whereon to levy the same, that then you the Constables, or one of you,
shall commit every such Offender or Offenders (refusing or neglecting to pay
the said sum or forfeiture, and not having sufficient whereon to be distrained
for the same) to the Stocks, there to remain by the space of four hours; and
this shall be your sufficient Warrant herein. Dated, etc.

Forfeiture.
LXXIII. Dalt. 362. cap. 121. ibid. The like Warrant may be made to levy the
forfeiture of Innkeepers or Alehouse-keepers, for suffering Townsmen or others
to continue drinking in their Houses, or for selling less than one Quart of
their best Beer or Ale for 1 d. saving that the distress taken of such
Innkeepers and Alehouse-keepers is not to be sold till after 6 days, and then
for default of satisfaction, the same are presently to be appraised and sold;
and therefore such Warrant must therein be made accordingly, 1 Jac. 9.

Cambr. ss.
LXXIV. Dalt. 362. To levy the forfeiture for not keeping the Assize, etc.

Measures.
R. T. Knt. one of the Kings Majesty's Justices, etc. Forasmuch as it has been
duly proved before me (according to the Statute in such Case provided) that G.
W. of your said Town Alehouse-keeper has lately uttered or sold in his House
less than one Ale-quart of the best Beer for one penny, contrary to the form of
the same Statute: These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to charge and
command you forthwith to levy by distress of the Goods of the said G. W. the
sum of 20s. the same to be bestowed and employed by you to the use of the poor
of your Parish; and if the said G. W. within six days next after such distress
by you taken shall not pay the said 20s. that then you cause the said distress
presently to be prized and sold, and that you bestow 20s. of the Money so made
to the use aforesaid, and the overpluss that shall remain upon your sale of the
said Goods, that you render the same overpluss to the said G. W. and this shall
be your sufficient Warrant herein. Dated, etc.

Cambr. ss.
LXXV. A Warrant for one who keeps an Alehouse without License.

Process.
FOrasmuch as it appears to us, as well by the Certificate of the Constables of
your Town, as also by the Information of diverse other credible persons, that T.
J. of your Town does keep a common Alehouse and Victualling-house within your
said Town without License, contrary to the Law in that behalf: These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name to will and require you to bring before us, or
one of us, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County,
the said T. J. there to be dealt and proceeded withal as to Law and Justice in
that behalf does appertain. And hereof, etc.

Cambr. ss.
LXXVI. A Warrant for Innkeeper, etc. Selling under Measure.

To the Constable of the Town of, etc.

Measures.
These are to will and require you in His Majesty's Name, to bring before me or
some other, etc. the body of W. C. and S. D. and either of them being accused
for selling less then an Ale-Quart of the best Beer for a penny, etc.

Imprisonment
LXXVII. A Mittimus to send to the Goal an Ale-house-keeper that Victualleth
contrary to commandment.

S^ff ss.
S. H. W. and R. T. two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said
County of S. to the Keeper of the Kings Majesty Goal at G. greeting. Whereas
R. D. of B. in the said County of S. upon complaint lately made unto us of the
evil Rule kept and suffered by him in his house, and other misdemeanors by
Warrant under both our Hands and Seals, was discharged of his
Ale-house-keeping, and was commanded by us that he should henceforth use no
more Common selling of Ale or Beer: And whereas we are Credibly informed that
the said R. D. notwithstanding our said Warrant and Commandment given to the
contrary, as aforesaid; has ever since, obstinately, and upon his onw
authority, taken upon him to keep a common Alehouse or Tipling-house, and
still continues the same; We do therefore send you herewith the Body of the
said R. D. commanding you in His Majesty's Name to receive him into your said
Goal, and there safely to keep until such time as he shall from thence be
delivered by due course of Law, and thereof, etc. Dated, etc.

LXXVIII. A Warrant to levy the penalty for being Drunk. Essex ss. Forfeiture.


Forasmuch as it stands sufficiently proved before me this present day,
according to the Statute in that behalf, that R. P. of W. in the said County,
was Drunk at your Town of D. the 24. day of this instant December, contrary to
the Law in that behalf, etc.

These are to will and require you to demand of the said R. P. the Sum of 5s.
for his Offense, and if he shall refuse or neglect to pay the same within one
week now next ensuing, that then you levy the said Sum of 5s. by distress and
Sale of the Goods of the said R. P. you rendering to the said R. P. the overplus
of the Money that shall remain upon your Sale of his said Goods, and the same
to be bestowed and employed by you to the use of the Poor of your said Parish;
and for want of distress 24 hours in the Stocks.

To the Constables and Churchwardens of D. and every of them.

LXXIX. Lamb. 3. cap. 1. page 330. Justices.
Any two Justices of the Peace may give allowance for urgent and necessary
occasion to remain in an Inn, Victualling, or Alehouse, 1 Jac. 9.

LXXX. Dalt. 148. 65. It appears by Mr. Crompt. 94. supra 2. that it by the
Justices that the Measure of Wine and Ale should be all one, Measures.
but now by 1 Jac. 9.. N. Ale and Beer, shall be sold by retail by one and the
same Measure, scil. the Ale-Quart.

LXXXI. Dalt. 148. 65. And for the Prices of all Vessels of Ale and Beer,
Apraisment.
by 23 H. 8. 4.. 5. N. 1. Any two Justices of the Peace might Assess the Prices
thereof, and that no Brewer shall take for any Barrel, Kilderkin, or Firkin,
etc. of Ale or Beer, but after such Prises and Rates as shall be Assessed by
the said Justices of Peace in the Country, or by the Mayor or their head
Officers in Corporate Towns, etc. But now by the Statute, 8. Eliz. 9.. 5. N. 1.
the Assesment of the Prises thereof by the Justices shall be by the Justices or
the most part of them, being present at the Easter Quarter Sessions, and only
of such Vessels as shall be made or sold out of Cities or Corporate Towns,
Crompt. 93.

LXXXII. 11 H. 7. 2.. 1. N. 13. And that it shall be Lawful for two of the
Justices of the Peace, whereof one shall be of the Quorum, Justices.
within their Authority, to reject and put away Common-Ale-selling in Towns and
Places where they think convenient, and to take sureties of the Keepers of
Alehouses, of their good behavior by the discresion of the said Justices, and
in the same to be advised and agreed at the time of their Sessions, supra 41.

LXXXIII. West. Symb. 2. part 96. Sect. 71. Lisence.
An Indictment for keeping an Alehouse or Tipling-house.

Juratores pro Dom. Rege sup. sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. de C. in
dict. Com. Yeoman, Essex ss.
10 die Mensis October. Anno Regni Dom. nostri etc. and continue multis diebus
postea, viz. usque XXXI diem dicti October. Anno supradict. apud. C. predict. in
com. predict. obstinate atque ex authoritate propria ipsius A. B. fine ulla
Justiciariorum pacis dict. Dom. Regis in Com. predict. admissione aut
allocatione assumpsit sup. se custodire and custodim unam communem tavernam
Anglice vocat a common Tipling-house and ibidem dicto xx. die and dictis diebus
tunc postea communiter and public vendidit cervicium and potum Anglice dictum
Ale and Beer, diversis dicti dom. Regis ligeis and subditis in dicti Domini
Regis contemptum ac contra formam cujusdam Statut. in Parliamentum Ed. nuper
Regis Angliae sexto tentum apud Westminster Anno Regni dicti domini Ed. quinto
in hujusmodi casu provisi ac Editi. Lamb. Presid. 18. b. pl. 50. 5. and 6. Ed.
6. cap. 25.

Victuals.
LXXXIV. Note that 1 Jac. 9. For restraint of inordinate Haunting and Tippling in
Inns, Alehouses and other Victualing-houses was made to continue only to the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament, but is made perpetual by 21
Jac. 7.. 1. N. 1. And as Mr. Chamberlains last Complete Justice page 9. says,
is without doubt perpetually in force, notwithstanding it be only continued by
21 Jac. 28.. 1. N. 29. 61. unto the end of the first Sessions of the next
Parliament; not only because this continuance is only affirmative, and so takes
not away the force of any former Statute, which were sufficient alone,
notwithstanding 1. Car. 1. cap. 4. which is expressly for further restraint of
Tippling, and refers to 1 Jac. 9. etc. but also because since that Act of 1 Jac.
9. (though that be about the same matter as 1 Jac. 9.) Yet by 1. Car. 1. cap.
7.. 3. N. 4. The Statute 1 Jac. 9. etc. is inclusively continued until some
other Act be made touching the continuance or discontinuance of the same, by
virtue whereof 1 Jac. 9. is also in force to this day, for no Act is made
touching that matter since.

Shiriff.
LXXXV. 22. and 23. cor. 2. cap. 20. (7). 9. N. 2. For remedy of abuses by
Bailiffs, etc. It is Enacted that if any Undersheriff, Bailiff, Sergeant at
Mace, or other Officer or Minister whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter have
in his custody any person by virtue or Color of any Writ, Process, or other
Warrant whatsoever, It shall not be Lawful for such Officer to convey, or cause
the said person to be conveyed to any Tavern, Alehouse, or other public
Victualling or Drinking-house, without the free voluntary consent of the said
person so as to charge such Prisoner with any sum of Money, for any Wine, Beer,
or Ale, Victualling, Tobacco, or any other things whatsoever, but what the said
person shall call for of his own accord.

2. Hereupon Mr. Chamberlain in his complete Justice, page 9, 10. well infers,
that Alehouses of Bailiffs Sergeants, etc. are very mischevous, and to be
considered of; and Dalt. 31. says, such are not fit to be Licensed. Supra 60.

Measures.
LXXXVI. West. Symb. 2. part 137. Sect. 238. An Indictment of Selling Ale in
Kilderkins 23 H. 8. 4.. 4. N. 1.

Bucks. ss.
Juratores pro dom. Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod I. R. de C. in
Com. B. predict' Pandoxator and A. L. de eadem C. predict' Beer Seller sunt
Communes Pandoxatores in C. predict' and 10 die, etc. Anno Regni, etc. ac
diversis aliis diebus ac viribus tam antea quam postea vendiderunt Cervisium
and Cervisiam per diversa vasa illicita vocat Kilderkins tam magna quam parva
contra formam Statutorum inde edita ad grave dampnum populi Domini Regis etc.

LXXXVII. West. Symb. 2. part. 96. Sect. 71. An Indictment for keeping an
Alehouse, or Victualling-house, against 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. N.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro dom. Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. de C. in
dicto. com. E. Yeoman 20 die Mensis October. Anno Regni dom. nostri, etc. and
continue multis diebus postea, viz. usque ad primum diem dicti Mensis October.
Anno supradict' apud C. predict' in Com' predict' obstinate atque ex autoritate
propria ipsius A. B. sine ulla Justiciariorum pacis dicti Dom' Regis in
Comitatu predict admissione aut allocatione assumpsit super se Custodire and
Custodivit unam communem Tabernam Anglia vocat a common Tipling-house, and
ibidem dicto 20 die and dictis diebus tunc postea communiter and public
vendidit Cervisium and Potum Anglice dict. Ale and Beer diversis dicti Dom'
Regis ligeis and subditis in dicti Dom' Regis contempt' and contra formam
cujusd' Statut' in Parl' Dom' Ed' nuper Regis Angliae 6. tent' apud Westm' in
Com. Middlesex Anno Regni dicti Dom' Regis Ed' quinto in hujusmodi casu provisi
and edit. Lamb. preced' 18. pl. 50.

^^m^s.
LXXXVIII. West. Symb. 2 p. 109. b. Sect. 121. Indictment against a Tipler on 33
H. 8. 9.. 11. N. 1. for keeping a Bowling-alley, etc. Lamb. Precedents 18. b.
pl. 51.

Juratores pro Dom. Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. de C. in
Com' E. predict' Tipler 2 die Septemb' Anno, Essex.
etc. and continne post dictum diem Anno supradict' usque primum diem Mensis
October. Anno supradict. apud C. predict. in Com. E. predict' quendam communem
locum jaciendi Glebos Anglice vocat a common Bowling-alley prolucro ipsius A.
B. proprio and ad ludendum tunc ibidem cum Globis Anglice vocat' Bowls:
illicite tenuit Custodivit ac manutenuit contra formam cujusd' Statut' in Parl'
Dom. Henrici nuper Regis Angliae 8. Anno Regni sue 33. in hujusmodi casu
provisi and editi.

Et quod I.S. de C. predict' in Com. E. predict Labourer and tres aliae
presonae ignot' dicto 2 die Septemb' Anno supradict' dictum communem locum
usitaverunt ac tunc ibidem cum Globis Anglice vocat Bowls insimul and illicite
Inserunt contra form' Statut' pred' etc.

LXXXIX. West. Symb. 2. part 155. Sect. 339. An Indictment of Misrule, etc.
infra 91.

Juratores pro Dom' Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod T. E. de, Essex
ss.
etc. in domo sua continue recepit hospitavit and supportat vagabond'
meretrices and alios diversos homines ociosos suspect' and malae conversationis
and continue custodivit malam regulam and Gubernationem in domo suo, ad grave
nocumentum and perturbationem omnium vicinorum suorum ac contra formam
diversorum Statut' etc. ac contra paecem, etc.

XC. West Symb. 2. part 15. 7. b. Sect. 355. An Indictment of disorders etc.

Juratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. de C.
etc. est communis Tiplator ^ervisiae and communis Barrectator and pacis Dom'
Regis perturbator and custodit and manutenet quotidie and noctanter in domo sua
apud etc. diversas personas suspect tam Homines quam Mulieres and Vagabond'
ibidem bibentes jurantes and ludentes ad luda illicita, Essex ss.
viz. apud Cards and Dice, in noctibus post horas debitas and legitimas and qui
vigilant in nocte and dormiunt in die nec non habet fidem and opinionem contra
fidem Dei. and hec verba dixit 2 September. Anno apud, etc. in his Anglicanis
verbis sequent', God never took Flesh nor Blood of our Lady, in presentia D. E.
F. G. and aliorum ligeorum dicti domini Regis in malum exemplum and magnum
nocumentum omnium aliorum ligeorum dicti Dom. Regis Coron' and dignitat' suas.

XCI. Practick Precedents 135. An Indictment for keeping a disordered
Alehouse, supra 89.

Juratores pro Dom' Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod G. R. Midd. ss.
nuper de A. in parochia de Islington in Com' M. pred. Yeoman 2 die Julij Anno
Regni, etc. and diversis aliis diebus ac vicibus tam antea quam postea apud
parochiam pred. in com' pred' custodivit and manutenuit and adhuc custodit and
manutenet quam dam demum tiplatorium malegubernat' and inordinat' Anglice vocat
a common disordered Alehouse and in eadem domo ad tunc and ibidem permisit
diversas personas otiosas and male dispositas Juratoribus pred' ignot' diversis
temporibus tam per noctem quam per diem esse and remanere tiplantes bibentes
and se malegerentes ad magnam inquietatem and perturbationem omnium ligeorum
and subditorum dicti Dom' Regis ibidem inhabitant' in contempt' Legum Angliae
in malum exemplum omnium aliorum in hujusmodi casu delilnquentium, ac contra
pacem dicti Dommini Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem suas.

XCII. Practick Precedents 89, 90. An Indictment against a common Drunkard.

Juratores pro Dom' Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. nuper de
C. in Com' pred' Yeoman 10 die, Midd. ss.
etc. Anno Regni, etc. and continue multis aliis diebus and vicibus tam antea
quam post, predict diem, etc. Anno, etc. supradict' apud C. predict' in Com'
predict' and alibi in diversis aliis locis infra Com' pred' fuit and adhuc est
communis poculator Anglice vocat' a common Drunkard, and communis perturbator
pacis dicti Dom' Regis in malum exemplum fidelium subditorum dict' Dom' Regis
nunc and contra pacem dicti Dom' Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc.

Alien and Allegiance.
Denizen, Foreigner, Strangers.
Peace.
I. DAlt. 164. cap. 68. An Alien born, who is made a Denizen, may have his
surety of the Peace; and so of an Alien born, who lives in England under the
King's Protection, although he be not made Denizen, because ( Cromp. J. P. 134.
b.) it is Felony to kill him, Lamb. 2. cap. 2. page 80.

War.
II. Dalt. 164, 165. cap. 68. And so of an Alien, whose King is in League with
our King; or if there be no Wars between this Realm and that Realm whereof the
Alien is; for by the Common Law all these may get and have within this Realm
any personal Goods, and sue for the same, and so have the benefit of the King's
Laws and Protection; But an Alien who is the King's Enemy, (viz. where there is
open War between our King and his King) shall not have this surety granted to
him, nor any other benefit of the King's Laws, Dyer 2. and 7. Co. 16, 17, etc.
Calvin's Case. Cromp. J. P. 134. a. b. such Enemy may be killed.

Apprentice.
III. If an Alien born serve seven years as an Apprentice in England, Query, If
he be within 5 Eliz. 4.. 31. N. 1. to set up his Trade? see 1 R. 3. 9.. 9. and
21 H. 8. 16.

Merchant.
IV. 9 Ed. 3. Alien or Denizen Merchant, except the King's Enemies, may buy and
sell where they will, within Franchises or without, 14 Ed. 3. 2. 2 L Ed. 3. St.
2. cap. 2. 5 H. 4. 7.

Almshouses, see Poor.
Amerciaments.
Fines, Forfeitures, Contempts, Affearment, Estreats.
Force.
I. LAmb. 2. cap. 4. page 159. Touching the assessment of the Fines or Ransoms
upon the Offenders so convicted by the Record of the Justice of Peace (on 8 H.
6. 9.. N. of forcible entry) and by his Warrant sent to the Gaol, some men do
think that the same Justice has sufficient authority to put them to their
Fines, and upon Pledges found for the payment thereof, to deliver them out of
Prison again, when he by his discretion shall think good; for (as they say) he
is only appointed Judge over this Offense, and only has the custody of that
Record, and knows best both how to moderate the Imprisonment, and to rate the
Fine according to the quantity of their Trespass and Offense; and as he is
bound by his Oath and Duty in their opinion to estreat all Issues and
Amerciaments growing to the King by his enquiry, so ought he also to estreat
and send this into the Exchequer, that from thence the Sheriff may be commanded
to levy it to His Majesty's behoof; But granting this to be true, yet to avoid
all peril of dashing against the Rock of Doubt, I think it the better course to
refer this over also to the Kings Bench, etc.

Justices.
II. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 355. Two Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of
the Quorum) appoinred by the Custos Rotulorum, or by the eldest of the Quorum
in his absence, are to oversee and control the Sheriffs Books and
Amerciaments, and the Estreatr of the said Amerciaments are to be made by
Indenture between them and the Sheriff or Undersheriff, and to to be sealed
with their Seals; and they may upon suggestion make Process, as in an Action of
Trespass against the Offenders of that Statute, ( viz. 11. H. 7. 15.. 1. N.
17.) to answer before them, Cromp. 200 b.

III. Lamb. 4. cap. 3. page 380. The Justices of Peace be so necessary, Justice
as without them (though all others should appear) no Sessions can be kept; And
yet if any of them be absent, their fellow Justices cannot amerce them, as the
Justices of Assize may do; for inter pares non est potestas.

IV. 27 H. 8. 24.. 9. N. 1. That the King, etc. Fines.
shall have all manner of Fines, Issues, Amerciaments, and Forfeitures, etc.
assessed by or upon any Stewards, Bailiffs, or any other Ministers or Officers
of any Franchises or Liberties for non exicution, misexicution or insufficient
returns of such Writs, Warrants, Precepts, or other Process, which to them, or
to any of them, or to any their Deputies, shall be directed; or for any
contempt or other misdemeanour whatever it be concerning their Offices in and
for the due execution or administration of Justice, any Grant or Allowance, or
other thing to the contrary, notwithstanding.

V. 5, and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 5. N. 3. Ale.
The said Justices of Peace in Town or County, upon the said Certificate made
(of disorder, or selling Ale without License) shall in open Sessions assess the
Fine for every such Offense, at 20 s. Lamb. 563. 569. in Ale,. 26. 30.

VI. 11 H. 7. 4.. N. 16. Be it also ordained that the Justices of the Peace,
Process.
etc. make like process against all persons found, etc. defective in Weights
and measures, and for such Fines and Amerciaments as upon them shall be
assessed, as if they were Indicted before them for breaking of the Kings Peace,

VII. Lamb. 571. 572. No doubt but this Ordinance ( viz. 51 H. 3. Stat.
Exchequer.
5. page 11.. 1. N. N. 2.) does extend to the Justices of Peace, as a man may
easily gatherby words in the Statute of Laborers, 5 Eliz. 4.. 39. N. 4. That
all Estreats of Fines, and Amerciaments, be certified into the Exchequer
Crompt. 168.

VIII. Lamb. 4. cap. 21. page 617. Fees.
If the Fines and Amerciaments of the same Sessions (says Mr. Marrow) will not
fully amount to the Sum of the Wages then due to the Justices, Yet shall the
Wages be Ratably paid out of them, so far as they will extend.

IX. Crompt. 168. Issues.
A Justice of Peace may deliver into the Exchequer an Indictment of Fines upon
the Country before them, and I have done so and it was Received in the
Exchequer, by the hands of one of the Barons there, Lamb. 571. 572.

X. Lamb. 4. cap. 16. page 566. And in that respect chiefly does it ( viz.
Fines.
a Fine for which a man is Imprisoned,) differ from an Amerciament; for when
the Offender has not so deeply trespassed, that thereby he deserves any
bodily punishment at all, as if he be nonsuited in any Action, or do commit any
such like fault, he is said to fall into the Kings mercy, because he is therein
mercifully to be dealt with T. D. L. verbo Amerciament.

XI. Lamb. 567. 568. Amerciament.
But now of later time the Justices themselves have in some case of
Amerciaments also used to Assess and Rate the same without any other help, as
where the Officers of their Courts have offended, 33 H. 6. 54. 34 H. 6. 20. and
L. 5 Ed. 4. 5. which also seems to make another difference between Fine and
Amerciaments, but neither of these be strictly observed, either in common
Speech, or in the understanding of the latter Statutes.

XII. Lamb. 568. Justifices.
Now therefore if the Offense be Finable by General words only, without
speaking of any Fine, or without showing by whom the Fine shall be Assessed,
for so it is commonly in the Elder Statutes that do prohibit any thing to be
done there, the Assessment thereof belongs to the Justices before whom the
conviction is lawfully had.

Fines.
XIII. Resolution of the Justices 1633. Dalt. 119. in Poor 537. 8. Quaere
whether it be in the power of any General Quarter Sessions to mitigate any
penalty upon a Statute Law, if the party Indicted shall submit himself to the
Fine of The Court, and Wave the traverse?

Resolved if the party be Convicted, or Confess the fault, it is not in the
power of the Court to mitigate the Fine in such cases where the Statute makes
it certain, Lamb. 568. 569. in Justices 185.

But if the party Indicted protesting his Innocence, yet quia noluit placitare
cum Dom. Rege, puts himself into the Grace of the Court, the Court may impose a
moderate Fine, and order to forbear the prosecution.

Annum and Diem, etc. see Days.
Apparel.
Liveries.
Drapery.
I. 1 Jac. 25.. 4. 5. N. 1. A Repeal of all Statutes of Apparel.

Appeal.
A Procurer, Coron.
Abatement.
I. 6 Ed. 19.. 1. N. 4. No Appeal shall be abated so soon as they have been
heretofore; But if the Appeal do declare the Deed, the Year, the Day, the Hour,
the time of the King, and the Town where the Deed was done, and with what
Weapon he was Slain, the Appeal shall stand in Effect.

Fresh Suit.
II. 6 Ed. 1.. 1. N. 5. Gloucester, and shall not be abated for default of Fresh
Suit, if the party shall Sue within the Year and the Day after the Deed done.

Dhyes.
III. Crompt. J. P. 25. b.. 54. The Appeal shall be brought within the Year
after the Death of the party, and not of the Stroke, and so is the Common
experience in B. R. and so is the Law without question, as Wray Chapter J. there
said 4. co. 42. and so it is in case of an Indictment that accounts of the
Death, not from the stroke, but from the Day when the party died.

Appearance.
Attorney.
Attorney.
I. 6 Ed. 1. 8. Gloucester, May be by Attorney in such Pleas where Appeal lies
not, and party absent, attainted shall have like pain as if present.

Sessions.
II. Lamb. 390. At the General Sessions must appear the Justices, the Clarks of
the Peace, the Sheriff, Coronors, Bailiffs, Constables, etc.

Apprentice.
Trades, Laborers, Servants, Workmen, Artificers, Handicraft-men.
License.
I. 5 Elix. 4.. 10. N. 6. The Form of a Testimonial to a Servant departing, to
be signed by the persons, etc. where the last Master dwelt.

Husbandry.
Memorandum That A. B. Servant to D. C. of E. Husbandman, or Tailor, etc. in
the said County, is Licensed to depart from his said Master, and is at his
Liberty to serve elsewhere according to the Statute in that case made and
provided, In Witness whereof, etc. Dated, etc. the day, etc. of the making
thereof.

II. Hetley, 164. pl. 351. Browns Ca. Hill. 6. Car. 1. Husbandry.
In an Information upon 5 Eliz. 4.. 11. N. 1. Only showing the said Branch, and
by Hutton and Harvey Justices, that it is not to be intende^ of an Apprentice
in Husbandry, but of an Hired Servant, for the said Statute did not provide for
the departure of an Apprentice, because that an Apprentice ought to be by
Indenture, and then a Writ of Covenant lies upon his departure to force him to
come again, and by the Common Law an Action upon the case lies for retaining
the Servant of another, Winch. 25. pl. 63.

III. Hetley 165. ibidem And by them the retainer, License.
without having any Testimonial, which is an offense against 5 Eliz. 4.. 10. N.
1. is after the years of retainer expired, for so are the Words of the Statute.

IV. Hetly 165. ibidem But they said that the Information was naught, Lieu.
because it does not appear that the Defendant did not retain him out of the
parish where they served before, for the Statue 5 Eliz. 4.. 10. N. 2. says,
out of the City, Town, or Parish, etc. except he have a Testimonial, and the
words Secundum formam Statuti, will not aid it; and in the same Village or
Cit^, etc. the Statute does not require a Testimonial, because that there it
was known etc.

V. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 190. 191. by 5 Eliz. 4.. 5. N. 5. Justices.
Any one Justice of the Peace may take upon him to hear and order the
controversies between Masters and Servants, touching their departure, and may
allow of the reason and sufficiency of the Cause for which a Master may put
away his retained Servant, or for which the Servant may depart before the end
of his Service, and he may in Hay-time or in Harvest upon request, and for the
saving of Corn, Grain, or Hay, cause such Artificers, and persons as be meet to
Labor by his discretion to serve by the day for the getting, cutting, Inning,
or carrying thereof, according to the skill and quality of the Person; and may
upon his refusal, Imprison him in the Stocks, by the space of two days and one
night: And his Testimonial under his Hand and Seal to such as may pass in Hay
or Harvest time from one Shire to another, sufficient; and he also (upon
complaint made) may Commit that party toward, that in his Judgment shall be
thought meet, and yet shall refuse to be bound as an Apprentice according to
the intent of the Statute, there to remain until he be contented so to be
bound: And he also may by his discretion, upon complaint or the Apprentice take
order between his Master and him; and for want of conformity in the Master, may
bind him to appear at the next Sessions before the Justices, Crompt. 159.. 16.
and 156.. 28. and 197.. 34. Dalt. 7. 7. 78. cap. 31.

VI Lamb. 3. cap. 1. page 329. Justices.
Any two Justices of the Peace upon complaint that any Servant retained by the
Statute 5 Eliz. 4. departs before the end of his Term, or at the end thereof,
without a Quarters warning: Or that any person compellable by the Statute to
serve, does refuse to serve for the Wages appointed, may examine the matter,
and finding such Servant or person faulty, may commit him to Ward, there to
remain till he shall be bound to the party offended, to serve and continue
according to the Statute, Crompt 198. Dalt. 78. cap. 31.

VII. Lamb. 329. 330. ibid. They also ( viz. 2. Imprison.
Justices) may Imprison for ten days the Master that gives, and for 21 days
the Servant that takes more Wages then after the Rates thereof made, 5 Eliz.
4.. 15. N. 2. and may Imprison for a whole year such Servant as shall be
convicted before them by his own confession, or by the Oaths of two honest Men,
to have made any assault upon his Master or Mistress, or other person having
any charge of him, or of the Work, and they may appoint any Woman, being
unmarryed, of the Age of 12 years, and under 14, that is out of Service, and
whom they shall think meet to Serve, to be retained by their discretion, and
may upon her refusal, commit her to Ward, till she be so bound to serve, 5
Eliz. 4.. 24. N. 2. Crompt. 198. Dalt. 79 cap 31.

Justices.
VIII. Lamb. 330. ibid. Any two Justices of the Peace may make Testimonial to a
Tiring-man that is turned away from his Master, or whose Master is dead, 14
Eliz. 5. N. 18 Eliz. 3.. N. and 27 Eliz. 11.

Poor.
IX. Lamb. 330. Any two Justices of the Peace may give assent to the
Churchwardens and Overseers, or the greater part of them, to bind as
Apprentice the Children of Poor Parents, till the age of a Man-child of 24, and
till 21 of the Woman, 39 Eliz. 3. Dalt. 391. infra.

Certificate.
X. Lamb. 3. cap. 3. page 360. It is requisite by 5 Eliz. 4.. 27. N. 2. That the
Certificate that is to be made to the head Officer of the City or Town
Corporate where a Child is to be put Apprentice to a Merchant, Mercer, Draper,
Goldsmith, Ironmonger, Imbroiderer, or Clothier, that the Father or Mother of
such Child may dispend 40 s. Freehold by the Year, be under the Hands and Seals
of three Justices of the Peace where the Lands lie, Crompt. 200. b. Dalt. 80.
cap. 31.

Fees.
XI. Lamb. 364. Every Justice of Peace sitting in execution of the same Statute
of Laborers and Servants (5 Eliz. 4. 38. N. 1.) shall have 5 shillings the
day, for three days together, out of the forfeitures that grow upon the same
Statute.

Fees.
XII. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 430. Article, in charge at Sessions on 5 Eliz. 4..
10. N. 5. if any Parson, Vicar, or Curat, have taken above 2 pence for
Registring a Testimonial for any Servant departing from one place to another,
Crompt. 175. b.. 3.

Trades.
XIII. Lamb. 454. Article of Charge in Sessions on 5 Eliz. 4.. 31. N. 1. If any
person do use any Art or Manual Occupation used in the fifth year of the late
Queen Elizabeth, which has not been brought up therein 7 years at the least,
as an Apprentice, or has set any to work in it which is not a Workman, or a
Journeyman by year, or haih served as an Apprentice, Crompt. 82 b. 83.

Days.
XIV. Lamb. 465. 466. Article of Charge in Sessions, if any person have been
retained into service to work for any less time then a whole year, in any the
Arts of a Clothier, Wollen-Weaver, Tucker, Fuller, Cloath-Worker, Sheer-Man,
Dyer, Hosyer, Tailor, Shooemaker, Tanner, Pewterer, Baker, Brewer, Glover,
Cutter, Smith, Farrior Curryer, Sadler, Spurrier, Turner, Capper, Hatmaker,
Feltmaker, Bowyer, Fletcher, Arrowhead-maker, Butcher, Cook, and Miller, and if
any person, being unmarryed or under thirty years of Age, and married, and
being compellable to serve in any of those Arts, have refused to serve, 5 Eliz.
4.. 35. N. 1.

Husbandry.
XV. Lamb. 466. ibid. If any person being between the Age of twelve, and
therefore being Compellable to serve in husbandry, have refused to serve in
husbandry 5 Eliz. 4.. 7. N. 14.

Fees.
XVI. Lamb. 466. ibid. And if any person have given any Wages, contrary to the
Rates of Wages of Servants and Labourres, appointed and proclaimed 5 Eliz. 4..
18. N. 1.

Husbandry.
XVII. 466. If any person retained in husbandry, or any the said Arts, have
after his retainer expired, departed out of one Limit Town or Parish into
another, without a Testimonial; and if any person have accepted into his
Service any so departing, without showing such Testimonials, 5. Eliz. 4.. 10.
N. 5.

Notice.
XVIII. Lamb. 466. If any any person have put away his Servant before the end of
his Term without reasonable and allowed cause before a Justice of the Peace: Or
at the End of his Term, without a Quarters warning before-given; and if any
Servant departs without such cause before the end of the Term, or at the end
thereof without such Warning given before two Lawful Witnesses, 5 Eliz. 4.. 8.
N. 1.

XIX. Lamb. 467. If any Artificer, or Labourer hired by the day or week, have
not continued at his work so many hours in the day as he might, or taking any
work by the Great, have unlawfully departed before the Finishing thereof, 5
Eliz. 4,. 13. N. 1.

XX. Lamb. 467. If any Servant, Workman, or Labourer, Laborers.
have wilfully and maliciously made any Assault or Affray upon his Master, or
Dame, or other persons having the Charge of such Workers or Works, 5 Eliz. 4..
35. N. 1.

XXI. Lamb. 467. If any Constable or head Officer, Peace.
have not upon complaint put into the Stocks two days and one night, every
Artificer or Person meet to Labor, that has refused to Labor in Hay-time or
Harvest, for the getting or carrying of Corn, Hay or Grain, being thereunto
appointed by a Justice of Peace, or such Constable or head Officer, 5 Eliz. 4..
22. N. 1.

XXII. Lamb. 467. Constable.
If any person have taken any Apprentice against the Order of the Law: And if
any person have exercised any Art, not being brought up therein as an
Apprentice Seven years, 5 Eliz. 4. 31. N. 1.

XXIII. Lamb. 4. cap 6. page 504. Trades.
So may the Justices hear and determine by Information, Action of Debt, or Bill
of offenses, against the Statute of Laborers, 5 Eliz. 4.. 39. N. 2. Crompt.
127. 184. infra.

XXIV. Lamb. 4. cap. 8. page 517. So if a Servant depart into another Shire,
the Justice of Peace of that Shire where the departure was, Informations.
may grant Writs of capias to the Sheriff of that other Shire where the Servant
is returnable before themselves, 5 Eliz. 4.. 47 N. 1. Crompt. 149. b. 109. b.
infra. Process:


XXV. Lamb. 571. 572. No doubt but 51 H 3. Stat. 5. page 11. de scaccario, this
Ordinance does extend to the Justice of Peace, as a man may easily gather by
Words in the Statute for Lobourers, 5 Eliz. 4.. 39. N. 3. Crompt. 166.

XXVI. Lamb. 593. I think it clearly proved, that, before 5 Eliz. 4.. 39.
Issues.
the Quarter Sessions ought to be directed by the Statute, 2 H. 5. 4.. 2. N. 2.
Crompt. 125.. 24. Infra.

XXVII. Lamb. 594. Upon this Statute 5 Eliz. Justices.
some have thought that 2 H. 5. 4.. 2. N. 2. is repealed concerning the Branch
of the Sessions, and others do think the contrary, and prove it by 5 Eliz. 4..
15. N. 1. which cannot be understood of any other Statutes conserning the
Sessions, but only of 2 H. 54.. 2. N. 2. etc.

XXVIII. Lamb. 4. cap. 19. page 601. Justices.
The Proof of the Sufficiency or insufficiency of the Cause for which the
Master may put away his Servant, or the Servant may depart from his master
before the end of the Term, shall be made at the Quarter Sessions, 5 Eliz. 4..
35. N. 4.

XXIX. Lamb. 4. cap. 21. page 620. Proof.
If any Justice of Peace not being Sick, nor having other Lawful excuse to be
restified under the Oath of one assessed in the Subsidy Book at 5 pounds, etc.
do not assemble at the Easter Sessions to rate the Wages of Servants, etc. he
shall lose ten pounds to the King, 5 Eliz. 4.. 17. N. 1.

XXX. Lamb. 4. cap. 19. page 609. Justices.
The Wages of Servants and Laborers are to be rated by the Justice of Peace at
the Easter Quarter Sessions, or within six weeks after Easter, where those
Sessions be usually holden in one place for the Shire by all Justices together,
but where they are not so usually holden, but in several places for several
divisions, there the Justices of Peace, or the most part of them resident
within such division, shall at the same Quarter Sessions, or at the time of
Easter Sessions as is aforesaid, Rate and Ingross in Parchment under their
Hands and Seals the Wages for Laborers, etc. within that Division, and the
Sheriff shall proclaim the same in places convenient therefore, 5 Eliz. 4.. 15.
N. 1. Cromp. 124.. 24. Infra.

Poor.
XXXI. Crompt. J. P. 7. b.. 17. Note that there is a Statute made 5 Eliz.
concerning Workmen, Artificers, Laborers, Apprentices, and Servants; and
another made 14 Eliz. 5. of Vagabonds, of which Statutes the Justices have
power thereby to inquire, and to punish them according to the Form of the said
Statutes, by which all other Statutes concerning them are of little effect at
this day, if it be not in certain special points.

Coron.
XXXII. Crompt. 49. b. Article of inquiry at Sessions, of those Servants that
are past the age of 18 years, and are not Apprentice, to whom any Caskets,
Jewels, Goods, or Chattels are delivered by their Masters accord, and run away
with them, or any part of them, to the intent to steal or defraud their Masters
or Mistresses of them, or be in service with their Master, Imbezil the said
Caskets, Goods or Chattels, without assent or command of their Master, or
convert them to their own use, with like purpose and intent to Steal them,
which Goods are of the value of 40 s. or more; this is Felony, 21 H. 8. 7. and
5 Eliz. 10. Fitz. J. P. 119. Infra 66.

Trades.
XXXIII. Crompt 82. b. 83. item. Sessions shall inquire whether any Use or
Exercise, any Mystery, Art, or Manual Occupation Used or Occupied, (5 Eliz.)
within this Realm, who has not been Educated therein seven years at least as
an Apprentice, or put any to Work therein who is not a Workman, unless he be an
Apprentice, or has served as an Apprentice, or shall be a Journeyman, a year
on payment of 40 s. for every month. 5 Eliz. 4.. 31. N. 1. Lamb. 454. supra.

Justices.
XXXIV. Cromp. 124.. 24. The Justices may hold Sessions annually between
Michaelmas and Christmas, and between the Feast of the Annuntiation, and St.
John Baptist; to inquire of the Branches of the Statute of Laborers, and of
the good execution thereof, and punish the Offenders by 5 Eliz. 4.. 37. N. 1.
Lamb. 593. 594. 609. supra.

Process.
XXXV. Cromp. 149. b. A Justice of the Peace of the County, or within a City or
Vill Corporate may Award all the Writs of Capias that are necessary to any
Sheriff, or chief Officers of places or other Counties from whom a Servant, or
Apprentice of Husbandry, or any Arts, Sciences, or Occupation mentioned in 5.
Eliz. 4. is unlawfully departed, is returnable before themselves when they
please, and upon their appearance they may commit them until they find sureties
well and honestly to serve their Masters from whom they departed, as appears by
the Statute, 5 Eliz. 4.. 47. N. 1. Lamb. 517. supra see 2 H. 5. 4. Cromp. 185.
b.

Bail.
XXXVI. Crompt. 154. b. The Servant that departs out of the Service of his
Master against the Statute 5 Eliz. 4. nor he that refuses to serve for the
Wages limited; nor who promises to serve, and does not serve according to the
said Statute, nor Artificers, nor Laborers or, etc. that depart before the
Work they undertook to do be finished, unless for Lawful cause, nor he that is
Committed, because he gave or received Wages against the Statute, shall not be
Bailed.

Justices.
XXXVII. Crompt. 168. The Justices of Peace or the greater number of them shall
assemble yearly at Easter Sessions, and there rate the Wages of Servants, etc.
for that year, and certify it into the Chancery before the 12 of July next
after, on pain of 10 l. every Justice that is negligent in doing thereof
according to the Statute, 5 Eliz. 4.. 15. 1. Lamb. 609. supra.

XXXVIII. Crompt. 175. b.. 3. A Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall make a
Testimonial to Servants that depart from their Masters, and shall have two
pence only for making thereof, and for Registring thereof 5 Eliz. 4.. 39. N. 2.
Lamb. 504.

Action.
XXXIX. Cromp. 184. Justices of Peace may Award execution to the informer, or to
him that will sue by Action of Debt, or Bill of complaint for the Moity of
forfiture by the Statute of Laborers, made 5 Eliz. 4.. 39. N. 2. Lamb. 504.

XL. Cromp. 185. By these Cases of F. N. B. 169. 168. 38. H. 6. 14. Trades.
Laborers 19. 44. 56. 14. Com. 259, etc. It appears what the Law was before
the making of the Statute of 5 Eliz. 4. whereby another Law is given for the
Retainer, Departure, etc. of Servants Retained in Husbandry, and for Apprentice
and others.

XLI. Cromp. 185. b. Process.
The Justice of Peace may Award Writs of Capias in any County to take Servants;
where, etc. who flee into other Counties from their own Masters, to bring
before them at such time as they will Assign, Cromp. 149. b. and Lamb. 517.
supra.

XLII. Cromp. 185. b. Nota, Imprison.
If any Serving-man depart without cause from his Master, he shall be Imprison,
for 23 Ed. 3. 2.. N. as to the departure of Servants, is general, 38 H. 6.
Laborers 9. but 5. Eliz. 4.. 11. N. 1. extends not to such Servingmen, but to
Servants in Husbandry, etc. Dalt. 81.

XLIII. Crompt. 184. b. 189. b. He is no Apprentice, if he be not retain, Deeds.
by Indenture, and by the name of an Apprentice expressly, Hill. 3 H. 8. Rot.
379. Dalt. cap. 40. and cap. 31. page 81.

XLIV. Dalt. 78. cap. 31. Process.
Also it seems that if the first Justice of Peace to whom complaint was made,
( viz' on 5 Eliz. 4.. 5. N. 5.) shall find the default to be in the Apprentice,
that then the said Justice of Peace may send him to the House of Correction, as
an idle or disorderly person, by the Statute 7 Jac. 4. and needs not to
trouble the Sessions with him, yet quere Dalt. 359.

XLV. Dalt. 78. ibid' Any one Justice of Peace may allow of the cause of
putting away of a Servant, or of the departure of a Servant within his Term;
Justices.
But otherwise of an Apperntice, for an Apprentice cannot be discharged but by
four Justices of Peace at the least, and in open Sessions as aforesaid, or else
by the agreement of the Master and the Apprentice, and under his Masters hand
in Writing; And yet one that is retained as an Apprentice may be seized by his
Lord as a Ward, by reason the Lords Title is more ancient, Crom' 259.
Labors, 143. Br. 27. 30.

XLVI. Dalt. 78. ibid' And yet one Justice of Peace as it seems may make his
Warrant to attach a Servant or Apprentice, Process.
departed out of Service, or refusing to serve, to be before the Justices at
their Sessions, there to answer their defaults, Dalton 259. 360. cap. 121. and
it seems that any one Justice of Peace may send such idle or disorderly
Servants to the House of Correction, and that by the Statute of 7. Jac. 4.. 8.
N. 3. Dalton 385. cag.

XLVII. Dalt. 80. cap. 31. The Reason of this Law, ( viz' 5 Eliz. 4.. 27.
Corporat.
N. 2.) seems to be, for that such as be to be bound Apprentices in Corporate
Towns, etc. If their Parents be of Competent Livelihood, then their Master
shall not only be the better secured, etc. but such Apprentices also in
likelihood shall have better means to set up their Trades after their time
expired, and concerning such whose Parents have not 40 s. per Annum, they are
fitter to be bound Apprentice to Husbandry, etc. in the Country, Lamb. 360.
Crompt. 200. b.

XLVIII. Dalt. 80. cap 31. But concerning this Certificate, Certificate.
(on 5 Eliz. 4. sect;. 27. N, 2,) it seems not much in use at this day,
neither is this Certificate so of the substance of the matter, or so material,
that for want thereof the Indenture for Binding of such an Apprentice shall be
void; For the Justice of Peace cannot be compelled to Certify, etc. But if the
Parent have 50. s. per Annum it suffices; And so were the opinions of Sir
Humfrey Winch, and Sir William Jones, in the Court of K. B. Pasch. 21, Jac,

But Sir Henry Hobard Lord Chief Justice of the K. B. Trades.
did not then deliver his opinion therein directly, yet he seems to me to
hold that the Parents of such an Apprentice ought to have 40 s, per Annum, and
also ought to procure such a Certificate from the Justice of Peace,

Trades.
XLIX. Dalt. 80. cap. 31.. By the Common Law no man may be prohibited to Work in
any Lawful Trade, for the Law abhoreth Idleness, 11. Co. 53. b.

Trades.
L. Dalt. 80. cap. 31. A Woman cannot be restrained to use the Trade of making
Dice, Cards, Bowls, or the like (except it be by Parliament,) for all Trades
which do avoid Idleness, Exercize men in Labor for the Maintenance of them and
their Families, And to increase their Substance, And to serve the King when
need shall be, are profitable for the Commonwealth, and therefore the
restraining of them is against the Law, 11. Co. 34. 8. Co. 126.

Trades.
LI. Dalt. cap. 31, Also by the Common Law no man is prohibited to use diverse
Mysteries and Trades at his pleasure, And although this was prohibited by the
Statute. 37 Ed. 36. yet presently at the next Parliament that Restraint of
Trade being found prejudicial to the Commonwealth, it was Enacted again 36 Ed.
38. that all persons should be as free as they, were at any time before the
said Statute, 11. Co. 54.

Trades.
LII. Dalt. 81. ibid. If a man use the Trade of Tallow Chandler, Baker, Brewer,
or any other Lawful Trade or Manual occupation for his own use, or the use of
his Family, without Selling any for the lucre and Gain, he may Lawfully do it,
8. Co. 129. 13. and 11. Co. 54. and yet he which uses any Trade or other
Manual Occupation for the use of himself, or of his Family only, without
selling, he cannot retain any Apprentice which in the Statute of 5 Eliz. 4. but
he may hire one to be his Servant who is skilful in that Trade or Occupation 8.
Co. 129.

LIII. Dalt. 81. cap. 31. One purchased a Mill, and hired a Miller to be his
Servant who Grown'd the Grists of his Neighbors, and the Wife of the Owner of
the Mill took Money of their Neighbors for their Grists so Grown'd, and for
this the Husband who was owner of the Mill, was Indicted at Cambridge Summer
Assizes, Anno. 1619, by reason that he was never himself an Apprintice to the
Trade, It was the Case of T. P. Yeoman.

Ale.
LIVE. Dalt. 81 ibid. The intent of 5 Eliz. 4. was, that no person should take
upon upon them any Art, Mystery, or Trade, etc. But such wherein they had Skill
and Knowledge. And therefore none may keep a Common Brew House, Cooks-shop,
etc. to Sell to others, except they have been Apprentice thereto by the space
of seven years.

Infant.
LV. Dalt. 82. cap. 31. If an Infant, Man or Woman, of twelve years of Age, or a
Gentleman, Chaplain, Carpenter, or other person which is not compellable to
serve, yet if they shall make a Covenant to serve in Husbandry, they shall be
bound by their Covenant, and are punishable if they then shall depart, etc. F.
N. B. 168. Lee. Br. 67. See 5 Eliz. 4.. 42. N. 1. Yet by the Commom-Law such a
Covenant, or retainer of an Infant under twelve years of Age, was void, they
neither having ability of Body, nor years to consent; for an Infant by the
Common Law is not of Age to Bind himself by Covenant ante Annos Nubiles which
is 12 years in a Woman, and 14 years in a Man, 7. Co. 43. and 9. Co. 72.
neither before that Age are they accounted potens in corpore, which were the
Words used in the Statute 23 Ed. 3. 2. though those words are now left out of the
Statute 5 Eliz. 4.. 22. N. 7. and thereupon Markham in 21 H. 6. 32. and
Coverture Br. 25. 30. Seems to hold 14. years, to be the Age of a Retainer of
an Infant, but there the case was of a Man-child that was retained, 2 H. 4. 18.
Laborers Br. 19. 20. But now by the Statute 5 Eliz. 4. 25. N. 1. Any person
above the Age of 10 years by their own consent and agreement, may by Indenture
be Bound an Apprentice to Husbandry or any other Trade or Art. Also one of 12
years of Age by the same Statute, 5 Eliz. 4.. 7. N. 1. 14. is compellable by
the Justice to serve in Husbandry, so also it seems of other Trades, Arts,
Occupations Winch. 26. infra.

LVI. Dalt. 82. cap. 31. Poor.
Such Children whose Parents are not able to maintain them, though they be
under 12, yet may they be Bound Apprentices by the overseers of the Poor with
the assent of any two Justices of the Peace by 43 Eliz. 2.. 5. N. 1.

LVII. Dalt. 82. If a Child use Husbandry till the Age of 12 years and after be
made an Apprentice to any Mystery, his Covenant shall be void: Husban-dry.
But Quere if this be not repealed by the general words of the Statute, 5 Eliz.
4.. 12. N. 1. also see the Statute 1 Jac. 2. 5.. 17. N. 1.

LVIII. Dalt. 82. A Servant may be compelled to Serve in Summer in the place
where he served in Winter before; Lieu.
but this seems to have been only by 23 Ed. 3. 2. which Statute now stands
repealed by 5 Eliz. 4.. 23. N. 1. Cromp. 238. b. infra.

LIX. Dalt. 83. cap. 31. If a Servant who is Retained shall depart out of his
Service and wander, he may be compelled to Serve another Man; Departure.
But yet the first Master may take him away again, F. N. B. 168. Notice Br. 24.
And besides, it is safe to get the consent of the first Master: For now, 5
Eliz. 4.. 11. N. 1. The Master Retaining a Servant departed, without showing a
Testimonial before his Retainer, forfeits 5 li.

LX. Dalt. 84. If the Master or his Wife shall beat the Servant, Peace.
these were good cause for the Servant to depart, before 5 El. 4.. 5. N. 5. But
now the allowance of the Justice of Peace is requisite, and yet note that the
Master by Law is allowed with moderation to chastise his Servant or Apprentice,
See 33 H. 8. 12.. N. Dalt. 165. 159. But now by the Statute of 5 Eliz. 4.. 5.
N. 5. The causes of putting away and departing of Servants, are referred to the
consideration and allowance of the Justices of Peace; It behooves them to have
good care lest by their giving too much way therein, either to the Master or
Servant, many which might by due ordering have proved good Servants, turn
Rogues, and Vagabonds.

LXI. Winch, 25. pl. 63. An Information Mich. 19 Jac. C. B. License.
was for that his Apprentice departed out of his Service, and the Defendant
Received and Retained him without a Testimonial from the Master, contra formam
Statuti, and so he demanded 5 li. The Defendant Pleaded nil debet, etc. and
found against him, and now Hendon Sergeant moved in Arrest of Judgment, that an
Apprentice is out of the Clause of 5 Eliz. 4.. 11. N. 1. And that the same
extends only to Servants, and to Laborours Retained within that Statute.

LXII. Winch. 26. ibid. Hobard. Chapter J. said, Infant.
that it was never the intent of 5 Eliz. 4.. 11. N. 1. to make an Infant who is
an Apprentice to be within the danger of the same Statute, for an Infant at the
Age of 14 years may be Bound to be an Apprentice, and the Punishment which is
given by the same Statute, is that such person shall be whipped as a Rogue, which
plainly proves the Statute intends only those who are of full Age; and if other
Construction shall be made, perhaps the Son of a Gentleman may be punished as a
Rogue by such departure. And he held, that if an Apprentice depart with his
Masters Goods delivered to him, that he is not within 21 H. 8. 7. as another
Servant is. Hob. said, that he doubted much whether an Apprentice had been
within that Statute, though the proviso 5 Eliz. 4.. 42. N. 1. had not been; But
this proves that the makers of the Statute thought this to be a hard matter, to
make an Infant who is an Apprentice, to be within the danger of the same Law,
and for that reason the proviso of the Statute was made, Winch. said, to which
Hutton agreed, that upon the nil debet, this may be moved in Arrest of
Judgment if the matter be not within the Statute, and adjurnatum Dalt. 82.
supra, Hetley 164. supra.

LXIII. Dalt. 359. cap. 121. A Warrant for a fugitive Servant Process.


I. C. Miles unus Justiciar' Dom' Regis, etc. Ballivis Hundred' de B. and T. H.
Constabular' de M. in Com' predict' salutem. Camb. ss.
Quia E. I. retentus in Servitio I. T. de M. predict' sibi serviend' secundum
form' and effect' Statut' de servientibus edit' a Servicio predict' I. T. sine
causa rationabili and licentia ipsius I. T. recessit ut dicitur, ideo ex part
Dom' Regis vobis and cuilibet vestrum precipio quod prefat' E. L. ad prefat. J.
T. magistrum suum de serviend' deliberar' faciatis and si hoc recusaveris tunc
eum Goalae de C. etc, duci faciatis quousque, etc. ita quod eum habeatis coram
me and sociis meis Justiciar' dicti Dom' Regis in Com' predict' ad proxim'
sessionem pacis ibid' tenend' ad faciend' and recipiend' ea quae ei tunc and
ibidem in hac part objicientur.

Sigillo meo sigillat' Dat' apud, etc,
West. Preced' ^ part Sect. 578.

Process.
LXIV. Dalt. 359, 360, Another Warrant for a Fugitive Servant.

To the Sheriff of, etc.
Cambr. ss.
WHereas I. E. being Lawfully retained in service with N. A. of, etc. is
departed from his said Masters service before the end of his Term without his
Masters leave or license, or without any reasonable cause, contrary to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm in that behalf provided, these are therefore in his
Majesty's Name, to command you and every of you, that you or some one of you do
Attach the Body of the said I. E. And to bring him before me, or some other of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, etc. To find sufficient sureties, well and
faithfully to serve his said Master, according to the Covenant between them
made, etc. And if he shall refuse thus to do, that then you cause him to be
conveyed safely to the Kings Majesty's Goal, etc.

Laborers.
LXV. Crompt. 238. de Servientibus ubi requisit' fuerunt ad serviend'
recusantibus, Dalt. 360. cap. 121,

Staff. ss.
Will' Basset Arnig' unus Justic' etc. R, L, Ballivo de S. in Com' pred'
salutem. Ex part dicti Dom' Regis tibi mando, quod Attachias R. A. de S, pred'
Labourer, ita quod eum habeas coram me vel sociis meis Justic' dicti Domini
Regis ad pacem in Com' pred' conservand', necnon ad diversas felonias,
transgress' and alia malefacta in eodem Com' andiend' and terminand' assignat',
ad proximam Generalem Sessionem pacis in Com' pred' tenend', ad respondend' tam
dicto Domino Regi, quam B, C. de A. etc. Yeoman, quare ipse pred' R. A. licet
in servitio congruo pro statu suo per prefat' B. C. fuit sepius requisitus ei
servire, ipse tamen B. C. servire penitus recusavit, in contempt' dicti Domini
Regis, and ipsius B. C. grave damnum, and contra form' Statut' de Servientibus
nuper edit' and provisi, and habeatis ibi tunc hoc mandatum. Test, etc. See 5
Eliz. 4.

Departure.
LXVI. Crompt. 238. Warrant' ad capiend' Servum qui recessit ante finem termini.

Staff. ss.
R. B. Armig' unus Justic', etc. Vic' Com' pred', necnon I. B. Constabular'
Villae de B. and R. N. Ballivo itineranti in eodem Com', and eorum cuilibet,
salutem. Ex part dicti Domini Regis vobis and cuilibet vestrum mando, quod
attachiatis seu unus vestrum attachiat W. B. de R. pred' Labourer, ita quod cum
habeatis seu unus vestrum habeat coram me and sociis meis Justiciar' dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' pred' conservand' necnon, etc. assignat' ad
proximum Generalem Sessionem pacis in Com' pred' tenend', ad respondend' tam
dicto Domino Regi, quam R. C. de etc. Yeoman, quare in servitio ipsius R. apud
T. in Com' pred' nuper retentus fuit ab eodem servitio ante finem termini inter
eos concordat', sine causa rationabili and licentia ipsius R. recessit, in
dicti Domini Regis nunc contemptum, and ipsius R. grave damnum, and contra
form' Statut' inde nuper edit' and provisi, and habeatis seu unus vestrum
habeat ibi tunc hoc preceptum. Test, etc. See 5 Eliz. 4. Dalt. 359. m. see
Dalt. 331. infra 74.

Imprisonm.
LXVII. Crompt. 238. b. Warrantia ad deliberandum servientem extra Goalam.

Staff. ss.
Humfr' F. Armig' unus Justiciar', etc. custodi Goalae dicti Domini Regis in
Com' predict' salutem. Quia W. C. de N. Labourer, venit coram me and invenit
sufficientem securitatem essendi coram me and sociis meis ad proximum Sessionem
Pacis in Com' predict' tenend', ad respondendum tam dictae Dominae Reginae,
quam C. D. de etc. de transgressione and contemptu suis, contra formam Statuti
de servientibus nuper editi and provisi. Ideo tibi ex part dictae Dominae
Reginae mando, quod predict' W. C. a prisona tua si ea occasion and non alia
ibidem detineatur, sine dilatione deliberari facias. Datum tali die and anno.

LXVIII. Crompt. 238. b. Departure.
Praeceptum versus servientem recessum de Villa ubi morabatur in hyeme.

J. C. Armig' Ballivis, etc. salutem. Staff. ss.
Ex part dictae Dominae Reginae tibi mando, quod attachiatis seu unus vestrum
attachiat' B. C. de E. in Com' pred' Labourer, ita quod eum habeas seu unus
vestrum habeat coram Justiciariis dictae Dominae Reginae ad pacem in Com'
predict' conservand' assignat' ad proximam Generalem Sessionem Pacis in eodem
Com' tenend', ad respondend' dictae Dominae Reginae, quare de Villa de M. in
Com' predict' ubi in hyeme Anno regni dictae Dominae Reginae nunc 26.
morabatur, quamquam in eadem Villa de M. servitium competens eidem B. per
quendam A. B. de M. predict' Yeoman, oblatus fuisset ad serviend' tamen extra
predict' Villam de M. in estate tunc proxime sequent' recessit, in predict'
Dominae Reg' nunc contempt', and ipsius A. grave dampnum, and contra form'
Statut' inde nuper edit' and provisi. Dat' etc. Dalt. 82. see 5 Eliz. 4.. 23.
N. 1.

LXIX. Crompt. 238, 239. Imprisonm.
Warrant' ad deliberand' Prisonar' capt' pro transgr' tangent' Statutum de
servient'.

H. G. Armig' unus Justiciar' Domini Regis nunc ad pacem in Com' pred'
conservand' assignat', Vicecom' Comitat' predict' ac custodi Goal dicti Domini
Regis, sive ejus locum tenenti, and eorum cuilibet, salutem. Quia S. W. de A.
Staff. ss.
in Com' predict' Labourer, venit coram me and invenit sufficient' securitatem
essendi coram Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' predict'
conservand', necnon ad diversas felonias, etc. in eodem Com' audiend' and
terminand' assignat', ad proximam Generalem Sessionem Pacis in Com' predict'
tenend', ad respondend' tam dicto Domino Regi, quam cuidam J. B. de A. Yeoman,
de diversis contemptibus and transgressionibus contra form' Statut' de
servient' nuper editi and provisi. Ideo vobis and cuilibet vestrum mando, quod
predict' S. W. sine dilatione de custodia vestra deliberari facias, seu aliquis
vestrum deliberari faciat, si ea de causa and non alia in custodia vestra
detineatur. Datum etc. 10 die Aug. Anno regni, etc.

LXX. A Mittimus to the House of Correction for disorderly Servants, Process.
or other Idle persons. Infra 79.

I Have sent you herewithall the Body of E. C. in the said County, Suff. ss.
being (an idle, dissolute and disorderly Fellow, or) one that will not keep
his Service, nor follow any honest course of life: These are therefore to will
and require you to receive the said E. C. and him safely to keep, until he
shall be thence delivered by my self, or some other of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace of this County. And in the mean time to hold him to such Works,
and to give him such punishment, by putting Fetters or Gives upon him, and by
moderate Whipping him, as in good discretion you shall find cause; yielding him
for his maintenance only so much as he shall deserve, or earn by his labor and
work; and that at the next Quarter Sessions you have the said E. C. together
with this our Warrant; and hereof fail you not at your peril.

Dated, etc.
See 7 Jac. 4.

LXXI. A Mittimus to the House of Correction, Departure.
of a Servant departed from his Master contrary to his reteiner.

WHereas I. F. of W. in the County aforesaid, Labourer, was lawfully retained
in Service with I. D. of W. aforesaid, Suff. ss.
Yeoman, and has often departed from his said Service before his term expired,
without his Masters leave or license, or any other reasonable cause, contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: These are therefore in his Majesty's
Name to will and require you, to receive and take into your custody the said I.
F. and him safely to keep, until he shall thence be delivered by due order of
Law. And in the mean time to hold him the said I. to such Labor and Work, and
give unto him such punishment, as by the Laws are required: Giving and yielding
him such and so much maintenance, as he the said I. shall by his labor and
work deserve or earn; and that you have the said I. at the next
Quarter Sessions to be holden at W. aforesaid, together with this Warrant;
unless he the said I. F. shall before that time, in the presence of some
Justice of the Peace, find sufficient Sureties well and faithfully to serve his
said Master according to his Covenants; and hereof fail you not at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal at my house at I. this (...) day of, etc.
To the Keeper of the House of Correction of W.
LXXII. A Warrant for a Servant which departs from his Master, contrary to his
reteiner.

Midd. ss.
FOrasmuch as I am informed that A. B. was retained with D. of C. for diverse
years yet to come, as his Servant, and that contrary to his reteiner the said
A. B. is departed from his said Master, before the said term expired, contrary
to the Law in that behalf: These are, etc. to require you immediately upon
sight hereof, to bring before me, or some other of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace of this County, the said A. B. to answer the premises; unless he
shall be content to serve his said Master willingly, according to his said
reteiner. And hereof fail you not, etc.

Deeds.
LXXIII: Dalt. 391. cap. 128. Indentures for Apprentices.

THis Indenture made the (...) day of (...) witnesses, That A. B. C. D. and E.
F. Overseers for the Poor in the Town of H. in the County of C. and I. S.
Churchwardens of the same Town, by and with the consent of I. N. and M. D.
Esqs; two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of, etc. have
by these presents put, placed, and bound I. H. being a poor Fatherless and
Motherless Child, as an Apprentice with R. W. of H. aforesaid, Yeoman, and as
an Apprentice with him the said R. W. to dwell from the day of the date of
these presents, until the said I. H. shall come to be of the Age of 24. years,
according to the Statute in that behalf provided. By and during all which time
and term, the said I. H. shall the said R. W. his Master well and faithfully
serve, in all such lawful business as the said I. H. shall be put unto,
according to his power, will and ability, and honestly and obedientially in all
things shall behave himself toward his said Master, his Wife and Children, and
orderly and honestly toward all the rest of the Family of the said R. W. And
the said R. W. for his part promises, etc. during all the said term to find
unto his said Apprentice Meat, Drink, Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoes, and all
other things needful or meet for an Apprentice, etc. In witness whereof, etc.
Lamb. 330. supra Dalt. 92. cap. 40.

Justices.
LXXIV. Dalt. 331. cap. 117. There be sundry Precedents of Attachments made from
one Justice of the Peace, against Laborers and Servants that shall refuse to
serve, or that shall depart out of their Service, etc. contrary to the
Statutes, ( viz. before any Indictment) to be before the Justices at their
Sessions to answer to their defaults; but these are warranted by 25 Ed. 3. 6..
N. which is now repealed by 5 Eliz. 4.. N. and by Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 187.
The like cannot be done unless Stat. specially require it.

LXXV. Kilborns Preced. 202. A discharge of a Servant within the time. Process,


FOrasmuch as it appears unto me, Kent ss.
that A. B. was retained by C. D. to serve him for a term not yet expired, and
the said A. B. without consent of him the said C. D. has for the space of,
etc. now last past, absented himself from the said Service, and is gone into
some place unto the said C. D. unknown: Therefore upon the consideration of the
premises, and of the Equity thereof on the part of the said C. D. I allow the
cause and matter aforesaid to be reasonable and sufficient to discharge the
said C. D. from any further keeping the said A. B. in his said Service, and do
accordingly discharge the said A. B. from his Service aforesaid.

Given under my Hand and Seal at T. the (...) day of, etc.
LXXVI. Kilborns Preced. 203. A Warrant for the paying Wages, Fees.


To the Constable, etc. of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every
of them.
THese are in his Majesty's Name to command you, that you, Kent ss.
some or one of you, do cause A. B. to come before me, or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace of the County aforesaid, to answer unto such
matters as shall be objected against him by C. D. touching his detention of xx
s. due unto C. D. as he says for Wages, and further to do and receive as to
Justice does appertain: unless the said A. B. shall forthwith pay unto the said
C. D. the Wages aforesaid, or do otherwise give satisfaction unto him for the
same. And you are hereby also further required, to give unto the said C. D.
convenient notice of the time, places when and whither, and before whom you
shall cause the said A. B. to come in Execution hereof, to the end that he may
be also then and there present, to make appear his due to the Wages aforesaid.
Hereof fail not, etc.

LXXVII. West. Symb. 2. part 96. sect. 74. Trades.
An Indictment for using the Art of a Mercer, against 5 Eliz. 4. Infra 89.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex.
quod A. B. de C. in Com' E. Mercer, 20 die mensis Maii, Anno regni dicti
Domini nostri, etc. and multis aliis diebus continue post dictum diem per
spacium duorum mensium ex tunc proxime sequent', viz. usque 30 diem Julii anno
supradict', apud C. predict' in Com' E. predict', quandam Artem sive Mysterium
(Anglice dict' Mercery) illicite pro lucro suo proprio usitavit and exercuit,
tunc ibidem vendendo Merces (Anglice vocat' Mercery-wares) diversis dicti
Domini Regis ligeis and subditis ubi revera idem A. B. nunquam fuit in dicta
Art sive Mysterio educatus tanquam Apprenticius per spacium septem annorum,
nec idem A. B. eandem Artem sive Mysterium predict' 12 die Januarii, Anno regni
Dominae Elizab. nuper Angl. Reginae quinto, usitavit aut exercuerit, in magnum
dicti Domini Regis nunc contempt', and contra form' cujusd' Statuti in
Parliament' dict' Dominae Eliz. nuper Reginae Angliae

tent' apud Westminster. Anno regni sui quinto, in hoc casu provisi ac editi ut
supradict.
Lamb. Preced. 19. b. pl. 53.

LXXVIII. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 26. A Warrant against a Master for abusing his
Apprentice, 5 Eliz. 4. Process.


To the Constable, etc. of H. etc:
FOrasmuch as Complaint has been made unto me by A. B. an Apprentice, against
C. D. his Master, both of the Parish aforesaid, Kent ss.
that he the said C. D. does not allow unto his said Servant competent Meat,
Drink, and Apparel, and does immoderately correct him without any cause at all,
(or turns him out of his House, and will not suffer him to return, etc.)
These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, that some or one of
you do cause both the said Parties to come before me at H. on Monday the 10. of
this instant June, at four of the Clock in the Afternoon, to the end that I may
examine the same matter. Hereof fail not, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal this 10. day of June, etc.
Peace.
LXXIX. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 26. b. 27. a. A Warrant against a disorderly
Apprentice, supra 70.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as Complaint has been made unto me by A. B. Joyner, against C. D.
his Apprentice, both of your Parish of H. in this County, that the said C. D.
is a stubborn and disobedient Servant, and does very much misbehave himself
toward his said Master, (or that the said C. D. is departed from his said
Master, etc.) These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, that
some or one of you do cause the said Parties to come before me at H. on Monday
the 10. day of thit instant June, at four of the Clock in the Afternoon, to the
end that I may examine the same matter. Hereof fail not, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal this 10. day of, etc.
Justices.
LXXX. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 27. A discharge of an Apprentice.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
WE R.K. H.D. E.F. G.H. four of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, etc. for
the County of K. aforesaid. Whereas Complaint having been made unto us by A. B.
an Apprentice, against C. D. his Master, both of your Parish of H. within this
County, that the said C. D. his Master has not allowed to his said Servant
competent Diet and Apparel befitting such Apprentice, and has sometimes
corrected him without any just cause at all, and when he had cause corrected
him above measure; and we having ordered the said Parties to appear before us,
having examined the Complaint, find it to be true; and therefore we do think
fit to discharge the said Apprentice of his Apprenticeship, and therefore do by
these presents under our Hands and Seals pronounce and declare, that we have
for the causes aforesaid discharged the said A. B. the Apprentice of his
Apprenticehood, the 8. day of July, Anno Dom. 1679.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
Treason.
LXXXI. West. Symb. 2. part 118. sect. 153. An Indictment of Petty Treason
against a Servant.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' predict' Grocer, nuper serviens B. D. de C. pred' in Com' pred' Grocer,
10 die September. Anno regni dicti Domini nostri, etc. in domo mansionali
predict' B. D. apud C. predict' in Com' predict', vi and armis, viz. gladiis,
etc. ad valentiam, etc. quos idem A. B. tunc ibidem in manibus suis tenuit, in
prenominatum B. D. tunc Magistrum suum tunc and ibidem in pace Dei and dictae
Dominae Reginae existentem, voludtarie and ex malitia sua precogitata insultum
fecit, and eundem B. D. tunc Magistrum suum adtunc and ibidem cum dicto gladio
felonice and proditorie super caput suum fortiter and valide percussit, ita
quod dicto ictu caput ipsius B. D. tunc Magistri sui, tunc and ibidem in duas
parts scidit dans E. plagam mortalem unde corpus dicti B. D. immediate ibidem
ad terram cecidit, and dict' B. D. instanter ibidem de plaga predict' mortuus
est, and sic prefat' A. B. apud C. predict' ex malitia sua precogitata eundem
B. D. Magistrum suum predict' modo and forma predict' voluntary nequiter
felonice and proditorie interfecit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nostri nunc
coronam and dignitatem suas.

Et quod quidem I. S. de C. predict' in dicto Com' M. Grocer, ante proditionem
predict' per prefat' A. B. sic ut prefertur voluntary perpetratam and
commissam, viz. sexto die September. anno supradict' eundem A. B. apud C.
predict' in Com' predict' ad proditionem predict' in forma predict' perpetrand'
and committend', felonice consuluit, excitavit and procuravit, contra pacem
dicti Domini Regis, ac contra coronam and dignitatem suas.

LXXXII. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 311. Process.
A Warrant for sending a Servant to his Service, etc. by 2 Justices, 1 Quorum.

To the Overseers of the Poor for the Parish of A. etc.
FOrasmuch as you have complained unto us, Kent ss.
that B. C. being retained into Service by D. E. of T. etc. for one year not
yet expired, is come out of her Service in the said Parish of T. and likely to
be chargable to the same: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command
you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith convey the
said B. C. to her said Master, and deliver her unto him, to remain with him
until she shall be from him lawfully discharged; and in case of refusal of the
said D. E. to receive the said B. C. accordingly, that you, some or one of you,
do forthwith certify us, or one of us of the same, to the end that such other
proceedings may be thereupon had as by Law is required; hereof fail not.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day of July, Anno, etc.
LXXXIII. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 313. Amerciament.
A Warrant to levy 40 s. on the Master, for putting away his Servant before the
end of his term, 5 Eliz. 4.. 5. N. 1.

To the Constables, etc.
FOrasmuch as it appears unto us this day upon Oath, Kent ss.
that A. B. of your Town of A. Yeoman, has put C. D. his Servant (lawfully
retained with him) out of his Service before the end of the term agreed,
contrary to the Law of this Realm: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to
charge and command you, and every of you, forthwith upon the receipt hereof,
that you levy the sum of 40 s. by him the said A. B. forfeited by the Statute
for his offense, by way of distress and sale of the offenders Goods, upon his
not payment thereof, rendering to the said A. B. the overplus, if any be; and
that you bring with you the said 40 s. at the next General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for these parts of K. except the said A. B. shall show
good cause to the contrary to his Majesty's Justice of the Peace at A.
aforesaid, upon Thursday next being the 12. day of this instant December. hereof
fail not at your perils.

Given at the General Quarter Sessions of the Peace at B. the second day of,
etc.
LXXXIV. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 315. Poor.
A Warrant for relief of a Man-Seruant that is out of Service, 43 Eliz. 2.

To the Constables, etc.
FOrasmuch as Complaint is made unto me by A. B. that he being lawfully
retained in the Service of C. D. of your Town of E. Yeoman, Kent ss.
at Lady Day was twelve month, and being discharged his Service at Lady Day
last, has been at the Statute-Sessions ( supra 30.) and cannot find himself a
Service, and being destitute of means whereby to relieve himself; These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name straightly to charge and command you, and every
of you, that presently upon the receipt hereof you do receive the said A. B.
into your Town, and see him set on work and provided for according to the
Statute in that case made and provided. Hereof fail not, etc.

LXXXV. West. Symb. 2 part 130. sect 205. Coron.
An Indictment against a Servant stealing 10 l. etc. Lamb. Preced. 10. pl. 28.
see 21 H. 8. cap. 7. and 5 Eliz. cap. 10.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex ss.
qurd cum A. B. de C. in Com' E. predict' Mercer, 20 die Sept. Anno regni, etc.
in domo mansionali ipsius A. B. apud C. predict' in Com' E. predict'
deliberasset cuidem E. F. de C. predict' in dicto Comitat' E. Mercer, tunc
servienti ipsius A. B. pro uno anno integro retento, ac etatis novemdecem
annorum existenti, december libras in pecuniis numeratis de bonis ipsius A. B. ea
intention ut idem E. F. eosdem salvo custodiret ad usum predict' A. B. tunc
Magistri sui, idem E. F. dicto 20 die Sept. Anno supradicto (Apprenticius dicti
A. B. tunc non existent') apud C. predict' in Com' E. predict' a dicto Magistro
una cum predict' 10 libris dicti A. B. tunc Magistri sui maliciose and felonice
discessit, abiit and aufugit, ea intention ad furand' dict' 10 libras, contra
fiduciam in eo per prefat' A. B. tunc Magistrum suum reposit' and collocat',
and ad inde dicum A. B. Magistrum suum predict' defraudand', contra pacem dicti
Domini Regis nunc, ac contra form' diversorum Statutorum hujus regni Angl. in
hujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum.

Indictment.
LXXXVI. West. Symb. 2 part 130. b. sect. 207. An Indictment upon 21 H. 8. cap.
7. etc. 5 Eliz. cap. 10. supra 32.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum per
quendam Actum in Parliament' Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angliae 8. apud Westminster.
in Com' Middlesex, Anno regni sui 21. tent' edit' per dictum Dominum Regem, cum
assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium, ac Communitatis in eodem
Parliament' congregat', necnon authoritate ejusd' inter alia ad tunc ibidem
inactitat' existit, quod si aliquis servus cui ejusdem Magister vel Magistra
liberat' aliqua bona valoris 40 s. custodiend' discessere cum bonis illis cum
intention ad furand' vel retrahendend' eadem foret feloniae prout per eundem
Actum plene liquet.

Qui quidem Actus postea per quendam alium Actum in Parliament' Dominae Mariae
nuper Reginae Angl. apud Westminster. predict' Anno regni sui primo tent' edit' fuit
repellat and annihilat.

Ac postea per quendam alium Actum in Parliament' Dominae Elizab' nuper Reginae
Angl. apud Westminster. predict' Anno regni sui 5. tent' edit' revivat' and adhuc in
vigore existit.

Ac etiam cum C. P. Armig' secundo die Sept. Anno regni Domini Regis nunc, etc.
apud G. in Com' M, predict' liberasset I. G. nuper de E. in Com' M. predict'
Husbandman, (ad tunc servienti suo and non Apprenticio existent', and ultra
etat' 18. annorum) quoddam Brachiale Auri, Anglice a Bracelet of Gold, valoris
18 l. etc. de bonis and catallis predict' C. pro eodem C. salvo custodiend',
predictus tamen I. G. Statut' predict' minime ponderans, nec penam in eodem
content' verens apud G. predict' in dicto Com' M. eodem 2. die Sept. Anno, etc.
supradict' a prefato C. ad tunc Magistro suo seipsum retraxit and cum Brachiale
predict' felonice discessit, ea intention ad furand' Brachiale predict' ad
defraudand' predict' C. Magistrum suum de Brachiali predict' contra fiduciam
and confidentiam eodem I. per predict' C. Magistrum suum reposit', ac contra
form' Statuti predicti inter caeteros Articulos quorum, etc. Crompt. J. P. 267.
pl. 105.

Trades.
LXXXVII. West. Symb. 2 part 136. sect. 231. An Indictment for using more Arts
then one, on 37 Ed. 3. cap. 6. Quaere if repealed by 5 Eliz. 4.. 2. N. 1.
Pract. Preced. 60.

Norf. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege (quod cum in Statut' in Parliament' Domini Edwardi
nuprr Regis Angl. 3. post conquestum, Anno regni sui 37. tent') inter caetera
ordinat' sit and statut', quod Artificiarii and Gentes occupationem habentes,
and quilibet eorum ad suam Artem seu occupationem se teneat, and quod nullus
exeoceat aliam Artem seu occupationem nisi tantum eam quam elegit, and si
aliquis in contrarium fecerit per Imprisonament' corporis sui per spacium
dimid' anni puniatur, and ulterius finem and redemptionem Domino Regi faciat,
prout in eodem Statut' before continetur.

Or thus Si A. B. de C. in Com' N. Baker, alias dict' A. B. in Com' N. predict'
Milner, Statut' predict' minime ponderans, nec penam in eodem Statut' content'
verens, a secundo die Julii Anno regni, etc. usque quartum diem Aprilis Anno,
etc. tam Artem Molendinarii quam Artis Pistoris Panis humani apud C. predict'
continue exercebat, in dicti Domini Regis contempt', and contra form' Statut'
predict'.

LXXXVIII. West. Symb. 2 part 140 b. sect. 251. Trades.
An Indictment on 5 Eliz. 4.. 31. N. for using Trade not being Apprentice.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex ss.
quod cum in Parliament' Dominae Eliz. nuper Reginae Angl. tent' apud Westminster. in
Com' Midd. 8 die Maii Anno regni sui 5. inter alia stabilitat' fuit, quod post
primum diem Maii tunc proximum sequent' non liceat alicui personae sive
personis erigere, occupare, uti vel exercere aliquam Artem, Mysterium sive
occupationem ad tunc usitat' vel occupat' infra regnum Angliae vel Walliae, si
non educat' in eadem tanquam Apprenticium per spacium septem annorum ad minus,
nec alicui personae opus tradere in hujusmodi Mysterio, Art sive occupatione,
si non eadem persona fuit Apprenticius aut tunc fuit exercit' in Mysterio
predict' tanquam Apprenticius ut predictem est, sub pena quod quilibet persona
voluntary offendens vel contrarium faciens, forisfaciat pro qualibet tali
defalt' 40 s. pro quolibet mense, prout in Statut' predict' before liquet and
apparet.

Quidam tamen I. S. Statut' predict' ac penam in eodem content' minime verens
sive ponderans, non existent' Apprenticius per spacium septem annorum, nec
exercit' in Art de, etc. 1 die Julii Anno, etc. and continue usque diem
captionis hujus Inquisitionis, scil. per quatuor menses apud A. in Com' E.
predict' occupavit and exercuit Artem, Mysterium sive occupationem de, etc. in
dicti Domini Regis contempt', and contra form' Statut' predict'.

LXXXIX. West. Symb. 2 part 143. sect. 269. Departure.
An Indictment for procuring a Servant to depart, Prac. Preced. 63.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex ss.
quod W. M. de N. in Com' E. Yeoman, die, anno and loco, etc. procuravit and
exhortavit I. C. servient' R. S. in servitio suo ibidem existent' abire ab
eodem servitio, cujus quidem procurationis pretextu idem I. C. a servitio R. S.
tunc and ibidem recessit, and quod idem W. M. est communis procurator
servientium diversorum ligeorum Domini Regis, ita quod ligei Domini Regis de
ejusmodi servient' ad negotia sua perimplend' multipliciter gravat' existunt,
in dicti Domini Regis contempt', and quamplurimum ligeorum Domini Regis
deteriorationem manifestam.

Arraignment, see Coron. Arrest, see Imprisonment and Process. Archery, see
Games and War. Armor and Arms, see War. Artificer, see Apprentice. Assault,
see Affray. Assemblies, see Riot. Assize, see Measures. Assistance, see Force.
Attachment, see Imprisonment.
Attainder.
Conviction, Judgment.
I. DAlt. 293. cap. 110. By 1 Rich. 3. 3.. 1. N. 4. no Sheriff, Seizure.
Undersheriff nor Escheator, Bailiff of Franchise, nor any other person, take
or seize the Goods of any person Arrested or Imprisoned for suspicion of
Felony, before, etc. he be convicted or attainted of such Felony according to
the Law, or else the same Goods otherwise lawfully forfeited: which seems to
be but a confirmation of the Common Law, says Mr. Stamford, 193. since that it
gives the party grieved a more ample recompense, etc. Poult. de Pace, 234.

Process.
II. Dalt. 294. cap. 110. and by diverse Statutes you shall find, that an
offender may be convicted out of Court, either upon view of the Record of the
Justices of Peace, or by confession of the offender, or upon examination of
witnesses before one or two Justices of the Peace. Dalt. cap. 66.

Records.
III. By 34 and 35 H. 8. 14.. 2. N. 1. the Clerks of the Crown, Clerks of the
Peace, and Clerks of Assize, where any such Attainder, etc. ( viz. of Felony,
etc.) shall be had, shall, etc. not only certify a transcript briefly and in
few words, containing the tenor and effect of every such, etc. conviction and
Clerk attainted before them, so to be had, etc. viz. the Name, Surname, and
addition of every person so, etc. convicted, or Clerk attainted, etc. shall be
made and done before the King in his Bench at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, there to remain of Record for ever, etc. but shall also deliver a
transcript, etc. to the Ordinary, etc.

Accessory.
IV. 9 Co. 119. in Sur Zanchars Ca. these word, while the Appellee is attaint,
in 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 14.. 1. N. 2. ( viz. that appeal shall not be intermit
against the Accessory) is intend of all manner of Attainders at the Kings Suit,
or of the party, and upon appearance and default; and in the same Act after
provision is made for the Appeal of the party, which proves it shall be taken
in that several sense.

Authority, see Jurisdiction.
Averment.
Suggestion, Proof, Action.
Chancery.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 6. page 501. Albeit the Chancery will sometimes both take
knowledge, and also award Process upon an Information by word, in the behalf of
the Prince, 1 Ed. 5. 6. and 39 H. 6. 41. surmise Br. 3. yet I think that before
Justices of Peace these Suggestions and Informations both, be they by word or
writing, are but of the force to stir up the Justices to recommend the Cause to
the Enquest, and not to award any Process upon them, unless it be in certain
Cases where that validity is specially given them by the Statutes.

Bail.
Recognizance, Bailment, Surety, Caution, Mainprise, Pledges, Replevin,
Imprisonment, Hab. Corp.
Replevin.
I. 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 15.. 1. N. 2. And forasmuch as before this time it was
not determined which persons were Replevisable, and which not, but only those
that were taken for the death of man, or by commandment of the King, or of his
Justices, or for the Forest.

Ability.
II. 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 15.. 1. N. 3. It is provided, etc. that such Prisoners
as before were Outlawed, and they which have abjured the Realm, Provers, and
such as be taken with the Manor, and those which have broken the Kings Prison,
Thieves openly defamed and known, and such as be appealed by Provers, so long
as the Provers be living, if they be not of good name; and such as be taken for
House-burning feloniously done, or for false Money, or for counterfeiting the
Kings Seal, or persons Excommunicate raken at the request of the Bishop, or for
manifest offenses, or for Treason touching the King himself, shall be in no
wise Replevisable by the common Writ, nor without Writ.

III. By 27 Ed. 1. 3.. 1. N. 4. (For the more assured conservation of the
Peace, etc. that Justices assigned in every County to take Assizes, Sheriffs.
where they do take Assizes, as they be appointed incontinent after the
Assizes, etc.) shall enquire if Sheriffs or any other have let out by Replevin,
Prisoners not Replevisable, or offended against 3 Ed. 1. 15. etc.

IV. 18 Ed. 2. page 84.. 32. N. 1. Leet.
The Frankpledge shall enquire of persons Imprisoned, and let go without
Mainprise.

V. 23 H. 6. 10.. 1. N. 6. ( viz. Sheriffs, Imprisonm.
etc. shall on oblig' deliver all persons imprisoned, etc.) such, etc. which be
or shall be in their ward by Condemnation, Execution, Capias Vtlagatum or
Excommunicatum, Surety of the Peace, and all such persons which be or shall be
committed to ward by special commandment of any Justices, and Vagabonds
refusing to serve according to the form of the Statute of Laborers, ( viz. 23
Ed. 3. 2. etc.) only excepted, 4 Ed. 3. 2.. 1. N. 4.

VI. 1 Rich. 3. 3.. 1. N. 2. That every Justice of Peace in every Shire,
Justices.
City or Town, shall have Authority by his or their discretion, to let such
Prisoners and persons so arrested ( viz. on suspicion of Felony) to Bail or
Mainprise, in like form as though the same Prisoners or persons were Indicted
thereof of Record, before the same Justices in their Sessions, 34 Ed. 3. 1.. 1.
N. 6. 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 7.

VII. 1 R. 3. 3.. 1. N. 3. Escape.
And that Justices of Peace have authority to enquire in their Sessions, of all
manner Escapes of every person arrested and imprisoned for Felony.

VIII. 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 3. That the Justices of Peace in every Shire, Justices.
City and Town, or two of them at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
have authority and power to let any such Prisoners, or persons Mainprisable by
the Law, that have been imprisoned within their several Counties, City or Town,
to Bail or Mainprise unto their next General Sessions, or unto the next
Jail-delivery of the same Goals in every Shire, City or Town, as well within
Franchise as without, where any Goals been or hereafter shall be.

IX. 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 4. And that the said Justices of the Peace, Certificate.
or one of them, so taking any such Bail or Mainprise, do certify the same at
the next General Sessions of the Peace, or the next General Jail-delivery of
any such Goal within every such County, City or Town, next following after any
such Bail or Mainprise so taken, on pain of 10 l. for every default recorded, 1
and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 2.

X. 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 7. And that the aforesaid Act ( viz. 1 R. 3. 3. Justices.
. 1. N. 2.) giving authority and power in the premises to any Justice of the
Peace by himself, be in that behalf utterly void and of none effect, etc.

XI. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 2. N. 1. That, Ability.
etc. no Justice or Justices of the Peace shall let to Bail or Mainprise, any
such person or persons which for any offense, etc. be declared not to be
replevised or bailed, or be forbinden to be replevised or bailed, by 3 Ed. 1.
W. 1. cap. 15.

XII. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1. And furthermore that any, Justices.
etc. arrested for Manslaughter or Felony, or suspicion, etc. being bailable
by the Law, shall not, etc. be let to Bail or Mainprise by any Justices of
Peace, if it be not in open Sessions, except it be by two Justices of the Peace
at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the same Justices to be
present together at the time of the said Bailment or Mainprise, Lamb. 339.
Crompt. 156 b. 157. infra.

XIII. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 2. Which Bailment or Mainprise they
shall certify in writing, subscribed or signed with their own hands,
Certificate.
at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden within the County where the
said person, etc. shall be arrested or suspected, 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 4.

Examination.
XIV. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 4. N. 1. And that the said Justices, or one of
them being of the Quorum, when any such Prisoner is brought before them for any
Manslaughter or Felony, before any Bailment or Mainprise, shall take the
Examination of the said Prisoner, and Information of them that bring him, of
the Fact and circumstances thereof, and the same, or as much thereof as shall
be material to prove the Felony, shall put in writing, before they make the
same Bailment.

Certificate.
XV. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 4. N. 2. Which said Examination, together with
the said Bailment, the said Justices shall certify at the next general
Jail-delivery to be holden within the limits of their Commission.

Landon.
XVI. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 6. N. 1. Provided, etc. and be it further
Enacted, etc. that Justices of Peace and Coroners within the City of London,
and County of Middlesex, and in other Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate
within this Realm and Wales, shall within their several Jurisdictions have
authority to let to Bail Felons and Prisoners, in such manner and form as they
have been heretofore accustomed, this Act, etc. notwithstanding.

Justices.
XVII. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 338, 339. It seems that Justices of the Peace
might (after the Statute 34 Ed. 3. 1.. 1. N. 6. that made them complete Judges)
have letten to Bail such persons as were Indicted of Felony before them in
their Sessions, even as the Justices of the Kings Bench used to do; but not
such as were arrested for suspicion of Felony, and not Indicted thereof before
them, because before the Indictment they were no Judges over them: and for help
herein 1 R. 3. 3.. 1. N. 2. was ordained, but that Law begat some
inconvenience, and therefore it was soon after repealed by 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 7.
And here again there sprung up another inconvenience, for then Justices of
Peace would not stick to borrow one another Name, (as many yet still do) and
by that means defraud the good meaning of the Statute; whereupon it was lastly
provided against by 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1. Crompt. 156 b. 157 a.
infra 33.

Imprisonm.
XVIII. Lamb. 340. recited 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13. Because it both
comprehends some such other things as must concur with the Bailment of the
Prisoner, and also provokes to set down what persons are Bailable, etc.

Justices.
XIX. Lamb. 342. Both these last Statutes (3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 15. and 23 H. 6.
cap. 10.) as appears were at the first made to give a Rule unto Sheriffs and
other Officers, as well for the letting to Bail, as for the retaining of their
Prisoners: but as 3 Ed. 1. 15. is by the express letter of 1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. 13.. 2. N. 1. set forth as a Line whereby the Justices of Peace are to
guide themselves, so it seems to me that they ought to have an eye to the
other Statute also, ( viz. 23 H. 6. 10.. 1. N. 6.) forasmuch as certain other
persons be therein also mentioned not to be Bailable by Law, and so within the
reach of the very words of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1.

Coron.
XX. Lamb. 342. That 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1. seems to distinguish
these words, death of a man, in 3 Ed. 1. 15., 1. N. 2. and in this place to
restrain them to Murder only; saving that 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1.
admits that for some death or Manslaughter, the slayer may be lawfully
Bailed; which also is the common practice in that behalf.

Days.
XXI. Lamb. 342. ibid. We learn also that he which within the year is acquitted
of Murder or Manslaughter at the Kings Suit, must be remitted to Prison, or
let to Mainprise till the end of the year, and the party grieved may in the
mean time commence his Appeal, 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 15.

Indictment.
XXII. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 343. It seems moreover that he which is Indicted
of Felony, is not Bailable, 41 Ass. 30. nor he which confesses the Felony
whereof he is accused; for the Statute 3 Ed. 1. 15.. 1. N. 4. means to
exclude the one, when it says, that he which is Indicted of Pety-Larceny may
be Bailed; the other, 3 Ed. 1. 15.. 1. N. 3. when it denies Bail to a Prover,
who must begin with confession of his own fault, before he may be admitted to
burden another man.

XXIII. Lamb. 343. ibid. And if a man be taken upon Process of Rebellion
issuing out of the Chancery or Star Chamber, Process.
those Justices of Peace may well be thought void of discretion, that shall
take upon them to Bail him, 23 H. 6. 10.. 1. N. 6. Crompt. 152 b.. 2. Dalt. 312.

XXIV. Lamb. 343. ibid. Ability.
Further me thinks that I may set down this as a Rule, even at the Common
Law, concerning Bailments, That the Justices of Peace cannot meddle with the
Bailment of any Prisoner, except he be Prisoner for such a cause whereof the
Justices of Peace be competent Judges; which also was the cause that one
Justice of the Peace could not by force of the Commission only, have bailed
suspects of Felony, before that they were Indict thereof, etc. for out of
Sessions and before Indictment they were no Judges of such a matter.

XXV. Lamb. 343, 344. And on the other side it seems, Justices.
that two Justices of the Peace, the one of them being of the Quorum, may out
of the Sessions Bail such as come into Prison by the Process of the Sessions,
made upon penal Laws not forbidding Bail; because two such Justices be
competent Judges of all those matters, insomuch as they may hear and determine
them.

XXVI. Lamb. 344. This I will say for all, that it becomes Justices of the
Peace to be very circumspect in granting Bail, Imprisonm.
both for fear of wrong by denying it to him that is Replevisable, and for fear
of danger to the Service it self by giving it where it is not grantable: and
therefore I advise them to consider first, whether the power of Bail, when it
is required, be not taken from them by some of those former Statutes recited;
and then whether that particular Statute it self, against which the Prisoner is
charged to offend, do not specially prohibit the Bail.

XXVII. Crompt. 152 b.. 3. Nota, in all cases where the Statute speaks that a
man shall be imprisoned at the Kings will, Prerogative.
the Prisoner cannot be enlarged or let to Mainprise, until the King sends his
pleasure concerning him, Stamf. 77. who voucheth 24 Ed. 3. 33. the Case of one
Forget, who went Armed in the Palace at Westminster. against 2 Ed. 3. 4.

XXVIII. Crompt. 157 a. b He that is taken by commandment of the Kings
Justices, shall not be put to Mainprise by 3 Ed. 1. 15.. 1. N. 2. Justices.
and this is intend by their absolute commandment, as if he commands one to
Prison without showing cause why he so commanded him, either for a misdemeanour
done before him, or for such a thing that lies in discretion of the Justice,
more then in his ordinary power, Stamf. 72 b. 73 a.

XXIX. Crompt. 160.. 30. Amerciament.
When a Statute says the offender shall be Fined at the Kings will, this is to
be intended that the Justices before whom the offense is examined, shall assess
the Fine by their discretions; for the King speaks and shows his pleasure by
the mouth of his Justices.

XXX. Crompt. 153.. 8. Error.
If Error appears of Record before Justices of the Peace, in a thing for which
a man is in Execution before them, they ought to let him by Mainprise to sue a
Writ of Error in another Court: as where a man is in Execution upon an
erroneous Recovery apparent of Record in Banco, they ought to let him to
Mainprise to sue a Writ of Error in B. R. but not for Error in fact, 33 H. 6.
22.

XXXI. Crompt. 153.. 10. Imprisonm.
Though the Justice of Peace commits one to the Goal for certain causes showed
in the Mittimus without Bail or Mainprise, yet he may be bailed, if he be
bailable: But if he be committed without Bail or Mainprise, and without showing
cause why he is committed in the Mittimus, then another Justice of Peace does
not do well to Bail him, without making him that committed him privy; for he
may be committed for cause that is not bailable.

Process.
XXXII. Crompt. 153.. 11. The Justice of Peace who commits any to the Goal by
reason of his Office, ought to show the cause in his Mittimus, to the intent
that it may appear whether he be bailable or not.

Examination.
XXXIII. Crompt. 156 b. 157 a. Nota, that when he that is taken for Felony,
shall be bailed by the Justices of Peace before commitment, he must be examined
and bailed by two Justices of the Peace, who shall be together at the time of
the Examination and Bailment, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1. and Lamb.
339. supra 17. but where he is examined and committed, he may be Bailed by one
Justice: Hoc Nota. See 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 10.. 2. N. 2.

Forfeiture.
XXXIV. Pasch. 21 H. 7. 20 b. pl. 3. in Mainprise, Br. 44. Nota per Fineux Chapter
J. that wherever any one is Bailed for suspicion of Felony until a certain day,
and this on pain to forfeit a certain sum of money, at which day the party
suspected comes not, in this case the party suspected shall forfeit a hundred
shillings; and if he were Indict of Felony, and so Bailed unto a certain day
wherein he appears not, he shall forfeit ten pounds to our Lord the King, quod
Nota. And note, that the pledges themselves who so Bailed him, are obliged for
his appearance, viz. corpus pro corpore, and besides that in a certain sum of
money to be forfeited to the King, unless he appear: but where a man comes in,
viz. by Cepi corpus in a Writ of Trespass, and is Bailed, his pledges are bound
corpus pro corpore without any other sum; and in that case if he for whose
appearance by a day they are obliged by Recognizance, do not come at the day
limited, then the pledges at the discretion of the Judges shall be amerced; so
note the diversity, etc. Crompt. 157.

Process.
XXXV. Crompt. 153.. 13. The Justices of Peace may discharge Mainpernors on
their prayer, and commit the party to prison.

Imprisonm.
XXXVI. Crompt. 157. A man is Bail for one suspected of Felony in 40 l. to
appear at the Assizes, and after he fears that the other will flee away; it
seems that he may take him and bring him before the Justice, and thereupon he
may commit him to the Goal, if he does not find other Sureties to appear, and
thereupon he may be discharged of his Recognizance that first Bailed him, 50
Ed. 3. 11. and 5 Ed. 4. 31. N. B. B. 117. Dalt. 306. cap. 114.

Justices.
XXXVII. Dalt. 307. cap. 114. So if a Prisoner be Bailed by insufficient
persons, the Justices of Peace ex officio may cause him to find better
Sureties, and may commit him as it seems till he shall so do; for 3 Ed. 1. W.
1. cap. 15. requires that such as be Bailed, be let out by sufficient Surety.
Mainprise Br. 2. Pledges Br: 1. and 10. Co. 101. Dalt. 174. cap. 70.

Ability.
XXXVIII. Dalt. 306, 307. And therefore, although the number of such Sureties,
their sufficiency, and the sum wherein they shall be bound, rests in some
sort in the discretion of the Justice; yet it is safe for them to take Sureties
at the least, and those to be Subsidy-men, and to be bound in good sums,
especially if the Prisoner be in for Felony, or suspicion thereof; for the
more, and the more able the Sureties are, the rather they will cause him that
is bailed to appear. And again, for want of taking sufficient Bail, the
Justices of Peace are finable. And at Cambridge Assizes, Anno 1613. Judge
Warberton threatened to have set 40 l. Fine upon two Justices of Peace who had
bailed a Prisoner that was committed for suspicion of Felony, and appeared not,
for that the Sureties were not Subsidy-men. Quere, If the Justices of Peace may
not examine upon their Oaths the Sureties, concerning their sufficiency, or
whether they be Subsidy-men?

Escape.
XXXIX. Dalt. 275. cap. 106. If the Justice of Peace, etc. shall bail one who is
not bailable, this is an escape. Fitz. 4. Coron 246. ( viz. a negligent
escape.) If it be in ignorance, Cromp. 39.. 7.

XL. Dalt. 306. cap. 114. If any Justices of Peace do let to Bail or Mainprise
any person who, for any Offense by him committed, Fines.
is declared not to be bailable, or forbidden to be bailed, by 3 Ed. 1. 15. the
said Justices of Peace so offending shall pay such Fines as shall be assessed
by the Justices of Jail-deliver where the Offense shall be committed. Query,
If the Bond be void, as 37 H. 6. 1. per Moyl.

XLI. Dalt. 307. cap. 114. I have seen a Report of a Case, Process.
Trin. 37 Eliz. That upon an Assembly of all the Judges and Barons at
Serjeant-Inn, it was resolved and agreed by them to be put in ure in their
Circuits, That if a Justice of Peace should commit a man to the Gaol for
Felony, for which by Law he is not bailable, but by his Mittimus he commits him
generally, not showing any cause; If other Justices of the Peace shall bail
him, not knowing of the matter, etc. they shall be fined for the same; for they
at their perils ought to inform themselves of the matter before they bail him.

XLII. Dalt. 310. cap. 114. If a Prisoner, Judgment.
after he has pleaded not Guilty, be attaint by Verdict that he killed a man
se defendendo, or by misfortune, yet he shall not be bailed by the Justice of
Peace. Quere, Stamf. 74. Coron 297, 354.

XLIII. Dalt. 311. If a man be Accessory to two, and the one Principal is
attainted, though the other be not, yet the Accessory shall not be bailed,
Accessory.
Stamf. 71. Coron 200.

XLIV. Dalt. 311. cap. 114. Process.
If any person be committed to Prison by Process from the Sessions made upon an
Indictment upon any penal Statute not prohibiting Bail, he may be bailed out of
the Sessions by two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum; or he may
have a Warrant out of the Chancery, directed to the Justices of the Peace, or
to the Sheriff, to take Surety of him for his appearance before the Justices at
their Sessions, etc. or he may have a Certiorari to remove the Record in B. R.
and a Habeas Corpus to remove the Body thither also. F. N. B. 250, 251.

XLV. Lamb. 347. That persons are not bailable on 5 Rich. 2. 2.. 1. Money.
N. 10. commit for a whole year without Redemption for transporting Gold or
Silver without License.

2 H. 5. 8.. 2. N. 2. Rioters attainted of great and heinous Riots shall have
one whole years Imprisonment at least, Riot.
without being let out of Prison by Bail, Mainprise, or in any manner, during
the year.

9 H. 5. 8. 2. cap. 8.. 1. N. 2. And Justices may hold falsifiers of Weights in
Prison without Mainprise, till they be acquit or attaint. Measures.


8 H. 6. 4.. 1. N. 11 Wearing Liveries for maintenance shall have a whole years
Imprisonment, without being let to Bail or Mainprise. Maintenaece.


22 H. 8. 5.. 4. N. 8. Ways.
Collector for Bridges refusing to account at Session, to be committed without
Bail or Mainprise, till account made.

23 H. 8. 2.. 2. N. 7. upon appearance of Collectors for Goods, Poor.
six Justices to commit without Bail or Mainprise, till Account and Payment,
etc.

27 H. 8. 20.. 1. N. 6. Two Justices of the Peace, Quorum unus, Justices.
may commit without Bail or Mainprise, till sufficient Surety by Recognizance,
etc. to pay Tithes, etc.

32 H. 8. 7.. 4. N. 1. Two Justices, Quorum unus, Ordinary.
on Information of Ordinary, etc. to commit to next Gaol till Sureties, by
Recognizance, or otherwise, before the same Justices, to obey Sentence of
Ordinary for Tithes, etc.

33 H. 8. 9.. 9. N. 2. Alien Exporting long Bows, etc. Auster le mere.
Imprison without Bail or Mainprise, until Fine before two Justices in their
Sessions.

2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2.. 3. N. 1. War.
Soldier selling or putting away Horse or Harness, Imprisonment without Bail
or Mainprise, until satisfaction to the Owner.

Ale.
5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. 4. N. 1. Seller of Ale without License, commit by two
Justices, Quorum unus, without Bail or Mainprise, for three days.

Market Overt.
Cap. 14.. 4. N. 1. Forestaller, etc. convict, for the first Offense Imprison
two months, without Bail or Mainprise.

Riot.
1 Mar. 1 St. 2. cap. 12.. 5. N. 1. Above two unlawfully assembled to throw down
Pales, Hedges, etc. Imprison a year without Bail or Mainprise.

Coron.
1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 5.. 4. N. 1. Transporting Corn without license Imprison a
whole year without Bail or Mainprise.

War.
4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. 3.. 5. N. 3. Justices before whom party is convict for
false Musters, etc. Imprison without Bail or Mainprise, until payment of the
Forfeiture.

Religion.
1 Mar. 1 St. 2. cap. 2.. 6. N. 3. Not recanting at next Sessions disturbance of
Preacher, etc. commit without Bail or Mainprise, till reconcile.

Religion.
1 Eliz. 2.. 4. N. 6. Depraver of Common Prayer, Imprison for six months without
Bail or Mainprise.

Fees.
5 Eliz. 4.. 9. N. 1. Taking Wages contrary to Stat. imprison twenty days
without Bail or Mainprise.

Fish.
Cap. 5. Eating Flesh on Fish-days, forfeit 3 l. or close imprisonment three
months without Bail or Mainprise.

Forgery.
Cap. 14.. 3. N. 7. Imprisonment a year, etc. without Bail or Mainprise for
Forgery.

Conjuration.
Cap. 15.. 2. N. 3. Convicted for false Prophesies, imprison a year without Bail
or Mainprise.

Forest.
Cap. 21. 2. N. 6. After three months imprison for taking Deer, Fish, or Hawks,
imprison without Bail or Mainprise until Sureties of Good behavior 7 years,
and never to offend again.

Cattle.
8 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 1. Transporting Sheep, imprison one year without Bail or
Mainprise.

Purveyance.
13 Eliz. 21.. 1. N. 9. Imprisonment of Purveyor within five miles of
University, as 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 15.. 2. N. 3. viz. for three months
without Bail or Mainprise.

Bastardy.
18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 5. Reputed Father or Mother of Bastard, perform not order of
Justices, etc. to be commit without Bail or Mainprise; except he or she put in
sufficient Surety to appear next Sessions, etc.

Schools.
23 Eliz. 1.. 7. N. 2. Schoolmaster without License, imprison one year without
Bail or Mainprise.

Religion.
35 Eliz. 1.. 1. N. 4. Present or joining in Conventicle, etc. convicted, commit
without Bail or Mainprise until Conformity.

Drapery.
39 Eliz. 11.. 2. N. 3. Refusing to be bound to Sessions to discover Logwood, to
be commit to the next Goal till bound with Sureties, etc.

War.
Cap. 16.. 1. N. 3. Disobeying Justices order of suppressing Musters, commit
without Bail or Mainprise for three days, and till Recogn. of 40 l. to perform
order.

Poor.
43 Eliz. 2.. 4. N. 2. For want of distress, commit by two Justices without Bail
or Mainprise, until payment of Tax to the Poor.

Fowl.
1 Jac. 27.. 2. N. 4. Unlawful destroyer of Pheasant, Hares, etc. Partridge,
Pidgeon, etc. committed for three months without Bail or Mainprise, unless
offender pay 20 s. etc.

Poor.
Cap. 31.. 3. N. 1. On default of Goods, to be commit without Bail or Mainprise
until satisfaction of Tax to Poor inflicted.

Oath.
3 Jac. 4.. 14. N. 2. Two Justices on refusal of Oath of Allegiance, may commit
without Bail or Mainprise until the next Assize or Quarter Sessions.

Cap. 21.. 2. N. 3. Unlawful hunting Deer, or stealing Conies, Forest.
unless Sureties of Good behavior for seven years be found, to continue in
prison without Bail or Mainprise until finding, etc.

7 Jac. 11.. 8. N. 4. Unlawful taker of Partridge, etc. with Nets, Fowl.
etc. imprison three months without Bail or Mainprise, unless he pay 20 s. etc.

21 Jac. 8. 7. N. 2. Certiorari.
Party Indict to become bound with Sureties in ten pounds in open Sessions to
prosecute, before allowance of Certiorari, etc.

Cap. 26.. 2. N. 1. Recognizance or Bail in another name, Felony. Nosm.


XLVI. Lamb. 3. cap. 2. page 348. The form of Bailment. Mainprise.


Memorand' quod 20 die mensis Julii, Anno regni Dom' nostri Jacobi, Kanc. ss.
etc. venerunt coram nobis T. R. and H. L. duorum Justiciar', etc. assignatorum
apud H. in Com' predict', A. B. and C. D. de E. in dicto Com' Yeomen, and
ceperunt in Ballium usque ad proximam Goalae deliberationem in dicto Com'
tenend', quendam F. G. etc. Labourer, captum and detentum in prisona pro
suspicione cujusdam feloniae, etc. and assumpserunt super se scilicet quilibet
predict' A. B. and C. D. sub pena 20 l. bonae and legalis monetae Angliae, and
predict' F. G. assumpsit pro seipso sub pena 40 l. similis monetae, de bonis
and catallis, terris and tenementis eorum quorumlibet and cujuslibet eorum, ad
opus dicti Domini Regis, haeredum and successorum suorum levand', si prefat' F.
G. ad eandem proximam Goalae deliberationem personaliter non comparebit coram
Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis ad dictam Goalam deliberand' assignatis ad
standum recto de felonia predict', and ad respondend dict' Domino Regi tunc and
ibidem de and super omnibus quae illi objicientur.

Datum sub sigillis nostris die and anno primum supradict'.
Dalt. 387, 388. cap. 127.

XLVII. Lamb. 348, 349. The Liberate. Imprisonm.
I. B. and T. L. two of the Justices of, etc.

To the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal in M. etc. Greeting.
FOrasmuch as F. G. etc. Labourer, has before us found sufficient Mainprise to
appear before the Justices of the Jail-delivery, Kent ss.
at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden in the said County, there to
Answer to such things as shall be then on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord
objected against him; and namely, to the Felonious taking of two Sheep, (for
the suspicion whereof he was taken and committed to your said Goal) we command
you on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord, that if the said F. G. does
remain in your Goal for the said cause, and for none other, that you forbear to
grieve or detain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence and suffer him
to go at large, and that upon the pain that will fall thereon.

Given under our Seals this 20 of July, etc.
Dalt. 389. cap. 127. Crompt. 238 b. 239.

XLVIII. 4 Ed. 3. 2.. 1. N. 4. Sheriff.
Such as shall be indicted or taken by the Keepers of the Peace, shall not be
let to Mainprise by the Sheriff, nor by none other Ministers, if they be not
Mainpernable by the Law, Lamb. 21. 23 H. 6. 16.. 1. N. 6.

XLIX. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 28. Recognizance of Bail. Recognizance


Kanc' ss.
Memorand' quod 1 die Maii Anno regni, etc. A. B. de etc. personaliter venit
coram me C. D. uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo
predict' conservand' assignat', and recognovit se debere eidem Domino Regi 10
l. legalis monetae Angliae, de bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis suis
fieri and levari, ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' and successorum
suorum, si defalt' fieret in performatione conditionis indorsat'.

(Anno Dom. not necessary.)

2. Kanc' ss.
Memorand' quod 5 die October. Anno regni, Recogn.
etc. A. B. de etc. G. H. de etc. I. K. de etc. personaliter venerunt coram
nobis C. D. and E. F. Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com' suo
predict' conservand' assignat', and recognoverunt se debere eidem Domino Regi
modo and forma sequent', viz. predict' A. B. 20 l. legalis monetae Angliae, and
uterque predictorum G. and I. 10 l. consimilis monetae, de separalibus bonis
and catallis, terris and tenementis suis separaliter fieri and levari ad opus
and usum dicti Domini Regis, haered' and sucessorum suorum, si defalt' fieret
in performatione conditionis indorsat'.



( Anno Dom. not necessary.)

Appearance.
L. Kilb. Preced. ibid. 30, 31. A Condition for Felony or suspicion of Felony.

THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, That if the within-bound A. B. do
personally appear before his Majesty's Justices of Jail-delivery, at the next
general Jail-delivery to be holden for the within-named County of Kent, then
and there to Answer to our Sovereign Lord the King, for and concerning the
Felonious taking and stealing of, etc. (or for suspicion of his Felonious
taking and stealing of, etc.) wherewithal he stands charged before, etc. and
to do and receive, etc. and do not depart the said Court without license for
the same; that then this Recogn. to be void, or else it shall stand in full
force.

2. If it be to appear at the Sessions, say, Do personally appear before his
Majesty's Justices assigned to keep his Peace in the within-named County of K.
at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the said County at
T. in the County aforesaid, then and there to Answer, etc.

3. If the Felon be in Prison, say, These are to charge and require you that
immediately you bring before me the Body of A. B. now in your custody, to be
Bailed as Law requires; whereof fail not, etc. Given, etc.

Bailiff.
Sheriff, Franchise, Officer.
Appearance.
I. LAmb. 390. The Bailiffs of Franchises, and the Constables of Hundreds, are
to serve at the Sessions, the one as Ministers, the other as Jurors, and
therefore ought to give their attendance, 27 H. 8. 24.. 14. N. 1.

Oath.
II. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 428. Article in charge at Sessions, if any Bailiff of
Franchise, Deputy or Clerk of the Shire, or Undersheriff, or other person,
have taken upon him to retorn any Enquest, Jury or Tales, or to meddle with the
execution of Process in any Court of Record, have not before taken the Oath of
Supremacy and of Office, etc. Crompt. 57. 27 Eliz. 12.. 4. N. 1.

Enquest.
III. Crompt. 182 b. Nota, that where the King is party, if the Sheriff sends to
the Bailiff of a Liberty to retorn the Panel, he shall be Amerced and the
Panel quasht, for no liberty holds where the King is party.

Fees.
IV. 37 Eliz. 4. Of Franchise or Liberties, etc. nor any of their Officers,
Servants, Bailiffs nor Deputies to do no Extortion.

Arrest.
V. 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 20. (7.). 9. N. 2. Under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Sergeant
at Mace, or other Officers, shall not carry persons Arrest to the Tavern,
Alehouse, or Victualling-house, etc. to put them to charge, without consent,
etc.

Baker and Badger, see Corn.
Bankrupts.
Indictment.
I. 21 Jac. 19.. 7. N. 1. That Bankrupt on examination concealing Goods, etc.
may be Indicted at Assizes, or the General Sessions to be holden before the
Judges of Assize, or Justices of the Peace of the County or place where he or
she shall become Bankrupt, and Pillory if found.

Barrettors, see Maintenance. Bark, see Leather, Woods. Bargain and Sale, see
Market Overt;
Baron and Feme.
Coverture, Women.
I. 3 Jac. 4.. 40. N. 1. Forfeit.
None to be charged with penalty for Wives offense in not receiving the
Sacrament during Marriage, nor any woman to be charged for such offense.

II. 3 Jac. 5.. 10. N. 1. Married woman convict Recusant, Women.
(whose Husband is none) not coming to Church in a year, forfeits two parts of
Jointure or Dower, and disable to be Executor or Administrator.

III. 22 Car. 2. 1.. 16. N. 1. If person offending in Conventicle and convict,
be a Feme covert co-habiting with her Husband, Forfeiture.
the penalties of five shillings and ten shillings shall be levied on his Goods.

IV. Lamb. 78, 79. The Wife if she be threatened to be killed, Peace.
or to be outragiously chastised by her Husband, may with good reason demand
the Peace against him, F. N. B. 80. F. and 230. and I do not doubt but that a
Justice of Peace may in such a case happening in his presence, command it upon
his own discretion. The Husband may also demand the Peace against his own Wife
in like case; and any man may demand it against the Wife of another, by Marrow,
Crompt. 133 b. 136.

V. Crompt. 136 b. Justification.
A man may beat another in defense of his Wife and Children, 21 H. 7. 41. 35 H.
6. 56. 9 Ed. 4. 51.

VI. Crompt. 144 b. Appearance.
The Husband is bound that he and his Wife shall appear at such a Sessions, and
that they keep the Peace in the mean time; at the day the Husband appears, but
not the Wife, the Recognizance is not forfeited, because if there be any cause
further to find Surety, the Husband shall be bound and not the Wife, and
therefore the appearance of the Wife is not material; yet Dalt. 175. cap. 71.
says, Quaere on 8 Ed. 2. Forfeiture 17.

VII. The Laws, etc. 26. abr. 23. Pope.
A Feme covert is within 1 Eliz. 2.. 14. N. 2. and shall forfeit 12 d. if she
repair not to Church every Sunday and Holy Day, 11 Co. 61. Dr. Fosters Ca. 3
Bulstr. 87. Laws Ca. 1 Roll. 93. c. 41. and Hob. 97. Moor and Hussy.

VIII. The Laws, etc. 68. abr. 72. N. 7. Religion.
If a Feme covert be Indicted at the Kings Suit for an offense within 23 Eliz.
1.. 5. N. 1. she may be charged with the penalty after her Husbands death; but
the Husband is not chargable nor shall pay the penalty, for that he is no party
to the Judgment: and this was one of the causes of making 35 Eliz. 1.. 10. N.
1. by which the King may have debt, and recover the forfeiture against the
Husband, 1 Roll. 93, 94. Fosters Ca. Savell 25. c. 59.

IX. The Laws, etc. 75. abr. 79. N. 10. Information.
An Action of debt or Information tam pro Domino Rege quam, etc. lies upon 23
Eliz. 1.. 11. N. 1. against the Husband and Wife for the Recusancy of the Wife,
and he is liable to the 20 l. per month, notwithstanding he himself be no
Recusant, 3 Bulstr. 87. 1 Roll. 93. Hob. 97. Savell 25. c. 59. But the Wife
cannot appear by Supersedeas alone without her Husband, for both must appear,
or both be Outlawed, Hob. 179. Lovedens Ca. Nor can she plead or join Issue
without her Husband, 2 Roll. 90. and 2 Cr. 530.

Poor.
X. Lamb. 206.. 3. If the Husband or Wife have a House, and the Husband or Wife
rogue about, they ought to be sent to the Town where that House is; and so of
an Inmate, Dalt. 125. cap. 47.

XI. Pract. Preced. 82. An Indictment for taking away a woman with her Husbands
Goods.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' K. predict' 10 die, etc. Anno regni, etc. vi and armis, viz. gladiis,
etc. E. M. uxorem cujusd' B. M. apud, etc. rapuit, and eam cum bonis and
catallis, viz. etc. ipsius B. M. cepit and abduxit, and ea eidem B. M. adhuc
injuste detinet, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem
suas, etc.

XII. Pract. Preced. 114. An Indictment for marrying two Wives, 1 Jac. 11.

Middlesex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. nuper
de parochia Sancti Egidii in Campis in Com' Midd. predict' Gen', 6 die Junii
Anno regni, etc. apud paroch' Sancti Martini in Campis in Com' predict' duxit
in uxorem quandam S. E. Spinster, and adtunc and ibidem eandem S. E. in uxorem
suam habuit, quodque predict' A. B. postea scil. 21 die Maii Anno regni, etc.
apud paroch' de Marybone in Com' Midd. predict' felonice uxorem duxit quandam
W. I. Spinster, and eidem W. I. adtunc and ibidem, scil. dicto 21 die Maii Anno
supradict' apud paroch' de Marybone predict' in Com' predict' maritat' fuit:
predicta S. E. priori uxore adtunc superstite and in plena vita existent',
contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem suas, etc. necnon
contra form' Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and provisi. Et quod predict' A.
B. postea scil. Anno 20 supradict' apud paroch' Sancti Egidii in Campis
predict' pro felonia predict' capt' and arrestat' fuit.

Bastardy.
Bawdry, Adultery, Coron, Poor, Incontinence.
Arrest.
I. LAmb. 118, 119. It is admitted by the opinion of the Court, 13 H. 7. 10.
That if a man in the night-season haunt a House that is suspected for Bawdry,
or use suspicious Company, then may the Constable arrest him, to find Sureties
of his good abearing; for Bawdry is not merely a Spiritual offense, but mixed
and sounding somewhat against the Peace of the Land. 27 H. 8. 14. per Fitz-h.
and 1 H. 7. 6.

Good behav.
II. Lamb. 2. cap. 2. page 119. And therefore it shall not be amiss at this day
(in my slender opinion) to grant Surety of the good abearing against him that
is suspected to have begotten a Bastard-child, to the end that he may be
forthcoming when it shall be born; for otherwise there will be no putative
Father found, when the Justices of the Peace shall (after the birth, and by
virtue of 18 Eliz. 3.) come to take order for his punishment; And if this
medicine might lawfully be applied to Shoemakers, Tailors, Weavers, and other
light persons, that without Testimonial, or other good Warrant, do flit out of
one Shire into another; not only that evil of Bastardy, but many other
mischiefs, might be either prevented or punished thereby. Cromp. 196 b.. 8.
Dalt. 191. 37. and 355. cap. 121. infra 10.

Imprisonment
III. Lamb. 546. And the reputed Father or Mother of a Bastard-child, that will
not perform the Order set down by two Justices of the Peace thereto authorized,
shall be committed, and shall remain in Prison without Bail or Mainprise, till
he or she will be bound, etc. 18 Eliz. 3.. 1. N. 4, 5.

Poor.
IV. Lamb. 352, 353. Two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum, in
or next to the Limits where the Parish Church is in which a Bastard-child (left
to the charge of the Parish) shall be born, ought to take order by their
discretion, as well for the relief of the Parish, and keeping of the Child, as
also for the Punishment of the Mother and reputed Father thereof. 18 Eliz. 3..
1. N. 2.

V. Lamb. 596. That 18 Eliz. 3.. 1. N. 5. Sessions.
have mention of the Quarter Sessions to be holden next after Easter; which
Statutes, as they make not in this point ( viz. of holding the Sessions) a new
Law, but be grounded upon former Law supposed to be in force, ( viz. 2. H. 5.
4.. 2. N 2.) So allowing of any one of these four Sessions, they do therein
give allowance of all the other three also.

VI. Lamb. 604. Apprentice*
A Beggars Child may at the General Sessions be bound to serve any Subject of
this Realm, being of honest Calling. 14 Eliz. 5. and 18 Eliz. 3. Cromp. 86.

VII. Cromp. 86 b. Women.
Enquiry at Sessions of Women that have Children born out of Matrimony, and of
the reputed Father of such Child, they shall be punished by the directions of
the Justices of Peace. 18 Eliz. 3.

VIII. Cromp. 131 b. Two Justices of the Peace, Women.
whereof one shall be of the Quorum, have power by their discretion, on
examination of the Cause, and circumstances, to take Order as well for the
punishment of the Mother as the reputed Father of every Bastard-child born out
of Matrimony, and for relief of the Parish where it is born, in part, or in
all. Cromp. 199. Bail.


IX. Cromp. 154 b. Neither the Mother nor reputed Father of any Bastard who
refuses to perform the order of the Justices can be bailed according to 18
Eliz. 3.. 1. N. 5. see 2 Bulstr. 323. (341.)

X. Cromp. 196 b.. 8. Quere, Good behav.
If a Justice of Peace may by discretion bind to the good behavior him that
has gotten a Woman with child, to be forthcoming until the delivery, because
otherwise peradventure he will fly. But the Stat. 18 Eliz. 3. does not give
this; but it seems reasonable, Lamb. 119. supra 2. Dalt. 191, and 255.

XI. Dalt. 191. cap. 75. Good behav.
Also this Surety of the good behavior is used to be granted against the
putative Father of a Bastard-child.

XII. Dalt. 37. cap. 11. Every Justice of Peace upon his discretion may (as it
seems) bind to the good behavior him that is charged or suspected to have
begotten a Bastard-child, to the end that he may be forthcoming when the Child
shall be born; otherwise there will be no putative Father when the two
Justices, after the birth of the Child, shall come to take order according to
18 Eliz. 3.. 1. N. 2. The like may be done after the birth of the Child, and
before such order taken. Lamb. 119. Cromp. 196.. 6.

XIII. Dalt. 37. cap. 11. Also if the putative Father of any such Child, Poor.
either before the birth of any such Child, or after, shall by any persuasion,
procurement, or other practice, be conveyed or sent away, or shall run away, so
as the Justices of Peace cannot come by him, or so as the order of the Justices
by means thereof shall not be performed; it seems every Justice of Peace upon
his discretion may bind to the good behavior, and so over to the next
Jail-deliver before the Judges of Assize, or to the next Quarter Sessions,
such as shall have any hand in such practice, etc. so of such as by practice,
etc. shall cause the Mother of the Child to be conveyed or sent away, or to run
away, whereby she leaves her Child to the charge of the Town, etc.

XIV. Dalt. 37. cap. 11. Two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, in
or next to the Limits where the Parish Church is, Justices.
in which Parish any Bastard-child (begotten and born out of lawful Matrimony)
shall be born, upon examination of the cause, and circumstances, shall and may
take order, by (...) discretion, as well for the relief of the Parish, in part,
or in all, and (...) of the Child, (by charging the Mother or reputed Father
with the payment of Money weekly, or other relief) as also for the punishment
of the Mother and reputed Father. 18 Eliz. 3. and 21 Jac. 28. and 3 Car. 1. 4.
But such a Bastard-child must be one that is left to be kept at the charge of
the Parish, or one likely to be, or which may be chargeable to the Parish. 7
Jac. 4.

Poor.
XV. Quere, If the Bastard die before any order, if the Justices may make an
order for the Parish only, or for Midwives Reward, etc. Dalt. 38. Infra.. 23.

Justices.
XVI. Dalt. 25. cap. 6. And yet (notwithstanding the Rule Com. 206 b. in
Stradling's Case) whereas by 18 Eliz. 3.. 1. N. 2. the order to be taken for a
Bastard-child is appropriated to two Justices of the Peace, one being of the
Quorum, in or next unto the Parish where such Child shall be born; if two such
Justices cannot agree upon the reputed Father, or in making such order as the
Statute requires, or in other execution of the Statute, Quere, what is to be
done. I have known the Case lately moved to the Judges of Assize, who thought
it fit that such difference between the two Justices of Peace should be
referred to the hearing of the whole Bench, and the matter to be examined by
them; and what order should be therein set down by the Bench, the same to stand
good. But in such things appropriate to some one or more Justices, if without
them all or any of the residue of the Justices shall intermeddle therein, such
their doings seems no ways warrantable, but to be coram non judice; and that
there is no necessity to obey them therein, as being no lawful Judges of the
Cause. 1 Cr. 470. Infra.

Justices.
XVII. Dalt. 37. cap. 11. If the two Justices cannot agree upon their order,
what is then to be done, see Dalt. 25. supra. But by some opinions the words of
this Statute 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2. being disjunctive, two Justices of Peace in
or next to the Limits, etc. If the two Justices of Peace in that Division or
Limits cannot agree, then the two Justices of Peace next to that Division or
Limits, being within the same County, and one of them of the Quorum, have power
to take order therein.

Oath.
XIII. Dalt. 37. ibid. Also it seems the Mother may be examined upon Oath
concerning the reputed Father, and of the time and other circumstances, for
that in this case the matter and the trial thereof depends chiefly upon the
Examination and Testimony of the Mother, 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2.

Imprisonm.
XIX. Dalt. 37, 38. ibid. By 7 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1. it appears, that the Justices
of the Peace shall now commit such lewd women to the House of Correction, there
to be punished, etc. And therefore Quaere if the Justices of Peace may punish
by corporal punishment the Mother, by force of 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 4. and then
to send them to the House of Correction; for nemo bis punire debet pro uno
delicto, 4 Co. 43. and 8 Co. 118. and 2 Bulstr. 348. (330.)

Women.
XX. 2 Bulstr. 330. (348.) At Salop Assizes 19 March 7 Car. 1. An. 1631. this
Question was propounded by Sir J. Corbet to Sir William Jones Justice of
Assize: One had a Bastard-child, but she was not questioned, nor no proceedings
had against her on 18 Eliz. 3. after she had another; whether she shall now be
proceeded against on 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 2. as for her second offense, or whether
this shall be taken for the first: And by Jones Justice, she shall not be
punished on 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 2. as for her second offense, unless she had been
before questioned and punished for her first offense, either by 18 Eliz. 3. or
7 Jac. 4. but she might have been punished as for her first offense on either,
etc. Infra 44, 47.

Imprisonm.
XXI. Dalt. 38. Such corporal punishment on 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 4. or commitment
to the House of Correction on 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 1. is not to be until after the
woman is delivered of her Child; neither are the Justices of Peace to meddle
with the woman until that the Child be born, and she strong again, lest the
woman being weak, or the Child wherewith she is happen to miscarry; for you
shall find that about 31 Eliz. a woman great with Child, and suspected for
Incontinence, was commanded by the Masters of Bridewell in London to be whipped
there, by reason whereof she Travailed and was delivered of her Child before
her time, etc. and for this the said Masters of Bridewell were in the
Star Chamber fined to the Queen at a great Sum, and were further ordered to pay
a Sum of money to the said woman.

XXII. Dalt. 38. Justices.
Now it seems that such commitment to the House of Correction, ought to be by
two Justices at the least, by the words of 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 1. and then by the
conference of these two Statutes, 7 Jac. 4. and 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 4. it
seems fittest for the two next Justices authorized by 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2.

XXIII. Dalt. 38. It seems by the words of 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 1. Poor.
that such a woman shall not be sent to the House of Correction until after the
Child be born, and that it be living; for it must be such a Child as may be
chargable to the Parish. See supra. 15.

XXIV. Dalt. 38, 39. Imprisonm.
Also it seems that such a Bastard-child is not to be sent with the Mother to
the House of Correction, but rather that the Child should remain in the Town
where it was born, (or settled with the Mother) and there to be relieved with
the work of the Mother, or by relief from the reputed Father; so Dalt. 125.
cap. 47. and yet the common opinion and practice is otherwise, scil. to send
the Child with the Mother to the House of Correction; and this may also seem
reasonable, where the Child sucketh on the Mother.

XXV. Dalt. 38. Nota, Infant.
that an Infant born 11 days post ultimum tempus legitimum mulieribus
constitutum, viz. after 40 weeks after death of his Father, shall not be
adjudged legitimate, etc. 1 Inst. 123 b. Radwells Ca. 2 Esdras 40, 41. and so
it seems of an Infant born after 40 weeks from the time that the Feme
charge the man to have carnal knowledge of her, such Infant shall not be
adjudged nor reputed to be the Issue of such a man.

XXVI. Palmer 10. pl. 2. in Alsop and Stacies Ca. Mich. 17 Jac. Infant.
a Child born ten days after the 40 weeks was adjudged legitimate; but there is
a difference per Dodridge Justice, between 1 Inst. 123 b. and this Case, for
here the Daughter shall be a Bastard, if it be not the first Husbands, but
there both were legitimate, 2 Cr. 541. m.

XXVII. 1 Cr. 341. pl. 414. Pridgeon was brought to the Bar, Hill. 9 Car. 1.
Sessions.
in B. R. upon an Habeas Corpus, being at Lincoln, on complaint to two Justices
of Peace next adjoining, ordered to keep a Bastard-child; from which he
appealed to the next Quarter Sessions, at which he was discharged, and the
former Order repeal. After at another Quarter Sessions the first Order was
confirm, and he commit for nonperformance: and per Curiam the second Sessions
has no power to alter it after discharge, etc. So 1 Cr. 351. upon 18 Eliz. 3..
2. N. 6. and 3 Car. 1. cap. 4. (5.). 15. N. 2. does not aid this Case, for the
Statute is there, that if the two next Justices of Peace make not provision for
the Bastard, the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions shall settle an
Order for keeping of the Bastard, as the two next Justices ought; but it does
not give more power or authority, nor gives authority to one Sessions to alter
that which in a former Sessions was ordered, Jones 330. m. 2 Bulstr. 355. (337.)

XXVIII. 1 Cr. 436. in Salter and Browns Ca. said, Poor.
that it has been resolved that a Bastard-child of persons able to keep it,
and not like to be chargable to the Parish, is not within 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2.
and a reputed Father is to be adjudged by the two next Justices of the Peace,
or the Sessions.

Justices.
XXIX. 1 Cr. 470. in Slater's Ca. Pasch. 13 Car. 1. B. R. Resolved by the whole
Court, 1st. That before 3 Car. 1. 4. (5.). 15. N. 2. the Justices at the
Sessions had no authority to meddle in the case of Bastardy, till the two next
Justices (according to 18 Eliz. 3. 2. N. 2.) had made an order therein; and
that then, and not before, the party refusing to perform the order, and upon
giving reasonable Security to appear at the next Sessions, and abide such order
as the Justices there (or the more part of them) should make, etc. the Justices
at the Sessions might make a new order, etc. otherwise nor. Dalt. 25. 37.
supra.. 16, 17. and 2 Bulstr. 324. pl. 238.

Sessions.
XXX. 1 Cr. 470. ibid. in Slater's Ca. Resolved 2dly. That by the Statute 3 Car.
1. 4. (5.). 15. N. 2. The Justices of the Sessions have power and authority
originally to make an order in the case of Bastardy. For the words are, That
all Justices of the Peace within their several Limits and Precincts, and in
their several Sessions, may do and examine all things concerning that part of
the Stat. 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. touching Bastards, etc. that by the Justices of the
Peace in the several Counties were by the said Stat. limited to be done. And
therefore the first order made by the Sessions was in this case good and legal,
and the second order made by the two next Justices void, and could not alter or
revoke the order, which was first made by good authority, etc.

Error.
XXXI. 1 Cr. 471. ibid. Slater's Ca. 3dly. Resolved, That an Error in part, (
viz. committing the Mother for life for the first Offense) and in that part of
the Order which only concerned her, should not vitiate the whole Order.

Poor.
XXXII. 13 and 14 Car. 2. 12.. 19. N. 2. That it shall and may be lawful for the
Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor of such Parish where any Bastard-child
shall be born, to take and seize so much of the Goods and Chattels, and to
receive so much of the annual Rents or Profits of the Lands of such putative
Father, or Lewd Mother, as shall be ordered by any two Justices of Peace, etc.
for or toward the discharge of the Parish, to be confirmed at the Sessions,
for the bringing up and providing for such Bastard-child.

Women.
XXXIII. 4 Co. 17. in Ann Davies Ca. If a Feme has a Bastard, she is punishable
by 18 Eliz. 3. and though Fornication or Avowtry be not examinable by our Law,
because they are done in secret, and peradventure are uncomly to be publicly
examined; yet the having of a Bastard is a thing apparent, and examinable by
the said Act.

Process.
XXXIV. Dalt. 355, 356. cap. 121. A Warrant for the reputed Father of a
Bastard-child.

Cumb. ss.
WHereas complaint has been made to me by K. I. of your said Town single woman,
That she is gotten with child by one T. S. also of your Town Butcher: These are
thetefore to will and require you, and in His Majesty's Name to charge and
command you, and either of you, That presently upon the receipt hereof you
attach the body of the said T. S. and thereupon to bring him before me, or some
other of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County, to find
sufficient Sureties as well for his appearance at the next General Sessions of
the Peace to be holden for this County, as also for his good behavior toward
His Majesty and all his Leige-people in the mean time; and hereof fail you not,
as you will answer the contrary at your perils. Dated, etc. Dalt. 37. in. supra.

XXXV. Dalt. 356. ibid. Where a Maidservant is gotten with child, Poor.
and from thence sent to her place of birth.

FOrasmuch as J. M. Essex ss.
for the space of (...) years now last has dwelt in the Parish of W. in the
County of E. and being there settled in service with (...) etc. was gotten with
child, and being so with child, now sent or conveyed to the Town of B. under
color that she was there born, to the burthening of the said Town, and
contrary to Law: These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to charge and
command you safely to convey the said J. to W. aforesaid, there to be set on
work, or otherwise to be provided for, according to the Law; and that you
deliver and leave, or offer to leave the said J. to and with some one of the
Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor of the Parish of W. aforesaid; and
hereof fail you not, etc. Dalt. 97. cap. 40.

XXXVI. Dalt. 384. cap. 125. A Mittimus to the Goal, Imprisonm.
of the reputed Father of a Bastard-child, etc.

I Send you herewithal the body of R. C. of C. Labourer, Cambr. ss.
brought before me this present day, and charged by F. S. of the same Town, to
have gotten her with child; and for that the said R. refuses to put in
Security for his appearance at the next Quarter Sessions; and to the end he may
be forthcoming when as order shall be taken for the relief and discharging the
said Town of B. and for the keeping of the said Child when it shall happen to
be Lorn, according to the Statute in that Case provided: These are therefore on
the Kings Majesty's behalf to charge and command you, That immediately you
receive the said R. C. and him safely to keep in your said Goal, until such
time as he shall be from thence delivered by due order of Law; and hereof fail
you not, as you will answer your contempt at your peril. Dated, etc.

XXXVII. Dalt. 385. cap. 125. Poor.
A Mittimus to the House of Correction for one that runs away, leaving her
Charge to the Town.

WE have sent you herewithal the body of I. K. of W. single woman, Cambr. ss.
being lately delivered of a Child, and one that is able to labor, and thereby
to relieve her self and her said Child; and has notwithstanding lately run her
away, and left her Child upon the Parish, to the charge of the same Parish,
contrary to the Statute in that behalf provided: These are therefore to will
and require you to receive the said I. K. and her safely to keep, until the
next Quarter Sessions to be holden for this County; and in the mean time to
hold her to such works, and to give her such due Correction, by moderate
whipping or otherwise, as shall be fitting in your discretion, and according to
the Law in that behalf provided; yielding her for her maintenance only so much
as she shall deserve or earn by her Labor and Work; and hereof see that you
fail not at your peril. Dated, etc. 7 Jac. 4.

XXXVIII. Dalt. 385. ibid. Note, If any mean person shall but threaten to run
away and leave their Family as aforesaid, any two Justices of Peace of that
Division may send them to the House of Correction as aforesaid; Justices.
But such their threatening must be proved by two sufficient Witnesses upon
Oath before the said Justices of Peace.

XXXIX. Dalt. 385. cap. 125. Women.
A Mittimus to the House of Correction of the Mother of a Bastard-child.

WE have sent you herewithal the body of I. C. of W. Cambr. ss.
in the said County single woman, being lately delivered of a Bastard-child
likely to be chargeable to the Parish of W. aforesaid; and for that the said I.
C. is able to labor, and that she may thereby the better relieve her self and
her said Child: These are therefore to will and require you to receive the said
I. into your said House, there to be punished and set on work during the term
of one whole year, according to the Statute in that behalf provided; and hereof
fail you not, etc.

Imprisonm.
XL. A Mittimus to the House of Correction of the Mother of a Bastard-child,
after Examination taken.

Suff. ss.
WE send you herewithal the body of B. H. being lately delivered of a
Bastard-child, and now brought before us; requiring you her to receive, and her
safely to keep in your House of Correction for the space of one whole year next
ensuing, and to punish and to set her on work, according to the Statute in that
case made and provided, during the said time; and hereof fail you not, etc.

Recogn.
XLI. A Condition for a reputed Father of a Bastard-child.

THe Condition, etc. That if the above-bound O. M. shall and do personally
appear at the next General Quarter Sessions of the Peace to be holden at I. for
that part of the County, and abide such order as the Justices of Peace shall
and do then and there take and make concerning the Bastard-child born of A. B.
of C. in the County of S. whereof he is accused to be the reputed Father, if
the said Justices shall take or make any order therein; and in default of such
order by them to be taken or made, that then, if the said O. M. shall and do
perform the order therein already made by J. T. and J. S. two of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, that then, etc.

Poor.
XLII. An Order for a reputed Father of a Bastard-child to discharge the Town.

Suff. ss.
WHereas E. C. of R. in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, has been heretofore
charged to be a reputed Father of a Male Bastard-child, late born at P. in the
County aforesaid, of the Body of S. B. single woman there dwelling at P.
aforesaid, and the matter being heard and examined by us, it appeared to us by
the Confession of the said S. B. her self, and by the Testimony of diverse
witnesses taken before us upon Oath, that the said E. C. is the reputed Father
of the said Bastard-child: We do therefore order and adjudge the said E. C. to
be the reputed Father of the said Base-child; and for the better discharge of
the said Parish of P. we do order the said E. C. shall weekly, and every week,
from the Birth of the said Child, until he shall accomplish the Age of twelve
years, or so long as the said Child shall be any ways chargable unto the said
Town of P. pay or cause to be paid unto the Churchwardens and Overseers of the
Poor of P. aforesaid, or some of them, toward the relief of the said
Base-child, twelve pence; and at the end of the said term of twelve years, to
pay to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said Town for the
time being, the sum of Five pounds of lawful English money, to bind the said
Child forth as an Apprentice to some honest Trade or Calling. In witness, etc.

Poor.
XLIII. An Order for the reputed Father of a Bastard-child to discharge the Town.

Suff. ss.
WHereas S. W. of G. in the County aforesaid, Widow, was lately delivered at G.
aforesaid of a Bastard-child named John, which is likely to be chargable to the
Town or Parish: We the Justices of Peace of the County aforesaid, whose Names
are here underwritten, having upon the complaint of the Townsmen of G.
aforesaid, taken upon us the hearing and Examination of the said Cause, do find
by diverse Examinations testified upon Oath before us, that the said S. in the
extremity of her Travail did accuse I. B. of G. aforesaid, Tailor, to be Father
of the said Bastard-child: And we do also further find by diverse other pregnant
proofs and circumstances upon Oath, that the said I. B. is the reputed Father
of the said Child, whereupon we do order and adjudge him the said I. B. to be
the reputed Father of the said Bastard-child; and we do further order, both for
the relief of the said Parish in part, as also for the punishment of the said
I. B. that the said I. B. shall weekly and every week from and after the Birth
of the said Child, (so long as the said Child shall be chargable unto the said
Parish) until the said Child shall attain to the Age of twelve years, pay or
cause to be paid unto the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said
Town of G. for the time being, for and toward the keeping and education of the
said Child, the svm of sixteen pence, and shall within three months after the
said Bastard-child shall accomplish his said Age of twelve years, pay at or
within the Church Porch of G. aforesaid, unto the Churchwardens and Overseers
of the Poor of the said Town of G. for the time then being, for and toward the
putting out and binding forth of the said Child to be an Apprentice, the sum of
Three pounds of lawful English money; and that the said S. W. so long as she
shall not keep the said Child, shall likewise pay weekly and every week, during
the twelve years aforesaid, (or so long as the said Child shall be chargable to
the said Parish) unto the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the said
Town for the time being, the sum of 6 d. a week for and toward the education
and maintenance of the said Child: And we do further order, that the said S.
shall be sent to the House of Correction at W. there to be punished and set on
work, and there to remain for one whole year now next ensuing, according to the
Statute and Law in that behalf. And lastly we do order, that the said I. B.
shall become bound in a Bond of Twenty pounds unto M. B. and G. W. two of the
chief Inhabitants of the said Town of G. well and truly to perform so much of
this our Order, as does concern the said I. B. and is on his part by this our
Order to be done and performed. In witness whereof we have put to our Hands the
15. day of March 1635.

XLIV. 2 Inst. 733. on 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 2. Women.
If she will discharge the Parish of the keeping of the Bastard, she cannot be
punished by this Statute, but by 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2. infra 47. supra 20.

XLV. 2 Bulstr. 323. (341.) pl. 237. Sessions.
on a Hab. Corp. retorn from Oxon. Littleton moved for discharge of Hamond, who
for a Bastard-child gave Bond to the two next Justices till the Sessions, to
appear, etc. which he did, and the Sessions made a new Order, and for
nonperformance of this last Order committed him; which per Curiam is illegal,
and he was discharged on 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 4.

XLVI. 2 Bulstr. 324. (342.) pl. 238. in Smiths Ca. Mich. 6 Car. 1. Justices.
in B. R. per Curiam, the next Sessions on appeal must make a final Order.

2. Note, that upon reading of the Statute 18 Eliz. 3. N. and conference had
among the Judges, they all agreed in this, that after an appeal to the
Sessions, and the Justices there do repeal the first Order, the matter then is
as res integra before them, and they may then grant a Re-reference of the
matter to the two next Justices, 1 Cr. 470.

3. Note per Curiam, that upon 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 5. the Recognizance taken
ought to be in the disjunctive, viz. to perform the Order made by the two nevt
Justices, or to appear at the next Quarter Sessions, and to abide the Order
there.

4. Note also per Curiam, on 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2. that one Justice of Peace by
his Warrant may commit.

5. Note upon 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 5. It was moved, that after the two next
Justices have made an Order under their Hands, whether one of them may
afterward disavow this or not; and if he so do, what is then to be done? as
here one did, but no opinion as to this.

Women.
XLVII. 2 Bulstr. 330, 331. (348, 349.) pl. 244. by Jones Justice of Assize at
Salop 1631. March 7 Car. 1. she that has a second Bastard, shall not be
punished upon 7 Jac. 4.. 7. N. 2. as for her second offense, unless she had
been before questioned and punished for her first offense; but she might have
been punished for her first offense either by 18 Eliz. 3.. 2. N. 2. or by 7
Jac. 4.. 7. N. 2. Supra 44.

Poor.
XLVIII. 2 Bulstr. 328. (346.) pl. 242. in Gerrards Ca. it was said by Whitlock
and Crook Justices, on reference Mich. 7 Car. 1. that if the poor Child to be
relieved be a Bastard-child, this is clearly out of the Statute of 43 Eliz. 2..
N. Quaere contra 2 Bulstr. 331. pl. 345.

Indictment.
XLIX. West. Symb. 2 part 153. sect. 323, An Indictment for keeping a
Bawdy House, Pract. Preccd. 186.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod N. W. de A.
in Com' predict' Tailor, and E, uxor ejus, etc. sunt communes Lupinar', and
diversis diebus and vicibus ante diem hujus Inquisitionis in domibus suis
scituat', etc. manutenuerunt hospitium Lupinar', necnon diversas personas
suspect' ibid' ludentes ad luda illicita, viz. Tables, Cards, etc. tam in die
quam in nocte post horas debitas ei legitim' ad gravamen Inhabitantium ibidem,
ac malum exemplum omnium aliorum ligeorum Domini Regis, etc.

L. Kilb. Preced. 2 Edit. 37, An Order for relief of the Parish touching a
Bastard-child, etc. Pract. Preced. 237, on 18 Eliz. 3.

Kent ss.
THe Order of us W. B. and R. K. Esqs; two of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the said County, whereof W. B. is of the Quorum, and both residing
within the limits where the Parish Church of H. in the County aforesaid is, the
19 Apr. An. 1672. according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided, touching the Male Bastard-child late born in the Parish of H.
aforesaid, of the Body of A. G. of the same Parish single woman, the keeping of
which said Bastard-child has ever since the Birth thereof been, and still is
chargable to the Parish aforesaid, and so likely to continue chargable.

First, upon our Examination of the cause and circumstance, and due
consideration thereof by us had, we do adjudge W. S. late of H. aforesaid
Tailor, the reputed Father of the said Bastard-child.

And for punishment of the said Mother and reputed Father, and the better
relief of the said Parish, we do hereby order as follows.

We do order that the said Mother shall by the Constable, etc. of the Hundred
of Great B. in the said County, or by some or one of them, upon the 10. day of,
etc. between the hours of nine and twelve in the Forenoon, in the
Common-Highway at or near, etc. in the Parish aforesaid, be stripped naked from
the middle upwards, and then and there shall be tied to the Tail of a Cart or
Dung-Court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be there openly whipped until
her Body be bloody.

We do also order, that the said reputed Father shall by the Constable, etc. of
the Hundred aforesaid, or some or one of them, upon the 10. day, etc. between
the hours of, etc. in the Forenoon, in the Common-Highway in the Parish
aforesaid, over against the dwelling house of I. S. there be stripped naked
from the middle upwards, and shall then and there be tied to the Tail of a Cart
or Dung-Court, and being so stripped and tied, shall be from thence drawn to
the Watch-house aforesaid, and on the way well whipped in such manner as in
such cases is accustomed.

We do further order, that the said Mother shall within three days next after
notice of this our Order, render her Body to the said Constable, etc. or to
some or one of them, ready to undergo her punishment before ordered.

We do likewise further order, that the said reputed Father shall within six
days next after notice given unto him of this our Order, pay or cause to be
paid to the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, or to some or one of
them, 20 s. of lawful money of England, toward the moneys by them disbursed
(before the said notice given) for or toward the charges of the keeping of the
said Bastard-child, from the time of the Birth thereof, until the time of the
giving of the said notice.

And that upon every Friday which shall be next after the end of the said six
days, until the said Bastard-child shall attain unto his Age of ten years, the
said reputed Father shall likewise pay unto the Overseers of the Poor of the
said Parish for the time being, or unto some or one of them, 16 pence of lawful
money of England, toward the charges by them disbursed toward the keeping of
the Bastard-child aforesaid, meaning between the end of the said six days, and
the time that he shall attain unto his said Age of ten years.

We do further order, that the said Bastard-child shall be kept and nourished
by his said Mother, until he shall attain unto the Age aforesaid; and that she,
so far as she shall be able, shall during the said time so keep and nourish the
same.

We do lastly order, that both the said Mother and reputed Father, shall for
ever from and after such time as the said Bastard-child shall attain unto his
said Age of ten years, jointly and severally discharge the said Parish of and
from all charges whatsoever, for, touching or concerning the keeping or
relieving of the same.

In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Names, the day and year
first above-written.

W. B. R. K.


Bath and Buckston, see Poor. Battery, see Affray, Trespass. Battle, see
Coron, War. Beads, see Pope. Beggars, see Poor. Behavior, see Good Behavior.
Bears, see Cattle and Games. Beer, see Ale. Bigamy, see Marriage. Blockwood,
see Drapery. Bloodshed, see Homicide, Coron. Boatmenand Barges, see Sewers and
Ships. Bonds, see Recognizance and Bail. Bows and Butts, see Games. Bowls, see
Games.
Books.
Printers, Libels.
I. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 10.. 4. N. 1. As well Justices of Assize, Justices.
as Justices of Peace in the General Sessions, shall enquire of Printing all
Antiphones, Missals, Grayls, Processionals, Manuals, Legends, Pyes, Portuasses,
Primers in Latin and English, Couchers, Journals, Ordinals, or other Books
whatsoever, heretofore used for the Service of the Church, Printed without
Authority, etc.

Brass, see Mettle. Breach of the Peace, see Peace. Breaking of Prison, see
Imprisonment. Bricklayers, see Masons. Bridges, see Ways. Buckstalls, see
Forest. Buggery, see Coron. Bulls, see Pope. Burglary and breaking Houses, see
Coron. Burials, see Church. Bushels, see Measures. Butchers, see Cattle.
Butter, etc. see Victuals. Buying of Titles, see Maintenance.
Calculation, see Days.
Cattle.
Calves, Sheep, Oxen, Cows, Butchers, Badgers, Drovers, Kidders, Horses,
Replevin.
Common.
I. 32 H. 8. 13.. 8. N. 1. The Justices of Peace in every Shire, Riding, and
other place, in their Quarter Sessions to be kept and holden by virtue of the
Kings Commission of the Peace to them directed, etc. shall have authority to
enquire of, hear and determine, as well by Examination as otherwise, the
offenses of putting Horses under measure into great Commons, etc. Lamb. 600.

Common.
II. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 475; 476. Article of charge in Sessions, if any
person have put to feed in any Forest, Chase, Moor, Marsh, Heath, Common or
Waste ground within this Shire, where any Mares are used to be kept, any
Stoned-Horse being above two years old, and not being fourteen hand high, etc.
and if any such Forest or Grounds have not been yearly driven within fifteen
days after Michaelmas, by the Owners or Officers thereunto appointed, 32 H. 8.
13. except in Marshes and Seggy Fen-grounds, 8 Eliz. 8., 2. N. 1. Crompt. 95 a.
b, 124 b.

Indictment.
III. Lamb. 497. This is certain, that Justices of Peace ought to receive
Indictments found in any Leets or Law-days, upon 32 H. 8. 13.. 8. N. 2. to
which end also the Court-holders of such Leets are bound to certify the same
unto them within the space of four days.

Justices.
IV. Lamb. 4. cap. 11. page 527, 528. Now whereas also some Statutes ( viz. 32
H. 8. 13.. 8. N. 3.) do enable the Justices of Peace to hear and determine, by
the general use of the word Examination, without showing of what persons; it
seems to me that they may thereupon examine as well the parties, as other
witnesses, Crompt. 130 b.

Forfeiture.
V. Crompt. 194 b. Informer before the Justice of Peace shall have the moiety of
the forfeiture, by 32. H. 8. 13.. 8. N. 5. touching the breed of Horses, and 2
and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3.. 3. N. 2. of Milch-Kine.

VI. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.. 16. N. 1. License*
Every person known for a common Drover, being licensed in writing by three
Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, of the County where the
same Drover shall be most abiding and dwelling, (may buy Oxen, Runts, Steers,
Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, or Kids) in such Shires or Counties
where Drovers have been wont in times past accustomably to buy Cattle, at their
free liberty and pleasure, and to sell the same, etc. at reasonable prices in
common Fairs and Markets, distant from the place of buying 40 miles at the
least, so that the same Cattle be not bought by way of Forestalling.

VII. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 447. Article of charge at Sessions, Husbandry.
if any feeding above a hundred and twenty Sheer-Sheep for the most part of the
year, upon his Grounds that be meet for Milch-Kine, and wherein no person has
any Common, have not for each 60 such Sheep, reared one Calf during the time of
keeping such Sheep; or if any person feeding upon his several Pastures above
twenty Oxen, Routs, Steers, Scrubs, Heifers or Kine, have not for every ten
such Beasts kept one Milch-Cow, and for every two Kine weaned and reared up
yearly one Calf, except it chance to die; he that feeds such Sheep or Beasts
only to be spent in his House excepted, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3.

VIII. Lamb. 599. Sessions.
The Justices may in their General Sessions determine of the offenses of
killing and selling Weanlings under two years of age, 24 H. 8. 9.. N. and of
not keeping of Milch-Kine and Calves, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3.. 3. N. 2.
Crompt. 86.

IX. Crompt. 126. Information.
Justices of Peace may hear and determine by Presentment, Bill, Information or
Plaint, the offenses of such as kill Weanlings under the age of two years, to
the intent to sell, by 24 H. 8. 9.. N.

X. Crompt. 126. The Justices by 24 H. 8. 7.. N. Indictment.
may hear and determine by Bill, Information and Presentment, the offense of
such as kill sucking Calves to be sold, Calved between 1 Jan. and 1 May.

XI. Crompt. 126. The Justices may determine by Bill, Information, Information.
Present, Action of Debt or Detinue, the offenses of not keeping Milch-Kine, or
not rearing Calves, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3.. 3. N. 2.

XII. Crompt. 193. Days.
Information for the party shall be commenced before Justices of the Peace,
within the year after the offense committed against 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3..
3. N. 2. touching not keeping Milch-Kine, and not rearing Calves.

XIII. Lamb. 464. Article in charge at Sessions, Husbandry.
if any have at once kept above the number of 2000 Sheep of all sorts, against
the purport of 25 H. 8. 13.

XIV. 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 7.. 7. N. 1. Market overt.
The Justices of Peace of every place and County, as well within Liberties as
without, shall have Authority within their Sessions, etc. to enquire, hear and
determine all the offenses against this Statute, ( of not Tolling Horses,
Mares, Geldings, Colts, in Fairs, etc.) as they may do any other matter tryable
before them, Lamb. 464. so 31 Eliz. 12.. 3. N. 1.

XV. Crompt. 86. Article of charge in Sessions, if any Butcher, Sessions.
etc. kill Calves to sell, under the age of six weeks, etc. 5 Eliz. 8. 1 Jac.
22.

XVI. Crompt. 86. Article, etc. if any kill sucking Calves to be sold whole, or
by retail, that shall be Calved between 1 Jan. and 1 May, Justices.
etc. 22 H. 8. 7.

XVII. 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 7.. 7. N. 1. Market overt.
The Justices of Peace of every and County, as well within Liberties as
without, shall have Authority in their Sessions to enquire, hear and determine
all offenses of selling and buying Horses, etc. in Markets and Fairs, without
Tolling, as they may do any other matter tryable before them, Dalt. 73. cap. 27.

Captains, see War. Carnal knowledge, see Women. Castles, see War. Cause of
suspicion, see Intendment. Carriages, see Purveyance. Carmen, see Ways.
Carriers, see Ways. Causeys, see Ways.
Certiorari and Certificate.
Removing, Retorn, Records.
Indictment.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 7. page 505. It falls out not seldom that when Justices of
Peace have taken an Indictment found before them, they cannot proceed to
hearing and determining upon it, either because it is grounded upon some such
Statute as gives unto them no further power but only to enquire thereof, or
else because the Indictment is taken out of their hands by Certiorari, and
conveyed to Justices of a higher Authority, at the solicitation and by the
means of some parties grieved, to the end that they may either Traverse it
above, or there avoid it for Insufficiency of form or matter.

Courts.
II. Lamb. 506. Albeit that in the removing of Pleas between party and party,
from inferior to higher Courts, by Toll, pone, recordare, etc. there was wont
to be a probable cause alleged for which the same were removed; yet in this
case of the Certiorari, there needs no cause to be comprised in the Writ of
Certiorari, because they all be the Courts of the King, against whom the
offense is committed, and it breeds neither injury to the offender, nor loss
to any other person in what Court soever the offense be tried.

Record.
III. Lamb. 4. cap. 7. page 507. This Certiorari may command either the Record
it self, or tenorem Recordi to be sent up, and it ought to be obeyed
accordingly; for upon fail thereof, 1. an Alias, 2. a Pluries, 3. an Attachment
shall go out against them that should send it, as F. N. B. 245. But I have
heard that they use also a Subpena at this day, Dalt. 408. cap. 134. Crompt.
132 b.

Supersedeas.
IV. Lamb. 507. And albeit the Certiorari be a Supersedeas of it self, yet may
the party upon the Certiorari purchased, have a Supersedeas also directed to
the Sheriff, and commanding him that he arrest him not upon that Record before
the Justices of the Peace, F. N. B. 237. E. in which place also he doubts
whether the Justices of Peace themselves ought in duty to award their own
Supersedeas to the same effect, after that the Writ of Certiorari is brought to
their hands.

Justices.
V. Lamb. 507, 508. This Certiorari is ever directed to the Justices of Peace,
and yet, etc. the Custos Rotulorum only has the keeping of these Records; but
the ancient Commissions of the Peace had no Custos Rotulorum specially named in
them, etc. and then this certifying belonged to them, all which form the Writ
retains to this day: and if it fall into Question, whether such a Certiorari
were delivered to the Justices of Peace or not, that must be tried by the
Verdict of 12 men, says 10 H. 7. 24. and 2 H. 7. 1. pl. 2. Peace, Br. 11.

VI. Lamb. 508. Now if a Certiorari come to the Justices of Peace to remove an
Indictment, and the party sueth not to have it removed, Process.
but suffers it to lie still, then the Justices of Peace may proceed
notwithstanding the Writ, as Hobard Attorney General said, 6 H. 7. 16. for
otherwise the trial of a Felon (if the Indictment were of Felony) might be
delayed and deluded also. But yet Keble held opinion against him, and was
fearful that in such a case it might prove Felony to make Execution of the
Felon after such Writ received; and to say the truth, the Justices ought of
Office to send it away, because the Writ contains in it self a commandment to
them so to do, Dalt. 408. cap. 134. Crompt. 133.

VII. Lamb. 508. Indictment.
And if a Certiorari come to the Justices of Peace to remove an Indictment, and
in truth the Indictment was not taken till after the date of the Certiorari,
yet if the Indictment be removed thereby it is good enough, for that they both
be the Kings Courts, 1 R. 3. 4. and in such case it is now usual, F. N. B. 71.
to remove it, Crompt. 132 b. 162 b. 167 b. Certiorari, Br. 15.

VIII. Lamb. 508. In the making of a Certificate upon this Certiorari, Justices.
the Justices of the Peace ought neither to omit that which does Authorize
them, nor to exceed that Authority which belongs unto them.

IX. Lamb. 509. For on the one side, if they certify an Indictment of Felony,
or of a Riot, as taken coram Justiciariis ad pacem, Indictment.
it was not thought enough without saying further, necnon ad diversas felonias,
etc. and otherwise it was doubtful whether the Indicted shall be quite
dismissed or no, because the Justices of Peace had then no Record at all
remaining with them; for the Clerk of the Peace makes his Entry accordingly,
and that Record which they sent up is insufficient, and therefore the Clerk of
the Crown was forbidden to receive any such Certificate, 12 H. 7. 25. but
happily the new words in the reformed Commission of the Peace, will now
dissolve that Prohibition, Crompt. 132. Dalt. 410. infra. 39.

X. Lamb. 509. On the other side, Record.
if they certify an Indictment of Felony not determined in B. R. they ought
not without Warrant to certify another Record of the Acquittal of that
Indictee for the same matter; for nothing ought by them to be sent thither
without Warrant but that which is executory and needs the help of the higher
Court, 8 Ed. 4. 18.

XI. Lamb. 509, 510. Variance.
And if a Certiorari be to send up the Indictment of A. in which Indictment
some others be Indicted together with the same A. yet need not the Justices of
Peace to make Certificate concerning any but A. so 6 Ed. 4. 5. Joyntenants, Br.
33. for though they be named jointly, yet be they Indicted severally, and the
King may pardon A. without forgiving the other, per Markham Chapter J. Record, Br.
57. Crompt. 132, 167. so 34 H. 8. 14.. 3. N. 1.

XII. Lamb. 4. cap 7. page 510. Variance.
Again if the Indictment be of the stealing of two Horses, and the Certiorari
speaks but of one Horse, it seems that they need not to certify it at all,
because of the variance; for it is certain that they of the King's Bench will
not arraign the Indictee upon it, but will rather write again to know whether
there be any Indictment that agrees with the Writ, 3 Ass. 3. per Curiam.

XIII. Lamb. 510. Finally it is noted 8 H. 5. 5. Nosm.
that Hankford Chapter J. of B. R. observed this order, that he which brought
thither an Indictment taken before Justices of the Peace, should endorse his
name upon the backside of it: which I note, not to teach them of B. R. but to
let the Justices of Peace see that there is some heed to be taken of him by
whom they sent up their Indictments.

XIV. 4 Ed. 3. 2.. 1. N. 6. Justices.
The Keepers of the Peace shall send their Indictments before the Justices
Assign, etc.

Courts.
XV. 6 H. 8. 6.. 1. N. 3. And Justices of B. R. may command all Justices of
Jail-delivery, Justices of Peace, and all other Justices and Commissioners, and
every of them, to proceed and determine upon all the aforesaid Bodies and
Indictments, ( of Felony and Murder so removed in B. R.) after the course of
the Common Law, in such manner as any of them might or should have done if the
said Prisoners or Indictments had never been brought into B. R.

Utlary.
XVI. 34 and 35 H. 8. 14.. 2. N. 1. The Clerk of the Crown, Clerk of the Peace,
and Clerks of Assize, where any attainder, outlawry or conviction of Murder,
Burglary, Felony, etc. shall be so had, shall not only certify a transcript
briefly and in few words, containing the tenor and effect of every such
Indictment, Outlawry or Conviction, and Clerk attainted before them, so to be
had, etc. that is to say, the Name, Surname and addition, etc. and the
certainty of the Felony or other offense, etc. and the day and place of his
Outlawry, Conviction and Attainder, etc. and where and when the said Felony,
etc. shall be done, before the King, etc. at Westminster. etc. within 40 days next
after any such Attainder, Conviction or Outlawry, if the Term be then; and if
not then, within 20 days of the Term next following the said 40 days; but also
shall deliver a tranfcript of every such Indictment, etc. to the Ordinary, etc.
4 Inst. 182. Lamb. 580.

Nosm.
XVII. 34 and 35 H. 8. 14.. 3. N. 1. That if there be any more persons contained
and named in any such Indictment, other then such person so attainted,
convicted or outlawed, that then such Clerk of the Crown, Assize, or of the
Peace, with whom the Record, etc. shall remain, shall within the time before,
etc. certify the transcript of such Indictment, Outlawry or Conviction only
concerning such person so Indicted, Attainted, Outlawed or Convicted, into B.
R. at Westminster. etc.

Utlary.
XVIII. 34 and 35 H. 8. 14.. 4. N. 1. That the Clerk of the Crown in B. R. etc.
shall at all such times as the Justices of Jail-delivery, or Justices of the
Peace in every County within this Realm of England, do write unto him for the
names of such persons which be so attainted by Outlawry, or Clerks attainted or
convict, and certified in B. R. shall incontinently and without delay certify
the said Names and Surnames of the said persons, with the causes why and
wherefore they were convict or attainted, unto the Justices of Jail-delivery,
or Justices of Peace, etc.

Imprisonm.
XIX. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 7. N. 1. No Writs of Habeas Corpus, or
Certiorari, shall hereafter he granted to remove any Prisoner out of any Goal,
or to remove any Recognizance, except the same Writs be signed with the proper
hands of the Chief Justices, or in his absence one of the Justices of the Court
out of which the same Writs shall be awarded or made, Dalt. 410. infra. 42.

Sessions.
XX. 21 Jac. 8.. 7. N. 1. That all such Writs of Certiorari, (of Riot, Forcible
Entry, or Assault, etc.) shall, etc. be delivered at some Quarter Sessions of
the Peace in open Court.

Bail.
XXI. 21 Jac. 8.. 7. N. 2. And that the parties Indicted shall before the
allowance or such Certioraries, become bound unto such, etc. which shall
prosecute such Bills of Indictment against them, in 40 l. with such Sureties as
the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace shall think fit;
with condition to pay unto such prosecutors, etc. within a month after
conviction, etc. such reasonable Costs and Damages as the said Justices of
Peace of such Counties where such Bills of Indictment shall be found in the
said Sessions of the Peace, shall assess or allow.

Process.
XXII. 21 Jac. 8.. 7. N. 3. And that in default thereof, it shall be lawful for
the said Justices to proceed, any such Writs of Certiorari to remove the same
Indictments notwithstanding.

Ways.
XXIII. 13 and 14 Car. 2. 6.. 16. N. 1. No Certiorari shall be allowed to remove
any Information, Indictment, Presentment, Order, or other proceedings in the
Quarter Sessions, of, for or concerning any matter or thing in this Act, ( viz.
for the Tax and Amendment of Highways, etc.) unless the party, etc. against
whom any such Information, Indictment, Presentment, Order, or other proceedings
shall be had by virtue of this Act, shall before the allowance of such
Certioraries become bound to the party, etc. prosecuting, in the sum of Forty
pounds, with such sufficient Sureties as the Justices of the Peace at their
said Quarter Sessions of the Peace shall think fit; with condition to pay unto
the said prosecutors within one month after the conviction, etc. their full
Costs and Damages, to be ascertained upon their Oaths; and that in default
thereof, it shall be lawful for the said Justices to proceed to trial of such
Indictments, any such Writ of Certiorari to remove the same Indictments
notwithstanding.

XXIV. Crompt. 131 b. 132 a. Money.
One was Indict of the Counterfeiting of Money before J. B. Mayor of the Vill
of S. and his Companions Justices of the Peace there; and because there was no
special Commission to enquire of High-Treasons, as other Justices of Peace
have, by 3 H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 7. which Authority ought to appear in the Title
of the Certificate, with the Indictment the Prisoner went without day in B. R.
whereinto the said Indictment was certified in form aforesaid, 2 R. 3. 10.

XXV. Crompt. 132. A Consetvator of the Peace may certify in B. R. Peace.
that such a man has broken the Peace in his presence, and upon this
Certificate the party shall be put to a Fine, without any Traverse to it,
Marwood Lect. 3. Crompt. 65.. 56. and 167 b.

XXVI. Crompt. 132. A Justice of Peace has a Record in his hands, Records.
and is discharged of his Office, he cannot cerrifie this without a Writ of
Certiorari, though he be made a Justice again, 8 H. 4. 5. Certiorari, Br. 9.
Garrant de Attorney, Br. 9. Record, Br. 64. Dalt. 408. cap. 134.

XXVII. Crompt. 132 a. b. Nota, if a Certiorari be retorn in B. R. Retorn.
then the words are nobis mittatis; if it be to be certified into the Chancery,
then it is in Cancellaria nostra, Registr. 90. if it be in C. B. then its coram
Justiciariis nostris de Banco.

XXVIII. Crompt. 132 b. Riot.
In the Certiorari to remove an Indictment of Riot, etc. it must say, necnon ad
diversas felonias, etc. for to make mention who were Justices of Peace only, is
not sufficient, 12 H. 7. 24, and 2 R. 3. 10. 22 Ed. 4. 12. b. Riot, Br. 186.

XXIX. Crompt. 132 b. A Certiorari may be awarded to Justices of Peace,
Recognizance.
to certify a Recognizance of the Peace taken by him, 2 H. 7. 1. pl. 2. Peace,
Br. 11. See 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26. that he must certify the Recognizance to the
Sessions of the Peace, but no pain is put there if it be not so, Lamb. 108. in
tit. Recognizance 4. Infra 58.

XXX. Crompt. 132 b. Indictment.
The Justices de Banco may write to the Justices of Peace, to certify an
Indictment taken before them, for trial of a Writ of Conspiracy pending there
before them, 19 H. 6. 19. and 41 Ass. 22. Certiorari, Br. 8.

XXXI. Crompt. 132 b. A Certiorari of an Indictment came to the Justices,
Execution.
which is delivered to the Custos Rotulorum, or to the Clerk of the Peace, and
the party who sued the Writ, suffered the day of the Retorn of the Certiorari
to pass the Record not being removed, and afterward brought another
Certiorari; it seems that the Justices may proceed with Execution upon the
Record, notwithstanding the second Certiorari, etc. because otherwise the party
may be always delayed; and so its voucht to be adjudg'd 13 Ed. 4. 4. See 6 H.
7. 16. and Dyer 245. pl. accordant, Crompt. 133. 162 b. 166, 167 b. Infra 64.

XXXII. Crompt. 132 b. 133. Variance.
If there be a variance between a Certiorari and the Record that should be
remove, the Justices ought not to certify this Record, for if the Record
comes into Court, they will not proceed by reason of the variance; as in case
where a Certiorari is to remove an Indictment of the stealing two Horses, and
the Indictment that is removed is only of the stealing of one Horse, which was
sent in B. R. by Mittimus out of the Chancery; and for that variance, etc. they
would not Arraign the Indictee, but he went adieu, for there was no Warrant to
Arraign him, 3 Ass. 3. Com. 393. the like of Number.

Courts.
XXXIII. Crompt. 133. The ordinary way of removing a Record into another Court,
is first to sue a Certiorari out of the Chancery to remove the Record thither,
and thence it shall be sent in B. R. or, etc. by Mittimus, 36 H. 8. Certiorari,
Br. 20.

Records.
XXXIV. Crompt. 133. Nota, that a Record shall not be removed by a Recordare,
but by a Certiorari, or Corpus cum causa, 9 H. 6. Record, F. 3.

Justices.
XXXV. Crompt. 133 b. A Justice of Peace may deliver in B. R. an Indictment
found before him, or a Recognizance of the Peace taken before him, or of force
by him recorded, on 15 R. 2. 2.. 1. N. 3. without any Certiorari, because he is
a Judge of Record, Dalt. 408.

Record.
XXXVI. Crompt. 133 b. A Justice of the Peace cannot carry into the King's Bench
no Record but that which is executory, no acquittal of Felony that is executed,
but that must come in by Certificate thereof, 8 Ed. 4. 18. Record, Br. 59.

Rot. i
XXXVII. Crompt. 133 A Certiorari to remove into the Chancery an Indictment of a
Riot, taken before Justices of Peace in the Country, is thus:

Staff. ss.
Jacobus Dei gratia, etc. Custodibus pacis suae, ac Justiciariis suis ad diversa
felontas, transgressiones, and alia malefacta in Comitatu S. perpetrata
audiend' and terminand' assignat', ac Vicecomitibus ejusdem Comitatus, and
eorum cuilibet, salutem. Volentes certis de causis Certiorari super omnibus and
singulis Indictament' fact' and habitis coram vobis seu aliquibus vestrum de
quibusvis Riotis, trangress', seu aliis malefactis quibuscunque, (feloniam non
tangent') unde Th. Chambers and P. B. Generosi, separatim, conjunctim, seu
simul cum aliis Indict' sunt, ut dicitur, vobis mandamus quod Indictamenta
predicta cum omnibus ea tangent' quibuscunque nominibus iidem T. C. and P. B.
Indictamentis illis censeantur, nobis sub sigillis vestris vel unus vestrum
distinct and aperte mittatis and hoc Breve. Ita quod ea habeamus a die Sancti
Michaelis proximi futuri in 15. dies ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia, ut
ulterius inde fieri faciamus, quod de jure and secundum legem and consuetudinem
regni nostri Angliae fuerit faciend'. Test meipso apud Westminster. 11 die Junii,
Anno regni, etc. 11.

Retorn.
XXXVIII. Dalt. 407. cap. 134. The retorn of a Certiorari sent to remove an
Indictment, may be thus:

First, upon the backside of the Writ of Certiorari, endorse these or the like
words; Executio istius Brevis patet in quadam Schedula eidem Brevi annexa. And
that Schedule may be thus:

Ego M. D. unus Custodum pacis ac Justiciarius Domini Regis ad pacem in dict'
Comitat' S. conservand', necnon ad diversas felonias, transgressiones, and alia
malefacta in eodem Comitatu perpetrata audiend' and terminand' assignat',
virtute istius Brevis mihi deliberati Indictamentum illud (unde in dicto Brevi
fit mentio) una cum omnibus idem Indictament' tangentibus, in Cancellaria dicti
Domini Regis distinct and aperte sub sigillo meo certifico. In cujus rei
testimonium ego prefat' M. D. hiis present' sigillum meum apposui. Datum apud
W. die, etc. Anno, etc.

Then take the Record of the Indictment, and close it within the Schedule, and
seal them up both together with the Certiorari.

Riot.
XXXIX. Dalt. 410. cap. 134. Note also, that upon a Certiorari to remove an
Indictment of a Riot, or Forcible Entry, etc. the Retorn must have these words,
necnon ad diversas felonias, etc. for if the Retorn mentions only that they are
Justices of the Peace, without the former words necnon, etc. according to the
Commission, the Retorn is insufficient, 12 H. 7. 25. 2 R. 3. 9. Indictment, Br.
32. 50. and 28 H. 6. 11. Error, Br. 13. Lamb. 529. supra. 9.

XL. Crompt. 143. Recogn.
A Writ out of the Chancery to certify a Recognizance that is taken by a
Justice of the Peace in the Country, for conservation of the Peace, is in this
manner:

Jacobus, etc. Custodibus pacis nostrae in Com' S. and eorum cuilibet, salutem.
Volentes certis de causis Certiorari super tenorem cujusdem securitatis pacis
(vel boni gestus) quam A. P. Armig' nuper invenit coram vobis vel aliquo
vestrum, de eo quod ipse damnum vel malum aliquod R. S. aut alicui alii de
populo nostro de corpore suo, nec faceret nec fieri procuraret quovismodo:
Vobis mandamus quod tenorem securitatis (sive boni gestus) predict' nobis in
Cancellaria nostra in Octab' Purificat' beatae Mariae proxim' futur' ubicunque
tunc fuerit, sub sigillis vestris vel unius vestrum distinct and aperte sine
dilatione mittatis, and hoc sub pena cent' librar' nullatenus omittatis, nec
aliquis vestrum omittat. Test meipso apud Westminster. 23 Jun. Anno, etc. Dalt. 409.
cap. 134.

XLI. Crompt. 143 b. Peace.
The form of a Certificate of a Recognizance of the Peace on the said Writ of
Certiorari, is in this manner: Virtute istius Brevis ego G. S. unus Custodum
pacis in Com' S. infrascript', tenorem securitatis pacis unde infra fit mentio
Domino Regi nunc in Cancellariam suam sub sigillo meo distinct and aperte
mitto, prout patet in Schedula huic Brevi consul', etc. and then write the
Recognizance verbatim, and put your Seal to the Certificate. See Rast. Entr.
416. Dalt. 185, 186. cap. 73. Crompt. 125 b. Lamb. 108.

XLII. Dalt. 410. cap. 134. Also note, Recogn.
that no Certiorari shall be granted to remove any Recognizance, except the
same Writ be signed with the proper hand of the Chief Justice, or in his
absence of one of the Justices of that Court out of which the same Writ shall
be awarded or made, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 7. N. 1.

XLIII. Lamb. 580. The Clerk of the Peace must under the pain of 40 s. Officer.
certify in B. R. a true transcript of every Attainder, Outlawry and
Conviction, had before the Justices of the Peace in any place, except Wales,
Chester, Lancaster and Durham, within 40 days after, if it be then Term, and if
not, then within 20 days after the beginning of the next Term, that the same
may there also appear of Record, to be used upon cause as that Statute has
appointed, 34 H. 8. 14.

XLIV. Lamb. 580, 581. Accessory,
And if a Principal be attainted of Murder or Felony in one County, whereunto
another is Accessory in any other County, then upon writing from the Justices
of Jail-delivery, or of Oyer and Terminer, to the Custos Rotulorum where such
Principal is attainted, he must certify in writing under his Seal to the said
Justices, whether such Principal be attainted, or otherwise discharged or not,
that they may proceed thereupon to the trial of the Accessory, 2 and 3 Ed. 6.
24.. 4. N. 2.

XLV. Lamb. 581. Indictment.
But in cases where Justices of the Peace have power to receive Indictments,
and no power to proceed any further upon them, there they ought to send up and
certify the Indictments themselves, and that of duty, as I think, without any
Certiorari commanding the same; because having none Authority to hear and try
the offenses, the Records thereof shall be unprofitable before them, and
therefore they can have no just cause to retain them; and yet for the more
surety it is specially commanded by 5 Eliz. 1.. 3. N. 2. that they shall
certify the Presentiments of some offenses against that Statute.

XLVI. Lamb. 581, 582. And so if a man bound to keep the Peace, Recogn.
do make default of appearance at the next Quarter Sessions, the Recognizance
it self, together with the Records of that default, must be certified into the
Chancery, B. R. or Exchequer, that Execution upon the Recognizance may be had
there, 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26. and so ought it as I think to be presented, that
the party has forfeited his Recognizance by breach of the Peace; and likewise
if it be presented before them, that the Chattels of a man attainted of Felony,
be in the hands of another, for in these and such other cases where they cannot
of themselves proceed, they ought to send the Records to such as have Authority
to determine upon them, and otherwise they do not discharge that duty which the
words salvis, etc. and aliis ad nos inde spectantibus, in the Commission,. 16.
do seem to expect at their hands, Crompt. 141 b.

Pope.
XLVII. Lamb. 582. The Abjuration of a Seditious Sectary being made in the open
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, ought to be certified from thence to the
Justices of Assize at the next Assizes, 35 Eliz. 1.. 2. N. 3.

Purveyors.
XLVIII. Lamb. 582. Furthermore, the Stat. of Purveyors, 2 and 3 Phil and Mar.
6.. 6. N. 2. does appoint the Justices of the Peace to certify to the
Treasurer of the Kings Household, the Dockets of Purveyors brought to rheir
Sessions by Constables, that the serving of such Commissioners, and the true
answering of Purveyors, may be the better examined thereby.

Records.
XLIX. Lamb. 582. And although it may be doubted whether these be Records or no,
yet for that they are to be certified from the Sessions of the Peace, I stick
not to afford them this place; and if you will also repute in this number the
Licenses and such other Acts of that kind which pass at the Sessions of the
Peace, I will not be against it.

Supersedeas.
L. Lamb. 583. Touching the Certiorari it is of force, if it be made
accordingly, to remove not only Indictments or other Executory Records, wherein
the Justices of Peace can go no further; but also the Records of Causes fully
and lawfully heard and determined by them, to the end that they may be reversed
and adnulled in B. R. if good matter and cause do require it.

Courts.
LI. Lamb. 583. For that pre-eminence has the King's Bench, as you may see by
proof; yea all other the higher Courts may write to the Justices of the Peace
to certify their Records, that do make for the trial of Causes hanging in
them, as 19 H. 6. 19. Records, Br. 24. where they of C. B. did send to the
Justices of Peace for an Indictment, because in a Writ of Conspiracy brought
before them it was material to have it.

Indictment.
LII. Lamb. 583. And yet neither they of C. B. nor B. R. do use to write for
Indictments, or such other Records, unless they be thereto induced by a Cause
hanging in their own Courts before them; for otherwise the right way to remove
them, is by Certiorari out of the Chancery, from whence they may be transferred
by Mittimus to any other Court, 41 Ass. 22. by Knivet Chapter J. Certiorari, Br. 8.
howbeit a man may gather upon 1 R. 3. 4. b. Causea Remplee, Br. 31. (32.) that
if any Record be sent up without Warrant to such a higher Court, they may there
proceed upon it, because it is thereby made a Record in that Court, and that
Court is the Court of the King as well as the other.

Ale.
LIII. Lamb. 620. If the Justices of Peace having taken a Recognizance for an
Alehouse, do not certify it at the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, they
shall lose five Marks, 5 Ed. 6. 25.. N. Crompt. 167 a. b.

Ways.
LIVE. Lamb. 620. That next Justice of Peace which does not certify at the next
General Sessions of the Peace, such Presentiments as the Overseers of Highways
have before presented unto him, shall lose 5 l. for every default, 2 and 3
Phil. and Mar. 8.. N. 5 Eliz. 13.. N. Crompt. 125 b.

Pope.
LV. Lamb. 621. If the Justices of Peace before whom any Presentment shall be
made at their Quarter Sessions, against any person for the extolling the
Authority of the Sea of Rome, do not certify the same in B. R. within 40 days
after, if the Term be then open, and if not then at the first day of the next
full Term, they shall every of them lose 100 l. for every fault, 5 Eliz. 11.. N.

LVI. Lamb. 621. Sheriffs.
Those Justices of Peace which do not certify into the Exchequer their
Examinations taken concerning the entering of Plaints by the Sheriffs, shall
lose 40 s. 11 H. 7. 15.. N.

LVII. Crompt. 125 b. Ways.
A Presentment at Sessions by Justices of Peace of their own knowledge, of such
a way not repaired, is as a Presentment of 12 men, whereon the Justices may
assess a Fine, 5 Eliz. 13. N. and 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 8.. N.

LVIII. Mich. 2 H. 7. 1. pl. 2. Peace, Br. 11. Peace.
If a Recognizance of the Peace be taken by a Justice of Peace, this may be
certified by a Certiorari, though that the Justice of Peace does not bring it
to the Sessions, nor to the Custos Rotulorum, Lamb. 109. and if a Supersedeas
be returned to the Sessions, and no Recognizance, then a Certiorari may be
awarded to the same Justice to certify the Recognizance: yet see 3 H. 7. 3..
1. N. 4. that the Justice shall forfeit 10 l. if he does not certify the
Recognizance to the next Sessions.

LIX. Dalt. 173. cap. 70. Justices.
If the Justice of Peace shall not certify such Recognizance taken for the
keeping of the Peace, at the next Sessions, 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 27. limiteth no
penalty: and yet see Peace, Br. 11. that the Justice shall forfeit 10 l. if he
do not certify the Recognizance of the Peace at the next Sessions: but Mr.
Brook there mentions 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 4. which was only for Bailment of
Prisoners, and certifying the same, and so seems to mistake the Statute,
F.N.B. 251. F. Crompt. 169.

LX. F. N. B. 251. F. And two Justices of Peace, whereof one must be of the
Quorum, may let Felons suspect, or other persons that are Mainpernable, to
Mainprise until the next general Sessions or Jail-delivery; but the Justices of
Peace there are bound to certify this Recognizance at the next general
Sessions or Jail-delivery, to the Justices on pain of forfeiture of 10 l. and
this by 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 4. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.

LXI. Crompt. 167 b. The Justices of Peace shall pay such a Fine, Fines.
as the Justices of Assize shall assess upon them, who do not certify to the
Assizes the Examinations and Bails of Felons taken by them, according to 1 and
2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. N. and 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 10.

LXII. Crompt. 169. The Stat. 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26. says, Recogn.
that the Recognizance of the Peace shall be certified at the next Sessions of
the Peace, to the intent that the party shall be demanded; but the Statute does
not give any pain in this case.

2. And if he that demands the Peace, Peace.
releaseth the Peace before the Sessions, then it seems that though he do not
certify it, that the said Statute 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26. is not offended, for
he shall not be demanded in that case.

3. And see 2 H. 7. Fitzh. J. P. 2. That before the said Statute 3 H. 7. 1.
Recogn.
. 1. N. 26. none was not bound to certify the Recognizance at the next
Sessions, though it were good so to do, as appears there; because that a
Certiorari may be awarded to the Justice of Peace to certify etc. Dalt. 173.
cap. 70.

LXIII. Crompt. 167 b. The Justices who enquire of a Riot by 11 H. 4. 7. Riot.
. N. must with the Sheriff or Undersheriff certify the King and his Council
of all the Fact, and of the circumstances of the Riot where, etc. where the
truth thereof cannot be found by Enquest, on pain of 100 l. to each of them who
do not certify, etc.

2. And by 19 H. 7. 13.. N. The said Justices and the Sheriff or Undersheriff,
must certify the names of Mainteinors and Embraceors, by which means the truth
of the Riot where, etc. is not found, upon pain of 20 l. to each of them.

Variance.
LXIV. Crompt. 167 b. A Writ of Certiorari came to the Justices to certify an
Indictment, and the Indictment was taken after the Test of the Certiorari, yet
its well certified, for both are the Kings Courts, 1 R. 3. 4. see F.N.B. 71.
the like case of Records; and supra 31.

Challenge, see Enquest. Champerty, see Maintenance. Chance-meddly, see Coron.
Chandlers, see Wax and Trades. Charge, see Sessions and Justices. Chastisement,
see Apprentice. Chattels, see Forfeiture and Coron. Cheese, see Victual.
Chiding, see Affray. Children, see Infant and Poor. Chimney-money, see Taxes.
Church and Church wardens.
Religion.
Religion.
I. LAmb. 412, 413. Article in charge at Sessions, If any person being above the
Age of sixteen years, (and not having lawful and reasonable excuse to be
absent) have not repaired and resorted unto his or her Parish Church or Chapel
accustomed, or upon let thereof, to some usual place where Common Prayer is to
be used, upon every Sunday and other Holy Day, and have not there orderly and
soberly abiden during the time of such Common Prayer, Preaching, or other
Service of God, and how long such person has forborne so to repair and resort,
1 Eliz. 2.. 14. N. 1. and 23 Eliz. 1.. 5. N. 1. 3 Jac. 4.. 27. N. 1.

Affray.
II. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 414. Enquiry at Sessions, If any person have
maliciously stricken any other with any weapon in Church or Churchyard, or
drawn any weapon there to that intent, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4.. N. Crompt. 16 a. b.
tit. Religion, 14.

Market.
III. Lamb. 414, 415. Enquiry at Sessions, if any person have kept Fair or
Market in the Churchyard, 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. Winch. cap. 6.. 1. N. Crompt. 16.
in tit. Religion, 14. N. 5.

Coron.
IV. Lamb. 415. Article of charge in Sessions, if any person have feloniously
taken Goods out of any Church or Chapel, Infra 12, 13.

V. 3 Jac. 4.. 4. N. The Churchwardens and Constables to present monthly
absence.

Fish.
VI. 3 Jac. 12.. 2. N. 3. The Constables and Churchwardens, (where offense of
destroying Spawn or Fry of Fish is committed) may levy forfeiture by distress
and sale of offenders Goods, Dalt. 55. cap. 21.

Poor.
VII. Lamb. 63, 64. tit. Churchwardens, They shall have allowance upon their
account of money paid by them for relief of Prisoners, by 14 Eliz. 5.

Ways.
VIII. Lamb. 65. ibid. The Constables and Churchwardens on Tuesday and
Wednesday in Easter-week, shall choose Surveyors of Highways, etc. 2 and 3 Phil.
and Mar. 8.. N. and 5 Eliz. 13.. N.

Fish.
IX. Lamb. 66, 67. Penalty for eating Flesh, etc. to be levied by the
Churchwardens after conviction, etc. 5 Eliz. 5.. N.

X. Lamb. 67. ibid. The Churchwardens, and four, Poor.
three or two of every Parish, etc. to be Overseers of the Poor, etc.

XI. Lamb. 69, 70. ibid. Fowl.
The Churchwardens with six other Parishioners to Tax, etc. for destruction of
Crows and Vermin, 8 Eliz. 15.

XII. West. Preced. 2 part 128. sect. 196. Indictment.
An Indictment of Sacrilege or Burglary in a Church in the Nightime, and
taking a Communion-Cup, Lamb. Preced. 4. pl. 12.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domina Regina super sacrament' suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' predict' Sailer, 1 die Sept. Anno regni dictae Dominae nostrae Eliz.
Dei gratia Angl. Franc. and Hibern. Reginoe, Fidei defensor', etc. tricesimo
quarto, vi and armis Ecclesiam Parochialem de C. predict' in dict' Comitat' E.
felonice and burglariter fregit and intravit noctanter, viz. inter horas december
and undecim post meridiem ejusdem diei, ac unum Chalicem (Anglice vocat' a
Communion-Cup) ad valent' 40 s. de bonis and catallis Parochianorum de C.
predict' ad tunc existent' in eadem Ecclesia and tunc ibidem invent' felonice
cepit and asportavit, contra pacem dictoe Dominoe Reginoe nunc, coronam and
dignitatem suam.

XIII. West. Symb. 2 part 128. b. sect. 197. Coron.
A Presentment for Sacrilege or Robbery in a Church, and taking two
Communion-Cups, etc.

Midd. ss.
Inquiratur, etc. Si I. M. nuper de D. in Com' M. and R. H. nuper de eadem D.
predict' in Com' predict' Yeoman, Laici hominis, etc. 23 die, etc. vi and
armis, viz. gladiis, baculis and cultellis, Ecclesiam Parochialem Omnium
Sanctorum de E. apud E. in Com' M. predict', circa hor' 12 in nocte ejusdem
diei felonice fregerunt and intraverunt, and duos Chalices de Argento and Auro,
duo Vestimenta de nigro Velvet, vocat' Copes, tres pannos lineos, vocat', etc.
ad valentiam, etc. de bonis and ornamentis de Parochian' de E. predict' in Com'
M. predict', in custodia I. B. and I. P. Custod' and Guardian' Ecclesioe
predict' ad tunc ibidem invent' felonice furati fuerunt, ceperunt and
asportaverunt, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, ac contra formam Statuti
ejusdem Domini Regis, Anno regni sui 23 edit' and provisi, etc.

( viz. 23 H. 8. 1.. 3. N. 1.

XIV. West. Symb. 2 part 128. sect. 196. Indictment.
An Indictment of Sacrilege or Burglary, etc.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rego super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' E. predict' Sailer, primo die September. Anno regni, etc. vi and armis
Eccles. Parochial. de C. predict' in Com' E. predict' felonice and burglariter
fregit and intravit noctanter, viz. inter horas 10 and 12 post meridiem ejusdem
diei, ac unum Chalicem Argent', Anglice vocat' a Communion-Cup, ad valentiam 40
s. de bonis and catallis Parochianorum de C. predict' ad tunc existent' in
eadem Ecclesia, and tunc ibidem invent' felonice cepit and asportavit, contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem suam.

XV. West. Symb. 2 part 101. sect. 93. An Indictment for drawing a Dagger in
the Church Yard with intent to strike, Lamb. Precedents 4 b. pl. 11.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si O. F. de L. in Com' E. predict' Generosus 8 die
etc. in Coemiterio Eccles. parochialis de L. predict' in dicto Com' malitiose
extraxit Pugionem suum in quendam J. S. de L. predict' Yeoman ea Intention ad
percutiend' predict' J. S. cum dicto Pugione contra pacem dicti Domini Regis
nunc, ac contra Form' statut' in Parliam' Domini Edvardi nuper Regis Anglioe
sexti tent' apud Westm' in Com' Middlesex, Anno Regni dicti nuper Domini Regis
V. in hujusmodi Casu provisi ac Editi 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 4. 3, N. 1.

XVI. West. Symb. 2 part 101. b. sect. 94. An Indictment for Fighting in the
Churchyard with a Weapon, contra to 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 4. 3. N. 1. Crumpt.
268. pl. 108.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacrament' suum presentant quod cum in statut'
in Parliam' Domini Edw.x nuper Regis Angl' 6 apud Westm' Anno Regni sui V.
tent' Edit' inter cetera stabilit' Existit, etc. quod si aliqua persona ad
aliquod tempus post primum diem Maii tunc proxim' sequent' malitiose percuteret
aliquam personam cum aliquibus Armis in aliqua Ecclesia seu Coemiterio,
Intention ad percutiend' alium cum eisdem Armis, quod tunc quilibet persona
sic offendens and inde convict' per veredict' xii hominum vel per suam propriam
Confessionem vel per 11 legales Testes cora^ Justiciar' Assizar' Justiciar'
audiend' and terminand' sive Justiciar' Pacis in Sessionibus suis virtute
illius actus adjudicaret' per eosdem Justiciar' coram quibus talis persona sic
convinceretur ad Habend' unam Anrium suarum abscissam, and si illa persona sive
personoe sic offendent' non haberet sive non haberent aliquas Aures ita quod
illius modi Poenam subiret ut prefertur, quod tunc ipse vel ipsi signarentur in
Bucca Anglice Cheek Ferro candenti Angl' a hot Iron habent Hanc literam F. per
quam ipse vel ipsi cognosci and haberi possint pugnar' affectores and
pugnatores and ultra hoc quilibet talis persona foret, and staret ipso facto
excommunicat' prout in statut' before Continetur.

Quidam tamen G. B. nuper de S. etc. 2 Die Junii etc. vi and Armis, viz. etc.
cum quodam Pugione in quendam T.C. in pace Dei and Dict' Domini Regis existent'
apud C. in Com' E. predict' in Coemiterio Ecclesiee Parochialis de C. predict'
Insultum fecit and ipsum T. super Caput suum ad tunc and ibidem malitiose
percussit, and alia Enormia ei intulit ad grave Damnum ipsius T. and contra
Pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc etc. ac Contra form' Statut' predict' etc.

Cinque Ports.
Peace.
I. Dalt. 163. cap. 68. If a man has cause to have Surety of the Peace against
one dwelling in the Cinque Ports, he must have a Writ out of the Chancery
directed to the Constable of Dover, and to the Warden of the Cinque Ports; the
form thereof see F.N.B. 80.

Circumstances, see Proof etc Examination. Citation, see Ordinary. Claim, see
Market Overt. Clergy, see Coron. Clerk of the Market, see Market Overt. Clerk
of the Peace, see Peace. Cloth, see Draperp. Cod, see Fish. Coertion, see
Process and Duress. Coffee-houses, see Ale. Collectors, see Account and Taxes.
Collusion.
Fraud, Covin, Cheats, Cozening, Deceits, Counterfeits, Forgery.
Forgery.
I. 33 H. 8. 1.. 3. N. 1. Two Justices of Peace in every County; whereof one to
be of the Quorum, shall have power to call and convent by Process or otherwise,
to the said Assizes or general Sessions, any suspected of gaining money by
false Tokens, or counterfeit Letters, etc. and to commit him or them to ward,
or let him or them to Bail till the next Assizes or general Sessions, there to
be examined, and further to be ordered by their discretions, Dalt. 47. cap. 17.

Good behav.
II. Dalt. 47, 48. cap. 7. Also it seems, that any one Justice of Peace may
bind such offender ( as Cheaters) to their Good behavior, and so to the next
Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, or else may send such offenders (as idle and
disorderly persons) to the House of Correction, there to be continued until the
next Assizes or Sessions, and then and there to be forthcoming: yet Quoere of
sending them to the House of Correction.

Commission, see Justices. Commitment, see Imprisonment. Common Prayer, see
Religion.
Common.
I. 32 H. 8. 13.. 6. N. 1. Shall be driven at the Feast of St. Michael, Days.
or within 15 days next.

II. Lamb. 475, 476. Enquiry in Sessions, Forest.
if any have put to feed in any Forest, Chase, Moor, Marsh, Heath, Common, or
Waste ground within this Shire, where any Mares are used to be kept, any Stoned
Horse being above two years old and not being fourteen handfuls high between
the lowest part of the Hoof, and the top of the Wither; if any such Forest or
Grounds have not been yearly driven within 15 days after Michaelmas, by the
Owners or Officers thereto appointed, 32 H. 8. 13.

III. West. Symb. 2 part 112 b. sect. 132. Indictment.
An Indictment for Enclosing of a Common, etc. Crompt. 260. pl. 92.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex ss.
quod est and a tempore quo memoria hominum non existit, fuit and esse
consuevit apud Villam de A. in Com' E. predict', quaedam antiqua Communia
vocat' M. eidem Villae adjacens, ac per spacium unius milliarii ab eadem Villa
extendens, pro omnibus hominibus and tenent' infra Villam predict' moram
trahentibus cum bobus, afris, porcis, bidentibus, and aliis averiis suis per
totum annum infra Commumniam predict' depascend', quodque omnes illi infra
Villam predict' moram trahentes a tempore quo memoria hominum non existit infra
Villam predict' Communiam pro Averiis suis predict' ibidem habuere, debuerunt
and consueverunt, quousque R. C. cum aliis ignotis de Communia sua ei
associatis, vi and armis, scil gladiis, etc. 10 die, etc. Anno regni, etc. apud
A. in parochia de A. predict' de Communia predict' injuria sua propria, and
absque titulo, clameo seu possessione per ipsos habitis, mill acras ibidem cum
sepibus and fossatis sibi inclusit and obstupavit, and illas sic inclusas and
obstupat' ut separale solum suum a predicto die, etc. usque, etc. tenuit and
occupavit, in prejudicium and damnum nocument' and impediment' omnium hominum
and tenentium predictorum infra Commumniam predict' Communiam habentium, necnon
contra consuet' predict', and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, etc.

Concealment, see Omission. Condition, see Recognizance. Confession, see Proof.
Congregation, see Riot. Conies, see Forest and Cattle. Coin, see Money.
Conjuration.
Witchcraft, Prophesies, Egyptians.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 4. page 410, 411. Enquiry in Sessions, Slander.
if any person have within these six months, advisedly advanced, published and
set forth by writing, Printing, open speech or deed, to any other person, any
fantastical or false Prophecy upon Arms, Fields, Beasts or Badges, or upon any
Time, Name, Bloodshed or War, to make thereby Rebellion, dissension, loss of
life, or other disturbance within the Kings Dominions, 5 Eliz. 15.. N. Crompt.
52. a: b.

II. Lamb. 410. Enquiry in Sessions, Coron.
if any person have used Invocation or Conjuration of any evil Spirit, for any
cause, or consulted with, fed or rewarded any evil Spirit for any intent.

2. Or have taken up the dead body of any Man, Woman or Child, or any part of
any dead person, to be used in any manner of Witchcraft, Sorcery, Charm or
Enchantment.

3. Or have used Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm or Sorcery, whereby any person
has been killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined or lamed in his Body, or
part thereof.

4. If any have undertaken by Witchcraft, Enchantment, Charm or Sorcery, to
tell in what place any Treasure of Gold or Silver might be found, or where
Goods lost or stolen should be become, or to the intent to provoke any person to
unlawful Love, or to destroy or impair any persons Goods, or to hurt any person
in Body, although the same were not effected, 1 Jac. 12.. 3. N. 1. Crompt. 52
b. Hales Pleas of the Crown, tit. Witchcraft.

Clergy.
III. Lamb. 556. Conjurers or Witches, their aiders or counselors, shall
neither have Sanctuary nor Clergy, 1 Jac. 12.. 4. N. 2.

Proof.
IV. Dalt. 276. (273. bis) cap. 107. Now against these Witches being the most
cruel, revengeful, and bloody of all the rest, the Justices of Peace may not
always expect direct Evidence, seeing all their works are the works of
darkness, and no witnesses present with them to accuse them; and therefore for
their better discovery, I thought good here to insert certain observations,
partly out of the Book of discovery of the Witches that were Arraigned at
Lancaster, An. Dom. 1612. before Sir James Altham, and Sir Edward Bromley,
Judges of Assize there, and partly out of Mr. Bernards Guide to Grand-Jury-men,
Bolt. J. P. 97. cap. 23.

1. These Witches have ordinarily a Familiar or Spirit, which appears unto
them sometimes in one shape, sometimes in another, as of a Man, Woman, Boy,
Dog, Cat, Foal, Fowl, Hare, Rat, Toad, etc. and to these their Spirits they
give Names, and they meet together to Christen them, as they speak, Bern. 107,
113.

2. Their said Familiar has some big or little Teat upon their Body, where he
sucketh them; and besides their sucking, the Devil leaves other marks upon
their Body, sometimes like a blue spot, or red spot like a Flea-biting,
sometimes the flesh sunk in and hollow, all which for a time may be covered,
yea taken away, but will come again to their old form; and these the Devils
marks be insensible, and being pricked will not bleed, and be often in their
secretest parts, and therefore require diligent and careful search, Bern. 112,
219. These first two are main points to discover and convict these Witches, for
they prove fully, that those Witches have a Familiar, and made a League with
the Devil, Bern. 60. So likewise if the suspected be proved to have been heard
to call upon their Spirit, or to talk to them, or of them, or have offered them
to others; so if they have been seen with their Spirit, or seen to feed
something secretly, these are proofs they have a Familiar, etc. Bolt. 97. cap.
23.

3. They have often Pictures of Clay or Wax, like a Man, etc. made of such as
they would bewitch, found in their House, or which they roast or bury in the
Earth, that as the Picture consumes, so may the parties bewitched consume,
Bolt. 97. cap. 23.

4. Other presumptions against these Witches, as if they be given to usual
cursing and bitter Imprecations, and withal use threatenings to be revenged, and
their Imprecations or some other mischief presently follows, Bern. 61, 205.

5. Their implicit confession, as when they shall accuse them for hurting them
or their Cattle, they shall answer, You should have let me alone then, or I
have not hurt you as yet: these and the like speeches are in manner of a
confession of their power of hurting, Bern. 206.

6. Their diligent enquiry after the sick party, or coming to visit him or her
unsent for, but especially being forbidden the House.

7. Their apparition to the sick party in his Fits.

8. The sick party in his Fits naming the parties suspected, and where they be,
or have been, or what they do, if truly.

9. The common report of their Neighbors, especially if the party suspected be
of Kin, or Servant to, or familiar with a convicted Witch.

10. The testimony of other Witches, confessing their own Witchcrafts, and
witnessing against the suspected, that they have Spirits or marks, that they
have been at their meetings, that they have told them what harm they have done,
etc. Bern. 212, 223.

11. If the dead Body bleed upon the Witches touching it, Bolt. 97. cap. 23.

12. The testimony of the person hurt upon his death, Bolt. 97. cap. 23.

13. The examination and confession of the Children (able and fit to answer) or
Servants of the Witch, especially concerning the first six observations, scil.
of the party suspected her threatenings and cursings of the sick party, her
enquiry after the sick party, her boasting or rejoicing at the sick parties
trouble: also whether they have seen her call upon, speak to, or feed any
Spirit or such like, or have heard her foretell of this mishap, or speak of her
power to hurt, or of her transportation to this or that place, etc. Bolt. 97.
cap. 23.

14. Their own voluntary confession, (which exceeds all other evidence) scil.
of the hurt they have done, or of the giving of their Souls to the Devil, and
of the Spirits which they have, how many, how they call them, and how they came
by them, Bolt. 98. cap. 23.

15. Besides, upon the apprehension of any suspected, to search also their
Houses diligently for Pictures of Clay or Wax, etc. Hair cut, Bones, Powders,
Books of Witchcrafts, Charms, and for Pots or places where their Spirits may be
kept, the smell of which place will stink detestably.

V. Dalt. (274.) cap. 107. Proof.
Now to show you further some signs to know whether the sick party be
bewitched: 1. When a healthful Body shall be suddenly taken, etc. without
probable reason or natural cause appearing, etc. Bern. 169.

2. When two or more are taken in the like strange Fits in many things.

3. When the afflicted party in his Fits does tell truly many things that the
Witch, or other persons absent are doing or saying, and the like.

4. When the parties shall do many things strangely, or speak many things to
purpose, and yet out of their Fits know not any thing thereof.

5. When there is a strength supernatural, as that a strong man or two shall
not be able to keep down a Child or weak person upon a Bed.

6. When the party does vomit up crooked Pins, Needles, Nails, Coals, Lead,
Straw, Hair, or the like.

7. When the party shall see visibly some Apparition, and shortly after some
mischief shall befall him, Bern. 173.

VI. Dalt. (274, 275.) cap. 107. Indictment.
Note for the better riddance of these Witches, there must good care be had as
well in their Examinations taken by the Justices, as also in the drawing of
their Indictments, that the same be both of them set down directly in the
material points; as, 1. That the Witch or party suspected has used Invocation
of some Spirit. 2. That they have consulted or covenanted with their Spirit. 3.
That they employed their Spirit. 4. That they have fed or rewarded their
Spirit. 5. That they have killed or lamed, etc. some person, etc. 6. And not to
Indict them generally for being Witches, etc.


Indictment.
VII. Lamb. Preced. 4. pl. 9. An Indictment for killing a man by Witchcraft,
West. Preced. 2 part 134. sect. 222.

Kanc' ss.
Juratores pro Dom' Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod Sarah B. de C.
in Com' predicto vidua, 20 die Aug' Anno regni dicti Dom' nostri Jacobi Dei
gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis. Fidei defensoris, etc.
ac diversis aliis diebus post dictum 20 diem, quasdam Arts detestandas,
Anglice vocat' Witchcraft and Sorcery, nequiter and felonice practicavit and
exercuit apud C. predict' in Comitatu predicto, in super and contra quendam
Johannem N. de C. predict' in dicto Comitatu Labourer, per quas quidem Arts
dict' J. N. a predicto 20 die Augusti Anno supradict', usque 24 diem predict'
mensis Augusti Anno supradict', periculosissime ac mortaliter aegrotabat and
languebat, ac eodem 24 die Augusti Anno supradict' idem J. N. per Arts
predictas apud C. predict' in Comitatu predict' obiit, and sic Juratores
predicti presentant, quod eadem Sarah ipsum Johannem N. apud C. predict' modo
and forma supradictis, ex malitia precogitata voluntary diabolice nequiter and
felonice per Arts predictas occidit ac interfecit, contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis nostri, ac contra formam Statuti in Parliament' dicti Domini Regis nostri
tent' apud Westminster. in Com' Midd. Anno regni sui predicti primo, in hujusmodi
casu provisi ac editi.

Indictment.
VIII. Lamb. Preced. 4. pl. 10. A Presentment for bewitching a Horse, West.
Preced. 2 part 134 b. sect. 223.

Kanc' ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si Sarah B. de C. in dicto Comitatu vidua, 20 die
Augusti Anno regni dicti Domini nostri Jacobi Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei defensoris, etc. quasdam Arts nequissimas,
Anglice vocat' Enchantments and Charms, apud C. predict' in Comitatu predict'
malitiose and diabolice in super and contra quendam Equum coloris albi pretii
quatuor librarum, de bonis and catallis cujusdam I. S. de C. predicta in dicto
Comitatu Generosi existentem, exercuit and practicavit, per quod idem Equus
dicti I. S. 20 die predict' apud C. predict' omnino impejoratus est and
vastatus, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, ac contra form' Statuti in hujusmodi
casu provisi ac editi.

Indictment.
IX. West. Symb. 2 part 134 b. sect. 222. An Indictment of killing a man by
Witchcraft, on 5 Eliz. cap. 16.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si Mary L. de A. in Com' E. Spinster, 24 Junii
Anno regni, etc. ac diversis aliis diebus and vicibus tam antea quam postea,
Deum pre oculis suis non habens, sed instigatione diabolica seduct', quasdam
malas diabolicas Arts, Anglice vocat' Witchcrafts, Charms and Sorceries,
nequiter diabolice and felonice apud H. predict' in Com' E. predict', ex
malitia sua precogitata usa fuit, practicavit and exercuit, in and super
quendam W. N. pretextu cujus predict' W. a predict' 24 die Junii Anno
supradict', usque 24 diem December. Anno regni, etc. predict' languebat, quo
quidem 24 die December. supradict' predict' W. ratione practicationis and
exercitation' diabolicum Artium predict' apud H. predict' in Com' E. predict'
obiit, and sic predict' M. ipsum W. apud H. predict' in Com' E. predict' modo
and forma supradict' and ex malitia sua precogitat' interfecit, contra pacem
dicti Domini Regis, and contra form' Statuti, etc.

Conspiracy.
Confederacy.
Justices.
I. LAmb. 1. cap. 12. page 61. And if the Justices of the Peace may by virtue of
their Commission, deal with such Conspirators as do confederate together, to
cause any person unjustly to be Indicted of Felony, whereof afterward he is
acquitted, (as some do think they may) then is there a special punishment
called the Villainous Judgment, etc. in 24 Ed. 3. 74. 4 H. 5. Judgment 220. and
27 Ass. 59.

II. Lamb. 4. cap. 5. page 498, 499. Though it be said, Indictment.
35 H. 6. 14. and 12 Ed. 4. 18. if a Bill of Indictment be delivered to a
Justice of the Peace, at or before the Sessions, which he promises to read and
to deliver to the Jury, and so does accordingly, that he shall not be charged
for it in a Writ of Conspiracy; yet may it be thereupon doubted, whether he
shall be excused if upon conference had he do busy himself either to draw,
engross, or amend the Bill, before it be preferred to the Enquest that shall
have it.

III. Crompt. 50 b. 51. Enquiry in Sessions, Treason.
of Conspiracy to enlarge Prisoners commit by the Kings commandment, to take
Castles, etc. against 14 Eliz. 2.

IV. Crompt. 56 a. b. Nota, that though these be Felonies by Statute, Justices.
yet the Justices of Peace cannot enquire of them, as it seems, ( viz. 3 H.
7. 13.. 1. N. 4.) If any Servant (admitted to be the Kings Servant sworn, and
his name put into the Cheque Roll, etc. under the state of a Lord) make any
Confederacies, Compassing, Conspiracies, or Imaginations with any person to
destroy or murder the King, or any Lord of this Realm, or any other person
sworn to the Kings Council, Steward, Treasurer, Comptroller of the Kings House.

V. Lamb. 4. cap. 4. page 448. Enquiry at Sessions, if any Butchers, Market.
Bakers, Brewers, Poulterers, Cooks, Fruiterers, or any mystery of any of them,
have conspired or taken any Oath or promise not to sell but at prices certain
agreed between them, against 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15.. 1. N. 2. Crompt. 83. Infra 8.

VI. Lamb. 454. Enquiry at Sessions, if any Artificer, Trades.
Workman or Laborers have conspired or promised together, or made any Oaths
that they will not do their Works but at a certain price or rate, or but at
certain times, or but a certain work in a day, or that one of them shall not
take upon him to finish that which another has begun, against 2 and 3 Ed. 6.
15.. 1. N. 4. Crompt. 83.

VII. Crompt. 83. So much of the Statute 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15.. 1. N. 4. as
concerns Artificers, Trades.
Laborers, etc. is repeal by 5 Eliz. 4.. N. as it seems, Quaere. See 3 H. 6.
1.. N. where Congregations of Masons shall be Felony.

VIII. Crompt. 131 b. Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Poulterers, Cooks, Victual.
Artificers, Workmen, etc. who conspire, covenant, or etc. that they will not
sell their Victual but at certain prices, or will not work, etc. may be
convicted by witnesses, confession or otherwise, as appears by the said Statute
2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15.. 1. N. 5. supra 5.

IX. West. Symb. 2 part 102. sect. 97. Coron.
An Indictment for Conspiracy to Indict one for stealing a Horse, Pract.
Preced. 83.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, Essex ss.
quod I. P. nuper de I. in Com' E. predict', and R. B. nuper de C. in predicto
Com' E. Generosos, una cum aliis quamplurimis personis adhuc ignotis, contra
legem Domini Regis, ac formam Statutorum in hujusmodi casu provisorum,
conspiratione and covina apud T. predict' 8 die, etc. habit', and diversis
temporibus postea simul unit', confederat' and jurat', falso fraudulenter and
malitiose venerunt ad vindicand', destruend', perturband', placitand',
adnihiland', and finaliter adnulland' fideles and innocents ligeos dicti
Domini Regis, pro lucro ad eorum proprium usum capiendo societatem inierunt and
adinvicem juraverunt ad simul standum, contra dictum Dominum Regem, and
quoscunque ligeos suos, in omnibus and singulis materiis, placitis and querelis
per ipsos and eorum quemlibet motis seu movendis: and si eorum aliquis cum
aliquo placita, materiam seu quaerelam moveret, quod ipsi and eorum quilibet
cum eo sic materiam, quaerelam scu placitum movent stare and perseverare
deberent and deberet, and si aliquis eorum aliquam quaerelam seu placitum
nomine alterius personae cujuscunque, versus aliam personam super se
assumpserit manutenend' extunc eorum quilibet quaerelam, sectam seu placit'
predict' tanquam quaerelam, sectam seu placitum nomine eorum prosecut'
manuteneret, foveret and teneret recto, veritate justitia and jure omnino
postpositis and sublat': Virtute quorum quidem unionis, conspirationis,
juramenti, confederationis and manutentionis, predictorum I. P. R. B. and al'
sic in unum Globat' and Jurat' postea viz. etc. die etc. Anno etc.
conspiratione inde inter eos apud C. in Com' predict' prehabita quendam I. H.
de eo quod ipse 3 die, etc. Anno, etc. unum Equum pretii, etc. de bonis and
catallis predict' I. P. and R. B. apud S. invent' felonice furatus fuit, cepit
and abduxit falso and malitiose Indictari procuraverunt, and predict' I. P. and
R. B. and alii modo and forma predict' uniti and confederati, diversa falsa
placita, sectas and quaerelas innumerabiles tam nominibus eorum propriis, quam
nominibus aliarum personarum eis falso and malitiose congregat' and uniti
prosecuti fuerunt and manutenuerunt, and indies prosequuntur and manutenent,
viz. predict' I. P. ad Hundred' Domini P. Militis apud C. predict' 13 die, etc.
Anno, etc. tent' eodem I. ad tunc Ballivo ejusd' Hundredi existent, ad statum
and possessionem R. S. and A. uxoris suae adnulland', and pro eo quod ad
quamlibet Curiam Hundredi ibidem successive tenend' predict' R. uxorem suam
ibidem producere requiret, ita quod excessiva Amerciamenta in status eorum
depauperationem fuerent and evenerent consideratione Taxator' Amerciament'
Curiae predict' semper de covina predict' I. P. extiterunt 13 quaerelas de
placito transgressionis nomine W. Y. and R. B. quatuor quaerelas transgr'
nomine W. E. absque vera materia seu justa causa separat' versus predict' R. S.
and A. levavit and intravit, ac predict' querentes hujusmodi quaerelas levare
procuravit, ad grave damnum ipsorum R. and A. and contra formam ordinationis in
hujusmodi casu provisi, etc.

Indictment.
X. West. Symb. 2 part 103. sect. 98. An Indictment for a Conspiracy of diverse
Bakers, touching the making of Bread, Pract. Preced. 108. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap.
15.

Lincoln ss.
Juratores pro Domine Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. C. D.
E. F. G. H. etc. de M. in dict' Comitat' L. Pistores, 2 die October. Anno regni,
etc. apud M. predict' in Com' L. predict' insimul convenerunt, conspiraverunt,
ac mutuo inter se promiserunt, quod panes denarii de integro frumento per eos
seu eorum aliquem tum deinceps faciend' ac vendend' non amplius quam 2 libr.
and 6 uncias Troici ponderis habebit and ponderabit, quodcunque in posterum
foret unius quarterii frumenti pretium, in dicti Domini Regis contempt', ac in
extrem' pauperum dicti Domini Regis subditorum gravamen, necnon contra form'
Statut' in hujusmodi casu provisorum ac editorum.

Constable.
Officer, Headborough, Thirdborough, Tythingman, Pety-Constable, Borsholder.
Officer.
I. LAmb. 1. cap. 3. page 14. These Constables were ordained (as it appears by
3 H. 4. 9. and 10 H. 4. and Fitzh. 172.) to keep the Peace, and to repress
Felons, and might take Surety of the Peace by Obligation, if they found any man
making an Affray, or otherwise commit him to Prison until he should find such
Surety, Br. 23. Dalt. 4. cap. 1.

Peace.
II. Crompt. 6 b.. 5. Item the Constables of Hundreds, Vills, Wapentakes, Laths
and Tythings, were and are Conservators of the Peace by the Common Law, within
the Hundreds and their Limits, as appears tit. Constables 222 b. and 12 H. 7.
17. and 5 H. 7. 6. 20 Ed. 4. 27. and 13 H. 7. 10.

Commission.
III. Crompt. 222 b. And before the Statutes that made Justices of the Peace,
the King by his Commission made Conservators of his Peace in the Counties and
places where it seemed good to him so to do, and the Authority that was in the
Conservators of the Peace by the Common Law, is the same Authority that the
Constable of a Vill or Wapentake has at this day by the Common Law, Dalt. 47.
cap. 16. Infra. 54, 56.

IV. Dalt. 3. cap. 1. Pety-Sessions.
The High-Constables of Hundreds are Conservators of the Peace within their
several Hundreds and Limits, by the Common Law, 12 H. 7. 18. Crompt. 6 b. 222
b. and therefore these High-Constables at their Pety-Sessions for any Affray
made in disturbance of their Court, may imprison the offenders, 11 Co. 43, 44.
Dalt. 46. cap. 16.

V. Dalt. 3. cap. 1. Peace.
Every Pety-Constable within the limits of their several Towns, be Conservators
of the Peace at the Common Law, by virtue of their Office; see tit. Affray, and
Forcible Entry, Dalt. 204. cap. 78. and these Pety-Constables may do what they
can to keep the Peace, but they cannot take Surety of the Peace at the request
of any man, Crompt. 6 b. 222 b. 12 H. 7. 18. Infra 17. Kitch. 47 b. Infra. 65.

VI. Lamb. 1. cap. 3. page 15. Bail.
I have read also that a Constable might at the Common Law, have Bailed a
suspect of Felony by Obligat', because he was a Conservator of the peace, and
that both he and the Sheriff lost this Authority by the Statutes 3 H. 7. 3.. 1.
N. 2. and 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13. the which Statutes in giving that power to
Justices of the Peace, do in the opinion of some men take it from the Sheriff
and Constable; reported by Justice Dalison.

VII. Lamb. 1. cap. 13. page 65. Process.
And if a Justice of Peace make any Warrant, although it be beyond his
Authority, yet is it not disputable by a Constable or other Ministers, but must
be obeyed, Lamb. Duty of Constable, 19, 20.

VIII. Lamb. 2. cap. 2. page 118, 119. Imprisonm.
Besides this, you may see admitted 13 H. 7. 10. Recogn. Br. 14. by the opinion
of the Court, that if a man in the Night-season haunt a House that is suspected
for Bawdry, or use suspicious Company, then may the Constable Arrest him to
find Sureties of his Good abearing, Lamb. Duty of Constable, 12, 13. Kitch. 48
b.

IX. Lamb. 2. cap. 3. page 134. Affray
If one do make an Affray upon a Justice of the Peace, Constable, or such other
Officer, he may not only defend himself, but may also apprehend the offender,
and send him to the Goal till he will find Sureties of the Peace, 5 H. 7. 6.
Crompt. 223. Kitch. 48 a. b.

X. Lamb. 134. ibid. And the Justice or Constable may, if need be, Process.
command assistance of the Kings people for the pacifying of an Affray, Dalt.
33. cap. 8. Kitch. 48 a. b.

XI. Lamb. 134. ibid. Fresh Suit.
If he that makes an Affray do flee into a House when the Justice of Peace or
Constable comes to Arrest him, they may also in Fresh Suit break open the
doors and take him, by Marwood; or if he flee thence, they may make Fresh Suit
and Arrest him though in another County, by the opinion of some men, 13 Ed. 4.
9. and it should seem by the reason of that Book, that in this case also they
may break open the doors to apprehend him, Lamb. Duty of Constable, 15.

XII. Lamb. 134, 135. Escape.
Now if the Constable do Arrest one that has hurt another, and do wilfully
suffer him to escape, and then he that was hurt dies thereof within the year
and day, the Constable shall make a great Fine, and that to the value of his
Goods, in the opinion of some, 11 H. 4. 12. and Stamf. 35. Lamb. Duty of
Constable, 16, 22, 23.

XIII. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 5. Out of which Office ( viz. Officer.
of Constable of England) this lower Constableship was at the first drawn and
fetched, and is as it were a very Finger of that hand, 13 Rich. 2. 2. for the
Statute of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. cap. 6.. 1. N. 11. by which these lower
Constables of Hundreds and Franchises were first ordained, does amongst other
things appoint, that for the better keeping of the Peace, two Constables in
every Hundred and Franchise should make the view of Armor, and 13 Ed. 1. St.
2. cap. 6.. 1. N. 12. shall present before Justices assigned such defaults as
they do see in the Country about Armor, and of the Suits of Towns, and of
Highways: and also shall present all such as do lodge Strangers in uplandish
Towns, for whom they will not answer, Dalt. 46. cap. 16. infra 54. supra 3.

Officer.
XIV. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 9. For as about the beginning of the Reign of Ed.
3. Pety-Constables were devised in Towns and Parishes for the aid of the
Constables of the Hundred, (or High-Constables) so of later times also
Borsholders, Tythingmen, Headboroughs, and such like have been used as
Pety-Constables within their own Boroughs and Tythings, Dalt. 46. cap. 16.
infra. 54. 4 Ed. 3. 3. 10.

Arrest.
XV. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 12.. 13. Any of these Officers may also Arrest
such strange persons as do walk abroad in the Night-season, and for that cause
13 Ed. 1. cap. 4. of Winchester, did ordain, that Night-watches should be kept
yearly, etc. and of these Watches the Officers, etc. have the charge within the
limits or places of their Authorities; as the Constable in his Town, the
Borsholder in his Borough, and the High-Constable within all his Hundred: and
these Officers ought to see these Watches duly set and kept, and ought also to
cause Hue-and-cry to be raised after such as will not obey the Arrest of such
Watchmen.

Force.
XVI. Lamb. ibid. 13, 14. Again, if any person whatsoever (except the Kings
Servants and Ministers in his presence, or in executing his Precepts, or other
Officers, or such as shall assist them, and except it be upon Hue-and-cry made
to keep the Peace, etc.) shall be so bold as to go or ride Armed, by night or
by day, in Fairs, Markets, or any other places, against 2 Ed. 3. 3.. 1. N. 4.
then any Constable, or any of the said Officers may take such Armor from him
for the Kings use, and may also commit him to the Goal; and therefore it shall
be good in this behalf for these Officers to stay and Arrest all such persons
as they shall find to carry Dags or Pistols, or to be apparelled with
Privy-Coats or Doublets, as by the Proclamation made 21 Eliz. they are
specially commanded, 12 Rich. 2. 6. Crompt. 223 b.

Arrest.
XVII. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 14. If any man do threaten to kill another, and
he which is so threatened do pray any of these Officers to Arrest the other to
find Sureties of the Peace, then may such an Officer Arrest him to find such
Surety before a Justice of the Peace, and may also carry him to Prison if he
refuse to find it; but if he yield to go, it shall be good to take the party
threatened to the Justice with him, supra 5. Crompt. 223. Kitch. 47 b. and 4 Ed.
3. Bar 102.

Peace.
XVIII. Lamb. ibid. 15. If a Constable or any other of the said Officers, shall
see any men going about to break the Peace, as by using hot words, by which an
Affray is like to grow, then ought such Officers to command those persons to
avoid upon pain of Imprisonment: and if they will not depart, but shall draw
weapon or give any blow, then ought he to do his best to depart them and to
keep them asunder, and he may for that purpose both use his own weapon, and may
also call others to assist him, 3 H. 7. 10. and 21 H. 7. 21.

Process.
XIX. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 17. Any of these Officers may of his own
Authority, Arrest one that is Indicted of Felony; so if the common voice and
fame be, that A. B. has done a Felony, that is sufficient cause for any of
these Officers that shall therefore suspect him, to Arrest him for it, Dalt.
303, 352, 353.

Seizure.
XX. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 17, 18. And if any man shall flee upon Felony, it
is the Office of the Constable of the Town, or of any of those other Officers
there, to seize his Goods, and to keep them safely, for he is to answer for the
loss or impairing of them, and therefore it is meet that he do it by Inventory
taken in the presence, and by the testimony of the honest Neighbors, 3 Ed. 3.
iter Northumb. 1 R. 3. 3.. 1. N. 4. Dalt. 293. cap. 110. Poult. de Pace 235.
Forfeiture, 44. 33. 70. Stamf. 192.

XXI. Lamb. ibid. 18. I like well of their opinion which do hold 1 H. 7.
Imprisonment
7. that if Information be given to any such Officer, that a man and a woman be
in Adultry or Fornication together, then the Officer may take company with him;
and that if he find them so, he may carry them to Prison.

XXII. Lamb. ibid. 18. But this is to be marked, Imprisonment
that in the cases before, and suchlike, where such an Officer has arrested,
or has in his ward any Offender that ought to be carried to the Goal, there
such an Officer is not bound forthwith to carry him, but may well for a
reasonable time keep him in the Stocks, until that convenient provision of
strength may be made to convey him safely thither, 22 Ed. 3. 35. and 3 H. 4. 9.
Crompt. 224.

XXIII. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 20, 21, 22. Process.
If a Warrant for the peace or good abearing happen to be directed to any of
these said Officers, then ought he with all speed and secrecy to find out the
party; and then also may he lay his hands upon him, and show him the matter,
and require him in the King's Name to go with him, to put in Surety according
to the Warrant, 21 H. 7. 39.

And this if the party shall refuse to do, then ought such Officer forthwith to
arrest him, and to convey him to Prison, without carrying him to any Justice;
in which doing, if the party shall offer any resistance, or seek to escape,
then also may such Officer justify the beating or hurting of him; but if the
party shall yield to go, and give Surety, and yet will not go to such Justice
as made out the Warrant, but to some other Justice, then ought such Officer to
give him that liberty, so that it be not far out of the limit; for else so
great travel might follow upon the Officer, as rather he than the Offender
might seem to be punished by it, 21 H. 7. 20.

And here the Officer must take regard, and consider whether the Warrant do
come directly from the mere authority of the Justices of Peace, or else be
grounded upon a Writ of Supplicavit sent down from higher authority; which
difference ought to appear plainly in all Warrants that be well and orderly
made; And if the Warrant be grounded upon such a Writ, then may such Officer
compel the party to go to the very same Justice or Justices of Peace that made
out the Warrant, and otherwise he may convey him to Prison, etc.

Neither is it requisite that such an Officer should dance after the party, as
many use to do, till he can find out Sureties; but he may lawfully keep him
until that he can get Sureties to come unto him; the ignorance of which point
is the cause both that many an evil man escapes, and many an honest Officer is
punished for it.

But here it happens many times, that the party hearing that such a Warrant
is granted against him, offers himself with Sureties for that cause unto some
other Justice of the Peace, or finds such Surety in some of the Courts at
Westminster, 21 Jac. 8.. 3. and so has a Supersedeas ready to show such
Officer as comes to him with a Warrant, etc. then is the Officer discharged
thereby, and ought not any longer to molest the party; But yet it shall be good
that such Officer do keep the Supersedeas for his better discharge, and show it
to the Justice from whom he received the Commandment of service, lest otherwise
he be called to account for not serving the Warrant that was sent unto him.

XXIV. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 22. Process.
If a Warrant be directed to a Constable, or such other Officer, to arrest one
that is Indicted of Felony, then may such Officer justify the killing of such
a party, if it be so that he cannot otherwise take him, or if so be that he
resist, or fly when he is taken, 22 Ass. 59. Coron 261, 288, 328.

Justices.
XXV. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 23, 24.. 17. All Constables and other Officers
ought to be attendant, aiding and assisting to the Justices of Peace for the
execution of all Acts made in or before 33 H. 8. 10.. N. concerning Reteiners,
Liveries, Maintenance, Imbracery, Bow-staves, Archery, unlawful Games,
Forestallers, Regrators, Victuallers, Inn-holders, or any of them, on pain to
make such Fine as by two of the said Justices shall be assessed.

Physicians.
XXVI. Lamb. ibid. 24. All Constables, etc. within London, or 7 miles, ought,
upon request made, to aid and assist the President of the College of
Physicians, etc. for the due execution of the Statutes 14 and 15 H. 8. 5.. N.
and 32 H. 8. 40.. 1. N. 3.

Purveyance.
XXVII. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 25.. 19. No Purveyor of the King ought to take
any Horse or Cart, etc. but by delivery of the Mayor, Bailiff, Constable, or
such other Officer of the place whence that taking shall be, 28 H. 6. 2. Cromp.
223 b. 224 b.

War.
XXVIII. Lamb. ibid. 27.. 22. All Constables, etc. of the Parish or place where
any of the King's Soldiers beyond the Seas, being mustered of Record, shall
happen to arrive, may arrest and stay such Soldiers, till it be enquired
whether they be lawfully departed from their Captains, or no, 18 H. 6. 19.. N.
Crompt. 224 a. b.

Petty-sessions.
XXIX. Lamb. 29.. 24. It seems to me that the words High-Constable,
High-Tythingman, and head Officers, (in 14 Eliz. 5.. 37. (2.) N. 2. for levying
relief for Goal, etc.) do exclude Petty-Constables, Borsholders, and suchlike,
to meddle therein; because none are called High, or Head, but in comparison of
Low and Base, Lamb. 51.. 46. ibid.

Officer.
XXX. Lamb. 29, 30. ibid. High-Constables of Hundreds in all such Shires where
Petty-Sessions for Servants and Laborers (otherwise called Statute-Sessions)
were used to be kept, before the first day of the Parliament 5 Eliz. 4.. 48. N.
1. may yet still hold their said Sessions, so that nothing be done in them
repugnant to the Statute, etc.

Indictment.
XXXI. Lamb. ibid. 30. The Constables of Hundreds and of Franchises ought to
make presentment to the Justices of Peace, and to all other Justices thereto
assigned, of the defaults of Watches, and of the defaults of the King's
Highways not enlarged, fenced, etc. and of lodging strangers, 13 Ed. 1. cap. 4,
and 5. of Winchester.

Petty-sessions.
XXXII. Lamb. Duty of Constable, 30.. 27. And every Constable of Hundred, etc. 4
Ed. 4. 1.. 6. N. 3. may hear and determine Complaints of Cloth-workers, etc. by
examination of parties, and may commit to Goal such as refuse to pay their
work-folks, Crompt. 224 b.

Forfeitures.
XXXIII. Lamb. 30, 31. ibid. Estreats indented ought to be made by the Clarks of
the Peace and Stewards of Leets, of all Forfeitures arising in the Sessions of
the Peace, or in Leets, upon the Statutes of Highways, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar.
8.. 2. N. 11. and 5 Eliz. 13.. 10. N. 1. of which Estreats one part ought to be
delivered yearly within six weeks after Michaelmas to the Constable and
Churchwardens of the Parish in which that default was made; to the intent that
such Bailiff and High-Constable may levy, etc. And the Constables and
Churchwardens may call the said Bailiff and High-Constable to account before
two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, etc. Lamb. ibid. 35 a. b.

Poor.
XXXIV. Lamb. Duty of Constables, 32.. 29. The High-Constable in whose limit the
Parish is situate, must pay at every Quarter Sessions to one of the Treasurers
of the Shire such moneys as the Churchwardens there have paid to him for the
Prisoners in the Marshalsea and Kings Bench, upon pain of 20 s. to be lost for
every default, 43 Eliz. 2.. 14. N. 3. And the like shall be done (by 43 Eliz.
3.. 5. N. 2.) for disabled Soldiers and Mariners, etc. Lamb. 37. ibid.. 38.

XXXV. Lamb. ibid. 32.. 31. The Minister or Curate of the Parish, Pope.
and the Constable, Headborough, or Tythingman of the Town to which any Popish
Recusant shall be sent by order of this Statute, shall take notice thereof, and
shall enter the same into a Book to be kept in every Parish for that purpose,
and shall certify the same to the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace in that
County, 35 Eliz. 2.. 7. N. 1.

XXXVI. Lamb. 33. If any common Inn-holder or Alehouse-keeper will not lodge
such as travel, the Ruler, Constable, Hostler.
or other Officer of the Town, may compel him thereto, 5 Ed. 4. 3. Action super
Casum. Br. 76. Crompt. 223.

XXXVII. Lamb. 33. ibid.. 33. No person retained in Husbandry, Husbandry.
etc. may not depart (after the time of such reteinure expired) out of the Town
or Parish, etc. unless he have a Testimonial under the Seal of the Constable,
or other head Officer, and of two other honest Householders, etc. 15 Eliz. 4..
10. N. 4.

XXXVIII. Lamb. ibid. 36, 37. Tax.
After the two Justices of Peace have ratably assessed every Town and Parish
for damages on default of Hue and Cry, then may the Constable or Headborough
ratably tax every Dweller and Inhabitant, etc. 27 Eliz. 13.. 5. N. 2.

XXXIX. 2. and 3 Ed. 6. 10.. 4. N. 2. That the Bailiffs and Constables of every
Borough, or Market Town, Coron.
or other Town where any Malt shall be made, shall view, search and survey all
such Malt as shall be made or put to sale within the said Towns, Lamb. Duty of
Constable 37.. 39.

XL. Lamb. 40, 41. After whipping, Poor.
the same sturdy Rogue shall have a Testimonial, subscribed with the Hand and
Seal of the same Justice, Constable, Headborough or Tythingman, and of the
Minister of the same Parish, or of any two of them, testifying the same
according to the Act, etc. 39 Eliz. 4.. 3. N. 3.

XLI. 1 Jac. 7.. 6. N. 1. and 7. N. 1. Every person shall apprehend, Poor.
or cause to be apprehended, Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars as they shall
see or know to resort to their Houses to beg, and shall cause them to be
carried to the next Constable or Tythingman; and that if such Constable or
Tythingman do not cause them to be punished according to 39 Eliz. 4.. 3. N. 2.
they shall forfeit 20 s. for every default, Lamb. Duty of Constable, 43.

XLII. Lamb. Duty of Constable 50, 51. Ways.
Those four Justices of Peace that tax for amendment of Highways, by 22 H. 8.
5.. 4. N. 2. ought to make that Taxation by the assent of the Constables, or
two of the most honest Inhabitants of every Town or Parish.

XLIII. Lamb. ibid. 51.. 47. The Constable, or other inferior Officer,
Trespass.
must whip Hedge-breakers, Robbers of Orchards and Gardens, Cutters of Corn and
Wood, as be for that purpose committed to them, etc. 43 Eliz. 7.. 2. N. 1.

XLIV. Lamb. ibid. 53. By 1 Jac. 31.. 7. N. 1. every Constable, Poor.
Headborough, or other chief Officer of the County, of or in any Town, Village
or Hamlet, out of any City, Borough, Town-corporate, priviledg'd place or
Market Town, may command or appoint any person infected, or being or dwelling
in any house infected, etc. to keep his house, for avoiding infection; and may
appoint Searchers, Watch, etc.

XLV. Crompt. 222, 223. Deputy.
A Constable may make a Deputy to execute his Office in his absence; for he may
be sick, when, etc.

XLVI. Crompt. 223 b. Hertion.
There be 10 houses that should find a Constable by the house annnually in a
Vill, and one man purchases 2 of them, he shall find a Constable 2 years, etc.
21 Ed. 4. 54.

XLVII. Crompt. 223 b. It was said, 7 Ed. 4. Peace.
That Guardians of the Peace at the Common Law may enquire of Congregations and
unlawful Assemblies, and also of Disseisin with Force, but not of Entry with
Force.

Fowl.
XLVIII. 24 H. 8. 10.. 7. N. 2. If any Owner or Farmer refuse to pay money
assessed for destroying Crows and Vermin, etc. then upon complaint and proof
thereof made to any of the Justices of Peace or High-constable, they shall
cause the said Tax to be levied by distress, etc. of every such Farmer or
Occupier, Crompt. 225 a. b.

Sessions.
XLIX. Lamb. 390, 391. The Bailiffs of Franchises and the Constables of Hundreds
are to serve at the Sessions, the one as Ministers, and the other as Jurors,
and therefore ought to give their attendance; and every of those (except the
Custus Rotulorum, for thereof I doubt) may without controversy be amerced, if
they make default.

Election.
L. Dalt. 46. cap. 16. Every Justice of Peace may cause two Constables to be
chosen in each Hundred, Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 185, 186. And this seems to be
meant of the High-constables of Hundreds, and to include and imply of
congruence the swearing of them; and seems to be by virtue and force of the
Statute of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. cap. 6.. 1. N. 11. and of the first
Assignavimus of the Commissioner,. Lamb. Constables 5. supra. 13.

Wales.
LI. Dalt. 46. cap. 16. And by the Statute of 34 H. 8. 26.. N. two Justices of
the Peace (the one being of the Quorum) may appoint the High-Constables in
Wales, 4 H. 4. 29. Crompt. 224.

Election.
LII. Dalt. 46. ibid. And yet the usual manner is, that these High-Constables of
Hundreds be chosen either at the Quarter Sessions of the Peace, or if out of
the Sessions, then by the greater number of the Justices of the Peace of that
Division where they dwell; and likewise that they be sworn either at the
Sessions, or by Warrant from the Sessions, which courses has also been often
allowed and commended unto us by the Judges of Assize.

Justices.
LIII. Dalt. 46. ibid. Also in such manner as they are to be chosen, in the same
manner and by the like Authority are they to be removed, etc. so as if there
shall be cause to remove and put an High-Constable from his place, it has not
been thought fit that any one or two Justices of Peace should do it upon their
discretion, but that it should be done by the greater part of the Justices of
that Division, and that for some just cause, or else that it be done at and in
the General Sessions of the Peace: and so was the direction of Sir John
Dodridge at Summer-Assizes at Cambridge, Anno 1620.

Sheriffs.
LIVE. Dalt. 46, 47. cap. 16. It appears 12 H. 7. 18. pl. that whereas the
Sheriffs of the Counties at the first had the Government of their Counties
committed to them, that afterward by reason of the multitude of people, and
for that it was too great a thing for one person ( viz. the Sheriff) to
undertake, therefore Hundreds were divided and derived out of the Counties, and
in every Hundred there was ordained a Conservator of the Peace, who was called
the High-Constable; and after Boroughs or Towns were made, and within every of
them also was ordained a Conservator of the Peace, who is called the
Pety-Constable, and in some places the Borough-head; and this was long before
the times that Mr. Lambert (Constables, 9. supra. 14.) speaks of: So that it
may seem, that as well the High-Constables as the Pety-Constables, and their
Authorities were by the Common Law, and that the old Statutes concerning them,
are but a recital of the ancient Common-Laws, Kitch. 47 b. infra. 65. Dalt. 3.
supra. 5.

LV. Dalt. 47. ibid. The choosing and swearing of these Pety-Constables is
reputed properly to belong to the Court Leet, yet we find it usual and
warranted by common experience, that every Justice of Peace does also swear
them, and upon just cause does and may also remove them, Dalt. 363. infra. 62.

LVI. Dalt. 47. ibid. Sheriff.
But in ancient time both the High-Constables of Hundreds, as also the
Pety-Constables of every Town, were yearly appointed by the Sheriff in the
Tourn, and were there sworn or received their Oath; and it seems that they
may still be chosen, or appointed and sworn in the Sheriffs Tourn, as well as
in the Leet, Crompt. 222 b. supra. 3. and 13.

LVII. Dalt. 31. cap. 7. Constable, Ale.
etc. is not fit to be allowed to be an Alehouse-keeper, 12 Ed. 2. 6. York, F.
N. B. 172.

LVIII. 4 Jac. 5.. 7. N. 1. All Constables, Churchwardens, Ale.
Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Alecunners and Sidesmen, shall in their Oaths be
charged to present Tiplers, etc.

LIX. Crompt. 147. dicitur, 38 H. 8. Faux Imprisonment, Br. 6. 41. Affray.
That a man cannot Arrest him that made an Affray, after the Affray is passed,
without a Warrant; contrary before the Affray, and in time of the Affray, Lamb.
131. Dalt. 33. cap. 8.

LX. Lamb. Preced. 24 b. pl. 69. A Warrant or Supersedeas for the removing of a
Pety-Constable, and for the swearing of another. Supersedeas.


Carolus Secund' Dei gratia, etc. Vicecom' Midd. necnon Capitali Constabulario
Villae Hundredi de W. and eorum cuilibet, salutem. Quia W. P. and R. S.
Sub-constabularii Villae de C. and K. certis de causis nos moventibus ab
Officio suo amoveri and exonerari fecimus; Ideo vobis and cuilibet vestrum
conjunctim and divisim precipimus and mandamus, quod I. F. and R. M. ad omnia
and singula eidem Officio incumbentia been and fideliter exercenda and
exequenda, prout ipsi nobis inde respondere voluerint jurare faciatis;
dictisque W. P. and R. S. similiter injungentes, quod ipsi de dicto Officio
ulterius exercendo and exequendo nullatenus se intromittant, quousque aliud de
nobis habuerint mandatum, and quicquid inde feceritis Justiciariis nostris ad
pacem nostram in dicto Comitatu conservand' assignat' ad proximam Generalem
Sessionem pacis apud C. in dicto Comitatu tenendam certificetis, hoc preceptum
nostrum tunc and ibidem remittentes. Test T. M. uno Justiciar' nostrorum
predictorum tali die, etc. Dalt. 362. cap. 121. Boult. 1. cap. 72. page 319,
320. lib. 3. page 175.

LXI. Dalt. 363. ibid. Upon such Warrant, Oath.
Quaere who shall give the Oath to the new Constables, whether the
High Sheriff, or High-Constable that shall execute such Warrant, or the Justice
of Peace that granted out such Warrant.

LXII. Dalt. 363. cap. 121. Leet.
This Authority of removing Pety-Constables, and of choosing and swearing new,
is reputed properly to belong to the Leet, Br. 14. that being one of the
ancientest Courts of the Realm; and if the new Elect be not present at the Leet
to take his Oath accordingly, then upon Certificate or notice thereof to any
Justice of Peace of that County, the Justice does use to send his Warrant for
the party so chosen, and to give them their Oath: and I have seen some
Precedents to such purpose as follows.

To our Loving Friend A. B. of W. Yeoman.
THese are in his Majesty's Name to charge and command you, to make your repair
unto us, or to some other Justice of the Peace of this County, to take the Oath
of a Constable, to serve his Majesty within the Town of W. (if they were not
chosen at the Leet, but if they were, its said further, According to the choice
made of you by the Jury at the last Leet holden in your Town) and hereof fail
you not.

Dated, etc.
Boult. 1. cap. 72. page 329.

Justices.
LXIII. Dalt. 363. cap. 121. Also in default of the Leet, or otherwise where
there shall be just cause to remove a Pety-Constable for his insufficiency, or
any misdemeanour or other cause, every Justice of Peace ex officio, as it
seems, may remove the old Constables, and may choose and swear new: which also
we see to be warranted by common experience.

Oath.
LXIV. Dalt. 363, 364. ibid. The form of the Oath concerning the Office of a
Constable, Kilb. Preced. 233.

YOu shall swear that you will well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the King
in the Office of a Constable. 2. You shall see and cause His Majesty's Peace to
be well and duly kept and preserved, according to your power. 3. You shall
arrest all such persons as in your sight and presence shall ride or go Armed,
offensively; or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or other breach of His
Majesty's Peace. 4. You shall do your best endeavor, upon complaint to you
made, to apprehend all Felons, Barretors and Rioters, or persons riotously
assembled. 5. And if any such Offender shall make resistance with force, you
shall levy Hue-and-cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken. 6. You shall
do your best endeavor that the Watch in and about your Town be duly kept, for
the apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Night-walkers, Eves-droppers, Scouts,
such as go armed, and the like. 7. And that Hue-and-cries be duly raised and
pursued, according to the Statute of Winchester, against Murderers, Thieves and
other Felons. 8. And that the Statutes made for the punishment of Rogues, and
Vagabonds, and other idle persons coming within your Bounds and Limits be duly
put in execution. 9. You shall have a watchful eye to such persons as shall
maintain or keep any common house or place where any unlawful Game is or shall
be used; as also to such as shall frequent or use such places, or shall use or
exercise any unlawful Games, there or elsewhere, contrary to the Statutes. 10.
At your Assizes, Sessions of the Peace, or Leet, you shall present all and
every the Offenses done contrary to the Statutes made (1 Jac. 9. and 4 Jac. 5.
and 21 Jac. 7.) to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in Inns,
Alehouses and other Victualling-houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness. 11.
You shall there likewise true presentment make of all Bloudsheddings, Affrays,
Outcries, Rescous, and other Offenses committed or done against the Kings
Majesty's Peace within your limits. 12. And you shall have a care for the
maintenance of Archery, according to the Statute. 13. You shall well and duly
execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from the Justices of Peace of
this County. 14. And you shall well and duly, according to your knowledge,
power and ability, do and execute all other things belonging to the Office of a
Constable, so long as you shall continue in this Office. So help you God.
Kitch. 47, Boult. 1. cap. 72. page 320.

Peace.
LXV. Kitch. 47 b. By the Common Law, before there was any Justices of Peace,
Constables of every Vill were Conservators of the Peace, Br. 2. within their
Vills, Dalt. 3. cap. 1. supra. 5. and 46. supra. 54. Lamb. Constables, 9.
supra. 14.

Officer.
LXVI. Kitch. 47 b. Constables were ordained for the intents to keep the Peace,
and also to pursue Felons, and to take Surety by Obligation of such persons as
they found making Affrays.

Poor.
LXVII. Kitch. 47 b. Constables have power to examine Vagabonds, and compel them
to find Surety of their Good behavior; and if they cannot, to commit them to
the next Goal, 1 R. 2. 5. Vagabonds, Rast. 5.

Apprentice.
LXVIII. Kitch. 48. Constable may arrest Servant, Labourer, Vagrant, unless he
has Letters containing the cause of his Journey, and the time of his return,
under the Kings Seal, and may put him in the Stocks until he has found
Sureties to serve, 12 R. 2. 3. Vagabonds, Rast. 7.

LXIX. Kitch. 48. Games.
Constables have power to commit every one using unlawful Games, until the
Offender be bound in an Obligation to the King's use, that he will not use any
unlawful Games, 6 H. 8. 2. Archery, Rast. 2. Crompt. 79.

LXX. Kitch. 48. Constables, on complaint, Sewers.
may arrest Boatmen and Watermen that take more then is limited for them to
take, and commit them to ward for their misdemeanors, and to make a fine for
the same, 6 H. 8. 7. Passage, Rast. 8.

LXXI. Kitch. 48. Poor.
Constables have power to committ Beggars to the Stocks who offend, 22 H. 8.
12. 14 Eliz. 5. Vagabonds, Rast. 29.

LXXII. Kitch. 48. A Constable was ordained to keep the Peace, Bail.
and may take a Surety of the Peace, by Obligation, of one, if he find him
making Affray, 10 Ed. 4. 18. Surety, Br. 26.

LXXIII. Kitch. 48 b. A Constable cannot take a Recognizance ( Br. 14. Recogniz.
) to keep the Peace, but an Obligation, Surety, Br. 26.

LXXIV. Kitch. 48 b. Stocks are ordained properly to punish Vagrants, and
Servants for Wages, 10 Ed. 4. 18. Surety, Br. 26. see 7 H. 4: 17.. N.

LXXV. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10.. 4. N. 2. Imprisonm.
Bailiffs and Constables of Town where any ill Malt shall be made or put to
sale, shall search and survey all such Malt made within the said Town, etc.

LXXVI. Crompt. 6 b.. 5. Item, The Constables of Hundreds, Vills, Coron.
Wapentakes, Laths and Tythings, were and are Conservators of the Peace by the
Common Law within the Hundreds and their Limits, as appears Crompt. 222 b. tit.
Constables, 12 H. 7. 17, 18. 5 H. 7. 6. 20 Ed. 4. 7. 13 H. 7. 10. Finch. Nomot.
127. (136.) cap. 22.

LXXVII. Dalt. 3, and 4. cap. 1. Peace.
The High-Constables of Hundreds are Conservators of the Peace within their
several Hundreds and Limits by the Common Law, Crompt. 6.. 5.

2. And therefore these High-Constables at their Pety-Sessions, Pety-Sessions.
for any Affray made in disturbance of their Court, may imprison the Offenders,
11 Co. 43, 44.

3. Every Pety-Constable within the limits of their several Towns, Peace.
be Conservators of the Peace at the Common Law, by virtue of their Office,
Peace, Br. 13.

4. There be other Officers of much like Authority to our Constables, Officer.
as the Borsholders in Kent, the Third-borough in Warwickshire, and the
Tythingman and Borough-head, or Headborough, or chief Pledge in other places.

5. But yet the Office of a Constable is distinct, and as it seems of more
and greater authority and respect than these; as in 39 Eliz. 4.. 3. N. 3. where
the Tythingman or Headborough is to be assisted in the punishment of Rogues
with the advice of the Minister, and one other of the Parish; whereas the
Constable alone of himself, as well as the Justice of Peace, may appoint or
cause Rogues to be punished.

6. And Mr. Lambert seems to hold, that these Borsholders, Officer.
Third-boroughs, Tythingmen, Headboroughs, and such other, being in a Town or
Parish wherein a Constable is, those other cannot meddle, because Constables be
in comparison of them head Officers; and that the Tythingmen, etc. are but as
assistants to the Constable in all services of his Office when the Constable is
present; and in his absence, then these other to attend the Service. And that
there are many other things which the Constables may do, and wherewith the
Borsholders and the rest cannot meddle at all.

7. And yet in Towns where there be no Constables, and that the Borsholders,
Third-boroughs, Tythingmen, Headborouhhs, and such other, be there the only
Officers for the Peace; as also in such cases where the Power or Authority of
the Borsholder, etc. is declared to be equal with the Power of the Constable:
In all such cases and things their Office and Authority be in a manner all one,
1 Jac. 7.

8. And now, for that these Pety-Constables be much absent from their houses
and homes, partly by reason of their Employments in their Office, and partly by
reason of their own private occasions; especially in our and other like parts
of the Land, where these Officers are for the most part Husbandmen, and so most
part of the day in the Fields; it would prove very serviceable, if (by a Law to
be made in Parliament) every Town and Village were to have a Tythingman, or
such other Officer, or the like, to attend this service of the Constable, in
his absence at the least; for that for want of such assistance, Rogues,
Vagabonds and the like, knowing their times, now travel up and down far more
boldly.

Peace.
9. If any man shall make an Affray or Assault upon another in the presence of
the Constable or Borsholder; or if any man in the presence of the Constable
shall threaten to kill, beat or hurt another, or shall be in a fury, ready to
break the Peace; In every of these cases the Constable or Borsholder may commit
the Offender to the Stocks, or to some other safe custody, for the present, as
his or their Quality requires.

10. And after may carry them before some Justice of the Peace, or to the Goal,
until they shall find Surety for the Peace; which Surety the Constable himself
may also take by Obligation to be sealed and delivered to the King's use; And
if the party will not find such Surety to the Constable, he may Imprison the
party until he shall do it.

Imprisonm.
LXXVIII. Dalt. 4, 5. cap. 1. I have seen the Report of Trin. 35 Eliz. Rot.
1458. C. B. Skarret against Hanmer.

In Faux Imprisonment for arresting the Plaintiff, and Imprisoning him, etc.
The Defendant to the Imprisonment pleaded that he was High-Constable of the
Hundred of E. in the County of S. and that the Plaintiff made an Affray within
the said Hundred upon one H. W. who presently came to him, and told him
thereof, and swore upon a Book, that he was in fear of his life by the other,
whereupon the Defendant came to the Plaintiff, and arrested and imprisoned him
until he had found sufficient Sureties for the Peace; upon which the Plaintiff
demurred.

2. And it was adjudged that the Plea of the Defendant was insufficient; 1st.
For that he was not present at the Assault and Affray; and 2d. For that he was
the High-Constable of the Hundred, and not Constable of the Town. Peace.


3. In the argument of this Case, Anderson held Constables to be Conservators
of the Peace at the Common Law, and still so to be; and that they ought to
preserve the Peace as much as in them lies. But that (said he) was by parting
of men which he should see breaking of the Peace, and to carry them before a
Justice of Peace, to find Sureties for keeping thereof; but to take Sureties
himself the Constable cannot. Bail.


4. And those which hold that he may take Surety, cannot tell what Surety that
should be; for he cannot take a Recognizance, nor Bail; for he is no Officer of
Record.

Certificate.
5. And if he should take an Obligation; how the same shall be certified, and
into what Cour^ Anderson said he knew not; and that it should be very
inconvenient to give such Authority to every Constable. But by Walmesly, Owen
and Beaumont, although a Constable cannot take Surety of the Peace by
Recognizance nor Bail, yet he may take an Obligation, according to 10 Ed. 4.
18. Surety, Br. 26. And if the Affray be in their presence, they are
Conservators of the Peace, and therefore may use such means for the keeping of
the Peace, by taking Surety by Obligation.

6. And that before Justices of Peace were, the Peace was preserved, and that
by Constables; and that Statute (1 Ed. 3. St. 2. cap. 16.) which ordained
Justices of Peace, did not take away the authority of the Constable.

7. But the Constable has no authority to take an Oath of the party, Oath.
that he is in fear, etc.

8. Whereunto Anderson Chief Justice replied, I doubt not but that at the
Common Law the Peace was kept, but that was to be done in such manner as the
Law appointed, and that is by Writ out of the Chancery, or B. R.

9. Arrest.
And yet I have seen another Author (supposed to be Sir Thomas Egerton, after
Lord Chancellor) who writes in these words: By the Common Law the Constables
Office was to Arrest the parties that had broken the Peace, or were ready to
break the Peace, scil. if either he had seen it himself, or were truly informed
thereof by others, or upon the confession of the party who had freshly broken
the Peace.

10. Imprisonment
And that all such offenders the Constable might imprison in the Stocks, or in
his own House, as the quality required, until they had been bound by Obligation
with Sureties to the King, to keep the Peace from henceforth.

Which Obligation was to be sealed and delivered to the Constable, Obligation.
to the use of the King.

And the Constable was to send it into the Exchequer or Chancery, from whence
Process should be awarded to levy the debt, if the Peace be broken; quod Nota.
See also Finch Nommot. 127. (136.) cap. 22.

LXXIX. Pract. Preced. 133. Process.
An Indictment against a Constable for neglecting to execute a Justices Warrant.

Midd' ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum S. P.
Armiger unus Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' M. predict'
conservand' assignat', 12 die Januarii Anno regni, etc. per Warrantum suum in
scriptis debito modo confect' mandasset omnibus Constabular' and Decennar' and
aliis dicti Domini Regis Officiar' infra Com' Midd. predict', ad quos Warrant'
predict' deveniret, quod immediate post receptionem istius Warrant' caperent
corpora A. I. and E. I. uxorem ejus, and quod dictos A. I. and E. uxorem ejus
ducerent coram prefat' S. P. ad respondend' eis omnibus and singulis quae
versus eos ex part dicti Domini Regis objicerentur; Quod quidem Warrantum
postea scil. dicto 12 die Januarii Anno supradict', cuidem W. R. ad tunc and
adhuc existent' unum Decennar' (Anglice Headborough) parochiae Sancti Egidii
extra Cripplegate in Com' Midd. predict', apud paroch' predict' in Com'
predict' deliberat' fuit in forma juris exequend', predictus tamen W. R. de
parochia Sancti Egidii predict' in Com' predict' Victualler, debitum suum in
hac part parvi pendens a predicto 12 die Januarii Anno supradict', usque diem
capt' hujus Inquisition' apud paroch' predict' in Com' predict' in executione
Officii sui circa premissa tepide, remiss and negligenter se habuit, and
execution' Warranti predict' per tempus supradict' totaliter neglexit and
contemptuose recusavit, contra Officii sui debitum in hac part, in manifestum
contempt' dicti Domini Regis nunc Legumque suarum, ad magnam justitiae
retardationem, in malum and perniciosum exemplum omnium aliorum in hujusmodi
casu delinquent', and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and
dignitatem suas.

LXXX. Shepherds Clerks Cabinet, 81. cap. 16. A Warrant for the making of a new
Constable.

To our Loving Friend A. B. of D. Yeoman.
These are to require you to make your repair to us, or to some other Justice
of the Peace of this County, to take the Oath of a Constable to serve within
your Town of D. you being chosen and ordered by the Leet of your Town to
undertake the same Office.

2. Or this: Whereas A. B. of your Town, the now Constable thereof, is by
reason of his Age and Impotence very unable and insufficient to execute the
said Place; These are to require you whose Names are underwritten, to be
before me at my House at W. in the same County, to morrow by eight of the clock
in the morning, that I may make choice of one of you to be sworn to undertake
the same Office.

3. It is not approvable to make Constables by one Justice of Peace, but in
case of necessity only, when a Constable dies, and it is long to the
Quarter Sessions or Leet, or the Courts where these Officers are usually made.

Indictment.
LXXXI. Pract. Preced. 108. An Indictment for not watching with a Constable.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod B. M. nuper
de parochia Sancti Andr. Holborn in Com' Midd. Gen', quarto die Febr. Anno
regni, etc. and diu antea fuit Inhabitan' paroch' predict' in Com' predict',
quodque idem B. M. ad tunc scil. dicto quarto die Febr. debito modo summonit'
and requisit' fuit ad vigiland' cum Constabular' in paroch' predict' in Com'
predict' in nocte ejusd' diei, predict' tamen B. M debitum suum in hac part
negligens, ad tunc scil. predict' nocte predict' diei Anno supradict', vel in
aliqua part ejusd' noctis non vigilavit cum predict' Constabular' apud paroch'
predict' in Com' predict', sed debitum suum in hac part facere ad tunc and
ibidem totaliter neglexit, and voluntary, obstinate and contemptuose ad tunc
and ibidem defalt' fecit, in contempt' dicti Domini Regis nunc, Legumque
suarum, and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, coron' and dignitat' suas, etc.

Conventicles, see Riot and Religion. Conviction, see Proof. Cordwainer, see
Leather.
Corn.
Badgers, Malt, Hay, Oats.
Ouster Ie mer.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 4. page 449. If any have against Proclamation transported or
carried out of this Realm any Corn, Grain or Malt, growing or made here, or any
Beer, Butter, Cheese or Wood in any Vessel, except to Berwick or the Marches
thereof, without sufficient Authority, etc. or have by any means connived or
willingly consented thereto, etc. or if any having License, have fraught or
laden his Vessel, etc. at any more places then only one, to be enquired of at
Sessions, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 5.

License.
II. Lamb. 4. cap. 19. page 601. Sessions may enquire of, and determine the
Licenses for Badgers, etc. and they are to be granted in open Sessions, 5 Eliz.
12.. 7.

Market.
III. Crompt. 79 b. Enquiry in Sessions of engrossing and forestalling Corn,
etc. Barley big, or Oats, against 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.. 1, 2, 3.

Merchants.
IV. Dalt. 45. cap. 15. The Certificate of one Justice of Peace, joined with the
Customer of the place of the unlading and selling of Corn, etc. carried by
water from one place to another within this Realm, is sufficient, on 5 and 6
Ed. 6. 14.. 12. N. 1. of Forestalling.

Al^.
V. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10.. 4. N. 1. Justices of Peace and Leet to determine
Presentiments of ill making of Malt, and to set prices, and Constables to
present, etc. Dalt. 85. cap. 23. Lamb. 445.

VI. 13 Eliz. 13.. 1. N. Justices at Assize or Sessions, unless controlled by
the Queen, to determine when its fit to transport Corn, or to prohibit it.

VII. 21 Jac. 21.. 2. N. 2. Hostlers or Inholders shall sell Horse-Bread,
Hostler.
Hay, Oats, Beans, Pease, etc. for reasonable prices, Lamb. 465.

VIII. Dalt. 147. cap. 65. Amerciament
For the punishment of the Baker for their unlawful Breads, Quaere whether they
shall only be Amerced, etc. after Indictment and conviction of their said
offense, or that the Justices of Peace (or sworn Officers in Leets) may take
away their unlawful Bread, and give it among the poor, as Officers in Corporate
Towns are enabled or appointed to do, in the end of the Book of the Assize,
Printed 1597. See 51 H. 3. page 10. and Incert temp page 85. cap. 2.

IX. Lamb. 465. Enquiry in Sessions, Corporation.
if any Inholder dwelling in any City, Town Corporate, or Market Town, wherein
is any common Baker that has been Apprentice there seven years, have within
his own House made any Horse-Bread, or dwelling in any other thorough-fair have
made it insufficiently, and not of due Assize, 13 R. 2. 8.. 1. N. 6. 32 H. 8.
41.. N. Dalt. 146, 147. cap. 65.

X. Lamb. 465. If any Inholder have taken any thing for Litter, Hostler.
or have taken excessively for Hay, or have taken above one halfpenny in a
Bushel of Oats over the common price in the Market, 13 R. 2. 8.. 1. N. 8. 4 H.
4. 25.. N.

XI. Lamb. 200. If any Bailiff or Constable of any Borough, Seizure.
or other Town, shall find any Malt made contrary to the Statutes 2 and 3 Ed.
6. 10.. 4. N. 3. and 27 Eliz. 14. then with the advice of any Justice of the
Peace within that Shire, he shall cause the same to be sold to such persons,
and at such reasonable prices under the common price of the Market, as to his
discretion shall seem convenient.

XII. Lamb. 201. Imprisonment
The party convicted and committed to Prison by the Justices of Peace, for not
obeying this restraint of converting Barley into Malt, must there remain three
days, and after that until he shall become bound in Recognizance of forty
pounds to the Kings use, before any Justice of the Peace, to obey such his
restraint, 39 Eliz. 16.. 1. N. 3.

XIII. Lamb. 331. Justices.
Any two Justices of the Peace may duly convict by two witnesses, or by the
parties confession, any person that shall disobey the restraint of Maulting
made in the open Quarter Sessions, and shall commit him to Prison without Bail
or Mainprise for three days, and until that he shall become bounden in 40 l. to
some one Justice, to perform such restraint, 39 Eliz. 16.. 1. N. 1.

XIV. Lamb. 444, 445. Enquiry in Sessions, Husbandry.
if any person have within these two years bought Corn in any Fair or Market,
for change of his Seed, having then sufficient for his House, and for sowing
his Ground for a year, and did not bring thither if he might so much as he did
so buy, and did not the same day sell it after the price then going, 5 and 6
Ed. 6. 14.. 8. N. 1. Crompt. 80.

XV. Lamb. 445. Enquiry at Sessions, Ale.
if any person have at any time within this year, the months of June, July and
August only excepted, made any Barley-Mault that was not the time of three
weeks at the least in the Fat floor steeping, and sufficient drying; and if in
any of the said three months, and was not seventeen days at the least in the
Fat floor steeping, and sufficient drying, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10.. 2. N. 1.

XVI. Lamb. 445. Collusion.
If any person have within this year mingled any Malt not sufficiently made,
or made of Mow-burnt or spired Barley, with other good Malt, and after put the
same to sale, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10.. 2. N. 4.

XVII. Lamb. 445. If any person have within this year, Market overt.
put to sale any Malt not sufficiently well trodden, rubbed and fanned,
whereby half a Peck of dust or more may be fanned out of one Quarter thereof;
but this Act extends not to Malt made for the provision of a man's own House
or Family, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 10.. 3. N. 1.

Justices.
XVIII. Lamb. 602. The Justices of the Peace, or the more part of them, may by
their discretions in their open Quarter Sessions restrain the converting of
Barley into Malt, 39 Eliz. 16.. N. Crompt. 79 b. 80 a.

XIX. West. Symb. 2 part 100. sect. 88. A Presentment for breaking and burning
a Barn with Corn, 22 and 23 Car. 2. cap. 7.. 2.

Midd' ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si I. N. de D. in Com' M. predict' Yeoman, 3 die,
etc. Anno regni, etc. apud I. in Com' M. predict', vi and armis quoddam Horreum
cujusd' I. S. apud I. predict' in Com' M. predict' scituat' and existent'
felonice fregit and intravit, and quibusd' candelis tunc igne accensis quas
predict' I. N. tunc and ibidem in manibus suis tenuit, ad tunc and ibidem ex
malitia sua precogitat', and ex instigatione Diabolica in Horreum predict' cum
diversis Granis and Garbis, viz. tribus quarteriis ordeii, and quatuor
quarteriis frumenti, and duobus modiis Avenarum, and quatuor Chareetat' hordei
in Garbis in eodem Horreo ad tunc existent', ignem accensum ad tunc and ibidem
voluntary and felonice imposuit, and cum eodem igne ad tunc and ibidem Horreum
predict' cum omnibus Granis and Garbis supradict' in eodem Horreo ad tunc and
ibidem existent', voluntary and felonice combussit, and totaliter cum igne
illo felonice and voluntary consumpsit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc,
etc.

XX. West. Symb. 2 part 103. sect. 98. An Indictment for a Conspiracy of
Bakers, etc. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15.. 1. N. 5.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. C. D.
E. F. and G. H. de M. in Com' E. predict' communes Pistores, 2 die October. Anno
regni, etc. apud M. predict' in Com' E. predict' insimul convenerunt,
conspiraverunt, ac mutuo inter se promiserunt, quod panem denarii de integro
frumento (per eos seu eorum aliquem tunc deinceps faciend' ac vendend') non
amplius quam 2 libr. and 6 uncias Troici ponderis habebit and ponderabit,
quodcunque imposterum foret unius quarterii frumenti pretium, in dicti Domini
Regis contempt', ac in extrem' pauperum dicti Domini Regis subditorum gravamen,
necnon contra form' Statut' in hujusmodi casu provisi and edit.

XXI. West. Symb. 2 part 145 b. sect. 281. An Indictment of breaking a Barn,
and taking Corn, Pract. Preced. 64.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod I. S. etc.
Horreum ejusd' I. C. de S. magna in Com' E. predict' ad tunc and ibidem
burglariter fregit and intravit, and quatuor modios hordei, Anglice vocat' a
Quarter of Barley, ad valent' 6 s. 4 d. de bonis and catallis predict' I. C. ad
tunc and ibidem invent' burglariter and felonice cepit, abduxit and asportavit,
contra pacem, etc.

XXII. West. Symb. 2 part 145 b. sect. 282. An Indictment of breaking a Mill,
etc. Pract. Preced. 64, 65.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod I. S. etc.
vi and armis domum Molendinum W. H. apud C. in paroch' de D. in Com' E.
predict', vocat' Clerk-Mill, Burglariter fregit and intravit and unum saccam
pretii, etc. and sex modios tritici, vocat' Six Bushels of Wheat in saccis
ibidem existent pretii 10 s. de bonis and catallis predict' W. H. ad tunc and
ibidem invent' die and anno supradict' Felonice cepit and asportavit, contra
pacem, etc.

XXIII. Justice restored, etc. 103. A Warrant for the bringing forth of Corn in
the time of Dearth.

Essex ss. To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of C. and to every
of them.
WHereas A. B. C. D. etc. have lately received Letters from the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, commanding us thereby in His Majesty's
Name to cause a diligent and exact survey to be taken of all the Corn and Grain
within this Hundred of C. Now forasmuch as they whose Names are
hereunder-written are presented to us by such as have inquired thereof to have
Corn to spare more than is needful for the maintenance of their Families: These
are therefore to command you to summon and warn all the said parties to be and
appear before us at G. the 20th. day of this instant May, by 1 of the clock in
the afternoon of the same day, there to receive such further directions as then
and there shall be given them in charge, according to such Orders as are
appointed by His Majesty to be straightly observed in that behalf. Hereof fail
you not at your peril.

Dated at W. this 10th. day of etc. Anno etc.
Coron.
Homicide, Murder, Robbery, Felony, Agait, Theft, Larceny, Pety-Larceny,
Misprision, Burglary, Burning Houses, Poisoning, Clergy, Arraignment, Annum and
Diem, Buggery, Rape, Bloodshed, Chance-medley, se Defendendo, Cutpurses,
Corruption of Blood, Attainder.
I. LAmb. 2. cap. 7. page 210. Process.
Every Justice of Peace before whom any person arrested for Manslaughter, or
Felony, or suspicion thereof, shall be brought, ought before he commit him to
Prison to take the Examination of such Prisoner, and the Information of those
that bring him; and to put the same, or so much thereof as shall be material to
prove the Felony, in writing within two days after; and to take Bond of all
such as do declare any thing material to prove the Offense, to appear at the
next General Jail-deliver, and to give Evidence there against the Offender, 2
and 3 Phil. and Mar. 10. Dalt. 52. Infra 36. Dalt. 295. cap. 111. Crompt. 193 b.

II. Lamb. 220. ibid. Proof.
Neither do I doubt but that this present Statute 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 10.
when it says Manslaughter and other Felony, does thereby make Manslaughter a
sort of Felony, (for so the word other does imply;) and does also therewithal
comprehend Murder underneath it, seeing it cannot be thought but that this
Statute requires Examinat' as well, if not more, in the case of Murder, as it
does in the other less hateful Homicides.

III. Lamb. 230. ibid. In all these sorts of voluntary Manslaughter, Ability.
being exempted from the fault of Felony, (as that is which we say to be done
se defendendo.) There is no person to be punished to whom the Law has denied a
will or a mind to do harm; as a Madman, he that is born both Deaf and Dumb,
nor an Infant under the age of 12 years, unless it may by some evident token
appear that he had understanding of Good and Evil; Lunaticks, etc. 3 H. 7. 1.
and 21 H. 7. 31. Coron 193. and 26 Ass. 27. Crompt. 29 a. b. 30. a. b. 31 a.
Dalt. 223. cap. 89. and 236. cap. 92. and 244. cap. 95.

IV. Lamb. 231. Moreover, to hurt a Woman great with-child, Women.
whereby the Child either dies within her Body, or shortly after that she is
delivered of it: Or to strike any person so as he dies not thereof till the
year and day be fully past, will not wrap a man within the danger of these
felonious Man-slaughters, 3 Ass. 2. 1 Ed. 3. 24. Coron 303. and 3 H. 7. 1.. 1.
N. 14. Bract. 121. Dalt. 242. cap. 93. 17.

V. Lamb. 231. ibid. Lastly, if any person shall be brought before a Justice of
Peace, and charged with any of these Homicides, ( viz. Murder, Imprisonm.
Manslaughter, Chance-medley, Misadventure, per Infortunium, or se Defendendo,
etc.) except that which is done in the orderly execution of a Judgment, it
shall be his part (as I think) to commit him to Prison; or at least, if the
cause will so suffer, to join with him some other Justice to the bailment of
him, to the end that the party may be discharged by Arraignment and Trial;
wirhout which, or other finding of the truth, before the Coroners, or
otherwise, I see not how the Justice may safely dismiss him; And for this
purpose I refer you to 6 Ed. 1. 9. of Gloucester, and to Coron 288. Infra. 23.

Offieer.
VI. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 232. Next unto the Justices that condemn, is the case
of those whom Law allows to slay a man, and holds them unpunishable for it;
whether it be upon a certain necessity for the advancement of Justice, or for
the defense of his House or Goods, or for the more terror against Offenders;
and therefore the Sheriff, Bailiff, or any other that has a Warrant to Arrest
a man Indicted of Felony, may justify the killing of him, if otherwise they
cannot take him, 22. Ass. 55. Crompt. 30.

And so may any other man that follows Felons upon the Hue-and-cry raised, if
they will not yield themselves, but stand at defense, or fly away, by the
opinion of Thorp, Coron 261, 288.

And so it is also if a man that is arrested for Felony do, as he is in
carrying to the Goal, make resistance, and fly; for then those that have the
conduction of him may without blame kill, if they cannot otherwise recover him,
Coron 288, 328.

Peace.
VII. Lamb. 233. ibid. And if a Justice of Peace come to arrest Rioters, and
they resist, whereby one of the Rioters is slain by any of the Justices or
their Servants, or by any other coming in their aid, that is justifiable and
allowed by Law, because in this and the former cases the killing proceeded upon
a necessity, for the execution of Justice, which otherwise should be left
undone, Crompt. 23 b.. 29. Crompt. 30 b. Dalt. 238. cap 93. and 249. cap. 98.

Imprisonm.
VIII. Lamb. 233. ibid. Of like account is it when a Jailer does slay any of his
unruly Prisoners that shall assault him, 22 Ass. 55.

But whether this rule will hold when the Arrest is only for Debt, or
suchlike, it is good to be advised, Britton 28. Infra. 16. Crompt. 26.. 6.

Riot.
IX. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 233. If the Justice of Peace, or any other lawfully
authorized, do assemble any number of men for the suppressing of any persons
unlawfully assembled, contrary to 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12.. N. and be driven
to set upon them, and thereby any of the Offenders be slain, this slaughter is
warranted both in the Justices themselves, and for every other of their
Company, by the same Stat. Crompt. 23 b.. 28, 29.

Fresh Suit.
X. Lamb. 233. If any Forester, Parker or Warrener, or such as be in their
company for their aid, after Hue-and-cry made upon Offenders within their
charge to yield themselves, which nevertheless make resistance, or fly; do
(without former malice) kill any of them, they are neither to be Imprisoned,
nor to forfeit any thing for it, 21 Ed. 1 St. 2. page 59. de malefact' in
Parcis, Crompt. 30 b. and 68 b.. 4.

Justification.
XI. Lamb. 233, 234. So if any do attempt to Rob or Murder any person in his
Dwelling House, or in or nigh any common Highway, Cart-way, Horse-way or
Foot-way; or feloniously to break into his Dwelling House in the nightime;
and in this attempt the party, or his Servants then with him, do kill any of
the mis-doers, he or they shall forfeit nothing thereby, 24 H. 8. 5.. N. And so
in effect was the Common Law before that Statute, as may appear, 26 Ass. 32.
Coron 261, 305, 330. And so also was the Roman Law of the twelve Tables:
Nocturnus fur quoquo modo; Diurnus si se telo defenderit; Impuna occiditur,
etc. Infra. 23. Crompt. 27 b.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Dalt. 250, 251. cap. 98.

Murder.
XII. Lamb. 2. cap. 7. page 235. In the old time every killing of one man by
another was (of the effect) called Murder, because death ensues of it. For, as
Postellus notes, of the Hebrew word Moth, came the Latin word Mors, and
thereof the Saxons called it Mord, and Morder, as we now sound it, Crompt. 21..
1. Dalt. 237. cap. 93.

Afterward, about the time of Mr. Bract. Murder was restrained to a secret
killing only, etc. with whom also agrees Britton. But since 14 Ed. 3. 4.. 1.
N. 1. by which the Presentment of Englishire was taken away, Murder is taken in
a middle degree, etc. wherein it is carefully to be observed, that the words of
Malice prepensed do make the true difference between this and the other
voluntary Man-slaughters; so that to make the offense Murder, it is of
necessity that there be a precedent malice, either apparent and bewrayed by the
party himself, or else employed and supplied by the understanding of the Law.

XIII. Lamb. 237. Intendment.
Many times the Law does by sequel judge of that malice which lurked before
within the party, and does accordingly make imputation of it; and therefore if
one do suddenly, and without any outward show of any present quarrel or
offense, draw his Weapon, and therewithal kill another that stands by him,
the Law judges it to have proceeded of former malice meditated within his own
mind, howsoever it be kept secret from the sight of other men, per Dalyson.

And for the due restraint of such Inhumane Slaughters, well has the Statute 1
Jac. 8.. 2. N. 1. provided that the person that stabbeth or thrusts any one
not having a Weapon drawn, or that has not first stricken him, so he die
within 6 months after, shall suffer death as a wilful Murderer, Dalt. 237. cap.
93.

XIV. Lamb. 237. The Ancient Law, Cattle.
that measured the fault not by the event, but by the intent, will, and
purpose, of the offender; took it for Felony (says Mr. Stamf. 16. out of 3 Ed.
3. Coron 111.) in the Owner of a Beast that killed a man, if so be that the
Owner did know it to be accustomed to do harm, and did not tie it up, or
otherwise restrain it. But the case goes not so far, (as I think) but only
says, that if the Owner were alive, he should be arraigned of the death, and
Amerced toward the King, Crompt. 24.. 45.

XV. Lamb. 238. Britton 14. has the Case, Physician.
That if one who is not a Physician or Chyrurgeon will take upon him to cure a
sick or wounded man, which dies under his hand, it is Felony; and Thorp, 43
Ed. 3. 33. says that he knew one to be Indicted accordingly.

But the Statute 34 and 35 H. 8. 8.. 3. N. 1. leaves so great a liberty of
such practice to unskilful persons, that it will be hard now to make any Felony
in such a case. Howbeit, if any of these two latter offenses ( Lamb. 237, 238.)
should be drawn to Felony, then I see not But that the same must be accounted
Murder, in respect either of the bold presumption, or of the will to do harm,
which does amount to malice. Crompt. 27.. 18. and 17. Dalt. 239. cap. 93.

XVI. Lamb. 238. Officer.
It has been adjudged Murder when a man has drawn his Weapon and killed
either a known Officer, or one that had and showed sufficient Warrant to arrest
him for Debt only, supra. 8. Crompt. 24.. 35, 37.

XVII. Lamb. 238. Bastardy.
If a Harlot will take the Child whereof she is newly delivered, and cover it
with Leaves, and let it lie abroad, whereby Vermin destroy it, this is Murder,
21 Jac. 27.. 2. N. 1. Crompt. 24 b.. 44. and 21.. 20.

XVIII. Lamb. 238. Execution.
If an Officer will Behead him that is condemned to be Hanged, or if a private
man will kill him without any Warrant; this is Murder, 27. Ass. 41. Appeal, Br.
69. 35 H. 6. 58. Crompt. 24.. 39. 33. Dalt. 235. cap. 92.

Poison.
XIX. 1 Ed. 6. 12.. 13. N. 1. That all wilful killing, by Poison, etc. shall be
adjudged wilful Murder of malice prepensed, Lamb. 240, 244. Com. 473. and 1
Bulstr. 87. 4 Co. 44. and 9 Co. 81. Crompt. 25 b.. 56, and 20.. 12, 21.. 19.
and 30 b. Dalt. 235. cap. 92.

Accessory.
XX. Lamb. 241. All such as be present, and aiding, abetting or comforting him
that commits a Murder, be principal Murderers in the eye of the Law, as well
as he is by doing the deed, though they strike never a stroke, 4 H. 7. 18. Com.
100. Dalyson and Dyer Crompt. 24. b.. 43. 22.. 10. and 34 b.. 15.

Treason.
XXI.. Lamb. 243. If a Clerk do maliciously kill his Prelate or Superior to
whom he owes obedience, or a Wife her Husband, or a Servant the Master, who
have a Civil Sovereignty over them, this will be Pety-Treason, 25 Ed. 3. St. 5.
cap. 2.. 1. N. 10. 12 Ass. 30. Coron Br. 74. (73.) and 22 Ass. 49. Coron 383.
and 19 H. 6. 47. But not so for ( Dalt. 233. cap. 91.) the Son to kill the
Father, unless he take wages, Crompt. 19 b.. 1, 3, 5, 7. and 21 Ed. 3. 17.
Kell. 204. pl. 1.

Games.
XXII. Lamb. 246, 247. If two play at Bucklers together without former malice,
and the one slays the other, this is reputed to be done by Chance-medley, if
it be not before the King, and by his Commandment or Proclamation; and if it so
be, then it is not punishable at all, as Justice Fineux did hold, 11 H. 7. 23.
Dalt. 246. cap. 96. But. Coron Br. 228. notes, that the Justices in the time
of H. 8. were of another ( Crompt. 23.. 27.) opinion, Crompt. 26 b.. 10. Kell.
108 b. pl. 27. Crompt. 29 a.

Justification.
XXIII. 250, 251. But he must know that it is not all one to have to do with a
Thief or Murderer, and with a Loyal Subject; for albeit he may boldly defend
himself, his Goods or his House against a Murderer or Thief on even-hand as it
were, and without any striking from him; ( supra. 11.) yet if he be assailed by
another manner of man, he must fly so far as he may, and till he be let by
some Wall or other Impediment, that his necessity of defense may be esteemed
altogether Great and Inevitable; and yet shall he be committed till the time of
his trial, and shall then lose his Goods, and seek the King's Pardon for taking
away the life of his fellow Subject, 6 Ed. 1. 9. Glouc' supra. 6.

Chance.
XXIV. Lamb. 252, 253. If a Labourer do work with an Ax, and in the fetching of
his stroke the Head of the Ax happen to fly off from the Helm, and do kill one
that stands by; or if a man does throw a stone at a Bird, or shoot an Arrow
at a Fowl or at a mark, without evil intent, and another man is slain unawares
thereby; or if in the felling of a Tree he gives loud warning when the Tree is
ready to fall, and yet it falls upon another man that stands or passes by,
Dalt. 245. cap. 96. or if a Tyler throws down Tyles from a House that he is
to amend, and gives warning thereof, and another man comes under and is slain
with a stroke of Tyles; or if a Schoolmaster do moderately Correct his
Scholar, and he dies thereof:

In all these and the like Cases (wherever the party is doing a lawful act,
etc.) it is to be adjudged Manslaughter by misfortune, 52 H. 3. cap. 25. of
Marlbr. 2 H. 4. 18. Coron 302, 228, 354, 398. and Crompt. 19 b. Bract. 121.
Stamf. 18. Kell. 108 b. pl. 27. Crompt. 24 b.. 42. and 28 b. 29 a.

Treason.
XXV. Crompt. 20 b. 21 a.. 18. A Feme Servant and a stranger conspire to rob the
Mistress; and at the time appointed in the night she let him into the House,
and carried him by a Candle to her Mistresses Bed, where she lay asleep, and
the stranger killed the Mistress in her Bed, the Maid saying nor doing nothing
but held the Candle; And Portman Chapter J. de B. R. Brook Chapter J. of C. B. and Hare
Master of the Rolls held the Feme a Principal and a Traitor; but Brook Chapter
Baron, Dalison and Saunders Justices e contra so Dyer 128 pl. But the Law is
with Portman, and so it was adjudged in the Case of one Blechenden, Captain of
the Castle of Wallm' in Kent, who about 5 Mariae was killed in the Castle by a
stranger, by assent of one Bigg and others, Servants of the said B. being then
in the same Castle in a Vault there, and not in the Parlor where he was killed,
and was Drawn and Hanged.

XXVI. Crompt. 21.. 3. Nota, Justices.
That the Justices of Peace may enquire of Murder or Pety-Treason, because
their Commission is de omnibus Feloniis, see 3 H. 7. 5 b. An Indictment of
Murder taken before Justices of Peace, Rast. intr. 362. Dyer 69. pl. Crompt. 21
b.. 5, 6. and 28.. 3. Infra. 35. Dalt. 234. Infra 38. Lamb. 497. in
Indictment,. 18.

XXVII. Pasch. 3 H. 7. 5 b. pl. 2. Indictment, 22. Br. 47. Justices.
The Servants of the Bishop of Lincoln were Indicted of Murder in the County of
Rutland before the Justices of Peace, etc.

XXVIII. Pasch. 5 Ed. 6. Dyer 69. pl. 29. Justices.
And also it was held clearly that Justices of Peace have Authority to enquire
of Murder, because it is Felony, against the opinion of Monsieur Fitzherbert.
Dalt. 52. cap. 20. Infra 35.

XXIX. Lamb. 4. cap. 5. page 485, 486. Indictment.
Where by the way you may see in plain words of this Statute 2 and 3 Ed. 6.
24.. 2. N. 5. That Justices of Peace may take Indictments of Murder, as Murder;
though Mr. Fitzherbert (fol. 17.) denies it, saying, That they cannot enquire
of Murder, saving only as of Felony or Manslaughter. And you shall read of an
Indictment of Murder before them received, 3 H. 7. 5 b. supra; agreeable
whereunto was the opinion of Hales and Portman Justices, as I have seen in a
Report of Dalison Justice; And of the same mind also were the Justices of 6 Ed.
6. B. R. Dyer 69. Dalt. 53. cap. 20 b. Infra 35.

XXX. Crompt. 21 b.. 5. see Rast. Entr. 417. Certiorari.
That an Indictment of Murder taken before Justices of Peace was removed in B.
R. and the party thereupon was Arraigned, and upon the Arraignment there he
pleaded the King's Pardon, and it was allowed, and the party discharged, Coron
360.

XXXI. 2 Inst. 316. On 6. Ed. 1. Gloc' cap. 9. it is to be observed, Justices.
that Justices of Jail-delivery may take an Indictment of killing a man se
defendendo, because their Authority is general; but Justices of Peace cannot
take such an Indictment, because their Commission is limited, and it is taken
not to be within their Commission, Dalt. 52. cap. 20. Infra. 36. and 33.

XXXII. Crompt. 21 b.. 6. see Rast. Entr. 246. Justcies.
An Indictment of Murder taken before Justices of the Peace, whereupon the
party was Outlawed before them, was delivered to the Justices of Jail-delivery,
and thereupon the person Outlawed was brought before them to the Bar, and
because he could say nothing in Arrest of Execution, it was adjudged he should
be Hanged. But Fitzh. in his Book of Justices of Peace, 21. is, That a Justice
of Peace cannot enquire of Murder, see Stamf. 15 b. 16 a. That an Indictment
taken before Justices of Peace, that A. killed B. se defendendo, is not good,
because that they have no Authority to take such Indictment, as he had heard.

XXXIII. Crompt. 28.. 3. Mr. Stamf. 15 b. 16 a. says, Indictment.
That a Justice of Peace cannot take an Indictmen af him that has killed
another se defendendo, as he had heard. But Marrow, Lect. 12. is to the
contrary; and it seems, that in as much as the Justices of Peace have power
to enquire of all Felonies, that they may enquire of this, Lamb. 497. and supra
31.

XXXIV. 23 b.. 28. Riot.
A Sheriff or Justices of Peace come to suppress Rioters, and one of them who
comes with the Justice is slain by the Rioters, this is Murder as well in him
as in all the other Rioters that are present; and so was taken, 22 Eliz. in the
Case of Drayton Basset, supra. 7. Crompt. 25.. 51. and 26.. 12.

XXXV. Dalt. 51, 52. cap. 20. Whereas one R. Forgery.
Smyth was Indicted at the Sessions in Oxford upon 5 Eliz. 14.. 10. N. 1. of
Forgery, it was adjudged by the whole Court in B. R. 30 Eliz. that the same
Indictment was not well taken; for although the Justices of Peace by their
Commission have power of Oyer and Term of Felonies, etc. yet forasmuch as there
is a Commission of Oyer and Term known distinctly by that name, and the
Commission of the Peace is known distinctly by another name; that the said
Indictment taken before the Justices of Peace at their Sessions was not well
taken, and therefore was quashed.

The reason of this Case and Judgment seems to hold in the former Cases, on 3
H. 7. 14.. 1. N. 4. 33 H. 8. 12.. N. and 8 H. 6. 12.. 3. N. 2. etc. and in all
other like Cases where any Statute does specially give Authority to any other
distinct Court, or to other Justices or Commissioners (leaving out the Justices
of Peace) to enquire of, hear and determine, or to try Felons, etc. there the
Justices of Peace at their Sessions cannot enquire thereof, 2 Inst. 316. and
Stamf. 15 b. 16 a. and supra. 26, 27, 28, 30, 31, etc. Crompt. 56. Infra. 50.
Poult. de Pace 43.

Justices.
XXXVI. Dalt. 52. cap. 2. But in the former Cases, if any such offender shall be
brought before any Justice of Peace, and charged with any such Felonies, (viz.
whereof he cannot enquire) Quaere how far the Justice of Peace is to deal, or
what he is to do therein, considering the Justices of Peace are no Juudges of
such Felonies, neither have they any Jurisdiction given them by the Statutes in
such Cases. And yet it may seem both serviceable and safe for the Justice of
Peace to examine the Offense, and then to certify his Examination to such
persons as by the Statute are made Judges of the Cause, But it seems the
Justice of Peace (on 8 H. 6. 12.. 3. N. 2. of Razures. 3 H. 7. 14.. 1. N. 4. of
the Kings Servants. 33 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 4. of the Verge. and 5 Eliz. 14.. 10.
N. 1. of Forgery. and 33 H. 6. 1.. 1. N. 3. Servants imbezelling Intestates
Goods.) may not commit such an Offender to Prison, nor bind over the Informers,
nor take the Information upon Oath, Crompt. 56 a. b.

Imprisonm.
XXXVII. Dalt. 55. cap. 20. If one shall bring a man suspected of Felony before
any Justice of Peace, but refuses to be bound to give Evidence against the
Prisoner, either at the Jail-delivery or Quarter Sessions, as the Case shall
require; if such bringer has given Evidence before the Justice against the
Prisoner, or can declare any thing material to prove the Felony, and will not
be bound to give Evidence upon his Trial, the Justice of Peace upon his
discretion may commit to Prison such person so refusing, or may bind him to his
Good behavior. But if the bringer of a person suspected of Felony cannot
declare any thing material to prove the Felony, nor any other person then
present, it seems the Justice ought not to commit the Prisoner; and so was
the direction of Sir David Williams at the Assizes at Cambridge.

Yet the Justices shall do well to examine the Prisoner; and if he shall
confess the Felony, then to commit him; or if the Prisoner be a man of evil
same, and that there be a Felony committed; in these Cases the Justice shall
not do well to let him go, but at least to bind him over to the next
Jail-delivery, and in the mean time to take further Inform' against him,
Crompt. 198 b. Dalt. 290. cap. 109.

Treason.
XXXVIII. Dalt. 234. cap. 91. The Justices of Peace may enquire of Pety-Treason,
as of Felony; and out of their Sessions every Justice of Peace may deal with
the Offenders therein, as in the Case of Felony, by Examination of the
Offenders, by taking Information against them, and binding over the Informers
to the General Jail-delivery, and by committing the Offenders to the Goal,
Crompt. 21.. 3. supra 26.

Enquest.
XXXIX. Dalt 236, 237. The Enquiry of such a Felony belongs to the Coroner;
and yet if Felo de se be cast into the Sea, or so secretly buried that the
Coroner cannot have the sight of his Body, and so cannot enquire thereof; then
the Justices of Peace, or any other having Authority to enquire of Felonies,
may enquire thereof, (for that it is Felony;) and a presentment thereof before
them, entituleth the King in his Goods, Dalt. 247. cap. 97. it is Quaere.

XL. Dalt. 248. cap. 98. Treason.
If the Justices of Peace shall Arraign a man of Treason before them at their
Sessions, who is found Guilty, etc. and thereupon is Hanged; this is Felony, as
well in the Justices as in the Sheriff, or Officer which shall hang him; for
that the Justices of Peace had no Authority therein; but it was coram non
Judice, Lect. m. Cock 10. Co. 76.

XLI. Dalt. 248. ibid. Justices.
If the Justices of Peace shall Arraign a man of Felony upon an Indictment of
Trespass, whereupon he is Hanged; this is Felony in the Justices, but not in
the Sheriff or Officer, Lect. m. Cock 10. Co. 76.

XLII. Dalt. 259. cap. 101. Yet may not the Justice of Peace ( viz. Bail.
because of variety of opinions, Coron 178. Forfeiture. Br. 1. Dr. and St. 17,
etc. of the value of Pety-Larceny) before whom such an Offender shall be
brought out of the Sessions, punish by his discretion the said Offender for
Pety-Larceny, and so let him go, but must commit him to Prison, or Bail him, to
the intent he may come to his Trial, as in case of other Felonies; and if upon
his Trial the Jury shall find the Goods stolen to exceed 12 d. in value, the
Offender shall have Judgment to die for the fault.

XLIII. Dalt. 268. cap. 104. Bar. and Feme.
Also the Wife is chargable for a Trespass done by her and her Husband
together; and therefore howsoevever (in case of Stealing or of Robbery by Baron
and Feme) it shall be safe for the Justice of Peace in such cases to commit the
Wife to the Goal as well as the Husband.

XLIV. Crompt. 39.. 7. Escape.
A Justice of Peace sends for a Felon who is in the Goal, and delivers him
without Bond for his appearance, and after he is Indicted; this seems to be a
voluntary Escape, for he is the cause that he comes not to his Trial; and so
where a man confesses a Felony before a Justice of Peace, and he lets him go
without Bail, etc. But a thing that is done pro defectu Scientiae is no Felony,
Dalt. 275. cap. 106. 25 Ed. 3. 39.

XLV. Crompt. 44.. 44. Bail.
A Justice of Peace lets one go without Bail who is brought before him for
Felony and confesses it; this is Felony in the Justice as it seems, for he
is the cause that he comes not to his Trial, Quaere 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 12..
3. N. 1.

XLVI. Dalt. 275. cap. 106. Escape.
If a Justice of Peace or Sheriff shall Bail one who is not bailable, this is a
negligent Escape, if by Ignorance, Coron 246. Escape, 4.

XLVII. Dalt. 275. cap. 106. Bail.
But if one that is brought before a Justice of Peace for suspicion of Felony
shall confess the Felony before the Justice of Peace, and yet he shall suffer
the Prisoner to go at large without Bail; this is a voluntary escape, and so
Felony in the Justice.

XLVIII. Dalt. 288. cap. 108. If the party Robbed, Escape.
or he that shall have any Goods stolen from him, after complaint by him made
of the Felony to a Justice of Peace, or to a Constable, shall then take his
Goods again, or otherwise be compounded withal, and will not prosecute the
Felon any further, but will suffer him to escape after he was once so charged,
and perhaps arrested for the same: Quaere if this makes not him an Accessory,
for that he did once agere Criminaliter, by complaint made to the Officer
against the Felon; I think the Justice of Peace shall do well at least to bind
over both the one and the other to the next Quarter Sessions, or to the next
Jail-delivery, and then to acquaint the Court with the whole matter.

Justices.
XLIX. Crompt. 40.. 13. Justices of Peace may enquire of Escapes, 1 Rich. 3. 3..
1. N. 2. 2 H. 5. 8. and 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 12.

Justices.
L. Crompt 56 a. b. Nota, That the eight Cases following, though they are
Felonies by Statute, yet the Justices of Peace cannot enquire of them as it
seems, 33 H. 6. 1. of Servants Imbezelling Testators Goods. 2 and 3 Ed. 6.
24. of Accessory in another County. Nor of Indictment of Felony taken before
Coroners or Justices of Jail-delivery, or of Oyer and Terminer. Nor of 5 Eliz.
14.. 10. N. 1. of Forgery. Nor of Razing Records, on 8 H. 6. 12.. N. Nor of
Conspiracy to kill Great Officers, 3 H. 7. 14. and 33 H. 8. 2. of the Verge.
Nor 13 Eliz. 1. of Libels against the Queens Succession, etc.) Dalt. 51, 52.
supra. 35, 36.

Lieu.
LI. Dalt. 289, 290. cap. 109. If a man do commit Murder, steal Goods, or do any
other Felony in one County, and then flees into another County, and is taken
there, and brought before a Justice of Peace there, he shall be by the Justice
Imprisoned in the Goal of the County where he was taken, and after shall be
removed by the Kings Writ into the Goal of the County where he committed the
Felony: But for those that do inform against such Felons, the said Justice
shall bind such Informers over to appear and to give Evidence against such
Felons at the next General Jail-delivery to be holden in that County where the
Trial of such Murder or Felony shall be, whither also the said Justice must
certify such Information taken by him.

Commission.
LII. 10 Co. 76 b. In the Case of the Marshalsea it is said, of a Justice of
Peace makes a Warrant to Arrest one for Felony who is not Indicted, though the
Justice erred in the granting of it, (34 Ed. 3. 1.. 1. N. 5. Com. 37 b. and 1
R. 3. 3.. N. 2.) yet he that made the Arrest by force of this Warrant shall not
be punished by Writ of false Imprisonment, because he is Judge of the Cause.
And 14 H. 8. 16. Faux Imprisonment, Br. 8. with this agrees. But if one be
Indict before Justices of Peace, and confesses the Felony, and has a Coroner,
and becomes an Approver, and makes an Appeal; such an Appeal before the King
was adjudged void, as appears in 9 H. 4. 1. and 2 H. 4. 19. see 44 Ed. 3. 44.

And the reason of this Case (as some suppose) is, because the Commission of
the Peace extends only to enquire before themselves, audiend' and terminand',
and so the Appeal of the Approver is out of their Commission, because an
Approver makes not his Appeal before the Justices, but to the Coroner, and the
Coroner records it to the Court. But the reason given 9 H. 4. 1. is, That the
Justices of Peace have no power to assign him a Coroner, no more than they can
enquire of Treason; as there it is also held, because it is not within their
Commission, Lamb. 542. Infra. 65.

Process.
LIII. Lamb. 2. cap. 6. page 188, 189. There is one thing also whereof I thought
meet to admonish our Justices of Peace: In this place many of them do give out
their Precepts to Attach persons suspected of Felony, to the end to have them
brought before them; which thing is neither newly devised by them, nor done
without color; (34 Ed. 3. 1.. 1. N. 5.) for they have such a Precedent in the
old 1561 Book of Justices of Peace, fol. 41. And there is no doubt but that if
a Felony be done every man may Arrest whomsoever he suspecteth of it; but for
all that the whole Court, 14 H. 8. 16. in Faux Imprisonment, Br. 8. and 4 Inst.
176, 177. condemns such Precepts, because if the Bailiff which serves the
Warrant have suspicion in the party, he may of himself, without the Warrant,
Arrest him; and if he have not, then is the Warrant of a Justice of Peace no
Warrant to Arrest him, unless he be Indicted before, Crompt. 147 b. Dalt. 303,
304. cap. 113.

Imprisonm.
LIVE. Dalt. 330, 331. cap. 117. But I find it much controverted, whether a
Justice of Peace may grant a Warrant to Attach persons suspected of Felony,
etc. Some hold that the Justice of Peace may grant his Warrant; for that it
seems by the first Assignavimus in the Commission,. 5. and by the Stat. 5 Ed.
3. 14.. 1. N. 3. That any one Justice of Peace may cause the Constables to
Arrest and Imprison Offenders suspected of Felony, etc. and how shall the
Justice of Peace cause this to be done, but by his Warrant or Commandment?

LV. Dalt. 331. ibid. Again, if a Felony be done, Process.
there is no doubt but that every private man, without a Warrant, may Arrest
whomsoever he suspecteth of it, being a man of evil fame, Crompt. 171 a. Dalt.
337. cap. 118. But if the Offender, being pursued, shall resist, Quaere who
shall be aiding to a private man, whose Goods are stolen, and who suspecteth
another to have stolen them; either to search for the Goods, or to apprehend
the party suspected, if the Justice of Peace by his Warrant shall not command
the Constable to aid him therein. If it be objected, that the Constable may do
all this of his own Authority, upon request to him made by the party Robbed. Be
it true, yet we find by common experience, that the Constables, without the
Justices Warrant therein, are for the most part both very fearful, and also
remiss herein; as neither knowing their own Authority, nor the danger, 2 H. 7.
15, 16.

And yet, by the opinion of the Court 14 H. 8. 16. a Justice of Peace cannot
make a Warrant to Arrest a Felon, unless he be Indicted of Felony, or unless
the Justice of Peace himself has suspicion of the Felon; But if the Constable
or other Officer shall serve such a Warrant, he shall justify the same, though
the Justice err in awarding thereof, see 24 Ed. 3. 9. Coron. Br. 3. 4 Inst.
176, 177. Lamb. Constable, 17.

LVI. 4 Inst. 177. Sed distinguenda sunt tempora and concordabis Leges;
Information.
for since the Statutes of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13.. 3. N. 1. and 2 and 3
Phil. and Mar. 10.. 2. N. 2. if any person be charged with any manner of
Felony, and Information be given to a Justice of Peace of the Felony, or
suspicion of Felony, and fears that the Kings Peace may be broken in
apprehending of him; the said Justice may make a Warrant to the Constable of
the Town, to see the Kings Peace kept in the apprehending and bringing the
party charged with, or suspected of the Felony before him; and the party that
gives the Information of his knowledge or suspicion to be present, and Arrest
the Delinquent. And in this manner it is employed and intended by the said
Statutes, for the Prisoner to be brought before them; and this (as we take it)
agrees with the common use and observance ever since those Statutes; and this
agrees also with 14 H. 8. 16. that a Justice of Peace may make his Warrant for
the salvation of the Peace, meaning to assist the party that knows or has
suspicion of the Felony. But in this case neither the Constable nor any other
can break open any House for the apprehension of the party suspected or charged
with the Felony; for it is in Law the Arrest of the party that has the
knowledge or suspicion, who cannot break open any House, but if the doors be
open, he may enter into the same, and Arrest the party, etc. 1 Rich. 3. 3.. 1.
N. 2.

LVII. 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 4.. 1. N. 2. Imprisonment
None shall be taken by petition or suggestion made to the King or Council,
unless it be by Indictment or Presentment, etc.

LVIII. Lamb. 540. The Felony of Forgery, 1 Eliz. 14.. 7. N. 1. Forgery.
after Conviction for a former Offense, the Justices of Peace cannot hear or
try at all, Crompt. 56 b.

LIX. Lamb. 540. Neither does the hearing and trial of that Felony, Apprentice.
33 H. 6. 1.. 1. N. 3. of a Servant taking the Goods of his Master after his
death, belong to the Justices of Peace in the County, because they cannot take
notice of his default in B. R. by which default it first begins to be Felony.

LX. Lamb. 541. Records.
The like (though for unlike reason) is to be said of the Felonies of
Imbezelling of any of the Records of the Courts at Westminster, against 8 H. 6.
12.. N. and of an Accessory in one County, where the Felony was done in
another, upon 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 24.. N. because the Jurisdiction over these
Felonies is not committed to the Justices of Peace, but remitted to other
Judges, by the very same Statutes.

Precog'
LXI. Lamb. 541. And so of the Felony of Conspiring the Death of the King, or of
any Lord of the Realm, or of any the Kings Counsel, or of the Steward,
Treasurer or Comptroller of the Kings House, because it is to be tried by them
of the Cheque-Roll of the same Household, 3 H. 7. 14.. N.

Trials.
LXII. Lamb. 541. Furthermore, they cannot make trial of such as were Indicted
of Felony before the Coroners, or before the Justices of Jail-delivery, or of
Oyer and Terminer, if the same persons were not Justices of Peace also in the
same Shire, so as the Indictments may be understood to be taken by them as
before Justices of Peace; for their Commission and Authority extends only to
such as stand Indicted before themselves as former Justices of the Peace, or
the Sheriff in his Tourn.

Process.
LXIII. Lamb. 541, 542. It seems by Marrow, and Fitzh. 16. that albeit two
Justices of the Peace (the one of them being of the Quorum) may hear and try
the Felonies, yet no Justices of the Peace have Authority to deliver Felons by
Proclamation, or without sufficient acquittal; nor yet to deliver such as be in
Prison for suspicion of Felony.

Imprisonm.
LXIV. Lamb. 542. Such persons, if they cannot be Indicted, must either remain
the coming of the Justices of Jail-delivery, as the common manner now is; or
else, being removed in B. R. they are either to be delivered thence upon the
Writ de gestu and fama, as the old Order was, or by such other mean as they at
this day do use therein.

Appeal.
LXV. Lamb. 542, 543. These Justices of Peace can take no Appeal of any
Approver, nor other before them, say all the Justices of C. B. 2 H. 4. 19. and
so it is clearly holden, 9 H. 4. 1. because their Commission stretches not so
far, but only to such Felonies as fall out by enquiry before themselves or
their former fellow Justices, however 44 Ed. 3. 44. upon 5 Ed. 3. 11.. N. or 8
H. 6. 10.. N. may seem to a running Reader to allow that power unto them, and
therefore Stamf. 95. worthily doubts of this matter, 10 Co. 76 b. supra. 52.
But howsoever that be, yet seems it to me no less reasonable then
serviceable, that if one Felon will accuse another before Justices of the
Peace, they may take his Confession, and reprieve him, and thereupon cause the
other to be enquired of, and so proceed against him.

Exile.
LXVI. Lamb. 543. They cannot Arraign a man upon his Abjuration, says Marrow.

Day.
LXVII. Lamb. 543. It has also been thought unmeet that they should try a Felon
the same day in which they awarded the Venire facias against the Jury 22 Ed. 4.
44. Coron 44. But that has no necessity; and the Law is now otherwise taken.

Women.
LXVIII. Lamb. 543. Marrow says, that they cannot award the Writ Ven' fac. tot'
matronas, to try whether a Woman Arraigned before them be with Child or not;
but seeing it stands with Law and Reason to stay her for the time that the
Child may be preserved, I cannot but doubt of this opinion.

Clergy.
LXIX. Lamb. 543. They may give Clergy to a Felon, if the Ordinary or his Deputy
be present to take him; but if they be absent, he must be reprieved, because
(as Marrow says) these Justices can set no Fine upon the Ordinary for his
absence, no more than if he will accept one to read as a Clerk, where in truth
he cannot read at all. But if you look upon Stamf. 2. cap. 25. he will persuade
you that the Ordinary is not the Judge, but a Minister in the Trial of Clergy;
and that Clergy may lawfully be given and allowed in his absence.

LXX. Lamb. Preced. 5. pl. 13. An Indictment for Pety-Treason in a Servant, and
Felony in the Procurers thereof.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacrament' suum presentant, quod A. B de C. in
Com' predict' Glover, nuper Serviens B. D. de C. predict' in dict' Com' Glover,
10 die Septembr', Anno regni, etc. in domo mansionali predict' B. D. apud C.
predict' in Com' predict', vi and armis, videlicet cum Gladiis and pugione
districtis ad valentiam 10 solidorum, quos idem A. B. ad tunc and ibidem in
manibus suis tenuit in prenominatum B. D. tunc Magistrum suum tunc and ibidem
in pace Dei, and dicti Domini Regis, existent' voluntary, and ex malitia sua
precogitata insultum fecit and eundem B. D. tum Magistrum suum ad tunc ibidem
cum dicto Gladio felonice and proditorie super caput suum fortiter and valde
percussit ita quod dicto ictu caput ipsius B. D. tunc Magistri sui tunc ibidem
in duas parts scidid dans ei plagam mortalem unde corpus dicti B. D. immediate
ibidem ad terram ceridit and dictus B. D. instanter ibidem de plaga predict a
mortuus e. and sic prefat' A. B. apud C. predict', ex malitia sua precogita a
eundem B. D. Magistrum suum predict' modo and forma predictis voluntary
nequiter felonice and proditorie interfecit, contra pacem dicti Domini nostri
Regis nunc, coron' and dignitat' suas.

Et quod quidem I. S. de C. predict' in Com' predict' Glover, ante proditionem
predict' per prefat' A. B. sic ut prefertur voluntary perpetrat' and commissam
niz. 6 die Sept' anno supradicto, eundem A. B. apud C. in Comitat' predict' ad
proditionem predict' in forma predict' perpetrandum and committend' felonice
consuluit, excitavit and procuravit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, ac
contra coronam and dignitatem suam.

West, symbol. 2 part 118. sect. 153, 154.

LXXI. Lamb. Preced. 5 b. pl. An Indictment for Murder of a Bastard-Child
against the Mother and Midwife as Principals, and against the reputed Father as
Accessory before, and against others as Accessory after.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod H. M. Kanc.
ss.
nuper de K. in Com' predict' vidua gravida existens cum quadam Infant viva 24
Maii, anno regni, etc. apud K. predict' in Com' predict' Dei providentia
parturiit and peperit tuam prolem famelam vivam posteaque quaedam I. S. nuper
de W. in dicto Com' vidua apud K. predict' in Com' predict' vi and armis, ex
malitia sua precogitata dicto 24 die Maii, anno supradict' circa horam 11 ante
meridiem ejusdem diei per consilium, mandatum and procurationem predictae H. M.
ac in presentia ipsius H. M. in predict' prolem famelam vivam insultum fecit
and cum quodam catello ad valentiam unius denarii quem eadem jana tunc in manu
tua dextra tenuit Gutter, ipsius prolis famelae quandam plagam mortalem in
Gutture suo predicto de qua quidem plaga mortali proles famela predict' apud C.
predict' in Com' predict' ad tunc and ibidem instanter obiit and quod predict'
H. M. ad tunc and ibidem felonice fuit presens, comfortan^ and auxilians ad
predict' prolem famelam in forma predict' interficiendam and sic prefatae H. M.
and jana predict' prolem famelam predict' ex malitia sua precogitata felonice
and voluntary interfecerunt and murdraverunt contra pacem dicti Domini Regis,
coronam and dignitatem suas.

Et in super Juratores predicti super sacramentum suum presentant, pro dicto
Domini Rege, quod Georgius R. nuper de K. predict' in dicto Comitatu Yeoman, 19
die Maii, anno regni, etc. ac diversis aliis diebus and vicibus ante feloniam
and murdrum predict' in forma predict' perpetrat' apud K. predict' in Com'
predict' malitiose and felonice consuluit, mandavit, procuravit and abettavit
predict' H. M. ad predict' murdrum voluntarium faciend' ac ad interficiend' and
murdrand' dictum prolem famelam, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc. Et
ulterius quod O. P. and A. B. de K. predict' in Com' predict' Spinsters, post
murdrum and feloniam predict' in forma predict' facta scientes prefatas H. M.
and I. S. feloniam and murdrum predict' in forma predict' fecisse and
perpetrasse ipsam tamen H. M. apud K. predict' in Com' predict' 27 die dicti
mensis Maii, anno supradict' felonice receptaverunt and comfortaverunt, contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem suam. West. symb. 2. part
117 b. sect. 152. Dyer 186. pl. 2.

LXXII. Lamb. Preced. 6. pl. 15. An Indictment for wilful Poisoning, on 1 Ed.
6. 12.. 13. N. 1.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod T. H. de C.
in Com' predict' Yeoman, secundo die Decembris, anno regni, etc. apud C.
predict' in Com' predict' in domo mansionali ibidem cujusdam W. B. nuper de C.
predict' in dicto Comitat' Yeoman, ex malitia sua propensa and precogitata
voluntary and felonice Porrexit ac dedit in catillo quodam eidem W. B. ad
edendum quaedam olera, Anglice vocat' Pottage, excecuta venenocissima and aliis
Herbis virulentis confect' and composita quae quidem olera predictus W. B. tunc
ibidem cum Cocleari quod in manu sua dextra tenuit comedit unde predictus W. B.
statim postea aegrotabat ac a predicto secundo die Decembr. anno supradict' in
dicta domo suo apud C. predict' languebat usque sextum diem dicti mensis
Decembr. anno supradicto quo quidem sexto die anno supradicto predictus W. B.
ex dicto esu olerum predictorum in dicta domo sua apud C. predict' in dicto
Comitatu interiit. Et sic Juratores predicti super sacramentum suum presentant,
quod predict' T. H. prenominatum W. B. apud C. predict' in Comitat' predict'
modo and forma supradict' ex malitia sua precogitata voluntary and felonice
veneno predicto interfecit ac murdravit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc,
ac contra formam Statuti in Parliament' Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae
sexti tento apud Westminster. in Com' Midd. anno regni sui primo, in hujusmodi casu
provisi ac editi.

22 H. 8. 9.. 1. N. 2. West. symb. 2. part 120 b. sect. 163.

LXXIII. West. symb. 2. part 121. sect. 164. An Indictment for wilful Poisoning
one in a Potion.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Regina super sacramentum suum presentant, quod H. R.
nuper de C. in Com E. predict' Yeoman, 10 die October. anno, etc. Deum pre
occulis suis non habeus sed instigatione Diabolica seduct' ex malitia sua
precogitat' quaendam R. F. in pace Dei and dictae Dominae Reginae existent'
apud C. predict' in Com' E. ad libend' pretextu amoris and amicitiae invitavit
and eidem R. F. ad tunc and ibidem Potionem quendam veneno intermixtam and
intoxicat' felonice dedit quam quidem Potionem predict' R. F. ex instigatione
and procuratione dict' H. ad tunc and ibidem accepit and eandem Potionem super
illud immediate bibebat and exhausit ratione cujus dict' R. F. immediate post
Potionem predict' sic exhaustum morbo correptus fuit ac a predict' 10 die
October. anno supradict', usque quartum diem Febr. etc. apud C. predict' in Com'
predict' languebat quo quidem quarto die Febr. anno, etc. supradict' predict'
R. F. ex Potione and intoxicatione predict' apud C. predict' in Com' E.
predict' obiit, and sic predict' R. H. prefat' R. F. apud C. predict' in Com'
predict' modo and forma supradictis cum Potione predict' veneno intermixta and
intoxicata felonice interfecit and murdravit, contra pacem dictae Dominae
Reginae nunc, and contra form' Statuti inde in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi.

LXXIV. West. symb. 2. part 121. sect. 165. An Indictment for Murder by wilful
Poisoning, upon 1 Ed. 6. 12.. 13. N. 1. wherein the Statute is recited.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum in
Statuto in Parliament' Dom' Edw. nuper Regis Angliae sexti, apud Westminster. in Com'
Midd. anno regni sui primo tento editi inter alia enactitat' existat'
Authoritate ejusdem quod omnis voluntaria interfectio per venenum, Anglice
Poisoning, alicujus personae sive personarum quae ad aliquod tempus ex tunc
imposterum facta perpetrata sine commissa foret: Adjudicaretur haberetur and
existimaretur voluntarium murdrum de malitia propensa quodque offensores in ea
part eorum coadjutores abettatores, procuratores and consiliatores sustinerent
mortem, and forisfacturam in quolibet respectu ut in aliis Casibus voluntarii
Murdri de malitia propensa; prout in eodem Statuto plene liquet quidam tamen A.
B. nuper de C. in Com' E. Labourer Statut' predict', and paenam in eodem
content' parvi pendens, neque timorem Dei pre oculis suis habens, 20 die
Januarii, anno, etc. apud R. predict' in predict' Comitatu E. ex ma litia sua
precogitata quendam E. L. voluntary and felonice per venanum interfecit and
murdravit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis coronam and dignitatem suas, ac
contra form' Statuti predicti, etc.

Crompt. 270. pl. 112.

LXXV. West. Symb. 2 part 121 b. sect. 166. An Indictment for Pety-Treason
against the Wife for poisoning her Husband, by putting Arsnick and Rosegree in
his Drink.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de F.
in Com' predict' vidua nuper uxor' I. B. de F. predict', etc. contra debitum
Matrimonii vinculum ac zelum and amorem quem eadem A. B. erga predict' J. B.
nuper virum suum gerere deberet Diabolico instinctu ducta ex malitia sua
precogitata machinans and intende^^s eundem I. B. nuper virum suum vita sua
primare ac ipsum felonice and proditorie murdrare 11 die Jan. anno, etc. apud
F. etc. felonice and proditorie posuit in potu ipsius I. B. ad tunc viri sui
quoddam venenum mortiferum, Anglice vocat', Arsnick and Rosegree, ac potum
illum sic venenatum felonice and proditorie ad tunc and ibidem predicto I. B.
dedit and ministravit bib^nd': Qui quidem I. B. nihil fraudis aut doli versus
predict' A. inde suspiciens potum illum sic venenatum and intoxicatum ad tunc
and ibidem per instigation' and procuration' predicti A. Bibit per quod idem I.
B. ab eodem 11 die Jan. etc. usque 22 diem Jan. tunc proxime sequent'
languebat, quo quidem 22 die, anno, etc. idem I. B. de veneno illo apud F. etc.
obiit, and sic super sacramentum suum dicunt Juratrres predicti quod predict'
A. die and anno supradict' predict' I. B. ad tunc virum suum apud F. etc.
felonice and proditorie intoxicavit and murdravit, contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis, etc.

Com. 473. Crompt. 270. lib. intr. 52. Stamf. 94.

LXXVI. Lamb. Preced. 6. pl. 16. An Indictment for a Murder committed by two.

Kanc ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. nuper
de C. in dicto Comitatu Blacksmith, and D. E. de C. predict' in Com' predict'
Butcher, 7 die September. anno regni, etc. vi and armis ex malitia sua
precogitata and premeditata in quendam F. G. nuper de B. in dicto Com' Yeoman,
apud B. predict' in Com' predict' in quodam loco ibidem vulgariter nuncupat'
the Bowling-place, ad tunc and ibidem in pace Dei and dicti Domini Regis
existentem insultum fecerunt and prefatus A. B. cum quodam Gladio districto ad
valentiam U. S. quem ipse in manu sua dextra ad tunc and ibidem tenuit ipsum F.
G. super synceput suum voluntary and felonice tunc ibidem percussit and eo
ipso ictu dedite idem F. G. quandam plagam mortalem in longitudine trium
pollicium and in profunditate quinque pollicium and dimidium de qua quidem
mortali plaga predict' F. G. tunc ibidem instanter and immediate obiit, and
ulterius quod predict' D. E. cum quodam baculo ad valentiam unius oboli quem
ipse in manibus suis ad tunc ibidem tenuit ipsum F. G. ad tunc and ibidem
voluntary and felonice percussit super caput suum dans eidem F. G. unam aliam
plagam mortalem in dicto suo capitae in longitudine trium pollicium and in
profunditate duorum pollicium unde idem F. G. de plaga ultive predicta obiisset
si non obiisset de ictu illo priore predicto quam predictus A. B. ei primo
dederat, and sic Juratores predicti super sacramentum suum dicunt quod
prenominati A. B. and D. E. dicto 7 die Septembr. anno supradicto apud B.
predict' in predicto loco, vocat' the Bowling-place, predict' F. G. modo and
forma predictis ex malitia sua precogitata voluntary and felonice
interfecerunt and murdraverunt, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, ac contra
coronam and dignitatem suam,

Crompt. 243 b. pl. 38.

Chance.
LXXVII. Lamb. Preced. 7. pl. 17. An Indictment for killing a man by
Chance-medley.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' predict' Sowgelder, 16 die Septembr. anno, etc. apud C. predict' in
Com' predict' quendam E. F. nuper de C. in Com' predict. Weaver, (cui tunc
ibidem fortuito and casu obviam venit) contumeliosis verbis lacessivit ac in
eundem E. F. tunc and ibidem in pace Dei, ac dicti Domini Regis existent' vi
and armis insultum fecit and ventrem dici E. F. tunc and ibidem cum Baculo
longo cuspide preacuto cupitato, Anglice vocat' a long sharp picked Staff, quem
idem A. B. tunc ibidem in manibus suis tenuit felonice pupugit and prefodit
dans eidem E. F. vulnus mortale in dicto ventre suo latitudinis unius pollicis
and profunditatis 8 pollicium de quo quidem mortali vulnere idem E. F. tunc
ibidem instanter obiit ac interiit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, ac
corona coronam and dignitatem suas,

Crompt. 243. pl. 36. and 243 b. pl. 37. West. symb. 2 part 142. sect. 260.

Clergy.
LXXVIII. West symb. 2 part 136 b. sect. 235. An Indictment for Murder ex
malitia prepensa Fact'.

Kanc. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si I. D. in Com' predict' Yeoman, laicus homo,
etc. vi and armis ac de malitia sua precogitata in W. H. ad tunc and ibidem in
pace Dei and Domini Regis nunc, existent' insult' fecit and cum uno Gladio
pretii 12 d. quod idem I. in manibus suis ad tunc and ibidem tenuit prefat'
W.H. felonice percussit and dedit ei tunc and ibidem super caput suum usque
cerebram unam plagam de qua quidem plaga mortali idem W.H. ad tunc and ibidem
instanter moriebatur and sic idem I. D. prefat' W.H. modo and forma predict'
felonice interfecit and murdravit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, coronam and
dignitatem suam, and contra form' Stat' de an. 23 Regis H. 8. nuper edit' and
provisi, 23 H. 8. 1.. 3. N. 1.

Fresh-Suit.
LXXIX. West. symb. 2 part 142. sect. 261. An Indictment for Murder, and the
Murderers flying, etc.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domina Regina, si T. B. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman, 20
die, etc. anno, etc. vi and armis, etc. ex malitia sua precogitat apud D. in
Comitat' predict' in quendam W. W. ad tunc and ibidem in pace Dei, and dictae
Dominae Reginae existent' insultum fecit and ipsum W. ad tunc and ibidem
verberavit vulneravit ac maletractavit ac ipsum W. cum quodam Baculo ad
valentiam, etc. quem idem T. B. ad tunc and ibidem in manu sua dextra tenebat
prefat' W. super sinistram partem tibiae suae felonice percussit dans ei plagam
mortalem ob quam quidem plagam mortalem predict' W. a predict' 20 die, etc.
anno, etc. usque ad 8 diem Julii tunc proxime sequent' languebat and de eadem
plaga mortali predict' W. etc. apud, etc. predict' 20 die Julii, anno
supradict' moriebatur and sic predict' T. B. predict' 8 die Julii anno
supradict' apud B. predict' felonice murdravit and interfecit, predict' W.
contra pacem dictae Dominae Reginae, etc. and post feloniam and murdrum
predict' immediate fugiebat, contra pacem, etc.

Cromp. 243. pl. 36. and 244 b. pl. 39.

Murder.
LXXX. Crompt. 242 b. 243 a. pl. 35, 36. An Indictment of Murder.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si H.W. nuper de S. in Com' predict' Tailor, and
W. C. de S. in Com' predict' Weaver, primo die Martii, anno regni, etc. apud C.
in Com' predict' vi and armis, etc. in quendam T. B. in pace Dei and dicti
Domini Regis, ad tunc and ibidem existent' insult' fecerunt and predict' H.W.
cum quodam falcastro, Anglice vocat' a Welsh Hook, valoris 12 d. quo idem H. in
utraque manu sua ad tunc and ibidem tenebat predict' T. B. super dextrum
brachinum prope manum dextram ad tunc and ibidem felonice percussit dans eidem
T. ad tunc and ibidem cum falcastor predict' unam plagam mortalem profunditatis
duorum pollicium and longitudinis quinque pollicium de qua quidem plaga mortali
predict' T. ad tunc and ibidem instanter obiit, and sic predicti H.W. and W. C.
apud S. predict' in Com' predict' modo and forma predict' prefat' T. B.
felonice ac ex malitia sua precogitata interfecerunt and murdraverunt, contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, coronam and dignitatem suas. Et si J. H. de S.
predict' in Com' predict' Husbandman, ante feloniam and murdrum predict' per
prefat' H. and W. sic in forma predict' commissum and perpetrat' viz. predict'
primo die Martii, anno regni Regis Jacobi secundo predict' apud S. predict' in
Com' predict', predict' H. W. and W. C. ad feloniam and murdrum predict' sic in
forma predict' faciend' and perpetrand' malitiose and felonice incitavit,
abettavit, and procuravit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis coronam and
dignitatem suam.

2. In the Indictment he need not mention the profundity nor breadth of the
Wound where the Pan of the Knee is cut out, no more than where an Arm or a Leg
is cut off, 4 Co. 42.

3. The Indictment in Murder, if he were struck one day and died another, shall
conclude that he murdered the party the day that he died, and not the day that
he was struck, 4 Co. 42, 45, 47.

LXXXI. Crompt. 244 b. pl. 40. Murder.
An Indictment against him that Suffocated a man.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si I. P. nuper de W. in Com' predict' Tailor, 11
die Novembr. anno regni, etc. Deum prae oculis suis non habens, sed
instigatione Diabolica seduct' apud H. in Com' predict' in Communi Pastura
ibidem vocat' E. in Com' predict' vi and armis, etc. ex malitia sua precogitat'
in and super quandam T. P. filiam predict' Johannis ad tunc and ibidem in pace
Dei and dicti Domini Regis existent' insult' fecit ac cum quadam Fibula vocat'
an Apron-string, valoris 1 d. qua predict' I. ad tunc and ibidem in manibus
suis tenuit collum dictae T. circumstruxit ac ipsam T. cum Fibula predict' ad
tunc and ibidem felonice suffocavit de qua quidem suffocatione predict' T. P.
ad tunc and ibidem instanter obiit, and sic predict' I. predict' T. P. predict'
11 die Novembr. anno supradict' apud H. predict' in Com' predict' ex malitia
sua precogitata modo and forma predictis felonice interfecit and murdravit,
contra pacem dicti Domini Kegis, etc.

LXXXII. Lamb. Preced. 7 b. pl. 18. Maihim.
An Indictment for pulling out a man's Eyes, 5 H. 4. 5.. 1. N. 2.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de D.
in dicto Comitat' Tinker, 9 die Sept. anno regni, etc. in quodam loco apud D.
predict' in Com' predict' vocat' the Dene, vi and armis in quendam D. E. de D.
predict' in Com' predict' Yeoman, in pace dicti Domini Regis tunc ibidem
existent' insultum fecit, and tunc and ibidem ex malitia sua precogitata
digitis and unguibus digitorum ipso A. B. oculos ipsius D. E. felonice effodit
ac erint, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nostri, coronam and dignitatect suam,
ac contra form' cujusdam Statuti in Parliamento Domini Regis Henrici olim Regis
Angliae, quarti tento apud Westmonaster' in Comitat' Middlesex, anno regni sui
Quinto, in hujusmodi casu provisi and editi.

LXXXIII. Crompt. 245. pl. 41. Indictment for Burning a House.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si W. S. nuper de O. in Com' predict' Smyth, 12
die Octobr. anno regni, etc. circa horam 12 in nocte ejusdem die vi and armis,
viz. Gladiis, Scutis, Baculis, Arcubus and Sagittis, apud S. in Com' predict'
ad domum mansionalem cujusdam Johannis C. simne cum aliis ventebat ea
intention ad spoliand' dictum Johannem, de bonis and catallis suis in eadem
domo tunc existent' ac si idem W. nuper tecturam ejusdem domus, vulgariter
nuncupat' the covering of the House, ad tunc and ibidem cum una Scala
ascendebat and scandebat ea intention per tecturam predict' ad intrand' and
ingrediend, in domum illam ac si dictus Will. simne cum aliis predict' J. G. R.
C. M. P. and Eliz. G. in eadem domo tunc existent' tantum timorem corporalem
tunc and ibidem inferebant ita quod de vitis suis desparabatur ac si dict'
Willielmus simus cum aliis predictis ad tunc and ibidem ex malitia sua
precogitata eandem domum cum igne tunc and ibidem felonice comburebant predict'
J. G. R. C. M. P. and Eliz. G. in eadem domo existent' contra pacem, etc. Ac si
W. R. de B. in Com' predicto Yeoman, and W. S. de S. in Com' predicto generosus
ante feloniam predict' per ipsos J. C. and alios fact' and perpetrat' predict'
Will. S. predict' 12 die Octobr. anno supradicto apud B. predict' in Com'
predict' ad feloniam predict' sic in forma predict' faciend' and perpetrand'
felonice excitaverunt procuraverunt and abettaverunt contra pacem, etc. ac si
predict' W. R. and W. S. scientes predict' Willielmi S. simul cum aliis
supradict feloniam predict' in forma predict' sic fecisse and perpetrasse
eundem W. S. postea scil' 13 die Octobr. anno predict' apud B. predict' in Com'
predict' felonice receperunt comfortaverunt, hospitaverunt and conclaverunt
contra pacem, etc.

West. symb. 2 part 143. sect. 268.

LXXXIV. Crompt. 245. pl. 42. An Indictment for Burglary.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, quod cum T. H. nuper de H. in Com' predict'
Yeoman, 10 die Maii, anno regni, etc. domum mansionalem cujusdam P. Armig' apud
H. predict' in Com' predict' circa horam 10 in nocte ejusdem dici felonice and
burglariter fregit and intravit and quadraginta libr' in pecuniis numerat' de
bonis and callis predict' P. in quadam cista in domo predicto ad tunc existent'
invent' felonice cepit and asportavit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis: Et si
quidem Christopherus G. nuper de H. predict' in Com' S. predict' Yeoman, ante
feloniam and burglariam predict' per ipsum T. H. in forma predict' fact' and
perpetrat' viz. 6 die Maii, anno supradicto eundem T. H. apud H. predict' in
Com' predict' ad feloniam burglarium predict' in forma predict' sic faciend'
felonice excitavit, abettavit and procuravit, contra pacem, etc. and si quidem
J. R. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman, sciens prefat' T. H. feloniam
predict' in forma predict' sic fecisse and perpetrasse eundem T. H. dicto 10
die Maii, anno supra dicto past feloniam predict' per ipsum T. H. sic ut
prefertur fact' and perpetrat' eundem T. H. apud H. predict' in Com' predict'
felonice receptavit, comfortavit and hospitavit contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis, etc.

Crompt. 245 b. 246. pl. 43, 44, 45. West. symb. 2 part 145. sect. 279, 280,
281, 282.

LXXXV. Lamb. Preced. 9 b. pl. 25. An Indictment for a Robbery in the Highway.

Kanc. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege, si A. B. de C. in dicto Com' Mariner, sexto die
mensis Octobr. anno regni, etc. vi and armis, viz. cum Gladiis and Pugione ad
valentiam 10 s. districtis inter horas 7 and 8 ante meridiem ejusdem di^i in
alta via regia juxta quendam locum vocat' Gads Hill, infra parochiam de F. in
Com' predict' petite Chapman tunc and ibidem in pace Dei, ac dicti Domini Regis
existent' insult' fecit and ipsum. J. S. tunc ibidem cum dicto Gladio percussit
and vulneravit and viginti solidos legalis monetae Angliae numerata in crumena
ipsius I. S. existent' de bonis and catallis predicti I. S. ad tunc and ibidem
ventos a personas ipsius I. S. tunc and ibidem violenter and felonice cepit and
asportavit in magnum predicti I. S. terrorem, ac contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis coronam and dignitatem suas.

LXXXVI. Lamb. Preced. 9 b. pl. 26. An Indictment for the taking of a Purse
privately from the person.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod I. S. nuper
de A. in dicto Com' Tailor, sexto die Julii, anno regni, etc. apud A. predict'
in Com' predict' in quodam loco ibidem vocat' the Elms, vi and armis in quendam
R. M. de A. predict' in Com' predict' Grocer, insult' fecit and 20 s. in
pecuniis numeratis in crumena ipsius R. M. tunc ibidem existent' inventas de
predict' crumena ipsius R. M. tunc and ibidem a persona ipsius R. M. clam and
insciente ipso R. M. felonice cepit and asportavit, contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis, ac contra coronam and dignitatem suas.

LXXXVII. Lamb. Preced. 10. pl. 27. An Indictment against the stealer of a
Horse, and his after Accessory, Lamb. Preced. 10 b. pl. 29. of a Cow.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. nuper
de E. in dicto Com' Gelder, 29 die Aug' anno, etc. vi and armis quodam stabulum
in domo mansionali cujusdam I. S. infra parochiam de E. predict' in Com'
predict' existens fregit ac intravit and unum Equum spadonem, Anglice vocat' a
Gelding, coloris albi, pretii 6 l. and unum Equam, coloris nigri, pretii 30 s.
de bonis and catallis ipsius I. S. tunc and ibidem existent' inventos felonice
cepit and abduxit, contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, coronam and dignitatem suas.

Et quod K. H. nuper de E. predict' in Com' predict' Horse-courser, sciens
prefat' A. B. feloniam predict' apud E. predict' modo and forma predict'
fecisse and perpetrasse eundem tamen A. B. apud E. predict' in Com' predict' 30
die dicti mensis Aug' anno supradicto felonice recepit and hospitio excepit
post feloniam predict' sic per ipsum A. B. ut prefertur fact' and commissum,
contra pacem dicti Domini nostri Regis nunc, ac contra coronam and regiam
dignitatem suas.

LXXXVIII. Lamb. Preced. 10. pl. 28. An Indictment against a Servant that
steals his Masters Goods committed to his keeping.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum A. B. de
E. dicto Com' Mercer, 20 die Septembr. anno regni, etc. in domo mansionali
ipsius A. B. apud E. predict' in Com' predict' deliberasset and cuidam E. F. de
E. predict' in dicto Com' Mercer, tunc serviens ipsius A. B. pro uno anno
integro retento ac etatis 19 annorum existenti 10 l. in pecuniis numeratis de
bonis ipsius A. B. ea intention ut idem E. F. easdem salvo custodivet ad usum
predict' A. B. tunc Magistri sui idem E. F. dicto 20 die Setembr. anno
supradict' (Apprenticius dicti A. B. tunc non existens) apud E. predict' in
Com' predict' a dicto Magistro suo una cum predict' 10 l. dicti A. B. tunc
Magistri sui malitiose and felonice discessit abiit and aufugit ea intention
ad furand' dictas 10 l. contra fiduciam in eo per prefat' A. B. tunc Magistrum
suum repositam and collocatam, and ad inde dictum A. B. Magistrum suum predict'
defraudand', contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, ac contra formam diversorum
Statutorum hujus regni Angliae in hujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum, 21 H.
8. 7.. 1. N. 2. and 5 Eliz. 10.

Corruption of Blood, see Coron. Corporal Pain, see Pain, Judgment. Costs, see
Damages. Cottages, see Poor. Counterfeits, see Forgery. County-Courts, see
Justices, Sheriffs. Courts, see Justices. Coupers, see Trades. Coynage, see
Money. Counsel, see Pleading. Cries, see Fresh-Suit. Crosss-Bows, see Games,
Wars. Crows, see Fowl. Cursing, see Oaths. Curriers, see Leather. Customers,
see Merchants, Admiral. Custus Rotulorum, see Peace. Cut-purses, see Coron.
Cutting of Tongues, Ponds, etc. see Coron.
Costs,
Damages.
I. 18 Eliz. 5.. 3. N. 3. And that if any such Informer ( viz. on penal Law,
etc.) shall willingly delay his Suit, or shall discontinue, or be Nonsuited,
or have Verdict or Judgment against him, then he shall yield, etc. unto the
party Defendant his Costs, Charges and Damages to be assigned by the Court in
which the same Suit shall be attempted.

Days.
Lent, Sabbath, Limitation.
LAmb. 4. cap. 4. page 452. Enquiry in Sessions if any person (other than by
reason of Age, Sickness, Childing, or License) have within this year eaten
Flesh in Lent, or upon any Fish day observed by the custom of this Realm, 2.
and 3, Ed. 6. 19.. N. and 5 Eliz. 5.. N.

II. Shepherds Clerks Cabinet, 17. cap. 3. A Warrant to any forfeiture, on 1.
Car. 1. cap. 1.. N.

W. S. Esquire, etc.
to the Constables and Tythingmen of D. within this County and every of them,
or to the Churchwardens of D. and C.
Whereas the persons undernamed, all of your Parish of D. within this County,
have been lawfully convicted before me, that the first day of May last past,
being the Lord's Day, did cause or maintain, or keep an Assembly, Meeting, or
Concourse, at Sale in this County, being out of their own Parish, for Sports
and Pastimes, viz. for Football and for Wrestling: ( or caused an Assembly,
Meeting, or Concourse of People for a Bear-bating, or for a Bull-bating, or for
a Common Play, or for Cards and Dice, or for Dancing, etc.) contrary to the
Acts of Parliament in that case provided, by which either of them has
forfeited 3. s. 4. d. a piece, for the use of the poor of your Parish, to be
levied by the Constables or Churchwardens by distress, and sale of the Goods of
the Offender; and in default of Distress, to be put in the Stocks three hours.
These are therefore to Authorize and Require you, forthwith to levy the same
Sum of 3. s. 4. d. of every of the said named persons, and of their Goods
respectively by distress and sale thereof, rendering to them the overplus. And
in case of lack of distress, that then you see that the same person or persons
lacking distress, be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of three hours,
and the same money forfeited being by you received, that you take care the same
be by you employed to the use of the Poor of your Parish, according to the said
Act; And hereof fail not, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal, the tenth day of, etc. W. S. of Dale,
Husbandman. I. S. of the same, Yeoman. K. L. of the same, Labourer. N. M. of
Sale, Yeoman.


III. Shepherds Clerks Cabinet, 19. cap. 30. Warrant on 3 Car. 1. cap. 1. Ways.
. N. for the forfeiture.

W. S. etc. To the Constables, etc.
It being duly proved before me, that I. S. of your Parish of D, Glouc. ss.
a common Carrier, etc. the first day of etc. Anno etc. being the Lords day, in
your Parish of D. aforesaid, did, being then a common Carrier, with his Horse,
etc. Travel into and through your said Parish of D. contrary to the Statute in
that case provided, by which he has forfeited twenty Shillings to the use of
the poor of your Parish of D. These are therefore to Authorize and Require you,
forthwith to levy the same twenty Shillings of the Goods of the said I. S. by
distress and sale thereof, rendering to him the overplus: And the same so by you
received, that you see it be employed to the use of the Poor of your Parish,
according to the intent of the same Statute, and hereof, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc. the tenth day of, etc.
II. ibid. A Warrant against a Butcher for killing meat on the Lords day,
Cattle.
on 3 Car. 1. cap. 1.

To the Constables and Tythingmen of D. and every of them; or to the
Churchwardens of D. etc. W. S. One of his Majesty's Justices for this County of
G. Glouc. ss.
assigned to keep the Peace, Greeting.
It being duly proved before me, that I. S. of your Town, Butcher, did in D.
aforesaid, the first day of May last past, being the Lords day, kill or cause
to be killed Victuals, to wit, one Calf (or did sell Victuals) contrary to the
Act of Parliament in that case provided; whereby he has forfeited 6. s. 8. d.
to the use of the Poor, etc. These are therefore to Authorize and Require you,
forthwith to levy the same 6. s. 8. d. etc. and hereof you are not to fail, etc.

Given, etc.
III. ibid.

To the Constables, etc.
It being duly proved before me, or some of his Majesty's Justices, etc. that
I. S. of your Parish, did, the first day of May last, Glouc. ss.
being the Lords day, at Dale aforesaid, without reasonable cause, carry
Burdens, viz. a Bushel of Wheat to a Mill there ( or do worldly Labor and
Work, viz. drive Cattle from one ground to another, half a mile distant)
contrary to the Act of Parliament in that case provided, by which he has
forfeited 5. s. to the use of the poor, etc. These are therefore to Authorize
and Require you, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal, etc.
Shepherds Clerks Cabinet, 20, 21. A Warrant upon 1 Car. 1. cap. 1. against
Officers for negligence.

Games.
To the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of N.
in the County of Glouc.
Glouc. ff.
Information and Complaint being given in and made unto us, W. S. and I. S. two
of his Majesty's Justices, etc. that the profanation of the Lords Day is very
much and frequently practiced within your Parish by disorderly meetings of
young people, by Gaming, Sports and Pastimes, Drinking, Tippling, and by other
means, contrary to the Laws in that case provided; and that you are negligent
in the duties laid upon you by the same Laws. These are therefore straightly to
charge you henceforth to look to it, that no such disorders be hereafter among
you, but that you forbid the same, and that you do from time to time, according
to the duty of your places, make diligent search for the finding out,
apprehending, and punishing of all them that shall be found offenders herein;
and that you do inform us hereof as occasion shall be: And that you or some of
you appear before the Justices of the Peace at the house of, etc. upon, etc. to
bring in the Names in writing of those persons who shall in the mean time
offend in the Premises. Letting you to know that if you fail hereof, we shall
not fail to inflict the punishment appointed by the same Laws upon you, for
your neglect therein.

Given under our Hands, etc.
Death, see Coron. Dear, see Forest. Deceit, see Collusion. Deeds, see
Inrollment. Dedimus Potestatem, see Oath. Demurrer, see Pleading. Denial of
Offense, see Proof. Deodand, see Coron. Departure, see Apprentice. Deputy, see
Officer. Denizen, see Alien.
Dignity.
Peers, Privilege nosine Trials.
Addition.
LAmbert 4. cap. 5. page 480. even so ought it to have been at the Common Law
also ( viz. before 1 H. 5. 5. of additions in Indictments; where process of
Outlawry lay etc.) as touching Names of Dignity made by Creation; as Duke,
Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Archbishop, Bishop, Knight, or Sergeant at Law;
because every of these Titles was accounted parcel of the Name: But it was not
so of the Names of Baron, Baneret, and Esquire, which are but Names of Dignity
without collation, nor of Chancellor, Treasurer, Chamberlain, Sheriff, Coroner,
Escheator, Bailiff, Dean, Archdeacon, Prebendary, or Parson: Which are Names
of Dignity by reason of Office only, unless the presentment did charge them in
respect of their Offices.

II. Lamb. 531. I mean by the word Nobility as our Law speaks, Nosine.
which calls none Noble under the degree of a Baron, and not as men of
foreign Countries, do use to speak; with whom every man of Gentile Birth is
accounted Noble: For we daily see that both Gentlemen and Knights do serve in
the Parliament as Members of the Commons: Howbeit in cases of forcible Entry,
Riot, and unlawful Assembly, or such like; they of the Nobility shall be tried
by twelve men, even as other inferior Subjects, 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. reported
by Dalison.

III. Crompt. 134, 135. A man who would have the Peace against a Lord, Peace.
or such a Great Man whom the Sheriff durst not Arrest, may have a Sub-poena
out of the Chancery against him of common right, as it was held in the
Exchequer Chamber by all the Justices, in the Case of the Duchess of Suffolk.

35 H. 6. Subpoena 20. Query, If he will not appear upon the Sub-poena, if he
shall have an Attachment; for it was held in the case of the Lord Cromwell in
Chancery, about 18 Eliz. that an Attachment does not lie against a Lord, where
he makes default upon a Sub-poena against him out of the Chancery, see Dyer
315. Pl. accord. see Rast. Entr. 29.

The Lord Tiploss threatened and assaulted another, and it was made appear, and
commanded that he should not meddle, who promised it, see 24 Ed. 3. 33
Contempts, Br. 6. the like mattec, 17 Ed. 4. 4.

IV. Dalt. I. S. 16. cap. 68. Recogn.
the Law has conceived such an opinion of the peaceable disposition of
Noblemen, that it has been thought enough to take one of their promises upon
his Honor, that he would not break the Peace against a man: And therefore if a
man shall have cause to have surety of the Peace against a Lord of the
Parliament, or such Great and Noble Personage, he shall not have a Warrant from
the Justices of the Peace to that purpose, nor yet have a Supplicant out of the
Chancery, directed to the Justices of Peace therefore; but if there be cause,
he shall have a Sub-poena 20. of common right, as it seems, out of the
Chancery, and there such Lord, etc. shall be bound to the Peace, etc. Contempt,
134.

V. Dalt. 161, 162. cap. 68. Arrest.
But though it be true, that the person of a Baron, who is a Peer of the
Parliament, shall not be arrested for, or in cases of Debt, or Trespass by his
Body, in respect of their Dignity and Sufficiency; yet in cases of Contempt it
seems they may be arrested by Capias or Attachment, etc. 27 A. 8. 22. b. 6
Co. 53, 54. and 11 H. 415. Replevin Br. 19. 9 Co. 45. or else it seems, that
the party may have the Peace in the Chancery against such Lord or Peer, to have
a Supplicant to the Sheriff, etc. F. N. B. 79.

VI. Dalt. 335. cap. 118. Process.
But the Justices of Peace are not to grant their Warrants for the Peace, or
the like, against any Nobleman: And yet if a Capias or Attachment shall be
awarded against a Baron or Peer of the Realm, from the Kings Justices at
Westminster, for a Contempt, or in case of Debt, or Trespass, the Officer
without any offense of Law, may execute the same, etc.

Distress, see Process and Replevin.
Drapery.
Cloth, Dyers, Wool, Logwood.
I. LAmbert 3. cap. 1. page 331. Two such Justices quorum unus, Corporation.
may once every year appoint Overseers for the whole year following, of Cloth
to be made or sold in any Town, not being Corporate, and may charge them upon
their Oaths to see execution of some parts of the Statute, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 2 P.
I. N. 1 Dalt. 42. cap. 14.

Officer.
II. Lamb. 364. If any person, commanded by two Justices of Peace to appear, to
be made an Overseer, to see 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 2. 12. N. 1. kept, do without
reasonable excuse refuse to come, and to take upon him that Office; he is to
forfeit for every such refusal, 40. s. and thereof those Justices are appointed
to have the one half.

Collusion.
III. Lamb. 461, 462. Inquiry at Sessions on 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 2. 1. N. 1. If any
Clothier have not set his Seal of Lead unto his Cloth, thereby declaring the
just length thereof, to be tried by the water. (2.) If any person have
stretched any Cloth above one yard and a half in length, or one quarter of a
yard in breadth, or have put to sale any Cloth, that has shrunk more in the
wetting than is aforesaid, or have stretched any narrow, strait, or Kersey,
above one yard in length or a quarter in breadth, or have put any such to sale.
(3.) If any Dyer of Woollen Cloth have dyed any Brown, Blews, or Pewbs,
Tawnies, or Violets, that were not perfectly boiled, greened, or maddered upon
the Woad, and that with good Cork or Orchald sufficiently. (4.) If any have
dyed any Wool for Cloth called Russets, Marbles, Grays, Bays, or such like; or
Furr Hats or Caps, unless it were perfectly woaded, boiled, and maddered, or
have died with Brazil, to the intent to make a false color in any such Cloth
or Wool, or have put any Flox, Calf, Starch, or other deceivable thing upon
any Cloth, except certain Devonshire and Cornwall Straits: Or, (5.) Have
occupied any Iron Cards or Picards in Rowing of any woollen Cloth, have sold
any Cloth of any less measure than after the true content thereof by the Yard
and Inch; or have put to sale in this Realm any Cloth, being pressed, to be
occupied in England, Wales, or Ireland. 6. If any Overseers of Cloth, appointed
by the Justices of Peace for this year, have refused to be Overseers, or have
not within their charge made due search thereof once every Quarter, and if any
person have interrupted them to make such search. Dalt. 44, 45. cap. 14.

Justices.
IV. Lamb. 355. Two Justices of Peace dwelling next any City or Town, where any
Retailer of woollen Cloth shall present unto them any defective Cloth against 5
and 6 Ed. 6. 6. 31. N. 1. (being conferred with 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. 5. 34. N.
1.) shall cause the same to be cut into three equal parts, whereof the one to
be to the King, the other to the Prosecutors, and the third to the Justices
themselves, Lamb. 364. Crompt. 200. Dalt. 44. cap. 14.

Measures.
V. Lamb. 462, 463. Inquiry in Sessions on 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 6. 4. N. and 4 and 5
Ph. and Mar. 5. 4. N. 1. If any Kentish Broad Cloth, except course Cloth only,
not exceeding 6. li. price, has been made, that contains not in length
between eight and twenty and thirty Yards being wet, and in breadth seven
Quarters within the Lists, and in weight seventy six pounds, being well
scowred, thicked, milled, and fully dried; and so changing it after their rates
for other Countries, as by these Statutes appears.

Market overt.
VI. Lamb. 463. For regrating of Woolls by Halifax men, see 2 and 3 Ph* and Mar.
13.

Trades.
VII. Lamb. 463. Inquiry, etc. If any person have used, or caused to be used,
any racking, beating, or casting of any deceitful Liquor or other mean, with
any kind of Linen Cloth, whereby the same became deceitful, or the worse for
the good use thereof, 1 Eliz. 13. Dalt. 45. cap. 14.

Justices.
VIII. Lamb. 330. Any two Justices of Peace may dispose of the moneys, rising by
the deceitful stretching of the Northern Cloth, etc. 39 Eliz. 20.. 4. N. 1.
Crompt. 97. and 4 Jac. 2.

Forfeiture.
IX. Crompt. 198. Any two Justices of Peace of the County, where any Logwood
alias Blockwood shall be found, in whose hands soever it shall be, may openly
burn it as forfeited, 23 Eliz. 9.. 2. N. 1.

Justices.
X. Dalt. 42. cap. 14. Every Justice of Peace may enter in and upon any Houses,
Lands, or Grounds, and make search for any Tainters, Wrenches, or orher Engines
whatsoever, whereby any deceit may be used in or about the stretching of any
woollen Cloth, and may utterly deface the same Tainters, etc. And for the
second offense may sell them away to the best value thereof, 39 Eliz. 20.. 8.
N. 1. and 43 Eliz. 10.. 9. N. 1.

XI. Dalt 45. cap. 14. Process.
Any two or more Justices of the Peace within the County, City, Borough, or
Town Corporate, where deceivable Cloth shall be made or suspected to be made,
upon complaint or Information of any Overseer, Searcher, or any other, of any
such offense; may grant their Warrant to call before them any person or
persons, that in their discretions shall be thought fit to discover any such
offense; and may examine upon Oath any such persons, for the Trial and better
finding out of the said offense: And if upon such Examination, it shall be
found by Testimony of two Witnesses or more, or by the Confession of the
Offender, that any such offense has been committed; the same shall be a
sufficient conviction of the offense, and then the said Justices shall or may
certify such offense unto the Churchwardens and Overseers for the time being,
of the Poor of the Parish, where such deceivable Cloth shall be made, under the
Hands and Seals of the said Justices: And upon such Certificate, and a Warrant
made by the said Justices to the said Overseers and Churchwardens for the
levying of the forfeiture; the said Overseers and Churchwardens, or any of
them, or their or any of their Successors, immediately from and after such
Certificate or Warrant delivered to them or any of them, may levy the sum or
sums of money, which by the said Certificate and Warrant shall appear to be
forfeited by way of distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to the
Offender the overplus, etc. And in defect of such distress, the said two
Justices may commit the Offender to the common Gaol, there to remain without
Bail until payment shall be made of the sums so forfeited, to the said
Overseers and Churchwardens, or some or one of them, 21 Jac. 18.. 2. N. 1.

XII. Dalt. 45. cap. 14. Justices.
Any two Justices of the Peace may take order between the Clothier and his
Spinsters, Carders, Kembers, Sorters, and Weavers, which shall unjustly or
deceitfully convey away, imbezil, sell, or detain any part of the Wool or Yarn
delivered to them, 7 Jac. 7.. 2. N. 1.

XIII. Lamb. 446. Wool.
Inquiry in Sessions if any person have bought any Woollen, Yarn, and have not
made Cloth thereof, 8 H. 6. 5. N. or have bought any Wool but of the owner of
the Sheep and of the Tithe, 14 Rich. 2. 4.. N.

XIV. Pract. Prec. 91, 92. An Indictment for cozening of Clothiers. Collusion.


London. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. nuper
de I. in Com' predict' Mercator Scissor est persona valde mali nominis and
famae and conversationis inhonestae, communis deceptor and defraudator
subditorum dicti Domini Regis, and quod ipse 30 die November. anno, etc. apud L.
viz. in parochia Sancti B. etc. and diversis aliis locis and diebus infra
Civitat' predict' tam antea que postea quendam T. R. de Civitate W. Clothier,
and multos alios fideles subditos dicti Domini Regis decepit and defraudavit
and per fraudem astutiam and deceptionem diversos Pannos Laneos Angl' vocal'
Broad-Cloths. Tam de predict' T. R. quam de diversis aliis dicti Domini Regis
subditis perquisivit habuit and percepit in depauperationem subditorum dicti
Domini Regis and in pessimum and pernitiosissimum exemplum aliorum ligeorum and
subditorum dicti Domini Regis in hujusmodi casu delinquentium and contra pacem
dicti Domini Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem suas and contra form' Statuti in
hujusmodi casu editi and provisi*

Discretion, see Justices. Discontinuance, see Process. Disturbers, see Riot,
Force. Divine Service, see Religion. Dogs, see Cattle. Doves, see Fowl. Draw
Latches, see Coron. Drovers, see Cattle. Drunkenness, see Ale. Dures, see
Imprisonment. Dyers, see Drapery.
Ecclesiastic Persons.
Person, Incumbent, Church Ordinary.
Pope.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 4. page 405. Article of Charge in Sessions if any have within
this half year, by Writing, Printing, Teaching, express Deed, or Act,
advisedly, maliciously, and directly affirmed, held in, set forth, or defended
the Authority, Pre-eminence, Power, or Jurisdiction, Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical of any foreign Prince or Person whatsoever, heretofore claimed,
used, or usurped, etc. 1 Eliz. 1.. N. 5 Eliz. 1.. 3. N. 1. and 23 Eliz. 1.. 8.
N. 1.

Incumbent.
II. Lamb. 411. ibid. Inquiry if any person has of purpose, maliciously, or
contemptuously molested, or by any unlawful means misused any Preacher lawfully
Authorized, in any his open Sermon or Preaching in any Church or other place
used, or to be appointed; and who were his Aiders, Procurers or Abettors, 1
Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3.. 3. N. 1. learn if this Statute do stand for this part.

Religion.
III. Lamb. 412. Inquiry if any Parson, Vicar, or Minister, have refused to use
the Common Prayer, or to Minister the Sacraments according to the Book of
Common Prayer, or wilfully standing in the same, have used any other form in
open Prayers, or in administration of the Sacraments, or have spoken any thing
in derogation of the said Book, or any part thereof: Or if any have caused or
maintained any Parson, Vicar, or Minister, to say any Common Prayer, or to
Minister any Sacrament in any other manner than after the said Book; or have
interrupted any Parson, Vicar, or Minister, to say open Prayer, or to
administer any Sacrament according to the said Book, 1 Eliz: 2.. N. and 23
Eliz. 1.. N.

Religion.
IV. Crompt. 12. a. b. Item, You shall inquire, etc. If such Ecclesiastical
Person who should say Common Prayer, and Minister the Sacraments in any
Cathedral or Parochial Church, or other place; has not within this year and
day, said and used matters, even to the administration of the Sacraments, and
all their Common and open Prayers in such order and form, as is mentioned in
the Books of Common Prayer, authorized by Parliament, etc. By the said Statute
23 Eliz. 1.. 8, 9. Justices of Peace may enquire within the Year and Day, but
cannot hear and determine; but the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or of Assize,
may hear and determine; But see if a Justice of Peace cannot award Process upon
the Indictment, until he appear and plead to the Indictment: And then for
Trial, find the Record in B. R. to the intent it shall be tried by Nisi Prius;
or if he shall send the Indictment in B. R. immediately, without awarding
Process; because they have no authority by the Statute, 23 Eliz. 1.. 8. but
only to enquire.

V. Crompt. 16. b. Schools.
Charge in Sessions if any has kept or maintained any Schoolmaster, who does
not resort to the Church, as is mentioned in 23 Eliz. 1.. N. or who is not
allowed by the Ordinary of the same Diocese where such Schoolmaster shall be
kept; he shall forfeit 10. li. every month, for keeping such Schoolmaster: And
every Schoolmaster presuming to instruct Youth, being thereof convict, shall be
disabled and shall be imprisoned for a year without Bail or Mainprize, 1 Jac.
4.. N.

VI. West. Symb. 2. part 137. b. sect. 239. Bastardy.
An Indictment of a Priest for keeping a Concubine, Pract. Prec. 74.

Warwick. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si H. R. nuper de K. in Com' W. Clericus primo die
Decembr. Anno Regni etc. Vi and Armis Deum per oculis suis non habens: Nec
legem Dei and Domini Regis timens and ordinem Sacerdotalem nihil regardans
tanquam Ribaldus and Luxuriosus and Riotose sicut transgressor malefactor, and
pacis Domini Regis perturbator irregulariter and extra legis morem and honestam
vitae virtuosae and Sacerdotiae dignitatis seipso utens apud K. predict' in
com' predict' hospitium illicitum levavit and custodivit and quandam A. B.
mulierem defamat' and stuprosam public ac notorie custodivit occupavit and
habuit and ipsam A. B. a predict' primo die Dec. Anno supradict' adtunc and
ibidem continuand' and adhuc quotidiae and noctanter manifest and aperte
custodivit occupavit and habet in communi stupro lemocinum in maximum
periculosum exemplum aliorum malefactorum contra pacem dicti Domini Regis etc.

Market.
VII. Pract. Preced. 77. An Indictment of a sp. Parson for buying and selling,
on 21 H. 8. 13.. 5. N. 1.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod cum in
Statuto in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl' 8.apud Westminster Anno
Regni sui 21. Tent' Edit' inter caetera ordinat' sit quod nulla spiritualis
persona seu personae secular' vel regular' cujuscunque status seu gradus fuit
deinceps per seipsum nec per aliquem alium per se, nec ad ejus usum
Barganizaret and Emeret ad vendend' pro lucro seu perficiu in aliquibus
mercatis feriis seu aliis locis aliqua catalla grana, seu plumbum pisces sanam
Boscum etc. seu aliquos victus, seu merchandizas cujuslibet generis fuit
subpoena furisfact' triplum valorem cujuslibet rei per eas seu eorum aliquem ad
eorum usum Barganizat' and Emp' ad revendend' in contrarium illius presentis
actus and quod quilibet hujusmodi Barganizatio seu contractus imposterum per
eas fiendum seu per aliquam alium ad eorum usum in contrarium ejusdem actus
penitus forent vacuae and nullius effectus and quod una medietas cujuslibet
talis foris facturae esset Domino Regi and altera medietas inde illi qui voluit
persequi pro eadem per breve Original' debit: Billam seu informat' in aliquibus
curiis Domini Regis in qua action seu secta nulla vadiat' legis per defend'
admittetur nec aliquod essom' nec protectio allocetur prout in Statut' predict'
before continetur.

Quidam tamen A. N. etc. de com' predict' Clericus Statut' predict' minime
ponderans 8. die Maii, Anno Regni etc. Emit' 10. boniculos Angl' Steers pretii
eorum cujuslibet 30. s. and illos cuidam ignot' postea pro lucro and proficiuo
suo revendidit contra form' Statut' predict' ac contra pacem dicti Domini Regis
nunc Coron' and dignitat' suas.

VIII. Pract. Preced. 173. An Indictment for not wearing the Surplice.
Encumbent.


Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. nuper
de C. in com' predict' Clericus die dominica viz. 1. die Sept. Anno Regni etc.
apud C. predict' in com' predict' viz. in Ecclesia Parochiali ibidem palam and
public dicebat and usus fuit preces matutinas and vespertinas Anglice vocat'
Morning and Evening Prayers, diversis Parochianis and Inhabitantibus ejusdem
parochiae in Ecclesia predict'. Ad tunc and ibidem presentibus and existentibus
non Judens vel utens tempore dictionis precationum predictorum aliquo super
pellico vocat a Surplice, aut aliquo alio ornamento Ecclesiae assignat'
Clericis and Ministris utendum infra hoc Regnum Angliae tempore dictionis
precationum predict' and quod predictus A. B. predicto die Sept. Anno
supradict, viz. tempore dictionis precationum predict' apud C. predict' in
Ecclesia Parochiali predict' in com' predict' omnino recusavit Induere sive uti
aliquo super pellico contra form' Statut' in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi
and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Eggs, see Fowl. Egyptians, see Poor. Embracery, see Maintenance, Enquest.
Embezelling, see Collusion, War. Encumbent, see Ecclesiastic Persons.
Endictment see Indictment. Enfant, see Infant.
Enquest.
Jurors, Charge, Challenge.
Fees.
I. 9 H. 3. 26. Magna Charta, Nothing shall be taken for Enquest of Life or
Member.

Amerciament.
II. 52 H. 3. 24. Justices in Eyr shall not amerce Townships, because all above
12 do not appear, so there be a full Enquest, except on Death of a man.

Sheriffs.
III. 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 11. Favorable Enquests shall not be taken by
Sheriffs, by the Writ de odio and alia, but by lawful men chosen by Oath,
whereof two at least shall be Knights.

Coron.
IV. 4 Ed. 1. page 28. St. 2. cap. 1.. 1. N. 2. de Officio Coronatores. Upon the
Oath of four, five or six of the next Towns, he shall enquire on the body of
parties slain, the manner, etc.

Writs.
V. 6 Ed. 1. cap. 9.. 1. N. 1. Gloucester No Writ shall be granted out of the
Chancery for the death of a man, to enquire whether a man did kill another by
misfortune, or in his own defense, or in other manner, without Felony.

Challenge.
VI. 33 Ed. 1. Ordinance for Enquests, page 69.. 1. N. 1. Of Enquests to be
taken before any of the Justices, notwithstanding it be alleged by them that
sue for the King, that the Jurors of those Enquests, or some of them be not
indifferent for the King; yet such Inquests shall not remain untaken for that
cause.

Leet.
VII. The 33 Articles of Charge in view of Frank-pledge, 18 Ed. 2. page 84.

Alien.
VIII. 14 Ed. 3, 4.. 1. N. 2. Englishire shall not be given in charge, etc.

Challenge.
IX. 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 3. No Indicter shall be put in Enquests upon the
deliverance of Indicters of Felonies or Trespass, if he be challenged for the
cause, etc.

Process.
X. 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 4. None shall be taken by Petition or Suggestion,
made to the King or Council, unless it be by Indictment or Presentment, etc.

XI. 42 Ed. 3, 4.. 1. N. 2. Commissions.
Commissions of Enquiry shall be made to some Justices, etc. Poult. de Pace 169
b.. 1.

XII. 11 H. 4. 9.. 1. N. 3. Retorn.
No Indictment to be made but by Enquests Returned by Sheriffs without any
denomination of parties, etc. Lambert 391. Dalt. Sheriff. 119. b.

XIII. 8 H. 6. 9.. 4. N. 1. Shall have Forty Shillings per Ann. Ability.
that Enquire of forcible Entry.

XIV. 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 4. Process.
The Justices of Peace of every Shire may take by their discretion an Inquest
thereof, each to have xl. s. etc. per Ann. to enquire of the Concealments of
other Enquests taken before them, and before others, of such matters and
offenses as are to be Inquired and Presented before Justices of the Peace,
whereof complaint shall be made by Bill. etc. as well within Franchise as
without 33 H. 8. 6.. 20. N. 1. Lamb. 396.

XV. 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 5. Amerciament.
And if any such Concealment be found of any Enquest, etc. had or made within
the year after the same Concealment, every person of the same Enquest to be
Amerced, etc. by the discretion of the same Justices of Peace, the said
Amerciaments to be sessed in plain Sessions.

3 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 4. Sheriffs.
All Pannels to be Returned which be not at the suit of any party that shall be
made and put in by every Sheriff and their Ministers before any Justice of Goal
Delivery or Justice of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, in their open
Sessions to Enquire for the King, shall be reformed by putting in and taking
out of the Names of the persons which are to be Impannelled by every Sheriff
and their Ministers, by discretion of the same Justice, before whom such
Pannels shall be Returned, Lamb. 395. Dalt. Sheriff. 120. Poult. de Pac. 173..
8.

XVII. Articles of charge in the Sessions in Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 399.
Sessions.
in Crompt. 11. b 12. a Boult. 2. page 83.

XVIII. Lambert 396. And because the Jurors of those days ( viz 3 H. 7.
Justices.
1.. 1. N. 4.) were yet wilful in their Concealments, it was provided within
Eight years after ( viz. 11 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 3.) that the Justices of Peace
should determine Causes upon Information, without any such Presentment, but
many times in vitium ducit culpae fuga, and therefore that Ordinance endured
not long, etc. (1 H. 8. 6.. 2. N. 3.)

XIX. Lambert 525. Trials.
So that now again the Trial of offenses ought for the most part to proceed
either after the general order of the Common Law, or upon such special
Examination, or other proof, as some Statutes do give in special Cases, and
this hearing at Liberty and Discretion has seldom any place.

XX. Lambert 4. cap. 3. page 393. Retorn.
Our Common manner in Kent (agreeing with the form of the Precept) is to return
particular Juries for the Hundreds, and one general Jury for the body of the
Shire; this last is made up with us for the most part of the Constables only,
and those others if they be not filled at the first, are wont to remain, and to
be renewed with the Rules from Sessions to Sessions: but that usage is no small
hinderance to the service as many do think, by reason that those particular
Juries being seldom served with full appearance, the whole Enquiry stands
only upon their labor that are Impannelled for the body of the Shire, that is
to say upon one man of each Hundred, or two at most, who cannot be thought to
see so much as a whole Jury of Eyes both do and may see, and therefore they
think that it were good to make up some of the particular Juries also when they
be not full de Circumstantibus of other Hundreds, by which means, either the
whole Shire, or at the least a great many parts thereof might perused and
serve; and to this Opinion Mr. Marrow seems to incline, saying, That in
default of those which are Returned, the Justices may take a Jury de
Circumstantibus, and hereunto also 3 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 5. shows good Consent.

Lieu.
XXI. Lambert 394. Neither is it to be objected that men being all of one Shire,
may not take knowledge of things done in diverse Hundreds, seeing they have
diverse occasions of meeting together, as at the County Court, the Sheriffs
turns, the Assizes, and General Quarter Sessions; and if a Jury of one Hundred
would make Presentment of an offense done within any part of the Shire (out of
their own Hundred) this were good in Law.

Justices.
XXII. Lambert 395. And the Justices may upon cause remove a Juror after he is
Sworn, 20 H. 6. 5. Again, if after the Swearing of the Jury, their service be
put off till the next day upon any urgent occasion, then may they be Sworn of
new, as if they had not before appeared, 7 H. 4. 38.

Verdit.
XXII. Lambert 395. Each Jury of Enquiry ought to contain XII. in number at the
least, and if there be XVIII. or more it shall not be amiss: Yea it is a common
order with us to have them of an odd number, as XIX or XXI. to the end as it
seems, that if they should dissent in opinion somewhat equally; yet there
should be always one to weigh down the side, and cast the Balance: but if XII
of them do agree, the gainsaying of the residue cannot hinder the Presentment:
yea the Law was in the time of King Etheldred, that in a Jury of XII. the
agreement of VIII. should prevail and make a good Verdit; although for a long
time together it has been, and is yet otherwise used.

Imprisonment
XXIV. Lambert 395. 396. The Justices ought not to Commit these Jurors of
Enquiry to any keeper, nor to keep them without meat or drink, nor to carry
them out of the Town, and yet they may adjourn them to another place to give
their Verdit.

Evidence.
XXV. Lambert 396, 397. Nevertheless it is to be wished that these and such
other Enquirors would more carefully employ themselves in that service, which
is the chief and almost the only ground whereupon the Justices are to work,
etc. and this shall they the better do if they will be directed by these few
Counsels. 1. That they come prepared to further the Good of their Country, and
not to save their Issues, or to serve for fashion sake. 2. That they give
Credit to Credible persons sworn to Inform them. 3. That they measure their
doings by the right line of Law, and not by the crooked cord of pretended
Equity and counterfeit conscience. 4. That they hold not a Court of Common Plea
by admitting proof of Witnesses against the King, as knowing that they are not
to try an Issue, but to offer an Information, the truth or falsehood whereof
shall be tried by another Jury. 5. That they discover not their own doings, etc.

Maintenance.
XXVI. West. Symb. 2. part 112. 130. An Indictment of Embracery and taking
money, etc. contra to 38 Ed. 3. 12. Lamb. Precedents 14. b. 15. Pl. 39.

Essex. ss.
Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod A.B.C.D. etc.
( naming all the Jurors, etc.) Jurat' in quadam Assiza Novae disseisinae quae
nupersummonita fuit Coram dilectis and fidelibus dicti Domini Regis, etc. L. M.
N. O. etc. nuper Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis nunc ad Assizam illam capiend'
per breve ipsius Domini Regis inter W. S. and J. H. de tenement' in N. in Com'
E. predict' and postmodum (viz. die Lunae etc. Anno etc. Coram prefat' L. M. N.
O. etc. apud M. in Com' E. predict' per breve ipsius Domini Regis si non omnes
capt' posit') pro veredicto suo in hac part dicenddo de prefat' J. H. diversas
pecuniarum summas viz. A. B. de predict' J. H. XL. s. and alia dona scil'
panem, serevicium and vinum ad valenc' 20 s. illigitime ceperunt etc. and
predict' J. K. (Imbraciator ejusdem Assizae ad eandemducend' and procuran'd) de
prenominato W.S. summam december marcarum 20 die Aug. An. Regni, etc. apud M.
predict' in Com' E. illigitime ceperunt in dicti Domini Regis nunc contempt'
and contra formam Cujusmodi Statut' in Parliamt' Domini Ed. olim Regis Angliae
tertii Anno Regni sui 38. tento in hujusmodi Casu provisi ac Editi.

XXVII. West. Symb. 2. part 112.. 131. Fees.
Another Indictment reciting 38 Ed. 3. 12. and 34 Ed. 3. 8. Crompt. 261. pl. 95.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacrament' suum dicunt quod ubi in parliamnt'
Domini Ed. nuper Regis Ang. tertio progenitoris Domini Regis nunc Ann Regni sui
38. tent' inter caetera concordat' existit quod si aliqui Jurat' in Assiza
Jurat' seu aliquibus inquisitionibus capiend' inter Domin' Regem and partem vel
inter partem and partem quicquid capiant per ipsos vel per alios de part
conquerent' vel defendent' pro veredict' suo dicend' and super hoc per
processum in quodam Articulo de Jurat' Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis 34.
factum convincantur sive sit ad sectam partis aut alterius cujuscunque personae
qui pro Domino Rege aut pro seipso prosequi voluerit solvat quilibet dictor'
Jurat' decies tantum quantum ipse recepit and habeat ille qui sectam produxit
unam medietatem and Dominus Rex alteram meditatem and quod omncs Imbraciatores
ducent' and procurant' tales inquisitiones in patria pro lucro vel proficuo
puniantur eisdem modo and forma sicut Jurat' and si Jurat' vel Imbraciat' Ita
convictus non habeat unde in forma predict' satisfacere possit habeat
Imprisonament' unius Anni prout in ordinatione and concordia predict'
continetur.

Quidam tamen J.H. J.B. and J.C. Jurat' etc. in quadam Assiza Novae dissesinae
qui nuper summonit' fuit Coram dilectis and fidelibus Domini Regis A. B. C. D.
E. F. etc. nuper Justiciariis Domini Regis nunc ad assizam illam capiend'
assignati per breve ipsius Domini Regis nunc inter W. S. de L. and M. de
tenement' in R. and S. in Com' E predict' and postmodum ( viz. decimo die etc.
Anno etc. Coram prefat' A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. apud W. in Com' predict' per
breve Domini Regis nunc si non omnes capt' posit' pro veredicto suo in has
part dicendo de prefat' J. H. diversas pecuniarium summas viz. predict' J. H.
xl d. predict' J. B. xl s. and predict' J. C. V. marcas 20. die October. Anno
etc. apud etc. ceperunt in dicti Domini Regis contempt' and contra form'
ordinationis and concordiae predict' etc.

XXVIII. Nota 38 Ed. 3. 12.. 1. N. 5. Justices.
No Justice nor other Minister shall enquire of office upon any of the points
of this Article, but only at the suit of the party or of other, etc.

Enterludes see Games. Entry see Force.
Escape.
Fresh Suit, Imprisonment, Bayl.
I. 18 Ed. 2. page 84.. 32. the view of Fr. Pledge to enquire of persons
Imprisoned, and let go without Bayl. Leet.


II. Lambert 134, 135. If the Constables do arrest one that has hurt another,
Constable.
and do voluntarily suffer him to escape, and then he that was hurt dies
thereof within the year and day, the Constable shall make a great Fine, and
that to the value of his Goods in the opinion of some 11 H. 4. 2. Lambert 228.
and Stamf. 35. but yet the offense shall not have such relation to the time of
the stroke, as to make the escape to become felony thereby, Com. 263. Crompt.
39.. 5. Poult. de pace 148.. 3. Dalt. 274. c. 106

Justices.
III. 1 Rich. 3 Cap. 3.. 1. N. 3. That Justices of Peace have Authority to
Enquire in their Sessions of all manner of Escapes of every person Arrested and
Imprisoned for felony, Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 434. Crompton 40.. 13.

Bayl.
IV. Crompt. 39.. 7. A Justice of Peace sends for a Felon who is in the Goal,
and delivers him without Bond for his appearance, and afterward he is
Indicted, it seems this is a voluntary Escape, for he is the cause that he
comes not to his Trial; and so where a man confesses a felony before a
Justice of Peace, and he lets him go without Bail, but a thing that is done pro
defectu scientiae is not Felony 2 R. 3. 10. Poult. de Pace 149. b.. 9. Boult.
97. Cap. 22.

Arrest.
V. Crompt. 40.. 10. If a man be arrested for suspicion of Felony, and delivered
to a servant to carry him to the Goal, and he suffers him voluntarily to
Escape, the Master shall not be Impeacht for this, but he that suffered the
Escape, per Curiam 10 Ed. 4. 17. Poult. de Pace 150. b.. 19. Coron. 328. 337.

Indictment.
VI. Crompt. 40.. 15. A man stole certain sheep and sold them, and another took
him for suspicion, and delivered him to the Bailif and 4 others to keep, who
let him go because they had no Indictment, nor other thing against him, and
afterward the Theif was Indicted, and thereupon the Constable and the 4. were
charged with the Escape, because he was arrested for suspicion of the Felony,
43 Ed.. 3. 36. and N. Ass. 12. Boult. 96. Stamf: 35. b.

Amerciament.
VI. 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 6. The Law of the Land is, that if any man be slain in
the day, and the felon not taken, the Township where the Death or Murder is
done shall be Amerced, Dalt. 291. Crompt. 40, b. 41. a. Poult. de Pace 150. a.
b.. 14. 22.

Imprisonment.
VIII. Dalt. 272. cap. 106. If a Jailer, a Constable, or any other which has a
Prisoner under Arrest for Felony or suspicion thereof, voluntarily lets or
suffers him to go at liberty; tho this be no breaking of Prison, yet this is
Felony in the Jailer, Constable, or him that lets such Prisoner escape, but
it is no Felony in the Prisoner, but if such a Prisoner shall escape by the
negligence of his Keeper, then the Felony rests in the Prisoner only, and not
in the Jailer, etc. Escape Br. 32. Stanf. 31.

Traverse.
IX. Poult. de Pace 151.. 28. And touching those which be Prisoners of Record,
the Keeper of the Prison cannot traverse the Escape, but confess and avoid it,
as in alleging that the Prison was Burnt or Broken by the Kings Enemies, or by
saying that he which is supposed to be escaped is not the same Prisoner which
was Committed to him.

Process.
X. Poult. de Pace 151.. 29. A Prisoner by matter in fact is, where one is
Prisoner by Arrest only, whether it be by the Sheriff, the Constable, or any
other, and he does escape, there the Escape shall be presented before he answer
unto it, and this Presentment ought to be before the Justices, etc. that they
have Authority to enquire thereof, as appears 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 3. Dalt.
275. cap. 106. Stanf. 35. 11. Co. 64, 65.

Imprisonment.
XI. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 227. Now as to this purpose it is called a breach
of Prison, whether it be out of the Goal, Stocks, or Possession of any that
has the keeping of the party arrested for Felony, tho he be not Indicted
thereof before, Coron. 158. Dyer 99. a. pl. and 312. pl. Stanf. 35. Boult. 93,
cap. 22.

Marriage
XII. Dalt. 272. cap. 106. If the Jailer or Keeper shall Marry a Felon which is
in his Goal, this is an Escape, but Quaere if it be Felony in the Jailer or no.

Officer.
XIII. Dalt. 273. cap. 106. But in these Cases ( viz. on 14 Ed. 3 c. 10.. 1. N.
3.) I have observed the favorable exposition and dealing of the learned and
Reverend Judges. I. In 9. Co. 98. that the Goalers who have the actual
possession, shall be answerable for Escapes, if they have wherewith. Also II.
Popham Chief Justice did cause one Stoner a Jailer at Cambridge, to be
Indicted, Arraigned, and Hanged for the Escape of a Felon suffered by him.

XIV. Dalt. 273. cap. 106. in Dr. and St. 135, 137. cap. 42. Lach.
This difference is taken, that if the Escape were by default ( scil. a
negligent Escape) of the Jailer, that the King may charge the Jailer if he
will, or the Sheriff may be charged by reason of the Statute 14 Ed. 3. 10.. 1.
N. 3. But if it be a wilful Escape in the Jailer, which is Felony in him, the
Sheriff shall not be found to answer to the Felony, but there the Sheriff may
be fined to the value of his Goods.

XV. Dalt, 275. cap. 106. Watch.
If a Watchman shall take any man for suspicion of Felony, he may Inquire of
his Good Name and Fame, and if he finds him to be of Good Name and Fame, he may
let him go. See the Old Justice of Peace, Imprinted Anno 1559. fol. 13. But it
were more safe for the Watchman to deliver such suspected person to the
Constable, or to the Sheriff, according to the Statute of Winchester 13 Ed. 1.
and 2. cap. 4.. 1. N. 6.

XVI. West. Presidents. 2. part 104. tit. Offenses. 105. Coron.
An Indictment against a Jailer, for suffering of one Committed to him upon
suspicion of Felony for stealing of an Horse to Escape.

Kanc ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege (super sacramentum suum) presentant qd' ubi quidam
A. R. nuper de C. in dicto Com' Kant. Shoemaker sexto di Maii Anno Regni etc.
apud C. predict' in Commitatu K. predict' pro suspicione cujusdam feloniae
(viz. unius Equi Coloris Albi pretii x l. solid' felonice per eundem A. B. ut
dicebatur capti and abducti Arrestatus est and Captus and Coram T. F. uno
Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in dicto Comitatu conservand' assignat'
ductus and superinde postea viz. dictis die Anno and loco cuidam B. D. in
Comitatu K. predct' Yeoman custodi Goalae dicti Domini Regis apud M. in dicto
Comitatu K. existent' (sub custodia I. F. Armigeri adtunc Vicecomes Comitatus
K. predict' and Custodis Goal predict') per quoddam preceptum de Mittimus
dicti T. F. Justiciarii Idem A. B. traditus est and Commissus ad salvo and
secure Custodiendum in Goala predicta Donecidem A. B. inde foret legitimo modo
deliberatus praefatus tamen I.F. nunc Vicecomes postea, viz. 7 die dicti mensis
Maii Anno supradict' apud M. predict' in Com' K. predict' prefatum A. B. (ad
tunc and ibidem in dictis Goala and Custodia existent') a predict' Custodia and
Goala adtunc and ibidem evadere and ad largum ire voluntar' and felonice
permisit contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and dignitatem suam, etc.

Lamb. Precedents 12. b.. 33. Boult. 3. cap. page 55.. 52.

West. Precedents 2. part 135.. 106. Another Indictment against a Jailer for
suffering of a Woman Committed to him upon suspicion of Felony and Murder to
Escape.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domina Regina quod cum quidam M. N. nuper de B. in predict'
Comitatu E. Spinster 10 die April. Anno etc. pro suspitione feloniae and murdri
per ipsam M. apud B. predict' in Com' E. predict' super quendam W. L. fieri and
perpetrari suppositi capt' and arrestat fuit' apud B. predict' in Com' E.
predict' and eisdem die and Anno predict' M. cuidam Richardo B. de N. in Com'
E. predict' Yeoman Custodi Goalae dictae Dominae Reginae Com' predict' sub
Georgio P. Armigero ad tunc Vicecom' Comitat' predict' and Custod' Goalae
predict' per quoddam breve de Mittimus W.M. Militis and J.M. Armig' duo Justic'
dictae Dominae Reginae ad pacem in eodem Comitatu conservand' assignat' salvo
and secure Custodiend' tradita fuit Quorsque eadem M. a Custodia illa secend'
legem and consuetudinem Regni Angl' pro suspitione murdri predict' acquietat'
sive deliberat' foret si predict' R. B. de N. predict' in predict Comitatu E.
Yeoman postea scil. 26 de November. Anno supradict' Apud M. predict' in Com' E.
predict' Predict' M. adtunc and ibidem in Custodia ipsius R. in Goala dictae
Dominae Reginae existent' a Goala predicta adtunc and ibidem voluntary and
felonice evadere and ad largum Ire permisit contra pacem dictae Dominae
Reginaenunc etc.

Crompt. 252.. 65. Boult. 3. page 56.. 53.

XVIII. West. Presidents 2. part 105.. 107. An Indictment against diverse, for
suffering one which had confessed a Felony before a Justice of Peace, and
delivered to them by the same Justice of Peace, to be by them conveyed to the
Goal, negligently to Escape.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domina Regina (super sacramentum suum) praesentant qd' cum J. B.
nuper de C. in predict' Com' E. Miller 8. die December. Anno etc. clausum
cujusdam J. G. apud C. predict' in Com' E. predict' fregit and intravit ac unam
Juvencam Coloris Brown pretii 20 s. de bonis and Catallis predicti J. G. adtunc
and ibidem Invent' felonice cepit and effugavit contra pacem dictae Dominae
Reginae and pro felonia predict' per prefat' J. B. sic fact' and perpetrat'
Arrestat' fuit and Coram G. R. Arm' uno Justiciar' dictae Dominae Reginae ad
pacem in Com' E. predict' conservand' Assignat' necnon and per predict' J. G.
ductus fuit and Coram dicto G. R. dictus J. B. feloniam predict' confessus fuit
and adtunc and ibidem G.R. predict per breve de mittimus prefatum J. B. pro
felonia predict' ad Goalam dictae Dominae Reginae de J. in Comitatu predict'
quibusdam J. C. de C. predict' Yeoman R. B. de eadem Clothyer and R. M. de
eadem Weaver deliberavit salvo and secure ducend' ad and usque Goalam predict'
de J. predict' Ibidem moratur' quousque idem I.B. abinde secundum legcm and
consuetudinem Regni Angliae deliberatus foret ipsi predict' I. C. R. B. and R.
in dicto 8. die December. Anno predict' prefat' I. B. apud C. predict' in Com' E.
predict' in eorum custodiam virtute deliberationis predict' sic existent'
adtunc and ibidem negligenter a custodia sua ad largum Ire and evadere
permiserunt contra pacem dictae Dominae Reginae Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Crompt. 225.. 74.

XIX. Crompt. 252.. 64. For a voluntary Escape.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum quidam R. R. nuper de P. in Com' predict'
Husbandman and I. K, nuper de P. predict' in Com' predict' Sadler 20 April.
Anno Regni Jac. etc. 2. Commissifuerunt per E. T. Armig' unum Justiciar' dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' predict' conservand' Assignat' apud H. in Com'
predict' cuidam A. P. de P. predict' in Com' predict' Husbandman tunc deliber'
de P. predict' ut per eundem A. adtunc usque ad Goalam dicti Domini Regis de I.
in Com' predict' duceretur pro suspitione cujusdam feloniae per predict' R. R.
and I. R. perpetrat' in Goala predicta salvo and secure custodiend' donec ab
inde secundus leges hujus Regni Angliae deliberat' ipse predict' A. P. minime
curans nec estimans custodiam predict' R. R. and I. R. postea scil. eodem 20.
April. Anno supradict' eosdem R. R. and I. R. apud H. predict' in Com'
prediand' ad largum ire and evadere voluntary and felonice permisit contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis etc.

XX. Crompt. 252. b.. 66. Alio modo.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum T.W. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman
decimo die October. Anno etc. apud C. predict' in Com' predict' pro suspitione
feloniae Captus and eisdem die and Anno predict' cuidam R. G. in Com' predict'
Yeoman Custodi Goalae dicti Domini Regis Comitat' predict' sub custodia
Johannis F. Armig' adtunc Vicecomes Comitat' predict' and Custodi Goalae
predict' per quoddam breve de mittimus G. T. Militi unius Justiciar' dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in eodem Comitat' conservand' assignat' salvo and secure
custodiend' tradit' fuit quousque idem T. W. a custodia illa secundum legem and
consuetudinem regni Angl. pro suspitione feloniae predict' acquietat' sive
deliberat' foret ipse predict' I. F. tunc vicecomes Comitat' predict' postea
scilicet 13 die October. Anno supradict' apud L. predict' in Com. predict'
predictum T. W. adtunc and ibidem in custodia ipsius vicecom. in Goala dicti
Domini Regis existent' ex Goala predicta adtunc and ibidem voluntary evadere
and ad largum ire permisit contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and
dignitatem suas, etc.

XXI. Crompt. 253.. 67. alio modo.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege (super sacramentum suum) presentant quod cum R. S.
nuper de M. in Com. predict' Husbandman Xiij die Maii Anno Regni etc. capt' and
arrestat' fuit apud M. predict' in Com. predict' per R. C. pro suspicione
feloniae per ipsum R. S. fact' and perpetrat' and adtunc and ibidem per eundem
R. C. deliberat' fuit T. W. Ballivo Hundredi de M. predict' salvo and secure
Custodiend' and ad ducend' eundem R. S. Coram uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis
ad pacem in Com' predict' conservand' necnon ad diversa felonias and transgr'
and alia malefacta in eodem Comitat' perpetrat. audiend' and terminand'
assignat' predictus tamen T. W. Custodiam predicti R. S. minime curans nec
estimans apud M. predict' in Com' predict' die and Anno supradict' eundem R. S.
ad largum ire and voluntary evadere felonice permisit contra pacem dicti
Domini Regis etc.

XXII. Bolt. 3. page 56.. 54. An Indictment where a Felon suspected for
stealing two Oxen, is Committed by a Justice of Peace unto the Goal, and is
delivered to two, to be conveyed to the Goal, which suffer the Felon wilfully
to escape away, West. Symb. 2. part 139.. 248.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Reg' (super sacramentum suum) presentant etc. quod cum
quidam W. H. Armiger' unus Justiciar' pacis dicti Domini Regis in Com' predict'
20. die etc. Anno etc. Apud S. in Com. predict' quendam I. nuper de etc. adtunc
and ibidem Arrestavit and Attachiavit pro suspitione feloniae per ipsum I.
antea fact' and perpet' viz. pro duobus bobus coloris etc. pretii etc. de bonis
and Catallis cujusdam R. I. per predict' I. felonice capt' and abduct' and
postea eundem I. die Anno and loco supradict' ut predict' cum arrestat predict'
W. H. adtunc and ibidem commisit and liberavit salvo custodiend' quibusdam I.
B. and R. D. nuper de etc. in Com' etc. Qui quidem I. B. et R. D. specialiter
requisiti fuerunt ex partedicti Domini Regis per prefat' W.H. ad salvo et
secure custodiend' and conducend' ipsum R.B. usque Goalam ipsius Domini Regis
Comitat' predict' ibidem moratur' quousque per debitam legis forman exoneret'
and deliberet' predict' tamen I. and R. ipsum I. a custodia sua adtunc and
ibidem felonice and voluntary ad largum quo voluit abire and evadere
permiserunt contra pacem etc.

XXIII. Bolt. 3. page 57.. 55. An Indictment of a Keeper of a Goal, for letting
one committed to him upon suspicion of Felony Escape out of Prison.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege etc. presentant quod cum quidam I. B. de etc. die
etc. Anno etc. pro suspitione cujusdam feloniae per ipsum infra villam predict'
antetunc fieri and perpetrari supositi Capt' and Arrestat' fuit apud villam
predict' and eisdem die and Anno predict' I. B. cuidam T. R. de villa and Com'
predict' Yeoman custod' Goali dicti Domini Regis in dicta villa de L. predict'
pro suspitione feloniae predict' salvo and securecustodiend' tradit' fuit
quousque idem I. B. a custodia illa secund' legem and consuetudinem Regni etc.
deliberat' foret idem tamen T. R. die etc. Anno supradict' apud Villam predict'
in Com' predict' eundem I.B. ad largum and extra Goalam predict' voluntary and
felonice exire and evadere permisit contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, etc.

XXIV. Cromp. 254.. 73. Against those that negligently permitted a Felon to
Escape.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum I. T. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman
and T. F. nuper de L. in Civitat' predict' Yeoman decimo die December. Ann. etc.
pro suspitione feloniae per ipsos J. T. and T. F. preantea fieri and perpetrari
suppositi apud Civit' Lond' capt' and arrestat' fuissent Iidemque J. T. and T.
F. eisdem die and Anno ad Civitat' predict' quibusdam R. F. and J. S. Vicecom'
Comitat' predict' ac custodibus Prisonae dicti Domini Regis infra Civitat'
predict' ob causam predict' tradit' fuerunt salvo and secure custodiend'
Quousque Iidem J. T. and T. F. a custodia illa secundum legem and consuetudinem
Regni dicti Domini Regis Angliae a prisona illa deliberat' forent, ipsi iidem
R. F. and J. S. die and Anno supradict' apud Comitat' predict' predictos J. T.
and T. F. ad largum and extra Goalam and custodiam predict' exire and evadere
in defectu bonae Custodiae negligenter permisserunt contra pacem etc.

XXV. Crompt. 255.. 75. Alio modo.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum J. B. nuper de K. in Com' predict' Laborer
6 die December. Anno etc. apud K. predict' in Com' predict' per J. M. Armig' unum
Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com' predict' conservand' necnon ad
diversas felonias transgr' and alia malefact' in eodem Comitat' perpetrat'
audiend' and terminand' assignat' pro suspitione feloniae capt' and per ipsum
J.M. apud K. predict' in Com' predict' pro suspitione ejusdem feloniae
Imprisonat' fuisset and in cappis per ipsum J.M. ad hunc and ibidem posit'
salvo custodiend' quousque secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni etc. inde
debito modo acquietat' and deliberat' foret ipse J. L. de F. in Com. predict'
Yeoman Constabular' de K. predict' die Anno and loco supradictis predict' J. B.
apue K. predict' adtunc and ibidem in custodia ipsius J. L. existent' tam
negligenter custodivit quod pro defectu bonae and sufficientis custodiae idem
J. B. a Prisona predict' evasit and ad largum ubicunque voluit ibat contra
pacem etc.

XXVI. Crompt. 255. b.. 76. Alio modo.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege (super sacramentum suum) presentant quod cum A.W.
nuper de T. in Com. predict' Spinster 11 die etc. Anno etc. per W. H. de eisdem
villa and Com. Husbandman fuit Arrestat' and capt' apud B. in Com. predict' pro
quadam felonia per ipsam facta and perpetrata and adtunc and ibidem per eundem
W. duc' coram J. H. Armig' uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com.
predict' conservand' necnon ad diversas felonias transgr. and alia malefact' in
eodem Com. perpetrat' audiend and terminand' Assignat' and quod eadem Agneta
adtunc and ibidem per praefat' J.H. Commissa fuit cuidam H. W. de B. predict'
in Com' predict' Yeoman tunc decenar' de B. predict' salvo and secure Goalae
dicti Domini Regis de Ilchester in Com' predict' ducend' and quod predict' H.
minime curans and parvi pendens custodiam dictae Agn. eandem Agn. tam
negligenter custodivit quod eadem A. a custodia dicti H. apud B. predict' ad
largum quo voluit recessit and escapavit contra pacem etc.

XXVII. West. Symb. 2. part 140. 249. An Indictment of Escape or Commitment for
contempt etc.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum quidem D. E. de etc. 3. die Martii Anno
etc. apud T. in Com. predict' Commissus fuit per R. J. Gen' unum Ballivor' de
P. predict' and H. L. Gen' deputat' J. B. Genesis alium Ballivorum ejusdem villae
in Goala sive prisona villae predict' pro quibusdam resistenc' dissobedient'
and malefact' per ipsum D. E. versus ipsum R. Ballivum in executione officii
sui virtute literarum Domini Regis eidem R. direct' ibidem moratur' sub salva
custodia M. unius servientium ad Clavem ad Villam predict' quousque predict' D.
inde deliberetur and dimissus esset per debitam legis formam prefat' O. circa
horam xij in nocte ejusdem diei Anno supradict' Regni Regis predict' Prison' in
qua detentus fuit ut predict' est adtunc and ibidem malitiose and minus just
fregit and ab hujusmodi Prisona sine aliqua licentia evasit and escapuit contra
form' Statut' etc. edit' and provis' and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis.

XXVIII. West. Symb. 2. part. 123. 176. An Endictment for a Rescue, etc.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod cum H. C. R.
G. and J. B. Arm' ac socii sui Justiciarii dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com'
E. predict' conservand' necnon ad diversa felonia transgressiones and alia
malefacta in eodem Com' perpetrat' audiend' and terminand Assignat' in Generali
Sessione pacis tent' apud T. in Com' E. predict' die Martis proxime post festum
sanctae Trinitatis Anno etc. mandaverunt Vicecom' ejusdem Comitat' E. necnon
and eorum cuilibet quod non omitterent propter aliquam libertatem Comitat' E.
predict' quin eam ingrederent' seu unus eorum ingreder' and attachiarent seu
unus eorum attachiaret corpora O. W. nuper de W. in Comitat' T. Laborer and A.
J. de W. predict' in Com' E. predict' servient' and eos Coram Justiciariis
predict' vel uno sociorum Justic' pacis in Com' E. predict' venire Compellerent
seu eorum unus venire compelleret ad inveniend' sufficient' manucaptionem quod
ipsi personaliter comparerent coram dictis Justiciariis and sociis suis
predictis ad proximam sessionem pacis in Com' E. predict' tenend' and quod
interim se been gerent erga dictum Dominum Regem and cunctum populum suum
secundum formam Statut' in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi Cumque prefat' G.
L. and J. B. virtute mandat' predict' Arrestassent predict' A. J. and eum coram
Justiciar' predict' vel eorum uni ducere voluissent prout mandatum predict'
Justiciar' predict' in se exigebat quidam tamen A. B. de W. predict' in Com' E.
predict' Gen' and R. W. de W. predict' in Com' E. predict' Yeoman leges dict'
Domini Regis minime verent' ex malitia sua precogitat' in Contempt' dicti
Domini Regis legum suarum ac mandati Justic' predict' decimo die Maii Anno etc.
Apud W. predict' in Com' E. predict' R. riotose and illicite assemblati and
congregati in prefat' G. L. and J. R. in pace Dei and dicti Domini Regis ad
tunc and ibidem existent' insult' and affraiam fecerunt ac prefat' R. W.
diversas sagittas Angl' vocat' Arrows versus prefat' G. L. and J. B. ad tunc
and ibidem sagittabant ea intention ut prefat' G. L. and J. R. vulneraret ac
predict' Agnetam in Custodia eorund' G. and J. rescusserunt etc. Ac ipsos G. L.
and J. B. vulneraverunt etc. ac preterea prefat' A. B. and R. W. predict'
Agnetam J. adtunc and ibidem a custodia dictorum G. L. and J. R. vi and Armis
rescusserunt atque eandem A. J. adtunc and ibidem ad largum ire and evadere
fecerunt contra Pacem, etc.

Escheator see Officer. Estople see Pleading. Estreats see Records, Justices,
Amerciament, etc. Evesdroppers see Coron. Evidence see Proof. Exaction and
Extortion see Fees. Example see Coron. Examination sees;ee Proof.
Excommengement see Ordinary. Excise see Taxes, Ale.
Execution.
Process, Judgment, Justices, Restitution.
Contempt.
I. Lambert 4. cap. 16. page 565, 566. Where the Conviction is for trespasses
against the Peace, Riots, and such other Contempts and Offenses against the
Crown or Statutes; for the which no certain fine is appointed, there the
Judgment is, that the party shall be taken to satisfy the King for his Fine,
and thereupon the capias pro Fine, and if the party cannot be found, other
Judicial Process goes out till he be outlawed, unless it be in a very few
Cases, where by the words of the Statutes themselves they may proceed to assess
the Fine in the absense of the parties, without calling them to it by any
process, as in 5 and 6. Ed. 6. 25.. 5. N. 3. of Alehouses, and in 5 Eliz. 13..
N. of Highways.

But if the party be brought in, then he is a Prisoner, and then are the
Justices of Peace by their discretion to assess the Fine, and to Estreat it,
and to deliver him.

Forfeiture.
II. Lambert 566. ibid. For in no Case (as I take it) can they of themselves
levy any Fine or Forfeiture due to the King; insomuch as not they but the
Sheriff is accountant for all such matters.

Amerciament.
III. Lambert 572. 573. And hereby (as I think) the Estreats of the Justices of
the Peace be now an immediate Warrant for the Sheriff to levy not only the
Fines and Amerciaments, but also all other Issues, Penalties, Losses,
Forfeitures and Sums whatsoever arising before them for the words of the
Statute 14 Rich. 2. 11.. 1. N. 2. are general, the money thereof arising, and
therefore whatsoever sums are to be Estreated into the Exchequer, the same are
also to be levied by the Sheriff, Crompton 177.. 30. Boult. 2. cap. 22. page 70.

Estreats.
IV. Lambert 574. Howbeit I do not (on 7 H. 4. 3.. N.) think that in our Case
this Duty of Estreating is so peculiar to the Clerks of the Peace, but that the
Justices of the Peace themselves ought also to have a Common and careful eye
unto it, etc.

Information.
V. Lambert 4. cap. 17. page 575. Albeit that the Justices of the Peace have
this power to make Warrant for levying the Amerciaments, Fines, and other
Forfeitures that grow unto the King by their service: yet it is commonly
thought that they may not (but in some cases only, and that by special speech
of the Statutes) make Execution either for him that will sue, or for any other
of such part of the forfeiture as the Law does afford them etc. But where they
have power either by their Commission, or by any Statute, to hear and determine
any cause at the Suit of a private person, I do not see how the Cause can well
be said to be fully determined till the Complainant has had the effect of his
suit, which cannot be without Execution.

VII. Lambert 576. Doubtless by special provision in 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 10. N.
4. against Forestallers, Acc. S. Stat.
the Justices of the Peace may make Execution of the one Moiety of the
Forfeiture for him that sueth by fieri fac' or capias as the Kings Justices at
Westminster use to do the like on 5 Eliz. 12. 8. N. 2. against Badgers,
Drovers, etc.

VII. Lambert 576. Maintenance.
For the moiety growing to the Informer upon the Statute of Liverys 8 Ed. 4. 2.
1. N. 13. they shall make such Execution as ought to be had in Recoveries of
Debt or Trespass at his own pleasure.

VIII. Lambert 576. Husbandry.
They may also award Execution for the party that sueth on the Statute of Flax
and Hemp, 24 H. 8. 4. 4. N. 5. by such process as shall seem fit by their
discretions.

IX. Lambert 577. Ways.
And the Estreats made by the Clerk of the Peace of forfeits for defaults of
amending Highways are a sufficient Warrant to the Constables to levy the same
by distress, to the use of the Churchwardens of the Parish where the default
was, toward the amendment of the Highwayes, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. N. 5 Eliz.
13.. N.

X. Lambert 577. Sheriffs.
And likewise the Estreats of the Justices of Peace of any Fines assessed by
them upon Presentiments in the Sheriffs Tourn, being enrolled, indented, and
delivered to the Sheriff, are a good Warrant unto him to levy the same, to the
use of him that was Sheriff, at the time of such presentiments taken, 1 Ed. 4.
2. 1. N. 8.

XI. Lambert 577. Enquest.
So may Justices of Peace award Process of Execution for levying the
forfeitures upon offenders against 27 Eliz. 7. 3. N. 1. of Issues lost by
Jurors.

XII. Lambert 577. Husbandry.
So may they in like manner award Execution by Fieri fac' and Capias of two
Thirds of the forfeitures, the one for the complainant, and the other for the
Poor by the Statute of Husbandry and Tillage, 39 Eliz. 2. 9. N. 2. as the
Justices at Westminster use to do; so upon 5 Eliz. 9, N. of Perjury 5 and 6 Ed.
6. 4. N. of striking in the Church, etc.

XIII. Crum. 140. 23. A. was bound to the Peace, before Justices of the Peace
in 1000 l. and each of his Mainpernors in 1000 marks, and afterward A. Bayl.
procured one to kill a Stranger, and upon this matter found by Verdict against
A. a scire facias issued upon the Recognizance, and the Recognizor and one of
the Mainpernors were taken for the Sum which he acknowledged, for the King may
take his Election to have Execution of the body or of the Lands and Chattels of
the Mainpernor for the said Sum, per Curiam, 7 H. 4. 105.

Extolling Foreign Power, see Pope. Exportation, see Ouster le mere, and Merch.
Common Fame, see Coron Intendment. False Imprisonment, see Imprisonment. False
News, see Slander. False Tokens, see Collusion Forgery. Farms, see Husbandry.
Fayrs, see Market Overt, Fasting, see Days and Religion.
Fees.
Extortion, Exaction.
Enquest.
I. 9 H. 3. 26 Magn' Chart' nothing shall be taken for an Enquest of Life or
Member, but grant freely and not deny.

Imprisonment
II. 4 Ed. 3. 10. Nothing shall be taken by Sheriffs or Goalers on receipt of
Felons, Lamb. 429.

Justices.
III. 12 Rich. 2. 10. Of Justices of Peace is 4 s. per diem, Clerk two Shillings
during Sessions. Crompt. 177.. 23. Boult. 70. 71. Lamb. 572. infra.

Ale.
IV. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. Alehouse-keepers to pay only 12 d. for recognizances.
Lambert 431. Crompt. 176.. 10.

Justices.
V. 5 Eliz. 4.. 38. N. 1. Fees of Justices of Peace sitting in Execuon of this
Act of Laborers, 5 s, per diem. Crompt. 176. b.. 21.

License.
VI. 27 Eliz. 4.. 10. N. To Clerk of the Peace, etc. for license of Kidder,
Drover, Badger, etc. and for Recognisanzance 8 d. Register 4 d.

License.
VII. 1 Jac. 27.. 7. N. 1. Clerk of the Peace to take only 12 d. for license to
shoot in Hand-gun, etc.

Inrolment.
VIII. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 430. 431. Enquiry in Sessions if the Clerk of the
Peace have taken above 12 d. for the Inrollment of a Bargain and Sale of any
Land not exceeding 40 s. per Annum, or above 2 s. 6 d. if the Land exceed the
value of 40 s. by the year. 27 H. 8. 16.. 1. N. 4. Crompt. 59.. 31. or have
taken above 2 s. in all for any License or Recognizance of a Badger, Drover,
Kidder or Lader, and for the Registering thereof, 5 Eliz. 12.. 6. N. 3. or have
taken above 12 d. for a Recognizance of him that takes a Rogue into his
service for one year, 14 Eliz. 5. N. Crompt. 59. b.. 32. 33. and 177.

Extortion.
IX. Crompt. 57 b.. 1. Nota the Commissioner. 6. gives power to the Justices of
Peace to enquire of all Extortions generally. Crompt. 8. b.. 33.

Officer.
X. Crompt. 175. b. 176.. 5. The Commission gives power to the Justices of Peace
to enquire of Extortions, and therefore where a Statute gives Fees to an
Officer who takes more, the Justices of Peace may inquire thereof, tho the
Statute does not give it.

Justices.
XI. Crompt. 176.. 9. Its said that a Justice of Peace shall have for his Fee
for every Recognisance taken by him of the Peace 2 s. and for Recognisance of
the Bailment of a Prisoner, 2 s. and for every Supersedeas of the Peace 2 s.
for every Warrant of the Peace under his Seal, 2 s. and for recording a release
of the Peace 2 s. and for a Precept which touches the Peace, 4 d.

XII. Crompt. 177. Ab.. 32. Lords of Franchises shall by 12 R. 2. 10. 1. N. 5.
be contributory to the Wages of the Justices of Peace, Franchise.
and this shall be intended that if any Lord of a Franchise has the Fines and
Amerciaments of all his Tenants and Inhabitants within such a Vill, where, etc.
that the Fines and Amerciaments shall be rated for the Portion, and the Sheriff
shall retain so much of them when the Lord demands them in the Exchequer, and
if the Lord may levy them by his Officers (as he may by the Kings Grant) then
the Justices of Peace shall be paid by the Lord himself, Marrow Lect. 10.
Boult. 2. cap. 22. page 70.

XIII. Crompt. 177. b. Justices.
Every one of the eight Justices who is not a Baron or, etc. who comes to the
Quarter Sessions, shall have 4 s. by the day, that they serve there, and their
Clerk, ( viz. the Clerk of the Peace) 2 s. 12 Rich. 2. 10. Boult. 70, 71.

XIV. Crompt. 177. b. Constable.
The Constable who arrests one that is like to make an affray shall take no
Fine nor Fee of him for his deliverance, by Marrow, Lect. 7.

XV. Crompt. 177. b. The Clerk of the Peace shall have for every Recognizance
of the Peace taken in Court, 2 s. Officer.
and for every release of the Peace 2 s. and for awarding Process against any
one to find surety of the Peace, 2 s.

XVI. Boult. 2. cap. 22. page 70, 71. and hereof ( viz. on 14 R. 2. 11.
Justices.
) also Mr. Marrow collecteth, that how many soever Commissioners of the Peace
there shall be assembled at these Sessions, yet only eight of them shall
receive the Wages, because that at such time as these Wages were first
appointed, the Law did take knowledge and make allowance only of eight
Justices, and no more. Crompt. 177. b.

XVII. Boult. 71. ib. Exchequer.
And Marrow also makes it doubtful whether it be not in the power of the
Barons of the Exchequer to appoint which eight, when more be assembled at the
Sessions, shall have the Wages paid unto them, but it seems by 14 R. 2. 11..
1. N. 3. that the Sheriff shall first pay the Wages, and then the Barons shall
make the allowance according to the Indenture, so that I see no liberty of such
nomination left unto the Barons, Lambert 572.

XVIII. Bolt. 2. cap. 22. page 71. Justices.
It would be somewhat hard indeed to strain 14 R. 2. 11.. 1. N. 2. so far as to
give Wages thereby to so many Justices as be now at these days in every Shire,
and would be present at the Sessions; and it might breed both offense against
the Sheriff, and a jealousy among the Justices themselves, to have one of them
preferred before another in this payment, and therefore I think it wisely done
as it is somewhere used, to bestow the whole allowance upon the defraying of
their common diet.

XIX. Bolt. 71. ibid. If the Fines and Amerciaments of the same Sessions,
Amerciaments
says Mr. Marrow, will not fully amount to the sum of the Wages then due to
the Justices, yet shall the Wages be valuably paid out of them so far as they
will extend.

XX. Polt. de Pace. 90.. 38. Extortion.
If a man Indicted and Arraigned of Felony does plead and show forth the King's
Pardon of the same Felony, which is allowed by the Court, whereupon he does pay
and give his Fees of Gloves to the Justices and the other Officers of the
Court, this is no Extortion, but an Ancient Fee, and lawfully due unto them. 4.
Edw. 4. 10.

XXI. Lambert 572. the Statute 12 Rich. 2. 10.. 1. N. 5. had allowed to every
of eight Justices of the Peace, four shillings by the day, Justices.
for the time of their Quarter Sessions, to be paid by the hands of the
Sheriff, of the Fines and Amerciaments coming of the same Sessions: But because
it was soon after seen that it was a great delay to the Justices of Peace in
this payment, to expect the levyings of those Fines and Amerciaments by
Estreats first sent up to the Exchequers and then delivered thence to the
Sheriff, (which was at that time the common manner of levying Fines and
Amerciaments) therefore it was within two years after, viz. 14. R. 2. 11.. 1.
N. 3. provided that the Estreats of the Justices of Peace should be indented or
doubled, and the one part thereof delivered by them to the Sheriff, to the
intent that he may levy the money thereof rising, and pay the Justices their
Wages, by Indenture between him and them to be made, and the Barons of the
Exchequer may charge and allow him upon the making of his account accordingly;
and hereby, as I think, the Estreats of the Justices of the Peace be now an
immediate Warrant to the Sheriff to levy, etc. Lambert 616.

Justices.
XXII. Lambert 4. cap. 21. page 615. Whilst it was at the liberty of the
Justices of Peace to hold their Quarter Sessions as short time as they would,
the Law did not allow them any Wages for their pains; but when 12 R. 2. 10.. 1.
N. 5. had bound them under pain of punishment to continue their Sessions three
days together, if the affairs of the Office did so require; the same Statute
thought it meet also to allow every of them four Shillings by the day, to be
paid by the hands of the Sheriff, out of the Fines and Amerciaments rising of
the same Sessions, and that the Lords of Franchises should be contributors to
those Wages, etc.

Indictment.
XIII. Lambert 619. A Justice of Peace may also be Indicted of the unlawful
taking of money for doing of his Office, or of such other falsity. F.N.B. 243.
E. 27. Ass. 8. Presentment, etc. Br. 23. 9 H. 660. Judges Br. 2.

XXIV. West. Symb. 2 part 105 b. sect. 108. an Indictment of Extortion against
a Coroner on 1 H. 8. cap. 7.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum per
Statutum in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl' 8. Anno Regni sui
primo ordinat' est, and stabilit' existit, quod super requisitionem Coronator'
fact' ad veniend' and inquirend' super visum corporis alicujus personae per
infortunium occisae, mersae seu aliter mortuae coronat' predict' diligenter
faceret officium super visum corporis cujuscunque talis personae vel personarum
absque aliqua de pro vel inde capiend' sub poena quod quilibet coronator qui
officio suo ut predict' est fungi recusaverit vel rem aliquam caperet pro
functione officii predicti super visum corporis alicujus personae mortuae per
infortunium pro quolibet tempore 40 s. prout in Statut' predict' before
continetur.

Quidam tamen W. B. de H. in Com. predict. Generosus 12 die December. etc. ad
tunc existens unius coronator' dicti Domini Regis in Comitat' predict' apud M.
in Com' predict' color officii sui predict' extorsive and injuriose cepit pro
feodo suo 20 solid. de quodam Roberto S. de B. in Com' predict' Yeoman, pro
executione officii sui predict' super visum corporis cujusdem Johannis C. nuper
de B. in Com' E. predict' Laborer, qui apud B. predict' in Com' E. predict'
quarto die predict' October. Anno, etc. per infortunium occisus fuit in contempt'
dicti Domini Regis, and ad grave Damnum ipsius R.S. and contra formam Statut'
predict' and diversorum aliorum Statut' inde edit, etc. promis.

Crompt. J.P. 248. b. Pl. 55.

2. ibid. sect. 109. The like on the same Statute 1 H. 8. cap. 7.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si A. C. de B. in Com' E. Gen' 6. die Junii Anno
Regni, etc. unus Coronator' dicti Domini Regis in dicto Com' E. ad tunc
existens apud B. predict' in Com' E. predict' color officii sui predict.
extorsive cepit pro feodo suo 20 solid. de quodam J. S. in dicto Com' Generos'
in and pro functione and executione officii sui predicti super visum corporis
R. N. nuper de B. predict' in Com' E. predict' (qui quidem R.N. 5 die Mensis
Junii predict' Anno supradict' apud B. predict' in Com' E. predict' Casu ab
equo suo per infortunium fuit occisus) in magnum dicti Domini Regis contempt'
ac contra form' Statut' in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl' 8.
tent' Anno Regni sui primo in hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi. Lambert
Precedents 15 b. Pl. 41.

XXV. West. Symb. 2. part. 10 b. sect. 110. Leather.
an Idictment of Extortion against an Escheators servant. See 23 H. 6. cap. 17.
and 5 Eliz. 8, etc. Crompt. 248 b. pl. 56.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant, quod R. Bennet de
P. in Com. E. predict' Yeoman, serviens and minister cujusdam B.T. Eschaetor'
dicti Domini Regis Com' predict' 15 die Julii Anno Regni, etc. apud W. in Com'
predict' domum Mansionalem cujusdem J. M. fregit and intravit and 6. tergora
Corii vocat' 6 Hydes of green Leather, ad valent' 8 l. and 6 duodenas Pellium
vitulorum vocat' 6 dozen of Calves Skins, ad valent' 4 l. 10 s. quae quidem
tergora and pelles adtunc and ibidem invent' color officii sui extorsive and
injuste cepit seisivit and asportavit ad grave damnum ipsius J. contra leges
and ordinationes Dominae Elizabeth' nuper Reginae Regni sui Angl' and contra
form' diversorum Statut' in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis.

XXVI. West. Symb. 2. part. 106. sect. 111. An Indictment against a Register in
the Spiritual Court for Extortion upon 21 H. 8. 5. Lamberts Precedents. 15. b.
pl. 42.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A.B. de C. in
dicto Com' E. Generos' primo die mensis Augusti Anno Regni, etc. ad tunc Scriba
seu Registerius reverendi in Christo Patris D. tunc permissione divina
Archiepiscopi E. existens apud M. in Com' E. predict' color officii sui
predict' extorsive ac injuriose cepit de quodam I. S. de M. predict' in dicto
Com' E. Tanner duos solidos legalis monetae Angliae pro feodo ipsius A. B. pro
scriptione probationis unius Testamenti cujusdam R. N. Qui quidem R. N. apud M.
predict. infra Dioces' dicti D. Archiepiscopi 24. die Junii Anno supradict'
mortuus est, ubi re vera idem Testament. tunc ibidem allatum est ad dictum
Scribam sive Registrarium per dict' I. S. in pergameno script' and ubi omnia
bona jura and credita dicti R. N. dicto tempore dictae mortis suae non
excedebant summam quinque librarum and ubi etiam tota dict' script' probationis
testament' predict' per prefat' Scribam sive Registrarium sic ut prefertur
fact' non continebat in se 40 lin. quorum quaeque linea erat 12 Policem in
logitudine, in magnum dicti Domini Regis contempt' ac contra formam cujusd'
Statut' in Parliamento Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angliae 8. tent' Anno Regni
sui 21. in hoc casu provisi ac editi.

Felons and Felony, see Coron. Felo de se, see Coron. Fencers, see Games.
Ferrets, see Forests. Fesants, see Fowls. Feather-Beds, see Drapery Trades.
Fighting, see Affray. Fines, see Amerciaments.
Fish.
Justices.
I. 17 Rich. 2.. 1. N. 7. the Justices of the Peace of all Counties shall be
Conservators of the Statutes (13 Ed. 1. W. 2. cap. 47. of taking Salmons; and
of 13 Rich. 2. 19. against taking Salmons in Milstands, etc.) in the Counties
where they be Justices. Lambert 189. 190. 447. Dalt. 55. cap. 21.

Nusans.
II. 23 H. 8. 18.. 2. N. 1. Justices of Peace, eight, seven or six, whereof two
to be Citizens of York, one of West, and one of East Riding, etc. to survey and
pull down all Fish Gorths, Pills, and Stakes in Humber and Owse, Nets wanting
Assize, etc.

Merchants.
III. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 450. Enquiry at Sessions if any have packed Fish
in Barrels, and have mixed the countable Fish with the small Fish, against 22
Ed. 4. 2.. 3. N. 6. and 11 H. 7. 23. or have bought of a stranger born, or out
of a strangers bottom any Herring (other than such as comes by Shipwreck) not
sufficiently salted, packed and casked, 5 Eliz. 5.

Alien.
IV. Lambert 450. ibid. If any have dried in this Realm to be sold any Fish
taken or brought hither by any stranger born, 13 Eliz. 11.

Alien.
V. Lambert 450. If any stranger born have brought into this Realm, any Cods or
Lings packed in Barrels or other Casks, 13 Eliz. 11 Crompt. 96.

Apraisment.
VI. Lambert 450. 451. Enquiry in Sessions if any person within this year have
taken upon him to set price to take Toll, or to demand any Tax upon any Sea
Fish, taken by any subject in their own Vessels, etc. 5 Eliz. 5.. 2. N. 1.

License.
VII. Lambert 452. If any person, other than by reason of age, sickness,
childing or license, have within this year eaten flesh in Lent, or upon any
Fish days observed by the custom of this Realm, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 19.. N. 5 Eliz.
5.. N. 35 Eliz. 7.. N. and 1 Jac. 29.. N.

Merchants.
VIII. Lambert 453. If any have made or brought into this Realm any Barrels of
Eels not containing 42 Gallons, or Butt of Salmon, not containing eighty four
Gallons, 2 H. 6. 11.. N. Crompt. 92 b.

Admiral.
IX. Lambert 3. cap. 2. page 355. No Fisherman shall be taken to serve as a
Mariner by the Kings Commissioners but by the choice of two Justices of the
Peace adjoining to the place where he is to be taken, 5 Eliz. 5.. N.

Process.
X. Dalt. 55. cap, 21. By Warrant of any one or more Justices of the Peace the
Constables and Churchwardens where any offense is committed in destroying the
spawn and brood of Sea Fish, may levy the forfeitures of the offenders by
distress and sale, etc. Lambert 201. 3 Jac. 12.. N.

XI. Dalt. 56. cap. 21. Forfeiture.
Every Justice of Peace in the Lent time may enter into and search all
Victualling Houses, and finding there any Beef, Mutton, Veal or Hogs killed or
dressed, (except Flesh to be killed three days before Easter) may take and
seize the same as forfeit, and shall give the same to Prisoners and poor People
by their discretion, 1 Jac. 19.. N.

XII. Lambert 447. 448. Lieu.
Enquiry at Sessions if any person have with any Net or mean taken or killed
any Fry or Spawn of any Fish in any Wear, Floodgate, Stream or River, salt or
fresh, or at the Tail of any Mill, or have taken there any Salmon or Trouts out
of Season, that is, being Kippers or Skedders: or have taken and killed any
Pickerel under ten Inches in length, or Salmon under fifteen Inches, or Trout
under eight Inches, or Barbel under twelve Inches; or have fished in any the
said places with any Net, but such whereof every Mesh was two Inches and an
half broad: but Angling is excepted, and so is the taking of Smelts, Loches,
Minens, Binheads, Gudgeons, and Eeels, in places only where they have been used
to be taken, 1 Eliz. 17. N. and 13 Eliz. 11. N.

XIII. Lambert 568, 569. Amerciament.
For the Justices (upon Conviction had before them) may set Fine by their
discretion upon such as take Salmons, or destroy the Fry of Fish in Rivers
against 13 Ed. 1. W. 2. cap. 47. and 13 Rich. 2. 19. and 17 Rich. 2. 9. 1. N.
7. Lambert 447.

XIV. West. Symb. 2. part 138.. 242. Indictment.
An Indictment for Fishing in a Mill-pond, etc.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si T. W. de M. in Com' predict' Laborer, and H J.
de W. in Com' predict Tailor, etc. die Aprilis Anno Regni etc. tam diversis
temporibus ante predict' diem and postea apud H. predict' in Com' predict' vi
and Armis in uno Stagno ibiddem vocat' H. milne Poole liberum tene ment' R. D.
Gen' cum Hamis and aliis ingeniis Piscat' and diversos Pisces ceperunt ad grave
Damnum predict' R. D. ac contra pacem, etc

XV. West. Presidents 72. b. 215. Indictment of Trespass in a Fish-gorth, etc.

Lincoln ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod W. S. de B.
in Com' L. predict' Yeoman J. W. de eadem villa Yeoman and J. W. de T. Com' L.
predict' Yeoman viii die Martii Anno etc. circa horam 4 post meridiem ejusdem
diei in S. K. and B. in Com' L. predict' vi and Armis etc. in quand' Piscat'
vocat' Fish Gorths tunc in tenura and occupat' R. F. C. L. and J. firmar'
ibidem dicti Domini Regis intraverunt and fregerunt and tres Salmones ad
vallent xx s. de bonis and Catallis predict' R. F. C. L. and J. L. in
Piscatoria predict' ceperunt and abinde asportaverunt contra voluntatem
predict' R. F. etc. ac contra pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc, etc.

XVI. West. Symb. 2. part 148. 252. An Indictment of Fishing in a Mill Pond.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si T. W. de M. in Com' predict' Laborer, and H. J.
de W. in Com' predict' Tailor, etc. 14 die Aprilis Anno etc. ac diversis
temporibus ante predict' ibidem and postea apud H. predict' in Com' predict' vi
and Armis in uno Stagno idem vocat' H. Milne Poole, liberum tenement' R. D.
Gen' cum Hamis and Aliis Ingeniis piscat' and diversos pisces ceperunt ad grave
Damnum predict' R. D. ac contra pacem etc.

Flesh see Catle, Fish.
Force.
Posse Comitatus, Enter, Riot, Rescous, Sheriffs.
Sheriff.
I. 3. Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 17. The Sheriff or Bailiff, etc. may take the power of
the County to Replevie Cattle driven into Castle.

Process.
II. 13 Ed. 1. W. 2. cap. 39. 1. N. 25. And if Resisters of the Kings Process
Retorn by the Sheriff be convict of such resistance, they shall be punished at
the Kings pleasure, neither shall any Officer of the Kings meddle in assigning
the punishment, for our Lord the King has reserved it specially to himself,
because that resisters have been reputed disturbers of his Peace, and of this
Realm.

Entry.
III. Lambert 2. cap. 4. page 135. It seems that before the troublesome Reign
of King Richard the Second, the Common Law permitted any person which had good
Right or Title to enter into any Land to win the possession thereof by force,
if otherwise he could not have obtained it, Crom. 67. b. 1. and 7 H. 6. 13.
Forcible Entry Br. 2. Crompton 65. b. 61. Boult. 1. cap. 29. page 121. Dalt.
193. cap. 76.

Disseisor.
IV. Lambert 135. For a man may see in Britton 115. cap. 44. Bract. 162. b. 163.
a. That a certain respite of time was given to the Disseisee according to his
distance and absence, in which it was lawful for him to gather Force, Arms,
and his Friends, and to throw the Disseisor out of his wrongful possession.

Trespass.
V. Lamber. 135, 136. And at this day, if in a Common Action or Indictment of
Trespass for entering into Lands, the Defendant will make Title thereunto, the
matter of the Force alleged against him, will rest altogether upon the
validity of his Title, as appears 7 H. 6. 13. 40. Lambert 147, 148. 9 H. 6.
19. Forcible Entry, Br. 18. Dalt. 193. cap. 76. Boult. 1. cap. 29. page 122. 2.

Entry.
VI. Lambert 136. But after the rebellious tumult and Insurrection of the
Villains, and other the base Commons which happened 4 Rich. 2. the Parliament
thinking it necessary to provide against all such occasions of further
Sedition, Uproar, and breach of Peace, did ordain among other things, 5 Rich.
2. 7. That none from henceforth make any Entry into any Lands and Tenements,
but in Case where Entry is given by the Law. 2. And in such Case not with
strong Hand, nor with multitude of People, but only in Peaceable and easy
manner. 3. And if any man from henceforth do the contrary, and thereof be duly
Convict, he shall be punished by Imprisonment of his body, and thereof Ransomed
at the Kings will, Crompt. 67. b. 2. Boult. 112. cap. 29. 3.

Justices.
VII. Lambert 136, 137. But because 5 R. 2. 7. provided no speedy remedy in this
poinr, nor extended to holding with force, nor left any special power therein
to the Justices of the Peace in the Country, whereas the experience of that
unquiet time required a more ready hand to the supression of such disorder, and
Justices of the Peace were then 13 R. 2. 7. newly chosen in all the Counties of
England, therefore it was further enacted 15 Rich. 2. 2.. 1. N. 2. that at all
times that such forcible Entry shall be made, and complaint thereof comes to
the Justices of Peace, or to any of them, that the same Justices or Justice
take sufficient power of the County, and go to the place where such force is
made. 3. And if they find any that hold such place forcibly after such Entry
made, they shall be taken and put in the next Goal, there to abide Convict by
the Record of the same Justices or Justice, until they have made Fine and
Ransom to the King. 4. And that all the people of the County as well the
Sheriff, as other shall be attendant upon the same Justices to Arrest such
Offenders upon pain of Imprisonment, and to make Fine to the King. 5. And in
the same manner it shall be done, of them that make such forcible Entries in
Benefices or Offices of Holy Church, Crompt. 67. b. 3. Boult. 122. cap. 29. 4.
Dalt. 194. cap. 76.

VIII. Lambert 137, 137. But yet again, Restitution.
forasmuch as 15 R. 2. 2. did not extend to those that entered Peaceably, and
then held with Force. 2. nor yet reached to the Offenders, if they were removed
before the coming of the Justices. 3. Nor made restitution of the Possession so
forcibly gotten. 4. Nor gave any pain against the Sheriff that did not obey the
Precepts of the Justices in this behalf, it was ordained, etc. 8 H. 6. 9. 2. N.
3. that where any does make any forcible Entry in Lands and Tenements or other
possession.s, or them hold forceably after complaint thereof made within the
same County where such Entry is made, to the Justices of Peace, or to one of
them, by the party grieved, that the Justices or Justice so warned within a
convenient time, shall cause, or one of them shall cause the said Statute 15 R.
2. 2. duly to be executed, and that at the Costs of the party so grieved,
Crompt. 68. 5. Boult. 122. cap. 29. 5. Dalt. 194. cap. 76. and 58. cap. 22.

IX. 8 H. 6. 9.. 3. N. 1. And moreover, tho that such persons making such
Entries be present, or else departed before the coming of the said Justices or
Justice, notwithstanding the same Justices or Justice in some good Town next to
the Tenements so entered, or in some other convenient place according to their
discretion, shall have, or either of them shall have Authority and power to
enquire by the People of the same County, as well of them that make such
Forceable Entries in Lands and Tenements as of them which the same hold with
force. 2. And if it be found before any of them, that any does contrary to this
Statute of 8 H. 6. 9. then the said Justices or Justice shall cause to reseise
the Lands and Tenements so entered or holden as before, and shall put the party
so put out, in full possession of the same Lands and Tenements so entered or
holden as before. 3. And if any person after such Entry into Lands or Tenements
holden with force, make a Feoffment, or other discontinuance to any Lord or
other person to have maintenance, or to take away and defraud the possessor of
his recovery in any wise, if after in Assize or other Action thereof to be
taken or pursued before Justices of Assize, or other the Kings Justices
whatsoever by due enquiry thereof to be taken, the same Feoffments and
discontinuances may be duly proved to be made for maintenance, etc. that then
such Feoffees, or other discontinuances, etc. shall be void, frustrate, and
holden for none.

X. 8 H. 6. 9. 4. N. 1. And also when the said Justices or Justice make such
enquiries as before, they shall make, or one of them shall make their Warrants
and Precepts to be directed to the Sheriff of the same County, Commanding him
on the Kings behalf to cause to come before them, and every of them, sufficient
and indifferent persons, dwelling next about the Lands so Entered as before, to
enquire of such Entreies. 2. Whereof every man which shall be Impannelled to
Enquire in this behalf, shall have Land or Tenement of the yearly value of xl.
s. by the year at the least above reprises. 3. And that the Sheriff Retorn
Issues upon every of them at the day of the first Precept Retornable 20 s. and
at the second 40 s. and at the third time 100 s. and at every day after the
double. 4. And if any Sheriff or Bailiff within a Franchise, having Retorn of
the Kings Writ, be slack, and make not Execution duly of the said Precepts to
him Directed to make such Inquiries, that he shall forfeit to the King 20 l.
for every default, and moreover shall make Fine and Ransom to the King.

XI. 8 H. 6. 9. 5. N. 1. And that as well the Justices or Justice aforesaid, as
the Justices of Assise, and every of them, at their coming into the Country to
take Assizes, shall have, and every of them shall have power to hear and
determine such defaults and negligences of the Sheriffs and Bailiffs, and every
of them, as well by Bill at the Suit of the party grieved for himself, as for
the King, to sue by Indictment only to be taken for the King. 2. And if the
Sheriff or Bailiff be duly attainted in this behalf by Indictment or by Bill,
that he which sueth for himself and for the King have the one moiety of the
Forfeiture of 20 l. together with his Costs and Expenses. 3. And that the same
Process be made against such persons Indicted or sued by Bill in this behalf,
as should be against persons Indicted or Sued by Writ of Trespass done with
Force and Arms against the Peace of the King.

XII. 8 H. 6. 9.. 6. N. 1. And moreover if any person be put out, or disseised
of any Lands or Tenements in forcible manner, or put out peaceably, and after
holden out with strong hand, or after such Entry, any Feoffment or
Discontinuance in any wise thereof be made to defraud and take away the right
of the Possessor, that the party grieved in this behalf shall have Assize of
Novel Disseisin, or a Writ of Trespass against such Disseisor. 2. And if the
party greived, recover by Assize, or by Action of Trespass, and it be found by
Verdit, or in other manner by due Form in Law, that the party Defendant entered
with Force into the Lands and Tenements, or them after his Entry, did hold with
Force, that the Plaintiff shall recover his Treble Damages against the
Defendant. 3. And moreover that he make Fine and Ransom to the King. 4. And
that Mayors, Justices, or Justice of Peace, Sheriffs, and Bailiffs of Cities,
Towns and Borroughs, having Franchises, have in the said Cities, Towns, and
Buroughs, like power to remove such Entries, and in other Articles aforesaid,
rising within the same, as the Justices of Peace and Sheriffs in Countyes and
Countries aforesaid have.

XIII. 8 H. 6. 9. 7. N. 1. Provided always that they which keep their
Possessions with Force in any Lands and Tenements, whereof they or their
Ancestors, or they whose Estate they have, in such Lands and Tenements have
continued their possessions in the same, by three years or more be not
endamaged by Force of this Statute.

Justices.
XIV. Lambert 140. This Statute 8 H. 6. 9. N. Enableth any one Justice of the
Peace to give remedy in this hurt of Forcible Entry, and holding: and is made
as well against such as enter with force and then hold peaceably, and against
those that enter in peaceable sort, and then maintain their possession
forcibly, as also against as many as do both enter and hold in forcible manner
3 Ed. 4. 19. Forcible Entry, Br. 15. F.N.B. 148. Dalt. 56. cap. 22. and 194.
cap. 76.

Disseisin.
XV. Lambert 141, 142. Walking over another man's ground to Hawk, Hunt, Fish, cut
Grass, or fell Trees, or taking Goods is a Disseisin with Force and Arms, 34 H.
6. 26. Acc. sur Stat. Br. 8. Brief Br. 522. and 11 Ass. 26. and 11 H. 4. 16.
21 Ed. 3. 34. Assize 301. and yet I doubt also, whether any of these be of
themselves forcible Entries of that nature, which these Statutes do take in
hand to punish; for albeit they have in them more actual force then those other
Trespasses, etc. Yet whilst the doer of them neither executes apparent
violence against any person, nor is furnished with Weapon, nor armed with
Company that may offer any dreadful disturbance. I see not how those Statutes
which have for their only mark strong hand and multitude of people can hurt, or
so much as hit him, Cromp. 68.. 1. Dalt. 195. cap. 77.

XVI. Lambert 142. So that if a man were Indicted upon this Statute, Riot.
8 H. 6. 9. for that he Disseised another vi and Armis, viz. Gladiis etc.
without saying manu forti, etc. or cum multitudine, etc. the Bill as I think
would be insufficient, unless it were helped by concluding afterward, contra
form' Statuti predicti, or by some other matter that implies so much, Dalt.
195. cap. 77.

XVII. Lambert 145. Seisin.
If a Justice of the Peace come to the house that is supposed to be holden with
force, and there finds but one person which obstinately keeps the Door shut
against him, and will not suffer him to enter, this is a forcible holding by
Marrow. So is it, if when the Justice enters the house, he shall find persons
harnessed, or in other Warlike sort, appointed, or having such furniture lying
ready in the House to be used by, them by Marrow. But if a man shall peaceably
enter into a House wherein he finds Armor or Weapon for the War, then, as I
think, the only suffering it to remain there without the use thereof, will not
charge him as a forcible holder, Crompt. 70. b. 40. Dalt. 57. cap. 2^. and 197.
cap. 77. Boult. 123. cap. 29. 11.

XVIII. Lambert 146, 147. Touching the Recording of the Force, Reeords.
although both this Statute 8 H. 6. 9. 2. N. 3. 15 R. 2. 2. 1. N. 2. have
mention that the Justice shall upon complaint made unto him by the party
grieved, go to the place, etc. yet that does not enforce any necessity of such
complaint; for it is holden 7 Ed. 4. 18. Crompt. 64. a. that a Justice of Peace
may Record a forcible Entry or holding, or may enquire of it, and make
restitution also upon any Information or knowledge thereof whatsoever, tho no
complaint at all be brought unto him by any party grieved thereby, Poult. de
Pace 38. 16. Boult. 122. cap. 29. 8.

XIX. Crompt. 67. b. 68. a. 4. Justices.
If a man enters with Force upon the possession of a Justice of Peace, it
seems he himself may Record this Force, and Commit him, tho he is party
himself to the matter, because the Statute 15 R. 2. 2. 1. N. 3. is that the
Justice shall Record the Force, and Commit him, and this is for the King; as in
the Case where a Constable Arrest one that would assault him, he may Imprison
him till he will find Sureties of the Peace per Curiam 5 H. 7. 6. faux
Imprisonment Br. 42. and yet I heard Flowerdew Justice of Assize at Stafford in
his Charge there, say, That it has been often seen, that a Justice of Peace
who has executed his Office in his own Case, has been punished in the
Star Chamber, 43 Eliz. 7.. 3. N. 1. Dalt. 344. cap. 120. 2.

XX. Lambert 2. cap. 4. page 147. And as the Statute 8 H. 6. 9. 2. N. 3. Costs.
says that this ought to be done at the Costs of the party grieved: so Marrow
thinks, that unless these Costs be tendered before hand, the Justice needs
not to stir about it. But howsoever he being then a practicer in the Law, might
think it good to stand upon his Fee; yet I advise our Justice of the Peace to
go forward, as having more regard of his Credits Oath and Duty, Costs Br. 2.

XXI. Lambert 147. Neither ought the Justice to Stagger, Droit.
or stay at at all about the right or wrong of his Title that enters or
holds forcibly; for considering that 5 R. 2. 7. 1. N. 2. does without
exception prohibit all Entry with Force, howsoever the Entry be otherwise
lawful, and seeing also that 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 3. permits no forcible
holding, but only where three years possession have gone before: and weighing
moreover, that both they and 15 R. 2. 2. 1. N. 3. do together labor to repress
force and Violence, and have also made the Justice of Peace their Minister
therein. I see no cause why the Justice of Peace, who perhaps shall want
sufficient learning in the Law to discern of the right or title, (and yet may
be both a fit person to remove the Force, and able enough to restore the
possession) should be tied to the discussion of the right or title of either of
the parties, and this I gather upon the opinion of all the Court, 9 H. 6. 19.
Enter. 5. Forcible Enter Br. 18. which was the very next year after the making
of the last of these Statutes, where it is said that Acc. Sur Stat. Br. 7. is
for the right only, and must say Illicite ingressus est, or ubi ingressus non
datur per legem: But the Indictment is for the Force in respect of the King, to
whom the party shall make Fine, although his right be never so good and sound
22 H. 6. 18. Crompt. 74. 164. b. 166. b. Dalt. 197, 198. cap. 77. and 210. cap.
81.

Justices.
XXII. Lambert. 148, 149. And therefore the Justices of the Peace may boldly
proceed in this business, taking with him sufficient power of the Country by
his Discretion, and therein the Sheriff also, if need do require, as well for
the Arresting of such as he shall find to Enter or hold forcibly against these
Laws: as also for the removing of the Force which they bring and for the
conveying of them to the next Goal, as persons thereof Convicted by his own
Eye, Testimony, and Record, Boult. 123. cap. 29. 8, 9.

Record.
XXIII. Lambert. 149, 150. The Record of the Force,

Kent ss.
Record.
Memorandum quod 8. die mensis Januarii Anno Regni etc. Questus est mihi S. L.
uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatu conservand'
Assignat' quidam A. B. de W. in dicto Com' Yeoman quod C. D. de W. predict' and
nonnulli alii pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatores ignoti in Domum
Mansionalem ipsius A. B. in W. predict' manu forti ingressi sunt and ipsum A.
B. inde Dissesiverunt ac eandem manu forti and Armata potentia adhuc extra
tenen' ac proinde petit' a me sibi in hac part remedium Apponi Quae quidem
querimonia and petitione audita ego prefatus S. L. Immediate ad dictam Domum
Mansionalem personaliter accessi ac in eadem Domo adtunc inveni prefatum C. D.
and quosdam E. F. and G. H. etc. Domum illam vi and Armis, manu forti and
Armata potentia, viz. Arcubus and sagittis Gladiis pugionibus Galeis and
loricis tenentes contra formam Statuti in Paliament' Domini Rich. nuper Regis
Angl' secund' Anno Regni sui XV. tent' provisi ac contra form' diversorum
aliorum Statutorum ac propterea ego prefat' S. L. predictos C. D. E. F. and G.
H. adtunc and ibidem Arrestavi proximaeque Goalae dicti Domini Regis apud M. in
dicto Comitatu duci feci ut de dicta manu forti tentione per visum and Recordum
meum convictos ibidem moraturos quousque Fines dicto Domino Regi pro
transgressionibus suis predictis fecerint. Dat' apud W. predict' sub sigillo
meo die and Anno supradict' per me prefat' S. L.

Dalt. 391. cap. 129. Crompt. 74. b.

Imprisonment.
XXIV. Lambert 150, 151. The form of the Mittimus to the Jailer may be thus,

Kent ss.
G. C. one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, within his said County of K. to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at M.
in the said County, and to his Deputy and Deputies there, and to every of them
Greeting: Whereas upon Complaint made unto me this present day by A. B. of W.
in the said County Yeoman. I went immediately to the Dwelling House of the said
A. B. in W. aforesaid, and there found C. D. E. F. and G. H. of W. aforesaid
Laborers forcibly, and with strong hand, and Armed power, holding the said
house against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord, and against the form of the
Statute of Parliament thereof made, in XV. year of the Reign of our late King
Richard the Second: Therefore I send you by the bringers hereof, the Bodies of
the said C. D. E. F. and G. H. Convicted of the said Forcible holding, by my
own View, Testimony, and Record, Commanding you in his Majesty's Name to
receive them into your said Goal, and there safely to keep them until such
time as they shall make their Fines to our said Sovereign Lord, for the said
Trespasses, and shall be thence delivered by order of the Law of the Land;
hereof fail you not, upon the Peril that may follow thereof.

Given at W. aforesaid, under my Seal the day and year abovesaid, by me the
said G. C.
Crompt. 74, b. 75. Dalt. 391. cap. 129. Poult. de Pace, 38.. 15.

XXV. Crompt. 62. 16. The Queens Attorney, viz. Sir Gilbert Gerard, Amerciament.
exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber, on 17 R. 2. 8. because the Sheriff and
Justices of Peace of Stafford, did not remove the force that was in the Manor
of Drayton Basset, and the Sheriff, and diverse of the Justices were fined,
Dalt. 59. cap. 22.

XXVI. Crompt. 68. b. 5. Justices.
Though the Justices of Peace will not Record the Forcible Entry or Deteyner,
nor enquire thereof; yet no pain is given by 15 R. 2. 2. nor by 8 H. 6. 9. but
on complaint in the Star Chamber, they shall be punished, etc. Dalt. 60. cap.
22.

XXVII. Crompt. 71. 44. If a House that is held with Force, Lieu.
extends into two Countries, and they remove the Force into that part of the
House which is in the other County when the Justices come, in this Case they
cannot remove this Force, Boult. 123. cap. 29. 12.

XXVIII. Dalt. 57. cap. 22. 3. Record.
Also the Justice ought to make a Record of such Force by him Viewed, which
Record shall be a suffic^^nt Conviction of the Offenders, and the parties shall
not be allowed to Traverse it, 8 Co. 122. and 14 H. 7. 8. and this Record
(being made out of Sessions by a particular Justice) the said Justice may keep
by him, or he may make it indented, and certify the one part into the Kings
Bench, or to leave it with the Clerk of the Peace, and the other part he may
keep himself, Boult. 123. cap. 29.

XXIX. Dalt. 57. cap. 22.. 4. Also he ought to Commit immediately to the next
Goal all such persons as he shall find and see, Imprisonment
continuing the Force at his coming to the Place, etc. For this sight and View
of the Force by a Justice, being a Judge of Record, makes his Record thereof
as strong as if the offenders had confessed, and touching the restraining of
traverse more effectual than if the Force had been found by a Jury, etc. and
yet the words of the Statute 15 R. 2. 2. 1. N. 3. seem more large, scil. if he
find any that made such Forcible Entry, or hold with Force, he shall Commit,
etc. but such Force must be in the View or presence of the Justice of Peace, or
else he can neither Record it, nor Commit the Offenders, Dalt. 60. cap. 22. 13
H. 7. Kell. 41. pl. Boult. 123, cap. 29. 18. 19.

XXX. Dalt. 197. cap. 77. But note that a Forcible Entry Br. 25. Entry.
cannot be without an actual Entry; for the words of 8 H. 6. 9.. N. be
Whosoever does enter, etc. Dalt. 200, etc. Note also that if a man shall Enter
with Force into House or Land, although he obteineth not, nor gets the
actual possession thereby, yet shall he be Imprisoned and Fined for the only
Entering with Force, as it seems, Dalt. 201. etc. but Restitution is not to be
made but only where there is a putting out, and a holding out of another out of
his Possession, Lambert 152. 153. Poult. de Pace 39. 22.

XXXI. Dalt. 198. cap. 77. It seems that to threaten to maim, beat, Menace.
or to do other bodily harm, etc. amounts to a Forcible Entry or deteiner,
for that Death may ensue upon such beating or hurt 39 H. 6. 50. and 7 Ed. 4. 21.

XXXII. Lambert 2. cap. 4. page 151. But now forasmuch as 8 H. 6. 9. Enquest.
3. N. 2. has provided restitution for the party that shall be put out of
possession by such forcible Entry, and for that no restitution can be made by
the Justice of Peace, but only upon the finding of the same, putting out by the
Oaths of the Enquirers, let us consider the duty of the Justice, etc. Dalt. 59.
cap. 22. Crompt. 166.

Enquest.
XXXIII. Lambert 152. ibid. Concerning the Enquiry, Marrow notes 1. That it is
no cause to Impeach the Inquiry, though the Justice do not go to see the place
where the Force is, and yet the words of 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 1. are whether the
persons be present, or avoided before the Justice coming. 2. That albeit the
Letter of 8 H. 6. 9. 4. N. 2. is that each Juror of this Inquiry ought to have
Lands or Tenements of the clear yearly value of xl. s. yet if any of the
presenters have not so much Land, the Presentment is good for the King: but
then says he the party shall have no restitution by it, if that matter be
showed at the time of the Restitution to be made; howbeit I my self do not well
perceive how the Restitution that the Justice of Peace ought to make upon such
a presentment can be stayed, save only by removing of the Record into B. R. or
by alleging three years quiet possession. 3. That if the Sheriffs shall Retorn
smaller Issues upon the Enquirers than the Statute 8 H. 6. 9. 4. N. 3. does
appoint, yet the party shall never take advantage by it, Dalt. 209. cap. 80.
58. cap. 22. Crompt. 165. b.

Seisin.
XXXIV. Lambert 153. Moreover it is not enough that the putting out be found,
unless the Indictment do also contain adhuc extra tenet, without the which, it
may be thought that the other has gotten in again, a^^ then restitution shall
be needless, Crompt. 163. b. and 14 H. 6. 16 Forcible Entry, Br. 13. Crompt.
166. a. Dalt. 210. cap. 81.

Restitution.
XXXV. Lambert. 154. This Restitution ought to be made to him that is put out,
and to none other: so that if the Father be put out by Force and Dies after
the time of Enquiry, and before Restitution, his Heir shall not have
Restitution upon it, Dalt. 213. cap. 83. and 59. cap. 22. and 206. cap. 79.

Enquest.
XXXVI. Lambert 164. The Precept to the Sheriff in nature of a Venire facias.

Kanc. ss.
G. R. unus Justiciar' Domini Regis ad Pacem in Comitatu Kanc. conservand'
Assignat' Vicecom' ejusdem Comitatus salutem ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi
mando and percipio quod venire facias coram me apud J. in Com' predict' xx die
Sept. proximum futurum xxiiij probos sufficientes and legales homines de
vicineto de J. predict' quorum quilibet habet xl. s. terrarum and tenement' vel
redit' per An' ad minus ultra reprisas ad inquirendum super sacramentum suum
pro dicto Domino Rege de quodam ingressu manu forti facto in Messuagium
cujusdam A. B. apud J. predict' contra form' Statut' in Parliament' Dom' H.
nuper Regis Angliae sexti Anno Regni sui octavo tent' editi ut dicit' and
videas quod super quemlibet Juratorum per se in hac part Impannelland' xx. s.
de exitibus ad prefatum diem retornes and hoc nullatenus omit' sub pena xx l.
q. noveris te incursum si in executione premissorum tepidus aut remissus fueris
and habeas ibidem tunc hoc preceptum Test me prefato G. R. xv. die martii Anno
Regni and

Crompt. 75. Dalt. 392. cap. 129. Poult. de Pace. 36. 7. Dalt. 209. cap. 80.

Process.
XXXVII. Lambert. 164, 165. And upon default of appearance of these Jurors, an
alias may be awarded, and after that pluries infinite till they come: but so
that at the day of the second Writ xl. s. must be Returned, at the third Writ
100 s. and at every day after the double, Crompt. 75.

Verdit.
XXXVIII. Lambert 165. The Inquiry or Verdit of the Jurors.

Inquisitio pro Domino Rege Capta apud J. in Comitatu K. 29 die Julii Anno
Regni etc. per sacramentum A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. coram H.P. milite uno
Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatu conservandum, necnon
ad divers' felonias transgr' and alia malefacta in eodem Comitatu perpetrat'
Audiend' and terminand' Assignat' Qui dicunt super sacramentum suum predictum
quod C. D. de J. predict' Yeoman diu ligitime and pacifice seisitus fuit in
Dominico suo ut defeodo de and in uno Messuagio etc. cum pertinentiis in J.
predict' and possessionem ac seisinam suam predict' sic continuavit quousque A.
B. de etc. and alii malefactores ignoti primo die Septembris ultimo elapso vi
and Armis, viz. Baculis Gladiis etc. in Messuagium predict' etc. Intraverunt
and adtunc and ibidem ipsum C. D. inde Disseisiverunt and manu forti
expulerunt, and eundem C. D. sic Disseisitum and expulsum ab eodem messuagio
etc. a predicto primo die etc. usque ad diem captionis hujus inquisitionis cum
hujusmodi fortitudine and potentia armata extratenuerunt and adhuc extratenent
in magnam pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbat' and contra form' Statut' in
Parliament' Domini H. nuper Regis Angliae sexti Anno Regni sui octavo tento in
tali casu editi and provisi ubi nullus eorum nec aliquis alius cujus Statum
ipsi aut aliquis eorum habuerunt aut habuit aliquid in eodem messuagio etc. aut
in aliqua inde parcella habuerunt aut habuit infra tres Annos proximos ante
ingressum suum predictum neque alio tempore precedente ad notitiam Juratorum
predictorum, Crompt. 75. b. Dalt. 393. cap. 129. Poult. de Pace, 36. b. 8.

XXXIX. Lambert 166, 167. Restitution.
The Warrant to the Sheriff for the making of Restitution, if the Justice
himself will not make it.

Kanc. ss. H.P. Miles, unus Justiciar' etc. assignat' Vicecom' ejusdem Comitat'
salutem.
Cum per quandam inquisitionem patriae coram me captam apud J. in Com' predict'
29. die Julii etc. supra sacramentum A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. ac per) form'
Statuti de ingressibus manuforti factis in tali casu provisi comperrum existit
quod A. B. etc. and alii etc primo die Septembr. etc. in quoddam messuagium
etc. C. D. etc. in J. predict' vi and armis ingressi sunt ac ipsum C. D. inde
tunc manu forti Disseisiverunt and expulerunt and predictum C. D. sic expulsum
a predicto Messuagio etc. a predicto 1. die Septembr. etc. usque ad diem
captionis inquisitionis predict' manu forti and (cum armata) potentia extra
tenuerunt prout per inquisitionem predictam before liquet de Recordo ideo ex
part dicti Domini Regis tibi mando and percipio quod (ad hoc debito
requisitus) una cum posse Comitatus tui si necesse fuerit accedas ad messuagium
and cetera premissa ac eadem cum pertinentiis reseisir' facias and prefatum C.
D. ad and in plenam possessionem suam inde prout ipse ante ingressum predictum
fuerat seisitus restitui and mitti facias juxta formam dicti Statuti and hoc
nullatenus omittas periculo incumbente Test me prefato H. P. etc.

Crompt. 75. b. 76. a. Dalt. 395. cap. 129. Poult. de Pace 36. b. 9.

XL. Dalt. 195. cap. 129. This Warrant to the Sheriff to make Restitution,
shall be under the Test of one of the Justices only, as it seems, Process.
Dyer 187. pl.

XLI. Lambert 154. b. And in some Cases says Marrow, there may be a mutual or
cross Restitution Awarded, as if it be found by one Inquiry, that I my self was
Seized until that A. Disseised me with force: and by another Inquiry, that the
same A. was Seized until by me Disseised with Force: now either of us may pray
Restitution, and shall have it against the other, because it is by several
Inquisitions, whereof the Justices supposed to be several, cannot take mutual
understanding, and then shall he be in the worst Case, that has the first
Restitution; for the other shall have him removed by his Restitution that
comes after, Crompt. 166.

Sheriffs.
XLII. Lambert 157. And if upon a Writ of Restitution Awarded, the Sheriff shall
Retorn that he is so resisted, that he cannot bring the party into his
possession, he shall be Amerced for such his Retorn (says Marrow) because he
may take the power of his County to assist him therein, Crompt. 163. b. Dalt.
212. cap. 82.

Courts.
XLVIII. Lambert 157. ibid. And it is certain that if the Presentment be sent
into the Kings Bench, the party may have his Restitution Awarded out of the
Court, by the Equity of this Statute, as it is holden, 7 Ed. 4. 18. and 4 H. 7.
18. Crompt. 16^. infra Dalt. 211. cap. 81.

Justices.
XLIV. Lambert 157, 158. But if it happen that the Justice of the Peace before
whom the Enquiry was taken, do dye before Restitution delivered by him: It may
be doubted whither his fellow Justices having the presentment brought unto
them, may at their Quarter Sessions Award the Restitution, because the Statute
8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 2. seems to refer it to them only before whom the Inquiry
was made. It is I know the opinion of Mr. Marrow that they may, grounding
himself, as I think, upon the same equity, by which the Justices of B. R. are
Enabled to do it, howbeit it may appear, Dyer 187. pl. (and forcible Entry, Br.
27.) that the Law is otherwise taken, both therein, and also in the granting of
a supersedeas to stay the Restitution, because no Justices can do the one or
the other, but they only that were present at the Session when the Indictment
was found, except those of B. R. who for the supposed presence of the King do
carry a supreme Authority in these Cases of the Crown: But Marrow agrees that
neither the Justices of B. R. nor any other besides him that made Inquiry, can
personally restore the party, but by way of Precept only, Dalt. 59. cap. 22.
and 212. cap. 82. Crompt. 165.

Imprisonment.
XLV. Lambert 158. This seems upon consideration of both the Statutes, 15 R.
2. 2. and 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 2. to be plain, that such persons as the Justice of
Peace does find and see, continuing the Force at his coming to the place, them
he may immediately Commit to the Goal, as convict of that offense,
notwithstanding any their gainsaying whatsoever, Boult. 123. cap. 29. 9. 10.

Traverse.
XLVI. Lambert 158. ibid. But upon the Inquiry, I see not that the Justice of
Peace has any other power Committed unto him by 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 2. then to
make the Restitution only, which also it seems that he may make,
notwithstanding this offer of Traverse; and if he will not so do, the safest
way in my opinion, is to deliver or certify the Presentment into B. R. and so
to reserve the further proceeding therein, to their further power and
Authority, Dalt. 60. cap. 22. Crompt. 164. b. Dalt. 407. cap. 133. infra.

Enquest.
XLVII. Dalt. 58. cap. 22. 6. Also the Justice of Peace notwithstanding his own
View of the Force may and ought in some good Town or place near where the Force
was (at the cost of the party grieved) to Enquire by a sufficient Jury of the
same County to be Returned by the Sheriff, etc. Com. 86. Boult. 124. cap. 29.
25.

Justices.
XLVIII. Dalt. 58. ibid. And here Note that any one Justice of Peace alone out
of the Sessions, may make an Inquiry, being so appointed by the Statute,
whereas otherwise there must be two Justices at the least to make an Enquiry,
or to hold a Sessions, and one of them of the Quorum, Peace Br. 14 Dalt. 61.
ibid.

Amerciament.
XLIX. Lambert 159. Touching the Assessement of the Fines, some do think that
the same Justice has sufficient Authority to put them to their Fines, and upon
Pledges found for the payment thereof, to deliver them out of Prison again,
when he by his discretion shall think it good; for as they say, he is the only
appointed Judge over this Offense, and only has the Custody of the Record, and
knows best both how to moderate the Imprisonment, and to rate the Fine
according to the quantity of their trespass and offense, and as he is bound by
his Oath and Duty in their Opinion to Estreat all Issues and Amerciaments
growing to the King by his Inquiry, so ought he also to Estreat and send this
into the Exchequer, etc. But granting this to be true, yet to avoid all peril
of dashing against the Rock of doubt, I think it the better course to refer
this over (by delivery or certificate in B. R.) Dalt. 57. 58. cap. 22. Boult.
124. cap. 29. 21.

L. Crompt. 161. 45. Justices.
Two Justices of Peace Record a forcible deteyner of Lands and a House made
against 8 H. 6. 9. and Commit the party, and before the Justice of Assize and
Goal delivery, he makes a fine for the Force, ut accidit apud Staff. at the
Assizes in August, 26 Eliz. and thereby it seems that the Justices of Peace
at the General Sessions may assess the Fine as well as the Justices who
recorded the Force, for the Statute 15 R. 2. 2. 1. N. 3. does not say expressly
that the Fine shall be assessed by them which recorded the Force more than by
other Justices; but it seems convenient that they who Record the Force or
Riot should assess the Fine, as Marrow says, Lect. 8. for they have best
cognizance of the matter, etc. Boult. 125. cap. 29. 32.

LI. Dalt. 60. cap. 22. Amerciaments
Although the Justice of Peace ought to Commit to the Goal, and may Fine all
such as he shall see continuing their Force at his coming to the place: yet
upon force found by Inquiry only, and not viewed and seen by the Justice;
although this presentment of the Jury be a Conviction of the Offenders, yet it
seems the Justice of Peace may neither fine nor send to the Goal the said
Offenders by 8 H 6. 9.. 3. N. 1. (which appoints the Inquiry) for the Justice
has power by the said Statute to make Restitution only, as says Lambert 158,
159. yet Mr. Crompt. 161. 45. holds the contrary, scil. That the party
Indicted shall be Fined for the Force found, Lambert 158. supra 46. Dalt. 407.
cap. 133. infra 79. Boult. 126. cap. 29. 41.

Lambert 162. That on 14 H. 7. 28. Forcible Entry, Seisin.
Br. 10. and 22 H. 8. 6. etc. The difference (as well in Acc' sur Stat. of an
Indictment pleading three years possession by 8 H. 6. 9. 7. N. 1.) will rest in
this as I think, whether that continual possession of three years do
immediately follow a peacible or forcible Entry (continual) I say because
Forcible Entry Br. 29. seems to hold that if that possession by three years,
have not been continual, and without interruption, then if he reenter he cannot
hold or deteyn with Force, be his right or Title never so good and lawful, see
Dyer 141, 142. for the resolution of this Question as to Indictments 31 Eliz.
11. N. was made Crompt. 162. 165. b. Dalt. 207. cap. 79.

LIII. Crompt. 161. b. Restitution.
When a man is Indicted of a Forcible Entry upon 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N. 2. the
Statute is that the party so ousted shall be restored, as appears by the
Statute, but without an Indictment he shall not have Restitution, though the
Justices Record the Force, Dalt. 210. cap. 81.

LIVE. Crompt. 162. Courts.
If a man be restored upon an insufficient Indictment in the Country, upon 8 H.
6. 9. which is removed in B. R. the Court there shall restore the party who was
first ousted, and so it has been adjudged, Dyer 142. Lambert. 157. supra 43.
Dalt. 210. cap. 81.

LV. Crompt. 162. ibid. Restitution.
Restitution is awarded in the Country on an Indictment taken before the
Justices of Peace, and before Restitution made the Justices de B. R. before the
Indictment was removed, Awarded a supersedeas upon the Indictment, which is
before them adjudged insufficient, with a proviso, that if Restitution be
Awarded before, that the Sheriff shall restore him that was ousted,
notwithstanding as it was adjudged, Mich. 27 and 28 Eliz. in B. R. Crompt. 162.
b. infra 57.

Amerciament.
LVI. Crompt. 162. ab the Statute of 8 H. 6. 9. conteins two matters, one the
Fine to the King for the Force found, the other the Restitution, and tho he
against whom the Bill is preferred, shall not be heard to give Evidence to
Excuse himself of the forcible Entry to save the Fine due to the King for the
Force, yet as to Restitution which the Plaintiff will demand, if the Force be
found the Defendant shall be heard to disprove the Title of the Plaintiff,
otherwise any man might be ousted without cause, and this is by Discretion.

Certiorari.
LVII. Crompt. 162. b. Restitution is Awarded, the party having a Certiorari out
of B. R. who after the Sessions delivers it to the Sheriff, yet he shall not
Surcease, for he has not any Authority to allow it: but if it be delivered to
any Justices of the Peace, he may Award a supersedeas, but if Restitution be
made before the Sheriff has the supersedeas the party shall have Restitution
in B.R. on the Indictment removed there, Crompt. 162. supra 55. and 164. b.
infra 60. Dalt. 214, 215. cap. 84. 21 Jac. 8.

Restitution.
LVIII. Crompt. 163. The form of a Writ of Restitution granted by Justices of
Assizes on a Verdit found before them in trespass on 8 H. 6. 9. 3 N. 3. and yet
the Statute speaks of an Indictment, which Writ of Restitution is directed to
the Justices of Peace and Coroners of the County where Restitution should be
made, 1 Inst. 257. Dalt. 208. cap. 80.

Rex Coronatoribus nostris in Com' S. ac custodibus pacis nostrae, and
Justiciar' nostris ad diverse. fe^nias transgr' and alia Malefacta in eodem Com'
audiend' and terminand' assignat' and eorumcuilibet salutem Cum per quandam
Juratam patriae inter H. C. Militem, and E. S. de M. and W. P. de etc. capt'
apud A. in Comitatu predicto die Jovis proxime post Festum S. Barthol' Apostoli
ultimum preterit. Coram R. B. and A. F. Justiciar' nostris ad Assizas in Com'
predicto capiend' assignat' perform' Statut' in hujusmodi casu provisi compert'
est quod predict' E. and W. die, Anno etc. in december Messuagia etc. predicti H.
cum pertinentiis in R. vi and armis ingressi sunt and ipsum inde vi and Armisac
manu forti adtunc and ibidem expulerunt and disseisiverunt and ipsum sic
expulsum and disseisitum vi and armis usque diem inquisitionis predictae
extratenuerunt prout in Curia nostra coram nobis plene liquet de Recordo unde
predict' H. C. nobis supplicavit sibi de remedio in hac part provideri: and
quia volumus eidem H. fieri quod est Justum in hac part, vobis precipimus quod
vos aut aliqui vestrum ad hoc debite requifit' una cum Posse Comitatus illius
si necesse fuerit accedatis ac Messuagium and cetera premissa ac Messuagia
nementa illa cum pertinentiis reseisiri faciatis and predictum H. ad and in
plenam possessionem suam inde prout ipse ante ingressum and Disseisinam
predict' fuerat restitui and mitti faciatis juxta form' dicti Statuti de
ingressionibus manu forti factis nuper editi and hoc nullatenus omittatis
periculo incumbente Test, etc. 20 H. 8. Rot. 22. Rast. Intr. 338.

Courts
LIX. Crompt. 164. A Forcible Entry was found before Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, and the Record was sent in B. R. where he that was ousted, prayed to
be restored, and this matter was debated before all the Justices of England in
the Exchequer Chamber, and by their opinions they could not by their Commission
of Oyer and Terminer, ad inquirend' de omnibus transgr' and de omnibus aliis
Articulis and Causis contra formam quorumcunque Statutorum fact' sive
perpetrat. Inquire of Forcible Entries, which was at another time granted in B.
R. Hill. H. 8. by all the Court, as to this point in a like Case, 1 and 2 Hen.
8. Kell. 159. pl. otherwise it is of a Forcible Entry found before Justices of
Peace, and removed in B. R. for there the Justiees may make Restitution, which
see there clearly by all the Justices aforesaid.

LX. Crompt. 164. b. If a man fear he shall be Indicted upon 8 H. 6. 9. and
that thereupon Restitution shall be Awarded, Certiorari.
he may have a Certiorari ready, and when the Bill of Indictment is found, he
may deliver this presently to the Court, and this is a supersedeas to the
Restitution, because that by this Writ the Indictment shall be removed, and tho
that the Indictment be found after the Test of the Writ of Certiorari, it is
not material for both are the Kings Courts 1 R. 3. 4. accord, etc.

LXI. Crompt. 164. b. Traverse.
Tender of a Traverse to an Indictment made on 8 H. 6. 9. is no supersedeas but
only by discretion, for in strictness of Law, whatever the Title of him that is
ousted by force be, its not material, because the Statute is general, that he
that is so ousted shall be restored, and this well appears by the Case of a
Disseisor, who shall be restored against the Disseisee ousting him with Force,
Dyer 122. Lambert 158. 46.

LXII. Crompton 165. A Question was demanded of the Justices of both Benches by
the Keeper of the Great Seal, Supersedeas.
if complaint be made at the Quarter Sessions to three Justices of Peace
sitting there, of a Forcible Entry, and Forcible Deteyner of any Freehold by
him that is Disseised, and a Bill or Presentment thereof is there found to be
contra form' Statut' 8 H. 6. 9. and the said Justices thereupon grant a Writ of
Restitution, Whether any other Justice of Peace who was absent from the
Sessions may lawfully grant a supersedeas in this Case or not, and as it
seems, if the Sessions were a special Sessions for this purpose, and the
Justices to whom such complaint had been made, had repaired to the Force to
have a View thereof according to the intent of the Statute, and afterward they
had inquired thereof, and found it, and thereupon had granted a Restitution, no
other Justice could have granted a supersedeas, for no other Justice has
Authority by the said Statute 8 H. 6. 9. to grant Restitution, but only he or
they before whom the Complaint and Force had been found, and the Writ shall be
made under the Test of one of them only; except the Justices de Banco Regis,
who have Supreme Authority, the King himself sitting there, as the Law intends,
Dyer 187. Lambert 157. By this it seems that where the Indictment is found on
the said Statute at the Quarter Sessions, that two Justices of the Peace who
were not at the Sessions cannot grant a supersedeas: but two of those who were
at the Sessions may do it well enough, as I Collect by the opinion here: And I
and another Justice of Peace granted a supersedeas of Restitution granted by
other Justices of Peace who were at the same Sessions, because the Indictment
was Erroneous, and he that should have had Restitution, demanded of his Counsel
if we did well, and he procured another Sessions, and no more was done upon our
supersedeas, Dalt. 209. cap. 80. and 211. cap. 81.

LXIII. Crompt. 165. a. b. Joynder.
Two are Indicted of a Forcible Entry and Deteyner, and upon the Traverse its
found, one entered, and another deteyn'd with Force, yet Restitution in this
Case shall be Awarded, as in Acc. sur Stat. 19 H. 6. Enter 17. Rast. Entr. 335.
and 12 Ed. 4. 1.

LXIV. Crompt. 165. b. If a man be Indicted of a Forcible Entry, Traverses
and the party puts in a traverse presently, whereupon Execution is stayed, and
they do not prosecute the Traverse, cum effectu, but suffer this to be
discontinued, and after tender another Traverse at another time, upon
Restitution prayed, it seems that the Court may Award Execution,
notwithstanding, as in the Case of a Writ of Error, etc. 13 Ed. 4. 4 and 6 H.
7. 16. Crompt. 166.

LXV. Crompt. 165. b. Traverse.
It seems convenient upon a Bill on 8 H. 6. 9. preferred to show the Evidence
in full Court before the Jury, to the intent that it may appear to the Court,
whether there be reasonable Cause to stay Restitution or not, if the Bill be
found, Dyer 123. pl. acc.

Traverse.
LXVI. Crompt. 166. He that tenders the Traverse in B. R. upon an Indictment of
Forcible Entry, shall bear all the Charges of the Trial, and not the King, nor
he at whose Suit the Indictment is found, as it is said by the Clerks de Banco
Regis, by the same reason it should be so of an Indictment Traverst before
Justices of the Peace, Costs Br. 4. Dalt. 216. cap. 84. infra 78.

Justices.
LXVII. Crompt. 166. Three Justices sit upon an Inquisition of Forcible Entry,
and one agrees that Restitution shall be made, and the others will not agree.
Quaere if one may award Restitution without the other, because 8 H. 6. 9. 3. N.
2. gives power to one Justice to Inquire of Forcible Entries, and to make
Restitution.

Prerog.
LXVIII. Crompt. 69. 12. a Bill upon 8 H. 6. 9. N. for the King is not good, for
he cannot be Deisseised nor ousted of his freehold, because of his Prerogative
Br. 89. and he shall not have an Acc. sur Stat. so 4 H. 7. 1. b. see 2 H. 4.
Prerog. 12. Coron. 553. and 8 H. 4. 17. Disseisor Br. 16. 64. Dalt. 201. cap.
77.

Prerog.
LXIX. Crompt. 69. 13. If the Kings termor be ousted with Force, he cannot
prefer a Bill on 8 H. 6. 9. that he was ousted, and the King Disseised; for the
King cannot be ousted of his Freehold, but he shall have an Information of
Intrusion in the Exchequer, Dalt. 201. cap. 77. Poul. de Pace 39. b. 24.

Outlawry.
LXX. Crompt. 68. b. 8. Process of Outlawry lies in an Acc. sur Stat. of 8 H.
6. 9. for it is Quare vi and armis, as was agreed 37 H. 6. 3. and so it seems
to be upon an Indictment on the said Statute infra, 77.

Prerog.
LXXI. Dalt. 201. cap. 77. Yet it seems that upon complaint made to the
Justice of Peace by the Kings Termor of any such Force, the Justice of Peace
may, nay ought to remove the Force, and upon his View thereof to Record it, and
to commit the Offenders to Prison, and may Fine them, and after such Force
removed, the Kings Termor may presently reenter, if he can in peaceable manner.

Chpihold.
LXXII. Dalt. 203. cap. 77. But howsoever the Law be taken for the Indictment or
Restitution thereupon; yet in case that Lessee for years, Tenant at will* or a
Copiholder be forcibly put out, or held out, either by a stranger, or by their
Lessor, or Lord, the Justices of Peace, or any one of them, by 15 R. 2. 2.
might safely remove the Force upon View thereof, and Commit the Offenders to
Prison, and then the Lessee for years, or Copiholder, might presently reenter,
if peaceably they could so do, and so might have his possession again without
any Restitution made him by the Justices, Crompt. 71. 45.

Restitution.
LXXIII. Dalt. 203. cap. 77. But now by the Statute 21 Jac. 15. such Judges,
Justices, or Justice of Peace, as by reason of any Act or Acts of Parliament
now in force, are Authorized and enabled upon Enquiry to give Restitution of
Possession unto Tenants of any Estate of Freehold of their Lands or Tenements,
which shall be Entered upon with Force, or from them withholden by Force, shall
by reason of this present Act have the like and the same Authority and ability
from henceforth upon Indictment of such Forcible Entries, or Forcible
withholdings before them, duly sound to give like Restitution of possession
unto Tenants for term of years, Tenants by Copy of Court Roll, Guardians by
Knights service, Tenants by Elegit, Statute Merchant, and Staple of Lands or
Tenements, by them so holden, which shall be entered upon by Force, or holden
from them by Force.

LXXIV. Mich. 2 Car. 1. Latch. 182. Widow Stacyes Case, Copihold.
one was Indicted on 21 Jac. 15. for entering into a house in Cobham in Oxford'
ad tunc existens liberum tenementum suum ad voluntatem Domini secundum
consuetud' manerii etc. the party came into the Court, and being put out of
possession upon this Indictment by one Justice of Peace, prayed Restitution,
and it was granted to him by Dodridg and Whitlock, Jones absent, the reason
was, because for any thing here showed, the Widow may be Tenant by the Verge,
and not by Copy, and the Statute shall not be taken by Equity, and therefore he
that will have Restitution must pursue the words of the Statute: but Dodridge
agreed, that if one has a Widows Estate by Custom, after the death of her
Husband Copiholder, she is within the Statute, because her Estate, is
immediately by Copy.

LXXV. Dalt. 206. cap. 79. And by force of this Statute and proviso, Heir.
8 H. 6. 9. 7. N. 1. every Heir, and every Feoffee may justify to keep their
Houses and Possessions by Force, in case that themselves, or their Ancestors,
or their Feoffors, or those whose Estate they have, have been in peaceable
possession thereof, by the space of three years or more, Kell. 187. pl. Lambert
1^4. supra 35.

LXXVI. Crompt. 166. It Is found that J. S. Disseised me with Force, Restitution.
and by another Enquest taken at the same Sessions, its found that I am
Disseised by A. B. with Force, I may Elect upon which of these Indictments I
will be restored, and if I have Restitution against J.S. and this is Retorn'd,
I shall not have Restitution upon the other: but tho I be in possession as to
him, if upon the Writ of Restitution it be not Returned that I have
Restitution, I shall have Restitution against A. upon the other Verdit, if A.
has reentred upon the first Restitution given to me, by Marrow Lect. 9.
Quaere, for if a man Recovers in an Assize, and enters upon the Tenant, and he
reenters, he that Recovers shall not have a sc. fac. to Execute the Judgment,
49 Ed. 3. 27. Dalt. 211. cap. 81.

LXXVII. Crompt. 150. b. Outlaw.
Justices of Peace cannot Award a Capias utlagatum, but must certify the
Outlawry in B. R. as the Clreks of the same Court say, supra.

LXXVIII. Dalt. 216. cap. 84. But upon a Forcible Entry found, and a Traverse
tendered, if the Justices of Peace will try the Traverse, Traverse.
it seems they ought to cause a new Jury to be Returned by the Sheriff before
them to try the same Traverse, the which may be done the next day, but not the
same day, Crompt. 150, 152, 166. Kell. 159. b. pl. 2

LXXIX. Dalt. 407. cap. 133. Process.
But although the Justices of Peace have power, in some Cases, out of their
General Sessions to take Indictments, and after such Indictment found, to Award
Process ad respondendum against Offenders, and to hear and determine thereof:
and the Offenders also have liberty to come in and to speak, and may answer for
themselves, and may offer their Traverse; and that the Justices of Peace are to
allow of, and to receive the same: yet Quaere whether the Justices of Peace out
of their General Sessions may try such Traverse, being tendered unto them,
without which Trial all the rest may seem Idle: or that upon the Traverse
tendered, they must certify or send the Inquisition or Indictment so found
before them into B. R. or unto their Quarter or General Sessions of the Peace,
there to be Tried and Determined: howsoever, it is the safest after such
Traverse tendered, to certify or deliver such Inquisition or Indictment in B.
R. or to their next Quarter Sessions, and so to refer the Trial of the
Traverse, and further proceedings therein to them, Lambert 158. supra Dalt. 6.
cap. 22. supra.

Joyntenants.
LXXX. Poult. de Pace 39. 23. If there be two Joyntenants, or Tenants in Common
of certain Lands, and one of them does expel and put forth the other out of
possession of the Lands by force; he that is so expelled may have an Action of
Trespass of Forcible Entry against his Companion that did so expel him upon 8
H. 6. 9 N. for the words of the Writ may be verified, Expulit and Disseisivit,
and thereupon he shall have a Writ of Restitution to restore him to his former
Estate 8 Ed. 4. 9. 19. 22 Ed. 4. 10. or 20. F. N. B. 249. and 10 H. 7. 27. 18
H. 6. 5. But if one Joyntenant or Tenant in Common of Lands, do expel the
other by Force out of the same Lands; he that is so expelled cannot maintain a
Writ of Entry upon the Statute 5 R. 2. 7. against his Companion, that so put
him forth, and suppose that he did enter into the same Lands, ubi ingressus non
datur perlegem; for that his Entry and possession in that Land is Lawful
through the whole Land in respect of his own moiety or Estate, etc. Dalt. 213,
214. cap. 83.

Restitution.
LXXXI. Boult. 125. cap. 29. 34. After it shall be found by such Inquiry, that
such Forcible Entry or Deteyner is made, the Justices of Peace may break open
the House by Force to resist the same, and to put the party so put out in
Possessions again and so may the Sheriff do, having the Justices Warrant: but
36. the Justice of Peace may not in any wise make Restitution without such
Inquiry first had, and such Force thereby found: and if the Justice shall make
Restitution without Inquiry, it seems to be punishable in the Star Chamber.

Process.
LXXXII. Crompt. 123. b. 19. It seems that when the Justices shall Inquire on
8 H. 6. 9. N. that they may make a Warrant to the Sheriff to Retorn Pannels to
Inquire for the King of such things as shall be enjoined them on the Kings
behalf, without saying to Inquire of Forcible Entry, or of any Riot, because 2
H. 5. 4. N. is that they may hold their Sessions four times a year, and more
often if need be.

Sessions.
LXXXIII. Crompt. 124. 23. on 8 H. 6. 9. N. of Forcible Entries, they must hold
Sessions on complaint of the parties grieved within covenient time.

Church.
LXXXIV. Crompt. 73. If a man keep a Prebend with Force, the Encumbent shall
have a Writ to the Sheriff.

Forest.
Warren, Coneys, Deerhays, Buckstalls, Ferrets, Hunting, Parks, Chaces,
Coursing.
Sessions.
I. 19 H. 7. 11. 1. N. 9. That the Justices of the Peace in their Sessions,
shall have Authority to call before them any persons suspected, etc. (viz. that
having no Park, Chase, or Forest, keep Deerhays or Buckstalls, etc.) and by
their discretion to examine them in the premises, etc. Lambert 527. Crompt. 86.
b.

Forfeiture.
II. 19 H. 7. 11. 1. N. 11. And that those Justices that so Examined them, shall
have the tenth part of the Forfeiture, etc. Lambert 617, 618.

III. Crompt. 86. b. Catle.
Inquiry at Sessions of such who keep Dogs or Greyhounds to hunt, or use
Ferrets, Hayes, Nets, Harepipes, Cords, or other Engines to take wild Hares or
Coneys, or other pleasures of Gentlemen, who cannot dispend xl. s. per Ann. of
Freehold, etc. 13 Rich. 2. 13 Lamb. 440, 441. Dalt. 76. cap. 29.

IV. Crompt. 86. b. Inquiring if any Trace and Kill Hares in the Snow, Sessions.
by any way, 24 H. 8. 10. 1 Jac. 27. Lamb. 441.

V. Lambert 440. Inquiry on 5 Eliz. 21. 3. N. 1. Deer.
If any person have unlawfully broken or destroyed the Head or Dam of any Pond,
Mote, Stew, etc, or have wrongfully entered into any Park, or other Ground,
before this Statute Enclosed, or after this Statute by likeness to be Enclosed
and used for keeping of Deer, and have wrongfully hunted, drove out, hurt or
killed any Deer there; or if any have unlawfully taken away any Hawk, or the
Eggs of any Hawk, out of the Woods or Grounds of any other person, Crompt. 126.
b.

VI. 144. ib. Lamb. If any person have Hawked, Fowl.
or with his Spaniel hunted, in any ground not being his own, where any Corn or
Grain did then Grow, or before it was Shockt without consent, 11 H. 7. 17. and
23 Eliz. 10.

VII. Lambert 563. Against him that is convicted for the unlawful taking or
slaying of any Deer, or for such taking of any Hawk or Eggs contrary to 5 Eliz.
21. 3. N. 1. the Justices must adjudge treeble Damages, to the party grieved,
three Months Imprisonment of the body of the Offender; and after that is
expired, to find Sureties of his Good-Behaviour for 7 years after, or else to
remain in Prison until he shall find such Sureties during those seven years.

VIII. Lambert 118. It seems to me, etc. that all these Statutes, etc. (viz.
5 Eliz. 21.) have this one meaning, that a party so bound, may afterward
Forfeit his Recognizance, if he Eftsoons offend against the said Statutes.

IX. Crompt. 155. Nor can Justices of Peace Bail him that is committed, for
taking Deer, Fish, Hawks, etc. of another against 5 Eliz. 21. 3. N. 3.

X. Crompt. 184. A man is Indicted for hunting in a Park upon 5 Eliz. 21. 3. N.
3. and confesses the Indictment, and thereupon is Committed for threee months,
etc. according to the said Statute, and after he is in the Goal, the
Undersheriff carries him to the house of the High Sheriff, 20 miles from the
Goal, and there the Sheriff kept him in Prison: It seems to some to be an
Escape, for the Goal is the Kings Prison, and thither he shall be Awarded for
causes touching the King, tamen Quaere for Marrow sect. 7. held that he may
make his Goal where he pleases, see Plats Case Com. 36. Dalt. 340. cap. 118.

XI. Lambert. 442. Enquiry if any person have sold or bought, to sell again any
Deer, Hare, Patridge or Feasant not brought up in House, 1 Jac. 27. 4.

XII. Lambert 442. Inquiry on 3 Jac. 13. 2. N. 1. If any person have in the
night time, or by day unlawfully broke or entered into any Park Impaled, or
other several grounds Enclosed, used for the keeping of Deer or Coneys, and
unlawfully have hunted, driven, or chased out, or taken, killed or slain any
Deer or Coneys there, against the will of the Owners, Occupiers, or Possessors
of the same, not having Lawful Authority so to do.

XIII. Dalt. 75. cap. 29. Upon Information given to any Justice of Peace of the
County where any unlawful hunting of Deer or Coneys by night, with painted
Faces, or other disguising in any Forest Park or Warren, shall be had of any
person suspected thereof, that the Justice may make a Warrant to the Sheriff,
Constable, Bailiff, or other Officer, to take the party, and to bring him
before him, or before any other Justice of Peace of the same County, who may
examine him of that hunting, and of the doers thereof, and if he conceal that
hunting, or any offender with him therein, then the same concealment shall be
Felony in such Concealer, ( Quaere if they kill nothing) But if he then confess
the truth of all that he shall be examined of and knows in that behalf, then
his offense of hunting shall be but Trespass, and Finable, the Fine to be
assessed at the next General Sessions of the Peace by the Justices there, 1 H.
7. 7. N.

XIV. Dalt. 75. cap. 29. And to disobey such a Warrant, or to make Rescous
thereupon, so that the Execution of the same Warrant thereby be not had, it is
Felony, 1 H. 7. 7. N.

XV. Dalt. 75, 76. cap. 29. The Justice of Peace that shall take the
Examination of the Offender for unlawful hunting in Parks, etc. may after such
Examination, bind the Offender to his Good-behaviour, as it seems, to the end
he may be forth coming, till the offense and residue of the offenders be fully
examined; otherwise, if it shall after appear, that the offender has concealed
any thing whereby the offense becomes Felony, then the offender perhaps will
not be found, 1 H. 7. 7. N.

XVI. Dalt. 76. cap. 29. There be diverse other Statutes made against Hunting,
etc. which be very penal, but not to be dealt withal by the Justices of Peace,
except at their General Sessions.

XVII. Lambert Precedents 11 pl. 30. An Indictment for Hunting by night in a
Park, and for concealing the same, 5* Eliz. 21 3. N. 1. West. Symb. 2. part
110. e. 126.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod secundo die
Augusti Anno Regni etc. inter horas 10 and 11 in nocte ejusdem diei, A. B. de
C. in dicto Com' Generosus D. E. and G. de F. in dicto Com' Husbandman
aggregatis sibi nonnullis aliis malefactoribus ignotis ad numerum sex
personarum vi and armis viz. perlongis Baculis Arcubalistis and Sagittis
clausum and parcum dicti Domini Regis nostri apud O. in dicto Comitat fregerunt
and intraverunt and unum par Damarum dicti Domini Regis Anglice vocat' a Bra^e
of Bu^ks in dicto parco adtunc and ibidem depascent and invent' illegitime
venati sunt ac cum duabus Sagittis ex dictis Arcubalistis emissis and
Sagittatis adtunc and ibidem occiderunt and asportaverunt contra pacem dicti
Domini Regis: ac quod postea die sequente, viz. tertio die dicti mensis Augusti
Anno supradicto T. S. tunc Parcarius dicti Domini Regis dicti sui Parci de O.
predict' in Com' predict'Informavit' apud C. predictum T. W. unum
Justiciariorum pacis dicti Domini Regis in Com' predict' de illicita venatione
predict' modo and forma predictis facta, Qui quidem Justiciarius superinde
Warrantum suum in scriptis postea, viz. dicto tertio die August. Anno
supradicto direxit cuidem K. M. uni Constabulariorum Hundredi de S. in Com'
predict' in quo quidem Hundredo Sitae sunt predictae villae de C. and F. eo
tenore ut idem Constabularius arrestaret prenominatos A. B. D. E. and G. H. ac
eosdem coram eodem Justiciario duceret and haberet ad eos de dicta illicita
venatione examinand' and quod dicti A B. de and G. H. postea scil. dicto tertio
die August. Anno supradicto coram dicto Justiciario apud C. predict' in Com'
predict' per Constabularium predict' virtute dicti Warranti adducti ac per
eundem Justiciarium per suam discretionem de dicta illicita venatione and de
factoribus in ea part examinati existentes predict' tamen venationem
voluntary and felonice concealverunt and eorum quilibet voluntary and
felonice concelavit contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas
necnon contra form' cujusdam Statuti in Parliament' Domini Henrici 7. tent'
Anno Regni sui primo in hujusmodi Casu provisi ac Editi, 1 H. 7. 7.. 1. N. 3.

XVIII. Lamberts Precedents 19. pl. 52. An Indictment for Hunting Coneys on 13
Rich. 2. 13. 1. N. 2. West. Symb. 2. part 111. b. sect, 129.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum presentant quod A.B. de C. in
dicto Com' Laborer Homo laicus existens a Festo Sancti Bartholomei Apostoli
Anno Regni etc. continuand' usque in hunc presentem diem ( scil. 11. die Sept.
etc. Anno etc.) apud C. predict' in Com' predict' habuit and custodivit unum
Canem Grecum Anglice vocat' a Greyhound ad venand' and Chaceand' Lepores and
Cuniculos, and quod idem A. B. 28 die mensis August. Anno supradict' unum
Cuniculum valoris 4 d. in quodam clauso J. S. de C. predict' in dicto Comitatu
Generosi vocat' the Cony gorth infra Parochiam de C. predict' in dicto Com'
existent' cum dicto Cane venatus est, and occidit ubi idem A. B. nunquam habuit
terras aut tenementa ad clarum Annuum valorem xl. s. in dicti Domini Regis
contempt' ac contra form' cujusdam Statut' in Parliament' Domini Richardi olim
Regis Angliae secundi tento Anno Regni sui xiii in hoc casu provisi ac editi
West. Symb. 2. part 147. 298.

XIX. Crompt. 256. pl. 80. Crompt. 256. b. pl. 80. An Indictment for unlawful
Hunting in any ones Park, West. Symb. 111. 6. 127.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si E. P. de C. in Com' predict' Generosus H.P. de
C. etc. and R. B. de C. etc. 30 die Aug^st. Anno Regni etc. Circa horam 12. in
nocte ejusdem diei, aggregatis sibi quam plurimis aliis malefactoribus and
Pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus ignot' vi and Armis, videlicet Baculis
ferro munit' arcubus sagittis etc. aliis armis tam invasivis q. defensivis
clausum and Parcum Eliz. P. viduae apud H. sancti Gregorii in Com' predict'
injuste fregerunt and intraverunt and Damas ipsius Eliz. adtunc and ibidem in
parco predict' cubantes and depascentes cum tribus Canibus vocat' Greyhounds
and uno reti vocat' a Buckstall quod in parco predicto' retinuer' injuste
venati sunt and Chaceaverunt and unum Damam vocat' a Buck, adtunc and ibidem
cum canibus predict' Riotose ceperunt and occiderunt and asportaverunt contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis ad Grave Damnum ipsius Eliz. and contra form' Statuti
in hujusmodi Casu editi and provisi.

XX. Crompt. 256, 257. pl. 81. alio modo West. Symb. 2. part 111. 128 13 Rich.
2. 13. 1. N. 2.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si R. M. nuper de O. in Com' predict' Yeoman R. P.
nuper de P. etc. 19 die August. Anno Regni etc. Forestam dicti Domini Regis de
M. in Com' predict' fregerunt and intraverunt and unum Damam vocat' a Buck ad
valent' x s. adtunc and ibidem invent' sine licentia and voluntate dicti Domi
Regis cum Cane Leporario vocat' a Greyhound, fugaverunt and chaceaverunt and
dictum Damam apud R. infra precinct' forestae predict' cum funibus Anglice
vocat' Halters suspenderunt and occiderunt and ipsum Damam sic suspens' and
occisum injuste ceperunt and asportaverunt contra pacem dicti Domini Regis, etc.

XXI. Kilb. Precedents 130. A Warrant to levy 20 l. for Stealing Deer, on 13
Car. 2. 10, 1. N. 2.

Kent ss. To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said
County, and to every of them.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before me, that A. B. of C. in the said
County, has unlawfully coursed (killed, hunted, or taken away) one Fallow (or
Red) Deer in the Forest (Chase Purlieu, Paddock, Wood, Park or other ground,
where Deer are, or have been usually kept) of E. F. against the Form of the
Statute in that Case made and provided; These are therefore in his Majesty's
Name to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you,
do levy by way of Distress, upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. the
Sum of 20 l. by him Forfeited for the offense aforesaid: the one moiety thereof
to the use of C. D. who Informs of the said offense, and the other moiety to
the use of the said E. F. owner of the Deer aforesaid, and in case of want of
sufficient distress that you certify me thereof forthwith.

Given under my Hand and Seal this Second day of May, An. 1679. Anno Regni,
etc. 31.
XXII. Kilb. Precedents 131. A Warrant against a person not able to pay etc. 13
Car. 2. 10, 1. N. 5. to the House of Correction.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid. Kanc. ss.
Whereas by my Warrant, you the said Constable and Borshoulders were lately
required to levy by way of Distress of the Goods and Chattels of A. B. of C.
the Sum of 20 l. by him forfeited for an offense by him lately committed
against the form of the Statute made in the 13th year of his now Majesty's
Reign, Entitled An Act to prevent the unlawful Coursing, Hunting, or Killing
of Deer, and you the said Constable have Returned unto me thereupon, that the
said A. B. has not sufficient Distress to be taken for the Moneys aforesaid:
These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, to will and require you the said
Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do
take the said A. B. and him safely convey to the aforesaid House of Correction,
and to deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept, requiring also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said House,
and there deteyn and put him to hard Labor, for six Months, hereof fail you
not, at your Perils.

Given under my hand and Seal the 8 day of etc. Anno Regni, etc.
XXIII. Kilb. Precedents 132. A Mittimus to the Common Goal for want of
Distress, etc. on 13 Car. 2. 10. 1. N. 5.

To the Constable, etc. and to the Keeper of the Goal, etc.
Kent. ss.
Whereas, etc. ut supra, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, to will and
require you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you, that you,
some, or one of you, do take the said A. B. and and him safely convey to the
Goal aforesaid, and deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together
with this Precept; Requiring also you the said Keeper, to receive him into the
said Goal, and him there safely to keep for the space of one whole year without
Bayl or Mainprise: And further, until he has given sufficient Security for
his Good-Behaviour for one whole year next ensuing after his Enlargement,
hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10th day of etc. An. etc.
XXIV. Kilb. Precedents 171. A Warrant to search for Setting Dogs, Guns,
Greyhounds, etc. on 22 and 23 Car. 2, 25.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
By virtue of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, etc. These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to Authorize and command you, and every of you,
in the day time, to search the Houses, outhouses, or other places of any
person or persons within the said Hundred, other then of such person as has
Lands and Tenements, or some other Estate of inheritance in his own or his
Wives right, of the clear yearly value of one Hundred pounds per Annum, or for
term of Life, or which has a Lease or Leases of Ninety nine years, or for any
longer Term, of the clear yearly value of one hundred and fifty pounds, or
which is the Son and Heir apparent of an Esquire or other person of higher degree,
or which are owners or Keepers of Forests, Parks, Chaces, or Warrens, being
stockt with Deer or Coneys for their necessary use, in respect of the said
Forests, Parks, Chaces, or Warrens, as upon good grounds shall be suspected to
have or keep in his or their Custody, any Guns, Bows, Greyhounds, Setting Dogs,
Ferrets, Cony Dogs, or other Dogs to destroy Hares or Coneys, Hayes, Tramels,
or other Nets, Lowbells, Harepipes, Snares or other Engines for the taking and
killing of Coneys, Hares, Pheasants, Patridges, or other Game; and such Guns,
Bows, Greyhounds, Setting Dogs, Ferrets, Coney Dogs, or other such Dogs as
aforesaid, Hayes, Tramels, or other Nets* Lowbells, Harepipes, Snares, or other
Engines aforesaid, as you or any of you shall so find, to seize, detein and
keep, to and for the use of the Lord of the Manor or Royalty, where the same
shall be so fo^nd or taken, or otherwise to cut in pieces or destroy, as things
by the said Act prohibited to be kept by persons of their degree, and what you
shall do in the premises, you shall make known unto me, with all convenient
speed, hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal at etc. the 10th day of etc.
2. This may be directed to any special person or persons, as well as to the
Officers.

XXV. Pract. Precedents 162, 163. An Indictment for Hunting in a Park, and
using a Net to take Deer on 13 Car. 2. cap. 10.

Hertford ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod R. F. de D.
in Com' H. Yeoman etc. 13 die Novembr. An. Regni, etc. Circa horam undecimam in
nocte ejusdem diei aggregat' sibi quamplurimis aliis malefactoribus and pacis
dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus ignotis vi and armis, viz. Gladiis etc.
clausum and parcum cujusdam P.L. Armigeri apud J. in Com' predict' injuste
fregerunt and intraverunt and Damas ipsius F. adtunc and ibidem in parco
predicto cubant' and depascent' cum duobus Canibus Leporariis Angl' vocat'
Greyhounds, and uno rete vocat' a Buckstall, quod in parco predicto tenuerunt
injuste venati sunt and Chaceaverunt and unam Damam adtunc and ibidem cum
Canibus predictis riotose ceperunt and asportaverunt contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis Coronam and dignitatem suas ad Grave Damnum ipsius F. and contra form'
Statut' in hujusmod' casu edit' and provisi.

Forestallers see Market-overt.
Forfeitures.
I. 18 H. 6. 11.. 1. N. 4. And if the Justice of Peace that has not 20 l. per
(...) give not knowledge thereof to the Chancellor within a mouth after he has
notice of being in Commission, or if he Sit or make any Warrant or Precept by
force of such Commission, he shall incur the penalty of 20 l. and nevertheless
be put out of the Commission, Lambert 28. 31. and Crompt. 122. 37.

II. 5 Eliz. 13. 8. N. 3. Justice of Peace Forfeits 100 l. not certifying
Presentiments of defaults of Highways, at the next General Sessions.

III. 1 Jac. 9. N. Is 40 s. of Constable omitting his Duty.

IV. 3 Jac. 4. 5. N. Is 20 s. of Constable not presenting Recusant, and 40 s.
by Clerk of the Peace not Entering it.

V. 3 Jac. 4. 8. N. Is 20 l. every Month of Recusancy.

VI. Lambert 2. cap. 2. page 111. Whether the Recognizance for the Peace be at
the Suit of A. or by the mere motion of the Justices in the behalf of A. the
King cannot release or pardon it before it be Forfeited, etc. but being once
Forfeited, then he and none other may pardon the Forfeiture.

VII. Lambert 127. Menacing, Affrays, Assaults, etc. be breaches of the Peace,
and do draw after them the Forfeiture of a Recognizance knowledged for the
keeping of the Peace.

VIII. But what this Process, ( viz. on 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. N. against
Alehouse-Keepers on Forfeit of Recognizance) shall be, I will not determine;
for I do not find that in any other Case, though it appear that a man has
Forfeited his Recognizance, the Justices of Peace can Award any scire fac' or
other Process, to call him in upon it, but rather to certify the same into
higher Courts, that from thence Process may issue out to call the party to
answer, Lambert 56.

IX. Lambert 569. 570. I have heard that even in Cases where the Statutes do
appoint a certain Forfeiture as 5 l. etc. yet the practice is to mitigate the
same by discretion, if so be that the party will come in upon the Indictment,
and put himself in Gratiam Regis, with or without confession of the fault, etc.
so that the Fine shall be small where the fault was great, and the penalty of
the Law it self not small: But this manner of doing in my mind is so void of
sound Reason, that I cannot recommend it to the Justices of Peace, but do
rather condemn it as a mockery of the Law, against which practice 17 Ed. 4. 4.
N. of Tyles, 33 H. 8. 6. N. of Crossbows, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. N. of Alehouses
are made, that Justices shall not assess less, etc.

Forgery.
Collusion.
I. Crompt. 56. b. Justices*
The Justices of Peace cannot Inquire of Forging of Deeds, Escripts, etc. the
second time, which is Felony by 5 Eliz. 14 7. N. 1. Inasmuch as they have not
the first Record whereby he was attainted of the first Forgery, nor of this
first act, they cannot Inquire by 5 Eliz. 14. 10. N. 1. Poult. de Pace 44. b.
9. Lambert 540. Dalt. (276.) cap. 107.

II. Dalt. 51, 52. cap. 20. Coron.
Whereas one R. Smith was Indicted at the Sessions of Peace in the County of
Oxford, upon 5 Eliz. 14. 7. N. 1. for Forging of a False Deed, it was adjudged
by the whole Court in the Kings Bench, Ann. 30 Eliz. that the same Indictment
was not well taken; for although the Justices of Peace by their Commissions,
have power of Oyer and Terminer, to hear and determine in Felonies and
Trespasses, and have in their said Commission an express clause, ad audiend'
and terminand', and so are Justices of Oier and Terminer, yet it was resolved
by the Court, that forasmuch as there is a Commission of Oier and Terminer
known distinctly by that name, and the Commission of Peace is known distinctly
by another name, that the said Indictment taken before Justices of Peace at
their Sessions was not well taken (by 5 Eliz. 14. 10. N. 1.) and therefore it
was quasht, Crompt. 120. b. 7.

III. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 436. Inquiry on 33 H. 8. 1. 2. N. 1. Collusion.
If any person have falsely and deceitfully gotten into his possession any money
or any other things, of any other man's, by color of false Privy tokens, or of
counterfeit Letters in another name, Crompt. 83.

IV. Lambert 4. cap. 11. page 527. The users of false tokens, or counterfeit
Letters may be tried out by the Examination of Witnesses, 33 H. 8. 1. 2. N. 1.

V. Lambert 4. cap. 15. page 561. He that is orderly convicted before them in
their General Sessions of the deceitful getting of any Goods into his hands,
by means of any false token, or Counterfeit Letter made in the name of any
other, may be adjudged by them to suffer Imprisonment, standing on the Pillory,
or any other Corporal pain that they shall apoint, except the pains of Death,
33 H. 8. 1.. 2. N. 2. Lambert 569. Poult. de Pace 47. b. 25.

VI. Lambert 600, and 601. Such as be suspected of using Counterfeit Tokens or
Letters may be called by Process to the next General Sessions, and must be
convicted there, Crompt. 125. Dalt. 47. cap. 17.

VII. West. Symb. 2. part 108. b. 119. An Indictment of Forging a Bargain and
Sale on 5 Eliz. 14. Crompt. 258. pl. 86. Pract. Preced. 160

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domini Rege etc. quod cum in Statut' in Parliament' Dominae
Eliz. nuper Reg. Angl. apud Westminster. in Com' Mid' sex Anno Regni sui quinto tent'
edit' etc. quod si aliqua persona sive personae quaecunque post primum diem
Junii tunc proxime sequent' ex sua propria mente and imaginatione seu per
falsam conspirat' and fraudem cum aliis scienter subtiliter and falso
fabricaret sive faceret sive subtiliter causaret, seu scienter consentiret
fabricari sive fieri aliquid falsum factum, Chartam seu scriptum figillat'
Rotulos Curiae aut Testament' alicujus personae sive personarum in scriptis ea
intention quod status liberi tenementi seu hereditatis alicujus personae sive
personarum de in aut ad aliqua terras tenement' seu hereditament' liberae
tenurae aut customar' vel rectum titulus sive interesse alicujus personae sive
personarum de in vel ad eadem sive aliquid eorum molestari perturbari destrui
Recuperari vel onerari poterit aut contigeret aut post predict' primum diem
Junii pronuntiaret publicaret seu ostenderet in evidentiis aliquid tale falsum
and fictum Factum Chartam script' Rot' Curiae aut testament' tanquam vera
sciens eadem facta falsa ac ficta ut prefertur ad intentionem supramentionat'
and inde foret convictus aut super aliquam actionem sive actiones fabricandi
falsa facta super hoc Statut' fundand' ad sectam partis gravatae vel aliter
secundum ordinem and debitum cursum legum hujus Regni Angl. aut super Billam
vel informat' in Curia Camerae Stellat' exhibend' juxta ordinem and usum Curiae
illius solveret parti gravatae custagia and Damna sua ad duplum inveniend' seu
assidend' in Curia ubihujusmodi convictio foret ac etiam statueretur super
collistrigium in aliqua aperta villa mercatoria aut alio loco aperto and ibidem
haberet Ambas aures suas abscissas ac nares suas interscissat' and in parts
diversas and ferro igneo cauterisatas sic quod remanere possent pro perpetua
nota and signo falsitatis suae and foris faceret Domino Regi heredibus and
successoribus suis integra exitus and proficua terrarum and tenem' suorum
durante vita sua ac etiam sufferet and haberet perpetuum Imprisonament durante
vita ipsius predict' Damnis and Custagiis recuperand' ad sectam partis gravatae
(ut prefertur) primo solvendis and levand' de Bonis and Catallis offendentis
and de exitibus and proficuis dictarum terrarum tenement' and hereditament'
hujusmodi partis convict' aut unius seu utriusque eorum predicto titulo dicti
Domini Regis hered' vel successorum suorum ad eand' non obstante prout in eodem
Statuto inter alia before liquet.

Quidem tamen T. M. de C. in Com' E. predict' Cleric' Statutum predict' non
ponderans nec poenam in eodem content' verens post predict' primum diem Junii,
scil. etc. Apud T. in Com' E. predict' ex sua propria mente and falsa
imaginatione conspiratione and Coruna quoddam falsum factum, viz. quandam
indent' per quam quidem T. A. Barganizaret and venderet omnes illas terras and
tenement' vocat' etc. cum pertinentiis in T. in Com' E. predict' cuidam J. S.
scienter subtiliter and falso fabricavit and fecit and eand' Indentur' tunc and
ibidem pronuntiavit publicavit and legi fecit and in evidentiam ostendit, ad
molestand' distruend' and perturband' Statum possessionem titulum and interesse
predict' T. B. in terris and tenement' predict' per quod idem T.B. de
possessione titulo and interesse suis ad tenement' predict' cum pertinentiis
multipliciter pregravat' and vexat' existit in dicti Domini Regis legisque suae
contempt' manifest' and ipsius T. Damnum non modicum and Gravamen ac contra
form' Statut' predict' etc.

VIII. West. Symb. 2. part 108. 118. An Indictment of Counterfeiting Letters
Patents of Protection, etc.

Middlesex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod R.D. nuper de
H. in Com' E. predict' Husbandman, and alii machinantes quomodo populum Domini
Regis nunc subtilissime poterint decipere vel defraudare and Dominum Regem de
Hiis quae ad ipsum Regem pertinent and regalia sua ut de feodo magni sigilli
and hujusmodi exheredare, and veram legem Angl. a toto tempore usitat' and
approbat' subvertere and adnullare 16 die Februar' Anno Regni etc. apud T. in
Com' Mid'sex deceptive falso and proditorie quasdam falsas literas patentes ad
similitudinem script' Cancellar' Domini Regis contra fecerunt quasi essent
literae patentes de protectione ipsius Regis contrafecit quasi essent literae
patentes de protectione ipsius Regis sub nomine J. K. Clerici Hanaperii Domini
Regis ac unius Clericorum Cancellariae predict' script' hunc tenorem continent,
viz. Carolus secundus, etc. (Reciting the Letters Patents verbatim) ac cum idem
R.B. and alii etc. dictas falsas literas patent' sic ut permittitur
contrafecissent non habentes magnum Sigillum Domini Regis deceptive falso and
proditorie machinant' qualiter ipsi falsas and fictas Literas Patentes
hujusmodi subtilius poterant sigillare and magnum sigillum Domini Regis contra
facere dict' 16 die Febr. Ann. supradict' apud B. in Com' predict' quoddam
magnum sigillum Domini Regis supra quasdam patent' ipsius Domini Regis preante
pendent' and debite impositum acceperunt assumentes sibi regiam potestatem and
ipsum Regem regali sua Autoritate quantum in eis fuit privand' adtunc and
ibidem cum quodam cultello Arripuerunt and illis dictis falsis fictis and
contrafact' Literis Patent' deceptive and proditorie Apposuerunt and
Annexerunt, and easdem literas sigillaverunt sigillum illud subtiliter
resciendendo quasi sic non fecissent and sic magnum sigillum Domini Regis
adtunc and ibidem proditorie contrafecerunt and cum premissa sic fecissent
dictas falsas and contrafactas Literas Patent' Ac ut predict' est sigillat' 8
die Martii Anno etc. apud Villam de S. in Com' Mid'sex ac in diversis locis
ejusdem Comitat' tanquam Literas Patentes ipsius Domini Regis de protect'
deceptorie falso and proditorie publicaverunt and diversas pecuniarum summas de
diversis ligeis Domini Regis receperunt virtute dictarum falsatum fictarum and
contrafactarum Literarum Patent' in deception' Domini Regis ac populi sui
prejudicium and exheredat' manifestum, etc.

IX. Pract. Precedents, etc. 49. An Indictment for Counterfeiting the Seal of
the Arches.

Fowl.
Hawks, Fesants, Birds, Crows, Poultry.
I. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 440. Inquiry at Sessions, Forest.
if any person have taken, or caused to be taken, upon his own or other men's
ground, the Eggs of any Falcon, Goshawke, Lanner or Swan, or have taken any
Eyrer Falcon or Goshawke, Tarcel, Lanner, or Lanneret, or have purposely driven
them out their Coverts, or have Borne any Hawk of the Breed of England, called
an Niesse, Gossehawke, Tassell, Lanner or Lanneret, 11 H. 7. 17. 1. N. 2.

II. Lambert 441. License.
If any person whatsoever have taken or killed any Pheasant or Partridge, with
any manner of Net or other devise whatsoever, upon the Freehold of any other,
without special License, or in the night time (except it were unwillingly) by
Lowbelling or Tramelling, who also did then and there presently let them go
again, etc. 11 H. 7. 17. 1. N. 2. and 23 Eliz. 10. 2. N. 1. Crompt. 77. a. 124.
b.

III. Lambert 442. Inquiry on 1 Jac. 27. 4. N. 1. Market overt.
If any person has Sold, or has Bought to Sell again any Partridge, Feasant,
etc. not bred up in house.

IV. Lambert 198, 199. Justices*
Every Justice of Peace may examine Offenses against the Statute made 23 Eliz.
10. 5. N. 1. for preservation of Pheasants and Partridges, etc. If the same
Offenses be not before Lawfully heard or determined otherwise, and may take
Bond of the Offender with good Sureties for his Appearance at the next General
Sessions of the Peace to answer the said Offense, and to pay the penalty, and
to receive the punishment due therefore, and may also after Conviction and
punishment of such Offender, etc. take like Bond of him and Sureties, that for
the space of two years, he shall not Offend against the said Statute, Crompt.
195. 8 and 196. b. 16.

V. Lambert 441, 442. Inquiry at Sessions 1 Jac. 27. 2. N. 1. If any person
have shot at, killed or destroyed any Feasant, Patridge, House-dove or Pidgeon,
Hen, Mallard, Duck, Teal, Wigeon, Gouse, Heathcock, Moregame, or any such Fowl;
or have taken, killed, or destroyed any Feasant, Patridge, Housedove or
Pidgeon, with Setting Dogs and Nets, or other Engine; or have taken Eggs of any
Fesant, Pratridge or Swans, or willingly destroyed the same in the Nets, etc.
Crompt. 88. a. b. 89. Poph. 141, 142.

VI. Kilb. Precedents 170. A Warrant to search for Nets and Setting Dogs, on 7
Jac. 11.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
By Virtue of an Act of Parliament in that behalf made, etc. These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name, to Authorize and Command you, and every of
you, to enter into, and search the house or houses of any person or persons
within the said Hundred, other then such person or persons which have free
Warren, or is Lord of a Manor, or is such Freeholder, which is Seized in his
own Right, or in the Right of his Wife, of Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
to the clear yearly value of 40 l. or more by the year over and above all
Charges and Reprises of some Estate of Inheritance, or of Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, in his own Right, or in the Right of his Wife for Term of Life
or Lives, of the yearly value of threescore pounds over and above all charges
and reprises, or which is worth in Goods and Chattels four Hundred pounds,
suspected to have Setting Dogs or Nets for the taking of Phesants or
Partridges, and that wheresoever you or any of you shall find any such Setting
Dog or Nets, the same you take, carry away, and detein, kill, destroy and cut
in pieces, as things prohibited by the Act aforesaid, and forfeited to such of
you as shall find out and take the same as aforesaid, hereof fail not at your
perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals at M. in the said County, the day of, etc.
Anno, etc.
VII. West. Symb. 2. part 120. b. 162. An Indictment for taking Pheasants and
Partridge with Nets, etc. contrary to 11 H. 7. cap. 17. Pract. Precedents 67.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod W. G. de S.
in dicto Com' E. Laborer, circiter horam 10 ante meridiem 20 die Aug. Anno
Regni, etc. In quodam loco infra Paroch. de S. predict' in Com' E. predict'
vulgariter vocat' the Wheat Field qui quidem locus tunc fuit and adhuc est
liberum tenement' A. B. de S. predict' in Com' E. predict' Gen' (nec unquam
fuit in, aut de Warrenna ipsius W. G. propria) duos Phasianos and december
Perdices cum quibusdam reticulis and aliis Ingeniis (valoris duorum solidorum)
tunc ibidem cepit occidit and asportavit, sine aliquibus Assensu Agreamento aut
speciali licentia dicti A. B. in hac part habitis aut obtentis in dicti Domini
Regis nunc contemptum ac contra form' cujusdem Statut' in Parliament' Domini
Henrici nuper Regis Angl' septimi tent' Anno Regni sui 11 in hujusmodi casu
provisi ac editi.

Fraud see Collusion.
Franchise.
Liberties, Bailey, Sheriffs.
I. 42 Ed. 3. 9. 1. N. 6. Green Wax.
Estreats of the Green Wax shall not be doubled by the Sheriffs, but the Copy
of the Estreats wherein they touch the Franchises of Lords shall be delivered
to the Bailiffs of the Franchises under the Seal of the Sheriff, and that the
same Bailiffs shall yield their account in the Exchequer, by the same Copies so
delivered.

II. 27. H. 8. 24. 9. N. 2. Amerciament.
And that the Amerciaments for insufficient Retorns of Writs, or their Process
made by Stewards or Bailiffs of Liberties or Franchises having Retorns of
Writs, and Execution of the same, shall be put and set upon the heads of such
Stewards or Bailiffs, and not upon the Sheriffs.

III. 8 H. 6. 9. 5. N. 1. Justices of Peace shall Inquire of, Justices.
and determine defaults of Sheriffs and Bailiffs, on Forcible Entries.

IV. 27 H. 8. 24. 17. N. 1. Appearance.
That no persons within the Liberties shall be hereafter in no wise compelled
to appear out of the said Liberties, before any other Justice etc. then before
such as shall be named and assigned to sit, and be by the Kings Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, within the said Liberties, etc. Lambert 46, 47.

V. 7 Eliz. 7. 3. N. 1. Justices, etc. to determine of Baliffs, Enquest.
etc. in Retorn of Jurors.

VI. Crompt. 80. Justices.
No Justice of Peace of the County shall intermeddle in any City, Borough, or
Vill Corporate for Execution of 39 Eliz. 16. of Malting, unless he be a Justice
of Peace in the same City, etc. Lambert 46, 47. Crompt. 8. a. b. Dalt. 23. cap.
6.

VII. Lambert 69. Justices.
And forasmuch as some Cities and Corporate Towns found themselves grieved with
the Law, etc. it was specially ordained by 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 18. 2. N. 1.
that a Commission of the Peace and Goal Delivery, made to a City, or Corporate
Town, not being a Country by it self, should not be determined by the making of
such another Commission afterward to any of the Shire, Lath, Rape, or
Wapentake, in which that City or Town stands.

Fresh Suit.
Hue and Cry, Watch, Escape, Coron.
I. Lambert 2 cap. 3. page 134. Affray.
If he that makes an affray do fly into a House when the Justice of Peace or
Constable comes to Arrest him, they may also in Fresh Suit break open the
doors and take him by Warrant, or if he fly thence, they may make Fresh Suit
and Arrest him, tho it be in another County, by the opinion of some men, 13 Ed.
4. 9.

II. Lambert 2 cap. 7. page 200. Acc. S. Stat.
No person shall after that he shall be Robbed bring any Action upon any the
Statutes of Hue and Cry, except he shall first within 20 days next before such
Action brought, be examined upon his Corporal Oath, before some one Justice of
Peace of the County wherein the Robery was Committed, inhabiting within or near
the Hundred where the Robery was Committed, whether he do know any of them that
did the Robery, and if upon such Examination he do confess that he knows any
of them, then also shall he (before such Action be brought) enter into
Recognizance before the same Justice effectually to prosecute such persons so
known by Indictment or otherwise, according to the due course of the Laws of
this Realm, 27 Eliz. 13. 11. N. 2.

Franchise.
III. 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 9. Forasmuch as the Peace of this Realm has been evil
observed heretofore for lack of quick and Fresh Suit making after Felons in due
manner, and namely because of Franchises where Felons are received. 2. It is
provided that all generally be ready and apparelled at Arrest of Felons when
need shall be, as well within Franchise as without. 3. And they that will not
so do, and thereof be attainted, shall make a grievous Fine to the King,
Crompt. 1. 58. a. b.

Notice.
IV. 13 Ed. 1. and 2 Winch. cap. 1. 1. N. 4. That Cries shall be solemnly made
in all Counties, Hundreds, Markets, Fairs, and all other places, where great
resort of People is, so that none shall excuse himself by ignorance, that from
henceforth every County be so well kept, that immediately upon such Roberies
and Felonies Committed, Fresh Suit shall be made from Town to Town, and from
Country to Country.

Limitation*
V. 13 Ed. 1. and 2. Winch. cap. 2. 1. N. 5. And after that the Felony or Robery
is done, the Country shall have no longer space than forty days, within which
it shall behove them to agree for the Robery, etc. 2 Inst. 569. Crompt. 93. b.

Sheriffs.
VI. 13. Ed. 1. and 2 Winch. cap. 6. 1. N. 14. And from henceforth let Sheriffs
take good heed, and Bailiffs within their Franchises, and without be they
higher or lower that have any Baliwick, or Forestry in Fee, or otherwise, that
they shall follow the Cry with the Country, and after as they are bounden to
keep Horses and Armor so to do, 15. And if there be any that do not, the
defaults shall be presented by the Constables to the Justices Assigned, and
after by them to the King, and the King will provide remdy as before is said, 2
Ed. 3. 6.

Coron.
VII. 4 Ed. 1. and 2. page 29. 1. N. 16. In like manner Hue and Cry shall be
levied for all Murders, Burglaries, and for men slain, or in peril to be slain,
as otherwhere it is used in England, and all shall follow the Hue and steps, as
near as can be, and he that does not, and is Convict thereupon, shall be
attached to be before the Justices of the Goal, etc. Stamf. 50.

Lect.
VIII. 18 Ed. ^. page 84. 1. N. 17. The Frank pledge to Inquire of Cries levied
and not pursued.

Enquest.
IX. 28 Ed. 3. 11. 1. N. 3. And Inquest if need be shall be also taken in the
Towns by him which is Sovereign of the Town, and after in Hundreds, Franchises,
and in the County, and sometime in two, three, or four Counties, in cases when
Felonies shall be done in the Marches of the Counties, so that Offenders may be
Attainted, N. 7. and longer term shall not the Country have after the Robery or
Felony done, then forty days, within which it behooves them to make Gree, etc.

Sessions.
X. Crompt. 93. b. You shall Inquire, if immediately after Felonies and Roberies
Committrd, Fresh Suit be made from Vill to Vill, and from County to County; and
if the Felon be not taken within Forty days after the Felony Committed, the
Hundred where the Felony is Committed, with the Franchises there, shall answer
for the Robbery, etc. and Note where it is said of the Statute of Winchester 13
Ed. 1. and 2. cap. 2. 1. N. 5. in the Ancient Books, that the Country shall
have half a year, etc. the Record of the Tower is but 40 days, according to 28
Ed. 3. 11. 1. N. 7. Crompt. 179.

Notice.
XI. Lambert 433. Inquiry in Sessions upon 3 Ed. 3. W. 1. cap. 9. and 4 Ed. 1.
and 2. page 29. 1. N. 16. and 13 Ed. 1. Winch. cap. 1. 1. N. 4. If any man have
raised Hue and Cry without good cause, or being raised upon good cause, have
not been ready upon the Commandment of the Sheriff, or at the Hue and Cry of
the Country, to pursue and Arrest Felons, or such as have dangerously hurt any
man; and if the Sheriff or any Bailiffs have not followed such Hue and Cry with
Horse and Armor, Crompt. 179. 11. Dalt. 291, 292. cap. 109.

XII. Crompt. 178. b. 2. Officer.
Note when Hue and Cry is levied upon a Robery, or etc. the Officer of the Vill
where the Felony was done, must send to every other Vill that is, and not go to
the Vill that is next only, as it seems; for if the Hue and Cry should not be
quite round, the Thief should seldom be taken, Dalt. 75. cap. 28.

XIII. Crompt. 178. b. 3. Query, Trespass.
If one Neighbor may not take another Horse to pursue the Hue and Cry if he
will not go himself, because it is for the Common profit to retake a Felon, it
seems he may.

XIV. Crompt. 178. b. 4. Process.
No Capias lies where a man is condemned for not persuing the Hue and Cry,
Execution 34.

XV. Crompt. 179. If the Felon be not taken within 40 days, Action S. Stat
the party Robbed shall have remedy against the Inhabitans of the Hundred, with
the Franchise therein, by 28 Ed. 3. 11. 1. N. 6. Some have said that the
Country shall answer only in Case of Robbery and Death of a man, and not for
other Felony, therefore Quaere, etc.

XVI. Crompt. 179. a. b. Two Joint owners of a Sum of Money, Joynder.
who are Robbed by Malefactors unknown, levy Hue and Cry at W. where the Robery
was done, and notice there given, and the Felons not apprehended nor
discovered, nor amends made within the six months according to the Statute 13
Ed. 1. and 2. Winch. cap. 2. 1. N. 5. (but Note the Role of the Tower is 40
days, so Crompt. 93 contra 2. Inst. 569.) and the Defendants, viz. the
Inhabitants infra hundredum predict' plead in Bar of the Action brought
Jointly by the said parties Robbed, that immediately after the Hue and Cry
made, they made Fresh Suit from the said Vill of W. to three other Vills by
name, within the Hundred of Winterstoke, where W. is, unto the Vill of C. which
is within the Hundred next adjacent, and there Hue and Cry was by them given to
the Inhabitants of this Hundred, Judgment if the Action whereupon it was
Demurred, and by the opinion of the Court without Argument, this pursuit is no
Excuse according to the intent of the said Statute without apprehension or
Answer of the Offenders, or discovery of their names so that they may be
Indicted and Outlawed, and in the said Case they may Join in the Action, but
not if the Sums were several, and several properties, Dyer 370. pl. and 3.
Inst. 117, 118. cap. 52.

XVII. Dalt. 75. cap. 28. Every Justice of Peace may cause Hue and Cry,
Justices.
Fresh Suit, and search to be made upon any Murder, Robbery, Theft, or other
Felony committed, and this he may do by force of the Commission, the first
assignavimus Dalt. 291. cap. 109.

XVIII. Dalt. 75. cap. 28. Notice.
Sir Nicholas Hide in his Charge at Cambridge Assizes in Lent 1629. delivered
that Hue and Cry must be made or pursued with Horsemen and Footmen, and that
not only a private search is to be made in every Town, but that they must raise
the Country as they go, and all still to follow the Hue and Cry as against a
Common Enemy, Com. Cromp. 179. a. b. Boult. 212. cap. 54.

XIX. Dalt. 75. cap. 28. Officer.
Also the Officers of every Town to which Hue and Cry shall come, ought to
search in all suspected Houses and places within their limits, and as well the
Officers as all other persons which shall pursue they Hue and Cry, may Attach
and stay all such persons, as in their search or pursuit they shall find to be
suspicious, and thereupon shall carry them before some Justice of the Peace of
the County where they are taken to be Examined, where they were at the time
when the Felony was Committed, etc. 3 Inst. 118. cap. 52. Poult. de Pace 155.
b. pl. 17.

Justices.
XX. Dalt. 291. cap. 109. Also it seems any Justice of Peace may bind persons
Convict (of not following the Hue and Cry) over to appear before the Justices
of Goal Delivery, and that by force of the Commission, the first assignavimus.

London.
XXI. 3. Inst. 118. cap. 52. de Civitate Lond' capien' in manum Regis pro
Hutesio non levato, Rot. Claus. 30 H. 3. membr. 5. mandatum est Gulielmo de
Hamershull Thesaurario Regis quod Civitatem London capiat in manum Regis eo
quod Cives ejusdem Civitatis non leaverunt Hutesium and Clamorem pro morte
Magistri Guidonis de Arretio and aliorum interfectorum secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni Test Rege apud Woodstock 22 die August.

Days.
XXII. 29 Car. 2. 7. 5. N. 1. No Remedy for parties Robbed on a Sunday, yet the
Hundred shall forfeit to the King for default of Fresh Suit as before, Crompt.
179. b.

Watch.
XXIII. Lambert 433, 434. Inquiry in Sessions, if the Watch in every Bourough
and Town have been kept from Sun Rising to Sun Set, between Ascension day and
Michaelmas day, to Arrest strangers that pass by in the night Season, 13 Ed. 1.
and 2. cap. 1. of Winchester.

XXIV. Lambert 21. pl. 58. An Indictment for not keeping Watch in a Town, West.
Symb. 2. pl. 134. 219.

Kent. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presenttant quod a decimo die
Maii Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Jacobi Dei Gratia Angliae Franciae and
Hiberniae Regis Fidei Defensoris etc. usque 20 diem mensis Julii Anno
supradicto Homines and Inhabitants Villae de C. in Com' predict' nullas
vigilias a solis occasu usque ad solis ortum in dicta villa de C. in Com'
predict' per aliquos homines fecerunt aut custodiverunt prout de Jure and
antiqua consuetudine facere debent and solebant in dicti Domini Regis nunc
contemptum ac contra form' cujusd' Statut' in Parliament' Domini Ed. olim Regis
Angliae primi apud Winton. Anno Regni sui 13. tent' in hujusmodi casu provisi
and editi, West. Symbol. 2. part 134. 219.

XXV. Lambert Precedents 21. b. pl. 59. An Indictment for not keeping Watch at
the Sea side, Pract. Precedents 86. West Symb. 2. part 134. sect. 220.

Kent ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presentant quod ubi Homines
and Inhabitants Hundredi de F. in Com' predict' Antiquitus ( viz. ante Annum
Regni Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angliae quarti quintum quasdam Maritimas and
minutas Vigilias Anglice) vocat' Sea Watch temporr Belli per Costerum Maris in
quodam loco uocat' Sandgate, in dicto Comitatu per quatuor homines singulis
noctibus a tempore in cujus contrarium memoria hominum tunc non existebat
custodire debebant and solebant dicti tamen Hundredi de F. Homines and
Inhabitants nunc tempore nuper Belli viz. a 24 die Junii Anno Regni dicti
Domini nostri Jacobi Dei Gratia Angliae etc. usque 31 diem dicti mensis Junii
Anno supradicto predictas vigilias apud Sandgate predict' modo and forma
predictis facere and custodire voluntary pretermiserunt and neglexerunt ac in
eisdem vigiliis tunc ibidem sicut prefertur faciendis custodiend' voluntariam
fecerunt defaltam in dicti Domini Regis contemptum ac hujus Regni sui Angliae
discrimen non modicum necnon contra form' Statuti in Parliement' dicti Domini
Henrici nuper Regis Angliae quarti tento Anno Regni sui quinto predicto in
hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi West. Symb. 2. part 134. 220.

XXVI. Crompt. 266, b. 267. pl. 104. An Indictment against Inhabitants for not
answering for Robbery.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum in Statuto in Parliament' Domini Edw.
nuper Regis Angliae primi progenitoris Domini Regis nunc apud Winton Anno Regni
sui 13. tent' edit' inter caetera ordinat' sit pro eo quod de die in diem
Roberiae Homicidia, Incendia, and Latrocinia, plus solito tunc fiebant quam
antea solebant and felones non potuissent esse attinct' per sacrament'
Juratorum qui magis voluntary permittebant felonias fieri gentibus extraneis
and felones evadere absque poena quam malefactores indictari ubi major pars
fuerunt gentes de eadem patria vel ad minus si Malefactores fuerunt de alia
patria eorum receptores fuerunt de visu ubi hujusmodi malefacta fiebant and hoc
faciebant pro eo quod sacramenta eisdem Jurat' non ministrabantur nec in patria
ubi feloniae illae fiebant, and quoad restitutionem Damnorum, poena ante nunc
non fuit provis' pro Concealiament' and negligentiis suis idem nuper Rex pro
posse hujusmodi felonias debilitand' and decrescend' stabilivit poenam in illo
Casu ita quod exinde pro timore poenae plus q. pro pavore sacrament' nullis
feloniis extunc parcerent, nec aliquas felonias extunc concealarent and quod
proclamatio fieret in omnibus Comitat' Hundred' mercat' feriis and omnibus
aliis locis ubi multitudo* Gentium foret assemblat' sic quod nulli per
ignorantiam se possint excusare and quod quaelibet patria extunc sic possint
custodiri quod instanter post Roberiam and felonias fact' recens insecutio
fieret de Villa in Villam de patria in patriam and etiam inquisitiones fierent
si necesse foret in Villis per ipsum qui Dominus vel Superior esset in Villa,
and postea in Hundred' and in Franchesia and in Comitat' and aliquando in
duobus tribus vel quatuor Comitat' in Casu quando feloniae factae fuerunt in
marchiis and confiniis Comitat' ita ut malefactores potuissent esse attincti:
and si patria de corporibus hujusmodi malefact' non respondere poena talis
esset quod quaelibet patria scilicet homines in Patria Commorantes responderent
de roberiis factis and Damnis sic quod totum Hundred' ubi Roberia facta fuit
cum Franchesiis quae essent infra precinctum ejusdem Hundred' responderet de
Roberiis factis: and si Roberia foret in divisis duorum Hundred' in hujusmodi
casu responderent inde ambo Hundred' simul cum Franchesiis quae forent infra
precinct' Hundred' predict' and longioris temporis spacium non haberet patria
post Roberiam and felonias fact' quam Dimidium Anni (nunc 40 dierum) infra quod
faceret emend' de Roberia vel de Malefactis vel responderent de corporibus
malefactorum prout in Statut' predicto before continetur Accum quidem
Malefactores ignoti tertio die Maii Anno etc. apud N. in Com' predict' quae
quidem Villa est infra Hundred' de H. vi and armis, viz. Gladiis Baculis and
Cultellis in quendam O.C. Insultum fecerunt and Centum libris de denariis
ipsius O. ibidem invent' felonice ab eodem O. spoliaverunt ceperunt and
asportaverunt contra pacem etc. qui quidem O. immediate post feloniam and
spoliationem predict' factas scilicet quarto die Maii Anno etc. supradict' apud
N. predict' per totam eandem Villam Hutesium and Clamorem de Roberia predicta
fecit and notitiam ibidem inhabitantibus ejusdem Villae de Roberia illa dedit
and post Roberiam illam dimidium Anni (nunc 40 dies) jam preterierint ibidem
tamen Inhabitants emend' de Roberia predict' fact' O. huc usque non fecerunt
nec Corpora felonum and malefactorum predict' ceperunt neque de Corporibus
eorum hucusque responderunt sed malefactores and felones illos evadere
permiserunt in dicti Domini Regis contempt' and ipsius O. Grave Damnum and
contra form' Statut' predicti etc. 3. Brownl. 224.

XXVII. Kilb. Precedents 161, 162. The Examination of a Person Robbed on the
Highway, praying an Hue and Cry.

The Examination of A. B. of C. in the County of O. Gent. taken by E. F. Esquire
one of the Justices of Peace of the County of K. on the Second day of October
Anno Domini 1679. upon his Oath.
Kent ss.
This Examinant says, that as he was Riding on Saturday the first day of April
last past, from the Town of A. in the County of B. to C. in the same County, he
was assaulted in the Common Highway leading from one of the said Towns to the
other, at or near a place called K. at about a 11 of the Clock in the Forenoon
of the same day, by two Footmen who there seized upon him this Examinant, and
carrying him into a certain Wood, Robbed him and Bound him; And this Examinant
further says, that he is since informed, that the said place and Wood are both
in the Parish of A. aforesaid, and so within the Hundred of A. and D. in the
said County; And this Examinant further says and deposes that the said
Thieves did then feloniously take from him, and Rob him of 10 l. 17 s. in Money,
and one Cloth Sadle with Stirrups and Girts worth in all 10 s. and two Leather
Purses, two Knives, etc. in all worth 5 s. And this Examinant further says and
deposes, that he then did not, nor yet does know the parties that Committed
the said Robery or either of them.

R. W.

2.Another.

Kent ss.
A. B. of C. in the County of O. did upon the present tenth day of October in
the 31 Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, etc.
personally come before me E. M. Esquire one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the said County of O. Inhabiting in the Parish of St. M. C. in the County
aforesaid, in the Hundred of R. in the said County; and upon his Corporal Oath
then taken before me, did say that upon Friday the 8th day of May lay past, at
about the hour of seven of the Clock in the Afternoon of the same day, in the
Kings Highway, at a certain place called E. F. in the Parish of C. in the
aforesaid Hundred of R. in the said County of O. he was Assaulted by five men
all unknown to him the said A. B. and they the said five men, did then and
there Feloniously take and carry away from him the said A. B. 100 l. in Moneys
Numbered, of the Moneys of him the said A. B. and also his Goods and Chattels,
that is to say, one Ring, with a deep Table Stone set in the same, one Watch in
two Gold Cases, etc. to the Value of 30 l. and Robbed him the said A. B. of all
and every the Moneys, Goods and Chattels aforesaid, and the said A. B. was on
the day and year first above mentioned upon his Oath aforesaid, by me Examined,
whether he did know the parties that Committed the said Robbery, or any of
them, and he then upon his Oath did say, that he neither at the time of the
said Robbery Committed, nor at any time since, did, or does yet know the said
parties that Committed the said Robbery, nor any of them; In Testimony whereof
I the aforesaid Justice have hereunto set my hand and Seal, the day and year
first above Written.

XXVIII. Kilb. Precedents 163. A Hue and Cry on 28 Ed. 3. 11.. N.

R. W. Esquire One of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County,
To all Constables, Borshoulders, and other his Majesty's Officers within the
said County, or elsewhere within the Realm of England, whom the Execution
hereof may concern, Greeting. Kent ss.
Whereas I have received Information and Charge against A. B. who is a person
of evil Fame, who is charged before me to have assaulted and taken from the
person of C. D. at etc. 10 l. in Moneys Numbered, etc. and he the said A. B. is
very much suspected to have committed several other Felonies; and
notwithstanding several endeavors for the apprehension of him, he has not as
yet been apprehended, but has withdrawn himself and is fled: These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name, to Command you, and every of you, to make
diligent search within your several Precincts for the said A. B. and to make
Hue and Cry after him from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, according
to Law, and if you shall find the said A. B. that then you do carry him before
some one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County or place
where he shall be taken, to be dealt withal according to Law; hereof fail not
at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal at etc. the Tenth day etc. Anno etc.
XXIX. Pract. Precedents 53. An Indictment of a Constable for not prosecuting
the Hue and Cry on Robery and Burglary.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra Sacramentum suum presentant quod quaedam
personae adhuc ignotae 19 die Febr. Anno Regni etc. vi and Armis etc. domum
mansionalem cujusdam A. B. apud C. in Com' predict' circa horam secundam post
meridiem in nocte ejusdem diei Felonice and Burglariter fregerunt and
intraverunt and unam Thecam Birretam vocat' a Cap Case etc. ad valent 40 s.
etc. de Bonis and Catallis ipsius B. adtunc and ibidem invent' Felonice and
Burglariter furati fuerunt ceperunt and asportaverunt contra Pacem dicti Domini
Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem suas predictusque A. B. immediate post
Burglariam and Feloniam predict' in forma predict' fact' and perpetrat' viz. 20
die Martii Anno supradicto circa horam Nonam in nocte ejusdem diei apud C.
predict' levavit and levari procuravit Hutesium and Clamorem ad prosequend'
Felones predict' secundum formam Statuti Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae
primi apud Winton An. Regni sui 13 in hujusmodi casu nuper edit' provisi
ratione cujus vestigationis and prosecutionis Feloniae and Burglariae Hutesii
and Clamoris predict' per notitiam and monitionem adtunc dat' C. D. adtunc
Constabulario de S. predict' in Com' predict' Yeoman and E. F. de eodem Laborer
Hutetiam and Clamorem Feloniae and Burglariae predict' ulterius non prosecut'
fuit secundum form' Statut' predict' and debitam legis formam' hujus Regni
Angl' per quod Felones illi impuniti evaserunt and escapiaverunt contra form'
Statut' predict' and contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and dignitatem
suas, etc.

Fruiterers see Market, Trades. Fuel see Measures. Fullers Earth see Drapery.
Gally Halfpence see Money.
Games.
Plays, Stage Plays, Archers, Bowling, Shooting Sports, Unlawful Games.
I. 33 H. 8. 9. 3. N. 5. Apprentice.
And after Children and Servants come to the age of 17 years, every of them
shall provide and have a Bow and four Arrows continually for himself at his
proper Costs and Charges, and use and occupy the same in shooting, etc. Lamb.
473, 474.

II. Lamb. 191, 122. Process.
Every Justice of Peace may as well within the Liberties as without, enter into
any Common house or place where any playing at Bowls, Coyts, Kayles, half Bowl,
Tennis, Dice, Cards, Tables, or at any other Game, prohibited by any former
Statute, of which sort be Football, and Casting of the Stone by 12 Rich. 2.
10. N. or playing at any unlawful Game already invented, or hereafter to be
invented, shall be suspected to be used against 33 H. 8. 9. 14. N. 1. and may
Arrest as well the Keepers of such places as the Players there, and Imprison
them until those Keepers find Sureties to the Kings use, to be bound by a
Recognizance or otherwise, no longer to occupy any such play or place, and that
the persons found there playing be in like sort bound by themselves, or with
Sureties at the Discretion of the taker, no more to play or haunt at, or to any
the said places, or at any of the said Games. And every Justice of Peace
finding or knowing any person not excepted by this Statute, to use any
unlawful Game contrary to this Act, may Commit him to Ward, there to remain
without Bayl or Mainprise, until he become bound by Obligation to the Kings
use, in a Sum to be thought reasonable to that Justice, that he shall not from
thenceforth use such unlawful Games, Lambert 345. Crompt. 131. 196. 4 and 79.
a Kitch. 48. Dalt. 63. cap. 23.

Apprentice.
III. Lambert 174, and 175. If any Artificer of any occupation, or any
Husbandman, Apprentice, Laborer, Servant at Husbandry, Journyman, or any
servant of Artificer, or any Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or Servingman, other
then of a Nobleman, or of him that may dispend 200 l. by the year, playing
within the precinct of his Masters House, have played out of the Christmas at
any of the said unlawful Games, or in the Christmas out of the house or
presence of their Master, shall be Inquired in Sessions, 33 H. 8. 9. N. and 12
R. 2. 7. 10. Crompt. 79. Dalt. 63. cap. 23.

War.
IV. Lambert 476. the Act 33 H. 8. 9. 20. N. 1. For Archery must be proclaimed
at the several Sessions of the Peace, Crompt. 123. b. 14.

Ability.
V. Crompt. 78. b. Inquiry at Sessions on 33 H. 8. 9. 3. N. if every one of the
age of 7 years, and within LX having no Impediment (except spiritual men, the
Justices of the one Bench or of the other, and Barons of the Exchequer) use
Shooting in Long Bows, and have a Bow and Arrows ready.

Item 2. Whither the Fathers and Governors educate their Children in Shooting
and have in their houses for every one of the age of 7 years, until he come to
17. a Bow and two Arrows, and they may provide and abate the Money out of their
Wages, otherwise he shall forfeit 6 s. 8 d. for every Month that they fail, 33
H. 8. 9. 3. N.

Item 3. If every man above the age of 17 years, and within 60 years, having no
Impediment, nor being a spiritual man, etc. has a Bow and four Arrows, and
occupies it, he that fails shall Forfeit 6 s. 8 d. for every Month, 33 H. 8.
9. 3. N. 5.

Item 4. If any under 24 years of age shoot at Pricks, he shall Forfeit 4 d for
every Shoot.

5. None under 17 years if his Father or Mother has not 10 l. in Land, or that
his Goods amount to the value of 40 Marks, shall shoot in any Bows of Yew
bought for him, on Forfeit of 6 s. 8 d.

Archers.
VI. Crompt. 79. Item 6. If Butts be made and continued in every place by the
Inhabitants, the Forfeit is 20 s. for every month failing, and the inhabitants
must exercise Shooting on Festival days, ^. 474. by 33 H. 8. 9. 4. N. 4.

Item 7. You shall Inquire if any for Lucre keep any place of Bowling, Tennis,
Dicing, or other unlawful Games, he shall Forfeit 40 s. for every day, and
every person haunting this, shall forfeit for every time 6 s. 8 d.

Bowls.
VII. Crompt. 79. If any Bowl in any open place out of his Garden or Orchard, he
shall forfeit 6 s. 8 d. for every time.

VIII. Crompt. 79. At the Assizes at Stafford, Lent 29 Eliz. before Manwood
Chief Baron, and Windham Justices of Assize there, diverse that were taken by L.
one of the Justices of the Peace there, were Indicted thereof, and he that kept
the house where they played also, and he that kept the house was fined to 5 l.
and every one that played 20 s. and because they were present in Court, they
were Committed to Prison till they paid their Fines, and there were above 20 of
them that played in the said house at one time, Dalt. 64. cap. 23.

IX. Crompt. 131. Imprisonment.
Justices of Peace and head Officers who find or know any person using
unlawful Games against 33 H. 8. 9. 14. N. 1. may Commit such Offenders to
Prison without Bayl or Mainprise, until they be bound by obligation to the use
of the King, that they will not use such unlawful Games, and so see a
Conviction by view of the Justices, as to Imprisonment, etc. as it seems,
Quaere Crompt. 154. b. 155. a. and 172. ab. 175. b. 21. 197. b. 27.

X. Crompt. 192. b. All Informations, Plaints, Actions and Suits, Days.
against such as keep Common Houses of unlawful Games, and against such as
play therein against 33 H. 8. 9. 17. N. 2. shall be Commenced within the year
after the Offense Committed, otherwise no advantage or Suit thereof shall be
taken, as appears by the said Statute.

Prohibition.
XI. Dalt. 64. cap. 23. But Inquire what Games shall be said to be unlawful,
etc. Quaere of Dancing of the Morris, or other open Dancings, Bear-baytings,
Common Plays and Fencings, all these seem to be prohibited by 39 Eliz. 4.. N.

Days.
XII. 1 Car. 1. cap. 1. 1. N. 5. And that any one Justice of the Peace of the
County, or the chief Officer, etc. of any City* etc. wherere such Offense (
viz. Bear-bayting, Bull-bayting, Interludes, Common Plays, and other unlawful
Pastimes on the Lords day) shall be Committed upon his or their View or
Confession of the party, or proof of any one or more Witness by Oath, which the
said Justice etc. shall administer, shall find any person offending in the
premises, the said Justice etc. shall give Warrant under his or their hand and
Seal to the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish, etc. where such offense
shall be Committed, to levy the said Penalty ( viz. 6 s. 4 d.) etc. by Distress
and Sale, etc. Dalt. 63. cap. 23.

Warren.
XIII. Lambert 95. Every person finding or seeing any to offend 39 H. 8. 6. 16.
N. 1. against the Shooting in Cross-bows and Hand-guns, may Arrest and bring or
convey him to the next Justice of Peace of the County where he was found
offending, who upon due Examination and Proof thereof before him made, may by
his discretion Commit him to the Goal, there to remain till he shall truly pay
the one Moiety of the Forfeiture of this Statute to the King, and the other
Moiety to the first bringer or conveyer, Dalt. 64. cap. 24.

In this Case, and such other, the Justice of Peace having as it seems, the
whole matter committed to himself alone, ought to be wary and circumspect etc.
and upon the offense sufficiently proved, it is necessary that in his Mittimus
or Precept to the Jailer, there be contained the names of the parties, with the
manner of the offense, and how long he is to be kept in Prison for it.

Ability.
XIV. Lambert 472. If any person have Shot in, used, or kept any Handgun, but
such as is in Stock and Gun one yard long; or any Hagbut, or Demihake, not
being three quarters of a yard long, 33 H. 8. 6. Lamb. 295.

XV. 471, 472. (Inquiry at Sessions) If any not having 100 l. per Annum have
carried in his Journey any Cross-bow bent, or Gun charged, unless it be to the
Musters, 33 H. 8. 6. Crompt. 88.

Warren.
XVI. Lambert 472, 473. Inquiry, if any person have Shot at large, other then at
a Butt or Bank of Earth, in place convenient, at any thing, with any Gun, in
any City, Bourough, or Market Town, or within a quarter of a Mile of any of
them, or have commanded his Servant to Shoot in Cross-Bow or Gun at any thing,
other then a Butt or Banck of Earth; or if any person not having 100 l. per An.
or not dwelling within five Miles of the Sea Coast, or not dwelling in a House
two Furlongs distant from any City, Bourough or Town, do keep or have in his
house, any Cross-bow, 33 H. 8. 6. 6. N. 1. Lambert 295.

Days.
XVII. Lambert 473. Inquiry if any having 100 l. per An. having Seized any
Cross-bow or Gun by virtue of this Act, have not broken the same in pieces
within 20 days next after such Seizure, 33 H. 8. 6. 2. N. 2.

Fowl.
XVIII. Crompt. 89. b. Inquire if any who is no Lord of Parliament, Shoot in any
Hand-gun within a City or Town, at any Fowl, or other Marks, upon any Church,
House, or Dovecote, or shoot more Bullets then one at a time, or Hail-shot,
shall lose 10 l, and shall be Imprisoned three years, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 14. 1. N.
3.

Enquest.
XIX. Lambert 190. b. 191. Justices of Peace also by another Enquest, may
Inquire of the Concealment of such an Enquest as is Sworn before them, to
Inquire of Offenses done against 33 H. 8. 6. 20. N. 1. concerning shooting in
Guns and Cross-bows, and the Fine of every such Juror that is Convict of such
Offense is 20 s.

Justices.
XX. Lambert 620. The Justice of Peace that fails to Record at the next
Quarter Sessions, the name of any person Authorized to shoot in a Gun, that
has presented his Name unto him, shall lose 20 s. if 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 14. 2. N.
3. do so far extend, whereof the words give cause of doubt.

Apprentices.
XXI. 1 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 11. Furthermore it is Ordained and Enacted, etc. that
none Apprentice, ne Servant of Husbandry, Laborer, ne Servant Artificer, Play
at the Tables from the tenth day of January next coming, but only for Meat and
Drink, ne at the Tenis, Claysh, Dice, Cards, Bowls, nor any other unlawful
Game in no wise, out of Christmas, and in Christmas to play only in the
dwelling house of his Master, or where the Master of any of the said Servants
is present, upon pain of Imprisonment, by the space of a day in the Stocks
openly.

Process.
XXII. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 12. And that the Householder where Dicing, Carding,
Tennis playing, Bowls, Claysh, or any other unlawful Game before rehearsed,
shall be used otherwise then is before rehearsed, and that lawfully be presented
before the Justices of Peace, the Mayor or Sheriff in his Tourn, or Steward in
his Leet, or by Examination had before the said Justices of Peace, that Process
be made upon the same, as upon Indictment of Trespass against the Kings Peace,
and that the said misdoers be admitmitted to no Fine under the Sum of 6 s. 8 d.

XXIII. Lamberts Precedents 18. b. pl. 51. An Indictment for keeping unlawful
Play, and Playing thereat, West. Symb. 2. pt. 109. b. 121. against 33 H. 8. 9.
11. N. 1. Pract. Preced. 163. 159.

Kent ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra sacramentum suum presenttant quod A. R. de C.
in dicto Comitatu Tyler, secundo die Junii Anno Regni, etc. and continue post
dictum diem Anno supradict' usque primum diem Mensis Julii Anno supradict' apud
C. predict' in Comitat' predict' quendam Communem locum Jacendi Globos Anglice
a Common Bowling Alley, pro lucro ipsius A. B. proprio and ad Ludendum tunc
ibidem cum Globis Anglice vocat' (Bowls) illicite tenuit and custodivit ac
manutenuit contra form' cujusdam Statuti in Parliament' Domini Henrici nuper
Regis Angliae 8. Anno Regni sui 33 in hujusmodi casu provisi ac Editi: Et quod
J. S. de C. predict' in dicto Comitatu Laborer and tres aliae personae ignotae
dicto secundo die Junii Anno supradict' dictum communem locum usitaverunt ac
tunc ibidem cum Globis Anglice vocat' Bowls insimul and illicite luserunt
contra formam Statuti predicti.

XXIV. Dalt. 80. cap. 31. A man cannot be restrained to use the Trade of making
Dice, Cards, Bowls, or the like, except it be by Parliament, etc. 11 Co. 86.

Gawgers see Measures. Glass men see Trades. Goals see Imprisonment. Goldsmiths
see Mettle.
Good Behavior.
Peace, Behavior, Abearing, Affray, Sureties, Warrants, Recognizance,
Contempts.
I. Lambert 2. cap. 2. page 116. That in 2 H. 7. 2. Peace.
the Surety of the good Abearing is set forth to rest in this point chiefly,
that a man demean himhimself well in his Port and Company, doing nothing that
may be cause of the breach of the Peace, or of putting the People in fear or
trouble, and that it does not consist in the observation of things that concern
not the Peace: And that it should differ from Surety of the Peace in this, that
where the Peace is not broken without an Affray or Battery, or such like, this
Surety de bono Gestu may be broken by the number of a man's Company, or by his
or their Weapons or Harness, Dalt. 187. infra 12.

Recognizance
II. Lambert 116. ibid. Herewithall also do certain Precedents of the Kings
Bench agree, which in Surety of the Good Abearing taken at the Suit of some one
person, do mingle the words a modo se been Geret erga Dominum Regem and cunctum
populum suum and precipue erga T. B. with those other words that are commonly
put in the Recognizance for the Peace, as in Rast. Entr. 415, 416. Tit. Peace.
any man may see.

III. Lambert 117. But all this notwithstanding, Condition.
methinks that a man may reasonably affirm, that the Surety of Good Abearing
should not be restrained to so narrow Bounds; for first the Statute 34 Ed. 3.
1. 1. N. 6. Enableth the Wardens of the Peace to take of all them that be not
of Good Fame, where they shall be found, sufficient Surety and Mainprise of
their Good Abearing toward the King and his People, so that if a man be
defamed, he may by virtue hereof be bound to his Good Behavior at the
discretion of the Wardens and Justices of the Peace: And I once received a
special Writ out of the Chancery, directed Custodibus Pacis and Vicecom' and
eorum cuilibet, and grounded upon the same Statute for the Binding of a man
with Surety, quod ipse boni Gestus and Famae de caetero erit and quod nihil in
contrarium Statuti predicti quovismodo attemptabit, etc. wherein I proceeded as
a Minister only, Dalt. 188. cap. 74.

IV. Lambert 117. But the doubt rests in this, Justices.
to understand concerning what matters this Defamation must be: and that as I
think may be partly gathered out of the said Statute also; for after it has 34
Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. ^.3. given power to the Wardens of the Peace to Arrest and
Chastise Offenders, viz. against the Peace, Rioters and Barretors, then it
wills them 34 Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. 4. To Inquire of such as having been Robbers
beyond the Sea, were come over hither, and would not labor as they were wont;
and lastly it Authorizeth them 34 Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. 6. to take Surety of the Good
Behavior of such as be defamed namely, as I think for any of those former
offenses, for so it stands well together, that they shall both punish such as
have already so offended, and shall also provide that others shall not likewise
offend; and even so do they of the Chancery understand it, as by their special
Supersedeas which I afterward received from them upon that Writ, etc. I did
well perceive.

Writs.
V. Crompt. ibid. 135. b. 136. a. He that is not of Good Fame or Name, nor of
honest Conversation, but of male Disposition, Barretors, and perturbers of the
Peace that are like to do Murder, Homicide, Strifes, Discords, and other
Grievances to the Kings Liege people in their Bodies by reason of the
Premises, shall be bound to their Good Behavior, as appears by Writ out of
the Kings Bench, which follows,

Jacob. Dei Gratia, etc.
Vicecom' S. Salutem
quia datum est nobis intelligi and informari per relationem and testimonium
multorum fide dignorum Com' tui quod A.B. de W. in Com' predict' Armiger and
J.C. de eodem Yeoman non sunt bonorum nominis and famae nec conversationis
honestae sed malae dispositionis Barratores and Pacis nostrae perturbatores ita
quod veresimiles sunt facere Murdrum Homicidium Lites Discordias and alia
Gravamina and Damna inter ligeos nostros de corporibus suis pretextu
premissorum indies oriri: Ideo tibi precipimussicut pluries tibi precipimus
quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliva tua quin attachias
prefatos A. B. and J. C. ita quod eos habeas coram nobis a die Paschae in 15
dies ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Angliae ad inveniendum tunc coram nobis
sufficientem securitatem de se been Gerendo erga nos and cunctum populum
nostrum juxta form' Stat' inde editi and provisi sub certa pena eis per nos
tunc imponend' and cum prefatos A. and J. seu eorum alterum virtute hujus
brevis sic attachiat' tunc eos per sufficientes manucaptores qui eos seu eorum
alterum manucap^re voluerit sub certa pena eis and eorum cuilibet per te
rationabiliter imponend' tam pro die sua conservand' quod pro seipsis medio
tempore b^ne gerend' in Ballium usque ad prefatum Terminum dimittatis and pro
officiorum in hac part faciend' duos solidos and quatuor denarios de utroque
prefatorum A. B. and J. C. solummodo capias and hoc nullatenus omittatis
periculo incumbent' and habeas ibi hoc breve

E. J. Popham
apud Westmin. 12 die April. 2 Eliz.
see Mich. 17 and 18 Eliz.

This Writ is founded upon 34 Ed. 3. 1. that speaks that Riotors, Barrators,
Misfeasors, and those that are not of good Fame, shall be bound to the Good
Behavior.

Forfeiture.
VI. Lambert 118. Moreover it seems to me that all these Statutes, 1 Mar. 1.
and 2. cap. 3. 6. N. 2. against disturbing Preachers, and 5 Eliz. 21. 2. N. 6.
against takers of Fish, Deer, or Hawks, and Crompt. 135. on 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N.
2. against not coming to Church, and 39 Eliz. 4. 5. N. 2. against hinderers of
Execution, against Rogues, and 3 Jac. 13. 2. N. 3. against unlawful Hunting:
That all these Statutes have this one meaning, that a party so bound may
afterward Forfeit his Recognizance if he eftsoons offend against the said
Statutes.

Imprisonment
VII. Lambert 118, 119. Besides this 13 H. 7. 10. its admitted by the Opinion of
the Court, that if a man in the night season haunt a house that is suspicious
for Bawdry, or use suspicious Company, then may the Constable Arrest him to
find Surety of his Good Abearing, Crompt. 135. b. Dalt. 189.

Bastardy.
VIII. Lambert 119. ibid. And therefore it shall not be amiss at this day, in my
slender Opinion, to grant Surety of the Good Abearing against him that is
suspected to have begotten a Bastard Child, to the end that he may be
forthcoming when it shall be Born, etc. And if this Medicine might lawfully be
applied to Shoomakers, Tailors, Weavers, and other light persons, that without
Testimonial or other good Warrant, do flit out of one Shire into another; not
only that evil of Bastardy, but many other mischiefs might be either prevented
or punished thereby, Dalt. 191.

Suspicion.
IX. Lambert 119, 120. But for some advice by the way in conceiving rightly this
suspicion, mark what Bracton Writes:

Suspicion arises from Fame, and from Fame and Suspicion arise violent
presumption: But that Fame which induces Suspicion ought to arise among the
Good and Grave, and yet not once, but often: Suspicion also arises upon a
Precedent compact to which we must stand till the contrary be proved.

X. Lambert 120. Justices.
Now the further that this Bond of the Good Abearing does extend, the more
regard there ought to be taken in the Awarding of it, and therefore although
the Justices of Peace may have power to grant it either by their own
discretion, or on the complaint of others, even as they may that of the Peace;
yet I wish rather that they do not command it, but only upon sufficient cause
seen to themselves, or upon the Suit and complaint of diverse, and the same very
honest and Credible persons, Dalt. 330, 331. cap. 117. and 188. cap. 74.

XI. Crompt. 135. b. Justices.
One Justice of Peace may bind a man to the Good Behavior who is a Common
Barretor, etc. 13 H. 7. Kell. 41. pl. see the words of the Commission, and
Lambert 120, 121. 9 Ed. 4. 3. Dalt. 187, 188. Crompt. 138. infra.

XII. Dalt. 187. cap. 74. The Peace is not broken without an Affray, Peace.
( Lambert 116.) Battery, Assault, Imprisoning, or extremity of Menacing
whereas the Good Abearing may be broken, and Recognizance Forfeit, without any
of these, as namely 1. By the extraordinary number of people attending upon the
party bound. 2. By wearing of Harness, or other Weapons more then usual. 3. By
using words or threatenings tending or inciting to the breach of the Peace. 4.
By doing any thing tending to the breach of the Peace, or to put the people in
dread or fear, tho there be no actual breach of the Peace; yet Note these four,
etc. are also causes to bind a man to the Peace, yea they are breaches of the
Peace, etc.

XIII. Dalt. 187. Recognizance.
This Surety of the Good Behavior is to be granted at the Suit of diverse, and
those being men of Credit, and to provide for the safety of many, whereas the
Surety of the Peace is usually granted at the request of one, and for the
preservation of the Peace chiefly toward one.

XIV. Dalt. 187. ibid. Justices.
Also this Surety of the Good Abearing is most commonly granted, either in open
Sessions of the Peace, or out of the Sessions by two or three Justices of the
Peace, whereas that of the Peace is usually granted by one Justice of Peace,
and out of Sessions, Dalt. 366. infra.

XV. Dalt. 187, 188. And yet by the words of the Commission, as also by the
Common opinion of the Learned, Lambert 120, 121. Crompt. 135. b. and 14 H. 7.
8. supra Any one Justice of Peace alone, and out of the Sessions may grant this
Surety of the Good Abearing, and that either by their own discretion, or upon
the complaint of others, as they may that of the Peace: But this is not usual,
unless it be to prevent some great and sudden danger (especially against a man
that is of any good Estate, carriage or report) Crompt. 138. infra.

XVI. Dalt. 189. cap. 75. I lately granted the Good Behavior against one, for
that he had bought Ratisbane, and mingled the same with Corn, Coron.
and then wilfully and maliciously did cast the same among his Neighbors
Fowls, whereby most of his Fowls dyed, and it was holden to be a Good cause to
bind the Offender over by the whole Bench, and since I have known it allowed as
a Good Cause by the Judges of Assize.

XVII. Dalt. 189. The Justice of Peace also upon his own discretion, Suggestion.
and without complaint may bind to the Good Behavior, any other person which
in his presence or hearing, shall misbehave himself in some outrageous manner
of Force or Fraud, and may Commit such person to the Goal if he refuse to be
bound.

Recognizance.
XVIII. Dalt. 189. It is also grantable against such as be of Evil Name and Fame
generally, but more specially against such as are Defamed or Detected in any of
these particulars, 1. For resorting to houses suspected to maintain Adultery or
Incontinency. 2. The Maintainers of suspected Bawdy houses. 3. Common Whores or
Whoremongers. 4. Night Walkers that be suspected to be Pilferers, or otherwise
like to disturb the Peace, or that be persons of Evil Behavior, or that shall
keep Company with such, Evesdroppers, Cutters of Gates, Carts, Pens, etc. 5.
Persons suspected who live Idly, and yet fare well, or are well aparelled,
having nothing whereon to Live, except on Examination they give a good account,
Dalt. 354, And 6. Common Haunters of Alehouses, Taverns, and Common Gamesters,
but more especially, if they have not whereon to Live. 7. Common Drunkards
twice Convicted by 7 Jac. 5. 21. Jac. 7. N. 8. Such as use to go on Messages
for Thieves.

London.
XIX. Crompt. 140. 21. One who had ill Women in his House in London, was
Committed until he were bound to Good Behavior, and this was so odered at the
Sessions at Newgate 28 Eliz. by Wray and Anderson Chief Justices, and Manwood
Chief Baron, Dalt. 189. cap. 75.

XX. Dalt. 190. cap. 75. Fresh Suit.
Also the Good Behavior seems grantable against such as shall make false
Outcryes, or shall raise Hue and Cry without Cause, for these are disturbers of
the Peace, Crompt. 179. If one man does levy Hue and Cry upon another without
Cause, either of them may be Attached and Bound over as Disturbers of the
Peace, 29 Ed. 3. Trespass 252. tamen Quaere Concerning him upon whom the Hue
and Cry is levied, except he be either a man of evil Fame, or that there be
some Felony Committed.

Collusion.
XXI. Dalt. 190. Also it seems grantable against Cheaters and Coseners.

Slander.
XXII. Dalt. 190. ibid. Libellers it seems also my be bound to their Good
Behavior as Disturbers of the Peace, whether they be the Contrivers, the
Procurers, or the Publishers of the Libell, etc. by Writings, Words or
Pictures, etc. 5 Co. 125. and no matter whither true or false.

Execution.
XXIII. Dalt. 191. The Sheriffs Bailiff upon a Warrant from the Sheriff to make
Execution of the Goods of A. went into the house of A. finding the door open,
and A. shut the doors upon the Bailiff, and so deteyned him as a Prisoner in
his House, and Sir Robert Houghton one of the Judges of the Kings Bench thought
it a good cause to grant out Process de been Gerendo against A. for thus
abusing an Officer of the Law, Anno 17 Jac.

Contempt.
XXIV. Dalt. 191. It seems that he which shall use words of contempt or contra
bonos mores against a Justice of Peace, tho it be not at such a time as he is
Executing his Office, yet he shall be bound to his Good Behavior.

Religion.
XXV. Dalt. 192. Disturbers of Preachers by the Statute, 1 Mar. 1. and 2 cap. 3.
6. N. 2. And destroyers of Fish by 5 Eliz. 21. 2. N. 6. and shall be bound to
the Good Behavior at the Sessions.

Pope.
XXVI. Dalt. 192. 5. Popish Recusants absenting from Church, shall be bound in
B. R. by 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2.

Pardon.
XXVII. Crompt. 135. He that is Attaint for Felony, and has a pardon shall find
Surety for the Good Behavior with six Mainpernors during his Life, by 10 Ed.
3. 3. N. Dalt. 192. 6.

Coro
XXVIII. Crompt. 135. He that is acquit of Felony, shall be bound to the Good
Behavior, if he be of ill Fame or ill Gesture, Rast. Entr. 361. Dalt. 192. 6.
Poult. de Pace, 118.

XXIX. Dalt. 193. To be Drunken is a Breach of the Good Behavior, Ale.
as Sir Nicholas Hide did deliver it in his Charge at Cambridge, Lent Assizes
An. 3. Car. 1.

XXX. Dalt. 193. cap. 75. Whether the Surety of the Good Behavior taken upon
complaint, may be released by any special person, Release.
some do doubt it, because it seems more popular then the Surety of the
Peace, yet others do hold that it may be released either by the Justice of
Peace himself that took it in discretion, or by the party upon whose complaint
it was granted, even as that for the Peace may, Dalt. 176. cap. 71. and 391.
cap. 128. Lambert 123.

XXXI. Dalt. 193. ibid. Supersedeas.
It seems also a Supersedeas of the Good Behavior my be granted by the
Justices of Peace (as well as for the Peace mutatis mutandis) upon Good
Sureties, etc. Crompt. 237. Dalt. 365. cap. 122. and 390.

XXXII. Cr. 146. Certiorari.
If a man be Bound to the Good Behavior before Justices of the Peace, and to
appear at the Assizes next, etc. the party Bound may remove the Recognizance
into the Chancery before the day, and then he shall not be bound to appear at
the Assizes, for they have no Record whereon he can be demanded there, and such
a Certiorari was obtained de Banco Regis, Hill. 24 Eliz. to the Justices of
Peace in Com' Staff. to certify such Recognizance of the Good Behavior taken
of one Ashenhurst, Dalt. 193. cap. 75. and 366. cap. 122. 18 Ed. 4. 17. and
Condition. Br. 162.

XXXIII. Lambert 2. cap. 2. page 121. Process.
The Precept of the Good Abearing.

Kent ss.
B. A. and E. S. Two of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
Kings Majesty in the County of Kent, to the Sheriff of the said County, To the
Constables of the Hundred of B. and to the Borsholders of the Town of E. in the
said Hundred, and to every of them Greeting: Forasmuch as A. B. of E.
aforesaid, is not of Good Fame, nor of honest Conversation, but an Evil doer,
Rioter, Barretor, and perturber of the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord, as we
are given to understand by the complaint of sundry Credible persons, therefore
on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord, We Command you and every of you, that
you cause the said A. B. to come before us, or some other of our Fellow
Justices, to find sufficient Surety and Mainprise, as well for his Good
Abearing toward our said Sovereign Lord, and all his Liege People, until the
next Quarter Session of the Peace, to be holden in the said County, as also for
his Appearance then there, and if he the said A. B. shall refuse so to do, that
then immediately without expecting any further Warrant, you him safely convey,
or cause to be safely conveyed to our next Prison in the said County, there to
remain until he shall willingly do the same, so that he may be before the
Justices at the said next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the
said County, then and there to Answer for his Contempt in this behalf; and see
that you certify your doing in the Premises to the said Justices, at the said
Sessions, bringing then thither this Precept with you. Witness the said B. A.
and E. S. of B. etc. the (...) day of (...) etc.

Crompt. 236. b. in Latin.

XXXIV. Lambert 122. ibid. Recognizance.
The usual Recognizance for the Good Abearing.

Memorandum quod 4. die Julii An. etc. R. P. de E. in Com' predict' Yeoman in
propria persona sua venit coram nobis H. P. Knight. and S. L. Esquire duobus Justic'
dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in dicto Comitatu conservand' assignat' and
assumpsit pro seipso sub poena vigint' librarum and H. J. de L. in Com'
predict' Yeoman and J. F. de M. in eodem Com' Husbandman tunc and ibidem in
propriis personis suis similiter venerunt and manuceperunt pro predict' R. P.
viz quilibet eorum seperatim sub poena Cent' solid' quod idem R. P.
personaliter comparebit coram Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis ad pacem etc. ad
proximam generalem sessionem etc. and quod ipse interim se been geret erga
Dominum Regem and cunctum populum suum and praecipue erga J. B. de C. etc. and
quod ipse non inferet nec inferri procurabit per se nec per alios Damnum
aliquod seu Gravamen prefato J. B. seu alicui de populo ipsius Domini Regis de
corporibus suis per insidias insultus seu aliquo alio modo quod in laesionem
seu perturbationem pacis dicti Domini Regis laedere valeat quovismodo viz.
uterque H. J. and J. F. sub pena cent' librarum and predict' R. P. sub pena
ducent' librarum quas quidem seperales summas Cent' librarum uterque predict'
H. J. and J. F. ut predicitur per se ac predict' R. P. dict' ducent' librarum
Recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino Regi de terris and tenement' Bonis and
Catallis suis and quorumblibet and cujuslibet eorum ad opus ipsius dicti Domini
Regis fieri and levari si contingat prefatum R. P. in aliquo premissorum
deficere and inde legitimo modo convinci, etc. Dat. etc. Dalt. 370. cap. 123.
Kilborns Precedents 192.

Condition.
XXXV. Lambert 122, 123. Or by a single Recognizance, with this Condition
Endorsed under Written,

Conditio Recogn' predict' talis est quod si predict' R. G. Imposterum se been
geret and Pacem Domini Regis conservabit erga dictum Dominum Regem and cunctum
populum suum and nullum Damnum Corporale etc. extunc Recognitio predicta pro
nullo teneatur alioquin in suo robore permaneat Dalt. ^71. cap. 123.

Supersedeas.
XXXVI. Dalt. 365. cap. 122. A Supersedeas of the Good Behavior by one Justice.

H. B. Serviens ad legem unus Justic' Domini Regis etc. Vicecom' ac omnibus and
singulis Ballivis Ministris and fidelibus dicti Domini Regis in eodem Com' and
eorum cuilibet salutem quia J. S. sufficient' securitat' de pace and de bono
Gestu suo erga dictum Dominum Regem and precipue erga W.T. coram me invenit,
ideo ex part dicti Domini Regis vobis and cuilibet vestrum mando and precipio
firmiter injungens quod de ipso J. S. pro hujusmodi securitat' etc. inveniend'
capiend' sive Arrestand' omnino supersed' and si ipsum J. S. ea occasion
ceperitis sive Imprisonaveritis tunc eum deliberari facias si ipse J. S. ea
occasion and non alia detineatur Test, etc.

XXXVII. Dalt. 366. cap. 122. And Mr. Crompton is of Opinion that these (viz.
Supersedeas of the Good Behavior, etc.) may be granted by any one Justice of
the Peace, with whom Rast. Entr. 454. tit. Peace. But Mr. Lambert 123. thinks
it not in the lawful power of any one Justice of Peace to grant such
Supersedeas at this day, but that it must be done by two Justices at the least,
and the one being of the Quorum; nevertheless for that I find the old
Precedents to run in the name of one Justice of the Peace alone, I have drawn
these accordingly, persuading notwithstanding the Joining of two Justices
herein, and one of the Quorum if they may conveniently.

XXXVIII. Crompt. 138. 3. Justices.
And it seems that one Justice of Peace may Award such a Precept, ( viz. for
the Good Behavior against another person by his discretion) as well as two
Justices may, and the Statute, 34 Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. 6. is to the same effect by
the words thereof, otherwise perhaps Damage would happen to some of the Kings
Subjects, if the party be not Attacht before two Justices have made the
Precept, yet the common usage is to make such a Precept of the Good Behavior
in name of two Justices, and it is good to keep this Ordinance, Fitzh. J.P. 7.

XXXIX. Dalt. 371. The Condition of a Recognizance, etc. Condition.


The Condition of this Recognizance is such, that if the above bounden R. G.
shall personally appear before the Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King, at
the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the County of C. to do
and receive that which by the Court shall be then and there enjoined him, and
that in the mean time he be of Good Behavior, and do keep the Peace of our
said Sovereign Lord the King, toward his Majesty and all his Liege People,
That then, etc.

XL. Dalt. 371. Or this, Conditio Recogn' predict' talis est quod si predict'
N. G. Imposterum se been Geret (and pacem Domini Regis conservabit) erga dict'
Dominum Regem and cunctum populum suum quod tunc Recognitio predicta pro nullo
teneatur alioquin in suo Robore permanere.

XLI. Dalt. 365. Note that such supersedeas, (viz. supra 36.) is good,
Supersedeas.
tho it name neither the Sureties, nor the Sums wherein they are bound, but yet
it is the better Form to express them both, for then if it shall appear that
the Sureties are not sufficient men, or not bound in sufficient Sums, better
Sureties may be taken, etc.

Gaugers see Measures. Glass-men see Trades Goals see Imprisonment. Goldsmith
see Metle Grain see Corn. Graziers see Catle Greyhounds see Catle Green Wax see
Process and Seals Guns see Forest and Shooting Habeas Corpus see Imprisonment,
Certiorari Handguns see Forest and Shooting Hay and Oats see Corn Hares see
Forest Harvest see Poor and Husbandry Hawks see Fowl. Harness see War.
Harborers see Hostler. Headbrough see Constable. Hedgbreakers see Trespass.
Herring see Fish. Hearthmoney see Taxes. Highwayes see Ways. Hides see
Leather. Homicide see Coron. Horn see Trades. Horses see Catle. Horsebread see
Corn. Hospital see Poor.
Hostler.
Harborer, Lodger, Innes, Victuals, Inholder, Hay and Oats.
Market overt.
I. Lambert 448. Inquiry in Sessions, if any Inholder, etc. or other Seller of
Victual, have not Sold the same at reasonable prizes, 23 rd. 3. 6. and 13 R. 2.
and Crompt. 67. b. 91. b.

Corporation.
II. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 4. 465. Inquiry on 13 R. 2. 8. 1. N. 6. and 32 H.
8. 41. N. If any Inholder dwelling in any City, Town Corporate, or Market Town
wherein is any Common Baker that has been Apprentice there Seven years, have
within his own house made any Horse Bread: or dwelling in any other
Thorow-Fair, have made it insufficiently, and not of due Assize, Crompt. 90. a.
91. b.

III. Lambert 465. If any Inholder have taken any thing for Litter, Fees.
or have taken excessively for Hay, or have taken above one Halfpenny in a
Bushel of Oats over the Common Price in the Market, 13 R. 2. 8. 1. N. 8. 4 H.
4. 25. N. and 21 Jac. 21. Crompt. 91. b.

IV. Dalt. 25. cap. 7. Every Keeper of Tavern, Ale.
Keeping also an Inn or Victualling in his House, and every Inkeeper etc.
which shall suffer any Townsman, or any Handycrafts man, or Laborer working in
the same City or Town, to remain and continue Drinking in their said House
(except such as shall be invited thither by a Travellor, and during his
necessary abode there, etc. except allowed by two Justices of Peace, the said
offense being seen by any Justice of Peace within his Limits, or confessed or
proved by one Witness on Oath, Forfeit 10 s. 1 Jac. 9. N. Crompt. 77. b. 78.

V. Dalt. 27. cap. 7. Now no person may come to Tiple in any such Tavern, or in
any Inn, etc. in the same Town where he dwells, nor dwelling within two Miles
thereof, except he be a Traveller, and so Sir Francis Harvey Knight delivered
it in his charge at Cambridge Summer Assizes, Anno 1629.

VI. Dalt. 28. cap. 7. If a Common Inholder, etc. Ways.
will not Lodge a Traveller, any Constable or Justice of Peace, may compel him
thereto: But how the Officer shall compel him, Quaere, It seems that all the
Officer can do, is either to cause such Alehouse Keeper to be suppressed, or
else to present such Offense of an Innkeeper at the Assizes or Sessions of the
Peace, that so such Offender may be thereupon Indicted, see the Commission. And
at Lent Assizes Anno 1622. Sir James Leigh Lord Chief Justice of B. R.
delivered it in his Charge, that an Innkeeper etc. might be Indicted, Fined,
and Imprisoned for the same; or else that the party grieved might have an
Action S. Case Br. 76. 92. against the Innkeeper refusing to Lodge him, Kell.
50. 14 H. 7. 22. b.

VII. Crompt. 77. ab. Nota, That it has been agreed, that such Inns that have
been newly erected since the Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. and were not Innes
before, must have Licenses as Alehouses shall have, License.
and this was put in ure upon an Indictment Traverst and Tried at the Assizes
in Sussex about 16 Eliz. as I have heard by him that was Counsel with the party
Indicted, Dalt. 31. cap. 7.

VIII. Hales Pleas of the Crown, 146.

Hospitals, and Houses of Correction see Poor. Hue and Cry see Fresh Suit.
Hundred see Franchise, Constable, Sheriff. Hunting see Forest. Husband see
Baron and Feme
Husbandry.
Tillage, Aprovement
Abbey.
I. Lambert 463. Inquiry in Sessions, if any owner of any Site or Precinct, and
Demeans of any late Dissolved Religions House, that was in yearly value under
200 l. per Annum do not keep an honest and continual household thereupon, 27 H.
8. 28. 9. N. 1. Lambert 600. Crompt. 96. b. 124. b.

Leases.
II. Crompt. 96. b. Inquiry if any takes in Ferm any house to which any Land
belongs above two such holds in one Vill or Hamlet; or if any has occupied two
such holds in one Vill or Hamlet, and does not inhabit in the same Parish, he
shall Forfeit for every week 3 s. 4 d. Fitzh. J. P. 128. 25 H. 8. 13. 14. N. 2.

Justices.
III. Lamb. 612. I will not gainsay, but that the Justices of Peace may at any
Special Session of the Peace give in Charge all such Statutes as dogive unto
them a general power of Enquiry, without using mention of restraint to any
Sessions as 25 H. 8. 13. 5. N. 1. of Sheep.

Catle.
IV. Lambert 464. Inquiry at Sessions if any person have at once kept above the
Number of 2000 Sheep of all sorts, against 25 H. 8. 13. Crompt. 125. b.

V. Crompt. 152. Such Process shall be awarded against him who is Indicted upon
25 H. 8. 13. Concerning the keeping of Sheep above a certain Number, as is used
in Trespass Presented before the Justices of Peace.

Days.
VI. Crompt. 193. b. The party must begin his Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information within the year, and his Presentment or Information for the King,
shall be taken within 3 years after the offense Committed, against 25 H. 8. 13.
6. N. 1. of Sheep.

Justices.
VII. Lamb. 463, 464. Note that the Offenses against the Statute of Husbandry
and Tillage 39 Eliz. 2. (which extends not to Kent, Essex, Sussex, and many
other Shires, nor to the greatest part of Wales) are inquirable and
determinable at the Quarter Sessions, but I leave them to Justices of those
Shires in which they have Force, Lambert 601.

VIII. West. Symb. 2. part 131. Sect. 208. An Indictment for converting Tillage
into Pasture, or for Coneys, etc. 6 H. 8. 5. N. Pract. Preced. 94, 95.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege supra Sacramentum suum presentant quod H. W. de A.
in Com' E. Genesis primo die Novembr' Anno Regni etc. Seisitus existens in
Dominico suo ut de feodo de and in 12 acras terrae Arabilis in A. predict' in
Com' E. predict' jacentibus ac de (aut in) aliqua libera Warrenna non existent
sed per spacium 4 Annorum dict' primum diem Novembr' An. supradict' proxime
Precedent' in cultura and seminat' Granorum usitatis and applicatis dicto primo
die Novembr' An. supradict' ac diversis aliis diebus and vicibus antea and post
predict' 12 acras terrae Arabilis a cultura predict' and sationem Granorum
usque ad hunc diem presentem in pastura pro cuniculis custodiend' convertebat
and adhuc convertit and custodit ad Grave Nocument' J. R. R. T. and W. M. de A.
predict' in Com' E. predict' vicinorum ibidem existent' ac contra formam
diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum.

IX. West. Symb. 2. part 131. Sect. 209. An Indictment of decaying houses of
Husbandry, and converting Tillage to Pasture, etc. 6 H. 8. 5. N. Crompt. 2. 7.
b. pl. 85. Pract. Preced. 96.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege (si) J. K. nuper de T. in Com' E. Gen' primo die
October. An. etc. seisitus in Dominico suo ut de feodo de and in 8 Messuag'
Agriculturae in T. predict' in dicto Com' E. in quibus septem seperales
Agricolae Angl' vocat' Husbandmen adtunc inhabitabant, ac de and in tricent'
Acris terrae Arabilis in T. predict' in dicto Com' E. in cultura and
seminatione Granorum usitat' and aplicat' adtunc existent' de quibus triginta
acrae ad minus cum quolibet dictorum Messuag' adtunc seperatim occupat' and
usitat' fuerunt and quod predict' J. K. leges and Statuta hujus Regni Angl'
Parvi pendens dicto primo die October. Anno etc. supradict' ac diversis aliis
diebus ac vicibus antea and postea pro proprio lucro and singulari commodo suo
tres agricolas dictorum septem de tribus de predict' septem Messuagiis adtunc
expulit and amovit and eadem tria Messuagia absque aliquo Inhabitant' sive
aliquibus Inhabitantibus in eisdem irreparat' stare and in decasum and
ruinamcadere adtunc and deinceps usque diem captionis hujus inquisitionis
voluntary causavit and permisit insuper quod predict' J. K. die and Anno
supradict' ac diversis aliis diebus ac vicibus antea and postea centum acras
predict' trecentarum acrarum terrae Arabilis jacent' and existent' in T.
predict' in Com' E. predict' tum Fossat' and sepibus vicinis inclusit and illas
abinde a cultura Agriculturae and seminatione Granorum usque diem captionis
hujus inquisitionis in pastura convertebat and custodiebat and adhuc convertit
and custodit in malum and pernitiosum exemplum aliorum ac contra form'
diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu edit' and provisi, etc.

Idiot and Infant see Enfant. Jesuits see Pope Idleness see Poor. Jews see
Religion. Images see Religion. Imbezilment see War. Imbraceors see Enquest and
Maintenance.
Imprisonment.
Habeas Corpus, Capias, Arrest, Process, Mittimus, Bail, Prisons, Goals,
Commitment.
I. 9 H. 3. 29. Magna Charta. No Freeman shall be taken, Imprisoned, Process.
or otherwise destroyed, but by Lawful Judgment of Peers, or by the Law of the
Land, Dalt. 336. cap. 118.

II. Lamb. 2. cap. 2. page 90. The Officer ought also to require the party to
come and find Surety of the Peace before that he do Arrest him, Peace.
by 5 Ed. 4. 13. and in truth the Common Form of the Precept of the Peace is,
and if he refuse etc. then he shall convey him to the Goal, and therefore if he
yield to come and to find Surety, the Officer may neither absolutely Arrest
him, nor take any Fee, etc. and this may be the cause, that when one appears
upon such a Warrant before the Justice of Peace, the Justice needs not to
demand Surety of him, but may commit him if he do not offer Surety, 4 H. 7. 9.
Lambert 93. Crompt. 171. b. Dalt. 335. cap. 118

Process.
III. Lambert 90, 91. If a Bailiff do Arrest a man for the Peace before that he
have any Warrant, and then afterward do procure a Warrant for it, this
nevertheless is unlawfully done, etc. Crompt. 172. Dyer 244.

Constable.
IV. Lambert 132. If a Constable, or such other Officer, do see a man
endeavoring to make an Affray, he may command them to avoid, upon pain of
Imprisonment, and if the Affray be great or dangerous, he may make
Proclamation, and may command the parties to Prison for a small time, till
their heat be passed over, and then he must deliver them without any Fine
taking.

Affray.
V. Lambert 133. If any of the Affrayers be in danger by reason of a hurt
received in the Affray, then ought the Officer to Arrest and carry the other to
the Goal, until he shall find Surety to appear at the Goal Delivery.

Constable.
VI. Lambert 133, 134. And yet when the Constable has taken an Affrayer, he may
not Imprison him in his House but in the Stocks, and that not above such a
reasonable time as he may provide to convey him to the Goal till he find Surety
for the Peace, 3 H. 4. 3. 22 Ed. 9. 35. and herein he differs from a Jailer
or the Sheriff who has the charge of the Goal; for he may make a Goal of his
Mansion House, and so cannot a Constable or Justice of Peace do, for by 5 H. 4.
10. 1. N. 2. the Justice of the Peace must send his Prisoners to the Common
Goal, and you may read, ( Br. f. 72.) that the Sheriff in his Turn used to
Inquire of those which made Prisons in their private Houses, 3 Cr. 8. 29.
Crompt. 169. b.

Justices.
VII. 3 Cr. 8. 29. pl. 35. Scamage and Tateham, Hill. 43 Eliz. Rot. 1831. False
Imprisonment in London from 10 September. unto 29 September. Defendant Justifies as
Mayor and Justice of Peace of P. that Robery was Committed, and the Plaintiff
suspected and brought before him, and because he seemed suspicious, he deteyned
him in his house during that time, etc. to examine him, and one Pole who was
not apprehended, etc. and after on 29 September. delivered him over to the New
Mayor, and Traverseth the Imprisonment in London, and thereupon Demurrer, and
adjudged that the Inducement to the Traverse was not good; for a Justice of
Peace cannot deteyn a person suspected in Prison, but during a convenient time
only to examine him, which the Laws intends to be three days, and within that
time to take his Examination and send him to Prison; for he ought not to deteyn
him as long as he pleases, etc. neither ought he to deteyn him in Prison in
his own house, but he is to Commit him to the Common Goal of the County; for
otherwise when the Justices come to deliver the Goal, he is not in the Goal,
and may not be delivered, and so should lie longer then is reasonable, see 2
Ed. 4. 8. 3 H. 4. cap. 10. and here he took not any Examination, but delivered
him over to the New Mayor without Examination, which was not Lawful.

Days.
VIII. Crompt. 169. b. A man cannot keep in his house or Custody him that is
taken for suspicion of Felony, above a day and a night, and then must send him
to the Kings Goal, on pain of Ransom, by Britton 19. cap. 11. and 20 Ed. 4. 6.
Faux Imprisonment Br. 27.

Sheriffs.
IX. Lambert 429. Inquiry on 4 Ed. 3. 10. 1. N. 2. If any Sheriff or Jailer have
denied to receive Felons by the Delivery of any Constables or Townships, or
have taken any thing for receiving of such, Dalt. 341. cap. 18.

X. Lambert Constable 18. But this is to be marked that, etc. where such an
Officer has Arrested, or has in his Ward any Offender that ought to be
carried to the Goal there, such an Officer is not bound forthwith to carry him,
but may well for a reasonable time keep him in the Stocks until that
convenient provision of strength may be made to convey him safely thither, and
when he shall bring such Offender to the Goal, then ought the Jailer to receive
the same freely, without taking any thing of the Officer for it, Crompt. 169. b.

XI. Crompt. 176. b. 17. Process.
The Vill shall be charged to carry the Prisoner to the Goal, 4 Ed. 4. cap. 10.
Crompt. 170. Coron. 328. Costs Br. 4. and it seems that it shall be at their
charge where its prayed, See the Statute, 14 Eliz. 5. N. For carrying Rogues to
the Goal, See 10 Ed. 4. 7. Dalt. 340. cap. 118. and 3 Jac. 10. 1. N. 2.

XII. Dalt. 340, 341. If a man be Arrested for Felony, Constable.
and the Constable shall carry him to the Goal, and the Jailer will not receive
him, the Constable must bring him back to the Town where he was taken, and that
Town shall be charged with the keeping of him until the next Goal Delivery, by
the opinion of 10 H. 4. 7. Escape 8. or the Constable or other party that
Arrested him, may in such case keep the Prisoner in his own house, as it
seems 11 Ed. 4. Faux Imprisonment, Br. 25.

XIII. Crompt. 170. b. The Justice commands one to Arrest another, Justices.
who does it in presence of the Justice; this is an Arrest by the Justice
himself and needs no Warrant, etc. 14 H. 7. 8. otherwise it is of the King, tho
it be in his presence, per Curiam, if he has no specialty 16 H. 6. Monstr. 182.

XIV. Crompt. 170. b. False Imprisonment against a Justice of Peace for
Imprisonment of one without a cause, Dyer 275. and 2 Inst. 591.

XV. Crompt. 171. Imprisonment almost in all Cases, Amerciament.
is but to retein him until he has made a Fine, and if he offers his Fine, he
ought to be delivered presently, and the King cannot justly retein him in
Prison, after the Fine tendered* Imprisonment Br. 100. which says that it was
so determined in Parliament, Ann. 2. Mar. 1. But if the Statute gives
Imprisonment, there he shall remain by discretion of the Court where the time
is not limited in certain by the Statute, 13 H. 7. and 34 H. 6. 24. Crompt.
172. b. Dalt. 34. 1. cap. 118. and 11. Co. 43.

XVI. Crompt. 171. Nota per Thorpe. Arrest.
It is an Imprisonment in any Case where a man is Arrsted against his Will, tho
it be in the High Street, or elsewhere, tho he be not Imprisoned in any House
22 Ass. 8. 5. Crom. 38. Dalt. 335. cap. 18. Crompt. 38. 1. Dalt. 271. cap. 106.

XVII. Crompt. 172. Justices of Peace, Games.
and Head Officers may resort to a place suspected, and Imprison the Keepers of
Common places of Bowling, Tenice, Dicing, Carding, or other Unlawful Games,
and those who play there, until they have found Surety by Recognizance to the
King to leave it, by 33 H. 8. 9. N.

XVIII. Crompt. 172. ab. Justices of Peace, and other head Officers who find or
know any person using or exercising any Uunlawfull Game against the Satute 33
H. 8. 9. N. may commit such Offender to Custody without Bayl or Mainprise,
until he be bound by Obligation to the Kings use, that he will not use such
Unlawful Games, etc.

XIX. Crompt. 172. b. Such who keep Common Alehouses without being Licensed,
Ale.
the Justices may Commit to Prison without Bayl or Mainprise, by the space of
three days, and before his delivery he shall be bound with two Sureties, that
he shall not keep any Common Alehouse, etc.

peace.
XX. Crompt. 172. b. A Justice of Peace may arrest one to find surety of the
Peace, and afterward let him go without being bound to the Peace, and yet the
Party shall have no Remedy frr this Imprisonment, for it is for his advantage,
and he is a Judge of Record, Fitzh. J.P. 10. and 9 Ed. 4. 3.

Dignity.
XXI. Dalt. 333. cap. 18. The Justices of Peace are not to grant their Warrants
for the Peace or the like, against any Nobleman, but against Ecclesiastical
Persons they may; in some Cases a Feme-covert may be imprisoned by the Justices
of Peace, for a Force or a Riot; but an Infant, though of years of Discretion,
yet he shall suffer no Imprisonment, nor other corporal Pain for any Offense
committed or done by him against any Statute, except that an Infant be
expressed by name in the Statute. Imprisonment, Br. 101. Coverture 68. Com.
364. Dr. and Stud. 147, 148. Lamb. 81, 82.

Coron.
XXII. Dalt. 336. cap. 118. For Misdemeanors done against the Kings Peace, as
for Treason, Felony, or breaking of the Peace, etc. the Offenders as well by
the Common Law, as by diverse Statutes, may be arrested and imprisoned by the
Officers of Justice, and sometimes by private Persons without either
Presentment, Process, Precept, Warrant, or other Commandment, and these being
by the Law of the Realm, are warranted by the aforesaid Statute of Mag' Chart'
9 H. 3. 29.

Arrest.
XXIII. Dalt. 337. cap. 118. Any man suspecting another of a Felony committed,
or only intended, may arrest him, so as thereupon he commits him to the Goal,
or carries him before a Justice of Peace, 9 Ed. 4. 26. and 20 Ed. 4. 6. Finch.
340. Dalt. 338. ibid.

Suggestion.
XXIV. Dalt. 338. cap. 118. The Justice of Peace upon his own motion and
Discretion, or upon Complaint, may also grant out his Warrant for the arresting
or conventing before him all such Persons as shall break, or go about to break
the Peace, or as he shall suspect to be inclined to break the Peace, and may
commit them to Prison, if they shall refuse to find, or cannot find Sureties
for the Peace or Good-behaviour.

Process.
XXV. Dalt. ^39. cap. 118. Wheresoever the Justice of Peace has Power or
Authority given him by any Statute to bind over any man, or to cause a man to
do any thing, it seems such Justice may send such person to the Goal there to
remain till he shall perform the same.

Lieu.
XXVI. Dalt. 339. cap. 118. None shall be imprisoned by any Justice of Peace,
but only in the common Goal by the Statute 5 H. 4. 10. 1. N. 2. and 23 H. 8. 2.
and therefore Justices of the Peace cannot commit Felons to any of the Counters
in London, nor to other Prisons which be no Common Goals, nor make a Goal of
their own Houses, but in some Cases may commit to the Stocks, as for Tippling,
etc. and in some Cases to houses of Correction, as Rogues, etc.

Fresh Suit.
XXVII. Dalt. 340. cap. 118. The Justice of Peace, Constable, or other Officer
persuing a Felon into another County, takes him there, the Felon shall be
committed to the Goal of the County where he was taken, for the Justice of
Peace, etc. being out of the County has no more Authority than a private man,
Fresh suit, Br. 3. Com. 37.

Days.
XXVIII. Dalt. 341. ibid. When a Statute does appoint Imprisonment, but limits
no time when the Offender shall be imprisoned, then he is to be imprisoned
presently, as in Case of a Force, the Justices of Peace upon view thereof ought
to commit the Offenders presently, for after they may not commit them.

XXIX. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 226. Escape.
And of like Condition (viz. Universal and against the Common Wealth) be those
Felonies that do grow by the breaking of Imprisonment for any Felony, the which
also are grounded chiefly upon 1 Ed. 2. Stat. 2. page 76. de frangent'
Prisonam, and are so restrained to Felony by it, whereas at the Common Law he
was generally a Felon that brake the Prison, although the cause were no Felony
for which he was Committed thither, Dalt. ^70. cap. 105.

XXX. Lambert 227. ibid. Rescous.
In the Prisoner himself it is most properly called a breach of Prison, in
another that helps the Prisoner to get away it is called Rescous, and in the
Officer, etc. by whose wilful default he is suffered to go, an Escape.

XXXI. Lambert 419. Inquiry on 1 Ed. 2. Stat. 2. page 76. Escape.
If any person Imprisoned for Felony have broken the Prison: or if any other
person have broken the Prison for such a Prisoner by which he Escapes; or if
any Jailer have willingly suffered such a Prisoner to Escape; and if any person
being Arrested for Felony, and by whom, 2 Inst. 591.

XXXII. Lamberts Precedents 12. pl. 31. Indictment for a wilful Rescous of one
Imprisoned in the Stocks for Felony.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege (super sacramentum suum) presentant quod 20 die
Junii Anno etc. quidam A. B. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Glover, apud C.
predict' in Com' predict' captus est and Arrestatus per E. F. de C. predict' in
Com' predict' Yeoman pro suspitione cujusdam Feloniae, viz. unius Vaccae ipsius
E. F. per prefat' A. B. felonice ut idem E. F. tunc asserebat captae and
abductae and quod idem A. B. immediate postea Traditus est per prefat' E. F.
cuidam H. M. tunc Constabulario Hundredi de N. in quo Sita est Villa de C.
predict' qui quidem Constabularius apud C. predict' in Com' predict' postea
viz. etc. eundem A. B. in Prisona in Cippis ibidem posuit ad eum salvo ibidem
custodiend' donec idem Constabularius parare posset Auxilium ad ducendum eundem
A. B. coram aliquo Justiciariorum pacis dicti Dom' Regis in Com' predict'
examinand' and quod postea scil. etc. die and Anno etc. quidam G. L. de C.
predict' in Com' predict' Glover apud C. predict' in dicto Comitatu vi and
armis Cippos predictos effregit ac eundem A. B. tunc ibidem existent' ex eisdem
custodia Prisona and Cippis felonice cepit eripuit and rescussit ac ad largum
ire and evadere permisit contra pacem dicti Domini nostri Regis Coronam and
Dignitatem suas.

Crompt. 38. b. 8. Dalt. 271, 272. cap. 106.

XXXIII. Lamberts Precedents 12. Pl. 32. An Indictment for breaking of Prison,
Crompt. 107. 17.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si W. H. de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman unus
Constabulariorum dicti Domini Regis Hundredi sui de T. in Com' predicto in quo
quidem Hundredo Sita est villa de C. predict' quendam R.B. nuper de C. predict'
in Com' predict' Tailor 20 die September Anno etc. apud C. predict' in Com'
predict' pro suspitione cujusdem Feloniae viz. pro morte cujusdam M. N. apud H.
in Com' predict' felonice interfecti cepit and arrestavit and ea de causa idem
R. B. sub custodia dicti W. H. Constabularii in Prisona dicti Domini Regis apud
C. predict' in Com' predict' postea scil. dict' 20 die Sept. Anno supradict'
fortiter and duriter detentus fuit ac idem R.B. tunc ibidem sic detentus
postea, viz. dict' die and Anno apud C. predict' in Com' predict' vi and armis
predictam Prisonam ibidem felonice fregit ac extra custodiam dicti
Constabularii tunc ibidem contra ejus voluntatem felonice evasit contra pacem
dicti Domini Regis nostri nunc Coronam and Dignitatem suas, necnon contra form'
Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi.

XXXIV. Crompt. 49. b. Escape.
Inquiry also shall be of them who are in Prison for Felony, or suspicion of
Felony, and break the Prison, this is Felony by 1 Ed. 2. Stat. 2. page 76. de
Frangent' Prisonam, and its not material whither he were guilty of the Felony
or not, Stamff. 32. Fitzh. J. P. 116. and 24 Ed. 3. 42. and 50. and so where
they escape going to the Goal Crompt. 107. 16.

Coron.
XXXV. Dalt. 271. cap. 106. One committed to the Constable by the Justice, for
suspicion of Felony, making an Escape from the Constable was after taken again
and Indicted and Arraigned for that Felony, and by the Jury of Life and Death
was Found not Guilty of that Felony: and after was Indicted for the Escape, but
here considering the Prisoner was found not Guilty for the first Felony,
therefore his Escape from the Constable was holden not to be Felony, and so I
have known the Jury directed by the Judge of Assize.

Rescous.
XXXVI. Dalt. 272. cap. 106. By some Opinions if a stranger shall disturb the
Arresting of a Felon, it is no Felony except the Felon were taken and Arrested,
and after Rescued, 9 H. 4. 1. Coron 333. Stanff. 33. yet Fitzh. J. P. 114.
says that such disturbance before Arrest is Felony.

Process.
XXXVII. Lambert. 294, 295. Such Justice of Peace as Committed for any offense,
any person to Prison, refusing to defray the Charges for conveying him thither,
may give his Warrant to the Constable to Sell such of the Offenders Goods as
will satisfy the same Charges, and if the Offender have no Goods, the Parish
where he was apprehended shall be Taxed according to this Act, and the Goods of
every person Assessed refusing to pay the same by Warrant from the said Justice
of Peace, or any other near adjoining to the Constable, etc. shall be
distrained and Sold for levying the same Taxation, 3 Jac. 10 1. N. 3.

XXXVIII. Lambert 218. The Mittimus of the Prisoner for-Felony after his
Examination taken, etc.

Kent ss.
J. S. Knight, one of the Justices, etc. to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at
M. in the said County, etc. Greeting, I send you herewithal the Body of A. B.
late of C. Laborer, brought before me this present day, and charged with the
Felonious taking of 20 Sheep (which also he has confessed upon his Examination
before me, and therefore these are on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord to
Command you, that immediately you receive the said A. B. and him safely keep in
your said Goal, until he shall be thence delivered by due order of his
Majesty's Laws: Hereof fail you not, as you will answer for your Contempt at
your own Peril.

Given at, etc.
XXXIX. 2. Inst. 591. Hereupon it appears that the Common Warrant or Mittimus
to answer to such things as shall be Objected against him, is utterly against
the Law.

Poor*
XL. And it was touched 10 Ed. 4. 18. pl. Surety Br. 26. that Stocks were
ordained in the Vills for the taking of Vagrants who would not serve, etc.

Indictment.
Indictments, Traverse, Process, Pleading, Action, Appeal, Information,
Aprovement.
I. Lambert 20. and 21. Justices.
And whether the Authority and power of these Wardens were then also with this
alteration, 1 Ed. 3. 16. N. any thing increased or no I will not affirm, but I
find 3 Ed. 3. Coron 360. That an Indictment of Murder was found before one
Warden of the Peace only, and that thereupon he wrote his Letter or Precept to
the Sheriff to apprehend the person Indicted who took and brought him before
the Justices in Eyer, and that they also thereupon proceeded to the Arraignment
and Trial of him.

II. 4. Ed. 3. 2. 1. N. 6. Certiorari^
And the Justices assigned to deliver the Goals, shall have power etc. of those
that shall be Indicted before the Keepers of the Peace, and the said Keepers
shall send their Indictments before the Justices, etc.

III. 25 Ed. 3. and 3. cap. 9. 1. N. 2. Ordinary.
The King will that his Justices shall not Impeach the Ordinaries nor their
Ministers, because of such Indictments of general Extortions and Oppressions,
unless they say and put in certain, in what, and in what manner, etc.

IV. 11 H. 4. 9.. 1. N. 4. And if any Indictment be made, Enquest.
viz. by denomination of Party, or without due Retorn of Enquest by Sheriff,
etc. that the same Indictment be void etc. Poult. de Pace 172. 7.

V. 1 H. 5. 5. 1. N. 1. Addition.
That in Appeals and Indictments where Exigent shall be awarded, Additions
shall be made of their Estate or Degree, or Mystery, and of the Towns or
Hamblets, or places and Countries of which they were or be, or in which they be
or were conversant, Lambert 480, 481.

1 Ed. 4. 2. 1. N. 4. Sheriffs.
(viz. That no Process shall be made by them) but that Sheriffs, and their
Under-Sheriffs, Clerks or Bailiffs, and their Ministers, shall bring, present,
and deliver all such Indictments and Presentiments taken before them, or any of
them, in their Turns or Law days, etc. to the Justices of Peace at their next
Sessions of the Peace that shall be holden in the County where such Indictments
and Presentiments shall be taken, etc. Lambert 496. Poult. de Pace 169. b. 171.
a. 6.

VII. 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 14. That if any man be slain or Murdered, Accessory.
and therefore the Slayers, Murderers, Abettors, Maintainers and Comforters of
the same, be Indicted, that the same Slayers, etc. and all accessaries of the
same, be Arraigned and determined of the same Felony and Murder, at any time at
the Kings Suit within the year after the same Felony and Murder done, and not
tarry the year and day for any Appeal to be taken for the same Felony or Murder.

VIII. 6 H. 8. 6. 1. N. 3. and (Justices of B. R.) to command all Justices of
Goal Delivery, Justices of Peace, Justices.
and all other Justices and Commissioners to proceed upon all the Bodies, and
Indictments so removed (and remanded from B. R.) after the course of the Common
Law, as if never removed, etc.

Amendment.
IX. 37. H. 8. 8. 1. N. 4. That these words Vi and armis, viz. cum Baculis
Cultellis Arcubus and Sagittis, or such other like, shall not of necessity be
put or comprised in any Inquisition or Indictment. Crompt. 102. 20. Lambert
494. Dalt. 401. cap. 131.

Days.
X. Lambert 4. cap. 4. page 479. This also is generally true, That all Bills,
Informations and Indictments grounded upon penal Statutes, wherein the Prince
only is to reap the Forfeiture ought to be commenced within two years next
after the Offense committed, and if the Suit be given to any other person for
himself and the Prince, that ought to commence for the Prince within two years,
and for every common person within one year next after the Offense done, and
otherwise it is merely void, unless shorter time be limited by that special
Statute upon which the Information, Indictment or Presentment is made and
framed, as it is by 13 Eliz. 5. of Husbandry, and 39 Eliz. 1.

Amendment.
XI. Lambert 479, 480. All Indictments forasmuch as they be in Nature of
Declaration, ought to contain Certainty, and therefore, as says Mr. Marrow,
five principal things be most commonly requisite in Presentiments before the
Justices of Peace: 1. The Name, Surname, Addition of the party Indicted: 2. The
Year, the Day and Place in which the Offense was done: 3. The Name of the
Person to whom the Offense was done: 4. The Name and Value of the thing in
which the Offense was committed: 5. The Manner of the Fact, and the Nature of
the Offense, Treason, Murder, Felony or Trespass. Dalt. 402. cap. 131.

Exposition.
XII. Lambert 492, 493. In an Indictment of Murder, murdravit is necessary,
Crompt, 101. 4. of Burglary must be burglariter, etc. Crompt. 106. 12. of Rape
quod felonice rapuit, etc. Dalt. 403. cap. 131.

Acc. S. Stat.
XIII. Lambert 494, 495. And if the Indictment be founded upon a Statute, it
ought to say contra form' Statuti in hujusmodi casu editi and provisi; or when
many Statutes do concern one Offense, as in the case of Liveries and such like
contra form' diversorum Statutorum without special naming of any, and then the
best shall be taken for the King. Crompt. 104. 49. but an Indictment of a Riot
without saying contra formam Statuti, etc. is not good, because Crompt. 102.
18. it is no Riot but by that Statute (viz.) 13 H. 4. 7. and yet it is not of
necessity. Dalt. 401. cap. 131. that the Statute be verbally rehearsed, but only
that the Offense against the Statute be sufficiently* and with full words
described, Crompt. 1. 79. Dyer 363. Again, it is not safe to recite the days
or places of the beginnings, Continuances, and Prorogations or Dissolutions of
the Parliaments, lest by mistaking any of them, the whole Indictment fall to
the ground thereby; Dyer 203. Crompt. 104. 51, 53.

Justices.
XIV. Lambert 4. cap. 5. page 496 Generally the Justices of Peace may receive
Indictments before themselves of all Causes, being either within their
Commission, or within the Statutes whereof they have to enquire.

Sheriffs.
XV. Lambert 496. And they may also receive Indictments taken before the Sheriff
in his Turn lawful, that is to say, so that the Turn be holden within the Month
after Easter, or within the Month after Michaelmas, 31 Ed. 3. 15. 1. N. 3. that
those Indictments or Presentiments be indented and sealed between the Sheriff
and the Jurors, 1 Ed. 3. Stat. 2 cap. 17. 1. N. 1. and so that they be made by
the Oath of twelve men at the least, 13 Ed. 1. W. 2 cap. 13. 1. N. 2. and that
these Jurors be of good fame and Legales homines that may dispend yearly 20 s.
of Freehold, or 26 s. 8 d. of Copyhold, 1 Rich. 3* 4. 1. N. 2. and for this
purpose the said Statute, 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1. N. 4. binds the Sheriff to certify
the Justices of the Peace at their next Sessions, the Indictment found in his
turn or Law-day, Crompt. 105. b.. 67. Poult. de Pace 170, 171.

XVI. Lamb. 496. Ibid. Lect.
It seems also by way of admitting in 27 H. 8. 2. Indictment Br. 1. that the
like ought to be done of the Presentiments of Felony in any Leet by virtue of 1
Ed. 2. 4.. 1. N. 4. but that is further to be enquired of, for I find no better
warrant for it, see Kitch. 8. b. they must be indent within 1 Ed. 3. St. 2 cap.
17. Crompt. 106. 69.

XVII. Lambert 497. ibid. This is certain, Justices.
that Justices of Peace ought to receive Indictments found in any Leets or
Law-days upon the Statute made for the breeding of Horses, to which end also
the Court-holders of such Leets or Law-days are bound to certify the same unto
them within the space of forty days, etc. 32 H. 8. 13. 8. N. 2.

XVIII. Lamb. 497. Justices.
Justices of the Peace have none Authority to receive an Indictment of the
killing of a man se defendendo, says Stanf. 15. b. 16. a. as he had heard say,
but enquire further thereof, for though it be not Felony, as appears by the
Statute of Gloucester, 6 Ed. 1. cap. 9. 1. N. yet be there other words in their
Commission 9. extending to give them power to hear and determine of such an
Offense, Crompt. 21.. 3. in Coron. 26.

XIX. Lamb. 497. ibid. Forests.
But they are not to receive an Indictment for the killing of a Heart purloin'd,
for the jurisdiction of it belongs to the Justices of the Forest, 21 H. 7.
30. per Fineux.

XX. Lambert 497. ibid. Records.
And as it seems they may reject an Indictment that finds any matter of
record, as Utlary, or such like, unless it be showed to the Jurors sub pede
sigilli, for Jurors are to find matter in deed only, and not of record, 1 H. 7.
6. and 3. H. 7. 1. and 10.

XXI. Lamb. 497. ^bid. Sheriffs.
And so if the Sheriff will offer Indictments of Liveries, Ravishment of Women,
or of Felonies by Statutes, or of such other Causes whereof they have no power
to enquire in their Turns, the Justices of Peace ought to reject them, 4 Ed. 4.
31. and 18 Ed. 4. 5. 22 Ed. 4. 2^. and Stanf. 87.

XXII. Lambert 498, 499. Justices.
And for that end viz. that the Justices of office may see that Bills be
sufficient, etc. 24 Ed. 3. 74. etc It is the manner in some places to command,
that the Enquest take no Bills, but only such as the Justices themselves have
first perused; howbeit, as it is certain that the Enquest may safely do the
contrary so long as the Bills do carry good matter and allowable form; so I
will advise, that the Justices shall rather peruse the Bills after that the
Evidence shall be thereupon given to the, Jury than to put their pens into them
before that the Enquest shall be informed, taking it to be not only no
hinderance at all to the Service, but also the most wary and secure way for the
Justices themselves to walk; for tho 35 H. 6. 14. and 12 Ed. 4. 18. it be said,
if a Bill of Indictment be delivered to a Justice of the Peace at or before the
Sessions, which he promises to read, and to deliver to the Jury, and so does
accordingly that he shall not be charged for it in a Writ of Conspiracy, yet
may it be thereupon doubted whether he shall be excused, if upon conference
had, he do busy himself either to draw, engross, or amend the Bill before it
be preferred to the Enquest that shall have it.

And seeing that the Justices do commonly receive the Bills from the Enquest
with their express assent to amend any defect of certainty in the form only,
and may also award a Ven' fac' against the Indictors, to amend a Bill upon
their first Oath at any time before it be removed. 22 Ass. Indictment Br. 12.
and 8 H. 5. 8. Indictment 28 Stanf. 97. a. so that the Business is not a whit
impeached by this forbearance; there is no cause, as I think, for the Justices
of Peace to anticipate the matter before the right time, but rather to leave
the first drawing and engrossing of the Bills to the Clerk of the Peace, or
other Ministers of the Court, and after the Evidence given, than to consider
whether they be formal or ought to be reformed, Crompt. 109.. 1

Justices.
XXIII. Crompt. 101. 1. The Court of Office ought to see that the Indictments be
sufficient in matter apparent, Lamb. 498. and 24 Ed. 3. 74.

Counsel.
XXIV. Crompt. 105. 56. The Defendant shall not have Counsel against the King in
an Indictment of Felony, if it be not for matter of Law, otherwise it is in an
Appeal, 9 Ed. 4. 22.

Aprovement.
XXV. 105. b. 61. An Approvement is as an Indictment, and he that is approved,
shall be arraigned thereon; 21 Ed. 3. 17. but a Justice of Peace cannot take an
Approvement, because he cannot assign a Coronor, 9 H. 6. 4. Coron. 457.

Justices.
XXVI. Crompt. 105. b. 63. A Bill of Indictment upon any Trespass that is
contra, Pacem, or upon which a man shall have a Writ of Trespass upon the Case,
for Deceit may be taken before Justices of the Peace, because the Writ is
contra Pacem, Fitzh. J. P. 12.

Suggestion.
XXVII. Lamb. 4. cap. 6. page 500. In some cases these Justices may hear one
another, for every Justice of Peace may upon his proper Knowledge make
Presentment at the Sessions of any Offense done against 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8.
N. and 5 Eliz. 13. N. of Highways, and in this, and such like Cases his Report
has the force of a Presentment of twelve men, so that he and his Fellows may
proceed upon it, 21. H. 6. 5. Crompt. 125. b.

Officer.
XXVIII. Lamb. 500. ibid. Of like value is a Presentment made at the next
Sessions by Searchers appointed to examine the true making of Tile, 17 Ed. 4.
4.. 1. N. 19. Crompt. 125. b.

Constable.
XXIX. Lamb. 500. ibid. And of some such like strength also as I think is the
Presentment of the Constables concerning sundry Points contained in the Statute
of Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. Stat. 2. cap. 6. 4. N. 12. Crompt. 125. b.

Ways.
XXX. Lamb. 500. But I doubt whether any such force be in a Presentment there
made by the Surveyors of the Highways in the Weilds of Kent, etc. by order of
39 Eliz. 19.. 5. N. 3. for as I think that amounts to none other, but only to
give matter to the Justices of Peace to charge the Enquirers there withal.

Suggestion.
XXXI. 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 4. 1. N. 2. None shall be taken by suggestion or
Petition to the King or Counsel, unless it be by Indictment, and Presentment,
etc. Poult. de Pace 148. 7.

Riot.
XXXII. Crompt. 125. b. A Certificat to the King and Counsel by two Justices of
the Peace, and the Sheriff or Undersheriff, of a Riot that is not found by
Jury, it shall be as an Indictment by 12, by 13 H. 4. 7. N.

Trial.
XXXIII. Crompt. 125. b. A Presentment, Bill or Information against Drovers and
Badgers on 5 Eliz. 12. N. on Examination of two lawful Witnesses shall be as if
he had been indicted by twelve men.

Infant.
Amerclament.
I. 52 H. 3. 24. Justices in Eyr shall not amerce Townships, because all being
twelve years old, come not before the Sheriffs and Coronors to make inquiry of
Roberies, Burning of Houses, and other things pertaining to the Crown, so there
come a full Enquest, etc. except for the death of a man whereas all being
twelve years of age, ought to appear.

War.
II. 13. Ed. 1. Winch. Stat. 2. cap. 6. 1. N. 2. Every man between fifteen years
of age and sixty, shall be assessed and sworn to Armor according to the
quantity of their Lands and Goods, 31 Ed. 1. page 71. 1. N. 11. Articles on
Winch. repealed, 21 Jac. 28. 11. N. 44, 69.

Apprentice.
III. 21 H. 8. 7.. 2. N. 1. Provided that this Act (of Servants, Felony in
Imbezelling Masters Goods above 40 s.) shall not be prejudicial to any
Apprentice, or any person within the Age of 18 years, etc.

IV. Dalt. 82. cap. 31. Covenant.
By the Common Law such a Covenant or Retainer of an Infant under 12 years of
age was void, but now by 5 Eliz. 4. 25. N. 2. every Tiller of a Plow-land may
receive Apprentice above Ten, and under Eighteen years of age, but 5 Eliz. 4.
36. N. 1. none shall be bound to enter into any Apprentiship, other than such
as be under 21.

V. 43 Eliz. 5. N. 1. Poor.
That Churchwardens and Overseers by consent of two Justices, may bind poor
Children Apprentices, until Men come to 24, and Women to 20. etc.

VI. Dalt. 199, 200. cap. 77. Force.
An Infant of the age of Eighteen years by his own act may commit a forcible
Entry or detainer, and so he may, though he be under Eighteen, if so be he be
of age of Discretion ( viz. of the age of Fourteen years,) see Perkins 10. b.
pl. and it seems, the Justice may fine him therefore, but yet it shall be
good Discretion in the Justice of Peace to forbear the Imprisonment of such
Infants; Imprisonment Br. 43, 45, 75, 101. for an Infant shall suffer no
Imprisonment or Corporal Pain for any Offense by him committed against any
Statute wherein an Infant is not expressly named, 7 Jac. 6.. N.

VII. Dalt. 222. cap. 88. Also Women and Children may commit a force, Peace.
may commit Larceny, and may be bound to the Peace, as Breakers of the Peace,
Dr. and Stud. 147, 148. Crompt. 29. b. Dalt. 269. cap. 104.

VIII. Lamb. 2. cap. 2. page 79. An Infant, Good behavior.
though within Fourteen years of age, may demand, and ought to have surety of
the Peace, Marrow, and I do not find any strong reason why any man against an
Infant above the age of Fourteen years, ought not, upon good Cause, to have it,
though perhaps an Infant cannot be bound for himself, Dalt. 163. cap. 68.

IX. Dalt. 236. cap. 92. Ideor.
If one that wants Discretion kills himself as an Infant, etc. he shall not
forfeit his Goods, Crompt. 29. b.

X. Dalt. 247. cap. 97. Forfeiture.
If he that is casually slain be under Fourteen years of age, nothing shall be
forfeited to the King, as a Deodand for him, as it seems Coron. 283. Stanf.
21.

Information.
Suits, Acc. S. Stat. Actions, Indictment, Action popular Suggestion,
Presentment.
Suggestion.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 6. page 501. Albeit, we read, 1 Ed. 5. 6. that the Court of
Chancery will sometimes both take Knowledge, and also award Process upon an
Information by word in the behalf of the Prince, and that 39 H. 6. 41. surmise
Br. 3. also admits such matter, yet I think that before Justices of the
Peace these Suggestions and Informations both, be they by Word or Writing, are
but of the force to stir up the Justices to recommend the Cause to the Enquest,
and not to award any Process upon them, unless it be in certain Cases where
that validity is especially given them by the Statutes, etc.

Acc. S. Stat.
II. Lamb. 501. ibid. There was once a time, I confess, when Justices of the
Peace might have awarded Process upon an Information (for the King only) of the
Offenses against any Penal Laws, even as they may yet upon Indictments against
the Peace, but that lasted not long, and therefore that Course is holden now in
special Statutes only, 2 Inst. 420.

Information.
III. Lamb. 502. ibid. Nevertheless at every Sessions, says Judge Prisot 35 H.
6. 15. the Justices of the Peace do use to make Proclaimation, that if any will
inform for the Prince, he shall be heard, and thereupon any man may come in,
and may both inform the Justices of the Peace, and give Evidence to the Enquest
without Danger of Conspiracy, by the opinion of the Court.

Addition.
IV. Lamb. 502. ibid. In this Information the Statute of Additions, 1 H. 5. 5.
seems upon the bare words to have no place, for Informations be not mentioned
in it, and upon that reason the Court, 13 H. 7. 21. Addition Br. 67. did hold
it clear, That if Rescous be returned by the Sheriff against certain Persons
without their Additions, yet in that Case they may well be outlawed upon it.

Evidence.
V. Lamb. 502, 503. ibid. The other Compulsory Information grows by
Examination of Witnesses called into the Court, and is set forth in the Statute
of Drovers, 5 Eliz. 12. 8. N. 1. where it appears, that upon the Examination
of two lawful Witnesses the Justices of Peace may make Process, as if it were
upon an Inquisition of twelve men, the like might be done upon 4, and 5. Ph.
and Mar. 2. 8. N. 2. of Armor, and the very like also may they do upon 5, and
6 Ed. 6. 14.. 10. N. 1. which last Statute seems for this point to have been
followed as a Pattern by the other two, so rightly they tread in the steps of
the same; hereto also you may add the Examination of the Master and Mariners
for Transporting Corn and Victuals against 1, and 2 Ph. and Mar. 5. 6. N. 1.

Suits.
VI. Lamb. 503. Now of those that seek to inform the Court for Profit ensuing to
themselves alone, the Knowledge that comes this way is by the private Suit and
proper Action of the Party, and is therefore in 11 H. 6. 1. N. 1. termed a Suit
between Party and Party, whereof that Statute had no less Consideration than of
those other Suits that be for the King himself, and therefore provided that
they also should not be discontinued by new Commissions of the Peace to be made.

Parliament.
VII. Lamb. 504. ibid. The Justices of Peace have power to enquire here, and
determine of all the Defaults against the Statute, 23 H. 6. 11.. 3. N. 1.
concerning the levying the wages of Knights of the Parliament as well by
Enquiry at the Kings Suit, as by Action at the Suit of the Party; so may they
hear and determine by Information Action of Debt or Bill, the Offense against
the Statute of Laborours, 5 Eliz. 4. 39. N. 2. And likewise by Information, or
any other Action the Offenses against 5 Eliz. 21. 6. N. 1. of taking Fish,
Deer, or Hawks, etc. in which, and such like, the Justices of Peace ought to
proceed after the usual manner of other Courts of Record at the Common Law, if
I do not mistake it, and therefore I will go no further with it, etc.

VIII. 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 4. Enquest.
The Justices of Peace of every Shire may take by their Discretion, an Enquest,
whereof every man shall have 40 s. per Annum at least, to enquire of the
Concealments of other Enquests taken before them, and before other of such
Matters and Offenses as are to be enquired and presented before Justices of the
Peace, whereof Complaints shall be made by Bill or by Bills, as well within
Franchises as without, Lamb. 396.

IX. 2, and 3 Ph. and Mar. 3. 3. N. 2. Cattle.
Moity of forfeiture for not rearing Milch-Kine, etc. to party, that within one
year after the Offense committed, will sue for the same in any Courts of
Record, or before the Justices of Peace in the same Shire where Forfeiture
shall be had at the General Sessions, who shall have power to hear and
determine the same Offenses by Bill, Information, Presentment, Action of Debt
or Detinue, etc. Crompt. 126.

X. Lamb. 4. cap. 3. page 396. And because the Jurors of those days, Trials.
( viz. 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 4.) were wilful in their Concealments, it was provided
within eight years after ( viz. 11 H. 7. 3. 1. N. 3.) that the Justices of the
Peace should determine Causes upon Information without any such Presentment,
but many times in vitium du^it culpae fuga, and therefore that Ordinance
endured not long, etc. 1 H. 8. 6. 2. N. 3. Lamb. 524.

XI. Lamb. 525. So that now again the Trial of Offenses ought for the most part
to proceed either after the general order of the Common Law, Evidence.
or upon such special Examination, or other Proof, as some Statutes do give in
special Cases, and this hearing at liberty and Discretion has seldom any place.

XII. Lamb. 433. Enquiry in Sessions, Agreement.
if any common Informer or Promoter (as he is commonly called) have compounded
or agreed with any person for any Offense against any Penal Law without the
Order and Consent of some of the Courts at Westminster, or have willingly
delayed or discontinued his Suit once commenced, 18 Eliz. 5. 3. N. 1.

XIII. Crompt. 83. ab. Enquiry on Sessions upon 18 Eliz. 5. 1. N. 1. etc. Item,
whether there be any common Informer, Appearance.
who does not exhibit his Information in his proper person, or does not pursue
it by himself, or by his Attorney in Court, or if he antidates the time of the
exhibiting thereof, or sueth out any Process before the Information exhibited,
or compounds with the Offender before his Answer made in the Court, or then
without order of the Court, the Offender in this Case shall stand upon the
Pillory two hours in some Market Vill next adjoining to the place where the
Offense is committed, and forfeit 10 l. and shall not be allowed after for an
Informer.

XIV. Crompt. 126. Cattle.
Justices of Peace may hear and determine by Presentment, Bill, Information, or
Plaint, the Offenses of such as kill Waynlings under the age of 2 years, to the
intent to sell them, by 24 H. 8. 9. N.

XV. Crompt. 126. They have power by 1 H. 8. 7. N. as well by examination as by
Presentment, Coron.
to hear and determine the Offenses of Coronors for not executing their Office
according to the Statute.

Maintenance.
XVI. Crompt. 126. The Justices of Peace may hear and determine as well by
Information as by Indictment the Offenses Committed against the Statute of
Reteyners, Liveries, Maintenance, Imbracery, Bow-staves, Archery, Unlawful
Games, Forestallers, Regrators, Victuallers, and Innholders, by 33 H. 8. 10 N.
and 37 H. 8. 7.

Pope.
XVII. The Laws, etc. 71. etc. 86. upon 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. The Axis upon
which all popular Suits for Recusancy depend, See in tit. Pope 79.

Incontinence see Bastardy. Infidels see Religion. Incumbent see Encumbent,
Ecclesiastic persons, Engrossing see Market Overt. Innkeeper and Innholder see
Hostler. Inmates see Hostler, Cottages. Inquest see Enquest.
Inrolement.
Deeds Enrolled, Bargain and Sale, Records.
Justice.
I. LAmbert 196. If any one Justice of the Peace do Join with the Clerk of the
Peace in taking the Inrolement of an Indenture of Bargain and Sale of Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, lying in that County where he is Justice, it is
sufficient, as it seems by the words of the Statute, 27 H. 8. 16. 1. N. 2.

Fees.
II. Lambert 365. The Justice or Justices of the Peace that do Join with the
Clerk of the Peace in taking the Conusans of an Indenture of Bargain and Sale
of Land to be Enrolled, shall have 12 d. therefore, if the Land exceed not in
value 40 s. by the year, and 2 s. 6 d. if it do exceed that value, by 27 H. 8.
16. 1. N. 4. Lambert 430, 431.

III. Crompt. 59. 31. It is Extortion in the Clerk of the Peace if he takes
above 12 d. for Inrolement of a Bargain and Sale of Land that exceeds not xl.
s. per Annum, or above 2 s. 6. where the Land exceeds the value of xl. s. per
Annum. by 27 H. 8. 16. and in the Justices of Peace that for the Conusance take
above the said Sums in the said Cases, by the said Statute, Lambert 430, 431.
Crompt. 177. b.

Intendment.
Suspicion, Sugestion, Proof.
Bastardy.
I. LAmbert 119. It shall not be amiss at this day, to grant Surety of the Good
Abearing against him that is suspected to have begotten a Bastard Child.

Inventory see Ordinary. Iron works see Mettle. Judgment see Justices,
Execution. Juglers see Games. Issues see Enquest, Forfeiture. Jurisdiction see
Justices. Jurors see Enquest.
Justices.
Jurisdiction, Judgment, Sessions, one Justice, two Justices, three Justices,
Courts, Commission, Records.
I. LAmbert 1. cap. 4. page 20. And then withal ( viz. during the Imprisonment
of Ed. 2. Commission.
) it was ordained by Parliament in the Life time of that Deposed King, and in
the very first entry of his Sons Reign, 1 Ed. 3. 16. That in every Shire of the
Realm, Good men and Lawful which were no Maintainers of Evil, nor Barretors in
the Country should be assigned to keep the Peace, which was as much to say,
that in every Shire the King himself should place special Eyes and Watches over
the Common People, that should be both willing and wise to foresee, and be also
enabled with meet Authority to repress all intention of uproar and Force, even
in the first seed thereof, and before that it should grow up to any offer of
Danger; so that for this cause as I think, the Election of simple Conservators
or Wardens of the Peace was first taken from the people, and translated to the
Assignment of the King.

II. Lambert 1. cap. 5. page 26. Patents:
If the King do grant unto a man to be a Justice of Peace during his Life,
within a certain Precinct* without any other words, he shall continue such a
Justice during his Life: and shall have all that power that a Warden or
Conservator of the Peace had, and perhaps such power also as is given to a
Justice of the Peace by express words in any Statute: but he shall not have all
that power which is ordinarily given to the Commissioners of the Peace by their
Commission, Marrow.

III. Lambert 1. cap. 7. page 33, 34. Joynder.
And for the better restraint of the increase of Justices of Peace, it was
Enacted that no Association should be made to the Justice of Peace after their
first Commission, 12 R. 2. 10. 1. N. 7. which Law though it be not to be
Abrogated till this day, yet was it long since ended by making of New
Commissions that had more new Justices thrust into them, and truly it seems
to me, that together with the like ambitious desire of Bearing Rule in some,
the growing Number of the Statute Laws Committed from time to time to the
Charge of the Justices of Peace, has been the cause that they also are now
again increased, to the overflowing of each Shire at this day, Dalt. 19, 20.
cap. 5.

IV. The Form of the Commission of the Peace for each County is as thus in
Middlesex, Lambert 1. cap. cap. 8. page 35.

Midd' ss.
Carolus secundus Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex Fidei
Defensoris, etc. precharissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario nostro Principi
Ruperto Comiti Palatino Rheni Duci and Cumbriae Constabular' Castri de Windsor,
etc. predilecto and fideli consiliario nostro Heneagio Dom. Finch Dom.
Cancellario nostro Angliae, Peace.
etc. Salutem, 2. sciatis quod assignavimus vos conjunctim and divisim and
quemlibet vestrum Justiciarios nostros ad Pacem nostram in Com' nostro
Middlesex conservand' 3. ac ad ea omnia Ordinationes and Statuta pro bono Pacis
ac pro conservatione ejusdem, Statutes.
and pro quieto regimine and gubernatione populi nostri edita in omnibus and
singulis suis articulis in dicto Comitatu nostro tam infra Libertates quam
extra, juxta vim, formam, and effectum eorundem custodiend' and custodiri
faciend': Contempt.
4. and ad omnes contra formam and Ordinationum, vel Statutorum, vel eorum
alicujus in Comitatu predicto Delinquentes castigand' and puniend' prout
secundum formam Ordinationum vel Statutorum illorum fuit faciend', Coron.
5. and ad omnes illos qui alicui vel aliquibus de populo nostro de corporibus
suis, vel de incendio domorum suarum minas fecerint ad sufficientem securitatem
de pace, vel bono gestu suo erga nos and populum nostrum inveniend' coram vobis
seu aliquo vestrum venire faciend', and si hujusmodi securitatem inveniri
recusaverint, tunc eos in Prisonis nostris quouscunque hujusmodi securitatem
invenerint salvo custodiri faciend. Enquest.
6. Assignavimus etiam vos and quoslibet duos vel plures vestrum quorum aliquem
vestrum vos prefat' Principem Rupertum, Dom. Cancellarium Angliae, etc. unum
esse voluimus Justiciarios nostros ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum and
legalium hominum de Comitatu predicto, per quos rei veritas melius sciri
poterit de omnibus and omnimodis feloniis, veneficiis incantationibus
sortilegiis Art Magica, transgressionibus forestallariis regratariis,
ingrossariis and extortionibus quibuscunque, 7. ac de omnibus and singulis
aliis maleficiis and offensis, Enquest.
de quibus Justiciarii pacis nostrae legitime inquirere possunt aut debent per
quoscunque and qualitercunque in Comitatu predicto factis sive perpetratis vel
quae imposterum ibidem fieri vel attemptari contigerit, Riot.
8. ac etiam de omnibus illis qui in Comitatu predicto in Conventiculis contra
pacem nostram in perturbatione populi nostri seu vi armata iverunt vel
equitaverunt, seu imposterum ire vel equitare presumpserint, 9. ac etiam de
omnibus his qui ibidem ad gentem nostram mahemand' vel interficiend' in
insidiis jacuerunt, Intendment. Measures.
vel imposterum jacere presumpserint, 10. ac etiam de Hostellariis and iis
omnibus and singulis personis qui in abusu ponderum vel mensurarum sive in
venditione vectualium contra formam Ordinationum vel Statutorum vel eorum
alicujus inde pro communi utilitate regni nostri Angliae and populi nostri
ejusdem deliquerunt vel attemptanerunt, seu imposterum delinquere vel
attemptare presumpserint in Comitatu predicto, Officers.
11. ac etiam de quibuscunque Vicecomitibus Ballivis Seschallisne
Constabulariis Custodibus Goalarum and aliis Officiariis qui in executione
officiorum suorum circa premissa, seu eorum aliqua indebite se habuerunt, aut
imposterum indebite se habere presumpserint, aut tepidi remissi vel negligentes
fuerunt, aut imposterum fore contigerit in Com' predicto, Enquest.
12. and de omnibus and singulis Articulis and Circumstantiis and aliis rebus
quibuscunque, per quoscunque and qualitercunque in Com' predicto factis sive
perpetratis, vel quae imposterum ibidem fieri vel attemplari contigerit
qualitercunque premissorum, vel eorum alicujus concernentibus before
veritatem, Endictment.
13. and ad indictamenta quaecunque sic coram vobis seu aliquibus vestrum capta
sive capienda aut coram aliis nuper Justiciariis pacis in Comitatu predicto
facta sive capta and nondum terminata inspiciendum ac ad Processus inde ver sus
omnes and singulos sic indictatos, vel quos coram vobis imposterumindictari
contigerit quousque capiantur reddant se vel Utlagentur faciend' and
continuand', Oyer.
14. and ad omnia and singula felonias veneficia Incantationes sortilegia Arts
Magicas transgressiones forestallarias regratarias ingrossarias extortiones
conventicula Indictamenta predicta ceteraque omnia and singula premissa
secundum Leges and Statuta regni nostri Angliae prout in hujusmodi casu fieri
consuevit aut debuit audiendum and terminandum and ad eosdem delinquentes and
quemlibet eorum pro delictis suis per fines redemptiones amerciamenta
forisfacturas ac alio modo prout secundum Legem and Consuetudinem regni nostri
Angliae aut formam Ordinationum vel Statutorum predictorum fieri consuevit aut
debuit castigandum and puniendum, Jurisdiction*
15. proviso semper quod si casus difficultatis super determinatione aliquorum
premissorum coram vobis vel aliquibus duobus vel pluribus vestrum evenire
contigerit tunc ad judicium inde reddendum (nisi in presentia unius
Justiciariorum nostrorum de uno vel de altero Banco, aut unius Justiciariorum
nostrorum ad Assizas in Comitatu predicto capiendas assignatorum coram vobis,
vel^ aliquibus duobus, Execution.
vel pluribus vestrum minime procedatur, 16. and ideo vobis and cuilibet
vestrum mandamus quod circa custodiam Pacis Ordinationum, Statutorum, and
omnium and singulorum ceterorum premissorum diligenter intendatis, and ad
certos dies and loca, quae vos vel aliqui hujusmodi duo vel plures vestrum ut
predictum est ad hoc provideritis super permissis faciatis inquisitiones, and
premissa omnia and singula audiatis and terminetis, ac ea faciatis and
expleatis in forma predicta facturi inde quod ad justitiam pertinet secundum
Legem and Consuetudinem regni nostri Angliae salvis nobis Amerciamentis, and
aliis ad nos inde spectantibus, Sheriffs.
17. mandamus etiam tenore presentium Vicecom' nostr' Middlesex, quod ad certos
dies and loca (quae nos vel aliqui hujusmodi duo vel plures vestrum ut
predictum est ei ut predictum est scire feceritis) venire faciat coram vobis
hujusm' duob' vel pluribus vestrum, ut dictum est, tot and tales probos and
legales homines de Balliva sua tam infra libertates quam extra, per quos rei
veritas in premissis melius sciri poterit and inquiri. Records.
18. Assignavimus denique te praefatum Gulielm. Comitem Craven custodem
Rotulorum pacis nostrae in dicto Comitatu nostro, ac propterea tu ad dies and
loca predicta Brevia, Praecepta, Processus, and Indictamenta predicta coram te
and dictis sociis tuis venire facias, ut ea inspiciantur and debito fine
terminentur sicut predictum est; in cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus patentes,

Test me ipso apud Westminst' 9 die Febr. An. Reg. Nostri 29.
See Crompt. 1. an old Commission for Stafford in Chancellor Elsemore's time.
and Crompt. 3. b. 4. a. this new one for Kent, Dalt. 16, 17. cap. 5. the like
for Cambridgeshire and for Ireland, see Bolt. 11, 12. cap. 2.

V. Lamb. 45. Peace.
This first assignavimus 2. makes them Justices for the conservation of his
Majesty's Peace, by force of which words they have singularly, dually and
plurally both all the ancient power touching the Peace which the Conservator of
the Peace had by the Common Law, and also that whole Authority which the
Statutes have since added thereto, for the more evident Declaration whereof
they are immediately after 3. assigned to conserve omnia Ordinationes and
Statuta pro bono pacis, etc. In which general words there do lie implied not
only the several Statutes, 3 Ed. 1 W. 1. 9. and 13 Ed. 1 of Winch. Stat. 2.
cap. 1. etc. 28 Ed. 3. 11. 5 Ed. 3. 4. But also whatsoever other Laws and
Statutes made either for the arresting of Robbers, Murderers, Felons, and of
those that be suspected to be such, or for the repressing of Riots, Affrays,
Force and Violence, etc. or for having Armor and Weapon, etc. Dalt. 18. cap. 5.

VI. Lamb. 46. But as the Conservation of the Peace, Contempt.
and the Execution of the Statutes be several things, so is there in this first
rank two distinct ways for the effecting of the same, for 4. the Statutes are
to be performed according to such Prescript and Order as themselves do deliver,
wherein if no power at all be expressly given to any one Justice of the Peace
alone, then can he not otherwise compel the Observation thereof (so far as I
can learn) than by Admonition only, and calling upon the Parties in which
behalf if he shall not be obeyed accordingly, he is to prefer the Cause at the
Sessions, and to work it to a Presentment upon the Statute, and so by the help
of his fellow Justices, to hear and determine thereof as Law requires, Dalt.
18. 19. cap. 5.

But for prevention of the breach of the Peace he has full Authority hereby.
5. Not only to call the party for the finding of Sureties for the Peace, or for
the Good Behavior, as the Case shall require; but also for not finding such
Sureties to Commit him to safe Custody within his Majesty's Goal or Prison,
Lamb. 77. 84.

Jurisdiction.
VII. Lambert 49, 50. Least these Justices should rather Ground their Judgments
upon the Number of voices, then upon the weight of reasons, this latter clause
is shut up with a proviso and restraint. 15. That in all Cases of ambiguity and
doubt they shall spare to proceed to Judgment, and expect the presence of the
Justice of Assize, etc. and yet as Mr. Fitzh. 7. well Notes, is not their
Judgment void if they list to proceed without such advise, but it stands good
and effectual until it shall be Reversed by a Writ of Error, Crompt. 6. ab.

Oath.
VIII. Lambert 53. The Oath of Office of a Justice of Peace

Ye shall Swear that as Justices of the Peace in the County of M. in all
Articles in the Kings Commission to you directed, you shall do equal right to
the Poor and to the Rich, after your cunning, Wit and Power, and after the Laws
and Customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made. ( 2.) And ye shall not be
of Counsel of any quarrel hanging before you. And 3. That ye hold your Sessions
after the Form of Statutes thereof made. And 4. The Issues, Fines, and
Amerciaments that shall happen to be made, and all Forfeitures which shall fall
before you, ye shall cause to be entered without any Concealment or Imbezelling,
and truly send them to the Kings Exchequer. 5. Ye shall not let for Gift or
other cause, but well and truly you shall do your Office of Justice of Peace in
that behalf, and that you take nothing for your Office of Justice of the Peace
to be done, but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and Costs limited by the
Statute. And 6. Ye shall not direct or cause to be directed any Warrant by you
to be made to the parties, but you shall direct them to the Bailiffs of the
said County, or other the Kings Officers or Ministers, or other indifferent
persons to do Execution thereof: So help you God, and by the Contents of this
Book, in French, Crompt. 10. ab. Dalt. 13. cap. 4.

Process.
IX. Lambert 56. It would avail greatly to the furtherance of the service, if
the Ded' potestat' to give these Oaths (viz. of Supremacy and Alleigance, etc.)
were dirigible to the Justices and none other to Minster the same, not
elsewhere, but in their open Sessions.

Statutes.
X. Crompt. 7. 13. 14. By these words, 3. it appears that the Justices ought to
do their Endeavor that these Statutes be kept in all points, and that they in
every of their Quarter Sessions should inquire of the Offenders against them,
and that they in their Charge given to the Enquests should rehearse, especially
the Articles of those Statutes that concern the conservation of the Peace, and
the Good Government of the Subjects of the Realm, Fitzh. J. P. 10. and 10. Ed.
3. cap. 6.

Imprisonment.
XI. Crompt. 9. b. 49. The Justices of the Peace have no power to deliver the
Goal, unless only of those that are Indicted before themselves, or before other
Justices of Peace of the same County according to the power given to them by
the Commission, 13 Fitzh. J. P. 14. Crompt. 122. b. 5. Lambert 541.

XII. Crompt. 10. 53. By these words ( 6.) it appears, Enquest.
that two Justices of the Peace may enquire of all Articles expressed in their
Commission, though none of them be Justices of the Quorum, but the Justices of
Peace cannot hear and determine the Articles contained in their Commissions,
unless one of them be a Justice of the Quorum, unless in special Cases given by
Statutes.

XIII. Dalt. 19. cap. 5. By this (Justices of Peace have, Execution.
13 Ed. 1 Stat. 2. of Winchester in charge) it may appear that the King by his
Commission, may commit the Execution of the Statutes and Laws to whom he shall
please; and so also a Justice of Peace by virtue of the Commission may execute
any Statute whereunto he shall be enabled by the said Commission, although
there shall be no express power given him so to do by the Words or Letter of
the same Statute, 22 Ed. 4. Jurisdict. 61. Bract. 108. and 11 Co. 65.

XIV. Dalt. 19. cap. 5. Note also, Commission.
that there be diverse Statutes which be not specified within the Commission,
and yet are committed to the Charge and Care of the Justices of Peace; but all
such Statutes which do give expressly any power or Authority to the Justices of
Peace, are to them a sufficient Warrant and Commission of themselves, though
they be not recited in the Commission, and all such Statutes are also to be
executed by them according as the same Statutes themselves do severally
prescribe and set down, Lamb. 33, 34. and Pasch. 11. H. 7. 22. pl. 11. of Rape.

XV. Lamb. 64, 65. It is the opinion of the Court, Records.
9 Ed. 4. 3. and 14 H. 8. 16. and of diverse other Books in our Law, that every
one of the Justices of Peace, even by himself is a Judge of Record, for he is
made by the Great Seal, and has judicial power and has a Seal, and by
Brudnell Peace Br. 6. 14 H. 8. 16. if he make any Warrant, though it be beyond
his Authority, it is not disputable by the Officer, etc. F. N. B. 81. E.
Crompt. 120.

XVI. Lamb. 65. Yea, Supersedeas.
by good opinion 2 H. 7. 1. a Supersedeas of the peace made by one Justice
under his Seal being brought into the Sessions, is a sufficient Record to prove
that there is a Recognizance of the Peace taken by the same Justice, and it is
warrant enough to call the party bound thereupon, and if he make default to
record the same.

XVII. Lamb. 67. The Kings Majesty may discharge the Commissioners of the peace
by his express Writ under the Great Seal, Repealans
L. 5 Ed. 4. 32. 137. Judges Br. 19. and if he send a Supersedeas to all the
Commissioners of the peace, that will suspend all their Authority, but yet so
that it may be renewed by a procedendo, and therefore it does not utterly
determine their Authority, as may be gathered by 12. Ass. 21. Oyer and Term. 4.

XVIII. Lamb. 67. Again, Repealans.
when the Kings Majesty makes other Commissioners of the same kind within the
same limits, it is employed thereby for avoiding of Repugnancy in the service,
that the former Commissioners shall have no longer power, although there be
never a word spoken of the discharge of them, 3 Mar. 1. Commissi. Br. 24. But
yet if there be Justices of Peace by Commission in a whole County, and
afterward the King makes another man Justice of the Peace in one Town of the
said County, Choke, only against others was of opinion 10. Ed. 4. 7. Commission
Br. 20. that the power of the first Commissioners continued still in that Town,
because it is not altogether contrariant, and Judge Fineux 20. H. 7. 8. held
also, that if the King make a proper Justice of the Peace within a special
Liberty, yet may the General Justices of the Peace of that Shire meddle there,
unlss there be words of Prohibition in the Patent, etc. but it is plain by the
preamble of 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 18. 1. N. 2. that the Law was taken, that if a
Commission of the Peace were first granted to certain within a Town, and after
another Commission had been granted to others within the whole Shire, that this
had been a Supersedeas to the Commissioners within the said Towns, Crompt. 187.
b. 188. a. 189.

Notice.
XIX. Lamb. 68, 69. Howbeit, this Determination of the old Commission that we
speak of, grows not immediately by the making of a new Commission, but either
after the reading or proclaiming of the new Commission at the Sessions of the
Peace, or at the full County, or else by holding of some open Sessions by
virtue of the new Commission, in all which cases the old Commissioners must
take notice of the new Commission, or else after the giving of notice of the
new Commission unto the old Commissioners, for otherwise all the mean Acts of
the old Commissioners are good in Law, by Marrow, and 21 H. 6. 29. and 34. Ass.
28. Commission. Br. 14. Crompt. 189.

Abatement.
XX. Lamb. 69, 70. It is to be noted, that in all Cases whereby an Ancient
Commission of the Peace is determined by a new, yet no Process or Suit hanging
before the old Commissioners shall be discontinued thereby, 11 H. 6. 6. N. and
1 Ed. 6. 7.

Commissioner.
XXI. Lamb. 71. But ask of this, if Commission be repealed by the coming of the
Justices in Eyr, or B. R. into the County, for if it should be so, then it may
be some question also what is wrought by the coming of the Justices of Nisi
prius, who do ordinarily bring Commissions of Oyer and Term* and of
Jail-delivery with them, Crompt. 188. b.

Adjournment.
XXII. Lamb. 69. Lastly, if Justices of the Peace made pro hac vice, do sit by
virtue of their Commission, and do not adjourn the same, it seems their
Commission Br. 11. 7. is determined thereby, Crompt. 188. b. Quaere.

Peace.
XXIII. Lamb. 80, 81. One Justice of Peace, says Mr. Marrow, may grant surety
of the Peace to any man against one of his fellow Justices etc. Dalt. 163. cap.
68. but I doubt not that one Justice of Peace if he will, may pray surety of
the Peace at the hands of his fellow Justice against another person, etc.
Crompt. 122. 36. and 134. b.

Next Justice.
XXIV. Lamb. 94, 95. If the party shall yield to find surety of the Peace, then
may he be at his Liberty (if the Precept proceed ex officio, and without the
Writ of Supplicavit) to go to any other Justice of the Peace to offer his
surety, for such is the opinion of Fineux, 21 H. 7. 20. Tho. Peace Br. 9. and
Faux Imprisonment Br. 11. Dalt. 167. cap. 69. likes better to give the
Election thereof to the Officer F. N. B. 81. Crompt. 89, 90. See 9 Ed. 4. 31.
and 5 Co. 59. b. Fosters Ca. and I do remember that a Justice of Peace was by
the order of Star Chamber thrust out of the Commission, only because he refused
to accept surety of the Peace offered unto him upon a Warrant awarded by one of
his fellow Justices, to whom the party, as he alled'gd, durst not go to give it
for fear that he would execute upon him the malice that he bear against him.

Supersedeas.
XXV. Lamb. 96. If a Justice of Peace will by a Supersedeas discharge a Precept
for the peace awarded by his fellow Justice, by virtue of his Office (and not
by force of a Supplicavit, which is of a higher nature, and cannot be so
avoided) then shall he do well to take the Recognizance of the peace after the
self same sort in all points, as the form of the former Precept does require.

XXVI. Lamb. 120. b. Good Behavior.
Although the Justices of Peace have power to grant the Good Behavior either
by their own Discretion, or upon the Complaint of others, even as they may that
of the Peace, yet I wish rather that they do not command it but only upon
sufficient cause seen to themselves, or upon the Suit or Complaint of diverse,
and the same very honest and credible persons.

XXVII. a. Lamb. 130. Jurisdiction.
A Justice of Peace is undoubtedly (for punishment of Breaches of the Peace)
endowed with no less power than every private man, or any Constable has, as it
is plain by 9 Ed. 4. 3. and 14. H. 7. 8.

XXVIII. Lamb. 132. Affray.
If one do make an Affray upon a Justice of the Peace, Constable, or such other
Officer, he may not only defend himself, but may also apprehend the Offender,
and send him to the Goal till he will find surety for the Peace, 5 H. 7. 6. and
the Justice or Constable may, if need be, command Assistance of the Kings
people for the pacifying of an Affray.

XXIX. Lamb. 140. Force.
This Statute of 8 H. 6. 9.. 2. N. 3. enableth any one Justice of the Peace to
give remedy in this hurt of Forcible entry and holding, and is made as well
against such as enter with force and hold them peaceably, and against those
that enter in peaceable sort, and then maintain their Possession forcibly, as
also against as many as do both enter and hold in forcible manner F. N. B. 148.
Crompt. 194. b. 3. 4. 3 Ed. 419. forcible Enter, Br. 15.

XXX. Lamb. 182. Upon the whole matter, Riot.
( viz. of 14 H. 7. 8. Justice of Peace 9. Br. 7, etc.) one Justice of the
Peace alone may do somewhat to prevent a Rout or Riot before it be done, and
for the stay of it whilst it is in doing, but nothing in effect to punish it as
a Riot or Rout when it is committed or done, for as Judge Fineux says, the
Statute which I take to be 34 Ed. 3. 1. 1. N. 2. (rather than 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N.
1. which by express words, requires two Justices at the least present,) was
given as a hasty remedy, and for to prevent a Mischief being imminent, and
before the Eye, and therefore the Law shall largely construe the Authority of a
Justice of Peace in that behalf, so that he shall neither need to make any
precept in Writing, nor to be present in his own person, but may use all
reasonable means for Prevention and Stay of the Evil, and yet the ordinary
power of punishing Routs and Riots rests not in his hand alone, but rather
belongs unto two Justices of the Peace.

XXXI. Crompt. 121. 17. One Justice of Peace may take Rioters, Imprisonment.
and yet 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 1. speaks of two Justices, for the said Statute is
taken largely, as appears 14 H. 7. 8.

XXXII. Lamb. 187. This (to be plain) I do not like, Recognizance.
that one Justice of the Peace should take upon him to bind an Offender against
any penal Law (being within the power of Justices of the Peace, but yet neither
comprehended in the Commission, nor committed to the charge of any one of them)
to apear at the Sessions to answer to his fault, for although I have seen
sundry old Precedents of Attachments made for one Justice of Peace against
Laborours to be before the Justices at their Sessions to answer to their
Contempts, yet I am not persuaded, that the like may be done against the
Offenders of other Statutes, unless it be therein specially so appointed no
more than it might have been done in that case of Laborours it self, had not 25
Ed. 3. 6.. 1. N. 1. expressly commanded it, Crompt. 122. b. 3. Dalt. 159. cap.
67.

Fish.
XXXIII. Lamb. 189, 190. Every Justice of the Peace is a Conservator of Rivers
within his County, and when he may attend it, ought to survey the Weers, etc.
13 Ed. 1. W. 2. cap. 47. 1. N. 3 and 13 Rich. 2. 19. 1. N. 6. 17 R. 2. 9. 1. N.
7. Dalt. 134. cap. 50.

Apprentice.
XXXIV. Lamb. 190. Any one Justice of the Peace may take upon him to hear and
order the Controversies between Masters and Servants touching their departure,
c. 5 Eliz. 4. N. Crompt. 195, 196. 16. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

Forest.
XXXV. Lamb. 191. Upon Information to any Justice of Peace of any unlawful
Hunting by night, or with Disguises, etc. in Forest, Park, or Warren, of any
suspected thereof, that Justice may make a Warrant, etc. and may examine him,
etc. 1 H. 7. 7. 1. N. 3. Crompt. 195. b. 20.

Games.
XXXVI. Lamb. 191, 192. Every Justice of the Peace may as well within Liberties
as without, enter into any common house where unlawful Games are kept, 12 R. 2.
6. N. and 33 H. 8. 9.. 14. N. 1. Crompt 195. b. 21. Dalt. 154. cap. 66. and 63.
cap. 23.

Ale.
XXXVII. Lamb. 192, 193. The Innkeeper, Victualer, or Ale-housekeeper that
suffers any to continue Tippling in his house, shall forfeit 10 s. and that
sells under measure upon view by one Justice, or upon proof thereof by two
Witnesses before any one Justice, etc. 1 Jac. 9.. 2. N. 6. Dalt. 154. cap. 66.

Fish.
XXXVIII. Lamb. 193. Any Justice of Peace in Lent may enter into common
Victualling-houses and seize Flesh forfeit, etc. 1 Jac. 29.. N. Dalt. 21. cap.
6. and 56. cap. 2.

Tiles.
XXXIX. Lamb. 193. Any one Justice of Peace by the large words of the Statute,
17 Ed. 4. 4. 1. N. 13. (but learn whether it be so to be taken or no) may
enquire, hear and determine by his Discretion, as well by Examination as
otherwise, Tile-making, etc. Crompt. 195. b. 23. Dalt. 21. cap. 6. and 155.
cap. 66.

War.
XL. Lamb. 193, 194. If Soldier imbezel Armor, etc. and escape punishment of
Lieutenant, etc. then upon Complaint and due proof of the Offense by Owner,
etc. to any Justice of the Peace, he shall by him be committed without Bail,
etc. 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2.. 4. N. 1. Crompt. 195. b.. 24. Dalt. 155. cap. 66.

Pope.
XLI. Lamb. 194, 195. If any to whom Agnus Dei, Cross, Picture, Bead, etc. shall
be offered, do disclose the name and dwelling of the Offerer to any Justice of
the Peace, that Justice must in 14 days next after declare the same to one of
the Kings Privy Counsel, 13 Eliz. 2.. 8. N. 1. Crompt. 195. b. 25.

Religion.
XLII. Lamb. 195. If Disturbers of Preacher be arrest and brought before a
Justice of Peace, then he upon due accusation shall forthwith commit, the party
so taken, by his discretion, 1 Mar. 1. Stat. 2. cap. 3. 2. N. 1. but enquire if
all this Statute be not repealed by 1 Eliz. 2. 27. N. 1. in general words,
Crompt. 195. 14. Dalt. 155. cap. 66.

XLIII. Lambert 195, 196. Poor.
Every Justice of Peace may within one Month after Arrival seize all the Goods
of any Outlandish persons calling themselves Egyptians, that shall come into
this Realm, etc. 22 H. 8. 10. N. But note that after the Month the Offense is
made Felony, and then it seems the King is to have the Goods wholly, Crompt.
195. 13. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 1. N.

XLIV. Lambert 196. Inrolement.
If any one Justice of the Peace do join with the Clerk of the Peace in taking
the Inrolement of an Indenture of Bargain and Sale of Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments lying in that County where he is Justice, it is sufficient as it
seems by the words of the Statute, 27 H. 8. 16. 1. N. 2.

XLV. Lambert 196. Wax.
Every Justice of Peace may examine and search by his Discretion, such as Sell
any Candles or other Works of Wax above 4 d. the pound above the price of plain
Wax, 11 H. 6. 12. 1. N. 4. As it seems by the large words of that Statute.

XLVI. Lambert 196, 197. Fuel.
Any one Justice of the Peace is Warranted to set on the Pillory in the next
Market Town to the place of Offense, any person that has broken the Assize of
Fuel, and is not able to pay Forfeiture, etc. 7 Ed. 6. 7. 6. N. 2. but
consider whither a Justice of Peace may convict him of the said Forfeiture or
no; for it seems by the words of the Statute that he is rather a Minister
than a Judge.

XLVII. Lambert 197. A Justice of Peace my appoint Searchers, Poor.
Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers and Buryers for Persons and Places Infected with
the Plague, give them their Oaths for Performance of their Offices, and other
Directions, as to his Discretion shall seem good, 1 Jac. 31. 9. N. 1. Crompt.
122 39. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

XLVIII. Lambert 197. Pope.
Any Justice of the Peace of the County where a person above 16 absents from
Church, dwells, may make Certificat thereof in Writing in B. R. 23 Eliz. 1.
5. N. 2. Crompt. 195. 12. Dalt. 155. cap. 66.

XLIX. Lambert 197. Any Justice of Peace within that County in which any
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastic
person mentioned, shall Arrive or Land, may within three days after take the
Submission Oath and Acknowledgment of him touching his obedience to the Kings
Majesty, and to his Laws and Ordinances provided in Causes of Religion, 27
Eliz. 2. 10. N. 2.

L. Lambert. 198. The party that does first discover to any Justice of Peace,
any Recusant or other, Entertaining or Relieving any Jesuit, Seminary or Popish
Priest, or any Mass to have been said, and any of them that were present
thereat within three days after the Offense, and by reason of his Discovery,
any of the Offenders be taken and Convicted, shall be freed from the Offense,
and have the third part of the Forfeiture 3 Jac. 5. N. Lamb. 294.

LI. Lambert 198, 199. Fowl.
Every Justice of Peace may examine the offenses against the Statute, 23 Eliz.
10. 2. N. 6. and against Hawkers in Corn, and may take Bond with good Sureties
to appear at the next General Sessions of the Peace, to answer the offense,
etc. Crompt. 124. b. Crompt. 195. 8. Dalt. 66. cap. 25.

Sheriffs.
LII. Lambert 199. It seems that one Justice of the Peace may upon complaint
of the party grieved, examine the Sheriff, Undersheriff, Shire Clerks, and
Plaintiff concerning the taking or entering of Plaints in their County Courts,
and Books against the Statute 11 H. 7. 15. 1. N. 10. infra 138. Lambert 293.
Crompt. 195. 9. 10. Dalt. 154, 155. cap. 66.

Corn.
LIII. Lambert 199, 200. The Certificate of one Justice of the Peace joined with
the Customer of the Place, of the unlading and Selling of Corn or Grain, or
Cattle carried by Water from one place to another of this Realm, unto the
Customer and Controller of the place where the same was Embarked, is sufficient
against Forestalling, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 12. N. 2. Dalt. 155. cap. 66.

LIVE. Lambert 200, 201. If any Bailiff or Constable of any Borrough or other
Town shall find any Malt made contrary to 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 16. N. and 25 Eliz.
14. N. than with the advice of any Justice of Peace within the Shire, he shall
cause the same to be Sold to such persons, and at such reasonable prizes under
the Common price of the Market, as to his discretion shall seem convenient,
Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

Imprisonment.
LV. Lambert 201. The party Convicted and Committed to Prison by the Justices of
Peace, for not obeying this restraint of converting Barley into Malt, must
there remain three days, and after that, until he shall become bound in
Recognizance of 40 l. to the Kings use before any Justice of the Peace to obey
such his restraint, 39 Eliz. 16. 1. N. 3.

Sanctuary.
LVI. Lambert 200. One Justice of Peace may take out of Sanctuary certain
persons abjured thither, and others being Indict of some kind of Offenses
mentioned, done after they became Sanctuary men, and may Commit them to the
Goal in the County where the Indictment is found, till they be Tried, 22 H. 8.
14. N. Crompt 195. 7.

Fresh Suit.
LVII. 200. No person shall after he shall be Robbed bring any Action upon any
the Statutes concerning Hue and Cry, except he shall first within Twenty days
next before such Action brought, be examined upon his Corporal Oath before some
one Justice of the Peace of the County wherein the Robery was Committed,
Inhabiting within or near the Hundred, etc. then also shall he before such
Action be brought, enter into Recognizance before the same Justice, effectually
to prosecute such persons known, etc. 27 Eliz. 13. 11. N. 2.

Fish.
LVIII. Lambert 201. By Warrant of any one Justice of Peace, the Constables and
Churchwardens of every place wherein destroying of the Spawn and Brood of Fish
is Commit, may levy the Forfeitures by distress and Sale, 3 Jac. 12. 2. N. 3.

Sewers.
LIX. Lambert 201, 202. Every Justice of Peace as it seems within the Shires
next adjoining to the River of Thames, within his several Jurisdiction, has
power upon complaint made unto him by the Overseers and Rulers of the Watermen
and Wherry-men, or two of them, or by the Masters of any such Servants, both to
examine, hear and determine all offenses against the Statute, and to set at
large him that shall be Imprisoned by such Overseers, or Rulers if there be
just cause, and also by his discretion to punish those Overseers and Rulers, 2
and 3 Phil. and Mar. 16. 6. N. 1. Cromp. 194. 2. Dalt. 155. cap. 66.

LX. Lambert 202. Cattle.
Any Justice of Peace within six Months after the Sale in Market overt of any
stolen Horse, Mare, Gelding, Colt, or Fillye, may take the claim, and hear the
proof of the right Proprietors thereof, 31 Eliz. 12. 4. N. 1.

LXI. Lambert 202. Pope.
Any one Justice of the Peace may within three Months after the Conviction of
any Seditious Sectarie, require the Submission of him to Conformity, and in
default thereof may require him to abjure the Realm, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1.

Poor.
LXII. Lambert 202. Any Justice of Peace may appoint any person to be openly
Whipped Naked until his or her Body be Bloody, that shall be taken Begging,
Wandering, or disordering him or herself, and is declared by the Statutes to be
a Rogue, Vagabond, or Sturdy Beggar, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 1 Jac. 7. N. Crompt.
96. Dalt. 21. cap. 6. and 155. cap. 66. and 122. cap. 47.

LXIII. Lambert 209. 210. Drapery.
Upon any Information given to any Justice of the Peace against suspected Users
of Logwood ( alias Blockwood) such Justice may by his Warrant or other
Commandment cause to come before him, and examine by Oath or otherwise, the
Servants or Workmen of such suspected, or others, and on finding the same, to
Bind with Surety to the next Goal Delivery, or Quarter Sessions of that County,
and on refusal to Commit to the next Goal, etc. 39 Eliz. 10. 2. N. 2. Crompt.
198. b. Dalt. 48. cap, 18.

LXIV. Lamb. 210. Every Justice of the Peace of any of the Counties on the
North side of Trent, has some power in searching out the deceit of strayning
or stretching those Country Clothes, Kersies, Cottons, etc. 39 Eliz. 20. N.

LXV. Lamb. 210. Every Justice of Peace before whom any person Arrested for
Manslaughter or Felony, or Suspicion thereof, shall be brought, Coron.
ought before Commitment to take Examinations etc. in Writing, and Bond to
appear and give Evidence next Goal Delivery, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 2.
Crompt. 194. b. 1.

LXVI. Lambert 292, 293. Taxes.
The Assess made at the Easter Sessions of the Peace upon every Parish in the
County, shall yearly in default of the Parishioners, and in default of the
Constables there, be rated by order of such Justice of Peace as shall dwell in
that Parish, or if none so be dwelling in the parts next adjoining, and in
default of the Churchwardens and Constables, any Justice of Peace within the
limit, may levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods of any person refusing
or neglecting to pay his portion thereof, and in default of Distress to Commit
etc. 43 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1.

LXVII. Lambert 293, 294. Any one Justice of Peace of that Limit, Pope.
Division, or Liberty where the party dwells, upon proof by Confession in not
repairing every Sunday to some Church, etc. according to 1 Eliz. 2. N. And if
he or she cannot make a sufficient excuse thereof, the same Justice may give
his Warrant to the Churchwarden of the Parish where the Offender dwells, to
distrain for 12 d. for every such default, and for want of Distress, to
Imprison the Offender, etc. 3 Jac. 4. 27. N. 2. Dalt. 104. cap. 45.

Imprisonment.
LXVIII. Lambert 294, 295. Such Justice of Peace as Committed for any offense of
refusing to pay Charges for conveying to Prison, may give his Warrant to the
Constable to Sell such Goods of the Offender as will satisfy the Charge, and
if he have none, the Parish where he was apprehended shall be Taxed, and on
refusal to pay, Distress and Sale by Warrant from the said Justice or any other
near adjoining to the Constable, etc. 3 Jac. 10. 2. N. 1. Dalt. 103. cap. 43.

Games.
LXIX. Lambert 295. Every person finding or seeing any to offend against the
Statute against shooting in Cross-bows and Hand-guns, may Arrest and bring or
convey him to the next Justice of the Peace of the County where he was found
offending, who upon due Examination and proof, may by his discretion Commit,
till payment of the Forfeiture, Crompt. 195. 6. 33 H. 8. 6. 16. N. 1. Dalt.
155. cap. 66.

Imprisonment.
LXX. Crompt. 122. 33. One Justice of Peace who was not of the Quorum rebuked a
Justice who was of the Quorum; yet he cannot Commit him to Prison, nor no other
of his Companions can Commit him to Prison for this Cause, because that all are
by one Authority, and therefore he has no Remedy if the King will not Amove
him, 3 H. 7. Fitzh. J. P. 3. See if it be in open Sessions that one abuses
another, it seems that the others may bind him to the Peace.

Ways.
LXXI. Crompt. 195. 5. One Justice of Peace may present to the next Sessions the
Highways not sufficiently repaired, 5 Eliz. 13 8. N. 3. Dalt. 67. cap. 26.

Slander.
LXXII. Crompt. 195. 15. One Justice of Peace may Commit him that is vehemently
suspected to offend against the Statute of 23 Eliz. 2. N. touching the speaking
of Slanderous News, etc. against the King that now is, Dalt. 102. cap. 42.

Poor.
LXXIII. Crompt. 195. b. Sect. 19. One Justice of Peace may Commit to Prison
Rogues, Vagabonds, and Sturdy Beggars, being above the age of 14. there to
remain until the next Sessions or Goal Delivery which first happen, 14 Eliz.
5. N.

Forest.
LXXIV. Crompt. 195. b. 20. The Examination by one Justice of Peace for Hunting
in Parks, etc. against 1 H. 7. 7. 1. N. 3. is Good, Lamb. 191.

Riot.
LXXV. Crompt. 195. b. 16. One Justice of Peace may suppress them who do any
thing against the Statute of Rebellious Assemblies, 1 Mar. 1. Stat. 2. cap. 12.
N.

War.
LXXVI. Dalt. 154. cap. 66. One Justice of Peace on view may punish persons that
shall ride or go Armed contrary to 2 Ed. 3. 5.

Force.
LXXVII. Crompt. 75. Tho one Justice may execute the said Statute, 8 H. 6. 9. of
Forcible Entry, its better to have two or more to avoid partiality.

Joynder.
LXXVIII. Lambert 3. cap. 1. p. 308, 309. It is universally true that whatsoever
thing one Justice of the Peace alone is permitted to do either for the
conservation of Peace, or in the Execution of the Commission or Statutes, the
same also may be no less lawfully performed by two or more Justices, except it
be in a very few Cases, where some Statutes do seem especially to appropriate
the Execution thereof to some one certain Justice, either in respect that he is
next to the place eldest of the Quorum, or the like.

Riot.
LXXIX. Lambert 318. If two Justices of the Peace without the Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, shall see certain persons in doing any Riot, they may cause them
to be Arrested, and may make a Record of that Offense, whereof the parties
shall be for ever concluded, Fitzh. J. P. 9. whereto he adds in his Book of
Justices of Peace fol. 17. that if two such Justices shall make such a Record,
where in truth they saw no such Riot, that yet the parties shall be Estopt, and
are without remedy, 8 H. 6. 14. 1. N. 11. Crompt. 199. ab.

LXXX. Lamb. 329. Any two Justices of the Peace, Apprentice.
upon complaint that any Servant retained by the Statute departs before the
end of his Term, or at the end thereof without a Quarters warning: or that any
person compellable by the Statute to serve, does refuse to serve for the Wages
appointed, may examine the matter, and finding such Servant or Person faulty
may commit him to Ward, there to remain till he shall be bound to the party
offended, to serve and continue according to the Statute, 5 Eliz. 4. 9. N. 5.
Crumpt. 198. Dalt. 21. cap. 6 and 154. cap. 66.

LXXXI. Lamb. 330. Poor.
Any two Justices of the Peace may make Testimonial to a Serving-man that is
turned away from his Master, or whose Master is dead, 14 Eliz. 5.. N. 18 Eliz.
3. N. Crumpt. 198.

LXXXII. Lamb. 330. Apprentice.
Any two Justices of the Peace may give assent to the Church^Wardens and
Overseers, or to the greater part of them, to bind as Apprentices the Children
of poor Parents, Men till XXIV, and Women till XXI, 39 Eliz. 3. N.

LXXXIII. Lamb. 330. Drapery.
Any two Justices of the Peace may dispose of the monys rising by the deceitful
stretching of the Northern Cloth, etc. 39 Eliz. 20.

LXXXIV. Lamb. 330. Poor.
Any two Justices of the Peace may by Warrant under their Hands and Seals,
cause to be Levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the Offender, all Fines
and Forfeitures that shall grow by the confession of the Offender, or by proofs
of two lawful and sufficient Witnesses before them upon this Statute of Rogues,
39 Eliz. 4. 11. N. 2.

LXXXV. Lamb. 330. Ale.
Any two Justices of the Peace may give allowance for urgent and necessary
occasions, to remain in an Inn, Victualing house, or Alehouse, 1 Jac. 9. 2. N.
5.

LXXXVI. Lamb. 331. Corn.
Any two Justices of Peace may duly Convict by two Witnesses, or by the Party's
confession, any person that shall disturb the restraint of Maulting made in
open Sessions, and shall commit him to Prison without Bail or Mainprise for
three days, and until that he become bound in 40 li. to some one Justice to
perform such restraint, 39 Eliz. 16. 1. N 2.

LXXXVII. Lamb. 331. License.
Such two Justices may License diseased Persons living of Alms, to travel
without begging to Bath, or to Buckstone for remedy of their Griefs, 39 Eliz.
4. 7. N. 1. Crumpt. 198, ab 199. b.

LXXXVIII. Lamb. 331. By the oversight of any two Justices, Ways.
and XII discreet Men of the Hundred and Hundreds adjoining, any person within
the Weald of Kent may make in his own Land a new Highway, more Commodious then
the old, 14 H. 8. 6. 2. N. 1. Crumpt. 198. b.

LXXXIX. Lamb. 331. Drapery.
Two such Justices may once every year appoint Overseers for that whole year
following, of Cloth to be made or sold in any Town not being Corporate, and may
charge them upon their Oaths to see execution of some parts of the Statute yet
in force, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 2. 9. N. 1. Crumpt. 198. b. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

XC. Lamb. 331, 332. Within six days after Accusation had, Religion.
That any person has disturbed a Preacher, and after his committing to safe
custody by one Justice of the Peace, another Justice of that Shire must join
with him in the Examination of the Offender, and may proceed to find him Guilty
by his own confession, or by two Witnesses, and thereupon commit him to the
next Goal for three months, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. 5. N. 3. Crumpt. 198. b.
Dalt. 102. cap. 41. and 154. cap. 66.

XCI. Lamb. 332, 333. Foul Games.
All the offenses committed against 1 Jac. 27. made against shooting in
Hand-Guns, and for the preservation of the Game of Fesants and Partridges, and
against the destroying of Hares with Harepipes, and tracking Hares in the Snow
may be examined, heard, punished, and determined by any two Justices of Peace
out of the Sessions, Dalt. 87. cap. 37. and 154. cap. 66.

Taxes.
XCII. Lamb. 333. If any person that ought to be set to the Subsidy, do by craft
or cunning escape the Taxation, and that be proved before two Justices of Peace
of that County, then shall he be charged at the double value of so much as he
ought to have been Taxed at, and shall further be punished at the discretion of
the said Justices, 39 Eliz. 27.. N. And diverse former Acts of Subsidy.

Pope.
XCIII. Lamb. 333. Any two Justices of the Peace of the County where any of His
Majesty's Subjects (not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other Priest,
Religious or Ecclesiastical person, etc) now being, or which hereafter shall be
of or brought up in any College of Jesuits, or Seminaries, shall arrive within
six months next after Proclamation to be made in that behalf in the City of
London, under the Great Seal of England, may within two days next after such
Return, receive his submission under the Oath, (1 Eliz. 1. 19.) 27 Eliz. 2. 5.
N. 1.

Pope.
XCIV. Lamb. 333, 334. Any two Justices of Peace may require any Popish
Recusant, not making submission according to this Statute, to abjure the Realm
upon his Corporal Oath before them, 35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 4.

Pope.
XCV. Lamb. 334. Any two Justices of the Peace of the County where he shall
arrive, may take the submission of a person reconciled to the Sea of Rome
within six days after such persons return into this Realm, and minister the
Oath set forth, 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 4. and 3 Jac. 4. 24. N. 1. And are to
certify the same Oaths so taken at the next Quarter Sessions, upon pain of
forfeiture of 40 li.

Pope.
XCVI. Lamb. 334. Any two Justices of the Peace may search the Houses and
Lodgings of every Popish Recusant Convict, or of every person whose Wife is a
Popish Recusant Convict, for Popish Books, and Relics of Popery, and deface
them, or if of value reserve to the General Sessions, 3 Jac. 5. 26. N. 1.

Bail.
XCVII. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 13. 3. N. 1. Any Arrested for suspicion of
Manslaughter, or Felony, shall not be let to Bayl or Mainprise by any Justices
of Peace if it be not in open Sessions, except it be by two Justices of Peace
at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the same Justices to be
present together at the time of the said Baylment or Mainprise, etc. Lamb. 339.
Crumpt. 198. b.

Joyndre.
XCVIII. Lamb. 343, 344. Out of Sessions, and before Indictment a Justice of
Peace was no Judge of Record by the Commission, unless the Party were Prisoner,
etc. And on the other side, It seems that two Justices of the Peace, the one
of them being of the Quorum, may out of the Sessions Bayl such as come into
Prison by the Process of the Sessions made upon Penal Laws, not forbidding
Bayl, because two such Justices be competent Judges of all those matters,
insomuch as they may hear and determine them.

Ale.
XCIX. Lamb. 349. Two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quortum) may
prohibit and remove common Ale-selling, and may also allow the same, taking
Bond with Surety by Recognizance for good rule to be kept in such Alehouse,
etc. by their discretion: And may also Commit and Imprison, for three days,
those that keep common Ale-selling of their own heads, against Prohibition, or
without Allowance thereof, and may after take Recognizance of them, with two
Surties, that they shall keep none, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 1. N. 2. Crumpt. 198,
199. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

Measures. Weights.
C. Lamb. 351, 352. Two Justices of the Peace, so that the one be of the Quorum,
may by Examination or Inquiry, hear and determine the defaults of Head-Officers
in Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns, that do not twice yearly view and
examine Weights and Measures, and break and burn the defective: As also the
defaults of Buyers and Sellers by other Weights and Measures then they ought to
do, and may break and burn the defective Weights and Measures, and Amerce and
Fine the Offenders by their discretion, and make Process against them, as if
they were Indicted of Trespass against the Peace, 11 H. 7. 4. 1. N. 13. 12 H.
7. 5.. N. Crumpt. 199. b. Dalt. 22. cap. 6. and 154. cap. 66.

CI. Lamb. 352. Two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum,
Sheriffs.
may take the Oath of the Undersheriff of their County before that he meddle
with the exercise of that Office, as well of Supremacy, 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 4. as
of Office, 27 Eliz. 12.. N.

CII. Lamb. 352. Poor.
The Bishop and his Chancellor shall call the two Justices of Peace next
inhabiting to any Hospital, to assist them in taking the account of such as
have had the Collection of the Revenues and Profits of such Hospital, and they
three may charge the Accountant under penalty to lose such Sum of Money as they
shall think meet to account, and not to delay it, etc. 14 Eliz. 5.. N. and 39
Eliz. 18.

CIII. Lamb. 352, 353. Two Justices of the Peace, Bastard.
the one being of the Quorum, in or next to the limits where the Parish Church
is, in which a Bastard Child left to the charge of the Parish shall be born,
ought to take order by their discretion, as well for the relief of the Parish
and keeping of the Child, as also for the punishment of the Mother, and reputed
Father thereof, 18 Eliz. 3. 2. 2. N. Crumpt. 199. Dalt. 37. cap. 11.

CIV. Lamb. 353. Two Justices of Peace, the one being of the Quorum, Tithes.
upon complaint by any competent Judge of Tithes, for any misdemeanour of the
Defendant in a suit of Tithes, may cause him to be attached or committed to
Ward, till he find Surety unto him by Recognizance to the King's use, to obey
the Process and Sentence of that Judge, 27 H. 8. 20. 1. N. 7. Crumpt. 200.

CV. Lamb. 353. Tithes.
Also upon complaint in writing by an Ecclesiastical Judge, that has given
definitive Sentence in Case of Tithes, against one which wilfully refuses to
pay the Tithes, or Sums of Money so adjudged, two such Justices may cause the
party to be attached and committed to the next Goal, till he find such Surety
as is aforesaid to perform that Sentence, 32 H. 8. 7. 4. N. 1. Certificat. Br.
31.

CVI. Lamb. 353, 354. Fresh Suit^
After Execution had for the party Robbed against the Men of the Hundred, and
upon complaint made by them so charged, two Justices of the Peace, one being of
the Quorum, of the same County, inhabiting within the said Hundred, or near
unto it, where any such Execution shall be had, may Assess and Tax, ratably and
proportionably by their discretions all and every the Towns, Parishes, Villages
and Hamlets, as well of the said Hundred, as of the Liberties within the same,
toward an equal Contribution to be had for the relief of them, against whom
such Execution was had, Dalt. 22. cap. 6. 27 Eliz. 13.. 5. N. 1.

CVII. Lamb. 354. Two Justices of Peace, Ways.
whereof one to be of the Quorum, which were present at the Session wherein any
person was Convicted for any offense against the Statute 27 Eliz. 19. 2. N. 3.
of Highways within the Wield of Kent, Surry, or Sussex, may make Warrant for
levying the forfeits thereof to any Officer, and they also may appoint by their
discretion such ways and means to levy the doubles, for not paying those
forfeits within twenty days next after lawful demand of the same by such
Officer, 39 Eliz. 19. 4. N. 6.

CVIII. Lamb. 354. Poor.
Any two Justices of the Peace have power to hear and determine all Causes that
shall grow in Question by the Statute of Rogues, 39 Eliz. 4. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.
and 154. cap. 66.

CIX. Lamb. 354. Two Justices of Peace of, or near the place to which a
Soldier, or Mariner comes with a Testimonial of one Justice of Peace, shall
take order by their discretion for setting to work, or relieving of him, if he
cannot of himself get work there, or employ himself in lawful course of Life,
39 Elizab. 17.. 6. N. 1. Dalton 22. cap. 6.

Drapery.
CX. Lamb. 355. Two Justices of Peace dwelling next any City, or Town where any
Retailer of Woollen Cloth shall present unto them any defective Cloth against
this Statute, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 6.. 31. N. 1. being conferred with 4 and 5 Phil.
and Mar. 5. 34. N. 1. shall cause the same to be cut into three equal parts,
whereof the one to be to the King, and the other to the Presenters, and the
third to the Justices themselves, Crumpt. 200. Dalt. 21. cap. 6. and 154. cap.
66.

Admiral.
CXI. Lamb. 355. No Fisherman shall be taken to serve as a Mariner by the
King's Commission, but by the choice of two Justices of the Peace adjoining to
the place where he is to be taken, 5 Eliz. 5. 43. N. 1. Crumpt. 200. Dalt* 86.
cap. 34.

Woods.
CXII. Lamb. 355. Two Justices of Peace, not being of Kindred, Alliance, Counsel
or Fee to the Lord, or Owner of a wood appointed by the more part of the
Justices of Peace at their Sessions, upon complaint of the Lord made unto them,
may divide and set out the fourth part of it, if the Lord and Commoners
thereof, being first called before them, cannot agree upon it, 35 H. 8. 17. 7.
N. 2. Crumpt. 200. ab.

Amerciaments
CXIII. Lamb. 335, 336. Two Justices of the Peace, whereof the one to be of the
Quorum, appointed by the Custos Rotulorum, or by the eldest of the Quorum in
his absence, are to Oversee and Control the Sheriffs Books, and Amerciaments;
and the Estreats of the said Amerciaments are to be made by Indentures betwixt
them and the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, and to be sealed with their Seals; and
they may, upon suggestion, make Process, as in an Action of Trespass, against
the offenders to answer, 11 H. 7. 15. 1. N. 17. Crumpt. 200. b.

Poor.
CXIV. Lamb. 356, 357. Two or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, dwelling in or near the Parish, or Division where the Parish is,
must nominate yearly in Easter week, or within one month after Easter, under
their Hands and Seals, four, three or two, etc. to be Overseers of the poor,
and the Churchwardens, and Overseers, with the consent of two or more such
Justices of Peace, set the Poor on work, Tax Inhabitants, and bind Children
out, excuse to be allowed by two Justices, and accounts yearly, etc. And two
such Justices may Tax any other Parish within the Hundred to contribute, to
levy, and in default to commit, 42 Eliz. 2. 1. N. 1. etc. Dalt. 154. cap. 66.

Drapery.
CXV. Lamb. 357. The offenses of Clothiers or others in not paying so much Wages
to their Weavers, Spinsters, etc. as shall be rated according to this Act,
being confessed by the Offender, or proved by two sufficient Witnesses before
two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, the person
offending shall forthwith stand Convicted thereof, and the forfeiture of 10 s.
to the party grieved, to be levied by Distress and Sale, by Warrant from the
same Justices, 1 Jac. 6. 7. N. 2. Dalt. 21. cap. 6. and 156. cap. 66.

Poor.
CXVI. Lamb. 357. Any two Justices of Peace of any City, Borough, Town
Corporate, and places Privileged, may Assess the Inhabitants thereof at such
reasonable Taxes as they shall think fit, for relief of persons Infected with
the Plague, and dwelling in houses Infected, to be levied by Warrant of two
such Justices of Peace, and in default of Goods to commit, etc. 1 Jac. 31. 2.
N. 1. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

Pope.
CXVII. Lamb. 358. Two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum, may
require any person of Eighteen years of Age, or above, Convict or Indicted for
Recusancy, for not repairing to Divine Service, or which has not received the
Sacrament twice within the year then next past, or any unknown person passing
through the County, confessing, or not denying, being Examined upon Oath, him
or her self to be a Recusant, or that he or she received not the Sacrament,
other then Noblemen or Noblewomen, to take the Oath in this Statute appointed,
and are to certify in writing at the next Quarter Sessions the names and place
of persons so taking the Oath, and to commit refusers to the common Goal
without Bail until next Assizes, or Quarter Sessions, 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 2. etc.
Dalt. 87. cap. 36.

CXVIII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 24. 2. N. 1. No person to make Felts, Apparel.
Hats or Coverlets, but by License by Mayor, Recorder, Steward, and two
Justices of Peace of the said City of Norwich, or by four of them, etc. Lambert
359.

CXIX. 35 H. 8. 11. 4. N. 1. Provided, Wales.
That two Justices in every County of Wales and Monmouth may Tax Inhabitants
for Wages of Citizens and Burgesses of Parliament, Lamb. 359.

CXX. 11 H. 7. 9. 1. N. 5. None to let Ferm in Tindal and Examshire, Peace.
till Lessee with two Sureties of 40 s. per Annum be bound to the King by
Recognizance in 20 li. before two Justices of the Peace of Northumberland,
Quorum unus, to appear on six days notice before them, or at any Sessions, etc.
Lamb. 359.

CXXI. Lamb. 359. Purveyors.
That two Justices have power on 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 15.. N. and 13 Eliz.
21.. N. for prohibition of Purveyors within five miles of either of the
Universities.

CXXII. Lamb. 359. Two Justices of Peace, one of the Quorum, Ways.
have power on 14 H. 8. 6.. N. and 26 H. 8. 7.. N. for laying out new Highways
in Kent and Sussex.

CXXIII. Lamb. 359. Two Justices, Quorum unus, have power for repair of Cardiff
Bridge, 23 Eliz. 11.. N.

CXXIV. Lamb. 359. The like for the making of the Bridge of Wilton over Wye in
the County of Hereford, 39 Eliz. 24.

CXXV. Lamb. 359. The like for repair of Chepstow Bridge, 3 Jac. 23.

CXXVI. 35 Eliz. 6. 2. N. 4. Cottages.
None to Erect new Building for Habitation within three Miles of London, except
Assess'd to Subsidy at 5 li. Goods or 3 li. Lands, or shall be adjudged by the
two next Justices of Peace by writing, under their Hands and Seals, to be fit
and able to be Assessed in the Subsidy at that rate, etc. Lamb. 359.

CXXVII. Crumpt. 199. b. Two Justices of Peace may give License to Fencers,
Bearwards, Common-Players in Enterludes, Minstrels, Juglers, License.
Pedlers, Tinkers, and petty Chapmen to go, so that they shall not be taken for
Rogues, 14 Eliz. 5. 39. Eliz. 4.. N.

CXXVIII. Lamb. 360. Riot.
Three Justices of the Peace one of them being of the Quorum, may discharge out
of Prison any Person committed thither for his Offense in not declaring to a
Justice within 24 hours that he was moved to join in any unlawful Assembly
contrary to 1 Mar. 1. St. 3. cap. 12.. 11. N. 1. and 1 Eliz. 17.. N. Crumpt. b.

CXXIX. Lamb. 360. Apprentice.
It is requisite that the Certificate that is to be made to the head Officer of
a City, or Town Corporate, where a Child is to be put Apprentice to a Merchant,
Mercer, Draper, Goldsmith, Ironmonger, Imbroyderer or Clothier, that the Father
or Mother of such Child, may dispend forty Shillings freehold by the year, be
under the Hands and Seals of three Justices of the Peace, where the Lands lie,
5 Eliz. 4.. 27. N 2. Crumpt. 200. b.

CXXX. Lamb. 360. 361. Four Justices of Peace of the County, Pope.
Limit or Division, where a Recusant is confined according to the Statute of 35
Eliz. 1.. N. With the assent in writing of the Bishop of the Diocese, or of the
Lieutenant or Deputy Lieutenant of the same County, under their hands and
Seals, may give license to such Recusant, to travail about his necessary
business according to the limitation of the same license (the Party licenced,
first taking his Oath, that he has truly informed them of the Cause of his
Journey, and that he shall not make any causless stays 3 Jac. 5.. N.

Poor ways.
CXXXI. Lamb. 361. The Bishop and his Chancellor and three such Justices of the
Peace, have power to examine how money or other relief appointed by King H. 8.
or any other to the use of the Poor, or of amending of Highways, or Bridges is
bestowed, and to call to account the Detainers thereof, 14 Eliz. 5.. N. 29
Eliz. 18.. N. Crumpt. 200. b.

Religion.
CXXXII. Lamb. 361. It seems that three such Justices of the Peace, may out of
the Sessions, take Information and Accusation by the Oaths of two honest
Persons, against such as shall deprave the Sacrament of the Body and Blood, of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ against the Statute, and Examine them what
other Witnesses were then by, and to bind them all by recognizance to give in
Evidence at the day of Trial, 1 Ed. 6. 1.. N. but enquire of this matter, Dalt.
133. 134. cap. 49. Crumpt. 124. a.

Ways.
CXXXIII. Lamb. 361. 362. Four Justices of the Peace whereof one to be of the
Quorum, may where a decayed Bridge is, and where it cannot be proved who or
what Lands be chargeable to the repairing thereof, tax the Inhabitants, make
Collectors, and appoint Overseers for the amendment of the same etc. 22 H. 8.
5. Crumpt. 200. b. 125.

Imprisonment
CXXXIV. Lamb. 362. Six Justices of the Peace may in sundry Shires, take order
for the common Goals whereof the Sheriff shall have the Custody, and to the
which Murderers, and Felons, etc. shall be sent, and may do and perform diverse
incidents thereto by the Statutes, 23 H. 8. 2.. N. and 13 Eliz, 25.. N. Crumpt.
200. b. 201. a.

Sewers.
CXXXV. Lamb. 362. Six Justices of the Peace two of them being of the Quorum may
for a whole year after the expiration of any Commission of Sewers, execute the
Laws of the Commissioners of Sewers, unless that a new Commission of Sewers be
published within the year, 13 Eliz. 9.. N. Dalt. 134, cap. 50. Crumpt. 201.

Wales.
CXXXVI. 34 and 35 H. 8. 26.. 57. N. 1. The Justices of Peace in Wales, or two
of them at the least whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall and may keep their
Sessions within the limits of their Commissions four times in the year, and at
other times upon urgent Causes, as Justices of Peace in England use to do, and
shall have like Power and Authority in all things and fees, etc. Lamb. 362. so
in Cheshire by, 27 H. 8. 5.. 7. N. 1.

Forfeiture.
CXXXVII. Lamb. 365. 366. The Statutes do now and then correct the dullness of
these Justices with some strokes of the Rod or Spur, and therefore generally if
a Justice of Peace will not give remedy to a Party grieved in any thing that he
may hear, determine or execute, then upon complaint to the Justices of Assize,
or to the Lord Chancellor, he shall not only be put out of the Commission by
the Lord Chancellor, but shall also be punished according to his demerits, 4 H.
7. 12.. 1. N. 5. Crumpt. 144. Lamb. 94. 95.

Sheriff.
CXXXVIII. Lamb. 293. The Custos Rotulorum, or the Eldest of the Quorum in his
absence ought at the general Sessions after St. Michael, to appoint two
Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum, to have the Oversight and
Controlment of the Sheriffs entering of Plaints and Amerciaments, and one of
those Justices may Examine, and without further enquiry convict the Gatherers
of the same Amerciaments, if they gather any more Money then is contained in
their lawful Estreats, 11 H. 7, 15.. 1. N. 20. Dalt. 136. 137. cap. 51. Crumpt.
195.. 10.

Sessions.
CXXXIX. Lamb. 4. cap. 1. page 373. A Sessions of the Peace, is an Assembly of
any two or more Justices of the Peace (one of them being of the Quorum at a
certain day and place within the limits of their Commission appointed to
enquire by a Jury, or otherwise to take knowledge and thereupon to proceed to
hear and determine according to their power for Causes within their Commission
and the Statutes referred to their Charge.

CXL. Lamb. 375. Indictments.
The Justices of Peace do at their Sessions take Knowledge of Causes within
their Jurisdiction, either by the Oath of the Inquirers or by the presentment
or declaration of other Men; and this Inquiry is first prepared by the
appearance of the Officers and Country: and by the Articles given in Charge,
and then performed by the Presentment or Indictment of them that had the Charge
to make it.

CXLI. Lamb. 375. 376. Now albeit that these Sessions be commonly and most
orderly summoned by a Precept in writing, Process.
yet is it not altogether of necessity for the making of a lawful Sessions to
have it so, for if competent Justices of the Peace do get men to serve, and
thereupon do hold a Sessions without any Precept before directed, all
presentiments made before them by twelve lawful men shall be of force in Law:
but no man shall lose any thing for his default of appearance there, because no
man had notice of their sitting by Marrow.

CXLII. Lamb. 376. Sessions.
A Precept to Summon the General Sessions of the Peace, etc.

Kanc. ss.
E. H. Miles and R. H. armig' Duo Justiciar' Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' K.
conservand' nec non ad diversas felonias transgressiones and alia malefacta in
dicto Comitatu perpetratu Audiend' and terminand' assignat' vicecom. ejusdem
comitat' Salutem. Ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi precipimus quod non omittas
propter aliquem libertatem in Balliva tua quin eam ingrediaris: and venire
facias coram nobis vel sociis nostris Justiciariis pacis, etc. tali die, etc.
proxime futuro apud Maidstone in Com' predicto tam 24 probos and legales
homines de Quolibet hundredo in Balliva tua quum 24 milites and alios probos
and legales homines de corpore Comitatus* tui tam infra libertates quum extra
quorum Quilibet habeat xl. s. redditus terrarum and tenement. liberum per Annum
ad minus ad Inquirendum and ibidem super hiis quae ex part dicti Domini Regis
iis injungentur; scire facias etiam omnibus coronatoribus comitatus tui
seneschallis constabulariis, subconstabulariis and Ballivis libertatum Infra
hundreda and libertates predicta quod sint tunc ibi ad faciend' and perimplend'
ea quae ratione officiorum suorum sunt facienda: proclamari preterea facias per
totam Ballivam tuam in locis Idoneis predictam Sessionem pacis ad diem and
locum predict' fore tenendum and tu ipse tunc sis ibidem ad faciendum and
exercendum ea quae ad officium tuum pertinent' and habeas ibi tunc tam nomina
Juratorum Coronatorum senechallorum Constabulorum subconstabulariorum and
Ballivorum predict' quum hoc preceptum Datum sub sigillis nostris apud
Shoreland in Com. predict' 16 Maii An. Regni etc.

Lamb. 614. of special Sessions Dalt. 532. 533. cap. 185. the new Edition.

CXLIII. Lamb. 377. 378. Joyndre.
This Preceipt may be made as here it is by any two Justices of the Peace, so
that the one of them be of the Quorum, for two such may hold a Session of the
Peace, as it does plainly appear by the Commission, and therefore as Mr. Marrow
says, it suffices not to have it run under the name of the Custos Rotulorum
alone, seeing that he has no more Authority in this behalf then any one of his
fellows has for the words of the said Mandamus in the Commission. 17. to the
Sheriff be coram nobis* venire facias tot and tales etc. yea if two such
Justices make a Precept for a Session of the Peace, all their fellow Justices
cannot discharge it by their Supersedeas, but a Supersedeas out of the Chancery
will discharge it, says Fitz. Crumpt. 122. b.. 1.

CXLIV. Lamb. 378. If one Justice of the Peace alone, Estoppel.
will take upon him to hold a Session of the Peace that was lawfully summoned
by him and another such Justice, and will make the style of the Session in the
names of himself and the other, all presentiments so taken before him may be
avoided, 11 H. 7. 5. Records, Br. 81. But if the Sessions be in truth holden by
two sufficient Justices only, and the style or title thereof be made in the
names of three, then all the presentiments before them shall stand good: for it
will not help the Party to say that one of the three was not there, when it
shall appear that two of them, the one being of the Quorum, were present, which
will suffice by Marrow.

Lieu.
CXLV. Lamb. 378. 379. The Place of holding them is Arbitrable and at the
pleasure of the Justices themselves, so that it be meet for Access, and
although the Precept do appoint the Sessions to be holden in some one Town by
name, yet may the Justices keep it in any other Town, and all the presentiments
shall be good that shall be taken where they held it, but then again no
Amerciament can be set upon any man for his default of appearance there,
because he had no warning of it by Marrrw.

Process.
CXLVI. Lamb. 376. So if two such Justices make a Precept for a Session to be
holden in one Town, and two other Justices make another Precept for another
Session to be holden at another Town, or in another part of the same Town the
same day, then the presentiments taken before either of them shall be good by
Marrow, and then also it seems, that he that serves at the one Session as a
Juror or Officer shall be excused for his default at the other, etc. Crumpt.
123. b.. 20. Dalt. 532. cap. 185.. 4.

Amerciament.
CXLVII. Lamb. 380. The Justices of the Peace be so necessary as without them,
tho all others should appear no Session can be kept, and yet if any of them be
absent their fellow Justices cannot Amerce them as the Justices of Assize may
do, Inter pares non de potestas, and the Authority of all the Justices of the
Peace at the Sessions is equal, so that like power has he which is not of the
Quorum, with him that is, except it be in special Cases set forth in the
Commission and Statutes, and therefore it was holden 3 H. 7. Justice of Peace
Fitzh. 3. that if one which is not of the Quorum will be so bold, as to rebuke
one that is of the Quorum, he, and his Companions may not Commit him to Prison
for it.

Riot.
CXLVIII. 381. And albeit the power of the Justices be joint at the Sessions,
yet to some purpose each one has a distinct power by himself also, for if one
of them sitting in his Judicial place shall see a Riot, he may cause the
Parties to be Arrested, and may also Record the Riot, whereby they shall be so
concluded as they shall have no answer to it, Justice of P. Fitzh. 9.

Appearance.
CXLIX. Lamb. 381. The Recognitors that stand bound to the keeping of the Peace,
and to appear at the Sessions, and such like, be commonly tied unto the Quarter
Sessions etc. and those Prisoners that are sent by Justices of the Peace for
Felony, or Manslaughter, or Suspicion thereof, or be let to Bail, or Mainprise
upon any such Offense, be for the most part reserved till the Jail-delivery,
etc. the rest of that Kind may be brought forth at every Sessions of the Peace.

Peace.
CL. Lamb. 382. Amongst the Offices that owe ordinary attendance at the Sessions
the Custos Rotulorum has worthily the first place, both for that he is always
a Justice of the Quorum in the Commission, and amongst them of the Quorum: a
man for the most part especially picked out, either for Wisdom, Countenance, or
Credit, and yet in this behalf he bears the Person if an Officer and ought to
attend by himself or his Deputy for the words of the Commission,. 18. be to him
now by his proper name quod ad dies, and loca predicta, Brevia processus and
indictamenta predict' coram te and dictis sociis tuis venire facias, whereas
until 14 Rich. 2. that charge was general to all the Justices, and not laid
specially upon any one Person in the Commission, as it does appear in the Tower
by the Records.

Commission.
CLI. Lamb. 382. 383. Marrow says, that seeing the other Justices may hold a
Session wlthout him, it is meet then they should have the Commission with them,
but Coke in 9 Ed. 4. 2. holds that a Justice of the Peace in making any
justification by virtue of his Office, needs not to show the Commission of
the Peace, because the keeping thereof belongs to the Custos Rotulorum, and
for the same cause also the Bailiff of a Justice of Peace shall not be driven
to show the Commission, as it seems, 14 H. 7. 7. monstr. Br. 63.

CLII. Lamb. 383. Record.
But under the name of the Records of the Sessions of the Peace, I do not
comprehend all manner of Records concerning the Peace, but those only which
ought to be at the Sessions of the Peace, as Bills, Plaints, Informations,
Indictments, Presentiments, the Rolls of Processes, Trials, Judgments,
Executions, and all other the Acts of the Sessions of the Peace themselves, and
furthermore the Ingrossement of the rates of Servants wages: all Recognizances
of the Peace and Good abearing, Recognizances concerning Felonies and
Alehouse-keepers, and such like as ought to be certifyed or brought to the
Sessions of the Peace, must be numbered amongst the Records of the Sessions of
the Peace, for of all these there may be use at the Sessions, and therefore the
Custos Rotulorum or some for him ought to be ready there to show them, Lamb.
388.

CLIII. Lamb. 384. Recognizance.
Now although it were before-time at the liberty of a Justice of the Peace to
certify a Recognizance of the Peace to the Custos Rotulorum as 2 H. 7. 1. yet
now by 3 H. 7. 1.. 1. N. 26. he ought to certify, send, or bring the same, to
the next Sessions of the Peace, that the Party may be called, and to the end
also that his default, if he make any, may be Recorded, and by such record of
his default he is concluded to say that he appeared there, 13 Ed. 4.

CLIV. Lamb. 384. 385. As for Precepts for surety of the Peace, Records.
the special Records for conviction of forcible Entries, Riots and such like,
as be made out of the Sessions of the Peace by particular Justices, and be to
remain with themselves and not appointed to be certified thither, I cannot
reckon them in the number of the Records of the Sessions, Kell. 41. pl. 6. no
more then I may well do the Inrolements of Bargains and Sales, and such other
Records lying in the Charge of the Custos Rotulorum, or Clerk of the Peace.

CLV. Lamb. 390. Appearance.
Furthermore the Coroner (as the common form of the Precept shows, and the
Stat. 27 H. 8. 5.. N. presumes) ought to be present at the Sessions, but yet
that is not for to certify their Inquisitions which ought by 1 and 2 Ph. and
Mar. 13.. N. to be done at the General Jail-delivery, nor yet to receive any
approver, for neither that belongs to the Justices of Peace 9 H. 4. 1. but it
is only, says Mr. Marrow, because the Coroners be Parties to the Exigents, and
be Judges of the outlary, howbeit they are besides that Conservators of the
Peace also, and may in Cases commit men to Prison, and therefore ought to be at
the Sessions to object against them.

Ibid. Sheriffs.
The Sheriff in like manner ought to attend at those Sessions for the double
duty that he bears, the one as Sheriff to return the Precept, to take the
charge of Prisoners, and to serve the Court, otherwise as he has in charge by
the Mandamus in the Commission. 17. the other because he also has care and
charge of the Peace, see supra 142.

CLVI. Lamb. 391. Ordinary.
But the Ordinary owes not his attendance at any Sessions of the Peace, as he
does at every Jail-delivery, in the Opinion of Mr. Marrow, indeed he is not
warned by the common form of Precept, and therefore cannot so conveniently take
knowledge of the Sessions of the Peace, howbeit I think that he ought to serve
when he shall be called for matter of Clergy, Poult. de pace, 215. pl. 38.
Lamb. 543. 544.

CLVII. Lamb. 395. 396. Inquest.
The Justices ought not to commit these Jurors of Enquiry to any Keeper, nor to
keep them without Meat or Drink, nor to carry them out of the Town, and yet
they may adjorn them to another place to give their Verdict.

CLVIII. Lamb. 397. 398. All others also may freely attend there, Privilege.
if not for any thing that especially concerns themselves, yet for the
advancement of public Justice, and for the service of the King, and to this
end they are invited thither (as I may say) by a certain freedom of Access, and
by protection from common Arrest, a thing that is incident to each Court of
Record, and without the which Justice should be greatly hindered, so that if a
man come voluntarily to these Sessions with the mind either to prefer any Bill
of Indictment, or to give Information against another, or to tender a Fine upon
an Endictment, touching himself, or do come compelled, to make appearance for
the saving of his Bond, and be arrested by the Sheriff upon common and original
process in his coming thither, or during his tarrying there, it seems that
uopn Examination of the matter under his Oath, he shall be dismissed thereof by
the Privilege of this Court, even as it is used in the higher Courts at Westminster.
1 H. 7. 12, etc. 2 H. 7. 4. privilege Br. 35. Boult. 2. cap. 3. page 8.. 36.
Crumpt. 141. b.

Inquest.
CLIX. Lamb. 399. The Justices of Peace, says Mr. Fitzherbert, for their parts
be bound to inform the People, and no doubt the Charge is given as well to
instruct those that be ignorant lest they offend unawares, as to inquire of
those that have already fallen into danger by Offense, and thereof it is that
many Statutes do expressly command that they shall be openly read or declared at
the Sessions.

Charge.
CLX. Lamb. 400. The manner of giving the Charge and receiving the Verdict at
this day, differs from that which the Justices in Air were wont to use, for
you may see in Bract. 116. a. that first one of the Justices did open before
the whole Assembly, the benefits of the service in hand, the commodities of
keeping the Peace, and the Evils of the contrary, and that then the Articles of
the Charge were read, by one and one to the Jurors (who receiving the same at
the hands of the Justices, did also make answer in the yiedling up of their
verdict to each Article severally, and by it self, which Custom as it had many
profits, so is it worthy in mine Opinion to be recontinued and brought in ure
again, Crumpt. 11. a. b. Boult. 2. cap. 4. page 9.

Jurisdiction.
CLXI. Lamb. 403. I know that Mr. Fitzh. was of opinion, that the Justices of
the Peace ought at their Quarter Sessions, and might at their private Sessions,
give in charge to the Enquest all such matters as they have power to determine,
and this he urges as well by the Oaths of the Justices who are sworn to do
right in all Causes within their Commission or Statutes, as also by the
ignorance of the Jurors who be instructed only by the Charge, which if it be
so, I see not for my part how either these Justices that are bound to utter
all, can be discharged, or the Jurors that ought to hear all, can be informed
without this or some such compendious and plain way, that may both shortly for
the time, and lightsomely for the order, comprehend the chief substance of all
that which belongs to their Inquiry: howbeit as I think it the best, for the
Justices to rehearse all such points whereof the Jury may make presentment
before them, so yet I hold them discharged in my slender opinion, if they
unfold only the Articles of their Commission and of such other Statutes as do
expressly Authorize them to make enquiry.

Indictment.
CLXII. Lamb. 498. I will advise that the Justices shall rather peruse the Bills
after that the Evidence shall be thereupon given to the Jury, then to put their
pens into them before that the Enquest shall be informed, taking it to be not
only no hinderance at all to the service, but also the most wary and secure way
for the Justices themselves to walk.

Sugestion.
CLXIII. Lamb. 500. In some Cases therefore these Justices may hear one another,
for every Justice of Peace may upon his proper knowledge make presentiments at
the Sessions of any Offenses done against 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. and 5 Eliz.
13. Concerning the amendments of the Highways, and in this and such like cases
his report has the force of a Presentment of twelve Men, so that he and his
Fellows may proceed upon it, 21 H. 6. 5.

CLXIV. Lamb. 501. I think that before Justices of Peace, Information.
these Suggestions and Informations both of private Persons, be they by word or
writing, are but of the force to stir up the Justices to recommend the Cause to
the Inquest, and not to Award any Process upon them, unless it be in certain
Cases where that validity is especially given by the Statutes.

CLXV. Lamb. 506. Process.
In the rest of the Statutes ( viz. except 1 Eliz. 2. 3. and 5 Eliz. 1. and 23
Eliz. 1.) so far as I have found their power of Enquiry, is accompanied with
the Authority to hear and determine also, for this want of Jurisdiction is not
found in the Commission of the Peace it self; but only in certain Statutes,
that for weighty Causes do restrain this further proceeding.

CLXVI. Lamb. 507. This Writ of Certiorari is ever directed to the Justices of
Peace, Certiorari.
and yet the Custos Rotulorum only has the keeping of these Records, but the
ancient Commissioners of the Peace had no Custos Rotulorum, especially named in
them, and then this certifying belonged to them, all which form the Writ
retains to this day, and if it fall in Question whether such a Certiorari
were delivered to the Justices of Peace or no, that must be tried says 10 H.
7. 24. by the Verdict of Twelve men.

CLXVII. Lamb. 508, 509. Certificate.
In the making of a Certificate upon this Certiorari, the Justices of Peace
ought neither to omit that which does Authorize them, nor to exceed that
Authority which belongs unto them. For on the one side if they Certify an
Indictment of Felony, or of a Riot as taken Coram Justiciariis ad pacem it was
not thought enough without saying further, necnon ad diversas Felonias, etc.
and otherwise it was doubted, whether the Indicted should be quite dismissed or
no; because the Justices of Peace had then no Record at all remaining with
them, for the Clerk of the Peace makes his Entry accordingly, and that Record
which they sent up is Insufficient; and therefore the Clerk of the Crown was
forbidden to receive any such Certificate 12 H. 7. 25. But happily the new
words in the reformed Commission of the Peace will now dissolve that
Prohibition. On the other side, If they Certify an Indictment of Felony not
determined in B. R. they ought not without Warrant to Certify another Record
of the Acquittal of that Indictee for the same matter, for nothing ought by
them to be sent thither without Warrant, but that which is Executory and
needs the help of that higher Court. 8 Ed. 4. 18.

CLXVIII. Lamb. 512. Process.
The Authority of making Process upon Indictments, is given by express words in
the Commission. And in other Cases where it is not namely given, it is implied
of Congruous or rather of necessity in the words hear and determine, which
cannot be performed, unless the party either do come in Gratis, or be brought
in by the power of Process.

CLXIX. Lamb. 513. In as much as the words of the Commission. Utlary.
Be quousque Capiantur, reddant se aut utlagentur it follows that in all
Cases of Indictments, if the Party be returned insufficient, the Process of
utlary lies against the Offender, if he be not taken before, or do not
otherwise offer and yield himself, and then the power of these Justices ends
with the utlary, for they can make no Capias Vtlagatum, but must certify the
utlary in B. R.

CLXX. Lamb. 520. Process.
The Power of making Process upon Informations proceeds from special
Statutes, and may not therefore vary from their direction although they
themselves do vary very greatly one from anoher.

CLXXI. Lamb. 525. Judgment.
How far this Discretion of Justices in 17 Ed. 4. 4. 1. N. 13. of Tile-makers,
and the word otherwise may be extended in this and such like Cases it cannot
well be foretold, for it is referred unto them, and they must take Counsel ex
re and ex tempore for it.

Proof.
CLXXII. Lamb. 526. This manner of Trial by Examination, is not loosely
permitted to the Justices of the Peace; but in Cases only where either the
Statutes do generally refer the Trial to their Discretions, or else do
specially Authorize them to take the Examinations.

Traverse.
CLXXIII. Lamb. 533. Mr. Brook notes 5 H. 7. 3. Traverse per Br. 182. That it
is not much used to Traverse Indictments before Justices of Peace, but rather
to remove them in B. R. and to Traverse them there, howbeit common Experience
at this day can show many Traverses before Justices of the Peace, also Dalt.
407. Cap. 133. And there is no doubt, but that as Justices of Peace have power
to Award Process, and the Parties also have Liberty to speak for themselves, so
having spoken, the Justices may hear and determine of their Speech, whether it
touch them in Freehold or otherwise.

Sessions.
CLXXIV. Lamb. 532. The Style of the Sessions

Kanc. ss.
Alias scilicet ad (Generalem) Sessionem pacis (Comitatus predict' or tent' pro
Comitat' predict') tent' apud B. in Com' predict' die Martis proxime ante
festum Sancti Mathei Apostoli Anno Regni, etc. Coram J. S. Milite, Vmfrido W.
and aliis sociis suis Justiciariis Dict' Domini Reg' ad pacem in J. M. Comitatu
predict' Conservand' necnon ad diversas Felonias transgressiones and alia
malefacta in eodem Comitatu perpetrat' audiend' and terminand' assignat' per
Sacram duod' Juratorum presentatum existit, etc.

Lamb. presidents. 1. 1.

Coron.
CLXXV. Lamb. 541, 542. It seems by Marrow and Fitz-Herbert, 16. That albeit
two Justices of the Peace, the one of them being of the Quorum, may hear and
try Felonies, yet no Justices of the Peace have Authority to deliver Felons by
Proclamation, or without sufficient acquittal, nor yet to deliver such as be in
Prison for Suspicion of Felony, Crumpt. 122 b.. 5.

Process.
CLXXVI. Lamb. 542. And such Persons if they cannot be Indicted, must either
remain the coming of the Justices of Goal Delivery as the common manner now is,
or else being removed in B. R. they are either to be delivered thence upon the
Writ de Gestu and fama, as the old Order was, or by such other means as they at
this day do use therein.

Days.
CLXXVII. Lamb. 543. It has been thought unmeet that they should Try a Felon
the same day, in which they Awarded the venire facias against the Jury, 22 E.
4. Coron. 44. but that has no necessity, and the Law is now otherwise taken.

Pleadings.
CLXXVIII. Lamb. 544, 545. If a man Utlawed of Felony by Process before the
Justices of Peace, be brought before them, and do allege that he was at the
time of the Utlawry pronounced, out of the Realm in the Kings Service under
such a Captain, or that he was then Imprisoned in another County, they can
neither write to the Captain nor into the County by the opinion of Marrow. But
by 22 H. 8. 14. N. and 32 H. 8. 3. N. all manner of Foreign Pleas triable by
the Country hereafter, to be pleaded by any Person Arraigned upon any
Indictment for any Petty-Treason, Murder or Felony, shall forthwith be Tried
before the same Justices before whom such Persons shall be Arraigned, and by
the same Jurors of the same County that shall Try the said Petty-Treason,
Murder or Felony, without any further respite or delay, in whatsoever place of
the Realm the matter of the same Pleas be supposed or alleged.

Trials.
CLXXIX. Lamb. 545. Thus much only of things, restraining the Justices of Peace
in the Trial of Felonies, wherein also they are not now adays much occupied,
the rather because they commonly defer it till the coming of the Justices of
Assize, by reason that 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 13. N. and 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10.
N. do enjoin them to Certify at the next General Goal Delivery, both the
Examination and Bonds that they shall take concerning Felons, and Suspects that
are brought before them, nevertheless their power is no whit restrained to
proceed before the coming of those Justices.

CLXXX. Lamb. 545. This I may add (not as a restraint, Certificate.
but for the enlargement of the Authority of Justices of the Peace, that if
they see cause, and do write to the Clerk of the Crown of B. R. for the names
of any persons, being otherwhere attainted of Felony by Utlary, or being Clerks
Convicted or Attainted, he ought without delay, and under the pain of 40 s. to
certify the same unto them, together with the Causes of such Attainder or
Conviction, 34 and 35 H. 8. 14.. N.

CLXXXI. Lamb. 561. Judgment.
He that is orderly Convicted before them in their General Sessions, of the
deceitful getting of any Goods into his hands, by means of any false Token or
counterfeit Letter made in the name of any other, may be adjudged by them to
suffer imprisonment, standing on the Pillory, or any other Corporal pain that
they shall appoint, except the pains of death* 33 H. 8. 1. 2. N. 2.

CLXXXII. Lamb. 565, 566. Where the Conviction is for trespasses against the
Peace, Execution.
Riots and such other Contempts and Offenses against the Commission or
Statutes, for the which no certain Fine is appointed, there the Judgment is,
that the prrty shall be taken to satisfy the King for his Fine, and thereupon
the Capias pro fine, if the Party cannot be found, other judicial Process goes
out till he be Ut-lawed, unless it be in a very few Cases, where by the words
of the Statutes themselves, they may proceed to Assess the Fine in the absences
of the parties, without calling them to it by any Process, for so it stands
in 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25.. N. of Alehouses, and 5 Eliz. 13.. N. of Highways: But
if the party be brought in, then is he a Prisoner, and then are the Justices of
Peace by their discretion to Assess the Fine, and to Estreat it, and to deliver
him.

CLXXXIII. Lamb. 568. If the offense be Finable by general words only,
Amerciaments
without speaking of any Fine, or without showing by whom the Fine shall be
Assessed, for so it is commonly in the elder Statutes that do prohibit any
thing to be done, there the Assessment thereof belongs to the Justices,
before whom the Conviction is lawfully had.

CLXXXIV. Lamb. 569. Fines.
This Fine or Pain Awarded by the discretion of the Justices of Peace, shall do
the more good both to the Prince, in profit to the people in Example, and to
the Justices themselves in Credit, if it be pronounced at the Bench openly as
it ought to be, and not shuffled up in a Chamber, or corner secretly, as in
some places it has been used to be.

CLXXXV. Lamb. 570. Process*
But (the mitigation where Fines are certain by Statutes, etc.) in my mind is
so void of sound Reason, that I cannot recommend it to the Justices of Peace,
but do rather condemn it as a mockery of the Law, yea I find that sundry
Statutes (fearing belike some such thing) have specially prevented it,
Commanding that Justices of Peace shall Assess no less Fine then is in those
Statutes themselves beforehand appointed. See Poor 537. Qu. 8.

CLXXXVI. Lamb. 572, 573. Fee^.
And hereby ( viz. by 14 R. 2.11. 1. N. 3. that gives Fees to Eight Justices
levyable by Indenture between Sheriff and them) as I think the Estreats of the
Justices of the Peace be now an immediate Warrant for the Sheriff to levy not
only the Fines and Amerciaments, but also all other Issues, Penalties, Losses,
Forfeitures, and Sums whatsoever, arising before them, such order is taken, 33
H. 8.10.. N. of the six weeks Sessions, for the levying as well of Fines and
Amerciaments, as of Pains, Losses, and Forfeitures of money: So did 2 and 3
Phil. and Mar. 2.. N. of Tillage, by way of admittance, rehearse, That Justices
of the Peace may make out Process for the levying of Fines and Forfeitures
before themselves: So does 31 Eliz. 7.. N. of Cottages appoint: And so are the
Estreats made for the most part, and the Fines and Forfeitures thereby levied
at this present time, if I be not deceived.

Execution.
CLXXXVII. Lamb. 574. Howbeit I do not think that in our Case, this duty of
Estreating is so peculiar to the Clerk of the Peace, but that the Justices of
Peace themselves ought also to have a common and careful Eye unto it, for it is
both specially provided for in the Commission, 16. And also an Article of their
Oath, to see unto the faithful Entry and Certificate of the Issues, Fines,
Forfeitures and Amerciaments that do happen before them; and therefore it were
well done in mine opinion, if the Justices would by turns, or otherwise, both
take knowledge of things that have passed before them; and also take order that
the same be Certified accordingly, lest otherwise it lie altogether in the
Power of the Clerk of the Peace to save or slay, as one said the Sparrow that
he holds closed in his hand.

Information.
CXXXVIII. Lamb. 575. Albeit that the Justices of the Peace have this power to
make Warrant for levying the Amerciaments, Fines, or other Forfeits that grow
unto the King by their Service, yet is it commonly thought that they may not
but in some Cases only, and that by special speech of the Statutes make
Execution, either for him that will sue, or for any other of such part of the
Forfeiture as the Law does afford them.

Certiorari.
CXXXIX. Lamb. 581. But in Cases where Justices of the Peace have power to
receive Indictments, and no power to proceed any further upon them, there they
ought to send up and certify the Indictments themselves, and that of duty, as
I think, without any Certiorari commanding the same, because having no
Authority to hear and try the Offenses, the Records thereof shall be
unprofitable before them, and therefore they can have no just cause to retain
them: And yet for the more surety, it is specially Commanded by 5 Eliz* 1. 3.
N. 2. that they shall certify the Presentiments of some offenses against that
Statute.

CXC. Lamb. 584* 585. The General Sessions of the Peace be those which are
provided for the General Execution of the Authority of the Justices of Peace,
Sessions.
whether you respect the limits of the place within their Commission, or the
bounds of power, proceeding from the Commission and Statutes; for at these
Sessions, as says Mr. Fitzherbert, generally all things ought to be given in
Charge that do lie within the Authority of these Justices to be determined:
These be moreover called the Quarter Sessions, because they be holden
Quarterly, or four times in the year: And the Statute 4 H. 7.12. 1. N. 4.
termed them Principal Sessions, for that in them chiefly the power of Justices
of the Peace does shine and show it self, in which respect 27 Eliz. 19. 2. N.
7. And some other Statutes do give the name of open Sessions, also Infra, 260.

Appointment.
CXCI. Lamb. 585, 586. The manner is in some Shires to Summon yearly 6 standing
Sessions of the Peace, in others 8, in others 12 or 16, and in others
otherwise, all which is done chiefly upon pretense to ease the Inhabitants of
the County, for whom it would otherwise be very painful to travel so often, and
far from all the parts of the Shire to any one place of the same. And therefore
such as do maintain six or eight Sessions, do use to Summon all the whole Shire
to a couple of them, and to the residue they call only such parts of the Shire
as they do there specially appoint: But yet so, that upon the reckoning each
Corner of the Country, gathers Attenders at four several Sessions, which also
falls out accordingly in those Shires, where they have twelve or sixteen
Sessions: For albeit that they do not at any one time Summon the Shires to any
one place, as the other do; yet dividing their Shire into three or four parts,
and keeping four several Sessions in each of those parts; they also, as well as
the other, do serve their whole Country with four sundry sittings; and
therefore in mine opinion, though none of these do follow the precise Letter of
the Law, which requires but only four Quarter Sessions in every year, yet
every of them draws near to the true meaning of the Law, which looks for
nothing else but that the Court of these Sessions should yearly be four times
opened for the whole County.

CXCII. Lamb. 586, 587. But if there be any that do for this purpose divide
their Shires into halves, and do hold only four Sessions in the year, Execution.
that is to say, two in one part, and two in the other, calling the one half of
their Hundreds to those two Sessions at the one place, and the other half to
the other two Sessions holden at the other place: These men, as some have
thought, do neither retain the Letter, nor attain the meaning of the Law in
this doing, for upon the matter, no part of their shire has any more then two
Sessions, which manner who sees not how much it may hinder Justice?

CXCIII. Lamb. 588. Neither may I well omit, Lieu.
that this doing may breed Danger to the Justices themselves, while any of them
having taken a Recognizance of a Tipler, does not certify it until the
Sessions happen to be in his own part, and in the mean season the next Sessions
of the Peace within the Shire, chances to be holden in the other part, whereof
what may follow 5 and 6 Ed. 6.25.. 2. N. 3. will tell you, and teach them the
like Fault, is it not the like Forfeit so to retain a Recognizance taken for
the Peace, as you may see, 3 H. 7.1.. 1. N. 26.

CXCIV. 25 Ed. 3.8.. 1. N. 1. Item, That the said Justices make their Sessions
in all the Counties of England, at the least four times a year, Days.
that is to say, at the Feast of the Annuntiation of our Lady, St. Margaret,
St. Michael, and St. Nicholas, and also at all times that shall need, according
to the discretion of the said Justices, Lamb. 588.590. Crumpt. 123.. 10.12.

CXCV. 36 Ed. 3.12. 1. N. 1. Item, Sessions.
In the Commission of the Justices of the Peace, and of Laborers express
mention be made, that the same Justices make their Sessions four times by the
year, that is to say, one Sessions within the Vlas of the Epiphany, the second
within the second Week of Lent, the third betwixt the Feast of Pentecost, and
of St. John Baptist, the fourth within the eight Days of S. Michael. Lamb.
589.590.

CXCVI. Lamb. 589. The Statute 12 R. 2.10. 1. N. 2. does afterward set the
matter at liberty, saying, That the said six Justices, Days.
shall keep their Sessions in every Quarter of the year at the least, and by
three days if need be, upon pain to be punished according to the discretion of
the King's Council, at the suit of every man that will complain: But they of
Middlesex be excepted by 14 H. 6.4. 1. N. 3. Crumpt. 124. 21.

CXCVII. Lamb. 589. Lastly, Sessions.
The Statute 2 H. 5.4. 2. N. 2. and (that the Justices of the Peace) make their
Sessions four times by the Year, that is to say, in the first week after the
Feast of St. Michael, and in the first week after the Epiphany, and in the
first week after the Clause of Easter, and in the first week after the
Translation of St. Thomas the Martyr, and more often if need be. And that the
same Justices hold their Sessions throughout the Realm of England in the same
weeks every year from henceforth.

CXCVIII. Lamb. 589, 590. That 25 Ed. 3.8. 1. N. 1. does in show and in common
opinion concern the Sessions of the Justices of the Peace, Day^
but in truth it belongs not at all to them, for it was made to direct the
Justices of Laborers, in the time of holding their Sessions, and they were not
Commissioners of the Peace, but especial Justices for the Causes of Laborers
alone, not resident in the Country, but sent down for the time of that Service,
as it may expressly appear, not only by the Preamble, and all the parts of the
said Statute it self, but also by 28 Ed. 3. 5.. N. and 31 Ed. 3. 6.. N. and 34
Ed. 3. 11. During all which time the Wardens of the Peace were neither called
Justices by any Statute, nor Authorized to deal with Laborers until 42 Ed. 3.
6. Crumpt. 123. 12.

Sessions.
CXCIX. Lamb. 599. But neither that 36 Ed. 3. 12. makes any Law for holding the
Sessions of the Peace at this day, as well because it was set at large by 12 R.
2. 10. as also if it were not because the Commissions of our time use no such
mention as it Commands.

Days.
CC. Lamb. 591. That 2 H. 5. 4. restrained 12 R. 2. 10. yet so as one of these
Statutes does not fret the other, but the latter is an Exposition of the
former, so that it is all one as if they both had been but one Law, and should
have said that the Justices of Peace shall hold their Sessions in every quarter
of the year at the least, namely in the first week after St. Michael, in the
first week after the Epiphany, etc. Crumpt. 123. b.. 17, 18.

Sessions.
CCI. Lamb. 591, 592. Now to prove that the Quarter Sessions of the Peace were,
or ought to be holden after the Prescript of 2 H. 5. 4. until 5 Eliz. 4. 2. N.
1. First Mr. Marrow says plainly, that in his days the Quarter Sessions were
so holden: Secondly 11 H. 7. 15. 1. N. 20. and 19 H. 7. 6. 1. N. 15. and 4 H.
8. 7.. 6. N. 2. and 27 H. 8. 5. 1. N. 4. and 32 H. 8. 43. 1. N. 8. do account
of these Sessions to be holden accordingly, Crumpt. 123. 18.

Days.
CCII. Lamb. 594, 595. upon 5 Eliz. 4. 2. N. 1. some have thought that 2 H. 5.
4. is Repealed, because this Statute was made for Laborers, and it falls out
unseasonable to hold the Michaelmas Sessions so near the Term: And others do
think the contrary, that some part of the Statutes of Laborers must needs
remain in force, because all are not Repealed, and therefore 12 R. 2. 3. and 23
H. 6. 13. be yet in force, for so much of them as does concern Victuallers,
etc. for that they concern not the Hiring, Keeping, etc. or order of Servants,
etc. (which might be done without the Sessions of the Peace) but the General
Service of the Commission, and Statutes that Authorize the Justices of Peace,
etc.

Apprentice.
CCIII. Lamb. 595. Neither was there ever, say they, any Quarter Sessions
holden, only for the Causes of Laborers by the Justices of the Peace, although
the petty Sessions of Constables were chiefly holden to that Service.

Sessions.
CCIV. Lamb. 596. But to make the proof full, they add that 5 Eliz. 4. 15. N. 1.
speaks of the Quarter Session to be holden after Easter, which cannot be
understood of any other of these Statutes, but only of 2 H. 5. 4. because the
rest that have certainty do appoint that Session, either at the Annunciation of
the blessed Virgin, or in the second week of Lent, and likewise 8 Eliz. 9.. N.
of Prizes of Vessels 14 Eliz. 5.. N. and 18 Eliz. 3.. N. of poor, have mention
of the Quarter Sessions to be holden next after Easter, which Statutes, as they
make not in this point a new Law but be grounded upon former Law supposed to be
in force: So allowing of any one of these four Sessions they do therein give
allowance of all the other three also.

Days.
CCV. Lamb. 597. Now if it shall seem to any Man strange, that I move Questions
of the time of holding these Sessions, 1. It is one Article of their Oath, that
they shall hold their Sessions after the form of Statutes thereof made. 2. The
Articles of many Statutes are enquirable, as it may seem only at the Quarter
Sessions, because they are not in the Commission at all, and the Statutes
themselves do appoint of no other Inquiry touching them but at the Quarter
Sessions only: And then if the Justices of Peace, do not hold their Quarter
Sessions according to the times appointed by the Law, they be no Quarter but
Special Sessions, and consequently such Statutes shall either not be enquired
of at all, or else enquired of without Warrant, both which be very great
inconveniences.

CCVI. Lamb. 598. Touching the continuance of these Quarter Sessions: Sessions.
Almost two hundred years ago it was ordained 12 R. 2. 10. That they should be
continued three days together, if need were, upon pain of punishment; and yet
in these days of ours, wherein the Affairs of the Sessions be exceedingly
increased, and consequently more need to prolong them now then before, many do
scantly afford them three whole hours, besides that time which is spent in
calling of the Country, and giving of the Charge.

CCVII. Lamb. 598. Pope*
The Justices of Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions enquire of, hear, and
determine all Offenses, except Treason, and Misprision of Treason, committed
against 23 Eliz. ^1. 9. N. 2. Crumpt. 124. b.

CCVIII. Lamb. 299. They may also, in their open Quarter Sessions, Pope.
enquire of such as do extol the Usurped Authority of the Sea of Rome against
5 Eliz. 1. 3. N. 1. And the Clerk of the Peace must read that Act at every of
the Quarter Sessions, Crumpt. 122. b.. 6.

CCIX. Lamb. 599. Maintenance.
All the Articles mentioned in the Statute 33 H. 8. 10. of Vagabonds,
Retainers, and Liveries, Imbraceors, Maintainers, etc. shall be enquired of,
and reformed by the Justices of the Peace in their Ancient Quarter Sessions, 37
H. 8. 7. 2. N. 3. Crumpt. 124.

CCX. Lamb. 599. They may, in their General Sessions, Cattle.
determine of the Offenses of Killing and Selling Wainlings under two years of
age, 24 H. 8. 9. 3. N. 1. and of the Offenses of not keeping Milch Kine and
Calves, 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 3. 3. N. 2. Crumpt. 124. b.

CCXI. Lamb. 599. The Enquiry, Hearing, Marker.
and Determinations of Forestallings, Ingrossings, and Regratings, may be at
the Quarter Sessions, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 10. N. 1. Crumpt. 124. b.

CCXII. Lamb. 599. Ale.
The Inquiry whether Ale-house-keepers have forfeited their Recognizances,
ought to be at the Quarter Sessions, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 3. N. 1. Crumpt. 125.

CCXIII. Lamb. 599. The Fine for Unlawful Hunting by Night, Forest.
or with painted Faces, shall be set at the next General Sessions, 1 H. 7. 7.
1. N. 6. Crumpt. 124. b.

CCXIV. Lamb. 599, 600. Forest.
If the party bound to his Good abearing seven years, according to 3 Jac. 13.
6. N. 1. against Unlawful Hunting, and stealing of Deer, and Conies, do within
the same time before the Justices of the Peace of the County, where the offense
was committed, or some of them, in the open Quarter Sessions acknowledge his
offense, and that he is sorry therefore, and satisfy the party grieved; the
same Justices in the same open Sessions, or in any other, may discharge the
Recognizance and Bond so taken, and the party bound.

CCXV. Lamb. 600. Fowl*
Justices of Peace in their General Quatter Sessions have Authority to examine,
hear and determine the offenses committed against 1 Jac. 27. 5. N. 2. of
Fesants.

CCXVI. Lamb. 600. Justices of Peace may in their Quarter Sessions enquire of,
hear and determine the Offenses of putting to pasture, Cattle*
any stoned Horses, etc. under the Hight appointed by the Statute, 32 H. 8.
13.. 8. N. 1. Crumpt. 124. b.

CCXVII. Lamb. 600. They may at their like Sessions enquire of, Ways.
and determine the Offenses of not amending Highways, 2 and 3, Ph. and Mar.
8.. 2. N. 10. 5 Eliz. 13.. 9. N. 1. and 18 Eliz. 19.. 9. N. 1. Crumpt. 125.

CCXVIII. Lamb. 600. In their Quarter and General Sessions, Husbandry.
they ought to inquire of, hear and determine, the Offenses of not keeping
continual Households, upon the Precincts of the late Monasteries, 27 H. 28.. 9.
N. 1. 5 Eliz. 2.. N. Crumpt. 124. b.

Information.
CCXIX. Lamb. 600. In their Quarter Sessions they may hear and determine the
Offenses of Informers, 18 Eliz. 5.. 4. N. 4. Crumpt. 125.

Oath.
CCXX. Lamb. 600. And at the like Sessions they may do the like, for Offenses in
Perjury, 5 Eliz. 9.. 9. N. 1. Crumpt. 124. a.

Collusion.
CCXXI. Lamb. 600. 601. Such as be suspected of using counterfeit Tokens, or
Letters, may be called by Process to the next General Sessions, and must be
convicted there, 33 H. 8. 1.. 2. N. 1. Crumpt. 125.

Woods.
CCXXII. Lamb. 601. Justices of the Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions,
call before them the owner of a wood, and 12 of the Commoners there for setting
out the fourth Part thereof, 35 H. 8. 17.. 7 N. 2.

Poor.
CCXXIII. Lamb. 601. The Taxes for relief of the Infected with the Plague, must
be certified at the next Quarter Sessions, and the same is to be enlarged*
extended or determined, as to the Justices of Peace there or the more Part of
them shall be thought fit, 1 Jac. 31.. 6. N. 1.

Apprentice.
CCXXIV. Lamb. 601. The proof of the Sufficiency, or Insufficiency of the Cause,
for which the Master may put away his Servant, or the Servant may depart from
his Master, before the end of the Term, shall be made at the Quarter Sessions,
5 Eliz. 4.. 8. N. 1.

Licenses.
CCXXV. Lamb. 601. The Licenses for Badgers, Drovers, etc, are to be granted at
the open Quarter Sessions, 5 Eliz. 12.. 4. N. 1. Crumpt. 124.

Corn.
CCXXVI. Lamb. 601. And the Prohibition of transporting Corn, is to be made by
the major Part of the Justice of the Peace at their Quarter Sessions, 13 Eliz.
13.. 1. N. 7.

Husbandry.
CCXXVII. Lamb. 601. The Offenses against the new Statute of Tillage, are to be
inquired, heard, and determined at the Quarter or General Sessions, 39 Eliz.
2.. 9. N. 1.

Poor.
CCXXVIII. 601. 602. If the Parish and Hundred be not able to relieve the Poor
of the Parish therein, then the Justices of Peace, or the greater Number of
them, may at their General Quarter Sessions rate any other Parishes etc.
thereunto, and they may there by Agreement, with any Lord of Wast, or Common,
set up Habitations there for the Poor, and place Inmates in the same, and they
also may at such Sessions, Assess the Parents, or Children being of sufficient
Ability, to relieve their Poor and Impotent Children and Parents, 39 Eliz. 3..
1. N. 11.

CCXXIX. Lamb. 602. The Parties grieved by any Act done upon 43 Eliz. 2.. 6. N.
1. are to be relieved by the Justices of Peace at their General Quarter
Sessions, and the Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother and Child of the
Poor, being of a sufficient Ability may there be Taxed toward the relief of
the said Poor.

CCXXX. Lamb. 602. The Justices of Peace, or the major Part of them, may at any
Quarter Sessions, give order for the Erection of Houses of Correction, and for
Stocks of Money, and all other things necessary for the same or for the
Government thereof, and they may Banish, or Condemn to the Galleys, such Rogues
as shall appear to be dangerous, 39 Eliz. 4.. 1. N. 2. and may Brand them in
the Left Shoulder with a hot burning Iron, with a Great Roman R. thereon, 1
Jac. 7. 5 N. 1.

Drapery.
CCXXXI. Lamb. 602. The deceitful Users of Logwood for Dying, are to be Tried
and Judged to Fine and Pillory, at the Quarter Sessions, 39 Eliz. 11.. 2. N. 4.

Corn.
CCXXXII. Lamb. 602. The Justices of the Peace, or the major Part of them, may
by their discretions in their Open Quarter Sessions restrain the converting of
Barley into Malt, 39 Eliz. 16.. 1. N. 1.

CCXXXIII. Lamb. 603. Ways.
They also in their Open Quarter Sessions may convict such as Carry not, or pay
not toward the amendment of the Highways in the Weild of Kent, Surry, or
Sussex, as this Statute does appoint, 39 Eliz. 19.. 4 N. 4. and the presentment
of such Defaults, ought to be made by the Surveyors of Highways at the next
Quarter Sessions after such default.

CCXXXIV. Lamb. 603. License may be given in the Quarter Sessions to shoot
Hayle-shot in a hand Gun for Hawks meat only, License.
the Party licenced becoming bound in Recognizance of xx l. to shoot but only
according to this Statute 1 Jac. 27.. 7. N. 1.

CCXXXV. Lamb. 603. Drapery.
The Offenses against the Statute of deceitful stretching and tentoring of
Northern Cloths, are inquirable and determinable before the Justices of the
Peace at their Quarter Sessions, and those Defaults are to be presented by the
Overseers at the next Quarter Session after such default made, 39 Eliz. 20..
10. N. 1.

CCXXXVI. Lamb. 603. Poor.
The Assignment and Revocation of Pensions for dissabled Soldiers and Mariners,
must be made by the major Part of the Justices of Peace at the Quarter
Sessions, and they may there set Fine upon the Treasurer, that shall willingly
refuse to pay any of the same Pensions, 43 Eliz. 3.. 3. 1.

CCXXXVII. Lamb. 603. Wine.
The Assignment of such as shall keep any Tavern to uttter Wine, by 7 Ed. 6.
5.. 3. N. 6. ought to be made at the General Sessions, but is otherwise used by
Special Grant.

CCXXXVIII. Lamb. 604. Apprentice.
A Beggars Child may at the General Sessions be bound to serve any Subject of
this Realm, being of honest Calling, 14 Eliz. 5.. 22. N. 1. and 18 Eliz. 3. N.

CCXXXIX. Lamb. 604. Purveyours.
The Dockets of Purveyors ought to be delivered over to the Justices of the
Peace, at the next General Sessions, 2 and 3. Ph. and Mar. 6.. 6 N. 1.

CCXL. Lamb. 604 A Decree may be made at the Quarter Sessions, Poor.
for the continuance of a Cottage that has not four Acres of Ground, and there
may the Justices inquire, hear and determine, of Cottages and Inmates, 31 Eliz.
7.. 4. N 1.

CCXLI. Lamb. 604. The Conviction of a Clothier, Drapery.
or other upon his own Confession or Proof, by two lawful Witnesses, for not
paying so great Wages to their Shearers etc. as shall be set down according to
the true meaning of this Act, may be before the Justices of Peace in their
Quarter Sessions, and the Forfeiture of ten Shillings by this Statute given to
the Party grieved, may be levied by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods,
by Warrant from the said Justices, 1 Jac. 6.. N.

CCXLII. Lamb. 604. 605. All Offenses against any Statute, Games.
for not using any lawful Game, or using any unlawful Games, or for not having
Bows and Arrows according to the Law, or for using any Art or Mystery in which
the Party has not been brought up according to the Statute thereof, shall be
Sued or otherwise inquired of, heard, and determined in the Quarter Sessions of
the Peace, or Assizes of the Shire, where they shall be committed, or in the
Leet within the which they shall happen, 31 Eliz. 5.. 7. N. 5.

CCXLIII. Lamb. 605. The Act of rebellious Assemblies, Riot.
or the effect thereof ought to be openly read at every Quarter Sessions, 1
Mar. 1. St. 2 cap. 12.. 16. N. 1. Crumpt. 123. b.. 15. and 124 b.

CCXLIV. Lamb. 605. Sheriffs.
The Justices of Peace have Power in their Open Sessions, to inquire, hear and
determine, the defaults of under-Sheriffs, Clerks of Sheriffs, or
under-Sheriffs, and of Bailies etc. in not taking the Oaths appointed by the
Statute 27 Eliz. 12.. 6. N. 1.

Pope.
CCXLV. Lamb. 605. The Abjuration of a Seditious Sectary, ought to be made in
the Open Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and there to be entered of Record, and
the Place certain and Name of a Popish Recusant limited by this Statute unto a
place ought to be certifyed by the Minister and Constable, that took and entered
it to the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and there be entered of Record in
the Rolls of the Sessions by the Clerk of the Peace, 35 Eliz. 1.. 2. N. 1.

Pope.
CCXLVI. Lamb. 605. The Penalties forfeited by a conformed Recusant, for not
receiving the Sacrament according to this Statute, may be Recovered before the
Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1.

Pope.
CCXLVII. Lamb. 605. 606. The Monthly absence from Church of Popish Recusants,
and their Childrens Names of IX. years old and upwards, abiding with them, and
their Servants Names ought by the Churchwardens and Constables to be yearly
presented at the Quarter Sessions, and by the Clerk of the Peace, or Town
Clerk, Recorded in the said Sessions, 3 Jac. 4.. 4. N. 2.

Oath.
CCXLVIII. Lamb. 606. The Oath appointed by this Statute, may be required in the
Quarter Sessions, of such Person as was formerly Convicted for refusing the
same: and such Person or any other whatsoever refusing the said Oath being
tendered in the said Sessions, shall Incur the danger of Praemunire, except Women
Covert; who shall only be Committed by the Justices of Peace in their Quarter
Sessions, to the Common Goal without Bail or Mainprise, till they will take the
said Oath, 3 Jac. 4.. 14. N. 2.

Pope.
CCXLIX. Lamb. 607. If a Crucifix or other Relick of any price be found in a
Recusants Lodging or Custody, upon search to be made according to this Act, the
same to be defaced at the General or Quarter Sessions, and so defaced, to be
restored to the Owner, 3 Jac. 5.. 26. N. 3.

Pope.
CCL. Lamb. 607. By Warrant of Four Justices of Peace at their General or
Quarter Sessions, Recusants Armor, Gunpowder, and Munition shall be taken from
them, other then necessary Weapons to be allowed them by the said Justices for
their Defense, and shall be maintained at the Costs of such Recusants in such
places, as the said Justices at their said Sessions shall appoint, etc. 3 Jac.
5.. 27. N. 1.

Commission.
CCLI. Lamb. 607. Enquire of others, whether the Proclamation (set forth 4 H. 7.
12.. 1. N. 4) be not yet to be read at every Quarter Sessions, for some do
think that it was to endure for the time of that King only, infra, 269.

Sessions.
CCLII. Lamb. 608, 609. Some men be of opinion, that these Statutes which be
Enquirable by express words at the Quarter Sessions only, may nevertheless be
Enquired of at the Special Sessions also, and their opinion seems to be backed
by some words of the reformed Commission of the Peace,. 7. where power is given
to two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum, to enquire, hear and
determine of all Offenses, of which Justices of Peace lawfully may or ought to
Inquire; nevertheless, as the Commission. 7. there speaks only of Inquiry,
hearing, and determining, and not of other Acts; so have I hitherto doubted,
whether that be true in all Cases or not: for as the Justices of Peace have
none other Warrant to Inquire of these matters; but only by those Statutes
which do appoint the Inquiry to be made at the Quarter Sessions, so they ought
to pursue that Warrant if they will have any Care that their doings may be
warranted: and I think it to be no great doubt, but that as the Statutes do
many times give degrees of Power, so also the same Statutes may restrain the
Authority of Enquiry to some certain Sessions, and specially to the Quarter
Sessions, in respect that they be both more open, more commonly known before
hand, and better furnished with Justices, and consequently the matter for
Administering of Justice, specially in Affairs of the weightier sort, Crumpt.
125.

CCLIII. Lamb. 609. The prices of Vessels for Soap, Ale and Beer, Measures.
shall be set and proclaimed by the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions
after Easter, 8 Eliz. 9.. 5. N. 1.

CCLIV. Lamb. 609. The Wages of Laborers and Servants, Apprentice.
are to be Rated by the Justices of Peace at the Easter Quarter Sessions, or
within Six Weeks after Easter, where those Sessions be usually holden in one
place of the Shire by all the Justices together; but where they are not so
usually holden but in several places for several Divisions, there the Justices
of Peace or the more part of them resiant within such Division, shall at the
same Quarter Sessions or at the time of the Easter Sessions as is aforesaid,
Rate and Ingross in Parchment under their Hands and Seals the Wages for
Laborers, etc. within that Division, and the Sheriff shall proclaim the same
in places convenient therefore, 5 Eliz. 4. 15. N. 1. and 39 Eliz. 12.. N. and 1
Jac. 6.. N.

CCLV. Lamb. 609. Poor.
And they must yearly in the same Sessions Examine the performance, or not
performance of so much of the Statute made for the Poor, 14 Eliz. 5.. 23. N. 3.
as is not altered by 43 Eliz. 2.

CCLVI. Lamb. 609, 610. The Account of the Treasurers for disabled Soldiers or
Mariners, is to be made yearly at the Quarter Sessions after Easter, or within
ten days after, 43 Eliz. 3.. 3. N. 1.

CCLVII. Lamb. 610. At the Quarter Sessions to be holden after Michaelmas,
Mettle.
the Justices of Peace are to appoint Searchers for Brass and Pewter, 19 H. 7.
6.. 1. N. 15. and 4 H. 8. 7.. 6. N. 2.

CCLVIII. Lamb. 610. And at the General Sessions after Michaelmas, Sheriffs.
two Justices of the Peace ought to be appointed by the Custos Rotulorum, or in
his Absence by the eldest of the Quorum, for the over sight and Controlement of
the Sheriffs Books, 11 H. 7. 15.. N.

CCLIX. Lamb. 610. Ways.
In the number of particular Statutes concerning the Quarter Sessions, these
may have place.

26 H. 8. 5. N. For passage over Severn. 23 Eliz. 12. N. For paving without
Algate. 3 Jac. 19. Of Highwayes from Non-such to Talworth. 3 Jac. 20. N. For
passage by water to Oxford. 3 Jac. 22. N. For paving Drury Lane and St.
Giles's. 3 Jac. 23. N. For making up Chepstow Bridge. 3 Jac. 24. N. For Vpton
Bridge on the Severn. 33 H. 6. 7. N. For Attorneys in Norfolk. 32 H. 8. 43. N.
For Sessions in Cheshire. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 13 N. Of Wools in Halifax. 27
Eliz. 24. N. For the Sea banks in Norfolk, Crumpt. 125.
CCLX. Lamb. 611. The special Sessions of the Peace do vary from the General in
this Chiefly, Sessions.
that they be holden at other times when it shall please the Justices
themselves or any two of them, the one being of the Quorum to appoint them, and
this power they have not only by the Commission,. 17. but also by the Statute 2
H. 5. 4.. 2. N. 2. which allows them to do it more often then the four times
if need do so require. 2. They be also for the most part Summoned for some
Special business, and not directed to the General service of the Commission,
and yet there is no doubt but that all the Articles within the Commission of
the Peace, are both Inquirable and Determinable at any special Session of the
Peace, Mr. Fitz-herbert, 19. Lamb. 584. supra 190. uses a third difference
between the General and Special Sessions of the Peace, affirming, that whereas
at the General Sessions the Justices of the Peace ought of Duty to give in
Charge all matters within the Commission or Statutes, that are to be determined
before them; yet nevertheless at the Special Sessions they are at liberty to
give in Charge either all or any of them as it shall seem good unto themselves.

Sessions.
CCLXI. Lamb. 612. I will not gainsay, but that the Justices of Peace may at
any Special Sessions of the Peace give in Charge all such Statutes, as do give
unto them a general Power of Inquiry (without using mention of restraint to any
Sessions) as does 25 H. 8. 13.. N. of Sheep, yea I will grant that they may
also at their Special Sessions of the Peace give in charge to Enquire upon all
such other Statutes as do use the word Sessions Indifferently, without adding
General or Special, of which sort there are a great many as 5 and 6 E. 6. 4..
N. of Fighting in Church or Churchyard, 14 H. 8. 11.. N. and 19 H. 7. 11.. N.
of Hunting 5 Eliz. 13.. N. of Linen Cloth, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 7.. N. of
Fairs and Markets, 5 H. 4. 3.. N. of Sea watch, and 7 Ed. 6. 5.. N. of Wines
and sundry others, but whether they may there also Inquire of such other
Statutes as do only assign the Inquiry to be made at the Quarter Sessions, you
have heard my mind and read my reasons, Crumpt. 125.

Sessions.
CCLXII. Lamb. 612, 613. however it be, there might be great use of the Special
Sessions of the Peace if they were now and then holden between the Quarter
Sessions to deliver the Goals of unruly Servants, Petty Thieves, and some
others, etc. Peradventure some will say, that by this means we shall draw upon
us again the same Inconveniences of troubling the County that happened by the
Six Weeks Sessions, which were therefore abrogated by 37 H. 8. 7.. N. but that
is not to be feared, for whereas those Sessions were to be holden in every
limit of the Shire, these may be kept only in the Towns where the Goal
stands, the which sithence it is commonly populous shall be easily able to
furnish this Service, without calling any other remote part of the County unto
it, Crumpt. 123.. 18.

Process.
CCLXIII. Lamb. 614. the form of the Precept for a Special Sessions, etc.

Kanc. ss.
M. F. Miles I. B. and H. F. Armig. Justiciarii inter alios Domini Regis nunc
ad pacem in Com. Kanc. Conservand' Assignat' nec non ad diversas felonias, etc.
Vicecom' Comitat' predicti salutem. Ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi precipimus
firmiter injungentes quod non omittas propter aliquam libertat' infra hundredmu
de O. P. and Q aut eorum aliquod in Com. predicto quin venire facias coram
nobis apud R. infra hundredum de O. predict' Decim' Die Aug. proxim' futur'
xxiv. probos and legales homines de eisdem hundredis ad Inquirendum tunc ibi
pro dicto Domino Rege tam super quibusdam Articulis in Statuto in Parliament'
nuper Reg' Eliz. Anno Regni sui Quinto tent' Edit, Artifices, laboratores,
servientes and apprenticios concernnent' Quam super Articulis Quibusdam in
Statuto in Parliament' Dict' nuper Reg' Anno Regni sui xxxix. tent' Edit'
Rogos, Vagabundos, validos mendicantes and alios pauperes tangentibus;
proclamari etiam facias in Idoneis locis per Hundred' predicta quod omnes qui
versus predictos Artifices, laboratores, servientes, apprenticios rogos,
vagabundos, validos mendicantes and alios pauperes seu Eorum aliquos Conqueri
voluerint, sint tunc ibidem coram nobis ad prosequendum versus eos parati and
sis ibi vel vicecomes tuus habens nomina Juratorum predictorum and hoc nostrum
breve, testibus nobis prefat' M. F. J. B. and H. F. apud J. in Com' predict'
ultimo Die Martii Anno regni, etc. Lamb. 376. A precept for the General
Sessions.

Indictment.
CCLXIV. Lamb. 618. It seems by the opinion of some Justices, 2 Rich. 3. 10.
Judges Br. 33. That if a Justice of the Peace do any thing of Record
Ignorantly, and for want of knowledge, that he shall not be punished for it.

Records.
CCLXV. Lamb. 618, 619. On the other side, if a Justice of the Peace will
craftily Imbezil^an Indictment, or wilfully Raze any part thereof, or
maliciously Enrol or File that for an Indictment, which was never found by the
Jury, then (by the resolution of all the Justices Assembled before the King in
the Star Chamber, 2 R. 3. 10.) a Commission may go out to Enquire by the Oaths
of Twelve Men of such his Misdemeanor, and if he be Convicted thereof, he
deserves to lose his Office, and to make Fine to the King, etc.

CCLXVI. Lamb. 619. And even so may he be punished, Amendment.
(as the Book leads me to think) if he alter an Indictment of Trespass into
an Indictment of Felony, howsoever the opinion 27 Ass. 18. presentment, Br. 23.
be found against it.

CCLXVII. Lamb. 619. A Justice of Peace may also be Indicted of the unlawful
taking of Money for doing his Office, or of such other falsity, Fees.
F. N. B. 243. E. and if he cause a man to be Indicted at the Sessions, by
former Conspiracy or Indirect practice, he is punishable for it as a private
man, 21 Ed. 4. 67.

CCLXVIII. Lamb. 619. Slander.
But if in the handling of a Cause at the open Sessions, it happen him to speak
against an Offender somewhat excessively, yet he shall not be punished for it.

CCLXIX. Lamb. 620. And if the Proclamation Annexed to 4 H. 7. 12.. 1. N. 5.
ought now to be read, Maintenance.
then if it be not read at each Quarter Sessions, every Justice of the Peace
there present, shall lose xx s. Crumpt. 122. b.. 4. supra 251.

CCLXX. Lamb. 621. And the Justices of Assize, may enquire of, hear, Drapery.
and determine the Offenses of any Justices of the Peace in not doing their
Duties, for Execution of the Statute made against the deceitful stretching of
Northern Clothes, 39 Eliz. 20.. N.

CCLXXI. Crumpt. 122. b.. 2. The King by his Writ of Supersedeas may command
the Sheriff or the Justices, Supersedeas*
that they shall not keep their Sessions as appointed by the two Justices at
the day and place, and this shall be a discharge of the Precept made by the
Justices to keep the said Sessions, Fitz-herbert. Ip. 10.

CCLXXII. Crumpt. 122. b. 123. a.. 7. Wales.
It is enacted 5 and 6 Ed. 6. by a Statute not Printed, that the Quarter
Sessions in the County of Anglesey in Wales, shall be always forever holden at
Blau-morris only, and not elsewhere within the County of Anglesey, except by
reason of the Plague or such Contagious Sickness, and notwithstanding this
Statute a Sessions of the Peace was held at Newburgh in the same County,
without any special occasion, and by all the Justices, etc. held void and coram
non judice by reason of the negative prohib. Dyer. 135. pl.

CCLXXIII. Crumpt. 123.. 8. If a man be bound to appear before the Justices of
Peace within xl days next after the Bond, Recognizance.
and before the end of xl days a General Sessions is held, he must appear
before them at the same Sessions, though it be not so expressed, etc. Condition,
Br. 208. Dalt. 172. Cap. 70.

CCLXXIV. Crumpt. 123.. 9. If a Justice of Peace upon a pain of x l. Commands
one by precept to be at the next Sessions, Process.
and he does not appear, no scire facias shall Issue no more then on a
Subpenae; but it seems he shall be Attacht at the next Sessions for a
Contempt, Dalt. 33. 17. Cap. 117.

CCLXXV. Crumpt. 123.. 11. The Statutes of Purveyors made, Purveyors.
36 Ed. 3. 2, 3, 4. shall be proclaimed by the Justices of Peace Annually.

CCLXXVI. Crumpt. 113. b.. 13. Victualers.
The Statutes of Victualers shall be Proclaimed twice, Annually in the Sessions
of the Justices, 22 H. 6. 13.. N.

CCLXXVII. Crumpt. 223. b.. 14. The Statute 33 H. 8. 9.. N. of Archery, shall
be proclaimed at several Sessions of the Peace. Games.


Forces.
CCLXXVIII. Crumpt. 123. b. 19. It seems that when the Justices shall enquire
upon, 8 H. 6. 9.. N. that they may make a Warrant to the Sheriff to return
Pannels, to enquire for the King of such things that shall be enjoined them of
the Kings part, without saying, to enquire of forcible Entries or of any Riot,
because 2 H. 5. 4. N. is that they may hold their Sessions four times by the
Year, and more often if need be.

Sessions.
CCLXXIX. Crumpt. 124 21. The Justices of the Peace of the County of Middlesex,
are not bound to keep their Sessions Four times a year (the Court of B. R.
sitting in that County,) but they must keep their Sessions twice ayear at
least, and oftener if need be, to enquire of Riots or forcible Entry made in the
same County on pain and forfeiture, etc. 14 H. 6. 4.. N.

Riot.
CCLXXX. Crumpt. 124. 22. The Justices for enquiry of Riot, etc. must hold
Sessions within a month after the Riot, etc. Commit by 13 H. 4. 7.. N. on pain
of C l. to every of the Justices of the Peace that are next abiding in the
County to the place where the Riot is Committed.

Force.
CCLXXXI. Crumpt. 124. 23. on 8 H. 6. 9.. N. of forcible Entries, the Sessions
must be held upon Complaint of the Party grieved within convenient time.

Apprentice.
CCLXXXII. Crumpt. 124. 24. They may hold Sessions Annually between Michaelmas
and Christmas, and between the Annunciation and St. John Baptist, to enquire of
the Branches of the Statute of Laborers, and of the good Execution thereof, and
punish the Offenders, 5 Eliz. 4.. N.

Measures.
CCLXXXIII. Crumpt. 124. 25. The Justices of Peace may enquire, hear, and
determine of falsifiers and Counterfeiters of false Weights, as often as they
shall think fit, 9 H. 5. 8.

Fowl.
CCLXXXIV. Crumpt. 124. b. Item. At the General Sessions they may enquire of
those that take Pheasants or Partridges, or hunt in others Corn, 23 Eliz. 10..
N. and 11 H. 7. 17.. N.

Leather.
CCLXXXV. Crumpt. 124. b. Item. They may enquire of those that offend against
the Statute of Tanners 5 Eliz. 8.. N.

CCLXXXVI. Crumpt. 125. The Justices at their Sessions or within the limits of
their Commission, not said General or Special may enquire on 5 Eliz. 5.. N. of
Fish, on 25 H. 8. 11.. N. of destroying Wild Fowls, Eggs in the Nest, and on 37
H. 8. 9.. N. and 13 Eliz. 8. of Usury of Eschetors, that form their Offices or
make a Deputy, 12 Ed. 4. 9.. N. and 3 H. 8. 8.. N.

Coron.
CCLXXXVII. Crumpt. 125. b. Item. Sessions shall enquire of defaults of
Coroners, 1 H. 8. 7.. N. of keeping above number of Sheep, 25 H. 8. 13.. N. of
Soldiers imbezelling Arms, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2.. N.

Rejoinder.
CCLXXXVIII. Dalt. 24. Cap. 6. Where a Statute appoints a thing to be done by
two Justices of the Peace, or more if the Offense be any misdemeanor or matter
against the Peace, thereupon complaint made of the Offense to any one Justice
of the Peace, it seems that one Justice may grant out his Warrant to attach
the Offender, and to bring him before the same Justice or any other to find
Sureties for his Appearance at the next General Sessions; there to make answer
to such his Offense, or else he may bind the Offender to the good Behavior,
and so to appear at the next Sessions if the said Justices shall see any just
cause so to do; but Justices of Peace alone may not in any wise meddle to hear
and determine the same.

Trials.
CCLXXXIX. Two Justice, 568. And likewise Justices of Goal Delivery, or Justices
of Peace, may Try the Prisoner the same day or any day after; but need not make
any particular precept (as Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer must) for the
Justices of Goal Delivery and Justices of the Peace, make a General Precept in
Parchment, under their Seals, for the Summons of their Sessions, and for
returns of Juries, etc. and there^fre any particular Precept is not requisite,
1 Cr. 315. Fens, Ca. Lamb. 543. Process, 25. N. 2.

CCLXXXXI. Dalt. Edit. 1666. Cap. 46. page 125. Justices.
The Justices opinion touching the Commission by which the Justices sit at
Newgate.

The Justices at Newgate sit by virtue of Two Commissions, viz. Goal Delivery,
and Oyer and Terminer.

2. By the Commission of Goal Delivery, they may Try all Prisoners in the Goal,
or by Bail, or such as be Indicted and will render themselves, generally for
all Felonies; and also for such other Offenses as are particularly assigned to
them by Statute.

3. The Statute 4 Ed. 3. 2. 1. N. 7. does give them power to receive
Indictments against Prisoners, or such as are upon Bail, and to proceed to Try
the same, viz. Indictments taken before the Justices of the Peace, and by
Equity thereof, all Indictments before Coroners.

3 Mar. 1. Commission, etc. Br. 24. says the Commission is ad deliberand'
Goal. de Prisonariis in eisdem existent'; but they cannot take Indictments as
Justices of Goal Delivery, but being Justices of Peace they may take
Indictments against Prisoners; but not against them that be at large, for as
much as no power is given them, and consequently they must have means so to do,
which is by Indictment ad Inquirend'.

4. However it is clear, that they may inquire of many Offenses, Indictment.
and take Indictments in such Cases where power by the Statute is given to the
Justices of Goal Delivery, in such Cases where they have Authority by Law or
Statute, there the title of the Indictment is, that ad Gaolam deliberand'
tent', etc. before the Commissioners of Goal Delivery, J. S. was Indicted and
the Record must be made up so.

5. And whereby 4 Ed. 3. 2. 1. N. 4. Indictments are taken before Justices of
Peace or Coroners, or any other against any Prisoner, then the Entry of the
Indictment is returned taken. Memorand' quod ad Generalem Sessionem pacis tent'
before A. B. C. Justices ad pacem in Com' Middlesex or London. J. S. was
Indicted and then Tried before the Justices of Goal Delivery.

And by virtue of the said Statute 4 Ed. 3. 2. 1. N. 7. Indictments taken
before Justices of the Peace of London or Middlesex, are tried before the
Justices of Goal Delivery.

6. The Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, is ad Triand' Inquirend' Audiend and
Terminand, they may inquire of all Offenses mentioned in the Commission, albeit
the Offenders be at large; but they cannot Try Prisoners upon Indictments taken
before any other then themselves, as the Justices of Goal Delivery may by the
aforesaid Statute, 4 Ed. 3. 2. 1. N. 1. unless there be a special Commission
made, as it was Commanded in the Earl of Leicester's Case; for the ordinary
Commission Br. 24. of Oyer and Terminer is ad Inquirend' Audiend' and
Terminand', therefore they cannot determine of things unless they made enquiry
first.

And on the other side, also the Justices of Goal Delivery may try Indictments
taken before Justices of Peace; yet if one be Indicted before Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, the Justices of Goal Delivery cannot Try the same; because
the Records of the Commission of Oyer and Terminer are to be returned in B. R.
44 Ed. 3. 31.

7. The Commission and the Records of the proceedings before the Justices of
Goal Delivery, are to be returned to the Custos Rotulorum of the County: when
the same Persons are Justices of Goal Delivery, and of Oyer and Terminer, they
may sit the same day and place, and Inquire by the same Jury; but the Entry of
the Records must be several according as the Indictment is.

8. At the Assizes in the Country the Justices have their several power as the
Justices of Goal Delivery, Oyer and Terminer, and Justices of Peace.

But when the Records are made up they must be according to the power they made
Election to proceed upon.

This is the regular and legal Course, but the Clerks of the Assizes
promiscuously make Entries thereof. But if a Writ of Error be brought they must
certify according to Law, or else it will be Erroneous, and so upon a
Certiorari.

9. The Sessions of London may be begun at the Guild Hall, and then adjourned
to Newgate; if some Indictments be at Guild Hall, then those must be so
Certified: if others at Newgate, then the Adjournment must be mentioned, and
that the Indictment was then taken.

10. Note that the Trial of Indictments taken before Justices of the Peace of
London, cannot be Tried at Newgate as in nature of a Trial before Justices of
the Peace at London, for many of the Commissioners for Goal Delivery are not
Justices of the Peace for London; but in such Cases the Trial must be before
the Justices of Goal Delivery as upon Indictments taken before the Justices of
Peace of London, as in the Case of Indictments taken before the Justices of the
Peace of Middlesex.

But if Indictments at Newgate be originally taken before them as Justices of
Goal Delivery, then it is Inquirable how the Jury sworn and Impannelled to
Inquire at the Sessions of the Peace for London or Middlesex do serve to
present Indictments before the Justices of Goal Delivery at Newgate, unless the
Custom and usage will Warrant the two several Juries sworn at the Sessions of
the Peace for London or Middlesex, are also by the same Oath and Impannelling
to serve for the Grand Jury for the Commission of Goal Delivery, and Oyer and
Terminer.

Upon Conference with the Clerks for Newgate of London and Middlesex, and the
Clerks of Assizes, and view of the several Entries, more certain resolution may
be given as occasion may be offered in any particular Case.

Kidders, see Cattle, Corn. Killing, see Coron. King, see Prerog. King's Bench,
see Justices Certiorari. Laborers, see Apprentice. Lace, see Drapery, and
Merchants. Lader, see Corn. Larceny, see Coron. Latten, see Mettle. Law, see
Pleading. Leap-year, see Days. Lead, see Mettle.
(Leather.)
Tanners, Curriers, Cordwainers.
I. LAmbert 446. Articles of Inquiry at Sessions, Market overt.
if any person have regrated, engrossed, or got into his hands any Oaken Bark,
to the intent to sell the same again, 1 Jac. 22. 19. N. 1. Lamb. 432.

II. Lamb. 446. Market overt
Enquiry at Sessions if any person have forestalled any Hydes, or bought any
Hides out of open Market or Fair, unless of such as have killed Beasts for
their own provision, 1 Jac. 22. 7. N. 3.

III. Lamb. 454. Charge at Sessions, Butchers.
If any Butcher have gashed or cut the Hides of any Ox, Bull, Steer or Cow,
whereby it is impaired, or have watered any Hide, except in June, July, and
August, or have put to Sale any putrified or rotten Hide, 1 Jac. 22. 2. N. 1.

IV. Lamb. 454, 455. Trades.
If any during the time that he has used the Occupation of a Butcher, have
also used the Mystery of a Tanner, 1 Jac. 22. 4. N. 1.

V. Lamb. 455. Trades.
If any person during the time that he has used the Mystery of a Tanner, have
used also the Mystery of a Shoemaker, Currier, Butcher, or of any Artificer
using the Cutting or Working of Leather, 1 Jac. 22. 6. N. 1.

VI. Lamb. 455. If any person, Tanners.
other then such who had a Tan-house 19 March 1606, and did then occupy Tanning
of Leather, or has been taught as an Apprentice, or hired Servant seven years
in the Mystery of Tanning of Leather, or has been Wife to a Tanner; or Son of
a Tanner, brought up in that Mystery four years; or Son or Daughter of a
Tanner; or such person as has married the Wife or Daughter of a Tanner, that
left to the same his Tan-house, and Fatts, have Tanned any Leather, or taken
any profit by Tanning thereof, 1 Jac. 22. 5. N. 1.

VII. Lamb. 455. If any person have bought, contracted for, Market overt.
or bespoken any rough Hide, or Calve-skin in the hair (except Salt Hides for
the use of Ships) but such persons only as shall have the same, or shall and
may by this Act Tan the same, or have bought, sold, or bespoken any Tanned
Leather, not wrought into made Wares (other then necks and shreds of Sadlers,
and Girdlers) but such persons only as will convert the same into made Wares, 1
Jac. 22. 7. N. 1. and 8. N. 1.

VIII. Lamb. 455, 456. If any Tanner have suffered any Hide to lie in the Limes
till the same be over-limed, Tanners.
or have put any Hides into any Tan-fatts before the Lime be perfectly wrought
out of them, or have used any thing in Tanning other then Ash-barke, Oak-barke,
Tapwort, Malt, Meal, Lime, Culver-dung, or Hen-dung; or have suffered his
Leather to be frozen, or to be parched with the Fire, or Sun, or have Tanned
any rotten Hides, or have not suffered the Hides for outer Sole-Leather, to lie
in the Woozes Twelve Months, and for the Upper-Leather Nine Months, or have
negligently wrought the Hides in the Woozes, or have not renewed the Woozes, as
often as was requisite, or have put to Sale any Tanned Hide not wrought according
to this Statute, 1 Jac. 22. 11. N. 1.

Deceit.
IX. Lamb. 456. If any Tanner have raised with any mixtures any Hides to be
converted to Backs, Bend-Leather, Clouting-Leather, or any other Sole-Leather,
except the same be fit and sufficient for that use, 1 Jac. 22. 13. N. 1.

Market overt.
X. Lamb. 456. If any person have put to sale any Tanned Leather, red and
unwrought, but in open Fair or Market, in the places therefore prepared, unless
it have been first lawfully Searched and Sealed in some open Fair or Market; or
have put to Sale any such Leather, before it has been Searched or Sealed
according to this Statute, 1 Jac. 22. 14. N. 1.

Market overt.
XI. Lamb. 456. Inquiry in Sessions, if any Tanner have put to sale any Leather
insufficiently, or not thoroughly Tanned, or not well and thoroughly dried, 1
Jac. 22. 15. N. 1.

Tanners.
XII. Lamb. 456, 457. Inquiry in Sessions, If any person have set his Fatts in
Tan-hills or other places, where the Woozes or Leather to be Tanned in the same
may take any unkind heats, or has put any Leather into any hot or warm Woozes,
or has Tanned with hot or warm Woozes, 1 Jac. 22. 17. N. 1.

Woods.
XIII. Lamb. 457. If any person have felled any Oaken Trees meet to be Barked,
where Bark is worth two shillings a Load above the charges of Barking and
Pilling (Timber for building and Reparations excepted) but between the first
day of April, and the last of June, 1 Jac. 22. 20. N. 1.

Curriers.
XIV. Lamb. 457. If any Currier have Curried any Leather but in his own house,
situate in a Corporate or Market Town; or have Curried any Leather not well
Tanned, or not thoroughly Dried after his wet Season, or have used in his wet
Season, any deceitful means to corrupt the same; or have Curried any outer
Sole-Leather with any other stuff then hard Tallow, or less of that then the
Leather will receive, or Inner-Sole, or Over-Leather with any salt stuff, or
have not liquored them thoroughly; or have burned, scalded, or shaven too thin,
or not wrought sufficiently any Leather, or have gashed or hurt any Leather by
any means, 1 Jac. 22. 22. N. 1. etc.

Trades.
XV. Lamb. 457, 458. If any Currier have, during the time that he has used
Currying, used the feat of a Tanner, Cordwainer, Shoemaker, Butcher, or other
Artificer using cutting of Leather, 1 Jac. 22. 25. N. 1.

Days.
XVI. Lamb. 458. Inquiry at Sessions, if any Currier have refused to Curry
Leather in Eight days in Summer, and sixteen days in Winter, in all degrees
perfectly, any Leather brought by any Cutter of Leather, or his Servant,
bringing with him good stuff for the perfect liquoring of the same, 1 Jac. 22.
^6. N. 1.

Shoomakers.
XVII. Lamb. 458. Inquiry at Sessions, if any Shoemaker have made any Boots,
Shoes, Buskins, Startups, Slippers, or Pantofles, or any part of them of
English Leather well Curried (other then Deer, Calve or Goat Skins dressed like
Spanish Leather) but of Leather well Tanned or Curried, and well Tanned only,
and well Sewed with Thread well Twisted, Waxed and Rosined, with the stitches
hard drawn with Hand-leathers, and without mixing Neats and Calves Leather in
the Over-leathers thereof: Or have put into any Shoes, Boots, etc. any Leather
made of Sheep-skin, Bull-hide, or Horse-hide, or into the Upper-leather of any
Shoes, Startups, Slippers or Pantoffles, or into the nether part of Boots (the
inner part of only excepted) any part of the womb, neck, shank, flank, harle,
or cheek of any Hide, or in the Utter Sole, other then the best of the Ox, or
Steer Hide, or into the inner Sole, other then the Wombs, Neck, Poll or Cheek,
or in the Treswelts of the double-soled Shoes, other then the flanks of any the
said Hides, or have put to Sale in any year between the last of September, and
the twentieth of April, any Shoes, Boots, Buskin, Startups, Slippers or
Pantoffles, meet for any person above four years old, wherein has been any dry
English Leather, other then Calve or Goat Skins dressed like Spanish Leather,
or have showed for Sale any of his Wares upon the Sunday, 1 Jac. 22. 28. N. 2.

XVIII. Lamb. 459. Enquiry in Sessions, Market overt,
If any Lord of Fair or Market have not appointed two or three honest and
skilful men to be Searchers and Sealers of Leather there, and six honest and
expert men to try the same Leather, and if such Tryers have done their duty
therein; and if any Searcher, or Sealer so appointed have refused with speed to
Seal good Leather, or have allowed insufficient Leather, or have received any
Bribe, or exacted any undue Fee for execution of his Office, or if any person
duly Elected Searcher or Sealer refuse to execute the same Office, 1 Jac. 22.
35. N. 1.

XIX. Lamb. 459. Inquiry at Sessions, Search.
if any person have denied any such Searcher to enter into any house or place
to search Tanned Leather, or Wrought Ware, or to seize and carry away that
which was insufficient: or have put away any Tanned Leather red and unwrought
without Registring the same, and the price thereof, or have bought any Tanned
Leather before it was searched and sealed, or have carried it out of any Fair
or Market before it was Registered, 1 Jac. 22. 40. N. 1. etc. 41. N. 1.

XX. Lamb. 459, 460. If any person, Collusion.
to whom any unlawful Leather or Stuff has been given by this Act, have given
or sold the same to any Person that has sold the same again, 1 Jac. 22. 47. N.
1.

XXI. Crumpt. 97. b. 124. b. Item, Justices.
The General Sessions may enquire of those who offend against the Statute 5
Eliz. 8. of Tanners, and 1 Jac. 22.

Lent, see Days, Fish, Religion. Letters, see Ways. Letters of Administration,
see Administrators, Executors.
(Leet.)
Peace, Justices.
I. 1 Ed. 4. cap. 2. 1. N. 4. That the Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffs, Sheriffs.
Clerks or Bailiffs, and their Ministers, shall bring and present and deliver
all such Indictments and Presentiments taken before them, or any of them in
their Turns or Law-days, to the Justices of the Peace at their next Sessions of
the Peace, that shall be holden in the County where such Indictments and
Presentiments shall be taken before the Justices of such County for the time
being, Lamb. 426.

II. Lamb. 596. The Statute 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1. N. 4. binds the Sheriff to certify
the Justices of Peace at their next Sessions, Justices.
the Indictments found in his Turn or Law-day. It seems also by way of
admittance in 27 H. 8. 2. Indictment Br. 1. that the liike ought to be done of
Presentiments of Felony in any Leet by virtue of the said Statute, but that is
further to be enquired of, for I find no better Warrant for it.

Traverse.
III. Lamb. 534. Mombray 41 Ed. 3. 26. Traverse per Br. 2. says further, That
in a Leet such a Presentment of Felony is not Traversable, because out of a
Leet no Process can be Awarded upon it.

Forest.
IV. 14 and 15 H. 8. 10. 1 N. 3. And that, etc. Stewards of Leets shall have
full power to enquire of tracing or killing Hares, etc.

Fees.
V. 1 Jac. 5. No Stewards of Leets, etc. to receive the profits to their own use.

Libels, see Slander. Liberties, see Franchise.
(License.)
Poor.
I. LAmb. 331. Any two Justices may License diseased persons, living of Alms, to
Travel without begging to Bath or Buckstone for remedy of their Grief, Crumpt.
198. al. 199. b. 39 Eliz. 4. 7. N. 1. Dalt. 100. cap. 40.

Victuals.
II. Lamb. 345. He that is Convict before the Justices for abusing a License for
Transporting Victuals, shall likewise be Committed by them, and shall remain
there a^ whole year without Bail or Mainprise, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 5.

Fish.
III. Lamb. 430. Inquiry in Sessions if any Parson, Vicar or Curate, have taken
above four pence for entering into the Church-Book the License of a sick person
to eat flesh upon fish days, 5 Eliz. 5. 21. N. 1.

Cattle.
IV. Lamb. 601. The Licenses for Badgers and Drovers, etc. are to be granted in
open Sessions, Crumpt. 80 b. 5 Eliz. 12. 4. N. 1.

Poor.
V. Dalt. 127. cap. 47. I do not find that any one or more Justices of the Peace
may, or can, in any Case, License any man to beg, or ask relief at all, etc.
and therefore Quaere of such Briefs and Licenses as lately have come from, or
in the name of the Lord Mayor of London, licensing poor persons to Travel, and
to ask and beg relief in their Travel, etc.

Apprentice.
VI. Dalt. 127. cap. 47. Yet any one Justice of Peace may License Laborers in
Hay and Harvest time to pass from one Country to another to work, but not to
wander or beg, 5 Eliz. 4.. N.

VII. Lamb. 330. Any two Justices of Peace may give allowance for urgent and
necessary occasions, to remain in an Inn, Victualling-house, or Alehouse, 1
Jac. 9. 2. N. 5.

VIII. Lamb. 349. Two Justices of Peace, the one being of the Quorum, may
prohibit and remove common Ale-selling, and may also allow the same, etc. 5 and
6 Ed. 6. 25. 1. N. 2. Crumpt. 198, 197. Dalt. 21. cap. 6.

IX. 33 H. 8. 6. 8. N. 1. All Patents etc. to License to shoot in Cross-bows
and Hand Guns void.

Games.
X. 33 H. 8. 9. 13. N. 1. License of Gaming-house to contain the particular
Games, and Persons, etc.

Poor.
XI. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 4. 6. N. 2. License to Egyptians to continue in
England, or Wales void.

Fish.
XII. 5 Eliz. 5. 18. N. 1. License to eat flesh on fish days, otherwise then
prescribed in this Statute, void. Crumpt. 17.

Drapery.
XIII. 8 Eliz. 6. 5. N 1. License to Transport Cloth, extends not to Kentish and
Suffolk, etc.

Pope.
XIV. 13. Eliz. 3.. N. Departing the Realm without, or staying after expiration
of License, on notice by Proclamation, forfeits Lands for life etc.

XV. 12 Car. 2. 25.. N. License to retail Wines must be to Trader or Owner of
House. Wine.


XVI. 15 Car. 2. 11. 15. N. 1. None to Retail Coffee, Ale.
etc. without License first had in General Sessions.

XVII. 29 Car. 2. 7. 2. N. 1. License of Wherry-Barge, etc. in the Thames on
the Lord's Day to be by Justice of the Peace of the County, Sewers.
etc. or head Officer adjoining, etc.

XVIII. Crumpt. 80. b. Note, That 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 16. N. 1. speaks of him
that is known for a common Drover, and not of any petty Chapman: And 5 Eliz.
12. 4. N. 1. speaks of common Drovers, and not of any petty Chapman; and it
appears that the intent of this Statute is to repress the number of Drovers,
Badgers, and Laders, etc. of Corn, etc. Therefore see if the Justices can
License petty Chapmen to buy Cattle as common Drovers.

XIX. Crumpt. 17. Charge at Sessions, That no Butcher, nor other person, Days.
tho he be Licensed, shall kill or dress in Lent to the intent to sell, 1 Jac.
29.. N.

XX. Crumpt. 199. b. Two Justices of Peace may give License to Fencers, Poor.
etc. Pedlers, Tinkers, and petty Chapmen to go, so that they be not taken as
Rogues, 14 Eliz. 5.. N. 39 Eliz. 4.

Lying in wait, see Coron. Linen Cloth, see Drapery. Liquors, see Ale.
Liveries, see Maintenance. Logwood see Drapery. Long-bows, see Games, and
Shooting. Loiterers, see Poor. London, see Franchise, Justices. Lord's Day, see
Days, Religion. Lunatic, see Infant. Maim, see Affray, Trespass. Malice, see
Coron. Intendment. Mainprise, see Bail.
(Maintenance.)
Liveries, Embracery, Champerty, Barretors.
I. 19 H. 7. 13. 1. N. 11. Every person duly proved to be a Maintainer or
Imbraceor of Jury on Riot, Forfeiture.
shall forfeit 20 li. and be Committed at discretion of the Justices, Crumpt.
199. b.

II. Lamb. 435. Inquiry in Sessions, if any have by himself, Liveries.
or other for him, given any Livery, or Sign, or Company, or Badge, or tetained
any man, other then his Houshold-servant, Officer, or Learned man in the Law, 1
H. 4. 7. and 7 H. 4. 21. and 8 Ed. 4. 2.

III. Crumpt. 93. b. Charge to Jury in Sessions to inquire of Maintainers,
Conspiracy.
Confederators, Conspirators, Imbraceors, and undertakers of Quarrels, Matters,
and other businesses, and of Champertors; and if Maintainers be Convict, they
shall forfeit as much as they can, 20 Ed. 3. 4.. N. and the Champertor ten
times as much as he has taken, Fitzherbet Ip. 118. see Tit. Maintainers,
Imbraceors, etc. Crumpt. 175.

IV. Crumpt. 174. a. 175. b. The Justices of Peace may hear and determine by
Inquiry at the Quarter Sessions, or by Information given to them of Maintainers
and Imbraceors, and award Execution of the forfeiture of Money or Imprisonment,
or both, according to the Statutes thereof made, whereof they are Convict, 33
H. 8. 10.. N. and 37 H. 8. 7.. N.

V. West Symb. 2 part 100. b. Sect. 89. An Indictment for Maintenance in an
Assize, Lamb. preced. 14. pl. 37.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod I.C.T.C. ac
I.P. de O. in Com. E. predict' Yeomen, ac alii de confederatione and communia
predictorum I.C.T.C. and I.P. existentes, quoddam placitum Assizae Novae
Disseisin quod nuper Summonitum fuit in curia dicti Domini Regis coram dilectis
and fidelibus dicti Domini Regis I. S. and I. K. and aliis nuper Justiciariis
ipsius Domini Regis ad Assizam illam capiend' assignat' per Breve ipsius Domini
Regis inter W. S. Querent' and I. H. Tenent' de quodam libero Tenement' in N.
and S. in Com E. predict. videlicet pro medietate inde sibi and haeredibus suis
imperpetuum, videlicet pro C li. Sterling' in pecunia numerata in hac part
habenda, per conventionem inde inter predict' N. S. and praefatos I.C.T.C. and
I.P. X die mensis Augusti Anno Regni, etc. apud O. predict' in dicto Comitat.
factam pro quod' predict' W.S. contra prefat' I. H. dict' die Anno and loco
assumpserunt manutenend' and manutenuerunt in magnum dicti Domini Regis
contempt' ac contra form' diversorum Statutorum hujus Regni sui Angl. in
hujusmodi casu provisorum ac edit.

2. Ibid. Sect. 90. An Indictment for Maintenance in an Assize of fresh force,
3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 25. infra 11.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum de
communi consilio Domini Edw. nuper Regis Angl. primi progenitor' Domini Regis
nunc provisum sit quod nullus minister, vel aliquis alius manuteneat placita,
quaerelas vel negotia, quae sunt in curia Domini Regis de Terris, Tenement' Aut
aliis rebus quibuscunque pro part rei petitae vel aliquo proficuo per convent'
factum inde habend' nec aliquis jus suum sub hujusmodi condition alteri
dimittat quidam W. P. etc. simul cum R. B. etc. X die, etc. Anno Regni, etc.
Quandam quaerellam cujusdem Assizae friscae forciae quae est in curia Domini
Regis nunc Comitatis E. coram E. B. Major, and C. D. Vicecom' ejusdem Cviitatis
sine Brevi ipsius Domini Regis nunc secund' consuet' Comitat' predict' inter
quosdam I. R. and T. L. de uno messuagio cum pertinent' in curia predic' pro
part ejusdem messuagii videlicet, pro medietate messuagii illius sibi and
haeredibus suis imperpetuum and alio proficuo, videlicet pro medietate damnorum
in quaerela Assizae praedict' recuperand' inde habend' per conventionem inter
praefat' I. ac predict' W. and R. S. apud E. predict' factum assumpsit
manutenend' and manutenuit ad grave damnum ipsius T. L. and contra formam
provisionis predict' etc.

VI. West Symb. 2. part 225. Sect. 182. An Indictment for giving a Livery, 7 H.
4. 14. and 8 H. 6. 4. and 8 Ed. 4. cap. 2. Lamb. Precedents, 16. b. pl. 44.

Essex. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod T. B. de C.
in Com' E. predict' Armig' X die Sept. Anno Regni, etc. apud C. predict' in
Com' E. predict' quasdam liberatas vesturae, videlicet, cuidam A. B. de C.
predict' in Com' E. predic' Yeoman, tres ulnas panni lanei colorat' Veneti
pretii xx s. Et C. D. de B. in dict' Com' Yeoman, alias tres ulnas similis
panni lanei eorund' coloris and pretii, ad duas seperales tunicas pro prefat'
A. B. and C D. inde faciend' dedit and distribuit ubi revera prefat' A. B. and
C. D. aut eorum alter nunquam fuerant aut fuit, domestici Servientes aut
Domesticus Serviens, Officiarii, sive Officiarius, Ballivi, sive Ballivus,
dicti T.B. aut de Consilio ipsius T. B. in una lege sive altera Eruditi vel
Eruditus in magnum dicti Domini Regis contempt' ac contra form' diversorum
Statutorum in hujusmodi casu antehac provis. ac edit.

2. Ibid. Sect. 183. An Indictment for receiving and using a Livery, Lamb.
Precedents 16. b. pl. 45.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' E. predict' Yeoman, unam liberatam panni, videlicet, tres ulnas panni
lanei coloris Veneti Anglice vocat' Watchet ad valent' xx s. ad tunica inde
sibi faciend' de T. B. de C. predict' in Com' E. predict' Armiger, apud C.
predict' in dicto Com' E. X die August. Anno Regni, etc. recepit ac eandem
tunicam a dicto X die, etc. Anno supradict' usque xx diem mensis Sept. Anno
supradict' apud C. predict' in Com' E. predict' and alibi in diversis locis
infra Com' predict' usus est ubi idem A. B. dicto tempore receptionis liberat'
predict' aut unquam postea non fuit familiaris, Officiarius, Ballivus, aut de
Consilio dicti T. B. in una lege aut altera Eruditus in magnum dicti domini
Regis contempt' ac contra form' diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu antehac
provis. and edit.

3. Ibid. Sect. 184. An Indictment for giving, receiving and using of Liveries,
contrary to 7 H. 4. cap. 14. and 8 H. 6. cap. 4. Crumpt. 262. pl. 96.

Essex ss.
Juratores super sacramentum suum dicunt, quod cum in Statut' Domini Henrici
nuper Regis Angliae Quarti, Anno Regni sui VII, ac in Statut' in Parliament'
Domini Henrici VI. bonae memoriae, Anno Regni sui VIII, apud W. in Com' M.
tent' and edit' inter cetera continetur, quod non liceat alicui cujuscunque
Status, Gradus seu conditionis fuerit, dare aliquam liberatam Vesturae, vel
capic' alicui personae, nisi tantummodo familiaribus, Officiariis, Ballivis and
Servientibus suis, ac aliis hominibus de Consilio suo in una lege seu altera
Eruditi, sub poena C. S. de Terris and Tenement' bonis, and catallis hujusmodi
liberat' dantes 54. s. de Terris and Tenement' bonis and catallis hujusmodi
liberat' recipient' sive utent' toties quoties aliqua liberat' in contrarium
Stat' pred' dat' seu accept' fuerit levand'.

Quidam tamen R. B. de C. in Com' E. predict' Statutum predict' minime
ponderans, quasdam liberat' Vestur' videlicet diversas togas coloris
Frost-Meadow quibusdam I. de B. Yeoman, etc. S. C. de eodem Yeoman, qui nec
sunt nec unquam fuerant Servient' Officiar' Ballivi seu familiarum ipsius R. B.
nec in lege una seu altera aliqualiter Erudit' aut instruct' X die, etc. Anno
Regni, etc. Apud, etc. dedit and distribuit, and predict' I. and S. easdem
togas continue, a predict' X die Anno, and loco supradict' contra form' Statut'
predict' receperunt, and eisdem togis continue a predict' X die, etc. usque,
etc. Apud E. F. and S. in Com' E. predict' usi fuerunt in contempt' dicti
Domini Regis, legisque suae dedecus manifest' ac contra form' Statut' praedict'.

West Symb. 2. Part 149. b. Sect. 323. An Indictment of Maintenance in a
formedon in discendre contra, 20 Edw. 3. cap. 4. and 13 Edw. 1. W. 2. cap. 49.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum in Statuto in Parliament' apud Westminster. in
Com' Middlesex nuper edit' inter cetera continetur, quod nulla persona de Regno
Domini Regis Angliae cujuscunque status, gradus seu condition' fuerit, aliquam
quaerelam in aliqua curia, nec alibi manuteneat, nec sustineat super penam
imprisonament' and faciend' Domino Regi finem and redemptionem, ad voluntatem
ipsius Domini Regis prout etc.

Quidem tamen P. M. de P. in Com' E. predict' Yeoman, Statut' predict' minime
Ponderans quandam querelam cujusdam loquelae quae A. in curia Domini Regis nunc
coram Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis, de communi Banco apud Westminster. predict'
per Breve ipsius Domini Regis de forma donationis en discendre inter R. G.
Querent' and N. A. Tenent' de V Acris Terrae, etc. cum pertinentiis in C. pro
part ipsius N. tenend' II. die Apr' Anno, etc. apud N. in Com' predict'
manutenuit, and sustentavit, and adhuc sustentat in dicti Domini Regis nunc
contempt', ac contra form' Stat' and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis.

VIII. West. Symb. 2. part 157. sect. 351. An Indictment for Maintenance in C.
B. upon 20 Ed. 3. cap. 4.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant quod cum in
Statut' in Parliament' Domini Edw. nuper Regis Angl' Tertii, apud Westminster. in
Com' Middlesex, Anno Regni sui XX. tent' edit' inter cetera continetur quod
nulla persona Regni Angl' cujuscunque status, gradus seu conditionis fuerit,
aliqam quaerelam in Patria, nec in curia Domini Regis manuteneat seu sustineat,
sub-poena Imprisonament', and faciend' dicto Domino Regi finem, and
redemptionem ad voluntatem dicti Domini Regis quilibet juxta statum, gradum and
demerita sua, prout in eodem Statut' before apparet.

Quidam tamen T. D. nuper de etc. Statut' predict' aut penam in eodem content'
minime ponderans die and Anno, etc. quandam quaerelam loquelae quae est in
curia dicti Domini Regis ad placita per Billam inter quendam M. C. viduam, and
I.F. sub Vicecom' and T. P. Vicecom' Middlesex, ad quandam transgressionem
eidem M. E. prefat' I. illat' ut dicitur pro part predict' M. in curia dicti
Domini Regis manutenuit and sustentavit, and adhuc manutenet and sustentat, in
dicti Domini Regis nunc contempt', and populi sui grave Damnum, ac contra form'
Statut' and ordinat' predict.

IX. West. Symb. 2. part 113. sect. 137. An Indictment for Maintenance in debt
on 32 H. 8. cap. 9. Crumpt. 264. b. pl. 102.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod cum in
Statuto in Parliament' Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl' VIII. apud Westminster. in
Com' Middlesex, 28 die April, Anno Regni sui 31 Inchoat', Tent', and ibidem per
diversas Prorogationes usque 25 diem Maii, Anno Regni sui 32 Prorogat' and
continuat' and tunc, and ibidem tent'

Per dictum Dom' Regem cum assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium, ac
Communitatis in eodem Parliament' Congregat' nec non Autoritate ejusdem
Parliament' inter alia ad tunc and ibidem inactitat' existit, quod nulla
persona sive personae cujuscunque status, gradus seu conditionis, ipse, vel
ipsi, fuerit, vel fuerint, ex tunc de cetero illicite manuteneret, sive
manutenerent, aut causaret sive causarent, procuraret sive procurarent, aliquam
illicitam manutentionem in aliqua action, demanda, secta sive quaerela, in
aliqua curia Domini Regis, Cancellariae, Camerae Stellatae Albae Aulae, aut
alibi infra aliqua Dominia Regni Angliae, vel Walliae, sive in Marchiis earund'
ubi aliqua persona, sive aliquae personae habent, seu extunc imposterum
haberent Autoritatem virtute Commissionis Domini Regis suarum Literarum Patent'
vel Brevis ad tenend' placita terrae, vel examinand' audiend', sive
determinand' aliquem titulum de terra, sive aliquam materiam vel testes
concernent' titulum jus vel interesse aliquarum terrarum, tenement' sive
hereditament' Ac etiam quod nulla persona, sive personae Cujuscunque status,
Gradus vel Conditionis, ipse, vel ipsi, fuerit, sive fuerint, ex tunc in futuro
Illicite retineret, sive retinerent, pro manutentione alicujus sectae, sive
placiti, aliquarum personarum, aut aliquas personas, sive Imbrasiaret, vel
Imbrasiarent, aliquos liberos tenentes vel Juratores, aut subornaret aliquos
testes per literas, munera promissa, sive aliquem alium sinistrum labor', vel
medium ad manutenend' aliquam materiam sive causam, aut ad disturbation' vel
impediment' Justitiae, vel ad procuration' sive occasion' alicujus perjurium
per falsum verdict' aut aliter in aliquibus curiis antedictis sub paena
forisfaciend' pro qualibet hujusmodi offensa x l. Quorum una medietas esset
Domino regi, altera vero illi qui pro eadem prosequi voluerit per actionem
debit' Billam Quaerelam sive Informationem in aliqua curia dicti Domini regis
ubi nullum essonium protect' vadiat' legis sive Injunctio allocabitur, prout in
statut' predict' inter alia before Continetur.

Quidam tamen T. L. Statut' predict' minime ponderans quandam actionem quae
fuit in curia domini regis Coram Justitiariis suis de Banco inter quendam R. B.
quaerent' and quendam T. D. de placito debiti pro part Dicti R. B. versus
prefat' T. D. xxvii. die Junii, Anno regni, etc. apud S. in Com' predict'
manutenuit and sustentavit in Justitiae manifestam retardationem and
disturbantiam, ac in dicti Domini regis nunc contempt' and predict' T. D. grave
damnum, ac contra formam statut' predict, etc.

X. Crumpt. 263. pl. 98. Indictment of using Liveries, Contra, to 1 H. 4. 7. 1.
N. 9. and 7 H. 4. Cap. 14. and 1 Rich. 2. 7. and 8 H. 6. Cap. 4.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino rege super sacrament suum dicunt quod cum in statuto Hen.
4. nuper Regis Angliae apud W. Anno regni sui primo tent' edit' inter cetera
ordinat' existit quod nullus Archiepiscopus, Episcopus, Abbas, vel Prior, nec
aliquis alius Ecclesiasticus, vel temporalis, cujuscunque status, seu
conditionis existat infra regnum Angliae a festo sancti Purificat' beatae
Mariae virgin' tunc proxim' sequent' det aliquam liberat' panni, nisi solummodo
familiaribus and officiariis suis, ac illis qui de consilio suo existunt, tam
spiritualibus quam temporalibus, in una lege vel in altera eruditis sub paena
faciend' finem and redemptionem ad voluntatem Domini regis.

Ac postmodum in Parliament' Domini regis supradict' Anno regni sui septimo
tent' ordinatum fuit and statut' quod tam hoc statut' quam statutum de capiciis
tempore domini Richardi nuper regis Angl' secundi post conquestum fact'
firmiter tenerentur, custodientur and in debita Execution' ponerentur, addit'
eidem quod si aliquis miles vel aliqua persona minoris status det aliquam
liberatam panni vel capiciorum contra formam statut' predict' immorat' paenam
cent' solid' pro qualibet liberata panni vel capiciorum Domino regi quoties in
contrarium statutorum vel ordinationum predict' faceret, and quod ipse qui
aliquam liberat' panni vel capiciorum receperit incurrat similiter paenam x l.
solid' solvend' eidem Domino regi ut predictum est, and quod ipse qui in hoc
casu sequi voluerit haberet medietatem talium paenarum pro labor suo, and quod
poenae predict' nullo modo pardonentur.

Ac in statuto in Parliament' Henrici vi. nuper regis Angliae apud Westm' in
Com' M. Anno regni sui viii. tent' edit' ordinatum and stabilitum existit quod
cum ordinatum sit per diversa statuta facta temporibus nobilium progenitorum
ipsius regis quod nullus miles sive aliquis alius de minore statu daret aliquam
liberatam pannorum seu Capiciorum aliquibus nisi familiaribus and officiariis
suis, and hominibus in una lege vel in altera erudit', sub paena Centum solid'
de Donatore and xl s. de receptore levand' toties quoties fecerint in
contrarium statut' predict' and quod ipse qui prosequi voluerit habeat unam
medietatem paenae predict' postquam hujusmodi dilinquentes debite convicti
fuerint; and quod Justiciarii ad Assizas capiend' and Justiciarii pacis in
quolibet Comitatu Regni Angl' Habeant potestatem de tempore in tempus in
Sessionibus suis ad Inquirend' de materia predicta, and illas Audiend' and
terminand' prout in statuto predicto before continetur.

Quidam J. L. nuper de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman, and alii quandam liberat'
panni viz. quilibet eorum unam togam coloris etc. de R. L. de S. Armiger' qui
familiares sive officiarii sui aut de consilio suo in una lege vel in altera
eruditi non existunt apud S. in Com' predict' die, etc. Anno etc. receperunt
and eisdem togis A. dicto x die, etc. usque etc. usi fuerunt, and quilibet
eorum usus fuit in Domini regis nunc contemptum, and contra form' statut' and
ordinat' predict' etc.

XI. Crumpt. 268. pl. 106. an Indictment of Champerty, on 28 Ed. 1. St. 3. Cap.
11. West Symb. 100. b. pl. 90. supra 5 2.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino rege etc. super sacrament' suum presentant, quod cum de
Communi consilio Regni Domini nostri Edw. nuper regis Angl' primi Anno Regni
sui xxviii. progenitoris Domini regis nunc provisum sit quod nullus minister
vel aliquis alius manuteneat placita, quaerelas vel negotia quae sunt in curia
Domini regis de terris, tenement' aut aliis rebus quibuscunque pro part rei
petitae, vel aliquo proficuo per Conventionem factam inde habend', nec aliquis
jus suum sub hujusmodi Condition alteri dimittat, quidem W. P. etc. simul cum
R. S. etc. x die etc. Anno etc. quandam querelam cujusd' Assizae friscae
forriae quae est in curia dicti Domini regis nunc Civitatis E. Coram E. B.
majore and C. D. vicecom' ejusd' Civitat' sine brevi ipsius Domini regis
secundum consuet' Civitat' predict' inter quosdam J. R. and T. L. de uno
messuagio cum pertinent' in Civitat' predict' pro part ejusd' messuagii viz.
pro medietate messuagii illius sibi and heredibus suis imperpetuum, and alio
proficuo viz. pro medietate Damnorum in quaerela assizae predict' recuperand'
inde habend' per conventionem inter prefat' J. ac predict' W. and R. S. apud E.
predict' factam assumpsit manutenend' and manutenet ad grave Damnum ipsius T.
L. and contra formam provisionis predict', etc.

May-poles, see Games. Manslaughter, see Coron. Marches, see Wales.
(Merchants)
Factors, Ouster le mere, Travelers, Trades, Ships.
Ouster le mere.
I. 31 Ed. 3. 7. 1. N. 2. The King may assign Justices to inquire, hear and
determine of exporters of Wool, Woolfels and Leather against the Statute of the
Staple, Victuals.
Lamb. 590.

II. 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 5. 6. N. 1. All and singular Justices of Peace, as
well within Liberties as without, at any time within three years after the
Offense, may as well by the Oaths to inquire, as also to hear and examine the
Master and Mariners, and all others of Offenders in Transporting Corn,
Victuals, Wood, etc. and to hear and determine the same as other Trespasses,
Lamb. 449. 503 Crumpt. 85. b. 86.

Seizure.
III. 13 and 14 Car. 2. 13. 3. N. 1. Any Justice of Peace on Complaint at time
reasonable, may give Warrant to Constable to enter and search Shops, etc. being
open, and to seize Foreign Imported Bonelace, Embroydery, Cut-work, Buttons,
Silke-works, etc.

IV. Lamb. 431. Scavage.
Enquiry in Sessions if any Officer have in any Town taken scavage or shewage,
that is to say, any thing for the showing of Ware or Merchandise that be truly
Customed to the King before, 19 H. 7. 8.. N.

V. Kilb. Presidents, 118. Officer.
A warrant against those who abuse the Officers of the Customs, on 14 Car. 2.
11.. N.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County,
at M. in the County aforesaid. Kent. ss.
FOrasmuch as it has been made appear unto me, that A. B. and C. D. persons
appointed by His Majesty for managing the Customs (Officers of the Customs or
their Deputies, etc.) have lately been forceably hindered (afronted, abused,
beaten or wounded to the hazard of their Lives) in the due Execution of Offices
in the said place by E. F. G. H. Armed with Clubs, etc. on board of the Ship
called, etc. (or on the Land or Water, etc.) and J. K. etc. acting in their Aid
and Assistance; these are therefore in His Majesty's Name to require you the
said Constables and Borsholders, and every of you, that you some or one of you
do take the said E. F. G. H. and them convey to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid,
and them there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this
precept, requiring also you the said Keeper to receive them into the said Goal,
and them there safely to keep till the next Quarter Sessions, there to be dealt
withal as by the Statute in that behalf lately made is appointed; hereof fail
not at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the x day, etc. Anno, etc.
VI. Kilb. Presidents. 119. Customs.
A Warrant against taking up uncustomed Goods, 14 Car. 2. 11. N.

Kent. ss.
FOrasmuch as complaint has been made unto me that A. B. Carman, (Porter,
Waterman, etc.) at E. in the County aforesaid, has assisted in the taking up
(Landing, Shipping off, or Conveying away, etc. (of Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises) prohibited (or whereof the Custom, Subsidy, or other duty are
payable to the King) without the presence of any of the Officers of his
Majesty's Customs thereunto appointed (or at hours and times not appointed by
law: or Goods passing by Certificates, Wast, Cochet or otherwise without the
presence of, or notice given to one of his Majesty's Officers,) these are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of you, that
you some or one of you apprehend the said A. B. and him bring before me to
answer the Premises, and farther to do and receive as by the said Statute in
that behalf lately made is appointed, hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the Tenth day, etc. Anno, etc.
VII. Kilb. Presidents. 120, 121. A Mittimus upon the precedent Warrant, 14
Car. 2. 11.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal of the said County at
C. in the County aforesaid. Kent. ss.
FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before me, That B. C. has assisted in
the taking up, etc. of Goods, etc. Prohibited, etc. without the presence of any
of the Officers of his Majesty's Customs thereunto appointed etc. These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you the said Constable and
Borsholders, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do convey the
said B. C. to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and him there deliver to the
aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this Precept, requiring also you
the said Keeper to receive him into the said Goal, and him there safely to keep
until he shall find sufficient Surety to be of Good behavior, for so long
time, until he be thereof discharged by the Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, under
Treasurer, or Barons of the Exchequer, or otherwise by due course of Law.
Hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the Tenth day, etc. Anno, etc.
VIII. Upon the second like Offense, upon 14 Car. 2. 11.. N.

Kent. ss.
FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before me, that C. D. has assisted in
the taking up, etc. of Goods, etc. Prohibited, etc. without the presence of any
of the Officers of his Majesty's Customs thereunto appointed, etc. and
forasmuch as the said C. D. has once before Offended in the like kind, and
has been duly Convicted thereof: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to
require you the said Constable and Borsholders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you do convey the said C. D. to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid,
and him there deliver to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept, requiring also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Goal,
and him there safely to keep for the space of two months without Bail or
Mainprise, or until he shall pay the Sheriff of this County the Sum of Five
Pounds for the use of his Majesty, or until he shall by the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor or under-Treasurer, or Court of Exchequer be thence discharged, or
by due Course of Law, hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the Tenth day, etc. Anno, etc.
(Market Overt.)
Fairs, Toll, Property, Forestalling, Ingrossors, Regrators.
Forestallers.
I. LAmb. 345, 562. He that is Convicted before the Justices of the Peace for
offending the Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 4. N. 1. made against Forestalling,
etc. shall be Committed to the Goal for two months without Bail or Mainprise,
Crumpt. 155. b.

Days.
II. Lamb. 443. Inquiry in Sessions if any have within these two years
Forestalled, Regrated or Engrossed unlawfully, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 1. 2, 3.
Crumpt. 79. b. 124. a. 193.

III. Lamb. 444, 445. Inquiry in Sessions if any Person have within these two
years bought Corn in any Fair or Market for Change of his Seed, having then
sufficient for his House, and for sowing his Ground for a year, and did not
bring thither if he might so much as he did so buy, and did not the same day
Sell it after the Price then going, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.. 8. N. 1. Crumpt. 80.

IV. Lamb. 446. Enquiry in Sessions if any Person have within these two years
bought Oxen, Ronts, Steers, Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Goats or Kids
living, and sold any of the same again alive before he has kept them five
weeks, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 9. N. 1. Crumpt. 81.

V. Lamb. 446. Enquiry in Sessions if any Person have Regrated, Engrossed, or
got into his hands any Oaken Bark to the Intent to sell the same again, 1 Jac.
22. 19. N. 1.

VI. Lamb. 446. Enquiry in Sessions if any have Forestalled any Hydes, or
bought any Hide out of open Market or Fair, unless of such as have killed
Beasts for their own Provision, 1 Jac. 22. 7. N. 3.

VII. Lamb. 446. Drapery.
Enquiry in Sessions if any Person have bought any Woollen Yarn, and have not
made Cloth thereof, 8 H. 6. 5.. N. or have bought any Wool but of the owner of
the Sheep, and of the Tyth. 14 Rich. 2. 4. Crumpt. 95. b.

VIII. Lamb. 503. Process.
Upon the Examination of two lawful Witnesses the Justices of Peace may make
Process as if it were upon an Inquisition of xii men, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 10 N.
1. Crumpt. 126. b. 130. ab. 151. b. 194. b.

IX. Lamb. 576. Execution.
Doubtless by special Provision made in 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 10. N. 4. against
Forestallers, the Justices of Peace may make Execution of the one moiety of the
Forfeiture for him that sueth by Fieri facias or Capias, as the Kings Justices
at Westminster use to do, Crumpt. 183. b. 194. b.

X. Lamb. 599. The Enquiry, hearing and determination of Forestallings,
Ingrossings and Regratings, may be at the Quarter Sessions, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.
10. N. 1.

XI. Crumpt. 80. b. Nota, that 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 16. N. 1. speaks of him that
is known for a common Drover, and not of any pety Chapman, and 5 Eliz. 12. 4.
N. 1. speaks of common Drovers and not of any pety Chapman, and it appears by
this Statute that the intent was to repress the number of Drovers, Badgers,
Laders, etc. of Corn, etc. therefore see if the Justices can License the pety
Chapmen to buy Cattle as the common Drovers.

XII. Crumpt. 196. b. 14. Justices of Peace in Sessions shall take
recognizances of Badgers and Drovers, that they shall not Forestal, nor
Ingross, nor do any other thing against the Statute, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 16. N.
1.

XIII. Dalt. 73. Cap. 27. Every Justice of Peace after sale made in open Fair
or Market of any stolen Horse, etc. at any time within Six months after the said
Sale may take, and hear the Claim and Proof of the right owner from whom the
same was Stolen, or of his Executors or Administrators, or other person by their
appointment, which proof must be by two sufficient Witnesses upon Oath to be
made within Forty days next ensuing such Claim. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 7. 7. N.
1.

XIV. Dalt. 74. Cap. 27. If the Thief which steals a Horse shall sell the
same in Market-Overt or Fair by a false name, and that be so Entered in the
Toll-Book, such mis-naming of the Seller makes the Sale void against the right
owner, and this was the opinion of Windham and Rhodes Justices. Anno 30 Eliz.
Gibs and Bastel upon 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 7. 4. N. 1. where Potter sold by the
name of Lyster, and so Entered, and Plaintiff recovered in Trover.

XV. 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. Winch. Cap. 6. 1. N. 16. The King commands and
forbids, that from henceforth neither Fairs nor Markets be kept in Church
yards for the honor of the Church, Crumpt. 16. b.

XVI. 27 H. 6. 5. 1. N. 2. All manner of Fairs and Markets in the said
principal Feasts ( viz. of Ascension, Corpus Christi, Whitsunday, Trinity
Sunday, Assumption of our Lady, all Saints, etc.) and Good Friday, shall
clearly cease from all showing of any Goods or Merchandises (necessary Victual
only except,) on pain of Forfeiture of all the Goods so showed, etc.

XVII. 3 Car. 1. Cap. 1. (2) 1. N. 3. If any Butcher by himself, Days.
or any other for him by his Privity or Consent, shall kill or sell any Victual
upon the Lords day (called Sunday) such Butcher shall forfeit Six Shillings
eight pence.

XVIII. Dalt. 74. Cap. 27. Also the Lord of such a Fair or Market kept upon the
Sabbath day, contrary to the Statute (27 H. 6. 5.) may be therefore Indicted
for the King, either at the Assizes and General Goal Delivery, or at the
Quarter Sessions of the Peace within that County.

Poor.
XIX. Crumpt. 199. b. Two Justices of Peace may give License to Pedlers, Tinkers
and petty Chapmen to Travel, so that they shall not be taken as Rogues, 14
Eliz. 5.. N. 39 Eliz. 4.. N. and 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21.. 1. N. 3.

XX. Lamb. 431. Enquiry at Sessions if the Clerk of a Market have taken any
common Fine to dispense with faults: or has ridden with more then six Horses,
or has tarried longer in the Country then the necessity of his business
required, 13 Rich. 2. 4.. N. Crumpt. Jurisd. 220.

Toll.
XXI. Lamb. 464. Enquiry in Sessions if any owner, Officer, or Ruler of any Fair
or Market, have not appointed one certain open place there for the Sale of
Horses, Geldings, Mares and Colts, and one sufficient Person to take Toll, and
keep the said place: and if any such Toll-gatherer, or his Deputy have taken
any more then one penny Toll for one Contract, or for Entering the names of the
Parties, and that in the same place only, and between Ten of the Clock in the
Morning and Sun setting, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 7. 2. N. 1.

XXII. Lamb. 464, 465. If any Person have in any Fair or Market sold, given, or
put away any Horse, Mare, Gelding, Colt or Filly, unless the Toll-taker,
Book-keeper, Bailiff, or Chief Officer thereof will take upon him perfect
knowledge of the same Person, his Name, sur Name, and place of Dweling, or
Residence, and shall enter the same into a Book kept for Horses Sold, or unless
the said Person do bring to such Toll-taker, Book-keeper, etc. one sufficient
and Credible Person that can and will testify that he knows the Seller,
Giver, or putter Away, his Name, Sur-Name, Mystery, and dwelling place, and
there enter into such Book as well the same, as the Name, Sur-Name, Mystery,
and place of Dwelling, or resiance of such Testifier, together with the true
Price that shall be taken for any such Horse, Mare, Guelding, Colt or Filly so
Sold, none shall so testify unless he do indeed truly know the same upon pain
to forfeit v l. for every default in any the Premises, and the like pain upon
the Toll-taker, or other Officer aforesaid, that shall refuse to give the
Buyer, or taker of such Horse, etc. a true Note in Writing of that his Entry,
the Party paying two pence for the same, 31 Eliz. 12.. N.

XXIII. Lamb. 431. Enquiry in Sessions if any Officer have in any Town taken
Scavage or Shewage, that is to say, any thing for the showing of Ware or
Merchandise that be truly Customed to the King before, 19 H. 7. 8.. N.

XXIV. Dalt. 146. Cap. 65. Sir Francis Harvey has often delivered in his
Charge at Cambridge Assizes these Directions, scilicet, that one Justice of the
Peace at the least ought to sit with the Clerk of the Market, to see the Kings
Subjects be not wronged.

2. And that the Clerk of the Market ought to have with him his Directions out
of the Exchequer, etc.

XXV. West Symb. 2. part 124. b. sect. 179. An Indictment for Regrating of Corn
in a Market, pract. Presidents, 71.

Essex. ss.
Inquiratur pro domino rege, etc. si W. T. D. N. in predict' Com' E. and A. B.
etc. Laborers x die etc. Anno regni etc. and quam plurimis aliis diebus antea
and postea fuerunt regratores mercati de D. in predict' Com' E. ac diversa
genera Gravorum ad mercat' predict' per diversos ligeos dicti Domini regis
illuc adventur' viz. x Quarterii frumenti ad valent' vi l. apud D. predict' in
predict' Com' E. regrat' ad Intentionem quod idem frument' iterum venderent ad
grave Damnum populi dicti Domini regis and Contra Formam diversorum statut' in
hujusmodi casu Edit' and Provis.

XXVI. West. Symb. 2. part 136. sect. 232. An Indictment for regrating of Corn.

Essex. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino rege etc. si R. L. nuper de T. in Com' E. predict'
Yeoman, and H. D. nuper de N. in Com' predict' Yeoman, xx die Junii Anno regni
etc. apud B. and T. in Com' predict' Emerunt and regrataverunt de T. S. R. R.
and aliis ligeis Domini regis l. Quarter' frumenti pertii xxv l. Cent'
quarteria Hordei pretii xxiv l. and al' frument' and Hordea in Domibus mansion'
suis ut regratores mercati dicti Domini regis accumulaver' and Custodiverunt ea
Intention ut frument' Hordea and alia grana sub suis Custodiis ad suum libitum
exponere and vendere potuerunt, ob quod grana in mercat' and villis Comitat'
predict' multipliciter Chariora and rariora forent in grave damnum populi
Domini regis, ac contra formam statuti in hujusmodi Casu Edit' and Provisi.

XXVII. Pract. Presidents, 59. An Indictment for Engrossing of Corn to sell it
again, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.. N.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de C.
in Com' K. predict' Laborer V die Maii Anno Regni, etc. apud M. in Com' K.
predict' ac diversis aliis diebus tam antea quam postea diversa grana, viz. LXX
quarteria Hordei and XXX quarteria tritici and XX quarteria brasii ad valentiam
etc. Emit and Ingrossavit and in manibus suis tenuit ea Intention ad vendend'
grana predict' contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu Edit' and provisi, in
contempt' dicti Domini regis nunc, and contra pacem dicti Domini regis Coronam
and dignitatem suas.

XXVIII. West. Symb. 2 part 124. b. Sect. 180. An Indictment for Regrating of
Fish and Butter, etc. Lamb. Precedents, 19. pl. 54.

Essex. ss
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A B. de C.
in dict' Com. E. Mercer XX die Julii Anno Regni, etc. apud C predict' in Com'
E. predict' in quodam mercatu tunc ibidem tent' pro XL s. monet' Emit',
regratavit, obtinuit and nactus est in possessione, and manus suas X paria
piscium Angl. dict' Ten Couple of Lings, and tria vasa Butyri falsi Angl.
vocat' Three Firkins of Salt Butter de quodam E. F. qui predict' X paria
piscium, ac dict' tria vasa Butiri ad Eund' mercatum, ut ea ad tunc ibidem
venderet adduxisset, and quod immediate postea scil. dict' XX die etc. Anno
etc. supradict' idem A. B. in dicto eodem pleno mercatu tunc ibidem apud C.
predict' in dict' Com' E. tent' eodem omnia dicta paria piscium ac butyri vasa
cuidam H. R. pro LXXX s. legalis monet' dicti Domini Regis hujus Regni sui
Angliae illicite vendidit in magnum reipublicae damnum ac contra form'
diversorum Statutorum hujus Regni Angl. in hujusmodi casu provisorum ac
editorum.

(Marriage.)
Bar and Feme, Coverture Women.
Bar and Feme.
I. LAmb. 416. Enquiry in Sessions if any Person being Married, shall Marry any
other, the former Husband or Wife being alive, other then such Persons whose
Husband or Wife have remaind beyond the Seas Seven years together, or has
absented him or her self one from the other Seven years together, within the
Kings Dominions, the one not knowing the other to be Living, or that was at the
time of such Marriage lawfully divorced, or whose former Marriage has by
Sentence Ecclesiastical been declared to be void, or whose former Marriage was
had within age of Consent 1 Jac. 11. 1. N. 2. Crumpt. 52.

Clergy.
II. Lamb. 555. Bigamus, that is to say, he that has been twice Married, or
which has Married a Widow, may have his Clergy at this day, though in old time
it were a good Counterplea against it, 4 Ed. 1. 5. de Bigamis, Dyer, 201. b. pl.

Ordinary.
III. Lamb. 544. Marrow says also, that if Bigamy that ungodly Popish
Counterplea had been alleged against one that prayed his Clergy, the Justices
of Peace could not have written to the Ordinary to certify the same.

Indictment.
IV. An Indictment for Marrying without a Ring, in practick part of Justice,
etc. 169. on 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 12. 3. N. 1.

Midd. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. de C.
in Com' M. predict' Clericus persona Ecclesiastica ac minister Ecclesiae de C.
predict' existens, divisans and imaginans diversa varia and insolita scismata
Ritus and Consuetudines inter populum dicti Domini Regis Regni sui Angl'
spargere and suscitare and plurimos ligeos and vera pietatis and religionis
Tramite necnon a Ritibus Ecclesiae Anglicanae and a forma ordinationis Communis
precationis and divini servitii in Ecclesia Anglicana pie and recte stabilit'
and usitat' in Densissimas Errorum tenebras producere primo die Martii Anno
Regni, etc. apud C. predict' viz. in Ecclesia parochiali ibidem quasdam C. D.
and E. uxorem ejus maritavit, and in juri matrimoniali Conjunxit non Dans
prefat' E. ad tunc and ibidem tempore solemnizationis sponsalium inter eosdem
C. and E. aliquem Annulum nuptialem prout Juxta morem and Consuetudinem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae fieri debet and solet: sed idem A. B. ad tunc and ibidem
sponsalia inter prefat' C. and E. Celebravit quantumvis prefat' E. Dicto
tempore Celebrationis sponsalia predict', aliquem Annulum non dedit contra
formam Statut' and ordinationem in hujusmodi Casu Edit' and provis. in
depravationem libri Communis precationis ac contra pacem dicti Domini Regis
Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Marshalsey, see Coron. Marshes, see Husbandry.
(Masons.)
Tyles, Brick-layers, Lime Burning.
I. LAmb. 193. Any one Justice of the Peace by the large words of 17 Ed. 4. 4.
1. N. 13. may enquire, hear and determine by his discretion, as well by
examination as otherwise the offenses committed in Tyle-making, and Assess the
Fine therein limited, and may call before him at any time or place such as have
best knowledge in Tyle-making, and appoint them searchers of the said defaults,
but learn whether it be so to be taken or no, Crumpt. 195. b. 23. Dalt. 140.
cap. 59.

II. Lamb. 460, 461. Enquiry at Sessions. If any Tyle-maker have not dug and
cast up his Earth for Tyle till after the first of November, or have not
stirred and turned it till after the first of February following, or if he have
wrought it before the first of March following, or if he have not wrought and
tried it from Stones, Veins and Chalk: Or if he have made, or any person have
put to Sale any plain Tyle under ten Inches and a half in length, six Inches
and a quarter in breadth, and half an Inch and a quarter in thickness,; or any
Roof Tyle under thirteen Inches in length, and half an Inch and half a quarter
in thickness, with convenient deepness: Or any Gutter-Tyles under ten Inches
and a half in length, with convenient thickness, breadth and depth: And if any
Searchers appointed for the Oversight of the true making of Tyle have not done
their effectual endeavor and diligence in this behalf, 17 Ed. 4. 4. 1. N. 2.
etc. Crumpt. 90. b. Dalt. 150. cap. 65.

III. Lamb. 500. Of like value ( viz. as Verdict of XII.) is a Presentment made
at the next Sessions by Searchers appointed to examine the true making of
Tyles, 17 Ed. 4. 4. 1. N. 19. Crumpt. 125. b.

IV. Lamb. 525. The Justices of Peace may hear by their discretion, as well by
Examination as otherwise, at the suit of the King, or of the party the offenses
done against 17 Ed. 4. 4. 1. N. 13. Crumpt. 130. b. Lamb. 528. 570.

V. Crumpt. 49. Charge at Sessions, you shall inquire of Congregations, and
Confederacies done by Masons in their General Chapters and Assemblies, whereby
the effect of the Statutes of Laborers is destroyed, if any such be Assembled;
These who make such Assemblies, and hold these Chapters, and Congregations, are
Felons; and the other Masons that come to these shall be punished by
imprisonment, Fine, and Ransom at the King's Will, 3 H. 6. 1.. N. and 1 Ed. 6.
12.. N. 5 Eliz. 4.. N. Fitzh. I.P. 115. Lamb. 225.

(Mettle.)
Brass, Pewter, Latten, Tynn, etc.
I. LAmb. 610. At the Quarter Sessions to be holden after Michaelmas, the
Justices of Peace are to appoint Searchers for Brass and Pewter, 19 H. 7. 6. 1.
N. 15. and 4 H. 8. 7. 6. N. 2.

Crumpt. 19. ab. Enquiry at Sessions, if any Pewterer or Brasier sell or
exchange any Pewter or Brass, in any place, if it be not in Market overt, or
Fair, or in their Houses, if he be not required by the buyer, he shall forfeit
10 li. for every default, 4 H. 8. 7. N. and 19 H. 7. 6.. N. and 25 H. 8. 9.
Fitzh. I. P. 126. Lam. 460.

III. Crumpt. 90. b. If any Cast or Work any Pewter Vessel, or Brass that is
not good and fine Mettle, as is wrought in London, and as by the Statute
thereof made ought to be, shall forfeit the Pewter and Brass so Cast, and
Wrought, Fitzh. I. P. 126.

IV. Crumpt. 90. If any make any hollow Ware of Pewter, as Salts or Pots,
called Ley-mettle, which is not according to the Assize of Pewter or
Ley-mettle, which is wrought in London, or does not mark this with their proper
marks, they shall be forfeit, 4 H. 8. 7.. N. Fitzh. I. P. 126.

V. Crumpt. 90. b. Enquiry at Sessions, if any that use the selling or buying
of Brass or Pewter, occupies any deceitful or false Beams, or Weights, he
shall forfeit 20 s. and shall be put in the Stocks until the next Market Day,
and then shall be put on the Pillory in time of Market, 4 H. 8.. N. Fitzh. I.
P. 126.

VI. Lamb. 460. Inquiry at Sessions, if any Goldsmiths, or Worker of Silver,
have wrought any Silver that is not so fine in Allay as the Sterling, or have
not set his mark upon his work before he set it to sale, 2 H. 6. 14.. N. And if
any have gilded any Sheaths, or any Mettle but Silver, saving the Spurs of
Knights, and the Apparel of a Baron, or such as are above that state, 8 H. 5.
3.. N. Crumpt. 89. b.

VII. Lamb. Precedents 20. pl. 56. An indictment against a Goldsmiths.

^^^t ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super sacramentum suum presentant, quod A. B. de S.
in dicto Comitatu Aurifaber secundo die Julii Anno Regni, etc. Apud S. predict'
in Com' predict' quoddam Manubrium pugionis ferrei Anglice dict' a Dagger-hilt
of Iron, Cujusdam E. F. de S. predict' in Com' predict' Yeoman, valoris duorum
solidorum deauravit Anglice did guild with the finest Gold in magnum
reipublicae detrimentum ac contra form' cujusdam Statuti in Parliament' Domini
Henrici nuper Regis Angliae quinti, tent' Anno Regni sui octavo in hujusmodi
casu provisi and editi. West. Symbol' 2. part 109. b. sect. 122. 8 H. 5. 3.. N.

Master, see Apprentice. Mass, see Pope. Malt, see Corn. Mean Acts, see Days.
Menace, see Affray. Messages, see Ways.
(Measures.)
Weights.
I. LAmb. 351. Two Justices of Peace, so that one be of the Quorum, may by
Examination or Inquiry, hear and determine the faults of Head-Officers of
Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns, that do not yearly View and Examine Weights
and Measures, and break and burn the defective: As also the defaults of Buyers
and Sellers by other Weights and Measures then they ought to do, and may break
and burn the defective Weights and Measures, and Amerce and Fine the Offenders
by their discretion, and make Process against them, as if they were Indicted of
Trespass against the Peace, 11 H. 7. 4. 1. N. 13. 12 H. 7. 5. Crumpt. 199. b.
95. a. 131. 152. Dalt. 142. cap. 65:

II. Lamb. 431. Inquiry at Sessions if the Mayor of, etc. have taken above one
penny for sealing a Bushel Measure, or above a halfpenny for any other Measure;
or above one penny for Sealing an Hundred-Weight, or above a halfpenny for half
a Hundred-Weight, or above a farthing for any less Weight, 7 H. 7. 4.. N. and
11 H. 7. 4.. N.

III. Lamb. 452. If any common Brewer, Baker, or Tipler, have broken the Assize
of Bread, Beer or Ale, and if any Steward of Leet, or Officer in Market Town,
have taken any Fine for breach of the Assize of Bread or Ale, in such case
where Corporal punishment is appointed, 13 Rich. 2. 8. 1. N.

IV. Lamb. 452. Inquiry at Sessions, if any have bought or sold by any unlawful
Weights or Measures, or if any person have bought or sold in any City or
Market, with any Weight or Measure that is not Lawfully marked or signed, 11 H.
7. 4.. N.

V. Lamb. 452. Or have bought Corn by heaped Measure in any place, except
within Shipboard, or have used double Measures, the one to buy, the other to
sell with, 25 Ed. 3. St. 4. cap. 10.. N. and 15 R. 2. 4.. N. Crumpt. 94 b.
Dalt. 145. cap. 65.

VI. Lamb. 452, 453. Inquiry at Sessions, if they of the Town where the King's
Standard is appointed to remain, have not their Common Weights and Measures
signed, or have not thereby signed Weights and Measures sold to all that have
required the same, and if the Head-Officers of Market Towns have not twice
yearly made View and Examination of Weights and Measures there, 11 H. 7. 4.. N.
Crumpt. 94. ab.

VII. Lamb. 453, Inquiry at Sessions, if any Barrel for Beer contain not of the
King's Standard 36 Gallons, the Kilderkin 18 Gallons, the Firkin 9 Gallons;
every Barrel of Ale 32 Gallons, the Kilderkin 16 Gallons, and every Firkin 8
Gallons, 23 H. 8. 4. 4. N. 1. Crumpt. 92. b. Dalt. 148. cap. 65.

Wine.
VIII. Lamb. 453. If any have made or brought into this Realm any Tun of Wine
not containing 252 Gallons, or Pipe not containing 126 Gallons, or Tertian not
containing 82 Gallons, or Hogshead not containing 63 Gallons; or Butt of
Malmsey not containing 126 Gallons; or Barrel of Herrings, not containing 32
Gallons of Wine-Measure, or Barrel of Eels not containing 42 Gallons, or Butt
of Salmon not containing 84 Gallons, or any Kilderkins, Tertian, Ferkins, or
Rundlets, but after the same rate, 2 R. 3. 13. 2 H. 6. 11.. N. and 28 H. 8.
14.. N. Crumpt. 92. b.

IX. Lamb. 453. Inquiry in Sessions, if any have made any Vessel of Soap, that
being empty contains not 32 Gallons for the Barrel, 16 for the half Barrel,
and 8 for the Firkin, or weighs above 26 li. the Barrel, and 13 li. the half
Barrel, and 6 li. and a half the Firkin, 23 H. 8. 4,. N. Dalt. 145. cap. 65.
Crumpt. 92. b.

X. Dalt: 143. cap. 65. Troy Weight is by Law, and thereby are weighed Gold,
Silver, Pearl, Precious-stones, Electuaries, Bread, Wheat, and all manner of
Grain or Corn, and this has to the Pound 12 Ounces, or 20 s. Sterling weight.

2. Averdupois Weight is by Custom, yet confirmed also by Statute, and thereby
are weighed all kind of Grocery Wares, Physical Drugs, Butter, Cheese, Flesh,
Wax, Pitch, Tar, Tallow, Wools, Hemp, Flax, Iron, Steel, Lead, and all other
Commodities, especially such as bear the name of Garbel, etc. whereof issues
refuse or wast.

Corn.
XI. Dalt. 145. cap. 65. The difference of Measure of Corn should seem to come
partly from the diversity of Clerks of the Market, there being a Clerk of the
Market for the King's House, another for the Prince, another for the Duchy,
others in Corporate Towns, and others belonging to Lords of Liberties, and
partly from the abuse of diverse Corporate Towns, and other privileged Places
or Liberties, where they by usurped Custom without any good Warrant of Law have
used to have, and to buy by such Measures, and where the Clerk of the Market
for the King has forborne or neglected to meddle, in regard perhaps of their
Corporation Liberty, or some other respect, but this abuse two Justices of the
Peace, the one being of the Quorum, may reform, etc. 27 H. 8. 24.

XII. Dalt. 146. cap. 65. And note that the Clerk of the Market shall carry
with him all his Weights and Measures signed according to the Standard of the
Exchequer, 16 R. 2. 3.. N. and the Justices of Peace may, yea ought for to sit
with the Clerk of the Market at his coming into the Country.

XIII. Dalt. 146. cap. 65. Sir Francis Harvey has often delivered in his
Charge at Cambridge Assizes these directions, scil.

1. That one Justice of the Peace at the least ought to sit with the Clerk of
the Market to see that the King's Subjects be not wronged. And 2. That the
Clerk of the Market ought to have with him his directions out of the Exchequer.
And 3. That he may take no money for any Bills, etc. And 4. That he ought to
Seal no Bushel, or other Measures or Weights but once, and not yearly, as they
use to do. And 5. That if after the first Sealing he shall take any thing for
the Sealing thereof again, or for the showing thereof, etc. it is Extortion,
yea one of the greatest Oppressions, for that it concerns almost all men.
XIV. Dalt. 147. cap. 65. For the punishment of the Bakers for their unlawful
Bread, Quaere, Whither they shall only be Amerced, etc. after Indictment and
Conviction of their said offense, or that the Justices of Peace, or Sworn
Officers in Leets, may take away their unlawful Bread, and give it among the
Poor, as Officers in Towns Corporate are enabled or appointed to do in the end
of the Book of the Assize, Printed 1597. And all Justices of Peace are there
willed and required to be aiding and assisting to the said Officers therein.
But by 51 H. 3. page 10. and 13 R. 2. 8. 1. N. 4. Bakers and Brewers being
Convict for not observing the Assize, the first, second and third time, they
shall be Amerced: But if the offense be grievous, or often, then they shall
suffer punishment of the Body without Redemption, scil. The Baker to the
Pillory, and the Brewer to the Tumbrel or Cucking-stool, or some other
Correction, Incert. temp. 85. cap. 5 and 6.

XV. Dalt. 148. cap. 65. No Cooper shall make any other Vessel for Beer, or
Ale, to be sold within this Realm of any greater or lesser number of Gallons,
unless he shall cause to be marked upon every such Vessel of greater or lesser
number of Gallons, the true and certain number, how many Gallons such other
Vessel shall contain, 23 H. 8. 4. 4. N. 1. Crumpt. 92. b.

XVI. Dalt. 148. cap. 65. It appears by Mr. Crumpt. 94. b. That it was agreed
by the Justices, that the Measure of Wine and Ale should be all one, but now by
the Statute 1 Jac. 9.. N. Ale and Beer shall be sold by Retail by one and the
same Measure, scil. the Ale-Quart.

XVII. Dalt. 148. cap. 65. And for the Prices of all Vessels of Ale and Beer by
the Statute 23 H. 8. 4. 5. N. 1. any two Justices of Peace might Assess the
Prices thereof, and that no Brewer shall take for any Barrel, Kilderkin or
Firkin, etc. of Ale or Beer, but after such Prices, and Rates as shall be
Assessed by the said Justices of Peace in the Country, or by the Mayor, or
their Head Officers in Corporate Towns, etc. But now by 8 Eliz. 9. 5. N. 1. The
Assessment of the Prices thereof shall be by the Justices, or the more part of
them, being present at the Easter Quarter Sessions, and only of such Vessels as
shall be made or sold out of Cities or Corporate Towns, Crumpt. 93.

XVIII. Dalt. 149. Butter shall be Ale-Measure 32 Gallons to the Barrel,
Victuals.
the empty Vessel not to weigh above 26 li. Firkin not above 6 li. and half.

XIX. Dalt. 149. cap. 65. A weigh of Cheese is 32 Cloves, every Clove 8 li. of
Averdupois, although 9 H. 6. 8. and the Assize Printed 1597, seem to make 7 li.
to be a Clove; and yet by the Assize, the weigh of Suffolk Cheese must be 256
li. or 12 score and 16 li. Averdupois, and their Barrel of Butter is of like
weight with the foist, but the weigh of Essex Cheese or Butter is 300 li. after
the Rate of 5 score and 12 li. to the Hundred, which is 336 li. or 16 score and
16 li Averdupois.

XX. Dalt. 149. cap. 65. For the Assize of Fuel, scil. Cole, Talwood, Billet,
and Faggot, see 7 Ed. 6. 7. 43 Eliz. 14.

XXI. Dalt. 150. cap. 65. Note, That the Clerk of the Market may enquire of the
Pole or Perch whereby Land is measured, as well as of other Measures, Crumpt.
Jurisd. 221. but the Justices of Peace are not to meddle therewith, especially
out of their Sessions.

XXII. Kilb. Presidents 108. b. A Warrant on complaint touching Coals, on 16
and 17 Car. 2. 2.

To the Constables, etc.
Kent ss.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to require you to cause A. B. of etc. to come
before us J. S. and W. B. Two of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this
County, at the House of, etc. the Tenth day of, etc. to answer such complaint
against him, for offenses against an Act of Parliament lately made (Entitled,
An Act for the Regulating the Measures and Prices of Coals) as has been made
unto us; and further to do and receive as to Justice does appertain, hereof
fail not at your perils:

Given under our Hands and Seals the Ninth day of, etc.
XXIII. Kilb. Precedents 108, 109. A Warrant for delivering a Moiety of Coals
forfeit, etc. 16 and 17 Car. 2. 2.

Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as A. B. of, etc. is duly Convicted before us J. S. and W. S. Two of
His Majesty's Justices for the Peace of this County, according to the Form of
the Statute in that behalf made, Entitled An Act for Regulating the Measures
and Prices of Coals, That he the said A. B. did lately expose to Sale forty
Chaldron of Sea-Coals ( Scotch-Coals, etc.) of the value of, etc. contrary to
the Form of the Statute aforesaid: These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to
Will and Require you to seize the Coals aforesaid, and the double value
thereof, and that you do deliver one half of the Coals and value aforesaid unto
C. D. being the person prosecuting in this behalf to his use, and likewise that
you do employ and dispose the other half of the same to, and for the use of the
poor, or repairing of the Highways of the Parish of M. where the said offense
was Committed; hereof fail not at your perils:

Given under our Hands and Seals the Tenth day of, etc.
Milch Kine, see Cattle. Millers, see Corn. Militia and Musters, see War.
Ministers, see Ecclesiastical Persons, Religion. Minstrels, see Games.
Misfeasons, see Officer. Misprision, see Treason. Mitigation, see Amerciament,
Forfeiture. Mittimus, see Imprisonment. Monasteries, see Abbey.
(Money.)
Multiplication.
I. LAmb. 225. Any Justices may Examine and Commit for practicing in the Art of
Multiplication of Gold or Silver, condemned for Felony by 5 H. 4. 4. Crumpt. 49.

II. Lamb. 420. Enquiry at Sessions, if any person have practiced the Art of
Multiplication of Gold or Silver, 5 H. 4. 4.

III. Crumpt. 49. Also you shall inquire (at the Sessions) of all those that
have any Galley, Halfpence, Suskins, or Dotkins, made, coined, bought or
brought into the Realm, this is Felony, 3 H. 5. 1.

IV. Crumpt. 7. b. pl. 21. This Statute 3 H. 5. St. 2. cap. 6. as to Clipping
and Washing is Repealed, 1 Mar. 1. cap. 1. 3. N. 1. and a new Statute thereof
made, 5 Eliz. 11. and 18 Eliz. 1.. N. but Authority is not given to Justices of
Peace, by these Statutes, to inquire thereof, and therefore the putting this
into the Commission is void, but by 3 H. 5. St. 2. cap. 7. it is ordained, That
Justices of Peace through the Realm have power by the King's Commission to
enquire of Counterfeiting, and of Importing of false Money into the Realm, made
in likeness of the Money of this Land, and to Award a Capias only against them
who are thereof Indicted before them; and this is declared to be Treason by 25
Ed. 3. St. 5. cap. 2. 1. N. 5. Dalt. 19. cap. 1.

V. Crumpt. 241. b. pl. 32. An Indictment against those who Counterfeit Money,
West. Symb. 2. part 115. sect. 143.

Somerset ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si R. W. nuper de H. in Com' predict' Smith I. L.
etc. and T. B. etc. deum prae oeulis suis non habentes, sed instigatione
Diabolica Seducti, Machinantesque dictum Dominum Regem and populum suum
callide, falso, deceptive and proditorie decipere, and defraudare 12 die
Martii, An' Regni, etc. Sex pecias monetae apud B. predict' in Com' predict' de
cupro, and aliis mixtis Metallis, ad instar and ad similitudinem, bonae,
legalis, and current' monetae, and cunei dicti Domini Regis hujus Regni sui
Angliae Anglice vocat' Shillings: nec non duas pecias e cupro, aere, and aliis
mixtis Metallis, ad instar and similitudinem bonae, legalis, and current'
monet', and cunei Auri dicti Domini Regis Regni sui Angliae Anglice vocat' half
Sovereigns falso and proditorie fabricaverunt, cuderunt, and controfecerunt, ac
quasdam earundem peciarum, sic ut praemittitur falso and proditorie fabricat'
cusus, and controfact' diversis ligeis dicti Domini Regis, pro vera legitima
and current' monet' hujus Regni Angliae apud B. predict' and alibi in dict'
Com' Somerset. Postea deceptive, falso, and proditorie exposuerunt, solverunt,
and utteraverunt in magnum prejudicium, fraudem, and deceptionem ligeorum dicti
Domini Regis, ac contra pacem ejusdem Domini Regis, Coronam, and Dignitatem
suas, etc. nec non contra form' diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu edit'
and provisorum, West. Simbol' 2. Part 114. b. Sect. 142, 143.

VI. Crumpt. 242. pl. 33. alio modo. West. Symb. 2. Part 115. Sect. 144.

Somerset ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si H. H. nuper de B. in Com' predict' Tailor, deum
prae oculis suis non habens, sed instigatione diabolica seduct' ut proditor
dicto Domino Regi 5 die Maii Anno Regni, etc. sexdecem peceas monetae vocat'
shillings, de falso and mixto metallo ad instar cunei hujus Regni Angliae
vulgariter vocat' King James shillings, apud B. predict' in Com' predict'
falso, felonice, and proditorie controfecit, fabricavit, and cunavit contra
pacem, etc. West. Simbol' 2. Part 115. Sect. 144.

VII. Crumpt. 242. pl. 34. An Indictment against him that counterfeited Gold,
and exposed it, West. Simb. 2. Part 114. b. Sect. 145.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si H. A. nuper de B. in Com' predict' Lalourer, and
T. S. nuper de T. in Com' predict' Labourer 10 die etc. Anno, etc. and diversis
aliis diebus and vicibus, tam antea quam postea, deum prae oculis suis non
habentes sed instigatione diabolica seducti, machinantesque dictum Dominum
Regem, and populum suum callide, falso, deceptive, and proditorie decipere and
defraudare de injuria sua propria absq: Authoritate Warrant' sive concessione
Regiae Majestatis eis aut eorum alteri concesso, octo pecias falsae monetae ad
imaginem and similitudinem peciarum monetae Auri Angl' vocat' Golden Sovereigns
of 10 s. a piece apud M. in Com' pred' pro iniquo lucro and advantagio e cupro
falso and proditorie deauravit, and easdem peceas falso and proditorie sic ut
praemittitur fact' fabricat' controfact', and cunat' diversis ligeis dicti
Domini Regis pro vero, legitimo, and current' Auro dicti Domini Regis Regni sui
Angliae apud M. predict' in Com' predict' 20 die Octob' Anno supradict': ac
diversis diebus antea and postea deceptive, falso, and proditorie exposuerunt
and utteraverunt in solutionem diversis ligeis dicti Domini Regis, necnon
contra form' diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu edit' and provisorum, etc.
West. Simb. 2. Part 115. b. Sect. 145.

Mortuary, see Tithes. Multiplication, see Money, Murder, see Coron. Navy, see
Admiral. News, see Slander. Next Justice, see Justices. Nets, see Fish. Night,
see Days, Night walkers, see Coron. Noble and Nobility, see Dignity. Non sane
Memory, see Infant.
(Nosme and Name.)
Addition, alias dictus.
I. LAmb. 427. If any Sheriff, etc. has returned any Juror without the true
addition of the place of his abode at the time of that Return, or within a year
next before, or without some other addition by which that Juror might well be
known, and Estreats of Issues be gathered, on such, etc. shall be enquired in
Sessions, 27 Eliz. 7.. N.

II. Lamb. 479, 480. In all Presentiments before Justices of the Peace the Name,
Mystery, Sur-Name, and addition of the Party Indicted, and of the Person to
whom the Offense was done is requisite, 1 H. 5. 5.. N.

III. Lamb. 481. Baron, Knight, Esquire, Gentleman, Alderman, Widow,
Single-Woman, Dean, Archdeacon, Parson, Doctor, Clerk, Parish-Clerk, are good
additions of Estate or Degree, as I take it, within the meaning of this Statute
of Additions, 1 H. 5. 5.

IV. Lamb. 481, 482. Also by the Statute 1 H. 5. 5. The Addition ought to
comprehend the County, and the Town or Hamlet whereof the Party is, or was, (or
the place known out of any Town or Hamlet:) But if he be named of a place
known, and the place be within a Town, then he must be named of the Town, 35 H.
6. 30. and if both the Town and Parish do bear one Name, he may be named of the
one, or of the other of them: but if there be two Towns in one Parish, then he
ought to be named of the Town, and not of the Parish, L. 5 Ed. 4. 129. and 22
Ed. 4. 2. 22 H. 6. 41.

V. Lamb. 482. As for the alias Dictus which is often put in the Addition, the
use thereof is chiefly in Writs grounded upon Specialties, and to make the writ
and writing to agree; for as touching Indictments, if the Party be not well
named, both for his name of Baptism, Sur-Name, Mystery or degree and place at
the first, then cannot the alias dictus make that good which was evil before.

VI. Lamb. 482, 483. And it appears, 1 Ed. 4. 2 and 2 Ed. 4. 16. that the
Addition of the Degree or Mystery must always be such as the Party has at the
very time: but the Addition of the Place may be of such where he was at any
time before: so that then the word nuper be used with it.

VII. Shepherds Clerks Cabinet, 125. An Indictment for acknowledging a
Recognizance of the Peace in the Name of another without his Privity, on 21
Jac. 26. 2. N. 1.

Derby ss.
JVratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. de C. in
Com' D. predict' Gener' x die etc. Anno Regni etc. apud S. in Com' predict'
venit coram J. H. Armigero uno Justiciar' Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Com'
predict' conservand' assignat', and tunc and ibidem coram prefato J. H. in
nomine cujusdam R. P. Armig' quandam recognitionem pro Conservatione Pacis
dicti Domini Regis in summa xx libr' Sterling, dicto Domino Regi nunc absque
Notitia aut Consensu predict' R. P. felonice recognovit contra formam Statuti,
etc.

2. Quaere, for on Thursday 25 Apr' Anno 1677. at the Old Baily it was doubted
by some Justices, if such a Recognizance were Felony within the Statute 21 Jac.
26. 2. N. 1. because the Recognizances there are Joined with Fines, Recoveries,
Inrolements and Judgments, which are the acts of Superior Courts, and because
by 21 Jac. 8. 5. N. 1. false Sureties are only punished at discretion.

(Notice.)
Proclamation.
I. LAmb. 31. None shall be assigned Justice of the Peace if he have not xx l.
per Annum, and if any be otherwise appointed, he shall within a Month after
notice of the Commission, and under the pain of xx l. and to be put out of
Commission, give knowledge of his not having xx l. per Annum, to the Lord
Chancellor who shall put another Person sufficient in his place, 18 H. 6. 11..
N.

II. Lamb. 68, 69. This determination of the old Commission of the Peace
grows not immediately by the making of a new Commission, but either after the
reading or proclaiming of the new Commission of the Sessions of the Peace, or
at the full County: or else by holding of some open Sessions by virtue of the
new Commission, in all which Cases the old Commissioners must take notice of
the new Commission, or else after the giving of Notice of the new Commission
unto the old Commissioners; for otherwise all the mean acts of the old
Commissioners be good in Law, by Marrow and 34 Ass. 28. Commission, Br. 14. and
21 H. 6. 29.

(Nuisance.)
I. CRumpt. 66. A man Levies a Gorse in his Land or other thing to the Nuisance
of my Land, I can enter with diverse peaceably into his Land and oust that
Gorse, etc. Dalt. 220. Cap. 86.

II. Dalt. 220. Cap. 86. Every private man to whose House or Land any Nuisance
shall be Erected, made or done, may in peaceable manner Assemble a meet Company
with necessary Tools, and may remove pull or cast down such Nuisance, and that
before any prejudice received thereby, and for that purpose if need be, may
also enter into the other man's ground, Nuisance. Br. 14 33.

(Oath.)
I. LAmb. 52. Upon this Ground ( viz. on all Christian Laws, etc.) 13 Rich. 2.
7.. N. which willed that Justices of the Peace should be made of new in all the
Counties of England, did there withal take order that they should be sworn to
keep and put in Execution all the Statutes touching their Office, which albeit
that it be the first Oath that I find to have been ministered to Justices of the
Peace, yet I think they were neither unsworn before, nor at any time after, as
may be Collected upon 21 Ed. 4. 67. and 12 Ed. 4. 18.

II. Lamb. 52. I believe also that the manner of the Oath was devised, but for
that time only and continued not long in that Form, as being of it self very
general and hard to be observed, and that happily was the Cause that it was
afterward changed to that Form which Mr. Fitz-herbert, 18. in his Book has
left us, Crumpt. 10. ab. and which with the alteration of a few words only is
yet at this day kept in use.

III. Lamb. 52, 53. For upon the renewing of the Commission of the Peace, which
now adays happens as often as any Persons is newly brought into the same,
there comes of Course a Writ of dedimus potestatem directed out of the
Chancery to some Ancient Justice of the Peace, to take the Oath of him whose
Name is newly Inserted, and to certify the same into that Court at such day as
the Writ commands.

Thus,

CArolus, etc.
Dilectis and fidelibus nostris Robert Hitcham Milit' and Nich' Rivet Armig'
salutem,
sciatis quod dedimns vobis conjunctim and divisim Potestatem and autoritatem
recipiendi Sacrament' dilecti and fidelis nostri Richardi Keble Armig', unius
Custod' pacis nostrae in Com' nostro Suff. de officio illo been and fideliter
faciend' juxta form' cujusdam Schedulae huic Brevi nostro annex' ac Sacrament'
specificat' in quodam Actu Parliament' Anno Regni Dominae Eliz. nuper Reg'
Angl. primo fact' cujus tenor presentibus similiter est annex', and ideo vobis
mandamus quod Sacramenta predicta recipiatis, vel unus vestrum recipiat, and
cum illa sic receperitis nos inde in Cancellariam nostram sub sigillis vestris
vel unius vestrum, distinct and aperte, sine dilatione reddatis certiores vel
unius vestrum reddat, hoc Breve nobis remittentes

test me ipso apud Westminst' etc. Die etc. Anno, etc.
The Return of the Ded' potestat' Endorse.

Executio Istius Brevis patet in quadam Schedula huic Brevi annexat'.
DOmino Regi in Cancellario certificamus quod virtute istius Brevis nobis
direct' xxvi. die Septembr' infrascript' apud Gippum in Com' Suff. infrascript'
recepimus Sacrament' infra nominat' Richardi Keble juxta tenorem and formam
Schedularum huic Brevi annex' quas quidem Schedulas una cum hoc Breve Domino
Regi in Cancellariam sua^ sub Sigillis nostris remittimus secundum exigentiam
Brevis Istius.

Respons. Robert' Hitcham Militis. Nich' Rivet Armig'.


Or thus, DAlt. 397. Cap. 129.

Ego M. D. in Cancellar' Domini Regis certifico me virtute Brevis Domini Regis
huic Schedulae annexat' x die mensis Decembr. Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri
Jacobi etc. xix apud West Wralling in Com' Cantabr' recepisse Sacrament'
Johannis Milissent militis, in Brevi predict' nominat' tam de officio Custodis
pacis dicti Domini Regis in dicto Com' Cantabr' been and fideliter faciend'
juxta formam Schedulae Brevi predict' annexat' similiter and in omnibus prout
in predicto Brevi precipitur. In cujus rei testimonium, etc. Mich' D.

IV. Lamb. 53. This Writ of ded' potest' is now accompanied with two Schedules,
Justices.
whereof the one contains the Oath of the Office of a Justice of Peace in this
Form,

Kilb. Presidents, 2 Edit. 231.
Ye shall Swear, that as Justices of the Peace in the County of K. in all
Articles in the Kings Commission to you directed, ye shall do equal right to
the Poor and to the Rich after your Cunning, Wit and Power, and after the Laws
and Customs of this Realm and Statutes thereof made. 2. And you shall not be of
Council of any Quarrel hanging before you. 3. And that ye hold your Sessions
after the form of Statutes thereof made. 4. And the Issues, Fines and
Amerciaments that shall happen to be made, and all Forfeitures which shall fall
before you, ye shall cause to be Entered without any Concealment or Embezelling,
and truly send them to the Kings Exchequer. 5. Ye shall not let for gift or
other Cause, but well and truly you shall do your Office of Justice of the
Peace in that behalf, and that you take nothing for the Office of Justice of
the Peace to be done but of the King, and Fees accustomed, and Costs limited
by the Statute. 6. And ye shall not direct nor cause to be directed any Warrant
by you to be made to the Parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffs of
the said County or other the Kings Officers or Ministers, or other Indifferent
Persons to do Execution thereof. So help you God.

V. Lamb. 56. There has been care taken once or twice in our Memory to exact
this latter Oath (viz. of Supremacy) of all the Justices of Peace throughout
the Realm, whereof some good has Ensued; Pope.
but yet many a Justice there is, that by Indirect practice never took either
this or the former (viz. of Allegiance) whereof what harms do and may grow, I
leave to wiser and higher men to be considered; adding this only, That it would
Avail greatly to the furtherance of the service, if the Dedimus potestatem to
give these Oaths were Dirigible to the Justices and none other, to minister the
same not elsewhere, but in their open Sessions.

VI. Lamb. 212. They which take Informations of Felonies, Information.
etc. without any Oath do say the Makers of 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10.. N. had
they intended so, would express it, etc. But they that examine upon Oath
strongly defend it by Example of the Justices of higher Courts, etc. and
because an Oath is Evidence in Case of Death, etc.

VII. Lamb. 83, 84. The Peace being for good cause required, Peace.
it is the common manner to exact an Oath of the Party, whereby the Justice may
be the better Informed and led to think that he does not ask it for malicious
vexation of another, but of very fear and for the needful safety of himself and
his; and F. N. B. 79. H. labors to show, that the Justices of the Peace
ought not without such Oath to grant this Surety at the suit of any Man,
forasmuch as not only the Judges of B. R. do yet take an Oath in such Case, but
the Ancient Course of the Law was such in the Chancery it self also, although
it be now adays otherwise used there, Infra. 11.

VIII. Lamb. 100. By Marrow, for the avoiding of which deceit of Insufficient
Security of the Peace the Justices of C. B. 7 H. 6. 25. pl. did examine the
ability of the Sureties upon their Oaths, etc.

Swearing.
IX. Kilb. Presidents. 207. A Warrant to pay 1 s. for Swearing in presence of a
Justice of Peace, on 21 Jac. 20.. N.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent. ss.
FOrasmuch as A. B. of etc. in the County aforesaid, Butcher, being of above
the Age of Twelve years, did in my hearing this present day in the Parish
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, profanely swear one Oath, for which
Offense he forfeited and was to pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish the
Sum of xii d; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, to command you, to
Levy to the use of the Poor of the said Parish the aforesaid xii d, by Distress
and Sale of the Goods of the said A. B. rendering to him the overplus; and in
defect of such Distress, that you the said Constable do set the said A. B. in
the Stocks by the space of three whole hours; hereof fail not, etc.

Given under my Hand and Seal this Tenth day of, etc. in the year of, etc. at
etc. in the said County, etc.
Constable.
X. Kilb. Presidents, 233. The Oath of a Constable, Dalt. 9. p. 363. 364.

You shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty in the Office of a Constable
of the Parish of A. 2. And all Commissions, Precepts, and Warrants, that are
directed to you, and shall come to your hands, you shall to the best of your
power cause to be duly and truly Executed. 3. All Riots and Misdemeanors and
breach of the Peace you shall suppress. 4. You shall punish all Rogues,
Vagrants and Idle Persons according to the Laws of this Land in that Case made
and provided. 5. You shall diligently pursue all Hue and Cries. 6. You shall
see that the Kings Majesty's Watch within the said Town of A. be duly and
truly set according to his Majesty's Laws. 7. You shall also do your best
endeavor to suppress Drunkenness within the said Parish, and to see the Laws
and Statutes concerning the same to be duly put in Execution. 8. And all other
things belonging to the Office of Constable, so long as you shall continue in
your Office, you shall well and truly perform and do so near as you can. So
help you God.

Peace.
XI. Kilb. Presidents, 233, 234. The Oath of him that Craves the Peace against
another, supra 7.

You shall swear that the Surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not for hatred or malice which you bear him; but for safety of your body from
harm, which you fear he will do or procure to be done unto you, So help you God.

2. Or thus; You shall swear that the Surety of the Peace which you crave
against A. B. is not of any private malice, hatred or evil will; but merely
that you are afraid of your life, or the hurting or maiming of your Body, or
the burning of your Houses. So help you God.

Proof.
XII. Kilb. Presidents, 234. The Oath to Informers or Witnesses.

The Information that you shall give on the Kings Majesty's behalf against A.
B. shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. So help you
God.

2. You shall true Answer make to all such Questions as by me shall be demanded
of you. So help you God.

Imprisonment.
XIII. Kilb. Presidents 2 Edit. 235. A Mittimus for refusing the Oath of
Allegiance.

Kent ss.
WHereas A. B. and C. D. two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the
said County of K. whereof A. B. is of the Quorum, do hereby Commit to your
Custody the body of E. F. for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance,
requiring you to take and safely in Prison to keep him till he shall be
delivered by due Course of Law; and for so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Given under our Hands and Seals this Second day of June, in the year of, etc.
2. Ibid. The Oath of Abjuration on 35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 4. Stamf. 119. Wilkinsons
Sheriff, 40. The Laws, etc. 138. Abr. pl. 135. Exile.


You shall swear that you shall depart out of this Realm of England, and out of
all other the Kings Majesty's Dominions; and that you shall not return hither
or come into any of his Majesty's Dominions, but by the License of our said
Sovereign Lord the King, or of his Heirs. So help you God.

XIV. Kilb. Presidents 2 Edit. 236. The Oath of an Under Sheriff and Bailiff
touching Juries on 27 Eliz. 12. 2. N. 3.

I A. B. do swear, That I shall not use or exercise the Office of etc.
Corruptly, during the time that I shall remain therein; neither shall or will
accept, receive or take by any Color, means or device whatsoever, or Consent
to the taking of any manner of Fee or Reward of any Person or Persons for
Impannelling or Returning of any Inquest, Jury or Tales in the said Court for
the King, or betwixt Party and Party, above 2 s. or the value thereof, and such
Fees as are allowed and appointed for the same by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm; but will according to my power truly and Indifferently with convenient
Speed Impannel all Jurors, and return all such Writ or Writs touching the same,
as shall appertain to be done by my Duty or Office during the time that I shall
remain in the said Office. So God me help.

2. Jurat' ad utraque Sacrament' (viz. this and the Oath of Supremacy)
supradict' x die Maii Anno 1680. Coram nobis A. B. and C. D. de quibus A. B.
est quorum unus etc.

XV. Kilb. Presidents, 2 Edit. 238. Churchwardens.
The usual Oath of Churchwardens.

You shall Execute the Office of Churchwarden in the Parish where you are
Chosen for this Ensuing year, according to his Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical
now in force. So help you God.

2. Or thus, You shall Execute the Office of Churchwarden in the Parish where
you are Chosen, according to your discretion and Skill in his Majesty's
Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm now in Force. So help you God.

XVI. Kilb. Presidents. 2 Edit. 239. 24. Constable.
The Oath of an High-Constable.

You shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King in the Office of High Constable of the Hundred of A. 2. You shall see and
cause his Majesty's Peace to be well and truly kept and preserved according to
your Power. 3. You shall Arrest all such Persons as in your sight and presence
shall Ride or go Armed offensively, or shall Commit or make any Riot, Affray,
or other breach of his Majesty's Peace. 4. You shall do your best endeavor
upon Complaint made, to apprehend all Felons, Barretors and Rioters, or Persons
Riotously assembled; and if any such Offenders shall make Resistance with
Force, you shall levy Hue and Cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken.
5. You shall do your best endeavor that the Watch in and about your Hundred be
duly kept for the Apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Night-walkers,
Eves-droppers, Scouts and other suspected Persons, and of such as go Armed, and
the like. 6. And that Hue and Cry be duly raised and persued according to the
Statute of Winchester (13 Ed. 1. St. 2. Cap. 1. etc.) against Murderers,
Thieves and other Felons. 7. And that the Statutes made for punishment of
Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle Persons as come within your Bounds
and Limits, be duly put in Execution. 8. You shall have a watchful Eye to such
Persons as shall maintain or keep any Common house or place where any unlawful
Games is or shall be used; as also to such as shall frequent or use such
places, or shall use or Exercise any unlawful Games there or elsewhere contrary
to the Statutes. 9. At your Assizes, Sessions of the Peace or Leet, you shall
present all and every the Offenses done contrary to the Statutes (made 1 Jac. 4
Jac. 21 Jac. etc.) to restrain the Inordinate haunting and Tippling in Inns,
Alehouses and other Victualling-houses, and for repressing of Drunkenness. 10.
You shall there likewise true Presentment make of all Blood-sheddings,
Affrayes, Outcries, Rescues and other Offenses committed or done against the
Kings Peace within your Limits. 11. You shall once every year during your
Office present at the Quarter Sessions all Popish Recusants within your
Liberty, and their Children above Nine years old, and their Servants, ( scil.
their Monthly absence from Church, 3 Jac. 4.. N.) 12. You shall well and truly
Execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from the Justice of the Peace
of this County, or higher Officers. 13. You shall be aiding to your Neighbors
against unlawful purveyances. 14. In the time of Hay or Corn Harvest, upon
request, you shall cause all Persons to meet to serve by the day for the
Mowing, Reaping or getting in of Corn or Hay. 15. You shall in Easter Week
cause your Parishioners to choose Surveyors for the mending of the Highways in
your Parish or Liberty. 16. And you shall well and truly according to your
knowledge, power and ability, do and Execute all other things belonging to the
Office of Constable, so long as you continue in the said Office. So help you
God.

Oats, see Corn. Obedience, see Oath and Pope. Obligation see Recognizance,
Bail. Office of the Justice, see Justices.
(Officer.)
I. LAmb. 424. Enquiry at Sessions if any Ordinary, Archdeacon, Official,
Sheriff, Escheator, Coroner, Undersheriff, Bailiff, Jailer or other Officer,
have by color of his Office, or for doing his Office, taken a greater or more
excessive Reward or Fee then belongs to him, or have taken any Fee or Reward
for Expedition in doing his Office, or have unlawfully exacted any Oath or
other undue thing.

II. Lamb. 431. Enquiry in Sessions if any Officer have in any Town taken
Scavage or Shewage; that is to say, any thing for the showing of Ware or
Merchandise that be truly accustomed to the King before. 19 H. 7. 8.. N.

Oils, see Merchants, Measures One Justice, see Justices. Oppression, see
Fees. Omission, see Amendment. Orchards, see Trespass. Orders of Sessions, see
Justices.
(Ordinary.)
Ecclesiastical Persons, Clergy.
I. LAmb. 4. Cap: 3. page 391. Justices.
But the Ordinary owes not his attendance at any Sessions of the Peace, as he
does at every Goal Delivery, in the opinion of Mr. Marrow. Indeed he is not
warned by the Common form of Precept, and therefore cannot so conveniently take
knowledge of the Sessions of the Peace; howbeit I think he ought to serve when
he shall be called for matter of Clergy.

II. Lamb. 543. The Justices of Peace may give Clergy to a Felon, if the
Ordinary or his Deputy be present to take him; but if they be absent, he must
be reprieved, because, as Marrow says, these Justices can set no Fine upon the
Ordinary for his absence, no more then if he will accept one to read as a
Clerk, wherein truth he cannot read at all. Clergy, Br. 7. but if you look on
Stanff. 2. Cap. 25. fol. he will persuade you that the Ordinary is not the
Judge, but a Minister in the Trial of Clergy; and that Clergy may lawfully be
given and allowed in his absence. So Poult. de pace, 214. pl. 36. etc.

III. Lamb. 544. Marrow says also, that if Bigamy that ungodly and Popish
Counterplea had been alleged against one that prayed his Clergy, the Justices
of Peace could not have written to the Ordinary to certify the same.

IV. Lamb. 580. And the Clerk of the Peace must also deliver unto the Ordinary
a transcript of Clerks Convicted or attainted before the said Justices, 34 H.
8. 14. 2. N. 1: but enquire whether this be needful at this day, by reason that
Clerks be not now delivered to the Ordinary, by 18 Eliz. 7.. N. Poult. de Pace,
217. pl. 43.

Overseers, see Poor. Ouster le mere, see Merchants. Pannels, see Inquest.
(Pardon.)
I. LAmb. 552. If a General Pardon by Parliament of all Persons make special
Exception of some, Amerciam
then must the Prisoner allege that he is none of those that be excepted,
unless the Act it self do say that he shall be helped by it without any such
pleading. 11 H. 4. 39. Stanff. 103. Crumpt. 115. b. 13.

II. Lamb. 552. Touching this sort of Pardon, Treason.
etc. the Servant that had killed his Master was Indicted of voluntary Murder,
without proditorie, and was thereupon Arraigned and found Guilty; but because
the Offense was Pety Treason indeed, and Pety Treason was then Pardoned by
Parliament (5 Eliz.) tho Murder was therein excepted, Justice Welsh thought it
meet to reprieve the Prisoner, without giving Judgment upon him. Dyer 235. pl.
Crumpt. 115. 9.

Relation.
III. Lamb. 552. A man stroke another in February, (13 Eliz.) whereof he died in
June next following, in which mean while all Felonies, Offenses, Injuries and
Misdemeanors were pardoned by Parliament; and he was discharged by that Pardon,
because the stroke was the Offense against the Queen, and that was past and
pardoned, though the death did afterward ensue upon it. Com. 401. Crumpt. 116.
20.

Utlary.
IV. Lamb. 552, 553. One that had committed Manslaughter was Indicted of
Murder, and thereupon Utlawed; afterward the Parliament pardoned all Offenses,
etc. except Persons Utlawed or Attainted of Murder; the Party reverseth the
Utlary, and then is Arraigned of Manslaughter: it was much doubted, whether he
should be discharged by the Pardon, because the persons Utlawed were excepted;
whereas if the Offenses only had been excepted, it would have made no great
Question, 29 Eliz. Report. Crumpt. 116. 17.

Pleading.
V. Lamb. 553. The special Pardon ought to be pleaded under the Great Seal of
England, for that Authority which some Subjects in Ancient time had to grant
Pardon, is resumed by 27 H. 8. 24.. N. Stanff. 104. b. Crumpt. 115. b. 15.

Non obstante.
VI. Lamb. 553. And with this special Pardon the party ought to bring a Writ of
Allowance, testifying that he has found Sureties for his Good Port, according
to 10 Ed. 3. 2.. N. howbeit that matter is many times dispensed withal, by
means of a Non-Obstante that may be put into the Pardon Coron. 502. Stanff.
101. 104. Crumpt. 115. b. 15.

Various.
VII. Lamb. 553. If the Pardon does agree with the Indictment as well in Name,
Sur-Name and addition of the Party, as also in the point of the Offense that is
to be Pardoned, then is there nothing to be said against it; but if the Pardon
be of all Felonies, that will not discharge him of Pety Treason nor Murder at
this day, except it contain them in special words, although before 13 Rich. 2.
St. 2. Cap. 1. such a Pardon was Available enough for them, Crumpt. 115. b. 14.
and fol. 16. 18.

Attainder.
VIII. Lamb. 554. Neither is such a special Pardon of all Felonies, sufficient
to save the Life of him that is attainted of Felony, unless it have words to
pardon the Attainder and Execution. 9 Ed. 4. 29. Chapter de pardon. Br. 23. no more
then the Pardon of the Attainder and Execution will deliver him without words
to pardon the Felony it self. 8 H. 4. 21. So where the Party is abjured for the
death of a Man, the Pardon must of necessity carry words of Abjuration. Coron.
124. Crumpt. 115. 1, 2, 3. Dalt. 242. Cap. 93.

Joinder.
IX. Lamb. 554. If the King do Pardon to a Jailer the Escapes of Prisoners being
in his ward for Felony or Treason, that shall extend to negligent Escapes only,
and to none other, Grants 37. 3 H. 7. 15. Grants Br. 51. So if he Pardon two
Men all Felonies done by them or any of them, that will not serve them apart,
because the first words be Joint and not several; whereas all Felonies be of
themselves several 22 Ed. 4. 7. For in these and like Cases howsoever the favor
of Life may desire liberal Interpretation, yet forasmuch as the Offense is
against Law, the Grace and Dispensation of the Prince may not be straightened
beyond the words. Crumpt. 115. b. 9.

Marriage.
X. Crumpt. 115. 4. Bigamy is objected against him that prays Clergy, and
after he shows a Charter of Pardon, and because it made no mention of Bigamy,
the opinion of the Court was, the Pardon was not Good. 11 H. 4. Chapter de pardon.
16.

XI. Crumpt. 115. 5, 6. The Husband is killed by his Wife, Bar. and Feme.
and the King pardons her all Treasons; the Son shall be Barred of the Appeal,
by Stanff. 59. who says, that he has heard it was so adjudged: by the Statute
22 H. 8. 9.. N. it was made High Treason in the Wife to poison her Husband, and
after by General Act of Pardon that Offense was pardoned; and it was moved, if
the Heir of the Husband shall have an Appeal of Murder which was at Common Law,
or whether the same Offense of Murder is Drowned in this that is made High
Trerson? and the opinion of the Justices was, as Dyer heard, that the Appeal is
not maintainable. Dyer 50.

XII. Crumpt. 115. b. 116. a. 16. One who had a Pardon for Utlary of Felony,
was after the Pardon Indicted of Trespass, and had made a Fine; Peace.
and because this is a Confession of the Indictment, and it appears to the
Court that he had broken the Peace since the Pardon, the Court adnulled the
Pardon. 3 H. 7. 6. and the party was Executed on the first Attainder; and this
by 10 Ed. 3. 3.. N. Dalt. 242, 243. Cap. 93.

XIII. Crumpt. 116.. 17. A Man committed Man slaughter, Utlary.
and after is Indicted of Murder for it, and thereupon he is Utlawed, and after
there is a General Pardon given by Parliament, except all Persons Utlawed or
Attaint of any Murder; and after the said Utlary was reversed, the Question is,
if the Party be discharged by this General Pardon? and some said that its no
discharge, because the Person Utlawed, etc. is excepted, and so is except from
the Pardon Generally; but if it had excepted the Offense as excepting all
Murders, without saying except the Pardon shall be discharge, this matter was
in B. R. Trin. 29 Eliz. and it was the Case of one Freeman, who had killed one
Shaw, as I heard, and the said F. being Arraigned of Manslaughter for killing
the said S. would have had the benefit of the said General Pardon; and
thereupon it was adjourned until Mich. 29 Eliz. Quere the end. Lamb. 552.

XIV. Lamb. 532. But if the Prisoner plead a Pardon before the Justices,
Pleading.
in which certain persons be excepted, and the Kings Attorney is not present to
join Issue, that he which pleads this, is one of those that be excepted, then
they themselves may supply the Office of the Attorney in that behalf. 8 Ed. 4.
7.

Parishes, see Poor. Parliaments, see Statutes. Parks, see Forest. Parson, see
Encumbent, Ecclesiastical Persons. Partridges, see Foul. Pain, Punishment,
Penalty, see Forfeiture. Paving, see Ways.
(Peace.)
Surety of the Peace, Bail, Force, Riot, Affray.
I. F. N. B. 79. G. The Writ de securitate pacis in Chancery. Bail.
Rex Vicecom' L. salutem. Quia A. de B. nobis Graviter conquestus est quod C.
ei de Corpore suo manifest minatus, tibi precipimus quod eidem A. de prefat'
C. firmam pacem nostram secundum consuetudinem Angliae habere faciatis: Ita
quod securus sis quod eidem A. de Corpore suo per prefatum C. vel per
procurationem suam, Damnum vel periculum non Eveniat, test etc. Or thus, de
Incendio Domorum suarum manifest minatur tibi precipimus etc. Ita quod etc.
Eidem A. de Domibus suis predictis per hujusmodi Incendium, Damnum, etc. And he
may have the Writ for Security of his Body, and of Burning his Houses in one
Writ, and he may have an Alias Pluries and an Attachment against the Sheriff,
if he does not do his Office.

Oath.
II. F. N. B. 79. H. But by the Ancient Course of Law, he must swear upon a Book
before he can have this Writ; and this before any Master of the Chancery, but
now they use to prosecute such Writs by their Friends who will Sue for them,
without making any Oath; and this is ill done, because they are many times sued
for vexation, more then for any good Cause: and the Justices of B. R. will not
grant any Writ for Surety of the Peace, without making an Oath that he is in
fear of bodily harm. Nor the Justices of the Peace ought not to Grant any
Warrant to cause a man to find Surety of the Peace, at the request of any
Person, unless the Party who requires it, will make an Oath, that he requires
it for safety of his Body, and not for malice, etc. Lamb. 83. 84. Infra 21.

III. F. N. B. 80. C. But it is a Common opinion, that the Surety that the
Sheriff shall take of the Party that shall find Surety for the Peace, must be
taken by obligation, that is to say, to oblige the Party and his Sureties by
Obligation, that he keep the Peace, and that he shall not Burn the Houses, etc.

Supplicavit.
IV. F. N. B. 80. C. But now since the Statute 1 Ed. 3. 16.. N. that wills that
certain Persons shall be assigned in the Chancery, as for keeping of the Peace,
there are other Forms of Writs made for the ease of the People who would have
Surety of the Peace of any Persons; which Writs Issue out of the Chancery, and
some are directed to the Justices of Peace and to the Sheriff, and some are
directed to the Sheriff only, and these Writs are in such Forms as this.

Rex dilectis and fidelibus suis J. etc. and sociis suis Justiciariis nostris
ad pacem nostram in Com' S. Conservand' Assignatis salutem. Or thus, Custodibus
pacis nostroe in Comitat' S. etc. and vicecom' ejusdem Comitat' and eorum
cuilibet salutem. Or thus, Vicecom' S. salutem. Supplicavit nobis A. quod cum
ipse de vita and mutilatione membrorum suorum, nec non de Incendio Domorum
suarum per E. graviter and manifest Comminatus existat, velimus pro securitate
ipsius A. in hac part provideri, nos supplication' predict' annuentes vobis
(vel tibi) precipimus, firmiter injungentes quod predict' E. coram vobis (vel
te) corporaliter venire faciatis, and ipsum ad sufficientes manucaptores
inveniend' qui eum manucapere voluerint sub certa Poena sibi per te vel vos
rationabiliter imponend' pro quo nobis respondere voluerint, vel volueris. Or
thus, and Ipsium E. ad sufficient' securitat' inveniend' sub poena centum
librarum ad opus nostrum solvend' vel quilibet eorum sub poena etc. quod ipse
Damnum vel malum aliquid eidem A. de Corpore suo, vel de domibus suis per
hujusmodi Incendium non faciat, nec fieri procurabit quovismodo, Compellatis
vel Compellas, and si hoc coram vobis (vel te) facere recusaverit, tunc ipsum
E. proximo Goal' nostroe Committatis vel Committas, in eadem salvo custodiend'
quousque hoc gratis facere voluerit, and cum securitatem illam sic receperitis
vel ceperis, nos inde in Cancellaria nostra sub sigillis vestris vel alicujus
vestrum (vel sub sigillo suo) distinct and aperte sine dilatione reddas
certiores, certificetis (vel certifices) indilate hoc Breve nobis remittentes
vel remittens. Registr. 89. Dalt. 182. Cap. 73.

V. Lamb. 2. cap. 11. page 75. The Justice of Peace takes security as a
minister when the Writ of Supplicavit (F.N.B. 80 supra 4.) which in old-time
was called Breve de minis, as Regist. 89. directed out of the Chancery, is
delivered into his hands; for then he is only to direct his Precept to compel
the party upon that Writ to find surety for the Peace, 21 H. 7. 20 per finence.

VI. Lamb. 75, 76. The form of which Precept or Warrant upon a Supplicavit is
thus,

G. M. One of the Justices of Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty
within the County of K. to the Sheriff of the said Shire, the Constables of the
Hundred of W. the Borsholder of the Town of I. and to all and singular the
Kings Majesty's Bailiffs and other Ministers, as well within liberties as
without, in the said County, and to every of them, Greeting. Know ye, That I
have received the Commandment of our said Sovereign Lord in these words, etc.
(reciting the Supplicavit, or the effect of it, etc.) thus: Know ye, that I
have received the Commandment of our said Sovereign Lord, to compel A. B. of J.
in the said County, Yeoman, to find sufficient Surety for his Majesty's Peace
by him to be kept toward C. D. of the said Town of J. Tailor: and therefore on
the behalf of our said Sovereign Lord I Command and Charge you jointly and
severally, that Immediately upon the receipt hereof you cause the said A. B. to
come before me at my House in I. aforesaid, to find sufficient Surety and
mainprise for the Peace to be kept toward our said Sovereign Lord and all his
Liege-people, and especially toward the said C. D. and if he the said A. B.
shall refuse thus to do, that then you him safely Convey, or cause to be safely
Conveyed unto the next Goal of his Majesty in the said County, there to remain
until that he shall willingly do the same: So that he may be before the
Justices of the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord within the said County, at
their next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden at M. there to answer to
our said Sovereign Lord for his Contempt in this behalf: And see that you
certify your doing in the premises to the said Justices at the said Sessions,
bringing then thither this Precept with you. Given at I. aforesaid under my
Seal the day of etc. An. etc. Dalt. 350. cap. 121.

VII. F. N. B. 81. B. And sometimes the Writ of Supplicavit is made Returnable
in Chancery at a certain day; and if it be so done, Certiorari.
then if the Justices do not certify the Writ, nor the Recognizance, and the
Surety that is taken, the party who sueth the Writ of Supplicavit shall have a
Writ of Certiorari directed to the Justices of Peace to certify this Writ of
Supplicavit, and that which they have done thereon, and the surety that is
found, etc. and so the party shall have such a Certiorari to the Justices of
Peace to certify the surety taken on a Supplicavit, though the writ of
Supplicavit were not made Returnable in the Chancery.

VIII. F. N. B. 81. C. And so if a Man demands surety of the Peace in the
County against any Man, he shall find himself sureties in the County before the
Justices of Peace, etc. he that demands this surety may sue a Writ of
Certiorari directed to the Justices of Peace, to remove this surety of the
Peace and the Recognizance taken therein; and this under the Seals of the
Justices or one of them, to certify this Recognizance and surety taken: And if
the Certiorari be sued upon a Writ of Supplicavit, then the Certiorari shall
rehearse this Writ of Supplicavit; and if it be sued upon a surety demanded in
the County without a Supplicavit, then the form of the Certiorari is thus.

Rex Custodibus pacis suoe in Com' L. and eorum cuilibet salutem, volentes
certis de causis Certiorari super tenorem cujusdam securitatis pacis nuper
coram R. B. and Sociis suis custodibus pacis nostroe and Justiciariis nostris
ad diversas Felonias, Transgressiones and Malefacta in Com' L. Audiend' and
Terminand' Assignat' de R. de W. de E. quod ipse damnum vel malum aliquod B. de
F. aut alicui populo nostro faciat nec fieri procurabit ex Officio vestr'
capta, quoe quidem securitas penes vos residet ut dicitur, vobis Mandamus quod
nos inde in Cancellaria nostra sub Sigillis vestris vel unius vestrum distinct
and aperte sine dilatione reddatis certiores hoc Breve nobis remittentes,
test. etc. Crumpt. 143, 144.

IX. F. N. B. 81. E. By reason of this Commission of the Peace, the Justices
have power to bind Men by Recognizance to keep the Peace, Recognizance.
upon complaint to them made by any person; and yet to take this Recognizance
there is no express Authority given them by the Commission, but of Congruity,
because that they have Authority to cause men to keep the Peace, and to hear
and determine offenses done against the Peace, they have power to bind men by
Recognizance to do it; for every Act which they do by virtue of their
Commission, must be taken as a matter of Record, Crumpt. 141. b.

Justices.
X. Lamb. 77. A Justice of Peace may also by virtue of his Office, and as he is
a Judge, command this Surety to be found, and that either of his own motion and
discretion, or else at the request and prayer of another: For he may cause a
common Barretor, Riotor, one that makes an Affray, or other person to him
suspected, to find Surety of the Peace, 9 Ed. 4. 3. per Curiam: And if he see
men contending in hot words, and threatening the one to hurt or kill the other,
he may of discretion, and ought of duty, as I think, to command them to find
Surety of the Peace, and thereby provide for their mutual safety, Crumpt. 134.
b. 135. b.

XI. Lamb. 78. And if a man that was bound to keep the Peace have broken his
Bond, the Justices of Peace ought of discretion to bind him of new, 21 Ed. 4.
40. per Marrow, Crumpt. 141. infra 87.

Conspiracy.
XII. Lamb. 78. And his Authority is so little to be controlled in this matter,
that Mr. Marrow is of the opinion, That if a Justice of Peace should procure
one man to demand Surety of the Peace against another, and he himself should
grant a Warrant for it, by which the Party is Arrested, yet no Action would lie
against that Justice for his so doing, because he might have granted it without
any demand made, and then it shall not be said but that he saw Cause both to
provoke the party to ask it, and for himself to grant it.

Bar. and Fem.
XIII. Lamb. 78, 79. The Wife if she be threatened to be killed, or to be
outragiously chastised by her Husband, may with good reason demand the peace
against him, F.N.B 80. and 230. and I do not doubt but that a Justice of Peace
may in such a Case happening in his presence, Command it upon his own
discretion: The Husband may also demand the peace against his own Wife in like
Case, and any man may demand it against the Wife of another, by Marrow, Crumpt.
133. b. Dalt. 163. cap. 68.

Ability.
XIV. Lamb. 79. A man Attainted of Treason or Felony, or Convict of Heresy, or
Abjured, a Dumb Man, or an Infant, though within 14 years of age, or a Villain
against his Lord, may demand and ought to have Surety of the Peace, by Marrow.
And I do not find any strong reason why the Lord against his Villain, or
another man against a Dumb-man that is not Deaf, or against an Infant above the
age of 14 years, ought not upon good Cause to have it, though perhaps the two
last cannot be bound for themselves, Crumpt. 133. b. 134. b. Dalt. 164. cap. 68.

Idiot.
XV. Lamb. 79. But a Madman shall not have surety of the peace at his own
request, as Mr. Marrow thought, because he has no discretion to ask it: and
therefore if there be Cause, he ought to be provided for by the discretion of
the Justices, as I think: Neither shall surety of the Peace be granted against
a Madman, except he have Lucida Intervalla, Dalton* 163, 164. cap. 68.

Attainder.
XVI. Lamb. 80. A man Attainted in a Proemunire, or that is an Alien born, and
no Denizen, ought not to have his Surety at his desire, as Mr. Marrow takes
it; but perhaps he would have changed his opinion in the Case of Proemunire, if
he had lived at this time, upon sight of 5 Eliz. 1. 21. N. 1. For such a Man
may not now be killed, as though he were out of the protection of the King,
Crumpt. 133. b. Dalt. 164. cap. 68.

Alien.
XVII. Lamb. 80. And as touching the Alien having surety of the Peace, some
think there ought to be a difference between such an Alien, as is of the Enmity
of the King, and him that is of his Amity, for Magna Charta, 9 H. 3. 30. 9. Ed.
3. 1.. N. and 14 Ed. 3. St. 2. cap. 2. and sundry other Statutes do all use
that difference in Merchant-strangers, and do provide, That such of them as be
not Enemies to the Realm, may both safely come into the Realm, and tarry here,
and go hence at their free pleasures. But the Case may bear some doubt, because
the Commission it self seems to Authorize the Justice of Peace no further
then to provide for the King's People, of which number no Alien seems to be;
but why any Alien may not be bound to the Peace, I do not yet understand,
Crumpt. 134. ab. Dalt. 164, 165. cap. 68.

XVIII. Lamb. 80, 81. Furthermore, one Justice of Peace, Justices.
says Mr. Marrow, may grant this surety to any man aginst one of his
Fellow-Justices; but, as Mr. Marrow requires a discretion in a Justice of the
Peace, when surety is craved of him against a Sheriff, Coroner, Escheator or
such other Officer whom he wishes not to be bound to keep the Peace Versus
Cunctum Populum, but only toward him that prays it, lest otherwise it should
argue them to be unworthy of such Offices; so much more he ought to use good
discretion in granting it against his Fellow-Justice, lest otherwise he both
bring the Office in contempt, and himself to reproof by it. But I doubt not
that one Justice of the Peace, if he will, may pray surety of the Peace at the
hands of his Fellow-Justice against another person, and the Recognizance may
then be according to the Common Form with and Precipue Versus, etc. Crumpt.
134. b. Dalt. 162. 163. cap. 68.

XIX. Lamb. 81. But some others there be, perhaps, Dignity.
with whom he may not well meddle; as, if a man have Cause to require the Peace
against a Lord, he for so small a Cause is not to be Arrested, as I take it, by
Warrant from a Justice, nor yet by a Supplicavit out of the Chancery, but the
Lord Chancellor may in such Case grant to the party a Sub-poena against that
Lord for the Peace, as it seems by 35 H. 6. Sub-poena 20. Dalt. 335. cap.
118. for such an opinion has the Law conceived of Peaceable disposition of
Noblemen, that it has been thought enough to take one of their promises upon
honor, that he would not break the Peace against a Man, 17 Ed. 4. 4.
Contempts, Br. 6. and 24 Ed. 3. 33. Sub-poena 20. but whether the Lord
Chancellor may Award an Attachment upon such a Sub-poena, it has been in our
memory made a Question, Dyer 315. pl. Exigent' Br. 72. Crumpt. 134, ab. 135.
Dalt. 161. cap. 68.

XX. Lamb. 82, 83. The Cause for which this Surety of the Peace may be Required
or Commanded, Dures.
appears in the first Assignavimus of the Commission, 5. in these words, Et
ad omnes illos qui aliquibus vel alicui de populo nostro de Corporibus suis vel
de incendio Domorum suarum minas fecerint ad sufficientem securitatem de pace,
etc. Inveniendam, etc. Which Mr. Fitzh. 8. Construeth thus, He that is
threatened that he shall be hurt in his Body, or that his House or Goods shall
be Burnt, may demand Surety of the Peace for his safeguard in that behalf; but
says the Court 17 Ed. 4. 4. If a man will demand the Peace, because he is in
fear that another Man will take and imprison him, it ought not to be granted;
and one yields the reason to be, because he may have a Writ De homine
Replegiando, or an Action of False Imprisonment, and may thereby recover the
Damages of his Imprisonment: The same Reason might be made against the demand
of the Peace where a Man is Threatened with Battery; and yet it is clear, that
in such a Case the Surety of Peace ought not to be denied him* And truly to
threaten Imprisonment, is within the words Minas de Corporibus, no less then
Battery it self; and like harm may happen by hard Imprisonment and cruel
Beating. It shall be Good therefore to enquire of this matter. But I take it
somewhat clear, that a Justice of the Peace may not by this Commission Award a
Precept of the Peace in the behalf of a Man that will require it, because he is
at variance with his Neighbor, or fears that he will do harm to his Servants
or Cattle; for in that Case Mr. Fitzherbert helps him with an old Writ to the
Sheriff, as he finds it in the Register, and F. N. B. 80. G.

Oath.
XXI. 83, 84. The Peace being thus for good Cause required, it is the common
manner to exact an Oath of the party, whereby the Justice may be the better
informed and led to think that he does not ask it for malicious vexation of
another, but of very fear, and for the needful safety of himself and his; and
Mr. Fitzherbert in F. N. B. 79. H. labors to show, that the Justices of the
Peace ought not without such an Oath to grant this Surety at the suit of any
man, forasmuch as not only the Justices of B. R. do yet take an Oath in such
Case, but the Ancient Course of the Law was such in the Chancery it self also,
although it be now adays otherwise used there. Crumpt. 135, 138. Dalt. 171.
cap. 69.

XXII. Kilborn's Precedents 233. The Oath of him who craves the Peace against
another.

YOU shall Swear that the Surety of the Peace which you crave against A. B. is
not for hatred or malice which you bear him, but for safety of your Body from
harm which you fear he will do, or procure to be done unto you. So help you
God.

Or thus. YOU shall Swear, That the Surety of the Peace which you Crave against
A. B. is not of any private malice, hatred or evil will, but merely that you
are afraid of your life, or the hurting or maiming of your Body, or the burning
of your Houses. So help you God.

Process.
XXIII. Lamb. 84, 85. It rests to show by what means this Surety may be
enjoined; and that is either by word or writing under Seal: for a Justice of
Peace may by word only Command a Man being in his presence to find Surety of
the Peace, 9 Ed. 4. 3. For seeing that he is a Judge of Record, says Mr.
Fitzherbert 8. his Precept by mouth is stronger then his Precept in writing. So
if the Peace be demanded against one that is in his presence, he may Command
the Sheriff or other known Officer, or his own Servant if they be then present
also to Arrest the party to find his Surety, 14 H. 7. 8. and Marrow, for it is
not so much the Arrest of the Minister as of the Justice himself: But if either
the Officer, Servant, or Party be absent, then it is requisite to make a
Warrant or Precept in writing; the form whereof may be thus in English, Crumpt.
138. b. 8. Dalt. 165. 166. cap. 68.

XXIV. Lamb. 85, 86. The Precept for the Peace.

Kent ss. Ja. by the Grace of God, etc. To Our Sheriff of K. the Constables of
the Hundred of W. etc. and to all and singular Our Bailiffs and other Our
Ministers in the said County, as well within Liberties as without, Greeting:
Forasmuch as A. B. of W. aforesaid, Yeoman, has personally come before G. B.
of the said Town Esquire one of Our Justices of the Peace within the said County,
and has taken a Corporal Oath, That he is afraid that one C. D. of S. in the
said County, Yeoman, will beat, wound, maim or kill him, or burn his Houses,
and has therewithal prayed Surety of the Peace against the said C.D. Therefore
we Command and Charge you jointly and severally, that immediately upon the
receipt hereof, you cause the said C. D. to come before the said G. B. or some
other of Our said Justices, to find sufficient Surety and Mainprise, as well
for his appearance at the next Quarter Sessions of our Peace to be holden at M.
in the said County, as also for Our Peace to be kept toward Us and all Our
Liege-people, and chiefly toward the said A. B. that is to say, That he the
said C. D. shall not do, nor by any means procure, or cause to be done any of
the said Evils to any of Our said People, and especially to the said A. B. and
if he the said C. D. shall refuse thus to do, that then immediately, without
expecting any further Warrant; you him safely convey or cause to be safely
conveyed to Our next Prison in the said County, there to remain until he shall
willingly do the same, so that he may be before Our said Justices at the said
next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden at M. aforesaid, then and there
to answer unto Us for his Contempt in this behalf; and see that you certify
your doing in the premises to our said Justices at the said Sessions, bringing
then thither this Precept with you.

Witness the said G. R. at W. aforesaid, the fourth day of August, etc.
Or thus,

In the Name of the Justice himself, Mutatis Mutandis. E. W. Knight, one of the
Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King within the said County, to
the Sheriff, etc. Greeting.
Forasmuch as A. B. etc. has personally come before me, etc. These be
therefore on the behalf, and in the Name of our said Sovereign Lord, to Command
you jointly, etc. to come before me or one other of his Majesty's said Justices
of the Peace in the said County, etc.

Given under my Seal at W. aforesaid.
XXV. Lamb. 87. Process.
It is meet that the Precept for the Peace do expressly contain the Cause of the
Peace within it, for otherwise how can the Officer or Parties take knowledge
that surety must be provided for it; yea every Precept made by a Justice of
Peace ought to comprehend the special matter upon which it proceeds, as the
King's Writs, and as for the form that is now commonly used (to answer to such
things as shall be objected and such like, they were not fetched out of the old
Learned Precedents, but lately brought in by such as either knew not or cared
not what they writ.

XXVI. Lamb. 87, 88. The Warrant of the Peace is the better also if it bear
date of the Place where it was made; for if a Man be to plead such a Precept
for his excuse, in an Action of false Imprisonment brought against him, he
ought in his Plea to show the place where the Warrant was made, 14 H. 8. 18.

XXVII. Lamb. 88. And this Precept may also be directed to any indifferent
person by name, though he be no Officer at all; for so it seems to be
permitted in the Oath of the Justice of the Peace, and so is also 14 H. 8. 18.
The which liberty the Justices in some Shires do use and take accustomably,
directing their Precepts to private Men of their own Election and Choice: But
yet I take our Kentish Course to be the safer way, where we commonly write to
the sworn Constables and Bursholders only.

XXVIII. Lamb. 89. If such a Precept be made jointly to Twain, yet the one
alone may serve it: If it be directed to the Sheriff, then he may Command his
Bailiff, Undersheriff, or other sworn and known Officer, to serve it without
writing any Precept: But if he will Command another Man that is no Officer to
serve it, he must give him a written Precept; for otherwise a Writ of false
Imprisonment will lie for the Arrest: And if it be directed to the Bailiff, or
to a Servant of a Justice of Peace, or other Stranger, they must serve it
themselves; for they can Command none other to do it, neither by Word nor
Precept, by Marrow.

XXIX. Lamb. 89. A sworn and known Officer needs not to show this Warrant,
when he does serve it upon a Man, 8 Ed. 4. 14. Officer.
False Imprisonment, Br. 23. and 20 H. 7. 13, etc. For his Office does after a
sort Authorize him: But if the Justice will set his Servant to serve it, that
Servant must show the Warrant, if the party demand it; and otherwise the party
may make resistance:

XXX. Lamb. 89, 90. A Justice of Peace, says Peace, Return.
Br. 9. may make this Warrant returnable before himself, and the Bailiff needs
not to carry the party before any other Justice; but Judge Fineux, 21 H. 7. 20.
says, That if a Justice of Peace do make a Warrant of the Peace Ex Officio,
that is, without any Writ of Supplicavit Awarded, then the party may choose to
appear before him or any other Justice in the Shire, and that he shall punish
the Bailiff in false Imprisonment, if he do otherwise compel him; (5 Co. 59.
Infra 37.) otherwise it is in the Execution of a Writ of Supplicavit; for he
alone to whose hands it first comes, is Authorized to execute and return that
Writ, and thereupon Mr. F. N. B. 81. affirms, That if such a Writ of
Supplicavit be delivered to the Sheriff, then he may both Execute it alone, and
also take Surety by Recognizance, which otherwise being but a Conservator he
could not do, because the Writ does so enable him, yet 9 Ed. 4. 31. Littleton
is to the contrary, Dalt. 166. cap. 69.

XXXI. Lamb. 90. The Officer ought also to require the party to come and find
Surety of the Peace before that he do Arrest him; by the opinion L. 5 Ed. 4.
13. 10. and in truth the Common Form of the Precept is, And if he refuse, etc.
then he shall convey him to the Goal, and therefore if he yield to come and to
find Surety, the Officer may neither absolutely Arrest him, nor take any Fee of
him: And this may be the cause that when one appears upon such a Warrant
before the Justice of Peace, the Justice needs not demand Surety of him, but
may commit him if he do not offer Surety, 4 H. 7. 9. Crumpt. 142. Dalt. 166.
cap. 69.

XXXII. Lamb. 90, 91. If a Bailiff do Arrest a Man for the Peace before that he
have any Warrant, and then afterward do procure a Warrant for it this
nevertheless is unlawfully done, and will not excuse him in an Action of false
Imprisonment. But if the Bailiff do cause one by force of a Warrant to come and
find Surety of the Peace, and when the Party is brought, the Justice will not
bind him, yet the Bailiff is excused, 21 H. 7. 22. Crump. 144. and 14 H. 7. 9.

XXXIII. Lamb. 91. If Surety of the Peace be required at the hands of a Justice
of Peace that dwells out of the County, against a Man within the County, the
Justice may grant a Precept to be served in the County: but when the party
shall be thereupon warned and commanded to find Surety, the Officer may not
carry him out of the County to the Justice of Peace that made the Warrant; by
Marrow: For a Justice of Peace has no Authority but in the County where he is
a Justice, 13 Ed. 4. 8. and Coron. 37. and therefore it may be doubted also
whether such a Warrant be good or no.

XXXIV. Lamb. 92. But if it fall out that he refuse to come and put in such
Surety, then may the Officer by virtue of his Warrant convey him to Prison; for
the words of the Commission, 5. are, And if he shall refuse, then, etc. And if
he add resistance to this refusal, and make assault upon the Officer, then may
that Officer justify the beating or hurting of him, 21 H. 7. 39. per Fineux.
Dalt. 167. cap. 69. 3 H. 7. 3. per Brian, False Imprisonment Br. 21.

XXXV. Lamb. 93. To this Arrest for the Peace, all Lay Persons under the degree
of Lords or Peers of the Realm be subject, and Ecclesiastic persons, if they
be not attendant upon Divine Service, may be Arrested for the Peace also, by
Marrow.

Release.
XXXV. Lamb. 93, 94. For as it seems to some, that any Justice of Peace may
upon his offer take the Surety and deliver him, so it may be some doubt whether
he may be delivered upon the Death or Release of the party, without the help of
a Sessions or Goal Delivery, Dalt. 167. cap. 69. and 176. cap. 71.

Privilege.
XXXVI. Lamb. 94. It appears, 4 Ed. 4. 16. pl. And by the opinion of Brian, 2
H. 7. 2. 4. That if such an Imprisoned person had a suit hanging in the Common
Place aforehand, he might by a Writ of Privilege be discharged of the
Imprisonment, if the Party at whose suit he was Arrested for the Peace, were
not ready in Court at the day of the Return of the Writ when he should be
called to pray there again the Surety of the Peace against him; and he says,
that it had been always their common Course so to do: but other there were of
a contrary opinion; and it seems a hard Case that without any sufficient
notice of such a removing of the Party, a man should be defeated of his Surety
for the Peace, Crumpt. 141. b. 142. b. 143. Dalt. 167. cap. 69. and 186. cap.
73.

XXXVII. Lamb. 94, 95. But now if the party shall yield to find Surety of the
Peace, then may he be at his Liberty if the Precept proceed ex officio,
Justices.
and without the Writ of Supplicavit, to go to any other Justice of the Peace
to offer his Surety; for such is the opinion of Fineux, 21 H. 7. 20. ( supra
30.) Tho Mr. Brook Peace, Br. 9. and Faux Imprisonment, Br. 11. likes better
to give the Election thereof to the Officer 5 Co. 59. b. and I do remember,
that a Justice of the Peace was by Order in the Star Chamber thrust out of the
Commission only, because he refused to accept Surety of the Peace offered unto
him upon a Warrant Awarded by one his Fellow Justice, to whom the party as he
alleged durst not go to give it for fear that he would Execute upon him the
malice that he bare against him, Crumpt. 140. b. 144. Jurisd. 31. Dalt. 166.
cap. 69.

XXXVIII. Lamb. 95. But here again the Officer had need be advised, lest he
find much trouble in following the Party whither he shall please to lead him:
for as there may be just Causes to yield unto the request of a man that shall
dislike to be brought before that Justice which gave out the Warrant, either
for some matter of private displeasure, or for the great distance of his
Dwelling, or for other Reasons; so yet without good Allegation made, I allow
not that the Officer shall be drawn out of the Division and Limit where both he
and the party do Dwell; for in so doing, the Officer and not the Offender may
seem to be punished by the Service, Dalt. 166. cap. 69.

XXXIX. Lamb. 95. 96. Hereupon also it happens often, Supersedeas.
that such Persons choosing rather to be bound by any other then by him that
makes the Warrant, do offer themselves and do become bound before some other
Justice: and do withal procure a Supersedeas from him to be discharged of any
other Arrest to be made upon them; yea and many times hearing of such precepts
and misliking to be bound in the Country, they go up to Westminster and give
Surety of the Peace there, either in the King's Bench for a time only, as the
manner of that Court is, or in the Chancery forever, or for a time, as they use
it, and do thereupon procure a Supersedeas from the Court where they are bound,
to close the hands of the Country Justices, Crumpt. 138. b. 9. and 144. b. 145.
b. Dalt. 168, 169. cap. 69.

XL. Lamb. 96. If therefore a Justice of the Peace will by a Supersedeas
discharge a precept for the Peace Awarded by his fellow Justice by Virtue of
his Office (and not by force of a Supplicavit, which is of a higher Nature, and
cannot be so Avoided) then shall he do well to take the Recognizance after the
self same sort in all points as the Form of the former Precept does require:
for as it is good reason that having taken Surety for the Peace, he may by his
Supersedeas save the party from finding other Surety for the self same Cause.
So is it not reasonable that he should proceed otherwise then according to the
first Precept, and thereby discharge a matter of Record that was made by one of
equal Authority with himself. Fitz-herb. 9. Crumpt. 138. b. 10. and Infra 99.

XLI. Lamb. 96, 97. Supersedeas.
But this Supersedeas sent by a Justice of Peace is sufficient, although it
neither name the Sureties nor contain the Sums in which they are bound; yet is
it the better form to express them both, as well because the higher Courts use
so to do, as also that if the Bailiff, Constable or other Officer to whom it is
delivered, be called at the next Sessions by the Suit of him that sought to
have the place, to show he has Executed his Warrant, and to come in and show
forth the Supersedeas; then the Party that is bound may be called thereupon at
the day that appears to be Limited unto him by the Supersedeas; for it is
under the Seal of a Justice, and does testify that the party is bound and has
found Surety to appear at a certain day; and if he make default, that being
recorded, shall be sufficient to cause him to forfeit the Penalty of the
Recognizance, although the Justice that Awarded it shall omit to bring the
Recognizance it self according as he ought now to do, by 3 H. 7. 1.. N. and
this may be Gathered upon the opinion 2 H. 7. 4. Surety, Br. 13. Privilege, Br.
52. and may also be seen by this Form of the Supersedeas underwritten.

XLII. Lamb. 97, 98. W. S. Esquire one of the Justices of the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the King within the County of K. to the Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables, etc. and other the faithful Ministers and Subjects of our said
Sovereign Lord within the said County, and to every of them, sends Greeting:
Forasmuch as A. B. of etc. Yeoman, has Personally come before me at A. etc.
and has found sufficient Surety, that is to say, C. D. and E. F. etc. Yeoman,
either of the which has undertaken for the said A. B. under the pain of XX li.
and he the said A. B. has undertaken for himself under the pain of XL li. that
he the said A. B. shall well and truly keep the Peace toward our said
Sovereign Lord and all his Liege People, and specially toward G. H. etc.
Yeoman; and also that he shall personally appear before the Justices of the
Peace of our said Sovereign Lord within the said County at the next General
Sessions of the Peace to be holden at M. there: therefore on the behalf of our
said Sovereign Lord I Command you and every of you, that ye utterly forbear and
surcease to Arrest, take, Imprison or otherwise by any means for the said
occasion to molest the said A. B. and if you have for the said occasion and for
none other taken or Imprisoned him, that then you do cause him to be delivered
and set at Liberty without further delay, given at A. aforesaid under my Seal
this Day of etc. Anno, etc.

This Supersedeas may also be in the Name of the King under the Test of the
Justice of Peace, thus; Charles by the Grace of God, etc. to the Sheriff, etc.
Greeting. Forasmuch as A. B. has come before T. F. Knight, one of our Justices
of the Peace within our said County, and has found, etc. we therefore Command
you and every of you that ye forbear, etc. Witness the said T. F. etc.

XLIII. Lamb. 99. Thus much of the Supersedeas Issuing from a Justice of the
Peace, the which ought to withold and stay the Proceeding of his fellow
Justices in the said Cause, in so much, that if any Officer by any of their
Warrants having this Supersedeas delivered unto him, will nevertheless urge the
Party to find new Surety for the Peace, he may refuse to give it; and if he be
Committed to Prison for such his refusal, he may, as I think have his Action of
False Imprisonment against the Officer upon the same.

XLIV. Lamb. 99. I read 21 Ed. 4. 40. Peace, Br. 17. that a Supersedeas
proceeding out of the Chancery, will discharge a Surety of the Peace taken
before the Justices of B. R. much more then will a Supersedeas sent out of the
Chancery or B. R. discharge a Precept for the Peace that is awarded from an
Inferior Justice of the Peace; and if the Justice of the Peace to whom a
Supersedeas out of such an High Court shall be delivered will not thereupon
surcease, an Attachment may be Awarded against him for his contempt, and he may
be Imprisoned and Fined for it. Crumpt. 139. 12.

XLV. Lamb. 99, 100. It is good Counsel therefore F. N. B. 238. E. where he
wills the Justice of Peace after such a Supersedeas received to forbear to
make any Warrant to Arrest the Party; and if they have Awarded it, then to make
their own Supersedeas to the Sheriff and other Officers, thereby Commanding
them to surcease to put it in Execution.

XLVI. Lamb. 100. Recognizance.
If the Justice of Peace deal in taking of the Recognizance of the Peace as a
Judge, and by virtue of his Commission 5. then the number of the Sureties, the
Sum of the Bond, their sufficiency in Goods or Lands, the time how long the
Party shall be bound, and such other Circumstances, are referred wholly to his
own Consideration: and if he be deceived in the ability of the Sureties, he may
compel the Party to put in others, by Marrow; for the Avoiding of which deceit
also the Justices of C. B. 7 H. 6. 25. Did Examine the Ability of the Sureties
upon their Oaths.

XLVII. Lamb. 100, 101. The Common manner is to take two Sureties besides the
Party himself; and good reason it is that those should be such as have their
names registered in the Book of Subsidy, for albeit that here and there some may
be sufficient that were not Assessed to the King, yet it stands not well
together that he should become bound to the King in X or XX li. that was not in
the Subsidy found worth any thing at all; and the Case may be such, that
Sureties only, not the principal Party, shall give the Bond: for if the Peace
be prayed against a Wife or an Infant under the years of Discretion, they shall
be bound by their Sureties only as was the Monk or Cannon, 36 H. 6. 23. Surety,
Br. 9. Moign. Br. 15. Dalt. 171. cap. 69.

XLVIII. Lamb. 101. But if the Justice of Peace shall Command the Peace as a
Minister in Execution of the Writ of Supplicavit, Supplicavit.
then must he behave himself as the Writ it self directs him; and that has
not been always after one manner, for some Commands him to take sufficient
Manucaptors in any pain or Sum to be reasonably set by himself, so that he will
be answerable for it at his own Peril: and some wills him to take sufficient
Security in a Sum certainly prescribed unto him, as C li. in all or every of
them in XX li. as at large, Register 89. Dalt. 185. cap. 73.

XLIX. Lamb. 101, 102. A Justice of the Peace, says Marrow, Bail.
may take this Surety by a Gage or pledge which shall not be forfeited thereby,
but pawned only, so that the Party shall under a certain pain keep the Peace;
which pawn he shall forfeit if he break the Peace. Dal. 171. cap. 69.

L. Lamb. 102. And by the Opinion of Marrow, a Justice of the Peace may also
take his Surety by an Obligation made to himself by the name of Justice of the
Peace; for so shall it be, says he, ad usum Domini Regis: but if it were made
unto him without his name of Justice of the Peace, then it could not be to the
use of the King, unless it had the words ad usum Domini Regis: on the other
side F. N. B. 81. D. holds, that such an obligation taken to the King by a
Justice of the Peace, is nothing worth; for a man cannot be bound to the King
but only by matter of Record, unless he will after come into a Court of Record
and Confess it to be his Deed, and pray that it may be Enrolled there, 9 Ed. 4.
31. But the new Statute 33 H. 8. 39.. N. has made a plain Law in these Cases,
that all Obligations and Specialties made for any Cause touching the King,
shall be in his own name by the words Domino Regi, and to no other Person to
his use. The safe way therefore is to take his Surety by Recognizance, as is
commonly used, and that also by the words Domino Regi, and then upon the
Forfeiture thereof, the King shall have Execution accordingly. 51. Dalt. 171.
172. cap. 69.

LI. Lamb. 103. Now if a Recognizance be meant to be taken for the Peace by a
Justice of the Peace, and yet do not contain within it, or in the Condition
thereof, that it was taken for the keeping of the Peace, it seems to be void,
as being then taken Coram non Judice, because a Justice of the Peace has not
power to take Recognizances Generally, but for matters concerning his Office
specially; and therefore Mr. Marrow adds further, that if the Recognizance
be, that the Recognizor shall not maim nor beat A, yet it is not good, because
it ought to be for the keeping of the Peace, and that may be broken otherwise,
as by Burning the House of A. or by such like Misdemeanor, Dalt. 171. cap. 69.

LII. Lamb. 103. 104. Although this Recognizance do not comprehend any time of
appearance, but be Generally to keep the Peace, yet it is good in Law, says
Mr. Marrow, because the chief scope is the keeping of the Peace, and the time
is referred to the Discretion of the Justice: but as 2 H. 7. 1. it was moved
whether the Justice of Peace ought to bring in the Recognizance to the Custos
Rotulorum, that the Party might be called upon it. So by 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 26.
It is plainly Enacted, That every Recognizance taken for the Peace, shall be
certified at the next Sessions of the Peace, that the Party may thereupon be
called, and his default, if any happen, may be recorded: whereby it seems,
that every Recognizance of the Peace ought not to contain the appearance of the
Party at the next Sessions, and otherwise there may be some mischief; for if
the Party shall not so appear he is at Liberty without a new Arrest, and not
forthcoming to be bound over, if it be so required. Crumpt. 141. b. 142. b.
Dalt. 172. cap. 69.

LIII. Lamb. 104. And by Mr. Marrow, if the Recognizance contain a day of
Appearance, and yet have no Person named before whom the Party so Bounden shall
appear, then may he appear where he will before the Justices of the Peace which
took the Recognizance of him.

LIVE. Lamb. 104. If the Form of the Recognizance be in xx li. to be Levied only
of the Goods, or only of the Lands of the Recognizor, it seems to be good
enough; for peradventure the words of the Goods only, or the Lands only, shall
be taken to be void, seeing that the very acknowledgment of the Sum of xx li.
before a Judge enabled to take it, both makes it a Debt, and implies the
Ordinary mean of Law to come unto it, Dalt. 172. cap. 69.

LV. Lamb. 104. Ibid. If this Recognizance be taken to keep the Peace against
one special Party only, Mr. Marrow thinks it good; but advise well of it, for
the words in the Commission 5. of the Peace now be to take Surety, Erga nos and
populum nostrum. Dalt. 172. cap. 69.

Recogn.
LVI. Lamb. 105. For the better Eschewing of all Error in himself, and bad
dealing against the Party, I wish the Justice to go via regia, following the
received Form; which I take to be thus.

K. Memorand' quod quarto die Julii, Anno Regni etc. R. P. de E. 'in Com'
predict' Yeoman in propria persona sua venit coram me I. L. Milite, uno
Justiciarior' dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in dicto Comitat' Conservand'
assignat' and assumpsit pro seipso sub poena viginti librar' and H. I. de L. in
Com' predict' Yeoman, and I. H. de M. in eodem Comitatu Husbandman, tunc and
ibidem in propriis personis suis similiter venerunt and manuceperunt pro
predict' R. P. (viz.) quilibet eorum separatim sub poena C. solidorum quod idem
R. P. personaliter comparebit coram Justiciariis dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem ad
proximam Generalem Sessionem Pacis in Com' predicto ad faciend' and recipiend'
quod ei per Curiam tunc and ibidem injungetur, and quod ipse interim pacem
dicti Domini Regis custodiet erga ipsum Dom Regem, and cunctum populum suum and
precipue versus M. N. de Ightham predict' Yeoman, and quod Damnum vel malum
aliquod corporale aut Gravamen prefato M. N. aut alicui de populo dicti Domini
Regis quod in loesionem aut perturbationem Pacis ipsius Domini Regis cedere
valeat quovismodo non faciet nec fieri procurabit. Quam quidem Summam xx libr'
predict' R. P. and quilibet manucaptorum predictorum predictas separales Summas
C. Solid' recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino Regi, de terris and tenementis,
bonis and catallis suis, quorumlibet and cujuslibet eorum ad opus dict' Domini
Regis, Heredum and Successorum suorum, fieri and levari ad quorumcunque manus
devenerint, si contigerit ipsum R. P. premissa, vel eorum aliquod in aliquo
infringere, and inde legitimo modo convinci. In cujus rei Testimonium ego
predictus I. L. Sigillum meum apposui Dat' etc. Dalt. 369. cap. 123. and 172.
cap. 69.

Or thus, MEmorand' quod 4 die etc. A. B. de I. etc. and C.D. de eadem Yeoman
venerunt coram me I.F. etc. and manuceperunt pro I.S. nuper de L. etc. quod
ipse personaliter comparebit coram me prefat' I. F. vel sociis meis
Justiciariis pacis Domini Regis ad proximam Generalem Sessionem etc. and quod
ipse interim gerit pacem erga cunctum Populum Domini Regis, and precipue erga
R. B. etc. viz. quilibet manucaptorum predictorum sub poena xx libr', and
predict' I. S. assumpsit pro seipso sub pena xl l, quam quidem Summam xl li.
predictus I. S. and quilibet manucaptorum predictorum dictam summam xx libr'
recognoverunt etc. Kilb. Presidents. 191. Dalt. 369. cap. 123.

LVII. Lamb. 107. And this may be well done also by a single Recognizance in
Latin, with a Condition added or Endorsed in English for the keeping of the
Peace, and for the day and place of the Appearance at the Quarter Sessions.

LVIII. Dalt. 368, 369, 370. cap. 123. A single Recognizance taken before
Justices of the Peace,

C. MEmorand' quod Die Anno etc. venerunt coram me M. D. and J. B. Armig'
Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' predict' Conservand' assignat'
J. S. de B. in Com' predict' Yeoman, and W. S. de eodem Weaver, ac R. D. de S.
in Com' predict' Tailor, and recognoverunt se debere Dicto Domino Regi, viz.
quilibet manucapt' predict' v libr', and predict' J. S. x libr' bonoe and
legalis monetoe Anglioe solvend' eidem Domino Regi in Festo Purificationis
beatoe Marioe Virginis proxim' futur' post Dat' present' and nisi fecerint
concesserunt pro se Heredibus Executoribus and administraterbus suis per
present' quod Dictoe separales Summoe leventur' and recuperent' de maneriis,
messuagiis, terris, tenement', bonis, catallis, and hereditament' ipsorum J. S.
W. S. and R. D. hered', executor', and assignator' suorum ubicunque fuerint
jnvent' per present' Dat' etc.

Another, CAntebr. Memorand' quod etc. Die, etc. Anno etc, D. E. de B. in Com'
predicto Yeoman personaliter venit coram me N. D. Armig' uno Justiciar' Dicti
Domini Regis ad pacem in Com' predict' Conservand' assignat' and recognovit se
debere dicto Damino Regi x libr' bonoe and legalis monetoe Anglioe de bonis and
Catallis, terris and tenement' suis fieri, and levari ad opus dicti Domini
Regis, heredum, and Successorum suorum, si defecerit in Condition indorsata.

Alias. MEmorand' quod etc. Die etc. Anno etc. venerunt coram me M. D. uno
Justiciar' etc. assignat' T. F. de W. in Com' predict' Yeoman, and J. S. de
eisdem Villa, and Com' Husbandman, Manuceperunt and uterque eorum separatim
manucepit sub pena v li. legalis monetoe Anglioe pro W. S. de W. predict'
Tailor, and predict' W. S. assumpsit pro seipso sub pena x li. consimilis
monetoe Anglioe, quas quidem separales Summas recognoverint, and quilibet eorum
ut predictum recognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi, de terris and tenement',
bonis and Catallis suis fieri etc. si predict' W. S. defecerit in performatione
Condition' infrascript'*

A Condition to keep the Peace.
THe Condition of this Recognizance is such, that if the within Bounden J. S.
shall personally appear before the Justices of our said Sovereign Lord the
King, at the next General Sessions of the Peace to be holden in the said County
of C. to do and receive that which by the Court shall be then and there
enjoined him, and that he in the mean time do keep the Peace of our said
Sovereign Lord the King toward the Kings Majesty and all his Liege People, and
especially toward A. B. of C. aforesaid Yeoman, that then, etc. Kilborns
Presidents, 176.

Retorn.
LIX. Lamb. 107. If the Surety were taken by virtue of a Supplicavit, then must
the Justice of Peace being in this Case but a Minister, make return of the Writ
and Certificate of his doing into the Court, from whence the Supplicavit did
proceed. First, let him note upon the Back of the Supplicavit thus, Executio
istius brevis patet in quadam Schedula huic brevi Annexa.

The Schedule thus. EGo T. F. Miles unus Custodum pacis Domini Regis in Com' K.
certifico in Canceliarioam dicti Domini Regis me virtute istius Brevis mihi per
A. B. in eodem Brevi nominat' primo deliberati) personaliter coram me tali die
and loco venire fecisse T. R. in dicto Brevi nominatum, ac eundem T. ad
sufficientem securitatem, and manucaptores pacis inveniend' secundum formam
dicti Brevis, viz. (as the Writ which is of diverse forms shall appoint)
Compulisse, in cujus rei testimonium huic presenti Certificationi meoe sigillum
meum apposui, datum apud D. predict' in Com' predict' 25 Die Febr' Anno etc.
Dalt. 185. cap. 73.

Certiorari.
LX. Lamb. 108. If a Certiorari be directed out of the Chancery to the Justice
of the Peace for removing this Recognizance, because it was not sent up
together with the Certificate, as there was no necessity that it should, then
that Writ also may be thus Answered.

Upon the Back of the Writ thus, VIrtute Istius Brevis ego P. H. unus Custodum
Pacis Domini Regis in Com' K. tenorem securitatis pacis unde infra fit mentio
Dicto Domino Regi in Cancellariam suam sub sigillo meo distinct and aperte
mitto, prout patet in Schedula huic Brevi consuta. Crumpt. 143. ab.

The which Schedule may be thus. Reciting.
MEmorand' quod XX die etc. Anno etc. (the whole Recognizance to the End) then
in cujus rei Testimonium ego predict' P. H. sigillum meum apposui, dat' etc.
Dalt. 185. cap. 73.

Joyndre.
LXI. Lamb. 108, 109. If the Supplicavit be against diverse, and the Party will
release his Prayer of the Peace against one of them, then the release ought to
be certified for him, and the Writ must be served for the rest, or else non est
Inventus may be certified for him, and the Writ may be certified for the rest,
Dalt. 173. cap. 69.

Retorn.
LXII. Lamb. 109. And this Form may serve also where a Certiorari is brought to
a Justice of Peace, to remove a Recognizance of the Peace, that was taken by
him ex officio without any such Writ of Supplicavit, as Registre 90.

But if the Recognizance be not thus removed from the Justice of Peace, then
may he keep it till the Certiorari come to him for it.

On the other side, if the Recognizance were taken by virtue of his Office,
then whether it were by his own Discretion or at the Suit and desire of
another, he must send or bring it in at the next Sessions to the Custos
Rotulorum, so that the Recognizor may be there Called, and if he make default,
then the same default to be recorded as is appointed by 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 26.
Dalt. 174. cap. 70.

LXIII. Lamb. 109. And although the Party that prayed the Peace, Appearance.
do not then appear at those Sessions, yet is not the default of the Recognizor
discharged thereby 39 H. 6. 26. Surety Br. 10. and the Justices may then of
discretion bind him over, which also they ordinarily do in some places for two
or three Sessions together, by order among themselves, Dalt. 174. cap. 71.

LXIV. Lamb. 110. The Justice of Peace that of his own motion compels one to
give Surety of the Peace until a certain day, Release.
may by like discretion before that day, release it. Fitzh. 10. and if it
should fortune to be made to keep the Peace Generally, without any day limited,
then would it be construed that it was to continue during the Life of the Party
bound, and then could no man release it by Fitzh. and 21 Ed. 4. 40. and 9 Ed.
4. 3. Crumpt. 139. b. 15. and 141. Dalt. 175. cap. 71.

LXV. Lamb. 110. If at the Suit of A. the Recognizance should be taken to keep
the Peace against A. only, and none other; then may A. release it either before
the same Justice, or any other that will certify the release, which
Certificate being of Record will discharge it, but to release it by Deed is
nothing worth, by Marrow, Dalt. 175. 176. cap. 71.

LXVI. Lamb. 110. And so if it be versus cunctum populum and precipue versus A.
yet may A. after that sort release it, as the Law is now practiced in our time
clear against the opinion of 21 Ed. 4. 40. for albeit that it seem popular, so
that all others should have equal Interest with A. in it; yet was it taken
specially say they for his safety, as the word precipue does argue plain, and
peace. Br. 17. says truly, that it was used at that time also, Crumpt. 142. b.
Dalt. 174. cap. 71. and 176. cap. 71.

LXVII. Lamb. 111. But since the Recognizance is made to the King, and not to
the Party, though for his Security, and seeing also that by such release, he
that ought to remain bounden shall be at Liberty, and may do harm whilst
intending to beat B. he may contend with A. both to pray and Pardon the
Recognizance for the Peace, I could for my part like better to maintain that
old, then to Imitate this new Opinion, Dalt. 176. cap. 71.

LXVIII. Lamb. 111. And now whether the recognizance be at the Suit of A. or by
the mere motion of the Justice in the behalf of A. the King cannot Release or
Pardon it, before that it be forfeited, both for the mischief that may come to
A. thereby, by the opinion of Fineux 11. H. 7. 12. and for that the
Recognizance being taken according to the common Form as is before set down. It
is not properly a Debt to the King until it be forfeited as appears 11 H. 4.
43. and 1 H. 7. 10. But being once forfeited, then he and none other may pardon
the Forfeiture, for then it is become proper Debt unto him, Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

LXIX. Lamb. 111, 112. Now in these Cases the Recognizance may not be
Cancelled, lest peradventure the Peace was broken, and consequently the
Recognizance forfeit before the time of the Release made, Fitzh. 10. and
therefore Crumpt. 140. b. 141. a.

It shall be best in such Cases to send to the Sessions the Recognizance and
the Release together, and that may be done in a few Lines under the
Recognizance it self, Crumpt. 139. b. 16.

For the Release of a Justice, thus.

EGo prefat' T. W. Miles qui supra nominat' A. B. ad predict' securitat' pacis
inveniend' ex mea Discretione compuli eandem securitatem pacis quantum in me
est ex mea discretione 1 Die August', Anno etc. remisi and relaxavi.

In cujus rei testimonium huic presenti relaxationi meoe sigillum meum apposui,
Dat' etc.
Dalt. 390. cap. 128.

And for the Release of the Party before the same Justice that took it, thus.

MEmorand' quod primo die Augusti, Anno etc. prefatus C. D. venit coram me S.
L. and Gratis remisit and relaxavit quantum in se est predictam securitatem
pacis per ipsum coram me versus supra nominatum A. B. petitum.

In cujus rei testimonium ego prefat' S. L. etc. Dat' etc.
But if the Release be made as some think it may, before another Justice of the
Peace which has not the Recognizance, then this latter form must be framed
accordingly, Dalt. 390. cap. 128.

LXX. Dalt. 390. cap. 128. These two former Releases are to be written under
the Recognizance it self, and if the Justice shall only Subscribe his Name to
the Release without his Seal it is well enough, especially where the
Recognizance is without Seal.

Or the Release of the Party may be by it self, thus.

C. MEmorand' quod C. D. de S. in Com' predict' Yeoman 1 Die August' Anno etc.
venit coram me J. B. Armig' uno Justiciar', dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com'
predict' conservand' assignat' apud W. in Com' predict', and ibidem remisit and
gratis relaxavit R. W. de S. in Com' predict' Laborer securitatem pacis per
ipsum C. D. versus dictum R. W. coram me petitum,

Dat' Die and Anno supradict'.
And if the Release be made before another Justice which took not, or has not
the Recognizance, it may be thus.

C. MEmorand' quod A. B. de C. in Com' predict' Yeoman, 1 Die etc. Anno etc.
venit coram me R. H. Armig' uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com'
predict' conservand' assignat' apud W. in Com' predict', and securitatem pacis
quam habet versus J. S. de etc. penitus remisit and relaxavit,

dat' Die and Anno supradictis.
Supersedeas.
LXXI. Lamb. 112, 113. Furthermore, if a man be bound before a Justice of the
Peace to keep the Peace against all the Kings People, and to appear at the next
Quarter Sessions, and do afterward procure a Supersedeas out of the Chancery,
testifying that he has found Surety there against all the Kings People
forever, this will discharge his Appearance at the Sessions, because the
granting of this Supersedeas is the act of the King, which is the Fountain of
Justice, and Controleth all other derived Authorities, Fitzh. 9. Crumpt. 139.
12. and 141. b.

LXXII. Lamb. 113. But if that Supersedeas should testify that he has found
Surety in the Chancery, only until a certain day (which day is after those
Sessions) then Mr. Fitz-herbert thinks, that his Appearance at the Sessions
shall not be discharged by the Supersedeas, Crumpt. 139. 13. In both these
Cases also I would advise the Justice of Peace to send in as well the
Recognizance as the Supersedeas, if it come to his Hands; for peradventure the
Recognizance was broken before the Supersedeas purchased, or if it were not,
yet he shall not be excused, and the Recognizor never a whit the more
endangered thereby.

LXXIII. Lamb. 113, 114. Abatement.
Lastly the death of the King discharges the Recognizance of the Peace, 1 H.
7. 2. per Curiam, so does the death of the Recognisor, and so also does the
death of him at whose suit it was taken, if so be that it were made to keep the
Peace against him alone, Crumpt. 140. b.

But although the Mainpervors or Sureties dye yet the Recognizance lives, for
if the Peace be broken after their deaths, their Executors shall be charged
with it, 21 Ed. 4 40. Crumpt. 142. b.

Neither in the former Cases is the Recognizance discharged by such death, if
it were forfeited before; and therefore here again my Counsel is to send in the
Recognizance to the Custos Rotulorum, for otherwise how shall the Justice of
Peace be assured that he does not defraud the King of a forfeiture that was
grown unto him, Crumpt. 141. b. Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

LXXIV. Lamb. 115. Menace.
If a Man be bound to keep the Peace against A. and do afterward threaten A.
to his face that he will beat him, he has forfeited his Recognizance: And an
Action of Trespass lies at the Common Law against him that shall threaten one
to beat him, as appears by 33 H. 6. 18. b. 37 H. 6. 20, etc. and shall
suppose it to be contra pacem. But otherwise it is, if A. be not present at
that threatening by good opinion, 18 Ed. 4. 28. yet if in the absence of A. he
does threaten that he will beat him, and then do afterward lie in wait to beat
him, he has in that Case also broken his Recognizance, 22 Ed. 4. 35. b. per
Curiam, Crumpt. 136, 137. Lamb. 127. Dalt. 177. cap. 72.

LXXV. Lamb. 113. Like forfeiture is it if he that is bound do but command or
procure another to break the Peace upon any man, or to do any other unlawful
act against the Peace, if that it be done indeed, tempus H. 8. Peace. Br. 20.
and 7 H. 4. 34. Dalt. 178. cap. 72.

LXXVI. Crumpt. 135. If a man be not in fear that A. will beat him, Oath.
or etc. yet if he doubts that he will procure this, or procure another to kill
his Cattle, or do evil to them, or to burn his Houses, or such like, he must
take his Oath expressly for this whereof he stands in doubt, as it seems, for
it may be he stands in doubt of one and not of another.

LXXVII. Crumpt. 136. A Justice of Peace makes a Warrant to the Sheriff to
Attach another, and to carry him to the Sessions to be bound to the Peace, and
that in the mean time he bind him to the Peace, and for his appearance at the
Sessions aforesaid: Quaere, if this Precept that he do bind him ut supra be
good, but the Justices of B. R. may command the Sheriff, as appears F. N. B.
79. Lamb. 187. Dalt. 330. cap. 117. Dalt. 183. cap. 73.

LXXVIII. Crumpt. 136. b. Nota, Where any Recognizance shall be forfeit which
is taken for the Peace, that Act must be done to the person that shall be a
breach of the Peace, by Marrow, lect. 7. Lamb. 115. Dalt. 178. cap. 72. and 2
H. 7. 1.

LXXIX. Dalt. 177. cap. 72. Whatsoever act is a breach of the Peace, the doing
or intending thereof against the person of another, being present, is a
forfeiture of this Recognizance, Crumpt. 137. ab.

LXXX. Crumpt. 136. b. 137. If a man corrects his Wife, Affray.
Servant or Child reasonably its no breach of the Peace, etc. Marrow, lect. 7.
and 21 Ed. 6. 53.

A Master may beat another in defense of his Servant, for fear of losing his
Servant; and so he may do in defense of his Wife and Children; and so a Servant
in defense of his Master may beat another, and no breach of the Peace, etc:
Ibidem. see 21 H. 7. 41. 35 H. 6. 56. and 9 Ed. 4. 51.

A Child may beat another in defense of his Father or Mother, and no breach,
etc. Ibidem.

A man may beat another in defense of his Goods, and no breach, etc. ibid. and
9 Ed. 4. Trespass. The Case is, that if a man will take another Goods, he may
lay his hands upon him and disturb him, and if he will not let them go, he may
beat him rather then suffer him to carry them away, libr' Intr' 553. 189. Dalt.
181. cap. 72.

To beat a Man that is Mad with Rods, and bind him is no breach of the Peace,
22 Ass. 56. 22. Ed. 4. 44. Dalt. 179. cap. 72.

LXXXI. Crumpt. 137. b. A Justice of Peace enjoins a man on pain of 10 li. to
keep the Peace, It avails nothing, by Marrow lect. 6. Crumpt. 123. 9. and 135.
a.

Officer.
LXXXII. Crumpt. 137. b. 17. If a Clerk of the Peace gives, or makes promise to
give any thing in consideration of having the said Office of Clerk-ship, he
shall be by this disabled of having and occupying the said Office, 5 and 6 Ed.
6. 16.. N.

Oath.
LXXXIII. Crumpt. 139. b. 18. Nota, The Clerk of the Peace must take in the same
Court where he is to serve the Oath of Supremacy, before he shall be permitted,
allowed or suffered to exercise the said Office, 5 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 3.

Justices.
LXXXIV. Crumpt. 140. 20. In an Appeal of Maim, the Court took surety of the
Peace of both Parties by their discretion by four Mainpervors, until the
Plaintiffs wound were Cured, each in 40 li. to the King, 21 Ass. 27. Error, Br.
64. and so may Justices of Peace, as it seems, on view in Court of the wound
and maim.

Appearance.
LXXXV. Crumpt. 140. b. If a man be bound to the Peace, and to appear at a
certain day, he must appear at this day, and Record his appearance, tho he that
demands the Peace comes not, otherwise the Recognizance shall be forfeit, 39 H.
6. 26. Dalt. 174. cap. 71. and though the Justice does not return the
Recognizance to the Sessions, yet the Party must appear and Record his
appearance, as where a Sheriff takes an obligation to appear in C. B. etc. he
must appear there and Record his appearance at the day, otherwise the
obligation shall be forfeit, though the Sheriff does not return the Writ, 18
Ed. 4. 18. Condition Br. 162.

Supplicavit.
LXXXVI. Crumpt. 140. b. When a Supplicavit of the Peace is directed to the
Sheriff, and to all the Justices, and is delivered to one of them, he alone
shall execute the Writ, and he that is Attacht by virtue of this Writ cannot go
to be bound before any other Justice, etc. 21 H. 7. 22. Crumpt. 141. and 9 Ed.
4. 32. Dalt. 182. cap. 73.

Recognizance.
LXXXVII. Crumpt. 141. If a Man forfeits the Recognizance of the Peace, yet
until he be thereof Convict by course of Law, he shall not be forced to find
new Security, for before Conviction it stands indifferent whether he has
forfeited the Recognizance or not, but after he is Convict of breach of the
Peace, then he shall be bound anew, 21 Ed. 4. 40. 10 H. 7. 11. Crumpt. 142. b.
152. 4. Lamb. 78. supra 11. Dalt. 159. cap. 67.

LXXXVIII. Crumpt. 141. Nota, if a Man be bound to the Peace, and his Sureties
be not sufficient, another Justice may force him to find better Surety, because
the Precept is ad inveniend' suffic' securitat', Marrow lect. 6. Dalt. 174.
cap. 70.

LXXXIX. Crumpt. 142. When the Conusor has forfeit his Recognizance, and paid
his Money, the Court Ex Officio shall Award him to Prison until he has found
Surety de novo, because the Ancient Surety is determined, and it appears to the
Court that he is Transgressor of the Law, and therefore shall have the rigor of
the Law, 21 Ed. 4. 48.

XC. Crumpt. 142. b. If Sureties be dead, and the King's Sergeant or Attorney
surmiseth this to the Court, they shall not compel the party to find new
Surety, for it was said at the Court, that they can take no regard to any such
surmise, because the Executors of the Sureties are charged for the breach of
the Peace, and so no mischief, 21 Ed. 4. 48. Lamb. 113, 114.

XCI. Crumpt. 141. b. Day^.
The Justice of Peace may take a Recognizance to keep the Peace for a year if
he will, or a longer time by his discretion, viz. forever for reasonable Cause,
Marrow, lect. 6. Jones Br. 71. Dalt. 171. 172. cap. 69.

XCII. Crumpt. 142. b. It was held 21 Ed. 4. 48. if a Man be bound to the
Peace, and no day limit how long, etc. that none can discharge this all his
lifetime by Release or otherwise.

XCIII. Crumpt. 142. b. Nota, Constable.
That the opinion of all the Justices that a Constable may take Security of the
Peace, but upon no pain; and if he will not he has power to imprison him until
he has found Surety, 3 H. 4. 10. See 10 Ed. 4. 18. It Is said he may take an
Obligation to keep the Peace.

XCIV. Crumpt. 143. b. Joinder.
If one breaks the Peace the whole Recognizance is forfeit, where a Man is
bound for him and his Servants to keep the Peace, 4 H. 7. 8.

XCV. Crumpt. 143. b. Forfeiture.
The King and the Counsor are at Issue on the breach of the Peace, and the King
waves the issue, yet the Recognizance is not discharged, but a new sc' fac' may
be Awarded for the breach of the Peace afterward, but not upon that breach for
which he was Impeacht before, per Cur' 10 H. 7. 11. and 21 Ed. 4. 40. Dalt.
177. cap. 71.

XCVI. Crumpt. 144. Ability.
The Peace must be granted against him that is an impotent person, though he be
not likely to break the peace, because he may procure a stranger to kill the
other who demands the Peace, for the words of the Recognizance are, by B. or
his procurement, etc.

XCVII. Crumpt. 144. b. Bar. and Feme.
The Husband is bound that he and his Wife shall appear at such a Sessions, and
that they keep the Peace; in the mean time at the day the Husband appears, but
not the Wife, the Recognizance is not forfeited, because if there be any Cause
further to find Surety, the Husband shall be bound and not the Wife, and
therefore the appearance of the Wife is not material, as it seems, Crumpt.
133. b. Dalt. 163. cap. 68. and 175. cap. 71.

XCVIII. Crumpt. 144. b. Supersedeas.
A man has a Supplicavit of the Peace out of the Chancery, to bind A. B. to
the Peace, and to certify the Recognizance into Chancery without delay; now if
A. B. be taken he shall be bound to the Peace for ever, for it is not contained
that he shall bind him to the Peace until any certain time, but generally;
therefore to prevent this A. B. before he is Attacht, must bind himself in the
Chancery until a certain day, and have a Supersedeas into the Country to the
Justices and Sheriff, to cease to compel A. B. to find Surety on the said Writ
of Supplicavit, Lamb. 112, 113.

XCIX. Crumpt. 145. 5. One Justice of Peace cannot by Supersedeas discharge a
Precept of another Justice, awarded to find Surety of the Peace before that he
is bound in fact, which see Crumpt. 138. b. 9, 10. Lamb. 96. supra 40.

C. Crumpt. 145. 6. A Justice of Peace cannot Award a Supersedeas to appear at
any other Sessions then is appointed by the other Justice, who has bound him
to the Peace before, to appear at a certain Sessions.

CI. Dalt. 160. cap. 67. Note also, Affray.
The Surety for the Peace shall not be granted but where there is a fear of
some present or future Danger, and not merely for a Battery or Trespass that is
past, or for any breach of the Peace that is past, for this Surety of the Peace
is only for the Security of such as are in fear.

CII. Dalt. 161. cap 67. Justices.
If the Justice of Peace shall perceive that this Surety for the Peace is
demanded merely of malice, or for vexation only, without any just cause of
fear; it seems he may safely deny it, as in common experience we find it,
that where A. shall upon just Cause come and crave the Peace against B. and
has it granted; B. will likewise crave the Peace against A. and will perhaps
surmise some Cause, but yet will be content to surcease so A. will relinquish
against him, here the Justice shall do well, as I think not to be too forward
in granting the Peace to B. yet if B. will not be persuaded but will take his
Oath, that he is in fear, where indeed he neither does fear, nor has any
cause, this Oath shall discharge the Justice, and the fault shall remain upon
such Complainant.

Behavior.
CIII. Dalt. 161. cap. 67. And when the Justice has so granted the Peace to one
that in the Justices judgment shall crave or require it only out of malice, or
for vexation, the Justice may presently in good discretion bind him to the good
behavior that so required the Peace.

Release.
CIV. Dalt. 176. cap. 71. But yet it is now holden, That neither the Justice of
Peace, nor the Party can discharge the Recognizance of the Peace by their
Release out of the Sessions, etc. and therefore notwithstanding that the
Justice of Peace out of Sessions shall make, or take any Release of the Peace,
yet it shall be safe for the Party bound to appear for the safeguard of his
Recognizance, etc. Lamb. 110, 111.

Supplicavit.
CV. Dalt. 185. cap. 73. And for this manner of Oppression ( viz. by obtaining
Supplicavits etc.) grew over Common, therefore by 21 Jac. 8.. N. It is now
Enacted, that all Process of the Peace or good Behavior, to be Granted out of
the Chancery, or B. R. against any Person whatsoever, at the Suit of any other
shall be void, unless such Process shall be granted upon motion first made
before the Judges of the same Court sitting in open Court, and upon Declaration
in writing, upon Oath of the Causes for which such Process shall be granted,
and unless that such Motion and Declaration be mentioned, to be made upon the
back of the Writ, the same writings to be there Entered of Record, and if after
it shall appear to the said Courts, that the said Causes expressed in such
writing be untrue, then the Court may award Costs and Damages to the Party
grieved, and may also Commit to Prison the Offenders until they pay the said
Costs and Damages.

CVI. West Symb. 2. part 129. b. sect. 203. An Indictment of a Common Barretor.

Norff. ss.
INquiratur pro domino rege etc. si J. S. Nuper de C. in Com' N. Laborer est
homo maloe Conversationis and Gubernationis, ac communis Barrator and pacis
Domini regis Perturbator.

Et quod idem J. S. apud C. predict' in Com' N. predict' custodit, tenet and
occupat quandam Domum sive Tabernam non habent' usuale signum, apt apposit'
vulgariter dict' a blind Tavern.

Et quod primo die Junii etc. necnon diversis diebus and noctibus antea and
postea in eandem domum diversos homines maloe Conversationis, and suspect'
venient' omnibus horis tam noctis quam diei recipit, and hospitatus est per
quod vicini sui ac alii ligei populi dict' Domini Regis ibidem multipliciter
vexantur inquietantur and gravantur, and ministri Domini Regis propter pacis
Conservationem, officia sua ibidem exercere and exequi prohibentur, and
sepenumero in periculo Amissionis vitoe and Loesionis Corporum suorum quotidie
existunt.

Et quod J. uxor predict' J. S. est communis objurgatrix tam cum vicinis quam
cum aliis ligeis dicti Domini Regis, per quod populi dicti Domini Regis
multipliciter molestantur, inquietantur and gravantur contra pacem dicti Domini
Regis etc.

Pedlers, see Poor. Penal Laws, see Information. Pensions, see Poor. Peers, see
Dignity. Perjury, see Oath. Pety Larceny, see Coron. Trespass. Pety Constable,
see Constable. Pety Sessions, see Constable. Pety Treason, see Treason. Pewter,
see Mettle.
(Physicians.)
I. LAmb. 3. cap. 4. page 368. Every Justice of Peace, Justices.
that dwelling within Seven Miles of London, does not upon request assist the
College of Physicians of London in the Execution of the Statute, 32 H. 8. 8.
shall be punished as one that runs in Contempt of the King, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2.
cap. 9. 6. N. 1.

Pictures, see Religion. Pillory, see Coron. Imprisonment. Pyracy, see Admiral.
Plays, see Games. Plague, see Poor. Plaints, see Information.
(Pleading.)
Demurrer, Traverse, General Issue, Proof.
I. LAmb. 4. cap. 13. page 531, 532. Some things be common to Peers and
Commoners, for if the Party charged will Demur in Law upon the Evidence, the
Justices ought to Record his Demurrer: so if he will plead in Jusitification
any matter of Record that is before other Justices, they ought to give him day
to bring it in, by Marrow.

II. Lamb. 532. But if the Prisoner plead a Pardon before them, in which
certain Persons be excepted, and the Kings Attorney is not present to join
Issue, that he which pleads it is one of those that be excepted, then they
themselves may supply the Office of the Attorney in that behalf, 8 Ed. 4. 7.

III. Lamb. 533. This Liberty of Traverse is commonly restrained to Indictment
of Trespasses, Contempts, Riots, etc. and other Inferior Offenses within the
Commission or Statutes Authorizing the Justices of Peace, and is not usually
extended to Treasons or Felonies.

IV. Lamb. 533, 534. Mr. Brook (in Traverse de Office, Br. 10.) notes, That
it is not much used to Traverse Indictments before Justices of the Peace; but
rather to remove them in B. R. and to Traverse them there, howbeit common
experience at this day can show many Traverses before Justices of the Peace
also, and there is no doubt, but as Justices of Peace have power to Award
Process, and the Parties also have Liberty to speak for themselves, so having
spoken, the Justices may hear and determine of their Speech, whether it touch
them in Freehold or otherwise.

POOR
Vagabonds, Beggars, Worke-houses, Setlement, House of Correction, Wanderers,
Removal, Laborers, Apprentice.
I CRompt. 184. b. He that has not sufficient of his own to occupy shall be
compelled to serve, Ability.
F. N. B. 168

II. 23 Ed. 3. 7. Item, Charity.
Because that many Valiant Beggars as long as they may live of Begging do
refuse to labor, giving themselves to Idleness and Vice, and sometimes to
Theft and other Abominations: None upon the said pain of Imprisonment, shall
under the Color of Pity or Alms, give any thing to such which may labor, or
presume to favor them toward their desires: So that thereby they may be
compelled to labor for their necessary living, etc. 1 Ed. 6. 3. N. 21 Jac. 28.
N.

III. 7 Rich. 2. 5. 1. N. 2. And moreover it is ordained and assented to
refrain the malice of diverse people Flitors and wandering from place to place,
Justices.
running in the Country more abundantly than they were wont in times past, that
from henceforth the Justices of Assizes in their Sessions, The Justices of
Peace, and the Sheriffs in every County, shall have power to enquire of all
such Vagabonds and Flitors and of their offenses, and upon them do that the Law
demands, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 21 Jac. 28. N.

IV. 7 Rich. 2. 5. 1. N. 3. And that as well the Justices and Sheriffs, Good
behavior
as the Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Governors of Towns, and places
where such Flitors and Vagabonds shall come, shall from henceforth have power
to Examine them diligently, and to compel them to find surety of their good
abearing by sufficient mainpernours of such as be distrainable, if any default
be found in such Flitors and Vagabonds, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 21 Jac. 28. N.

V. 7 Rich. 2. 5. 1. N. 4. And if they cannot find such surety, Imprisonment
they shall be sent to the next Goal, there to abide till the coming of the
Justices assigned for the deliverance of the Goals, who in such case shall have
power, to do upon such Flitors and Vagabonds so Imprisoned, that thereof to
them best shall seem by the Law, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 21 Jac. 28. N. and 11 H. 7.
2.

VI. 12. Ric. 2. 7. Item, License.
It is accorded and assented that of every person that goes Begging, and is
able to serve or labor, it shall be done of him, as of him that departs out
of the hundred and other places aforesaid, without Testimonal as aforesaid,
except people of Religion and Hermites having letters Testimonial of their
Ordinaries, 1 Ed. 6. 3. N. and 21 Jac. 28.

VII. 12 Rich. 2. 7. 1. N. 2. And that the Beggars Impotent to serve,
Settlement.
shall abide in the Cities and Towns where they be dwelling at the time of the
Proclamation of this Statute, and if the people of Cities or other Towns, will
not or may not suffice to find them, that then the said Beggars shall draw them
to other Towns within the Hundred, Rape or Wapen-take: Or to the Towns where
they were born, within forty days after the Proclamation made, and there shall
continually abide during their Lives, 1 Ed. 6. 3. N. 21 Jac. 28. N.

VIII. 12 Ric. 2. 7. 1. N. 3. And that of all them that go in Pilgrimage,
Religion.
as Beggars, and be able to travail, it shall be done as of the said Servants
and Laborers, If they have no letters Testimonial of their Pilgrimage under
the said Seals, 1 Ed. 6. 3. 21 Jac. 28.

Scholars.
IX. 12 Ric. 2. 7. 1. N. 4. And that the Scholars of the Universities that go so
Begging have letters Testimonial of their Chancellor upon the same pain, 1 Ed.
6. 3. N. and 21 Jac. 28. N. 39 Eliz. 3. N.

Ouster le mer.
X. 12 Rich. 2. 8. 8. Item, it is ordained and assented that they that fain
themselves men travailed out of the Realm and there to be imprisoned, shall
bring Letters Testimonial of the Captains where they were abiding, or of the
Mayors or Bailiffs, where they arrived 21 Jac. 28. N.

Pasports.
XI. 12 Ric. 2. 8. 1. N. 2. And the same Mayors and Bailiffs, shall enquire of
such people where and with whom they have dwelled, and in what place their
dwelling is in England: And that the same Mayors and Bailiffs make them Letters
Patents under the Seal of their Office, testifying the day of their arrival,
and also witnessing where they have been as they have said 21 Jac. 28. N.

Oath.
XII. 12 Ric. 2. 8. 1. N. 3. And that the Mayors and Baliffs, cause them to
Swear, that they shall hold their right way toward their Journey, except they
have Letters Patents under the Kings Great Seal to do otherwise, 21 Jac. 28.

Pain.
XIII. 12 Ric. 2. 8. 1. N. 4. And if any such travailed man be found without
such Letter, as before is said, it shall be done of him as of the said Servants
and Laborers; and also this Ordinance shall be intended of men travailed that
go begging through the Country after their arrival, 21 Jac. 2. 8. N.

Appropriation
XIV. 15 Ric. 2. 6. 1. N. 2. It is agreed and assented that in every License
from henceforth to be made in the Chancery, of the Appropriation of any Parish
Church, it shall be expressly contained and comprised, that the Diocesan of the
place upon the Appropriation of such Churches, shall ordain according to the
value of such Churches, a convenient sum of money to be paid and distributed
yearly of the fruits and profits of the same Churches, by those that will have
the said Churches in proper use, and by their Successors, to the Poor
Parishioners of the said Churches, in aid of their living and sustenance for
ever.

Abbe.
XV. 2 H. 5. 1. 1. N. 2. The King, etc. has, etc. ordained and established that
as to the Hospitals which be of the Patronage and Foundation of the King, the
Ordinaries by virtue of the Kings Commissions to them directed, shall enquire
of the manner and foundation of the said Hospitals, and of the Governants and
Estate of the same, and of all other matters necessary and requisite in this
behalf, and the Inquisitions thereof taken shall certify in the Kings Chancery,

Ordinary.
XVI. 2 H. 5. 1. 1. N. 3. And as to other Hospitals, which be of another
Foundation and Patronage, than of the King, and Ordinaries shall inquire of the
manner of the Foundation, Estate and Governance of the same, and of all other
matters and things necessary in this behalf, and upon that make thereof
correction and reformation according to the Laws of Holy Church, as to them
belongs.

Imprisonment
XVII. 11 H. 7. 2. Forasmuch as the Kings Grace most entirely desires among all
earthly things the prosperity and restfulness of this his land, and his
Subjects of the same to live quietly and surely, to the Pleasure of God, and
according to the Laws, willing always of his Pity, intending to reduce them
thereto by softer means than by such extreme Rigor, therefore provided in a
Statue made in the time of Ric. 2. ( viz. 7 R. 25.) considering also the great
charges that should grow to his Subjects, for bringing of Vagabonds to the
Goals, according to the same Statute, and the long abiding of them therein,
whereby by likelihood many of them should loose their lives, 19 H. 7. 12.

Imprisonment
XVIII. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 3. In moderating of the said Statute ( viz. 7. R. 2.
5. 1. N. 4.) his Highness will by the Authority of this present Parliament, it
be ordained and enacted, that where such misdoers should be by Examination
Committed to the Common Goal, there to remain as is aforesaid, that the
Sheriffs, Mayors, Baliffs, high Constables, and pety Constables, and all other
Governors and Officers of Cites, Boroughs, Towns, Townships, Villages, and
other places within three days after this act Proclaimed, make due search, and
take, or cause to be taken, all such Vagabonds, idle and suspect persons living
suspitiously, and them so taken to set in Stocks, there to remain by the space
of three days, and three nights, and there to have none other sustenance but
bread and water, 21 Jac. 28. N. and 19 H. 7. 1. 2. 1. N. 2.

XIX. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 3. And after the said three days, and three nights,
Lieu.
to be had out and set at large, and then to be commanded to avoid the Town,
and if Eftsoons he be taken in such default in the same Town or Township, then
to be set in likewise in the Stocks by the space of six days, with like diet as
is before rehearsed, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 5.

XX. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 4. And if any person or persons, Charity.
give any other meat or drink to the said misdoers, being in the Stocks, in
form aforesaid, or the same Prisoners favor in their misdoing, that then they
forfeit for every time so doing twelve pence, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 6.

XXI. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 5. And also it is ordained, Lieu.
etc. That all manner of Beggars not able to work within six Weaks after the
Proclamation made of this Act, go, rest and abide in that Hundred where last he
dwelled, or there where he is best known or born there to remain or abide
without begging out of the said Hundred upon, pain to be punished as is
aforesaid, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 5.

XXII. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 8. And that no man be excused by that he is a Clerk of
one University or of other, Scholars.
without he show the Letters of the Chancellor of the University, from whence,
he says, he comes: nor none other, calling himself a Soldier, Shipman or
Traveling man, without he bring a Letter from his Captain, or from the Town
where he landed, and that he then be commanded to go the straight Highway into
his Country, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 6.

XXIII. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 9. And over this, it is ordained, Officers.
etc. that if any Sheriff, or other Officer before rehearsed, execute not the
premises, as is abovesaid, of every Vagabond, Hermit, or Beggar able to
labor, or Clerk, Pilgrim, or Shipman, as often as any such comes in his sight,
or that he has thereof knowledge, within the Town where he has authority,
rule, and governance, that as often as any such of the said Misdoers, abiding
thereby the space of a day, depart unexamined, and unpunished, as is abovesaid,
for every misdoer so departed he to lose 12. d. 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 7.

XXIV. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 10. And that the Lord of every Leet within this Realm,
and the Sheriff in his Tourn, Leet.
have Authority to enquire thereof in his Leet and Tourn; and the Lord of the
Leet to have for every default found, as is abovesaid, 1 s. 8 d. and the
Sheriff to enquire in his Tourn of such escapes within the Jurisdiction of his
own, and to have 1 s. 8 d. for every such default found in his Tourn, 19 H. 7.
12. 1. N. 11.

XXV. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 11. And that the penalty limited by this Ordinance be
forfeited by any Officer, or any other person, Forfeiture.
for non punishment of Vagabonds, and other misruled persons, within every
City, where Mayor and Aldermen be, that the profit of every such penalty be
unto the Alderman of that Ward, where such forfeiture is had or made, to his
own profit, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 12.

XXVI. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N. 12. And also it is ordained and enacted, Distress.
etc. that it shall be lawful to every man entitled to have the penalty, to
distrain for it, in like wise, as the Lord of any Leet may do for Amerciaments
and Fines had and assessed in the same Leet, 19 H. 7. 12. 1 N. 13.

Women.
XXVII. 11 H. 7. 2. 1. N, 14. Provided always that deminution of punishment of
Vagabonds and Beggars aforesaid may and shall be had for women great with
Child, and men and women in extreme Sickness by him that has authority to do
the said punishment, 19 H. 7. 12. 1. N. 17.

Alen.
XXVIII. 22 H. 8. 10. For as much as before this time diverse and many outlandish
people, calling themselves Egyptians, using no Craft nor Feat of Merchandise,
have come into this Realm, and gone from Shire to Shire, and place to place in
great Company, and used great subtlety and crafty means to decline the people,
bearing them in hand, that they by Palmestry could tell Men's and Women's
fortunes, and so many times by Craft and Subtlety have deceived the people of
their money, and also have committed many and heinous Felonies and Robberies to
the great hurt and deceit of the people that they have come among, 1 and 2 Ph.
and Mar. 4.

Forfeiture.
XXIX. 22 H. 8. 10 2. N. 1. Be it therefore, etc. ordained, etc. that from
henceforth no such person be suffered to come within this the Kings Realm, and
if they do, then they and every of them so doing, shall forfeit to the King,
etc. all their Goods and Chattels, and then to be commanded to avoid the Realm,
within fifteen days next after the commandment, upon pain of imprisonment, 39
Eliz. 3. N. Lamb. 437.

Seizure.
XXX. 22 H. 8. 10. 2. N. 2. And it shall be lawful to every Sheriff, Justice of
Peace, and Escheator, to seize to the use of our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and
Successors, all such goods, as they or any of them shall have, and thereof to
make account to our said Sovereign Lord in his Exchequer.

Enquest.
XXXI. 22 H. 8. 10. 2. N. 3. And if it shall happen any such Stranger hereafter
to commit within this Realm, any Muder, Robbery or any other Felony, and
thereof be Indicted and Arraigned, and to plead not Guilty, or any other plea
tryable by the County, that then the Enquest that shall pass between the King
and any such party, shall be altogether of Englishmen, albeit that the party
so indicted pray medietatem Linguae, according to the Statute, Anno 8 H. 6. (
viz. 8 H. 6. 29. N.) or of any other Statute thereof made.

Exile.
XXXII. 22 H. 8. 10. 3. N. 1. Provided always that the Egyptians, now being in
this Realm, have monition to depart within sixteen days after Proclamation of
this Statue amongst them shall be made, upon pain of Imprisonment and
forfeiture of their goods and Chattels, and if they then so depart, that then
they shall not forfeit their Goods nor any part thereof, this present Statute
notwithstanding.

Restitution.
XXXIII. 22 H. 8. 10. 4. N. 1. Provided always that every such person or
persons, which can prove by two Credible persons before the same party, that
seizes such Money, Goods, or Chattels of the same Egyptians, that any part of
the same Goods, Money or Chattles, were craftily or Feloniously taken or stolen
from him, shall be incontinently restored unto the same Goods, Money or
Chattels, whereof he makes such proof before the same party, that so seizes
the same Money, Goods or Chattels, upon pain to forfeit to the same party that
makes such proof, the double value of the same by action of debt, bill or
otherwise, in any of the Kings Courts, to be sued, upon which action and suit
he shall not be admitted to wage his Law, nor any protection or Essoin to be
allowed, any thing in this Act to the Contrary notwithstanding.

Seisures.
XXXIV. 22 H. 8. 10. 5. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted, that if
any Justice of Peace, Sheriff or Escheator, which by Authority of this Act have
power to take or seize any Goods or Chattells, of any Egyptians, at any time
hereafter do seize or take the Goods or Chattels of any such Egyptians, that
then every such Justice, Sheriff or Escheator, doing the same, shall have,
keep, and retain to his own use the moity of all such Goods, so by him seized,
and of the other moity so by him taken or seized shall make answer and account
to the King, in his Exchequer, according to the tenor of this present act, any
thing in the same act contained to the contrary hereof, notwithstanding, and
that upon any account hereafter to be made for the said other moity, of the
same Goods, the accountant shall pay no manner of fees, or other charges, for
his account or discharge, to be had in the Kings Exchequer, nor elsewhere.

XXXV. Lambert 2 Cap. 7. page 195. 196. Seizure.
Every Justice of the Peace may, (within one month after the arrival,) seize
all the Goods of any Outlandish persons, calling themselves Egyptians, that
shall come into this Realm, and may also keep the one moity thereof to his own
use, making account to the King in the Exchequer, for the other moity: And
every person that can prove by two Credible Witnessess before him, that so
seizes, that any of those Goods were craftily or feloniously taken from him,
shall be incontinently restored thereto, before the party that so seizes them,
upon pain of the double value thereof to be forfeited to such Prover, 22 H. 8.
10. But note that after the Month, the offense is made Felony, and then it
seems the King is to have the Goods wholly, 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 4. N.

XXXVI. Lambert 364. 365. And every Justice of the Peace is allowed to retain
to his owe use, the one moity of all strangers Goods, Seizure.
calling themselves Egyptians, that he shall lawfully seize by virtue of this
Statute, 22 H. 8. 10. 5. N. 1. Crompt 178. and 195. 13.

XXXVII. Lambert 366. That Justice of the Peace which seizes the Goods of any
Egyptians, Restitution.
and does not Incontinently restore such part thereof, as shall be proved
before him to have been Craftily or Feloniously taken, shall forfeit the double
thereof to such Provers, 22 H. 8. 10. 4. N. 1.

XXXVIII. Crompt 129. 32. If any Outlandish Person, naming himself an
Egyptian, or any such stranger commits any Murder, Enquest.
Felony or Robbery, and upon his Arraignment, pleads not Guilty, or any other
plea tryable by the Country, the Enquest in this Case shall be all of English,
22 H. 8. 10. 2. N. 3. And so shall the Enquest be where any of the said
Egyptians is Indicted of Felony, for continuance within this Realm by the
space of a month, Contrary to 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 4. N. and 5 Eliz. 20.

XXXIX. 22 H. 8. 12. Where in all places throughout this Realm of England,
Vagabonds and Beggars, have of long time increased, Laborors.
and daily do increase in Great and Excessive Numbers, by the occasion of
Idleness, the Mother and Root of all Vices, whereby has Insurged and sprung,
and daily Insurgeth and springs continual Thefts, Murders and other sundry
heinous Offenses and great Enormities, to the high displeasure of God, the
inquietation and damage of the Kings people, and to the mavelous disturbance
of the commonweal of this Realm 35 Eliz. 7. 25. N. 1.

XL. 22 H. 8. 12. 1. N. 2. And whereas many and sundry good Laws, strict
Statutes and Ordinances, have been before this time devised and made, Contempt.
as well by the King our Sovereign Lord, as also by diverse his most noble
Progenitors Kings of England, for the most necessary and due reformation of the
premises, yet that notwithstanding the said numbers of Vagabonds and Beggars be
not seen in any parts to be punished, but rather daily augmented and increased
into great Routs and Companies, as evidently and manifestly it does and may
appear.

XLI. 22 H. 8. 12. 1. N. 3. Be it therefore enacted, Justices.
etc. That the Justices of the Peace, of all and singular the Shires of England
within the limits of their Commissions, and all other Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers, of all and every City, Borough,
Riding or Franchis whereof they be Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs or Officers, and so being divided, shall make diligent search and
enquiries of all Aged Poor and impotent Persons which live, or of necessity be
compelled to live by Alms of the Charity of the People that be or shall be
hereafter abiding within every Hundred, Rape, Wapentake, City, Borough, Parish,
Liberty or Franchis within the limits of their Division, and after and upon
such search made, the said Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and
other Officers, that is to say every of them within their limits of their
Authorities whereunto they be divided, shall have Power and Authority by their
Discretions, to enable to beg within such Hundred, Rape, Wapentake, City, Town,
Parish or other Limits as they shall appoint such of the said Impotent persons
which they shall find and think most convenient within the limits of their
Division, to live of the Charity and Alms of the People, and to give in
Commandment to every such Aged and Impotent Beggar by them enabled, that none
of them shall beg without the limits to them so appointed.

Records.
XLII. 22 H. 12. 1. N. 4. And shall also register and write the names of every
such Impotent Beggar by them appointed, in a Bill or Roll Indented, the one
part thereof to remain with themselves, and the other part by them to be
certified before the Justices of Peace at the next Sessions after such search
had, to be holden without the said Shires, Cities, Towns or Franchises, there
to remain under the keeping of the Custos Rotulorum.

Seals.
XLIII. 22 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 5. And that the said Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers, that is to say, as they be divided,
shall have Power and Authority to make such and so many Seals to be Ingraved
with the Names of the Hundreds, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughs, Towns or
places within the which they shall appoint and limit every such Impotent Person
to beg, and commit the said Seals to the custody of such of them, or to the
custody of such other as they shall think convenient.

License.
XLIV. 22 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 6. And shall make and deliver to every such Impotent
Person by them enabled to beg, a Letter containing the name of such Impotent
Person, and witnessing that he is Authorized to beg, and the limits within
which he is appointed to beg.

Seals.
XLV. 22 H. 8. 12. 1. N. 7. The same Letter to be sealed with such of the said
Seals as shall be engraved with the names of the limits wherein such Impotent
Person shall be appointed to beg in, and to be subscribed with the name of one
of the said Justices or Officers abovesaid.

Lieu.
XLVI. 22 H. 8. 12.. 1. N. 8. And if any such Impotent Person so authorized to
beg, do beg in any other place than within such limits that he shall be
assigned unto, that then the Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
Constables, and all other the Kings Officers and Ministers, shall by their
discretions punish all such persons by Imprisonment in the Stocks, by the space
of two days and two nights, giving them but only bread and water, and after
that cause every such Impotent Person to be sworn to return again without delay
to the Hundred, Rape, Wapentake, City, Borough, Town, Parish or Franchis where
they be Authorized to beg in.

License.
XLVII. 22 H. 8. 12.. 2. N 1. And it is Enacted, that no such Impotent Person as
is abovesaid, after the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming,
shall beg within any part of this Realm, except he be Authorized by Writing
under Seal, as is abovesaid; and if any such Impotent Person after the Feast of
St. John, be Vagrant and go a begging, having no such Letter under Seal, as is
above specified, that then the Constables and all other Inhabitants within such
Town or Parish, where such person shall beg, shall cause every such Beggar to
be taken and brought to the said Justice of Peace or High Constable of the
Hundred.

XLVIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 2. N. 2. Pain.
And thereupon the said Justice of Peace or high Constable, shall command the
said Constables, and other Inhabitants of the Town or Parish, which shall bring
before him any such Beggar, that they shall strip him naked, from the middle
upward, and cause him to be whipped within the Town, where he was taken, or
within some other Town, where the same Justice or high Constable shall appoint,
if it shall seem to the discretion of the said Justice of Peace, or high
Constable, that it be convenient so to punish such Beggars to him brought.

XLIX. 22 H. 8. 12. 2. N. 3. And if not, Imprisonment
then to command such Beggar to be set in the Stocks in the same Town or Parish
where he was taken, by the space of three days and three nights, there to have
only bread and water.

L. 22 H. 8. 12. 2. N. 4. Lieu.
And thereupon the said Justice or high Constable, before whom such Beggar shall
be brought, shall limit to him a place to beg in, and give him a Letter under
Seal, in form above remembered, and swear him to depart, and repair thither
immediately after his punishment to him executed.

LI. 22 H. 8. 12 3. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, Ability.
etc. That if any person, etc. Being hole and mighty in Body, and able to
labor, at any time after the said Feast of Saint John, be taken in Begging in
any part of this Realm, or if any Man or Woman, being hole and mighty in Body,
and able to labor, having no Land, Master, nor using any lawful Merchandise,
Craft or Mystery, whereby he might get his living, after the same Feast be
Vagrant, and can give no reckning how he does lawfully get his living, that
then it shall be lawful to the Constables, and all other the Kings Officers,
Ministers and Subjects, of every Town, Parish and Hamlet, to Arrest the said
Vagabonds and Idle persons, and them bring to any of the Justices of the Peace,
of the same Shire or Liberty, or else to the high Constable of the hundred,
Rape or Wapentake, within which such persons shall be taken, and if he be taken
within any City or Town Corporate, then to be brought before the Mayor, Sheriff
or Bailiff, of every such Town Corporate.

LII. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 2. And that every such Justice of Peace, Pain.
high Constable, Mayors, Sheriffs and Bailiffs, by their discretions shall
cause every such Idle person, so to him brought, to be had to the next Market
Town, or other place where the said Justice of Peace, high Constable, Mayors,
Bailiffs, and other Officers shall think most convenient by his or their
discretions, and there to be tied to the end of a Cart naked, and be beaten
with Whips throughout the same Market Town, or other place, till his body be
bloody, by reason of such Whipping.

LIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 3. Oath.
And after such punishment and whipping had, the person so punished by the
discretion of the Justice of Peace, high Constable, Mayor, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
and other Officers before whom such persons shall be brought, shall be enjoined
upon his Oath to return forthwith without delay in the next and strait way, to
the place where he was born, or where he last dwelled before the same
punishment by the space of three years, and there to put himself to labor,
like as a true man ought to do.

LIVE. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 4. And after that done, Pasport.
every such person so punished and ordered, shall have a Letter Sealed with the
Seal of the Hundred, Rape Wapentake, City, Borough, Town, Liberty, or Franchis,
wherein he shall be punished, Witnessing that he has been punished according
to this Statute, and containing the day and place of his punishment, and the
place whereunto he is limited to go, and by what time he is limited to come
thither, within which time, he may lawfully Beg by the way, showing the same
Letter, and otherwise not.

Process.
LV. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 5. And if he do not accomplish the order to him
appointed by the said Letter, then to be Eftsoons taken and whipped, and so as
often as any default shall be found in him contrary to the order of this
Statute, in every place to be taken and whipped till he be repaired where he
was born, or where he last dwelled by the space of three years, and there put
his body to labor for his living, or otherwise truly get his living without
begging, as long as he is able so to do.

Imprisonment
LVI. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 6. And if the person so whipped, be an Idle person, and
no common Beggar, then after such whipping he shall be kept in the Stocks till
he has found surety to go to service or else to labor, after the discretion
of the said Justice of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, High-Constables, or
other such Officers, before whom any such Idle person, being no common Beggar
shall be brought, if by the discretion of the same Justice of Peace, Mayor,
Sheriff, Bailiff, High-Constable, or other such head Officer, it be so thought
Convenient, and that the party so punished be able to find surety, or else to
be ordered and sworn to repair to the place where he was born, or where he last
dwelled by the space of three years, and to have like Letter, and such further
punishment, if he Eftsoons offend this Statute, as is above appointed to, and
for the Common strong and able Beggars, and so from time to time to be ordered
and punished, till he put his body to labor, or otherwise get his living truly
according to the Law.

Justices.
LVII. 22 H. 8. 12. 3. N. 7. And that the Justices of Peace of every Shire,
Riding, City, Town and Liberty, shall have power and Authority within the
limits of their Commissions, to enquire of all Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables,
and other Officers, and persons that shall be negligent in Executing this Act.

Constable.
LVIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 4. N. 1. And if the Constables and Inhabitants, within any
Town and Parish where any such impotent person, or strong Beggar does happen to
Beg, contrary to the form of this Statute, be negligent and take not every such
impotent and strong Beggar, that so shall Beg, against the form of this
Statute, and order and punish every such Beggar, as is above limited, that then
the Township, or Parish, where such default shall be, shall lose and forfeit
for every such impotent Beggar that shall be suffered to beg within the said
same Township, or Parish, not being taken, ordered and punished according to
the form of this Statute, 3 s. 4 d. and for every strong Beggar that shall
happen to beg within any such Township, or Parish, not being taken, and ordered
as is above limited by this Statute, 6 s. 8 d. the one half of all which
forfeitures to be to the King, etc. And the other half to him that will sue for
the same, by any Bill of Information, before the Kings Justices of his Peace,
in their General Sessions to be holden in the Shire, or within any Liberty
where such default shall happen.

Justices.
LIX. 22 H. 8. 12. 5. N. 1. And that all Justices of Peace, within any Shire,
City, Borough or Liberty, shall have full power and authority, as well to hear
and determine every such default by presentment, as by such bill of
Information, and upon every presentment before them, and upon every such Bill of
Information, to make process by distress against the Inhabitants of every such
Town and Parish, where any default shall be presented or supposed by any such
Information.

Distress.
LX. 22 H. 8. 12. 5. N. 2. By Authority of which distress, the Sheriff or other
Officer, to whom by the Law such distress shall be made, shall distrain the
Goods and Chattels of such, one or two of the said Inhabitants as he may have
knowledge, were most negligent and in default in the Execution of this Act, and
the said distress retain till they find surety to appear at the Sessions
limited in the said distress.

LXI. 22 H. 8. 12. 5. N. 3. And in case they appear and Confess the default, or
else if they traverse the Presentment, Americament
and it be tried against them by Verdict, or deny the Information, and it be
proved against them by sufficient Witnesses, then the said Justices of Peace in
their Sessions shall have Authority to assesse the Fines as been above limited,
after the rates abovesaid, and to make process for the leving of the same by
distress of the Inhabitants of such Towns or Parishes, where such default shall
be tried or proved.

LXII. 22 H. 8. 12. 5. N. 4. And that Every such fine, Fines.
if it grow by presentment, to be only to the Kings use; and if it grow by
Information, then the moity thereof to be to him, that persueth the Information
for the same, and the other moity thereof to the Kings use, as is aforesaid.

LXIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 5. N. 5. And if any such person, Issues.
or persons distrained, appear not at the day and place contained in such
distress, then upon the return of the Sheriff, or other Officers to whom the
distress was delivered to execute, that such person or persons were distrained,
then every such person, etc. so destrained at the first distress, shall lose 3
s. 4 d. and at the second 6 s. 8 d. and so to be doubled upon every distress,
in such cases to be awarded, till appearance may be had by one of the
Inhabitants of such Town, or Parish, to deny, traverse or Confess the
Presentment or Information exhibited against any such Town, or Parish, to the
intent that upon trial or proof thereof, the Fines above limited may be
assessed and levied of the Inhabitants of every such Town, or Parish, as is
above rehearsed.

LXIV. 22 H. 8. 12. 6. N. 1. And be it enacted, Scholars.
etc. That Scholars of the Universities of Oxford, and Cambridge, that go about
Begging, not being Authorized under the Seal of the said Universities, by the
Commissary, Chancellor or Vice Chancellor of the same, and all and singular the
men pretending losses of their Ships and Goods of the Sea, going about the
Country begging, without sufficent authority witnessing the same, shall be
punished and ordered in manner and form as is above rehearsed of strong Beggars.

LXV. 22 H. 8 12. 6. N. 2. Vagrants.
And that all Proctors and Pardoners going about in the Country, etc. without
sufficent Authority, and all other idle persons going about in any Country, or
abiding in any City, Borough or Town, some of them using diverse and subtle
Crafts and unlawful Games and Plays, and some of them feigning themselves to
have knowledge in Physic, Phisnomy, Palmistry, or other crafty sciences,
whereby they bear the people in hand, that they can tell their Destinies,
Deceases, and Fortunes, and such other like fantastical imaginations, to the
great discredit of the Kings subjects: shall upon examination had before two
Justices of the Peace, whereof the one shall be of the Quorum, if he by
probable Witness be found Guilty of any such deceits, be punished by whipping
at two days together, after the manner* before rehearsed, 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 3.

LXVI. 22 H. 8. 12. 6. N. 3. And if he Eftsoons offend in the said offense, or
any like offense, to be scourged two days, Pain.
and the third day to be put upon the Pillory from 9 of the Clock till a 11
before noon, of the same day, and to have one of his ears Cut off.

LXVII. 22 H. 8. 12. 6. N. 4. And if he offend the third time, Pain.
to have like punishment with whipping, standing on the Pillory, and to have
his other ear cut off.

LXVIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 6. N. 5. And that Justices of the Peace, Franchis.
have like Authority in every Liberty and Franchis, within their Shires, where
they be Justices of Peace, for the Execution of this Act, in every part thereof
as they shall have without the Liberty or Franchis.

Notice.
LXIX. 22 H. 8. 12. 7. N. 1. And it is further Enacted, that this Act shall
yearly be read in the open Sessions, to the intent that the said Estatute shall
be the more feared, and the better put in Execution.

Charity.
LXX. 22 H. 8. 12. 8. N. 1. And further more be it Enacted that if any person or
persons, at any time hereafter give any Harbor, Money or Lodging to any Beggars
being strong and able in their bodies to work, which order themselves Contrary
to the form of this Estatute, that every such person so doing, being
sufficiently proved or presented before any Justices of the Peace, shall make
such fine to the King as by the discretion of the said Justices of Peace at
their general Sessions shall be assessed.

Process.
LXXI. 22 H. 8. 12. 8. N. 2. And if any person, etc. do disturb or let the
Execution of this Act in any manner, wise, or make rescous against any Mayor,
Sheriff, Baliff, or other person that shall endeavor himself for the due
Execution thereof, its then enacted that every such person, etc. for every such
offense doing shall lose and forfeit, 100 s. and over that to have imprisonment
at the Kings will, the one moity of which forfeiture if such offense be
Committed in any City or Town Corporate, to be to the Mayor Sheriff, Bailiff,
or other head Officer, of such City or Town Corporate, where any such Offense
shall be done to the use of the Commonalty of every such City and Town
Corporate, and if it be Committed out of a City or Town Corporate, then the said
one half to be to the Lord of the Leet, or Law days, where such offense shall
be done, and the other half of every such forfeiture to be to the King, etc.
for the which forfeiture of 5 l. recovery shall be had by action of Debt, Bill,
Plaint or Information, in any of the Kings Courts, in which suits the
defendants shall not wage their Law, nor have any Essoin or Protection allowed.

Cinque Ports.
LXXII. 22 H. 8. 12. 9. N. 1. Provided always that this Act nor any thing
therein contained, shall be hurtful or prejudicial to the Barons, or other
Inhabitants of the Five Ports or of their Members, neither to any Grant Liberty
or Franchis heretofore made by the King, etc. Or any his Progenitors, Kings of
England, to the said Barons, or other Inhabitants, their Ancestors or
Predecessors or any of them.

Cinque Ports.
LXXIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 9. N. 2. And that it be Enacted, etc. that all and every
Mayor and Mayors, and Bailiff and Bailiffs, Electife and Elected by the Commons
and Inhabitants of every Town and place, of the said Ports and Members, shall
have like Authority, within every such Town and place where they, or any of
them be or shall be Mayor or Baliff or Jurate, to put or cause to be put this
Act in due Execution, as the Justices of Peace, in any County of this Realm,
have or shall have Authority and power by this Act, to do where they be
Justices.

Cinque Ports.
LXXIV. 22 H. 8. 12 9. N. 3. And that the Inhabitants within every Town within
the said Ports, shall be bounden to the Execution of this Act like as other
Inhabitants be without the said Ports upon like pain, as is above remembered.

Cinque Ports.
LXXV. 22 H. 8. 12. 9. N. 4. And if any person, etc. which shall Inhabit within
the said Five Ports or Members, be impotent, or other Idle person do hereafter
beg without the said Five Ports or Members of the same, Contrary to this Act,
that then every such person shall be ordered and punished according to this
Act, any thing in this Proviso to the contrary notwithstanding.

Seals.
LXXVI. 22 H. 8. 12. 10. N. 1. And it is ordained and Enacted, that the Seals
above rehearsed shall be made at the costs and charges, of the Justices of
Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers above written on this
side the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next comeing, that is to
say, that every of them shall do the said Seals to be made within the limits of
their Division Jurisdiction and Authority.

LXXVII. 22 H. 8. 12. 11. N. 1. And it is also Ordained and Enacted that every
Letter to be made by the Authority of this Act, License.
whereby any Impotent Beggar shall be authorized and assigned to beg, shall be
made in this form ensuing.

LXXVIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 12. N. 1. Kanc' ss. Memorandum that A. B. of Dale,
License.
for reasonable considerations is Licensed to beg within the Hundred of P. K.
and L. in the said County, given under the Seal of that limit, tali die and
anno.

LXXIX. 22 H. 8. 12. 13. N. 1. And that every such Letter that shall be made
and delivered to such Beggar or Vagabond, License.
after he has been Whipped by Authority of this Act, shall be made in this
wise following.

LXXX. 22 H. 8. 12. 14. N. 1. Kanc' ss. I. S. Whipped for a Vagrant, License.
strange Beggar, at Dale in the said County, according to the Law, 22 day of
July, in the 23 year of King H. 8. was assigned to pass forthwith and directly
from thence to Sale in the County of Middlesex, where he says he was born, or
where he last dwelled by the time of three years, and he is limited to be there
within fourteen days next ensuing, at his peril, or within such number of days
as to him shall be limited by the discretion of the maker of the said Letter,
in Witness whereof the Seal of the limit of the said place of his punishment,
hereunto is set, 39 Eliz. 4. N.

LXXXI. 22 H. 8. 12. 15. N. 1. And it is enacted that every such Letter shall
be made at the equal costs of such the said Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, License.
Bailiffs or other Officers within whose Jurisdiction, Powers, and Authorities,
the said Beggar and Vagabond shall be whipped, or limited to beg in by
Authority of this Act, and every such Letter shall be subscribed with the hand
of one of the said Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Baliffs, or other Officers in
this form following, per me A. B. unum Justiciariorum pacis, or Majorem
Civitatis, or Ballivum villae, or Constabularium talis hundredi, or else in
like form in English.

LXXXII. 22 H. 8. 12. 16. N. 1. And it is further Enacted, Imprisonment
that every such person, etc. As have the Custody of any Goals, within any
Shire, City, Borough or Town, Corporate on this side the Feast of Saint John
the Baptist, shall do make a Seal engraven with the name of the Castle, Prison
or Goal, which he keeps.

LXXXIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 16. N. 2. And in Case any person, Fees.
etc. That at any time after the said Feast of Saint John, shall be delivered
out of any Goal or Prison, for suspicions of Felony, by Proclamation, or be
acquit of any Felony, and has no friends to pay his fees, nor was born within
the Hundred or place where he shall happen to be so delivered, nor can get him
no Master, there to abide and work with, shall have liberty to beg for his
fees, by the License of his Keeper, by the space of six Weeks next after such
deliverance, and after that to be compelled to go to the Hundred where he was
born, or last dwelled, by the space of three years, within such time as shall
be limited by one of the Justices of Peace, Mayors, Seriffs, Bailiffs, or any
Officers where such deliverance shall be had 27 H. 8. 25. (26) 6.

LXXXIV. 22 H. 8. 12. 17. N. 1. And it is enacted that every such person so
delivered shall have a Letter made to him by the Clerk of the Peace of the
Shire, within the which he was delivered, License.
if he be delivered in the Shire, and if he be delivered in any City, Borough
or Town Corporate, then he to have a Letter of the Common Clerk of every such
City, Borough or Town where he is delivered, every such Letter witnessing the
day of his deliverance, and the place where he was delivered, and before whom,
and the time appointed to him to beg for his fees, and the place to which he
shall be assigned to repair unto, in case he can get no Master to fall to Work,
where he was delivered, and to every such Letter the said Jailer or Keeper of
Prison, out of the which such person shall be delivered, shall put the Seal
limited to be made as is aforesaid for the said Prison, and that every such
Letter shall be made in this wise following.

License.
LXXXV. 22 H. 8. 12. 18. N. 1. Essex' ss. the 20 day of July, Anno Regni Regis,
H. 8. 23. I. S. was delivered for Felony out of the Goal of Dale in the said
County, at the Sessions holden before A. B. and his Fellows at Sale, the day and
year aforesaid, and is allowed to beg for his fees by the space of six Weeks,
and in case he can get no Master to work with in the said term, then he is
assigned to pass directly to Dale, in the County of Kent, where he says he was
born, or last dwelled for the space of three years, and he is allowed fourteen
days next after the said six weeks for his passage thither, or such number of
days as to him shall be limited by the discretion of the maker of the said
Letter, in witness whereof the Seal of the Prison from which he was delivered
thereunto is set, and in such Shires where their is no Goal, the Sheriff
thereof for the time being, shall cause a Seal to be Engraven with the name of
the Shire, and shall order and use the same Seal to and from such persons
delivered, as is aforesaid, after like manner and form, as the Jailer or Keeper
of the Goal, is limited and appointed to do by this act, 27 H. 8. 25. (26) 6.

Fees.
LXXXVI. 22 H. 8. 12. 19. N. 1. And it is also Enacted, that every Clerk of the
Peace of the Shire, within the which such person shall be delivered, and every
Common Clerk of every City, Borough or Town Corporate, within the which any
such person shall be delivered, shall make for every such person as shall be so
delivered, where they be such Officers, the said Letter in form abovesaid,
without any fee taking for the same, and shall deliver every such Letter to the
Jailer or Keeper of the Prison, from the which such person shall be delivered:
And if there be no Jailer there, then to the Sheriff of the Shire, where such
deliverance shall be had within one day next after the end of the Sessions,
where any such deliverance is had, upon pain to lose and forfeit for default of
every Letter, 12 d. to the King our Sovereign Lord.

Escape.
LXXXVII. 22 H. 8. 12. 19. N. 2. And that the Jailer or Keeper of the Prison,
from the which the said person shall be so delivered, and in case there be no
Jailer, then the Sheriff of the Shire, where any such deliverance shall be had,
shall not suffer any such person to go abroad to beg for his fees, nor depart
out of Prison, except it be to service, or labor, unless the same Jailer or
Sheriff, first deliver to the said person, the said Letter, containing his
Name, Sealed with the Seal of the Prison, from the which he shall be delivered,
or else with the Seal Engraved with the Name of the Shire, if there be no
Prison, upon pain for every default to lose 12 d. to our said Sovereign Lord.

License.
LXXXVIII. 22 H. 8. 12. 20. N. 1. And it is Enacted, that if any person, etc. So
being delivered out of Prison, at any time after the said Feast do beg, not
having the said Letter Sealed, in form abovesaid, or beg contrary to the Tenor
of the same Letter, that then he shall be taken, ordered and whipped in every
behalf, like as is above appointed for strong Beggars, and that to be done, and
executed by such as is above limited to do the same upon strong Beggars, and in
such wise and upon such pain as is before limited for Non-Execution of the
punishment of strong Beggars.

LXXXIX. 22 H. 8. 12. 21. N. 1. Charity.
Provided always that it be lawful to every person, etc. Being bounden by reason
of any Foundation, or Ordinance, to give or distribute any Money in Alms, and
also to every person, etc. At Common Doles used at Burials or Obiits, to give
and dispose in Alms, any Money to every person, etc. Coming to such Alms or
Doles, after like manner and form, as they have been accustomed to do in that
behalf before the making of this Act, without any danger or penalty of this
Estatute, any thing contained in this present Estatute to the contrary hereof
notwithstanding.

XC. 22 H. 8. 12. 22. N. 1. Provided also that it be lawful to all Masters and
Governors of Hospitals, Abbe.
to lodge and Harbor any person or Persons, of Charity, or Alms according to
the Foundation of such Hospitals, and to give Money in Alms in as large manner
and form as they are bounden or own to do, any thing in this Statute to the
Contrary hereof notwithstanding.

XCI. 22 H. 8. 12. 22. N. 2. And this Act to endure unto the last day of the
next Parliament, 35 Eliz. 7. 25. N. 1. Continuance.


XCII. 23 H. 8. 15. 2. N. 1. Suits.
Provided always that all and every such poor person, etc. being Plaintiff,
etc. in any of the said Actions, Bills, or Plaints, which at the Commencement
of their Suits or Actions, be admitted by discretion of the Judge, etc. Where
such Suits or Actions shall be persued or taken to have their process and
Counsel of Charity, without any Money or fee paying for the same, shall not be
compelled to pay any costs by virtue and force of this Statute, but shall
suffer other punishment, as by the discretion of the Justices or Judge, before
whom such suits shall depend, shall be thought reasonable, any thing etc.
notwithstanding.

XCIII. 27. H. 8. 25. (26) Where in an act, Lieu.
etc. (viz. 22. H. 8. 12. 1. N. 3.) Among other things, it was Ordained,
Established and Enacted, that every strong and valiant Beggar and Vagabond,
after he were whipped for his Vagaboncy and Idleness, should depart from the
place where he was whipped directly unto such Town, Hundred and County where he
was born, or were he had dwelled by the space of three years next before, there
to continue and abide: And also that aged Poor and Impotent people should in
likewise repair into every Hundred, within the said Counties, there to remain
and continue according to the meaning and purparty of the said Act upon pains
limited in the same, etc.

XCIV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 2. N. 1. Taxes.
And forasmuch as it was not provided in the said Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) how
and in what wise the said poor people, and sturdy Vagabonds should be ordered
at their repair, and at their coming into their Counties, nor how the
Inhabitants of every Hundred should be charged for the relief of the same poor
people, nor yet for the setting and keeping in work and labor of the aforesaid
valiant Vagabonds at their said repair into every Hundred of this Realm.

XCV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 2. N. 2. It is therefore now Ordained, Constable.
etc. That all and every the Mayors, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables,
House-holders, and all other head Officers and Ministers of every City, Shire,
Towns and Parishes of this Realm, at the repair and coming thither of such Poor
Creature or sturdy Vagabond, as is contained in the said Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8.
12.) shall most Charitably receive the same and order the same in manner and
form following, that is to say.

XCVI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 2. N. 3. That all the Governors and Ministers of
every of the same Cities, Shires, Towns, Hundreds, Corporation.
Wapentakes Lathes, Rapes, Ridings, Tythings, Hamlets and Parishes, as well
within Liberties as without, shall not only succor find and keep all and every
of the same poor people by way of voluntary and Charitable Alms, within every
of the same Cities, Shires, Towns, Hundreds, Wapen-takes, Luthes, Rapes,
Tythings, Hamlets and Parishes, as well within Liberties as without, to be
succored relieved and holden with such convenient and necessary Alms, as shall
be thought meet by their discretions in such wise as none of them of very
necessity shall be compelled to wander Idly, and go openly in Begging to ask
Alms, in any of the same Cities, Shires, Towns and Parishes: But also to cause
and compel all and every the said sturdy Vagabonds, and valiant Beggars, to be
set and kept to continual labor, in such wise as by their said labors they and
every of them may get their own livings with the continual labor of their own
hands.

Sheriffs.
XCVII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 2. N. 4. And every Mayor, Alderman, Sheriff, Bailiff,
Constable, and all other head Officers and Ministers, of every County, City,
Town and Parish, within this Realm, or within any the Kings Dominions, as well
within Liberties as without, and all other persons Inhabitants within any of
the same, shall endeavor themselves to order and direct the Poor people,
valiant Beggars, and sturdy Vagabonds in such wise as the effect of this
present Act shall be duly observed and put in due execution, upon pain that
every Parish shall lose and forfeit 20 s. for every Month, in which it is
omitted and undone, and that to be enquired of at every Quarter Sessions, and
to be duly presented and found by the verdict of twelve men.

Constable.
XCVIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 3. N. 1. Item, It is further Enacted, etc. That all
and every person, etc. Being Whipped or sent into their Countries, in form
aforesaid, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12. 14. N. 1.) at the end of every ten Miles shall
repair unto the Constable of any Parish, being directly in his way toward the
County and place whereunto he is so appointed, and upon sight of his Letters
given unto him at the time of his whipping and sending of him into the same his
Country, every the said Constables, and others the Kings Subjects, shall and
may furnish him with Competent Meat, Drink and Lodging, for one night only, or
for one Meal, and so he shall contiue his daily Journey of Ten Miles, until such
time as he shall come unto the Hundred and place whereunto he is assigned to go.

Ability.
XCIX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 4. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, etc. That all and every
Idle person, etc. Rufflers, calling themselves Serving-men, as well within the
City of London, as within all other Cities, Shires, Towns, Parishes and Hamlets
of this Realm, having no Masters, shall be entreated used and ordered in every
behalf and to all intents, as is contained and specified, as well in the
aforesaid former Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) as in this present Act, upon the
pain aforesaid, to be lost and forfeited to the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Burgesses, Ministers and Inhabitants of every of the same Cities,
Boroughs and Towns Corporate, where any such Rufflers shall be suffered to be
resiant and abiding by the space of two days, and not punished in form
hereafter declared.

Corporation.
C. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 5. N. 1. It is Ordained, etc. That all and every the
Mayors, Governors and head Officers of every Borough and Town Coporate, and the
Churchwardens, or two others of every Parish of this Realm, shall in good and
Charitable wise, take such discreet and convenient order, by gathering and
procuring of such Charitable and voluntary Alms, of the good Christian people
within the same, with Boxes every Sunday, Holy Day, and other Festival days, or
otherwise among themselves in such good and discreet wise as the Poor,
Impotent, Lame, Feeble, Sick and Diseased people, being not able to Work, may
be provided, helped and relieved, so that in no wise they nor none of them be
suffered to go openly in Begging: And that such as be lusty or having their
Limbs strong enough to labor, may be daily kept in continual labor, whereby
every one of them may get their own sustenance and living with their own hands.

CI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 5. N. 2. Forfeiture.
Upon pain that all and every the Mayors, Governors, Aldermen, head Officers,
and others the Kings Officers and Ministers, of every the said Cities Boroughs,
Towns Corporate, Hundreds, Parishes and Hamlets, shall lose and forfeit for
every month that it is omitted and undone the sum of 20 s.

CII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 6. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, Lieu.
etc. That all Leprous and poor Bedridden Creatures, whatsoever they be, may at
their own liberty remain and continue in such place where they be, and shall
not be compelled to repair into their Countries according to the tenor and
purport of the aforesaid former Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12. 18. N. 1.) Any thing
contained in the same Act, or in this present Act, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

CIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 7. N. 1. Item, It is also Enacted, Enfant.
etc. that the said Governors, Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, and head
Officers, Bailiffs and Constables of every City, Borough, Town, Hundred and
Parish of this Realm, shall have Authority by virtue of this present Act to
take up all and singular Children in every Parish within their limits, that be
not grieved with any notable disease or sickness, and being under the age of
fourteen years and above the age of five years, in Begging or Idleness, and to
appoint them to Masters of Husbandry, or other Crafts or labors to be taught,
by the which they may get their livings, when they shall come to age, giving to
them of the said Charitable collections as it may conveniently be sustained,
and borne Arayment to enter into such service.

CIV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 7. N. 2. And if any above the age of twelve years, and
under the age of sixteen years, Apprentice.
refuse such service or depart from the same, without cause reasonable, then
they to be Arrested and apprehended by any of the said Officers, and to be
brought before the Mayor, Aldermen, Justices of the Peace, Baliffs, Governors,
Constables, and other Officers and Ministers, of that limit or circuit where
they be taken: And if it shall appear by his or their Confession, or other
sufficient Testimony before the same Officers and Ministers, that he or they
have refused to serve, or have departed from their service without cause
reasonable, he shall then in the Parish where he was apprehended, be openly
whipped with Rods, by the discretion of the said Governors or Bailiffs, and
thereupon to be sent again unto his service, and so to be served as often as he
shall be apprehended and Convicted in form aforesaid.

CV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 7. N. 3. And if any person or persons, Process.
refuse to Execute and to do the said punishment at the Commandment of any of
the said Governors, Aldermen, Justices of Peace, and others the said Officers
and Ministers, then he or they so refusing the same shall be set in the stocks
by the space of two days, without having of any other sustenance, saving only
bred and water.

CVI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 8. N. 1. Item, It is also enacted, Search.
etc. that all and every the aforesaid Mayors, Governors, Aldermen and every
the Justices of the Peace, as well within liberties as without, shall once in
every month or oftener, if need shall require, command a Privy or secret search
to be made within every City and Ward, Town, Hundred, Parish and Hamlet of this
Realm in such time of the night and day as they shall think convenient, to the
intent that all Rufflers, sturdy Vagabonds and valiant Beggars, and other
suspect persons may be by such means apprehended taken and ordered according to
the purport and meaning of this present act, and otherwise to be used according
to the Laws of this Realm.

CVII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 8. N. 2. Process.
And that all and every person and persons, obey, aid, assist and maintain from
time to time, all and every the Commandments of the said Justices of Peace, and
other head Officers aforesaid, for and concerning the making of all the said
searches and the apprehending of all and every the suspect persons aforesaid,
upon pain to make fine for not doing of the same at the next quarter Sessions,
as it shall be thought by the discretion of the Mayor, Governors, Aldermen and
Justices of the Peace.

Games.
CVIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 9. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, etc. that no person
etc. at any time after the Feast of Saint John Baptist next coming, shall use,
keep and maintain, any open Playing-House, or place of Common Bowling, Dicing,
Carding, Closh, Tennis, or other unlawful Games, taking money for the same, or
other gain, in any place of this Realm, upon pain to forfeit five Marks for
every Month that any such unlawful Houses or Games shall so be openly kept,
used and maintained in any Place within this Realm, be it within liberties or
without, any grant heretofore made to any person, etc. in any wise
notwithstanding.

Encumbant.
CIX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 10. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, etc. that every
Preacher, Parson, Vicar, Curate of this Realm, as well in all and every their
Sermons, Collections, Biddings of the beads, as in time of all Confessions, and
at the making of the Wills or Testaments of any Persons, at all times of the
year shall exhort, move, stir and provoke people to be liberal and bountiful to
extend their good and Charitable Alms and Contributions from time to time, for
and toward the comfort and relief of the said Poor, Impotent, Decrepit,
Indigent and needy people, as for the setting and keeping to continual work and
labor of the aforesaid Rufflers, sturdy Vagabonds and valiant Beggars in every
City, Ward, Town, Hundred and Parish of this Realm, as well within liberties as
without.

Pain.
CX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 11. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, etc. that if any of the
aforesaid Rufflers, sturdy Vagabonds and valiant Beggars, after such time as
they have been once apprehended, taken, whipped and sent unto any City, Ward,
Town, Hundred or Parish, by any Justices of Peace, Mayor, Constable, Bailiffs,
or any other the Kings Officers and Ministers, happen to wander, loyter, or
idly to use themselves and play the Vagabonds, and willingly absent themselves
from such labor and occupation as he or they shall be appointed unto within any
City, Ward, Town, Hamlet, Hundred or Parish, whereunto he or they have been
appointed in manner and form aforesaid, that then he or they being Eftsoons
apprehended and taken of suspicions of Idleness in any privy searches
aforesaid, or otherwise shall be brought before the next Justice of Peace; And
upon due Examinations and proof of the continuance of his said loytering,
wandering in idleness or Vagaboncy, shall be Eftsoons, not only whipped again
and sent into the City, Ward, Town, Hundred or Parish, whereunto he was first
appointed, but also shall have the upper part of the Grislle of his right Ear
clean cut off, so as it may appear for a perpetual token after that time that
he has been a contemner of the good order of the Commonwealth.

Constable.
CXI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26) 11. N. 2. And that every Constable of the Parish, with
the assistance of the most substantial of every such Parish where any such
Ruffler or Vagabond, shall happen thus to be taken, shall do or cause to be
done this present Execution, as well in whipping as in cutting off the said
upper Grisle of the Ear of every such Ruffler or sturdy Vagabond, or valiant
Beggar, upon pain to lose and forfeit five Marks, for every time that he shall
refuse to do or cause to be done the same Execution: And all and singular the
Inhabitants of the said City, Ward, Town, Hundred or Parish, shall assist and
aid the said Constables in Execution of the premises to the best of their
Power, with Good diligence and without contradiction upon the pain aforesaid.

CXII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 12. N. 1. Item, It is further Enacted, Imprisonment
etc. That if any Ruffler or sturdy Vagabond or valiant Beggar not having the
upper part of the right Ear, and being cut off as is aforesaid, happen to be
apprehended and taken, in or at any privy search, as aforesaid, at any other
time wandering in Idleness in or without any City, Ward, Town, Parish, or
Hamlet, within this Realm, whereunto he or they have been assigned, and duly
proved before any Justice of Peace, that he or they haunt Idleness, and has
not applied, nor does not apply such labors as he or they have been assigned
unto, or be not in service with any Master, that then he or they so taken,
marked and having the upper part of the right Ear cut off, as is aforesaid,
shall be by any of the said Justices of Peace sent unto the next Goal, there to
remain without Bail or Mainprise until the next Quarter Sessions, and there to
be Indicted of wandering, loytering and idleness, and shall be arraigned of the
same, and if he or they shall happen to be found Guilty by Verdict, Confession
or otherwise, of, for and upon the same continual loytering and idleness, then
every such sturdy Vagabond and valiant Beggar so found Guilty and Condemned,
shall have Judgment to suffer pain and Execution of death as a Felon, and as
Enemies of the Commonwealth, and to lose and forfeit all their Lands and Goods
as Felons do in all other cases within this Realm.

CXIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 13. N. 1. Item, It is Enacted, Search.
etc. That the Knight Marshal for the time being, shall have full power and
Authority by virtue of this present act, to search, do and put in due and plain
Execution all and every the contents as well of the aforesaid former Act, (
viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) as of this present Act, and of and upon all such Rufflers
sturdy Vagabonds and valiant Beggars, Men and Women, as in any wise shall
frequent, hunt or loyter, Masterless and out of service, in and about the
Court, wheresoever the Kings Highness chance to be resiant, with his most
Honorable Houseshold in any place of this Realm.

CXIV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 14. N. 1. Charity.
And for the avoiding of such inconveniences and Infections as oftentime have
and daily do chance among the people by Common and open Doles, and that most
commonly unto such Doles many persons do resort, which have no need of the
same. It is therefore Enacted, etc. that no manner of person, etc. shall make
or cause to be made any such common or open Dole, or shall give any ready money
in Alms, otherwise than to the common Boxes and Common Gatherings in Every
City, Town, Hundred, Parish and Hamlet, to and for the putting in plain and due
Execution of all and every the good and virtuous intents and purposes,
contained in this present Act, upon pain to lose and forfeit ten times the
value of all such ready money as shall be given in Alms, Contrary to the tenor
and purport of the same.

CXV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 14. N. 2. And that every person, Taxes.
etc. of this Realm, Bodies Politic, Corporate and others, that be bound or
charged Yearly, Monthly or Weekly, to give or to distribute any ready Money,
Bread, Victual, or other sustentation to Poor people, in any place within this
Realm, shall from the Feast of Michaelmas next coming, give and distribute the
same Money, or the value of all such Bread, Victual or sustentation, unto such
Common Boxes, to the intent the same may be employed toward the relieving of
the said Poor, Needy, Sick, Sore and Indigent persons, and also toward the
setting in work of the said sturdy and idle Vagabonds, and valiant Beggars, and
every of the said person and persons, Bodies Politic, Corporate and others,
shall be clearly discharged against all and every other person and persons, of
and for all manner of Bonds or Grants, whatsoever they be, for making of any of
the said Common Doles, or others the foresaid distributions at any time of the
year, so as the Money and true value of the same be given unto the Boxes toward
the common Alms and relief of the poor people, in form aforesaid.

Account.
CXVI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 15. N. 1. And to the intent that the Money gathered
toward the relief of Poverty, as is abovesaid, shall be employed and converted
to such charitable uses and behoofs by this present Act limited, and no part
thereof to be misused by such as shall have the collection thereof; it is
therefore ordained and enacted, etc. that the Churchwardens of every Parish,
calling unto them six or four of their honest Neighbors, shall have full power
and Authority, every Quarter of the year, or oftener by their discretions to
command every such Collector to appear before them, and to render and yield
account of all sums of Money, as by them shall be gathered, and how, and in
what manner it was employed.

Account.
CXVII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 15. N. 2. And if upon any account it shall be seen,
perceived or found that any such Collector has not converted nor employed, the
Money by him gathered, to such uses and intents as be limited by this Act, or to
have imbezilled any part thereof, that then every such offender shall be
attached and apprehended by them, before whom he so shall make account, and
shall immediately be brought before a Justice of the Peace, if it be in any
Shire, or before the Mayor or Bailiff, if it be in City, Borough or Town
Corporate, which Justice or Mayor or Bailiff, shall cause every such offender
to be committed to Ward and Prison, there to remain unto such time as he shall
have fully restored and paid to the Collectors of the said Alms, within the
Parish where he so offended, all such sums of Money as by him shall be so
imbezilled, converted or employed to other uses or intents, than by this Act be
limited, and also till he shall have paid 6 s. 8 d. for a penalty to be
converted, employed and distributed to the uses and intents specified and
declared in this Act.

Incumbent.
CXVIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 16. N. 1. And it is ordered, etc. that the Parson,
Vicar or Parish Priest, or some other honest man of every Parish of this Realm,
without taking or demanding any thing for the same, shall keep a Book of
reckoning and then shall enter, write and make mention from time to time, in
one place or part of the Book, as well of all and every such sums of Money, as
shall be gathered by the charitable Alms of the Inhabitants of every of the
same Parishes, as to make mention in other place of the same Book, how, upon
whom, and in what wise, any part of the same Money shall be spent, and so from
year to year, from one year to another year, he shall keep a new book, the Book
to be bought and paid for, by the Constable and Churchwardens, for the time
being, of the common Collections, and always shall remain in the Custody of two
or three of them, or of some other indfferent man, by their consents, and not
with the Parson, Vicar or Parish Priest.

Charity.
CXIX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 17. N. 1. Item, It is ordered, etc. that two or three
times in every week, two or three of every Parish, within Cities and Towns
Corporate, by the assignment and appointment of the Mayor, Aldermen, Governor,
Bailiff or Constable, some in one week and some another week, shall name and
appoint certain of the said poor people found of the common Alms, to collect
and gather broken meats and fragments, and the refuse-drink of every
Householder within every such Parish, which shall be by their discretions
distributed evenly among the poor people found of the said common Alms, as they
by their discretions shall think good.

Constable.
CXX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 18. N. 1. Item, It is ordered, etc. that all and every
Bailiff, Constable, Churchwardens, and other the Collectors of the said Alms,
which shall at any time forbear their own business and labor, and shall travail
or take any pains in and about the Execution of any part of this present Act,
shall have and take for his and their so doing, such competent wages of the
Money of the said common Collections, as by the discretion of the Mayor,
Aldermen, Governor Bailiff or Justices of Peace, and others of the Parish shall
be thought good and reasonable, which shall be appointed to them from time to
time, always at the making of their accounts before the whole Parish aforesaid.

CXXI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 19. N. 1. Item, Charity.
The Money of all and every the aforesaid free and Charitable Collections, shall
be kept in the common Coffer or Box, standing in the Church of every Parish, or
else shall be committed into the hands and safe custody of any other such good
and substantial trusty man as they can agree upon, where they shall think it
always sure and safe, and where it may be surely delivered unto the uses before
expressed from time to time, as necessity shall require, making always mention
thereof in two several places of the said book as it is before declared, as
often times as any part thereof shall be spent or gathered.

CXXII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 20. N. 1. Item, It is ordered, Days.
etc. That the Inhabitants of every Parish of this Realm, shall begin to make
the foresaid free Charitable and Godly Collections and Gatherings, in every
Sunday and Holiday next after the day of Saint John Baptist next coming, and so
shall continue yearly unto the last day of the next Parliament; and every
Parish making default, and not putting all and every the premises in due and
perfect Execution, according to their power, behaviors and discretions, shall
lose and forfeit 20 s. for every Month in which it is omitted and undone.

CXXIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 20. N. 2. And all Justices of Peace in every County
and Liberty of this Realm, Justices.
shall have full power and Authority by virtue of this present act to enquire,
hear, order and determine all and every the premises in manner and form, and
to all intents as it is before declared.

CXXIV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 21. N. 1. Finally it is ordained, Continuance.
etc. that this present Act shall begin to take effect, and to be put in
Execution, with the aforesaid former Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) the morrow after
the day of Saint Michael the Archangel next coming, and shall continue unto
the last day of the next Parliament, 31 H. 8. 7.

CXXV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 21. N. 2. Forfeiture.
And that the one moity of all and every the Forfeitures aforesaid shall be to
the use of the common box to the relief of the Poor, Decrepit, Sick and
Indigent and Impotent people, being within any City, Town, Hundred or Parish,
where any such offense is committed, and the other moity to him or them that
will sue for the same, by Bill, Action of Debt, Plaint or otherwise, in any
Court of Record or Court Baron of this Realm, in which Action no wager of Law,
Essoyn or Protection shall be allowed.

CXXVI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 22. N. 1. Charity.
Provided always that this present Act, shall not be hurtful or prejudicial
unto any person or persons, for giving or sending any ready money, or of any
fragments or broken meat or drink, unto any person or persons, Inhabited within
the Parish where he dwells, or to any persons, but that they and every of
them, of their Charity may use, send, order, give and dispose the same to any
person or persons aforesaid, as they will themselves, either within their own
Houses, or else where, any thing contained in this present Act to the contrary
in any wise notwithstanding.

CXXVII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 23. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, Certificat.
etc. That they which by the Authority of this Act, shall cause the Ears of any
offender to be cut off, in form before mentioned, shall certify in writing
indented under their Seals, at the next General Sessions of the Peace, that
shall be kept in any City, Town, Borough or Shire, unto the Clerk of the Peace,
of the same City, Town or Shire, the names of all such as shall fortune to have
their Ears cut off, for the causes beforesaid, and of the time and place of
doing the same, and if they fail and make default this to do by the space of
one month, that then they shall forfeit for every month so offending, 40 s.

Church wardens.
CXXVIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26) 24. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. That no
Churchwarden, Collector or Collectors of any the foresaid charitable Alms,
shall continue in his or their said Offices and Rooms above the space of one
whole year.

Charity.
CXXIX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 24. N. 2. And that in all Cities, Boroughs, Towns and
Parishes of this Realm, the overplus of all, and all manner of Collections of
the Rich and Wealthy Parishes, within any of the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns,
Hundreds, Lathes, Rapes and Wapentakes, from time to time, shall be ordered and
distributed for and toward the sustentation of the charges of other poor
Parishes, near and within any of the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns, Hundreds,
Lathes, Rapes and Wapentakes, by the discretion from time to time, of the
Mayor, Aldermen, Baliffs, Governors, Justices of Peace, and high Constable of
the same.

Constable.
CXXX. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 25. N. 1. Provided alwais that in such Cities, Towns,
Hundreds, Wapentakes, Lathes, Rapes, Ridings, Tythings, Hamlets and Parishes,
where the voluntary, and unconstrained Alms, and Charity of the Parishioners or
people, which by this Act shall be contributory to such Alms, and with such
Money, as shall be added and given to the same, from any Monasteries, or other
persons, bodies Politic, Corporate or other, will not suffice to the
sustentation of the poor, needy and indigent people, being within the limits of
such contribution, neither the Mayors, Aldermen, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables
or other head Officers, Householders, Ministers or Inhabitants of the same in
particular; ne also the whole of them in general, shall incur or run into the
said forfeiture, danger or penalty of 20 s. for every Month; ne any of them to
be constrained to any such certain contribution, but as their free wills and
Charities shall extend, otherwise than that the persons thereunto appointed by
this Act, shall well and truly distribute, according to the purport of the
same, the said Charity and Alms that shall come to their hands, of voluntary
gift, upon the penalties in this Act for the same provided, any Clause,
Sentence or Words in the same Act, being or founden to the Contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

Charity.
CXXXI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 26. N. 1. Provided also it shall be lawful to all
Noblemen, and other keeping Houses, their Almoners, Servants, Officers and
Ministers, to give in Alms the Fragments or broken Meat or Drink, of the same,
as well to poor and indigent people of other Parishes, as of the same Parishes,
where such House is kept, any thing in this Act or in any provision of the same
to the contrary notwithstanding.

License.
CXXXII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 27. N. 1. Provided furthermore that Servingmen
departing from their service by License, Will, Death or Exclusion of their
Lord, Lady, Master or Mistress, having of the same their Lord, Lady, Master or
Mistress, Letters, or in case of their death, other sufficient proof, testifying
the day of their Exclusion or departure, from such service, shall not incur or
run into any the punishments or penalties comprised in this Act, for Vagabonds
or sturdy Beggars, within the space of one month after the day mentioned in the
said Letters, or appearing by the said testimony to be the day of the departure
from such services, ne also at or after the same month expired, so that by the
end of such month they shall have entered into any service, or be otherwise in
labor, according to the form and tenor of this Act.

Abbe.
CXXXIII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 28. N. 1. Provided also that in as much as Friars
Mendicants have little or nothing to live upon, but only by the Charity and
Alms of all Christian people, this Act therefore ne any thing therein contained
shall be prejudicial or hurtful unto any person or persons, for giving of them
in general or particular, any manner of Alms in Money, Victual or other things,
ne also to them or any of them, for being or remaining out of the places where
they were born, or had their last habitation, or for passing abroad to gather
the Alms and Charity of Christian people, or for continuance in their Religion
as they have been accustomed to do, this Act or any thing therein mentioned to
the contrary notwithstanding.

CXXXIV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 29. N. 1. Provided also that this Act ne any thing
therein mentioned, be hurtful or prejudicial to any Abbots, Abbe.
Priors or other person or persons, of the Clergy or other that by any means be
bound to give yearly, weakly or daily Alms, in Money, Victual, Lodging,
Clothing, or any other thing in any Monasteries, Almshouses, Hospitals or
other Foundations or Brotherhoods, by any good Authority or Ancient custom, or
of daily charity by keeping of poor men established for that purpose.

CXXXV. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 29. N. 2. Ne to any person or persons, Charity.
for receiving of the same, or for their abiding in such Almshouses or
Hospitals according to such foundation.

CXXXVI. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 29. N. 3. Ne also for Alms in ready Money, Mariners.
or otherwise to be given to Mariners or other persons that shall for time to
come, or be set on Land from Ships perished or lost on the Sea.

CXXXVII. 27 H. 8. 25. (26.) 29. N. 4. Or to any person that Riding, Going or
passing by the way, Charity.
shall after his or their Conscience or charity, give Money or other thing to
Lame, Blind or Sick, Aged or Impotent people, any thing in this Act to the
contrary mentioned notwithstanding.

CXXXVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. Forasmuch as Idleness and Vagaboncy, Laborers.
is the Mother and Root of all Thefts, Robberies, and all evil Acts, and other
mischiefs, and the multitude of people given thereto, have always been here
within this Realm, very great and more in number, as it may appear than in
other Regions, to the great Impoverishment of the Realm and danger of the Kings
Highness Subjects.

CXXXIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 1. N. 2. The which Idleness and Vagaboncy, Parliament.
all the Kings Highness Noble Progenitors, Kings of this Realm, and this High
Court of Parliament have often and with great travail gone about and assayed
with Godly Acts and Statutes to repress: Yet until this our time it has not
had that success, which has been wished, but partly by foolish Pity and Mercy
of them, which should have seen the said Godly Laws Executed, partly by the
perverse Nature and long accustomed Idleness of the persons giving to
loytering, the said Godly Statues hitherto have had small effect: And Idle and
Vagabond persons being unprofitable Members, or rather Enemies of the
Commonwealth have been suffered to remain and increase, and yet so do, whom if
they should be punished by Death, Whipping, Imprisonment, and other Corporal
pain, it were not without their deserts, for the Example of others, and to the
benefit of the commonwealth, yet if they could be brought to be made
profitable and do service, it were much to be wished and desired.

CXL. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 1. N. 3. Be it therefore Enacted, Repealance.
etc. First that all Statutes and Acts of Parliment heretofore made for the
punishment of Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, and all Articles comprised in the
same, shall be from henceforth repealed, void and of none effect.

CXLI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 1. Ability.
Secondly that whosoever after the first day of April next following, Man or
Woman, being not Lame, Impotent or so Aged or diseased with Sickness, that he
or she cannot work, not having Lands or Tenements, Fees, Annuities, or any
other yearly, Revenues or profits, whereon they may find sufficiently their
living, shall either like a Serving-man wanting a Master, or like a Beggar, or
after any such other sort, be lurking in any House or Houses, or loytering, or
Idly wander by the highways side, or in streats, in Cities, Towns or Villages,
not applying themselves to some honest and allowed Art, Science, Service or
Labor, and so do continue by the space of three days or more together, and not
offer themselves to labor with any that will take them, according to their
faculty: And if no Man otherwise will take them, do offer themselves to work
for Meat and Drink; or after they be so taken to work for the space agreed
between them and their Master, do leave their work out of convenient time, or
run away, that then every such person shall be taken for a Vagabond.

Apprentice.
CXLII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 2. And that it shall be lawful to every such Master
offering such idle person Service and labor, and that being by him refused: Or
who has agreed with such idle person, and from whom within the space agreed of
service, the said loyterer has run away or departed before the end of the
Covenant between them: And to any other person espying the same, to bring or
cause to be brought the said person, so living idly and loyteringly, to two of
the next Justices of Peace, there resiant or abiding, who hearing the proof of
the idle living of the said person, by the said space, living idly, as is
aforesaid, proved to them, by two honest witnesses, or confession of the party,
shall immediately cause the said loyterer to be marked with an hot Iron in the
Breast, the mark of V.

Villenage.
CXLIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 3. And adjudge the said person living so idly, to
such Presentor, to be his Slave, to have and to hold the said Slave to him, his
Executors, or Assigns for the space of two years, then next following, and to
order the said Slave as follows, that is to say, to take such person adjudged
a Slave with him, and only giving the said Slave bread and water, or small
drink, and such of meat, as he shall think meet, cause the said Slave to work
by beating, chaining or otherwise, in such work and labor, how vile soever it
be, as he shall put him unto, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 3. 1. N. 2.

Villenage.
CXLIV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 4. And if any manner of Slave, either for loyterings
or for the cause before rehearsed, so adjudged, shall within the space of the
said two years here appointed run away, depart or absent him from his said
Master by the space of fourteen days together, without License, it shall not
only be lawful to his said Master to pursue and search him again by virtue of
this Act, but also to punish such fault by chains or beating as is aforesaid.

Villenage.
CXLV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 5. And against the detainor, if any man do willingly
detain him, knowing him to be a Slave as is aforesaid, to have an Action of
Trespass, and recover thereby in damages 10 l. besides the loss and charges of
the suit for so detaining his said Slave.

Villenage.
CXLVI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 6. And further every such Master showing and proving
by two sufficient witnesses, the said offense and fault of his running away,
before two Justices of Peace of the same County, whereof the one to be of the
Quorum, the same Justice shall cause such Slave or Loiterer to be marked on the
Forehead, or the ball of the Cheek, with an hot Iron, with the sign of an S.
that he may be known for a Loiterer and a Runaway, and shall adjudge the
Loiterer and Runaway to be the said Masters Slave for ever.

Villenage.
CXLVII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 7. And if such Slave shall the second time run away,
or absent himself, if the said Master shall prove the same second Running away,
with two sufficient witnesses, before the Justice of Peace, in their General
and Quarter Sessions, then every such fault and Running away, to be adjudged
Felony, and such a Loiterer and Runnaway to be taken as a Felon, and thereof
being lawfully Indicted and attainted or otherwise condemned, to suffer pains
of death, as other Felons ought to do.

CXLVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 3. N. 1. Provided also and be it Enacted, Clergy.
etc. that no Clerk convicted shall hereafter make his purgation, and upon such
purgation, be delivered and set at large, otherwise than is in the Statute
hereafter expressed.

CXLIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 4. N. 1. And be it further enacted, Ordinary.
etc. that every Clerk convict or hereafter to be convicted, which should by
the order of the Law enjoy the benefit of their purgation, shall and may from
henceforth find any man, if they can, who shall be bound with two sufficient
Sureties to the Ordinary, in the sum of 20 l. to the Kings Highness use, to
retain the said convict as his Slave, and to keep the said person so convicted
for the space of one year then next following, that he shall not go abroad, and
at large, and then the said convict shall be delivered to the said person so
taking the same, and being bound as is aforesaid, to be his Slave for one whole
year, then next following, by virtue of this Act, in all such manner and form,
and to all such intents and purposes, and with all such Orders, Laws,
Conditions and penalties for Running away or other, as is aforesaid, of a
Vagabond taken loytering and made a Slave (burning in the breast only excepted)
and the Ordinary by the delivery of the said convict to such person, being
bound, as is aforesaid, to be of the keeping of the said convict, clearly
discharged and exonerated by virtue of this Act.

CL. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 5. N. 1. And if so be that the said Clerk so convict, Bail.
cannot find any man to be bound, as is aforesaid, to whom he may be adjudged a
Slave, in the space of one year, then at any time after the end of one year
after his conviction, it shall be lawful for the said Clerk convict to make his
purgation, as he might before this Estatute, any thing in this present Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

CLI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 6. N. 1. And where the Clerks convicted or attainted by the
order of the Laws of this Realm, cannot make their purgation, Imprisonment
and should perpetually by the same remain in prison: Be it nevertheless
enacted, etc. that if there be any manner of person who will at any time demand
the same Clerk convicted or attainted, and be bound to the Ordinary, with two
sufficient Sureties, as is above written, to keep the same as his Slave, by the
space of five years then next following, that then the same shall be adjudged
his Slave for like space, with all such Orders, Laws and Penalties for running
away, and other orders, as is before expressed of a Vagabond, adjudged to any
man for a Slave, (the burning in the breast only excepted) and upon the
adjudgment delivered to such demandant, the Ordinary from thenceforth of the
keeping of such Clerk convicted or attainted clearly exonerated and discharged
by virtue of this Act.

CLII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 1. And forasmuch as diverse Women and Men go on
Begging, wayfaring, Infant.
of the which some be impotent and lame, and some able enough to labor, which
do carry Children about with them, some four or five years of age, or Younger
or Elder, which brought up in idleness might be so rooted in it, that hardly
they may be brought after to good thrift and labor.

CLIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 2. Or if any Child above the age of five years and
under the age of fourteen years, Infant.
go idly wandering about as a Vagabond.

Infant.
CLIV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 3. Be it Enacted, etc. that if any manner of person
will take away such Child, be it Male or Female, of and from any such Beggar,
being the Mother thereof, Nourisher or Keeper, whether they be willing or not,
or without any such Nourisher, Mother or Keeper wandering, and bring the said
Child so taken away, before one of the Constables of the Parish, and two other
honest and discreet Neighbors witnesses, and before any Justice of the Peace
there resiant and abiding, and promise to bring the same Child up, in some
honest labor or occupation, till he or she come to the age of twenty years the
Woman Child, or twenty four years the Man Child.

Infant.
CLV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 4. That then and immediately the said Justice of Peace
and Constable, shall adjudge by virtue of this Act, the said Child unto the
ages before specified to be Servants or Apprentices to the said person, so
taking and promising to be used and ordered in all points, according as the Law
and custom of this Realm is of Servants and Apprentices, to what labor,
occupation or service soever, the said Master shall appoint him or her during
the said term.

Infant.
CLVI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 5. And if it shall fortune such Child so adjudged, to
run away at any time, one or more times from his or her Master or Mistres, that
then it shall be lawful for every such Master, to take the said Child again,
and to keep and punish the said Child, in chains or otherwise, and use him or
her as his Slave in all points, for the time before rehearsed, of the age of
such Child, that is to say, till twenty the Woman Child, and the Man Child
twenty four.

Villenage.
CLVII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 8. N. 1. Provided always that any Master either of the Men
or of the Women so adjudged Slaves, or of the Children adjudged Apprentices, or
Servants, may Let, set forth, seal, bequeath or give the service and labor of
such Slaves or Servants, so adjudged as is aforesaid, to any person or persons,
to whomsoever he will, upon such condition and for such term of years, as the
said persons be adjudged to him for Slaves, Servants or Apprentices, after such
like sort and manner, as he may do of any other his moveable Goods or Chattels,
and they for the said space and time to be bound to all points and
constructions, to such lessee, vendee, donee, or assignee, as they were to
their first apprehendors and Masters, by virtue of this Statute.

Villenage.
CLVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 9. N. 1. Provided always, and be it enacted, etc. that if
any such Slave or Slaves, or Children so adjudged, shall at any time after such
Judgment maihem or wound their Masters or Mistresses in resisting their
correction or otherwise, or when they be manumitted and set again free, or in
the time of their service, shall conspire with any other, or by themselves, go
about to Murder and Kill, or to Maihem, Wound or Beat the said Master or
Mistres, or any that was their Master or Mistres, or to burn their Houses,
Barns or Corn, so that their intent come to an Act tending to the effect, as
lying in wait with Weapon, or any such like, shall be accounted Felony, and
they shall suffer therefore pains of Death as in case of Felony.

Villenage.
CLIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 9. N. 2. Except that any such person or persons, as be, or
had been Master or Mistres to any of them, or he refusing any other will take
such person so offending to their Slaves, and then he or she so offending, to
be adjudged to the person so willing to take him or her so offending, slave for
ever, and thereupon to be discharged of the Felony.

Villenage.
CLX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 9. N. 3. The same Law and order to be had, in all conditions,
if it should chance the Father, Mother, Nourse, or other the bearer about of
the Child, or any other person or persons, to steal away such Child, adjudged
Apprentice or Servant, that is to be slave to such Apprentices or Servant's
Master, whose Apprentice or Servant was so stolen or enticed away for ever, and
the Master nevertheless to take and receive his said Apprentice or Servant
again, as if the said taking away had never been done.

CLXI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 1. Be it also Enacted, Apprentice.
etc. that although there be no man which shall demand such Loyterer or
Loyterers, as before expressed, into their Service, yet nevertheless the
Justice of Peace in that City, Borough, Town or Hundred dwelling, if any such
be, or else any other Justice of Peace of the same Shire and also there
dwelling, of his or their Office, shall be hereafter bound by virtue of this
Act, not only to inquire of all such Idle-persons, but also if they do espy any
such Vagabonds or Idle-persons, or if any such be detected unto them, to examine
him or her of the time of their Vagabondry.

CLXII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 2. Justices.
And if it shall appear to any Justice of Peace, any such Man or Woman to have
been a Vagrant and Vagabond or Idle-person, by the space as is aforesaid; to
cause the same to be marked on the Breast with an V. made with an hot Iron,

CLXIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 3. And also to inquire of him, Lieu.
the Town, City or Village wherein he was born, and then shall immediately give
a Writing in Parchment sealed with his Seal to the said Loyterer, of the tenor
and form which here ensues.

CLXIV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 4. A. B. Justice of Peace in the County of S. to the
Mayor or Cheif-Officer of the City of Z. (if it be a City) or to the
Head-Borough, Baily or Constable, Certificate.
or Head-Officer of the Town of Z. (if it be a Town) or to the Constable or
Tything-man of the Village of C. if it be a Village.

CLXV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 5. According to a most Godly Statute made in the
first year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, etc. we
have taken this Bearer J. K. Vagrantly, Certificate.
and to the Evil Example of others, without Master, Service or Labor whereby to
get his Living, going loytering idly about, and because the same says he was
born in C. in the County of S. whereof you are the Head-Officer or Constable,
we have sent him to you to be ordered, according to the purport and effect of
the same Statute.

CLXVI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 6. And with this Writing, Constable.
shall deliver the same Loyterer to the Constable or other Head-Officer of the
said City, Town or Village wherein such Loyterer was taken, to be safely by
them conveyed to the next Constable, and so from Constable to Constables, and
other Head-Officers, till he or she be brought to the place, the which he or
she has named themselves to be born in.

CLXVII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 7. And then to be delivered to the Head-Officer or
Constables of that same City, Borough or Town, Village, Lieu.
Hamlet or Parish, there to be nourished and kept of the same City, Town or
Village, in Chains or otherwise, either in the common Works in amending
Highways, or other common works, or from man to man, in order till they which
may bear be equally charged to be Slave to the Corporation of the said City, or
to the Inhabitants of the Town or Village that he or she was born in, after all
such Form, Condition, space of Years, Orders, Punishments for running away, and
all others, as are expressed of a Common or Private Person, to whom any such
Loyterer is adjudged a Slave.

CLXVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 10. N. 8. And the said City, Town or Village, Laborer.
shall see the said Slave being able to Labor, set on work, and not live Idly
within the said Premises, upon pain for every such default that the said Slave
does live Idly, by the default of the City, Borough or Town, or Village by the
space of three working days together, the City to Forfeit 5 l. a Borough or
Town Incorporate, 40 s. and other Town or Village 20 s. whereof the one half to
the King our Sovereign Lord, the other to him that will sue for the same in any
of the Kings Courts of Record, by Bill, Information, or Action of Debt, in the
which Suits, no Essoyn, Wager of Law or Protection shall be allowed.

Corporation.
CLXIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 11. N. 1. Provided and be it Enacted, that the City, Town
and Borough Coporate, by the consent of the most part of the Corporation, and
the Town and Village not Corporate, by the consent of the most part of the
Inhabitants thereof, may set, sell or give away, the right, title and interest
of the said Slave, to any other Persons, as any other Common, or Private person
may do with his Slave by Virtue of this Act.

Lieu.
CLXX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 12. N. 1. Provided always, and be it Enacted, that if it
fortune when the said Vagabond is brought to the said City, Town or Village
where the said person said he was born, to appear and be manifest, that he or
she was not there born, that then for such lie, the said Vagrant shall be
marked in the face with an S. and be Slave to the Inhabitants or Corporation of
the City, Town or Village where the said Vagrant said he was born in, for ever,
upon such Conditions and Orders in all points, as of a Slave marked in the face
is before expressed.

Alien.
CLXXI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 12. N. 2. The same Law and Order in all points to be had, of
all Vagrant persons and Vagabonds, being born in any other Nation or Country
than this Realm, as is before expressed of English idle persons, marking in the
breast or face only excepted, that is to say, to be had to the next Port, and
there to be kept of the Inhabitants of the said next Port in convenient Labor,
and from Idleness or otherwise, till they may be conveyed over, and then at the
costs of the Inhabitants of the said Port, to he conveyed over into their
Countries,

Ability.
CLXXII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 13. N. 1. And forasmuch as there is many maimed and
otherwise lamed, sore, aged and impotent persons, which resort to the City of
London, and to other Cities, Towns, and Villages on begging, whose coming
together and making a number, does fill the streets or highways of diverse
Cities, Towns, Markets and Fairs, who if they were separated, might easily be
nourished in the towns and places where they were born, or where they were or
have been most conversant and abiding, by the space of three years.

Trades.
CLXXIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 13. N. 2. Be it therefore Enacted, etc. that all and
singular Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables or other head-Officers, of any
City, Town or Hundred, to which such resort is or shall be, shall before the
Feast of Purification of our Lady next following, see all such Idle, Impotent,
maimed and aged persons, who otherwise cannot by their discretions be taken for
Vagabonds, which were born within the said City, Town or Hundred, or has been
there most conversant and abiding by the space of three years, as is aforesaid,
and now decayed, bestowed and provided for, of Tenantries, Cottages, or other
convenient Houses to be lodged in, at the costs and charges of the said Cities,
Towns, Boroughs and Villages, there to be releived and cured, by the devotion
of the good people of the said City, Borough, Town or Village.

Lieu.
CLXXIV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 13. N. 3. And that they do not suffer after the time before
rehearsed, any other than such as either were born, or have been for the most
part conversant or abiding for the space aforesaid, in the said City, Borough,
Village or Town, to remain and beg abroad, within the Precincts of such Cities,
Towns, Villages or Hundreds.

Forfeiture.
CLXXV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 13. N. 4. Upon pain that every such Mayors, Sheriffs and
Bailiffs, Constable or other head-Officer, by what names soever he be called,
suffering any person to beg within the precinct of his, or their such
Jurisdiction, other than is before rehearsed, for every three days, shall
forfeit 10 s. to whomsoever will sue therefore, by Bill, Information, or Action
of debt, in any Court of Record, in the which suits no Essoyn, Wager of Law,
nor Protection shall be allowed.

CLXXVI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 14. N. 1. And for the better performance hereof, be it
Enacted, etc. that the Mayor of the City of London, Corporation.
and all other Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Constables, and other Head-Officers
of every City and Town Corporate, do with all convenient speed, by themselves
or their sufficient Deputies, by them appointed, before the Feast of the
Purification next coming, and so from time to time, every month once make a
view and Examination of Aged, Impotent and Lame persons, Beggars, as be within
the precinct of their Jurisdiction.

CLXXVII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 14. N. 2. And see all such as were not born, Settlement.
nor have been for the most part conversant and abiding there, by the space of
three years complete, conveyed on Horseback, Cart or Chariot or otherwise, as
shall seem by their discretions, to the next Constables, and they to convey the
same to the next Constables, and so from Constables to Constables, till the
said persons be brought to the place where they were born, or most conversant,
and abiding, as is aforesaid, there to be provided for, kept and nourished, of
Alms, as is aforesaid.

CLXXVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 14. N. 3. Upon pain that every such Mayor, Forfeiture.
Sheriff or Constable, Head-borough or Head-Officer, not making view, not
sending or conveying away, not receiving, or not providing, as is before
appointed, according to the true purport or meaning of this Act, to forfeit for
every such default, 40 s. whereof the one half to the Kings use, the other to
the party that will sue therefore, in any of the Kings Courts of Record, by
Bill, Information, Action of Debt, in the which suits none Essoyn, Wager of
Law, nor Protection shall be allowed.

CLXXIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 15. N. 1. Provided always, Ability.
that if any of the said aged, maihmed or Impotent persons of the Cities, Towns
or Villages, where they were born in, or had their most abiding, as is
aforesaid, be not so Lame or Impotent, but that they may work in some manner of
work, that then such City, Town, Parish or Village, do either in common provide
some such work for them, as they may be occupied in, or appoint them to such as
will find them work for meat and drink.

CLXXX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 15. N. 2. And if they refuse of Wilfulness and Stubbornness
to work, or do run away and beg in other places, Pain.
then to punish the same according to their discretions, with chayning,
beating, or otherwise as shall seem to them convenient.

CLXXXI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 16. N. 1. And for the more furtherance of the relief of
such as are in unfeigned misery, Ability.
and to whom Charity ought to be extended.

CLXXXII. 1 Ed. 6 3. 16. N. 2. Be it Enacted, Days.
etc. that every Sunday and Holyday, after the reading of the Gospel of the
day, the Curate of every Parish do make, (according to such talent as God has
given him) a Godly and Brief Exhortation to his Parishioners, moving and
exciting them, to remember the Poor people, and the duty of Christian Charity,
in relieving of them, which be their Brethren in Christ, born in the same
Parish and needing their help.

CLXXXIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 17. N. 1. Provided always, Apprentice.
that if it shall chance any such adjudged Apprentice, Servant or Slave, as is
before rehearsed, to have inheritance descended unto him or her, or any other
ways by the Laws of this Realm, Ward or Bondsman, or Nief of blood, by or from
any of his Ancestors, to any person or persons, that then it shall be lawful to
any such person or persons to whom any such Ward, Bondman or Nief shall
appertain, to seize and take such Wards, Bondmen or Neifs, and them to retain
and keep as their Wards, Bondmen or Neifs, and the said Wards, Bondmen and
Neifs, shall be discharged of the said Slavery, or other Servitude or Bondage
above rehearsed, this Statute, or any thing therein contained to the contrary,
in any wise notwithstanding.

Villenage.
CLXXXIV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 18. N. 1. And also be it Enacted, that if any such
Servant, Apprentice, Slave or Slaves, which shall have at any time hereafter,
any Advancement or Living, accrue, come or grow unto him or any of them,
whereby he or they may have a convenient Living; that then and from
thenceforth, he or they so being advanced, to be discharged of their Slavery,
Servitude and Bondage, this Act, or any thing therein contained to the
contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

Women.
CLXXXV. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 18. N. 2. Any Woman being a Servant, Apprentice or Slave,
as is aforesaid, being married within the age of twenty years without the
assent of her Master, until she shall accomplish and come to the said age of
twenty years only excepted.

Settlement.
CLXXXVI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 19. N. 1 Be it also Enacted, that all Leprous and Poor
Bedridden Creatures, whatsoever they be, may at their own liberty remain and
continue, in such houses appointed for Leprous or Bedridden people, as they now
be in, and shall not be compelled to repair into any other Counties or Places,
by Virtue of this Act, any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Charity.
CLXXXVII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 19. N. 2. And that also it shall be lawful unto the said
leprous and bedridden people for their better releifs, to appoint their Proctor
or Proctors, so there be not appointed above the number of two persons for any
one house of leprous bedridden people, to gather the charitable Alms of all such
Inhabitants as shall be within the compass of four Miles, of any of the said
houses of leprous and bedridden persons.

Villenage.
CLXXXVIII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 20. N. 1. And be it Ordained and Enacted, etc. that it
shall be lawful to every person, to whom any person in form abovesaid shall be
adjudged a Slave, to put a Ring of Iron about his Neck, Arm or his Leg, for a
more knowledge and surety of the keeping of him.

Villenage.
CLXXXIX. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 20. N. 2. And that if any person or persons, do take or
help to take, any such bond of Iron from any such Slave; that then every person
so doing without the License or Assent of his Master, shall forfeit for every
such default, 40 l. Sterling.

Notice.
CXC. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 21. N. 1. Be it further Enacted, that this present Act shall
before the first day of March next, be openly proclaimed in every City,
Corporate-Town and Market Town upon the Market day; and also from thenceforth
shall yearly be read in every Shire openly in two general Quarter Sessions of
the Peace, that is to say, at the general Quarter Sessions after Midsummer, and
the general Quarter Sessions next after Christmas, to the intent that every
person may have knowledge thereof.

Continuance.
CXCI. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 21. N. 2. And that this Act shall endure unto the end of the
next Parliament, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 1. N. 2. and 21 Jac. 28, 11. N. 28. 69.

Commission.
CXCII. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 22. N. 1. Provided always and be it Enacted, that it shall
be lawful to the Lord Chancellor of England, or the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal for the time being, at their discretions to grant Commissions under the
Great Seal of England, to every or any person or persons, that has or shall
have his or their Houses or Barns burnt, or such losses, to gather the relief
and charity of others for their aid, and help of his or their losses, decay, or
hinderance, as in time past has been used, any thing contained in this Act
notwithstanding,

CXCIII. 1 Ed. 6. 14. 12. N. 1. And over that the said Commissioners, Charity.
(viz. of Chantries, etc.) or two of them at the least, shall have full power,
etc. to enquire and try by such ways, and means, as they shall think meet and
convenient, what Money, Profit and benefit any poor person or persons, by virtue
of any Conveiance, Assurance, Composition, Will, Devise or otherwise heretofore
had, or enjoyed within five years next, before the beginning of this present
Parliament, out of any College, free Chapel or Chantry, and other the
premises, etc.

CXCIV. 1 Ed. 6. 14. 12. N. 2. And thereupon to make assignments, Mortmain.
and orders, in such manner and form as all and singular such said money, profit
and Commodity, shall be paid to poor people for ever according to such
Assurance, Composition, Will, etc. for the same, and to assign and appoint
Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments, parcel of the premises, for the
maintenance and continuance of the same for ever.

CXCV. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. Forasmuch as it is notoriously seen and known that
Vagabonds and Beggars, Trades.
do daily increase within this the Kings Highness Realm, into very great
numbers, chiefly by occasion of Idleness, the Mother and Root of all vices,
whereby do ensue continual Thefts, Murders, Conspiracies, and other sundry
heinous offenses, and partly for that the good and wholesome Laws and Statutes
of this Relam, have not been put in due Execution, and partly also by reason of
the multitude of the same, the extremity of some whereof have been occasion
that they have not been put in ure, 5 Eliz. 3. 1. N. 6.

CXCVI. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 1. N. 2. Therefore and for diverse good
considerations, it is Enacted, etc. that the Statute, Villenage.
etc. (viz. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 2. N. 3.) concerning idle persons and Vagabonds, in
certain cases to be made Slaves, etc. and all and every Article, matter,
proviso, branch and sentence therein contained, shall be from henceforth
utterly repealed, made frustrate, void and of none effect, 21 Jac. 28. 11. N.
28. 69.

CXCVII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 2. N. 1. And that the Statute, Continuance.
etc. (viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) And every matter, article, proviso, branch and
sentence therein contained, to be from henceforth revived, made good and stand
in full strength and virtue, and shall continue and remain a perfect Act of
Parliament for ever.

CXCVIII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 3. N. 1. And be it therefore Enacted, Justices.
etc. that all Justices of Peace, and every of them, within the limits of their
Commission, and the Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers, within
their several rules and offices, shall within their several limits, assemble
together and make their several division according to the purport and effect of
this Act, at the next general Quarter Sessions of the Peace, to be holden after
the Feast of Easter next to come, for the due speedy and diligent Execution of
the same Act, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.)

CXCIX. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 3. N. 2. And that if any such aged or impotent
person, after the Feast of Easter next to come, Ability.
shall offend contrary to this Estatute, that then the said offender shall be
used and punished as in the same Estatute, etc. (viz. 22. H. 8. 12. N.) is
provided.

CC. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 3. N. 3. And that before the Feast of Easter, Pain.
no punishment shall be put in Execution against any such Impotent, Lame and
Aged person, but only by the discretion of the next Justice of Peace of the
same Shire where such offender shall be apprehended, any thing in said Act (
viz. 22 H. 8. 12. to the contrary notwithstanding.

CCI. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 4. N. 2. Be it Enacted, Husbandry.
etc. that such common laborers ( viz. in Husbandry) being persons able in
body, using loytering and refusing to work for such reasonable wages, as is
most commonly given in the parts where such persons shall dwell, shall be for
every such times, as he or they refuse to labor; having reasonable wages, as is
aforesaid, adjudged Vagabonds, and shall be punished, as strong and mighty
Vagabonds, in such manner and form as is declared in the said Act, ( viz. 22 H.
8. 12. N.)

Cottages.
CCII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 4. N. 4. Be it Enacted, etc. that all and singular
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, or other Head-Officers, of any City,
Town or Village, to which such resort is, or shall be, shall before the Feast
of the Purification of our Lady next following, see all such Idle, Impotent,
Maihmed and Aged persons, who otherwise cannot by their discretions be taken
for Vagabonds, which were born within the said City, Town or Village, or have
been there most conversant, and abiding by the space of three years, and now
decayed, bestowed and provided for of the Tenantries, Cottages, or other
convenient Houses to be Lodged in, at the costs and charges of the said Cities,
Towns and Boroughs and Villages, there to be relieved and cured, by devotion of
Good people of the said City, Borough, Town or Village, 1 Ed. 6. 3. 13. N. 2.

Continuance.
CCIII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 9. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that all and
every Statute and Act of Parliament, made for punishment of Vagabonds, Slaves,
Aged and Impotent persons, or any of them, and every Article, Sentence, Clause
or Proviso therein contained, other than this prepresent Act and Statute made,
and the said Act, etc. (viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) shall be from henceforth utterly
void, repealed and of no effect or force.

Records.
CCIV. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 11. N. 2. And the said Judgment, ( viz. 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7.
N. 3. 4.) shall be entered by the Clerk of the Peace, in the said Sessions, in
form following, Memorandum that at the Sessions of the Peace holden at or on
the day, etc. one J. B. of the Town of J. had delivered to him, according to
the form of the Statute in that case provided B. D. esteemed to be of the age
of seven or eight years, to be ordered according to the form of the said
Statute.

Infant.
CCV. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 12. N. 1. And if it shall fortune such Child so
adjudged to run away at any time, once or more times, from his or her Master or
Mistres, that then it shall be lawful for every such Master or Mistres, to take
the said Child again, and to keep and punish the said Child in the Stocks or
otherwise by discretion, or otherwise at the liberty of such Master or Mistres,
to have a Warrant from any Justice of Peace in the same Shire, where the Child
so runs away, for such Child running away or going away, as is provided by the
Statute of Laborers, ( viz. 12 Ric. 2. 3.) for such Servants as depart away
from their Master or Mistres, without a reasonable cause before the end of
their term, 1 Ed. 6. 3. 7. N. 5.

Justices.
CCVI. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 13. N. 1. And that every Justice of Peace, shall by
force of this Act, have Authority and power, to make such warrant against every
such person so going and running away, in like form as they or any of them may
do, against any Servant departing out of his Masters service without License or
reasonable cause, and by force of the same Warrant the Child so running or
going away, to be taken and ordered in every degree, as is provided by the said
Statute, etc. (viz. 12 Ric. 2. 3.) as is aforesaid.

Apprentice.
CCVII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 14. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that if,
and as often as it shall chance the Father, Mother, Nource or other bearer
about of the Child, or any other person or persons, to steal or entice away any
such Child adjudged for a Servant, as is aforesaid, that then and so often it
shall be Lawful for the Master or Mistres of the same Child to be at his or
their liberty, to take an action upon the Statute of laborers ( viz. 12 Ric. 2.
3.) against every such person so stealing or Enticing away such Child as he or
they might have by reason of the said Statute, etc. against him or them that
retains any man's Servant out of his service, before the end of the said term,
or else to take an Action of Trespass against such offender, in which Action he
shall recover his damages and treble costs of his suit.

CCVIII. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 15. N. 1. Provided always, Justices.
and be it Enacted, etc. that if the Master or Mistres, to whom such Child, as
is aforesaid, shall be adjudged to be Servant, be unreasonable in ordering and
bringing up of such Child, that then at all times upon complaint made at the
General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, in the County where the said Child shall
be by two honest Neighbors of the same place or Town, where the same Child
shall fortune to be so unreasonably ordered, if it shall appear by honest
witness to the Justices of Peace at the same Sessions, the complaint thereof
made shall be true, then the Justices of Peace at their General Sessions in the
same Shire, where such complaint shall be made, shall by virtue of this Act
have Authority and power to discharge the said Child from his or their
unreasonable Master or Mistres.

CCIX. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 15. N. 2. And appoint the same to some other honest
Master or Mistres, unto the said ages, Infant.
to be ordered in every degree as the said Child should have been with his
former Master or Mistres, and that order and appointment to be written in the
book of the Clerk of the Peace.

CCX. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 15. N. 3. For the which entry the said Clerk of the
Peace shall have 4 d. for his labor, and not above, Fees.
and in like manner shall have 4 d. and not above, for the first entry of the
Child to be servant, as is aforesaid, to be paid by the Master or Mistress of
the said Child.

CCXI. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16. 16. N. 1. Provided always, and be it Enacted, Women.
etc. that if the Woman Child to be appointed a Servant, as is aforesaid, be
Married before the Age of 12 years, that then by the Marriage she shall be
discharged of service, this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding, 1 Ed. 6. 3. 18. N. 2.

CCXII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 1. N. 2. Be it Enacted, Continuance.
etc. that as well the Statute, etc. (viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) as also the Statute,
etc. (viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16.) and every Article, Clause, Branch, Sentence, and
other thing contained in them, and in every of them, other then such things as
shall be by this present Act, ordained and provided for, shall stand remain and
be in their full force and effect, and shall be from henceforth justly and
truly put in Execution, according to the true meaning of the said several
Statutes and every of them.

CCXIII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 1. And further be it Enacted, Assembly.
etc. that yearly one Holyday in Whitsunday week in every City, Borough and
Town-Corporate, the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other head Officers for the time being,
and in every other Parish of the Country, the Parson, Vicar or Curate, and the
Churchwardens, having in a Register book, as well all the Names of the
Inhabitants and Householders, as also the Names of all such Impotent, Aged and
Needy persons, as being within their City, Borough, Town-Corporate or Parish,
are not able to live of themselves, shall openly in the Church, and quietly
after Divine Service, call the said Householders and Inhabitants together.

CCXIV. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 2. Among whom the Mayor, Overseers.
and two of his Brethren in every City, the Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers,
in Boroughs and Towns-Corporate; The Parson, Vicar or Curate, and
Churchwardens in every other Parish, shall elect nominate and appoint yearly
two able persons or more, to be Gatherers and Collectors of the charitable Alms
of all the residue of the People, for the releif of the Poor.

Taxes.
CCXV. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 3. Which Collectors, the Sunday next after their
Election, (or the Sunday following if need require) when the people is at the
Church and has heard Gods holy Word, shall gently ask and demand of every man
and woman, what they of their charitable Will, will be contented to give weekly
to the releif of the Poor, and the same to be written in the said Register or
Book.

Charity.
CCXVI 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 4. And the Gatherers so being elected and chosen,
shall justly gather and truly distribute the same charitable Alms, weekly by
themselves or their Assigns, to the said poor and impotent persons, of the said
Cities, Boroughs, Towns Corporate or Parishes, without Fraud or Covin, Favor
or Affection.

Alms.
CCXVII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 5. And after such sort that the more Impotent
may have the more help, and such as can get part of their living to have the
less, and by the discretion of the Collectors, to be put in such labor as they
be fit and able to do.

Beggars.
CCXVIII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 6. But none to go or sit openly a begging,
upon pain limited in the foresaid Statutes, ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12. and 3 and 4 Ed.
6. 16.

Officer.
CCXIX. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 3. N. 1. Be it also Enacted, etc. that no person or
persons, so elected, nominated and appointed, to be Gatherer or Gatherers, as
is aforesaid, shall refuse the said Office, but shall justly and truly execute
the same, by the space of one whole year next ensuing, upon pain of forfeiting
20 s. to the Alms box of the Poor, to be levied by the Churchwardens where
they or he dwells, of the Goods of the said Gatherer or Gatherers.

Account
CCXX. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 4. H. 1. And further be it Enacted, etc. that the said
Gatherers or Collectors shall make their just Account Quarterly, to the Mayor
of the City, Bailiffs or Head-Officers, of the Borough or Town Corporate, and
in every Parish of the Country, to the Parson, Vicar or Curate, and
Churchwardens of the Parish.

Account.
CCXXI. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 4. N. 2. At which Account, such of the Parish as will
may be present.

Arearges.
CCXXII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 4. N. 3. And when they go out of their Office, they
shall deliver or cause to be delivered, forthwith upon the end of their
Accounts, all such Surplusage of Money as then shall remain of their Collections
undistributed, to be put in the common Chest of the Church, or in some other
safe place, to the use of the Poor, at the oversight and discretion of the said
Mayor, or other the Officers before mentioned.

Account.
CCXXIII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 4. N. 4. And if the said Collectors or any of them,
do refuse to make their said Account within eight days, then the Bishop of the
Diocese or Ordinary, shall have Authority by Virtue of this Act, to compel the
said person or persons by Censures of the Church, to make their said Accounts
before such persons, as the said Bishop or Ordinary shall appoint.

Charity.
CCXXIV. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 5. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any
person or persons being able to further the charitable Work, do obstinately and
frowardly refuse to give toward the help of the Poor, or do wilfully
discourage others from so charitable a deed, the Parson, Vicar or Curate, and
Churchwardens of the Parish where he dwells, shall gently exhort him or them
toward the releif of the Poor.

Ordinary.
CCXXV. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 5. N. 2. And if he or they will not so be persuaded,
then upon the Certificate of the Parson, Vicar or Curate of the Parish to the
Bishop of the Diocese, the same Bishop shall send for him or them, to induce
and persuade him or them by Charitable ways and means, and so according to his
discretion to take order for the reformation thereof 5 Eliz. 3. 7. N. 3.

CCXXVI. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 6. N. 1. And for the better maintenance of this
Charitable work ordained, Abbe.
etc. that whereas the late King of Famous Memory, King Henry the eighth, by
his several Erections and foundations has ordained and appointed any sum or
sums of Money to the use of the poor, not being taken away, otherwise by Act of
Parliament, whether the same be in any Cathedral-Church, College, or
elsewhere, the Bishop of the Dioces for the time being, shall from time to time
Examine how and after what manner the money is bestowed, and to call to account
the Parties which retain the said money, so that it may appear the same is
distributed to the Poor, according to the Kings Majesty's foundation.

CCXXVII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 9. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted,
etc. that this present Act, nor any thing therein contained, Franchis.
shall extend, or be prejudical unto the Mayor, Sheriffs and Citizens, of the
City of Chester, for or concerning any gift or Grant of any Annuity or yearly
rent heretofore made, given or granted, by the Kings Majesty that now is, unto
the said Mayor, Sheriffs and Citizens of the said City, going out of any
Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, of the Cathedral-Church of Christ
and our Lady, within the City of Chester, but that the same Mayor, Sheriffs and
Citizens, shall and may from henceforth receive, use and employ the same
Annuities, yearly rents and profits, to such uses and intents, and according to
the said gift of our said Sovereign Lord the King, any thing in this act to the
contrary notwithstanding.

CCXXVII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 7. N. 2. This Act to endure to the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament, Continuance.
7 Ed. 6. 11. 11. N. 4.

CCXXIX. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21. Forasmuch as it is evident, that Tinkers, Trades.
Pedlers, and such like Vagrant persons, are more hurtful than necessary to the
Common wealth of this Realm, 1 Jac. 25. 47. N. 2. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 5.

CCXXX. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21. 1. N. 2. Be it Enacted, etc. that, License.
etc. no person or persons, commonly called Peddler, Tinker, or petty Chapman
shall wander and go from one Town to another, or from place to place out of the
Town, Parish or Village, where such persons shall dwell, and sell pins, points,
laces, gloves, knives, glasses, tapes or any such kind of wares whatsoever, or
gather cunny-skins, or such like thing, or use, or exercise the trade or
occupation of a Tinker, but only such persons, etc. as shall be thereunto
Licensed, 1 Jac. 25. 42. N. 1.

CCXXXI. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21. 1. N. 3. And that in such Circuit or compass, as
shall be to him or them Assigned, by two Justices of Peace, Justices.
or more, of the Shire where he or they shall dwell by writing under their
hands and seals.

CCXXXII. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21. 1. N. 4. Upon pain that every person, Justices.
which shall offend contrary to the meaning of this Act, shall by any Justice
of the Shire, where the same offense shall be committed upon complaint and due
proof, had by witness, or otherwise, be imprisoned by the space of fourteen
days at the least.

CCXXXIII. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 2. N. 1. Be it Enacted, Continuance.
etc. that the Statute, etc. (viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) and also the Statute, etc.
(viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16.) concerning Beggars, Vagabonds and Idle persons, and
every Article, Clause, Branch, Sentence, and other things contained in them and
in either of them, other than such things, as shall be by this present Act,
otherwise ordained and provided for, shall stand, remain and be in their full
force and effect, and shall also from henceforth justly and truly be put in
Execution, according to the true meaning of the said several Statutes, and
either of them.

Records.
CCXXXIV. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 3. N. 1. And further be it Enacted, etc. that
yearly on some one Holyday, in the Christmas, in every City, Borough and
Town-Corporate, the Mayor, Bailiffs, and other Head-Officers for the time
being, and in every other Parish of the County, the Parson, Vicar or Curate,
and the Churchwardens, having in a Register or book as well all the Names of
the Inhabitants and Householders, and also the Names of all such Impotent, Aged
and Needy persons, as being within their City, Borough, Town-Corporate or
Parish, are not able to live of themselves or with their own labor, shall
openly in the Church, and quietly after Divine service, call the said
Householders and Inhabitants together, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 2. N. 1.

Certificate.
CCXXXV. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 7. N. 1. And be it further Enacted etc. if it
shall chance any Parish, to have in it more Poor and Impotent folks, not able
to labor, than the said Parish is able to relieve, that then in every such, not
standing in any City or Town-Corporate, the Mayor, or Chief-Officers of the
same City or Town-Corporate, calling to them two or three of the Chief
Parishioners of the same Parish, such as the said Mayor, or Head-Officer shall
think meet, shall certify unto the Justices of Peace of the County, where the
same Parish is, the Number and Names of the persons with which they be
surcharged.

License.
CCXXXVI. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 7. N. 2. And upon such Certificate the said
Justices of Peace in the same County, or two of them, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, shall consider and Examine the said Certificate, and finding the same
true, shall then grant unto such, and as many of the said Poor folks, as by
their discretion they shall think good, a sufficient License under the seal
appointed for the limit to go abroad to beg, get and receive the Charitable
Alms of the Inhabitants of the Country, out of the said Parishes, Cities and
Towns so charged.

License.
CCXXXVII. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 7. N. 3. In which License the places Towns
and Parishes, to which such Poor folks are by that License, Licensed to resort,
shall in the same License be named, limited and appointed, be it one Hundred or
more in the said County at the said discretion of the same Justices.

Lieu.
CCXXXVIII. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 7. N. 4. And if any of the said Poor folks,
so Licensed, shall transgress the limits to them appointed, and resort, to beg
at other places than is in the said License named, the party so transgressing
and offending to be taken for a Valiant Beggar, and punished according to the
Statute, etc. ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) and his or their License to be taken from
them.

Corporation.
CCXXXIX. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 8. N. 1. And be it further Enacted that where
any of the said Cities, Boroughs, Towns-Corporate or Parish, so surcharged, is
situate and standing in one County or two Counties of this Realm, or situate
and standing in one, and immediately adjoining to another County of the Realm,
as the City of Bristow, and Towns of Ludlow and Stanford stand, that in those
Cities the said Mayor, Head-Officers, and Inhabitants of every such City,
Borough, Town-Corporate and Parish, shall make Certificate unto the Justices of
the said Counties adjoining to the same Cities, Boroughs, Towns-Corporate and
Parishes, and the same Justices of the said adjoining County or Counties, to
do, give License and follow the order above remembered according as other
Justices of the Counties, in which the Parish surcharged stands, is limited
and Authorized to do.

CCXL. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 9. N. 1. And be it Enacted, Corporation.
that in all Cities, Boroughs and Towns-Corporate, within which be diverse
Parishes, the Mayors, and Head-Officers, of every the same Cities, Boroughs and
Towns-Corporate, shall consider the state and Ability of every such Parish, and
if the same Mayor and Officers, shall understand by their discretion, that the
Parishioners of every one of the said Parishes, is of such Wealth and Honor,
that they have no poverty amongst them, or be able sufficiently to relieve the
poverty of the Parish, where they inhabit and dwell, and also to help and
succor poverty elsewhere further, that then the said Mayor and Officers, with
the assent of two of the most honest of the Inhabitants, and substantial of
every such wealthy Parish, shall consider the neediness of the Inhabitants of
the other Parish or Parishes, within the same City or Town-Corporate, and move,
induce and persuade the Parishioners of the Wealthier Parish, Charitably to
contribute somewhat according to their ability toward the Weekly relief,
succor and consolation of the poor and needy, within the other Parish or
Parishes aforesaid where need is.

CCXLI. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 10. N. 1. And be it also Enacted that all and
every such Poor folks, as by any such License, Notice.
are to be Licensed and authorized, to resort out of the limits, liberties and
franchises of all and every such City, Borough and Town-Corporate, into any the
said Counties to beg, get and gather the Charitable Alms of good people, shall
at all times when the same go abroad to beg, wear openly upon him or them,
both on the breast and the back, of his or their uttermost Garment, some
notable Badge or Token to be assigned unto him, by the Mayor or Head-Officers
of the same City, Borough and Town-Corporate or Parish, with the assent of the
Justices of Peace, that shall grant the same License, upon pain to be taken for
a valiant beggar, and to be punished as before is remembered, and shall also
carry his License with him upon like pain.

CCXLII. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 10. N. 2. This act to endure to the latter end
of the first Session of the next Parliament, Continuance.
1 Eliz. 18. 3. N. 5.

CCXLIII. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 12. N. 1. Provided always and be it Enacted,
London.
etc. that all and every sum and sums of money from henceforth to be collected
or gathered within the City of London, or the liberties of the same by virtue
of this Act, shall be paid over to the Governors of the Hospital, called the
Hospital of Christ-Church, within the said City of London, for the time being,
and shall be by them from time to time distributed and bestowed, for the relief
of the Poor of the said City, according to their Wisdoms and discretions, any
thing in this Act mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding, 14 Eliz. 5. 27. N.
1.

CCXLIV. 5 Eliz. 3. 1. N. 2. Be it Enacted, etc. that the Statute, Continuance.
etc. ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) and also the Statute, etc. ( viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6.
16.) and every Article, Clause, Branch, Sentence, and other things contained in
them, and either of them, other then such things as shall be by this present
Act, otherwise ordained and provided for, shall stand and remain and be in
their full force and effect, and shall be also from henceforth justly and truly
put in Execution, according to the true meaning of the said several Statutes
and every of them, 14 Eliz. 5. 1. N. 6.

CCXLV. 5 Eliz. 3. 2. N. 7. And if the said Mayors, Bailiffs, Forfeiture.
Head-Officers, Parson, Vicar, Curate and Churchwarden, or any of them, fail
in the doing and Executing of the premises in form above declared ( viz. 2 and
3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 3.) he or they so making default, to forfeit for every such
default 40 s. to be employed to the use of the Poor of that Parish, where he or
they do inhabit to be levied by the Collectors of the same Parish by way of
distress or otherwise, as is appointed by this Act for levying of like
forfeitures.

Officer.
CCXLVI. 5 Eliz. 3. 3. N. 2. (viz. None shall refuse but justly Execute, Office
of Gatherer, etc.) upon pain to forfeit 10 l. the one moity thereof to the
Churchwardens of the Parish, where he or they shall be Elected Collector, and
the other moity thereof to the use and relief of the poor of the said parish,
to be levied by the Churchwardens, where they or he dwells, of the Goods of
the said Gatherer, etc. so refusing, by distress or else by action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint or Information, to be brought or pursued by the said
Churchwardens of the said parish where they shall dwell, in any Court of
Record, or in the Court of any Lord of any Manor within the said parish, where
the said Gatherer shall be so chosen, in which suit no protection or wager of
Law shall be allowed or admitted for the party defendent.

Church wardens.
CCXLVII. 5 Eliz. 3. 4. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that if the said
Churchwardens or either of them shall refuse to sue for the said forfeiture or
within two months next after the same cause of forfeiture shall be given, shall
not sue or take the remedy for the recovery thereof, in such manner and form as
before this present Act is limited and appointed, that then the same
Churchwardens so making default of suit, shall forfeit and lose 20 l. of
Lawful money of England, the one moity thereof to him or them that will sue for
the same by action of debt, bill, plaint or information in any Court of Record,
or in the Court of any Lord of any Manor within the Parish where the said
Churchwardens shall dwell, and the other moity to the use of the Poor of the
said parish, in which suit no Essoyn, Protection or wager of Law shall be
admitted or allowed for the party defendent.

Incumbent.
CCXLVIII. 5 Eliz. 3. 5. N. 2. Be it Enacted, etc. that every Parson, Vicar,
Curate or Minister, of every parish within this Realm, shall yearly forevermore
upon the Sunday before Midsummer in the Pulpit or some other convenient place
in the Church, give knowledge and warning at the end of some of the Morning
service to the Parishioners then and there present to prepare themselves on the
Sunday next after Midsummer day then next following, to come to the Church, and
there to elect and choose Collectors, and Gatherers for the Poor, according to
the tenor of this Act.

Incumbent.
CCXLIX. 5 Eliz. 3. 5. N. 3. And if the Parson, Vicar, Curate or Minister shall
make default in giving of the said knowledge, that then he or they so making
default to forfeit and lose 40 s. toward the reparation of the said Church.

Churchwardens.
CCL. 5 Eliz. 3. 5. N. 4. And the Churchwardens of the said Parish to sue and
distrain for the same in such form as before is appointed for the other
forfeitures.

Account.
CCLI. 5 Eliz. 3. 6. N. 1. And further be it Enacted, etc. that the said
Gatherers or Collectors for the Poor, so to be chosen as is aforesaid, shall
make their Just account Quarterly to the Mayors, or Chief-Officers of the said
Cities, Boroughs and Towns Corporate, and in every Parish of the said Country,
to the Parson, Vicar or Curate, and Churchwardens of the Parish, at which
account such of the Parish as will may be present.

Account.
CCLII. 5 Eliz. 3. 6. N. 2. And when they go out of their Office they shall
deliver or cause to be delivered forthwith upon the end of their accounts all
such surplusage of money, as then shall remain of their Collection
undistributed, to be put in their Common Chest of the Church, or in some other
safe place, to the use of the Poor, at the oversight and discretion of the
Mayor, Officers, and others before mentioned.

CCLIII. 5 Eliz. 3. 6. N. 3. And if the said Collectors or any of them do
refuse to make their said account within the eight days next after request made
to them for the same, Account.
then the Bishop of the Diocese or the Ordinary of the place, Chancellors or
their Commissaries, together with a Justice of Peace and the Churchwardens of
the said parish, or one of them shall have Authority by virtue of this Act,
upon complaint to them made, to commit the said person or persons so refusing,
to Ward, there to remain without Bail or mainprise, until he or they so
refusing shall make their said accounts before such persons as the said Bishop,
Ordinary, Chancellors or Commissaries and Justices of Peace shall appoint, and
to make Immediate payment of the sums wherewith by determination of the said
account they shall be charged.

CCLIV. 5 Eliz. 3. 7. N. 3. And if the person or persons, Ordinary.
so sent for ( viz. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 2. 5. N. 2.) of his or their froward or
wilful mind, shall obstinately refuse to give weekly for the relief of the
poor, according to his or their abilites, that then the Bishop or Ordinary of
the Diocese, Chancellors or Commissaries, shall have full power and Authority
by virtue of this Act, to bind the said obstinate and wilful persons so
refusing, unto the Queen by recognizance in the the sum of 10 l. which
conditition thereupon to be Indorsed, that the said obstinate person so
refusing shall personally appear before the Justices of Peace of the County,
where the same person shall then inhabit and dwell, if it be out of any City,
Borough or Town-Corporate, and if it be within any City, Borough or
Town-Corporate, then before the Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers of
every such City, Borough or Town-Corporate, at the next General Sessions, to be
holden before the said Justices, within the said County, or at the next Court
to be holden before the said Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers, within
every such City, Borough or Town-Corporate; and that the same obstinate person
shall not from thence depart, without the License of the said Justices, if he
dwell out of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate, of the said Mayor, Bailiff,
or other Head-Officers, if he dwell within any such City, Borough or
Town-Corporate.

CCLV. 5 Eliz. 3. 7. N. 4. And if any such obstinate person shall refuse to be
bound as is aforesaid, that then the said Bishop, Ordinary, Imprisonment
Chancellor or Commissary, shall have Authority by this Act, to commit the said
Obstinate person to prison, there to remain without Bail or mainprise until the
said obstinate person shall become bound as is aforesaid.

CCLVI. 5 Eliz. 3. 8. N. 1. And further be it Enacted, Justices.
etc. that the said Justices, or such of them, as shall be at the said
Sessions, or the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers, of every such City,
Borough or Town-Corporate, if the said obstinate person do appear before them,
shall Charitably and gently persuade and move the said obstinate persons to
extend his or their Charity toward the relief of the poor of the parish, where
he or she inhabiteth and dwells.

CCLVII. 5 Eliz. 3. 8. N. 2. And if he or she shall obstinately and wilfully
stand in the same, Taxes.
and will not be persuaded therein by the said Justices, Mayor, Bailiff, or
other Head-Officers, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Justices, if it be out of any City, Borough or Town-Corporate, for the Mayor,
Bailiff, or other Head-Officers of the same City, Borough or Town-Corporate,
with the Churchwardens, where the said obstinate person shall inhabit or one
of them, to sesse, tax and limit upon every such obstinate person so refusing,
according to their Good discretions, what sum the said obstinate person shall
pay weekly toward the relief of the Poor within the said Parish, where he or
she shall inhabit and dwell.

Taxes.
CCLVIII. 5 Eliz. 3. 8. N. 3. And if the said person so seized and taxed shall
refuse to pay the sum that shall be so reasonablly limited, taxed and
appointed, then the said Justices of Peace, or two of them, whereof one to be
of the Quorum, or the said Mayor, Bailiff, or other Head-Officers of every such
City, Borough or Town-Corporate, shall have full power and Authority by virtue
of this Act, upon complaint and certificate to them by the Collectors and
Churchwardens of the same Parish where the said obstinate person shall dwell,
to commit the said obstinate person and persons so refusing to pay, to Prison
to the next Goal, there to remain without Bail or mainprise, till he or they
have paid the said sum so appointed taxed and limited, together with the
Arrears thereof, if any such shall fortune to be.

Certificate.
CCLIX. 5 Eliz. 3. 10. N. 6. And if the said Justices of Peace, shall fail to
appoint a day and time for inspection of the said poor, and examination of the
said Certificators ( viz. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 5. 7. N. 4.) within one month
next ensuing the day of the receipt of the said certificate, or shall grant or
give License to any person or persons, so certified to go abroad and beg,
before such time as they shall have viewed and seen the said poor persons and
have received Oath of the persons that so certified, that the said poor persons
for age impotence or sickness in their Consciences and to their knowledge are
not able by any work or labor, to earn them necessaries, meat, drink and cloth,
and the same deposition put in writing, subscribed or marked by the persons
deposed, to forfeit for every such default 10 l. to be employed to the use of
the poor of any parish or parishes, within the said County where the said
Justices dwell, at the oversight and appointment of the Bishop, or his
Chancellor of the same Diocese, to be levied in sort and form as other
forfeitures in this Statute are appointed.

Justices.
CCLX. 5 Eliz. 3. 11. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, that where any the said
Cities, Boroughs, Towns-Corporate, or Parish so charged, is Situate and
standing in one County, or two Counties, of this Realm, or Situate and standing
in one and immediately adjoining to another County of the Realm, as the City of
Bristol, and the Town of Ludlow and Stanford stand, that in those Cites, the
Parson, Vicar and Curate of the said Parish, and the said Mayor, Head-Officers
and Inhabitants of every such City, Borough, Town-Corporate, and Parish, shall
make certificate unto the Justices of the said Counties adjoining to the same
Cities, Boroughs, Towns-Corporate and Parishes, and the same Justices of the
said adjoining County or Counties, to do, give License and follow the order
above remembered, according as other Justices of the Counties in which the
Parish surcharged standing is limited and Authorized to do, 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. 5. 8. N. 1.

Continuance.
CCLXI. 5 Eliz. 3. 13. N. 3. This Act to endure to the latter end of the first
Session of the next Parliament, 13 Eliz. 25. 12. N. 2.

Incumbent.
CCLXII. 5 Eliz. 3. 16. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted that the
Curate, Minister, or Reader, together with the Wardens of every Chapel of
Ease, and where no Wardens are, the Warden or two of the chiefest of the
Inhabitants resorting and frequenting the said Chapel of Ease for hearing
divine service, the same inhabitants to be nominated and chosen by the same
Curate, Minister or Reader.

Officer.
CCLXIII. 5 Eliz. 3. 16. N. 2. And also the Collectors and all and every other
person and persons to whom in this behalf it shall appartain by force of this
Statute, shall do, execute, perform and be liable to all and every such
ordinance, clause, article, sentence and penalties, specified and contained in
this present Act, for and toward the releif of the poor, in like manner and
form as the Vicar, Curate, Churchwardens and Collectors of every Parish
Church, shall, may or ought to do by force of this Act, according to the
purport and true meaning of the same, and not be compelable to come or resort
to their Parish Church, for the same only purpose or intent, any thing in this
Act before specified to the contrary notwithstanding.

CCLXIV. 5 Eliz. 3. 17. N. 1. Provided also that this Act, Charity.
or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend or be prejudical
to any Gift, Legacy, Conveiance or Assignment of any manner of Lands, or other
profit heretofore Given, Assigned or Bequeathed to the relief of the Poor,
reparation of Highways or Bridges, upon any manner of condition, but that the
same shall be employed, converted, bestowed and accounted for in such manner
and form, and upon such condition as the same lawfully was or ought to be
before the making of this Act.

CCLXV. 5 Eliz. 20. 3. N. 1. And yet moreover, Egyptians.
(viz. Beside 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 4.) be it Enacted, etc. that all, etc.
which, etc. shall be seen or found within this Realm of England or Wales, in
any Company or Fellowship of Vagabonds, commonly called, etc. Egyptians or
counterfeiting, etc. Egyptians, and that shall or do continue and remain in
the same, either at one time or at several times, by the space of one month,
etc. shall by virtue of this Act be deemed and Judged a Felon, etc.

CCLXVI. 13 Eliz. 17. 1. N. 2. For the better perfection and doing whereof
(viz. Of a Meason de Dieu, etc.) be it Enacted, Hospital.
etc. that the said Robert Earl of Leicester, his Heirs, Excutors or Assigns,
at his or their Wills and Pleasures, shall have full power, strength, license
and lawful Authority, to erect found and establish one Hospital or Meason de
Dieu within the said Town of Warwick, or else within the said Town of
Kenelworth, at his or their choice and election, for the finding, sustentation
and relief of poor, needy and impotent people, to have a continuance for ever.

CCLXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. Where all the parts of this Realm, and Wales, Vagabonds.
be presently with Rogues, Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, exceedingly pestered,
by means whereof daily happens in the same Realm horrible Murders, Thefts,
and other great Outrages, to the high displeasure of Almighty God, and to the
great annoiance of the commonweal, 35 Eliz. 7. 24. N. 1.

CCLXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 1. N. 2. And for avoiding confusion by reason of numbers
of Laws concerning the premises standing in force together. Parliament.


CCLXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 1. N. 3. Be it Enacted that the Statute, Continuance.
etc. ( viz. 22 H. 8. 12.) and one other Act, etc. (viz. 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 16.)
and one other Act, etc. (viz. 5 Eliz. 3.) and every Branch, Article, Clause and
Sentence in them and every of them contained, shall be from and after the Feast
of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle, next coming, utterly void, frustrate and of
none effect.

CCLXX. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 1 Be it also Enacted, Nusans.
etc. as well for the utter suppressing of the said outrageous enemies to the
commonweal, as for Charitable relieving of the aged and impotent poor people
in manner and form following.

CCLXXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 2. First that all and every person and persons,
whatsoever they be, being above the age of fourteen years, Infant.
being hereafter set forth by this Act of Parliament, to be Rogues, Vagabonds
or sturdy Beggars, and be at any time after the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the
Apostle next coming taken Begging in any part of this Realm, or taken Vagrant
wandering and misordering themselves contrary to the purport of this present Act
of Parliament in any part of the same, shall upon their apprehension be brought
before one of the Justices of the Peace, or Mayor, or Cheif-Officers of Cities,
Boroughs or Towns-Corporate, within the County, City, Borough or Town-Corporate
where the Apprehension shall happen to be.

Imprisonment
CCLXXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 3. And by the said Justice or Head-Officer, to be
presently committed to the common Goal of the said County, being apprehended
within the County, or else such other place as by the Justices of Peace of that
County or three of them, at any their general Sessions shall be appointed.

Corporation.
CCLXXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 4. And if he be taken within any City, Borough or
Town-Corporate, then to be committed to the said City, Borough or Town
Corporate,

Bail.
CCLXXIIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 5. There to remain without Bail or Mainprize,
until the next Sessions of the Peace or general Jail-delivery for the said
Shire, City, Borough or Town-Corporate to be holden, which shall first happen.

Constable.
CCLXXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 6. And the Constables or other Officers for the
conveying of such Rogue or Vagabond by Commandment of the said Justices, to
have such reasonable charges for themselves and the Prisoner from time to time,
born by the Parish or Parishes where the said Rogue or Vagabond shall happen to
be taken, as to the discretion of the Justices of Peace present at the next
Assizes, or at the Sessions of the Peace then next kept within the limit where
the Prisoner is apprehended, shall seem convenient.

Sessions.
CCLXXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 7. At which Sessions or Jail-delivery, if such
person or persons be duly convict of his or her Roguish or Vagabonds trade of
Life, either by Inquest of Office, or by the Testimony of two honest and
credible Witnesses upon their Oaths, that then immediately he or she shall be
adjudged to be grievously whipped and burnt through the Gristle of the right
Ear with an hot Iron of the compass of an Inch about, manifesting his or her
punishment received for the same, whereof entry shall be made of Record by the
Clerk of the Peace of the same Shire, in the Records of the same Sessions.

Execution.
CCLXXVII. 14. Eliz. 5 2. N. 8. Which Judgment shall also presently be executed,
except some honest person valued at the last Subsidy next before that time, to
5 l. in Goods, or 20 s. in Lands, or else some such honest Householder, as by
the Justices of Peace of the same County, or two of them shall be allowed, will
of his Charity be contented presently to take such Offender before the same
Justices, into his Service for one whole year next following, and to that end
will presently before the said Justices enter into Bond by Recognizance to the
use of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, to pay to our said Sovereign Lady the sum
of 5 l. if he keeps not the said Offender in his Service by the space of the
said whole year, and to bring him or her unto the Sessions at the years end, or
then good proof of his or her death during the said year.

Fees.
CCLXXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 9. The said Clerk of the Peace taking for the said
Recognizance, but 12 d. only.

Departure.
CCLXXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 10. And if such Rogue or Vagabond so taken into
Service, depart within the said year from the said Service, against the will of
him that so takes him or her into Service, that then such Rogue or Vagabond
shall be whipped, and burnt through the Gristle of the right Ear with a hot
Iron, as is aforesaid.

Bail.
CCLXXX. 14 Eliz. 5. 3. N. 1. Provided always nevertheless, that if the said
person so committed or to be committed, come before the next Sessions of the
Peace or the next Jail-delivery to be holden for the said County, or before
their committing and do find any such Surety as is next before recited to be
bound in form aforesaid, for him or her for one whole year, then the said
person shall not tarry in the Goal till the next Sessions, or till the next
Goal delivery.

CCLXXXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 4. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, Pain.
that the said person or persons so marked or adjudged to be burnt as
aforesaid, shall not be dealt withal again by way of punishment by the space of
forty days next after the said punishment executed, or adjudged to be burnt as
is aforesaid, if he or she have License for the said forty days from two
Justices of the Peace of the same Shire, testifyng the Punishment received or
Judgment given.

CCLXXXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 4. N. 2. But if after the said punishment Executed, or
Judgment given, the said person or persons, Coron.
so marked or having received such Judgment, do after threescore days next
after he, she or they shall be so marked, either in the same County where he or
she was so marked, or having received such Judgment, or else in any other
County within the said Realm of England or Wales, being of the age of Eighteen
years or above, do Eftsoons fall again to any kind of Roguish or Vagabond trade
of life, that then the said Rogue, Vagabond or Sturdy Beggar, from thenceforth
to be taken adjuged and deemed, in all respects as a Felon.

CCLXXXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 4. N. 3. And shall in all degrees receive, have,
Forfeiture.
suffer and forfeit as a Felon, except some honest person valued at the last
subsidy next before that time to 10 l. in Goods, or 40 s. in Lands, or else
some such honest House-holder, as by the Justices of Peace of the same County
or two of them, shall be allowed of mere Charity, will be contented before such
Justices, as the said Vagabond is or shall be arrained of Felony, to take him
or her into his service for two whole years, then next following, and then
before the same Justices, will then presently put in Bond by Recognizance of 10
l. to be levied of his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to the use of our
said Sovereign Lady, If he keeps not the said offender in his service for two
whole years, and bring him or her unto the Sessions at the said two years end,
or good proof of his or her Death.

CCLXXXIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 4. N. 4. And if such Rogue or Vagabond, Departure.
so taken into service, depart within the same two years, from his or her said
service against the will of him that so took him or her into his service, that
then such Rogue or Vagabond, shall be taken adjudged and deemed as a Felon in
all respects, and shall in all degrees have, suffer and forfeit, as a Felon
without allowance or benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary.

CCLXXXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 4. N. 5. And if such Rogue or Vagabond, Coron.
after 40. days next after he or she shall be two several times taken into
service as is aforesaid, do either in the said County or elsewhere Eftsoons the
third time, fall again to a kind of Roguish or Vagabond trade of life, that
then such Rogue or Vagabond, shall be adjudged and deemed for a Felon and
suffer pains of Death, and loss of Lands and Goods, as a Felon without
allowance or benefit of Clergy or Sanctuary.

CCLXXXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 1. And for the full expressing what person and
persons, shall be intended withing this branch, to be Rogues, Vagabond.
Vagabonds and Sturdy Beggars, to have and receive the punishment aforesaid for
the said lewd manner of life.

CCLXXXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 2. It is now published, Attorney.
etc. that all and every such person and persons, that be or utter themselves
to be Proctors or Procurators, going in or about any Country or Countries,
within this Realm, without sufficient Authority, derived from or under our
Sovereign Lady the Queen.

Games.
CCLXXXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 3. And all other Idle persons, going about in any
County of the said Realm, using subtle, crafty and unlawful games or plays,
and some of them feigning themselves to have knowledge in Phisnomy, Palmistry,
and other abused Sciences, whereby they bear the people in hand they can tell
their Destinies, Deaths, and Fortunes, and such other like fantastical
Imaginations, 22 H. 8. 12. 6. N. 2.

Ability.
CCLXXXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 4. And all and every person and persons, being
whole and mighty in body and able to labor, having not Land nor Master, nor
using any lawful Merchandise, Craft or Mystery, whereby he or she might get his
or their living, and can give no rckoning how he or she both lawfully get his
or her living.

Games.
CCXC. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 5. And all Fencers, Bearwards, Common-players in
Enterludes and Minstrels, not belonging to any Baron of this Realm, or toward
any other Honorable personage of greater degree, all Inglers, Pedlers, Tinkers,
and pety Chapmen, which said Fencers, Bearwards, Common-players in Enterludes,
Minstrels, Inglers, Pedlers, Tinkers, and pety Chapmen, shall wander abroad and
have not License of two Justices of Peace at the least, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, where and in what Shire they shall happen to wander, 5 and 6 Ed. 6.
21. Crompt 199. b.

Laborers.
CCXCI. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 6. And all Common Laborers, being persons able in
body, using loytering and refusing to work for such reasonable wages as is
taxed and Commonly given in such parts, where such persons do or shall happen
to dwell.

Forgery.
CCXCII. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 7. And all Counterfeiters of License, Pasports, and
all users of the same, knowing the same to be Counterfeit.

Scholars.
CCXCIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 8. And all Scholars of the Universities of Oxford or
Cambridge, that go about Begging, not being authorized under the Seal of the
said Universities, by the Commissary, Chancellor or Vice Chancellor of the
same, 12 Ric. 2. 7. 1. N. 4.

Mariners.
CCXCIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 9. And all Shipmen pretending losses by Sea, other
then such as shall be hereafter provided for.

Imprisonment
CCXCV. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 10. And all persons delivered out of Goals that Beg
for their their Fees, or do travail to their Countries or Friends, not having
License from two Justices of the Peace of the same County where he or she was
delivered,

Vagabond.
CCXCVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 11. Shall be taken, adjudged and deemed Rogues,
Vagabonds, and sturdy Beggars, intended of by this present Act.

Vagabonds.
CCXCVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 5. N. 12. Together with all and every such other person
and persons, as shall be hereafter for altering and breaking of such Good
Orders, as in the second part of this present Act shall be Established for the
relief of the aged and impotent Poor people, set forth and declared to be
Vagabonds.

Cottages.
CCXCVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 6. N. 1. And further be it Enacted, that if any person or
persons, after the said Feast of Saint Bartholomew, give any Harborough, Money
or Lodging, or any other relief to any Rogue, Vagabond or sturdy Beggar, either
marked as before, or not marked not having such a License as is before recited,
from two Justices of the Peace, then in Continuance, and that duly proved
before the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions, shall make such fine to
the Queens Majesty, as by the discretions of the said Justices or the more part
of them at the General Sessions shall be assessed, so as the same exceed not 20
s. West. Symb. 2 part 127. b. Sect. 194.

Process.
CCXCIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 6. N. 2. And also if any person or persons do disturb or
let the Execution of this Act, in any manner of wise, or make rescouse against
any Mayor, Bailiff or other person that shall endeavor himself for or about
the due Execution hereof, shall forfeit and lose 5 l. and over that shall have
Imprisonment at the Queens Majesty's pleasure.

CCC. 14 Eliz. 5. 7. N. 1. Provided always that this Act, Accessory.
nor any thing herein contained, shall not extend to make any person or
persons, Accessory or Accessaries, to the Felonies made by this Statute, nor
that any attainder by any the Felonies aforesaid shall work or be any
corruption of blood in the Issues or line of the person attainted.

CCCI. 14 Ed. 5. 8. N. 1. Provided also that it shall be still lawful to all
Masters and Governors of the Hospitals, Hospital.
to lodge or Harbor any impotent or aged person or persons, of Charity or Alms,
according to their foundation, and to give Money in Alms, in as large manner as
they are bound to do by their foundation to any such aged or impotent person,
any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

CCCII. 14 Eliz. 5. 9. N. 1. Provided always that Ship-men and Soldiers having
License of the next two Justices of the Peace, License.
to the place where they first happened to Land, or where they first entered into
this Realm, shall and may pass according to the purport of their License, and
intent of this Act of Parliament, any thing herein contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

CCCIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 10. N. 1. Be it also further provided that no License
recited in this Statute shall give any manner liberty, License.
or be of any manner force, but only in the Shire, whereof the grantor or
grantees of such License shall be Justice or Justices of Peace.

CCCIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 10. N. 2. Wherefore if the said party Licenced will have
any further passage, without the danger of this law, License.
than the Shire where his first License is granted, it shall be lawful for him
to procure and get in every other Shire, where he intends to pass one other
License from two Justices of the Peace of the said Shire, and so from Shire to
Shire, to the end of his Journey.

CCCV. 14 Eliz. 5. 10. N. 3. Be it also provided that this Act, Husbandry.
nor any thing therein contained, do in any wise extend to any Cockers or
Harvest Folks that travail into any Country of this Realm, for harvest work,
either Corn Harvest, or Hay-Harvest, if they do work and labor accordingly.

CCCVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 10. N. 4. Neither yet to any that happens to be robbed or
spoiled by the way. Robbery.


CCCVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 10. N. 11. Neither yet to any Serving-men, Apprentice.
that be of honest behavior, that be turned from their Masters, or whose Master
or Mistres shall be dead, for the space of six months next after such turning
away, or death of such Master or Mistres, so as every such Serving-man has a
testimonial from his Master or Mistres, or from two Justices of the Peace of
the same County, declaring such turning away, or such death of his Master or
Mistres.

CCCVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 11. N. 1. Provided always that it shall be lawful to the
Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, License.
for the time being, to make License under the said Great Seal, as heretofore
has been accustomed, and that the said License and Licenses, shall as largly
extend as the contents of them will bear, any thing herein to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding.

CCCIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 12. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted, Ouster
le mers;
etc. that this present Act or any thing therein contained shall not extend to
make frustrate or void any safe Conduct, Pasport or License made and granted,
or to be made and granted, by the Lord Deputy of Ireland, or by the Lord
Governor of the Towns and Garrisons of Berwick or Carlisle, for time being, or
any other Chief Captain or Governor, of any Castle or Fortress of the Queens
Majesty's, or by any other in his or their absence, having the said charge of
the said Towns and Garrisons, or by any of the Guardians of the three Marches
toward Scotland, or by any General, Lieutenant, or other Chief-Officer,
appointed by the Queens Majesty, to have the charge and conduct of any Army,
Garrison or Power of men, levied or to be levied by her Highness order and
appointment, and for the special service and affairs of Her Majesty, her Heirs
or Successors, or by any Private Captain, upon the dispersing of any Army only
to any Soldier or Soldiers, or any other person or persons whatsoever within
this her Realms of England, and Ireland, passing by virtue thereof about his or
their lawful business and affairs, but that he or they shall and may quietly
without any let or disturbance enjoy the benefit effect and true meaning
thereof in as large and ample manner, and form, as heretofore has been used
and accustomed, any thing in this present Act mentioned to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

Infant.
CCCX. 14 Eliz. 5. 13. N. 1. Provided always that this present Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to the punishment of any such
person or persons, as by this Statue are limited for Rogues, unless the same be
of the age of fourteen years or above, but that they and every of them under
the age, shall be punished with whipping or stocking, as heretofore has been
used and appointed by the Laws and Statutes in that case provided and now
repealed, this Act, or any thing therein contained to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

Constable.
CCCXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 1. And it is further Enacted, etc. that if within any
Town or Parish, where any such Vagabond or Rogue, shall happen to beg or make
his abode contrary to the form of this Statute, if the Constable or
Tything-men, be negligent and do not his or their best endeavor for the
apprehension of such Vagabond or Rogue, which there shall beg or make abode
contrary to the form in this Statute limited, or shall willingly suffer the
said Vagabond or Rogue, to escape from the punishment or order in this Statute
prescribed, that then the said Constable or Tything-men in whom such default
shall be, shall lose and forfeit for every such Vagabond and Vagrant person,
that shall be so suffered to beg or make abode within his Authority contrary to
the form of this Statute, 6 s. 8 d.

Cottages.
CCCXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 2. And forasmuch as Charity would that Poor, Aged
and Impotent persons, should as necessarily be provided for, as the said
Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars repressed, and that the said aged,
impotent and Poor people, should have convenient Habitations, and abiding
places, throughout this Realm, to settle themselves upon, to that end, that
they nor any of them should hereafter beg or wander about.

Justices.
CCCXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 3. It is therefore Enacted, etc. that the Justices
of Peace, of all and singular the Shires of England and Wales, within the
limits of their Commissions, and all other Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers, and all and every City, Borough, Riding
and Franchise, within this Realm, whereof they be Justices of the Peace, within
the limits of their Authority, shall at or before the said Feast of Saint
Bartholomew next coming, divide themselves, and so being divided, shall within
every of their several divisions and Authorities make diligent search and
enquiry, of all Aged, Poor, Impotent and decayed persons, born within their
said divisions and limits, or which were there dwelling within three years next
before this present Parliament, which live, or of necessity be compelled to
live by Alms of the Charity of the people that be or shall be abiding within
the limits of their Commissions and Authorities.

CCCXIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 4. And shall upon that search made, Records.
make a Register-Book containing the Names, and Surnames of all such Aged,
Decayed and Impotent Poor people, as be within their said limits and
Authorities, which shall always remain with the said Justices, Mayors,
Bailiffs, or other Head-Officers, or any one of them.

CCCXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 5. And when the number of the said Poor people,
forced to live upon Alms, be by that means truly known, Cottages.
then the Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs and other Officers, shall within
like convenient time, devise and appoint, within every of their several
divisions, meet and convenient places by their discretions to settle the same
Poor people, for their Habitations and abidings, if the Parish within the which
they shall be found shall not or will not provide for them.

CCCXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 6. And shall also within like convenient time
number all the said Poor people within their said several limits, Apportionment.
and thereupon having regard to the number set down, what portion the weekly
charge toward the relief and sustentation of the said Poor people, will amount
unto within every their said several divisions and limits.

CCCXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 7. And that done they the said Justices, Tax.
Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers, within every their several
Commissions, Authorities, Divisions and limits, shall by their good
discretions, Tax and assesse all and every the Inhabitants, dwelling in all and
every City, Borough, Town, Village, Hamlet and Place, known within the said
limits and divisions, to such weekly charge, as they and every of them shall
weekly contribute toward the relief of the said Poor people.

CCCXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 8. And the names of all such Inhabitants Taxed,
shall also enter into the said Register-Book, Record.
together with their Taxation.

CCCXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 9. And also shall by their discretions within every
their said divisions and limits, appoint to see Collectors, Officers.
for one whole year to be appointed of the said weekly portion, which shall
Collect and gather the said proportion, and make delivery of so much thereof,
according to the discretion of the said Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs,
and other Officers, to the said Poor people, as the said Justices, Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and other Officers shall appoint them.

CCCXX. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 10. And also shall appoint Overseers of the said
Poor people, by their discretions, Overseers.
to continue also for one whole year.

CCCXXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 14. N. 11. And if they do refuse to be Overseers, then
every of them so refusing, Officer.
to forfeit 10 s. for every such default.

CCCXXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 15. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, London.
etc. that the Mayor of the City of London, and the Mayor, Sheriffs, Baliffs,
and other Head-Officers, of every other City, Borough or Town-Corporate, or his
or their sufficient Deputy or Deputies, within their Cities, Boroughs and
Towns-Corporate, and the Constables or Tythingmen, of all and every Hundred,
Rape and Wapentake, within all and every such abiding place and places, within
their Hundreds, limits and precincts, as shall be appointed to settle the Poor
people in, shall once every month next after the said places so appointed be
inhabited with the said Poor people, according to the intent of this present
Act of Parliament, make a view and search of all the Aged, impotent and Lame
persons, within the precinct of their Jurisdictions.

Lieu.
CCCXXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 15. N. 2. And all such person and persons, as they shall
find, not being born within that division, nor within the said Cites, Boroughs
or Towns-Corporate, then shall they presently see the same Poor people, not
there born, nor dwelling within the said three years, (except Leprous people
and Bedrid people) to be conveyed on Horseback, in Cart, or otherwise, as shall
seem best to their discretions, to the next Constable, and so from Constable to
Constable, the directest way, till the said person and persons, be brought to
the place where he or she was born, or most conversant by the space of three
years next before.

Hospitals.
CCCXXIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 15. N. 3. And there to be put in the abiding place, or one
of the abiding places of that County, appointed or to be appointed for the
Habitation of the Poor people of that County, there to be provided, kept and
nourished of Alms, as is aforesaid, upon pain of 20 s. every of the said
Officers that is neglecting.

Vagabonds.
CCCXXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 16. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that if any of
the said Poor people, upon the appointment of the said Justices, or other
Officers refuse to be bestowed in any of the abiding places before mentioned,
but covet still to hold on their trade of Begging, or after they be once
bestowed in the said abiding place or places, do depart and beg, then the said
person or persons so offending, for the first offense to be accounted a Rogue
or Vagabond, in the first degree of punishment, set forth by this Act in all
points.

Pain.
CCCXXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 16. N. 2. And if he, she or they do the second time
offend, they to be esteemed as a Rogue or Vagabond, in the last degree of
punishment set forth by this Act in all points.

Forfeiture.
CCCXXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 17. N. 1. And it is further Enacted, etc. that if any
manner of person or persons, appointed and Elected to be Collectors, as is
aforesaid, shall refuse the said Office, or shall after he has agreed to it
neglect the same, he shall forfeit and lose for every offense to the use of the
Poor of the same place, 40 s. of lawful money of England, to be levied by
distress, or recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information, in any Court of
Record, or Lords Court, by the High-Constables or Tything-men aforesaid, in
which suit no Essoyn, Protection nor Wager of Law shall be allowed or admitted
to the party Defendent.

Constable.
CCCXXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 17. N. 2. And if the said High-Constables shall be
remiss or negligent to sue, or shall refuse to sue the said Collectors, and
every of them, within two months next after such refusal or negligence in or by
the said Collector, that then the said High-Constables or Tything-men, shall
forfeit and lose 5 l. of lawful money of England, to the use of the Poor of the
same place.

Justices.
CCCXXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 17. N. 3. To be sued for, by and in the name of two of the
next Justices of the said place or places, being out of the Cities, Boroughs
and Towns Corporate.

Corporation.
CCCXXX. 14 Eliz. 5. 17. N. 4. If within, then by Mayor, Bailiffs, or other
Head-Officers of the said Cities, Boroughs or Towns-Corporate, in any Court of
Record, or Lords Court, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information, in
which no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

Account.
CCCXXXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 18. N. 1. And further be it Enacted that the said
Collectors and every of them so to be chosen, as is aforesaid, shall make their
just account half yearly of their said Collecting and gathering to two Justices
of the Peace dwelling next to the said abiding place or places, not being
within any City, Borough or Town-Corporate, or to the Mayor, Sheriffs, or other
Chief-Officers of the said Cities, Boroughs or Towns-Corporate.

CCCXXXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 18. N. 3. And when they go out of their Offices, Account.
they shall deliver or cause to be delivered forthwith upon their accounts all
such surplusages of their Collection and gathering, as shall then remain
undistributed, to be ordered by the said Justices, Mayors, Bailiffs, or other
Head-Officers, upon the said pain of 10 l.

CCCXXXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 18. N. 4. If any such Collector shall refuse to make
his said account, Imprisonment
or neglect the same by the space of fourteen days after request to him
therefore made, then the said two Justices, or one of them to commit the said
Collector to the next Goal for the said County, there to remain without Bail or
mainprise, till he have made his said account, and immediate payment and
delivery of all such surplusages as he has received.

CCCXXXIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 19. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, Taxes.
that if any person or persons being able to further this Charitable work, will
obstinately refuse to give toward the help and relief of the said Poor people,
or do wilfully discourage others from so charitable a deed, the said obstinate
person, or wilful discourager shall presently be brought before two Justices of
the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum of the same County, to show the
cause of his obstinate refusal, or wilful discouragment, and to abide such
order therein, as the said Justices shall appoint, if he refuse so to do, then
to be committed to the next Goal for the said Shire, there to remain until he
be contented with their said order and do perform the same.

CCCXXXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 20. N. 1. And it is also further Enacted that if any of
the said aged and impotent persons, not being so diseased, Laborers.
lame or impotent, but that they may work in some manner of work, shall be by
the Overseers of the said abiding place, appointed to work, if they refuse,
then in form aforesaid to be whipped and stocked for their first refusal, and
for their second refusal to be punished as in case of Vagaboncy in the first
degree of punishment.

CCCXXXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 21. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted,
etc. that three Justices of the Peace, Justices.
whereof one to be of the Quorum, of and with the surplusages of the said
Collections and forfeitures, (the said Poor and Impotent people satisfied and
provided for,) shall by their discretions in such convenient place and places,
within their said Shires, as they shall think meet, place and settle to work
the Rogues and Vagabonds, that shall be disposed to work, born within their
said Counties or there abiding for the most part, within the said three years,
there to be holden to work by the oversight of the said Overseers, to get their
livings and to live and to be sustained only upon their labor and travail.

CCCXXXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 22. N. 1. Be it also further Enacted, Apprentice.
etc. that if any Beggars Child, being above the age of five years, and under
fourteen years, being Male or Female, shall be liked of by any Subject of this
Realm, of honest calling, who shall be willing to take the said Child into
service, the said Subject shall at the next General Sessions, to be holden for
the said County, by order of the Justices there or the most part of them, have
the said Child bound with him, if it be a Man Child till the age of twenty four
years, if it be a Woman Child till the age of eighteen years.

CCCXXXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 22. N. 2. If the Child do after depart or be taken or
be enticed from the said Master or Mistres, Infant.
to have their remedy by order of laborers, ( viz. 23 Ed. 3. 2.) either by way
of Action or otherwise as well against the Child as against the taker or
inticer thereof.

Forfeiture.
CCCXXXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 23. N 1. Be it also enacted, etc. that all the
forfeitures appointed or to grow by this Statute, except the forfeitures of
Justices of Peace, shall wholly go and be employed, to the use of the Poor
aforesaid, and shall be levied by distress, by the discretion of the Justices
of the same County or two of them, or other Head-Officers aforesaid.

Justices.
CCCXL. 14 Eliz. 5. 23. N. 3. And that the Justices of Peace, in all Shires of
England, shall in their Quarter Sessions next after Easter, yearly Examine the
performance, or not performance of this Statute, according to the tenor
thereof, as they are bound to do the Statute of Laborers, ( viz. 23 Ed. 3.)
etc. And at their said Sessions shall yearly appoint new Collectors and new
Overseers, for the causes aforesaid, and shall then also agree upon new views
and searches of the said Impotent people, within every their limits, for the
year following if need shall be, and further at their said Sessions, shall take
order by their good discretions, for all and every thing and things, that may
in any ways further the intent of this Act.

Justices.
CCCXLI. 14 Eliz. 5. 24. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, etc. that three
Justices of Peace, within all the Shires of this Realm, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, shall have full power by Authority of this present Parliament, to
hear and determine all causes, except forfeitures of Justices of Peace, that
shall come in question by reason of this present Act.

Alms.
CCCXLII. 14 Eliz. 5. 25. N. 1. Provided also that forasmuch as it is thought
that the Inhabitants of diverse Counties, Cities and Towns, within this Realm,
be not able to relieve the Poor, Lame and Impotent persons, with money to be
Collected in manner and form aforesaid, and that it were overgreat a burden to
the Collector for to gather Meat, Drink, Corn, or other things for their relief
to be employed and bestowed in form aforesaid.

License.
CCCXLIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 25. N. 2. Therefore it is further Enacted, that it shall
be lawful to and for the Justices of Peace, in their open Sessions of the
Peace, or for the most part of them there assembled, within any the Counties,
Cities or Towns of this Realm, where Collections of money cannot presently be
had, as this present Act wills and appoints, to grant License under their
Hands and Seals, to such and so many of the said Poor and Impotent or diseased
persons, or to any other person or persons, to be by the said Justices assigned
and allowed, for the said Poor

Charity.
CCCXLIV. 14. Eliz. 5. 25. N. 3. To ask gather and receive within such other
Township, or Parishes, of the said County, as the said Justices, or the most
part of them, there then in their said Sessions assembled, shall especially
name and appoint, limit and assign, the Charitable devotion and Alms, at the
House or Houses of the Inhabitants of such Town, Parish or Parishes, by the
said Justices Named, Appointed, Limited or Assigned, so that they do appoint
the said Poor so to be relieved, only within the Towns and Parishes, being
within the divisions of the same Justices, that so shall give such License or
Licenses.

Lieu.
CCCXLV. 14 Eliz. 5. 25. N. 4. And that the Inhabitants of every such Parish or
Parishes, to the which such Poor or Impotent persons, shall be so appointed as
is aforesaid, shall be coacted and bound by virtue of this Act under such pain,
as to the discretion of the said Justices, there in their Sessions Assembled,
or the most part of them shall seem convenient to relieve the said Poor and
Impotent persons, in such sort as the said Justices there assembled shall
appoint.

Corporation.
CCCXLVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 26. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, that if it shall
happen any City or Town-Corporate, to have in it more Impotent and Poor folks,
not able to labor, then the said Town or City, is able to relieve, and the
said City or Town-Corporate, is a County of it self, or Situate or standing in
one County, and Immediately adjoining to another, that in those Cities or Towns,
the Mayor, or Head-Officers of the said City or Town, shall make Certificate to
the Justices of the Counties adjoining to the said Cities or Towns.

CCCXLVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 26. N. 2. And the same Justices of the said adjoining
County or Town, in their General Sessions of the Peace, License.
shall give License and follow the Order above remembered, according as other
Justices of the Counties in the which any Town or Parish surcharged stands,
are before limited and authorized to do.

CCCXLVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 27. N. 1. Provided always and be it Enacted, etc. that
all and every sum and sums of money, London.
from henceforth to be Collected or Gathered, within the City of London, and
the Liberties of the same, by virtue of this Act, shall be paid unto the
Governors of the Hospital, called the Hospital of Christ-Church, within the
said City of London for the time being, and shall be by them from time to time
distributed, and bestowed for the relief of the Poor of the same City,
according to their Wisdoms and discretions, any thing in this Statute contained
to the contrary notwithstanding.

CCCXLIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 28. N. 1. Provided also and be it Enacted, Franchis.
etc. that all and every sum and sums of money, from henceforth to be
Collected or Gathered, within the City of Coventry, and the Liberties of the
same, by virtue of this Act toward the maintenance and relief of the Hospital
of Poor people, erected in the same City, shall be paid unto such Governor and
Governors of the said Hospital as now is, or hereafter shall be admitted and
appointed by the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City of Coventry, or the more
part of them for the time being.

CCCL. 14 Eliz. 5. 28. N. 2. And such Governor and Governors, Charity.
so admitted and appointed, as is aforesaid, shall from time to time,
distribute and bestow for the relief of the Poor within the said City, the
said sum or sums of money, according to their Wisdoms and discretions, any
thing mentioned in this Act, to the contrary notwithstanding.

CCCLI. 14 Eliz. 5. 29. N. 1. Provided also and be it Enacted, Franchis.
etc. that all and every sum and sums of money, from henceforth to be paid,
Collected or Gathered, within the City of Gloucester, Liberties and limits of
the same City, for and toward the use or relief of the Poor, and all and every
other relief, which shall be due and payable, or is to be yielded within the
said City, Liberties or limits, for and toward the relief of the said Poor,
shall be from time to time paid and delivered, or otherwise shall stand and be
at the only rule, order and disposition of the President, and Governors of the
Hospital of Saint Bartholomew, of the Foundation of our most Gracious Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth, within the said City of Gloucester for the time being,
and shall be by them from time to time distributed, and bestowed for the relief
of the Poor of the said City, according to their Wisdoms and Discretions.

CCCLII. 14 Eliz. 5. 30. N. 1. And be it further Enacted, Ordinary.
etc. that the Bishop of every Diocese, or his Chancellor, for the time being,
shall yearly visit all Hospitals in the Diocese of such Bishop, where no
Visitor by the Founder or Founders is appointed, if the Founder of the said
Hospital be then Dead, and to see and take order, that the said Hospital be
ordered and used according to the Statutes, and Ordinances of the Foundation
thereof, and if the Founder be then living, the said Founder to visit the same,
during his life, without any the Bishops Visitation, and the same Visitation to
be at the only costs and charges of the Visitors and not of the Hospital.

Ordinary.
CCCLIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 30. N. 4. And that it shall be lawful to the Bishop of the
Diocese for the time being where such Hospital is or shall be, or his
Chancellor upon complaint or other intelligence of just cause, to take account
how the rents, revenues and profits of any such Hospital has been bestowed and
spent, to call before him or them at the said Hospital to account all such
person and persons, as have had the Collection or receipt of any the said Rents,
Issues, Revenues or profits.

Account.
CCCLIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 30. N. 5. And if any person or persons so called, shall and
do refuse to account, or entering into account, shall refuse to proceed and
finish the same, or upon finishing thereof, shall refuse forthwith to employ or
answer to the use of the said Hospital, such sum or sums of money, as upon the
same account shall appear to be due by him, that then every such person and
persons so refusing, shall forfeit and loose such sum and sums of money, as to
the said Bishop or Chancellor, and to two Justices of the Peace next Inhabiting
to the said Hospital, shall be thought meet and convenient.

Account
CCCLV. 14 Eliz. 5. 30. N. 6. To which accounts the said Bishop or Chancellor
shall call the same two Justices of the Peace.

Ouster le mere.
CCCLVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 31. N. 1. Provided also and be it further Enacted, etc.
that no person or persons, having charge of any Voyage in passing to the Realm
of Ireland, or from the Isle of man into this Realm of England, do from the
last day of June, next coming, wittingly or willingly transport, bring, carry
or convey, or suffer to be transported, brought, carried or conveyed, in any
Ship, Picard, Vessel, Boat or Boats from and out of the said Realm of Ireland,
or from or out of the said Isle of Man, into the Realm of England or Wales, or
any part thereof, any Vagabond, Rogue or Beggar, or any such as shall be forced
or very like to live by Begging within the Realms of England or Wales, being
born in the Realm of Ireland, or in the said Isle of Man.

Ouster le mere.
CCCLVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 31. N. 2. On pain of every such person or persons, so
bringing, transporting, carrying or conveying, either suffering to be brought,
transported, carried and conveyed, in manner and form aforesaid, to forfeit and
lose for every such Vagabond, Rogue, Beggar or other person, which shall be
forced or like to live by begging within this Realm of England or Wales, being
transported and set on Land, in any part of England or of Wales, 20 s. of
lawful English money, to the use of the Poor of the same Parish in which they
were set on Land.

Seizure.
CCCLVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 31. N. 3. To be levied by the Collectors of the same
Poor, for the time being by seizure and selling of any the Goods and Chattels
of the same person, which shall so bring, transport, carry or convey any such
Rogue, Vagabond or Beggar, or other person which shall be forced or like to
live by Begging, within the Realm of England or of Wales, to the value of the
same forfeiture.

Vagabond.
CCCLIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 31. N. 4. And on the pain of the same Vagabonds, Rogues and
Beggars so set on Land to be punished, as the other Vagabonds and sturdy
Beggars, in this Act before mentioned, and declared.

Ireland.
CCCLX. 14 Eliz. 5. 32. N. 1. And be it likewise Enacted, if any such Maniske or
Irish Rogue, Vagabond or Beggar, been already, or shall at any time hereafter
be set on Land in any part of England or of Wales, the same shall be conveyed
to the next Port, in or near which they were Landed, and from thence be
transported at the Common charge of the County, where they were set on Land
into those parts from whence they came or were transported.

CCCLXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 33. N. 1. Also be it provided, Taxes.
that if any manner of person shall hereafter find him or her self grieved with
any Taxation set upon them, by virtue of this Act, it shall be lawful for them
at the next General Sessions of the Peace, to be holden within the same Shire
where their Taxation shall be, to make complaint thereof to the Justices o the
Bench, and to be eased of their excessive charge, by the discretion of the
whole Bench, or the most part of them.

CCCLXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 33. N. 2. And if any default shall be hereafter found in
any Justices of the Peace, or Quorum, Justices.
in or about the Execution of this Act, every of the said Justices, upon proof
of the said default, by two sufficient Witnesses, before the Justices of
Assize, at the next General Sessions of Goal delivery for the same County,
after the same default, shall forfeit and lose 5 l. etc. The one half whereof
to be to the use of the said Poor people of the same County, and the other half
to the Queens Majesty, which said forfeiture shall be levied by distress, by
discretion of the said Justices of Assizes.

CCCLXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 34. N. 1. And whereas a great number of Poor and
diseased people, do resort to the City of Bath, Pasport.
in the County of Somerset, and the Town of Buckstone, in the County of Derby,
for some ease and relief of their diseases at the Baths there, and by means
thereof, the Inhabitants of the same City of Bath, and Town of Buckstone, are
greatly overcharged with the same Poor people to their intolerable charge.

CCCLXIV. Be it Enacted, License.
etc. that no diseased or Impotent Poor person, living on Alms, at any time
after the Feast of Saint Bartholomew the Apostle next coming, shall resort or
repair from their dwelling places, to the said City of Bath, and Town of
Buckstone, or either of them, to the Baths there, for ease of their grief,
unless such person be not only Licenced so to do, by two Justices of the Peace
of the County, where such person does or shall then dwell or remain, but also
provided for of the Inhabitants of such Hundred, Parishes or places, from
whence they shall be so Licenced to travail, of such relief for and toward his
maintenance, as shall be necessary for the same person for the time of such his
abode at the said City of Bath, and Town of Buckstone, or either of them, and
return home again as shall be limited by the same License, upon pain to be
reputed, punished and used, as Vagabonds by the purview of this Statute, and
that the Inhabitants of the same City and Town, shall not in any wise be
charged by this Act with the finding or relief of any such Poor people.

CCCLXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 35. N. 1. And for the better performance of this
Charitable Act, Hospital.
it is ordained and established that whereas the late King of Famous Memory,
King Henry the Eighth, his Heirs, or Successors, or any other person or
persons, heretofore by his or their several and lawful Erections, and
foundations has or have ordained or appointed any sum or sums of money,
rents, reliefs or Commodity, to the use of the Poor, or for the repairing or
mending of Highways or Bridges, not being taken away otherwise by Act of
Parliament, whether the same be in any Cathedral Church, College, or elsewhere.

CCCLXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 35. N. 2. That the Bishop of the Diocese, Justices.
or his Chancellor, within which the said Cathedral Church, College or place
is, And the Justices of Peace, of the County within the which the said
Cathedral Church, College, or place is, or three of them, whereof one to be of
the Quorum, shall have Authority from time to time, to examine how and after
what manner the said Money, Rent, Relief, or Commodity is bestowed, and to call
to account the parties which do detain the said money, rents or relief, and
thereupon to take such order for the distribution of the same, as to their
discretions shall seem most fit and agreeable to the good intent of the
Founders, Givers or Granters, and thereof to make Certificate in the High-Court
of Chancery, once in every year. Lambert 361.

Imprisonment
CCCLXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 36. N. 1. Provided always that whereas, by reason of this
Act, the common Goals of every Shire within this Realm, are likely to be
greatly pestered with a more number of Prisoners, than heretofore has been,
for that the said Vagabonds, and other lewd persons before recited, shall upon
their apprehension be committed to the common Goal of the same Shire, where
they are so taken and apprehended, and that in the most Shires of this Realm,
the Common-Goals are in such Towns where there be a great number of Poor
people, more than they are well able to sustain with their relief, and in some
Shires the Assizes are kept far distant from the place where the Common-Goals
are, by reason whereof the said Prisoners are like to famish, for want of
sustenance, if they be not therefore provided.

Sessions.
CCCLXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 1. For remedy whereof, be it therefore
Enacted, etc. that it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of Peace, of
every Shire within this Realm, at their General Quarter Sessions of the Peace,
to be holden within the same Shires, or the most part of the said Justices
being then present to Rate and Tax every Parish within the said Shires at such
reasonable sums of money, for and toward the relief of the said Prisoners, as
they shall think convenient by their discretions, so that the said Taxation and
rate does not exceed above 6 d. or 8 d. by the week out of every Parish.

Churchwardens.
CCCLXIX. 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 2. And that the Churchwardens of every Parish
within this Realm, for the time being, shall every Sunday levy the same, and
once every Quarter in the year, pay to the High-Constables or Head-Officers, of
every Town, Parish, Hundred, Riding or Wapentake within this Realm, all such
sums of money as their Parish shall berated and taxed, for and toward the
relief of their said Prisoners within their said several Parishes, Lambert,
467. 468.

Constable.
CCCLXX. 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 3. And that the said High-Constables, and
Head-Officers and every of them, shall pay all such sums of money, so to them
paid by the said Churchwardens, at every General Quarter Sessions, to be
holden within the said several Shires, to such sufficient persons dwelling nigh
the said Goals, as shall be appointed by the said Justices in their said open
Quarter Sessions, to be there ready to receive the said money so Collected as is
aforesaid.

Imprisonment
CCCLXXI. 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 4. And that the Collectors for the said
Prisoners, shall weekly distribute and pay all such sums of money as they and
every of them shall receive, for the relief of the said Prisoners as aforesaid.

Churchwardens.
CCCLXXII. 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 5. Upon pain as well the said Churchwardens
of every Parish, Constables, and Head-Officers of every Hundred, or Wapentake,
as also the said Collectors, appointed for the Collection, and contribution of
the said Prisoners so making default, as is aforesaid, to forfeit, 5 l. the one
moity therereof shall be to the use of the Queens Majesty her Heirs and
Successors, and the other moity to the relief of the Prisoners, any Statute,
law, custom, use or other thing, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Corporation.
CCCLXXIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 38. (3.) N. 1. Provided always that the Justices of
Peace within any County of this Realm, or Wales shall not intromit or enter
into any City, Borough, Place or Town-Corporate, for the Execution of any
Branch, Article or Sentence of this Act, for or concerning any offense, matter
or cause growing or arising within the Precincts Liberties, or Jurisdictions of
such City, Borough, Place or Town-Corporate, but that it shall and may be
lawful to the Justice and Justices of the Peace, Mayor, Bailiffs, and other
Head-Officers, of those Cities, Boroughs, Places and Towns-Corporate, where
there be Justice or Justices, to proceed to the Execution of this Act, within
the precinct and compass of their Liberties, in such manner and form, as the
Justices of Peace, in any County, may or ought to do within the same County, by
virtue of this Act, any matter or thing in this Act expressed to the Contrary
thereof notwithstanding.

CCCLXXIV. 14 Eliz. 5. 39. (4.) N. 1. And that every Justice and Justices of
Peace, within every such City, Borough, Justices.
Place and Town-Corporate, for every offense by them or any of them, to be
committed contrary to the intent and meaning of this Statute, shall be
punishable and chargeable, as other Justices of Peace, at large in the Counties
are by this Act above appointed to be.

CCCLXXV. 14 Eliz. 5. 40. N. 1. Provided always and be it further Enacted, etc.
that if it shall chance any City, or Town Corporate, Corporation.
to have in it more Poor folks, than the Inhabitants thereof shall be able to
relieve, that in such case upon Certificate thereof made, and of the number and
names of persons, with which they be so surcharged, unto the Justices of Peace
of the County, in which such City or Town-Corporate, shall lie and be Situate,
at their Quarter Sessions of the Peace, by two Justices of Peace of the said
County, and the Mayor, or other Head-Officer of the same City, or
Town-Corporate, the Justices may by their discretions in the same Sessions
take, order, appoint and cause the same Poor folks so Certified, to be provided
for and be relieved by giving of License to beg or otherwise, in some other
place or places of the said County out of such City or Town-Corporate, so
surcharged.

CCCLXXVI. 14 Eliz. 5. 41. N. 1. Provided always that this Act or any thing
therein contained, shall not extend to the Poor people, Hospitals.
for the time being, in the Hospital called Saint Thomas Hospital, otherwise
called the Kings Hospital, in the Borough of Southwark, near adjoining to the
City of London, but that the Mayor, Commonalty and Citizens of the said City of
London for the time being, shall and may only have the rule, order and
Government of the said Hospital and of the Poor people therein for the time
being, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

CCCLXXVII. 14 Eliz. 5. 42. N. 1. Provided always that this Act or any thing
therein contained, or any Authority thereby given, Games.
shall not in any wise extend to disinherit, prejudice or hinder John Dutton of
Dutton in the County of Chester Esquire his Heirs or Assigns, for, touching or
concerning any Liberty, Previledge, Pre-eminence, Authority, Jurisdiction or
Inheritance, which the said John Dutton, now lawfully uses, or has or
lawfully may or ought to use, within the County Palatine of Chester, and the
County of the City of Chester, or either of them, by reason of any Ancient
Charters of any Kings of this Land, or by reason of any prescription or other
lawful usage or title whatsoever.

CCCLXXVIII. 14 Eliz. 5. 43. N. 1. This Act to endure for seven years, and from
thence to the end of the next Parliament, Continuance.
then next following, 18 Eliz. 3. 14. N. 1. Crompt. 97. b.

CCCLXXIX. Crompt. 154. b. Nor shall Bail be received for the Mother, nor
reputed Father of any Bastard-Child, Bail.
who refuses to perform the order of the Justices, according to the Statute 18
Eliz. 3. N.

CCCLXXX. Crompt. 154. b. Nor shall he be Bailed who is Collector for the Poor,
who refuses to account, etc. 14 Eliz. 5. N. Account.


CCCLXXXI. Crompt. 155. Nor shall Bail be received for the Collectors nor
Governors of Poor, nor for Guardians nor Collectors for the Houses of
Correction who refuse to make account contrary to 18 Eliz. 3. N.

Pain.
CCCLXXXII. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 202. Any Justice of the Peace, may appoint
any person to be openly whipped naked, until his or her body be bloody, that
shall be taken begging wandering or misordering him or her self, as is declared
by the Statutes, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 1 Jac. 7. N. to be a Rogue Vagabond or
sturdy Beggar etc.

Settlement.
CCCLXXXIII. Lambert 202. 203. And shall cause such person so whipped, to be
forthwith sent from Parish to Parish, by the Officers of every the same the
next strait way to the Parish, where such person was born, if that may be known
by the parties confession or otherwise, and if not, then to the Parish where
such person last dwelt, before that punishment by the space of one whole year,
there to labor, or not being known where such person was born or so dwelt, then
to the Parish through the which such person last passed without such
punishment, 1 Jac. 7. Dalt. 128. cap. 47.

Pasport.
CCCLXXXIV. Lambert 203. And such Justice under his hand and Seal shall make a
Testimonial, witnessing such punishment, and the day and place thereof, and
mentioning the place to which such person is limited to go, and by what time,
at his or her peril, and in case such place of Birth, or last dwelling be not
known, then such person shall by the Officer of the Village, through which he
or she last passed without punishment, be conveyed to the House of Correction,
of the limit wherein that Village is, or to the common Goal of that place or
County, there to remain in work till such person be placed in service for one
years continuance, (or not being of able body) till such person shall be placed
in some Almshouse of that place or County, 39 Eliz. 4. Dalt. 126. cap. 47.

Certificate.
CCCLXXXV. Lambert 204. The form of which Testimonial may in efect be the same
which was lately in use by the Statute, 22 H. 8. 12. 14. N. 1. Dalt. 380. 381.
cap. 124. 212. now repealed, viz. Kilborns predicts 212. Kent. ss. John at
Style, a sturdy Vagrant Beggar, of low personage, red haired, and having the
Nale of his right thumb cloven, was (the sixth day of April, in the second year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James) openly whipped at Dale in the
said County, for a wandering Rogue, according to the Law, and is Assigned to
pass forthwith from Parish to Parish by the Officers thereof, the next strait
way to Sale, in the County of Midlesex, where (as he confesses) he was born,
or dwelled last by one whole year, etc. If the case be such, and he is limited
to be at Sale aforesaid within ten days now next Ensuing at his peril.

Pasport.
CCCLXXXVI. Lambert 204. 205. By the the occasion of this Testimonial or Pass, I
thought it serviceable to advertise that it is needful both in this and in all
other testimonial Certificates safe Conducts and Pasports whatsoever, to annote
and specify expressly some assured marks of the party, as his Stature, color
of hair, complexion, or if it may be, some apparent scar or other note, by
which he may be infallibly distinguished and known from others, lest as I have
often found both himself take the benefit thereof, and he also communicate the
use of the same to others in abuse of him that made it.

Justices,
CCCLXXXVII. Lambert 205. And by occasion also of this power given to one
Justice for correction of Rogues, I trust that I may without offense to any,
make public use of those grave resolutions and advises, that being in the
hands of sundry men abroad, are commonly ascribed to his Majesty's Justices at
Westminster, and do tend much to the right Execution of this 1. Jac. 7. and the
other Statute, 39 Eliz. 4. concerning Rogues and the Poor, which only of all
our Laws have most Christianly and civilly given order in that behalf, and are
therefore with so much the more care and diligence to be put in ure amongst us,
as they will not only deliver us of the present burden, but also destroy the
very brood of this unruly people, Dalt. 96. cap. 40.

CCCLXXXVIII. Lambert 205. 1. A Rogue affirms that he was born in such a
Town, in such a County, Lieu.
then ought he to be sent thither if it may not otherways appear that he was
born elsewhere, and if he were not born there in truth, then is he to be said
an Incorrigible Rogue and is to be sent thence to the House of Correction, in
the County to which he is sent, and if there be none there, then to Goal, until
the next Sessions, there to be dealt with according to the Statute, Dal. 128.
cap. 47.

CCCLXXXIX. Lambert 206. 2. The same course is to be observed if it appear not
where he was born, Lieu.
or if he untruly affirm that he was last dwelling in such a Town, in such a
County, by the space of a year and was not.

CCCXC. Lambert 206. 3. If the Husband or Wife have a House, Bar. and Fem.
and the Husband or Wife Rogue about, they ought to be sent to the Town where
that House is, and so of an inmate, Dalt. 125. cap. 47.

CCCXCI. Lambert 206. 4. The Wife and Children under seven years of age, being
Vagrant, must go and be placed with the Husband, Bar. and Fem.
if the Husband be dead, then with the Wife, where she was born or dwelt, and
the Vagrant Children above seven years of age must be sent to the place of
their birth, and if the Vagrant Parents with their Children, under seven years
be placed at the place of birth of the Parents, or at the place of last
dwelling, as the case shall fall out, if afterward the Parents or either of
them die or runn away, yet the Children once settled must remain there still,
and may not be sent to their place of birth, tho after they grow above the age
of seven years, Dalt. 96. 97. cap. 40.

CCCXCII. Lambert 206. 5. The Wife being a Vagrant Rogue, Bar. and Fem.
ought to be sent to the Husband, tho he be but a Servant in another Town,
Dalt. 98. cap. 40. and 125. cap. 47.

CCCXCIII. Lambert 206. 207. The Rogue, Bar. and Fem.
whose place of birth or dwelling cannot be known, has Wife and Children under
seven years of age, they must go with the Husband to the place where they were
last wilfully suffered to pass without punishment, where the Children must be
relieved by the work of their Parents, tho the Parents be committed to the
House of Correction.

CCCXCIV. Lambert 207. 7. If any not being Rogues shall travail with their
Children, through a Town, Infant.
and the Father or Mother die or runn away, the Town is not bound to keep them
where they die, nor to send them away, but only in Charity, except they become
wandering Beggars, Dalt. 96. cap. 40. and 2. Bulstrod. 333. (351.) pl. 247.

CCCXCV. Lambert 207. 8. If the Parents be able to work, Trades.
and may have work, they are to find their Children by their labor and not the
Parish, but if they be overburthened with Children, it shall be a very good way
to procure some of them to be placed Apprentices according to the Statute,
Dalt. 96. cap. 40. and 2 Bulstrod 332. (350.) pl. 246.

CCCXCVI. Lambert 207. 9. No man is to be put out of the Town where he
dwells, nor to be sent to their place of birth, Vagrant.
or last habitation, but a Vagrant Rogue, nor to be found by the Town, except
the party be impotent, but ought to set themselves to labor if they be able and
can get work, if they cannot, the Overseers must set them to labor, and so of
them that have or shall have Houses, when their Estates be expired, and
Servants whose times of service are ended, tho they cannot get Houses, for they
must provide themselves Houses anew, if they be not impotent, Dalt. 97. cap. 40.

Fees.
CCCXCVII. Lambert 207. 208. Such persons as be of any Parish, and have able
bodies to work, and be no wanderers abroad out of the Parish, tho they refuse
to work at such wages as is taxed or commonly Given in those parts, are
notwithstanding not to be sent to their place of birth or last dwelling, by the
space of a year, but to the House of Correction, upon consideration had of both
the Statutes of the Poor and Rogues, ( viz. 39 Eliz. 4. N. and 1 Jac. 7. N.)
But if they have any lawful means to live by, tho they be of able bodies, and
refuse to work, yet are they not to be sent to the House of Correction, Dalt.
97. cap. 40.

Lieu.
CCCXCVIII. Lambert 208. 11. Such as will remove or put any out of their Parish,
that be not to be put out, this is against the Statute, ( viz. 39 Eliz. 4. N.)
and finable, and if they have been so sent, they may be sent back again, Dalt.
98. cap. 40.

Lieu.
CCCXCIX. Lambert 208. 12. If any be sent to a Town, whereto he ought to be
sent, and is refused, being a sturdy or an Impotent Rogue, the persons refusing
shall forfeit 5 l. and he that is so to be sent, is to be offered to the
Churchwardens, and Overseers, Dalt. 129. cap. 47.

Pasport.
CCCC. Lambert 208. 13. To send the Rogues by a general Pasport, without
conveying them from Parish to Parish, is a let to the conveying of Rogues,
according to the Statute, ( viz. 39 Eliz. 4. N.) and so a forfeit of 5 l. upon
them, and to go with such a Pasport, is but still to continue a Rogue to be
punished by whipping, Dalt. 128. cap. 47.

Officer.
CCCCI. Lambert 209. 14. If the Officer will not receive a Rogue to convey him
to the place where he was born or dwelt, this is a forfeiture of 5 l. in the
Officer that shall not receive the party to convey him or her over, Dalt. 128.
cap. 47. 2.

Begging.
CCCCII. Lambert 209. 15. None may be suffered to take relief at any man's door,
tho within the same Parish, unless it be by the order of the Overseers,
according to the Statute ( viz. 39 Eliz. 4. Dalt. 124. cap. 47. neither may any
be suffered to beg by the highways, tho in their own Parish, Dalt. 97. cap. 40.

Parents.
CCCCIII. Lambert 209. 16. By this word Parents is understood a Father, or a
Grandfather, Mother, or Grandmother, being persons able, Dalt. 96. cap. 40.
Lambert 602.

Child.
CCCCIV. Lambert 209. 17. Within the word Children, is concluded any Child or
Grandchild being able, 10 H. 7. 11. a

Parson.
CCCCV. Lambert 209. 18. Parsons or Vicars, etc. be bound as Inhabitants to the
relief of the Poor, as well as others, that inhabit within the Parish.

Estates.
CCCCVI. Lambert 209. 19. Every one that has Tyths Impropriate, Coal-Mine, or
Lands in Manual occupation, etc. is chargeable, and so for such as have
saleable Wood, proportioning the same to an Annual benefit.

Churchwardens.
CCCCVII. Lambert 209. 20. If there be but one Churchwarden in the Parish he
suffices with the other four Overseers, Dalt. 96. cap. 40.

Taxes.
CCCCVIII. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 292. 293. The Assesse made at the Easter
Sessions of the Peace, upon every Parish in the County, shall yearly in default
of the Parishioners, and in default of the Churchwardens and Constables there,
be rated by order of such Justice of Peace, as shall dwell in that Parish, or
if none so be dwelling, in the parts next adjoining, and in default of the said
Churchwardens and Constables, any Justice of the Peace within the limit, may
levy the same by distress and sale of Goods, of any person refusing or
neglecting to pay his portion thereof, and shall render to the party the
overplus of such sale, and in default of such distress, any Justice of that
limit, may commit to Prison such person without Bail till he pay the same, 43
Eliz. 2. Kilborn. 179. 180.

CCCCIX. Lambert 293. The like order is taken concerning the assesse made for
Soldiers or Mariners, 43 Eliz. 3. Taxes.


CCCCX. Lambert 293. And any one of these two Justices of Peace which by this
Statute, Justices.
43 Eliz. 2. N. may appoint Overseers for the Poor, may also send to the House
of Correction, such as will not employ themselves in work according to this
Statute.

CCCCXI. Lambert 3. cap. 2. page 356. Two or more Justices of the Peace,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, Overseers.
dwelling in or near the Parish or division, where the Parish is, must nominate
yearly in Easter week, or within one month after Easter, under their hands and
Seals, four, three or two substantial Householders, in every Parish, to be
Overseers of the Poor of the same Parish, and the Churchwardens and Overseers
of every Parish, shall with the consent of two or more such Justices of Peace,
set the Poor on work, and Tax every Inhabitant and occupier of Land there,
toward the same, and to bind Children Apprentices, and the excuse of the
Churchwardens and Overseers, for not Executing their Office is to be allowed
by two such Justices of Peace, and such two Justices of Peace are to take their
accounts yearly, and to commit them that refuse to account, 43 Eliz. 2.

CCCCXII. Lambert 356. 357. And two such Justices of Peace may Tax any other of
other Parishes within the Hundred, Taxes.
to contribute to a Poor Parish, and may make out their Warrants to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of every Parish, to levy the Taxtions by distress
and Sale of the Offenders Goods, and in defect of distress may commit the party
refusing to contribute, to the Common-Goal, without Bail or Mainprise, and they
may do the like, concerning penalties and forfeitures committed, 43 Eliz. 2. N.
Lambert 601. 602. Dalt. 95. cap. 40.

CCCCXIII. Lambert 357. Any two Justices of Peace, of any City, Plague.
Borough, Town-Corporate and places privileged, may assesse the Inhabitants
thereof, at such reasonable Taxes as they shall think fit for relief of persons
infected with the Plague, and dwelling in Houses infected, to be levied by
Warrant of two such Justices of Peace, of his Goods that refuses to pay the
same, and in default of Goods the offender by them may be committed to prison
without Bail or Mainprise, 1 Jac. 31. Dalt. 90. cap. 39. and 96. cap. 40.

CCCCXIV. Lambert 357. 358. Upon Certificate of the Mayor, Certificate.
or other Head-Officers of any City, etc. of their disability to relieve their
Poor infected persons, to any two Justices of the Peace of the County near to
the said City, etc. the same Justices may Tax the Inhabitants of the same
County, within five Miles of the place infected, for their relief, to be levied
by Warrant from any such two Justices of the Peace by distress and sale of
Goods, and in default thereof by Imprisonment of the party Taxed and refusing
as before, 1 Jac. 31. Dalt. 90. cap. 39.

CCCCXV. Lambert 361. The Bishop and his Chancellor, Ordinary.
and three such Justices of the Peace, have power to Examine how money or other
relief appointed by King H. 8. or any other to the use of the Poor or of
amending of Highways or Bridges is bestowed, and to call to account the
detainers thereof, etc. 14 Eliz. 5. 35. N. 1. and 39 Eliz. 18. N. Lambert 352.

CCCCXVI. Lambert 367. If any Justice of Peace, Justices.
shall be proved to be in default about the Execution of the act of the Poor, (
viz. 14. Eliz. 5. N.) by two sufficient witnesses before the Justiecs of Assize
at their next general Jail-delivery, he shall lose 5 l.

Imprisonment
CCCCXVII. Lambert 467. 468. Enquiry in Sessions, if the Churchwardens of any
Parish, have not every Sunday levied the Money for relief of the Prisoners of
the Goal, and once in every Quarter paid it to the Constable of the Hundred, or
if the Constable have not every Quarter Sessions, paid over the same to the
Collector thereto appointed, or if such Collector have not weekly distributed
the same for relief of the said Prisoners 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 2.

Cottages.
CCCCXVIII. Lambert 468. (Charge in Sessions on 31 Eliz. 7.) If any person has
since the end of the last Session of Parliament, made, builded or erected, or
caused to be made, etc. any manner of Cottage for dwelling, or converted or
ordained any building or Housing to be used as a Cottage for dwelling, unless
the same person have laid thereunto four Acres at the least, of ground to be
accounted by ordinance, ( viz. 33 Ed. 1. page 70.) de terris mensurandis, being
his or her own freehold and inheritance, lying near to the said Cottage, to be
continually manured there withal, so long as that Cottage shall be inhabited,
Crompt 90. b. 91. a.

2. If any person have willingly maintained or upholden such Cottage, not
having so many Acres so lying and manured.

3. If there be any Inmates or more Householders than one dwelling in one
Cottage by the placeing or suffering of any owner or occupier of such Cottage.

Cottages.
CCCCXIX. Lambert 468. 469. But this Statute ( viz. 31 Eliz. 7.) extends not
to any Cottage in any City, Corporate or Market Town, or Ancient Borough.

2. Nor to the dwelling of any workers of Mineral works, Coal-Mines Quarries of
Stone or Slate, or about the making of Brick, Tile, Lime or, Coal, so that they
be not distant above one Mile from the works, and be used only for the
Habitation of such workers.

3. Nor to Cottages within a Mile of the Sea, or upon the side of any Navigable
Rivers within the Admirals Jurisdiction, so as none dwell therein but Saylors,
or men of manual occupation for the making, furnishing or Victualling of Ships
or Vessels used to serve on the Sea.

4. Nor to any Cottage in any Forest, Chase, Warren or Park, inhabited only by
them that keep the Deer or Game there.

5. Nor to any Cottage hereafter to be made, wherein only a common Herd-man, or
common Shepherd of any Town, or any Poor, Lame, Sick, Aged or Impotent person
shall dwell.

6. Nor which for any just respect (upon complaint to the Justices of Assize,
at the Assizes, or to the Justices of Peace, at the Quarter Sessions,) shall by
their order entered in open Assizes or Quarter Sessions be decreed to continue
for dwelling, for so long time, only as by such decree shall be limited.

7. Nor extended to any Inmates to be placed by the order of the Justices in
their Quarter Sessions, with the leave of the Lord of any wast or common, at
the charge of the Parish, Hundred or County, 43 Eliz. 2.

Sessions.
CCCCXX. Lambert 596. and 14 Eliz. 5. and 18 Eliz. 3. Concerning Poor people and
Vagabonds, have mention of the Quarter Sessions, to be holden next after
Easter, which Statutes as they make not in this point a new Law, so allowing of
any one of the four Sessions, they do therein give allowance of all the other
three.

Infant.
CCCCXXI. Lambert 604. A Beggars Child, may at the General Sessions be bound to
serve any Subject of this Realm, being of an honest caling, 14 Eliz. 5. N. 18
Eliz. 3. N.

Cottages.
CCCCXXII. Lambert 604. A Decree may be made at the Quarter Sessions for the
continuance of a Cottage, that has not four Acres of ground and there may the
Justices enquire, hear and determine of Cottages and Inmates in offense of the
Statute, 31 Eliz. 7.

CCCCXXIII. Lambert 609. And they must yearly in the same Sessions ( viz. after
Easter, or in six weeks, Sessions.
etc.) Examine the performance or nonperformance, of so much of the Statute
made for the Poor, 14 Eliz. 5. as is not altered by 43 Eliz. 2.

CCCCXXIV. Lambert 609. The account of the Treasurers for disabled Soldiers or
Mariners, Account.
is to be made yearly at the Quarter Sessions after Easter, or within ten days
after, 43 Eliz. 3.

CCCCXXV. Lambert 29. Duty of Constables, Constable.
etc. It seems to me that in this case ( viz. on 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (2.) N. 2.)
the words High-Constable, High-Tythingmen, and Head-Officers, do exclude pety
Constables, Borsholders, and such like to meddle therein, because none are
called High or Head, but in comparison of low and base.

CCCCXXVI. Lambert 49. Duty of Constables, Officer.
etc. all these things etc. (viz. the resolutions mentioned, Lambert 205.
supra. 387. which as it is commonly said were given by the Queens Justices at
Westminster, soon after the making of the said Statutes, ( viz. 39 Eliz. 4. and
1 Jac. 7.) do pertain as well to the charge of a Tything-man, Borsholder,
Headborough, Chief-pledge, or such other inferior Officer, as they do to the
Constable of such a Town or Parish, that has any of those other Officers
underneath him, but some other points of charge there be that belong to such a
Constable only and not to any of them.

CCCCXXVII. Crompt. 7. b. 17. Nota that there is a Statute made, Apprentice.
5 Eliz. 4. Concerning Workmen, Artificers, Laborers, Apprentices and Servants,
and another Statute, made 14 Eliz. 5. Concerning Vagabonds, whereof the
Justices have power by the said Statutes to enquire, and to punish them
according to the form of the said Statutes, whereby all other Statutes
concerning them are of little effect at this day, if it be not in certain
special points.

CCCCXXVIII. Crompt. 53. If any infected person with the Plague, Plague.
being commanded to keep his House, contrary to that command, voluntarily and
contemptuously goes abroad, and shall converse in Company, having any
infectious sore on him uncured, such person shall be adjudged as a Felon, and
shall suffer as a Felon, 1 Jac. 31. N. And if he has no such sore, he shall be
punished as a Vagabond, according to 39 Eliz. 4. N. Lambert 437. Dalt. 90. cap.
39.

CCCCXXIX. Crompt. 53. If any be commanded to keep his House, Plague.
who is infected, or be in a House infected with the Plague, and will not keep
his House, but voluntarily and contemptuously disobeys such direction and
appointment, offering or attempting to go abroad, and resists the Keepers and
Watchmen, who shall be appointed to keep them in their houses, such Keepers and
Watchmen may force them to keep their Houses, and if any hurt comes by such
inforcement, to any such disobedient person, the said Keepers or Watchmen,
shall not be impeacht therefore, 1 Jac. 31. Dalt. 90. cap. 39.

CCCCXXX. Crompt. 59. b. 33. Its extortion in the Clerk of the Peace, who
takes above 12 d. for a Recognizance, Fees.
taken of him that takes a Rogue in service for a year, by 14 Eliz. 5. N.

CCCCXXXI. Crompt. 86. b. Item, Bastardy.
Sessions to enquire of Women that have Children born out of Matrimony, and of
the reputed Father of such Child, they shall be punished by the discretion of
the Justices of the Peace 18 Eliz. 3.

CCCCXXXII. Crompt. 86. b. See by a Clause in 14 Eliz. 5. 22. N. 1. The Statute
is how that Infants of Beggars, Apprentice.
shall be taken to be Apprentices by order of the Justices of Peace at the
Sessions, and how the party who took him in service, shall have remedy against
the Infant, who departs, or such who took or enticed him out of the service of
him, to whom he shall be committed as Apprentice by the said Justices.

Imprisonment
CCCCXXXIII. Crompt. 195. b. 19. One Justice of Peace may commit to prison,
Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, being above the age of fourteen years,
there to remain until the next Sessions or Jail-delivery which first comes, 14
Eliz. 5.

Recognizance
CCCCXXXIV. Crompt. 196. b. 15. A Justice of Peace in Sessions, may take a
Recognizance of him that takes a Rogue into service to appear at the same
Sessions, a year next after, 14 Eliz. 5.

License.
CCCCXXXV. Crompt. 198. Any two Justices of Peace, may License such who shall be
delivered out of Goals, to Beg for their fees, or to travail to their Countries
or Friends, and may give License for 40 days to a Rogue that is marked, and may
make a Testimonial to a Servingman, who is turned away from his Master, or
whose Master is dead, 14 Eliz. 5. N. and 18 Eliz. 3.

Justices.
CCCCXXXVI. Crompt. 198. Two Justices of Peace may certify to the Quarter
Sessions, that a City or Ville-Corporate of the County, being no County of it
self, is surcharged with Poor, together with the names and number of them, to
the intent that order may be taken for their relief there, 14 Eliz. 5.

License.
CCCCXXXVII. Crompt. 198. a. b. And they may License diseased persons, living of
Alms, to travail to Bath, or Buckstone, for ease of their grief, 14 Eliz. 5.
Lambert 331.

Games.
CCCCXXXVIII. Crompt. 199. b. Two such Justices of Peace, may give License to
Fencers, Bearwards, Common-players in Interludes, Minstrels, Inglers, Pedlers,
Tinkers and pety Chapmen to go, so that they shall not be taken as Rogues, 14
Eliz. 5. 5. N. 5. 39 Eliz. 4. Infra 451. N. 5.

Constable.
CCCCXXXIX. Crompt. 199. b. 200. a. Suit may be commenced against a
High-Constable, in the name of two next Justices of the Peace, if it be out of
a City, and Ville-Corporate, for not fuing a negligent Collector of Money for
the Poor, within the time limit by the Statute, and they every half year, shall
take an account of such Collector, and may take order with the surplusage of
such Collection, and may also commit him to Ward for his refusal to account, or
to bring in his surplusage against the Statute, 14 Eliz. 5. N. and 39 Eliz. 4.

Imprisonment
CCCCXL. Crompt. 200. Two Justices of Peace, whereof one shall be of the Quorum,
may imprison such as refuse to give to the relief of the Poor or who discourage
others to give.

And the Bishop or his Chancellor, shall call two Justices of the Peace, next
Inhabiting, to any Hospital, to assist them in the taking of the Account of
such, as have had the Collection of the Revenues and profits of such Hospital,
and they three may charge the Accountant (under the penalty of losing such sum
of Money as they think meet,) to account and not to delay it, and presently to
employ the surplusage to the use of the Hospital, 14 Eliz. 5. N. see 39 Eliz.
4. N. and 1 Jac. 7.

Goodbehavior
CCCCXLI. Lambert 118. Likewise 39 Eliz. 4. N. which tyeth to the Goodbehavior,
all such as disturb the Execution of that Statute, either for the punishment
of Rogues, or for the relief or setting on work of the Poor, etc. It seems
that all these Statutes have this one meaning, that a party so bound may
afterward forfeit his Recognizance, if he Eftsoons offend against the said
Statutes.

License.
CCCCXLII. Lambert 302. The Justice of, or near the place where the Seafaring
man suffering Shipwreck, and not having to relieve himself homewards, does
Land, may give him a Testimonial under his hand, containing the time and place
of his Landing, with the place of his birth or dwelling to which he is to pass,
and with a convenient time for his passage thither, by which he may accordingly
pass, in the usual and direct ways thither, and ask and take relief, 39 Eliz.
4. 14. N. 1.

CCCCXLIII. Lambert 302. 303. The Justices of Peace in or near the place where
any Idle or wandering Soldier or Mariner, Pasport.
coming from his Captain from the Seas, or from beyond, does Land, ought upon
request, to give him a Testimonial under his hand, expressing therein the time
and place of such his Landing, with the place of his dwelling or birth, to
which he is to pass, and with a convenient time therein limited, for his
passage thither, and the Justice of Peace next adjoining to the place, or
direct way where any Soldier or Mariner, coming from or beyond the Seas,
Landeth or Travaileth, and makes known his Poverty, may License him to pass
the next and direct way to the place, whether he is to repair, and may limit
him time necessary, only for his travail thither, which License if he pursue,
he may ask and take without danger, for his necessary relief in such his
travail that which any persons shall willingly give him, 39 Eliz. 17.

CCCCXLIV. Lambert 330. Any two Justices of Peace, Forfeiture.
may by Warrant, under their hands and Seals, cause to be levied (by distress
and sale of the Goods of the offender all fines and forfeitures, that shall
grow by the Confession of the offender, or by proof of two lawful and
sufficient witnesses before them upon this Statute of Rogues, 39 Eliz. 4.

CCCCXLV. Lambert 354. Any two Justices of Peace, Justices.
have power to hear and determine all causes that shall grow in Question by the
Statute of Rogues, 39 Eliz. 4.

CCCCXLVI. Lambert 354. Two Justices of Peace, Laborers.
of or near the place to which a Soldier or Mariner comes with the
Testimonial of one Justice of the Peace, shall take order by their discretion
for setting to work or relieving of him, if he cannot of himself get work
there, or employ himself in lawful course of life, 39 Eliz. 4.

CCCCXLVII. Lambert 422. If any strangers calling themselves Egyptians, or
being commonlly called Egyptians, Egyptians.
have remained in the Realm one month, and if any person being fourteen years
of Age which has been seen or found in the Fellowship of such Egyptians, or
which does disguise himself like to them, have remained here or in Wales, by
the space of one Month, either at one time or at several times (to be enquired
at Sessions) 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 4. and 5 Eliz. 20. and 39 Eliz. 3.

CCCCXLVIII. Lambert 422. If any dangerous Rogue that was banished the Realm,
or adjudged perpetually to the Galleys, Exile.
have returned into the Realm, without lawful License ( viz. enquire at
Sessions) 39 Eliz. 4.

CCCCXLIX. Lambert 422. 423. Charge in Sessions, Lieu.
if any dangerous Rogue, after he has been branded in the open Sessions, with
a Roman R. upon the left Shoulder, and sent to the place of his dwelling, the
place where he last dwelt, by the space of a year, or the place of his birth,
to be placed in labor, have offended again in Begging or wandering, contrary to
the Statute, 39 Eliz. 4. N. or this Act 1 Jac. 7.

CCCCL. Lambert 423. Charge in Sessions, War.
if any Soldier or Marnier have wandered idle, without setting himself to
service, labor, or other lawful course of life, and has not repaired to his
place of birth or dwelling, and had not a lawful Testimonial from a Justice of
Peace, of or near the place where he landed, or has counterfeited such
Testimonial, or has carried the same, knowing it counterfeit 39 Eliz, 17.

CCCCLI. Lambert 436. 437. Charge in Sessions to inquire, Infant.
if any person above the Age of seven years, calling himself a Scholar, has
gone about Begging, 12 Rich. 2. 7. 1. N. 4.

Pasport.
2. Or if any Seafaring man not having suffered Shipwreck, nor having a Lawful
testimonial, from a Justice of Peace of or near the place where he Landed, have
gone about begging, or have transgressed such testimonial.

Games.
3. Or if any idle person have gone about begging, or have used any subtle
craft or unlawful game, or play, or have feigned knowledge in Physiognomy,
Palmistry, or other like crafty science, or have pretended to tell destinies,
fortunes, or such like fantastical imaginations.

4. Or have uttered himself to be a Proctor, Procurer, patent Gatherer or
Collector for any Goal, Prison or Hospital.

5. Or if any Fencer, Bearward, Minstrel or Common-player of Enterludes,
Ingler, Tinker, Peddler, Pety-chapman or Glassemen, have wandered abroad. Supra
439.

6. Or if any wandering person or common laborer, not having otherwise than by
labor to maintain himself, being able of body, have used loytering.

7. Or refused to work for lawful wages.

8. Or if any person delivered out of Goal, have begged for fees, or traveled
begging, or pretending loss by fire or otherwise, have wandered beging.

9. Or if any not being a Felon have pretended to be an Egyptian, or have
wandered in the form or habit of counterfeit Egyptians, 22 H. 8. 10. 2. N. 1.

10. Or if any Impotent or diseased person Licenced by two Justices of Peace,
to go to Bath or Buxstone, have not forborne to beg, or have not returned
according to such License.

11. Or if any Poor person appointed to ask relief in the same Parish, by the
Churchwardens and Overseers thereof, shall beg in any other sort than is so
appointed, for all such be declared to be Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars,
39 Eliz. 3. and 1 Jac. 7.

Taxes.
CCCCLII. Lambert page 601. If the Parish and Hundred, be not able to relieve
the Poor of the Parish therein, then the Justices of Peace, or the greater
number of them, may at their General Quarter Sessions rate any other Parishes,
etc. thereunto, Lambert 356. 357. on 43 Eliz. 2. Dalt. 95. cap. 40.

Plague.
CCCCLIII. Lambert 601. The Taxes for relief of the infected with the Plague,
must be certified at the next Quarter Sessions, and the same is to be enlarged,
extended or determined, as to the Justices of Peace there, or the more part of
them, shall be thought fit, 1 Jac. 31.

Cottages.
CCCCLIV. Lambert 601. 602. And the General Quarter Sessions may there by
agreement with any Lord of wast or common, set up Habitations for the Poor, and
place inmates in the same, 39 Eliz. 3.

Taxes.
CCCCLV. Lambert 602. And they may also at such General Quarter Sessions,
assesse the Parents or Children, being of sufficient ability to relieve their
Poor and Impotent Children and Parents, Lambert 209. And the Father,
Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and Child of the Poor, being of a
sufficient ability, may there be Taxed toward the relief of said Poor, 43
Eliz. 2. 6. N. 1,

Sessions.
CCCCLVI. Lambert 602. the parties grieved by any Act done upon the Statute, 43
Eliz. 2. N. are to be relieved by the Justices of Peace at their general
Quarter Sessions.

Imprisonment
CCCCLVII. Lambert 602. The Justices of Peace or the more part of them, may at
any Quarter-Session give order for the erecting of Houses of Correction, and
for stocks of Money, and all other things necessary for the same or for the
Government thereof, and they may Banish or condemn to the Galleys such Rogues
as shall appear to be dangerous, 39 Eliz. 4. N. and may brand them in the left
Shoulder, with a hot Burning Iron, with a great Roman R. thereon, 1 Jac. 7.

CCCCLVIII. Lambert 603. The Assignment and revocation of the Pensions for
disabled Soldiers and Mariners, Sessions.
must be made by the more part of the Justices of the Peace, at the Quarter
Sessions, and they may there set fine upon the Treasurer, that shall willingly
refuse to pay any of the same Pensions, 43 Eliz. 3. Crompt. 94.

CCCCLIX. Lambert 369. If there be no nomination of Overseers of the Poor,
yearly according to the Statute, Overseers.
43 Eliz. 2. N. Every Justice of Peace dwelling within the division shall
forfeit to the Poor, 5 l.

CCCCLX. Lambert 558. Clergy is taken from the dangerous Rogue, Clergy.
that after he has been Branded with a Roman R. and placed in labor, shall be
taken Begging again, 1 Jac. 7.

CCCCLXI. Crompt. 97. Every Authority given or to be given by any Baron of the
Realm, or by any of higher degree, Games.
to Players of Enterludes, shall be void, and they shall be in the degree of
Rogues, ordained by a Statute, 39 Eliz. 4. 1 Jac. 7. N.

CCCCLXII. Crompt. 97. And Glassmen, Trades.
who go about the Country and sell Glasses, shall be taken and punished as
Rogues, 1 Jac. 7. 3. N. 1. 39 Eliz. 4. 15. N. 2.

CCCCLXIII. Crompt. 97. Dangerous Rogues shall be in open Sessions of the
Peace, burned in the left Shoulder with a hot burning Iron, Pain.
of the breadth of an English Shilling, with a great Roman R. upon the Iron, and
to be so thoroughly burned upon the Skin and Flesh, that the said Letter be seen
and remain for a perpetual mark, during his life, and thereupon to be sent by
the said Justices to the place where he abode, if he has any, and if he has
none, then to the place where he last abode by the space of a year, if it can
be known by his confession or otherwise, and if that cannot be known, then to
the place where he was born, to be placed in labor as a true Subject ought to
be, and after such punishment, if any such Rogue so punished offends in Begging
or wandering, against 39 Eliz. 4. or against the said Statute, 1 Jac. 7. he
shall be adjudged a Felon, and shall suffer as a Felon, and shall be tried in
the County where any such offender shall be taken, and shall lose Clergy.

CCCCLXIV. Crompt. 97. Every one after two Months next after the end of this
present Session of Parliament, Beggars.
shall take or cause to be taken such Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, who
come to their Houses to Beg, Gather or receive any Alms, and carry him, or
cause him, to be carried to the next Constable or Tythingman, on pain of
forfeiture for every default 10 s. to be levied and employed, as is limited by
the said Statute, 39 Eliz. 4. And for default to be levied and employed by the
Lord of the Leet or his Officer, where such offense is committed, as the said
persons authorized by the said Statute, may have, levy and employ the same, 1
Jac. 7.

CCCCLXV. Crompt. 97. a. b. If the said Constable and Tythingman, Constable.
do not cause such Rogue, etc. to be punished according to the said Statute, 39
Eliz. 4. and to be conveyed according to the purport of the said Statute, he
shall forfeit 20 s. for every such default, to be levied and employed as by the
said Statute is limited, 1 Jac. 7. to continue to the end of the next
Parliament, not to prejudice John Dutton, etc.

CCCCLXVI. Crompt. 97. b. See 39 Eliz. 4. touching Rogues, Continuance.
Vagabonds, who shall be said so, etc. and diverse matters concerning them, and
how he shall be punished, continued until the end of the first Session of the
next Parliament, and then 43 Eliz. 2. N. continued until the end of the first
Session of the next Parliament which was 1 Jac. 7. whereby it was ordained that
39 Eliz. 4. should remain in force as long as 1 Jac. 7 8. N. 1. continued in
its force, 21 Jac. 28. 1. N. 37. 61.

Taxes.
CCCCLXVII. Crompt. 97. b. All Statutes concerning the punishment of Rogues made
before 39 Eliz. 4. are thereby repealed, but by 1 Jac. 7. 8. N. 1. the Statute,
14 Eliz. 5. concerning Rogues, etc. is revived and to stand in force until the
end of the first Session of the next Parliament, as to rating, taxing, levying,
receiving and employing of Goal money, 21 Jac. 28. 1. N. 13. 61.

Justices.
CCCCLXVIII. Dalt. J. P. cap. 40. pa. 91. Any one of those Justices who may
appoint Overseers for the Poor, may also send to the House of Correction or
common Goal such as will not employ themselves in work, being thereunto
appointed by the Overseers according to the Statute 21 Jac. 28.

Justices.
CCCCLXIX. Dalt. 40. page 91. Two or more Justices of Peace, whereof one to be
of the Quorum, dwelling in or near the Parish or division, etc. shall yearly
within one month after Easter, under their hands and Seals, appoint four, three
or two substantial Householders in every Parish to be Overseers of the Poor
within the same Parish, who shall join with the Churchwardens therein, 21 Jac.
28.

Account
CCCCLXX. Dalt. 356. cap. 141. A warrant for Overseers to give up their
accounts, Infra 481. To the High-Constables of the Hundred of etc.

Kent. ss.
These are in His Majesty's Name to charge and command you forthwith to give
warning to the Churchwardens, and other the Overseers of the Poor of every
Parish within your Hundred, that they do personally appear before us at N. at
the sign of, etc. there upon Tuesday the (...) Day of (...) next coming, by
nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to yield up and to make a
true and perfect account in writing, subscribed with their names or Marks of
all such sums of money, as they have received or rated and sessed, and not
received for and toward the relief of the Poor of their several Parishes, and
also of such stock to set their Poor on work, as is in their hands, or in the
hands of any their said Poor to work, and of all other things concerning their
said office, and hereof that they fail not at their and every of their perils (
Dalt. 90. 94. cap. 40.) and further we require you that you give warning to the
pety Constables of every Town within your said Hundred, that they or one of
them be also then and there present before us to inform and certify us of the
names of such other persons as are meet and fitting to be Overseers of the
Poor, within their several Towns for this year next ensuing, and hereof fail
you not, etc. Kilborn 178. the like: And this Warrant must be under the hands
and Seals of two Justices at the least, the one of the Quorum.

CCCCLXXI. Dalt. 357. cap. 121. A Warrant to new Overseers to take their
charge, Kilborn 183.

Kent ss.
Overseers.
By virtue of the Statute, made in the three and fourtieth year of the Reign of
our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, Entitled an Act for the relief of the
Poor: These are to will and require you, whose names are here under written,
that you together with the Churchwardens of the Parish for the time being, do
according to the same Statute, take order from time to time for this year to
come for the setting to work of the Poor within your Parish, and for the
raising of a convenient stock of some ware or stuff in your Town to that
purpose, and for the providing of necessary relief, for such as be lame and
impotent amongst you, and for the placing Apprentices, such Children whose
Parents are not able to maintain them, and hereof see that you fail not at your
perils, dated, etc.

CCCCLXXII. Dalt. 92. cap. 40. These Overseers and Churchwardens or the
greater part of them, Apprentice.
with the consent of two or more such Justices shall take order from time to
time, for setting their Poor on work, putting out Apprentices and relieving
their impotent, as follows.

CCCCLXXIII. Dalt. 92. cap. 40. First for setting to work the Children of all
such whose Parents shall not by the greater part of the said Overseers be
thought able to keep and maintain their Children, Apprentice.
which Children they or the greater part of them, by the assent of two such
Justices, may also put out to be Appretices, viz. The Men Children till the age
of twenty four, and the Women Children till their age of twenty one years, or
the time of their Marriage, and all Poor Children so bound Apprentices, may be
taken and kept as Apprentices by their Masters, any former Statute to the
contrary notwithstanding, see 1 Jac. 25. N. and 21 Jac. 28. N. but such binding
must be by Indenture, Dalt. 391. cap. 128. and Dalt. 82. cap. 31.

CCCCLXXIV. Dalt. 92. cap. 40. Secondly for setting to work of all such
persons, Married or unmarried, as having no means to maintain them, Estates.
use no ordinary and daily trade of life to get their living by, now the
placeing of such Apprentices, and the setting and holding the Poor to work, is
the more proper and true duty of Overseers, for otherwise their bare gathering
or raising of a stock is to little purpose. And note that the Churchwardens
and Overseers of the Poor, may by and with the consent of two or more Justices
of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, etc. set up use and occupy any
trade mystery or occupation, only for the setting on work and better relief of
the Poor of the Parish, Town or place where they are Overseers, etc. 3 Car. 1.
4.

CCCCLXXV. Dalt. 92. cap. 40. Thirdly for relieving such Poor amongst them as
are Poor and impotent or not able to work. Taxes.
And to these purposes the said Overseers are enabled to raise weekly or
otherwise by taxation of every Inhabitant, Parson, Vicar, and other, and of
every occupier of Lands, Houses, Tithes, Mines or Saleable under-woods,
proportioning them to an Annual benefit, etc. in the same Parish, such
competent sums of money, as they shall think fit, therewith to provide a
convenient stock of some ware or stuff, to set the Poor on work, and also
competent sums of money, toward the necessary relief of the lame, impotent,
old, blind, and other Poor not able to work, and for the putting out of such
Children as aforesaid to be Apprentices.

CCCCLXXVI. Dalt. 93. cap. 40. But in putting forth of these Apprentices, there
must be regard hard to the Master, viz. his ability and honesty, Apprentices.
otherwise by some device or hard entreaty they may provoke their Apprentices
to depart or run away.

2. Secondly to his trade or faculty, lest the Apprentice consume his time
without learning any thing, and to these two the Justices of Peace must have an
eye.

3. Regard must also be had to the Child, viz. to put them out timely, and
while they are young and tractable, so as they be above the age of seven years,
otherwise by reason of their idle and base Educations, they will hardly keep
their service or employ themselves to work.

4. And regard is to be had to the Parents, viz. to take away such as are
brought up to live idly and losely, or else such as are a burden and charge to
their Parents.

CCCCLXXVII. Dalt. 93. cap. 40. Note also that as this Statute, Apprentice.
3 Car. 1. 4. (5.) 22. N. 9. Enableth the Churchwardens and Overseers with the
consent of two Justices of the Peace, to put out Apprentices, so it does enable
them to place those Apprentices with Masters, for without Masters there can be
no Apprentices. And the said Justices may compel all such as be of ability to
take such Apprentices according to their discretion, and if any such Master
shall refuse to take such Apprentice so to him appointed, the said Justices may
bind such Master over to the next General Goal delivery, there to answer such
default. And this was the direction of Sir Henry Mountague, Chief Justice of B.
R. at Cambridge Assizes, 1618. Wherewithal agreed, Sir Nicholas Hide, and Sir
Francis Harvy, Judges of Assize at Cambridge, summer Assizes, Anno, 1627.

Fines.
CCCCLXXVIII. Dalt. 93, 94. cap. 40. Also the Statute, 43 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 1.
seems to warrant as much, etc. or else the said Churchwardens and Overseers
with the consent of the said Justices, as it seems, may impose upon such
Master refusing to take such Apprentice, a competent sum of money for the
putting out of such an Apprentice elsewhere. And upon the Masters refusal to
pay such money, two such Justices may make their Warrant to levy the same by
distress and sale of the offenders goods, etc.

Apprentice.
CCCCLXXIX. Kilborns Precedents 22. A Warrant to put out Poor Children
Apprentices.

To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A.
in the said County, and to every of them. Kent ss.
THese are in his Majesty's name to Command you, that you do present unto us or
some of us in writing, under your hands at the House of A. R. in, etc. upon the
(...) day of (...) next, at nine of the clock in the morning of the same day,
the names of all such Poor Children of your said Parish as are Orphans, or
whose Parents shall not by you or the greater number of you be thought able to
keep and maintain them. Together with the names of the Parents of the said
Children, if they have any living, and the several ages of the Children
aforesaid. And that you do cause such of the said Children as be able to come
thither, and more especially such of them as by you shall be thought fit to be
put forth Apprentices, to appear before us at the time and place aforesaid, to
be by us there viewed. And likewise that you do then and there also present
unto us in writing as aforesaid, the names of such substantial Inhabitants of
your said Parish to whom you shall think fit to put the said Children or any of
them Apprentices, and more especially of such of the said Inhabitants as have
not formerly taken such Poor Children of the said Parish Apprentices. And
lastly that you do give notice to the said Inhabitants that they are by us
required then and there, to appear before ut to show cause why you by our
assent shall not bind such of the said Children Apprentices unto them (as to
you stall seem convenient,) unless they shall in the mean time consent to take
and receive the same accordingly. And that you your selves be then and there
also present, and have there this Precept, of all which you are not to fail at
your peril,

given under our hands and Seals the (...) day of, Process.
etc.
CCCCLXXX. Kilborns Precedents 25. A Warrant against them that refuse to take
Apprentices.

To the Constables, etc. of the Hundred of K. and to every of them. Kent ss.
WHereas the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in
the County aforesaid, did by our assent by Indenture bearing date the (...) day
of etc. put and bind out unto B. C. of the Parish aforesaid, D. E. a Poor Child
of the said Parish, Apprentice according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided, in the forty third year of the Reign of the late Queen
Elizabeth, Entitled an Act for the relief of the Poor. And forasmuch as the
said B. C. does refuse to take, receive and keep the said Apprentice
accordingly, and does likewise refuse to Seal the Counterpart of the said
Indenture, These are therefore in His Majesty's name, to Command you, that you,
some or one of you, do cause the said B. C. to come before us or one of us, or
some other Justice of Peace of the said County to enter into Recognizance unto
his said Majesty conditioned for personal appearance at the next General
Sessions of the Peace, to be holden at E. in the County aforesaid, then and
there to answer the premises, and further to do and receive as the said Court
shall then consider of him, in this behalf hereof fail not at your perils,

given under our hands and Seals at, etc.
CCCCLXXXI. Dalt. 94. cap. 40. Two Justices shall take the Account of such
Overseers, at the end of their year, Account.
and of the Churchwardens in every of these particulars following, 43 Eliz. 2.
Supra. 470.

1. Of all sums of money by them received, or rated and not received.

2. Of all such stock of ware or stuff, as they or any of the Poor have in
their hands.

3. What Apprentices they have put out and bound according to the Statute.

4. What Poor they have set to work or relieved.

5. Whether they have suffered any of their Poor to wander and beg out of their
Town, or in the Highways, or in their Town without their direction, 39 Eliz.
3. and 4.

6. Whether they have monthly met to consider of these things.

7. Whether they have assessed the Inhabitants and occupiers of Lands, etc. in
their Parish, viz. all such as are of ability, and with indifferency.

8. Whether they have endeavored to levy and gather such assessements.

9. Whether they have been otherwise negligent in their Office, within which
words also there seems to lie included, if they shall neglect to execute the
Justices Warrants, to them or any of them directed for the levying of any
forfeiture according to this Statute.

CCCCLXXXII. Dalt. 95. cap. 40. He that shall bring any Poor to any Town which
are burdensome to the Town, Settlement.
may be raised in his rates toward the relief of the Poor of that Parish.

CCCCLXXXIII. Dalt. 96. 97. cap. 40. Young Children whose Parents are dead, are
to be set on work, relieved or maintained, Infant.
at the charge of the Town, where they were dwelling at the time of the death
of their Parents, and are not to be sent to their place of birth, etc. for if
the Parents were not Rogues, we may not make the Children Rogues, except they
wander abroad and beg, this was the direction of Fleming Chief Justice in a
case between Weston and Cowledge, Anno. 11 Jac. Lambert 207. 7.

CCCCLXXXIV. Dalt. 97. cap. 40. A Travailing Woman having a small Child sucking
upon her, is apprehended for Felony, Women.
and sent to the Goal, and is after arraigned and hanged, this Child is to be
sent to the place of its birth, if it can be known, otherwise it must be sent
to the Town where the Mother was apprehended, for that, that Town ought not to
have sent the Child to the Goal, being no Malefactor, and so was it delivered
by Sir Nicholas Hide at Cambridge lent Assizes, Anno. 3 Car. 1.

CCCCLXXXV. Dalt. 97. cap. 40. So that ( Lambert 207. 9.) such persons whose
Estates of their Houses be expired, Lieu.
and Servants when their service is ended, they shall not be put out of the
Towns where they so last dwelt or served, neither are they to be sent from
thence to their place of birth or last habitation, but are to be settled there
to work, being able of body, or being impotent, are to be there relieved. And
yet if such persons shall wander abroad, begging out of that Parish, then they
may be sent as Vagabonds from the place where they shall be taken wandering or
Begging to their place of birth.

Justices.
CCCCLXXXVI. Dalt. 97. 98. cap. 40. But for the placing and settling of these
Poor people, who now for want of Charity are much sent and tossed up and down,
from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, it has been holden by some
that it is in the power of the next Justice of Peace to give order therein. And
that upon appeal from him, the Justices of Peace at the Quarter Sessions may
fully take order therein, and that their order made in Sessions will not easily
be avoided. But Sir Francis Harvy, at Summer Assizes at Cambridge, Anno. 1629,
did deliver it, that the Justices of Peace, especially out of their Sessions
were not to meddle either with the removing or settling of any Poor but only of
Rogues.

Bar. and Fem.
CCCCLXXXVII. Dalt. 98. cap. 40. If a Man hireth an House in A. and being there
with his Wife and Children, he afterward shall bind himself as a Servant with
one dwelling in B. yet are not his Wife and Children to be sent to B. or placed
there, but are to remain still at A. where they were once settled, otherwise if
the Husband has hired an House in B.

Bastardy.
CCCCLXXXVIII. Dalt. 98. cap. 40. A Maid Servant gotten with Child at A. by her
fellow Servant, or by another young man of the same Town, after both their
times of service expireth, and they marry, and then the Young Man is retained
at B. then the Woman delivered of her Child, she with her Child are to be sent
to the Father at B. and there they, are to be settled.

Imprisonment
CCCCLXXXIX. Dalt. 99. 100. cap. 40. And all such persons sent to the House of
Correction, must there live by their own labor and work without charging the
Town or Country for any allowance, 7 Jac. 4. But for the Overseers to suffer
such thriftless Poor, or any other which can live of their labor or otherwise,
to be chargeable to the Town, or to relieve such, were a means to nourish them
in their lewdness and idleness, which take it, and to Rob others of relief that
want it, to wrong those of their money that pay it, and to condemn them of
oversight that dispose it. And yet if any of these thriftless Poor happen to
prove impotent, it seems they are to be relieved by the Town, but I leave
that to better consideration.

Lieu.
CCCCXC. Kilborns Precedents, 183. 184. A Warrant to remove one come to a Parish.

To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the said County, and every
of them. Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as complaint has been by you made unto us that Helen the Wife of R.
D. an Inhabitant in the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, is lately come
into your said Parish of Hawke, and has brought with her thither a Male-Child
of the said Robert and Helen, of the age of, etc. or thereabouts, and that both
the said Helen and Child are likely to be chargeable to your said Parish, and
you have thereupon craved from us such relief touching the premises, as by Law
is appointed, These are therefore in his Majesty's name to Authorize and
require you, that you, some or one of you do convey the said Helen and Child to
the said parish of C. and there to deliver them to the said Robert in case you
can there find him, to be with him settled according to Law, and in case that
you cannot there find him, then to deliver the said Helen and Child to the
Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish of C. to be disposed according to Law,

given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
CCCCXCI. Kilborns Precedents, 185, 186. A Warrant for removing, Lieu.
etc. one come to a Parish.

To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor, of the Parish of H.
in the said County and to every of them. Kent ss.
WHereas complaint has been made by you to us according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided ( viz. 13 and 14 Car. 2. ca. 12. N. that
A. B. has within forty days before the said complaint, come into your said
Parish to settle therein a Tenement under the yearly value of ten pounds, and
that he is likely to be chargeable to the Parish aforesaid, and was last
legally settled at B. in, etc. by the space of forty days at the least as a
Native, ( Householder, Sojourner, Apprentice or Servant, etc.) there, These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name, to require and authorize you and every of you,
that you, some or one of you do remove and convey the said A. B. to B.
aforesaid, where he was so last legally settled, unless he give sufficient
security for the discharge of your said Parish, to be allowed by us,

given under our Hands and Seals the, etc.
CCCCXCII. Kilborns Precedents, 186. Husbandry.
The like Warrant against one for not returning, etc. (when his work is
finished, or shall fall sick or Impotent, etc.) where he comes to a Parish to
work, 14 Car. 2. 12.

To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of H. in the
said County, and every of them. Kent ss.
WHereas complaint has been made by you unto us, that A. B. an Inhabitant of
C. came into your Parish to work, and is not returned upon his finishing
thereof, These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to require and Authorize you
and every of you, that you, some or one of you do convey the said A. B. to C.
aforesaid, there to remain an Inhabitant as formerly he was,

given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
CCCCXCIII. Kilborns Precedents, 184, 185. Lieu.
A Warrant for apprehending one for returning to the Parish from which he was
removed, 14 Car. 2. 12.

To the Constables, etc. of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and to every
of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said County, at
B. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
WHereas A. B. in May last legally settled as a Native, (Householder,
Sojourner, Apprentice or Servant, etc.) in the Parish of T. came into the
Parish of V. to settle in a Tenement there, under the yearly value of ten
pounds, and likely to be chargeable to the said Parish, was upon complaint
thereof made by the Churchwardens and Overseers, according to the Statute
aforesaid in that behalf made by Warrant to the said Churchwardens and
Overseers, according to the Statute aforesaid, directed by them, removed and
conveyed to the aforesaid Parish of T. there to remain according to the said
Statute, since which the said A. B. did return of his own accord to the said
Parish of V. from whence he was so removed, These are therefore in His
Majesty's Name to Command you, that you, some of you, or one of you, do cause
the said A. B. to come before us, some or one of us, at the House of T.
Inholder called the George-Inn, in the said County, the first day of June next
ensuing, at nine of the clock in the forenoon of the same day, to show cause
why he returned to the said Parish of V. and further to do and receive, as to
Justice does appertain, Hereof fail not at your perils,

given under our Hands and Seals the (...) day of, etc.
Bar. and Fem.
CCCCXCIV. Kilborns Precedents, 187. A Warrant and Mittimus, for one who Runs
away and leaves his Family upon the Parish, 7 Jac. 4. Dalt. 385. cap. 125.

To the Constable, etc. of the Hundred of C. and every of them, and to the
Keeper of His Majesty's Goal, for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid. Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as it has been duly proved before us, that A. B. of the Parish of
H. being able to labor, and thereby to relieve himself and his Family, did
nevertheless lately run away out of this said Parish, and leave his family upon
the Parish, these are therefore in His Majesty's Name to command you the said
Constable, etc. and every of you, that you some or one of you, do take the said
A. B. and him safely convey to the Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
said Keeper of the same, together with this precept, Commanding also you the
said Keeper to receive him in the Goal aforesaid, and him there safely keep,
until he shall be from thence delivered by due order of Law, hereof fail not at
your perils,

given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
Pain.
CCCCXCV. Kilborns Precedents 242. A Rogue is not to be sent to the House of
Correction, but to be whipped, and sent where last settled, if known, otherwise
to the place of his birth, but the House of Correction is properly for those
that will not work, 2 Bulstrod. 358. Lambert Constable 41.

Trades.
CCCCXCVI. Kilborns Precedents 242. If Inhabitants of the County go with Wares
to sell at Houses in that County, they are Rogues, Jenkins 318.

Taxes.
CCCCXCVII. Kilborns Precedents 241. Assessment for the Poor ought to be made
according to the visible Estates of the Inhabitants there, both real and
personal, but not for any Estate they have elsewhere, and the occupiers of
Lands, and not the Landlords are to be taxed, Jenkins 327. pl. 48.

Taxes.
CCCCXCVIII. Kilborns Precedents 179. A Warrant for the Poors Tax on 43 Eliz. 2.
Dalt. 357. cap. 121. Infra 504.

To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of B.
in the said County and to every of them. Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as complaint has been made by you unto us, that the several persons
hereunder named have refused to pay unto you the everal sums of money adjoining
to their several Names, being assessed upon them severally for and toward the
necessary relief of the Poor of the said Parish according to the form of the
Statute, in that case made and provided, These are therefore in His Majesty's
Name to Command you, that you, some or one of you, do forthwith levy the said
several and respective sums of money by distress and sale of the several
respective goods of the said several and respective offenders rendering to the
parties the overplus, and in defect of such distress, that you, some or one of
you do cetrifie the same, unto us, to the end that there may be such further
proceeding touching the premises as to Justice does appartain,

given under our Hands and Seals, at A. the (...) day of, etc.
A. B. 1 s. 6 d. C. D. 1 s. 8 d.

CCCCXCIX. Kilborns Precedents, 180. Imprisonment
A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to destrain.

To the Keeper of His Majesty's Goal for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid.
Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as it appears unto us, that A. B. of etc. was assessed and rated
at the sums of, etc. for and toward the necessary relief of the Poor of the
said Parish, according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided, and that for his refusal of payment of the same, a Warrant was
according to the form of the said Statute, directed to the Churchwardens, and
other the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid, under the Hands and
Seals of E. F. G. H. etc. His Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid, and for that it now appears unto us that the said A B. has no Goods
cr Chattels by distress and sale whereof the said moneys can be levied, nor
will he yet pay the moneys aforesaid, We therefore do send you here withal the
body of the said A. B. Commanding you to receive him into the said Goal, there
to remain without Bail or Mainprize, until he shall pay the moneys aforesaid.
Hereof fail not at your perils

given under our Hands and Seals at, etc. the day of, etc.
Lambert 292. 293.

D. Dalt. 126. 127. cap. 47. Also one Justice of Peace or the Constable, with
the Minister and one other of the Parish, Relief.
after the whipping of a Rogue according to the Statute 39 Eliz. 4. N. may make
the said Rogue a Testimonial under their Hand and Seal for the conveying of
such Rogue according to this Statute.

And yet such Rogues may not beg in their travail, neither may the Constable of
the Parish thorough which they pass, nor any other person give them any relie^
as it seems, for that were contrary to 1 Jac. 7. N. and a forfeiture of 10 s.

But now for that after so many years since the making of these Statutes they
will not be reformed of the Roguish life, they are rather to be dealt withal as
Incorrigible Rogues.

And as for the Soldier or Mariner, 43 Eliz. 3. especially such as are sick,
hurt or maihmed, they now are usually or may be relieved with money by the
Treasurers of every County where they come, viz. with such convenient sums, as
may carry them to the next County, and this is by a latter law, 21 Jac. 28. N.
and therefore now it may seem unfit that either the Constable should relieve
them or suffer them to beg, or ask relief in their Towns, for so the Country
shall be double charged toward their relief, viz. in paying to the Treasurer
toward their relief, and again in giving them at home at their doors.

DI. Dalt. 127. cap. 47. So that I do not find that any one or more Justices of
Peace, License.
may or can in any case License any Man to beg or ask relief at all, but only
may make a Testimonial or License, in the two first former cases, and some few
other, to pass from place to place, and yet in those two cases only the Law
tolerates them to ask and receive necessary relief. I observe further that by
39 Eliz. 3. tho it be now expired, no person whatsoever might go wandering
abroad and beg in any place whatsoever, by License or without, upon pain to be
taken as a Rogue, and therefore Quaere of such briefs and License as lately
have usually come from or in the name of the Lord Mayor of London, Licenceing
Poor persons to travial and to ask or beg relief in their travail, and by
general passeports not directing them from Parish to Parish, Dalt. 380. cap.
124.

Relief.
DII. Dalt. 130. cap. 47. At Summer Assizes held at Royston, for the County of
Cambridge, Anno Dom. 1630. Sir Francis Harvy, delivered these rules or
directions upon the Statutes made against Rogues.

1. That now no Pass is to be allowed for these wandering people, and that such
of them as do Pass or travail tho with any passeport, yet are to be punished as
Rogues notwithstanding such their Passeport.

2. That if any Ale-house-keeper or other person shall but lodge a Rogue, this
is relieving of them, and contrary to the Statute of 1 Jac. 7. N. and is a
forfeiture of 10 s.

3. That giving of money by a Constable to a Rogue is a relieving of a Rogue
within 1 Jac. 7. N. and a forfeiture of 10 s.

4. For the way to rid the Country of these Rogues is to give them either due
punishment, and that often, yea at every Town, if they will not be reclaimed,
and to keep them from lodging and other relief, as much as may be, or else to
send them to the Goal as incorrigible Rogues.

Relief.
DIII. Kilborns Precedents, 188. A Warrant to allow a poor prisoner relief.

To A. B. Gent. Treasurer for the relief of the prisoners in His Majesty's Goal
for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss.
WHereas T. S. now Prisoner in the said Goal is in very great necessity for
want of present relief for his subsistence there, These are therefore, so far
forth as in us lies, to appoint and Authorize you the said Treasurer to allow
unto the sad T. S. competent relief during his necessity in the said Goal,

given under our Hands and Seals the third day of J. Anno. Dom. 1679.
Taxes.
DIV. Dalt. 357. cap. 121. A Warrant to distrain such as refuse to pay their
Rates for the poor, Kilborn 179. Supra 498.

To the Churchwardens and other the Overseers for the poor within the parish
of W. and to every of them.
Canterbr. FOrasmuch as we are credibly informed that the persons
hereundernamed do refuse to contribute or pay the sums of money
hereundermentioned, upon their Heads, being assessed and rated upon them
severally, for and toward the necessary relief of the poor of your said Town,
according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately provided. These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name to charge and Command you and every of you
forthwith, to levy all and every the said several sums of money unpaid, and all
the Arrearages thereof, of all and every the said persons so refusing, by
distress and sale of the offenders goods, you rendering to the parties the
overplus that shall remain upon the sale of the said Goods, and this shall be
your sufficient Warrant therein,

dated, etc.
Another to the Churchwardens, etc.

Canterbr.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to charge and Command you and every of you,
presently to demand of all and every the persons hereunder Named, all and every
the several sums of money hereunder severally written or set upon their Heads,
being assessed and rated upon them, for and toward the necessary relief of the
poor of your said Town, according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
lately provided, and if they or any of them shall refuse to pay the said
several sums of money so rated upon them, that then presently you levy the same
by distress and sale of the offenders goods, rendering to the parties the
overplus that shall remain upon the sale of their said goods, and this shall be
your sufficient Warrant therein.

Dated, etc.
DV. Lambert J. P. Precedents, 18, pl. 49. Indictment.
A Presentment for a Rogue or Vagabond, and his relief, Infra 538.

Juratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacramentum suum Praesentant. quod A. B. nuper
de C. in dicto Com. Schauelman aetatis septem Annorum and amplius, ac Corpore
sano, valente potente atque ad laborandum Habili Existens, nullam Artem habens,
terram, aut ullum Magistrum, nec aliqua utens licita Marchandiza, Art vel
misterio unde sibi victum parare posset 10. die Decembr. Anno Regni Dom. nostri
Jacobi Dei Gratia, Angliae, etc. apud E. Infra Hundredum de W. in Com.
praedict. and multis aliis in locis dicti Comitatus huc illuc passim vagatus
est mendicans ac per. W. de E. praedicta, in dicto Comitat. Ycoman,
Constabularium dicti Hundredi de W. (in quo sita est villa de E. predicta)
postea viz. 12 die mensis Januarii. Anno supradicto apud E. praedict. in Com.
praedicto inventus est vagrans and mendicans, ac per eundem Constabularium tunc
ibidem deprehensus est, Inordinate se gerens tanquam Vagabundus, and Mendicus
validus, contra pacem dicti Dom. Regis ac contra formam diversorum Statutorum
inde provisorum and editorum, and ulterius quod G. H de E. praedict. in dicto
Comitatu Yeoman sciens praefatum A. B. modo and forma praedictis Vagantem and
mendicantem, eundem tamen A. B. dicto 10. die Dec. Anno supradicto in Domo.
Ipsius G. H. mansionali apud E. praedict. in Com. praedict. Hospitavit, and
eidem A. B. tunc and ibidem panem and potum voluntary dedit in contemptum
dicti Dom. Regis ac contra formam Statutorum praedictorum.

DVI. Kilborns Precedents, 198, 199. Fresh suits
A Warrant to make General search for Rogues, Vagabonds, etc. on 7 Jac. 4.

To the Constable, etc. of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and to every
of them. Kent ss.
THese are in His Majesty's Name to Command you and every of you, that taking
assistance of sufficient men of the said Hundred you do in the night before the
20 day of October next ensuing make a general privy search within every of the
Parishes, Villages and Hamlets, within the same, for the finding out and
apprehending of all Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering and Idle persons, in and
about the said Parishes, Villages and Hamlets, and that such Rogues Vagabonds
and wandering and Idle persons as you shall then find and apprehend in the said
search, you do bring before us, or some of us, on the aforesaid 20 day of
October, at the House of John Price in C. at nine of the Clock in the forenoon
of the same day, there to be Examined of their Idle and wandering life and to be
further dealt withal according to Law, and that you do then and there also give
unto us an account and Reckoning upon Oath in writing, and under the hand of
the Minister of each respective Parish, what Rogues, Vagabonds and wandering and
disorderly persons, you have apprehended both in the same search, and also
since the last like general search made, and how many have been punished, or
otherwise sent to the House of Correction, all which you are not to neglect
upon forfeitures of such fines, pains and penalties, as by the Statute in such
case made and provided, may be by us inflicted upon you for such your neglect.
We do likewise hereby in His Majesty's Name further Command you, and every of
you, to bring before us, or some of us, at the time and place aforesaid, all
such persons within the said Hundred, as be Masterless, or live out of service,
or be Common Alehouse haunters, or expenders of their moneys, in riotous
living, not duly laboring for their living, whereby so to maintain them to the
end that we may proceed against them, as to Justice does appertain, and that
you your selves be then and there also personally present to give account of
the Execution of this our Warrant, hereof fail you not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals at, etc.
Fresh suit.
DVII. Dalt. 358. cap. 121. A Warrant for a General Search for Rogues, 7 Jac. 4.

To the High-Constables of the Hundred of, etc.
Cambridge THese are in His Majesty's Name to charge and Command you, that you
together with the Pety Constables of the several Towns, Parishes and Hamlets
within your Hundred, taking sufficient assistance out of the said Towns, do
make a general privy search within every of the said several Towns, Parishes
and Hamlets upon the (...) day of, etc. at night next coming, for the finding
out and apprehending all Rogues, Vagabonds and wandering and Idle persons in or
about your said several Towns, Parishes or Hamlets, and that such as shall be
found and apprehended, you do cause them to be brought before us the next day
unto L. by nine of the Clock, there to be by us dealt withal according to the
late Statute in that behalf provided, at which time and place, we further
require you together with the said Pety Constables to appear before us, and
there to give an account and reckoning upon Oath in writing, and under the
hands of the Minister of every several Parish within your Hundred, what Rogues,
Vagabonds, wandering and disordered persons, have been there apprehended, as
well in the same search, as also since the last assembly and meeting that made
was for that purpose, being upon or about the (...) day of, etc. last past, and
hereof fail you not, etc.

Process.
DVIII. Dalt. 358. cap. 121. Note that all Rogues which shall be brought before
the Justices upon such search after Examination of their idle life taken by the
Justices, are either to be whipped by the Constables of the Town where the
Justices sit, as it seems, or else from thence are to be sent to the House of
Correction, and to be conveyed thither by the Constables that brought them, and
yet at the charge of the Hundred, which services imposed on the Constables, are
some cause of their neglect of this service, and therefore I have set down
another course and Precedent perhaps no less serviceable, which also may be
performed and done, every month or every meeting of the Justices, if need shall
so require, or if the Justices can not, or shall not meet, yet it seems such
Warrant may be granted out by any one Justice of the Peace as follows.

Fresh suit.
DIX. Dalt. 358. 359. cap. 121. Another Warrant for a general search

To, etc.
Cambridge THese are in the Kings Majesty's Name to Charge and Command you,
that you, together with the Pety Constables of the several Towns, Parishes and
Hamlets, within your Hundred, taking sufficient assistance out of the said
Towns, do make a general privy search within every of the said several Towns,
Parishes and Hamlets, upon the (...) day of, etc. at night next coming, for the
finding out and apprehending of all Rogues, Vagabonds and wandering and idle
persons, in or about your said several Towns, and that such as shall be found
and apprehended, you do cause them to be punished in every several Town or
Parish, where they shall be so apprehended by the Pety Constables of every
several Parish respectively, and by them also further to be conveyed according
to the Statute, and if any of the said Rogues shall appear to be dangerous or
Incorrigible, that then you cause such to be brought before me or any other of
His Majesty's Justices of Peace of this division, to be further dealt withal
according to the Statute in such cases provided.

Dated, etc.
DX. Dalt. 380. cap. 124. A Testimonial or Pasport for a Poor man to Travail.
License.


Canterbur. SIr R. M. and Sir J. R. Knights, two of the Kings Majesty's
Justices of Peace, within the said County, to all Justices of Peace, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Constables, and all other his Majesty's Officers and Ministers
whatsoever, sends greeting, etc. Forasmuch as the bearer hereof E. P.
(because of, etc.) has desired our Testimonial or License for his safer
travail unto the City of B. where, etc. in consideration whereof know ye, we
the said Sir R. M. and Sir J. R. so far as in us lies to have Licenced the
said E. P. to travail and pass the direct way from H. within the said County of
C. wherein he lately dwelled, unto the said City of B. so as his Journey be not
of longer or further continuance than twenty days next after the date hereof,
praying you and every of you not to molest or trouble the said Poor man in his
travail, but to permit and suffer him peaceably to pass, so as he show himself
in no respect offensive to his Majesty's laws.

In witness, etc.
DXI. Dalt. 381. cap. 124. A Testimonial for such as have suffered Shipwreck.
License.


Norf. A. B. of C. in the County of Norfolk Esquire one of the Kings Majesty's
Justices, etc. to all, etc. Forasmuch as the bearer hereof is aged about, etc.
having lately been at Sea in a ship called, etc. and has suffered Shipwreck,
and got to land at Y. in the said County of Norfolk, upon the (...) day of,
etc. last past, as I am credibly informed, as well by the report of the said I.
S. as also by the testimony of diverse the Inhabitants of Y. aforesaid, and for
that the said I. S. has not wherewith to relieve himself in his Travail
homewards to D. in the County of H. where he says he was born, or has a
dwelling, etc. These are therefore to pray you and every of you, to whom these
presents shall come, not to molest or trouble the said I. S. in his travail to
D. aforesaid, where he is limited to be within, etc. days next after the date
hereof, but desiring you rather to relieve him in his necessity as you shall
seem meet, and withal you the Constables of every Town where he shall come, to
help him with lodging in convenient time, so that he Travaileth the direct way
to D. aforesaid, not doing any thing contrary to the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm.

In witness, etc.
DXII. Kilborns Precedents, 115. 214. Imprisonment
A Warrant for apprehending and committing a dangerous Rogue, 7 Jac. 4.

To the Constables, etc. of the Hundred of A. and to the Keeper of the House of
Correction for the County aforesaid.
Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as A. B. a Rogue (Vagabond, idle or disorderly person, etc.) was
found and apprehended at C. in the Hundred and County aforesaid, in a general
privy search by our Command made according to the form of the Statute in that
case made and provided, and brought before us this present day at our assembly
at T. in the County aforesaid. We do therefore in His Majesty's Name Command
you the Constables, etc. that you, some or one of you, do at the charge of the
said Hundred convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid house of Correction, and
there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept,
Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said house, and
there set him to work and labor or otherwise to deal with him according to Law,
until he shall be from thence lawfully delivered, thereof fail not at your
perils,

given under our Hands and Seals, at A. aforesaid the, etc. day of etc.
Imprisonment
DXIII. Dalt. 384. cap. 125. A Mittimus to the House of Correction, of a
dangerous Rogue.

Kent ss.
I. R. etc. and M. D. Esquire two of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace
within the said County of K. to the Master or Governor of the House of
Correction at B. for the East side of the same County, or to his Deputy there
greeting, 39 Eliz. 4. and 7 Jac. 4.

Whereas I.S. a sturdy Vagrant Beggar, was this day of etc. Anno Dom. etc.
brought before us and charged, as well with Begging and Idle wandering abroad,
as also with other lewd and disorderly behavior, so as he appears to us to be
dangerous to the inferior sort of people, or such a one as will not be reformed
of his Roguish life, Contrary to His Majesty's Laws in that behalf provided.
These are therefore to Will and require you, to receive the said I. S. and him
safely keep in your said house until the next Quarter Sessions to be holden in
the said County, and during all that time that he shall so continue with you,
that you hold him to work and labor, and to punish him by putting Fetters or
Gives upon him, and by moderate whipping him, as in good descretion you shall
find cause, yealding him for his maintenance only so much as he shall deserve
or Earn by his labor and work, and that at the said next Quarter Sessions you
have the said I. S. there, together with this our Warrant, and hereof see that
you fail not, etc.

dated, etc.
Imprisonment
DXIV. Kilborns Precedents, 196. A Mittimus for a dangerous Rogue on 39 Eliz. 4.

To the Constable, etc. of the Hundred of A. and to every of them, and to the
Keeper of His Majesty's Goal for the said County at M. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss
FOrasmuch as A. B. a wandering Rogue does appear to be dangerous to inferior
sort of people, (or one that will not be reformed of his Roguish life, etc.) We
do therefore in His Majesty's Name charge and Command you the said Constable
and Borsholders, etc. that you, some or one of you do safely convey the said A.
B. to the Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper of the same,
together with this precept, Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said Goal, and him there safely to keep until the next Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said County at A. aforesaid, that
he may then and there be farther dealt withal according to the Law. Hereof fail
not at your perils,

given under, etc.
War.
DXV. Kilborns Precedents, 205. A Certificate for allowance to Wife or Orphan of
maihmed Soldier on 14 Car. 2. 12.

To the Treasurer of the said County for maihmed Soldiers.
Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as A. B. (Widow or Orphan) of D. Officer, Soldier or Mariner,
maihmed, indigent, aged or disabled in body for work in the service of His
Majesty, etc has according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately
made appear unto us, that A. B. late of C. continued faithful to his trust, and
not deserted the same by taking up Arms against His said late Majesty, or His
Majesty that now is, or otherwise. We do therefore according to the said
Statute adjudge that over and besides such relief as shall give by work and
labor and shall be allowed by the Charity and benevolence of the Parish of A.
where is now settled.

DXVI. Kilborns Precedents 212. 213. License.
A Testimonial or Pass for a Vagrant where the place of his birth is nor known
on 39 Eliz. 4. Lambert 204. Constables duty 41.

Kent ss.
A. B. a Vagabond of low Stature, aged about twenty years, was this present day
taken, Begging (Vagrant wandering or misordering himself, etc.) at T. in the
County aforesaid, and then and there by my appointment punished according to
the form of the Statute in that case provided, and for that the Parish where he
was born is not known, tho it be demanded of him, and for that also he did last
dwell before the same punishment by the space of one whole year in the Parish
of T. etc. as he confesses, he is therefore to be conveied from Parish to
Parish by the Officers of every of the same, the next right way to the said
Parish of T. there to put himself to labor as he ought to do, and he is limited
to pass thither within, etc. days now next ensuing at his peril.

Given under my hand and Seal at, etc.
DXVII. Kilborns Precedents, 213. Lieu.
The like where neither the place of his birth nor last abode is known.

Kent ss.
A. B. Vagrant of middle Stature, aged about forty years, was this present day
taken Begging (Vagrant wandering or misordering himself, etc.) at T. in the said
County, and then and there by my appointment punished according to the form of
the Statute in that case provided, and for that neither the Parish where he was
born nor the Parish where he did last dwell before the said punishment by the
space of one whole year, is known, tho both were by me demanded of him, he is
therefore to be conveyed from Parish to Parish by the Officers of every of the
same, the next strait way to the Parish of B. in the, etc. through which he
last passed, without punishment as he says, and he is to be from thence
conveyed by the Officers of the said Parish, according to the form of the
Statute in that case made and provided, and is limited to pass thither within
days now next ensuing at his peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal at, etc.
DXVIII Kilborns Precedents 214. Forfeiture.
A Warrant to pay 2 s. for apprehending a Vagrant on 14 Car. 2. 12.

To the, etc. of A. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss.
WHereas A. B. did lately apprehend and bring unto me C. D. a Rogue, (Vagabond
or sturdy Beggar) which did pass through your, etc. in the Parish aforesaid
unapprehended, These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to Will and require
you, forthwith to pay to the aforesaid A. B. 2 s. (for each) for his said
apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. according to the form of the Statute in
that case lately made, hereof fail you not at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal the, etc.
DXIX. Kilborns Precedents 215. Distress.
A Warrant upon non payment of 2 s. for apprehending a Vagrant on 14 Car. 2. 12.

To the Constables, etc. of the Hundred of A. in the County aforesaid, and to
every of them. Kent ss.
WHereas A. D. did lately apprehend and bring unto T. H. one of His Majesty's
Justices of Peace of the said County, C. D. which did pass through the, etc. in
the Parish of T. in the County aforesaid, unapprehended, of which said place of
apprehension A. B. was then Constable, etc. and thereupon the aforesaid Justice
did according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made, require the said
A. B. to pay to the aforesaid A. D. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the said
C. D. nevertheless the said A. B. has neglected to pay the same, These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name to require you, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do levy by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of
the said A. B. 20 s. by him forfeited and lost, for not causing the aforesaid
C. D. to be punished and convicted according to the form of the Statute in that
behalf made; and that out of the moneys by you so levied, you do pay to the
said A. D. the aforesaid 20 s. and etc. more, which we think fit to allow unto
him for loss of his time, and that you do employ and dispose of the residue of
the said 20 s. to the relief of the Poor of the Parish aforesaid. Hereof fail
not at your perils,

given under our Hand and Seals, the (...) day of, etc.
Certificate.
DXX. Kilborns Precedents 216. A Certificate of apprehending a Vagrant in the
confines of another County, on 13 and 14 Car. 2. 12.

To A. B. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, of the said County of C.
Kent ss.
THese are to certify you that C. D. Rogue (Vagabond or sturdy Beggar) having
passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of C. unapprehended, was
upon the second day of June apprehended at T. in the said County of C. in the
confines of the County aforesaid, by R. W.

Given under my hand the (...) day of, etc.
Forfeiture.
DXXI. Kilborns Precedents 216. A Warrant to pay 2 s. thereupon.

To, etc. in the Parish of B. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss.
WHereas I have received a Certificate under the hands of A. B. one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of K. that C. D. Rogue (Vagabond
or sturdy Beggar) having passed through the Parish of T. in the said County of
C. unapprehended, was upon the second day of June apprehended at T. in the said
County of C. in the confines of the County aforesaid by R. W. which said Parish
of T. was then in your Hundred, (Borough, etc.) These are therefore in His
Majesty's Name to Will and require you forthwith to pay to the aforesaid R. W.
2 s. for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. according to the form of
the Statute in that case lately made, Hereof sail not at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the (...) day of, etc.
Process.
DXXII. Kilborns Precedents 217. A Warrant upon non payment of the same.

To the Constables, etc. of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and every of
them. Kent ss.
WHereas I lately received a Certificate under the hand of A. D. one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. that C. D. having passed
through the Parish of, etc. in the said County of K. unapprehended, was
apprehended at T. in the said County of K. in the confines of the County
aforesaid by R. W. of which said Parish A. B. of C. was then Constable, etc.
and whereas I did according to the form of the Statute in that behalf lately
made by Warrant under my hand and seal, require the said A. B. to pay the
aforesaid R. W. 2 s. for his said apprehension of the aforesaid C. D. according
to the Statute aforesaid, nevertheless the said A. B. has neglected to pay the
same, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do levy by distress and sale of the goods
and Chattels of the said A. B. 10 s. by him forfeited and lost by not causing
the aforesaid C. D. to be punished and conveyed according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made, and that out of the moneys you have so levied, you
do pay to the said R. W. the aforesaid 2 s. And, etc. more which we think fit
to allow him for his expenses and loss of time, and that you do employ and
dispose of the residue of the said 10 s. to the relief of the Poor of the said
Parish of T. Hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under my hand and seal the (...) day of, etc.
DXXIII. A Mittimus to the House of Correction of Rogues, Imprisonment
apprehended by the Watch.

To the Keeper of the House of Correction of W. etc.
Suff. ss
FOrasmuch as A. B. and C. B. his Wife were this present day brought before me
by I. D. and I. F. Constables of the Town of W. being by their Watch this last
night apprehended and charged with wandering and Roguing abroad, as also with
other lewd and disorderly behavior and course of life, and such as will not be
reformed thereof, contrary to his Majesty's Laws in such behalf provided, These
are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you to receive and take
into your custody the said A. B. and C. B. his Wife and them safely keep until
they shall be thence delivered by due order of Law, and in the mean time to
hold them the said A. B. and C. B. his Wife to such labor and work, and give
unto him such punishment as by the Laws are required, giving and yealding him
such and so much maintenance as they the said A. B. and C. B. shall by their
labor and work Earn and deserve, and that you have the said A. B. and C. B. at
the next Quarter Sessions to be holden at W. aforesaid, together with this
Warrant.

Given under, etc.
DXXIV. Kilborns Precedents 219. A Warrant to send a Wife and Child to a
Husband. Bar. and Fem.


To the Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of C. in the said County, and to
every of them, Kent ss.
FOrasmuch as complaint has been by you made unto us that H. the Wife of R. D.
an Inhabitant of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, is lately come into
your said Parish of H. and has brought with her thither a Child of the said R.
and H. of the age of, etc. or thereabouts, and that both the said H. and Child
are likely to be chargeable to your said Parish, and you have thereupon craved
from us such relief touching the premises as by the Law is appointed, These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to Authorize and require you, that you, some or
one of you, do convey the said H. and Child to the said Parish of C. and there
deliver them to the said R. in case you can there find him, to be with him
settled according to Law, and in case that you cannot there find him, then to
deliver the said H. and Child to the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish
of C. to be disposed of according to Law.

Given under our hands and seals at, etc.
Apprentice.
DXXV. 2 Inst. 734, 735. And where some are of opinion that in particular Towns
a discreet and expert Workman may set the young and idle people as Volunteers
on work, certainly the youth on both Sexes has in the time of this great
negligence gotten such a trade of picking, theving, stealing of Wool, and the
like, through idleness, as they will never be brought to work, unless they be
thereunto compelled, and the rather for that some of their Parents and Masters
have benefit by them, but compelled they may be, and this great work happily
effected, if by the order of the Justices of Peace, these Statutes, 43 Eliz. 2.
7 Jac. 4. etc. be put in due Execution.

Trades.
DXXVI. 2 Roll. 172, 173. Hollingworth Trin. 18. Jac. B.R I.S. Indicted that he
being Inhabitant at B. in the County of Midlesex was Circumferarius Anglice a
Peddler and otiosa and vagra persona diversis temporibus and locis in patria
vagarius and apud Hackney and diversa alia loca privata and non in mercatis aut
feriis diversas mercimonia personis venditioni exposuit, and specifieth certain
smallwares which he sold. And, 1. Exception, that its not alleged he was taken
wandering as, 39 Eliz. 4. 3. N. 1. is, but non allocatur. For the wandering it
self is that which makes him a Rogue, and not the being so taken. 2. Its said
at H. and diversa alia loca, and names no place certain, no persons to whom
sold, but per Curiam any place is sufficient; And per Dodridg, by wandering he
is a Rogue, tho he sells nothing. 3. Tho the value of the things sold be not
expressed, its well enough, And tho it be expressed. 4. that he has a place of
Habitation, viz. at B. yet this will not excuse him, but he shall be adjudged a
Rogue.

Bastard.
DXXVII. 2 Bulstrod 326, (344.) pl. 240. Mich. 7 Car. 1. B. R. Reves Case. The
reputed Grandfather Inhabitant in Suffolk of a Poor Bastard-Child in Midlesex
is chargeable by order of Sessions in Suffolk, not in M. upon 43 Eliz. 2. N.
contra 2 Bulstrod 328. (346.) pl. 242.

Bar. and Fem.
DXXVIII. 2 Bulstrod 327. (345.) pl. 241. At Summer Assizes 7 Car. 1. at
Leicester, by Hutton and Crook in Drapers case, the Husband of Gran-Mother that
was able before Marriage shall keep the Poor Child, so 2 Bulstrod 328. (346.)
pl. 242.

Bastard.
DXXIX. 2 Bulstrod 346, (328.) pl. 242. in Gerrards case, Mich. 7 Car. 1.
Against City of Westminster it was said, that a Bastard Child is not within 43
Eliz. 2. to be relieved, nor by Crook is Grandfather in-law chargeable by
Improvement of his Wife, if she had nothing at Marriage. Contra per Whitlock.
Quaere.

Bar. and Fem.
DXXX. 2 Bulstrod 330, (348.) pl. 243. The Justices cannot make any order to
remove or charge a Parish on 43 Eliz. 2. N. until the Husband becomes impotent,
etc.

Settlement.
DXXXI. 2 Bulstrod 331, (349.) pl. 245. The Parish where Bastard Child was got,
shall keep the Child, if the Mother by practice was removed to be delivered in
another, else the Parish where the Mother dwells, per Jones at Summer Assizes 8
Car. 1. at Gloucester.

Bar. and Fem.
DXXXII. 2 Bulstrod 332, (350.) At Salop Assizes Lent 7 Car. 1. in Goughs case,
by Jones and Whitlock, Poor Bastard Child is to be sent to Mother, if able, on
death of reputed Father, and if she he unable, to the Parish where reputed
Father kept it.

Infant.
DXXXIII. 2 Bulstrod 334, (352.) pl. 247. By Jones and Whitlock at Stafford
Summer Assizes 5 Car. 1. the last proviso of 39 Eliz. 4 15. N. 1. shall not
extend unto Children if they be under the age of seven years, and that an
Infant under the age of seven years shall not be said to be a wanderer.

Taxes.
DXXXIV. 2 Bulstrod 353, (335.) pl. 248. At Worcester Assizes Summer 8 Car. 1.
between the Parish of Saint Peter's and Saint Ellens, charge of abler Parish to
support the Poorer may be altered as the Poor of each increase or decrease and
Overseers where Tenements are, may charge such as inhabit in another Parish.

DXXXV. 2 Bulstrod 336. (354.) pl. 249. At Lincoln Assizes, Taxes.
Lent 9 Car. 1. held by Haughton and Crook, that assessment to Poor ought to be
made according to the visible Estate of Inhabitants in that Town or Parish,
both real and personal, and not for any Estate elsewhere, and this has been so
resolved by all the Judges.

2. The Tenants or occupiers are only to pay to the Poor and not the Landlord.

DXXXVI. 2 Bulstrod 339. (357.) pl. 251. At Worcester Assizes, Settlement.
Lent 14 Car. 1. One Chapels case who was born at W. in one County, settled at
S. in another, and after laboring at L. in another, became a Cripple, and was
taken begging as a wanderer, and by Jones Justice sent to W. the place of birth
to maintain.

2. Note also, resolved that if one great with Child be sent to the House of
Correction, and there she is delivered of the Child, that the Child shall be
sent to the Parish from which the Mother was sent to the House of Correction to
be kept and provided for there, being there last settled.

3. Note also, resolved that a Rogue is not to be sent to the House of
Correction, but he is to be whipped and so to be sent to the place where he was
last settled, if the same may be known, or otherwise to the place of his birth,
but the House of Correction is for the Poor of a Parish who refuse to work, to
be there whipped and set on work.

DXXXVII. Dalt. Edit. 1666. cap. 46. page 118. Apprentice.
Resolutions of the Judges of Assize 9 Car. 1. Anno 1633.

1. Question, Whither the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the
Parish with assent of two Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum may by
43 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 1. or any law, enforce a Parishioner of the same Parish to
take a Child of a Poor Parishioner of the same Parish, who is not able to keep
his said Child, to be an Apprentice?

Resolution, That 43 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 1. which says that the Churchwardens and
Overseers of the Parish shall put out Children to be Apprentices, necessarily
implies that such as are fit must receive Apprentices, and the putting out of
poor Children to be Apprentices is one of the best ways of providing for the
poor.

2. Quest. If they may, then whither they must not give money with him, Money.
and who shall determine what money shall be given with him if the party that is
to take such Apprentice and the Churchwardens and Overseers cannot agree
thereupon?

Resolu. There is no necessity that money must be given, but that must be left
to the discretion of the Churchwardens and Overseers, all circumstances of age
and ability being considered, and if they cannot agree with the party then the
Justices of Peace near adjoining, or in their default the Sessions of the Peace
are to determine these controversies.

3. Quest. Whither a Knight, Gentleman, Clergyman or Yeoman, Estates.
or one that is Sojourner using Husbandry, Clothing or Grasing, or the like,
may be enforced to take such an Apprentice?

Resolu. Every Man who is by calling or profession or manner of living that
entertaineth and must have the use of other Servants of the like Quality, must
entertain such Apprentices, wherein discretion must be the guide upon due
consideration of circumstances.

4. Quest. Whither a wealthy man keeping few or no Servants not wanting a
Servant, but living privately, may be forced to take such an Apprentice,
Apprentice.
if not, then whither he may be taxed toward the putting forth of such an
Apprentice?

Resolu. For the receiving of such Apprentices the answer may be referred to to
the next Question 3. before, but out of doubt every such person must contribute
to the charge as to other charges for the provision for the Poor.

Lieu.
5. Quest. Whither they may enforce a Parishioner that is of one Parish to take
such a Child Apprentice that is of another Parish, but within the same County
or division, if the proper Parish be not able to provide for the Children of
the same Parish?

Resolu. The Justices may provide Masters for them in other Parishes within the
same Hundred, and if the same Hundred be not able, then out of that Hundred in
the rest of that County, as for other provision for the poor which must be at a
Quarter Sessions, 43 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. 2.

Process.
6. Quest. If such a parishioner may be enforced to take such an Apprentice and
shall refuse not only to take such an Apprentice, but also refuse to be bound
to appear at the next Quarter Sessions or Assizes what shall be done to him?

Resolu. If any refuse, let such a one be bound over to the next Sessions or
Assizes, if he refuse to give such bond, let him be sent to the Goal, there to
remain until he shall give such bond.

Bail.
7. Quest. If such a parishioner who refuses to take such an Apprentice shall
be bound over to the Sessions for not taking such an Appentice, and when he
appears there shall likewise refuse, what shall be done to him and what shall
be done to the Parents who refuse to suffer their Children to be put out to be
Apprentices, themselves not being able to maintain them?

Resolu. If at the Sessions or Assizes such a one refuses to take an
Apprentice, and his excuse be not allowed, it is fit he be bound to the
Good-behavior.

And it will be a good course to indict such a refuser for a contempt, and
thereupon to fine and imprison him.

If he refuse to be bound to the Goodbehavior, let him be imprisoned till he
will, and the Kings book of orders directs that such be bound with good
sureties to appear at the Council board.

And if the parents of such poor Children refuse to suffer their Children to be
bound Apprentices, or being bound entice them away, themselves not being able
to maintain them, let them be committed to the House of Correction.

Americaments.
8. Quest. Whither it be in the power of any general Quarter Sessions to
mitigate any penalty upon a Statute Law, if the party Indicted shall submit
himself to the fine of the Court and wave the traverse?

Resolu. If the party be convicted or confess the fault, it is not in the power
of the Court to mitigate the fine in such cases where the Statute makes it
certain, Lambert 569. 570. in Justices 185.

But if the party indicted protesting his Innocence, yet quia noluit placitare
cum Dom. Rege puts himself upon the grace of the Court, the Court may impose a
moderate fine and order to forbear the prosecution.

Justices.
9. Quest. If any be bound to appear at the Sessions, and shall tender
submission to the Court, whither the Sessions may stay the Indictment and
mitigate the fine aforesaid upon the Confession of the fact?

Resolu. This is answered before to the next Precedent Article 8. Question.

Ale.
10. Quest. If a man be convicted for being drunk, tippling and keeping an
unlicenced Alehouse, or that being Licenced, for suffering others to remain
tippling in his house, or for swearing, or for driving of Cattle upon a Sunday
contrary to the Statute 4 Jac. 5. in that case provided, whither the Justiice
of Peace before whom he was convicted, or any other Justice of the Peace may
discharge him of all or part of the forfeiture or punishment appointed by the
Statute?

Resolu. The Justices have no such power of mitigation after convicton, where
the Statute appoints the measure of the punishment.

11. Quest. Whither a Constable may upon a Warrant for carrying one to the
House of Correction for keeping an unlicenced Alehouse, Constable.
upon the second conviction break open the house wherein the party convicted
is, to apprehend him, 3 Car. 1. cap. 3. (4.) 4. N. 1.

Resolu. This Question is to be advised upon: It is put in general terms and
referred to be considered in the particular case when it appears.

12. Quest. If a Woman unmarried be hired from week to week or from half year
to half, or by the year, in one Parish, Settlement.
and there be gotten with Child, and then goes from thence unto another Parish
where she is settled in service by the space of two or three months, and then is
discovered that she is with Child, the Question is whether she shall be settled
in the Parish where she is begotten with Child, or in the Parish where she was
last settled?

Resolu. The place where such a woman was lawfully settled, is the direction in
this Case, not where she was begotten with Child.

13. Quest. If a Woman Servant unmarried be begotten with Child and then goes
out of her Masters service, Bastard.
before or after it is discovered that she is with Child, and the reputed
Father be run away, or is not able to free the Parish, whither the Master may
be enforced to provide for her till she be delivered, and for a month after?

Resolu. If the Master has legally discharged his house of such a Servant he
is no more bound to provide for her than for any other.

14. Quest. In case a Parish consist part of Ancient Demesne and part of
Guildable, Taxes.
and an assessement is made for the relief of the maihemed Soldiers the Goal,
etc. according to 43 Eliz. 2. 12. N. 2. whither the Tenants in Ancient Demesne
shall contribute with the Guildable for the payments of the assessement?

Resolu. The Statute does not distinguish between the Ancient Demesne and the
Guildable in those cases, and ubi lex non distinguit, ibi nec nos distinguimus.

15. Quest. Whither an Indictment of forcible detainer be within 21 Jac. 8. 6.
N. 1. and not to be removed by Certiorari, Certiorari.
unless the party indicted first find sureties according to the Statute 21 Jac.
8. 7. N. 2.

And whither the party indicted be to be bound himself, or may send sureties to
be bound in his absence to prosecute according to that Statute 21 Jac. 8. 7. N.
2.

And whither an indictment of forceible entry, etc. found at a private
Sessions, and certified to the Quarter Sessions, be to be removed by Certiorari
without sureties according to that Statute?

Resolu. This is fittest to be left unto the Court of B. R. to whose courses
and Jurisdiction this is most proper.

16. Quest. If one be convicted upon 3 Car. 1. 1. (2.) 1. N. 2. for driving of
Cattle on the Sunday throughout several Parishes, Days.
whither he shall forfeit 20 s. to every of the said Parishes, or only to one,
if to one, then to which of them?

Resolu. 3 Car. 1. 1. (2.) Gives the forfeiture but of one 20 s. for one
Sabbath day, although the driving of that day be through diverse Parishes,
therefore where the Action is first attached and the distress first taken, that
Parish shall have the benefit of the forfeiture and not the other.

17. Quest. If one who is under thirty years of age, Husbandry.
and brought up in Husbandry, or a Maid Servant, or brought up in any of the
Arts mentioned in 5 Eliz. 4. 4. N. 13. and not enabled according to that
Statute to live at his or her own hand, shall be warned by two Justices of
Peace to put him or her self in service by a day prescribed by them, and shall
not do the same accordingly, but shall after continue living at his or her own
hand, what course shall be taken with such a person and how punished?

Resolu. Such persons being out of service and not having visible means of
their own to maintain themselves without their labor, and refusing to serve as
an hired Servant by the year, may be bound over to the next Sessions or
Assizes, and to be of the Good-behavior in the mean time, or may be sent to the
house of Correction.

Taxes.
18. Quest. Whither the tax for the relief of the Poor upon 43 Eliz. 2. 12. N.
2. shall be made by ability, or occupation of Lands, or both?

And whither the visible ability in the parish where he lives, or general
ability wheresoever?

And whither his Rent received within the Parish where he lives, shall be
accounted visible ability, and whither he shall be taxed of them only, and not
for any Rents received from another Parish, and what shall be said visible
ability?

Resolu. The Land within each Parish is to be taxed to the charges in the first
place equally and indifferently, but there may be an addition for the personal
visible ability of the parishioners within that Parish according to good
discretion, wherein if there be any mistaking, the Sessions, etc. or the
Justice must Judge between them.

Estates.
19. Quest. Whither Shops, Salt Pits, Sheds, profits of a market, etc. be
taxable to the poor as well as Lands, Cole-mines etc. expressed in 43 Eliz. 2.
1. N. 4.

Resolu. All things which are real and a yearly Revenue must be taxed to the
poor.

Taxes.
20. Quest. Whither the tax for the County stock, Goal, and House of Correction
is to be made 14 Eliz. 5. 37. (^2.) N. 1. and 43 Eliz. 2. 12. N. 1. by ability
and upon the Inhabitants of the parish only, or upon them that are occupiers of
lands dwelling in that parish, or whither such as occupy lands in that parish
and dwell in another parish shall be taxed?

Resolu. If the Statute in particular cases give no special direction, it is
good discretion to go according to the rate of taxation for the poor, but when
the Statutes themselves give direction, follow that.

Taxes.
21. Quest. VVhither any taxes ought to be made for the charges that pety
Constables and Borsholders are at in conveying Rogues from Parish to Parish and
relieving of them, and how to be rated?

Resolu. It is fit to relieve the Constable and Tythingmen in such sort as it
has been used in the several places where they live.

Women.
22. Quest. VVhither a Justice of Peace may discharge a Servant being with
Child, from her service, allowing that as a reasonable cause that she is
thereby made unable to do the service which otherwise she might have done?

And if he may discharge her, whither that Parish shall provide for her till
her delivery, if she cannot provide for her self, and so also if her time be
expired before her delivery who shall provide for her after her time ended?

Resolu. If a Woman being with Child procure her self to be retained with a
Master who knows nothing thereof, this is a good cause to discharge her from
her service, and if she be gotten with Child during her service it is all one,
but the Master in neither case must turn away such a Servant of his own
authority.

But if her term be ended or she lawfully discharged, the Master is not bound
to provide for her, but it is a misfortune fallen upon the Parish, which they
must bear as in other cases of casual impotency.

23. Quest. Whither one being delivered of a Bastard-Child in one Parish and
goes into another with her Child, and becomes a Vagrant, Settlement.
and so is sent to the place of her birth, her Bastard-Child being under the
age of seven years, shall be settled with the Mother and there maintained, if
the Mother be not able nor the reputed Father known, or to be found, or whither
it shall be sent to the place of its birth, or being settled with the Mother,
whither the Parish where it was born, shall be ordered by the two next Justices
to pay a weekly sum toward the maintenance of it?

Resolu. The Bastard-Child must be placed with the Mother so long as it is
within the Quality or Condition of a Nurse-Child; which shall be till seven
years of age, and then it is fit to be sent to the place of its birth to be
provided for, the Mother or reputed Father not being able, and the Parish where
the Child is born shall not be forced to contribute to the Charge as long as
the Mother lives and the Child be under seven year old.

24. Quest. A Man with his Wife and Children takes a House in one Parish for a
year, Bar. and Fem.
and before the end of his Term is unlawfully put out of possession, and after
takes part of an House as an Inmate in another Parish, from whence he is also
put out, and then not being able to get any dwelling, they come to lie in a
Barn in a third Parish, where the Husband falls sick and the Wife is
delivered of another Child, where ought these to be settled?

Resolu. If a Man or Woman having House or Habitation in one Parish be thrust
out, this is an illegal unsetling which the Law forbids, for none must be
enforced to turn Vagrant, and such one must be returned to the place where he
or she was last lawfully settled, and the Child also born in the time of his
distraction.

25. Quest. VVhither an Apprentice put out by the Churchwardens, Apprentice.
etc. according to 43 Eliz. 2. N. to a Master in another Parish, if his Master
die and leave no Executor or Administrator, fit to keep an Apprentice, or able
to place him, he shall be provided for in the Parish where he was Apprentice or
shall be sent back to the Parish from whence he was put out?

Resolu. Servants and Apprentices are by law settled in that Parish, and if they
become Impotent there the Parish must abide the adventure after their term or
time of service be lawfully ended.

26. Quest. What is accounted a lawful settling in a Parish and what not?
Settlement.


Resolu. This is too too general a Question to receive a perfect answer to
every particular case which may happen, but generally this is to be observed,
that the Law unsetleth none who are lawfully settled, nor permits it to be done
by Practice or Compulsion.

And every one who is settled as a Native-Householder, Sojourner, an Apprentice
or Servant for a month at the least, without a Just complaint made to remove
him or her, shall be held to be settled.

27. Quest. A Rogue is taken at C. and will not Confess the place of his birth,
neither does it appear otherwise, Rogues.
but that he confesses the last place of his Habitation to be at S. hereupon
he is whipped and sent to S. at his coming to S. the place of his birth is
there known to be at W. and thereupon the Rogue Confesses it to be so, whither
he might without any more Vagrancy be sent to W?

Resolu. In this case it is fit to send such a Rogue to the place of his birth,
for this is but a mis-taking and no legal settling.

28. Quest. If an Indictment be preferred to the Grand Jury of the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace, against one for Murder, Manslaughter, Robbery, Justices.
Felony or Pety Larcency, and Ignoramus found thereupon, whither the said
Sessions may deliver the party by Proclamation or not?

Resolu. Not by Proclamation at all, but for pety Larcencies and other pety
Felonies in discretion the Goal may be delivered of them.

Constable.
29. Quest. If a Constable be chosen and refuses to take his Oath, what shall
be done and whither a Constable may make a Deputy and by what means?

Resolu. The refusal or neglect to take an Oath in such a case is a contempt
worthy of punishment, and thereupon to Fine and Imprison him.

And the making of a Deputy is rather by toleration than by Law.

Constable.
30. Quest. If a Constable die or remove out of the Parish where, etc. how is
his place to be supplied?

Resolu. By the Lord of the Leet, if that time fall near, otherwise by the
Sessions, but if that be too far off, then by the next Justices.

Constable.
31. Quest. If a Poor weak man be chosen Constable or Tythingman, and be unfit
for the place, how may he be removed, and a fit Man sworn in his room?

Resolu. The Justices of Peace must help this, and if the Lord of the Leet have
power to choose a Constable or Tythingman, and perform it so ill, it is a just
cause to seize is liberty.

Settlement.
32. Quest. If a Nurse-Child, a Scholar at a Grammar School, or in the
University, prove to be Impotent by sickness, Lameness, Lunacy or discovery of
Ideocy, how such person shall be disposed?

Resolu. A Nurse-Child, or a Scholar at the Grammar School, or at the
University, (or persons sent to the Common Goal, Hospital or House of
Correction) are not to be esteemed as persons to be settled there, more than
Travelers in their Inns, but their settling is where their Parents are settled,
or themselves were last settled, (and Children born in Common-Goals and Houses
of Correction) their Parent being Prisoners are to be maintained at the charge
of the County.

Taxes.
33. Quest. What proportion shall Parsonages and Tithes bear to the Taxation of
the Poor of the Parish?

Resolu. The Parson or Vicar presentative shall bear according to the
reasonable value of his Parsonage, having consideration to the Just deductions.

Cottages.
34. Quest. VVhither for placing the Poor of the Parish, not to be removed by
consent of the Parish, these Poor men may be placed as Inmates for a time?

Resolu. They may by express words of the Statute 43 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 4.

Taxes.
35. Quest. If a Parishioner or owner within a Parish do bring into the Parish,
without the consent of the Parish, a stranger of another Parish, which is or
apparently is like to be burdensome unto the Parish, how may they ease
themselves?

Resolu. By taxing such a one to the charge of the rates of the Poor, not only
having respect to his ability or the Land he occupies, but according to the
damage and danger he brings to the Parish by his folly.

Constables.
36. Quest. For warding in the day time, for apprehending of Rogues whither the
Constable may not enlarge it to a further time?

Resolu. VVarding in the day time is of great use, and must be left to the
discretion of the Constables or direction of the Justices to vary according to
the occasion.

Ale.
37. Quest. VVhither Alehouses ought to be allowed only in thoroughfare Towns,
and others in other places to be restrained only to sell to Poor out of doors.

Resolu. The Justices shall do very well to allow none but in places very fit
for their Situation and uses, and to moderate the number.

38. Quest. A Man for his quality otherwise fit to be a Constable, Constable.
or of other Office of that nature, procures himself to be the Kings Servant
extraordinary, and by that means would excuse himself to serve in the Country?

Resolu. A Servant extraordinary may well perform his ordinary service in the
County according to his Quality.

DXXXVIII. West. Simb. 2. part 127. b. Sect. 194. An Indictment against a
Rogue, a Vagabond, and against him which lodges and relieveth him, Indictment.
Supra 505. in Pract. Precedents 82.

Midlesex ss.
JVratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacrament. suum praesentant quod A. B. nuper de
C. in Com. praedict. Laborer, aetatis 14 Annorum ac amplius ac corpore sano,
valente, potente atque ad laborand. habili existent. nullam autem habens
terram, nec ullum Magistrum, nec aliqua utens licita Merchandiza, Art vel
Mysterio unde sibi victum parare possit, ac prorsus nesciens rationem reddere
quo pacto victum sum legitime acquirit 10 die Augusti, Anno Regni, etc. apud
F. Infra Hundredum de W. in Com. M. praedict. and multis aliis locis dicti
Comitatus hac illac passim vagatus est mendicans ac per W. P. de F. praedict.
in dicto Com. M. Yeoman Constabularium dicti Hundredi de W. in quo sita est
villa de F. praedict. postea, viz. 11 die dicti mensis Augusti, Anno supradict.
apud F. praedict. in Com. praedict. invent. est Vagrans and mendicans, ac per
eundem Constabularium tunc Ibidem deprehensus est, Jnordinate se gerens tanquam
Vagabundus and mendicus valens, contra pacem dicti Dom. Regis ac contra formam
diversorum statutorum, etc. inde provisorum and Editorum.

Et ulterius quod G. H. de F. praedict. in Com. praedict. Yeoman sciens
praefat. A. B. modo and forma praedictis vagantem and mendicantem eundem tamen
A. B. dicto 10 die, etc. Anno supradict. in domo Ipsius G. H. mansionali apud
F. praedict. in Com. praedict. Hospitant. ac eidem A. B. tunc and Ibidem panem
and potum voluntary dedit in contemptu dicti Dom. Regis, etc. ac contra form.
Statutorum praedict.

DXXXIX. Practical Precedents 129, 130. Trades.
An Indictment against Vagrant selling Linnen-Cloath, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 21. N.

Midlesex ss.
JVratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacrament. suum praesentant quod T. M. nuper de
paroch. sanct. Buttolph. extra Aldersgate London, existent. aetat. 7 Annorum
and Amplius, Leges and Statuta Hujusmodi Regni Angl. parvi pendens nec poenas
in eisdem content. aliqualiter verens, 13 die Sept. Anno Regni, etc. and semper
Postea hucusque and adhuc Inhabitans. in parochia praedict. dicto 13 die Sept.
Anno supradict and diversis aliis diebus and vicibus. tam antea quam postea
fuit and ad huc est otiosa persona Vagrans and Circumferens cum panno lineo
Anglice, wandering abroad with Linen Cloth, Infra Com. praedict. and ad tunc
dictis aliis diebus and vicibus Ibidem in paroch. St. Mar. Marsellon alias
VVhite-Chappel in Com. M. praedict. portans secum and venditioni exponens Angl.
offering to sale diversis ligiis and subditis dicti Dom. Regis pannum lineum
praedict. ac dicto 13 die Sept. Anno supradict. apud paroch. St Mariae
Marsellon alias VVhite-Chappel praedict. in Com. M. praedict. and diversis
aliis locis Infra Com. M. praedict. contra leges and Statuta hujus Regni Angl.
Circumvagrans Anglice has wandered abroad, Circumferens Angl. carrying about
secum T. M. praedict. and venditioni Exponens pannum lineum praedict. ac in
hujusmodi sua Circumvagratione apud paroch. ult. mentionat. and diversos alios
locos Infra Com. M. praedict. ad tunc and dictis aliis diebus and vicibus
illicite callide and subtiliter vendidit and utteravit diversas virgat. panni
linei praedict. diversis ligeis, and subditis dicti Dom. Regis Juratoribus
praedict. adhuc Ignot. private. Domibus suis and non apertis feriis sive market.
ex Intention ad Colorand. dictam Circumvagrationem suam and ad scapiend. a
pumtione pro ejus Circumvagratione, and sic Juratores praedict. super
Sacrament. suum praedict. dicunt quod praedict. T. M. dicto 13 die Sept. Anno
supradict. ac dictis aliis diebus and vicibus apud paroch. Sanctae Mariae
Marsellon alias VVhite-Chappel praedict. in Com. M. praedict. and dictos alios
locos Infra Com. M. praedict. fuit Vagabundus in contemptum dicti Dom. Regis
nunc Legumque suarum in malum Exemplum omnium aliorum in hujusmodi casu
delinquent. and contra pacem, etc. nec non contra form. Statut. in hujusmodi
casu edit. and provisi, etc.

Cottages.
DXL. Pract. Precedents 190. An Indictment for maintenance of Inmates.

Mid. ss.
JVratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacrament. suum praesentant quod A. B. nuper de
parochia Sancti Sepulchri in Com. Midlesex Bricklayer 15 die Maij Anno Regni,
etc. Existens proprietor cujusd. Tenement. apud paroch. praedict. in Com.
praedict. dictum Tenement. in Quatuor separalia Tenement. pro Inhabitatione ad
tunc and ibidem divisit and conversit, and quod praedictus A. B. separales
subtenents cum Familiis in dictis Tenement. per Ipsum sic ut praefertur divisis
and conversis cohabitare Ibidem voluntary locavit dictosque separales
subtenentes cum Familiis suis a praedict. 15 die Maij Anno supradict. usque
diem captionis hujus Inquisitionis in dicto Tenement. per praedict. A. B. sic
ut praefertur divis. and convers. cohabitare and commorari promisit in magnum
periculum inficiend. inhabitant. ibidem cum pestilentia and aliis morbis
contagiis ac ad depauperationem parochianorum paroch. praedict. and ad
parochiam istam cum multitudine pauperum onerand. ad Commune nocument. omnium
ligeorum and subditorum dicti Dom. Regis Ibidem Commorant. nec non contra pacem
dicti Dom. Regis nunc Coronam and dignitatem suas, etc.

POPE.
Recusants, Provisors, Rome, Crucifix, Jesuits, Agnus Dei, Absolution, Bulls
Seminaries, Priests, Praemunire.
Commission.
I. THE form of a Commission into the County of Middlesex on 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N.
3. and 5 Eliz. 1. 7. N. 1 and 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 2. for Administering the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance to Popish Recusants or so reputed.

CAROLUS secund. Dei. Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
fidei Defensor, etc.
Omnibus and singul. Custodib. Pacis Com. Mid. Salutem.
Sciatis quod dedimus vob. and aliquibus duob. vel plurib. vestrum Potestatem
and Authoritatem requirendi and recipiendi Sacrament. Communiter vocat. the
Oath of Supremacy, specificat. in quodam Statuto Anno Regni Dom. Elizabeth
nuper Reginae Angliae, primo fact. Ac etiam Sacrament. Vulgarit. vocat. the
Oath of Obedience, specificat. in quodam alio Statuto Anno Regni Dom. Jacobi
nuper Regis Angliae tertio fact. Quaere de omnibus and singulis.
de A. B. C. D. etc. subditis nostris Romanae Superstionis sectatorib. sive
tal. reputat. Anglice Popish Recusants or so reputed, de quib. seperalia
Sacram. praedict. vigore Statuto praedict. ac virtute hujus nostrae
Commissionis ullo modo respective requirunt. and recipiant. in aliquo loco in
dicto Com. Midlesex, qui sit infra december Milliaria a Civitatibus nostris
London, vel Westminster Comorantib. and ideo vob. firmiter mandam. quod in and
circa premissa respective diligenter intendatis. In Cujus rei Testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test me ipso apud Westminster Septimo
die Novembris Anno Regni nostri tricesimo.

BARKER.

2. Note that in one Englefields Case on an Indictment of Praemunire for refusal
to take the Oath of Supremacy in Pasch. 33 Car. 2. in B. R. upon a special
Verdict out of Berks, on the like Commission it was adjudged good de omnibus
and singulis generally on 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 3, etc.

II. At the Court at White Hall, Jan. 17. Anno 1678, Alien.
etc.

There having been lately presented by the Justices of the Peace, six Quaeries
to His Majesty in Council, viz. 1. Whether Foreigners (Popish Recusants) that
are and have long been here settled Housekeepers, and are Tradesmen, viz.
Chirurgions, Tailors, Perywig-makers, or Ordinary Shopkeepers following
Employments for their own advantage, but not otherwise Merchants, but are
certified to be Merchant Strangers, shall be excused from taking the Oaths, or
finding sureties or either of them.

2. Whether such Foreigners being certified by Ambassadors or other Foreign
Ministers to be their Servants at this time, shall be excused.

3. Whether Foreigners (Popish Recusants) settled here, Housekeepers, but
neither are Tradesmen, Travellors or Foreign Ministers Servants, shall be
excused.

4. Whether native Subjects of our Sovereign Lord, that are Menial Servants of
Foreign Ministers, shall be excused.

5. Whether Married Women being Popish Recusants, but their Husbands
Protestants, shall be excused.

6. Whether Popish Recusants that have taken the Oaths, found sureties have
appeared and are convict shall find new Sureties or be continued over.

And His Majesty having from the Judges to whom the same were referred,
received answer in writing, in the words following,

May it please your Majesty, we have met and considered of the Questions
proposed to us, and do hereby humbly return our opinions; To the first we are
of opinion, 1. That Foreigners being Popish Recusants and exercising ordinary
Trades (but not Merchants) are not excused from taking the Oaths or finding
securities.

2. To the second, that Foreigners tho certified by Ambassadors to be their
Servants, except they are their Menial Servants, are not excused.

3. To the third, that Foreigners, tho settled Housekeepers, being no
Travellors, or foreign Ministers Servants, are not excused.

4. To the fourth, that the Kings Native Subjects are not excused from taking
the Oaths by being Menial Servants to Foreign Ministers.

5. To the fifth, we find no law that excuses a Feme-Covet being a Papist,
from taking the Oaths, tho her Husband be a Protestant.

6. To the sixth that a Popish Recusant having taken the Oaths is not bound to
find new sureties, unless upon a new tender of the Oaths he shall refuse to
take them.

All which with great humility we submit to your Majesty's Judgment.

William Scroggs, Chapter J. B. R. Fran. North, Chapter J. C. B. Will. Mountague, Chapter
Baron. Robert Atkins, C. B. V. Bertye Esch. or C. B. Fra. Bramston, Esch. Will.
Wild, B. R. Tim. Litleton, Esch. Hugh Windham, C. B. Tho. Jones, B. R. Will.
Dolben, B. R.


His Majesty is Graciously pleased to approve the said report and opinion of
his Judges, and did this day order, as it is hereby ordered accordingly, that
the Justices of the Peace in their respective Precincts, do in Execution of
their duties touching the particulars there mentioned, take notice of the same,
and conform themselves thereunto, and this order is to be sent to the Custos
Rotulorum of Each County, that he may give information of the same, see 3 Jac.
5. 5. N. 1. Infra. 219.

R. Southwel.

Days.
III. The Laws, etc. 13. 14. Abr. 7. The half year here mentioned 1 Eliz. 1. 31.
N. 2. is not to be understood of six months (as Wingate Crown 10 mistakes,)
which is in Law to be accounted secundum numerum singulorum dierum, allowing
twenty eight days to every month, and not according to the solar month, nor
according to the Calendar, unless it be on 13 Ed. 1. W. 2 cap. 5. N. for the
lapse in Quare Impedit, and by 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 13. N. of proving a suggestion 1
Inst. 135. and 2 Crook 166, 167. B. of Peterborough verse. Catesby, Yelverton
100. Catesby verse. Baker, and Hob. 179. Coply against Collins. But the half
year in 1 Eliz. 1. 31. N. 2. is to be understood according to the Calendar
Infra pl. 65.

Process.
IV. The Laws, etc. 14. Abr. 8. Sir Edw. Coke 4 Inst. 331. in his Construction
of 1 Eliz. 1. 31. N. 2. says, that no persons shall be impeached for any of
the offenses by preaching, teaching, or words, unless they be lawfully indicted
within the space of half a year, but yet it seems, that the words of the
Statute will not bear such a Construction, neither if they did, is it Law at
this day, nor was then when the Institutes were wrote.

1. For that 1 Eliz. 1. 31. N. 2. refers only to the Case of Imprisonment, that
where the Offender by preaching, teaching, or words is Imprisoned, and is not
Indicted within half a year after the offense committed, he shall be set at
liberty and shall be no longer detained in prison for any such cause or
offense, and this was done in favor of liberty, and to prevent a long
Imprisonment upon a malicious and groundless accusation; but there is no color
to extend the words to the Offender, who was never Imprisoned, although the
offense was by preaching, teaching, or words only.

2. Put the Case, that an Offender by preaching, teaching, or words, had been
Imprisoned within the half year, yet it seems very questionable, whether at the
half years end, when he was set at liberty (as he ought to be by 1 Eliz. 1. 31.
N. 2. if he be not in the mean time indicted) he should have been clearly
discharged by this Act from any prosecution, during the half year then next
following, for although it be said (he shall be no longer detained in prison for
any such cause or offense) yet that seems to refer only to his Imprisonment
before Conviction, and (detained) imports as much, viz. that he should not be
continued or remain in the same Imprisonment, which he suffered within the
first half year, before any Indictment was found against him, but not that he
should not be indicted afterward within the compass of the year, and if found
guilty, suffer the Imprisonment and other penalties inflicted by this Act; and
it might so have happened, that an offender by preaching, teaching, or words,
might have been accused, taken, and Imprisoned a day or two before the half
year next after the offense expired, in which Case it cannot be thought to be
the meaning of the makers of the Law, that by his Imprisonment for a day or two
he should escape the penalties of the Law, and could not be afterward indicted
within the compass of the year, and yet in that Case he ought to be set at
liberty by the express words of the Act, which says (he shall be set at
liberty if not indicted within half a year after the offense) and not half a
year after his Imprisonment.

3. It seems now to be out of doubt, but that any Offender against 1 Eliz. 1.
although by preaching, teaching, or words, may be Indicted at any time within a
year and a day after the offense committed, and that by 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1.
which says, that all offenses against 1 Eliz. 1. and 5 Eliz. 1. and 13 Eliz.
2. touching acknowledgment of Her Majesty's Supreme Government in Causes
Ecclesiastical, shall and may be inquirable within a year and a day after the
offense committed, and the affirming or maintaining the Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of a Foreigner was without question an offense
against Her Majesty's Supreme Government in Causes Ecclesiastical, and against
the acknowledgment thereof, so that the year limited by 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. is
now extended to a day further: and whatever the meaning of it was as to the
half year, all offenses against it, whether by preaching, teaching, or words,
or otherwise (for 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. is general, and reaches all offenses
whatsoever against 1 Eliz. 1. touching the Supremacy Ecclesiastical) may now be
enquired of within a year and a day, whether the party be in prison or not, but
yet it seems, that in Case of Imprisonment within the first half year this
provision 1 Eliz. 1. 31. N. 2. for the setting at liberty of the Prisoner at
the end thereof, if he be not before that time indicted, remains still in
force, and is not abrogated by 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1.

V. The Laws, etc. 16. Abr. 9. Dignity.
The provision made in 1 Eliz. 1. 34. N. 1. and other Acts of Parliament for
the Trial of a Peer by his Peers in case of Treason, where he was to be tried
by the Course of the Common Law, is ex abundanti, and he should have such trial
if no such provision were inserted, the like in the case of Felony, Stamf.
Coron. 159.

VI. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 227. Justices of Peace cannot deal with Traitors
in the point of Treason, but as Breakers of the Peace, Treason.
saving that in some Cases they have a special power to inquire and receive
Indictments only, and of this sort are, 1. Treason of extolling Foreign power
by 1 Eliz. 1. 27. N. 1.

2. The Treason of absolving or withdrawing his Majesty's Subjects from their
Natural Obedience, by 23 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. etc.

And 3. The Treason of putting in ure any Instrument of Reconciliation gotten
from the Sea of Rome, by 13 Eliz. 2. 2. N. 1.

VII. Lambert 56. There has been care taken once or twice in our memory to
exact this Oath of Supremacy, Oath.
1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 4. of all the Justices of the Peace throughout the Realm,
whereof some good has ensued; but yet many a Justice there is, that by
indirect practice, never took either this or the Oath of Officers, whereof what
harms do or may grow, I leave to wiser and higher Men to be considered, adding
this only, that it would avail greatly to the furtherance of the service, if
the Dedimus Potestatem to give these Oaths were dirigible to the Justices, and
none other to Miniister the same, not elsewhere, but in their open Session.

VIII. Crompt. 10. b. Every Justice of Peace before he takes upon him to
exercise or occupy the Office of a Justice of Peace shall take the Oath of
Supremacy, 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 4. Justices.


IX. Crompt. 11. Nota, Sessions.
That the Justices of Peace ought to take this Oath of Supremacy in the open
Court of Sessions, where he serves, by 5 Eliz. 1. 15. N. 1. and I have seen it
done at the Assizes in the County of Stafford, and its the best way to be so
done, for where on 5 Eliz. 1. 7. N. 1. a Commission is made to take their
Oaths, when they are made Justices of Peace, it may be that the Commissioner
will return, that he has taken his Oath, when he has not done so in fact, if
he that be to be sworn be such a one, as is not well affected to the Religion
now established.

X. Crompt. 12. Charge in Sessions. Religion.
First to enquire if any within this year and day has depraved, despised or
Contemned the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, in
contempt thereof by any contemptuous words, or by any words of depraving,
despising, or advisedly has in any other manner contemned, despised, or
reviled the said Sacrament contrary to the Edicts and Declarations heretofore,
etc. 1 Ed. 6. 1. N. 1 Eliz. 2. N. and 23 Eliz. 1. N.

Indictment.
XI. The Laws, etc. 22. Abr. 17. One indicted on 1 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 1. for
Administering Baptism in other form than is thereby prescribed, and is
convicted, and afterward is again indicted for the like offense, 1 Leon. 295.
pl. 403. by the opinion of Clench Justice in B. R. the second Indictment must
mention the first Conviction, or the Judgment cannot be for the second offense,
viz. Imprisonment for a year, and deprivation: But Wray Chief Justice held,
that if both Indictments were before the same Justices, they are to take notice
of the firct Conviction, although it be not mentioned in the second Indictment,
and ought to give Judgment accordingly; but if the second Indictment be taken
by other Justices, then without mention therein of the first Conviction, they
cannot give Judgment for the second offense.

Bar. and Fem.
XII. The Laws, etc. 24. Abr. 18. A Feme Covert is within the meaning of (1
Eliz. 2. 9. N. 1. any person, etc.) and shall be liable to the penalties
thereby inflicted, Hob. 97. Moor versus Hussy. Dyer 203. pl. Sir Edward
Walgrave's Case.

Religion.
XIII. The Laws, etc. 24. Abr. 20. The hearing of Mass is a maintaining within 1
Eliz. 2. 9. N. 2. and the person hearing is indictable thereupon, Hob. 97. Dyer
203. and 323. pl. Fermors Case.

Indictment.
XIV. The Laws, etc. 25. Abr. 21. The Offender in any of these Cases, ( viz. 1
Eliz. 2. 10. N. 1. and 11. N. 1.) cannot be punished for the second offense
before he be adjudged for the first, and that second offense must be committed
after the Judgment given for the first; nor for the third offense before he be
adjudged for the second, and that third must be committed after the Judgment
for the second, for quod non apparet non est, and non apparet Judicialiter ante
Judicium, 2 Inst. 479. Dyer 323. pl.

Bar. and Fem.
XV. The Laws, etc. 26. A Feme Covert is within this Statute (1 Eliz. 2. 14. N.
1. all and every person, etc.) and shall forfeit 12 d. if she repair not to
Church every Sunday and Holyday 11 Cook 61. Dr. Fosters Case 1 Roll. 93. 3
Bulstr. 87. pl. Dominus Rex and Law, Hob. 97.

Alien.
XVI. The Laws, etc. 26. Abr. 24. In an Indictment upon 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. It
need not be averred that the Offender is an Inhabitant within this Realm, etc.
for if he be not, that ought to come on the other side, Godbolt 148. pl. 191.
An. Mannocks Case.

Averrment.
XVII. The Laws, etc. 26. 27. Abr. 25. Nor need it be averred in such Indictment
on 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. that the party had no lawful or reasonable excuse to be
absent, but that ought likewise to come on the other side. 2 Leonard 5. pl. 6
Eliz. Dormers Case. Note, that these words having no lawful or reasonable
excuse, etc. are by mistake in that Case supposed to be in 23 Eliz. 1.

Justices.
XVIII. The Laws, etc. 30. Abr. 30. These words in like manner and form, in 1
Eliz. 2. 22. N. 1. appoint in what manner the offenses shall be enquired of,
heard, and determined by Mayors and Head Officers of Corporations, etc. By
Indictment, for so (inquire) imports, and trial and verdict of twelve men, or
such other legal proceedings upon the said Indictment, as are used by the
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and Assizes in their general Sessions: For the
Mayor or Head Officer is not left by this Act to his own Arbitrary Will or
Discretion in the hearing and determining the offense, but must proceed
according to the rules and forms of Law in the Conviction of the offender

2. And 1 Eliz. 2. 22. N. 1. Says (to which Justices of Assize do not commonly
repair) so that the Mayor or head Officer of such places were only intended in
the Lieu and Room of Justices of Assize, and are therefore to proceed by the
same Rules, as they do in the Counties at large.

3. But these words 1 Eliz. 2. 22. N. 1. extend not to the point of time
limited for Indicting such offender, Days.
nor are Mayors and Head-Officers tied to their next Sessions, as the Justices
of Oyer and Determiner, and of Assize are, as Wing. Tit. Service and
Sacraments, N. 26. mistakes; for (in like manner and form) is intended in such
respects only where it is not otherwise provided for by the Statute, but it is
expressly provided here 1 Eliz. 2. 22. N. 1. that Mayors, and Head Officers of
Corporations shall inquire of these offenses only twice in the year ( viz.
within fifteen days after Easter and Michaelmas) and not at their general
Sessions, unless it happen to be the Sessions after one of those two Feasts.

Nor can the Archbishop, or Bishop by 1 Eliz. 2. 18. N. 1. Associate himself
in this Case to any Mayor or Head Officer of a Corporation, as Wing. tit.
Service and Sacraments, N. 25. mistakes.

XIX. The Laws, etc. 37. Abr. 35. Indictment.
By Presentment here 5 Eliz. 1. 3. N. 2. is to be understood, not only that
which is properly so called, which the Jurors find and present to the Court,
without any former Indictment delivered to them: but also an Indictment, which
is drawn and engrossed in form of Law, and delivered to the Jurors to be
inquired of, which Indictment, the Justices here named have power to take, by
force of the word Inquire, 5 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1. and is included within the word
presentment, 5 Eliz. 1. 3. N. 2. being a species of it, for every Indictment
found by the Jurors is a presentment, and the Record says Juratores, etc.
praesentant, etc. when they find an Indictment, but every presentment is not an
Indictment, 2 Inst. 739. and as well the one as the other, touching the
offenses aforesaid, must be certified in B. R. infra 72.

XX. The Laws, etc. 41. Abr. 41. Certificate.
It is not necessary on 5 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. that it be mentioned of Record in
B. R. how or by whom the Certificate was brought in thither, and in Bonners
Case, Dyer 234. pl. where the Bishop of Winchester certified the refusal of
this Oath of Supremacy, and Exception was taken, that the Certificate was
entered to be brought into Court per A. B. Cancellarium dicti Episcopi, but not
per mandatum Episcopi, and the Exception was disallowed for that reason.

XXI. The Laws, etc. 41. Abr. 42. And on 5 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 3. a Jury of the
County where the Kings Bench is, Inquest.
can do no more in this Case than inquire, that is, indict the party refusing
the Oath, unless where the refusal is in the same County.

2. Horn Bishop of Winchester tendered this Oath in Surrey, parcel of his
Diocese, to Bonner then late Bishop of London, who refused to take it, and this
was Certified by the Bishop of Winchester into B. R. then sitting at
Westminster in the County of Middlesex, where Bonner was Indicted by a Jury of
that County, according to this Act, 5 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 3. the question was, by
what County he should be tried, whether by a Jury of Middlesex, where the
Indictment was taken, or by a Jury of Surrey, where the Offense was committed,
and it was resolved, that he should be tried by a Jury of Surrey, for 5 Eliz.
1. 9. N. 3. extends to the Indictment only, and leaves the trial to the
Common Law, which appoints it to be where the Offense was committed, for
regularly by the Common Law, debet quis Juri subjacere ubi deliquit, 6 and 7
Edw. 6. Dyer 234. 3 Inst. 34.

XXII. The Laws, etc. 44. Abr. 45. Although by this act 5 Eliz. 1. 17. N. 1. no
temporal person, Previledges.
of or above the degree of a Baron is compellable to take this Oath, yet if he
be made a Justice of Peace he ought to take it by force of 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 1.
Jones 152, 153. the Earl of Lincolnes Case.

Intendment.
XXIII. The Laws, etc. 52. 53. Abr. 55. Upon 13 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 3. The intent is
material in this Case, and therefore if a man be Indicted upon the Statute for
bringing in and offering or delivering such Agnus Dei, etc. or receiving the
same, the intent must be mentioned in the Indictment as it must be in
Indictments upon all Statutes where the intent as here is made part of the
offense, so in an Indictment upon 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. 3. N. 1. It is not enough
to say the party drew his Dagger in the Church against I. S. but it must be
averred that he did it with an intent to strike him, as was resolved by the
Court of B. R. Trin. 33 Eliz. in Penhalls Case, 4 Leonard 49. pl. 127.

It seems by the words of 13 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 3. That to make the Receiver of
such superstitious things an offender within it, there must be a Concurrence of
intentions, for the using or wearing them both in the giver and receiver, and
that therefore if a person coming from beyond the Seas brings into this Realm
any such superstitious things, but with no intent they should be worn or used,
and gives them to his friend, at his request, who receives them with an intent
to wear or use them, this is penal to neither.

Not to the giver, for he had no superstitious intent, and the intent is
material; nor to the receiver, for that the offering or delivering them to be
worn or used, is expressly made in the Statute 13 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 2. a Condition
precedent to the obliquity of the fact in receiving them; for the Statute 13
Eliz. 2. 7. N. 3. says, then as well the person so doing as also every other
person receiving them to that intent shall incur a Praemunire, so that then
only when the person delivering them, so does, that is delivers them to be worn
or used, the person receiving them to that intent shall incur a Praemunire.

But yet there needs not any such concurrence of intentions in the giver and
receiver to make the giver an offender, and therefore if a man brings into the
Realm such superstitious things and delivers them to be worn or used, tho the
party receive them not to the intent to use or wear them, but defaces, burns or
otherwise destroys, yet he that gave or delivered them incurrs a Praemunire,
for the words in the Act 13 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 2. relating to the offerer or
deliverer are entire in themselves and have no dependenee on the subsequent
words 13 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 3. relating to the receiver, but generally make all
offenders who bring them in, and either offer or deliver them to a
superstitious intent, without any respect to the intent of the party who
receives or is offered them.

Justices.
XXIV. The Laws, etc. 54. Abr. 56. Upon 13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 1. If the person to
whom such Agnus Dei, etc. is offered, do bring the offender to any Justice of
Peace of the County where the offer is made, although he be not the next Justice,
yet it is good enough, and satisfies the intent of this Act, for the word
(next) is put in such cases into Acts of Parliament but for convenience and the
more speedy Execution of Justice, Styles, 246. pl. Maine and Sergeants Case.

Justices.
XXV. The Laws, etc. 54. Abr. 57. The Statute 13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 1. provides for
the discovery of the offender in order to his punishment in three Cases, 1. If
any such superstitious things be offered and the party be able to apprehend him
that offers it, he must bring him to the next Justice of Peace of the County
where the offer is made.

2. But if he cannot apprehend him, he is to disclose his name and place of
abode or resort to the ordinary of that Diocese, or a Justice of Peace of that
County, where the person to whom the offer was made is resident, and that
within three days after such offer made.

3. But 13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 2. If he receives the thing offered, then he is not
to apply to the Ordinary, but is strictly tied to deliver it within a day after
to some Justice of Peace of that County, where he who received it shall then be
Resident or happen to be, and in this last Case, if he receives it with an
intent to use or wear it, and keeps it above a day, or delivers it to any other
person or Justice of Peace, of any other County, he incurrs a Praemunire.

But these Justices of Peace are strangely confounded, as well in Dalt. 229.
cap. 89. tit. high Treason, as in Wingate, Crown, 37. Lambert 194. 195.

XXVI. The Laws, etc. 56. Abr. 58. Upon 13 Eliz. 2. 10. N. 1. (As is aforesaid)
So that if the offense be not declared, as is aforesaid, that is, Certificate.
to such Justice of Peace as is appointed in 13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 1. but it shall
be declared to any other Justice of Peace of a wrong County, that other Justice
of Peace shall not incur a Praemunire, if he does not signify or declare it
to a Privy Counselor.

Here 13 Eliz. 2. 10. N. 1. It Is plain that any one Privy Counselor suffices,
and the Justice of Peace is not bound to signify the offense to the Privy
Council, as Wingate Crown 138. misrecites the Statute.

XXVII. The Laws, etc. 60. Abr. 61. Upon 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. Moor 606. pl.
838. Talbot was Indicted, Infant.
quod existens aetatis 16 annorum and amplius non accessit ad Ecclesiam, etc.
The question was, whether the Existens, etc. Should refer to the time of his
Indictment or to the time of his absence. And the Judges conceived that the
Indictment was well enough and pursuant to the Statute, and that Existens
should in this Case refer to the time of his absence.

XXVIII. The Laws, etc. 60. Abr. 62. Upon 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. Lieu.
This offense (Not repair, etc. but forbear, etc.) consists not in committing
but in omitting, and is but a nonfeasance, and therefore cannot be said to be
in any certain place, and for this reason in a popular action brought by the
Informer, qui tam, etc. there needs no place be alleged in the Declaration,
Anderson, 139. pl. 109. Cuff against Vachel.

Nor is Recusancy within 31 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 1. which says that the offense
shall be laid in the proper County where it was done or committed, for to speak
properly it was not committed any where, Hobart 251. pl. Grimstone versus
Molineux. infra, 79. 6.

XXIX. The Laws, etc. 60, 61. Abr. 63. Proof.
By this Being thereof lawfully convicted, 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. Is not meant
that the party must be Convicted in some former suit, but a Conviction upon the
same Indictment or Information which is brought against him, for the recovery
of the 20 l. per month is sufficient conviction within the meaning of this
Statute: And so are all penal Statutes which have in them those words (being
thereof lawfully Convicted) to be understood, that is of a conviction in the
same suit whereupon the penalty is to be recovered, for the meaning only is
that the offender shall forfeit nothing before Conviction, which is no more
than the Law implies, and therefore in truth these words are but surplusage,
and might as well have been omitted, 11 Co. 59. and 1 Rolls 90. pl. 41. Dr.
Fosters Case, and 1 Rolls 204. pl. 6. and 3 Bulstrode 87. the King against Lane.

2. Nor is Convicton intended here 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. only of a Conviction by
Verdict, and therefore if the offender be Convicted upon his confession of the
Fact and Judgment thereupon be had, and consequently if Judgment be had against
him upon a demurrer, which is a Confession of the matter of Fact, or if
Judgment be given against him on nihil dicit, for any other Cause, any of these
are sufficient Convictions whereupon to recover his penalty; for Convicted is
here 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. to be taken for attainted, as it is in many other
Cases, for until Judgment he shall forfeit nothing, and although he that is
Convicted is not therefore attainted, yet every one who is attainted or
adjudged is Convicted, and of such a Conviction is this Statute to be
understood infra 233.

Good-behavior.
XXX. The Laws, etc. 63, 64. Upon the words, Be bound. in 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2.
Some have made a question, and among them Mr. Shephard in his Sure Guide, cap.
6. Sect. 5. by whom or in what Court the Recusant shall be bound to the good
behavior by force of this Statute, for that the Court is not expressly
mentioned, and Wingate Crown 44. has stumbled upon a conceit that after
Certificate made in B. R. a Justice of Assize, Goal delivery, or Peace shall
bind the party to the good behavior, and misrecites the Statute accordingly,
but it seems the intention of the Law makers was that he should be bound in
B. R. and of that opinion is Dalt. 192. 5. cap. 75. tit. good behavior.

2. For where any proceedings are appointed to be upon or after a Certificate
sent to any Court, there by Common intendment the proceedings are to be in that
Court to whom the Certificate is sent, if no other Court be named, and it
cannot be presumed by any reasonable construction of 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2. That
the Certificate into B. R. is to any other end than for the Justices there to
proceed in such manner as the Act directs to be done after such Certificate, as
no question they may in this Case as well as upon Certificate of a presentment
or of refusal of the Oath of Supremacy against 5 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 10. Supra 39.
and it is a rule in Construction of Statutes, that where the intention plainly
appears, the Law ought to be advanced according to its end, tho the words be
short and imperfect, especially Laws made for Religion, as is held Hob. 157.
and 11 Co. in Magdalen College Case and 2 Bulstrode 155.

3. Popish Recusants Convicted are not to be reputed sufficient sureties within
23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2. and therefore were refused by the Court of B. R. in the
Case of Griffith. 2 Bulstrode 155.

XXXI. The Laws, etc. 64. An Usher or assistant in teaching is a Master in the
School and seems to be included within the word Schoolmaster, 23 Eliz. 1. 6.
N. 1. and the following words here (or teacher) explain who is intended (viz.)
Every teacher of youth 23 Eliz. 1. 7. N. 2.

Scholars.
XXXII. The Laws, etc. 65. 66. Abr. 69. This limitation of time within one year
and day 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. Extends not to any offense made Treason by 23
Eliz. 1. but only to such offenses mentioned in this Act or 1 Eliz. 1. 2. and 5
Eliz. 1. and 13 Eliz. 2. as concern the Kings Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical, the service of God, coming to Church, or Establishment of
Religion.

2. And for those touching Religion 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. enlarges the time
limited by 1 Eliz. 2. 20. N. 1. which says the party must be Indicted the next
Sessions or 1 Eliz. 2. 22. N. 1. If in a Corporation within fifteen days after
Easter or Michaelmas: for now he may be Indicted at any time within the year
and day.

3. But for absolving or withdrawing, or for being absolved, withdrawn or
reconciled, which are 23 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. made Treason, no time is limited for
the prosecution, but the offender may be Indicted at any time after the year
and day, for the latter part of 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 2. Speaks of those offenses
of Treason which the Justices of Peace cannot hear and determine, and there no
time is limited, although there be in the former part 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1: for
those offenses which are inquirable by Justices of Peace 1 Leonard 238. pl.
322. Guilfords, Case.

Justices.
XXXIII. The Laws, etc. 66. 67. Abr. 70. Upon 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. The Justices
of the Court of B. R. are the Sovereign Justices of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-delivery 9 Co. 118. Lord Sanchers Case, and therefore may enquire of, hear
and determine the offenses against this Act, although they be not here especially
named.

2. If an Indictment be preferred upon this Statute 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or of Assize, for any offense not made Treason
or misprision, and there is an Indictment before Justices of Peace likewise for
the same offense, the Judgment of the Justices who do first enquire, hear and
determine the same, shall stand, and the Judgment given by the other shall be
void, as was held in the like Case. 2 Inst. 739. Upon 31 Eliz. 7. N. of Inmates.

3. The power here given 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. The Justices of Peace in their
open Quarter Sessions to hear and determine the offense of not coming to Church
is in force at this day, notwithstanding 29 Eliz. 6. 2. N. 2. which says that
every Conviction for not coming to Church shall be in B. R. or at the Assizes
or general Jail-delivery, and not elsewhere; for 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1. has given
power to Justices of Peace in their general or Quarter Sessions to enquire,
hear and determine of all offenses for not coming to Church according to former
Laws in such manner as the Justices of Assize and Goal delivery might do by
former Laws in the Case of Recusancy for not repairing to Church, which is
clearly a reviver of the power of Justices of Peace given to them by 23 Eliz.
1. 9. N. 2. to proceed against Recusants, and taken from them by 29 Eliz. 6. 2.
N. 2.

4. Nor does that following Clause 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 2. Touching Conviction by
Proclamation impeach this, or restrain the Justices of Peace to proceed to
Conviction upon Proclamation only and default of appearance, no more than the
Justices of Assize or jail-delivery are restrained thereby or by 29 Eliz. 6. 2.
N. 5. which gives them likewise Authority to proceed by Proclamation.

5. For these Clauses of 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1. 2. are in the Affirmative, viz.
first that the Justices of Peace shall have power to hear and determine the
offense of not coming to Church according to Laws in such manner as Justices of
Assize and Jail-delivery might do, and those Justices might hear and determine
that offense according to this Statute 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. and then comes the
next Clause of 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 2. that the Justices of Peace shall have power
to Convict by Proclamation which is purely affirmative also, and thefore
abrogates no part of the power given them by the former Clause of 3 Jac. 4. 7.
N. 1. and this agrees with what Sir Edward Coke says 12 Co. 13. that if a man
be Indicted for Recusancy at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace, the Court
may waive the proceedings by Proclamation upon 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 2. And may still
if they please proceed against the party by process upon this Statute 23 Eliz.
1. 9. N. 2. in which Case the process must be by Venire facias, capias, etc. As
in Indictments of Trespass, and if says he the party be fugitive in another
County, the Indictment may be removed in B. R. and then process may be there
made out against him into any County of England.

XXXIV. The Laws, etc. 67. Abr. 71. Justices.
Upon 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. by Quarter Session, is intended here only the
Sessions of the Peace, held at four times of the year and not any other, although
it be a general Sessions.

2. And therefore the Justices of Peace in London who hold a Sessions every
month cannot take Indictments upon this Statute 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. at any of
them, unless it be the Quarter Sessions: For that their Authority is given them
only at a certain time, as was resolved upon 5 Eliz. 9. 9. N. 1. in the like
Case, Mich. 17. Jac. B. R. Palmer 44. pl. Tailors Case.

3. And 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1. which gives Justices of Peace power to take
Indictments of Recusancy at their general or Quarter Sessions, for so the word
(said) there imports, having reference to the general or Quarter Sessions
mentioned before 3 Jac. 4. 4. N. 2. about Presentiments, yet does not enlarge
the power of the Justices of Peace in this particular, nor enable them to take
such Indictments at any Sessions, but at their four Quarter Sessions: for although
it be put there 3 Jac. 4. 4. N. 2. dis-junctively General or Quarter, yet the
latter word is but Explicative of the former, and shows what General Sessions
are meant, as appears by 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 1. and 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 5. touching
the Oath of Allegiance; for in 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 1. it is said, that if the party
refuse the Oath he shall be committed to Goal, until the next Assizes or
General Quarter Sessions, and if he refuse the Oath tendered him by the Justices
of Assize and jail-delivery in their open Assizes, or by the Justices of Peace
in their said general Quarter Sessions, he shall incur a Praemunire; and in 7
Jac. 6. 26. N. 5. that the party refusing shall be committed to Goal until the
next Assizes, or general Quarter Sessions, and if he refuse the Oath tendered
him by the Justices of Assizes and Goal delivery in their open Assizes or
jail-delivery, or the Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them in their
general or Quarter Sessions, he shall incur a Praemunire, which clearly shows
that the same thing is intended by general Quarter Sessions, and General or
Quarter Sessions; and that all General Sessions which are not Quarter Sessions
are excluded out of the meaning of those Statutes.

Indictment.
XXXV. The Laws, etc. 68. Abr. 72. The Justices named in 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2.
are hereby empowered to proceed by Indictment only, and no other way, for they
are to hear and determine after enquiry, infra, 95. and 165.

2. And the word (Enquire) implies an Indictment, and is always so to be
expounded, supra 35, and so are the other words hear and determine where other
proceeding are not specially named, as here they are not.

3. For the action of debt, Information, etc. in any Court of Record is given
to the Informer qui tam etc. afterward 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. in a distinct
branch by it self without any reference to this.

4. So that by 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. and before 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. which gave
the Queen an action of debt, etc. the Queen had no other remedy to recover the
entire forfeitures given hereby but by Indictment only. 11 Co. 60. and 1 Roll.
91. pl. 41. Dr. Fosters Case.

5. See Jones 193. pl. for that and the suit by the common Informer are the
only ways appointed by 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. and 11. N. 1. and the subsequent
Clause 23 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 1. of submission which names the Justices before whom
the party is to submit, viz. the Justices before whom he is Indicted, Arraigned
or Tried, shows what proceeding are meant which are to be had before the
Justices here named, that is by Indictment, Hob. 205. Pie and Lovel.

6. Talbot and Shelden were Indicted for Recusancy, Contra formam Statuti 23
Eliz. 1. in which Indictment the penalty was demanded, and in a Writ of Error
the Judgment was reverst, for the offense is made by 1 Eliz. 2. N. and the
penalty is given by 23 Eliz. 1. ^ N. and therefore it should have been Contra
formam Statutorum, Owen. 135. pl. Wests Case infra 79. 4.

Bar. and Fem.
7. If a Feme-Covert be Indicted at the Kings Suit for an offense within 23
Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. she may be charged with the penalty after her Husbands death,
but the Husband is not chargable, nor shall pay the penalty, for that he is no
party to the Judgment: And this was one of the Causes of making 35 Eliz. 1. 10.
N. 1. by which Statute the King may have an Action of debt, and recover the
forfeiture against the Husband, 1 Roll. 93. 94. Roy versus Foster, Savile 25.
pl. 59.

Treason.
XXXVI. The Laws, etc. 68. Abr. 73. This Exception 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. of
Treason and misprision of Treason extends not to the Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, or of Assize and Jail-delivery, as Wingate Crown 46. has mistaken,
but only to Justices of Peace, who are not to meddle in those two Cases, but
the other Justices may.

XXXVII. The Laws, etc. 69. Abr. 75. Certificate.
Upon 23 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 1. If a man be Indicted for Recusancy before Justices
of Peace, and he submits and conforms before the Bishop of the Diocese, he may
remove the Indictment by Certiorari into B. R. and there plead his Conformity
by Certificate under the Bishops hand and Seal, Styles 26. pl.

2. For the manner of a Recusants submission and Conformity before the Bishop
after Conviction, and the Bishops Certificate thereupon, see Co. Entr. 569.

XXXVIII. The Laws, etc. 90. Abr. 85. Alien.
And his Being born within this Realm, 27 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. must be comprised
in the Indictment, but it need not be shown in what particular place he was
born, but generally, quod J. S. natus infra hoc regnum Angliae, etc.

And so it must be alleged in the Indictment on 27 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. that he
was made a Jesuit or Priest, etc. by Authority Challenged or pretended from the Sea of Rome.

But it need not be showed where he was made a Jesuit or Priest, etc. whither
beyond the Sea or within the Realm, for wheresoever it was, it is within this
Law, if he were made so by the pretended Authority of the Sea of Rome, Popham
94. Southwells Case.

XXXIX. The Laws, etc. 102, 103, 104. Abr. 96. Process.
This Statute 29 Eliz. 6. 3. N. 1. meddles not with any other way of Conviction
than at the Queens suit by Indictment, as has been said, and so is the
Conviction here mentioned to be understood, for this Statute is not
Introductory of a new Law, nor gave the Queen any new or other remedy than what
she had against the Recusant by 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. that is, by Indictment,
but only gave her a more speedy way of proceeding upon that fundamental remedy,
11 Co. 60. and 1 Roll. 93. Dr. Fosters Case.

So that a Conviction upon an Information against the Recusant upon 23 Eliz. 1.
11. N. 1. or any other way, save by Indictment, does not appropriate the
penalty of twenty pound per month to the King for the time to come by force of
29 Eliz. 6. 3. N. 1. Infra 165. abr. 72. Hob. 205. Pie and Lovel, Nor for the
same person by force of 3 Jac. 4. 8. N. 1. where the same words are used and a
Conviction by Indictment only intended, as here.

XL. The Laws, etc. 107. 108. Abr. 103. Process.
If the same be taken at any Assize or Goal delivery, 29 Eliz. 6. 5 N. 6. for
if the Indictment had been taken before Justices of Peace, no Proclamation
thereupon could have been made upon this Statute by the Justices of Assize or
Jail-delivery, as was resolved in the Case of Sir Edward Plowden.

And therefore upon such an Indictment for Recusancy taken before Justices of
Peace, the Court was to remove the Indictment in B. R. and there process might
have been made out against the Recusant and he Convicted: for the Justices of
Peace could do no more than Indict, all other proceedings being taken away from
them by this Statute 29 Eliz. 6. 2. N. 2. 11 Co. 63. and 1 Roll. 94. but now by
3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1. the Law is altered in this point, and the Justices of Peace
upon Indictments taken before them, may proceed to Proclaim and Convict the
Recusant, as well as Justices of Assize and jail-delivery, Abr. 95. N. 2.

XLI. The Laws, etc. 114. Abr. 108. Wingate Crown 70. says, Religion.
that if any person above sixteen years of age obstinately refuses to come to
Church for a month, or impugnes the Queens Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical,
he shall be Committed to prison, 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 2. which is a great mistake,
for no man shall be punished by this Act for either of those Causes, only the
not coming to Church being only a precedent qualification required in the
person whom the act makes liable to the penalties thereof for the other
offenses therein mentioned, Crompton 53. b.

2. And therefore if a man never comes to Church, yet he is no offender within
35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 2. unless he advisedly or purposely move or persuade another
to deny or Impugn the Kings Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, or to that end
or purpose advisedly and maliciously move or persuade some other to forbear to
come to Church, or receive the Communion, or to be present at Conventicles,
etc. or if he himself be present at such Conventicles, etc.

3. And on the other hand, if a man move or persuade any other to deny or
Impugn the Kings Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, or to forbear to come to
Church or receive the Communion, or to be present at Conventicles, etc. Or if
he himself be present at any Conventicles, etc. yet he is no offender within 35
Eliz. 1. 1. N. 2. if he goes to Church once within the compass of a month.

4. So that the party must both forbear to come to Church, and be guilty of
some other offenses here enumerated, or he is not punishable by 35 Eliz. 1. 1.
N. 2. and as for the denying or Impugning the Kings Authority in Causes
Ecclesiastical, its no offense within this Statute, unless the party moves or
persuades others so to do: and not then neither, unless he has been absent
from Church by the space of a month.

XLII. The Laws, etc. 114. 115. Abr. 109. Under color or pretense of any
exercise of Religion. 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 3. Although this Act is commonly called
the Act against Sectaries, as distinguished from those of the Romish
profession, yet in truth it extends to all Recusants whatsoever, as well Popish
as other, except 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. in the point of abjuration, for Popish
service is performed under Color or pretense of Exercise of Religion; and the
assembly or meeting of Popish Recusants under such color or pretense is an
assembly or meeting contrary to the Laws and Statutes: and they as well as
others may be Indicted upon this Statute if they forbear to come to Church for
the space of a month, and be present at any part of the Popish service, or move
or persuade, ut supra: And may be Imprisoned without Bail until they conform
and make submission, as by 35 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1. is appointed, but they cannot
be required to abjure unless they offend aganst 35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 2.

2. A Popish Recusant is likewise subject to an Action of debt, etc. given to
the Queen by this Statute 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2.

Process.
XLIII. The Laws, etc. 115. Abr. 110. Being thereof lawfully Convicted 35 Eliz.
1. 1. N. 5. that is Convicted both of his absence from Church and of that other
offense which makes him punishable by this Act (viz.) going to Conventicles, or
moving or persuading, etc. for his absence from Church for a month must be laid
down precisely in the Indictment, for without that the other is no offense
within this Act.

2. And it is not necessary that the party be Convicted of such absence upon any
prior Indictment, for although there was never any former Conviction of him for
Recusancy, yet if he offend against this Act 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5. in any of the
other particulars, he may be Convicted both of that offense and of his absence
upon one and the same Indictment, and so was the Indictment Mich. 16. Car. 1.
in the Case of Lee and others, 1 Cro. 593. pl. who were Indicted upon this
Statute, at the Sessions of the Peace in Essex, for absenting themselves for a
month from Church, and resorting to Conventicles, to which they pleaded not
guilty, and the Indictment was removed in B. R. to be tried there.

Oath.
XLIV. The Laws, etc. 116. Abr. 111. Being thereunto required by the Bishop,
etc. or any Justice of Peace, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. But put the Case that the
offender is Convicted, and the three months next after his Conviction elapse,
before he is required by the Bishop or any Justice of Peace, or the Minister or
Curate of the Parish, to conform and make submission as here appointed; and
afterward he is required by one of them so to do. It seems in this Case such
request comes too late, for he ought to conform and submit within the three
months, if he be required, but if he be not required, he is not bound to abjure
for omitting it, although he shall remain in Prison till he conforms and submits.
But if within the three months he be required to conform and submit, and
refuse, there is no question but he may be at any time afterward warned or
required to abjure.

XLV. The Laws, etc. 117, 118. Abr. 112. Conformity.
That 35 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 5. appoints the Conformity and submission to be At any
Church Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, but 35 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1.
limits it to be at some Parish Church; the meaning whereof seems to be, that if
a man be an offender against this Act, and Convicted, he may within the three
months after his Conviction conform and submit by 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5. in any
Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, where there is Common Prayer
and either a Sermon or the Gospel read: Infra 145. But if he be required within
the three months to conform and make submission, and he refuses so to do, but
the three months expire, then by 35 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1. his Conformity and
submission must be more solemn and public, (viz.) In some Parish Church, where
it is presumed, there will be the greatest number of people to be witnesses
thereof.

And by this Construction the seeming difference between 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5.
and 4. N. 1. is reconciled, and this construction naturally flows from the
order wherein these two branches are placed, for 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5. speaks of
a Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer, before it mentions the
parties refusal to conform and submit within three months next after
Conviction, but when it has mentioned such refusal 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. then
it speaks of the Parish Church only, and the second time here limited 35 Eliz.
1. 4. N. 1. to the offender when he may conform and submit (viz.) before he be
warned and required to abjure, presupposes his refusal to conform and submit
within the three months, for otherwise he could not be required to abjure.

But if the offender be not required within the three months, according to 35
Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1. to conform and submit, it seems he is not afterward limited
to some Parish Church, but may do it according to 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5. in any
Church etc. for he is then in no danger of abjuration: and his Conformity and
submission is then to no other end but to free himself from the Imprisonment
inflicted on him upon his Conviction, and in that Case the Act says he may
conform and submit in any Church, Chapel or usual place of Common Prayer.

And of this difference of places of Conformity no notice is taken in the
Additions to Dalt. cap. 81. Sect. 13. tit. Recusants.

2. By Parish Church 35 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1. is to be understood, Church.
not only that which has been always the Mother Church and never belonged to
any other, but every Church which has the Administration of Sacraments and
Sepulture. For that in Law is a Parish Church, although it anciently belonged to
another Church, 2 Inst. 363. where the issue was whither it had Baptisterium
and Sepulturam.

And the Church of Stoke Goldenham, tho the Town was parcel of the Rectory of
Hinckly, whose Church was Anciently the Mother Church, yet having all parochial
rights and Churchwardens, was adjudged a Parish Church, and within 43 Eliz. 2.
N. of the Poor, Hutton 93. Hilton and Paul's Case.

Forfeitures.
XLVI. The Laws, etc. 120. 121. Abr. 114. These words (All and every the said
pains, duties, forfeitures and payments) 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. are not to be
understood simpliciter or Exclusive, as if the forfeitures upon 23 Eliz. 1. 5.
N. 1. could be recovered no other way than is prescribed here: but only they
give the Queen a new remedy for recovery of them which she had not before, and
take not away the remedy given by 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. upon Indictment, nor
that by 29 Eliz. 6. 5. N. 6. upon Indictment and Proclamation, nor the
Informers popular action given by 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. for all these three are
affirmative Laws, and do not abrogate one the other, but may well stand
together.

2. And the meaning of them taken together, is, that if the Informer recover
the forfeiture upon 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. he shall have his part thereof, but
if the offender were Indicted at the Queens suit, and Judgment had against him
upon 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. or if he were Convicted upon Proclamation and default
upon 29 Eliz. 6. 5. N. 6. the Queen should have the whole penalty, excluding
the Informer, for he shall not be punished again for the same offense at the
suit of the Informer.

3. But if the offender were neither Indicted nor sued by the Informer Qui tam,
etc. the Queen should have another remedy to recover the entire forfeiture by
Action of debt etc. upon this Statute 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. so that the
remedies given by these three Statutes 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. 29 Eliz. 6. 5. N.
6. and 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. are Cumulative, and not Privative.

4. But as 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. does not abrogate any of the former laws
touching Recusancy, nor takes away the Informers popular suit; so it adds
nothing as to the Informer, nor gives him any more speedy remedy for the
recovery of the forfeiture, but leaves him in the same condition as he was in
before to take his remedy upon 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. Dr. Fosters Case 11 Co.
61, 62. and 1 Roll. 90, 91, 93. 2 Cro. 481. and Bridgman. 121, 122. Parker
versus Webb.

XLVII. The Laws, etc. 123. Abr. 120. The Statute here 35 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1.
mentioned and called 28 Eliz. 6. is the same with 29 Eliz. 6. before: It being
in some books called 28 Eliz. in others 29 Eliz. but (as it seems) more
properly 29 Eliz. 6. for the Session wherein it was made was by Prorogation
held 15 Feb. 29 Eliz. 1 Anderson 294. pl. 303. and 4 Inst. 7.

XLVIII. The Laws, etc. 124. Abr. 122. In the Additions to Dalton cap. 81. Sect
7. It Is said, that no married Woman is punishable by this Statute 35 Elizabeth,
but are thereout excepted, whereas in truth they are no where excepted
throughout this Statute, save only that they shall not be compelled or bound to
abjure, 35 Eliz. 12. N. 1.

For if a married Woman comes not to Church, but forbears for a month, and goes
to Conventicles, or any other Meetings or Assemblies, under color or pretense
of the Exercise of Religion contrary to Law, whether they be Popish or other,
or persuades others so to do, or to forbear the Church, or to impugn the Kings
Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, she shall be imprisoned by force of this
Act, 35 Eliz. 1. 1. N. 5. until she conform and submits her self, but she
cannot be further proceeded against, so as to require her to abjure.

A Married Woman by this Act, 35 Eliz. 1. 10. N. 2. with her Husband is
likewise punishable for her Recusancy, by action of Debt, etc. brought against
her and her Husband at the Kings Suit, so that it is a great mistake to say she
is not punishable by this Statute.

Days.
XLIX. The Laws, etc. 125. 126. Abr. 124. Note that this Act 35 Eliz, 1. 13. N.
4. being at first but temporary was afterward discontinued, Hutton 61, 62. But
is since revived by 3 Car. 14. (5.) 21. N. 1. and declared to be in Esse, 16
Car. 2. 4. 1. N. 1.

2. And in such Case it has been questioned if a Statute be discontinued and
afterward revived, how an Indictment thereupon shall conclude, Parliament.
whither contra formam Statuti or Statutorum: For if a Statute be temporary,
and afterward continued for a longer time, or made perpetual and never
discontinued, there without doubt it shall be contra formam Statuti.

But it has been held by some, that where it was once discontinued and then
revived, there it is as if there were two several and distinct Statutes, and
the Indictment shall conclude, contra formam Statutorum. 9 Eliz. Palmers Case.

But others have held the contrary, and that there is not any difference in the
Case of a Statute at first temporary, and afterward, before any
discontinuance, continued for a longer time or made perpetual, and a Statute
discontinued and then revived, but that it shall in both Cases be held but as
one Statute, and that the Conclusion shall be contra formam Statuti, and not
Statutorum, unless where the Act of reviver makes any addition to the former
Act, or increases the penalty or forfeiture, for then there is no doubt but
they are two distinct Acts of Parliament, and according to this latter opinion
has the practice been in Informations upon 5 Eliz. 9. of Perjury, which
determined 14 Eliz. and was revived 29 Eliz. 5. 2. N. 3. and yet all
Informations thereupon conclude contra formam Statuti: And so as it seems ought
all Indictments upon this Statute of 35 Eliz. 1. 13. N. 4: notwithstanding its
discontinuance and reviver. Owen 135. Wests Case, 2 Cro. 170. pl 9, Yelvert
116. pl. 165. and 3 Cro. 750.

L. The Laws, etc. 137. Abr. 133. Days.
Within three months next after such person shall be apprehended or taken 35
Eliz. 2. 8. N. 3. Wingate Crown 80. clearly mistakes the meaning, for he says,
that a Popish Recusant, whose Estate is under value, must make the submission
prescribed by this Act within three months next after his arrival at his place
of abode, which is a complicated Error; for he quite leaves out him who is to
repair to the place where he was born, or his Father or Mother dwells; he makes
the party liable to such submission before he becomes an offender by not
repairing or not presenting himself, and giving in his true name or Traveling
above five Miles: He speaks nothing of his being apprehended, whereas by the
Act he cannot be required to abjure until three months after his apprehension,
and he turns the three months after his apprehension into three months after
his arrival; all great mistakes and fit to be taken notice of by Justices of
Peace, whose part it is to require the submission and abjuration, that they may
not be misled in the Execution of this part of their office by trusting to that
abridgment.

LI. The Laws, etc. 138. Abr. 134. Being thereunto required by the Bishop, etc.
35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 3. If the offender be not before the end of the three months
next after his apprehension required by the Bishop, a Justice of Peace, or the
Minister or Curate to make such submission, he cannot be required afterward,
nor be compelled to abjure by force of this Act, but if he be required within
the three months to make submission, and refuse, he may be at any time
afterward warned or required to abjure.

LII. The Laws, etc. 138, 139. Abr. 135. Exile.
The Oath of abjuration 35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 4. may be in this form, or to this
effect.

You shall Swear that you shall depart out of this Realm of England, and out of
all other the Kings Majesty's Dominions, and that you shall not return hither
or come again into any of his Majesty's Dominions but by the License of our
said Sovereign Lord the King or of his Heirs: So help you God. 3 Inst. ^17.
Stamford 119, 120.

Wilkinson, 66. has set down another form, etc. resembling that of a Felon
etc. vet. Magna Chart. 167. b. 168.

This hear you, Sir Coroner, that I J. M. of H. in the County of S. am a Popish
Recusant, and in the contempt of the Laws and Statutes of this Realm of
England, I have and do refuse to come to hear Divine Service there read and
exercised: I do therefore according to the intent and meaning of 35 Eliz. 2. 8.
N. 4. etc. abjure the Land and Realm of King Charles, now King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland; and I shall have me toward the Port of P. which
you have given and assigned to me, and that I shall not go out of the highway
leading thither, nor return back again etc. If I do, I will that I be taken as
a Felon of our said Lord the King; and that at P. I will diligently seek for
passage, and I will tarry there but one Flood and Ebb, If I can have passage;
and unless I can have it in such space, I will go every day into the Sea up to
my knees, assaying to pass over. So God me help and his holy Judgment.

But in alluding to the old Oath for Felony, etc. Wilkinson is mistaken in the
very Offense for which the Popish Recusant is to abjure by force of 35 Eliz. 2.
8. N. 4. For the Offense is not his Refusal to hear Divine Service, for that is
but one of the precedent qualifications of the person; but the offense it self
is of another nature, viz. his not repairing to the place the Statute appoints
him, or his removal from thence contrary to the Statute, or his not presenting
himself, and delivering his true Name, as aforesaid: Either of these, if he be
a Popish Recusant, within the meaning of this Act, is a Crime for which he
ought to abjure, unless he prevents his abjuration by a timely Submission: Nor
is the Popish Recusant bound to Swear that he will not go out of the high way,
or return back, or will tarry but one Flood and Ebb, or go into the Sea up to
his knees: Nor ought the Coroner or Justices of Peace to require any such Oath
of him; for this is a new Offense made by a Statute Law, which does not require
the strict form of Abjuration, as in Case of Felony; and although the Felon were
tied to these Circumstances, yet the Recusant is not, nor shall be a Felon for
omitting them, but it is sufficient if he simply abjure as, 35 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 4.
directs, and go from the appointed Port within the time limited, and not return
without License into any of the Kings Dominions.

He that thus abjures the Realm does yet owe the King his Ligeance and
remains within the Kings Protection. Qui abjurat Regnum, amittit regnum, sed
non Regem; amittit Patriam, sed non patrem patriae, 7 Co. 9. Calvin's Case.

LIII. The Laws, etc. 140. 141. Abr. 139. Having lawful Authority in that
behalf, 35 Eliz. 2. 11. N. 1. this Clause seems to refer to 27 Eliz. 2. 13. N.
1. Which appoints that the discovery of a Popish Priest, or Jesuit shall be
made to some Justice of Peace, or higher Officer, who is to give Information
thereof to some of the Privy Council. etc. under the penalty of two hundred
Marks: Which Statute of 27 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1. tho it do not in express terms
say, that the Justices of Peace, or other higher Officer shall examine the
Priest or Jesuit so discovered; yet in as much as it gives power to take
Cognizance of the matter, it seems Implicitly to empower him to inform himself
of the truth, whether the party be a Priest or Jesuit or not, as well by
examination of the party as otherwise, that he may be the better enabled to
give Information thereof to some of the Privy Council, etc. and one Justice of
Peace having by 27 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1. lawful Authority to examine him, he has
Authority likewise by this Statute 35 Eliz. 2. 11. N. 1. to Commit him, if he
be suspected to be a Priest or Jesuit, and refuses to answer whether he be so
or no.

As for Mr. Shepherds opinion in his sure Guide Cap. 14 5. That there must be
two Justices to Commit a man by force of 35 Eliz. 2. 11. N. 1. who is suspected
to be a Jesuit or Priest, till he answers directly, I see no ground at all for
it.

LIVE. The Laws, etc. 141. Abr. 140. Answer the said Questions, Examinant.
35 Eliz. 2. 11. N. 1. that is, whether he be a Jesuit, Seminary or Massing
Priest, for he is not bound to Answer to any other Question, nor can be
Committed by force of this Act for his refusal.

LV. The Laws, etc. 141. 142. Abr. 141. Urged by Process, Process.
35 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1. If a Popish Recusant, restrained by this Act, be
summoned by Warrant of a Justice of Peace to appear before him, the Recusant
ought not to travel to such Justice out of his compass of five miles; for
although a Justice of Peace's Warrant be the Kings Process, yet it is not
intended here, for these words (Urged by Process) are restrained by the
subsequent words 35 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1. as requires the Recusants appearance in
some of the Kings Courts, and extend not to all Cases of Summons and Process,
as Wingate Crown 83. mistakes.

But if in the Case aforesaid the Warrant be to Arrest the Recusant, Constable.
and by force thereof to be carried by the Constable, etc. out of the compass
of five miles, there he is excused, and shall forfeit nothing, for that it was
done by compulsion; and yet if there be any Covin between the Recusant and the
Justice of Peace, or Officer, it may be otherwise.

LVI. The Laws, etc. 144. 145. Abr. 146. Submission, Submission.
35 Eliz. 2. 15. and 16. If a Popish Recusant, Indicted upon this Statute,
makes his Submission, and brings with him into B. R. a Testimonial thereof, it
is the course of that Court to cause him there to make his Submission again
upon his Knees, which the Clerk of the Crown reads to him. And so was it done
Pasch. 2 Car. 1. Latch. 16. in the Case of one Throgmorton. But Jones Justice
said, There was no Statute to compel him to this second Submission: and
Throgmorton complained that he was not therein dealt with according to Law.

35 Eliz. 2. 16. N. 2. Is over her Majesty, Jurisdiction.
or within any her Majesty's Realms or Dominions; and not over her Majesty
within any her Dominions, as Wingate Crown 85. grossly misrecites: For that
denies only the Popes or See of Romes Authority over her Majesty, but not any
other Authority which they might claim over her Subjects: And it is there by
Disjunctive (Or) which Wingate omits, that both these Authorities are intended
to be denied by this Submission, these words (or any color or means of any
Dispensation) which are a very material part of the Submission, are likewise
omitted by Wingate.

LVII. The Laws, etc. 145. Abr. 147. Such relapse, Certificate.
35 Eliz. 2. 18. N. 1. with the Indictment thereof, is to be certified into the
Court of Exchequer, as was done by the Justices of B. R. 1. Bulstr. 133. in the
Case of Francis Holt, Pasc. 9 Jac. 8.

LVIII. The Laws, etc. 160. Abr. 163. Or before Justices of Assize, Justices.
etc. 3 Jac. 4. 3. N. 5. Note, that notwithstanding these words, an Information
upon this Statute by an Informer, Qui tam etc. for not receiving the Sacrament
cannot be brought before Justices of Assize, or Goal Delivery, or Justices of
Peace: For no common Informer can sue for the King and himself before any of
those Justices, but must sue in one of the Courts of Record at Westminster.

LIX. The Laws, etc. 161. Abr. 164. Constable.
Of all and all manner of Popish Recusants, 3 Jac. 4. 4. N. 1. as this Act is
penned, It seems that the Churchwardens and Constables are not bound thereby
to present the Monthly absence from Church of any of the Children or Servants
of a Popish Recusant, although such Children or Servants be Recusants, unless
they are Popish Recusants; and that it is sufficient to satisfy, 3 Jac. 4. 4.
N. 2. to present their Names, without taking any notice of their absence from
Church.

But if they be Popish Recusants, they fall within the General words of the
Act, and their Monthly absence ought to be presented as well as that of their
Parents or Masters: And in this Wingate Crown 100. has clearly mistaken; for
he tells us, That the Monthly absence of all the Children and Servants of a
Popish Recusant ought to be presented.

Indictment.
LX. The Laws, etc. 162. 163. Abr. 165. To enquire, hear, and determine, 3 Jac.
4. 7. N. 1. This is intended of Indictments only, and revives the Power of the
Justices of Peace, given them by 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. supra, and taken from
them by the Negative words of 29 Eliz. 6. 2. N. 2. supra, so that now the
Justices of Peace may proceed to Judgment against the Recusant upon 23 Eliz. 1.
5. N. 1. or Convict him upon Proclamation and Default, and so may the Justices
of Assize or Jail-delivery proceed either way: For the words of 3 Jac. 4. 7. N.
2. and of 29 Eliz. 6. 5. N. 5. which give the Proclamation being in the
Affirmative, do not take away the proceedings upon 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. but
that the Justices may waive the Conviction by Proclamation if they please.

Nor is the Informers popular Suit, 23 Eliz. 1. 11. N. 1. taken away by 29
Eliz. 6. 4. N. 3. or by this Statute, 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 2. Dr. Fosters Case, 11
Co. 61.

Appearance.
LXI. The Laws, etc. 164. Abr. 169. Shall not make Appearance of Record, 3 Jac.
4. 7. N. 3. And if the Recusant do appear of Record at the Assizes,
Jail-delivery, or General or Quarter Sessions, it shall be sufficient to save
his Default, although he did not render himself to the Sheriff upon the
Proclamation; and this is clear by the words of 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 3. which is
grossly mistaken Wingate Crown 102. who says, The Recusant shall be Convicted
if he render not his Body to the Sheriff or Bailiff of the Liberty, and that
Default be recorded.

This appearance on 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 3. must be in proper Person, and not by
Attorney, for none can at first appear by Attorney unless enabled by some
Statute; and all Appearances by the Defendant in any Court, ought by the Common
Law to be in Person, 10 Co. 101. Bewfages Case.

But after a Plea pleaded to an Indictment, an Attorney may be admitted at the
Discretion of the Court if they think fit, but not otherwise; and in some Cases
not without a special Writ directed to the Justices to that purpose, 16 Ed. 4.
5. F.N.B. 26.

The Party Indicted and Proclaimed on 3 Jac. 4 7. N. 3. who appears at the
Assizes or Sessions, must take care that his Appearance be entered of Record:
For if the Clerk of the Assizes, or Clerk of the Peace should mistake, and
instead thereof Record his Default, he has no way to avoid his standing
Covicted, but he is to put his Action upon the Case against such Clerk of the
Assizes or Peace. See Popham 29. Kellway 180.

The personal Presence at the next Assizes or Sessions of the Party Indicted of
Recusancy, and proclaimed on 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 3. although he continue there from
the beginning to the ending, is no sufficient ground to Record his Appearance,
nor shall save his Default; for although he be there personally present, and
openly confess himself to be the same Person who was Indicted, and against whom
the Proclamation Issued, yet if he deny to appear upon the Proclamation, or to
consent that his Appearance be entered of Record, it seems that his Appearance
cannot be Recorded, but his Default shall, and he shall stand convicted
thereupon.

And this is no more an Appearance than where a Prisoner is brought to the
Common Pleas Bar by Habeas Corpus, to the intent to have him appear to an
Original brought against him, and he denies to appear to the Action, in which
Case his Appearance cannot be Recorded, as was resolved 43 Eliz. in Ascoughs
Case, Golsb. 118. pl.

LXII. The Laws, etc. 174. Abr. 131. These words ( passing, etc. and unknown) 3
Jac. 4. 13. N. 4. being in the Conjunctive, it seems that the Bishop, or two
Justices, ought not to examine upon Oath, or tender this Oath to any Passenger
or Traveller, quatenus such, unless he be unknown, viz. such an one as conceals
his true Name or Quality, for so it must be reasonably intended, and not of all
Travelers through the Country, as Wingate Crown 106. mistakes: For it appears
by the other Qualifications here enumerated, that the intent of the Act is,
that it shall be offered by the Bishop, or two Justices, to such only of whom
there is any just Cause of Suspicion, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. Infra 260.

LXIII. The Laws, etc. 175. Abr. 182: Imprisonment.
There to remain without Bail or Mainprise, 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 1. the Bishop or
two Justices cannot take Sureties of him who refuses the Oath for his
Appearance at the Assizes or Sessions, as Wingate Crown 107. mistakes, but must
Commit him immediately to Goal; nor can any other Court or Justices Bayl him in
this Case.

LXIV. The Laws, etc. 175. Abr. 183. Justices.
Until the next Assizes or General Quarter Sessions, 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 1. This
being in the Disjunctive, the Bishop or two Justices have their Election to
Commit the Party refusing the Oath, either until the next Assizes, or until the
next Sessions, as they shall think fit: For some may be more aptly committed
until the next Assize, and some until the next Sessions. 12 Co. 131.

LXV. The Laws, etc. 175. 176. Abr. 184. Oath.
These words (Any other person whatsoever) 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3. are Exclusive of
the said Person or Persons who are Committed for refusal, for it is here in the
Disjunctive; So that it seems, that if any Person whatsoever of the Age of 18
years or above, and under the degree of a Nobleman or Noble woman, be at the
Assizes or General Quarter Sessions of the Peace, whether voluntarily, or
brought in upon Process on an Indictment of Recusancy, or for any other matter,
and be there tendered this Oath, and refuse to take it, although it were never
tendered to him before, yet upon his refusal there he incurs a Praemunire; and
in this respect this Statute 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3. is more Extensive than 7 Jac.
6. 26. N. 6. where there must be a prior tender and refusal of this Oath,
otherwise a refusal of it at the Assize or Sessions, does not make a Praemunire
by that Act, 12 Co. 18. Infra.

LXVI. The Laws, etc. 176. Abr. 185. Error.
Shall incur the danger and penalty of Praemunire, 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3. If a man
be committed by the Bishop or two Justices of Peace for the refusal of this
Oath, and the tender and refusal be expressed in the Mittimus, the Justices of
Assize or Justices of Peace in their Sessions, are bound to take notice of this
tender and refusal.

And after they have there made the Party a second tender of the Oath,
Indictment.
and he refuses it, by which he incurs a Praemunire, the Indictment against
him to Convict and Attaint him of Praemunire, must contain all the special
Matter; viz. That he stood Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, or that he had
not received the Sacrament twice within the year next before, or that passing
through the Country and unknown, being examined upon Oath, he confessed or
denied not, etc. (as the Case is) and that the Oath was tendered to him by the
Bishop, or two Justices of Peace, Quorum unus, etc. and he refused it: And that
it was again tendered to him in open Court, and he again refused it: For in this
Case the Mittimus is the ground upon which he must be proceeded against at the
Assizes or Sessions.

But if the first tender and refusal be not expressed in the Mittimus or
Warrant of Commitment, there, although there was a tender and refusal of the
Oath before the Bishop or two Justices, yet the Justices of Assize, or Justices
of Peace in their Sessions can take no notice of it, but they must there tender
him the Oath without reference to any prior tender which they may do by force
of the General words (any other person whatsoever) 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3. And if
he refuse he incurs a Praemunire; and in this Case the Indictment may be short
and general (scil.) That he was tendered the Oath in open Court, and refused it,
etc. And so it must be in all Cases where in truth there was never any prior
tender and refusal, 12 Co. 131, 132.

See 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. Whereby the power of the Justices of Peace is in some
particular Cases enlarged in reference to this Oath of Allegiance, Infra.

Oath.
LXVII. The Laws, etc. 179. Abr. 186. Unto which Oath to take, the said Person
shall subscribe his or her Name or Mark. 3 Jac. 4. 15. N. 6. If a man refuse to
take any word of this Oath, it is a refusal of the whole, 1 Bulstr. 198. Lord
Vauxes Case.

Proof.
LXVIII. The Laws, etc. 190. Abr. 199. To the satisfaction of the said Justice
of Peace, 3 Jac. 4. 27. N. 2. In this Case the Justice of Peace is sole Judge,
whether the Excuse the Party makes for his Absence be sufficient, and
sufficiently proved; and the same cannot be brought into question elsewhere by
the Party.

Justices.
LXIX. The Laws, etc. 196. 197. Abr. 211. Where any Bishop or Justices of the
Peace, 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. The Justices of Peace have a twofold power given
them by this Act in reference to the Oath of Allegiance: 1. Out of Sessions,
and so any two Justices of Peace, Quorum unus, etc. may tender the Oath to any
Person by 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 2. Eighteen years old or above, other than Noble men
or Noble women. 2. In their General or Quarter Sessions, and there they may by
3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 2. 3. They may tender the Oath to any such Person who has
before refused it, or to any Person whatsoever, of or above that Age, other
than Noble men or Noble women.

Now whether the six Privy Counselors here mentioned 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. may
require the Oath of Noble men and Noble women in all Cases where the Justices
of Peace may require the same of any Subject, either in or out of Sessions: Or
only in such Cases where they may require it out of Sessions, seems to be a
Question.

For if the Power here given 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. to the six Privy Counselors,
be the same with that of the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, they may by
force of this Act tender it to any Noble man or unmarried Noble woman
whatsoever above Eighteen years old; for the Justices of Peace in their
Sessions, by 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 2. may tender it there to any other Person
whatsoever. But if it be meant of the Power given the Justices of Peace out of
Sessions, 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 1. then the six Privy Counselors can tender it by
force of this Act, 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. to such Noble men or unmarried Noble
women only, who stand Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy for not coming to
Church, or who have not received the Sacrament twice within the year next
before, or who passing through the Country unknown, shall upon Examination
confess, or not deny their Recusancy, or that they have not so received the
Sacrament.

For the Solving of which Doubt, it is to be considered,

1. That the Bishop, and not the Justices of Assize, are here joined with the
Justices of Peace; And these words, 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. (where any Bishop or
Justices of Peace) seem to bear this Construction, viz. Either the one or the
other indifferently may require the Oath, and that can be intended only of the
Power given out of Sessions; for in Sessions the Bishop has nothing to do.

But had the Justices of Assize been here added, scil. in all Cases where the
Bishop, Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace may require this Oath, it had
been clear that the Power here 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. given the six Privy
Counselors, was as Extensive as that which 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3. is given the
Justices of Assize, or Justices of Peace in their Sessions, and they might have
required the Oath of any Noble man or unmarried Noble woman whatsoever of
competent Age. So if the Justices of Peace only had been here named, it had
been clearly intended of the Justices of Peace in either Capacity, either in or
out of Sessions. But (Bishop) 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. seems here to be a
Restrictive word, and to give the Privy Counselors no more power in respect of
the Nobility, than the Bishop had in reference to any other Subjects.

2. These words ( In all Causes where, etc.) 3 Jac. 4.. 41. N. 1. seem to be
Restrictive likewise, and Exclusive of some Causes; but the power of Justices
of Peace in Sessions, 3 Jac. 4.. 14. N. 3. extends to all Causes and Persons
under the degree of Nobility whatsoever, which therefore cannot be here
intended, 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. but only some particular Causes, Ejusdem generis,
which can be no other than the Causes before mentioned, 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 1.
wherein the Bishop, or two Justices out of Sessions may deal, scil. where the
Party was before Convicted or Indicted, or had not received the Sacrament, or
passed unknown, and confessed, etc.

And yet, as it is reported 1 Bulstr. 197. the Lord Vaux's Case, Pasch. 10 Car.
1. is to the contrary: For it is said there, he was Committed to the Fleet by
the Privy Council for refusing the Oath of Allegiance, and afterward Indicted
in B. R. of a Praemunire for such his refusal, he being then of the Age of
Eighteen years and above, and the said Oath being lawfully tendered, etc. all
which was certified to the Court by diverse of the Privy Council; upon which
Indictment he was Arraigned: And no word in the Indictment of his standing
Convicted or Indicted of Recusancy, or not having received the Sacrament, etc.
and yet the Indictment was grounded upon 3 Jac. 4. 41. N. 1. and not upon 7
Jac. 6. 26. N. 6. For by the Statute 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 5. He could not have been
Indicted of a Praemunier for the first Refusal, but must have been Committed
until the next Assizes or Sessions; and if he had there refused it the second
time, he might have been Indicted of a Praemunire, and not otherwise. But
whether this Indictment were according to Law, or only passed Sub silentio,
Quaere.

Note by 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 1. Any Privy Counselor, or the Bishop of the Dioces,
may now require this Oath of any Baron or Baroness of or above the Age of
Eighteen years in all Cases, and in some Cases three Privy Counselors, Quorum
unus, etc. may require it of Persons above the said Degree.

LXX. The Laws, etc. 205. Abr. 220. License.
Giving Power to grant License or Licenses unto the said Recusants, 35 Eliz. 2.
12. N. 1. in the Proviso which is by 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 4. here repealed, is only
that which there Impowers the Justices of Peace, for that is the only Proviso
which gives Power to grant Licenses; and the Cause here alleged for the
Repeal, 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 2. is the giving of sundry Licenses to Recusants under
color of a Proviso in 35 Eliz. 2. which can be construed only of those which
were given by the Justices of Peace, 35 Eliz. 2. 12. N. 1. and not of the other
Licenses given by 35 Eliz. 2. in several other Cases: So that the Provisoes
there, 35 Eliz. 2. 13. and 14. permitting the Popish Recusant to travel in Case
of Process, or Commandment by Privy Counselors, or the Queens Commissioners,
or Proclamation to render his Body to the Sheriff, remain still in force and
unrepealed, and the Recusant may take the benefit thereof at this day.

Justices.
LXXI. The Laws, etc. 207. 208. Abr. 221. by (such Recusant) is intended here, 3
Jac. 5. 7. N. 1. such Recusant as is confined by 35 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. and 4. N.
1. and not only such as were mentioned in 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 1. For that Recital
is imperfect, in that it mentions only the Popish Recusant Convict, 35 Eliz. 2.
3. N. 1. whereas 35 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. speaks as well of the Popish Recusant not
Convicted, who has no certain place of abode.

And the benefit of having Licenses from the King, or three Privy Counselors,
by force of this Act, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 1. is intended as well to the one as the
other, although the Convicted only are mentioned in the recital: And this will
plainly appear, 1. By the following words here, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 2. which
empower the Justices of Peace to grant Licenses, and expressly extend to all
Persons confined, by virtue of 35 Eliz. 2. Now it cannot be presumed that the
Makers of the Law intended any difference between the Persons to he licenced by
the King or Privy Counselors, and the Persons to be licenced by the Justices
of Peace; the Power given 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 1. to the King or Privy Counselors,
being more absolute, and not under such Precautions as is that which is given 3
Jac. 5. 7. N. 3. to the Justices of Peace: For the King or Privy Counselors
may grant a License to the Recusant to travel without any particular Cause
shown in the License, or the assent of any other Person, and without any Oath
to be made by the Recusant, which the Justices of Peace cannot do: And there is
no reason to think that the Power here given to the King or Privy Counselors,
which in all other Particulars is so much more absolute and extensive than that
given to the Justices of Peace, should be yet less Extensive as to the Persons
to be licenced.

2. It were absurd to think that the Makers of 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 1. intended to
confer a greater Privilege upon the Recusant Convicted, whose Offense appears
upon Record, than to such as are not Convicted, etc. But it by (such Recusant)
should be meant only such as are mentioned in the Recital, 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 1.
viz. those Convicted, and not all who are confined by 35 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. and
4. N. 1. it would follow that the Convicted Recusant, who is the more notorious
Offender, may have a License without any Cause shown, or Oath made; but he who
is not Convicted is barred of that Privilege, and can apply himself only to
the Justices of Peace for a License, clogged with diverse Circumstances which
are not required in a License granted by the King or the three Privy
Counselors, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 1.

Much less shall this Recital 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 1. of the Statute 35 Eliz. 2. 3.
N. 1. Impeach the express words of that Statute 35 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. as if no
other Popish Recusants were intended to be confined thereby, but only such as
are Convicted, because no other are mentioned in the Recital: For the Recital
of an Act of Parliament in another Act of Parliament, being only by way of
Preface or Introduction, cannot add to or diminish the Act recited, or make it
liable to any other Constitution, than what shall naturally flow from the Act
it self, 4 Inst. 331.

LXXII. The Laws, etc. 208. Abr. 222. License.
Without any other Cause to be expressed, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 1. Here is one
difference between a License by the King or three of the Privy Counselors, and
a License by Justices of Peace: For by these 3 Jac. 7. 5. N. 2. it ought not to
be granted, unless the Popish Recusant has necessary occasions or business;
but the Kings or Privy Counselors License may be granted in any Case at the
Recusants request.

LXXIII. The Laws, etc. 200. Abr. 203. Under the Hands and Seals, Indictment.
3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 2. An Indictment was brought upon 35 Eliz. 2. 3. N. 1. for
traveling out of the Compass of five Miles, the Recusant pleaded a License
under the Seals of four Justices of Peace, and Exception was taken to the Plea,
for that the License ought to have been under their Hands as well as their
Seals, 2 Co. 352. Mich. 17 Jac. Maxfields Case. And this is a good Exception:
For a License by a Justice of Peace, although in Writing, is not sufficient
without Seals and Subscription both, 1 Roll. 108. pl. 47. Macclefields Case.

LXXIV. Abr. 224. Of four of the Justices of Peace, Justices.
3 Jac. 5.. 7. N. 2. And a License from less than four will not now serve,
since the Repeal of 35 Eliz. 2.. 12. N. 1. and therefore 1 Roll. 108 is
misreported in that particular; for there mention is made of a License from two
Justices of Peace, as if no more were then requisite. And that Case could not
be grounded upon the Proviso in 35 Eliz. 2. 12. N. 1. which required only two
Justices, as well for the distance of time (being Nine years after the Repeal
of that Proviso by 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 4.) As for that in 1 Roll. 108. there is
mention of a License under the Seals of the Justices of Peace, and of the Oath
to be taken by the Recusant, neither of which was appointed by 35 Eliz. 2. 12.
N. 1. but by this Statute, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 4. which must therefore necessarily
be there intended, and not any Statute 1 Jac. which is another mistake in that
Case, 1 Roll. 108.

LXXV. The Laws, etc. 208. 209. Abr. 225. With the privity and assent in
writing of the Bishop, etc. the Lieutenant, or of any Deputy-Lieutenant, 3 Jac.
5. 7. N. 2. An Information was brought against a Popish Recusant Convict, for
remaining above five Miles from the place of his Confinement, who pleaded a
License from four Justices of Peace; but the Plea was disallowed, Mich. 12 Jac.
says Moor 836. pl. 1127. Mansfields Case. But yet if it had been granted with
the assent of any Deputy-Lieutenant residing in the County, there is no doubt
but it had been good enough.

The Bishop, Lieutenant, or Deputy-Lieutenant, who gives his assent, must be a
distinct Person from the Justices of Peace who grant the License, by 3 Jac. 5.
7. N. 2. And therefore if one and the same Person be a Justice of Peace and
Deputy-Lieutenant, he cannot act herein in both Capacities; for una persona non
potest supplere vicem duorum. And if he Sign and Seal the License, as a Justice
of Peace, the assent of some other Deputy-Lieutenant, or of the Bishop, or
Lieutenant must be had thereto, or the License is void, Mich. 12. Jac.
Maxfields Case. 2 Cr. 352. and Mansfields Case. Moor 836. pl. 1217. and
Macclefields Case, 1 Roll. 108. And that Rule, Quando duo Jura concurrunt in
una persona aequum est ac si essent in diversis, holds not in such Cases where
distinct Persons are necessarily required by Law, 7 Co. 14. Calvin's Case. And
here four Persons, 3 Jac. 5.. 7. N. 2. are necessarily required to grant the
License, and another Person to assent to it.

In 2 Cr. 352. one Exception to the License in Maxfields Case, was, That the
assent of the Deputy-Lieutenant was contained in the License granted by the
four Justices of Peace, and was not separate and distinct by it self, but to
this the Court made no Answer: And it seems that such an assent is well enough
by 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 2. though in the same Writing with the License, if it be
expressed that the four Justices do license, and the Deputy-Lieutenant does
assent, and such writing be under the Hands and Seals of all five.

License.
LXXVI. The Laws, etc. 210. Abr. 228. The particular cause of the said License,
3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 3. In Maxfields Case, 2 Cr. 352. another Exception to the
License granted by the four Justices was, That it was said to be granted for
certain urgent Causes, but no particular Cause for the Recusants travel was
expressed in the License: And this seems to be a good Exception: For the
inserting into the License that the Popish Recusant has urgent or necessary
occasion or business, answers only the former part of this Proviso, 3 Jac. 5.
7. N. 2. which gives the four Justices power to license him, if he has
necessary occasion or business to travel out of the compass of five miles; but
withal it ought to be mentioned in the License particularly what that occasion
or business is, which is the cause of the License, for so this Act here 3 Jac.
5. 7. N. 3. expressly appoints; and therefore that form of a License for a
Recusant to travel, which Dalt. 379. cap. 124. tit. Licenses has set down,
wherein no Cause is mentioned but urgent and necessary business seems too short
and general, and is not to be relied on.

Oath.
LXXVII. The Laws, etc. 210. Abr. 229. First taking his Corporeal Oath, 3 Jac.
5. 7. N. 4. In Mansfields Case, Moor 836. pl. 1127. there is another Oath
mentioned for a Popish Recusant to take before he can be licenced to travel,
and that is the Oath of Allegiance, prescribed by 3 Jac. 4. 25. N. 1. for its
said, Moor 836. That in an Information brought against the Recusant for
traveling out of the Compass of five Miles, the Defendant pleaded a License
from four Justices of Peace, and his Plea was disallowed, because (among other
things) he did not show that before the License he had taken the Oath of
Allegiance; yet Quaere of this, and by what Law the omitting to take that Oath
makes the License void: But I rather think it to be a mistake, and that such an
Exception might be moved, but the Plea not disallowed for that Reason.

Justices.
LXXVIII. The Laws, etc. 210. 211. Abr. 229. Before the said four Justices of
the Peace, or any of them, 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 4. Mr. Shepherd in Sure Guide, cap.
14. Sect. 5. thinks that no less than two of the four Justices of the Peace can
minister this Oath to the Recusant. But I take it to be clear that any of the
four Justices may minister the Oath in this Case.

And there is a great difference between (any Justices) for that denotes the
Plural Number, as in the subsequent Clause, 3 Jac. 5. 27. N. 1. where any
Justices may Imprison the Offender, that is, any two Justices or more, and (any
of the Justices) as here 3 Jac. 5. 7. N. 4. which denotes the Singular Number;
and the following words (who shall have Authority by virtue of this Act to
minister the same) may be well enough applied to any one Justice of Peace.

Books.
LXXIX. The Laws, etc. 236. 237. Abr. 254. Shall be thought unmeet for such
Recusant, 3 Jac. 5. 26. N. 2. So that the Justices of Peace are not bound by
this Act to deface all Relics of Price, or to Burn or deface all other Relics
or Popish Books, as Wingate Crown 144. misleads, etc.

And though herein much is referred to the Direction of the Justices of Peace,
yet where the Husband is a Protestant, and only the Wife a Popish Recusant, it
seems by these words, 3 Jac. 5. 26. N. 2. that they are not to consider what is
unmeet for the Husband, but what is unmeet for the Recusant, viz. the Wife: And
that it was not intended that they should seize, burn or deface any Books of
the Husbands though Popish, unless such whereby the Wife might be aided or
confirmed in her Superstition. So that in this Case, Books written in a
language or style unintelligible to the Wife, are not within the meaning of 3
Jac. 5. 26. N. 2. nor ought by color thereof to be taken from the Husband, who
is no Popish Recusant.

LXXX. The Laws, etc. 238. Abr. 255. Ware.
In the same County where such Popish recusant shall be resident, 3 Jac. 5. 27.
N. 1. A Popish Recusant lives in one County, and his Arms are kept in another
County by one who is no Popish Recusant, such Arms cannot be seized by force of
this Act by the Justices of Peace of either County.

Not by the Justices of Peace of the County where the Arms are kept, for the
seizure or taking is here limited to be by Warrant at the Sessions in the
County where the Recusant resides; and 3 Jac. 5. 27. N. 1. must be strictly
pursued in that particular: Nor by the Justices of Peace of the County where
the resident; is Recusant, for the Arms are in another County where they have
nothing to do.

And also in some Cases where a Statute appoints a Justice of Peace to do a
thing, he may do it out of his County; Justices.
as to take an Examination upon the Statute of Winton, 13. Ed. 1. Stat. 2 cap.
1. N. of a Robery, 27 Eliz. 13. 11. N. 2. as was resolved 1 Cr. 213. Jones 239.
Helier verse. H. of Benburst; yet he cannot Exercise any coercive Power out of
his County, as was resolved in that Case; for his Potestas Jurisdictionis is
confined to his Cou^ty, as well as that of a Bishop is confined to his Dioces.
See Palmer 473. Ascuiths Case, Infra. 266. N. 2.

And here the taking Recusants Armor is a coercive Act, and therefore by 3 Jac.
5. 27. N. 1. can be Executed by warrant of the five Justices of Peace in that
County only where they are Justices; so that this is clearly Casus omissus, and
not provided for by this Act.

LXXXI. The Laws etc. 238. Abr. 256. Imprisonment.
Imprisoned by warrant of or from any Justices of Peace, 3 Jac. 5. 28. N. 1.
Any two Justices may grant their Warrant for imprisoning the Offender, and it is
sufficient in this Case; for Pluralis numerus ect duobus contentus; but a
Warrant from any one Justice will not serve, contrary to Wingate Crown 145.

LXXXII. The Laws, etc. 238. 239. Abr. 257. Of such County, Lieu.
3 Jac. 5. 28. N. 1. That is of the County where the Popish Recusant is
resident, for no other County was named before.

A Popish Recusant lives in one County, and his Arms are kept in another County
by one who is no Popish Recusant, the Justices of Peace of that other County
cannot by force of this Act, 3 Jac. 5. 28. N. 1. imprison him that keeps them,
for they are not named here; but the Power in this Case is expressly limited to
other Justices, and no other can intermeddle therein.

Neither will the Warrant of the Justices of Peace of the County where the
Recusant is resident, reach him who is in another County; for the coercive
Authority of a Justice of Peace cannot exceed his limits or bounds, as Com. 37.
is held in the Sheriffs of Londons Case.

And therefore in the Case of the Lord Say, it was resolved, That if a Justice
of Peace of the County where the Felony was committed, pursue a Felon into
another County, and take him, there the Felon must be imprisoned in the County
where he is taken, and the Justice of Peace who pursued him has no Power to
carry him to the Goal of the County where he did the Felony; for he is a
Prisoner in the County where he was taken, and there the Justice of Peace has
no more Power to do, then an ordinary person 13 Ed. 4. 8. Fresh Suit Br. 3.

So that as it seems in this Case, the Party who keeps such Arms cannot be
imprisoned by 3 Jac. 5. 28. N. 1. but this likewise is Casus omissus, and not
here provided for.

Oath. 7 Jac. 6. of Allegiance.
LXXXIII. The Laws, etc 243. upon 7 Jac. 6. 8. N. 1. The King cannot dispense
with any Member of the Commons House of Parliament from taking this Oath of
Allegiance, for that he is here declared to be Persona inhabilis, until he
take it, Vaughan 355. Thomas and Sorrel, Supra, and 3 Inst. 154.

Justices.
LXXXIV. The Laws, etc. 246. For any two Justices of Peace within any County,
City, or Town Corporate, etc. 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. the two Justices may require
this Oath of any person that shall happen to be within their Jurisdiction,
although his habitation be in another County or Liberty, for the Oath of
Allegiance Sequitur personam non locum, 2 Bulstr. 155. The King against
Griffith, etc.

Oath.
LXXXV. The Laws, etc. 246. Abr. 260. To require any person or persons, 7 Jac.
6. 26. N. 2. This is an Enlargement of the Power given to two Justices of Peace
by 3 Jac. 4. 13. N. 4. for thereby they could have required the Oath but only
in some particular Cases, Supra. But by 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. They may require it
of any person whatsoever of competent Age, and under the degree of a Baron or
Baroness.

The Justices of the Peace in this Case, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. or the Justice of
Peace in the following Case, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. may make his or their special
Warrant to the Constable to bring the party before the said Justice or Justices
to take the Oath; for 7 Jac. 6. 26 N. 2. by giving them Power to require the
Oath, does implicitly authorize them to make such a Warrant, Quando lex aliquid
alicui concedit concedere videtur and id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest: and
it is against the Office of the Justices of Peace; and the Authority hereby
given them to go and seek the Party, 12 Co. 130.

But the Constable cannot by virtue of such Warrant, break the House where the
Party is; for he is no Offender before he refuse the Oath or commit some
contempt to the King.

Endictment.
LXXXVI. The Laws, etc. 247. Abr. 263. Shall stand and be Presented, Indicted or
Convicted, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. These words being in the Disjunctive, it is not
necessary that the party be convicted; but if he stand Presented or Indicted
for not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sacrament and be under the
degree of a Baron, the Justice of Peace ought to tender him this Oath.

Intendment.
LXXXVII. The Lands, etc. 247. 248. Abr, 264. And the said Justice shall find
cause of Suspicion, 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 4. And not if the party be suspected, as
Wingate Crown 150. mistakes; for the bare suspicion of the Justice of Peace, or
any other person, is no sufficient ground to require the Oath, or commit the
party for refusal; but there must be some good Cause for that Suspicion, and
the same must be alleged in the Justice of Peace his Plea or Justification, if
he be sued for committing him to Prison for such refusal. So if a Man be
Arrested on Suspicion of Felony, and brings his Action for false Imprisonment,
the Defendant ought to show some Matter in Fact to induce his Suspicion: For in
these and the like Cases, a bare Suspicion is no Justification sufficient, it
being a Matter secret and not traversadle, but the Cause of Suspicion is
traversable, 3 Bulstr. 284. Weal verse. Wells, 7 Ed. 4. 20. and 17 Ed. 4. 5.
and 5 H. 7. 4. And whether the Supposition be just and lawful shall be tried
and determined by the Justices 2 Inst. 52. 11. Ed. 4. 4.

LXXXVIII. The Laws, etc. 284. Abr. 265. Justices.
That then any one Justicie of Peace, 7 Jac. 6.. 26. N. 4. What was said by
Coke Chief Justice in Griffiths Case, 2 Bulstr. 155. that any one Justice of
Peace may minister this Oath, is to be understood of some Cases only, 12 Co.
130. which are no others than those here mentioned, as he explains his meaning
12 Co. 132. That one Justice of Peace cannot Commit any for refusal of this
Oath, unless they be Prosecuted, Indicted, or Convict, etc. according to 7 Jac.
6. 26. N. 4. Supra.

LXXXIX. The Laws, etc. 248. 249. 250. Abr. 266. Lieu.
Within whose Commission or Power such Person or Persons shall at any time
hereafter be, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. A Person complained of, and against whom
cause of Suspicion is found by the Justices of Peace, flies into another
County, Quaere whether a Justice of Peace of that other County can require the
Oath of him, and Commit him upon refusal, for he seems to be empowered
thereunto by the express words of the Statute, for that the Party is fallen
within his Commission or Power, etc.

But yet I conceive that 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. by these words ( Any one Justice
of Peace within whose Commission or Power, etc. is designed or intended no
other Justice than a Justice of that County where the Party was complained of
and suspected: And that if he fly into another County, no Proceedings can be
there upon the complaint and suspicion in the County whence he came, nor any
one Justice tender him the Oath, or Commit him for refusal, without a new
complaint and cause of Suspicion in the County whither he flies.

For where the Party cannot be Indicted of a Praemunire for refusing the Oath
upon the second tender at the Assizes or Sessions, by 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 6. there
the Justice, or Justices of Peace, out of Sessions cannot tender the Oath, or
Commit for refusal; for a Commitment is in order to a second tender, and an
Indictment of Praemunire thereupon: But in this Case the Party cannot be
Indicted of a Praemunire in the County where he flies for refusing it upon the
second tender: For the Offense for which the Party must be Indicted is a
complicated Offense, consisting of several Particulars. 1. In giving just cause
of Suspicion, without which the Party complained of, according to this Act, 7
Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. cannot be tendered the Oath by one Justice of Peace. Then 2.
in refusing the Oath before the Justice of Peace who tendered it. And lastly, 3.
in refusing it upon the second tender at the Assizes or Sessions; all which
must be comprised in the Indictment.

So that the cause of Suspicion is pars Criminis, and that arising in the
County where the Party dwelt, and was complained of, cannot be punished in
another Counry, unless the Statute 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 4. had expressly made it
Examinable there, Supra.

2. True it is, that some Statutes do enable Justices of Peace to punish an
Offense done in another County; but that is where they enable them likewise to
examine the truth of the Fact, and take Proofs and Evidences thereof. So 1 Jac.
27. 5. N. 2. and 7 Iac. 11. 8. N. 3. and Supra. empower the Justices of Peace
where the Party is apprehended, to examine and punish the Offense: But in our
Case, the cause of Suspicion arising in one County, is not made examinable, and
consequently not punishable in another County; and if not punishable there, no
Justice of Peace of that other County can proceed upon that cause of Suspicion,
notwithstanding the Party happen to be within his Commission or Power.

3. But yet the Party so flying into another County, may without any new
Complaint or Cause of Suspicion, be tendered the Oath, and proceeded against
there by two Justices of Peace. Quorum unus, etc. by virtue of the foregoing
words of this Clause, 7 Jac. 6. 26. N. 2. although he dwell in another County,
and that for the Reason before given, viz. because this Oath Sequitur personam
non locum.

4. But Wingate Crown 150. saves the labor of this Question, for he
erroniously restrains the Power of tendering the Oath in this Case to the
Justice of Peace to whom the Complaint is made, as if no other Justice of Peace
of that County could proceed therein, which is contrary to the express words,
as well as the meaning of 7 Jac. 6.. 26. N. 4.

5. Note that Dalt. 107. cap. 45. says, It seems requisite that the Justice,
or Justices of Peace, do make like Certificate, as 3 Iac. 4. 13. N. 5. at the
next Assizes or Quarter Sessions, of such Persons as have taken this Oath
betore them, by force of 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 4. But upon what ground Mr. Dalton
thought this requisite to be certified at the Assizes, I know not, seeing there
is no such Certificate to be made by 3 Iac. 4. 13. N. 5. but only to the
General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace.

6. And as for the Sessions, I conceive, neither the Justices of Peace, if they
proceed on 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 4. and not upon 3 Iac. 4. 13. N. 5. are bound to
make such Certificate, nor the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk to record it,
for it is not here required to be done.

7. But yet in such Cases where the same Persons are empowered by both these
Statutes to require and minister this Oath, as where the Party is Convicted or
Indicted of Recusancy, in which Case two Justices of the Peace, Quorum unus,
etc. may require the Oath by the special words in 3 Iac. 4. 13. N. 2. or of the
general words in this Clause of 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 2. And it does not appear upon
which of these Statutes they proceed, as it may some times so happen there, if
the Party take it, it will be safest for the two Justices to make such
Certificate to the next General or Quarter Sessions, as is appointed 3 Iac. 4..
13. N. 5. and for the Clerk of the Peace or Town Clerk to Record it.

Oath.
XC. The Laws, etc. 251. Abr. 268. Shall refuse to take the said Oath duly
tendered to him or her, 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 5. If the Persons Authorized to tender
this Oath ask the Party whether he will take it, and he says he will not,
Quaere whether this be such a tender and refusal as shall make the Refuser
liable to be imprisoned and proceeded against by force of this Act, unless he
or they who tender it have in readiness both the form of the Oath and the Book
to swear on; for it is to be presumed that the Act intends all requisite
Circumstances ready to enable the one to minister, and the other to take the
Oath.

And it is held by some, That before there can be any such refusal of this Oath
as is here intended, it ought to be read, or offered to be read to the Party,
especially if he be Illiterate, or if he be not, yet that at least it ought to
be offered to him for himself to read it, for perhaps the Party never saw or
heard it; And in such Case it would be against Reason that the refusal should
be Penal. And therefore in 9 Iac. upon the tender of this Oath at Sergeants Inn
in Fleetstreet, it was read by order of the Judges there.

XCI. The Laws, etc. 251. Abr. 269. To the Common Goal, 7 Iac. 6. 26. N. 5. The
Justices of the Court of B. R. have used to tender this Oath in Court as
Justices of Peace of Middlesex, and upon refusal the Party is to be Committed
to the Prison of the Marshalsey, which is the ordinary Prison of that Court,
until the next Sessions, 2 Bulstrode 155. Dyer 297.

XCII. The Laws, etc. 258. 259. Or of Oyer and terminer, Justices.
3 Car. 1. Chap. 2. (3.) 3. N. 1. Justices of Peace cannot take an Indictment
upon this Statute; for no Inferior Court shall take Authority by any Statute,
unless it be specially named, Savile 135. pl. 212. Agard and Candish.

And although Justices of Peace have in their Commission, 14. an express
Clause, ad audiend and terminend', and by that are Justices of Oyerand,
Terminer yet forasmuch as there is a Commission of Oyer and Terminer known
distinctly by that name and the Commission of Peace is known distinctly by
another name, they shall not be included under the general words of Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, as was adjudged 3 Cr. 87. Hill 30 Eliz. B. R. in Smiths
Case, who was indicted at the Sessions of the Peace in the County of Oxford, on
5 Eliz. 14, of forging Deeds, which impowers Justices of Oyer and Terminer to
enquire of, hear, and determine that offense, and yet the Indictment before the
Justices of Peace was quasht, as taken Coram non Judice, 9 Co. 118. 3 Inst.
103. and 3 Cr. 601. Wilsons case and 3 Cr. 697. Hunts Case. See Justices.

XCIII. Lambert 2. cap. 7. page 194. 195. Justices.
If any Person to whom any Agnus Dei, Cross, Picture, Bead, or such
superstitious thing from the Sea of Rome, or the Authority thereof, shall be
offered or delivered, do disclose the Name and dwelling, or Place of resort of
such offerer or deliverer, to any Justice of the Peace of that Shire where he
to whom such offer or delivery is shall be resiant, then the Justice must
within 14. days next after declare the same to some one of the Kings Privy
Counsel 13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 1. Supra. Crompt. 14 b. 15 a. 168 b.

XCIV. Lambert 225. Coron.
Receiving of Jesuits or Seminary Priests contrary to 27 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1.
Supra, and the refusal of Seditious Sectaries, and of Popish Recusants to
abjure the Realm, and their return after abjuration made against 35 Eliz. 1. 3.
N. 1. and 35 Eliz. 2. 10. N. 1. are Felonies against the Body of the
Commonwealth.

XCV. Lambert 293. 294. Any one Justice of Peace of that Limit, Religion.
Division or Liberty where the party dwells, upon proof by Confession of the
Party, or Oath of Witness, may call before him the Party offending, in not
repairing every Sunday to some Church, etc. according to 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1.
And if he or she cannot make a sufficient excuse thereof, the same Justice may
give his Warrant to the Churchwarden of the Parish whereby the offender
dwells to distrain for 12d. for every such default, and for want of distress
to imprison the Offender until payment be made, 3 Jac. 4.. 27. N. 2.

XCVI. Lambert 294. Before some Justice of Peace of the County, Oath.
Liberty or Limit where the Parents of a Child sent beyond the Seas against
this Act, 3 Iac. 5. 16. N. 1. did dwell, such Child shall take the Oath
expressed 3 Iac. 4. 15. N. 1. And they that were beyond Seas before the making
of this Act are to take the same Oath within six Months after their return,
being of Eighteen years of Age or more, before some Justice of Peace where such
Person inhabiteth, or remains, before they can take benefit of any gift,
Conveyance, etc. of any Lands, Tenements, etc. 3. Iac. 5.. 17. N. 2.

XCVII. Lambert 294. Lieu.
Popish Recusants indicted or Convicted and other Persons which have not
repaired to some usual Church or Chapel, and there heard Divine Service by the
space of three Months last past, dwelling or which shall dwell in any County
within ten Miles of the City of London, shall depart from thence according to 3
Iac. 5. 3. N. 1. and deliver up his or her name to the next Justice of Peace in
the same County upon pain of forfeiture of C l. Supra.

Submission.
XCVIIII. Lambert 333. Any two Justices of Peace of the County where any of his
Majesty's Subjects not being a Jesuit, Seminary Priest or other Priest,
Religious or Ecclesiastical Person etc. now being, or which hereafter shall be
of or brought up in any College of Jesuits, or Seminaries, shall Arive within
six Months next after proclamation to be made in that behalf in the City of
London, under the great Seal of England, may within two days next after such
return receive his Submission under the Oath set forth by 27 Eliz. 2. 5. N. 1.
Infra.

Religion.
XCIX. Lambert 197. If any Person above sixteen years of Age do by the space of
Twelve Months forbear to repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of
Common Prayer, contrary to the tenor of 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. then any Justice
of Peace of the County where such offender shall dwell or be, may make
Certificate thereof in Writing in B. R. to the end that the offender may
thereupon be bound in CC l. at the least, with sufficient sureties, to the good
behavior for that his so long obstinacy, besides the other Penalties 23 Eliz.
1. 5. N. 2. Crompt 13 b. 144.

Justices.
C. Lambert 197. Any Justice of Peace within the County in which any Jesuit,
Seminary Priest, or other Priest, Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical Person
mentioned in this Statute, shall arive or land, may within three days after
take the Submission Oath and Acknowledgment of him, touching his Obedience to
the Kings Majesty, and to his Laws and Ordinances provided in Cases of
Religion, 27 Eliz. 2. 10. N. 1. supra. Dalt. 104. cap. 45.

Notice.
CI. Lambert 197. 198. And every Subject having understanding that any such
Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other the abovesaid, shall be within any the Kings
Dominions, contrary to the meaning of this Statute, ought to discover the same
to some Justice of Peace, or other higher Officer, within twelve days after
such his knowledge, under the pain of a Fine and Imprisonment; and that Justice
of Peace ought within 28 days after such discovery made unto him, to give
Information thereof to one of the Kings Privy Council, under the pain of CC
Marks, 27 Eliz. 2. 13. N. 1. Crompt. 45. Dalt. 104, 105. cap. 45.

Forfeiture.
CII. Lambert 198. The Party that does first discover to any Justice of Peace
any Recusant or other, entertaining or relieving any Jesuit, Seminary or Popish
Priest, or any Mass to have been said, and any of them that were present
thereat, within three days after the Offense, and by reason of his discovery
any the Offenders be taken and Convicted, shall be freed from danger of the
Offense if he be an Offender therein, and have the third part of the Forfeiture
by such Offense, 3 Iac. 5. 1. N. 3. Dalt. 105. cap. 45.

Oath.
CIII. Lambert 333, 334. Any two Justices of Peace may require any Popish
Recusant, not making Submission according to this Statute, to abjure the Realm
upon his Corporal Oath before them, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. Dalt. 104. cap. 45.
infra.

Justices.
CIV. Lambert 334. Any two Justices of Peace of the County where he shall arive,
may take the Submission of a Person reconciled to the Sea of Rome, within six
days after such persons return into this Realm, and minister the Oath 1 Eliz.
1. 19. N. 4. of Supremacy and of Allegiance, and are to certify the same Oaths
so taken at the next Quarter Sessions, upon pain of Forfeiture of Forty pounds,
3 Iac. 4. 24. N. 1.

Process.
CV. Lambert 334. Any two Justices of Peace may search the Houses and Lodgings
of every Popish Recusant Convict, or of every person whose Wife is a Popish
Recusant Convict for Popish Books and Relics of Popery: And if any Altar, Pix,
Beads, or Pictures, or such like Popish Relics or Books be found, as in the
opinion of the said Justices shall be thought unmeet for such Recusant to have
and use the same, they shall be presently defaced and burnt (being meet to be
burnt.)

And if a Crucifix, or other Relick of any Price, the same is to be defaced at
the General Sessions of the Peace, and restored to the owner, 3 Iac. 5. 26. N.
1. Lambert 607. Dalt. 108. cap. 45.

CVI. Lambert 118. Moreover, Bail.
it seems to me that all these Statutes ( viz. 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2. etc.)
have this one meaning, that a Party so bound may afterward forfeit his
Recognisance if he eftsoons offend against the said Statutes.

CVII. Lambert 224. Justices.
The Treason 1 Eliz. 1. N. of extolling And 23 Eliz. 1. 2. absolving or
withdrawing Subjects from Obedience, and 13 Eliz. 2. 2. N. 1. of putting in ure
Instrument of Reconciliation to Rome, are public Felonies that concern the
King, and Justices of Peace can only enquire and receive Indictments, Lambert
506. Infra. Crompt. 192.

CVIII. Lambert 495, 496. Ecclesiastical Causes enquirable in Sessions. Rome*
1. If any Person have within this half year, by writing, printing, teaching,
preaching, express deed or act, advisedly, maliciously, and directly affirmed,
held, set forth, or defended the Authority, Pre-eminence, Power, or
Jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, of any foreign Prince or Person
whatsoever heretofore claimed, used, or usurped in this Realm, or any the Kings
Dominions, Crompt. 124, 192.

2. Or have advisedly, maliciously, or directly put in use, or executed any
thing in the extolling, setting forth, or defense of any such pretended or
usurped Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, or Authority, or any part thereof, Crompt.
15.

3. Or if any Person compellable to take the Oath of Recognition of the Kings
Majesty to be Supreme Governor in all Causes within his Dominions, have
refused to take the said Oath, Oath.
after lawful tender thereof to him made, 1 Eliz. 1. N and 5 Eliz. 1. N.
enquirable by words of 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1.

4. Lambert 496, 497. Treason.
If any Person under the Kings Obedience have at any time within this year, by
writing, cyphering, printing, preaching, or act advisedly, holden, or stood
with to extol or defend the Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See
heretofore claimed or usurped within this Realm, Crompt. 15.

5. Or by any Speech, open Deed or Act, advisedly attributed such manner of
Authority to the said See of Rome, or to the Bishop thereof, within any the
Kings Dominions, ye shall present him, his Abetters, Procurors, Counselors,
Aiders and Comforters, 5 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 2. Crompt. 15 b.

6. If any Person have by any means practiced to absolve, persuade, or withdraw
any other within the Kings Dominions from their natural Obedience, or for that
Intent from the Religion now established here to the Romish Religion, or to
move them to promise obedience to the Sea of Rome or other Estate, Crompt. 17
b. 18.

7. Or if any Person have been willingly so absolved or withdrawn, or have
promised such obedience, 23 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 5. Crompt. 14 b. 18 a.

8. And if any Person have willingly aided or maintained any such Offender, or
knowing such offense have concealed it, and not within 20 days disclosed it to
some Justice of Peace, or other higher Officer, 23 Eliz. 1. 3, N. 1. Crompt. 14
b. 18.

9. If any Subject of this Realm have after the Tenth day of June 1606. gone
out of this Realm to serve any foreign Prince, State, or Potentate: Or have
after the Tenth day passed over the Seas, and there has voluntarily served any
such foreign Prince, etc. not having taken the Oath expressed 3 Iac. 4. N.
before the Customer and Comptroller of that Port, Haven or Creek where he had
Passage.

10. If any Gentleman or Person of higher Degree, or any Person which has born
any Office, Place, or Charge in any Camp, Army, or Company of Soldiers, or
Conductor of Soldiers, have gone voluntarily out of the Realm to serve any
foreign Prince, State or Potentate, before he became bound by Obligation, with
two sufficient Sureties, unto the King, his Heirs or Successors, according to
this Act, 3 Iac. 4. 19. N. 1.

11. Lambert 408, 409. If any have said or sung Mass, or have willingly heard
Mass, 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1.

12. If any Person have used or put in ure any Bull, Writing, or Instrument of
Absolution or Reconciliation, or of other sort gotten from the Bishop of Rome
or See of Rome, or from any Person claiming Authority from the same, Crompt.
pl. 14 b. 17 b. 18 a.

13. Or have by color of any such, taken upon him to absolve or reconcile any
persons, or have published any such Bull or Instrument.

14. Or if any Person have received such Absolution, or have procured, abetted,
or counseled any such Offender to the intent to uphold such offense.

15. If any Person have, after such offense, aided, comforted, or maintained
such Offender to the Intent to uphold the Authority of the said See of Rome,
Crompt. 14 b.

16. If any Person to whom such Bull or Instrument has been offered or
persuaded, has not within six weeks next after signified the same to some of
the Kings Privy Council, or to the Kings Privy Council, or to the Lord
President of the North, or of Wales, Crompt. 14 b. 168 b.

17. If any Person have brought hither from the Bishop, or See of Rome, or from
any Person Authorized, or claiming to be Authorized by any of them, any Agnus
Dei, Crosses, Pictures, Beads, Graile, or such like Superstitious things, and
have the same delivered, or caused or effected to be delivered to any the Kings
Subjects, to use or wear in any wise, and if any Person have to such intent
received or taken the same, and have not apprehended the offender thereof, nor
within three days after disclosed him to the Ordinary, or to some Justice of
the Peace, nor within one day delivered the thing to some Justice of the Peace,
13 Eliz. 2. 8. N. 1. Crompt. 14 b. 15 a. Dalt. 105. cap. 45.

18. If any Person being at liberty, or out of hold, have since 8 May, 27 Eliz.
wittingly and willingly received, aided, or maintained within any part of his
Highness Dominions, any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or such other Priest Deacon,
or Religious or Ecclesiastical person, being born within this Realm or any his
Highness Dominion's, and at any time since Midsummer 1 Eliz. made, ordained, or
professed by any Authority derived, challenged, or pretended from the Sea of
Rome, knowing him to be a Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other such Priest,
Deacon, or Religious or Ecclesiastical Person, 27 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. Crompt. 45.

Certification.
CIX. Lambert 367. 368. That Justices of Peace which does not within fourteen
days after matter uttered to him concerning any Agnus Dei, etc. signify the
same to one of the Kings Privy Council, shall incur the pains of 13 Eliz. 2..
5. N. 1.

And that Justice of the Peace which after discovery made unto him by any
Person that any Jesuit, Seminary or other Ecclesiastical or Religious Person,
professed by any Authority from the Sea of Rome, is abiding within any the
Kings Dominions, shall not within Twenty Eight days then next following, give
information thereof to some of the Kings Privy Council, or to one of the
Presidents in Wales or in the North, shall forfeit for every such offense CC
Marks, 27 Eliz. 2.

CX. Lambert 368. Certificate.
Those Justices of Peace that neglect to certify at the next General or
Quarter Sessions, the Oaths taken in the submission of any Person reconciled to
the Sea of Rome returning into this Realm, shall lose xl l. 3 Jac. 4. N.

CXI. Lambert 412, 413, 414. Religion.
Inquiry in Sessions if any Person being above the Age of sixteen years, and
not having lawful and reasonable excuse to be absent have not repaired and
resorted unto his or her Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon let
thereof, to some usual place where Common Prayer is to be used upon every
Sunday and other Holyday, and have not there orderly and soberly abiden during
the time of such Common Prayer, Preaching, or other service of God, and how
long such Person has forborne so to repair and resort, 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. and
23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. Crompt. 13. Dalt. 104, 105. cap. 45.

2. If any Person have, after one Month after the making of this Statute,
willingly maintained, retained, relieved, kept, or harbored any Servant,
Sojourner, or stranger, not repairing to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of
Common Prayer to hear Divine Service, by the space of one Month together, not
having a reasonable excuse, other then such as harboreth his Father or Mother
not having other sufficient maintenances, or the ward of any person, or any
person committed to the Custody of any by Authority, or have retained or kept
in service, fee, or livery, any not repairing to some Church as before, by the
space of a Month together, knowing the same, 3 Iac. 4. N.

3. If any conformed Popish Recusant have not within the first year after he
has conformed him or her self and after the said first year, once in every
year following at the least, received the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper
in the Parish Church where he or she have most usually abiden within the said
year, and if there were no Parish Church, in the Church next adjoining: And if
he or she have received the said Sacrament as aforesaid and after have eftsoons
offended in not receiving the same as is aforesaid by the space of a year 3
Iac. 4. N.

4. If any Popish Recusant, or other Seditious Sectary, which is by any the
Statutes 35 Eliz. 1. 2. to be abjured this Realm, and all his Majesty's
Dominions, have either refused to make such abjuration, or making it, have not
gone to such Haven within such time as was to him therefore appointed, and have
not from thence departed this Realm, or after such departure have returned unto
any his Majesty's Dominions without his special license, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1.
and 35. Eliz. 2. 8. N. 4.

5. If any Person have kept or maintained any Schoolmaster which resorteth not
to the Church, or is not allowed by the Bishop or Ordinary of the Dioces, 23
Eliz. 1. 6. N. 1. Crompt. 16.

CXII. Lambert 598. 599. Justices.
The Justices of Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions enquire of, hear, and
determine all offenses except Treason and Misprision of Treason committed
against 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 2. made for retaining the Kings Subjects in their due
Obedience, Supra. Lambert 607. or 3 Iac. 4.

2. They may also in their open Quarter Sessions Enquire of such as do extol
the usurped Authority of the Sea of Rome against 5 Eliz. 1. 3. N. 1. and the
Clerk of the Peace must read that Act at every of the Quarter Sessions.

Abjuration.
CXIII. Lambert 605, 606, 607. The abjuration of a Seditious Sectary ought to be
made in the open Quarter Sessions of the Peace, and there to be entered of
Record, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. and the place certain, and Name of a Popish
Recusant limited by this Statute unto a place certain, ought to be certified by
the Minister and Constable that took and entered it, to the next
Quarter Sessions of the Peace and there be entered of Record in the Roles of the
Sessions by the Clerk of the Peace, 35 Eliz. 2. 7. N. 1.

2. The penalties forfeited by a conformed Recusant, for not receiving the
Sacrament according to this Statute, may be recovered before the Justices of
Peace at their Quarter Sessions, 3 Iac. 4. 3. N. 5.

3. The Monthly absence from Church of Popish Recusants, and their Childrens
Names of Nine years of Age and upwards abiding with them, and their Servants
Names ought by the Churchwardens and Constables to be yearly presented at the
Quarter Sessions, and by the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk, Recorded in the
said Sessions 3 Iac. 4. 4. N. 1.

4. Justices of Peace at any their Quarter Sessions have Power to enquire,
hear, and determine of all Recusants and offenses, as well for not receiving
the Sacrament according to this Law, 11 Co. 61 a. 63 b. as for not repairing to
Church, according to former Laws in such manner as Justices of Assize and Goal
delivery may do, 3 Jac. 4. 7. N. 1.

5. And at the Sessions in which any Indictment for not repairing to Church, or
receiving the Sacrament, shall be taken to make Proclamation for the rendering
of the Offenders body to the Sheriff, etc. before the next Quarter Sessions, at
which if the Offender shall not make appearance of Record, the same shall be a
sufficient conviction of the offenses whereof he was Indicted, 3 Jac. 4.. 7. N.
2.

Oath.
6. The Oath of allegiance appointed by this Statute may be required in the
Quarter Sessions of such Person as was formerly convicted for refusing the
same, 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 2. and such Person, or any other whatsoever, refusing
the said Oath, being tendered in the said Sessions, shall incur the Danger of
Praemunire, 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 3.

Except Women covert who shall only be committed by the Justices of Peace in
their Quarter Sessions to the Common Goal, without Bail or mainprise, till they
will take the said Oath 3 Jac. 4. 14. N. 4.

7. By Warrant of five Justices of Peace at their General or Quarter Sessions,
Recusants Armor, Gunpowder and Munition, shall be taken form them, other then
necessary Weapons to be allowed them by the said Justices for their defense,
and shall be maintained at the costs of such Recusants in such places, as the
said Justices, at their said Sessions, shall appoint, 3 Jac. 5. 27. N. 1.

8. And if they shall refuse to declare what Armor they have, or disturb the
delivery thereof, the Person offending shall forfeit the same Armor etc. and be
Imprisoned three Months without Bail or Mainprise 3 Jac. 5. 28. N. 1.

Justices.
CXIV. Crompt. 12 b. By 23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. Justices of Peace may enquire
within the year and day of these Articles ( viz. 1 Eliz 2. etc.) but they
cannot hear and determine them, but the Justices of Oyer and Terminer, or of
Assize may, by 23. Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. hear and determine, but vide 23 Eliz. 1.
9. N. 2. If Justices of Peace cannot award Process upon the Indictment until
he appears and pleads to the Indictment, and then for Trial send the Record in
B.R. to the intent it shall be tried by Nisi prius, or if he ought to send the
Indictment in B. R. Immediately without awarding Process, because they have no
Authority by 23 Eliz. 1. 9. N. 1. but only to enquire, etc.

CXV. Crompt. 12 b. Amerciament.
It seems that that party being hereof Indicted ( viz. on Articles of 1 Eliz.
2. etc.) shall be fined by the Discretion of the Court, though no Fine is given
in this Case by the said Statute, in as much as the Statute says ( viz. 1
Eliz. 2.. 3. N. 1.) that they shall be bounden to say and use the Common
Prayers, etc. ut supra, Quaere the intent of the Statute in this point, Fines
pro, etc. Br. 21. Golsb. 162 pl. 95.

CXVI. Crompt. 12. b.. 5. Every Priest though he be no Vicar, Parson, Encumbent.
or stipendary Chaplain, nor obliged nor bound by his Cure to serve, etc. is
within the purview of the Statute, by reason of the first Clause ( viz. 1 Eliz.
2. 3. N. 1.) That all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral or Parish Church,
or other place, etc. which may be intended, a Minister local and inducted, and
at length by the Opinion of all the Justices but one, it was held that he
should be within the Statute.

And this by reason of this Clause 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. And that if any manner
of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister, etc. whereby the meaning of the
Parliament appears, that the superstitious Service in the Church should be
abolisht, and the true Service planted in lieu thereof, etc. Dyer 203.

CXVII. Crompt. 13. a. Forfeiture.
Item you shall enquire if any one has sung or said Mass, being thereof
convict, he shall ferfeit CC Marks and shall be imprisoned a year, and thence
until he has paid the said Sum, 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1.

1. And if any voluntarily has heard Mass, he shall forfeit C. Marks, and
shall be Imprisoned for a year, 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 2. Church.


2. Also of such who having no reasonable excuse do not resort to their Parish
Churches or Chapel every Sunday and Holy day, or having any lawful excuse to
any other usual place where Common Prayer is used, and there abide discreetly,
during the time of the Service, Preaching, and other Service, etc. he shall
lose for every such offense 12. d. to the use of the Poor of the same Parish,
to be levied by distress by the Churchwardens to the use of the Poor, and
shall be further punished by the censures of the Church, 1 Eliz. 2.. 14. N. 1.
and 23. Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. Dalt. 105. cap. 40.

3. Also of such being above the Age of sixteen years, who do not resort to
some Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common Prayer, but forbears it against
the form of the Statute 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. shall forfeit for every Month that
he is absent xx l. and if he forbears so to do by the space of Twelve Months,
he shall be bound with two Sureties in 200 l. to his good behavior in B.R. on
Certificate to be made there in writing by the Ordinary, or by one Justice of
Peace of the same County, where the Offender abides, or shall be, and so shall
continue bound until he will conform himself and come to Church, according to
the same intent of the said Statute, 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. 2. 3. Lamb. 197.
Supra.

CXVIII. Crompt. 14. If a Feme Covert be a Recusant, Baron and Feme
the forfeiture of xx l. a Month shall be levied of the goods of the Husband,
because she is amenable by Intendment of Law at the will of the Husband, ut
Dicitur, See Supra. Dalt. 105. cap. 45.

CXIX. Crompt. 15. 16. Books.
See Resolutions 9 Febr. 11 Eliz. in Dyer 281 b. 282 a. pl. 22. put as
follows.

If a Man, being out of the Realm, writes Books against the Kings Supremacy,
and thereby attributes Jurisdiction to the Sea of Rome to be observed within
the Realm, and the same Books are brought unto the Realm by such of the Kings
Subjects who know the effect thereof, and are by them secretly uttered and sold
to diverse Persons, knowing also (by report) the same Books to contain matter
extolling the said usurpt Authority, and after they to whom these Books are
delivered, read them to themselves secretly, to the intent thereby to be the
more able to defend this Opinion, but they have no conference thereof with any
others, whether they brought these Books, and they who read them be Offenders
against 5 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. Lambert 496. 497.

1. The Resolution of all the Justices of both Benches, the Chief Baron being
present, as to the first point agreed, that they who had brought these, and who
had delivered them, ut Supra, are offenders by the words of the said Statute, 1
Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. Hold and stand with to set forth.

2. But as to the second point, viz. the Receivers and Readers of these Books
only, and doing no further act or attribution by conference and allowance, etc.
all but two held it no offense.

3. Item, If any one obtains any such Book, ut Supra, into his hands, and
afterward reads and confers thereon with any other Person, and in his
conference by any Speech or words allow this Book to be good, it was resolved
by all clearly within the danger of the said Law, 5 Eliz. 1. 2. N 2 by
attribution.

4. Item, If a man hears of the Contents of such Book by report of another, and
by any Speech thereon commend or affirm it to be good.

Or if a man having such Book in his Custody, and knowing the Contents thereof,
conveys it secretly to his Friend, to the intent that he should read it, and
thereby persuade him to be of his opinion touching Supremacy, Quaere of him, ut
Supra, and it was resolved that both are within the Danger of 5 Eliz. 1. 2. N.
1. especially the first.

5. Two were executed for Printing certain Books Seditiously penned by one
Robert Brown against the Book of Common Prayer established by Parliament, Stow,
etc. 1187. and the Books Burnt, An. Eliz.

6. Item, If a Man Imprints any of these Books within this Realm, and utters
them, it was resolved by all clearly to be within the Danger of the said
Statute, 5 Eliz. 1 2. N. 1.

Item, If any of these Books be made and Written within the Realm, and
afterward sent out as a thing done out of the Realm, and these are brought,
read, and conference had upon them, ut Supra, it was resolved by all to be
within the Danger of the said Law.

Fish.
CXX. Crompt. 16 b. Inquiry in Sessions if any has affirmed that the Eating of
Fish, or the forbearing to Eat Flesh is of necessity for Salvation of souls, or
that it is the service of God, or other then for common Policy, shall be
punished as spreaders of false News, 5 Eliz. 5. N.

Jesuits.
CXXI. Crompt. 45. Charge in Sessions to enquire if any one has voluntarily
received, aided, relieved, or comforted any Seminary Priest, Jesuit, etc. being
at liberty or out of hold, knowing him to be a Jesuit, etc. this is Felony and
shall lose Clergy, 27. Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. Supra. N 18.

The Statute does not give expressly that Justices of Peace shall inquire
hereof, but in as much as it is Felony, and they have Power by the Commission,
to inquire of all Felonies, they may, etc.

Ac^^ssory.
CXXII. Crompt. 45 b. The Bailiffs of Stafford came to the House of one W. to
attach a Jesuit, who was saying Mass there, and certain others who were there
hearing Mass, as it was said, who shut the door and would not suffer the
Bailiffs to enter to attach the Jesuit, and hereupon they were arraigned and
convicted of Felony, as of aiding the Jesuit 27 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. at the
Assizes at Stafford, 30 Eliz. and the Jesuit was executed, Crompt. 53 b.

CXXIII. Crompt. 104 b. 53. Its held a good Indictment where its said,
Indictment.
Contra formam statuti in Parliamento, tent' apud Westminster. (not said in Com.
Middlesex) An. 1 Eliz. in Dyer 203, pl. 72. Dr. Clerk, and Sir Edw Walgraves
Case, where it appears that an Information was put in B. R. against certain
Persons, for saying and hearing Mass, etc. unde Indictati existunt coram
Commiss, etc. and show their Names and the Sessions in certain, and made not
any special recital of the Act, 1 Eliz. 2. 9. N. 2. and to this Information
they were put to Answer, and confessed the Indictment, and had their several
Judgments, viz. Each to forfeit C. Marks, and this Indictment was on 1 Eliz. 2.
9. N. 2. 4. for now he shall forfeit a greater Sum by 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1.

CXXIV. Crompt. 107. 17. An Indictment in this form, Averment.
Juratores presentant (si) A. B. of, etc. did, etc. its not good, etc. for it
should be (quod) etc. and so adjudged upon an Indictment at Stafford of a
Recusant by Manwood Chief Baron.

CXXV. Crompt. 124. Rome.
Inquiry at Sessions of those that maintain the Authority of the Bishop of Rome
against 5 Eliz. 1.

CXXVI. Crompt. 144. Good behavior.
He shall be bound to the Good behavior in B.R. who absents himself from
Church for a year contrary to the Statute, and so shall remain until he will
reform himself, and come to Church according to the intent of 1 Eliz. 2. N. as
appears by 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2.

CXXVII. Crompt. 167. b. Certificate.
The Justices of peace may certify in B.R. the name of him that absents
himself from the Church for a year, contrary to the Statute, and he shall be
thereupon bound to his Good behavior there, according to 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2.
Crompt. 195. 12. Dalt. 104. cap. 45. Endictment.


CXXVIII. Crompt. 168. The Justices shall certify in B. R. every Presentment
taken before them of him that extolls, etc. the Authority of the Bishop of Rome
within Forty days after Presentment found, if the Term be then open, and if it
be not open, then the first day of full Term next after the Forty days, on pain
of C l. by every Justice of Peace before whom its taken, and that does not make
such Certificate, 5 Eliz. 1.

CXXIX. Crumpt. 169. Accessory.
Enquiry at Sessions if he that has received any Agnus Dei, Pictures, Beads,
Crosses, or such like superstitious and vain things, mentioned in 13 Eliz. 2.
7. N. 2. to be used or worn in any manner within any of the Kings Dominions,
contrary to the said Statute, and does not deliver it to a Justice of Peace of
the same County within a day after the receipt thereof: And also, if he does not
apprehend him who so offered it, if he be of power to do so: Or if he be not of
such Power, if he does not disclose his name and place of his habitation, or of
abode (which he has endeavored to know) to the Ordinary of the same Dioces,
or to a Justice of Peace of the same County, within three days after such
offer, he shall incur the pain of 16 R. 2. 5. 2. N. 6. of Praemunire. Dalt.
105. cap. 45.

CXXX. Crompt. 193 b. Church.
It must be enquired within the year and day of such who being above Sixteen
years old, absent themselves from Church for a month or for a year, contrary to
23 Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1.

CXXXI. Lambert. 582. Oath.
The Abjuration of a seditious Sectary being made in the open Quarter Sessions
of the Peace, ought to be certified from thence to the Justices of Assize at
the next Assizes, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 3. Submission.


CXXXII. Dalt. 104. cap. 45. Any one Justice of Peace may require the
submission and declaration of Conformity to his Majesty's Laws of Recusants and
Sectaries, within three Months after their Conviction, etc. and in default of
such Submission, may require them to abjure the Realm: which Abjuration
notwithstanding shall be in open Sessions, 35 Eliz. 1. 2. N. 1. Lambert. 333,
334. Supra.

Religion.
CXXXIII. Dalt. 105. cap. 45. Also this repairing to Church (1 Eliz. 2.. 14. N.
1. and 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1. and 3 Jac. 4. 27. N. 1.) every Sunday, must be as
well to Evening Prayer as to Morning Prayers; for it ought to be an entire Day
and an entire Service; and so Sir Richard Hutton, one of the Justices of C. B.
did deliver it in his Charge at Cambridge Lent-Assizes, 1 Car. 1. and therewith
agreed Sir Robert Bartlet at Summer Assizes, 9 Car. 1. Dalt. Edit. 1666. page
134. cap. 52.

License.
CXXXIV. Dalt. 379. cap. 124. A License for a Recusant to travel, etc. Supra,
not sufficient.

Whereas R. C. of L. in the County of C. being a Recusant Convicted, has
confined himself to L. aforesaid, being the usual place of his abode, according
to the Statute made in the Five and thirtieth year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, (35 Eliz. 2. 12. N. 1.) Know ye that we, etc.
five of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the said County, do by
the Consent of the Right Reverend Father in God, Nicholas, by Gods Providence
Lord Bishop of Ely, at the request of the said R.C. for the dispatch of his
urgent and necessary business, grant and give license to the said R. C. to
travel out of the Precincts or Compass of Five miles limited by the said
Statute, at all times until the first day of November next coming, Rome.
and at the said first day of November to return again to L. aforesaid. In
Witness, etc. 3 Jac. 5. 6. N. 4.

CXXXV. Lambert. Precedents 1 pl. 2. An Indictment for extolling the Authority
of the Pope.

Juratores super Sacrament' suum present' pro Dom. Rege quod J.S. de C. in Com.
predict' Clericus xx. die mensis Aprilis An. Regni Serenissimi Dom. nostri
Jacobi, Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris,
etc. apud D. in Comitatu predict' scienter, considerate, malitiose, and direct
palam in presentia multorum dicti Domini Regis nostri nunc subditorum,
affirmavit, and defendit Autoritatem Papae Romani Ecclesiasticam, in hoc Regno
Angliae preantea usurpatam, Hiis expressis verbis Anglicanis seqentibus, viz. I
swear by the blessed Mass, and will avow that our holy Father the Pope of Rome,
is the Supreme Head of the Church of England: In magnam derogationem Regiae
Autoritatis, and Prerogative dicti Domini Regis nostri, ac contra Coronam and
Dignitatem suam, nec non contra formam diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu
editorum and provisorum, and Quod A. B. de D. predict' in Comitatu predict'
Wax-chandler, sciens predict' J.S. dicta verba locutum esse ac dicti Papae
Autoritatem modo and forma, ut prefertur defendisse ipsum J. S. apud D.
predict' postea scil. secundo die dicti Mensis Aprilis, An. supradicto
consolatus est and comfortavit ex industria and ex proposito and ad eam
intentionem, ut idem A. B. promoveret and efferret prefatam dicti Papae
Autoritatem usurpatam in pernitiocissimum aliorum exemplum, ac contra Coronam
and Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri nunc, ac etiam contra formam
diversorum Statutorum in ejusmodi casu provisorum and editorum, West. Symbol. 2
part. 131 b. Sect. 210.

Rome.
CXXXVI. Lambert Precedents 1 b. pl. 3. A Presentment for absolving from the
Kings Obedience.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si A. B. de C. in dicto Comitatu Clericus, sexto
die Mensis Maij Anno Regni Domini nostri Jacobi, Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae,
and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. apud C. predict' in Comitat'
praedict' voluntary and proditorie conatus est, and procuravit, absolvere,
persuadere, and seducere quandam Johannam W. de C. predict' in Comitatu
predict' viduam a naturali obedientia and subjectione sua, Quam eadem Johanna
erga dictum Dominum nostrum Regem gerere debet ad obediendum pretensae
Autoritati Sedis Romanae tunc and ibidem proditorie prae se ferens and asserens
se habere potestatem and fa cultatem id faciendi, and tunc and ibidem
proditorie dicens eidem Johanni in his Anglicanis verbis sequentibus ( Mother
Jone you shall have a black Soul I tell you, if you do not the sooner forsake
the King (Innuendo predict' Dominum nostrum Regem nunc) and his Heirs, and
yield your self to the obedience of our Mother Church, the holy See of Rome) ac
contra Pacem dicti Domini nostri Regis Coronam and Regalem Dignitatem suam, ac
contra formam Statuti in Parliament' Dominae Elizab. nuper Reginae Angl. tento
apud Westminster. in Com. Middlesex, Anno Regni sui vicessimo tertio in hujusmodi
casu provisi ac editi, West. Symbol. 2 part. 132. Sect. 211.

CXXXVII. Lambert Precedents, 2. pl. 4. Jesuit.
For a Jesuit and his Receivers.

Essex ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si E. C. nuper de S. in Com. predicto Clericus,
natus apud S. predict' in Com. predict' atque infra Annum jam proxime
preteritum factus and professus Jesuita per Autoritatem a Sede Romana
derivatam, proditorie apud S. predict' in Comitatu predict' sexto die Julij,
Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Jacobi, Dei Gratia Angl. Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. a partibus transmarinis applicuit, and dicto
sexto die Julij Anno supradicto, and nonnullis aliis diebus tunc proxime
sequentibus apud S. predict' in Comitatu predict' proditorie moram fecit ac
remansit contra formam cujusdam Statuti in Parliamento Dominae Elizab' nuper
Reginae Angl. tento apud Westminster. in Com. Middlesex, Anno Regni sui vicessimo
septimo in hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi, ac contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis
Coronam and Dignitatem suas.

Et si W. B. de S. predict' in dicto Comitatu Mercator, scienter, voluntary
and felonice, Postea scil. sexto die dicti mensis Julij Anno supradicto,
predict' E. C. apud S. predictam in Comitatu predictis receptavit and
comfortavit dicto W. R. ad tunc and ibidem ad largum and extra Prisonam
existentem ac prefat' E. C. hujusmodi Jesuitam esse tunc and ibidem sciente and
cognoscente) contra formam Statuti predict' ac contra Pacem Coronam and
Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri.

West. Symbol. 2 part. 132. Sect. 212.

CXXXVIII. Lamberts Precedents, 2 b. pl. 5. Religion.
For saying and hearing of Mass.

Essex ss.
Juratores super Sacrament' suum present' pro Dom. Rege quod J.R. nuper de C.
in Com. pred' Clericus, octavo die Aprilis An. Regni dicti Dom. nostri Jacobi,
Dei Gratia Angl', Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, etc. apud C.
predict' voluntary dixit, and celebravit unam Missam contra formam cujusdam
Statuti in Parliamento Dominae Eliz. nuper Reginae Angliae tento apud Westminster. in
Com. Middlesex, Anno Regni sui vicessimo tertio in hoc casu provisi and editi,
and contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suam ( West. Symbol.
2 part. 114. Sect. 140.

Et quod Maria B. de C. praedict' in Comitatu predict' vidua dicto octavo die
Aprilis Anno supradicto apud C. predict' in Com. predict' interfuit presens
tempore dictae celebrationis Missae predictae ac eandem Missam (sic ut
prefertur dictam) ad tunc and ibidem voluntary audivit contra formam Statuti
predicti, ac contra Pacem Coronam and Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri,

Dyer 203. pl. 72.

Certificate.
CXXXIX. Kilborns Precedents, 92 a. Certificate for receiving the Sacrament and
the Oath on 25 Car. 2. cap. 2.

Kent ss.
We A. B. Minister of the Parish Church of C. in the County of D. and E. F.
Churchwardens of the same Parish and Parish Church, do hereby certify, That
M. N. of O. in the County of P. Gent. upon the Lords day, commonly called
Sunday, the Tenth day of June, immediately after Divine Service and Sermon, did
in the Parish Church aforesaid receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
according to the usage of the Church of England.

In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our Hands the Tenth day of etc.
A. B. Minister of the Parish and Parish Church of C. E. F. Churchwarden of the
said Parish and Parish Church.

H. J. of K. in the County of K. Gent. and L. M. of etc. do severally make Oath
that they do know M. N. in the above-written Certificate named, and who now
present has delivered the same into this Court. And do further severally make
Oath, That they did see the said M. N. receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in the Parish Church of C. etc. in the said Certificate mentioned, and
upon the day, and at the time in the said Certificate in that behalf certified
and expressed; and that they did see the Certificate above-written subscribed
by the said A. B. Minister of the said Church, and E. F. Churchwarden there.
And further, That the said H. J. and L. M. do say upon their respective Oaths,
that all other matters or things in the said Certificate recited, mentioned, or
expressed, are true as they verily believe.



Religion.
CXL. Kilborns Precedents 93: A Certificate of receiving the Sacrament according
to the Act, 25 Car. 2. 2.

Kent ss.
Memorandum, That at the Quarter Sessions for the said County holden at C. in
the County aforesaid upon Tuesday the 22 of July, in the Year of our Lord One
thousand six hundred seventy three, and from thence adjourned to M. in the said
County, and there holden by the same Adjournment upon Monday the 28th of July
aforesaid, R. W. of the Parish of M. in the County aforesaid, Esquire did upon the
said 28th of July, in the said Court of Quarter Sessions, there deliver into
the said Court a Certificate under the Hands of J. P. Clerk, Minister of the
Parish and Parish Church aforesaid, and J. M. Churchwarden of the same Parish
and Parish Church, by which they certified, That the said R. W. upon the Lords
day, commonly called Sunday, the 18th day of May, in the said year of our Lord
1673. immediately after Divine Service and Sermon, did in the Parish Church
aforesaid receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, according to the usage of
the Church of England.

Religion.
CLXI. Kilborns Precedents 94. A Testimonial upon the receiving the Sacrament
according to the Act, 25 Car. 2. 2.

K. ss.
Memorandum also, That at the time and place of the said Delivery of the said
Certificate, A. B. C. D. and E. F. did upon Enquiry made by the said Court,
then and there severally make Oath that they did know the said R. W. in the
said Certificate named, and that they were present, and delivered the same into
Court; and that they did see the said R. W. receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper at the time, day, and place, and in the manner in the said Certificate
certified. And that they did see also the said Certificate subscribed by the
said Minister and Churchwarden; and that the said R. W. did upon the 20th day
of May then last past, and for several years before Inhabit, and then did
inhabit in the above named Parish of H. and County of Kent.

CXLII. Westminster. Symb. 2 part. 114 b. 141. An Indictment upon 1 Eliz. 2. against
a Priest for saying Mass in the Vestry of a Church, etc. Crompt. 259. pl. 89.
tit. Religion 16.

CXLIII. Practical Precedents, etc. 189. Apprentice.
An Indictment for keeping a Servant that goes not to Church, 3 Jac. 4. 33. N.
1.

Warwick ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacramentum suum presentant quod A. B. nuper
de E. in Com. W. predict' vidua primo die Maij Anno etc. post editionem Actus
in Parliament' Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Angliae, apud Westminster. in Com.
Middlesex, Anno Regni sui tertij editi scilicet predicto primo die Maij Anno
supradict' voluntary and libenter retinuit and custodivit Anglice, did
willingly retain and keep in domo sua quendam C. D. Servum suum (Anglice her
Servant) continue per spacium 12 Mensium integrorum insimul a predicto primo
die Maij Anno supradicto, usque ad quartum diem Maij Anno Regni etc. Qui quidem
C. D. non accessit, Anglice did not repair alicui Ecclesiae, Capellae, aut
usuali loco Communis precationis ad audiend' Divinum Servitium, sed abstinuit
ab eisdem Anglice did forbear the same per predictum spatium predictorum 12
Mensium contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, and contra
formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit and provisi etc.

Poisoning, see Coron. Possession, see Seisin, Execution. Posse Comitatus, see
Sheriffs, Riot, Force. Post Office, see Ways. Poulterers, see Fowl. Pound, see
Replevin. Power, see Justices Authority. Power of the County, see Force,
Sheriffs. Preachers, see Religion, Encumbent. Precepts, see Process.
Praemunire, see Pope. Presentment, see Endictment. Presentation, see Encumbent,
Church. Presumption, see Intendment. Priests, see Pope. Principal, see
Accessory, Coron. Prisons, see Imprisonment. Privy Sessions, see Justices.
Privilege, see Dignity.
Process.
Warrants, Precepts, Attachments.
Deeds.
1. LAmbert. 84, 85. A Justice of Peace may by word only command a man (being in
his Presence) to find Surety of the Peace, 9 Edw. 4. 3.

For seeing that he is a Judge of Record, says Mr. Fitzherbert, his Precept by
mouth is stronger then his Precept by writing, Dalt. 328. cap. 117.

2. So if the Peace be demanded against one that is in his Presence, he may
command the Sheriff, or other known Officer, or his own Servant if they be then
present also, to arrest the Party to find this Surety, 14 H. 7. 8. and by
Marrow, for it is not so much the Arrest of the Minister, as of the Justice
himself, Crompt. 149.

3. But if either the Officer, Servant, or Party be absent, then it is
requisite to make a Warrant or Precept in Writing, the form whereof may be thus
in English, for I see no cause yet why it should be directed in Latin to a
Constable or Bursholder, that by all Presumption understands no Latin at all,
Dalt. 328. cap. 117.

Joindre.
II. Lambert 89. If such a Precept be made jointly to twain, yet the one alone
may serve it, Crompt. 147 b. Dalt. 332. cap. 117. Jointenants, Br. 1. libr.
Intr. 600.

Sheriffs.
2. If it be directed to the Sheriff, then he may command his Bailiff,
Undersheriff, or other sworn and known Officer to serve it, without writing
any Precept, Dalt. 332. cap. 117.

Deputy.
3. But if he will command another man that is no such Officer to serve it, he
must give him a written Precept, for otherwise a Writ of false Imprisonment
will lie for the Arrest, Crompt. 148 b.

4. And if it be directed to the Bailiff, or to a Justice of the Peace, or
other Stranger, they must serve it themselves, for they can command none other
to do it, neither by Word or Precept, Per Marrow, Dalt. 332. cap. 117.

Monstr.
5. A sworn and known Officer needs not to show his Warrant when he does serve
it upon a man, 8 Ed. 4. 14. Faux Imprisonment, Br. 23. Kell. 86. pl. 9 Co. 69.
and 20 H. 7. 13. etc. for his Office does after a sort Authorize him, Crompt.
148 b. Dalt. 332. cap. 17.

But if the Justice of Peace will set his Servant to serve it, that Servant
must show the Warrant if the Party demand it; and otherwise the Party may make
resistance.

Retorn.
6. A Justice of the Peace, says Peace Br. 9. may make his Warrant retornable
before himself, and the Bailiff needs not carry the Party before any other
Justice: But Fineux 21 H. 7. 20. says, That if a Justice of Peace does make a
Warrant of the Peace ex officio, (that is, without any Writ of Supplicavit
awarded) then the Party may choose to appear before him, or any other Justice in
the Shire, and that he shall punish the Bailiff in false Imprisonment if he do
otherwise compel him, 5 Co. 59. Lambert 94.

7. Otherwise it is in the Execution of the Writ of Supplicavit, for he alone
to whose hands it first comes is authorized to execute and retorn that Writ,
and thereupon F. N. B. 81. affirms, That if such a Writ, of Supplicavit be
delivered to the Sheriff, then he may both execute it alone, and also take
Surety by Recognizance, which otherwise being but a Conservator he could not
do, because the Writ does so enable him; yet Littleton 9 Ed. 4. 31. is to the
contrary.

III. Lambert 90. 91. Notice.
The Officer ought also to require the Party to come and find Surety of the
Peace, before that he do Arrest him, by 5 Ed. 4. 13. and in truth the common
form of the Precept is, and if he refuse etc. then he shall convey him to the
Goal; and therefore if he yield to come, and to find Surety, the Officer may
neither absolutely arrest him, nor take any Fee of him.

2. If a Bailiff do Arrest a Man for the Peace before that he have any Warrant,
and then afterward do procure a Warrant for it, Officer.
this nevertheless is unlawfully done, 43 Eliz. 6. and will not excuse him in
an Action of false Imprisonment, Crompt. 149. Dyer 244. Bar. 248. Dalt. 333.
cap. 117.

3. But if the Bailiff do cause one by force of a Warrant to come and find
Surety of the Peace, and when the Party is brought the Justice will not bind
him, yet the Bayl^ff is excused, 21 H. 7. 22.

IV. Lambert 91. Lieu.
If Surety of Peace be required at the hands of a Justice of Peace that
dwells out of the County against a Man within the County, the Justice may
grant a Precept to be served in the County.

But when the Party shall be thereupon warned and commanded to find Surety, the
Officer may not carry him out of the County to the Justice of Peace that made
the Warrant, by Marrow, Crompt. 149 b. infra. for a Justice of Peace has no
Authority but in the County where he is Justice, Com. 37. And therefore it may
be doubted also whither such a Warrant be good or no.

2. The Case was there 13 Ed. 4. 8. That a Justice of Peace in one County
pursued a Felon and took him in another County, whereupon it was holden that he
ought to be committed to the Goal of the County wherein he was taken, and not
of the County wherein he which took him was a Justice, for that he being out of
his County had no more Authority than a Private Man.

3. But yet the Bailiff may not dispute the Sufficiency or insufficiency of
such a Warrant, because he that awarded it is a Judge of Record, 14. H. 8. 18.
Crompt. 147.

V. Lambert. 42. Justify.
But if it fall out that he refuse to come and put in Surety of the Peace, then
may the Officer by Virtue of his Warrant convey him to Prison, etc. and if he
add Resistance to this refusal, and make Assault upon the Officer, then may the
Officer Justify the beating or hurting of him 21 H. 7. 39. by Fineux.

VI. Lambert. 93. Arrest.
And an Arrest may be called the beginning of Imprisonment; the Precepts and
Writs of the higher Courts of Law do use to express it by Capias and Attachias,
etc. but this our Precept notes it by these words, Duci facias, etc. for that
the Officer has after a sort taken him before, in that he comes unto him, and
requires him to go to some Justice of the Peace, Dalt. 335. cap. 118. infra.

VII. Lambert 131. Riot.
One Justice of the Peace can neither make inquiry of a Riot or Rout when it is
done, nor assess any Fine, nor yet Award any Process for it, nor otherwise
meddle with it in the very Nature of a Rout or Riot, but only as a Trespass,
against the Peace, or upon the Statute of Northampton, 2 Ed. 3. 4. or of
forcible Entry, 8 H. 6, 9. etc. Crompt. 148 b.

Justices.
VIII. Lambert 187. This to be plain, I do not like that one Justice of Peace
shall take upon him to bind an Offender against any Penal Law, being within the
power of Justices of the Peace, but yet neither comprehended in the Commission,
nor committed to the Charge of any one of them, to appear at the Sessions to
Answer to his Fault, Dalt. 331. cap. 117. infra.

For although I have seen sundry old Precedents of Attachments made from one
Justice of the Peace against Laborers, to be before the Justices at their
Sessions, to answer to their Contempts.

Yet I am not persuaded that the like may be done against the Offenders of
other Statutes, unless it be specially therein so appointed, no more then it
might have been done in that Case of Laborers it self, had not the Statute of
Laborers 25 Ed. 3. 6. 1. N. 1. expressly commanded it, Dalt. 331. cap. 117.

2. And I doubt not but they of the late Parliament were also of this mind with
me; for if they had thought it generally lawful so to do, they would not have
so specially provided for it, as by 5 Eliz. 4. N. of Servants, and 23 Eliz. 2.
N. against slanderous News, and 23 Eliz. 10. N. against taking Pheasants and
Partridge.

3. And surely much harm follows of it; for it falls out most commonly in
Experience, that those Justices which be most busied to take such Bonds, be no
less ready to release them, etc.

Indictment.
IX. Lambert 188, 189. And therefore it were better, etc. that such Offenders
were first Indicted, and then that Process were orderly awarded against them,
until that either they yielded themselves, or were taken or outlawed, the which
manner of doings it is better warranted of the twain, so does it recompense the
delay of the punishment with the weight of the pain, and shall profit more than
the former.

2. There is one thing also whereof I thought meet to admonish our Justices of
Peace in this place. Many of them do use to give out their Precepts to attach
Persons suspected of Felony, to the end to have them brought before them, which
thing is neither newly devised by them, nor done without color; for they have
such a Precedent in the old Book of Justices of the Peace, 41. infra, Crompt.
147 b.

3. And there is no doubt but that if a Felony be done, every man may Arrest
whomsoever he suspecteth of it: But for all that the whole Court, 14 H. 6. 16.
Fax Imprisonment, Br. 8. 33. condemns such Precepts; because if the Bailiff
which serves the Warrant have suspicion in the Party, he may of himself
without the Warrant Arrest him; and if he have not then is the Warrant of a
Justice of Peace no Warrant to Arrest him, unless he be Indicted before, 4.
Inst. 177, 178. Crompt. 148 b. Dalt. 331. cap. 117. infra.

Commission.
X. Lambert 512. The Authority of making Process upon Indictments is given by
the express words in the Commission, 13. And in other Cases where it is not
namely given, it is employed of congruence, or rather of necessity in the words
hear and determine in the Commission, 14. which cannot be performed unless the
Party do come in gratis, or be brought in by the power of Process, Dalt. 330.
cap. 117. Dalt. 403. cap. 132.

Nosme.
2. This Process ought always to be in the name of the King, thus, Jacobus Dei
gratia, etc. Vicecomtti Kanciae, etc. And therefore also seeing he is Party, it
must say, Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem, Quin etc. Prerog. 21. Crompt.
149 b. Dalt. 347. cap. 121. and 404. cap. 132. Franchise, Br. 31.

3. And the Test thereof may be under the Name of some two Justices, so that it
be made sitting the Court in the Sessions of Peace, Br. 6, 7. Dalt. 347. cap.
121.

4. But now whereas the Commission gives to the Present Justices Authority to
make Process upon Indictments taken, Abatement.
as well before former Justices as before themselves, all that doing was wont
to be discontinued in Law by the coming out of a new Commission of the Peace,
until 11 H. 6. 6. 1. N. 2. did establish that no Pleas, Suits, or Process to be
taken before Justices of the Peace, should be discontinued by a new Commission
of the Peace to be made etc. and of the like effect etc. is 1 Ed. 7. 6. N. 1.
Crompt. 151. 152.

XI. Lambert 513. Furthermore, Sheriffs.
whereas Sheriffs and their Bailiffs used to Arrest Men and to proceed upon
Indictments found in their Tourns or Law-days, another Statute 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1.
N. 3. wringeth that Power out of their hands, and delivers it over to the
Justices of Peace, 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1. N. 6. appointing them to proceed upon them as
if they had been found before themselves, Crompt. 151 b.

XII. Lambert 513. 514. Now seeing that this process of the Sessions is sent
out to this end, Utlary.
that either the Party shall come in to answer and to be Justified by the Law,
or else that he shall for his Contumacy be deprived of the benefit of the Law,
for so much in effect do the words of the Commission 13. Quousque Capiantur
reddant se aut Vtlagentur, import in them: It follows, that in all Cases of
Endictments, if the Party be returned Insufficient, the Process of Utlary lies
against the Offender, if he be not taken before, or do not otherwise offer and
yield himself, and then the Power of the Justices ends with the Utlary, for
they can make no Capias Vtlagatum, but must certify the Utlary in B. R.

2. A good while after that Commissions of Peace were first Awarded, there was
not given by them any power to make out any Process by Utlary; for 20 Ed. 3.
part 3. Patent in dorso, were words Authorizing the Commissioners of the Peace
to Arrest all such as should be Endicted before them; but by and by this
follows there, and ad nomina eorum qui fuerint, and coram vobis Justiciari
noluerint Certificand' in Cancellaria, etc. So that if they might not get them
Arrested they could go no further, but to certify their names only, 25 Ed. 3.
Stat. 5. cap. 14. 1. N. 4. Crompt. 150 b. 151.

3. Now the mean to this Utlary is not all one in all Cases; for upon
Endictments of Trespasses against the Peace, or such other Contempts, the
Process is one, and upon Endictments of Treason or Felony it is another.

XIII. Lambert 514, 515. Upon Endictments of Trespass against the Peace, of
Conspiracies, and of Routs in the Presence of the Justices, Utlary.
or in Affray of the People, if the Offenders may not be found, nor brought in
by Attachment or Distress, by reason of their insufficiency, the Process of
Utlary is to be Awarded by the Statutes of 18 Ed. 3. St. 1. page 109. 1. N. and
18 Ed. 3. St. 2. cap. 5. The like is against such as be Indicted upon the
Statute of Liveries, 19 H. 7. 14. N. Crompt. 150. Dalt. 404. cap. 132.

2. A Venire Facias first, and then if thereupon he be returned sufficient, a
Distringas, and so the same Process Infinite till he come in, Crompt. 150 b.
151 a. 152.

3. But if a Nihil habet, etc, be at the first returned against him, then a
Capias alias and pluries, and after an Exigent, as it seems by Mr. Marrow.

4. And the old Precedents agreeing with the common Course, as I take it, is
the very ordinary Process upon all Endictments not sounding in Felony or
greater Offense, whether they be of Trespass against the Peace, or of Contempt
against Penal Laws, unless it be otherwise specially provided by those same
Statutes whereupon such Endictments be altogether grounded, etc.

Ways.
XIV. Lambert 515, 516. The Statute 22 H. 8. 5. 1. N. 1. of Bridges allows
such Process as the Justices of B. R. do use, or such as the Justices of Peace
themselves shall think meet by their discretion for the speedy Amendment of
those Bridges, Crompt. 151.

Maintenances.
2. Upon Endictments of Liveries, Maintenance, Archery, unlawful Games, etc. by
33 H. 8. 10. 1. N. 9. there was given one Venire Fac, one Capias, and then the
Exigent, but it is to be weighed whither the Statute 37 H. 8. 7. 2. N. 4. which
utterly repealeth 33 H. 8. 10. do transfer the manner of that Process unto the
Ancient Quarter Sessions, as it does sundry other Parts of 33 H. 8. 10. or no,
Crompt. 151.

Apprentice.
3. The Statute of Laborers, 23 H. 6. 13. 1. N. 10. gave after the Endictments
Grounded thereupon an Attachment, Capias, and Exigent: But I think it no great
doubt but that point is taken away for Laborers by 5 Eliz. 4. 2. N. 1. and
stands good for none, except it be for Victuallers only, 5 Eliz. 4. 47. N. 1.
Crompt. 151.

Ale.
4. The Statute 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 3. N. 1. gives Power to the Justices of
Peace to enquire of alehouse-keepers, whether they have done any act to the
breach of their Recognizance, Crompt. 151 b.

And 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 3. N. 2. If any matter be Presented, then to award
Process against the Offender, to show why he should not forfeit his
Recognizance, infra.

But what this Process shall be, I will not determine; for I do not find that
in any other Case, though it appear that a Man has forfeited his Recognizance,
the Justices of Peace can Award any Scire Facias, or other Process, to call him
in upon it, but rather to certify the same into higher Courts, that from
thence Process may Issue out to call the Party to his Answer.

Lieu.
XV. Lambert 516. 517. Some other Statutes there be also that have extended the
Authority of the Justices of Peace in sending Process beyond the bounds of
their own Commission; for by 1 Ed. 6. 1. 3. N. 1. three Justices of the Peace,
the one being of the Quorum, may make Process against such as be thereupon
Endicted for depraving the Sacrament, by two Writs of Capias and the Exigent,
and by Capias Vtlagatum into any Place within the Kings Dominions, Crompt. 151.

2. So if a Servant depart into another Shire, the Justices of the Peace of
that Shire where the departure was, may grant Writs of Capias to the Sheriff of
that other Shire where the Servant is retornable before themselves, 5 Eliz. 4.
47. N. 1. Crompt. 649 b.

3. The like they may do by 22 H. 8. 5. N. where a decayed Bridge lies in one
Shire, and the Person or Lands chargeable thereto do lie in another, Crompt.
151.

Lieu.
4. They may also Award Process of Attachment unto any foreign Shire against the
Accountants for Money levied toward the making of any Goal, 25 H. 8. 5. N. and
5 Eliz. 24. N.

XVI. Lambert 517. 518. But if the Endictment be in one County, Lieu.
and the Endicttee be named to be (then or nuper) dwelling in any other County,
there is a special Course of Process in that behalf, for his benefit appointed
by 8 H. 6. 10.. 2. N. 1. both for Treason, Felony, and Trespass, for before any
Exigent shall be Awarded, one Capias must be sent out and returned; Crompt.
105. Ab. Stanf. 68.

2. And then a Second Capias shall go into the County, where he is supposed in
the Endictment to be, or to have been conversant, retornable before the same
Justices of the Peace, before whom the Endictment was taken, three Months at
the least after the date thereof, for all Counties be now holden from Month to
Month by the Statute 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 25. 2. N. 1.

By which last Writ, 8 H. 6. 10. 2. N. 2. 3. 4. The Sheriff shall be commanded
to take the Endictee, if he may be found within his Bailywick: And if not, then
to make Proclamation in two Counties before the retorn of that Writ, that the
Endictee shall appear before the said Justices of the said County where the
Endictment was taken at the day contained in the last said Capias to answer to
his Offense, at which day if he come not, then the Exigent shall be Awarded
against him, and otherwise not.

3. And by the Equity of this Statute 8 H. 6. 10. 2. N. 1. says Mr. Marrow, if
the Indictee be imprisoned in another County, the Justices of Peace may Award
an Habeas Corpus to remove him before them.

XVII. Lambert 518. Nosme.
But if it be mentioned in the Endictment that the Endictee is dwelling in
another County by the Alias Dictus only, then it is out of the Case of the
Statute of 8 H. 6. 10. 2. N. 1. because the Alias dictus is not to be
traversed, 1 Ed. 4. 1. Crompt. 149 b. 150 a.

XVIII. Lambert 518, 519. Supersedeas:
But yet you must prseuppose that all this Process of Utlary may be staid by
Supersedeas. And F.N.B. 237. E. has the Case, That if an Exigent go out upon
an Endictment of Trespass found before Justices of the Peace, the Party may
find Sureties in the Chancery, body for body, to appear at the day of the Writ,
and may then also have a Supersedeas thence to the Sheriff, commanding him to
forbear to take him, and to let him go if he then have already taken him for
that Cause.

And Co. Entr. 546. The Process upon such an Endictment staid by a Supersedeas
issuing from one Justice of the Peace alone, and testifying that the Party came
before him, and found Surety de fine assidendo, Crompt. 150.

But as I believe the former, so will I not persuade the Practice of the
latter, because I think it not in the lawful power of any one Justice of Peace
to Award any such Warrant, but that it must be done by two Justices of Peace at
the least, the one being of the Quorum, as the Commission now stands.

XIX. Lambert 519. Endictment.
It seems by Mr. Marrow that the Process at the Common Law upon Indictments
of Felony, was but one Capias, and then an Exigent; for so it was upon an
Indictment of Death, 22 Ass. 81. Stanf. 67.

2. But the old Precedents grounding themselves upon the Statute, 25 Ed. 3. St.
5. cap. 14. do use the mention of two Writs of Capias before the Exigent.

For 25 Ed. 5. Stat. 5. cap. 14. 1. N. 2. provideth, that after the retorn of
Non est inventus upon the first Capias; another Capias shall be incontinently
Awarded, whereby the Sheriff shall be commanded to seize the Chattels of the
Indictee, and safely to keep them till the day of the Capias returned; and if
he then also retorn Non est inventus, and the Endictee comes not in, the
Exigent shall be Awarded, and the Chattels shall be forfeited. But 25 Ed. 3.
St. 5. cap. 14. 1. N. 5. if he come and yield him, or be taken before the
retorn of the second Capias, then the Goods and Chattels shall be saved unto
him.

Lieu.
XX. Lambert 520. And here also the Justices of Peace have power to send into a
foreign County.

2. For whereas by the Common Law no man could be attached upon an Indictment
or Utlary of Felony, but only in the County wherein he was Indicted or
Outlawed, whereby many Evil men were much encouraged.

3. The Statute 5 Ed. 3. 11. 1. N. 2. did take order that Justices assigned to
hear and determine Felonies, might direct their Writs to any County in England,
to take such Endictees whither soever they were removed, Crompt. 149 b.

4. On the other side, if the Endictment be found in one County, and the
Indictee is therein named to be then dwelling in another County, supra, it
appears what Process is to be, etc.

Information.
XXI. Lambert 520, 521. The power of making Process upon Informations proceeds
from special Statutes, and may not therefore vary from their Directions,
although they themselves do vary greatly one from another.

2. For upon an Information given for the King before Justices of the Peace
upon 8 Ed. 4. 2.. N. of Liveries, they shall Award such Process as is made upon
an Original Writ of Trespass done against the Kings Peace, because the
Information it self is by force of that Statute instead of an Original Writ,
Crompt. 151.

3. And upon Information made unto them that an Alehouse-keeper has done any
act whereby he has forfeited his Recognizance, they may, as supra, Award
Process against him, to show Cause why he should not forfeit his Recognizance,
by 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. 3. N. 2. but learn if that be meant of a Scire Facias, or
of some other Process.

Supplicavit.
XXII. F. N. B. 250. G. And if a Man be Indict of Trespass before Justices of
Peace, and put in Prison by Process made thereon he may sue a Writ in the
Chancery, directed to the Sheriff, that he take Surety of him to appear before
the Justices at the Sessions, etc. and that he let him at large, but the
Justices of Peace may let him by Mainprise go at large if they will.

Certiorari.
2. F. N. B. 250. H. And if a Man be Indicted of Trespass before Justices of
Peace, and be taken and put in Prison, therefore he may sue a Certiorari to
remove this Indictment in B. R. directed to the Justices of Peace and a Writ of
Habeas Corpus directed, that he bring the Record at his proper Charges before
the King at the same day in his Bench, etc. Crompt. 150.

Market overt.
3. F. N. B. 250. ^. And if a Man be Indicted of Forestalling, and taken and put
in Prison therefore, he may sue a Writ in Chancery directed to the Sheriff,
that he take surety of him to appear before the Justices to answer of the
Trespass, etc. and that then he may let him at large, Crompt. 150. infra.

Arrest*
XXIII. Lambert Constable 16, 17. And as these Officers ought to Arrest those
that do make assault upon any private Person, so also may they Arrest any such
as shall make Assault or Affray upon themselves, whilst they be in doing their
Offices, and may for that purpose both lawfully defend themselves, and also
take the Offenders and commit them to the Goal, or carry them to a Justice of
the Peace for the finding of Surety of the Peace.

2. But if one do Assault a man in or nigh the Highway to rob him, and be
taken by the true man, or by any other, and be brought to the Constable, or
such other Officer of the Peace, then ought such Officer not only to take him
to his Ward, but also to carry him before a Justice of Peace to cause him to
give Surety of his good abearing.

3. So if any man do suspect another of Murder or Felony, and do declare the
same to any such Officer of the Peace, then such Officer may Arrest the
suspected person, and he shall do well do carry him to a Justice of the Peace,
together with him that does suspect him, to the end that they both may be
Examined, as appertains, supra.

4. Yea, any Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen, etc. may search within the
Limits of his Authority for any persons suspected of Felony; for it is a chief
part of their Office to repress Felons.

XXIV. Lambert 541, 542. Justices.
It seems by Mr. Marrow and Fitzh. 16. that albeit two Justices of the Peace,
the one being of the Quorum, may hear and try the Felonies, yet no Justices of
the Peace have Authority to deliver Felons by Proclamation, or without
sufficient Acquittal, nor yet to deliver such as be in Prison for suspicion of
Felony.

2 For they must proceed by enquiring, hearing, and determining, as their
Commission 13. appoints them, and not rid the Goal otherwise as the Justices
of Goal delivery may do.

3. And therefore such Persons, if they cannot be Indicted must either remain
the coming of the Justices of Jail-delivery, as the common manner now is, or
else being removed in B. R. they are either to be delivered thence upon the
Writ F. N. B. De gestu and fama, as old order was, or by such other mean as
they at this day do use therein.

XXV. Lambert 543. Furthermore, Oath.
they cannot Arraign a Man upon his Abjuration, says Mr. Marrow.

2. It has also been thought unmeet that they should try a Felon the same day
in which they Awarded the Venire Fac. against the Jury, Trial.
on 22 Ed. 4. Coron 44. but that has no necessity, and the Law is now
otherwise taken. See tit. Justices 289. Crompt. 150 b. 152 a.

3. Marrow says, that Justices of Peace cannot Award the Writ of Venire Fac.
tot matronas, to try whether a Woman Arraigned before them be with Child or not.

But seeing it stands with Law and Reason to stay her for the time that the
Child may be preserved, I cannot but doubt of this Opinion.

XXVI. Lambert 534. 535. Pleading.
If Process be Awarded (in B. R. or before Justices of the Peace) the Party may
come in and offer his Traverse, and otherwise the Process should be in vain.

2. Hereunto agrees Moubray, 41 Ed. 3. 26. Traverse de etc. Br. 2. Saying
further, that in a Leet such a Presentment is not traversable, because out of a
Leet no Process can be Awarded upon it. And this peradventure is the Reason of
8 Ed. 4. 5. and of Mr. Marrow, where they say, That a Presentment of Bloodshed
found in the Sheriffs Tourn, and sent as it ought to be to the Justices of
Peace, cannot be Traversed before them; as whereupon they can neither make
Process nor discharge the Party by way of Plea, Lambert 496.

3. So that this seems a general Learning, That wherever any Process ad
Respondendum goes out upon such an Endictment as is traversable, there also
the Party may offer and ought to have his Traverse against it.

Officer.
XXVII. Crompt. 147. A Justice of Peace may make whom he will Officer, by
Brudnel, which was granted 14. H. 8. 18. Dalt. 332. cap, 117.

2. But the Warrant must bear date of the place where it is made, 14. H. 8. 15.

3. It appears by the Oath of a Justice of Peace that he ought to direct his
Precept to the Baily of the County, or other the Kings Officers, or to other
Indifferent Persons, to do Execution thereof, Fitzh. J. P. 19.

Commission.
4. Crompt. 147 b. If a Justice of Peace commands an Officer known, by Precept
to do a thing out of the Jurisdiction of the Justice of Peace, and he does it,
the Officer shall be punished; etc. 22. Ass. 64. Officer Br. 20. and so see that
the Officer must take notice of the Authority of the Judge, Dalt. 334. cap. 117.

Notice.
5. Nota, That the Officer who Arrests a Man must see at his Peril whither it be
the same Person or not that should be Arrested, etc. 21. Ed. 4. 54. Replevin
Br. 58. 13. H. 4. 2. Crompt. 148 b. Dalt. 333. Cap. 117. infra.

6. If the Justices Award Process to take another without Cause, and the
Sheriff takes him, yet he shall not be punished, for he cannot argue their
Authority. As if the Justices De Banco, in a Praecipe quod reddat Award a
Capias to take the Defendant, and the Sheriff takes him, and after the Justices
Amend the Process, yet the Sheriff shall be discharged 20 H. 6. 15.

Monstrance.
XXVIII. Crompt. 147 b. 148. A Justice of Peace makes a Precept to bring A.B.
before him to answer to such things as he has to object against him on the
Kings behalf, it seems good without showing the special matter, for it may be
he has matter of Treason, Conspiracy, Murder, or etc. to object to him. This
is used by the Justices, as the chief Clerk of Wray Chief Justice told me,
Dalt. 329. cap. 117.

2. See Libr. Intr. 83. An Attachment to appear before Justices of Assize to
Answer super hijs quae sibi ex part nostra tunc ibidem objicientur, Dalt. 329.
cap. 117.

Place.
3. But if a man be to find Surety of the Peace or Good-behaviour, he must show
the Matter in the Precept, but not if it touches Felony, or Capital Offenses,
or Conspiracy, or unlawful Assemblies, etc. Dalt. 329. cap. 117.

4. Stamf. 155. A Corpus cum causa out of B. R. to the Sheriff of York against
one who was in Prison in the Castle there, and he did not show the Cause in the
Writ; for it may be that the Justices sent for him for matter of Treason, or
great Conspiracy, and therefore by Catline Chief Justice they need not show
Cause; no more shall a Justice of Peace do, as it seems, in Case where he
sends for him that has committed Felony where he is to be examined thereon, for
then he would not be taken, and so it is used every where.

5. A Bailiff or other Arrests a Man by Warrant of the Peace, and takes his
Promise that he will come to him such a day to go to a Justice to find Surety
of the Peace, and he comes not, the Bailiff cannot take him again by the said
Warrant, etc. But if he escapes Br. 12. 45. against his will, he may retake him
by Fresh Suit, etc. Dalt. 333. cap. 117.

Riot.
XXIX. Crompt. 148 b. A Justice of Peace may command his Servants to go to such
a Place, and if Rioters come there, to Arrest them, without making any Precept
to them, by Fineux Chief Justice, and Tremail, 14 H. 7. 8. Lambert. 89. supra.
Dalt. 328. cap. 117.

2. If a Justice of Peace makes a Warrant to a known Bailiff to Arrest another
for Felony, where he is not before Indicted, Arrest.
the Bailiff shall not be punished for the Arrest, for a Justice of Peace is an
Officer of Record, and the Bailiff cannot argue his Authority: And yet this
Warrant is out of the Authority of the Justice of Peace himself; For the
Justice himself cannot Arrest another for Suspicion of Felony, if he himself
does not suspect him, 14 H. 8. 18. and 20 Ed. 4. 6. Faux Imprisonment Br. 8.
33. Bar 289. Trespass 179. Lambert 188, 189. supra.

3. A Commission issued to take such as were slandered for Felony or Trespass,
and he Arrested them though they were nor Indicted, and good, though it seems
the Warrant is against Law, 24 Ed. 3. 9. accord, and so see the Officer
excused: And such an Attachment by others by Precept is good. Ibidem quod not a
Faux Imprisonment Br. 29. accord, and he shall not be punished.

4. The Defendant in Faux Imprisonment shall not show the Warrant that was sent
to him to attach the Plaintiff, because it may be it is returned, 27 Ass. 26.
21 H. 7. 24.

5. It seems that the Justices of Peace in full Court may Award a Precept,
upon a pain contained therein, as Justices of B. R. may, etc.

XXX. Crompt. 149. Appearance.
See if a Justice of Peace may Award a Precept to warn a man to appear to be
deposed for the King at the Sessions, and if he refuses he shall be Imprisoned.

2. Upon an Indictment before Justices of Peace, if an Exigent be returned
quarto exactus, and that he can call him no more for shortness of the time, an
Exigi facias de novo shall issue without alleging of 4 Counties, etc. and so
is the Experience in B. R. Crompt. 150 b.

3. By the like Reason as F.N.B. 92. if any abuse the Precepts of Justices of
Peace which are direct to the Sheriff to Arrest others to the Peace where etc.
he shall be Indict and fined, for it is the Kings Process, Contempt.
Dalt. 334. cap. 117.

4. Crompt. 149 b. Jurisdiction.
A Justice of Peace makes to a Bailiff a Warrant to Arrest such a one to the
Peace, and to bring him to him at such a place in another County, and he does
so, in Faux Imprisonment against the Officer he cannot plead this matter,
because it is out of the Jurisdiction of the Justice. See Com. 37. Lambert 91.
supra. Marrow Lect. 3. that the Warrant supra is void, Dalt. 334. cap. 117.

XXXI. Crompt. 150. Accessory.
Process of Exigent shall not issue against the Accessory, until the Principal
be Attaint by Utlary, 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 14. and by 43 Ed. 3. 17. until the
Principal be Attaint.

2. If the Party appears in Court who is Indict of Trespass, Appearance.
and there confesses the Indictment, no Process shall be Awarded to make a
Fine, but he shall be Committed presently until he has made a Fine, 1 H. 7. 7.
Faux Imprisonment Br. 100. Dalt. 404. cap.

3. Three Exigents are awarded upon an Indictment before Justices of Peace, and
the Party sueth a Supersedeas out of the Chancery or B. R. for delay, and does
so thrice; Quaere in this Case if the Justices may Award another Exigent with a
pain to the Sheriff, who alleges such a Supersedeas again, though the
Chancery be the higher Court, as 7 Ed. 4. 9. Supersedeas Br. 31. Crompt. 151 b.

XXXII. Crompt. 150 b. Market overt.
Upon an Indictment of Forestalling Process of Utlary lies not, 22 Ed. 4. 11.
F.N.B. 250. I.

Nor in Maintenance upon an Original, 8 H. 6. 37. Maintenance.


XXXIII. Crompt. 151 b. Justices.
One Justice of Peace alone cannot Award a Capias nor other Process, but there
must be two Justices at least to do it, and this Sedente curia in Sessionibus,
and not extra, Peace Br. 6. 7.

Franchise.
2. Justices of Peace may Award an Attachment to the Sheriff of any County in
England, as well within Liberties as without, retornable before themselves,
against him that is Commorant that should Account, having been Collectors of
Sums Assest for making of Goals, 23 H. 8. 5. N. and 5 Eliz. 24. N.

Hostler.
3. The Justices of Peace may award such Process against Hostlers and
Inn-holders, who bake Horse-bread which is not sufficient, lawful, and of due
assize, whereof they are Indicted, as they should do a Presentment of Trespass
against the Peace, 32 H. 8. 41. N.

Sheriff.
4. The Process shall be Awarded as upon an Indictment of Trespass where the
Sheriff or Bailiff of a Franchise is Indicted for not executing Process upon 8
H. 6. 9 N. of forcible Entries.

Market evert.
5. Process shall be Awarded against Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers,
who offend against 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14. 10. N. 2. as should be where they are
Indicted before them by Inquisition, or by Verdict of Twelve men.

War.
6. Process shall be as in Trespass where a man is Indict on 4 and 5 Ph. and
Mar. 3. N. for not coming to Musters.

Measures.
XXXIII. Crompt. 152. Process against such who shall be Indict for using of
false Measures and Weights, shall be as if they had been Indict of breach of
the Peace by 11 H. 7. 4. N. Dalt. 403. cap. 132.

Ftsh.
2. Process shall be as upon Indictments of Trespass, etc. against such who are
Presented, or against whom an Information shall be made on 5 Eliz. 5. N. of
Maintenance of the Navy.

3. Process shall be as upon Indictments with force, etc. against an Escheator
who offends against the Statute, Officer.
12 Ed. 4. 9.. N. touching the not having of 20 l. Land by the year, or if he
sets his said Office to Farm, etc.

Husbandry.
4. Such Process shall be Awarded against him who is Indicted on 25 H. 8. 13. N.
of keeping of Sheep above a certain number, as is used in Trespass Presented
before Justices of Peace.

Capias.
XXXIV. Crompt. 232 b. pl. 2. Process upon Indictments of Trespass. The Writ of
Capias, Dalt. 405. cap. 132.

Jacobus Dei Gratia Angliae etc.
Vicecom' S. salutem,
Precipimus tibi quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliva tua
Quin eam Ingredias and Capias J. D. de A. in Com. tuo Yeoman etc. si invent'
fuerit in Balliva tua and eum salvo Custodiri facias Ita quod Habeas Corpus
ejus coram Custodibus Pacis nostrae nee non Justiciarijs nostris ad diversas
Feloniam transgressiones and alia Malefacta in eodem Comitatu tuo perpetrat'
audiend' and terminand' Assignat' apud Stafford in Com. tuo die Martis proxime
post Clausum Pasch proximum futurum ad respondend' nobis de diversis transgr.
Contempt' and offensis de quibus ipse Indictatus existit and habeas ibi tunc
hoc breve.

Test W. H. apud Stafford 6 die Junij Anno Regni nostri, etc.
Ad quem diem A. B. Armig' Vicecomes Comitatus predicti Retornavit quod ipse
Non est inventus in Balliva sua, and ipse non venit, ideo preceptum est sicut
alias, etc. Alias.
2. Jacobus, etc. Vicecom' etc. precipimus tibi sicut alias tibi preceperimus
quod non non omittas, etc.

Ad quem diem, etc. and ipse non venit, ideo Preceptum est Viecom' sicut
plures, etc.

He may appear gratis to avoid an Attachment of his Body, 3 Ed. 4. 16. Jours
Br. 2. 16: And this is the Reason its Entered, and ipse non venat, Dalt. 404,
405. cap. 132.

3. Jacobus etc. Vicecom' etc. salutem, Pluries.
Precipimus tibi sicut pluries tibi Precipimus quod non omittas, etc.

Ad quem diem A. B. Armiger Vicecom' Comitat' predict' Retorn' quod predict' C.
D. Non est inventus in etc. and ipse non venit, ideo Precept' est quod Exigi
facias etc. Dalt. 406. cap. 132.

Exigint.
4. Jacobus etc.
Vicecom' etc. salutem,
Precipimus quod Exigi facias C. D. and A. in Com. tuo Yeoman, quodque secundum
legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae Utlagatur si non comparuerit, and
si comparuerit tunc eum Capias and Salvo Custodiri facias, Ita quod Habeas
Corpus ejus Coram Justiciariis Pacis nostrae nec non Justiciarijs nostris ad
diversas Felon' Transgr' and alia Malefacta in eodem Comitatu tuo perpetrat'
audiend' and terminand' Assignat' ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis Comitatus tui
proxime post Festum Sancti Mich' Archangeli proximum futur' tenend' ubicunque
in eodem Comitatu teneri contigerit ad respondendum Nobis de diversis Transgr'
Contempt' and Offensis de quibus ipse Indictus existit and habeas ibi tunc hoc
breve.

Test etc. H. apud Staff. 8. die Sept. Anno Regni etc.


Dalt. 406. cap. 132.

Ad quem diem A. B. Armiger Vicecomes Com. predicti Retorn' quod ad Com. Staff.
tentum apud Stafford quinto die Maij Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc secundo and
hic ad quatuor alios Com. tunc proxime sequent'. Ibidem tent' predict' C. D.
exactus ^uit and non comparuit ideo Utlagatus fuit.

XXXV. Crompt. 233 And he must show the days when the Counties were as it
seems Process, Br. 149. Days.


2. Note, Where the Process Issues upon an Endictment of Felony, then the
first Process shall be a Capias, and then a Capias alias, and then an Exigent,
and the Entry of the Process shall be ut supra, mutatis mutandis.

3. Nota, That an Entry must be made in the Roll with the Clerk of the Peace,
which shall be a Warrant of every Process that shall be Awarded, as it seems.
And 2 R. 3. 12. it appears that the Writ must be Warranted by the Roll, See
Dyer 211.

4. And a Man that has day to appear by the Roll, or is to have corporal
Penance, or is to loose an Inheritance if he does not come there he shall be
received to appear notwithstanding the Writ be not returned served, which see
Kell. 166 b. pl. and 10. H. 7. 11 b. Jours 29. Br. 93.

XXXVI. Dalt. 329. Cap. 117. Recites Crompt. 148 Supra. Monstr.
And I once received a Warrant, brought me by one Thomas Evans, a Pursevant or
Messenger of his Majesty's Chamber, Anno 1607. under the hand of the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Ellesmore Late Lord Chancellor of England, for the
apprehending of one James Malin for a matter of Contempt, and the said Warrant
was in general words, scil. to Answer to such Matters as were to be objected
against him without any special Cause therein mentioned, infra.

2. Also I saw another Warrant 3 Jac. granted under the hand of Popham, Chief
Justice, to bring one Edmonds of Barnwel by Cambridge before him, to answer to
such Matters as he had to object against him on the Kings Majesty's behalf,
without any special Cause or Matter therein set down, Libr. Intr. 83.

3. But it is not safe for a Justice of Peace to grant out his Warrant with a
blank; for about 30 Eliz. one wrote to Sir J. R. a Justice of Peace to send him
a Precept or Warrant with a blank that he might put therein one whom he would
Attach upon Suspicion of Felony, and the Justice of Peace did so, granting a
Warrant with a blank, where he neither knew the Parties Name, nor the Matter;
and for this the Justice was fined in the Star Chamber, as Crompt. Jurisd. 34.

Laches.
XXXVII. Dalt. 330. cap. 117. Also the Justices of Peace in diverse Cases do use
to grant their Warrant against a Man for his neglect, or other default, as for
refusing to pay down rates, and the like, and such Warrant may be either to
attach the Offender to be at the next Sessions there to answer, etc. or else to
bring the Offender before the said Justice, or any other Justice, etc. who
finding Cause may bind such an Offender to appear at the next Sessions to
answer the said default, Lambert. 187. Supra.

2. And wheresoever any Statute does give Authority to the Justices of Peace to
cause another Person to do a thing, there it seems they have Power given them
of congruity to grant their Warrant to bring such Person before them, that so
they may take Order therein, Lambert 512 supra.

Suggestion
XXXVIII. Dalt. 330. 331. cap. 117 But I find it much controverted, 14. H. 8.
16. Peace Br. 6. Commission Br. 3. Crompt. 147 b. Lambert 188. 189. supra.
Whether a Justice of Peace may grant a Warrant to Attach Persons suspected of
Felony, or against Offenders upon a Penal Statute, unless such Persons or
Offenders be first thereof Indicted, for that the Justice of Peace, as he is a
Judge of Record, so it is said he must have a Record whereupon he does Award
his Process or Precept.

2. For the first, Some hold that the Justice of Peace may grant his Warrant to
Attach Persons suspect of Felony, for that it seems in the first assignavimus
in the Commission, 13. and by 5 Ed. 3. 14. N. that any one Justice of Peace may
cause the Constables to Arrest and imprison Offenders suspect of Felony, etc.
and how shall the Justice of Peace cause this to be done, but by his Warrant or
Commandment?

3. Again, If a Felony be done, there is no doubt but that every Private Man,
without a Warrant, may Arrest whomsoever he suspecteth of it, being a Man of
Evil Fame, etc. but if the Offender, being pursued shall resist, Quaere who
shall be aiding to a Private Man whose Goods are stolen, and who suspecteth
another to have stolen them, either to search for his Goods, or to apprehend the
Party suspected, if the Justice of Peace by his Warrant shall not command the
Constable to aid him therein: If it be objected, that the Constable may do all
this of his own Authority upon request to him made by the Party Robbed; be it
true, yet we find by common Experience that the Constables, without the
Justices Warrant therein, are for the most part both very fearful, and also
remiss herein, as neither knowing their own Authority, nor the Danger.

4. Besides this is no new thing, for there is such a President in the old Book
of Justices of Peace, Impress. 1561 fol. 41. yea, it is the common Practice at
this day, and it seems to be very serviceable, and of two Evils the less is
to be chosen, scil. that an Offender or suspected Person should be Imprisoned
for a time, though sometimes wrongfully, than that one which has committed a
Felony should escape unpunished.

5. Next, Indictment
For the Justices of Peace to bind one or to grant a Warrant against Offenders
upon any penal Statute to appear at the Sessions to answer to their Offenses or
fault, though such Statute be within the Power of the Justices of Peace, yet
such Warrant or binding over of such Offenders may seem not Warranted unless it
be specially so appointed in the Statutes. But such Offenders ought first to be
Indicted, and thereupon Process from the Sessions is to be Awarded against them
until they come in, etc.

6. And yet there be sundry Precedents of Attachments made from one Justice of
Peace against Laborers, etc. but these may seem also to have been Warranted,
etc. by 25 Ed. 3. 6. 1. N. 1. which Statute is now repealed by 5 Eliz. 4. 2. N.
1. Lambert 187. supra.

7. Also it is usual, by way of prevention to bind by Recognizance such as do
Tramel for Larks, that they shall destroy no Partridges.

As also to bind by Recognizance Butchers, and all Victuallers, that they shall
not kill nor dress any Flesh in Lent time contrary to the Laws; and for these
purposes the Justices of Peace, do grant out their Warrants to convent the said
Persons before them; (for Victuallers, viz. Taverners, Inholders,
Alehouse-keepers, Keepers of Ordinary Tables, and other Victuallers) I have
known sundry Proclamations which seem to Warrant the Justices of Peace therein;
but for the other, what Law or Warrant there be for it, I know not, until the
Offender be Convicted.

XXXIX. Dalt. 332. cap. 117. Officer.
The Officer to whom any Warrant shall be directed and delivered, ought with
all speed and secrecy to seek and find out the party, and then to execute his
said Warrant.

2. And an Officer gives sufficient notice what he is, when he says to the
Party, I Arrest you in the Kings Name, etc. and in such Case the Party at his
Peril ought to obey him, though he knows him not to be an Officer: And if he
have no lawful Warrant the Party grieved may have his Action of false
Imprisonment against him.

XL. Dalt. 333. cap. 117. Notice.
Where there be two or three known by the Name of J. S. of D. Yeoman, and upon
a Warrant or other Process granted out against one of them, another of them is
Arrested, an Action of false Imprisonment will not lie against the Officer for
this, for the Officer is not bound at his Peril to take notice which of them is
the Offender, etc. and perhaps no particular Offense is mentioned in the
Warrant: Yet see L. 5 Ed. 4. 51, and 84. pro and contra, and 11 H. 4. 90. and
Crompt. 174. supra, ideo Quaere.

2. Where a Warrant is granted out against J. N. the Son of W. N. and the
Officer thereupon Arresteth J. N. the Son of T. N. although in truth he be the
same Person that Offended, and against whom the Complaint was made, yet this
Arrest is tortious, and the Officer Subject to an Action, 10 Ed. 4. 12. Faux
Imprisonment Br. 38.

3. The Officer upon any Warrant from a Justice of Peace for the Peace, or
Good-behaviour, or in any other Case where the King is a Party; may by force
break open a Man's house to Arrest the Offender etc.

XLI. Dalt. 334. cap. 117. Examination.
If a Justice of Peace shall grant his Warrant to one to apprehend another for
Murder, Robbery, or Felony, it shall be safe for the Justices, upon delivery of
the said Warrant, to take upon Oath the Examination of the said Party that
requires the Warrant, or at least to bind him over by Recognizance to give
Evidence at the next Jail-delivery, etc. against the Offender, lest that
afterward, when the Offender shall be brought by the Officer before the
Justice upon his said Warrant, or else happen to yield himself to the said
Justice, then the Party that procured the Warrant be gone, Lambert 210, 211.
Proof 1.

2. For by credible report I am informed, that one having procured a Warrant
from a Justce of Peace in Suffolk against another for Robbery done upon the
Highway, and the Justice upon the delivery of his Warrant, not having bound
over the Complainant to give Evidence, nor taken his Examination, etc. that at
the next Assizes and Jail-delivery the Party charged with the Robbery came and
offered himself to the said Justice of Peace, who immediately acquainted Sir
Thomas Fleming, then Lord Chief Justice and Judge of Assize there, with the
whole matter, but the said Judge much blamed the said Justice of Peace for not
having bound over the said Complainant at the first, when be granted him the
Warrant; and charged the said Justice of Peace at his Peril, presently to send
for the Party Complainant to come to give Evidence, etc. and further directed
the said Justice of Peace presently to bind over the Party charged with good
Sureties for his Attendance and Appearance. Dalt. 352. cap. 121.

Arrest.
XLII. Dalt. 335. cap. 118. If the Constable, or other Officer, upon a Warrant
received from a Justice of Peace, shall come unto the Party, and require or
charge or command him to go or come before the Justice, etc. this is no Arrest
or Imprisonment; and upon a Warrant for the Peace, the Officer ought first to
require the party to go before the Justice, before he may Arrest him, Lambert.
93. supra.

Dignity.
2. But the Justices of Peace are not to grant their Warrants for the Peace or
the like, against any Nobleman: And yet if a Capias or Attachment shall be
Awarded against a Baron or Peer of the Realm from the Kings Justices at
Westminster for a Contempt: Or in Case of Debt or Trespass, the Officer without
any offense of Law, may execute the same; for that the Officer is not to
dispute the Authority of the Court.

3. Ecclesiastical Persons also may be Arrested, and that by a Warrant from the
Justices of Peace in some Cases.

Venire Fac.
XLIII. Dalt. 405. cap. 132. The Venire Facias is thus.

Carolus Dei Gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensoris, etc.
Vicecom' Com. Cantabr' salutem,
Precipimus tibi quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliva tua
quin Venire Facias A. B. de C. in dicto Com. tuo Yeoman, Coram R. M. Milite and
M. D. Armiger' duobus Justiciar' nostris ad Pacem conservand' nec non ad
diversas Felonias Transgr. and alia Malefacta in dicto Com. perpetrata audiend'
and terminand' Assignatis apud Lynton in Com. tuo 1 die Maij proximum futurum
ad respondend' nobis super quibusdam Articulis super ipsum A. B. presentatis,
and habeas ibi tunc hoc Preceptum.

Test R. M. and M. D. apud Lynton.
Distress.
2. The Distringas thus: Carolus Dei Gratia etc.
Vicecom' etc. salutem.
Precipimus tibi quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliva tua
quin eam Ingrediaris and Distringas A. B. de C. in Com. tuo Yeoman, per omnia
terras and tenementa etc. and quod de exitibus eorum respondeas etc. and quod
Habeas Corpus ejus coram etc. Justiciar' etc. ad respondend' etc.

Test etc.


J^^tices.
XLIV. Dalt. 404. cap. 132. The difference between Process and the Precept or
Warrant of the Justices of the Peace, seems to be this, that the Precept or
Warrant is only to Attach and Convent the Party before any Indictment or
Conviction, and may be made either in the Name of the King, or of the Justice,
etc. Process is always in the Name of the King, and usually after an Endictment
found, or after other Conviction.

XLV. 2 Inst. 591. Imprisonment.
Hereupon it appears that the common Warrant or Mittimus to answer to such
things as shall be objected against him, is utterly against Law, 4 Inst. 177.
Lambert 187. supra. 12 Co. 103. supra.

Proclamation, see Notice, Process.
Proof.
Evidence, Examination, Witnesses, Testimony, Accusation.
I. LAmbert 210. 211. Examination.
Every Justices of Peace before whom any Person Arrested for Manslaughter or
Felony, or Suspicion thereof, shall be brought ouhgt before he commit him to
Prison; to take the Examination of such Prisoner, and the Information of those
that bring him, and to put the same, or so much thereof as shall be material to
prove the Felony in writing within two days after, and to take Bond of all such
as do declare any thing material to prove the Offense to appear at the next
general Jail-delivery, and to give Evidence there against the Offender, 2 and 3
Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 2. Dalt. 334. cap. 17. Process 41. and infra. and Dalt.
295. cap. 111.

Lambert 213. 214. Oath.
To this latter Opinion (of taking Informations or Examinations on Oath) I my
self am ready to subscribe, as well because I have heard some Justices of
Assize deliver their minds accordingly; as also for that I have found by
Experience, that without such an Oath many Informers will speak coldly against
a Felon before the face of the Justice, having belike first made their Bargain
with the Offender or his Friends, before that the Justice did hear of the
cause, Crompt. 194. 5. Dalt. 171. cap. 70.

2. The Bond spoke of in 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 4. and in some others,
Recogn. 9.
seems to be meant of a Recognizance acknowledged unto the Kings use,
conditioned to the performance of that which the Statute appointed, Crompt.
196. 3.

3. For as in the Case of Surety of the Peace and good abearing, Records.
the Justice of the Peace takes usually a Recognizance, and is Warranted so to
do, being made a Judge of Record as touching Matters of the Peace, though he
has no full words for it, either in any Statute, or in the Commission so being
Authorized by 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 1. to deal in this matter, he may
be well said to have herein implied (by good congruence) a Power to Record the
acknowledging of a Sum of Money forfeitable to the King, for not performing the
Condition of the same, Dalt. 170. cap. 70.

III. Crompt. 102 b. pl. 26. Evidence.
If a Man gives Evidence to a Justice of a Felony against another, and will not
be bound to give it at the Assizes, he shall be Committed by discretion,
because the Statute 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 4. says, that he shall be
bound to give it, 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 13.

Certification.
IV. Crompt. 167 b. The Justice of Peace who takes any Examination, touching
plaints entered in the Courts of Sheriffs against 11 H. 7. 15. N. and does not
certify it in the Exchequer within a quarter of a year after, shall lose 40 s.
for his default therein by the said Statute.

Recognizance.
V. Crompt. 197 b. pl. 25. A Coroner may take a Recognizance or Obligation of
such who give Evidence before him Super visum corporis, to prove him that
Killed the Party Culpable, and bind them to appear before the Justices of
Jail-delivery, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10. 2. N. 4. etc.

Evidences.
VI. Dalt. 55. cap. 20. If one shall bring a Man suspected of Felony before any
Justice of Peace, but refuses to be bound to give Evidence against the
Prisoner, either at the Jail-delivery or Quarter Sessions as the case shall
require, if such bringer has given Evidence before the said Justice against
the Prisoner, or can declare any thing material to prove the Felony, and will
not be bound to give Evidence upon his Trial, the Justice of Peace upon his
Discretion may commit to Prison such Person so refusing, or may bind him to his
Good-behaviour.

Imprisonment.
2. But if the bringer of a Person suspected of Felony, cannot declare any thing
material to prove the Felony, nor any other Person then present, it seems the
Justice ought not to commit the Prisoner; and so was the direction of Sir David
Williams at the Assizes at Cambridge.

Justices.
3. Yet the Justices shall do well to Examine the Prisoner, and if he shall
confess the Felony, then to commit him; Or if upon his Examination there shall
appear any just cause of suspicion: Or if the Prisoner be a Man of Evil Fame,
and that there be a Felony committed, in these cases the Justices shall do well
not to let him go, but at least to bind him over to the next Jail-delivery, and
in the mean time to take further Information against him.

Examination.
VII. Dalt. 49. cap. 20. Every Justice of Peace may and must take the
Examinations of all such Felons or Persons suspected of Felony as shall be
brought before him 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10.

2. And must take Information against them of those that bring them, scil. of
the Fact and Circumstances of the Felony and Fact.

3. And must put in writing such Examinations and Informations, or so much
thereof as shall be material to prove the Felony, and must certify them to the
next general Jail-delivery.

4. And after such Examination and Information taken, then the Justice must
commit such Felons to the Goal, or may Bail them if they be Bailable; but then
there must be two Justices together, and the one of them of the Quorum.

5. And must bind over by Recognizance the informers that do declare any thing
material to prove the Felony, to appear, and to give Evidence against the Felon
at the next general Jail-delivery to be holden within the County, City, or Town
Corporate where the Trial of the said Felony shall be.

6. And if such Informer be unable to Travel, etc. then the Justice of Peace
may take his Information upon Oath, and may Certify the same, etc. and may
forbear to bind such Informer to appear personally before the Justices at the
Jail-delivery.

7. It the Justice of Peace shall not Certify such Examinations and
Informations to the next general Jail-delivery; or if the Justices of Peace
shall not Certify their Bailment, or shall not bind over the Informers to
^ppear and to give Evidence against the Felon at the next general
Jail-delivery, etc. the said Justice of Peace shall be fined for every such
default or Offense at the discretion of the Justices of Jail-delivery 1 and 2
Ph. and Mar. 13. N. and 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 10.

8. But yet if it be for Petty Larceny, or other small Felonies, the Just^ce of
Peace may bind over the Informers, and may Certify the Examinations and
Informations to the next Quarter Sessions of the Peace; and this was the Advice
and Direction of Sir David Williams Knight late one of the Justices of the
Kings Bench at the Assizes at Cambridge.

For said he, It was not meet to keep poor Prisoners in the Goal for small
Matters or Felonies from one Assizes to another, and therefore he gave order
that the Justices of Peace, at their General-Sessions of the Peace, should try
and deliver Offenders for small Felonies, Dalt. 295. cap. 111.

VIII. Dalt. 52. cap. 20. Coron.
But in the former Cases of Felony by the Kings Servant, on 3 H. 7. 24. N. and
Manslaughter within the Verge, etc. on 33 H. 8. 12. and of razing of Records by
8 H. 6. 12. etc. and of Forgery on 5 Eliz. 14. and of Imbezelling Armor on 33
H. 6. 1. N. If any such Offender shall be brought before any Justice of Peace,
and charged with any such Felony, Quaere how far the Justice of Peace is to
deal, or what he is to do therein, considering the Justices of Peace are no
Judges of such Felonies, neither have they any Jurisdiction given them by the
Statutes in such Cases.

And yet, 2. Certificate.
It may seem both serviceable and safe for the Justice of Peace to Examine the
Offense, and then to Certify his Examination to such Persons as by the
Statutes are made Judges of the cause.

But, 3. It seems in the four last Cases, the Justice of Peace may not commit
such an Offender to Prison, nor bind over the Informers, nor take the
Information upon Oath.

IX. Dalt. 53. cap. 20. Trial.
By the letter of 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 24. N. the Jurisdiction over the last recited
Felonies (of stealing goods or Strokes in another County, etc.) and over such
Accessories is not committed to the Justices of Peace to Proceed to the Trial
of them; but this Authority is remitted to the Justices of Jail-delivery, or of
Oyer and Terminer; yet the Justices of Peace may Examine these Offenses, and
take Information against the Offenders, and Certify the same to the next
General Jail-delivery, and may bind over the Informers, and commit the
Offenders.

Also the Justices of Peace may enquire thereof, and take Indictments against
them, as in other cases of Felony.

X. Dalt. 54, cap. 20. Pope.
And if any such Offender against etc. 5 Eliz. 1. or 13 Eliz. 2. or 23 Eliz. 1.
of Bulls, Absolution, or Popery, etc. shall be brought before any Justice of
Peace, and charged with any such Offense, it shall be the Justices part to take
the Examination of such Offenses, and to bind over the Accusers and material
Informers to appear, and to prefer a Bill of Indictment, and thereupon to give
in Evidence to the Inquirors against such Offenders at the next
Quarter Sessions, as it seems, or at the next Assizes or general
Jail-delivery, or else in the Kings Bench, whenever upon reasonable warning
they shall be thither called, and then to commit the Offender to the Goal, and
after to Certify the said Examinations, Informations, and Recognizances by him
taken to the said Sessions or Jail-delivery, or in B. R. etc.

XI. Dalt. 296. 297. ^ar. and F^^^*
The Justices of Peace have Authority by 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 13. N. to bind by
Recognizance all such as do declare any thing material to prove the Felony, to
give Evidence against the Offender, and yet the Wife is not to be bound to give
Evidence, nor to be Examined against her Husband, for by the Laws of God, and
of this Land, she ought not to discover his Counsel or his Offense in case of
Theft or other Felony, as it seems, See Stanf. 26 b.

2. Nay, I have known the Judge of Assize greatly to disallow, that the Wife
should be Examined or bound to give in any Evidence against others in case of
Theft wherein her Husband was a Party and yet her Evidence was pregnant and
material to have proved the Felony against others that were Parties to the same
Felony, and not directly against the Husband, 1 Inst. 6 b.

Testimony.
3. But for Children, I find in the Book of the Discovery of Witches at
Lancaster Assizes, Anno 1612. that the Son and Daughter of Elizabeth Device a
Witch, were not only Examined by the Justices of Peace against their said
Mother, and the said Examinations Certified, and openly read upon the
Arraignment and Trial, but the Daughter also was commanded, and did give open
Evidence against her Mother, then Prisoner at the Bar.

4. I find further in the said Book 4. of the Discovery of Witches, that two
Children, the one about Nine years of Age, the other of Fourteen, did upon
their Oaths give Evidence against the Prisoners upon their Arraignment. The
like was done at Cambridge at Lent Assizes, Anno 1619. before Sir Henry
Mountague Lord Chief Justice of B.R.

5. Accusation or Information by one that is unable to travel or decrepit, is
good, and may be taken by the Justice of Peace upon Oath, and certified at the
next general Jail-delivery or Sessions of the Peace, as the Case shall require.

6. If one be an Accuser upon his own knowledge, sight, or hearing, and he
shall utter the same to another, that other may be an Accuser, Dyer 99. pl.

7. And note, That an Offender confessing any Felony upon Indictment or
otherwise against himself, may also accuse others of the same Felony, and such
Accusation may be taken by the Justice of the Peace, etc.

8. Two Inform against another in matter of Felony, and they vary in their
Tales, ( viz. in the Day and Place when and where the Felony was committed)
such Information is not much to be credited. See the Story of Susanna.

9. He that is Examined, if part of that he speaks be proved to be false, he
is not to be credited in the residue of his Information, and therefore we shall
find in 16 Ed. 4. That a man who was produced as a Witness in the Chancery, in
his Deposition he was found to swear false in part, and thereupon his Testimony
was utterly rejected.

10. A man Attainted of Perjury, and the King pardons and restores him, etc.
Quaere whether such a persons Information shall be allowed aagainst a Prisoner;
for the Old saying is, Once forsworn and ever forsworn. But in the Case of the
Lord Cestlemain B.R. in Trin. 32 Car. 2. Dangerfield was allowed to be a
Witness in like Case; but the Credit of such an one is left to the Jury, on the
Circumstances of the Trial that concur therewith; and thus also its intended in
Dalt. 297. cap. 111. and Crompt. 127 b. Such who are Attaint at the King's Suit
in Conspiracy, or of Forgery of false Deed, shall not be received to give
Testimony, and that they must have the Record ready sub pede sigilli, if it be
not resident in the same Court where any Challenge is made, 33 H. 6. 1.

11. But if one be brought before a Justice of Peace upon Suspicion of Felony,
although the Information against the Prisoner shall be by such Witnesses, yet
it seems safest for the Justices of Peace to take their Information for the
King, and to bind them over to give Evidence, etc. and to commit the Party
suspected, and upon the Trial to inform the Justices of Jail-delivery
concerning the Credit of those Witnesses.

XII. Dalt. 297, 298. cap. 111. Imprisonment.
When a Prisoner shall be brought before the Justice of Peace for Felony, or
Suspicion thereof, but they that bring him, or first complained of him, will
not or cannot inform any material thing against the Prisoner, yet it seems
the Justice of Peace ought to Commit the Party suspected (after his Examination
taken) and to bind over such as did first Accuse the Prisoner, or such as do
bring him before the Justice, to give Evidence, etc. and if afterward the said
Justice shall hear of any other person that can inform any material thing
against the Prisoner to prove the Felony whereof he is suspected, the said
Justice may grant out his Warrant for such persons to come before him, and may
also take their Information, etc. and may bind them to give in Evidence against
the Prisoner; for every one shall be admitted to give Evidences for the King,
Stanf. 163.

2. And it seems fit that the Parties grieved be bound not only to give in
Evidence, but also to prefer a Bill of Indictment against the Prisoner,
Testimony.
and the other persons may be bound to give in Evidence only.

3. And for that men should be the readier and more willing to give Evidence
against Felons, 21 H. 8. 11. N. has enacted, Restitution.
That if any man has any Goods stolen from him, if the Felon be thereof
Indicted, and after in any sort Attainted or Arraigned, and thereof found
Guilty by reason of Evidence given by the Party robbed, or Owner of the same
Goods, or by any other by his procurement, then the Party robbed, or the Owner
of the Goods shall be restored to his said Goods, though he never made any
fresh Suit, or Hue and Cry, before which Statute, 21 H. 8. 11. the Party robbed
could have no Restitution without suing of an Appeal against a Felon, and fresh
Suit made.

XIII. Crompt. 194.

Promoters, see Information. Prophesying, see Conjuration. Property, see
Chattels. Pursuit, see Fresh Suit. Putting out of Eyes, see Trespass.
Purveyors.
Carriage.
I. LAmbert 417, 418. Enquiry in Sessions if any Purveyor for the Kings
Majesty's House, or his Undertaker, Deputy, or Servant have made any Purveyance
without Warrant, and have carried any thing away against the consent of the
Owner, being above 12 d. in value, 28 Ed. 3. St. 3. cap. 2. Artic. super
Chartas 18 Ed. 2. cap. ult. page 85. and 5 Ed. 3. cap. 2. and 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. 6. 12 Car. 2. 24. 12. N. 1. Crompt. 48.

2. If any Purveyor of the King, or his Undertaker, Deputy, or Servant, have
taken any Carriage in any other manner than is contained in his Commission, 36
Ed. 3. 2. Crompt. 48.

3. Or have made Purveyance without the Testimony and Appraisment of the
Constable, and four honest men of the Town, and without delivering Tallies or
Indentures under his Seal testifying his Purveyances, the Goods being above 12
d. in value, 5 Ed. 3. 2. Crompt. 48 b. 25 Ed. 3. St. 4. cap. 1.

4. Or has taken any Sheep with their Wools between Easter and Midsomer at
small prices, and carried them to his own House and shorn them, Crompt. 48. 25
Ed. 3. St. 4 cap. 15.

Quaere if the Felony of Purveyors made 36 Ed. 3. 6. N. be not ^ltered by 23 H.
6. 14. N. Crompt. 48 a. 12 Car. 2. 24. 13. N. 1.

II. Crompt. 48 b. Also you shall enquire that where 36 Ed. 3. 5.. 1. N. 3. it
is ordained that none of the King's Household, being Purveyor or Foregoer to
make Purveyance, nor take for any of the Household, but that they buy that which
they need of those that will sell of their own accord; and if they do in other
manner its Felony, 12 Car. 2. 24. 13. N. 1.

III. Crompt. 48 b. The Warrant of a Purveyor shall be under the Great Seal by
36 Ed. 3. 2.

And by 11 H. 4. 28. he must have a Commission.

IV. Lambert 476. The Statutes 36 Ed. 3. 2. 3. and 4. shall be proclaimed by
the Justices of Peace every year (openly at any Sessions of the Peace) and
thereof to inform the People, 23 H. 6. 2.

V. Lambert 432, 433. Enquiry in Sessions if any Purveyor of the Kings Majesty
have taken any thing of the value of 40 s. or under, without ready payment
thereof, made 20 H. 6. 8.

2. If any Constable or Borsholder have not upon request made, assisted the
Owners to resist the Purveyors so taking: And if any of the King's Officers
have procured any to be Arrested or Vexed for such Resistance, 23 H. 6. 2.

3. If any Purveyor of Timber have felled, for the King's use, any Oaken
Timber-tree meet to be barked, but only in barking time, other than Trees for
building or repair of the Kings Houses or Ships: Or have taken any profit by
the Lops, Tops, or Bark of any Trees taken by him: Or have taken from the Owner
any more of any Tree than only the Timber of the same Tree, 1 Jac. 22. 21. N. 1.

4. If any Purveyor have taken any thing of any man to the end to spare him, or
have taken Corn by any other Measure than by the stricken Bushel, or by any
more than eight such Bushels to the Quarter: Or have taken Carriage therefore
without making ready payment, 25 Ed. 3. St. 4. cap. 1. and 36 Ed. 3. 3. and 1
H. 5. 10. 12 Car. 2. 24. 13. N. 1.

5. Of Purveyors within five Miles of Oxford or Cambridge, See 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. 15. 2. N. 1. 13 Eliz. 21. 3. N. 1. and 39. Eliz. 18.

VI. Crompt. 155 b. Nor Purveyors of Noble Persons shall not be bailed, who
offend against 23 H. 8. 14. N. touching taking of Victuals against the good
will of the Subject.

2. Nor Takers nor Purveyors of Victuals or Grain in the Vills of Oxford or
Cambridge, or within five Leagues thereof, against 2 and 3 Phil. and Mar. 15.
13 Eliz. 21.

VII. Lamberts Precedents 13 b. pl. 35. A Presentment for unlawful Purveyance.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Dom. Rege super Sacramet' suum present' qd' primo die Julij An.
Regni dict^ Dom. nostri Jacobi, Dei ratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Fidei Defens. etc. Quidam H.W. nuper de G. in dicto Com. Tipler apud C.
in Com. predict' prae se ferens and asserens se esse unum ex provisoribus and
emptoribus Hospitij dicti Domini Reg^s dicto primo die Anno supradicto (Quo
quidem tempore nullum ostendit aut secum habuit Warrantum sub magno aut parvo
sigillo dicti Domini Regis apud C. predict' in Com. predict' tres Oves
Castratas Anglice vocatas Weathers pretij xx solid' de Bonis and Catallis J.S.
de C. predict' in dicto Com. Yeoman tunc ibidem existentes inventas sub color
Purveyanciae pro dicto Hospitio Illegitime ac Felonice cepit and abduxit contra
Pacem dicti Domini Regis ac contra formam diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi
casu provisorum and editorum.

West. Symb. 2 part. 122. Sect. 171.

VIII. Kilb. Precedents 100. 101. A Mittimus for one that does impress or take
away any Cart, or other thing from the Owner, under pretense of Power from the
Green-Cloth, for Carriage of his Majesty's Provisions, not having lawful
Authority to do the same, 12 Car. 2. 13. N. 1.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County and
to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at C. in the County aforesaid.
Kent ss.
For as much as it has been made appear unto me upon the complaint of A.B. of
etc. in the County aforesaid, that C. D. of E. has Impressed a Cart for
Carriage of his Majesty's provisions, without consent of the Owner, on pretense
or color of a Warrant from the Green-Cloth, contrary to the Intent of the
Statute in that case made and provided, These are therefore in his Majesty's
Name, at the request of the said A. B. to will and require you the said
Constables and Borsholders and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do
take the said C. D. and him deliver to the said Keeper of the Goal aforesaid,
together with this Precept, Requiring and commanding also you the said Keeper,
to receive the said C. D. into the Goal aforesaid, and him there safely to keep
until the next Sessions, and thereof neither you, nor any of you, are to fail
at your Peril;

given under my Hand and Seal the Second day of May Anno 31. Car. 2. etc.
IX. Kilb. Precedents 101. A Warrant for providing Carriages by two Justices,
An 13 Car. 2. 8. 2. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of C. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Whereas we have by Warrant from the Green-Cloth received notice to provide
Carts and Carriages from the places adjacent, for the present Service of his
Majesty, according to the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided,
these are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of
you, that you, some or one of you, do cause four sufficient Carriages within
the said Hundred, each Carriage to consist of four able Horses, or six Oxen, or
four Oxen and two Horses, to be and attend for the Service aforesaid at B. in
the said County, upon the first of April next ensuing, at Eight of the Clock in
the Forenoon of the same day. Hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals, etc.
X. Kilb. Precedents. A Warrant to levy the Penalty for not appearing with
Carriages for the King upon notice, on 13 Car. 2. 8. 2. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County and
to every of them. Kent ss.
For as much as it has been duly proved before us (viz. two Justices by the
Oath of the Officer or two other Credible Witnesses) that A.B. of C. of the
said County, was by you, some, or one of you, required to be and attend for his
Majesty's Service, according to the form of the Statute in that case made and
provided, with one Carriage, consisting as by the said Act is required, at and
in the County aforesaid, upon the second day of May, at seven of the Clock of
the same day, and that the said A. B. did make default therein, contrary to the
form of the Statute aforesaid, these are therefore in his Majesty's name to
will and require you, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do by
Distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. levy to his
Majesty's use Forty shillings by the said A.B. forfeited to his said Majesty's
use for the Offense aforesaid, rendering to the said A. B. the Overplus upon
such Sale, if there be any. Hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given undet our hands and Seals the Day of, etc.
XI. Kilb. Presedents 103. A Warrant for Rates for lodging and horsemeet on 13
Car. 2. 8. 4. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Whereas we have received Notice from the Green-Cloth that his Majesty will
shortly pass through the Road in this County, leading between B. and C. we
therefore according to the form of the Statute in that Case made and provided,
do set down and appoint the Rates and Prices to be paid, during his Majesty's
abode within this division, for Hay, Oats, and other Accommodations for Horses,
as is here under written, which Rates are to be observed, and kept, and obeyed
by all Persons concerned at their Perils: And we do will and require you, and
every of you that you, some, or one of you, do in the Market Town within the
said Hundred, on the Market Day now next ensuing, cause to be proclaimed the
Rates aforesaid: As also, that you do in like manner cause to be proclaimed the
Rates aforesaid in all the Towns and Villages within the said Hundred, within
etc. days now next ensuing, to the end that notice may be taken of the same
Rates and Prices. Hereof fail not at your Perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of, etc. For a Bushel of Oats, etc.

And so ratable for every greater or lesser Quantity, etc.



XII. Kilb. Precedents 104. A Warrant for levying the Penalty forfeited for not
observing the Rates aforesaid, on 13 Car. 28. 5. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before me, that A. B. of C. in the said
County Innkeeper has taken of C.D. Yeoman of the Gards, more for his Lodging,
etc. During his Majesty's late abode within this Division, than by the Justices
of Peace of this County was, according to the form of the Statute in that case
made and Provided, set down, and appointed, contrary to the form of the Statute
aforesaid, these are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you,
and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do levy to the use of the said
C. D. by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. 40 s. by
him forfeited to the said C. D. for the Offense aforesaid, returning the
Overplus to the said A. B. the Charge of the Distraining being first deducted;
hereof fail not at your Perils,

Given under my hand and Seal the day of, etc.
XIII. Kilb. Precedents 105. A Warrant for providing of Carriages for the Kings
use, on 13. and 14. Car. 2. 20. 1. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Whereas we have received Notice in writing by Warrant under the Hands and
Seals of A. and B. (two Justices by Warrant of the L. High Admiral, or two more
of the Principal Officers or Commissioners of his Majesty's Navy, or Master of
his Ordnance, or Lieutenants of his Majesty's Ordnance,) for providing of
Carriages for the Service of his Majesty's Navy (or Ordnance) These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you, and every of you, that you,
some, or one of you, do cause to be sent to A. Ten Carriages on the Second day
of May next, furnished with Horses or Oxen sufficient for the said Service
hereof; fail not at your Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of etc.
XIV. Kilb. Precedents 106. Another Warrant against him who refuses to provide
Carriages on 13 and 14 Car. 2. 20. 3. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borshoulder of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before us that B. C. having had
reasonable Notice to bring one Carriage to T. upon the first day of May last,
for the service of his Majesty's Navy (or Ordnance) according to the form of
the Statute in that behalf lately made, has wilfully neglected so to do, by
which he has forfeited 20 s. to the Kings Majesty's use, These are therefore
in his Majesty's Name to require you, and every of you, that you, some, or one
of you, do demand of the said B. C. to his Majesty's use the aforesaid 20 s.
and in default of Payment upon demand, that then you, some, or one of you, do
forthwith levy the aforesaid 20 s. to the use aforesaid, by distress and Sale
of the Goods and Chattels of the said B. C. rendering to him the overplus upon
such Sale, if there shall be any, the Charge of Distraining being first
deducted; hereof fail not at your Peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of etc.
Quakers, see Religion. Quarrelling, see Affray. Quarter Sessions, see
Justices. Quorum, see Justices. Ransom, see Amerciament. Rape and Ravishment,
see Coron, Women. Razure, see Records. Rates, see Taxes, Poor. Rebellion, see
Riot, War, Treason.
Recognizance.
Obligation, Sureties, Condition, Release, Certiorari, Pardon.
Pledges.
I. LAmbert 101, 102. A Justice of Peace, says Mr. Marrow, may take this Surety
of the Peace by a Gage or Pledge which shall not be forfeited thereby, but
pawned only; so that the Party shall under a certain pain keep the Peace, which
pawn he shall forfeit if he break the Peace, Dalt. 171. cap. 69.

Bail.
2. And by Marrows Opinion a Justice of the Peace may also take this Surety by
an Obligation made to himself, by the Name of Justice of Peace; for so shall it
be (says he) ad usum Domini Regis.

But if it were made unto him, without his name of Justice of the Peace, then
it could not be to the use of the King, unless it had the words ad usum Domini
Regis.

Records.
3. F. N. B. 82. D. on the other side holds that such an Obligation, taken to
the King by a Justice of Peace is nothing worth; for a man cannot be bound to
the King, says he, but only by matter of Record, unless he will afterward
come into a Court of Record, and confess it to be his Deed, and pray that it
may be enrolled there, 9 Ed. 4. 31. Dalt. 171. cap. 70.

Obligation.
4. But the new Statute 33 H. 8. 39. 52. (2.) N. 2. has made a plain Law in
these Cases, and wills that all Obligations and Specialties made for any
cause touching the King, shall be made in his own name by the words Domino
Regi, and to none other Person to his use; and 33 H. 8. 39. 52. (2.) N. 3.
ordains further, That such Bonds shall be of the nature of a Statute Staple,
and that if any person take any Obligation otherwise, he shall be imprisoned at
the Pleasure of the King, or of his Honorable Council.

5. The safest way therefore is to take his Surety by Recognizance, as is
commonly used, and that also by the words Domino Regi, and then upon the
forfeiture thereof the King shall have Execution accordingly.

II. Lambert 103, 104. Peace.
Now if a Recognizance be meant to be taken for the Peace by a Justice of the
Peace, and yet do not contain within it, or in the Condition thereof, that it
was taken for the keeping of the Peace, it seems to be void, as being taken
Coram non Judice, because a Justice of Peace has not the power to take
Recognizances generally, but for matters concerning his Office specially, Dalt.
171. cap. 70.

2. And therefore Mr. Marrow adds further, That if the Recognizance be that
the Recognizor shall not maim nor beat A. yet it is not good, because it ought
to be for the keeping of the Peace, and that may be broken otherwise, as by
burning of the House of A. or by such like Misdemeanor, Dalt. 171. cap. 70.

3. Days.
Although this Recognizance do not comprehend any time of Appearance, but be
generally to keep the Peace, yet it is good in Law, says Mr. Marrow, because
the chief scope is the keeping of the Peace, and the time is referred to the
Discretion of the Justice, Dalt. 172. cap. 70.

4. But as it was moved, 2 H. 7. 1. pl. Records.
Whether the Justice of Peace ought to bring in the Recognizance to the Custos
Rotulorum, that the Party might be called upon it: So by the Statute 3 H. 7. 1.
1. N. 26. it is plainly Enacted, That every Recognizance taken for the Peace
shall be certified at the next Sessions of the Peace, that the Party may
thereupon be called, and his default, if any happen, may be Recorded, whereby
it seems that every Recognizance of the Peace ought not to contain the
Appearance of the Party at the next Sessions, Dalt. 172. cap. 70.

5. And otherwise there may be some Mischief; for if the Party shall not so
appear, he is at liberty, without a new Arrest, and not forth coming, to be
bound over if he be so required.

6. And by Mr. Marrow, if the Recognizance contain a duty of Appearance, and
yet have no person named before whom the Party so bounden shall appear, then
may he appear where he will before the Justice of Peace which took the
Recognizance of him, Dalt. 172. cap. 70.

7. Again, If the form of the Recognizance be in 20 l. to be levied only of the
Goods, or only of the Lands of the Recognizor, it seems to be good enough;
for peradventure the words (of the Goods only) or (Lands only) shall be taken
to be void, seeing that the very acknowledgment of the sum of 20 l. before a
Judge enabled to take it, both makes it a Debt and implies the ordinary mean
of Law to come unto it. Dalt. 172. cap. 70.

8. So if this Recognizance be taken to keep the Peace against one special
Party only, Mr. Marrow thinks it good, but advise well of it; for the words
in the Commission of the Peace now be, to take Sureties Erga nos, and Populum
nostrum, Dalt. 172. cap. 70.

III. Lambert 105, 106. I wish the Justice to go via Regia, Appearance.
following the received form, Which I take to be thus:

Kanc. ss.
Memorand' quod quarto die Julij Anno Regni Domini nostri Jacobi Dei gratia
etc. R. P. de E. in Comitatu predict' Yeoman in propria persona sua venit coram
me J. L. Milite, uno Justiciariorum dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in dicto
Comitatu conservand' Assignat' and assumpsit pro seipso sub poena viginti
librarum, and J. H. de L. in Comitatu predict' Yeoman, and J. F. de M. in eodem
Comitatu Husbandman, tunc and ibidem in proprijs personis suis similiter
venerunt and manuceperunt pro predict' R.P. videlicet, Quilibet eorum separatim
sub poena C. solid' quod Idem R. P. personaliter comparebit coram Justiciarijs
dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem ad proximam generalem Sessionem Pacis in Comitatu
predicto ad faciendum and recipiendum qd' ei per curiam tunc and ibidem
injungetur and quod ipse interim Pacem dicti Domini Regis custodiat, Erga ipsum
Dominum Regem and cunctum populum suum and precipue versus M. N. de Ightham
predict' Yeoman, and quod Damnum vel Malum aliquod Corporale aut Gravamen
prefato M. N. aut alicui de populo dicti Domini Regis quod in Laesionem aut
perturbationem Pacis ipsius Domini Regis cedere valeat Quovismodo non faciet
nec fieri procurabit. Quam quidem summam 20 libr. predict' R.P. and quilibet
manucapt' predictorum predictas seperales summas C. solid' Recognoverunt se
debere dicto Domino Regi de terris and tenementis Bonis and Catallis suis
Quorumlibet and cujuslibet eorum ad opus dicti Domini Regis heredum and
successorum suorum fieri and levari ad quorumcunque manus devenerit si
contigerit Ipsum R. P. premissa vel eorum aliquid in aliquo infringere and inde
legitimo modo convinci.

In cujus rei testimonium, Ego predict' J. L. Sigillum meum apposui. Dat' etc.
Kilb. Precedents 191.

2. Or thus a little different in Form:

Kanc. ss.
Memorand' quod quarto die etc. A. B. de Ightham etc. and C. D. de eadem
Yeoman, venerunt coram me J. F. etc. and manuceperunt pro J. S. nuper de L. and
C. quod ipse personaliter comparebit coram me prefat' J. F. vel socijs meis
Justiciarijs Pacis Domini Regis ad proximam generalem Sessionem, etc. and quod
ipse interim geret Pacem erga cunctum populum Domini Regis and precipue erga B.
B. etc. videlicet quilibet manucapt' predict' sub poena xx libr. and predict'
J. S. Assumpsit pro seipso sub poena xl libr. quam quidem summam xl libr.
predict' J. S. and quilibet manucapt' predictorum dictam summam xx libr.
Recognoverunt etc.

3. And this may well be done also by a single Recognizance in Latin, with a
Condition added or endorsed in English for the keeping of the Peace, and for
the day and place of the Appearance at the Quarter Sessions.

Supplicavit.
IV. Lambert 107, 108, 109. If the Surety were taken by virtue of a Supplicavit,
then must the Justice of Peace, being in this Case but a Minister, make retorn
of the Writ and Certificate of his doing into the Court from whence the
Supplicavit did proceed, etc.

2. First let him note on the back of the Supplicavit thus:

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam Schedula eidem brevi annexa, Dalt. 173.
cap. 70.

Then may the Schedule be thus:

Ego T. F. Miles, unus Custodum Pacis Domini Regis in Comitatu K. Certifico in
Cancellariam dicti Domini Regis me virtute istius brevis mihi per A. B. in
eodem brevi nominatum primo deliberati personaliter coram me (die and loco
etc.) venire fecisse T. R. in dicto brevi nominatum ac eundem T. ad
sufficientem securitatem and manucaptores pacis inveniend' secundum formam
dicti brevis, videlicet, etc. (as the Writ which is of diverse forms shall
appoint) Compulisse. In cujus rei testimonium hujus presenti Certificationi
meae Sigillum meum apposui. Datum apud D. predict' in Com' predict' 25 die
Februarij Anno Regni etc.

3. And if a Certiorari be directed out of the Chancery to the Justice of Peace
for removing this Recognizance, because it was not sent up together with the
Certificate (as there was no necessity that it should) then that Writ also may
be thus answered.

Upon the back of the Writ thus:

Virtute istius brevis Ego P. H. unus Custodum Pacis Domini Regis in Com. K.
tenorem securitatis Pacis (unde infra fit mentio) dicto Domino Regi in
Cancellariam suam sub Sigillo meo distinct and aperte mitto prout patet in
Schedula huic brevi consuta.

The which Schedule may be thus:

Memorand' quod xx die Junij (reciting the whole Recognizance to the end) then
in Cujus rei testimonium Ego predict' P. H. Sigillum meum apposui. Dat' etc.

4. And this form may serve also where a Certiorari is brought to a Justice of
Peace, to remove a Recognizance of the Peace that was taken by him, ex officio,
without any such Writ of Supplicavit, as Register 90.

5. But if the Recognizance be not thus removed from the Justices of Peace,
then may he keep it till the Certiorari come to him for it, Infra.

6. On the other side, if the Recognizance were taken by virtue of his Office,
then whether it were by his own Discretion, or at the Suit and desire of
another, he must send or bring it in at the next Sessions to the Custos
Rotulorum, so that the Recognizance may be there called; and if he makes
default then the same default to be Recorded, as is appointed by the said
Statute, 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N. 27. Dalt. 173. cap. 70.

7. And although the Party that prayed the Peace, do not then appear at those
Sessions, yet is not the default of the Recognizor discharged thereby, 39 H. 6.
26. Surety Br. 10. and the Justices may then of Discretion bind him over, which
also they ordinarily do in some places for two or three Sessions together, by
order amongst themselves, Dalt. 174 cap. 71.

V. Lambert 110. 111. 112. Release.
The Justice of Peace that of his own motion compels one to give surety of
the Peace until a certain day, may by like discretion before that day release
it, Fitzh. 10. Dalt. 175. cap. 71. Crompt. 139 b.

2. And if it should fortune to be made to keep the peace general, without any
day limited, then would it be construed that it was to continue during the life
of the Party bound, and then could no Man release it, by Fitzh. and 21. Ed. 4.
40.

3. If at the Suit of A. the Recognizance should be taken to keep the Peace
against A. only, and none other, then may A. release it either before the same
Justice or any other that will Certify the Release, which Certificate being of
Record will discharge it, but to Release it by his deed is nothing worth, by
Marrow, Dalt. 176. cap. 71.

4. And so if it be Versus cunctum populum and precipue versus A. yet may A.
after that sort Release it, as the Law is now practiced in our time, Clean
against the Opinion of 21 Ed. 4. 40. for albeit that it seem popular, so that
all others should have equal Interest with A. in it, yet was it taken
specially, say they, for his safety, as the word precipue does argue plain, and
Peace Br. 17. truly says, That it was used at that time also, Dalt. 176. cap.
71.

5. But since the Recognizance is made to the King, and not to the Party,
though for his Security; and seeing also, that by such Release he that ought to
remain Bounden shall be at liberty, and may do harm while intending to Beat B.
he may collude with A. both to pray and Pardon the Recognizance of the Peace, I
could for my part like better to maintain that old, than to Imitate this new
Opinion, Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

6. And now whether the Recognizance be at the Suit of A. or by the mere motion
of the Justices in the behalf of A. the King cannot Release or Pardon it before
that it be forfeited, both for the mischief that may come to A. thereby, by
Fineux Opinion, 11 H. 7. 12.

And for that the Recognizance being taken according to the common form, as is
before set down, it is not properly a Debt to the King until it be forfeited,
as appears 11 H. 4. 43. and 1 H. 7. 19.

But being once forfeited, then he, and none other, may Pardon the forfeiture,
for then it is become a Proper Debt unto him.

Records.
7. Now in these Cases, the Recognizance may not be cancelled, lest peradventure
the Peace was broken, and consequently the Recognizance forfeited before the
time of the Relase made, Fitzh. 10. Dalt 176. cap. 71.

And therefore it shall be the best in such Cases to send to the Sessions the
Recognizance and the Release together, and that may be done in a few Lines
under the Recognizance it self, Dalt. 173. 174. cap. 70. infra.

8. First, for the Release of the Justice thus,

Ego prefat. T. W. Miles, Qui supra nominatum A. B. ad predictam securitatem
pacis inveniend' ex mea discretione compuli eandem securitatem pacis, quantum
in me est ex mea discretione 1 Die Aug. etc. remisi and relaxavi. In cujus rei
testimonium huic presenti relaxationi meae Sigillum meum apposui. Dat. etc.

And for the Release of the Peace before the same Justice that took it, thus:

Memorand' quod 1. Die Aug. etc. prefatus C. D. venit coram me S. L. and gratis
remisit and relaxavit, quantum in se est predictam securitatem pacis per ipsum
coram me versus supra nominatum A. B. petitam. In cujus rei testimonium Ego
prefat. S. L. etc. Dat. etc.

But If the Release be made, as some think, it may before another Justice,
which has not the Recognizance, then this latter form must be framed
accordingly, Dalt. 176. cap. 71.

Appearance.
VI. Lamb. 112. 113. 114. Furthermore if a Man be bound before a Justice of
Peace to keep the Peace against all the Kings People, and to appear at the next
Quarter Sessions, and do afterward procure a Supersedeas out of the Chancery
testifying that he has found Surety there against all the Kings People for
ever, this will Discharge his Appearance at the Sessions, because the granting
this Supersedeas is the Act of the King, which is the Fountain of Justice, and
controlleth all other derivative Authorities, Fitz. 9. Dalt. 169. cap. 69.

2. But if that Supersedeas should testify that he has found Surety in the
Chancery only, until a certain day, which day is after those Sessions, then
Mr. Fitzh. thinks that his appearance at the Sessions shall not be Discharged
by the Supersedeas.

3. In both these Cases also I would advise the Justice of Peace to send in as
well the Recognizance as the Supersedeas, if it come to his hands; for
peradventure the Recognizance was broken before the Supersedeas purchased, or
if it were not, yet he shall be Excused, and the Recognizor never a whit the
more Endangered thereby.

4. Lastly the Death of the King discharges the Recognizance of the Peace, 1
H. 7. 2. per Curiam; so does the Death of the Recognizor; Abatement.
and so also does the Death of him at whose Suit it was taken, if so be that it
were made to keep the Peace against him alone, Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

5. But although the mainpernors or Sureties dye, yet the Recognizance lives;
for if the Peace be broken after their deaths, their Executors shall be charged
with it, 21. Ed. 4. 40. Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

6. Neither in the former Cases is the Recognizance discharged by such death,
if it were forfeited before, Dalt. 177. cap. 71.

7. And therefore here again my Counsel is to send in the Recognizance to the
Custos Rotulorum, for otherwise how shall the Justice of Peace be assured that
he does not defraud the King of a forfeiture that was grown unto him.

VII. Lambert 114. 115. The Condition of this Recognizance, Forfeiture.
of what good form soever you make it, stands upon two points, 1. For
appearance at the time; 2. For keeping the Peace in the mean while, etc. As to
the latter, this is general, that whatsoever act is a breach of the Peace, the
doing thereof does also beget a forfeiture of the Recognizance that is made for
the keeping of the Peace, etc.

2. If a Man be bound to keep the Peace against A. and do afterward threaten
A. to his face that he will beat him, he has forfeited his Recognizance; Dalt.
177. cap. 72.

3. And an Action of Trespass lies at the Common Law against him that shall
threaten one to beat him, as appears in diverse Book Cases 33 H. 6. 18. 37. H.
6. 20. (...) etc. and shall suppose it to be contra pacem.

4. But otherwise it is if A. be not present at that threatening, by good
Opinion, 18. Ed. 4. 28. yet if in the absence of A. he does threaten that he
will beat him, and then he afterward lie in wait to beat him, he has in that
Case also broken his Recognizance, 22 Ed. 4. 35 b. per Curiam.

5. Like forfeiture is it if he that is bound do but command or procure another
to break the Peace upon any Man, or to do any other unlawful Act against the
Peace, if that it be done indeed 7 H. 4. 34 a. temps H. 8. Peace Br. 20.

VIII. Lambert 122. 123. the usual Recognizance of the good behavior has this
form; Kilb. Precedents 192. Good behavior.


Kanc. ss.
Memorand' quod quinto die Mensis Julij Anno Regni etc. venit coram nobis H. P.
Miles, and S. L. Armigero etc. Justiciar' Dom. Regis ad Pacem nunc etc. R. de
E. in Com. predict' Yeoman in propria persona sua and assumpsit pro seipso sub
poena CC libr. and H. C. de L. in Com. predict. Yeoman, and J. S. de M. in
eodem Comitatu Husbandman, tunc and ibidem in proprijs personis suis similiter
venerunt and manuceperunt pro predict R.G. viz. Quilibet eorum seperatim sub
paena C libr. quod Idem R. G. personaliter comparebit coram Justiciarijs dicti
Domini Regis ad Pacem, etc. ad proximam generalem Sessionem, etc. and quod ipse
interim se been gerit erga Dominum Regem and cunctum populum suum and precipue
erga J. B. de C. etc. and quod ipse non inferret ne inferri procurabit per se
nec per alios Damnum aliquod seu Gravamen prefato J.B. seu alicui de populo
Ipsius Domini Regis de Corporibus suis per insidias insultus seu aliquo alio
modo quod in laesisionem seu parturbationem pacis dicti Domini Regis cedere
valeat quovismodo, quas quidem separales summas C libr. uterque predictorum H.
C. and J. S. ut predicitut pro se ac predictus R.G. dictas CC libr.
recognoverunt se debere dicto Domino Regi de terris and tenementis Bonis and
Catallis suis and quorumlibet and cujuslibet eorum ad opus ipsius dicti Domini
Regis fieri and levari si contingat prefatum R.G. in aliquo praemissorum
deficere and inde legitimo modo convinci, etc.

Dalt. 370. cap. 123.

2. Or by a simple Recognizance with this Condition endorsed or underwritten.

Conditio recognitionis predict. talis est, quod si predict. R.G. imposterum se
been geret and pacem Domini Regis conservabit erga dictum Dominum Regem and
cunctum populum suum and nullum Damnum Corporale, etc. extunc Recognitio
predicta pro nullo teneatur, alioquin in suo robore permaneat.

Release.
3. I have known it doubted whither the Surety of the good abearing commanded
upon complaint may be released by any special Person or no; because it seems
more popular than the Surety of the Peace.

But if it may, then may the form of such a Release be easily made by that of
the Peace, Supra. using the words Securitatem de se been gerendo in stead of
the words Securitatem pacis.

Obligation.
IX. Lambert 213, 214, 215. The Bond spoken of in this Stat. 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. 10. 2. N. 4. and 1 and 2. Ph. and Mar. 13. 5. N. 2. and in some oaths,
seems to be meant of a Recognizance acknowledged unto the Kings use, and
conditioned for the performance of that which the Statute appoints, Crompt.
196. 3.

Coron.
2. The Party therefore that Informs against the Prisoner for Felony, may be
thus bound in a single Recognizance.

Ks. ss.
Memorand' quod tertio Die Aprilis Anno Regni Domini nostri Jacobi Dei Gratia,
etc. D. E. de B. in Com. Predict. Yeoman, personaliter coram me T. S. uno
Justiciariorum etc. ad Pacem etc. Assignatorum constitutus apud B. predict.
Recognovit se debere dicto Domino Regi X libr. bonae and legalis monetae
Angliae de bonis and catallis terris and tenementis suis fieri and levari ad
opus dicti Domini Regis heredum and Successorum suorum si defecerit in
condition indorsata.

And with such a Condition.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, whereas one A. B. late of G.
Laborer, was this presant day brought before the said Justice by the above
bound D. E. and was by him charged with the Felonious taking of twenty Sheep of
him the said D, and thereupon was sent by the said Justice to the Kings
Majesty's Goal: If therefore he the said D. shall and will at the next General
Jail-delivery, to be holden in the said County, prefer, or cause to be framed
and preferred one Bill of Endictment of the said Felony against the said A. B.
and shall and will then also give Evidence there concerning the same, as well
to the Jurors that shall then enquire of the said Felony, as also to them that
shall pass upon the Trial of the said A.B. that then, etc. or else etc.

(...).
X. Lambert 12, 13. The Lord Chancellor or Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, the
Lord Steward of England, the Lord Marshal and Constable of England, and every
Justice of B. R. have closed in their Offices a Credit for conservation of the
Peace over all the Realm, and may award Precepts, and take Recognizances for
the Peace, by Marrow and Fitzherbert, and by good Opinion the Lord Treasurer of
England may well be added to the same number, Dalt. 1. 2. cap. 1.

2. The Master of the Rolls also, by the Judgment of Mr. Marrow, is a general
Conservator of the Peace by his Office, but he makes process, and takes
Recognizance thereupon, not as incident to his Office, but by Prescription,
Dalt. 2. cap. 1.

3. The Justices of C. B. and Barons of the Eschequer be Conservators within
special places only, that is to say, within the Precincts of their several
Courts; so also the Justices of Assize may Award a Man to Prison that breaks
the Peace in their presence, and they may command the keeping of the Peace
under a pain, and that Weapons be taken from the Jurors or Witnesses that
appear before them, if any complaint be thereupon made; but as they be merely
Justices of Assize, they can neither take Surety of the Peace nor Award any
Process for it, by Marrow, Dalt. 2. cap. 1.

4. The Justices of Jail-delivery may take Surety for the Peace of a Prisoner
before them that was committed for not finding Surety of the Peace, by Marrow.

5. The Coronors, says Britton, 3. be principal Conservators of the Peace
within their Counties, and every Sheriff is a Conservator of the Peace within
his County, as Judge Fineux affirmed, 12 H. 7. 17. and after him F. N. B. 81.
D. where he says, that the Sheriff may upon request made and without any Writ
sent unto him, command a Man to find Surety of the Peace by Recognizance,
Crompt. 196 b. Infra. Dalt. 3 c. 1.

6. The Steward of the Marshalsey may take Surety of the Peace by Recognizance
also within the Verge by Prescription, Dalt. 2. cap. 1.

And the Constable and Marshall of the Kings House may see to the Conservation
of the Peace within the same House, by Marrow.

7. The Steward of the Sheriffs Turn, the Steward in a Leet, or the Steward in
a Court of Pypowders, cannot grant Surety of the Peace, unless it be by
Prescription, Dalt. 2. cap. 1.

XI. Kilb. Precedents 190. Bailmen^.
A Recognizance to appear and Answer for Felony.

Memorand' quod 20 die Maij Anno Regni Domini Caroli Secundi, etc. R. C. de L.
Generos. E. C. de L. predict. Generos. J. B. de eodem Genesis and M. C. de Eodem
Yeoman, venerunt coram me J. H. Armiger' uno Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad
Pacem in Com. predict. conservand' Assignat' and manuceperunt per R.B. de L. in
Com. predict. Gent. viz. Quilibet eorum corpus pro corpore quod idem R. B.
personaliter comparebit coram prefatis Justiciarijs and Socijs suis ad proximam
Generalem Sessionem Pacis in Com. predict. tenend' ad stand' Rect. in Curia si
quis versus eos tunc loqui voluerit de diversis Felonijs and Transgressionibus,
unde idem R. B. Indictatus existit, ut dicitur, and ad respondendum dicto
Domino de eisdem porut debet, Datum, etc.

XII. Crompt. 196. 1. Justices.
A Justice of the Peace may take Recognizances of the Peace, because he is a
Judge of Record, and yet the Commission does not give it, F. N. B. 80. Dalt.
170. cap. 70.

XIII. Crompt. 196. 4. Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Vicounts, Games.
and every other Chief Officers who find or know of any other using or
exercising any unlawful Game, against 33 H. 8. 9. 14. N. 3. may bind them by
Obligation to the Kings use in such Sum as they conclude reasonable, that they
shall not use such unlawful Games afterward, Crompt. 197 b. 2 b.

XIV. Crompt. 196. 5. Sepersedeas.
Justices of Assize out of their Places granting the Peace, Another Justice of
Peace there may make a Supersedeas, but not where its granted sitting the
Court, as I heard was done at Derby, 43 Eliz. Quaere, Dalt. 168. cap. 69.

Ale.
XV. Crompt. 196. 6. Justices of Peace may take a Recognizance of such who have
License to keep an Alehouse, for keeping of good rule, and that they shall not
use unlawful Games, there 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 25. N.

Variance.
XVI. Crompt. 196 b. 7. If a Statute gives Power to a Justice of Peace to take a
Recognizance or Obligation for any Cause, and the Justice of Peace inserts
therein any other Cause, it seems that the whole Recognizance shall be void,
as Com. 62. etc.

Bastardy.
XVII. Crompt. 196 b. 8. Quaere, If a Justice of Peace may by his Discretion
bind a Man to the good behavior, who has gotten a Woman with Child, to be
forthcoming until the delivery, because that otherwise paradventure he will
fly; but 18 Eliz. 3. 2. N. 3. does not give this, but it seems reasonable,
Lambert 119. Dalt. 191. Cap. 75.

Process.
XVIII. Crompt. 196. 9. A Justice of Peace cannot Award process upon a
Recognizance forfeit before them, as it seems, but must certify it unto the
Chancery, B. R. or Exchequer, by 3 H. 7. 1. 1 N. 26. Dalt. 173. cap. 70. Peace
Br. 11. infra.

Constable.
XIX. Crompt. 196. 10. A Constable may bind a Man by Obligation to keep the
Peace, 10 Ed. 4. 18. Surety Br. 26. Recognizance, Br. 14. but 3 H. 4. 9. Surety
Br. 23. Contra. as to the Obligation with Penalty, Dalt. 4. cap. 1.

2. Lambert 14. 15. These Constables were ordained, as it appears, 3 H. 4. 9.
Surety Br. 23. and 10. H. 4. and Fitzh. 172. to keep the Peace, and to repress
Felons, and might take Surety of the Peace by Obligation, if they found any Man
making an Affray, or otherwise commit him to Prison until he should find such
Surety.

I have read also that a Constable might at the common Law have Bailed a
Suspect of Felony by Obligation, because he was a Conservator of the Peace.

And that both he, and the Sheriff, lost this Authority by 3 H. 7. 3. 1. N. 5.
and 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 13. 5. N. 2. the which Statutes in giving that Power
to Justices of Peace do in the Opinion of some Men, take it from the Sheriff
and Constable, reported by Dalison Justice, Supra.

Sheriffs.
XX. Crompt. 196. 13. A Sheriff may take a Recognizance of the Peace, Virtute
Officij, as it seems F. N. B. 81. D. supra. because its an Office of Record,
Quaere tamen.

Cattle.
XXI. Crompt. 196. 14. Justices of Peace in their Sessions may take a
Recognizance of Badgers and Drovers, that they shall not forestall nor ingross,
nor do any other thing against the Statute of 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 14.

Poor.
XXII. Crompt. 196 b. 15. A Justice of Peace in Sessions may take a Recognizance
of him that takes a Rogue in Service to appear at the same Sessions, a year
next after 14 Eliz. 5. N.

Fowl.
XXIII. Crompt. 196 b. 197 a. 16. A Justice of Peace may bind a Man for two
years, that he shall not kill, nor take Phesants, nor Patridges against the
Statute 23 Eliz. 10. 2. N. 5. And it seems it shall be by Recognizance, and
yet the Statute does not say whether it shall be by Recognizance or otherwise,
and so he may bind him that Hawks in another Corn, contrary to the said
Statute 23 Eliz. 10. 5. N. 3. to appear at the the next General Sessions of the
Peace to answer thereto (Quaere the Statute.)

XXIV. Crompt. 197. 18. Peace.
Justices of Peace upon a Supplicavit of the Peace Directed to them out of the
Chancery, shall take Surety of the Peace by Recognizance, as it seems F. N.
B. 81. yet he says, Quaere.

XXV. Crompt. 197. 19. Upon a Supplicavit of the Peace to the Sheriff and
Justices of Peace, it seemed to Danby 9 Ed. 4. 32. that he may take Surety by
Recognizance, because the Writ is as a Commission to them, and F. N. B. 81.
accords.

XXVI. Crompt. 197. 21. Justices.
The Justices of Peace have no Authority to take Recognizance of any to appear
at the Sessions to Answer to their default or offense, where the Statute does
not give it, as it seems, Quaere.

XXVII. Crompt. 197. 22. Two Justices of the Peace, Tithes.
whereof one is of the Quorum upon complaint by any Competent Judge of Tithes
for any Misdemeanor of the Defend, in suit for Tithes, may cause him to be
Attacht and Committed to Ward, till he has found Surety to them by
Recognizance or Obligation to the Kings use to obey the Process and Sentence of
the same Judge, 27. H. 8. 20. N.

XXVIII. Crompt. 197. 23. On complaint to two Justices of Peace, whereof the
one is of the Quorum, made by the Ecclesiastical Judge, who has given Judgment
of Tithes against another who refuses to pay them, or Sums of Money for him
adjudged to be paid; the Party so refusing shall be Attacht and committed unto
the Goal until he has found Surety by Recognizance, or otherwise to perform
the said Sentence, 32 H. 8. 7.

XXIX. Crompt. 197. 24. Apprentice.
If a debate arises between a Master and his Apprentice for default of
conformity in the Master, the Justice of Peace may bind the Master to appear
before the Justices of Peace at the Sessions, 5 Eliz. 4. N.

XXX. Crompt. 197 b. 25. Coron.
A Coroner may take a Recognizance or Obligation of such as give Evidence
before him, super visum corporis, to prove him that killed the party guilty,
and to bind them to appear before the Justices of Jail-delivery 1 and 2 Ph. and
Mar. 13. 5. N. 2.

XXXI. Crompt. 197 b. 26. Slander.
Every Justice of Peace within a Month after the Offense may commit any that is
vehemently suspected of speaking or reporting of slanderous News or Tales
against our Lord the King that now is, if he does not find Sureties to appear
at the next Quarter Sessions or Jail-delivery, there to remain until he will
find Surety, ut Supra.

XXXII. Crompt. 197 b. 23. Obligation.
Where a Statute gives Power to a Justice of Peace to take Bond of any for his
Appearance at the Assizes or Sessions: or to take Surety of any for any thing,
it seems he may take a Recognizance, though it be not so expressly given.

XXXIII. M. 2 H. 7. 1. pl. 2. Peace Br. 11. Certiorari.
If a Recognizance of the Peace be taken by a Justice of Peace, this may be
Certified by a Certiorari (supra) though that the Justice of Peace does not
bring it to the Sessions nor to the Custos Rotulorum.

And if a supersedeas be returned to the Sessions, and no Recognizance; then a
Certiorari may be Awarded to the same Justice to certify the Recognizance; yet
see 3 H. 7. 3.. 1. N. 4. that the Justice shall forfeit 10. l. if he does not
Certify the Recognizance to the next Sessions, Dyer 265.

XXXIV. Dalt. 173. cap. 70. If the Justice of Peace shall not Certify such
Recognizance taken for the keeping of the Peace at the next Sessions, 3 H. 7. 1
1. N. 27. limiteth no penalty, and yet see Peace Br. 11. that the Justice shall
forfeit 10 l. if he do not certify the Recognizance of the Peace at the next
Sessions: But Mr. Brook there mentions 3 H. 7. 3. 1 N. 4. which was only for
Bailment of Prisoners, and certifying the same, and so seems to mistake the
Statute, F. N. B. 251. F. Crompt. 169 a. 167 b.

Release.
XXXV. Dalt. 173. 174. cap. 70. If he which demanded the Peace shall Release the
Peace before the said next Sessions, then it may seem, though the Justice of
Peace shall not Certify the Recognizance, that the Statute (3 H. 7. 1. 1. N.
26.) is not Transgressed or offended, for it has been holden ( Crompt. 169. in
Certiorari 62. N. 2.) that the Party shall not be called in such Case upon his
Recognizance, yet Quaere inde; and see Dalt. 175 and 176 cap. 71.

2. But howsoever, it is better to Certify the Recognizance for peradventure
it was forfeited before the Release made, Supra.

Appearance.
XXXVI. Dalt. 174. 175. cap. 71. If the Justice of Peace shall not Certify the
Recognizance to the Sessions, yet the Party ought to appear, and to Record his
Appearance, etc. as 18 Ed 4. 18.

2. If the Party that is bound to appear, be so sick that he cannot appear, nor
by any means travel at the day, yet it seems his Recognizance in strictness
of Law is forfeit, etc. yet in this Case upon due proof of such his sickness, I
have known the Justices of Peace in their Discretion have forborne to Certify
or Record such forfeiture or default, and that they have taken Sureties for the
Peace of some Friends of his present in Court until the next Sessions.

But Quaere how far this is Warrantable by their Oath: Besides the Party so
bound might by Certiorari, Dalt. 70. Cap. 69. and Crompt. 81 b. have removed
his Recognizance into the Chancery, or B. R. before the Day of his Appearance,
and then he should not have needed to appear at the Sessions; for that the
Justices there should have no Record whereupon to call him.

Bar. and sem.
3. If the Husband be bound that he and his Wife shall appear at such a
Sessions, and that they shall keep the Peace in the mean time, etc. and at the
day the Husband does appear, but not his Wife, here Crompt. 144 b. says, the
Recognizance is not forfeit, etc. yet Quaere, and see 8 Ed. 2. Forfeiture 17.

Religion.
XXXVII. 1 Ed. 6. 1 2. N. 2. And (three Justices of Peace at the least, Quorum
unus) shall have Power and Authority by their Discretions to bind by
Recognizance to be taken before them, as well the said Accusers, as all such
other Persons whom the said Accusers shall declare to have Knowledge of the
Offenses ( viz. of depraving the Sacrament, etc.) by them Presented and
Informed, every of them in Five pounds to the King, to appear before the said
Justices of Peace, before whom the Offender or Offenders shall be Tried at the
day of Trial and deliverance of such Offenders.

Records, see Justices. Recusants, see Pope. Reconciliation, see Pope.
Recordare and Removal, see Certiorati. Regrator, see Market overt. Relation,
see Days. Release, see Peace, Recognizance. Religious, Houses see Abbe.
Religion.
Church, Divine Service, Preachers Encumbent, Pope, Quakers, Common Prayer,
Sacraments, Sabbath.
I. LAmbert 118. Recognizance.
Moreover it seems to me that all these Statutes 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. 4.
N. 3. which gave this Surety of good Abearing against such as disturbed a
Preacher, etc. have this one meaning, that a Party so bound may afterward
forfeit his Recognizance if he Eftsoons offend against the said Statutes.

II. Lambert 195. Church.
If any Offender contrary to the Statute 1 Mar. 1. St. 2 cap. 3. 5. N. 2.
provided against the Disturber of any Preacher, shall be Arrested and brought
before a Justice of Peace, then he upon due Accusation thereupon to be had by
the said Arrester, or other Person, shall forthwith Commit the party so taken
to safe Custody by his Discretion.

2. But enquire if 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap, 3.. 5. N. 2. be not repealed by 1
Eliz. 2. 27. N. 1. in general words, Lambert 411. and Crompt. 14.

III. Crompt. 14. Ecclesiastical Persons.
Enquiry at Sessions upon 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. 2. N. 1. If any Voluntarily
and of purpose by overt act, word or deed, maliciously or contemptuously has
molested or troubled, or by any other unlawful ways or means, disquieted or
misused any Preacher lawfully Authorized, or other Person, Charged by Reason of
his Spiritual Promotion or Charge, in any his overt Sermon, Preaching or
Collation in any Church, Chapel, Churchyard, or other place used, or to be
appointed, every such Offender in the Premises, his Aiders, Procurers, and
Abettors shall be committed to the Goal by three Months, without Bail or
Mainprise, and shall remain there from thence until the next Quarter Sessions
to be held within the same County, City, or etc. at which Sessions, upon his
Reconciliation and Repentance in this behalf before the Justices at the said
Sessions, he shall be delivered and shall be bound to his good behavior for a
year, and if he will not, he shall remain there until he will, Dalt. 192. cap.
41.

2. This Statute 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. 2. N. 1. As to the said matter is not
repealed, as it seems; for the Statute contains diverse several matters, and
so is as Diverse Statutes, as Com. 65. as it seems, Lambert 411. Quaere infra.

IV. Dalt. 102. cap. 41 And yet Sir Nicholas Hide at Bury Lent-Assises 1629.
delivered it (as I am credibly informed) that 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. was
wholly repealed by 1 Eliz. 2. 27. N. 1.

Process.
V. Lambert 333. 334. Within six days after Accusation had, that any Person has
disturbed a Preacher and after his Committing to safe Custody by one Justice of
the Peace, one other Justice of the Shire must join with him in the Examination
of the Offender, and may proceed to find him Guilty by his own Confession, or
by two Witnesses, and thereupon Commit him to the next Goal for three Months, 1
Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 3. 5. N. 3. ask of the Continuance of this Statute.

Slander.
VI. Lambert 411. 412. Enquiry at Sessions, if any person have within these
three Months, by contemptuous or reviling words, or have advisedly in any
otherwise depraved, despised, or reviled the blessed Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ, 1 Ed. 6. 1. 1. N. 6. revived 1 Eliz. 1. 14. N. 1. Crompt. 12.

Justices.
VII. Lambert 361. It seems that three such Justices (viz. Quorum unus) may
out of the Sessions take Information and Accusation by the Oaths of two honest
Persons against such as shall deprave the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ against the Statute, and Examine them what
other Witnesses were then by, and to bind them all by Recognizance to give in
Evidence at the day of Trial, 1 Ed. 6. 1. 1. N. 7. But enquire of this matter,
Dalt. 133. 134. cap. 49.

Sessions.
VIII. Crompt. 124. The Justice of Peace shall enquire at every of their general
Quarter Sessions of those that speak irreverendly of the Sacrament of the Body
and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Ed. 6. 1. 1.

Process.
IX. Lambert 516. Some other Statutes there be also that have extended the
Authority of the Justices of Peace, in sending Process beyond the Bounds of
their own Commission; for by 1 Ed. 6. 1. 3. N. 1. three Justices of the Peace,
the one being of the Quorum, may make Process against such as be thereupon
Indicted for depraving the Sacrament, by two Writs of Capias and the Exigent,
and by Capias Vtlagatum, into any place within the Kings Dominions.

Church.
X. Lambert 197. Enquiry at Sessions, if any Person above sixteen years of Age
do by the space of twelve Months forbear to repair to some Church, Chapel, or
usual Place of common Prayer, contrary to the tenor of 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1.
then any Justice of Peace of the County, where such Offender shall dwell, or
be, may make Certificate thereof in writing in B. R. to the end that the
Offender may thereupon be bound in CC l. at the least, with sufficient
Sureties, to the Good-behaviour, for that his so long obstinacy, besides the
other penalties, 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2. Crompt. 13 b.

Encumbent.
XI. Lambert 412. 413. Enquiry at Sessions, if any Person, Vicar, or Minister
have refused to use the Common Prayers, or to Minister the Sacraments according
to the Book of Common Prayers, 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. Crompt. 130 a. infra.

2. Or wilfully standing in the same, have used any other form in open Prayers
or in Administration of the Sacraments, or have spoken any thing in derogation
of the said Book, or any part thereof 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 2. 3. Crompt. 12 b. 13 a.

3. Or if any Person have in any Play, Song, or Rhyme, Slander.
or by any open word spoken in derogation of the said Book, or of any thing
therein contained, or have caused or maintained any Parson, Vicar, or Minister
to say any Common Prayer, or to Minister any Sacrament in any other manner than
after the said Book, 1 Eliz. 2. 9. N. 1. Crompt. 13 a.

4. Or have interrupted any Parson Vicar, or Minister to say open Prayer, or to
Administer any Sacrament according to the same Book, 1 Eliz. 2.. 9. N. 3.

5. If any Person being above sixteen years of Age, and not having lawful and
reasonable Excuse to be absent, have not repaired and resorted unto his or her
Parish Church, or Chapel accustomed, or upon let thereof, to some usual Place
where Common Prayer is to be used upon every Sunday and other Holy Day, and
have not there orderly and soberly abiden, during the time of such Common
Prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God, and how long such Person has
forborne so to repair and resort, 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. and 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 1.
3 Jac. 4. 27. N. 1.

XII. Crompt. 12. Ab. Ecclesiastical. Persons.
As also you shall enquire if such Ecclesiastical Person who should say Common
Prayer, and Minister the Sacraments in any Cathedral or Parish Church, or other
place, has not within this year and day said and used the Matins, Even-Song,
Celebration of our Lords Supper, and the Administration of every of the
Sacraments, and all their common and open Prayers, in such order and form as is
mentioned in the Book of Common Prayer, Authorized by Parliament, and none
other, or otherwise, supra. 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1.

2. By the said Statute 23. Eliz. 1. 8. N. 1. Justices of Peace may Enquire
within the year and day of these Articles, but they cannot hear and determine
them, but the Justices of Oyer and Terminer or of Assize may, by 23. Eliz. 1.
9. N. 1. hear and determine.

3. But see if a Justice of Peace cannot Award Process upon the Endictment
until he appear and pleads to the Endictment, Process.
and then for Trial send the Record in B. R. to the intent it should be tried
by N^si prius: Or if he shall send the Endictment in B. R. immediately without
Awarding Process, because they have no Authority by the Statute 23 Eliz. 1 8.
N. 1. but only to Enquire.

4. It seems that he being Indicted hereof, Amerciament.
shall make a Fine by the Discretion of the Court, though no Fine is given in
the case aforesaid by the said Statute 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 5. because it is a
contempt, in as much as 1 Eliz. 2.. 3. N. 1. says that he shall be bound to
say, and use, etc. ut supra, Quaere the intent of the Statute in this point,
Fines pro etc. Br. 21.

5. Every Priest, though he be no Vicar, Parson, Encumbent.
or Stipendary Chaplain, nor obliged nor bound by his Cure to serve, etc. is
within the purview of 1 Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. by reason of the first Clause 1 Eliz.
2. 3. N. 1. which is, that all and singular Ministers in any Cathedral or
Parish Church, or other place etc. which may be intended a Minister local and
enducted, and at length by the Opinion of all, but one, Dyer 203. pl. it was
held, That he shall be within the Statute, and that by reason of this Clause, 1
Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1. That if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever
Minister, etc. Whereby the meaning of the Parliament appears, that the
superstitious Service in the Church should be abolisht, and the true Service
planted in lieu thereof.

6. And under this Term (Minister) every Priest is included, and by this that
he is Sacerdos, he is bound ex Jure Divino, to Celebrate the Lords Supper and
the Orisons of the said Supper.

7. And also it was held by all the Justices, That this Term Clerk is
sufficient to prove him a Priest or a Minister.

Pope.
XIII. Crompt. 13. Ab. 8. Enquiry at Sessions if any has sung or said Mass,
being thereof convict, he shall forfeit CC Marks, and shall be Imprisoned a
year, and thence until he has paid the said Sum, 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 1.

2. And if any one voluntarily has heard Mass he shall forfeit C Marks and
shall be Imprisoned for a year, 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 2.

3. See 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 1. 6. N, 1. that none is bound to be present at any
Common Prayer that is not according to the Book upon pain of Imprisonment, etc.
see the Statute, etc. And by consequence, such are not to be called before the
Ordinary, nor to be Indicted.

Church.
XIV. Crompt. 16. Ab. If any has quarrelled by words only, or chided or brauled
in any Church or Churchyard, being proved by two lawful Witnesses before the
Ordinary of the Place where the Offense was committed, he shall be suspended if
he be a Layman ab ingressu Ecclesiae, if he be a Clerk, then from the
Administration of his Office as long as the Ordinary shall think convenient
according to the fault, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. 1. N. 1.

2. If any one has struck or laid violent hands upon any other in any Church
or Churchyard, he shall be deemed Excommunicate, Ipso facto, and shall be
Excluded out of the Congregation of Christ, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. 2. N. 1.

3. If any Maliciously strike any Person with any Weapon in any Church or
Churchyard, or draws any Weapon there to such intent, the Offender being
thereof Convict by twelve, or his own Confession, or by two lawful Witnesses
before the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, he shall have one of his Ears
cut off, and if he has no Ears, he shall be marked in the Cheek with a hot
Iron, having the letter F. therein, in token that he is a Fray-maker, and shall
stand also Excommunicate, Ipso Facto, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4. 3. N. 1.

Process.
4. Nota, That an Endictment only without Answer thereto made, or Process of
Utlary thereupon ended, is no sufficient conviction in Law to have the Corporal
Penance appointed by the said Statute, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 4.. 3. N. 1. Dyer 275 b.
per Curiam, Crompt. 9 b. 48. But whether he shall be said Excommunicate Ipso
Facto, without proof or due Trial, or without Sentence or proof of Witnesses
before the Ordinary, was doubted per Curiam.

Church.
5. The King defends, and commands that Fairs nor Markets hence-forward shall
not be held in Churchyards for the honor of Holy Church, 13 Ed. 1 Stat. 2 (3)
Winchester 6. 1. N. 3. Lambert 414. 415.

Scholars.
XV. Crompt. 16. Enquiry at Sessions if any has kept or maintained any
Schoolmaster who does not resort to the Church, as is mentioned 23 Eliz. 1. 6.
N. 1. or that is not allowed by the Ordinary of the same Dioces where such
Schoolmaster shall be kept, he shall forfeit 10 l. for every Month for keeping
of such Schoolmaster, The Laws, etc. 64. 65. Abr. 68. Lamberts Precedents 3.
pl. 7. infra.

2. And every Schoolmaster presuming to Instruct youth, contrary to this Act,
being thereof convict, shall be disabled to be an Instructor of Youth, and
shall be Imprisoned for a year without Bail or Mainprise, 23 Eliz. 1. 7. N. 2.
see 1 Jac. 4.

XVI. West. Symb. 2. part 114 b. sect 141. Endictment.
Inquiratur per Domina Regina si G. C. nuper de E. in Com. E. Clericus, 26 Die
Martij, etc. apud E. predict' in Com. E. predict' in quodum loco ibidem vocat'
the Vestry-house Juxta Ecclesiam Parochialem de E. predict' in Com. E. predict'
voluntary usus fuit privato alio Ritu Ceremonia forma and modo Celebrationis
Coenae Dominicae vocat' the Lords Supper, quam in quodam libro Intitulat' Liber
Communis Precationis and Administrat' Sacrament' and aliorum Rituum and
Ceremoniarum Ecclesiae Anglicanae Authorizat' per Actum Parliament' tent' in
Annis 5 and 6 Regni Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Augliae sexti declarat' and
mentionat' existit, videlicet dicend' and Celebrand' unam Privatum Missam
contra formam Statuti in Parliament' dictae Domiminae Reginae nunc apud Westminster.
Anno Regni sui primo tent edit' and provisi, and contra pacem ejusdem Dominae
Reginae coronam, etc.

Et si T. B. nuper de B. in Com. predict' Yeoman, and J. M. nuper de W. in
Comitatu predict' Laborer, Die and Anno supradict. apud W. predict' in Comitatu
predict' tempore Celebrationis predict' Coenae Domini modo and forma predict'
fuerunt presents and voluntary audientes Missam predict' in forma predict'
dictam and Celebratam contra formam Statuti predict' ac contra pacem, etc.

Crompt. 259. pl. 89.

XVII. Lamberts Precedents 2 b. pl. 5. Pope.
For saying and hearing Mass.

Juratores super Sacrament' suum presentant pro Domino Rege, quod J. R. nuper
de C. in Comitat' predicto Clericus 8. die Aprilis Anno Regni dicti Domini
nostri Jacobi, Dei Gratia Angliae, etc. Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc. apud C.
predict' in Comitatu predict' voluntary Dixit and Celebravit unam Missam
contra formam cujusdam Statuti in Parliament' Dominae Elizab. nuper Reginae
Angliae tento apud Westminster. in Com. Middlesex, Anno Regni sui 23. in hoc casu
provisi, and editi, and contra pacem dicti Domini Regis coronam and Dignitatem
suam.

Et quod Maria B. de C. predicta in Comitatu predict' vidua dicto 8. die
Aprilis Anno supradicto apud C. predict' in Com. predict' interfuit presens
tempore dictae Celebrationis Missae predict' ac eandem Missam sic ut prefertur
dictam ad tunc and ibidem voluntary Audivit contra formam Statuti predicti ac
contra Pacem Coronam and Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri.

XVIII. Lambert Precedents 2 b. pl. 6. Church.
An Indictment for being absent the from Church, West. Symb. 2 part 101. sect.
92.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. nuper de
B. in Com. predict' Armiger', qui 10. Die Julij, Anno Regni Domini nostri
Jacobi, etc. Regis, fidei Defensoris, etc. fuit etatis 16. Annorum, and ultra,
non accessit, Anglice, did not repair, ad Ecclesiam suam Parochialem de D.
predict' nec ad aliquam Ecclesiam, Capellam, aut usualem locum Communis
Predicationis, and ibidem moratus fuit tempore Communis Precationis, ad aliquod
tempus infra sex Menses tunc proxime sequentes, sed abstinuit ab eisdem,
Anglice, has forborne the same, per spatium predict' sex Mensium, contra formam
cujusdam Statuti apud Westminster. in Com. Middlesex Anno Regni Domini Elizab. nuper
Reginae Angliae primo pro uniformitate Communis Precationis editi and provisi,
ac contra formam Statuti Anno Regni dictae nuper Reginae Vicessimo tertio in
Hujusmodi casu editi and provisi ac in Contempt' dicti Domini Regis nunc and
contra Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc.

Scholars.
XIX. Lamberts Precedents 3. pl. 7. An Indictment against a Schoolmaster not
licenced, nor resorting to the Church, and against his Maintainers, West. symb.
2 part. 128. 129. sect. 199. Crompt. 16. b. supra.

Juratores super Sacrament' suum presentant pro Domino Rege quod K. M. de L. in
dicto Comitatu Scholae Magister a secundo Die Septembr. Anno Regni Domini
nostri Jacobi Dei Gratia, etc. Regis fidei Defensoris, etc. usque nunc in domum
Mansionalem cujusdam E. A. de J. predict' in Comitatu predict' viduae, ausus
est and presumpsit erudire and docere Pueros Dictae E. A. ibidem cum idem K. M.
durante dicto tempore non accessit nec resortavit ad Ecclesiam Parochialem de J
predict' in Comitatu predict' nec ad ullam aliam Capellam aut usualem locum
Communium Precationum, sed se penitus per totum tempus predictum ab inde
absentavit nullam habens legitimam aut rationabilem dictae suae absentiae
excusationem, and cum idem K.M. non est per Episcopum Diocesis loci illius in
quo sita est predicta Ecclesia Parochialis de J. predict' aut per ejus loci
Ordinarium licentiatus aut allocatus ad erudiendum and docendum in magnum dicti
Domini nostri Regis contemptum ac contra formam Statuti in Parliamento Dominae
Elizab. nup ^ Reginae Angliae tento apud Westminster. in Com Middlesex Anno Regni sui
23. in hujusmodi casu provisi and editi.

Et quod predict' E. A. voluntary in domo sua predict' per totum tempus
predict' custodivit and manutenuit prefat' K.M. modo and forma predict'
erudientem and docentem sciens ipsum K.M. modo and forma predict' se absentasse
in contempt' dicti Domini Regis ac contra formam Statuti predicti.

Pope.
XX. Dyer 203 pl. 72. An Indictment for Celebrating private Mass.

Essex ss.
Juratores super Sacrament' Suum presentant por Domino Rege quod Johannes R.
nuper de L. Clericus 8. di^ Aprilis, Anno Regni etc. apud B. in Com. E.
voluntary dixit usus fuit and celebravit unam privatam Missam contra formam
and effectum cujusdam Statuti in Parliament' tent' apud Westminster. Anno primo
Reginae etc. edit' and provisi, and contra pacem Domini Regis nunc coronam et
Dignitatem suas.

Et quod E. W. de B. predict' in Comitatu predict' Miles, F. et alij dicto 8.
Die Abr. apud B. predict' tempore Celebrationis Missae predictae fuerunt
presents, audientes Missam predictam, ac manutenent' and comfortant' predict'
J. R. ad Missam predict' dicend' et Celebrand' contra formam Statuti predicti
ac contra pacem etc.

Endictment.
XXI. Crompt. 104 b. 53. Its a good Indictment where its said, contra formam
Statuti in Parliament' tent' apud Westminster. Anno primo Elizab, etc. ut patet, Dyer
203. etc. infra.

Et Nota; That he did not say in the Information, Apud Westminster. in Com.
Middlesex, but in general, apud Westminster, etc.

And this Indictment was upon 1 Eliz. 2. 9. N. 2. 4. for now he shall forfeit a
greater Sum by 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 2.

Sessions.
XXII. Crompt. 125. Item, the general Sessions shall enquire of them that say or
hear Mass, and who come not to the Church, against 23 Eliz. 1. 4. N. 2.

Good-behaviour.
XXIII. Crompt. 144. He shall be bound to the Good-behaviour in B. R. who
absents himself from the Church for a year against 23 Eliz. 1. 5. N. 2. and
shall so remain until he will reform himself and come to Church, according to
the intent of the Statute, 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. etc.

XXIV. Crompt. 151. Two Capias an Exigent, Process.
and a Capias Vtlagatum shall issue against him that is Indicted upon 1 Eliz.
2. 4. N. 4. for depraving the Sacrament, etc.

XXV. Crompt. 155. Ab. Bail.
Nor he shall not be let to Bail or Mainprise, who disturbs Preachers contra to
1 Mar. 1. Stat. 2 cap. 3. 5. N. 2.

2. Nor he shall not be left to Bail or Mainprise who offends against 1 Eliz.
2. 4. N. 1.

XXVI. Kilb. Precedents 94. 95. For not coming to Church, Church.
a Warrant to appear before a Justice.

To the Constables and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County,
and to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as I have received Information that B. C. of D. in the County
aforesaid, etc. did not upon any of the etc. Sundays last past resort or repair
to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place appointed for Common Prayer, and
there hear Divine Service according to the form of the Statute in that behalf
made; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, that
you, some or one of you do cause the said B. C. to come before me to Answer the
Premises; hereof fail not at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal the day of etc.
1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. 3 Jac. 4.. 27. N. 1.

XXVII. Kilb. Precedents 95. Forfeiture.
A Warrant to levy the forfeiture for not coming to Church.

To the Churchwardens of the Parish of A. in the said County, and to every of
them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as B. C. of D. aforesaid etc. did not upon Sunday the second day of
May, nor upon Sunday then next following, nor upon Sunday then next following,
etc. resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or other usual place appointed
for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service, according to the form of the
Statute in that behalf made, and being called before me did not make sufficient
excuse of his said Defaults to my satisfaction; These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to will and require you, that you, or one of you, do levy by
Distress and Sale of the Goods of the said B. C. three Shillings for his
defaults aforesaid, to be employed to and for the use of the Poor of the said
Parish, rendering to him the Overplus of Money raised of the Goods aforesaid, so
to be sold, and in default of such Distress that you do certify me thereof
with all convenient speed, to the end I may further Proceed therein as to
Justice does appertain; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the Day of, etc.
1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. 3 Jac. 4.. 27. N. 1.

XXVIII. Kilb. Precedents 96. Imprisonment.
A Mittimus to the Goal of one not repairing to Church for want of a Distress.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at B. in the County
aforesaid. Kent ss.
Whereas by Warrant under my Hand and Seal, the Churchwardens of the Parish of
A. in the said County, were lately by me Commanded to levy three Shillings by
Distress and Sale of the Goods of B. C. of the Parish of A. in the said County,
to be employed to and for the use of the Poor of that Parish, for that he did
not upon Sunday the second day of May nor upon Sunday then next following, nor
upon Sunday then next following resort or repair to any Church, Chapel, or
other usual place appointed for Common Prayer, and there hear Divine Service,
according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made, and the
Churchwardens aforesaid have returned to me, that the said B. C. has no Goods
nor Chattels sufficient for the levying of the Moneys aforesaid: These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, that you, some, or one
of you, do take the aforesaid B. ^. and him safely convey to his Majesty's Goal
aforesaid, and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Goal,
and him there safely keep until payment shall be made of the Moneys aforesaid;
hereof fail not at your peril.

Given under my Hand and Seal the Day of etc.
1 Eliz. 2. N. and 3 Jac. 4.

Encumbent.
XXIX. Kilb. Precedents 98. A Warrant against Encumbent for not Officiating, on
14 Car. 2. 4. 7. N. 1.

To the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of A. in the
said County.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before us ( viz. two Justices, etc.)
that A. B. the proper Incumbent of the Parsonage (Vicarage, or Benefice) of
etc. in the County aforesaid, does reside on his Living and keep a Curate, and
has not himself in Person within one Month now past openly and publicly read
the Common Prayers in and by the Book prescribed by the Statute made in the
fourteenth year of his now Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the
Uniformity of Public Prayers and Administration of the Sacraments, and other
Rights and Ceremonies, and for the establishing the form of making and
Ordaining and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Church of
England; in the Parish Church of C. to the said Parishioners in such order,
manner, and form as in and by the said Book is appointed, whereby he has by
virtue of the Statute aforesaid forfeited five pounds to the use of the Poor of
the Parish aforesaid; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and
require you, and every of you, that you, or some of you, do demand of the said
A.B. the aforesaid five pounds to the use of the Poor afroesaid, and in default
of payment thereof within ten days after such demand, that you, or some of you
do levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said A.
B. rendering to him the Surplusage, hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the Day of etc.
2. The like Warrant, mutatis mutandis, if he de not if there be occasion,
Administer each of the Sacraments and other Rites of the Church, once in every
Month.

Encumbent.
XXX. Kilb. Precedents 99. A Mittimus for Preaching whilst disabled on 14 Car.
2. 4. 21. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County
at M. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as we ( viz. two Justices) have received a Certificate from the
Ordinary within whose Jurisdiction the Parish of T. in the said County is
situate, That A. B. being by virtue of the Statute in that behalf made,
disabled to Preach any Sermon, did during the time that he did continue and
remain so disabled, Preach a Sermon in the Parish Church of T. aforesaid
against the form of the Statute; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to
will and require you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you,
that you, some, or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the
Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the said Keeper thereof, together with
this Precept: Requiring also you the said Keeper to receive him into the Goal
aforesaid, and him there safely to keep by the space of three Months without
Bail or Mainprise; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands, etc.
XXXI. Kilb. Precedents 52. Church.
A Record of a Conventicle to be written in Parchment, on 22 Car. 2. 1. by two
Justices.

Kent ss.
Memorand', That upon the 10th day of June in the 31. year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England Scotland,
France, and Jreland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. It was according to the
form of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles, duly proved to us, ( viz. two
Justices, etc.) that A. B. being of the Age of sixteen years and upwards and a
Subject of this Realm, was upon the first day of June now last past, in the
Parish of, etc. present at T. in the said County, under color (or pretense) of
Exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy, (or
practice) of the Church of England, where five Persons are present more than
those of the same Household, contrary to the Act aforesaid, of all which we
have the Day and year above written made this Record, under our Hands and Seals.

2. Or better in Latin thus, Kilb. Precedents 53, 54.

Kent ss.
Memorand' quod J. S. de S. in Com. predict' Yeoman, Church.
E. W. de W. in Com. predict' Generosus and Maria uxor G. J. de parochia de E.
in Com. predict' Husbandman, Eliz. W. de E. predict' in Com predict' vidua J.
B. de, etc. Cum multis alijs in toto se attingent' ad numerum duodecim
personarum, and quilibet eorum die Solis 26. die Junij, Anno Regni Domini Regis
nunc 22. die ultra etatem 16. Annorum, and subditi dicti Domiin Regis ad tunc
existent' predict' 26. die Junij, Anno 22. supradicto insimul assemblaverunt
and presents fuerunt and quilibet eorum presens ^uit in Domo Mansionali ipsius
A. P. viduae, in predict' Parochia de E. in Com. predict' ad Conventiculum sub
color Exercitationis Anglice Exercise, Religionis in alio modo quam secundum
Liturgiam and practicationem (Anglice practice) Ecclesiae Angliae Ad tunc and
ibidem tent' contra formam Statuti prevenire and supprimere seditiosa
Conventicula nuper Editi and proviso, infra,

Memorand' etiam quod tempore and loco supradict' predict' J.S. assumpsit super
se docere in Conventiculo predict' and in eodem ad tunc and ibidem docuit
contra formam Statuti predicti, quodque predict' A. B. vidua tempore supradicto
scienter, Anglice Wittingly, and voluntary permisit Conventiculum predictum
fore tenend' in Domo Mansionali sua predict' etiam contra formam ejusdem
Statuti Record' quarum quidem separalium offensarum Ego W. L. Miles, unus
Justiciariorum dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com. suo predict'
conservand' assignat' cui secundum formam and effectum Statuti predicti,
separales offensas predict' sic ut pre^ertur fore Commissa sufficienter aparuit
per presents, sub Manu and sigillo meo 11. die Julij Anno 22. supradicto apud
N. predict' in Com. predict' feci: Predictique J. S E. W. predict' Maria uxor
predict' G. J. Eliz. W. J. B. Junior, J. B. Senior, J. F. R. P. A. P. Vidua, A.
B. and D. P. Spinster de separalibus offensis suis in Record' predict' superius
mentionat' per Recordum illud virtute Statuti predicti plene and perfect
convicti sunt, and quilibet eorum inde separaliter plene and perfect convictus
est, and ego prefat' Justiciar' superinde virtute Statuti predicti die Anno and
loco ultimo mentionat' finem V.S. super quemlibet offensorum Anglice,
Offenders, predict' sic ut prefertur ad Conventiculum predict' present'
Existent' pro separali offensa predict' imposui.

Predictaque A. P. Vidua pro offensa sua predicta eo quod ipsa ut prefertur
permisit Conventiculum predict' fore tenend' in Domo Mansionali sua predict'
forisfecit Summam 20 l. Virtute Statuti predict' predictusque J.S. pro offensa
sua predicta eo quod ipse, ut prefertur, assumpsit super se docere in
conventiculo predicto, and in eodem ut predictum est, docuit, forisfecit summam
20 l. Virtute Statuti predicti.

Forfeiture.
XXXII. Kilb. Precedents 55. 56. A Warrant to levy the penalty of 22 Car. 2. 1
3. N. 1. upon the Teacher in a Conventicle.

To the Constables, Borshoulders, Headboroughs, and Tythingmen of the Hundred
of C. in the said County, and to the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor
of the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid, and all other Officers within the
said County whom the Execution hereof may concern. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as I did this present day receive a Certificate to me directed under
the Hand and Seal of W. E. of S. in the County of S. Esquire one of his Majesty's
Justices, Assigned for keeping his peace in the said County of S. that G. H. of
C. aforesaid, Tailor, was upon the first day of this Instant August by him
Convicted by proof to him made, according to an Act of Parliament Entitled, An
Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, lately made and provided,
of being present in the Barn of R. W. of W. in the said County of S.
Husbandman, and there did take upon him to Preach or teach at a Conventicle,
the five and twentieth day of July last past, under pretense of Exercise of
Religion in other manner then according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, and contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid: And that
therefore being thereof Convicted as aforesaid, the said G. H. did forfeit for
the said first Offense 20 l. and that he the said Justice had by Virtue of the
said Act imposed on him so convict as aforesaid for his said Offense the said
Sum of 20 l. as being thought by him able to pay the same, as by the said
Certificate appears, 22 Car. 2. 1. 13. N. These are therefore by Virtue of
the aforesaid Act in his Majesty's Name, to command you, that you, some, or one
of you, do forthwith levy the said 20 l. by Distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said G. H. and that when you, or any of you, have so levied the
said 20 l. or any part thereof, that then you, they, or he that so levied the
same, do forthwith deliver the Moneys so levied to the aforesaid W. E. to be by
him distributed according to the Act aforesaid; hereof neither you, nor any of
you, are to fail at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal at A. in the said County of K. 10 Apr. Anno Regni
etc. 31.
Proof.
XXXIII. Kilb. Precedents 57. 58. A Warrant for Witnesses to prove the
Conventicle.

To the Constable, Borshoulders, Headboroughs, and Tythingmen of the Hundred of
S. in the said County, and every of them. Kent. ss.
Whereas we have this day received Information that several persons upon the
19. day of June last past were present in the Parish of S. in the said County,
at a Conventicle then and there held, under Color of Exercise of Religion, in
other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England, contrary to the form of an Act of Parliament lately made and provided
to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles: And whereas we are also
Informed, that the several persons hereunder Named can certify the Particulars
and truth of the Premises, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to
command you, and every of you, that you do give notice to the several Persons
that they, and every of them, are by us Commanded to appear before us at the
House of R.K. Esquire in H. in the County aforesaid, on Wedensday the first day of
this Instant August at eight of the Clock in the Forenoon of the same day, then
and there to testify their several Knowledges touching the Premises, whereof
neither they, nor any of them, are to fail at their perils: And you are further
hereby commanded to appear at the time and place aforesaid, to make appear unto
us what you have done in the Execution hereof; hereof also you are not to fail
at your peril.

Given under our Hands and Seals at H. in the said County the (...) Day of etc.
A. B. of etc. etc. as many as be. C. D. of etc. etc. as many as be.


XXXIV. Kilb. Precedents 58. 59. A Certificate made by a Justice where the
Offenders liev in a Corporation.

Kent ss. S. B. and R. K. Esquires, Certificate.
Two of his Majesty's Justices assigned to keep the Peace in his County
aforesaid, to the Chief Magistrate of the Corporation of T. in the said County,
Greeting;
Whereas W. S. of T. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Yeoman, was this
present day before us Convicted according to an Act of Parliament to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made and provided, of being present
in the Dwelling house of J. B. in the Parish of C. in the County aforesaid,
upon the sixth day of this Instant July, at a Conventicle than and there held,
under Color of Exercise of Religion, in other manner then according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act
aforesaid: And we have by Virtue of the said Act imposed upon him a Fine of
Five shillings for that his Offense, and whereas also the said J. B. was this
present day before us also, according to the said Act, Convicted of his
wittingly and willingly suffering the Conventicle aforesaid to be held in his
aforesaid Dwelling house, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid, for which
his Offense he has forfeited the Sum of 20 l. and for that we do in our
Judgments think the said J. B. poor and unable to pay the said Sum of 20 l. by
him as aforesaid forfeited, we have therefore by our Discretions adjudged one
hundred Shillings thereof to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the
aforesaid W. S. who as aforesaid was present at the same Conventicle: And
forasmuch as the said W. S. is an Inhabitant in the Corporation aforesaid, we
do therefore hereby Certify you of the Premises, to the end you may proceed
thereupon as by the said Act is required.

Given under our Hands and Seals at C. in the said County 20 November. Anno 1679,
etc. Regni etc. 31.
Church.
XXXV. Kilb. Precedents 59. 60. A Record of the Conviction of certain Persons
taken at a Conventicle.

Kent ss.
Memorand' quod' S. B. de Parochia de C. etc. (pro ut etc. 31. N. 2.) and
quidam alius homo ignotus in toto se attingnut ad numerum octo personarum and
quilibet eorum 3 die, etc. Anno etc. ultra aetatem, etc. and subdit' etc.
quorum que ad numerum quinque personarum non ad tunc fuerunt defamilia Roberti
Kite de predicta Parochia etc. in Com. predict' Mercer, in predict' Parochia de
S. eodem 3 Die, etc. Anno etc. Insimul assemblaverunt and presents fuerunt,
and quilibet eorum presens fuit in Donio Mansionali ipsius Roberti Kite in
predicta Parochia de S. in Com. predict' ad assemblationem sub color, etc. pro
ut etc. and ad tunc and adhuc in pleno robore existent'.

Memorand' etiam quod predict' homo ignotus ad tunc and ibidem assumpsit super
se docere in assemblat' predict' and ad tunc and ibidem docuit etiam contra
formam ejusdem Statuti.

Memorand' etiam quod predict R. Kite tempore supradicto scienter, Angl.
wittingly, and voluntary permisit assemblat' predict' fore tenend' in Domo
Mansionali sua predict' etiam contra formam Statuti predict'

Record' quarum quidem separalium offensarum nos J. H. Miles, W.C.S. B. and R.
K. Armigeri, Justiciarij dicti Domini Regis ad pacem suam in Com. suo predict'
causa assemblat', quibus secundum formam and effectum Statutorum dredictorum
separales offensas predict' sic ut presertur sore Commissa sufficienter
apparuit per presents sub Manibus and Sigillis nostris 17 Die Apr. Anno etc.
27. supradicto apud C. predict' in Com. predict' fecimus, predictique S. B. and
predict' uxorejus H. S. etc.

R. K. and predict' Hom' ignot' de separalibus offensis suis in Record'
predict' superius specificat' per Record' illud Virtute Statuti predicti plene
and perfect convicti sunt, and quilibet eorum inde separaliter plene and
perfect Convictus est.

Et nos presati Justiciarij superinde Virtute Statuti predict' die Anno and
Loco ultimo mentionat' super quemlibet offensorum Auglice, Offenders, predict'
sic ut prefertur ad assemblat' predict' present' Existent' pro separali offensa
sua predict' finem 5 s. Imposumus.

Predictusque homo Ignotus pro offensa sua predict' eo quod ipse ut presertur
assumpsit super se docere in assemblat' predict' and ad tunc and ibidem docuit,
forisfecit Summam 20. libr. Virtute Statut' predict'.

Predict' K. Kite pro offensa sua predict' eo quod ipse ut prefertur permisit
assemblationem predict' fore tenend' in Domo Mansionali sua predict' forisfecit
Summam 20 libr. Virtute Statuti illius.

Et quia in Judicijs nostris putamus predict' H. S. fore pauperem and inhabilem
solvere predict' finem 5 s. super ipsum pro offensa sua predict' eo quod ipse
ut prefertur presens fuit ad assemblat' predict' ut prefertur impositum, and eo
quod predict' fines 5 s. super predict' Hom' ignot' ego quod ipse ut prefertur
presens fuit ad assemblat' predict' ut prefertur imposuit' de Bonis et Catallis
suis non potest, levari ideo ex discretionibus nostris predict' duos separales
fines 5 s. ultimo mentionat' de Bonis et Catallis predict' ^.B. qui pre^ertur
ad assemblat' predict' presens fuit ut nos prefat' Justiciarij apud C. predict'
in Com. predict' eodem 17 die Apr. Anno 27 supradict' sevari adjudicavimus.

Et quia predict' homo qui ut prefertur assumpsit super se docere in assemblat'
predict' et ad tunc et ibidem docuit, est extraneus, Angl', a Stranger, et
nomen et habitatio sua incogn' existit, ideo ex discretionibus nostris predict'
summam 20 libr. per ipsum pro offensa predict' ut prefertur forisfact' nos
prefati Justiciarij die anno et loco ultimo mentionat' de Bonis et Catallis
separalium personarum hic Postea Mentionat' levari adjudicavimus modo et forma
sequent' viz. de Bonis et Catallis predict' J. B. qui, etc. pro ut, etc. 9 l.
et 10 s. inde, et de Bonis et Catallis C. B. qui etiam etc. pro ut etc. 40 s.
inde, et de Bonis etc. predict' R. C. qui etiam etc. pro ut etc. C. S. inde
resid' etc. ut in Recordo.

In quarum omnium rerum testimonium nos prefat' Justiciarij die Anno et loco
ultimo mentionat' Manus et Sigilla nostra presentibus aposuimus.

XXXVI. Kilb. Precedents 62. 63. Forfeiture.
A Warrant to levy the Money upon the Offenders 22 Car. 2. 1.

To the Constable and Borshoulder's Headboroughs and Tythingmen of the Hundred
of M. and D. in the said County, and to every of them, and to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish of S. in the County
aforesaid, and to every of them, and to all and every other Officers whom the
Execution hereof may concern. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as R. L. of the said Parish of S. Mercer, was this present day,
according to an Act of Parliament to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles lately made and provided, by us Convicted of his wittingly and
willingly suffering an Assembly to be holden in his Dwelling house in the said
Parish of S. upon the 30. day of March now last past, under color of Exercise
of Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid, by which he has
according to the said Act, forfeited the Sum of 20 l. for his said Offense;
These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, and every of you,
forthwith to levy by Distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said R.
K. the aforesaid, Sum of 20 l. and you, and every of you, are in his Majesty's
Name hereby further commanded, that when you or any of you have, as aforesaid,
levied the Sum aforesaid, that then they, or he, having so levied the same, do
forthwith deliver the same to us or one of us, to be distributed according to
the said Act; hereof neither you, nor any of you are to fail at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals at C. etc.
XXXVII. Kilb. Precedents 63. 64. Religion.
A Condition of a Recognizance in case of an Appeal made touching Conventicles,
on 22 Car. 2. 1. 7. N. 1.

The Condition of this Recognizance is such, That whereas R. G. of R. in the
within named County of Kent, Gentleman, was lately Convicted by the within
named Justices of taking upon him to teach in an Assembly lately held in the
Parish Church of S. within written, under pretense of Exercise of Religion in
other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England, against the form of the Statute lately made to prevent and suppress
Seditious Conventicles, and had therefore according to the Statute aforesaid
forfeited the Sum of 20 l. And for that in the Indictments of the said Justices
they did think the said R. G. unable to pay the said Sum 20 l. they did
therefore by their Discretions adjudge S l. thereof to be levied by Distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the within Bounden W. W. who was also
according to the said Statute Convicted of being present at the said Assembly,
contrary to the Statute aforesaid: And whereas the said W. W. was also by the
said Justices Convicted, for that he at the time of the said Assembly was one
of the Churchwardens of the said Parish, and knowing the said Assembly to be
holden within the same, did not give Information thereof to any Justices of
Peace, nor endeavor the Conviction of the Parties which were at the said
Assembly, nor of any of them, according to the Duty of his said Office, but
wittingly and willingly did omit the performance of his Office aforesaid in the
Execution of the said Statute against the form of the same, by which he
forfeited the Sum of 5 l. And the said two several Sums of five pounds have by
Warrant of the said Justices been levied of the Goods and Chattels of the said
W. W. and he has the day and year within written appealed from the Justices
aforesaid to the Judgment of the Justices of Peace of the said County in their
next Quarter Sessions; if therefore the said W. W. do prosecute the said Appeal
with effect, that then this Recognizance shall be void or else it shall stand
in full force.

And forasmuch also as the aforesaid Wife of S. B. is a Feme Covert cohabiting
with the said S.B. her Husband, these are therefore etc. (pro ut supra etc.)
forthwith to levy the aforesaid 5 s. so imposed upon her as aforesaid by
distress etc. (pro ut etc.)

And forasmuch as a Man unknown did then and there take upon him to Preach or
teach etc. (pro ut the record supra) You may levy 20 l. upon any the Offenders,
as in your Judgments shall seem fit.

Forfeiture.
XXXVIII. Kilb. Precedents 65. 66. 67. 68. A Warrant to levy the Money upon the
Offenders on 22 Car. 2. 1.

To the Constable etc. ut supra.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as W. W. of the aforesaid Parish of S. Gent. one of the
Churchwardens of the said Parish: J. H. of the parish aforesaid Yeoman, the
other Churchwarden of the said Parish, T. N. of the Parish aforesaid,
Chandler, one of the Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, J. W. the Elder
of the Parish aforesaid, Yeoman, G. P. etc. W. H. of the Parish aforesaid
Headborough of the North-borough in the said Parish, etc. were every of them
this present day by us Convicted (according to an Act of Parliament to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles lately made and provided) of being present
in the Parish Church of S. aforesaid in the County aforesaid, upon Sunday the
19. day of June last past, between the hours of nine and twelve before Noon the
same day, at an Assembly then and there held under pretense of Exercise of
Religion in other manner than according to the Liturgy and Practice of the
Church of England, contrary to the form of the Act aforesaid, and we have by
virtue of the said Act imposed upon every of the said Offenders so Convicted as
aforesaid, a Fine of 5 s. for that his respective Offense;

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Command you, and every of you,
forthwith to levy upon every of the said Offenders respectively by Distress and
Sale of his respective Goods and Chattels the aforesaid Fine of 5 s.

And Forasmuch as R. G. of R. in the said County, Gent. did then and there take
upon him to teach in the Assembly aforesaid, and did then and there teach
against the form of the Act aforesaid, and was this present day by us according
to the said Act Convicted of his said Offense, and he has for the same
forfeited the Sum Twenty pounds.

And for that in our Judgments we do think the said R.G. is unable to pay the
said Sum so forfeited as aforesaid, we have therefore by our Discretions
adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid W. W.
J. H. D. P. and J. C. who as aforesaid were all of them present at the
Assembly, and are thereof as aforesaid Convicted: And the same Sum of 20 l. to
be levied in manner following; that is to say, one C. S. thereof of the Goods
and Chattels of the said J. H. other one C. s. thereof of the Goods and
Chattels of the said D. P. and the other one C. s. thereof residue of the Goods
and Chattels of the said J. C.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, and every of you,
forthwith to levy one C. s. parcel of the said Sum of 20 l. by distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said W.W. and to levy other one C. s.
other parcel of the said Sum of 20 l. by distress and Sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said J. H. and to levy other one C. s. other parcel of the said
Sum of 20 l. by distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said D. P.
and to levy the other one C. s. residue of the said Sum of 20 l. by distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said J. C.

And forasmuch as T. H. of the aforesaid Parish of S. Labourer, was this
present day by us Convicted according to the Act aforesaid, of being present at
the Assembly aforesaid, contrary to the said Act, and we have also by Virtue of
the Act aforesaid imposed upon him a Fine of 5 s. for that his Offense; and for
that we do in our Judgments think the said T. H. poor and unable to pay the
said Sum of 5 s. upon him, for his said Offense, imposed as aforesaid, we have
therefore by our Discretions adjudged the same to be levied of the Goods and
Chattels of the said J. W. who as aforesaid is Convicted of the like Offense at
the same Assembly; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you,
and every of you, forthwith to levy the said fine of five 5 s. by distress and
Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said J. W.

And for as much as T. H. of B. in the County aforesaid, Master, was was this
present day by us convicted according to the Act aforesaid of being present at
the Assembly aforesaid, contrary to the said Act, and for that the said T. H.
heretofore committed the like Offense and according to the form of the Act
aforesaid was thereof convicted, therefore he for his said Offense of being
present at the Assembly herein before mentioned has incurred the penalty of 10
s. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, and every of you,
forthwith to levy the said 10 s. by distress and Sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the said T. H.

And forasmuch as Mary the Wife of the said J. W. and E. the Wife of the said
J. C. were both of them this present day by us Convicted, Bar and Feme.
according to the Act aforesaid, of being present at the Assembly aforesaid
contrary to the said Act, and we have by virtue of the Act aforesaid imposed
upon the said Mary a Fine of 5 s. for that her said respective Offense, and we
have also by virtue of the said Act imposed upon the said E. a Fine of 5 s. for
her said respective Offense, and for that the said Mary is a Feme Covert,
cohabiting with the said J. W. her Husband, and the said E. is also a Feme
Covert, cohabiting with the said J. C. her Husband, These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to command you, and every of you, forthwith to levy the
aforesaid fine of 5 s. so imposed upon the said Mary as aforesaid by distress
and Sale of the Goods and Chattels of the said J. W. and to levy the aforesaid
Fine of 5 s. so imposed upon the said E. as aforesaid, by distress and Sale of
the Goods and Chattels of the said J. C.

And Forasmuch as the aforesaid W. W. at the time of the said Assembly, ^fficer.
was and still is one of the Churchwardens of the Parish of S. aforesaid, and
the aforesaid J. H. then also was and still is the other Churchwarden of the
aforesaid Parish, and the aforesaid T. N. then was and still is one of the
Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, and the said W.H. then was and still
is Headborough of the Northborough in the Parish aforesaid, and every of them
was this present day by us, according to the said Act Convicted for that he
knowing the Assembly aforesaid, in form aforesaid, to be holden within his
aforesaid Parish, did not give Information thereof to any Justice of Peace, nor
Endeavor the Conviction of the Parties aforesaid, or any of them, but
wittingly and willingly did omit the Performance of his duty in Execution of
the Act aforesaid, against the form of the said Act, for which offense every of
them respectively has forfeited the Sum of 5 l. These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to Command you, and every of you, to levy the Sum of 5 l. by the
said W. W. so forfeited, as is last before mentioned, by distress and Sale of
his Goods and Chattels, and to levy, etc. (of the rest in like manner etc.) and
you, and every of you, are hereby in his Majesty's name further commanded, that
when you, or any of you have, as aforesaid, levied the several Fines and
forfeitures aforesaid, or any of them, that then they, or he so having levied
the same, do forthwith deliver the same to us, or one of us, to be distributed
according to the said Act; hereof neither you, nor any of you, are to fail at
your peril.

Given, etc.
Record.
XXXIX. Kilb. Precedents 70. 71. A Memorial of a Record of a Conventicle.

Kent ss.
A Memorial of the Account of the Moneys mentioned in the Record Certified at
the Quarter Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid, on Tuesday next after the Close of Easter 1679. by Sir J. H.
Knight W.C.S.B. and R. K. Esquires, four of his Majesty's Justice of the Peace,
of the said County, forfeited as in the said Record is mentioned, in an
Assembly holden in the Dwelling House of R. K. in the Parish of S. in the
County aforesaid, under color of Exercise of Religion in other manner than
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, upon the 30. day of March
1679.

His Majesty's third part of the said Forfeitures by the said Justices tendered
into the Court of the General Sessions of the Peace holden for the said County
at M. aforesaid on Tuesday next after the close of Easter 1679. and by
Appointment of the same by the said Justices paid to Sir J.C. Knight and
Baronet, Sheriff of the said County, to his Majesty's use, viz.

For R. C. xx d. and xx d. and xxxix s. iv d. 2 l. 2 s. 8 d. All which was
levied and paid to the said Justices since the last general Sessions of the
Peace holden for the said County at M. aforesaid, viz. summa patet.

And as concerning the Moneys in the said Record mentioned to be payable by the
several persons here under named, his Majesty's third part whereof comes to as
follows, viz. l. s. d. R. B. xx d. and xx d. and iii l. iii s. iv d. in all 3
6 8 C. B. xx d. xx d. xx d. and 13 s. 4 d. in all 0 18 4 J. B. xx d. and xxiii
s. iv d. in all 1 5 0 R. K. 6 13 9 in all 12 3 9

The said Justices do say, that they did upon the seventeenth day of April 1678
being the day of the Convictions of the Persons aforesaid for their Offenses in
the said Record mentioned, make out their Warrants for levying thereof, but
they have not as yet received the same, or any part thereof, nor is the same,
or any part thereof as yet levied, that they know of, though they have
diligently inquired after the same

XL. Kilb. Precedents 72. 73. Imprisonment.
A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Offense by 22 Car. 2. 1. 2. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County at B. in the County
aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as C. B. was this present day according to the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made (entitled an Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Couventicles) Convicted by Record by us ( viz. two Justices) made of being
present in the Parish of C. in the said County at an Assembly, Conventicle, or
Meeting, under Color or pretense of Exercise of Religion in other manner than
is allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England, contrary to the
Act aforesaid; and whereas we did upon the said Conviction Fine the said C.D.
(viz. not exceeding 5 l.) for his said Offense, and he did not pay down the
said Fine unto us, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and
command you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely Convey to his
Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said Goal, and him there safely keep without Bail or Mainprise, by the
space of (viz. not exceeding three Months) next after such delivery of him unto
you; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our hands etc.
2. The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither, which they must not do if the
Offender (or her Husband, if a Feme Covert) have 5 l. per Annum Freehold or
Copyhold, or 50 l. in Goods.

XLI. Kilb. Precedents 73. 74. Imprisonment.
A Mittimus upon the second Offense, 22 Car. 2. 1.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as C. D. was this present day according to the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made entitled An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles) Convicted by Record by us made, of being present in the Parish of
T. in the said County, at an Assembly (Conventicle, or Meeting) under color or
pretense of Exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy
(or practice of the Church of England, contrary to the Act aforesaid; and
whereas we did upon the said conviction Fine the said C. D. (viz. not Exceeding
10 l.) for his said Offense, and he did not pay the said Fine unto us: And
forasmuch as the said C. D. has been once before that time convicted of the
like Offense, contrary to the Act aforesaid, These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to charge and command you the said Constable and Borshoulders,
and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him
safely convey to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the
Keeper of the same, together with this Precept, commanding also you the said
Keeper to receive him into the said Goal, and him there safely keep, without
Bail or Mainprise, by the space of ( viz. not Exceeding six Months) next after
such delivery of him unto you; hereof fail not etc

2. The like Mittimus (Mutatis Mutandis) to the House of Correction etc.

Imprisonment.
XLII. Kilb. Precedents 74. 75. A Mittimus upon the third Conviction.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as C. D. was this present day according to the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made, Entitled, (An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles) Convicted by Record by us made, of being present at the Parish of
T. in the said County at an Assembly, Conventicle or Meeting, under Color or
pretense of Exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy
or practice of the Church of England, contrary to the Act aforesaid; and
Forasmuch as the said C. D. has been twice before that time Convicted of the
like Offense, contrary to the said Act, These are therefore in his Majesty's
Name to charge and command you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every
of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said C. D. and him safely
convey to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of
the same, together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to
receive him into the said Goal, and him there safely keep without Bail or
Mainprise, until the next General Quarter Sessions for the West-division of
this County, the next Assizes, Jail-delivery, Great-Sessions or sitting of Oyer
and Terminer in the County aforesaid, which shall first happen, and that you
then and there have him to be further proceeded against as by the said Act is
directed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of, etc.
2. The like Mittimus (mutatis mutandis) to the House of Correction, if the
Justices think fit to send the Offender thither, which they must not do if they
be satisfied that the Offender (or her Husband, if a Feme Covert) have 5 l. per
Annum Freehold or Copyhold, or be worth 50 l. in Goods.

XLIII. Kilb. Precedents 76. A Certificat to the Militia etc. for Aid on 22
Car. 2. 4. 9. N. 3. and 16 Car. 2. 4. 10. N. 1.

To the Lieutenant, any Deputy Lieutenant, or any Commissioned Officer of the
Militia, or any other his Majesty's Forces, the Sheriffs, Justices, or other
Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, jointly or severally. Kent ss.
These are to Certify you, that I A.B. one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace, etc. have received Information of an unlawful Meeting or Conventicle,
held or to be held, under Color or pretense of Exercise of Religion in other
manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England,
contrary to an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles, at T. in the Parish of C. in the County
aforesaid, and that I with such assistance as I can get together, am not able
to suppress, dissolve, dissipate or prevent the same, all which I do Certify
unto you, to the end that you may repair unto the said place aforesaid, and do
therein as by the said Act is required and enjoined.

Given under my Hand and Seal the day of, etc.
XLIV. Kilb. Precedents 77. Record.
A Record of suffering a Conventicle fit to be in Parchment, and Quaere if not
in Latin, 22 Car. 2. 1. 4. N. 1.

Kent ss.
Memorand, that upon the second day of June in the 31. year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles the second, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France, and Jreland King, Defender of the Faith, etc. It was according to the
form of an Act of Parliament in that behalf lately made, Entitled, An Act to
prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, duly proved to us, that R. T. of
etc. did wittingly and willingly suffer an Assembly, (Conventicle, or Meeting,)
under Color or pretense of the Exercise of Religion in other manner than is
allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the Church of England, to be held in his
house (Out-house, Barn or Rome, Yard, or Backside, Woods, or Grounds) in the
Parish of T. in the said County on, etc. day now last past, contrary to the Act
aforesaid, of all which we have the day and year first above written made this
Record under our Hands and Seals.

XLV. Kilb. Precedents 78. 79. Imprisonment.
A Mittimus thereupon upon the first Conviction.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County at C. in the County
aforesaid, Kent ss.
Forasmuch as D. E. was this present day according to the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles, Convicted by Record by us made ( viz. two Justices etc.) of
wittingly and willingly suffering an Assembly, (Conventicle or Meeting,) under
Color or pretense of Exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by
the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, to be held in his House,
(Out-House, Barn or Room, Yard or backside, Woods or Grounds) in the Parish of
T. in the said County, upon the second day of June now last past, contrary to
the Act aforesaid; and whereas we did upon the said Conviction Fine the said D.
E. (viz. not Exceeding 5 l.) for his said Offense, and he did not pay down the
said Fine unto us, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and
command you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you, do take the said D. E. and him safely Convey to his
Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said Goal and him there safely keep without Bail (or Mainprise, by the
space of (viz. not Exceeding three Manths) next after such delivery of him unto
you; hereof fail not at your perils.

2. The like Mittimus (Mutatis Mutandis) to the House of Correction, etc. the
like upon the second Conviction, and the like upon the third Conviction, ut
supra.

XLVI. Kilb. Precedents 81 A Certificate for the taking the Oath according to
16 Car. 2. 4. 19. N. 1. Quakers.


Kent. ss.
I A. B. one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County of K. do
humbly Certify, that D.E. did this present day before me take the Oath
mentioned in an Act of Parliament lately made, (entitled, An Act to prevent
and suppress Seditious Conventicles,) in these words, I do swear that I do not
hold the taking of an Oath to be unlawful, nor refuse to take an Oath on that
account; in Testimony whereof I the said A. B. have hereunto set my Hand and
Seal the day of etc.

Escape.
XLVII. Kilb. Precedents 81. 82. To levy Money upon a Jailer etc. for suffering
one committed upon this Act to go at large, 16 Car. 2. 4. 12. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before me that A. B. Keeper of his
Majesty's Goal at C. in the County aforesaid, did upon the 10. day of June last
past permit D.E. to go at large contrary to the Warrant of his Commitment made
by virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles, and contrary to the Act aforesaid, These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to Charge and Command you, and every of you
that you, some or one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
A.B. Ten pounds by him forfeited for his said Offense, and that you do pay the
Moneys so levied to the Churchwardens of the Parish of T. in the said County
for the relief of the poor of the Parish.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of etc.
2. The like Mittimus, Mutatis Mutandis, if the Keeper of the House of
Correction suffer the Offender to go at large.

Escape.
XLVIII. Kilb. Precedents 82. 83. the like Mittimus for suffering one at large
to Join with the Offender in the Exercise of Religion.

To the Constable etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before us, that A. B. Keeper of his
Majesty's Goal at C. in the County aforesaid, did upon the 10. day of June last
past permit E. F. being then a Person at large, to join with D. E. a Person
Committed to his custody by virtue of an Act of Parliament lately made
(Entitled an Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles) in the
Exercise of Religion differing from the Rights of the Church of England
contrary to the Act aforesaid; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to
charge and command you, and every of you, that you some or one of you, do levy
upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. Ten Pounds by him forfeited for
his said Offense, and that you do pay the Moneys so levied to the
Churchwardens of the Parish of T. the Parish where the Offender did last
inhabit in the said County for the relief of the Poor of the said Parish:
Hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of etc.
2. The like (Mutatis Mutandis) against the Keeper of the House of Correction,
if he offend in the like Case.

Dignity.
XLIX. Kilb. Precedents 83. 84. A Warrant to levy the forfeiture of a Peer on
the first Conviction, 22 Car. 2.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as T. Lord C. a Peer of this Realm was this present day according to
the form of An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, Convicted by
Record by us made, of being present in the Parish of V. in the said County at
an Assembly Conventicle or Meeting, under Color or pretense of Exercise of
Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or Practice of the
Church of England, contrary to the Act aforesaid, These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name to charge and command you and every of you, that you, some or
one of you, do levy upon the Goods and Chattels of the said T. Lord C. Ten
pounds for the Offense aforesaid, and that you do pay the Moneys so levied to
the Churchwardens of the aforesaid Parish of V. for Relief of the Poor of the
said Parish; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the day of etc.
2. The like for the second Conviction etc. and the like for a Peers suffering
a Conventicle the first and second conviction.

L. Kilb. Precedents 868. Imprisonment.
A Mittimus for a Nonconformist etc. on 17 Car. 22. 5. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them
and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before us ( viz. two Justices etc.) that
A. B. Parson (Vicar, Curate, Lecturer or other Person in holy Orders,
Stipendary or other Person, who has been possessed of any Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual promotion) who has not declared assent to the Common Prayer pro ut
the Act of 14 Car. 2. or Preacher in Conventicle) upon the 12. day of etc. or
etc. was within five Miles of D. a City (Town Corporate or Borrough that sends
Burghesses to Parliament, or of any Parish Town or place wherein he or they
have since the Act of Oblivion been Parson Vicar Curate Stipendary or Lecturer,
or taken upon them to Preach in a Conventicle) contrary to the form of the
Statute in that Case made and provided, Entitled an Act for restraining
Nonconformists from inhabiting in Corporations: These are therefore in his
Majesty's Name, to will and require you to take the said A. B. and him convey
to the Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said Goal, and him there safely keep for six Months without Bail or
Mainprise; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals etc.
LI. West. sym^^ 2 part 101 b. 102. sect. 95. Church.
An Indictment for absence from Church, etc. 1 Eliz. 2. 14. N. 1. supra.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino rege super Sacrament' suum presentant' quod cum in
statuto in Parliament' Dom' Eliz. Dei Gratia etc. Anno regni sui primo tent'
apud W. in Com. M. inter alia inactitat' and ordinat' existit quod post Festum
Sancti Johan' Bapt' Anno Regni Dictae Dominae Reginae omnis and singula persona
sive personae Inhabitant' in hoc Regno Angliae, aut aliquo alio Dominiorum
dictae Dominae Reginae diligenter and fideliter habentes nullam legalem seu
rationabilem Excusationem abessendi adnitentur adire suam Parochialem Ecclesiam
vel Capellam consuetam vel super rationabile impediment' aliquem usitatum locum
ubi communes precationes and Divina servitia, in Actu illo mentionat' Celebrat'
fuerint tempore talis impediment' quodlibet die Dominico and alijs diebus
ordinarijs and usitatis observari ut Feestivis Diebus, and tunc and ibidem
man^re secundum ordinem and sobrie durante tempore Precium communium
Predecationum aut aliorum divinorum Servitiorum ibidem utend' and ministrand'
sub pena punitionis per censuras Ecclesiae and etiam sub pena quod quilibet
persona sic offendens forisfaciat pro qualibet tali offensa 12. denarios
levand' per Gardianos Ecclesiae parochialis ubi talis offensa foret fact' ad
usum pauperum Inhabitent' ejusd' parochiae de bonis terris and tenementis
offend' per medum districtionum pro ut in Statuto predict' Continetur.

Cumque T. R. de D. in Com. predict' Armiger, and A. uxor ejus uterque eorum
existent' etatis 16 Annorum and Amplius ac existent' Parochiani Eccles.
Parochialis de D. predict' in Com. E. predict' infra quam quidem Ecclesiam
communes Precationes and alia divina Servitia in Statut' predict' specificat'
post predict' Festum Nativitat' St Johan' Bapt' Anno primo supradict' scilicet
Die Dominico proximo post Festum St. Mich. Archangeli, Anno Regni etc. and 12.
diebus dominicis tunc proxime sequent' and 8. alijs diebus festivalibus easdem
12. dies Dominicas intervenient' Dicebantur and utebantur predict' J. and A.
non habentes legalem nec rationabilem Excusationem seu Impediment' abessendi ab
Eccles. predict' in diebus predict' tempore predict' Communum precationum
predictarum and divinorum' servitiorum' ibidem tunc Dictorum habitorum et
ministratorum non solum non adnillebantur adire Ecclesiam parochialem de D.
predict' existens eorum Ecclesiam consuetam in predicto die Dom. proxime post
predictum Festum Sancti Mich. Archangeli Anno Regni etc. et predictis alijs 12.
diebus Dominicis tunc proximum sequent' et predict' alijs 8. diebus
festivalibus inter easdem 12. dies Dominicas intervenient' tempore predict'
Communum Precationum et divinorum Servitiorum ibidem in diebus illis dictorum
Habitorum et Ministratorum, sed etiam odio Habent' et contemnent' Evangelium et
salubre Dei Verbum et dictum Dominum Reg. et Leges suas, seipsos voluntary
absentaverunt et uterque eorum voluntary seipsum absentavit ab Ecclesia
predict' die Dom. proxim' post Festum Sancti Mich. Arch' Anno Regni etc. et
predict' 12. alijs diebus tunc proxime sequent' et predict' alijs 8. diebus
festival' inter easdem 12. dies Dominicas intervenient' tempore predict'
communum Precum, Predicationum et Divinorum Servitiorum ibidem in diebus illis
dictorum habitorum et ministratorum, contra pacem et in contempt' dicti Domini
Regis nunc et Legem suam et Coronam et Dignitatem suam, ac contra form' Statut'
predict' in pernitiosum Exemplum Malefactorum etc.

the same ibid. 137 b. sect 240.

XLXII. Pract' Precedents etc. 50. 51. An Endictment for omitting the words of
signing with the Cross in Baptism, contrary to 2 et 3 Ed. 6. 1. 1. N. 8. et 1
Eliz. 2. 4. N. 1.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant, quod quidam A. B.
nuper de C. in Com. K. predict' Clericus, secundo die Sept' Anno Regni etc.
Existens Vicarius Ecclesiae Parochialis de C. predict' eodem secundo die Sept'
Anno supradict' apud C. predict' in Ecclesia Parochiali de C. predict' in Com.
predict' Sacrament' Baptismi cuidam Infanti Masculino Existent' filio Cujusdam'
C. D. ad tunc de C. predict' in Com. predict' Yeoman, administrant' et ad tunc
et ibidem in Ecclesia predict' ad eundem Infantem masculinum illum, Haec
Anglicana verba sequentia, And do sign him with the sign of the Cross; Quae
quidem verba Anglicana mentionat' et expressa sunt in libro communis
Precationis, Angl' the Book of the Common Prayer, ad tunc et ibidem voluntary
et obstinate dicere recusat et omisit in Dictae Communis Precationis
derogationem et contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' et provis. nec
non Contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam et Dignitatem suas.

2. Ibidem 172. Another Endictment for not making the sign of the Cross in
Baptism.

Middlesex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. nuper de
L. in Com. predict' Clericus, fuit et est Minister Ecclesiae Anglicanae et
Rector Ecclesiae Paroch' de L. predict' in Com. predict' per spacium 12.
mensium ult' elaps' et per idem tempus debuit et debet cantare aut dicere
communem Precationem, Anglice, the Common Prayer, secundum, modum et ordinem
libri vulgariter vocat', the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, ac administrare Sacrament' in Ecclesia predict' de L. predict' in
tali modo et forma pro ut mentionat' vel Edit' sunt in libro pred' predictus
tamen A.B. apud L. predict' in Com. predict' per 12. menses in Ecclesia
Parochiali predict' recusabat uti et dicere nec usus est precationem Communem
in Ecclesia Parochiali de L. predict' in Com. predict' in tali modo et forma
pro ut mentionatur in eodem libro, et quod predict' A. B. apud L. predict' in
Com. predict' 24. die Martij Anno Regni dicti Domini Regis nunc etc. in
Ecclesia Parochiali predict' Ministravit Sacrament' Baptismi cuidam Infanti
cujusd' C. D. in alia forma quam in dicto libro Communis Precationis
continetur, et non faciebat signum Crucis super frontem ejusdem Infantis in
Ministrand' Baptismum eidem Infanti, sed illud signum Crucis sic facere ad tunc
et ibidem contemptuose recusavit et denegavit.

Ac etiam quod predict' A. B. 20. die Martij, Anno etc. ac dictis alijs diebus
et vicibus apud L. predict' in Com. predict' in presentia quam Plurimorum
ligeorum Dicti Domini Regis nunc ad tunc et ibidem presertim in publica
Lectione sua in Ecclesia Parochiali de L. predict' in Com. predict' ad tunc et
ibidem existent' malitiose et seditiose dixit et propalavit haec Anglicana
verba sequentia, viz. That using the Cross in Baptism is Idolatry, in
defamationem libri predict' ac in contempt' dicti Domini Regis Coronam et
Dignitat' suas.

LIII. Pract. Precedents 109. An Endictment for Blasphemy.

Middlesex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. nuper de
Parochia S. Buttolfi extra Aldersgate in Com. M. predict' Gen' existens homo
impius, prophanus et Irreligiosus, ac timorem Dei in cord suo non habens, sed
instigatione Diabolica motus et seductus et veram et Christianam Religionem
Infra hoc Regnum Angliae per diversa Statuta et Acta probat' et confirmat'
scandalizare et vilificare nec non Sapientiam Omnipotentiam et Majestatem
Domini nostri Jesu Christi Blasphemare intendens ac machinans 10. die Julij
Anno etc. Apud paroch' predict' in Com. predict' haec falsa Impia Blasphematica
et Heretica verba Italica in presentia et auditu diversarum personarum linguam
Italicam been Intelligent' falso malitiose et advisate Diabolice Blasphematice
et Heretice dixit pronunciavit et alta voce publicavit, viz. Jesu Christo,
Moses, et Mahomet furmo tree grand furbe; quae quidem verba Italica sic
significant et interpretantur et eundem sensum habent pro ut haec Anglicana
verba sequentia viz. Jesus Christ, (predictum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum
unigenitum filium Dei Omnipotentis innuendo) Moses (Moysen magnum Prophetam in
sacra scriptura nominat' innuend') And Mahomet were three great Rogues, ad
grave Scandalum professionis verae Religionis Christianae, in contemptum et
Blasphemiam Deitatis Domini nostri Jesu Christi et maximam Die Omnipotentis
displicentiam, in malum et pernitiosum exemplum omnium aliorum in hujusmodi
Casu delinquent' ac contra pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam et Dignitatem suas.

Replevin, see Process, Cattle, Bailment, Request, see Process. Restitution,
see Force. Rescous and Resistance, see Escape, Force. Reparation, see Ways.
Retorn, see Certificate. Recordare, and Removing, see Certiorari. Removal, see
Poor. Revenue, see Taxes. Records, see Pain.
Riot.
Rout, Affray, Force, Sheriffs, Tumults, War, Assemblies, Rebellion,
Insurrection.
I. LAmbert 2 cap. 5. page 173. Not only the Commission 14. gives Power to
Enquire of Conventicles against the Peace, but sundry Statutes, also have
devised many means and pains to meet with and to punish the same, whereas
before they were punishable only as other Trespasses, though sometimes by a
greater, and sometimes by a smaller Fine, as the Case it self required
consideration, Crompt. 53 b. and 61. infra. Dalt. cap. 46.

II. Lambert 174. 175. 176. Of these Conventicles that bring manifest terror to
the Subject, some consist of a number of People gathered together disorderly,
for the Cause of some one or of a few Persons, and do not Breed any general or
present Danger to the Estate or Government, and yet be against Law, and be
called Riots, Routs and Assemblies against the Law, against which the Statutes
13 H. 4. 7. and 2 H. 5. 8. and 19 H. 7. 13. were specially provided, and before
that the penalty of the Statute of Northampton. 2 Ed. 3. 3. was laid upon them
by 2 Rich. 2. 6.

2. But others there be that do savor of a more general Disobedience, and be in
regard of the Number or Quarrel, a very Seed of Rebellion, if not the Weed it
self, and are therefore also sometimes Called Rumors, great Ridings, Routs and
Riots against the Peace, 15 Rich. 2. 6 7 Rich. 2. 2. 6. Sometimes Assemblies of
People in great Numbers in manner of Insurrection, 2 H. 5. 9. and sometimes
Rebellious Insurrections and Rebellious Assemblies, 15 R. 2. 6. and 2. H. 6.
14. and 1 Mar. 1 St. 2. cap. 12. etc.

3. An unlawful Assembly is of the Company of three or more Persons disorderly
coming together, forcibly to commit an unlawful act; as to Beat a Man, or to
enter upon his Possession or such like, Crompt. 61. 3.

4. A Rout says Marrow, is such a Company so assembled for their own common
Quarrel, as where the Inhabitants of a Township come forceably together to throw
down a Hedge, Ditch, or Pale, in Claiming their Common, Crompt. 61. 4.

Or to Beat a Man that has done unto them some public Offense or Displeasure.

But 18 Ed. 3. St. 1. page 159. N. speaking of Routs that are brought into the
presence of the Justices, and 2 Rich. 2. 7. that treats of Riding in great
Routs to make entry into Lands, to beat Men, or to carry away their Wives, etc.
do seem to understand the word Rout in a more ample and large meaning, Dalt.
217. cap. 85.

And therefore I will describe it thus. A Rout is a disordered Assembly of
three or more Persons moving forward to commit by force an unlawful Act; for it
is a Rout whether they put their purpose in full Execution or no, if so be that
they go, ride, or move forward after their first moving. Riot, Br. 4 5. etc.

5. A Riot is thought to be where three or more Persons be disorderly Assembled
to commit with force any such unlawful Act, and do accordingly Execute the
same, of the French Riotter to scold or brawl, because such manner of Acts be
commonly accompanied with words of brawl, Crompt. 61. 2. Dalt. 217. cap. 85.

6. And thus upon the whole Reekning an unlawful Assembly is the first degree
or beginning, a Rout the next step or proceeding, and a Riot the full Effect
and consummation of a Disordered and forbidden Action.

III. Lambert 176, 177, 178. But howsoever that stands, two special things
there are that be common, and must concur both in the unlawful Assembly, Rout,
and Riot. 1. That three Persons at the least be gathered together; for so it is
commonly holden at this day, as I have learned. 2. That their being together do
Breed some apparent Disturbance of the Peace, either by signification of
Speech, show of Armor, turbulent Gesture, or Actual and Express Violence: So
that either the Peaceable sort of Men be unquieted and feared by the Fact, or
the lighter sort and busy Bodies be imboldned by the Example, Dalt. 218. cap.
85.

2. And in these matters not only the Fact it self, but also the manner of
doing the same, falls sometime justly into Consideration, in so much as the
Lawfulness or unlawfulness of the thing it self that is done, or intended, does
not always excuse or accuse the Parties to a Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly,
but so that the manner and Circumstance of the doing must also be brought into
Judgment with it.

3. And therefore, says Mr. Marrow, the manner of the doing of a lawful thing
may make it unlawful, as if many in one Company Riding or going to the
Sessions, Fair, Market, or Church it self, will ride or go Armed to the terror
of the People; for although it be not only lawful, but meet and necessary also
to go to the Church and Sessions, yet to go in such show, it is altogether
needless, disordered, and against the Law, Crompt. 62. 74. Dalt. 221. cap. 87.

4. So if three or more shall enter into Land with a force, where their entry
is otherwise lawful.

5. And contrariwise, an Assembly to do a wrong, says he, may be so handled
that it shall prove none of these Offenses; as if I gather meet Company
together to carry away a piece of Timber, which will not be moved without a
good many, whereto I pretend right, though in Law it be another man's, Dalt.
219. 220. cap. 85.

6. And so also to do an unlawful thing, as if many do meet to play at Bowls,
Tables, or Cards, and do use no misbehaviour against the Peace, they are not
punishable in this degree, Crompt. 61 b.. 6.

7. And yet if he that carries the Piece of Timber away will use dreadful
words, as to say, that he will carry it in spite of him that has it; or that
he will have it though he dye for it, or such like; his doing may then become a
Riot, by Marrow, Crompt. 61 b.. 8.

IV. Lambert 178, 179, 180. Furthermore, the Intention and purpose of those
that be Assembled is worthy the weighing, for to use Horns on Midsomer-night in
London or on May Day in the County for sport only, is no such Offense, seeing
no terror follows it; and the words in terrorem populi, seem to be material
in an Indictment of this kind, Crompt. 61. 7. 64. 43. 3 H. 7. 1. Riots Br. 2.

2. So if the Sheriff or his Bailiff do levy People to serve the Kings Writ of
Capias, or if a Constable do gather Assistance of Men with weapon to part an
Affray, it makes no Riot, 3 H. 7. 1. 10.

3. So if a Man, hearing that another will fetch him out of his House and beat
him, do assemble company with force, it will be no unlawful Assembly, for his
House is his hold and Castle, Crompt. 64. pl. 42. and 70. pl. 2. Dalt. 217.
cap. 85.

4. But if he be only threatened that he shall be beaten, if he go to the
Market, then may he not assemble Company for his aid, because he needs not to
go thither, and he may provide for himself by Surety of the Peace, 21 H. 7. 39.
per Fineux.

5. And if many be assembled, and none of them knows to what end, it can make
no Rout nor Riot, as Marrow thought, till the Intent be known; for if the
Master intend to make a Riot, and take his usual Servants with him, not
foretelling them what he intended to do, and then commits an Outrage with
them, this is no Riot in them; for although he shall be punished, they shall be
Excused. But otherwise it is if he make them privy to his purpose, for then
they also shall be punished, by Marrow, and Reported by Dalison, Crompt. 61 b.
62. 13.

And in the former Case it is not material, whether his number of Servants be
above his degree, or no, so long as they be his Menials or Household men,
Dalison, Dalt. 220. cap. 86.

6. If many be at an Alehouse, a Christmas-Dinner, or Church-Ale and without
any intent of an Affray they suddenly fall together by the Ears, and make it
Lapitharum Convivium, yet this is no Riot, but a sudden Affray, because they
had no such Intention, Crompt. 61 b. 12.

But if in that Affray they shall be taken themselves to sundry parts, it may
become a Riot, as Marrow thinks, for then it is not the first, but a new
Assembly as it were in his meaning.

7. And if twelve Jurors being committed to their Keeper, do fall out, and
fight six against six, this makes no Riot, says Marrow, because they were
lawfully Assembled, and were compelled to be in company together.

8. But if a number of Women or Children, under the Age of Discretion, do flock
together for their own Cause, this is none Assembly punishable by these
Statutes, unless a Man of Discretion moved them to assemble for the doing of
some unlawful act, as M.E. Marrow writes, Dalt. 222. cap. 88.

Yet I remember well, that not many years ago, sundry Women were punished in
the Star Chamber, and that worthily, because putting off that shamefastness
which beseems their Sex, they Arraied themselves in the Attire of Men, and
assembling in great number, they most riotously pulled down a lawful Enclosure,
Crompt. 62. infra.

9. Finally, Marrow notes, that if the Mayor and Commonalty of a Town do
Assemble and make a Rout in their Common Quarrel, this Offense shall be Judged
and punished in their Natural Persons, and not in their Body Politic, Crompt.
62. 18.

V. Lambert. 167, 168. The Stat. 2 Ed. 3. 3. of Northampton is of late days
frequently put in ure for the punishment of forcible Entries, Crompt. 71 b. 72
a. Poult. de Pace 40.. 28.

2. That Law 2 Ed. 3. 3. in Effect, and for this purpose, is thus; No Man
whatsoever, except the Kings Servants and Ministers in his Presence, or in
Executing his Precepts, or their Offices, and such as shall assist them, and
except it be upon loyal Proclamation made for Arms to keep the Peace and that
in places where such Acts do happen, be so hardy to come before the Kings
Justices or other his Ministers doing their Office with force and Arms.

2 Ed. 3. 3. 1. N. 2. Nor bring any force in Affray of the Country.

2 Ed. 3. 3. 1. N. 3. Nor go nor ride Armed by night or by day in Fairs or
Markets, or in presence of the Justices or other Ministers, nor in any place
elsewhere, upon pain to forfeit his Armor to the King, and his Body to Prison
at the Kings pleasure.

3. Upon this Statute 2 Ed. 3. 3. he that is put out, or holden out of his Land
with force, uses to have at this day a Writ directed out of the Chancery,
either to the Sheriff only, as F. N. B. 249. E. rehearses it; for I find it
not in the Register, or else Custodibus pacis ac Vicecomitibus and eorum
cuilibet, as the common manner is.

4. Commanding that Proclamation be made upon 2 Ed. 3. 3. and that if any be
afterward found offending against the same, they shall be committed to Prison,
there to remain until some other commandment be given concerning them, and
that their Armor and Weapon shall be prised, and the same answered to the use
of the Kings Majesty.

VI. Lambert. 168, 169, 170. But forasmuch as that Justice of Peace to whom
this Writ shall be delivered is to make Execution of the same as a Minister
only, and is to certify his doing therein, I think good to lend these few
helps toward it.

2. At his coming to the Place where the force is supposed by the Writ, he may
cause three Oyes for Silence to be made, with this or such another
Proclamation; The Kings Majesty's Justice of his Peace straightly charge, and
in his Majesty's Name Commands all and every Person to keep Silence whilst
his Majesty's Writ upon the Statute made at Northampton, in the second year of
King Edw. 3. his noble Progenitor, delivered to the said Justice be read, and
Proclamation be thereupon made accordingly, Crompt. 72 Ab.

3. Then may he read the Writ, or declare the Effect thereof in English: After
that let three other Oyes be made, and thereupon may this Proclamation follow.

His Majesty's said Justice does in his Highnesses name, and by virtue of his
said Writ, straightly charge and command that no manner of Person, of what
Estate, degree, or condition soever, now being within the House of A. B. etc.
named in the said Writ, shall go Armed nor keep force of Armor or Weapon, nor
do any thing there or elsewhere in disturbance of his Majesty's Peace, or in
Offense of the said Statute, upon the pains of losing his said Armor and
Weapon, and of Imprisoning his Body at his Majesty's pleasure, Crompt. 72 b.

God save the King.

4. This done, the Justice may enter and search whether there be any force or
Armor of Weapon worn or born against this Proclamation.

Or otherwise he may Enquire thereof by a Jury, for so the Writ it self does
Warrant him to do, Kilb. Precedents 193. infra.

5. And if any such be found, he ought to Imprison the Offenders, and to seize
and appraise the Armor and Weapon so found with them.

But if upon the Proclamation made, they do depart in peacible manner, then
has he no Warrant by the Writ to commit to Prison.

6. A form of Certificate or Return of this Writ into the Chancery, is thus,
Crompt. 72 b. 73.

Upon the Writ it self these words may be endorsed;

Executio istius Brevis patet in quadam Schedula eidem Brevi consuta.

And the Schedule may be thus; Dalt. 396. cap. 129.

Ego K. T Armiger, unus Custodum Pacis Domini Regis in Com. K. certifico in
Cancellariam dicti Domini Regis, quod virtute istius Brevis mihi primo
deliberat' 10. die Apr. Anno etc. public proclamari ex part dicti Domini
Regis feci, quod B. cujus in dicto Brevi fit mentio pro ut in dicto Brevi
precipitur, and quod quidem A. C. and D. E. de F. in Com. predict' Laborers
predict' proclamat' parvi pendentes post Proclamat' predict' ibidem sic fact'
Armati fuerunt ac Armatam potentiam ibidem duxerunt, scilicet, Duas Galeas,
unum Arcu', and december sagittas, duos Gladios, and totidem pugiones in
perturbationem pacis dicti Domini Regis ac terrorem populi sui; nec non in
contempt' Statuti in dicto Brevi specificati manifestum, ac perinde dict' A.C.
and D.E. una cum Armaturis suis predict' arrestavi and seisivi and eorum
corpora ad proximam Prisonam dicti Domini Regis in Com. predict' Duci feci,
ibidem moratura donec aliud a dicto Domino Rege pro ipsorum deliberatione
habuero in mandatis: Armaturas etiam eorum predict' appretiari feci per A. B.
C. D. and E. F. de B. predict' Yeoman; ad hoc Juratos qui dicunt super
Sacrament' suum predict' quod predict' duo Galea valent 10 s. and quod dict'
Arcus and 10. Sagit' valent 6 s. and quod Gladij predict' valent 20 s. and quod
dict' Pugiones valent 5 s. and sic quod Armatura predict' valent' in toto 40 s.
de quibus paratus sum respondere secundum tenorem dicti brevis, in cujus rei
testimonium huic presenti Certificationi meae Sigillum meum apposui. Dat' apud
B. predict' Die and Anno supradict' Dalt. 396. cap. 129.

VII. Lambert 171 172. By this you have seen what one Justice of the Peace
ought to do in the Execution of this Statute 2 Ed. 3. 3. as a Minister; and by
the same you may also see what he may do therein of himself, Ex Officio, as a
Judge, and without any Writ brought unto him.

2. For not only by the plain words of 2 Ed. 3. 3. 1. N. 4. the Wardens of the
Peace have Power within their Wards, and are Commanded to Execute this Act upon
a pain, but also by good Implication in the Commission 14. it self, every
Warden of the Peace has the Statute of Northampton committed to his Charge.

3. So that both in the matter and manner the doing is all one, saving that if
he do it as a Judge he needs not to make any Proclamation, the Statute 2 Ed.
3. 3. being a Prohibition in it self; nor yet to send any Certificate into the
Chancery, but only to make his own Record of that which he shall do in this
behalf; and thereout to send some Estreat into the Exchequer, that the King may
be answered of the Armor, or of the value thereof.

4. And here perhaps the Redemption of the Imprisonment may be at the
Discretion of the same Justice, even as in 15 R. 2. 2. and 8 H. 6. 9. it is sure
it seems to be, but therein my advice shall be the same that I gave them
before.

5. Adjoining this, that in the Execution of the Statute of Northampton 2 Ed.
3. 3. the Justice of the Peace has to do with removing of the Force only, and
may not meddle with any restitution of the Possession.

VIII. F. N. B. 249. F. Rex Vicecom' etc. Quia datu' est nobis intelligi quod
quamplures malefactores and pacis nostrae perturbatores in Conventiculis
Congregati Armati and modo Guerrimo Arraiati apud C. accederunt and Clausas and
domos quorundam ligeorum nostrorum ibidem per vim and potentiam Armatam intrati
and res' redditus and proventus ac alia bona sua quaecunque de quibuscunque
possessionibus suis ibidem proveinent' capere consentiunt and asportare
intendunt and ad hoc parant in nostri contempt' ac quorundam de populo nostro
ibidem terrorem and commotionem manifestam ac contra form' Statut' apud
Northampton de Armis contra pacem Domini E. nuper Regis Angliae terij
progenitoris nostri non portand' editi et contra pacem nostram: Nos Statutum
predict' inviolabiliter observari et idem infringentes Juxta vim et effectum
ejusdem Statut' Castigari facere volentes et puniri tibi precipimus quod apud
villam de C. et alibi in Com. tuo ubi necesse fuerit public proclamari et ex
part nostra firmiter inhiberi facias ne quis eujuscunque status sive
conditionis fuerit ibidem Armatus contra pacem nostram ac form' Statuti
predicti accedat nec armatam potentiam nec quicquam aliud ibidem seu alibi
facere per quod Pax nostra seu Statut' predict' laedi vel populus noster
terreri turbari aut indebite gravari poterit quov^smodo sub paena Amissionis
Armorum suorum et incarcerationem corporum suorum ad voluntatem nostram pro ut
in Statut' predict' before continetur: Et omnes illos quos post et contra
Proclamationem et inhibitionem predict' inveneris contraria facientes vel per
inquisitionem per te modo et forma debitis cap end' inveneris fecisse una cum
Armis et Armaturis suis secum invent' Arrestari et capi et corpora ipsorum
arrestatorum in Prisona nostra quousque aliud a nobis pro deliberatione sua
habueris in mandatum salve custodiri ac Arma et Armatura predict' appretiari et
nobis inde Respondere facias, nos vero in Cancellaria nostra sub sigillo tuo de
nominibus Arrestatorum predict' ac de Armis et Armaturis suis et quid et
cujusmodi fuerint et de pretio vel vero valor eorundem ac de toto facto tuo in
hac part reddatis distinct et aperte sine dilatione certiores hoc Breve nobis
Remittent' etc. Test Crompt. 71 b. 72 a.

IX. Crompt. 72. Nota, if a Justice executes the Statute of Northampton 2 Ed.
3. 3. aforesaid, as a Justice, virtute officij, (for it is committed to his
Charge by the Commission 14) then he need not make any Proclamation as it
seems, because a Proclamation is not mentioned in the Statute.

X. Crompt. 76 Ab. See of forc^ble Entries, the Writ of Northampton, F. N. B.
249. F. supra. 8. whereby it appears, that the Weapon and Armor of such as keep
Lands with force after the Proclamation made upon the said Writ, shall be
forfeited; and this is by reason of 2 Ed. 3. 3. that says, that none shall
come before the Sheriff, Justices, or etc. with force when they are in doing
their Office, nor shall bring any force in affray of the Peace, nor shall go or
ride Armed by night nor by day in any place, on pain of forfeiture of their
Armor to the King, and of their Bodies to Prison at the Kings will, and by 20
R. 21. N. they shall make a Fine and Ransom to the King in that Case.

2. Nota, This word Armor is taken as well for Weapons as for Harness, as
appears by the Writ of Northampton F. N. B. 249. F. supra.

3. Nota that the Armor or Weapons that a Man has, who keeps a House where
etc. with force shall be praised and answered to the King as appears by the
Writ F. N. B. 249. F. supra. etc.

4. A Servant in husbandry shall forfeit his Dagger, Sword or Buckler that he
bears, if it be not in traveling with his Master, or in the business of his
Master, or in defense of the Realm, by 12 Rich. 2. 6. N. see 5 Eliz. 4. N.
which does not take away the Statute.

Affray.
XI. Lambert. 126. An Affray may be without word or blow given, as if a Man
shall show himself furnished with Armor or Weapon, which is not usually worn
and born, it will strike a fear into others that be not Armed as he is, and
therefore both the Statute of Northampton, 2 Ed. 3. 3. made against the wearing
of Armor and Weapon, and the Writ thereupon grounded (supra.) do speak of it by
the words Affray del pais and in terrorem populi.

Justices.
XII. Lambert. 181. 182. one Justice of Peace can neither make enquiry of a Rout
or Riot when it is done, Crompt. 61 b. 9. Dalt. 109. cap. 46. nor assess any
Fine, nor yet Award any Process for it, nor otherwise meddle with it in the
very nature of a Rout or Riot, but only of a Trespass against the Peace, or
upon the Statute 2 Ed. 3. 3. of Northampton, or 8 H. 6. 9. of forcible Entries,
etc.

2. And therefore if he hear of any Rout, or of any intention of a Riot, he
alone, or with his Servants may go to the Place, and such as he finds riotously
Assembled and Armed, he may Arrest to find surety of their good abearing, and
may commit them to ward, if they refuse to give it, and may take their Weapons
from them, Crompt. 62. pl. 19.

3. And if he come to the Place, and do not find them, yet coming thither, he
may leave his Servants there to make such Arrest when they shall come; so also
if he be sick, he may send his Servants to the Place to Arrest them.

4. And this is the Judgment of all the Court in that Case of Sir Thomas Green,
14 H. 7. 8. in the Book at large Grounded upon the words both of the Commission
14 of the Peace, and as I take it, of 34 Ed. 3. 1. N. for that which is found
in the report of that same Case by Fitzh. Justices of Peace; 9 ( Peace Br. 7.)
having many other matters not extant in the Book of the Terms, seems rather
to pertain to 13 H. 4. 7. N. than to 34 Ed. 3. 1. N.

5. But if one Justice of the Peace alone will take upon him to Record a Riot
that he sees, the Party shall not be concluded thereby, for he may Traverse
it, infra.

6. And if the Justice will commit one to ward, pretending untruly that he did
a Riot, where he did none, an Action of Trespass lies for the party against
him, Fitz. J. P. 9. infra.

7. So that upon the whole matter, one Justice of the Peace alone may do
somewhat to prevent a Rout or a Riot before it be done, and for the stay of it
whilst it is in doing, but nothing in effect to punish it as a Riot or Rout
when it is committed and done.

8. For as Judge Fineux says, 14 H. 7. 8. in the Case of Sir Thomas Green, the
Statute (which I take to be that of 34 Ed. 3. 1. rather than 13 H. 4. 7. which
by express words requires the presence of two Justices at the least) was given
as a hasty remedy, and for to prevent a mischief being imminent, and before the
eye, and therefore the Law shall largely construe the Authority of a Justice of
Peace in that behalf, Crompt. 121 17. so that he shall neither need to make any
Precept in writing, nor to be present in his own Person, but may use all
reasonable means for prevention and stay of the Evil.

9. And yet the ordinary Power of punishing Routs and Riots rests not in his
hand alone, but rather belongs unto two Justices of the Peace etc.

XIII. Lambert 309, 310, 311, 312. by 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 1. If a Riot, Assembly,
or Rout of People against the Law be made, the Justices of Peace, or three, or
two at the least of them, and the Sheriff and Undersheriff of the County shall
come with the Power of the County, if need be, to Arrest them, and shall Arrest
them, Crompt. 199 Ab.

13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 2. And shall have Power to Record that which they shall find
so done in their presence against the Law.

13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 3. And by that Record such Offenders shall be Convicted in
manner and form as it is contained in the Statute of forcible Entries, ( viz.
15 R. 2. 2.)

13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. And if such Trespassers be departed before their coming,
then these Justices of Peace, or three, or two of them, shall diligently
enquire within a Month after such Riot, Assembly, or Rout made, and thereof
shall hear and determine according to the Law of the Land, Crompt. 199 b.

13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 1. And if the truth may not be found in the manner as
aforesaid, then within a Month then next following, the said Justices and
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, shall certify before the King and his Counsel all
the Deeds and Circumstances thereof.

13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 2. Which Certificate shall be of like force as the verdict
of 12. Men, etc.

13 H. 4. 7. 3. N. 1. And if such Offenders do traverse the matter so
certified, then the Certificate, and Traverse shall be sent in B. R. to be
tried, and determined as Law requires, infra.

13 H. 4. 7. 4. N. 1. And that the Justice of Peace Dwelling most nighest in
every County, or Undersheriff shall do Execution of this Statute, every one
upon pain of one C l. to be paid to the King as often as they shall be found in
default.

2. Whereupon 19 H. 7. 13. 1. N. 9. Adds, that if the said Riot, Rout, or
unlawful Assembly be not found by the said Jury, by reason of any Maintenance
or imbracery of the said Jury, then the same Justices and Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, shall also Certify the Names of the Maintainers and Imbraceors
in that behalf, if any be, with their Misdemeanors, that they know; upon pain
of every of the said Justices and Sheriff, or Undersheriff to forfeit 20 l. if
they have no reasonable excuse for not Certifying the same. Lambert. 366.

19 H. 7. 13. 1. N. 10. which Certificate so made shall be of like force as a
Verdict, etc.

19 H. 7. 13. 1. N. 11. And every Person duly proved to be a Maintainer or
Imbraceor in the same, shall forfeit 20 l. to the King, and shall be committed
to ward, there to remain by the Discretion of the Justices.

3. Hereunto also 2 H. 5. 8. 2. N. 5. adjoyneth further, that the Kings Liege
People being sufficient to Travel, shall be assistant to these Justices
Sheriffs, or Under-Sheriffs, when they shall be reasonably warned to ride with
them in Aid to resist such Riots, Routs, and Assemblies, upon pain of
imprisonment, and to make Fine and Ransom to the King.

2 H. 5. 8. 2. N. 1. Provided always, that the said Justices, Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, shall do their said Offices, at the Kings Costs in going,
tarrying and returning, by payment thereof to be made by the Sheriff, by
Indenture between him and them of the said payment, Lambert. 365.

2 H. 5. 8. 2. N. 2. And that such Rioters attainted of great and heinous
Riots, shall have one whole years Imprisonment at the least, without being let
out of Prison by Bail, Mainprise, or in any other manner, during the year
aforesaid.

2 H. 5. 8. 2. N. 3. And that Rioters attainted of petty Riots, shall have
Imprisonment as best shall seem to the King, and to his Counsel.

2. H. 5. 8. 2. N. 4. And that the Fines of such Rioters attainted shall be by
the same Justices Increased and put in greater Sums than they were wont to be
put in such Cases before that time, in Aid and supportation of the Costs of the
Justices and other Officers aforesaid in this behalf.

4. Now by 2 H. 5. 9. 2. N. 1. If it be witnessed by two Justices of the Peace,
and the Sheriff, by letters under their Seals to the Lord Chancellor of
England, that any Murders, Manslaughters, Batteries, Robberies, Assemblies of
People in great number in manner of Insurrection, or other Rebellious Riots,
have been done, and that such Offenders have withdrawn themselves to the intent
to Avoid the Execution of the Common Law, then 2 H. 5. 9. 1. N. 3. The Lord
Chancellor may make a Writ of Capias, and 2 H. 5. 9. 1. N. 6. if need be, a
Proclamation etc.

Which Statute 2 H. 5. 9. Was made to endure to the next Parliament, and so
discontinued; but it was revived by 8 H. 6. 14. 1. N. 15. and made perpetual,
which 8 H. 6. 14. 1. N. 11. moreover ordains, that before this Writ of Capias
shall be awarded, two Justices of the Peace, and the Sheriff of the Shire where
such Riot is supposed, ought to witness that the common Voice and Fame runs
in the said County of the same Riots, 8 H. 6. 14. 2. N. 1.

XIV. Lambert. 313, 314, 315. Forasmuch as the Power given by 17 Rich. 2. 8. N.
for repressing of great Assemblies and Riots was delivered with such
conjunctive and general words, viz. To the Sheriffs, and other the Kings
Ministers, that it was often doubted not only who were meant by the word
Ministers, but also whether the Sheriff, and any of those Ministers apart,
might perform the Service, or that they ought all to join together therein,
Crompt. 62. 15. infra.

2. Therefore this Statute 13 H. 4. 7. N. clears those Questions and puts
express Power into the Hands, of any three, or two Justices of the Peace, and
of the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, not only to Arrest such Riotors, but also to
Convict them of their Offenses, by recording of that which they should see to
be done against the Peace, Dalt. 217. cap. 85.

3. And this Authority of Assembling the Power of the County, and of Arresting
and Imprisoning the Rioters, was once before this time, namely 2 Rich. 2. 7.
committed to some, but it was by and after, even in the self same year of the
same King, 2 Rich. 2. St. 2, cap. 2. resumed as a thing overhard to be born,
that a Freeman should be Imprisoned without an Indictment or other Trial by
his Peers, as 9 H. 3. 29. Magna Charta speaks, until that the Experience of
greater Evils had prepared and made the Stomach of the Commonwealth able and
fit to digest it.

4. Now whereas here 13 H. 4. 7, 1. N. 1. is mention of the Power of the
County, by virtue of those words Master Marrow thinks that the Justices of
the Peace, Sheriff, or Undersheriff ought to have the aid and attendance of
all Knights, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Laborers, Servants, Apprentices and Villains,
and likewise of Wards, and of other young Men that be above the Age of sixteen
years, because all of that Age are bound to have Harness by the Statute of
Winchester, 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. cap. 6. 1. N. Dalt. 113. cap. 46.

5. But by 13 H. 4. 7.. 1. N. 1. Women, Ecclesiastical Persons, and such as be
decrepit, or do labor of any continual infirmity, shall not be compelled to
attend; for the Statute 2 H. 5. 8. 2. N. 5. which also works up-the same
Ground says, That Persons sufficient to travel shall be assistant in this
service.

6. And on 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 1. It is referred to the Discretion of these
Justices, Sheriff, or Undersheriff, how many, or how few they will have to
attend upon them in this business, and how, or in what sort also they shall be
armed, weaponed, or otherwise furnished for it, Crompt. 62 b. pl. 20.

7. But be it that Information be made to these Justices, and Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, that certain Persons be riotously assembled at Dale, and they do
thereupon gather People to suppress them, and when they come to the Place, they
find no Riot there; yet are they Excusable for this Assembly o^ Power so made
by them, because they did it by Information, Crompt. 64 b. pl. 49.

8. And although they do so much without any Information, yet if they find a
Riot when they come to the place, they shall not only be Excused for calling
together such company upon their own motion, but may also lawfully proceed to
punish the Offenders, Justices, etc. Fitzh. 9. Crompt. 64 b. pl. 59. Dalt. 110.
cap. 46.

9. And this they ought to do by Arrest, if they be present, Crompt. 65. pl. 53.

10. In the Execution of which Arrest, they may also Justify the beating,
wounding, or Killing of any of the Rioters that shall resist it, Crompt. 62 b.
pl. 20.

11. So if they meet with the Offenders in their way Riotously Arrayed, and
coming from the Place, they may nevertheless Arrest them for their unlawful
Assembly, Crompt. 63. pl. 32.

12. And after this Arrest so made, the Power of the County ought to aid the
Sheriff, for Conveying the Rioters unto the Goal, without which the Arrest were
but a Nugation.

13. And in this point, it differs by the Opinion of Marrow, from the Arrest
of Felon, by Hue and Cry; for there, says he, when they have once delivered
the Felon unto the Sheriff, they are no longer compellable to wait upon him.

XV. Lambert. 315, 316, 317. The Arrest thus made, these Justices, Record.
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, ought to make a Record in writing of that which
they see and find; the which since it is a Conviction in it self against the
Offenders, ought to be formal and certain as well for the time and place, as
for the Number, Weapon, manner, and other Circumstances; for the Parties shall
be concluded thereby, and shall not be received to traverse or deny it, because
the view of a Riot, as Mr. Fitzherbert says, is not to be traversed.

2. Insomuch as if they either do Record that they saw a Riot, wherein truth
there was none at all, or that it do afterward appear by the Record it self,
that that Act which they recorded does not amount to a Riot, yet be the Parties
without any remedy, Crompt. 63. pl. 33. 65. pl. 55, 56. Dalt. 109. cap. 46.
infra.

3. And if a Man be bound to the Peace, and afterward such a Record of a Riot
is made against him and others, he shall neither justify, as Mr. Marrow
holds, nor plead not Guilty in a Scire Facias upon his Recognizance.

4. If therefore a Man be slain or maimed, or a Rescous done to the Officer by
such a Riot, then the Record ought to be Riotose occiderunt, or Riotose
Mahemaverunt, or Riotose Rescusserunt, and not Felonice nor simply
Rescusserunt, because their Authority in this Case is restrained to the Riot
only, and extends not to the Felony.

But so that the Parties may, notwithstanding that Record, plead not Guilty to
the Felony, or to the Rescous, howsoever for the Riot they are Estopt.

5. And this Record ought to remain with the one of them, and they, and none
other Justices of the Peace, shall Imprison the Rioters and assess their Fine,
by Marrow.

Which Fine they are willed by 2 H. 5. 8. 2, N. 4. to put in greater Sums then
they were wont to be put in such Cases, for supportation of the Costs of the
said Justices, and other Officers in this behalf, as well in going and
tarrying, as retorning, whereof payment ought to be made by the Sheriff by
Indenture thereof between him and them.

6. But if the Rioters shall Escape after that these Justices, Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, do come and see the Riot, then can they neither Arrest them at
any other time, says Mr. Marrow, nor Award Process against them upon that
Record which they do make, Crompt. 63 b. pl. 38.

And then that Record must be sent into B. R. from which place Process may be
made upon it, where also the Parties shall not be admitted to any Traverse, but
must of necessity make Fine for their Offenses.

7. And now, if these Justices, Sheriff, or Undersheriff, shall go to see one
Riot, and then another Riot falls out in their presence, yet may they make a
Record of that, by Marrow.

So if they be assembled for some other Cause of Service, or for some private
business; as for an Arbitrament or such like matter; and a Riot happens to be
committed in their sight, they may Record it, by Marrow.

8. Likewise if the Rioters shall make a Riot upon the Justices and Sheriff
that do come of purpose to Arrest them from the former Riot, they may Record
that also, by Marrow.

And so may they, as I think, Record any Riot that shall be done upon
themselves, whilst they be assembled for any other Cause than for to suppress a
Riot, though Mr. Marrow seems to deny it.

XVI. Lambert. 318. 319. If two Justices of the Peace, without the Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, shall see certain Persons in doing any Riot, they may cause them
to be Arrested, and may make a Record of that offense, whereof the Parties
shall be for ever Concluded, Justices of Peace 9. whereto Fitzh. adds in his
Book of Justices of Peace 17. that if two such Justices shall make such a
Record, wherein truth they see no such Riot, that yet the Parties shall be
Estopt, and are without remedy.

2. How this Record may be made without the Sheriff or Undersheriff, since
none other Statute but 13 H. 4. 7. gives this Power of recording, but this
only, I cannot hitherto perceive, unless it be understood of a Riot committed
in their presence whilst they be sitting in judicial place, as in the Sessions,
or at the least done to their disturbance when they be coming unto Sessions;
and so far in this way with him goes 7 Ed. 4. 18. pl. as well as 14 H. 7. 8.
Justices etc. 9.

XVII. Lambert. 319. 320. The Recording of a Riot by the Justices, and Sheriff,
or Undersheriff, Crompt. 66 b. Dalt. 397, cap. 130. Poult. de Pace etc. 86. 8.

Kent ss.
Memorand' quod 20. die Jan. Anno Regni etc. nos E. H. Miles, and J. L. Miles,
duo Justiciariorum dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Com. predict' etc.
assignatorum, and M. B. ad tunc Vicecomes ejusdem Comitatus ad gravem
queremoniam and humilem petionem A. B. de C. in dicto Comitatu Yeoman, in
proprijs personis nostris accessimus ad Domum mansionalem ipsius A. B. in C.
predict' ad tunc and ibidem invenimus D. E. F. G. H. J. de C. predict'
Laborers, ac alios malefactores and pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatores
ignotos ad numerum december personarum modo guerrino Arraiatos, viz. Gladijs,
Pugionibus, Galeis, Loricis Arcubus and Sagittis illicite and riotose
Aggregatos, and eandem Domum obsidentes and multa mala in ipsum A. B.
comminantes in magnam pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbationem ac populi sui
terrorem, and contra formam Statuti in Parliament' Domini Henrici nuper Regis
Angliae quarti, Anno regni sui 13. tento editi and provisi, ac propterea nos
prefati E. H. ct J. L. and M. B. predict' D. E. F. G. H. J. etc. tunc and
ibidem Arrestari ac proximae Goalae dicti Domini Regis in Com. predict' Duci
fecimus per visum and recordum nostrum de illicita Congregatione and Riota
predict' convictos, ibidem moraturos quousque finem dict' Domino Regi pro inde
fecerint; incujus rei in Testimonium huic presenti Recordo nostro sigilla
nostra apposuimus. Dat. apud predict' die and Anno primum predictis.

2. Imprisonment.
The Mittimus for conveying the Rioters to the Goal may be easily (with a few
words of change) framed out of that which is in Tit. Force 24. Dalt. 398. cap.
130.

XVIII. Lambert. 320, 321, 322. But now, Enquest.
as the Laws have laid down this Order of proceeding against the Riotors that
shall be apprehended in their Offense, so have they also provided that if the
Offenders be gone, yet their Fault shall not escape with them.

And therefore these Justices are commanded first to enquire of that by others,
which they, and the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, did not see and find, and if the
truth may not thereby be found, then to certify what be the Impediments.

2. To this enquiry the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, be not associated as they
were before in Arresting the Rioters, and recording their disorder, because
they are now Ministers for returning of the enquiry, and therefore to be spared
from being Judges therein, Crompt 67 b. infra.

3. And albeit these Justices do not go to see the Riot, as 13 H. 4 7. 1. N. 1.
bids, yet may they enquire thereof within the Month after, Dalt. 110. cap.
46.

4. Every Juror of this Enquiry ought to have lands in that County to the value
of 20 s. by the year, of Freehold, above all charges, or 26 s. 8 d. of
Copyhold, or of both: Upon every of which Jurors the Sheriff ought also to
return 20 s. in issues at the first day, and 40 s. at the second day, 19 H. 7.
13. N. Crompt. 67.

5. Moreover where 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. says that the same Justices shall
enquire, yet if any other Justices of Peace there, and not they shall do it,
that will suffice, by Marrow.

6. Neither is it of such necessity to have enquiry within the Month by 13 H.
4. 7. 1. N. 4. that for default thereof the Presentment shall be void; for the
Justices of Peace may enquire thereof at any time by force of their Commission
14.

But if it be not within the Month, every of them that be the next Justices is
in Danger to lose 100 l. for it, by 13 H. 4. 7. 4. N. 1. Lambert. 366.

And therefore if these Justices do charge the Jury within the Month, and do
give day unto them for yielding their Presentment after their Month, the
Statute 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. is not offended by it, by Marrow.

7. But if it happen the Parties to fall to an accord amongst themselves, so as
none of them will solicit the Justices to make the enquiry, yet ought the
Justices to proceed ex officio, as knowing that either some of the Jury may
have knowledge of the Fact, or that upon Proclamation made to give Evidence for
the King, some other Persons may come forth ready to inform them, Crompt. 62 b.
pl. 24.

8. The truth of the matter being found by this Enquiry, these Justices have
Authority by this Statute, not only to make out Process against the Offenders,
under their own Test, but also to commit them to prison till they make their
Fine, and to deliver them after payment of the same, or upon Sureties taken for
it, or otherwise to receive their Traverse, and thereupon if the matter will so
serve, to discharge and dismiss them.

9. For to all these Effects, as I think, the words 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. (hear
and determine according to the Law of the Land) do lead and enable him.

Certificate.
XIX. Lambert. 322, 323, 324. On the other side, if by this enquiry the fault be
not brought to light, being hindered either by the malicious perversity of the
Jurors, or by the unlawful maintenances, countenances, or embracery of other
Men that put themselves into the cause, yet ought there by 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 1.
within one Month after such enquiry, a Certificate to be made as well of the
names of the Principal Offenders, and of so much of the Fact and Circumstances
thereof, as may by any ways or means appear, as also of the names of such
Maintainors, and Imbracers and of their Misdemeanors in this behalf, Crompt.
167 b. 863. pl. Dalt. 120. cap. 46.

2. And here 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 1. the Sheriff, or his Undersheriff, is once
more called to this service, and joined with these Justices, who by reason of
his presence at the enquiry may both help to epsy the Evil, and add force and
credit to the Certificate, the end of which Certificate is but only to put the
Offenders to Answer, Crompt. 63. pl. 33.

3. For although the words of the Statute 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 2. do make the
Certificate equal in force with the Verdict of 12. Men; yet forasmuch as it
follows in the same Statute, 13 H. 4. 7.. 3. N. 1. that the Certificate may
be traversed, that is a plain Proof that it is no Conviction at all, but is
only in the nature of a Declaration, Presentment, or Endictment at the common
Law.

4. And therefore also it ought to comprehend the certainty of the time, place,
persons, and other Circumstances, though perhaps, as Mr. Marrow holds it,
needs not to express the Additions of the Parties, as not being within the
words of 1 H. 5. 5. N. because no Process of Utlary does lie upon it, Crompt.
63. pl. 31.

5. And whereas the enquiry is good by 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. though it be had
after a Month from the Offense committed, this Certificate, 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N.
1. says Mr. Marrow, is not good unless it be made within the Month after the
enquiry, because the Power of certifying is given by the Statute only, which is
the Warrant that they must pursue.

6. However, where the Statute 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 1. wills that they shall
certify before the King and his Council, it seems to me that the same ought
to be done, either to the Body (and Board of the Privy Council, or into the
Star Chamber at the least, because that the Statute it self does by express
words 13 H. 4. 7. 3. N. 3. distinguish the King and his Counsel here both from
the Chancery, and from the Kings Bench, which in many other Cases be taken for
the King and his Council also, Crompt.

7. And this I do the rather note, because I have read of Certificate of this
kind, sent by Justices of Peace into the Star Chamber, for that it is penal in
those Justices, Sheriffs, or Under-Sheriffs, if they shall not address their
Certificate as the Statute does appoint them.

8. But now, if two Justices and the Sheriff go to see a Riot, and other two
Justices make the enquiry, then the one sort, or the other of them, with the
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, may make the Certificate, by Marrow, Dalt. 121. cap.
46.

9. And if four Justices, the Sheriff, and Undersheriff, go to see a Riot, and
two of those Justices, and the Sheriff, Join in one Certificate, and the other
two, and the Undersheriff, join in another Certificate, then the Certificate
whereunto the Sheriff is party, shall be preferred, because the Authority of
the Undersheriff is overshadowed by the Sheriffs own presence, by Marrow: But
otherwise, if two Certificates be equal then that, shall be preferred which is
best for the King.

10. And the same Rule must hold where the Enquiry and Certificate shall
disagree; for if the Enquiry shall find that the Riot was made by twelve
Persons, where in truth it was made by a hundred; or if the Enquiry be of
twelve persons, and the truth is that those twelve were Harnassed; or if the
Endictment be of a Riotous Assault only, and the Riotous did both make an
Assault and did beat and Wound, in these and the like Cases the Certificate may
well be made so, as the omission in the Enquiry shall be supplied by it, by
Marrow, Crompt. 63 b. pl. 37. 39

Howbeit, he says, that if they shall vary only in the day, then the
Endictment shall be preferred.

11. And if after the Enquiry, and before the Certificate, the Sheriff, dye, or
one of the Justices be put out of the Commission, no Certificate can then be
made, by Marrow, infra.

But if the Riot were recorded by the Justices and Sheriff, and the Rioters do
escape, yet may that Justice of the Peace so put out of the Commission, ioyn
with the other Justice, and the Sheriff in their Certificate of the same, by
Mar.

But if the Riot were recorded by the Justices and Sheriff, and the Rioters do
escape, yet may that Justice of the Peace so put out of the Commission, join
with the other Justice, and the Sheriff in their Certificate of the same by
Marrow.

XX. Lambert. 325, 326, 327. Upon which words 13 H. 4. 7. 4. N. 1. these notes
may be gathered.

1. That no Justice of Peace, dwelling out of the County where the Riot is, can
be charged, although he be the next unto the Place, Crompt. 63 b. pl. 34.

2. That if any Justices that be not next unto the Place shall Execute the
Statute, then that will Excuse those Justices that be the next, because they
all have Power by the first part of the Statute 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. Crompt. 62
b. pl. 26 infra. Crompt. 63 b. pl. 36.

Yea, all the Justices of the Peace within the Commission and County ought to
supply the default of the next Justices, if they have notice of such unlawful
Assembly, Rout, or Riot; for so was it lately adjudged in the Star Chamber,
Crompt. 62 b. 21 infra.

Howbeit that penalty of 100 l. 13 H. 4. 7. 4. N. 1. was there laid upon the
next Justices only, and the residue were fined by the Discretion of that Court,
according to the Exigence and temper of their fault, Lambert 366.

3. It is to be gathered, that if one or two of the Justices of the Peace that
be next to the place, shall come to Execute the Statute, and the Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, do not come at all, yet those Justices shall be Excused for
their 100 l. Crompt. 63 b. pl. 35.

And Mr. Marrow thinks that in this last Case the Justices be bound to send
for the Sheriff, or Undersheriff, and not they for the Justices, Crompt. 62 b.
pl. 22.

And in the same Case also it seems that the Justices shall be fined if they
Arrest not the Riotors, or do not moreover all that which without the Sheriff,
or Undersheriff, they are herein by any way Authorized to perform, infra.

4. That they shall do Execution of this Statute, 13 H. 4. 7. that is to say,
of all and every part thereof respectively, as to such Justices, Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, is thereby appointed.

But whether they are to take notice of such Riots at their peril, or may
safely expect the Information thereof, I find it both doubted and undecided,
Dyer 100, pl. 25. infra. Dalt. 110. cap. 46.

XXI. Lambert 327, 328, 329. The Precept to the Sheriff for Enquiry upon a
Riot: Crompt. 66 b. Dalt, 398. cap. 130. Kilb. Precedents 193. Poult. de Pace
26 b. 9.

M. S. Miles, and M. H. Armiger, duo Justiciariorum etc. assignatorum
Vicemomiti ejusdem Comitatus, salutem,
ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi precipimus quod Venire Facias coram nobis
apud J. in Com. predict' 29. Jan' proximum futuro 24. probos sufficientes and
legales homines de Comitatu predicto, quorum quilibet habeat terras and
tenementa infra dictum Comitat' liberi tenement' per chartam ad Annuum valorem
20. solid' aut per Copiam rotulorum curiae ad Annuum valorem 16. solid' and 8.
denar' aut per utrumque ultra omnes reprisas ad inquirend' pro dicto Domino
Rege ac pro indemnitate nostra in hac part super Sacrament' suum de quibusdam
illicitis aggregrationibus and Riotis apud C. in Com. predicto nuper commissis
ut dicitur and hoc nullatenus omittas sub paena 20. libr. quam incursurus es si
in Executione premissorum defeceris, and habeas ibi tunc nomina Juratorum
predictorum and hoc preceptum.

Datum sub sigillis nostris 20. die Jan' Anno Regni etc.
2. The Entry of the Presentment or Enquiry, Crompt. 67. Dalt. 358. cap. 130.
Pault. de Pace 26 b. 9.

Kent ss.
Inquisitio pro Domino Rege etc. Capt. apud S. in Com. predict' 20. die Jan.
Anno Regni etc. coram M. S. Milite, and M. H. Armiger', qui ad hoc Jurati and
onerati dicunt super Sacrament' suum predictum quod' D. E. F. G. H. J. simul
cum alijs Malefactoribus and Pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus ignotis
ad numerum 7 personarum modo guerrino Arraiati Vi and Armis, viz. Hawberdis,
Gladiis, Arcubus, and Sagittis 20. die mensis Januarij ultimo predicto apud C.
in Com, predict' inter horas octavam and nonam Post Meridiem ejusdem diei domum
Mansionalem A. B. de C. predect' Yeoman, scituat' in C. predict' Riotose
fregerunt and intraverunt and in ipsum A. B. tunc and ibidem insultum fecerunt
ac ipsum tunc and ibidem verberaverunt vulneraverunt and indignis modis
tractaverunt ita quod de vita ejus desperabatur, in magnam Pacis dicti Domini
Regis perturbationem and Populi terrorem ac contra formam Statuti de Riottis,
Routis, and Congregationibus gentium illicitis in Parliamento Domini H. nuper
Regis Angl. 4. Anno Regni sui 13. tento provisi and editi.

3. And as for the Certificate, 13 H. 4. 7. 2. N. 1. which ought to be made to
the King and Counsel, that may be done in English by way of a Letter,
comprehending the truth of the matter present, as the case shall require.

XXII. Crompt. 12. Ab. Nota, This Precept, supra, is not to bring a Jury from
any special place but to Summon 24. within the County, by 19 H. 7. 13. N.
otherwise it is in the Case of 8 H. 6. 9. N. of forcible Entries.

2. Nota, Though that the Sheriff of the County shall be a Party to the
recording of a Riot by 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 2. yet he ought not to sit upon the
Inquisition with the Justices, because this is not given by the said Statute 13
H. 4. 7. 1. N. 4. but he may be there as Sheriff, Lambert. 32. supra.

XXIII. Crompt. 61 1. Imprisonment.
At the Common Law a Riot was punished as a Trespass, and the Fine was according
to the quantity of the Offense by Marrow Lect. 8. and Imprisonment is given by
the Statutes thereof made, Lambert. 173. supra.

XXIV. Crompt. 61 b. 10. If the Justices and Sheriff, or Undersheriff, Record
the Force, and do not commit the Riotors to Prison, or if they commit them, and
do not Record the Force, they shall pay every one 100 l. by 13 H. 4. 7. 4. N.
1, ( supra 18. N. 2. and 20. N. 3.) because they have not Executed the Statute
according to it, for the Statute 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 1. is that they shall Record
and commit.

XXV. Crompt. 62. 21. If the two Justices nearest to the Place, where etc. and
the Sheriff, or Undersheriff do not Execute the said Statute of of 13 H. 4. 7.
4. N. 1. they shall pay every one 100 l. and the other Justices of the same
County where the Riot was made, shall be fined for not redressing of the Riot,
if there be any default in them, as it happened 23 Eliz. in the Star Chamber in
the Case of Drayton Basset supra, Dalt. 109. 110. cap. 47.

XXVI. Crompt. 61 b. 11. When Men are Indicted of a Riot, they most commonly
pray to be admitted to a Fine, and thereby they are not Imprisoned, which will
give more benefit to the Endictee than the Fine, which is most commonly of
small Sums, and therefore it will be good to use discretion in the admittance
of him to a Fine ( Crompt. 145 pl. 8.) Dalt. 119. cap. 46.

2. Quaere if he prays to be admitted to a Fine, if the Court cannot force
him to a Traverse, so that he may be convicted of a Riot and be Imprisoned,
unless he confesses the Indictment in Court, Crompt. 159 b. pl. 17. 21.

XXVII. Crompt. 62. pl. 15. Nota, That in the Case of the Riot committed at
Draiton Basset, in the County of Stafford, 21 Eliz. It was taken, that where 17
Rich. 2. 8. of Riots speaks, that Sheriffs, and other the Kings Ministers,
shall take Rioters, etc. that under this word (Ministers) the Justices of Peace
are comprised, etc. Lambert 313. supra.

And see Fitzh. Justices of Peace 156. that he conceived that the Constables of
the Vills had Power to do as the Sheriff might by the said Statute 17. Rich. 2.
8. N. by reason of this word Minister, Crompt. 158. and 65 b. pl. 58.

XXVIII. Crompt. 62. pl. 16. The Queens Attorney, viz. Sir Gilbert Gerrard,
exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber upon 17 Rich. 2. 8. N. because the Sheriff
and Justices of Peace of Stafford did not remove the force that was in the
Manor House of Drayton Basset, and the Sheriff, and diverse of the Justices
there were Fined, Crompt. 68 b. pl. 5.

XXIX. Crompt. 62 b. pl. 22. It seems that the Justices of Peace must have
notice of the Riot given to them, or otherwise it must be so notorious that by
common intendment they may have Notice, and yet 13 H. 4. 7. 1. N. 1. speaks not
of any notice; see Dyer 210. pl. 25. that its reason that they should have
notice given to them, Tamen Quaere supra.

XXX. Crompt. 62. b. pl. 25. Nota, That it is not necessary that any of the
Justices of Peace, who shall enquire of the Riot, be of the Quorum; for 13 H.
4. 7. 1. N. 4. does not give this, otherwise it is for a general Sessions of
the Peace; as appears by the Commission.

XXXI. Crompt. 62 b. pl. 26. A Riot is done, and within the Month after the
doing of it, and before Inquiry, one who is the next Justice of Peace to the
place where, and when it was done, removes thence, Quaere if the other next
Justices of the Peace shall not inquire within the Month, for 13 H. 4. 7. 4. N.
1. says, That the next Justices shall enquire within the Month, etc. not
saying, that were next at the time of the Riot, or where it was made, etc.
supra.

XXXII. Crompt. 64. pl. 47. If a Man complains of a Riot, or a forcible entry,
so that Justices of Peace be assembled to enquire thereof, and at the day he
does not prosecute the matter, Quaere if the Justices to whom the complaint is
made who went etc. may commit him to Custody by Good discretion for the
delusion etc.

XXXIII. Crompt. 64. pl. 49. If three or more enter into Lands where, etc. with
force, where their entry is Congeable, yet it shall be a Riot, because that 5
Rich. 2. 7. defends from entry with force, though it were Congeable, Crompt. 65
b. pl. 60.

Traverse.
XXXIV. Poult. de Pace, 30. Ab. 31. The form of a Traverse taken in a Town
Corporate on 13 H. 4. 7. 3. N. 1.

Bucks ss.
Alias scil. ad Sessionem Pacis tent' apud B. in Com. predict' die Lunae
proximo post Festum Sanctae Trin. Anno Regni Domini nostri Regis etc. Coram J.
N. Generoso Ballivo Burgi and Parochiae de B. predict and F.F. Milite, T. D. R.
J.W. A. and R. J. Milit' P. R. Armiger' and S. L. Gen' and alijs socijs suis
Justiciarijs dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Burgo and Parochia
conservand' nec non ad diverse. felonias transgressiones and alia malefacta in
eisdem Burgo and Parochia perpetrata Audienda and terminand' assignaris, per
Sacrament' 12 Jurat' extitit presentatum quod A. B. C. D. E. F. de G. cum
diversis alijs malefactoribus and pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus modo
Guerrino Arraiati, and assemblati 20. die Maij Hora quarta Post Meridiem
ejusdem diei Anno ejusd' Domini Regis 2. Vi and Armis, viz. Baculis, Gladijs,
Pugionibus, Falcastris and alijs Armis tam invasivis quam defensivis apud P. in
B. predict' clausum cujusdam L. M. vocat' Bonehilclose, illicite Riotose and
Routose fregerunt and intraverunt and december caractat' feni ad valentiam quatuor
librarum de Bonis and Catallis dicti L. M. ad tunc and ibid em injuste and
illicite ceperunt and asportaverunt contra pacem dicti Domini Regis and contra
form' Statut' inde Editi and provisi.

Per quod preceptum est J. C. sub-Ballivo quod non omitteret propter aliquam
libertatem etc. quin Venire Faceret eosdem A. B. C. D. E. F. ad respondend'
etc. Posteaque scil' Die Lunae proxim. post Festum sancti Mich' Archang. Anno
Regni Domini Regis etc. coram prefatis Justiciarijs venerunt predicti A.B.C. D.
E. F. in proprijs personis suis and habito Auditu Indictament' predicti
separatim dicunt quod ipsi non sunt inde culpabiles and de hoc ponunt se super
patriam and H. J. qui pro Domino Rege in hac part sequitur similiter. Ideo
veniunt inde jurat' coram Justiciarijs dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in Burgo and
Parochia predict' conservandam assignatis etc. ad Sessionem Pacis apud B.
predict' die Lunae proximum Post Epiphaniam Domini tunc proximum futurum
tenend' and qui etc. ad recogn. etc. qui tam etc. idem dies Datus est tam
prefato H. J. qui sequitur pro Domino Rege quam prefat' A.B.C. D. E. F.

Ad quas quidem Sessiones Pacis tent' apud B. predict' in Com. predict' dicto
Die Lunae proximo Post Festum Epiphaniae Domini Anno Regni Regis etc. coram
Ballivo and dictis F. F.T. D. R. J. and socijs suis Justiciarijs dicti Domini
Regis ad Pacem in dicto Burgo and Parochia Conservandam nec non ad diversas
felonias transgressiones and alia malefacta in eodem Burgo and Parochia
perpetrata Audienda and terminanda assignatis, venerunt tam prefatus H.J. qui
pro Domino Rege in hac part sequitur quam prefat A.B.C.D. E. F. in proprijs
personis suis and Juratores per sub-Ballivum Burgi and Parochiae predict' ad
hoc impannellat' and exacti, viz. F. F. Mercer or Draper, etc. similiter
venerunt, qui ad veritatem de premissis dicend' triati and Jurati dicunt super
Sacrament' suum quod predict' A. B. C. D. E. F. Culpabiles sunt and eorum
quilibet culpabilis est de transgressione contemptu and Rioto predict' in
indictamento predict' superius specificatis modo and forma prout superius
versus eos supponitur.

Ideo consideratum est per curiam quod predict' A.B.C. D. E. F. Capiantur ad
satisfaciend' dicto Domino Regi de finibus suis occasion transgressionis
Contemptus and Rioti predicti: Qui quidem A. B.C. D. E. F. ad tunc and ibidem
presents in curia petierunt se ad finem cum dicto Domino Rege occasion
predict' admitti and ideo ponant se separatim in misericordia dicti Domini
Regis and assessat' finis ejusdem A. B. per Justiciarios predict' ad 5 l. and
assessatur finis ejusdem C. D. ad 3 l. etc. bonae and legalis monetae Angliae
ad opus and usum dicti Domini Regis, Lambert 535, 536 Dalt. 400. cap. 130.

XXXV. Lambert. 381. And albeit the Power of these Justices be joint at the
Sessions, yet to some purpose each one by himself has a distinct Power also;
for if one of them, sitting in his Judicial place, shall see a Riot, he may
cause the Parties to be Arrested, and may also Record the Riot, whereby they
shall be so concluded, as they have none answer to it. Justice of Peace Fitz.
9. supra. 12. N. 5. infra.

XXXVI. Lambert 494, 495. Endictment.
An Endictment of a Riot without saying Contra formam Statuti, etc. is not
good, as may appear in the Traverse, Lambert 535. supra. because it is no Riot,
but by that Statate 13 H. 4. 7. and yet it is not of necessity that the Statute
be verbally rehearsed, but only that the Offense against the Statute be
sufficiently and with full words described, Com. 179. infra.

XXXVII. Dalt. 109. cap. 46. And yet if one Justice of Peace sitting in a
Judicial place, as in the Sessions, shall see a Riot, he may command them to be
Arrested, and may make a Record thereof, and the Offenders shall be concluded
thereby, supra.

But if one Justice of the Peace shall see a Riot in another place, and shall
command them to be Arrested, and shall make a Record thereof, the Offenders
shall not be concluded thereby, but may Traverse, it supra. And yet the Justice
may Record it, and certify the same to the next Sessions, K^ll. 41.

XXXVIII. Dalt. 109. cap. 46. If a Justice of Peace commit a Man to Ward,
pretending untruly that he did a Riot where he did none, the party may have an
Action of Trespass against him; see 8 Co. 121. supra, yet see Judges, Br. 2.
10. that an Action will not lie against a Justice or Judge of Record, Lambert
316 supra.

Assemblies.
XXXIX. Lambert 183. The Statute 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. N. and 1 Eliz. 16. N.
do make three degrees of Riots and Seditious Assemblies in certain special
Cases; The first consisting of the common number of three Persons, and being
under the Number of twelve; the second of twelve Persons or more; and the third
of forty Persons and upwards, all which are to be punished diversely according
to the number, intent, act, and obstinacy of the Parties Assembled, wherein
there is some imitation of an ancient Law that King Ina made against Thieves,
whose degrees in Offense he also severed and punished by their Number, saying
thus, that Thieves we call them until the Number of seven men, from 7. a Troop
until 35. and an Army above that Number.

XL. Lambert 183, 184. One Justice of Peace therefore may by virtue of these
Statutes, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. and 1 Eliz. 16. make, or cause to be made,
a Proclamation in the Kings Name, after three Oyes thus, The King our Sovereign
Lord, charge and commands all Persons being assembled, immediately to
disperse themselves, and peaceably to depart to their Habitations, or to their
lawful B^siness, upon the pains contained in the Act lately made against
Unlawful and Rebellious Assemblies; And God save the King; Dalt. 110. cap. 86.

2. And he also may at his discretion assemble his Majesty's Subjects to take
them, and may take them indeed, if they disobey, Crompt. 195 b. pl. 26. and
shall be unpunished for the hurting or maiming, or Killing of any of them, if
they make resistance. He also is to take the Declaration of any Person, that
being moved to any such assembly, will within 24. hours after reveal the same
unto him.

XLI. Lambert. 360. Three Justices of the Peace, one of them being of the
Quorum, may discharge out of Prison any Person committed thither for his
Offense, in not declaring to a Justice within 24 hours that he was moved to
join in any unlawful Assembly, contrary to the Statute 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap.
12. and 1 Eliz. 16.

XLII. Lambert 367. That Justice of Peace that does not, after request thereof
made, give attendance upon the Kings Lieutenant of the Shire, for the
suppressing of any Rebellion or unlawful Assembly, shall suffer a years
Imprisonment, unless there be Cause of reasonable Excuse, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap.
12. N. and 1 Eliz. 16.

XLIII. Lambert. 420, 421, 422. Enquiry at Sessions if any Persons, of or above
the Number of twelve, have been assembled, and have intended, gone about, and
practiced with force of Arms unlawfully to change any Laws of this Realm, or to
cut or cast down any enclosure of Park, or enclosed Ground, or the Banks of any
Fish Pond, or any Conduit head or P^pe, to the intent they should lay open or
void, or to have any Common or Way there, or to destroy the Deer or Conies in
any Park or Warren, or D^ve houses, or Fish in Pool, or in Pond: Or to cut down
any Houses, Ba^^s, Mills, or Bays, or to burn any Stack of Corn or Grain, or
other usual Sustenance of men: And being commanded by the Sheriff, or any
Justice of the Peace of the Shire, or by the Mayor, Sheriff, Justice of Peace,
or Bailiff of the City, Borough, or Corporate Town, where the Assembly was, by
Proclamation in the Kings Name to depart to their Houses, have notwithstanding
continued together one hour after, or have after that forcibly attempted to do
any such thing.

2. And if any Person have unlawfully by ringing of Bells, Sounding of Trumpet,
Drumm, Horn or other Instrument, or by firing of Beacon, or by Malicious Speech
or Outcry, or by Setting up or casting any writing, or by any other Act, raised
or caused to be raised twelve Persons or above, in such manner, and to any such
intent, as is aforesaid, and they being commanded by Proclamation as before,
have nevertheless continued together one hour after, or have afterward
attempted forceably to do any of the said things.

3. And if any the Wife or Servant of any the said Assembled Persons, or if any
other Person have willingly, and without compulsion, delivered or conveyed
Money, Harness, Weapon or Victual to any of the said Persons Assembled, during
their abode together as before.

4. and if any Person have hindered or hurt any that did Proclaim, or went to
Proclaim, as before, and if any of the Parties Assembled, knowing of that
hinderance, or Procuring it, have nevertheless afterward committed or put in
ure any the things aforesaid.

5. And if any Persons, to the Number of Forty or more, so have assembled, to
the intent to do any the said things, or any other Felonious or Rebellious Act,
and have continued together three hours after such Proclamation made, at or
nigh the place of Assembly, or in some Market Town next adjoining, and after
notice to them thereof given, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. N. 1 Eliz. 16.

XLIV. Lambert 439. Enquiry in Sessions, if any Persons to the number of three
or above, have been riotously Assembled, to beat any man, to enter upon a
Possession, or to do any such unlawful Act, and have done it indeed, or
attempted to do it, or have been assembled together in Routs for any common
Quarrel, or otherwise, unlawfully against the Kings Majesty's Peace, 2 H. 5. 8.
Commission under the name of Conventicles.

2. If any Persons above the number of two, and under twelve, being assembled,
have intended unlawfully with force to murder or slay any of the Kings
Subjects; or to cut and cast down any enclosure, or Banks of any Fish Pond, or
Conduit-head or Pipe, or to do any the deeds mentioned in unlawful Assemblies
before 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. 1 Eliz. 16. N. and have not departed upon
Proclamation, but have attempted to do any of these things.

3. Or if any Person being moved to make any Rebellious Assembly, have not
within 24. hours after disclosed the same to a Justice of Peace, or to the
Sheriff; or if any Person have stirred or procured any other to make such
Assembly 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. 1 Eliz. 16. Crompt 168. Ab.

XLV. Lambert. 605. The Act of Rebellious Assemblies, or the effect thereof,
ought to be openly read at every Quarter Sessions, 1 Mar. 1. St. 2. cap. 12. 1
Eliz. 16.

XLVI. Lamb. Precedents 13. pl. 34. An Endictment upon a Rebellious Assembly.

Juratores pro Domino Rege presentant quod primo die Mensis Octobr. Anno Regni
Domini Jacobi etc. A. B. C. E. F. (etc. to the Number of 13. with Additions)
apud quendam locum infra Parochiam de O. in Com. predict' Angl' vocat' le Old
Court inter horas decimam and undecimam ante meridiem ejusdem diei Vi and Armis
tam invasivis quam defensivis, viz. Gladis, Pugionibus, Baculis, Arcubus,
Sagittis, Runicis, far Ferreis, and Tormentis seipsos Congregaverunt and
Assemblaverunt ac tunc ibidem intenderunt conati sunt and Practicaverunt Vi and
Armis illegitime and ex authoritate sua propria secare and prorsus evertere
prosternere ac destruere quoddam caput unius Aquaeductus Angl' vocat' a
Conduit-head, tunc ibidem in fundo cujusdam R. S. de O. predict' in Com.
predicti Generosi existent' and cursum aquae in ipso habens ea intention ut
idem caput Aquaeductus predict' ex tunc ap^rtum and vacuum remaneret ac
Jaceret: Et ulterius quod super querimonia inde sacta coram T. W. uno
Justiciariorum Pacis dicti Domini Regis in Comitatu predict' omnes and singuli
predict' A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. tunc and ibidem per eundem Justiciarium
requisiti sunc ac jussi per Proclamationem in nomine dicti Domini Regis tunc
ibidem per eum palam factam ad habitationes Loca and Domos suas unde venerant
se inde in Pacifico modo tetrahere retirare discedere and reverti quae quidem
Proclamatio tunc ibidem modo and forma sequentibus habita and facta est viz.
predict' T. W. Justiciarius tunc ibidem fecit alta voce unam Oyes ad tunc
ibidem immediate haec verba Anglicana sequentia Palam alta voce pronunciavit
dicens scilicet, The King our Sovereign Lord, charge and commands all
Persons being assembled immediately to disperse themselves, and peaceably to
depart to their Habitations, or to their lawful Business, upon the pains
contained in the Act lately made against unlawful and Rebellious Assemblies;
and God save the King.

Et ulterius Juratores predict' super Sacramentum suum dicunt quod non obstante
dicta Proclamatione modo and forma predictis per prefatum Justiciarium tunc
ibidem facta and habita ibidem tamen omnes and singuli predicti A.B.C. D.E. F.
etc. in dicto loco vocat' le Old Court infra Parochiam de O. predict' in dicto
Comitatu per spatium duarum horarum immediate and continue Post dictam
Proclamationem sic ut prefertur factam and habitam sequentium sed riotose and
felonice insimul remanserunt and continuaverunt in magnum dicti Domini Regis
contemptum ac contra pacem coronam and Dignitatem suas, nec non contra formam
diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum.

XLVII. Lamb. Precedents 16. pl. 43. An Indictment for a Riotous Affray at the
Quarter Sessions.

Jurat' pro Dom. Rege super Sacrament' suum present' qd' octavo die Oct. An'
Regni dicti Domini nostri Jacobi etc. apud M. in Com predict' tempore Generalis
Sessionis Pacis pro dicto Comitatu tunc ibidem tentae and H. C. Milite, and
socijs suis Justiciarijs dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in dicto Comitatu
conservand' assignatis tunc ibidem existentibus and in plena curia sedentibus
quidam A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. and J. K. de S. in Com. predict' Generosi
aggregatis sibi non nullis alijs pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus
ignotis ad numerum 20. hominum Vi and Armis, viz. Gladiis etc. Armat' illicite
Riotose and Routose sese assemblaverunt ac inter se insultum and Affraiam
maximam tunc ibidem fecerunt sese invicem verberantes and valuerantes in magnum
terrorem tam dictorum Justiciariorum tunc ibidem in curia sedentium quam totuis
populi dicti Domini Regis ad dictam Sessionem Pacis tunc ibidem Convenientium
ac contra pacem coronam and Dignitatem dicti Domini Regis nostri.

XLVIII. Crompt. 250. pl. 60. An Indictment against Riotors who made a Riot
upon the Sheriff.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quad cum quaedam Commissio ex Curia cancellariae
Domini Regis nunc emanent' direct' fuit quibusdam T. S. Armiger' Vicom'
Comitat' predict' R. C. M.O.R. S. and alijs ad quend' H. A. Armiger' and omnes
alios de possessione cujusdam Messuagij and diversorum Tenementoram in N. in
Com. predict' Amovend' ac ad collocand' quendam R. N. Armiger' in possessione
ejusdem Messuagij ac Tenement' in N. predict': Cumque etiam quoddam Breve
Domini Regis de Habere facias possessionem eorundem tenementorum eundem R.
super quandam Recuperationem in quadam Action de Ejectione Firmae tenementorum
predictorum per predict' R. Armiger' versus dictum H. direct' and deliberat'
suit eidem Vicecom', cunque etiam tam Vicecomes predict' quam predict'
Commissionarij pro Executione tam Brevis quam Commissionis predict' eidem
Vicecom' and Commissionarijs in forma predicta direct' 13. die Augusti Anno
Regni Domini nostri Jacobi etc. tertio apud N. predict' ad dictum Capitale
Messuagium et Tenementa predict' accesserunt seseque pro Executione
Commissionis ac Brevis predict' ad tunc et ibidem assemblaverunt ac eundem H.
A. et omnes alios ibidem a possessione Messuagij et Tenementorum predictorum
quiet et pacifice removere voluissent, ac eundem R.N. in possessione eorundem
collocare voluissent: Quidam tamen R. A. nuper de M. in Com. predict' Generosus
H. A. de ejsdem Yeoman etc. Aggregatis sibi quamplurimis alijs Malefactoribus
ignotis et Pacis dicti Domini Regis Perturbatoribus ad numerum 16. personarum
servientium et famulant' ejusdem H. A. et per Mandatum predict' H.A. Elizab'
uxorem ejus ad tunc et ibidem Vi et Armis viz. Gladijs, etc. et alijs Armis tam
invasivis quam defensivis Riotose, Routose, et modo Guerrino Arraiati in dictum
Capital' Messuagium sese Assemblaverunt and Aggregaverunt ac tam eundem
Vicecom' quam Commissionarum predict' et servientes suos in predict' Capitale
Messuagium et Tenementa predicta intrare offerentes Riotose minati sunt, ac
eosdem Commissionar' et Vicecom' ad tunc et ibidem violenter et Riotose
Extratenuerunt et Rescusserunt et possessionem ejusdem Messuagij et
Tenementorum predictorum ad tunc et ibidem per Spacium sex horarum contra
eosdem Vicom' et Commissionar' Violenter et Riotose tenuerunt et defenderunt
ita quod dictus Vicecomes ac Commissionar' predict' ad possessionum predict'
virtute Brevis et Commission' predict' habend' et prefat' R. N. deliberandum
periculum mortis subierent nonnullique servientium suorum ad tunc et ibidem
existent' vuluerat' fuerunt contra Pacem dicti Domini Regis et in pernitiosum
exemplum aliorum Malefactorum ac contra formam Diversorum Statutorum in eo casu
edit' et provis.

XLIX. Crompt. 251. pl. 61. An Indictment for a Riot and a Rout.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si J. B. de B. in Com. predict' Generos. T. H. de
B. predict' in Com. predict' Yeoman, etc. Aggregatis sibi quam plurimis alijs
Malefact' et Pacis dicti Domini Regis perturbatoribus ignotis ad numerum septem
personarum Riotose et Routose et modo novae insurrectionis in Conventiculis
illicitis et modo Guerrino Arraiati, Vi et Armis viv. Bombardis, Gladiis, etc.
et alijs Armis tam invasivis quam defensivis 5 die Juij Anno Regni etc. apud E.
predict' in Com' predict' sese illicite Riotose et Routose Assemblaverunt,
Congregaverunt, et univerunt, ad Pacem dicti Domini Regis distourband' et ad
tunc et ibidem in quosdam E. H. et J. S. in Pace Dei et dicti Domini Regis
existent' insultum fecerunt et ipsum E. H. ad tunc et ibidem verberaverunt,
vulneraverunt, et male tractaverunt, Ita quod de vita sua desperabatur et alia
Enormia ei intulerunt ad grave Damnum ipsorum E. H. et J. S. et contra Pacem
dicti Domini Domini Regis Coronam et Dignitatem suas, et contra formam
Diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi Casu edit' et provis'

2. Alio modo.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si J. R. nuper de B. in Comitatu predict' Yeoman,
R. A. nuper de G. in Comitat' predict' Husbandman, et J. B. nuper de D. in Com.
predict' Grome, cum multis alijs Malefactoribus eis Aggregatis et Pacis dicti
Domini Regis Perturbatoribus ignotis modo Guerrino, Arraiat' vnit' assemblat'
et congregat' ad numerum quindecem personarum per instigationem et
procurationem predict' J. R. in magnum terrorem subditorum dicti Domini Regis
5. die Maij Anno Regni etc. Vi et Armis viz. Gladijs, etc. et alijs Armis
invasivis Clausum R. B. Armiger' Apud F. infra Parochiam de B. in Com. predict'
vocat' the M. Riotose fregerunt et intraverunt ac sepes et clausas predict' R.
B. ad numerum sex cent' pedum ad tunc et ibidem existent' laceraverunt'
irruperunt et prosternaverunt et fossat' ibidem existent' ad tunc et ibidem cum
ligonibus et bipaliis foderunt planaverunt et impleverunt ad Grave Damnu'
ipsius R. B. contra formam Diversorum Statutorum de Riotis er Routis, et alijs
Conventiculis illicitis inde nuper edit' et provisis: Et contra Pacem dicti
Domini Regis, etc.

L. Crompt. 251 b. pl. 63. An Indictment against Rioters not said Riotose,
supra.

Inquiratur pro Domino Rege quod cum N. W. Miles, Vicecomes Comitat' predict'
per Warrantum suum de deliberatione sigillo suo sigillat' cujus Dat' est 5. die
Apr. Anno Regni etc. mandavit cuidam A. B. Ballivo suo Comitatus predict' quod
deliberaret seu deliberari faceret cuidam T.H. Averia sua nuper de eadem Villa
et Com. Clothier, cepissent et injuste detinebant ut prefat' T.H. dicebat, et
quod poneret ipsos W. et P. per vadios et salvos plegios, Ita quod essent ad
proximum Comitat' ipsius Vicecom' apud Ilchester in Com. predict' tenen^' ad
respondend' prefat' T. H. de placito predicto, virtute cujus Warranti predict'
A. Die et Anno supradictis apud S. predict' requisivit prefat' W. S. quod
dimitteret sibi averia predict' ad deliberand' eidem prefat' T. H. secundum vim
formam et effectum Warranti predicti, si predict' W. ac quidem H. C. nuper de
S. in Com. predict' Husbandman, etc. cum multis alijs ignotis ad numerum octo
personarum dicto 5. Die Apr. Anno supradict' Apud S. predict' Warrant' predict'
minime Ponderantes, Vi et Armis, viz. Gladiis, etc. in prefat' A. insultum
fecerunt Verberaverunt, vulneraverunt et male Tractaverunt ac ipsum A. ad tunc
et ibidem Imprisonaverunt et detinuerunt per spatium quatuor dierum et quatuor
noctium ex tunc proxime sequent' et ad tunc et ibidem debitam execution'
Warranti predicti contradixerunt, impediverunt et distourbaverunt ad Grave
Damnum ipsius C. ac contre Pacem dicti Domini Regis Coronam etc.

Rivers, see Sewers. Rogues, see Poor. Robery, see Coron, Fresh-Suit. Rome, see
Pope. Sabbath, see Days, Religion. Sacraments, see Religion. Sacrilege, see
Coron and Church. Salmons, see Fish. Saltpeter, see War. Sanctuary, see Coron.
Scavage, or Shewage, see Merchants. Schoolmasters, see License. Scotland, see
Alien. Seals, see Deeds. Sectaries, see Religion. Se defendendo, see Co^on.
Searchers, see Merchants. Sedition, see Slander. Seisin, see Force. Sermons,
see Religion. Servants, see Apprentice. Sessions, see Justices. Settlement, see
Poor.
Sewers.
I. LAmbert. 362. Six Justices of the Peace, Justices.
two of them being of the Quorum, may for a whole year after the Expiration of
any Commission of Sewers Execute the Laws of the Commissioners of Sewers,
unless that a new Commission of Sewers be published within the year 13 Eliz. 2.
2. N. 2. Crompt. 201 Dalt. 134. cap. 50.

II. Lambert 571. 572. Exchequer.
No doubt but this Ordinance 51 H. 3. St. 5. page 11. 8. N. 1 (that all
Justices, Commissioners, and Inquirers whatsoever deliver Extreats into the
Exchequer) does extend to the Justices of Peace, as a Man may Easily gather by
the words of 13 Eliz. 9. 6. N. 1.

III. Kilb. Precedents 2. Edit. 244. The Oath of a Commissioner 23 H. 8. 5. 5.
N. 3.

You shall Swear that you, to your cunning, Wit, and Power shall truly and
indifferently Execute the Authority to you given by this Commission of Sewers,
without any favor, affection, corruption, dread or malice to be born to any
manner of Person or persons: And as the Case shall require, you shall consent
and endeavor your self, for your Part, to the best of your Knowledge and
Power, to the making of such wholesome, just, equal and indifferent Laws and
Ordinances as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent
number of your Fellows being in Commission with you, for the due redress,
reformation, and amendment of all and every such things as are Contained and
specified in the said Commission, and the same Laws and Ordinances to your
cunning, will, and Power, Cause to be put in due Execution without favor,
mead, dread, malice, or affection. So help you God.

Sheep, see Cattle, Shooting, see Games, War. Shoomakers, see Leather.
Sheriffs.
I. LAmbert. 390. The Sheriff in like manner ought to attend at these Sessions
of the Peace for the double duty that he bears, the one as Sheriff, to Retorn
the Precept to take the Charge of Prisoners, and so to serve the Court
otherwise as he has in charge by the Mandamus that is mentioned in the
Commission 17. the other because he also has Care and Charge of the Peace, see
tit. Justices 142. the Precept of Summoning the Sessions.

II. Lambert 352. Two Justices of the Peace, the one being of the Quorum, may
take the Oath of the Undersheriff of their County before that he meddle with
the Exercise of that Office, as well of Supremacy 1 Eliz. 1. 19. N. 3. as
touching his Office 27 Eliz. 12. 2. N. 3.

And the like may they do for the like Oaths of Bailiffs of Franchises,
Deputies, and Clerks of the Sheriffs and Under-Sheriffs, and of every other
Person that shall take upon him to intermeddle with the Retorning of Jurors, or
with the Execution of process in any Court of Record, 27 Eliz. 12. 4 N. 1
Crompt. 76 b. Lambert. 427. 478.

III. Crompt. 76 b. Nota, Adjudged in B. R. that a special Bailiff shall not be
Sworn by 27 Eliz. 12. 4. N. 1. as Mr. Farmer an Apprentice of the Law told me.

IV. Dalt. 134. cap. 51. But special Bailiffs made for the serving of Process,
are not to be Sworn by this Statute 27 Eliz. 12. 4 N. 1. as Mr. Crompt. 76 b.
Reports, and says that it was so adjudged in B. R. etc.

V. Nota, that Mich. 27. Car. 2. in B. R. in an Information against one Bents
and others, for intermedling with Process without first swearing, it was
adjudged that a special Bailiff is not within 27 Eliz. 12 4. N. 1. against the
Opinion of Twisden Justice, on motion of the now Sarjant Bigland in Arrest of
Judgment.

VI. Lambert 386* This Custos Rotulorum has credit by 11 H. 7. 15. N to
appoint two Justices of the Peace that may control the Sheriffs Books, Dalt.
132. cap. 51. And by 27 Eliz. 12. 2. N. 1. for taking the Oath of the
Undersheriff.

VII. Lambert. 425, 426, 427, 428, 429. Enquiry in Sessions if any Sheriff have
letten his County, or any his Balywicks, Hundreds or Wapentakes.

2. Or have Returned in any Pannels any Bailiffs, Officers, or their Servants

3. Or have refused to let to Bail upon sufficient Sureties any Person being in
his Custody, because of any Action Personal; or because of Endictment in
Trespass, and not being in for any Condemnation, Execution, Utlary,
Excommunication, Surety of the Peace, or Commandment of any Justice, or for
being a Vagabond.

4. Or have taken any Obligation by Color of his Office, but only to himself,
and upon the Name of his Office, and upon Condition only to appear according to
the Writ or Warrant,

5. Or have taken for an Arrest above 20 d. or if he or any other Minister,
have taken any thing for making of any Retorn or Panel, or above 4 d. for the
Copy of a Panel, or above 4 d. for the said Obligation, or for any Warrant or
Precept, or any Bailiff above 4 d. for making any Arrest; or the Jailer above 4
d. upon the committing to his Ward of any Person Arrested or Attached, 23 H. 6.
10.

6. If any Sheriff, or other his Minister, have Arrested or Imprisoned, or
caused any Fine or Ransom or Amerciament to be levied of any Person, by reason
of any Endictment, or Presentment made by the Sheriff, Turn or Law-day, without
Process from the Justices of Peace for the same first obtained, 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1.
N. 5. Lambert 513.

7. Or have not brought in such Endictments and Presentiments to the Justices of
the Peace at their next Sessions 1 Ed. 4. 2. 1. N. 4.

8. If any Sheriff, or any his Ministers, have entered into his Books any
Plaints in any Man's Name, not being present in the Court, either in his own
Person, or by sufficient and honest Attorney or Deputy; or have entered any more
Plaints than the Plaintiff supposes that he has cause of Action for; or have
levied the Shire Amerciaments without Book indented between them and two
Justices of the Peace 11 H. 7. 15. N. Dalt. 133. cap. 51.

9. Or if the Bailiff of the Hundred have made default in warning or Executing
any Warrant against any Defendant in the Sheriffs Court, Dalt. 133. (bis) cap.
51. 11 H. 7. 15. N.

10. If any Sheriff or his Minister have levied any the Debts of the King
without showing to the Parties the Estreats of the same under the Seal of the
Exchequer 42 Ed. 3. 9. N. and 7. H. 4. 3. N.

11. If the Sheriff of this Shire, or any other Person, to whom it appertained
to make Retorn of any Writ, has returned any Juror without the true Addition
at the Place of his abode at the time of that Retorn, or within a year next
before, or without some other Addition by which the Juror might well be known
27 Eliz. 7. N.

12. If any Estreat of Issues has been gathered of any Person, other than such
as by virtue of the said Estreat was of right chargeable or charged therewith
27 Eliz. 7.

13. If any Undersheriff, or other of the said Persons named 27 Eliz. 12 has
committed any Act contrary to the said Oaths.

14. If any Sheriff or Jailer have denied to receive Felons by the delivery of
any Constable or Townsh^ps, or have taken any thing for receiving of such, 4
Ed. 3. 10. N.

Ships, Seamen, Shipwright, see Admirals Silk, see Drapery. Silver, see Metal.
Skinners, see Leather.
Slander.
Libels, Words, Rumors, News.
I. CO. Inst. 3. 198. cap. 93. The Law before the Conquest was, that the Author
and spreader of false Rumors amongst the People, had his Tongue cut out, if he
redeemed it not by the Estimation of his Head, Inter Leges Alveredi, cap. 28.

II. Crompt. 84 b. 85 Enquiry in Sessions if any one has published or forged
false News or Controversies, ( viz. Tales) whereby Discord or Slander may arise
between the King and his People, or between the Nobles of the Realm, the
Offender shall be Imprisoned until he can produce in Court the Author of such
News, 3 Ed. 1. W. 1. cap. 33. (34.) and 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 3. 2. N. 2.

2. If any one has forged or Counterfeited any false News, and horrible false
Lies of any Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, or other Nobles, and great Men of
the Realm, or of the Chancellor, Treasurer, Clerk of the Privy Seal, Steward of
the Kings Household, Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, or of any
great Officer of the Realm, of things that by them were never spoken, nor
thought, to their great slander, whereupon debate and discord may rise between
the said Lords and Commons, they shall be punished according to 3 Ed. 1. W. 1.
cap. 34 (33.) unt^ll they have brought into Court the Author of the said false
News and Lies, by 2 Rich. 2. 5. and 1 and 2 Ph. and Mar. 3. 2 N. 2.

3. If the Forgers and Counterfeiters of false News, etc. mentioned in 3 Ed. 1.
W. 1. cap. 34 (33) and 2 R. 2. 5. cannot bring into Court the Author of such
false News, then they shall be punished by advice of the Kings Council, 12 Rich.
2. 11. 1. N. 3.

4. Slanderous words of the King shall be punished by Fine and Imprisonment on 3
Ed. 1 W. 1. 34. (33) and not by advice of the Privy Counsel, on 12 Rich. 2. 11.
for the King is a Person exempt, and not implied within the words, Great Men or
Nobles etc. Oldnols Case, 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Dyer 155.

III. Poult. de Pace 1 b. There is another foul puddle that ouzeth from the
same corrupt Gogmire with Menaces, and distilleth out of a heart likewise
infected with Mal^ce and Envy, but is devised and practiced by another mean
than the former, which is by Libelling, secret slandering, or defaming of
another etc.

2. And whether this Libelling, secret Slandering, or defaming be against a
Public Magistrate, or Private Person, yet it may tend to the breach of the
Peace, to the raising of quarrels and effusion of Blood, and so may be a
special impediment of that Peace, which all good Policy endeavors to
maintain, 5 Co. 125 libr. intr. 13. Hob. 354.

IV. Crompt. 197. Every Justice of Peace within a Month after the Offense, may
commit any one that is vehemently suspected to speak or report Slanderous News
or Tales against the Queen that now is, if he do not find Sureties to appear at
the next Quarter Sessions or Jail-delivery, there to remain till he will find
Surety, ut supra, 23 Eliz. 2.

V. West. Symb. 2 part 129. Sect. 200. An Indictment for words spoken against
the Queen, on 23 Eliz. 1.

Glos. ss.
Juratores pro Domina Regina super Sacrament' suum presentant quod infra tres
Menses jam ultimo Elapsos, viz. 2 die Mensis Octobr. Anno Regni Dominae nostrae
Eliz. etc. 35. G. P. de A. in Com. G. predict' Laborer, in Domo Mansionali
cujusdam R. S. infra Parochiam de A. predict' in Com. G. predict' ac in
presentia multorum dictae Dominae Reginae subditorum fide Dignorum tunc ibidem
existentium consulto deliberate ac cum maliciosa intention adversus dictam
Dominam nostram nunc ex imaginatione ipsius G. P. propria haec falsa ficta
seditiosa and scandalosa dicta ad scandalum and defamationem dictae Dominae
Reginae nostrae tunc and ibidem locutus est in his Anglicanis verbis
sequentibus scil. (reciting the words, etc.) in magnum dictae Dominae Reginae
nostrae nunc contemptum ac contra Pacem Coronam and Dignitatem suas necnon
contra formam Statuti in Parliament' dictae Dominae nostrae nuper tent' apud
Westm' in Com. Middlesex Anno Regni sui, 23. etc.

VI. West Symbol. 2 part 129. sect. 201. An Indictment for Slandering of a
Nobleman.

Derby ss.
Inquiratur pro Domina Regina si R. B. nuper de C. in Com. D. predict' Yeoman,
Deum prae oculis suis non habens, sed instigatione Diabelica seduct' ac
ligeantiam suam erga dictam Dominam nunc Elizab. Dei Gratia, etc. parvi pendens
ac leges and Statuta hujus Regni Angliae minime, estimans nec paenam in eisdem
content' aliqualiter verens 16. die Maij Anno Regni Dominae Elizab. etc. apud
M. in Com. D. predict' malitiose ex imaginatione sua propria haec falsa and
scandalosa verba ac rumores de magnatibus and proceribus hujus Regni Angliae
subsequentia prolocutus est viz. that, etc. Quae quidem omnia quamquam falsa
fuit ut vera retulit and multa alia verba scandalosa ad tunc and ibidem dixit
and propalavit contra pacem dictae Dominae Reginae nunc Coronam and Dignitatem
suas and formam diversorum Statutorum inde nuper editorum and provisorum,
Crompt. 259 b. pl. 90.

VII. West Symb. 2 part. 141. sect. 256. An Endictment for words of the Queen.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod J. S. nuper de
W. in Com. predict' Laborer, Deum prae oculis suis non habens sed Instigatione
Diabolica seduct' 5 Die etc. Anno etc. apud M. in Com. predict' Narravit and
publicavit de dicta Domina Regina nunc haec falsa seditiosa and scandalosa
verba Anglicana sequent', viz. That the Queen has had by the Lord R. D.
(innuendo R. D. prenobilis ordinis Garterij Militem) two or three Children,
contra legiantiae suae debitum in magnum scandalum and contempt', dictae
Dominae Reginae nunc Coronam' and Dignitat' suas and contra formam Statuti, etc.

VIII. West. Symb. 2 part 148. sect. 309. An Endictment of hearing words of
one, and not publishing them to Sheriff, etc. of the Queen.

Norff ss.
Inquiratur pro Domina Regina, si W. J. de S. in Com. N. predict' Clericus, 10
die, etc. Anno etc. apud W. in Com. predict' Deum prae oculis suis non habens
and ligeantiam debitam minime ponderans falso and proditorie ut falsus
Proditor, and Inimicus ipsius Dominae Reginae dict' Die and Anno apud N.
predict' coram A. B. and C. D. de E. in Com. predict' Yeoman, obstinate and
malitiose dixit and propagavit haec verba sequentia in Anglicanis verbis (A
vengeance on the Queen, and of such false Counsel) tam contra Ligeantiam ac
Pacem Dominae Reginae quam contra formam Statuti in hujusmodi casu edit' and
provis. and sic predict' A. B. and C. D. sciens predict' J. dicta verba
proditiorie locut' fuisse, falso and proditiorie contra ligeantiae suae debitum
concelavit and secret custodivit contra Pacem Dominae Reginae and contra
formam Statut' in hujusmodi casu edit' and provis. usque ad 1 Diem Martij Anno
etc. quod dicti A. B. and C. D. dicta verba sic proditorie per predict' J.
loquuntur coram J. S. Milite Vicecom' Comitat', predict' ac R. S. Gen'
retulerunt and ostenderunt.

IX. West Symb. 2 part 153 b. Sect. 326. An Indictment for slandring of a Jury.

Essex ss.
Juratores Dant Curiae hic intelligi quod cum ipsi 10. Die Martij, Anno etc.
Apud S. in Com. predict' cuncti fuerunt ad inquirend' in and interloquend' de
diversis Articulis and Offensis super eorum Sacrament' pro dicto Domino Rege
ibidem dicto 10. die, etc. Anno etc. supradict' venit quidem T. B. de S. in
Com. predict' ut Barractator and Pacis Domini Regis perturbator, and predict'
Juratores vili pendit and scandalizavit dicend' sic in his Anglicanis verbis,
Fie on you false Varlets, pamperd Knaves, and perjured Knaves, and alia
minatoria and contumeliosa verba ejsd' Jurator' dixit magnam redarguationem and
vilipedent' Juratorum predict' ac retordationem Execution' eorum Jurament' and
contra Pacem etc.

X. Pract. Precedents 54. 55. An Endictment for libelling of a Justice of
Peace, Quaere 2 Rich. 2. cap. 5.

Middlesex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod cum 10. die
Febr. Anno Regni etc. apud G. in Com. predict' Goala dicti Domini Regis castri
sui de G. ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent' ad tunc and ibidem coram A. B.
Milite C. D. Armigero and alijs Socijs suis Justiciarijs dicti Domini Regis ad
Pacem in Com. predict' conservand' necnon ad diversas Felonias,
Transgressiones, and alia Malefacta in eodem perpetrat' Audiend' and terminand'
assignat' de quibusdam Prisonarijs in eadem Goala ad tunc existent' and coram
eisdem Justiciariis ad tunc and ibidem indictat' rite just and secundum leges
and consuetund' hujus Regni Angl. deliberat' fuit, quidam tamen T. R. nuper de
S. in Com. predict' Yeoman, premissorum non ignarus sed machinans and intendens
predict' Justiciar' in magnum Scandalium and infamiam inducere, Postea scil.
13. die Martij Anno Regni etc. apud G. predict' in Com. predict' malitiose
quendam famosum libellum Angl. vocat' a Libel, in scriptis ad defamationem
Justiciar' predict' edidit and publicavit continent' inter inter alia haec
falsa and scandalosa verba sequentia.

All the poor Captains which yet alive do remain,
Pray that the Judges of the Land their Causes do retain:
For they do bring with them both Judgment and Mercy mingled together,
And will not hang four for stealing a Wether.
Innuendo predictos Justiciar' ad predict' Sessionem and Goalae deliberationem
injuste and Crudeliter abjudicasse and mandasse quatuor Prisonarum de Prisona
predict' per collum suspend' quousque etc. pro furatione Angl' for stealing
unius Ovis, ubi revera Justiciarij predict' ad predict' Sessionem and Goalae
predict' deliberationem non adjudicaverunt nec mandaverunt quatuor Prisonarum
de Prison' predict' per collum suspendi pro furatione unius Ovis contra Pacem
dicti Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, necnon contra formam Statut' in
hujusmodi Casu edit', and provisi.

Smoak-mony, see Taxes. Soap, see Measures, Merchants. Soldiers, see War.
Spinsters, see Drapery. Stabbing, see Coron. Star Chamber, see Riots. Statutes,
see Parliament. Stealing, see Coron. Stewards, see Leet, Justices. Stock, see
Poor, Account, Taxes, Stocks, see Imprisonment. Stolen Goods, see Coron,
Chattels. Strays, see Coron, Chattels. Striking, see Affray. Strangers, see
Alien. Submission, see Pope. Subornation, see Proof, Oath. Subpena, see
Process. Subsidy, see Taxes. Suggestion and Suits, see Information, and Action
sur Stat. Supremacy, see Pope, Oath. Summons, see Process. Sunday, see Days,
Religion. Supplicavit, see Peace. Supervisors, see Poor, Ways.
Supersedeas.
Release.
I. LAmbert 65. Yea, by good Opinion 2 H. 7. 1. a Supersedeas of the Peace,
made by one Justice of the Peace under his Seal, being brought into the
Sessions, is a sufficient Record to prove that there is a Recognizance of the
Peace taken by the same Justice, and it is Warrant enough to call the Party
bound thereupon; and if he makes default, to Record the same, infra.

II. Lambert 95, 96, 97, 98, 99. Hereupon also it happens often that such
Persons as break the Peace, choosing rather to be bound by any other Justice
than by him that makes the Warrant, do offer themselves and do become bound
before some other Justice, and do withal procure a Supersedeas from him to be
discharged of any other Arrest to be made upon them, Crompt. 138 b. pl. 9.

2. Yea, and many times hearing of such Precepts for the Peace, and misliking
to be bound in the Country, they go up to Westminster, and give Surety of the
Peace there, either in B. R. for a time only, as the manner of that Court is,
or in the Chancery for ever, or for a time, as they use it, and do thereupon
procure a Supersedeas from the Court where they are bound to close the hands of
the Country Justices, etc. Dalt. 168* cap. 69.

3. If therefore a Justice of Peace will by a Supersedeas Discharge a Precept
for the Peace Awarded by his fellow Justice, by virtue of his Office, and not
by force of a Supplicavit, which is of a higher nature, and cannot be so
Avoided, then shall he do well to take the Recognizance after the self same
sort in all points, as the form of the Precept, Tit peace 24. does require,
Crompt. 138 b. pl. 9.

4. But this Supersedeas sent by a Justice of Peace, is sufficient, although it
neither name the Sureties, nor contain the Sums in which they are bound yet is
it the better form to express them both, as well because the higher Courts use
so to do, as also that if the Bailiff, Constable, or other Officer to whom it
is delivered, be called at the next Sessions by the Suit of him that sought to
have the Peace, to show how he has Executed his Warrant, and do come in and
show forth the Supersedeas, then the Party that is bound may be called
thereupon at the day that he appears to be limited unto him by the
Supersedeas, for it is under the Seal of a Justice, and does testify that the
Party is bound, and has found Surety to appear at a certain day, supra, Dalt.
168. pl. 69.

And if he make default, that being recorded, shall be sufficient to cause him
to forfeit the Penalty of the Recognizance, although the Justice that Awarded
it shall omit to bring in the Recognizance it self, according as he ought now
to do by the Statute 3 H. 7. N. and this may be gathered upon the Opinion 2 H.
7. 1. and may also be seen by this form of the Supersedeas here under written
Dalt. 365. cap. 122.

5. W. S. Esquire, one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the
King within the County of Kent, to the Sheriff, Bailiffs, Constables,
Borshoulders, and other the faithful Ministers and Subjects of our said
Sovereign Lord within the said County, and to every of them sends Greeting;
forasmuch as A. B. of etc. Yeoman, ^ath personally come before me at A. etc.
has found ^ufficient Surety, that is to say* E. D. and E. F. etc. Yeomen,
either of the which has undertaken for the said A. B. under the p^in of 20 l.
and he the s^id A. B. h^th undertaken for himself under the pain of 40. l. that
he the said A. B. shall well and trul^ keep the Peace toward our s^^d
Sovereign Lord, and all his Liege People, and specially toward G. H. etc.
Yeoman, and also that he shall personally appear before the Justices of the
Peace of our said Sovereign Lord within the s^id County, at the next General
Sessions of the Peace to be ^olden at M. there, Therefore on the behalf of our
said Sovereign Lord, I command you, and every of you, that ye utterly forbear
and Surcease to Arrest, take, Imprison, or otherwise by any means for the said
occasion, to molest the said A. B. and if you have for the said occasion and
for none other, taken or Imprisoned him, that then you do cause him to be
delivered and set at liberty without further delay. Given at A. aforesaid,
under my Seal this last day of July etc. Dalt. 364. cap. 121. Crompt. 2^6. pl.
15.

6. This Supersedeas may also be in the name of the King, under the Test of
the Justice of Peace, thus: Charles the Second by the Grace of God, etc. to the
Sheriff, etc. Greeting; Forasmuch as A. B. has come before T. F. Knight, one
of our Justices of Peace within our said County, and has found etc. we
therefore command you, and every of you, that ye forbear etc. Witness the said
T. F. etc.

7. Thus much of the Supersedeas issuing from a Justice of the Peace, the which
ought to withold and stay the proceedings of his fellow Justice in the said
c^use, insomuch, that if any Officer by any of their Warrants, having t^is
Supersedeas delivered unto him, will nevertheless urge the Party to find new
Surety for the Peace, he may refuse to give it, and if he be committed to
Prison, for such his refusal, he may, as I think, have his Action of false
Imprisonment against the Officer upon the same, Dalt. 168. cap. 69.

8. I read 21 Ed. 4. 40. that a Supersedeas, proceeding out of the Chancery,
will discharge (...) Surety of the Peace taken before the Justices in B. R.
much more then will a Supersedeas sent out of the Chancery, or B. R. discharge
a Precept for the Peace that is Awarded from an Inferior Justice of the Peace;
and if a Justice of the Peace to whom a Supersedeas out of such high Court
shall be delivered, will not thereupon Surcease, an Attachmnet may be awarded
against him for his contempt, and he may be Imprisoned and fined for it Crompt.
145 b.

9. It is good Counsel therefore given F. N. B. 238. where he wills the
Justice of Peace, after suc^ a Supersedeas received, to forbear to make any
Warrant to Arrest the Party: And if they have Awarded it, then to make their
own Supersedeas to the Sheriff, and other Officers, thereby commanding them to
S^rcease to put it in Execution.

III. Lambert 123. And the like imitation (of a Release of the Peace or good
Abearing, Tit. Peace 69.) may be used also for a Supersedeas of the good
abearing, if at the least that be grantable by the Justices of the Peace, Dalt.
366. cap 122. infra.

IV. Lambert 112, 113. Furthermore, if a Man be bound before a Justice of the
Peace to keep the Peace against all the Kings People, and to appear at the next
Quarter Sessions, and do afterward procure a Supersedeas out of the Chancery,
testifying that he has found Surety ther^ against all the King-People for
ever, this will Discharge his Appearance at the Sessions, because the granting
of this Supersedeas is the Act of the King, which is the Fountain of Justice,
and controlleth all other derived Authorities, Fitzh. 9. Dalt. 169. cap. 69.
Crompt. 139. 12.

2. But if that Supersedeas should testify that he has found Surety in the
Chancery only, until a certain day, which day is after those Sessions, then,
Mr. Fitzh. thinks that his Appearance at the Sessions shall not be discharged
by the Supersedeas, Crompt. 139. pl. 4. 10. 11.

3. In both these Cases also, I would advise the Justice of Peace to send in as
well the Recognizance as the Supersedeas, if it come to his hands, for
peradventure the Recognizance was broken before the Supersedeas purchased; or
if it were not, yet he shall be excused, and the Recognizor never a whit the
more endangered thereby.

V. Lambert 157, 158. It is, I know, the Opinion of Marrow (that the Sessions
on death of that Justice that enquired of forcible Entry, Br. 27. may grant
restitution) grounding himself upon the same equity by which the Justices of B.
R. are enabled to do it, howbeit it may appear, Dyer 187. pl. that the Law is
otherwise taken both therein, and also in the granting of a Supersedeas to stay
the Restitution, because no Justices can do the one or the other, but they only
that were present at the Session when the Endictment was found, except those of
B. R. who for the supposed presence of the King, do carry a supreme Authority
in these Cases of the Crown.

VI. Lambert 378. Yea if two Justices, Quorum unus, make a Precept for a
Sessions of the Peace, all their fellow Justices cannot discharge it by their
Supersedeas, but a Supersedeas out of the Chancery will discharge it, says
Fitzh.

VII. Lambert 518, 519. But yet you must presuppose that all this process of
Utlary may be staid by a Supersedeas.

2. And F. N. B. 237. has the Case, that if an Exigent go out upon an
Endictment of Trespass found before Justices of the Peace, the Party may find
Sureties in the Chancery, Body for Body, to appear at the day of the Writ, and
may then also have a Supersedeas thence to the Sheriff, commanding him to
forbear to take him, and to let him go if he then have already taken him for
that cause, Crompt. 145. pl. 10. 11.

3. And again, libr. Intr. 546. you may see the Process upon such an Endictment
of Trespass staid by Supersedeas, Issuing from one Justice of the Peace alone,
and testifying that the Party came before him, and found Surety, de fine
assidendo, Crompt. 145. pl. 8. Dalt. 366. cap. 122.

4. But as I believe F. N. B. 237. so will I not persuade the practice of libr.
Intr. 546. because I think it not in the lawful Power of any one Justice of
the Peace to Award any such Warrant, but that it must be done by two Justices
at the least, the one being of the Quorum also, as the Commission now stands,
Dalt. 366. cap. 122.

VIII. Crompt. 138. pl. 10. But it seems that another Justice cannot
Discharge Precept to the Sheriff, for the Peace made by another, and give
another day to the Party to appear at any other Sessions than is expressed in the
same Precept, because one Justice has no more Authority than another, and this
Warrant or Precept is a matter of Record, which cannot be discharged by another
Justice, Crompt. 122. pl. 133.

IX. Crompt. 138, 139. pl. 11. And if a Man be obliged by Recognizance before
any Justice of Peace to keep the Peace against all the Kings Lieges, and to
appear at the next General Sessions in the same County, now another Justice of
Peace cannot grant a Supersedeas that he shall appear at any other Sessions,
and not at that Sessions to which he is obliged by Recognizance to appear,
because he cannot discharge that Recognizance so taken by the other Justice,
and the Justice is bound by 3 H. 7. 1. 1. N 26. to certify the Recognizance at
the next Sessions, and the Party shall be called thereon, Fitzh. 8 but Nota,
there is no Penalty to the Justice if he does not certify by the said Statute.

X. Crompt. 144. 145. pl 1. If a Supplicavit be Awarded out of the Chancery
against one to find Surety of the Peace in the County, and the Party cannot
travel because of infirmity, or otherwise will not travel himself to the
Chancery, he may find Surety there to keep the Peace, and shall have a
Supersedeas in the County, and in this Writ it shall be sent to the Justices to
take Surety of the Party himself, and by this means his Travel may be saved;
see F. N. B. 81. like matter, and Dalt. 168. and 169. cap. 69.

2. A Man has a Supplicavit of the Peace out of the Chancery to bind A. B. to
the Peace, and to certify the Recognizance in Chancery without delay; now if
A. B. be taken he shall be bound to the Peace for ever, for it is not contained
that he shall bind himself to keep the Peace until a certain time, but
generally, ( Crompt. 242 b.) therefore to prevent this A. B. before he is
attacht, must bind himself in the Chancery until a certain day, and shall have
a Supersedeas into the County to the Justice and Sheriff to cease to compel A.
B. to find Surety upon the said Writ of Supplicavit.

3. A Man found Surety of the Peace in C. B. until certain day, and then to
appear there, before which day a Supersedeas out of the Kings Bench came to the
Justices of C. B. and it was allowed; and this Writ made mention of the Peace
found in B. R. which see Libr. Intr. 416. and Trin. 2 H. 8. Rot. 118. 22. H. 6.
66.

4. One Justice of Peace cannot by Supersedeas discharge a Precept of another
Justice Awarded to find Surety to the Peace, before he is bound in Fact.

XI. Crompt. 145 b. 146. When a Man is taken at the Kings Suit, a Supersedeas
lies not, by Babbington, and the whole Court, 9 H. 6. 44. and by him if he be
taken for a Fine Recorded upon an Indictment of Trespass, he shall not have a
Supersedeas.

XII. Dalt. 168. cap. 69. Also a Justice of Peace of the County by a
Supersedeas cannot Discharge a Warrant Awarded by his fellow Justice, by force
of a Supplicavit to him directed out of the Chancery or Kings Bench, to take
Surety of the Peace of one resident in that County.

XIII. Dalt. 170. cap. 69. All Writs of Supersedeas to be granted by, or out of
either of the said Courts of Chancery, or B. R. shall be void, unless such
Process be granted upon motion in open Court, and upon such sufficient Sureties
as shall appear unto the Court upon Oath to be assessed at 5 l. Lands, or 10 l.
in Goods in the Subsidy Book at the least, etc. and unless it shall also appear
first unto the said Court, that the Process of Peace or Good-behaviour is
prosecuted against him or them desiring such Supersedeas, bona fide, by some
Party grieved in that Court, out of which such Supersedeas is desired to be so
Awarded and directed.

XIV. Dalt. 365, 366, 367, 368. cap. 122. Another Supersedeas of the Peace.

O. G. Sacrae Theol' Doctor, etc. unus Justiciar' Domini Regis etc. ommibus
Ballivis and Ministris Domini Regis infra Com. predict and eorum' cuilibet
salutem, Quia A. B. and C. D. coram me personaliter constitut' Manuceperunt pro
J. S. sub paena 40 l. quas concesserunt and uterque eorum pro se pro toto and
in solido concessit ad opus dicti Domini Regis levari si damnum vel malum
aliquid W. T. eveniat de corpore suo, etc. per dictum J. S. vel per
procuratorem suum quovismodo vobis and cuilibet vestrum ex part Domini Regis
mando quod captione Corporis ejusdem J. S. quocunque modo censeatur pretextu
alicujus sive Warranti vobis seu alicui vestrum in hac part direct' seu
dirigend' supersedeatis and sine dilatione deliberari facias,

Datum etc.
Another of good-abearing.
H. B. unus Justiciar' Domini Regis etc. Vicecom' etc. salutem;
Quia J. S. sufficient' securitat' de Pace and de bono Gestu suo erga Dominum
Regem and precipue erga W. T. coram me invenit, ideo ex part dicti Domini
Regis vobis and cuilibet vestrum mando and precipio firmiter injungens quod de
ipso J. S. pro hujusmodi securitate Pacis inveniend' capiend sive Arrestand.
omnino Supersedeatis, and si ipsum J.S. ea occasion ceperitis sive
Imprisonaveritis tunc eum deliberari facias si ipsum ea occasion and non alia
detineatur,

Test, etc.
3, If the Prisoner be in the Goal, see another form, Dalt. 389. 390. cap. 127.
and Dalt. 368. cap. 122.

F. B. Armiger unus Justiciar' etc. Vicecom' seu Custod' Goalae etc. Quia J. S.
in Prisona Domini Regis in Custodia tua existent' ad sectam cujusdam A. L. de
se been Gerend' (vel pro pace Gerend') erga Dominum Regem and cunctum Populum
suum and precipue erga predict' A. S. invenit coram me sufficient' securita^'
(vel quatuor Manucaptores) scil' A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. etc. qui
manuceperunt pro predict' J S. quod ipse J. S. non inferret nec, Inferri
procurabit per se nec per alios eidem A. S. seu alicui de Populo dicti Domini
Regis aliquid' Damnum seu Gravamen de corpore suo per Minas, insidias, Insultum
seu aliquo alio modo quod in lesionem seu perturbationem pacis Domini Regis
sedere valeat Quovismodo viz. quilibet eorum manucaptorum sub plena 20 l. ideo
ex part dicti Domini Regis tibi mando quod predict' J. S. in Prisona Domini
Regis in Custodia tua ea occasion and non alia existent' indilate deliberari
facias, Dalt. etc.

4. Note, that upon good Sureties taken for the Good-behaviour, a Supersedeas
of the Goodbehaviour may be granted as for the Peace, mutatis mutandis, supra.

5. Note also, that a Supersedeas de capias Indictatum de transgressione, and
so of an Exigent may be granted by the Justices of Peace out of Sessions, for
otherwise it were mischievous, for the Party as well by reason of his
Imprisonment, as also for that he may be outlawed before the Sessions, if the
Justice of Peace might not take Sureties of him for his Appearance, and all is
but to appear to Answer to the Indictment.

6. Crompt. 138. pl. 9. is of Opinion, That these Supersedeas may be granted by
any one Justice of Peace, with whom agrees Lib. Int. 546. supra. But Lambert
519. supra. thinks it not in the Lawful Power of any one Justice of Peace to
grant such Supersedeas at this day, but that it must be done by two Justices at
the least, and the one being of the Quorum: Nevertheless for that I find the
old Precedents to run in the name of one Justice, of the Peace alone, I have
drawn these accordingly, persuading notwithstanding the joining of two Justices
herein, and the one of the Quorum, if they may Conveniently.

7. A Supersedeas de Capias Indictatum de Transgressione, Crompt. 233 b. pl. 8.
Lamb. Precedents. 24. pl. 67.

Cantabr. ss. A. E. Sacrae Theol' D. unus Justiciar' Domini Regis, nunc ad
Pacem in Com. predict' conservand' necnon ad divers' Felonias Transgr' etc. in
eodem Comitat' Audiend' and terminand' assignat' Vicecom' Comitat' predict'
Salutem;
Quia C. D. de A in Com. tuo Yeoman, venit coram me and invenit sufficientes
manucapt' essendi coram Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. predict'
conservand' necnon ad diverse. felon' etc. in dict' Comitat' Audiend' and
Terminand' assignat' ad generalem Sessionem Pacis apud C. in Com. predict'
proxim' die tenend' ad respondend' dicto Domino Regi de quibusd' transgr'
contempt' and offensis unde indictat' existit, ideo ex part dicti Domini Regis
tibi precipimus quod de capiend' prefat' C. D. seu ipsum Imprisonand' aut eum
ea ex causa aliqualiter molestand' omnino supersed' and si eum ex causa and non
alia ceperitis tunc ipsum sine dilatione deliberari facias,

Test me, etc.
XV. Crompt. 234. A Supersedeas of a Capias Indictat', and so of an Exigent by
one Justice of Peace made out of Court, are good, for otherwise there would be
a mischief for the Imprisonment, and he may be Utlawed before the Sessions, if
one Justice of Peace cannot bind him to appear, and all is but to appear to
answer to the Indictment, supra.

2. Two Justices of Peace out of Sessions may Award a Supersedeas upon a Writ
of Restitution upon 8 H. 6. 9. N. Awarded at the general Sessions, because the
Indictment was insufficient in Law, but without special cause they cannot, etc.
Quaere of this last.

3. It is said that one Justice of Peace cannot Award a Capias nor other
Process, but there must be two Justices at the least, and this Sedente Curia in
Sessionibus and non contra, Peace Br. 6.

XVI. Crompt. 234. pl. 9. Supersedeas de Capiendo Indictat' de Transgr' Quia
invenit plegios pro fine extra Sessiones: Dalt. 367. cap. 122.

Staff. ss. R. B. Miles, Migister Rotulorum Cancellar' Domini Regis nunc, ac
unus Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. predict' conservand' necnon
ad diverse. Felonias Transgr' and alia malefact' in eodem Comitat' audiend' and
terminand' assignat' Vicecom' Comitat' predict' ac omnibus and singulis
Ballivis Constabular' ceterisque dicti Domini Regis Ministr' tam infra
Libertat' quam extra in Com. predict' Salutem:
Licet nuper per Breve dicti Domini Regis vobis seu uni vestrum precept' fuit
quod caperetis seu unus vestrum caperet A. B. de S. in Com. predict' Yeoman, si
invent' fuerit in eodem and ad ipsum salvo Custodiend', Ita quod haberetis seu
unus vestrum haber^t corpus ejus coram Custodibus Pacis ac Justiciar' dicti
Domini Regis ad Pacem in Com. predict' necnon ad diverse. felon' transgr' and
alia malefact' in eodem Comitat' Audiend' and terminand' assignat' apud Staff'
D^e etc. ad respondend' dict' Domino Regi de diverse, contemp^' and transgr'
unde coram dictis Justiciar' indictat' existit' quia modo predict' A.B. venit
coram me and invenit sufficient' plegios pro Fine suo cum dict' Domino Rege pro
premissis faciend' ideo ex part dicti Domini Regis vobis conjunctim and
divisim mando quod ad Execution' Brevis predict' ulterius faciend'
supersedeatis omnino and si ipsum A.B. ea occasion and non alia ceperitis and
in prisona dicti Domini Regis detinueritis tunc ipsumsine dilatione ab eadem
deliberari facias et habeatis seu unus vestrum habeat hoc preceptum ad
Sessiones predict' Dat. 20. die Julij Anno Regni dicti Domini nostri Jac. Dei
Gratia, etc.

XVII. Crompt. 134, 235. pl. 11. Supersedeas de Capias pro Fine, Dalt. 367.
cap. 122.

Staff ss R. E. Miles, unus Justiciar' Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Com.
predict' conservand' assignat' Vicecom' Com. predict' Salutem;
Quia C. D. de A. in dicto Comitat' Yeoman, venit coram me and invenit
sufficientes manucapt' essendi ad proxim' generalem Sessionem Pacis in Com.
predict' tenend' ad faciend' finem cum dicto Domino Rege pro quibusd' transgr'
contempt' and offensis unde indictat' existit, ideo ex part dicti Domini Regis
tibi precipio quod de capiend' prefat' C. D. Imprisonand' seu ipsum ea
occasion aliqualiter molestand' omnino supersedeatis, and habeas ibi tunc hoc
Precept',

Test me prefat' R. E. 10. Die Augusti, Anno Regni, etc.
XVIII. Crompt. 235. pl. 13. Supersedeas de Capias indictat' de felonia, etc.
Dalt. 367. cap. 122.

Staff. ss. T. G. Armig' unus Justiciar' Domini Regis nunc ad Pacem in Com.
predict' conservand' assignat' Vicecom' Com. predict' necnon omnibus and
singulis Ballivis Constabular' Caeterisque dicti Domini Regis nunc Ministris
tam infra Libertates quam in dicto Com. Salutem;
Quia A.B. de C. in Com. predict' Husbandman, venit coram me and invenit,
sufficient' securitatem essendi coram Justiciar' dicti Domini Regis ad pacem in
Com. predict' conservand' necnon, ad diverse. felon' transgr' and alia.
malefact' in eodem Comitat' Audiend' and terminand' assignat' ad proximam
generalem Sessionem pacis in Com. predict' tenend' ad respondend' dicto Domino
Regi de diverse. felon' and transgr' unde coram eis Indictat' existit', ideo ex
part dicti Domini Regis, vobis and cuilibet vestrum mando quod de Capiend'
predict' A. B. ea ex causa supersedeatis omnino and si eum ea occasion and non
alia Ceperitis seu Imprisonaveritis tunc ipsum sine dilatione deliberari facias,

Dat' 10. die Junij Anno Regni, etc.
XIX. Lamb. Precedents 24. pl. 68. A Supersedeas to stay the exigi facias upon
an Indictment of Felony, Dalt. 368. cap. 122.

Kent ss. Carolus secundus Dei Gratia etc. Vicecom' Com. Kanc' Salutem;
Quia A. B. de C. in dicto comitat' tuo Yeoman, Venit in curiam nostram apud M.
5. Die Julij Anno Regni etc. coram H. C. Milite and socijs suis Custodibus
pacis nostrae necnon Justiciarijs etc. ac se reddidit Prisonae nostrae
occasion quarund' feloniarum unde coram eis Indictatus est and in eadem
moretur sicut nobis Constat' ( or thus, Quia invenit nobis sufficient'
manucapt' essendi coram prefatis Justiciarijs ad proximam Generalem Sessionem
Pacis in dicto Comitat' tenend' ad respondend' nobis de quibusd' felonijs unde
coram eis Indictatus Existit:) Ideo tibi precipimus quod de ulterius exigendo
prefat' A.B. ad aliquem Comitat' tuum vel eum Imprisonand' sive ipsum ea
occasion molestando omnino Supersedeas and Habeas ibi hoc Breve, Test prefat'
H. C. etc.

2. Some other forms of Supersedeas there be in that old Book of the Justices
of Peace, Imprinted, proceeding from one of the Justices of the Peace, which I
do pretermit, because I see not how they be Warranted at this day.

XX. Crompt. 337. b. pl. 20. A Supersedeas of the Peace upon a Writ of
Supplicavit out of the Chancery against an Enfant who must find Surety to be
bound for him, for he himself shall not be bound, Moin Br. 14. Dalt. 365. cap.
122.

Staff. ss. E. L. Armiger, unus Justiciar' Dominae Reginae ad pacem in Com.
predict' conservand' assignat' Vicecom' ejusdem Comitat' ac omnibus and
singulis Ballivis Constabular' ceterisque dictae Dominae Reginae Ministris tam
infra libertates quam extra in Com. predict' Salutem;
Sciatis quod Breve dict' Dominae Reginae recepi in haec verba (reciting the
Supplicavit verbatim) and quia predict' J. B. and C. A. coram me prefat' E. L.
personaliter comparuerunt and predict' J. B. Manucepit pro dicto C. A. qui
infra aetatem 21. Annorum Existit' in 20 l. Quas recognovit se debere dictae
Dominae Reginae ac concessit de terris and tenement' Bonis and Catallis suis ad
opus dictae Dominae Reginae levand', viz. quod predict' C. A. Damnum seu Malum
aliquid alicui de populo dictae Dominae Reginae de Corpore suo vel de incendio
Domorum suarum non faciet nec fieri procurabit quovismodo: Ideo ex part dictae
Dominae Reginae vobis and cuilibet vestrunt mando quod de Arrestand'
attachiand' dict' C. A. inveniend' aliquam securitatem pacis per ipsum Gerend'
erga dict' Dominam Reginam and cunctum populum suum seu alicui de eodem populo
suo coram vobis seu aliquo. vestrum iterum inveniend' Supersedeatis seu
Supersederi faciatis omnino and si ipsum C. A. ea occasion and non alia
Ceperitis seu Capi Mandaveritis and in Prisona ipsius Dominae Reginae sub
Custodia vestra detinueritis tunc ipsum a Prisona illa in qua sic detinetur
sine dilatione deliberari ^aciatis seu unus vestrum deliberari faciat,

Test me prefat' E. L. 20. Die Maij Anno Regni, etc. 35.
Surety, see Bail, Recognizance. Suspicion, see Coron, Intendment. Surplusage,
see Account. Swans, see Fowl. Swearing, see Oath. Tales, see Slander. Tales,
see Enquest. Tanners, see Leather. Taverns, see Wine.
Taxes.
Tole, Merchants, Poor, Ways, Excise, Chimney-Money, Subsidies, Stock, Rates,
Assessment.
Ability.
I. LAmbert 333. If a Person that ought to be set to the Subsidy do by his craft
or covin escape the Taxation, and that be proved before two Justices of Peace
of that County, then shall he be charged at the double value of so much as he
ought to have been Taxed at, and shall further be punished at the discretions
of the said Justices 39 Eliz. 27. N. and diverse former Acts of Subsidies, Dalt.
137. cap. 54.

II. West. Symb. 1 part Sect. 631. A Certificate for payment of Subsidymony,
Justice restored 51, 52.

We whose Names are here under written Commissioners of our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty, amongst others within the County of W. for the Taxation,
levying and Collection of the second payment of the first of the two Subsidies
granted to her Majesty in the Parliament holden at W. in the 31. year of her
Highness Reign, do signify unto the Right Honorable the Lord Treasurer, the
Barons of the Exchequer, and to all other her Majesty's Commissioners, and
Officers, to whom it shall appertain, that A.B. of W. in the County of W.
Esquire, is Taxed and assessed, to pay to our Sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty, for the second payment of the said first Subsidy, and has paid etc.
after the Rate of 20 l. in Lands amongst the Inhabitants of the Parish of W. in
the Hundred of etc. in the said County of W. at which place the said A. B. was
altogether resident with his Family at the time of the Taxation of the said
Subsidy.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 5. day of May, in the year etc.
III. Kilb. Precedents. 107. A Mittimus for disturbing a Collector of
Chimny-mony, 16 Car. 2. 3, 4. N.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them,
and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Common Goal for the said County at M. in the
County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before me that A. B. an Officer duly
appointed to Receive, Collect and Answer the duty arising by Fire, Hearths and
Stoves in this County, according to an Act of Parliament, Entitled An Act for
Collecting the Duty arising by Hearth-mony by Officers to be appointed by his
Majesty, has been violently opposed (or injured) in the due Execution of the
said Act by C. D. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and
command you the said Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you, that you,
some or one of you do take the said A. B. and him safely convey to his
Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same,
together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said Goal, and him there safely to keep by the space of, etc. (viz.
any time not exceeding a Month) next after such delivery of him unto you;
hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the eighth day of etc.
IV. Kilb. Precedents 133 A Warrant to levy the forfeiture for not paying the
Excise by Alehouse-keepers, etc. 12 Car. 2. 24. 15.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto us whose Names are hereunto
subscribed ( viz. to his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid, that A. B. of C. in the said County of K. Alehouse-keeper etc. has
not paid or cleared off his duty of Excise unto such Person, as by the Statute
in that behalf made is appointed, according to the Entry of the said A. B. in
that behalf made, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed, and upon Examination
of the complaint aforesaid we do find the same to be true, These are therefore
in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some
or one of you do levy the Sum of etc. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said
A. B. being the double value of the duty so not paid or cleard off, and by him
forfeited according to the form of the said Statute, and to sell the said Goods
and Chattels (if they shall not be redeemed within 14 days) and that you pay
the Moneys so levied to such Person or Persons as by the said Statute is
directed, rendering to the said A. B. the overplus, if any be, and for want of
sufficient distress that you do forthwith certify us thereof, to the end we
may further proceed touching the same as by Law is appointed: Hereof fail not
at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day of etc.
V. Kilb. Precedents 134. For not paying the Excise by a Brewer, on 12 Car. 2.
24. 15. N.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto us whose Names are hereunto
subscribed ( viz. to) his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County
aforesaid, that A. B. of C. in the County aforesaid Common Brewer, has not
paid nor cleared off unto such Person, as by the Statute in that behalf made is
appointed, according to the Entry of the said A. B. in that behalf made, as by
the Statute is directed, and upon Examination of the Complaint aforesaid we
find the same to be true; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and
require you, and every of you, that you, some or one of you do levy the Sum of
etc. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. being the double value of
the Duty so not paid or cleared off, and by him forfeited according to the form
of the Statute aforesaid, and to see the said Goods and Chattels (if they shall
not be redeemed within fourteen days, and that you pay the Moneys so levied to
such Person or Persons as by the said Statute is directed, rendering to the
aforesaid A. B. the Overplus, if any be, and for want of sufficient distress
that you do forthwith certify us thereof, to the end that we may proceed
touching the same as by Law is appointed: Hereof fail not etc.

VI. Kilb. Precedents 135. For not entering the duty of Exceise, on 12 Car. 2.
24. 15. N.

To the Constable etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto us whose names are hereunto
subscribed, 2 of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the County aforesaid
that A. B. of C. in the said County of K. etc. has not not made such due and
particular entry of Beer (Ale, Sider, Perry, Metheglin, or Strong-water, etc.)
as by the said Statute is required, and upon Examination of the complaint
aforesaid, we do find the same to be true; These are therefore in his Majesty's
Name to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you,
do levy the Sum of, etc. upon the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. being
the double value of the duty so not paid or cleared, of and by him forfeited,
according to the form of the Statute aforesaid, and do sell the said Goods and
Chattels of the said A.B. if they shall not be redeemed within 14. days, and
that you pay the moneys so levied to such Person or Persons as by the said
Statute is directed, rendering to the aforesaid A. B. the Overplus, if any be;
and for want of sufficient distress, that you do forthwith certify us thereof,
to the end we may further proceed touching the same, as by Law is appointed;
hereof sail not at you perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 5 day of etc.
VII. Kilb. Precedents 136, A Warrant for not suffering to Gage the Vessels on
12 Car. 2. 23. N.

To the Constable, etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto us whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, that A. B.
of C. in the County aforesaid Brewer (Innkeeper, Victualler, Retailer of Beer,
Distiller of Strong-water, or Retailer of Ale, Sider, Perry, Metheglin, or
Strong-water) has refused to permit C. D. a Gager, appointed according to the
Statute aforesaid, to enter into his House, Outhouse etc. to Gage or take
account of his Beer, etc. yet notwithstanding the said A. B. after warning
given etc. has sold and retailed etc. Beer, (Ale, etc.) not having paid or
cleared off the duty of Excise: And upon Examination of the said Complaint, we
do find the same to be true, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will
and require you, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do levy upon
the Goods and Chattels of the said A. B. five pounds for his Offense aforesaid,
and sell the said Goods and Chattels, if they shall not be redeemed within 14.
days, and that you do pay the Money so levied to such Person or Persons as by
the said Statute is directed, rendering to the aforesaid A. B. the Overplus, if
any be; and for want of sufficient distress, that you do forthwith certify us
thereof to the end we may further proceed touching the same, as by Law is
appointed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day of etc.
VIII. Kilb. Precedents 137. A Warrant for loss of allowance for making false
Entries 12 Car. 2. 23. N.

Kent ss.
Forasmuch as by the Statute in that behalf made, it is enacted that all common
Brewers and makers of Beer, or Ale, not selling the same by retail, for and in
Consideration of wast by Filling and Leekage of their Beer and Ale, shall have
and be allowed our of the Retorns made by the Gagers upon every three and
twenty Barrels of Beer, whether strong or small, Returned by the said Gagers,
three Barrels; and upon every two and twenty Barrels of Ale, whither strong or
small, Returned by the Gagers, two Barrels; and forasmuch as A. B. of C. in the
said County, Common Brewer, has this present day been duly convicted before
us, that he has wittingly and willingly made a false Entry of Beer etc. by him
lately Brewed, contrary to the form of the Statute aforesaid, we do therefore
adjudge that the said A. B. shall forfeit and lose for his Offense aforesaid,
over and besides the Penalties in the said Act mentioned, the said allowance so
to be made, for six Months now next ensuing:

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day of etc.
IX. Kilb. Precedents 138. A Warrant upon complaint of a false Entry, 12 Car.
2. 23. N.

To A. B. of C. in the County.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto us, that you A. B. of C. etc.
contrary to the Statute in that Case made and provided, These are therefore in
his Majesty's Name to require you to appear before us ( viz. two Justices) at
the House of D. in E. in the County aforesaid, upon the 22. day of this instant
May, to Answer to the premises; hereof fail not at your peril:

Given under our Hands the 28. day of May, etc.
X. Kilb. Precedents 138, 139. A Mittimus where there is not sufficient to pay
the Excise.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and every of them, and
to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County at M. in the County
aforesaid. Kent ss.
Whereas by Warrant under our ( viz. two Justices) hands, you the said
Constable and Borshoulders were required to levy of the Goods and Chattels of
A. B. of C. in the said County, etc. by him forfeited according to the form of
the Statute (Entitled a grant of certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale, or other
Liquors, for the increase of his Majesty's Revenue during his Life) and you the
said Constable have this day certified us that the said A.B. has not
sufficient distress whereby the said etc. can be levied, These are therefore in
his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some,
or one of you, do take the said A. B. and him convey to the Goal aforesaid, and
there deliver him to the aforesaid Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept, requiring also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Goal,
and him there Imprison till satisfaction be made of the aforesaid Forfeiture
etc. hereof fail not at your perils:

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day of May etc.
XI. Kilb. Precedents 139. A Certificate upon taking the Oath of Officers of
Excise 12 Car. 2. 23. N.

Kent ss.
We whose Names are hereunto subscribed, his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of
the County aforesaid, do certify that A. B. of C. in the said County has
before us this present day taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and the
Oath mentioned in the Statute made in the 12 year of his now Majesty's Reign
(entitled A grant of Certain Impositions upon Beer, Ale and other Liquors for
the increase of his Majesty's Revenue during his Life.)

Given under our Hands and Seals the second day of May in the 31. year of the
Reign of etc.
2. This Oath is by the Justices to be certified to the next Quarter Sessions.

XII. Kilb. Precedents 140. A Warrant against one for 10 l. for bribing etc. an
Excise Officer 15 Car. 2. 11.

To the Constable etc.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it has been duly proved before us ( viz. two Justices) that A.
B. of C. etc. Brewer did Bribe (or corrupt, give money, fee, or other reward
etc.) to J. S. Gager (or other Officer) to make a false Return turn or report
unto the Officer of Excise of Beer, Ale, etc. Excisable within his division
(charge or walk) in the said County (or to forbear or omit the doing or
Executing of his place or employment) against the form of an Act of Parliament
lately made, entitled An additional Act for the ordering and collecting the
duty of Excise and preventing the abuses therein, whereby he has forfeited 10
l. for his said Offense. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, to charge
and command you, and every of you, to levy by distress and Sale of the Goods of
the said A. B. the aforesaid 10 l. rendering to him the Overplus thereof, and
thereof fail not at your perils:

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day of May etc.
XIII. Kilb. Precedents 141. A Mittimus against the Offender for not paying the
said 10 l. 10 Car. 2. 11.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the said County
at C. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Whereas it was duly proved before us that A.B. of C. etc. Brewer, did Bribe
C.D. Gager to make a false Return into the Office of Excise of Beer etc.
Excisable within his Division in the said County, against the form of an Act of
Parliament lately made, entitled An additional Act for the ordering and
collecting the duty of Excise and preventing the abuses therein, whereby he
forfeited 10 l. for his said Offense; and we did therefore by Warrant under our
Hands and Seals charge and command you to levy by distress and Sale of the
Goods of the said A. B. the aforesaid 10 l. and you the said Constable have
returned to us that for want of such distress you, could not levy the same:
These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and command you the said
Constable and Borshoulders, and every of you to attach the said A. B. and him
to convey to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and there deliver him to the Keeper
of the same, together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to
receive him into the said Goal, and him there safely keep by the space of three
Months without Bail or Mainprise Hereof: fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day of May etc.
2. The like as supra, mutatis mutandis, against any sworn Gager or other
Officer that shall take and receive any Bribe, money, Fee, Gift or other reward
of any Brewer or other Person, for any cause or matter retaining to the
Exercise.

XIV. Kilb. Precedents 142, 143, 144. A Warrant to distrain for the duties of
Excise.

To T. O. and J. T. Gent' and to either of them, and such other Persons as they
or either of them shall take to their, or either of their assistance in
Execution hereof. Kent ss.
Whereas Complaints were lately made unto us S. B. and R.K. Esquires, two of
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County by the Officers of
Excise, that the several Persons hereunder named had committed the several and
respective Offenses, hererein after mentioned, and severally added to their
several Names, against the form of several Statutes made for payment to his
Majesty of the duties of Exc^se, and forasmuch as upon hearing of the said
Complaints this present day it was duly proved before us, that the said
Complaints were true, and we have therefore according to the form of the
Statutes aforesaid adjudged that the several and respective Persons, shall for
his and their seveveral and respective Offenses forfeit and pay the several
Sums of Money here under added to their several and respective Names, that is to
say,

T. D. of H. in the said County Vintner a Retailer of Beer, etc. for forfeiture
for neglect of entering by the space of 12. Months, last past, of Beer etc. by
him retailed within the said time 24 l. and for double the Duty of Exercise for
25. Barrels 3. Firkins and 5. Gallons of Beer of above 6 s. the Barrel, and for
3. Barrels and 3. Firkins of Beer, of 6 s. per Barrel or under, he not having
paid the single duty, or any of the same 8 l. 14 s. ob. in all 32 l. 14 s. ob.

J. L. of H. aforesaid Cordwinder, for forfeiture for neglect to appear before
us this day to give Evidence for discovery of Breaches of the Laws of Excise,
the 10 day of May, at H. etc. (viz. the day and place of condemnation)
notwithstanding that he was summoned so to do according to the Statute in that
behalf made, 40 s.

E. B. Late of B. in the said County Laborer, for the like, 40 s. and for
forfeiture for that he refusing to permit the Gager to Gage or take account of
Beer by him Brewed, and being thereupon forbidden by the said Gager to sell any
of the Beer aforesaid, he after such warning given, did sell the some not
having paid or cleared the Duty of Excise, 5 l. and for Costs and Charges of
the Officer and others employed in the Services touching the Premises, 5 s. in
all 7 l. 5 s.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Authorize and command you, and
every of you, to levy the aforesaid several and respective Sums of Money upon
the Goods and Chattels of the said several and respective Offenders, and to
make Sale of the said Goods and Chattels if they shall not be redeemed within
14. days, rendering to the Parties the Overplus, if any be, and for want of
sufficient distress, to certify us, or one of us, of the same, to the end that
such further proceedings may be made therein, as by the Laws and Statutes
aforesaid are required: And you are hereby further Commanded to dispose of all
such Moneys as you shall by virtue hereof levy or receive, in such manner as by
the Laws and Statutes aforesaid is appointed,

Given under our Hands and Seals the 15. day of May etc.
2. All the before mentioned Warrants upon 12 Car. 2. 23. will also serve,
Mutatis mutandis, upon the other Statute touching the Excise made the same
Parliament 12 Car. 2. 24. 15. etc. Entitled An Act for taking away the Court
of Wards and Liveries,

XV. Dalt. 167. cap. 63. Edit. 1666. In the Default of the Parishioners, Poor.
Churchwardens, and Constables that shall not assess the Tax imposed upon the
Parishioners by the Justices at their Easter-Sessions, toward the relief of
the Prisoners in the Kings Bench and Marshalsey, and of the Hospitals of that
County, and of the losses by Fire, Water, and other Casualties, and relief of
the Poor within that County, any Justice of Peace, dwelling in that Parish, or
if none dwell there, in the parts next adjoining, may assess the same, and the
same Justice, or any other Justice of Peace of that Limit, in default of the
Churchwardens and Constables, may levy the same by Distress and Sale of the
Goods of the Party refusing or neglecting to pay his Part thereof, rendering to
the Party the Overplus, and in default of such Distress, any Justice of Peace
of that Limit may commit such Person to Prison, there to remain without Bail
till he has paid the same 43 Eliz. 2.

XVI. Dalt. 167. cap. 63. Edit. 1666. Also in default of the Parishioners,
Churchwardens and Constables that shall not assess the Tax imposed upon the
Parishioners by the Justices at their Easter-Sessions toward the relief of
maihmed Soldiers and Mariners, any Justice of Peace dwelling in that Parish,
or if none dwell there, in the Parts next adjoining, may assess the same and
the same Justice of Peace in default of the Churchwardens and Constables may
levy the same by Distress and Sale of the Goods of the Party refusing, or
neglecting to pay his part thereof, rendering to the Party the Overplus, but in
default of such distress, the Justices of Peace may not commit such Person to
Prison, as they might in the former case 43 Eliz. 3.

XVII. Dalt. 167, 168, 169. cap. 63. Edit. 1666. Now in these Cases and other
Rates and Taxations, you shall observe these Rules following. First, that the
most reasonable Rating of Land is by the yearly value and quality thereof, and
not by the quantity or content, 9 Co. 12.

2. He that occupyeth in his own hands Lands lying in several Parishes, shall
be charged in every Parish proportionally for his Land there, 5 Co. 67.

3. The Fermer shall be rated for the Lands, and not the Lessor or Landlord, 5
Co. 65.

4. The Landlord shall not be rated or Taxed for his Ferm-rents, in as much as
the Fermor or Occupyer of the Land is chargeable for the same Lands, so where
any Fermor is assessed by his Goods, I ought not to be assessed for my Rent of
the same Ferm, 7 H. 7. 33. and 11 H. 4. 35. Quinzim Br. 2. 4.

5. Upon a complaint to the Judges of Assize in the County of Lincoln, it was
resolved and ordered, that the Lands in the Parish, and not the Rent neither of
that Land, nor of other Lands could be Taxed, at Assizes at Lincoln, 1633. Sir
Anthony Irbies Case.

6. By Goods in most Cases a Man may be rated as well as by Lands, but not both
by Goods and Lands, as it seems, the like you may see in diverse Act of
Subsidies, wherein there is usually a special Proviso, that no Person shall be
Taxed both for his Lands and Goods, nor doubly rated, 27 Eliz. 29. 29. Eliz. 8.
and 31 Eliz. 15. and 35 Eliz. 13. and 39 Eliz. 26. and 43 Eliz. 18. and 7 Jac.
23. and 18 Jac. 2. and 21 Jac. 34. 3 Car. 1. 7. And yet see 44 Ed. 3 Customs,
Br. 6. Where a Tax of ten pounds was made by the Parishioners for the amending
of their Church, and was Taxed to be levied of every Plow-land 6 d. and of
every Cow 1 d. and of every 10. Sheep ob. and J. S. for his Land, Cows, and
Sheep, was rated at 9 s. and was distrained for the same, and upon a Replevin
by J. S. sued, no Exception was taken to the manner of Rate imposed upon J. S.
but Note, that the said Tax was made by his Consent, and consensus tollit
errorem, 5 Co. 36. 40.

7. So then he that has both Lands and Goods shall be charged by the best of
them both, but he is not to be double charged, scil. by the one and the other;
and yet in some places they do use to charge one Person both by Lands and
Goods, which if it be warrantable by Law, yet it seems to be with this
difference, scil. that where a Man occupies Land, and also has in his hands a
great estate or stock of Merchandise, or be also a Clothier, Malster, or the
like, that such Person peradventure may be charged by his Lands and also by
such his Stocks, but for such Goods or Stock of Cattle, whereby a Man does
occupy, compass or manure his Lands, as for Horses, Sheep, Kine, etc. wherewith
he stocketh his Land, a Man shall not be charged, scil. if he be charged by his
Land he shall not also be charged for such his Cattle which do manure the same
Land.

8. Also where a Man is rated by his Goods, it seems reasonable that such
Goods be rated after the value of Lands to be purchased, scil. 100 l. in Stock
or Goods to be rated after 5. or 6 l. pounds per Annum in Lands, and so after
the like proportion for a greater or lesser Estate in Goods, Stock, Merchandise
or the like.

9. Note, that where a Man is charged by Goods, they must be bona Notabilia, as
it seems, and yet the Subsidy Men are rated not only by their Stock of
Merchandise, or Cattle, Corn, Household-stuff, or other moveable Goods, which
are Notabilia, but also to their Coin and Debts owing to them, deducting such
Debts as they owe to others, and such Debts as be desperate: But there the
Party over-rated upon his complaint to the Commissioners, and his Oath taken
before them, that his Goods, Coin, or Debts be not of such value (which Oath
the said Commissioners are Authorized to take by the Statute,) the said
Commissioners may abate the said Assessments, according as upon such
Examination shall appear to them just.

10. Also for Goods a Man shall be charged only in the Town where the Goods be
at the time of the Assessment, Quinzim Br. 4. 6. See 9 H. 4. 7. N.

11. Also if a Man be Assessed for his Goods in D. when as he has no Goods
there, and be Distrain'd for such Assessment, he may have an Action of
Trespass, Quinzim Br. 3. 4. 9.

12. The Constables or other Officers, and great part of the Parishioners upon
a General warning given in the Church assembled, may make such Taxations by
Law, 5 Co. 6. 7. Fitzh. 49.

The like may be done by the Churchwardens, and greater part of the
Parishioners for Church Charges.

And if the greater part of the Parishioners will not meet upon such warning
given, it seems the Officers and such of the Parishioner, as will meet, may
make such Taxations.

13. Note, that such Taxations being made for a Commonwealth, as for the
making or amending of a Bridge, Highway, Causey, Sea, or the like, they shall
bind all Persons, although they assent not, 44 Ed. 3. 18. 19. Customs Br. 6.
Fitzh. 49. 5 Co. 63.

And so of Taxations made to repair the Church, or for other common Town
Charges, as it seems where such Taxations are made by the greater part of the
Parishioners, as aforesaid, 5 Co. 63. 67. and 21 H. 7. 20 b. pl. 8 Ed. 1.
Assize 413.

14. Also when Assessments are made for the reparations of Bridges, Highways,
Sea-bounds, Causeys, and the like, it seems that the Sum assessed upon
particular Men or Towns, ought to be competent and reasonable, having regard to
the benefit which the Parties Assessed or charged, shall and may have and
enjoy, by reason of the said Assessment, and so reasonable, as that the Parties
shall or may have more Benefit than charge thereby, and then such Assessments
cannot be reputed Burdensome, or a charge to the Subject, when he shall or may
reap benefit thereby, 13 H. 4. 14. Patents Br. 12. and 5 Co. 63 b.

15. If a Township be Amerced, and the Neighbors do by assent Assess a certain
Sum upon every Inhabitant, and do agree that J. S. shall gather it up, and that
if it be not paid such a day, that J. S. shall Distrain for the same, in such
Case a distress taken by J. S. for such Rates behind, is good, Customs Br. 6.
Dr. and St. 74 b.

16. And Issues Estreated upon the Parish may by order of Sessions be equally
rated upon the Inhabitants, and levied accordingly, Libr' Sess. Pacis in Com.
Middlesex, Ord. 16. May 8 Car. 1.

The like Order for the Inhabitants of Fulham, 9 Apr. 11 Car. 1. And the like
for the Inhabitants of Eling, 2 Dec. 9. Car. 1.

XVIII. Lambert 353, 354. After the Execution had for the Party Robbed against
the Men of the Hundred, and upon complaint made by them so charged, two
Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum of the same County, Inhabiting
within the said Hundred, or near unto it where any such Execution shall be had,
may Assess and Tax rateably and proportionably by their Discretions, all and
every the Towns, Parishes, Villages, and Hamlets; as well of the said Hundred
as of the Liberties within the same, toward an equal Contribution to be had
for the relief of them against whom such Execution was had, 27 Eliz. 13. N.

XIX. Shepherds Clerks Cabinet 66 cap. 12. A Warrant for a Rate charged on the
Hundred for a Robery, on 27 Eliz. 13. N.

To the high Constable of the Hundred of W. in the said County of Gloc. and to
all the Petty Constables and Tythingmen of the several Parishes and Tythings
within the said Hundred, W. S. and J. S. two of the Justices etc. send
greeting. Gloc. ss.
Whereas one A. B. was of late Robbed of an Hundred pounds within the said
Hundred of W. and has thereupon sued the same Hundred of W. and has a
Judgment to recover an Hundred pounds against the same, the which has been
levied of and charged upon C.D. and E. F. two of the Inhabitants of D. within
the said Hundred of W. and upon their Complaint to us thereof, we have
according to the Act of Parliament in that Case provided, for the raising of
the same money, set a Rate upon the Parishes and Places within the said Hundred,
which Rate is hereunto subscribed and annexed, These are therefore to require
you the said High-Constable to give Notice thereof.

Testimonial, see Poor. Theft, see Coron. Thirdborough, see Constable. Threats,
see Affray, Force. Tilemaking, see Masons. Tillage, see Husbandry. Timber, see
Woods. Tinkers, see Poor. Tin, see Metal. Tippling, see Ale.
Tithes.
I. LAmbert 353. Two Justices of Peace, the one being of the Quorum; upon
Complaint of any competent Judge of Tithes, for any Misdemeanor of the
Defendant in a Suit of Tithes, may cause him to be Attached or Committed to
Ward till he find Surety unto them by Recognizance to the Kings use, to obey
the Process and Sentence of that Judge, 27 H. 8. 20. Crompt. 197. pl. 22. 18
Eliz. 11. 7. N. Crompt. 200. Dalt. 139. cap. 58.

II. Lambert 353. And also upon Complaint in writing by an Ecclesiastical Judge
( Certificate, Br. 31.) that has given definitive Sentence in Case of Tithes,
against one which wilfully refuses to pay the Tithes or Sums of Money so
adjudged, two such Justices may cause the Party to be Attacht and Committed to
the next Goal till he find Surety, as is aforesaid, to perform that Sentence,
32 H. 8. 7. Crompt. 197. pl. 23. Crompt. 200, Dalt. 140. Cap. 58.

III. Lambert 404. That 27 H. 8. 20. and 32 H. 8. 7. of Tithes, do give to
Justices of Peace a certain special (or particular) power in them, and yet do
not yield unto them any Authority to enquire upon the same.

IV. Crompt. 155. Nor shall he be let to Bail or Mainprise who is Committed by
Justices of Peace to the Goal, because that he refuses to pay his Tithe
according to the Judgment given against him in the Spiritual Court, by 27 H. 8.
20. 32 H. 8. 7.

Tokens, see Forgery, Collusion. Tobacco, see Husbandry, Merchants. Three and
two Justices, see Justices. Toll, see Market-overt, Taxes. Transportation, see
Ouster le Mere. Trades, see Apprentice. Traverse, see Pleading.
Treason.
Misprision, Felony, Treason.
LAmbert 224. And albeit the Justices of Peace may deal with all Traitors as
with Persons that offend against the Peace of the King, and of the Land, yet
not in the very point of their Offense, Dalt. 231. cap. 90.

2. Saving that in some they have a special power to enquire of them, and to
receive Indictments only, 2 Inst. 558. Treason Br. 5. infra.

Of this latter sort is the Treason of Extolling Foreign Power, 1 Eliz. 1. 30.
N. 1.

The Treason of putting in ure any Instrument of Reconciliation, gotten from
the Sea of Rome, 13 Eliz. 2.

The Treason of absolving or withdrawing his Majesty's Subjects from their
natural Obedience, 23 Eliz. 1. Dalt. 228. cap. 89.

II. Lambert 405, 406, 407. tit. Pope. Enquiry in Sessions, if any Person have
within this half year, by writing, printing, teaching, preaching, express deed
or act, advisedly, maliciously and directly affirmed, holding, set forth or
defended the Authority, Pre-eminence, Power, or Jurisdiction Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, of any Foreign Prince or Person whatsoever, heretofore claimed,
used, or usurped in this Realm, or any the Kings Dominions.

2. Or have advisedly, maliciously, and directly put in use, or executed any
thing to the extolling, setting forth, or defense of any such pretended or
usurped Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, or Authority, or any part thereof.

3. Or if any Person compellable to take the Oath of Recognition of the King's
Majesty to be Supreme Governor in all Cases within his Dominions, have refused
to take the said Oath, after lawful tender thereof to him made.

4. If any Person, under the King's Obedience, have at any time within this
year, by writing, cyphering, printing, preaching, or act, advisedly holden, or
stood with to extol or defend the Power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his See,
heretofore claimed or usurped within this Realm.

5. Or by any speech, open deed or act, advisedly attributed such manner of
Authority to the said See of Rome, or to the Bishop thereof, within any the
King's Dominions, ye shall present him, his Abettors, Procurors, Counselors,
Aiders, and Comforters, 5 Eliz. 1.

6. If any Person have by any means practiced to absolve, persuade, or withdraw
any other within the King's Dominions from their natural Obedience, or for that
intent, from the Religion now established here, to the Romish Religion, or to
move them to promise Obedience to the Sea of Rome, or other Estate.

7. Or if any Person have been willingly absolved or withdrawn, or have
promised such Obedience, 23 Eliz. 1.

8. And if any Person have willingly aided or maintained any such Offender, or
knowing such Offense have concealed it, and not within the twenty days
disclosed it to some Justice of Peace, or other higher Officer, 23 Eliz. 1.

III. Lambert 506. And therefore Justices of Peace may only Enquire of certain
the Offenses against 1 Eliz. 1. 2. 5 Eliz. 1. and 13 Eliz. 2. touching the
knowledging the King's Supremacy, or the Service of God, or coming to the
Church, or the establishment of true Religion, as you may see 23 Eliz. 1. Dalt.
54. cap. 20.

2. And they may only Enquire of any the Treasons or Misprisions of Treasons
made by the same Act, 23 Eliz. 1. Coron Fitz. 360. Br. 257. and 9 H. 4. 1. pl.
1.

IV. Crompt. 21. pl. 3. Nota, That the Justices of Peace may Enquire of Murder
or Petty Treason, because their Commission, 6. is De omnibus Feloniis, see 6 H.
7. 5. pl. 4. tit. Coron 31. and Leet Br. 12. 2 Inst. 31^. Dalt. 234. cap. 91.

V. Poult. de ^^ce, 173. 10. That 33 H. 8. 23. N. is Repealed by 1 and 2 Phil.
and Mar. 10. N. touching the Indictment and Trial of Traitors; for they are to
be indicted and tried in the County where the Offense was Committed, or by the
Freeholders of that County, according to the Course of the Common Law,
notwithstanding that they have confessed their Offenses before three of the
King's Counsel.

Trespass.
Affray, Peace, Force, Riot, Maihem.
I. LAmbert 424. Enquiry at Sessions, If any Person have maihmed another of any
Member, whereby he is the less able to fight, as by putting out his eyes,
striking off his hand, finger, or foot, beating out his fore-teeth, or breaking
of his skull; and of their Accessories.

2. If any have Committed unlawful Assault, beating, wounding, or such like
Trespass against the Body of any Man.

3. Or have with Force and against the Law taken the Goods of another, or have
done any Trespass in the Lands of another, this is in the Commission of the
Peace.

II. Lambert 301, 302. The Justice of Peace where the Hedge or Pale-breaker,
cutter of Corn or Wood, robber of Orchard or Garden, and such like, is
apprehended, or the Offense is committed, may upon the Testimony of one
sufficient Witness upon Oath, cause the Offender to pay Damages, and to be
whipped by the Constable, 43 Eliz. 7. Dalt. 21. cap. 6. Crompt. 96.

Trials, see Proof, Troop, see Riot. Travelers, see Ways. Treasure, see Money.
Truce, see Admirals Trunks, see Fish. Tumults, see Riot. Turn, see Sheriffs.
Vagabonds and Vagrants, see Poor. Venire Facias, see Enquest, Process. Vessels,
see Measures.
Victuals.
I. LAmbert 448, 449, 451. Enquiry in Sessions if any Butcher, Fishmonger,
Innholder, Tipler, Brewer, Baker, Poulterer, or other Seller of Victual, have
not sold the same at reasonable prices, and for moderate gains, 23 Ed. 3. 6. 13
Rich. 2. 8.

2. If any Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, Poulterers, Cooks, Fruiterers or any
Mystery of any of them, have conspired or taken any Oath or Promise not to
sell, but at prices certain agreed between them, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 15.

3. If any Butcher have sold, or offered to sell Swines-flesh meezled, or any
Flesh that died of the Murrain; or if any other Victualler have sold, or
offered to sell any corrupt or unwholsom Victual, 51 H. 3. page 13. cap. 7. 3.
N. 1. infra. Crompt. 87 b.

4. If any Person have bought to sell again any Butter or Cheese, unless it be
in open Fair or Market, by retailing it after the weigh of Cheese and Barrel of
Butter, or after a less quantity, or unless it be Victuallers for that which
shall be retailed or spent in their Houses, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. 21.

5. If any Innholder, Taverner, Alehouse-keeper, Common Victualler, Common
Cook, or Common Table-keeper, has uttered or put to sale any kind of Flesh
Victual upon any day in the time of Lent, or upon any Sunday, Saturday, or
other day appointed by former Law to be Fish-day, not being Christmas Day,
except it be to such Person as resorting to such House, had lawful License to
eat the same, according to the Statute thereof made 5 Eliz. 5.. 14. N. 1.

6. If any Person, other than by reason of Age, Sickness, Childing, or License,
have within this year eaten Flesh in Lent, or upon any Fish-day observed by the
Custom of this Realm, 5 Eliz. 5. 15. 35 Eliz. 7. and 1 Jac. 29.

II. Crompt. 87 b. Enquiry in Sessions of Butchers that sell Swine-flesh
meezled, or Flesh that dies of the Murrain, for the first time he shall be
grievously Amerced, for the second time, shall be put on the Pillory, and for
the third Offense, shall be imprisoned and make a Fine, and the fourth time he
shall forejudge the Vill, 31 Ed. 1. Incert' temps page 85. cap. 7. de
Pistoribus and Braceatoribus, etc. Justice of Peace may Enquire of this Offense
by their Commission,

2. If a Butcher or etc. sends Flesh that has the Murrain, or that is not
sound, to be sold, this is an Offense for which he shall be punished, for it
shall be intended he will sell, if any will buy, by Fairfax, 1 Rich. 3. 1.

III. Crompt. 95. A Victualler shall be compelled to sell his Victual, if the
Party tenders ready Money, by Hussy and Brian, 10 H. 7. 8. See Ed. 4. 3.

Vi Laica, see Force. Villain, see Poor. Violence, see Affray. Undertakers, see
Purveyance. Universities, see Franchis. Unlawful Assemblies, see Riot.
Undersheriff, see Sheriffs. Unlawful Games, see Games. Vpholsters, see
Drapery.
Usury.
I. LAmbert 443. Enquiry in Sessions, If any Person have by himself, or any
other, sold any Merchandises or Wares to any other, and have within three
Months next after that, by himself, or by any other bought the same, or any
part thereof again upon a lesser price, knowing them to be the same, Crompt. 17
b. 125 a.

2. Or if any Person have, by any corrupt Bargain, Mortgage, or other means
taken in gain, above the rate of Ten pounds for the Hundred for one whole years
forbearance, and so after the rate for more or less, 37 H. 8. 9. Crompt. 17 b.
13 Eliz. 8.

II. Lamberts Precedents 17. pl. 46. An Endictment for Usury.

Kent ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod ubi A. B. de
C. in dict' Comitat' Mercer, primo die October. Anno Regni dict' Domini nostri
Jacobi etc. apud C. predict' in Com. predict' mutuo dedisset and accommodasset
cuidam D.E. de C. predict' in dicto Comitatu Shoemaker, summam 20 l. in
pecuniis numeratis de pecunijs dicti A. B. in ea intention ut idem D. E. 20 l.
eidem A. B. redderet and resolveret primo die Aprilis tunc proxime futuro idem
A. B. ad tunc and ibidem injuste cepit and habuit prae manibus de prenominato
D. E. 26 solidos in lucro usura and proficuo pro differendo and dando diem
solutionis sic ut prefertur earund' 20 l. a dicto primo die October. Anno
supradicto usque dictum primum diem Aprilis tunc proxime sequentem qui quidem
26 solidi modo and forma predictis prae manibus capti and habiti multo excedant
and superant ratam and proportionem december librarum pro Cent. lib. pro uno Anno
integro accommodand' ad damnum non mediocre ipsius D. E. ac in contemptum dicti
Domini Regis nunc, necnon contra formam diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi Casu
provisorum and editorum, West. Symb. 2. part 132 b. Sect. 216.

III. West. Symb. 2. part 133. Sect. 217. Another Indictment of Usury upon 37
H. 8. 9. N. in which the Statute is recited to be revived by 13 Eliz. 8.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod cum per
quendam Actum in Parliament' Dominae Elizab' nuper Reginae Angliae apud Westm'
in Com. Middlesex secundo die Aprilis Anno Regni sui 13 tent' edit' inter alia
inactitat' fuit quod quidam Actus in Parliament' Domini H. nuper Regis Angliae
octavi apud Westm' predict' Anno Regni sui 37. tent' edit' pro reformatione
Usurae ab and post 25 diem Junij proxim' sequent' predict' secundum diem Apr.
Anno Regni dictae Dominae Rginae 13. supradict' revivat' ^oret and staret in
suo pleno robore vigore and effectu, in quo quidem Actu in Parliament' dicti
nuper Regis H. 8. Anno Regni sui 37. supradicto tent' and edit' Inactitat' suit
Autoritate ejusdem Parliament' quod nulla persona sive personae cujuscunque
status gradus sive conditionis ipse vel ipsi foret sive forent ad aliquod
tempus post ultimum diem Januarij in Actu illo mentionat' per viam sive medium
aliquarum corruptarum bargainae accommodationis Exchambij Chevansy Cautelae
sive Interesse aliquarum Merchandizarum Mercium aut alicujus alius rei sive
aliquarum aliarum rerum quarumcunque aut per aliquam aliam corrupt' sive
deceptivam viam vel conveyantiam haberent reciperent acciperent sive caperent
in lucro vel proficuo pro differendo seu dando diem solutionis unius Anni
integri de and pro ejus vel eorum denarijs vel alia re quae foret debita pro
ejusdem Mercibus Merchandizis sive alia re vel rebus ultra summam december
librarum pro Centum libris and sic secundum ratum illum, and non ultra de and
pro majore sive minore summa seu pro longiore sive breviore tempore, and non
plus sive majus lucrum vel summam inde habend' sub poena forisfaciendi and
amittendi pro qualibet offens. triplum valorem Mercium Merchandizarum and alius
rei vel rerum sic barganizat' vendit' Exchambiat' sive accommodat' ac etiam
haberet and sufferret imprisonament' Corporis sui and faceret finem and
redemptionem ad voluntat' dicti Domini Regis de qua quidem forisfactura
triplicis valoris predict' una medietas esset dict' Domino Regi and altera
medietas illi vel illis qui pro eadem prosequerentur in aliqua Curiarum dicti
nuper Regis de Recordo in qua secta, nulla vadiatio Legis, Essonium sive
protectio allocaretur prout in eodem Statut' de Anno 37. dicti nuper Regis H.
8. supradict' before continetur, cumque etiam quidem R. P. de etc. post
predict' 2 die Apr. Anno 13. dictae Dominae Reginae supradict' scil. 22 die
December. Anno Regni etc. apud L. in Com. E. predict' accommodasset cuidam C. F.
4 l. Idem R. P. Statut' predict' minime ponderans nec poenam in eodem content'
verens ad tunc and ibidem recepit and habuit de prefat' C. F. in lucro and
proficuo pro differendo and dando diem solutionis earundem 4 l. ab eodem 22 die
Dec. Anno etc. supradict' usque 4 diem Apr. tunc proxime sequent' 8 s. qui
quidem 8 s. in lucro and proficuo pro differendo and dando diem solutionis
dictarum 4 l. a predict' 22 die December. Anno etc. supradict' usque predict' 4
diem Apr. ex tunc proximum sequent' excedunt ratam 10 libr. pro 100 l. pro uno
Anno integro contra formam and effectum Statuti predict' ad grave damnum ipsius
C. F. etc. Crompt. 269. pl. 111.

Vtlary.
Exigent, Process.
I. LAmbert 513, 514. Now seeing that this Process of the Sessions is sent out
to this end, that either the Party shall come in to answer, and to be Justified
by the Law, or else that he shall for his Contumacy, be deprived of the benefit
of Law; for so much in effect do the words of the Commission Import in them
Quousque Capiantur reddant se aut utlagentur.

2. It follows, that in all Cases of Endictments, if the Party be returned
insufficient, the Process of Utlary lies against the Offender, if he be not
taken before, or do not otherwise offer and yield himself.

3. And then the Power of the Justices ends with the Utlary, for they can
make no Capias utlagatum, but must certify the Utlary into the Kings Bench.

Wages, see Fees, Apprentice.
Ways.
Chemin, Bridges, Streets, Cawseys, Highways, Post Office.
I. LAmbert 300. Thus supervisors for amendment of the Highways ought, within
one Month next after any Offenses done by any against the Acts of 2 and 3 Ph.
and Mar. 8. and 5 Eliz. 13. to present that Offense to the next Justice of the
Peace, and thereupon he ought to certify the same at the next General Sessions
within the same County.

2. The Occupier of any Iron-work, for every load of Coal or Mine, and also for
every Tun of Iron that he shall cause to be carried in any year, between the 12
of October and the first of May, by the space of one mile in the Highways
within the Weilds of Sussex, Kent, or Surry, shall for every three such Loads,
and also for every such Tun, pay to the Justice of Peace, dwelling near to the
Places in that County where the Highways shall be most Annoyed, or to his
Assigns, three shillings in Money, the same in default of such payment to be
levied by distress by such Justices, or his Assignee, of any the Goods of the
Party, Lambert 471.

3. And such Occupier for every 30 Loads of Cole and Mine, or of either of
them, and for every ten Tuns of Iron carried in the said Highways, between the
first of May and 12 of October in any year, shall lay one load of Cynder,
Gravel, Stone, or Chalk in places to be appointed by such Justice, or else
shall pay within eight days after demand at every such Iron-work, 3 s. for
every such Load, to the hands of such Justice, who upon default of payment
shall levy the same by distress, the same Moneys to be likewise bestowed by
such Justice upon the same Highways at his discretion: And such Justice may
yearly within forty days next after May Day, assign the places for bestowing
the said Cynder, Gravel, Stone, Chalk or Moneys, therefore 39 Eliz. 19.

Justices.
II. Lambert 331. By the oversight of any two Justices, and 12. discreet Men of
the Hundred and Hundreds adjoining, any Person within the Weild of Kent, may
make in his own Land a new Highway, more commodious than the old, 14 H. 8. 6.
N. Crompt. 198 b.

Justices.
III. Lambert 354. Two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
which were present at the Session wherein any Person was Convicted for any
Offense against this Statute 39 Eliz 19. of Highways, within the Weild of Kent,
Surry, or Sussex, may make Warrant for levying the forfeits thereof to any
Officer, and they also may appoint by their Discretion, such ways and means to
levy the Doubles for not paying those Forfeits within 20 days next after lawful
demand of the same by such Officer.

Bridges.
IV. Lambert 361, 362. Four Justices of Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
may, where a decayed Bridge is, and where it cannot be proved who, or what
Lands be chargeable to the repairing thereof, Tax the Inhabitants, make
Collectors, and appoint Overseers for the amendment of the same, Crompt. 200 b.
22. H. 8. 5.

Nusans.
V. Lambert 434. Enquiry in Sessions, if any Lord of the Soil have not enlarged
the Highway from Market to Market, so that no Dyke, Bush, nor Tree, (except
great Trees) be within 200 Foot of each side thereof, 13 Ed. 1. St. 2 cap. 5.
1. N. 1. Winch.

Constables.
VI. Lambert Constable etc. 30. 26. The Constables of Hundreds and of Franchises
ought to make Presentment to the Justices of Peace, and to all other Justices
thereto assigned, of the defaults of Watches, and of the defaults of the Kings
Highways not so enlarged, as no Ditches, Underwood, or Bushes be within 200
foot on every side of the same, etc. Articles on Winch. 34 Ed. 1. St. 2. page
71. 1. N. 9. 10. Crompt. 82 b. 94 a.

Bridges.
VII. Lambert 469, 470, 471. Enquiry in Sessions if any Bridges in the
Highways, being out of the Cinque Ports, and Members thereof, be broken or
decayed, to the annoyance of Passengers, and if there be, then what Hundred,
City, Town, Parish, or Person certain, or Body Politic, ought of right to
repair or amend the same, 22 H. 8. 5. N. 9 H. 3. 15 Crompt. 125.

Overseers.
2. If the Constables and Churchwardens of any Parish have not in Easter-week
called their Parishioners together, and appointed Overseers of the works for
Amendment of the Highways leading to any Market; or have not appointed the six
days for that work: And if any such Overseers have refused the charge, Dalt.
67. cap. 26.

T^xes.
3. And if any Person having a Plowland in Tillage or Pasture, or keeping a
Draught or Plow, have not found one Wain or Cart furnished, to work Eight hours
every of the said days, 18 Eliz. 10. 4. N. Crompt. 82.

Or if any other Person being assessed in Subsidy to 5 l. in Goods, or 40. s.
in Lands, have not likewise found two able Men, Crompt. 82 b.

Or if any other Householder or Cottager, have not by himself, or any other, so
wrought every of the same days, Crompt. 82 b.

4. If the Hedges, Ditches, Trees and Bushes, Words.
in and on each side of any such Highway, be not kept low, secured, and cut
down by the Owners of the Grounds adjoining: If any such Overseer have not
within one Month after any of the said Offenses done, presented the same to the
next Justice of the Peace, Crompt. 82 b. Dalt. 67. cap. 26.

And if any Person occupying Land adjoining to any such high Highway, have
cast the scowring of any Ditch thereof into the Highway.

5. If any Bailiffs, Constables, Surveyors, Forfeiture.
or Churchwardens have not levied the forfeiture for Offenses aforesaid, and
employed them upon their said Highways, and accounted thereof, 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. 8. Crompt. 183 Ab. 5 Eliz. 13. and 18. Eliz. 10. and 27 Eliz. 19.

VIII. Lambert 500. Justices.
In some Cases therefore these Justices of Peace may hear one another, for
every Justice of the Peace may upon his proper knowledge, make Presentiments at
the Sessions of any Offense done against 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. and 5 Eliz.
13. concerning the Amendment of Highways; and in this and such like Cases his
Report has the force of a Presentment of 12 Men, so that he and his Fellows
may proceed upon it, 21 H. 6. 5. Dalt. 67. cap. 26.

IX. Lambert 576, 577. Process.
And the Estreats made by the Clerk of the Peace of Forfeits for defaults of
Amending Highways, are a sufficient Warrant to the Constables to levy the same
by Distress, to the use of the Churchwardens of the Parish where the fault
was, toward the Amendment of the Highways, Lambert Constable etc. 30, 31. pl.
28. Dalt. 94. 95. cap. 40. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. N. and 5 Eliz. 13.

X. Lambert 600. Two Justices of Peace may at their Quarter Sessions, Justices.
enquire of, and determine the Offenses of not Amending the Highways, 2 and 3
Ph. and Mar. 8. N. and 5 Eliz. 13. 18 Eliz. 10. Crompt. 125.

XI. Lamb. Precedents 17 b. pl. 48. Reparation.
An Endictment for a common Bridge that is in decay.

Kent. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege presentant super Sacrament' suum quod Pons publicus
and communis situs in alta Regia via super Flumen de Medway, infra Parochiam de
A. in Com. predict' vulgariter dict' (Ailford Bridge) est and per aliquot Annos
jam proxime lapsos fuit valde ruinosus and in maximo decasu ob defectum
reparationis adeo ut subditi dicti Domini Regis in super trans vel ultra dictum
Pontem per se vel cum eorum Equis Bigis aut Carriagiis ire redire aut transire
sine magno vitae discrimine non audent aut possunt ad commune nocument' omnium
vicinorum and compatriatarum in dicto Comitat' habitantium quorum interest
ratione negotiorum suorum illac transire: Et ulterius quod prorsus nescitur
quae personae quaeve terrae tenementa aut corpora corporata and Politica,
eundem Pontem aut aliquam inde parcellam ex Jure aut ex Antiqua consuetudine
reficere and reparare debent aut consueverunt, 9 H. 3. 15. 22 H. 8. 5.

XII. Lamb. Precedents 20. pl. 55. Laborers.
An Endictment for not working upon the Highways.

Kent ss. Laborers.

Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod ubi die Martis
in septimana Paschae ultim' preterit' scil. 7. die mensis Aprilis Anno Regni
Domini nostri Jacobi etc. A. B. tunc Constabularius Villae de C. in dicto Com.
and D.E. and F.G. tunc Guardiani Ecclesiae parochialis de C. predict' in Com.
predict' existentes vocatis ad se multis alijs Parochianis dictae Parochiae de
C. tunc and ibidem elegerunt quosdam J. S. and R. N. duas honestas ejusdem
Parochiae personas in Supervisores pro uno Anno integro tunc proxime Sequenti
pro emendatione and reparatione altarum regi^rum viarum infra dictam Parochiam
de C. ducentium a Villis Mercatorijs ad Villas Mercatorias, ac etiam tunc
ibidem Nomina verunt and appunctuaverunt sex dies, viz. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. dies
mensis Maij tunc proxime sequent' pro dicta emendatione dictarum Viarum and
nominatim pro emendatione illius viae Regiae ibidem, quae est inter etc. atque
de eisdem sex diebus sic per eos ut prefertur nominatis and appunctuatis
dederunt paulum postea, scil. die Dominico dictae Paschae tunc proxime sequenti
publicam notitiam in dicta Ecclesia Parochiali: Quid am tamen T. W. tunc and ad
huc Parochiani de C. predicta in Com. predict' existens ac tunc habens and
occupans in dicta Parochia de C. in Com. predict' unam integram Carucatam
Terrae Arabilis, Anglice dictum a Plough-land, nullum dictis primo secundo and
quarto die dicti mensis Maij, Anno supradicto prorsus invenit aut misit currum
instructum Anglice dictum, A Wain or Cart furnished, equis bobus aut alijs
animalibus and necessarijs secundum morem Patriae ibidem nec ullus habiles
homines erga emendationem and reparationem dictarum viarum aut earum aliquam
sive aliquam inde percellam sed inde tunc ibidem voluntary fecit defaltam in
dicti Domini Regis contemptum ac contra formam diversorum Statutorum in
hujusmodi casu provisorum and editorum, West. Symb. 2 part 133 b. Sect. 218.

Reparation.
XIII. West. Symbol. 2 part 155 b. Sect. 344. An Endictment for not repairing
the Pavement of a Highway, which ought to be repaired by a Bishop.

Kent ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod pars Regiae
viae apud S. in Com. predict' in quantitate viginti pedum jacent' and
existent', ex opposito certis terris sive tenementis Domini Episcopi Cestriae,
ibidem est ruinosa pro defectu reparationis paviament' ibidem ad grave and
commune nocument' populi Domini Regis and quod predict' Episcopus debet facere
and reparare predict' paviament' ex suis proprijs expensis and juxta formam
Statut' etc.

Reparation.
XIV. West. Symb. 2 part 156. Sect. 346. An Endictment against a Bishop and
Churchwardens for not repairing of a ruinous and broken Bridge.

Kent ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant etc. quod communis
Pons apud S. adeo ruinosus and confractus existit pro defectu reparationis
ejusdem Pontis quod homines per predictum Pontem itinerantes absque magno
periculo non possunt itinerare ad Grave and Commune Nocumentum populi Domini
Regis: Et quod Dominus Episcopus Cestriae and Guardiani Ecclesiae Parochialis
beatae Mariae Virginis de S. predict' pro tempore Existent' debent reparare
sustentare and manutenere predict' Pontem ex suis proprijs Custagijs and
expensis, viz. predict' Episcopus ex part occidentali ejusdem Pontis and
prefati Guardiani ex part orientali.

XV. West. Symb. 2. part, 156. Sect. 347. Nuisance.
An Endictment for stopping and enclosing the King's Highway with Hedge and
Ditch.

Suff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. de etc.
6 die Apr. etc. Vi and Armis etc. Regiam viam apud etc. tam Fossat' quam sepi
injuste obstupavit and inclusit quae quidem via jacet in vico vocat' etc. and
extendit se usque Regiam viam apud Hospitalem Sancti Cornelij, ita quod homines
neque pedestres neque equestres per predictam viam transire possunt and quod
predicta via debet and a tempore quo non extat memoria solebat esse Communis
via quousque A. B illam in forma predict' fecillet contra pacem etc. ad grave
damnum and commune nocument' Ligeorum dicti Domini Regis, etc. infra.

XVI. Kilb. Precedents 153. Officers.
A Warrant for not choosing Surveyors of Highways on 14 Car. 2. 6. 2. N. 1.

To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as the Churchwardens, Constables, Borsholders, and Inhabitants of
the said Parish of A. did not choose Surveyors of the Highways aforesaid for
this present year of our Lord, etc. but made default of such Choice, against
the form of the Statute in that behalf lately made and provided; These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of you, that
you, some, or one of you, do levy, collect, and gather the Sum of 5 l. by
Distress and Sale of Goods of the said Churchwardens, Constables, Borsholders,
and Inhabitants rendering to the Parties so distrained the Overplus, if any be,
and that you do employ and bestow the moneys so levied, collected, or gathered
in such manner as by the Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed; hereof
fail not at your perils.

Given under our (viz. two Justices) Hands and Seals the 10 day of etc. Anno
etc.
XVII. Kilb. Precedents 154. Taxes.
A Warrant for not paying a Tax for the Highways, on 14 Car. 2. 6. 12. N. 1.

To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as upon your Complaint it appeateth unto us that the several Persons
here under named, have not paid unto you the several Sums here under specified,
and severally added to their several Names, Assessed on them for the repairing
and amending and enlarging of the Public and Common Highways in the said
Parish, according to the form of the Statute in that behalf made and provided;
These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of
you, that you, some, or one of you, do levy, collect, or gather by Distress and
Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective Persons, double so much
Money as was so as aforesaid respectively Assessed on them, rendering to the
Parties so distrained the Overplus, if any be, and that you do employ and
bestow the Moneys so levied, collected, or gathered in such manner as by the
Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day, etc. Anno etc. A. B. of A.
aforesaid 2 s. C. D. of A. aforesaid 3 s. etc.


Laborers.
XVIII. Kilb. Precedents 155. A Warrant for not sending in Teams on 14 Car. 2.
6.. 4. N. 4.

To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them. Kent. ss.
Forasmuch as upon your Complaint it appears unto us, (viz. two Justices)
that the several Persons here under named, were by you charged to send each of
them a Team to work in the Highways in the Parish aforesaid, according to the
form of the Statute in that Case lately made and provided, and yet nevertheless
they neglected so to do by the space of such number of days as are here under
mentioned, and severally added to their several Names; These are therefore in
his Majesty's Name to will and require you, and every of you, that you, some,
or one of you, do levy, collect, and gather by Distress and Sale of the
respective Goods of the said respective Persons, the respective Sums of Money
here under added to their respective Names, being Moneys by them respectively
forfeited for their said Neglects, according to the Statute aforesaid, rendering
to the Parties so distrained the Overplus, if any be, and that you do employ
and bestow the Moneys so levied, collected, or gathered in such manner, as by
the Statute aforesaid is directed and appointed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day, etc. in the year, etc. A. B. of C.
one day 10 s. C. D. of H. two days 20 s. etc.


Laborers.
XIX. Kilb. Precedents 156. A Warrant for not working, on 14 Car. 2. 6.. 4.

To the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the County aforesaid,
and to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as upon your Complaint it appears unto us that the several Persons
here under named, were by you Charged to come to labor in the Highways in the
Parish aforesaid, according to the form of the Statute in that Case lately made
and provided, and yet nevertheless they neglected so to do by the space of such
number of days as are here under mentioned, and severally added to their
several Names; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require
you, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do levy, collect, and
gather by Distress and Sale of the respective Goods of the said respective
Persons, the respective Sums of Money here under added to their respective
Names, being Moneys by them respectively forfeited for their said Neglect,
according to the Statute aforesaid, rendering to the Parties so Distrained the
Overplus, if any be, and that you do employ and bestow the Moneys so levied,
collected, or gathered in such manner, as by the Statute aforesaid is directed
and appointed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day of etc. Anno etc. A. B. of A.
aforesaid, one day 1 s. 6 d. C. D. of A. aforesaid, two days 3 s. etc.


XX. Kilb. Precedents 157. Common.
A License to dig in another Parish for Materials 14 Car. 2. 6. 7. N. 1.

Kent ss.
Forasmuch as by the Information of the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish
of A. in the County aforesaid, it appears unto us, that there is not
sufficient Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cynders, and Stones within the said Parish to
repair their Common and Public Highways, we ( viz. two Justices) do therefore,
according to the form of the Statute in that Case lately made and provided,
hereby allow and approve that the said Surveyors, or either of them, and such
Person and Persons as they, or e^ther of them shall appoint, shall and may dig,
take, and carry away Gravel, Chalk, Sand, Cynders, or Stones, out of any Wast
or Common of any Parish, Town, Village, or Hamlet Neighboring to the Parish
aforesaid, or upon the Seacoast, without paying any thing for the same, for
the repairing and amending of the Highways aforesaid, so as they fill up the
place within one Month next after their digging aforesaid, if required by the
Owner of the Soil.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10. day, etc. Anno etc.
XXI. Kilb. Precedents 158. An Order what Damages to pay, etc. 14. Car. 2. 6.
8. N. 1. Damages.


Kent ss.
Whereas by Information of the Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A.
in the County aforesaid, it appears unto us, that there being not sufficient
Gravel, Chalk, Stones, Cynders, and Sand, or other Materials, for to amend and
repair the aforesaid Highways within the Common or Wast Grounds of the said
Parish, they did according to the form of the Statute in that Case lately made
and provided, enter into the Ground of B.C. in the Parish aforesaid near
adjoining to the Highways to be repaired, and did dig, take, and carry away
Materials which they judged necessary for the said Reparations: And for that
difference did arise between the said Surveyors, and the said B.C. about the
Damages by the said B. C. suffered by the digging and carriage thereof, We do
therefore, according to the Statute aforesaid, Assess the Damages aforesaid at
etc. of lawful Money of England which the said Surveyors are to render unto him
for the same;

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
XXII. Kilb. Precedents 159. Account.
A Warrant against Surveyors for not accounting, 14 Car. 2. 6. 13. N. 1.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Common Goal for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as Complaint has been made unto us (viz. two Justices) that B. C.
and D. E. Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the said County, for
the year etc. have not made such Account touching their said Office, as by the
Statute in that behalf lately made, is appointed, and upon Examination of the
business upon Oath, we do find the said Complaint to be true, These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you the said Constable and
Borshoulders, and every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do take the said
B. C. and D. E. and forthwith convey them to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and
there deliver them to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept,
requiring also you the said Keeper to receive them into the Goal aforesaid, and
them there safely to keep until they have made such true and perfect Account,
touching their said Officer, as by the said Statute is appointed; hereof fail
not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
Account.
XXIII. Kilb. Precedents 160. A Warrant for not Paying over what is due upon the
Account, 14 Car. 2. 9. 13. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Common Goal for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as Complaint has been made unto us (viz. two Justices) that B. C.
and D. E. Surveyors of the Highways in the Parish of A. in the said County for
the year etc. had in their hands, upon their Account made touching their said
Office, according to the form of the Statute in that Case made, the sum of etc.
Overplus, which they have not returned or paid to the next Surveyors, or either
of them, as by the said Statute is appointed, and upon Examination of the
business upon Oath, we do find the said Complaint to be true: These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name to require you the said Constable and
Borshoulders, and every of you, that you, some or one of you, do take the said
B. C, and D. E. and forthwith convey them to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid, and
there deliver them to the said Keeper of the same, together with this Precept,
requiring also you the said Keeper to receive them into the said Goal
aforesaid, and them there safely keep until they have made payment of the
said, etc. to the aforesaid next Surveyors, as by the said Statute is
appointed; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
Approvement.
XXIV. Crompt. 257. a. b. pl. 84. An Indictment for enclosing a Common Highway,
supra.

Staff. ss.
Inquiratur pro Domino Rege si E.S. nuper de W. in Com. predict' Gen' secundo
die Maij Anno etc. partem cujusdam viae Regiae in W. in Com. predict' ducent' a
W. Predict' usque ad S. in eodem Com. viz. a predict' etc. usque ad quendam
foveam in S. predict' vocat' le Common Pit, in eadem via existent cum sepe and
fossa inclusit and obstruxit and eandem viam Regiam sic inclusam a predicto
secundo die Maij usque diem captionis hujus inquisitionis in Pasturam
convertebat and custodiebat and adhuc custodit in malum and pernitiosum
exemplum aliorum and ad grave damnum and commune nocument' omnium ligeorum
subditorum dicti Domini Regis ibidem prope Inhabitantium, ac contra formam
diversorum Statutorum in hujusmodi casu editorum and provisorum, and contra
pacem dicti Domini Regis etc.

Reparation.
XXV. Crompt. 264 b. pl. 101. A Presentment for a Bridge in decay.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant etc. quod quidam
Pons situat' super aquam de Trent in Parochia de Newark in Com. predict' vocat'
N. Bridge, existens in Regia via est ruinosus, and in magno decasu, ita quod
ligei Domini Regis in per super vel ultra eundem Pontem absque magno periculo
transire seu laborare non valent ad commune nocument' omnium ligeorum dicti
Domini Regis trans and ultra Pontem predict' transeunt' and quod Dominus Rex
nunc ratione tenurae seu manerij de N. super T. cum pertinent' in Com. predict'
Pontem illum facere reparare and emendare debet and quod idem Dominus Rex and
omnes Progenitores sui ac omnes alij quorum Status ibidem Dominus Rex modo
habet in eodem Manerio de N. super T. cum pertinentijs Pontem illum facere
reparare and emendare consueverunt de tempore cujus contrarium memoria hominum
non existit toties quoties necesse fuerit, in cujus. Crompt. 186. Dalt. 41.
cap. 13.

XXVI. Dalt. 68, 69. cap. 26. At Lent-Assizes at Cambridge, Anno 1622.
Approvement.
Sir James Lee delivered it in his Charge, that if any Person has made or
shall make any enclosure next the Kings Highway, that such Person shall be
charged to Amend the Highway adjoining to his said Enclosure; and if one Man
has enclosed on the one side or part, and another Man of the othet side, they
shall be both charged to Amend the said way.

2. Otherwise Highways must be sufficiently Amended at the charge of the whole
Town, Reparation.
and it is not enough for the Inhabitants to do their full six days work
yearly, except their ways be well and sufficiently repaired; for if all their
said Ways, be not sufficiently Amended, the whole Town may be indicted
therefore F. N.B. 235. Register 154. Taxes.


3. Also concerning the Causey near Cambridge, called Dr. Harveys Causey
(toward the repair whereof Dr. Harvey has given 8 l. per Annum payable by the
Master and Fellows of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge) Sir James Lee said that if
this 8 l. per Annum were not sufficient to repair the said Causey, that then
the Towns adjoining within which that Causey or way does lie, ought to help to
repair the same.

XXVII. Dalt. 72. cap. 26. Again, Taxes.
if one occupies a Plow-land in Pasture, viz. six or eight score Acres, or
more of Pasture, for feeding of Cattle, but keeps neither Cart nor Plow, how
shall he be charged to find a Cart or Draught that keeps more, and yet the
words of the Statute seem to charge him, 18 Eliz. 10. N. Rast. Entr. 199. Taxes.


XXVIII. Kilb. Precedents 229. A Warrant to Collect the Tax for repairing
Country-Bridges, 22 H. 8. 5. N.

To A. B. and C. D. Inhabitants of the Hundred of E. in the said County, and to
every of them. Kent ss.
These are in his Majesty's Name to command you, that you do forthwith collect
and gather the several Sums of Money specified in the Taxation herewith all
delivered unto you, of the several Persons therein mentioned to be Taxed upon
them for the purpose in the said Taxation specified, and that you do pay the
same unto R.T. whom we (viz. four Justices, Quorum unus) have appointed General
Receiver of the Moneys raised for the purpose aforesaid within this Division of
the several Hundreds, on or before the second day of May, deducting out of the
same only 5 s. as by us allowed unto you, for and toward your pains in
Collecting and paying in of the same, and in Case of refusal or neglect of
payment of any of the said Parties so Taxed of the Money taxed upon them, as
aforesaid, after demand made thereof by you, or either of you, that then you do
certify unto us, or some, or one of us the Names of the said Persons so
refusing or neglecting, with all convenient speed, to the end that such further
proceeding may be had thereupon as to Justice does appertain:

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
Taxes.
XXIX. Kilb. Precedents 230. A Warrant for not paying the same Tax Collected for
Bridges, on 22 H. 8. 5. N.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as Complaint has been made unto us by R. T. etc. by us appointed
Collectors and Gatherers of the Moneys imposed upon the said Hundred, for and
toward the reparations of the several Bridges of D. in the said County, that
the several Persons whose Names are here under written have refused to pay unto
them the several Sums of Money adjoined to their several Names, being Taxed upon
them for the purpose aforesaid, although the same have been duly demanded of
them; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to command you, that you, some,
or one of you, do cause the said several Persons to come before us, or one of
us, or some other Justice of the Peace of the said County, to answer to the
Premises, and further to do and receive as to Justice does appertain, unless
they shall forthwith pay the said Moneys unto you, some, or one of you, which
if they shall so do, that then you so receiving the same, do forthwith pay the
said Moneys so received unto the said R.T. etc. or one of them, to the end that
the same may be by them paid over to the General Receiver of the Moneys raised
for the purpose aforesaid, by us formerly appointed; hereof fail not at your
perils.

Given under our Hands and Seals at D. etc. the 10. day etc. Anno etc.
Charity.
XXX. Crompt. 200 b. the Bishop and his Chancellor and three Justices of the
Peace have Power to Examine how Money, or other Relief appointed by King, H. 8.
or by any other, to the use of Poor, or to the Amendment of Highways or
Bridges, is bestowd, and to call to account the detainors thereof, 14 Eliz. 5.
N.

Reparation.
XXXI. Crompt. J. P. 82. Enquiry at Sessions of Common Bridges decayed, whither
any ought to repair them by Prescription, or by their Tenure, or by reason of
any Lands that they have, and what Lands they are, etc. 22 H. 8. 5.

2. Item, Whether every Person for every Plow-land in Tillage or Pasture that
he has and occupies, and every other Person who keeps a Draught or Plow
within the Parish where he abides, sends at every day and place to the
Reparation of the Highways, a Wayn or Cart furnished according to the Custom of
the Country, with Oxen, Horses or other Cattle, and every thing necessary for
that purpose, and two able Men therewith, on pain for every default of Draught
10 s. each day, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. and 27 Eliz. 12.

3. Item. Whither every other Householder, Cottager, and Laborer of this Parish,
who can labor, not being any retained Servant by the year, by themselves, or by
other sufficient Laborers for them, labor in the Amendment of the Highways, on
pain of 12 d. for every default, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8.

4. Item, Whither every one who does not inhabit in London, assessed to 5 l in
Goods or 40 s. in Lands to the subsidy, so long as he is so assest, and is not
Chargeable by 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. if he be not a Cottager, has found to
the Amendment of the Highways two lawful Men to labor in the said ways, 18
Eliz. 9.

5. Item, Whither every one that occupies a Plough-land in Tillage or Pasture,
lying within several Parishes, has found a Carriage where he inhabits, to the
Reparation of the Highways, 18 Eliz. 9.

6. Item, Whither he that has several Plow-lands in diverse Vills, has come in
each Vill or Parish with a Cart, Wayn, or Tumbrel, to the Amendment of the
Highways there, 18 Eliz. 9.

7. Quaere if the said Statute 18 Eliz. 9. gives the same pain in the said last
Cases for those that make Default, as 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8. N. gives.

8. Item, The Surveyors should present the Defaults of the aforesaid Persons to
the next Justice of Peace within a Month next after the Offense, on pain of 40
s. and the Justice must certify it to the next Sessions on pain of 5 l. 5
Eliz. 13.

9. Such who are appointed to be Surveyors of Highways, must take the Office
upon them on pain of 20 s. on refusal 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8.

10. If Carriages be not necessary, then he shall not send Carriages, but shall
send two able Men for every Carriage so spared to labor, for that day on pain
of 12 d. for every Man not sent, 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. 8.

11. The Owner of the Lands adjoining shall cleanse, scowr, repair, and keep the
Hays, Fences, Ditches, or Hedges next adjoining to the Highway, on every side,
and all Woods and Bushes growing in the Highways, shall be cut by the Owner on
pain, of 10 s. for every default, 5 Eliz. 13 and 18 Eliz. 9. see 39 Eliz. 19.
for repairing of the Highways in Sussex etc.

XXXII. Crompt. J. P. 94. Enquiry in Sessions if the Highways of Market Towns
be enlarged and cleansed from Wood and Underwood, by the space of 200 foot on
each side, if there be no Oaks and Great Trees, so that all be clear under them.

2. If Robery be done by default of not clensing or keeping of the said Ways,
he that should do it, shall answer for the Robery and for the Murder done
there, and shall be fined to the King at his will 13 Ed. 1. St. 2. Winch. 5.

Way-laying, see Coron. Waifs, see Coron, Chattels. Wainlings, see Cattle.
Wales.
I. LAmbert 610. The Quarter Sessions are to enquire, hear, and determine on 26
H. 8. 5. of Passage over the Severn, Crompt. 95 b.

2. Of 3 Jac. 23. for making up of Chepstow Bridge.

3. Of 3 Jac. 24. for re-edifying a Bridge over Severn.

War.
Guns, Hand-Guns, Shooting, Captains, Soldiers, Musters.
I. LAmbert 475. Enquiry in Sessions if any Person being generally or specially
Commanded to Muster before any having Authority for the same, have without true
and reasonable Cause absented himself, or have not brought with him in
readiness his best Furniture of Array and Armor of his own Person, Crompt. 48
b. 4. and 5 Phil. and Mar. 3. N.

2. If any Person authorized to Muster, or to levy Men for the King's Service
in War, have taken any Reward for the discharge or sparing of any Person from
that Service.

3. Or if any Person having Charge of Men for Warfare, have not paid to his
Soldiers their whole Wages, Conduct and Coat-money, or have for any gain
licenced any of them to depart out of the Service, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. N.

4. If any Soldier serving the King in his Wars, have given away, wilfully
purloined, or put away any Horse, Gelding, Mare, or Harness wherewith he was
set forth, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. N. Crompt. 89 b. 125 b. 155. Dalt. 134. bis. cap.
52.

II. Lambert 422, 423. Enquiry in Sessions if any Soldier, entered a Soldier
of Record, and having taken part of the King's Wages, or any Mariner or Gunner,
having taken present Wages to serve the King on the Sea, have not accordingly
gone to his Captain, unless he were let by notorious Sickness or other
Judgment from God, or have departed from his Captain without his License under
his Seal, 18 H. 6. 19. N. and 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. N. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. 3. N.
and 5 Eliz. 5. N. But consider whether this Entering of Record have any use now,
Crompt. 117 b. 20.

2. If any Soldier or Mariner, or other Person, as Soldier or Mariner, have
wandered idle without setting himself to Service, Labor, or other lawful course
of Life, and has not repaired to his place of Birth or Dwelling, and had not a
lawful Testimonial from a Justice of Peace, of or near the place where he
landed, or has counterfeited such Testimonial, or has carried the same,
knowing it Counterfeit, 39 Eliz. 17. Dalt. 135. (bis) cap. 52.

III. Lambert 295, 296. Guns.
Every Person finding or seeing any to offend the Statute made against the
shooting in Cross-bows and Hand-Guns, may arrest and bring, or convey him to
the next Justice of Peace of the County where he was found offending, who upon
due Examination and Proof thereof before him made, may by his Discretion Commit
him to the Goal, there to remain till he shall truly pay the one Moiety of the
Forfeiture of this Statute to the King, and the other Moiety to such first
bringer or conveyor, 33 H. 8. 6.. N. Dalt. 64. cap. 24.

2. In this and such other Cases the Justice of Peace having, as it seems,
the whole matter committed to himself alone, ought to be wary and circumspect,
lest either he rashly condemn the Guiltless, or negligently suffer the Guilty
to Escape, Dalt. 65, 66. cap. 24.

3. And upon the Offense sufficiently proved, it is necessary that in his
Mittimus or Precept to the Jailer, there be contained the Names of the Parties,
with the manner of the Offense, and how long time he is to be kept in Prison
for it.

4. Furthermore, he is to make a Record of the Matter, and to send the Estreat
of it into the Exchequer, whereby the Barons may, upon Intelligence thereof,
cause the King's Duty to be levied to his use.

IV. Lambert 296, 297. A Mittimus for unlawful shooting in a Cross-bow or
Hand-gun, 33 H. 8. 6. N.

To the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal at M. in the said County, and to his
Deputy or Deputies there, and to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as this present day A. B. and C. D. of H. in the said County,
Yeomen, did arrest and bring before me at H. aforesaid, one J. S. of H. in the
said County, Mariner, whom they had seen and found the same day, as they said,
shooting in a Hand-gun, charged with Powder and a Pellet at a Coney, in a
certain place in C. within the said County, called the Church-field, contrary
to the Law of this Realm, and thereupon praid me that Justice might be done in
that behalf; J. L. Knight. being the next Justice of Peace in the said County to
the place aforesaid, did then at H. aforesaid, upon the said Request, take the
Examination of the said J. S. and did then also and there hear the Proofs of
them the said A.B. and C. D. touching the said Offense, and for that it did
then manifestly appear unto me, as well by the Testimonies of them the said A.
B. and C. D. as also by the plain Confession of him the said J. S. that he had
not then Lands, Tenements, Fees, Annuities, or Offices to the clear yearly
value of 100 l. and that he had shot in the said Hand-gun in manner and form as
is aforesaid, I do send unto you herewith the Body of him the said J. S. as
lawfully Convicted of the said Offense before me, requiring you in his
Majesty's Name to receive him unto your said Goal, and him there safely to keep
as his Majesty's Prisoner, until that he shall have truly paid the Pain and
Forfeiture of 10 l. of lawful Money of England, laid upon him for his said
Offense by the Statute thereof, made in the 33th year of the Reign of the late
King Henry the Eighth, that is to say, the one Moiety thereof to our said
Sovereign Lord, and the other Moiety to them the said A. B. and C. D. the first
bringers of him before me, and this shall be your sufficient Warrant in this
behalf; hereof fail you not as you will Answer for your Contempt at your own
peril.

Given at H. aforesaid the 20th day of March, in the second year of the Reign,
etc. By me the said K. L.

V. Lambert 298, 299, 300. The Record of Conviction for shooting in a Hand-gun,
contrary to 33 H. 8. cap. 6.

Kanc. ss.
Memorand' quod 20 die Maij Anno Regni etc. A. B. and C. D. de H. in Com.
predict' Yeomen, quendam J. S. de F. in dicto Comitat' Mariner, invenerunt and
viderunt apud C. in Com. predict' die and Anno supradict' cum quodam Tormento,
Anglice vocat' a Hand-gun, onerato pulvere tormentario and globo plumbeo
Anglice Charged with Gunpowder and a leaden Bullet, in quendam cuniculum ad
tunc existent' in quodam loco ibidem vocat' C. Sagittantem and exonerantem
dictum tormentum contra formam Statuti in Parliament' Domini H. nuper Regis
Angliae 8. apud Westm' Anno Regni sui 33. tent' provisi ac editi: ac proinde
die and Anno supradict' prefat' J. S. arrestaverunt and apud H. predict' coram
me J. L. Milite, uno (and dicto loco) proximo Justiciariorum dicti Domini Regis
ad Pacem in dicto Com' conservand' necnon ad diversas transgressiones and alia
malefacta in eodem Comitatu perpetrata audiend' and terminand' assignat' ad
tunc una secum adduxerunt, petentes inde justiciam fieri: Qua quidem petitione
audita ego prefat' J.L. apud H. predict' die and Anno supradict' debite super
inde examinavi prefat' J.S. ac probationes predict' A. B. and C. D. in hac
part cepi ac propterea quod tam per probationes predict' quam per Confessionem
ipsius J. S. ad tunc and ibidem aparuit mihi manifest quod prefat' J. S. cum
non haberet in Jure suo proprio nec in Jure uxoris suae ad usum suum proprium
nec aliqui alij ad usum ejusd' J. S. haberent terras tenement' feoda Annuitates
aut Officia ad clarum Annuum valorem 100 l. in Tormento predict' modo and forma
predict' sagittasset contra formam Statut' predict' ego prefat' J. L.
prenominat' J. S. die and Anno supradict' proximae Goalae dict' Domini Regis
apud M. in Com. predict' de transgressione predict' coram me Convictum Commisi,
ibidem moraturum quousque paenam and forisfacturam december librarum legalis
monetae Angliae vere solveret, viz. unam medietatem inde dicto Domino Regi and
alteram medietatem inde dictis A. B. and C. D. primo ejusdem J. S. coram me
ductoribus and quorum omnium fidem and testimonium ego prefat' J. L. hiis
presentibus sigillum meum appofui. Datum apud H. predict' die and Anno primum
supradict'.

Per me prefat' J.L.

2. And every Person, other then such as are so Authorized by the yearly value
of 100 l. as is aforesaid, ought, if he be licenced to shoot in Crossbow or
Hand-gun, and do inhabit in the Country, to present his Name to the next
Justice of Peace adjoining: and thereupon the Justice ought to present and
record the same before the Justices of the Peace at the next Quarter Sessions,
2 and 3 Ed. 6. 14. N. But learn of others, whether this part is to have
continuance still, or else did only extend to such Persons as had License at
that time, Dalt. 66. cap. 24.

VI. West. Symbol. 2. part 129 b. Sect. 202. An Endictment for shooting
Hailshot in a Hand-gun, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 14. N.

Kent ss.
Inquiratur pro Domina Regina quod cum in Statuto in Parliament' Domini Edw.
nuper Regis Angliae sexti apud Westminster. Anno Regni sui secundo inter alia
ordinat' and inactitat' existit quod nulla persona subter gradum Domini
Parliament' ex tunc deinceps sagittaret in aliquo Tormento infra Civitat' vel
Villam ad aliquam volucrem sive aliam metam super Ecclesiam Domum aut Columbar'
neque quod aliqua persona sagittaret in aliquo loco, aliquam sagittationem
vocat' Hailshot, aut plures glandines plumbeas quam unam uno tempore sub paena
forisfact' 10 libr' pro quolibet tempore in quo ipse contra Statut' predict'
delinqueret and imprisonament' Corporis sui per spatium trium Mensium prout in
Statut' predict' before continetur: Quidam tamen J.C. nuper de B. in Com. R.
Yeoman, Statut' predict' minime ponderans nec paenam in eodem content'
aliqualiter verens 5 die Junij etc. in quodam Torment' Anglice vocat' a
Hand-gun onerat' pulvere et glandinibus plumbeis Angl' Charged with Powder and
Hailshot, in quandam Anat' ad tunc in quadam palude in commune Campo vocat'
Netherfield de B. in Com. K. predict' existent' sagittavit et exoneravit Angl'
discharged, contra formam Statuti predicti ac contra Pacem dictae Dominae
Reginae nunc Coron' et Dignitatem etc.

7. Crompt. 94. See 43 Eliz. 3. How Soldiers and Mariners, Poor.
maihmed in the Wars, in the King's Service, shall be relieved, which is to
continue to the end of the next Session, etc. which was 1 Jac. 25. and thence
its continued to the next, 39 Eliz. 21.

VIII. Crompt. 195 b. pl. 24. Justices.
One Justice of the Peace may Commit him that sells the Harness or Horses with
which he shall be sent into the Wars, until he has satisfied the Owner, etc.
by 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 2. N.

XI. Dalt. 66. cap. 24. Note, that the Sheriff, or any of his Officers, Guns.
for the better Executing of their Office, may carry with them Hand-guns,
Daggers, or other Weapons, invasive or defensive, notwitstanding, 33 H. 8. 6. N
5 Co. 72.

X. West. Symb. 2. Part 113. Sect. 135. An Indictment for not keeping of a
light Horse, 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. 3.

Essex ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod ubi A. B. de
C. in Com. E. predict' Gen' a primo die Junij Anno Regni etc. usque in hunc
presentem diem, scil. primum diem Maij Anno etc. terras et tenement' in C.
predict' in dicto Comitat' E. eidem A. B. et heredibus suis in feodo simplici
ad clarum Annuum valorem Centum Marcarum et amplius ultra omnes reprisas
habuerit ac tenuerit, idem tamen A. B. per totum tempus predict' viz. a dicto
primo die Junij Anno supradict' usque nunc nullum habuit custodivit manutenuit
aut sustinuit equum castrat' Angl. dict' a Guilding, habilem et idoneum pro
levis Armaturae Equite Anglice able and meet for a light Horsman, in dicti
Domini Regis contempt' ac in magnum hujus Regni sui Angliae enervationem necnon
contra formam cujusd' Statut' in Parliament' Ph. et Mar. nuper Regis et Reginae
Angliae tent' apud Westm' Anno Regnorum suorum quarto et quinto in hujusmodi
Casu provisi ac editi.

Warrants, see Process. Warrenors, see Forest. Watch, see Fresh-Suit.
Wax.
I. LAmbert 196. Every Justice of Peace may Examine and search by his
Discretion such as do sell or set forth to be sold any Candles, or other Works
of Wax, at higher Price than after the rate of four pence the pound over the
common price of plain Wax between Merchant and Merchant, and may also punish
them by forfeiture of the work set forth to Sale, and of the value of that
which is sold, and by Fine to the King, 1. H. 6. 12. N. as it seems by the
large words of that Statute, Lambert. 461. Enquiry in Sessions Dalt. 141. cap.
62. Crompt. 92.

Watermen, see Sewers. Wears, see Sewers. Weights, see Measures. Weapons, see
War. Weavers, see Drapery. Wife, see Baron and Feme. Wildfowl, see Fowl.
Wine.
I. LAmbert 451. Enquiry in Sessions, if any Person Authorized to sell Wine by
retail, have within this year sold the same above the Prices thereof limited by
the Kings Proclamation, if there have been any, 5 Eliz. 5.

II. Crompt. 95. Nota per Shard 27 Ass. 22. That he that sells Wine against the
Assize of the Law, shall forfeit the whole Tonnel.

III. Dalt. 175. cap. 74. Edit. 1666. Every Justice of Peace as, it seems, by
the words of the Statute, 24 H. 8. 6. N. within the precinct of his Office, at
the request of any Subject to whom denial of Sale shall be made of any Wine,
and full payment therefore offered, according to the Prices set down by the
Lords etc. may enter into the places where such Wine shall lie, and may sell
and deliver the same Wine desired to be brought to the Person requiring to levy
the same, taking the buyers money toward the Satisfaction of the Forfeiture
etc. 21 Jac. 28. N.

2. Note, That no Person may sell any Wine in any Town, not Corporate, but by
License of the Justices of Peace in open Sessions by writing under the Several
Seal of every of the said Justices, upon pain of 5 l. for every day of so
offending, Co. Entr' 370. Finches Case, who recovered 500 l. in an Information
upon 7. Ed. 6. 5. N. notwithstanding the Queens License there pleaded in Bar of
the said Action.

3. And by 7 Ed. 6. 5. N. in Towns Corporate no Person to sell but by License
of the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. and that under the common Seal of the Corporation
upon the same penalty, quod Nota. See 12 Car. 2. cap. 25.

Witness, see Proof. Woad, see Drapery.
Woods.
I. LAmbert 404. There be sundry Laws that do give to Justices of the Peace a
certain special or particular Power in them, and do not yet yield unto them any
Authority to enquire upon the same, as 35 H. 8. 17 7. N. 2. of Woods etc.

II. Lambert 355. Two Justices of Peace not being of kindred, Alliance,
Counsel, or Fee to the Lord or Owner of a Wood, appointed by the more part of
the Justices of Peace at their Sessions, upon Complaint of the Lord made unto
them, may divide and set out the fourth part of it, if the Lord and Commoners
thereof, being first called before them, cannot agree upon it, 35 H. 8. 17. 7
N. 2. 13 Eliz. 25. Crompt. 200 Ab. Dalt. 142. cap. 64.

III. Lambert 601. Justices of the Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions
call before them the Owner of a Wood, and 12 of the Commissioners there, for
setting out the fourth part thereof, 35 H. 8. 17. 7. N. 2.

IV. Kilb. Precedents 220. A Warrant to search for stolen Wood, etc. upon a
particular complaint to one Justice, on 15 Car. 2. 2. 2. N. 3.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them. Kent ss.
Forasmuch as complaint has been made unto me by A. B. Wood (Underwood,
Poles, young Trees, Bark, or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales,
Rayles, Hedgwood, Broom or Furze) were within five days now last past taken out
of his Lands in L. in the said County, and has prayed such relief from me
therein, as by an Act of Parliament in such cases lately made, I am Authorized
to give; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and command you, and
every of you, that you, some, or one of you, do enter into and search the
Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Gardens, or other Places belonging to the Houses
within the said Hundred, of all and every Person or Persons, which you shall
suspect to have any of the said Wood, etc. and wheresoever you shall find any
such, to Apprehend or cause to be Apprehended, all and every Person or Persons
suspected for the cutting and taking of the same, and them, and every of them,
as also those in whose Houses, or other Places belonging unto them, any such
Wood etc. shall be found, to bring before me or some other of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace of the said County, to be proceeded against as by the
said Act is directed; hereof fail not at your perils,

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
V. Kilb. Precedents 221. A General Warrant to search for stolen Wood, on 15
Car. 2. 2. 2. N. 3.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. and to every of them.
Kent ss.
Forasmuch as it is observed in these parts of the said County, that Woods,
Under-woods, Poles, Young Trees, Bark, or Bast of Trees, Gates, Styles, Posts,
Pales, Rayls, Hedgwood, Broom and Furze, are unlawfully cut, stolen, spoiled,
and taken away from the lawful Owners of the same, contrary to an Act of
Parliament lately made, entitled, An Act for the punishment of unlawful
cutting or stealing, or spoiling of Wood and Underwood, and destroyers of young
Timber Trees: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to charge and command
you, and every of you, that you do with all convenient speed enter into and
search the Houses, Outhouses, Yards, Gardens, or other places belonging to the
Houses within the said Hundred, of all and every Person or Persons which you
shall suspect to have any kind of such Wood, Underwood, Poles, or young Trees,
or Bark or Bast of any Trees, or any such Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rayls,
or Hedgwood, Broom or Furze, and wheresoever you shall find any such, to
Apprehend or cause to be Apprehended all and every Person and Persons suspected
for the cutting or taking of the same, and them and every of them in whose
Houses, or other Places belonging to them, any such Wood, Underwood, Poles, or
young Trees, or Bark or Bast of any Trees, or any Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales,
Rails, or Hedgwood, Broom or Furze shall be found, to bring before me, or some
other of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the said County, to be
proceeded against as by the said Act is directed; hereof fail not at your
perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
VI. Kilb. Precedents 222. An Order against a Person Apprehended with Bundles
etc. of Wood, etc. to make satisfaction etc. for the same to the Owner; The 1
Offense 15 Car. 2. 2. 3. N. 1.

Kent ss.
Forasmuch as A. B. of C. was within five days last past Apprehended by J. S.
An Officer (or Inhabitant of etc.) having (or carrying or any ways conveying) a
Bundle of (any kind of) Wood etc. and this day brought before me to give
account how he came by the said Wood etc. by the consent of the Owner,
according to an Act of Parliament lately made, entitled, (An Act for the
punishment of unlawful cutting or stealing or spoiling of Wood and Underwood
and destroying of young Timber Trees) and for that he did not give such account
thereof, as did satisfy me, nor produce the party of whom he bought the same,
or any other credible witness to depose upon Oath such sale thereof, whereby he
is according to the said Act by me deemed and adjudged as convict of the
Offense of cutting and spoiling of the said Wood, etc. within the meaning of
another Act of Parliament, which was made in the forty third year of the Reign
of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, An Act to Avoid and prevent
misdemeanors in idle and lewd Persons; and forasmuch as it appears unto me
that C. D. of etc. was lawful Owner of the said Wood etc. I do therefore
according to the said first before mentioned Act, order and appoint that the
said A. B. shall within six days now next ensuing, given the said C. D. etc.
the Sum of etc. of lawful Money of England, for recompense and satisfaction for
his Damages, and that the said A. B. shall over and above pay down presently
unto the Overseers for the use of the Poor of the Parish of T. in the said
County, where the said Offense was committed the sum of etc. of lawful Money.

Given under our Hands and Seals the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
VII. Kilb. Precedents 223, 224. A Warrant for not obeying the Justices Order,
5 Car. 2. 2. 3. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borshoulders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County at B. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Whereas A. B. of C. within 8 days last past, was Apprehended by J. S. Officer
(or Inhabitant) etc. having etc. a Bundle of Wood etc. and lately brought
before me to give account how he came by the said Wood etc. by the consent of
the Owner, according to an Act of Parliament lately made, Entitled (An Act for
the punishment of unlawful cutting or stealing or spoiling of Wood and
Underwood, and destroyers of young Timber trees) and for that he did not give
such an account thereof, as did satisfy me, nor did produce the Party of whom
he bought the same, or any other credible Witness to depose upon Oath such Sale
thereof whereby he was then according to the said Act by me deemed and adjudged
as convict of the Offense of cutting and spoiling of the said Wood, etc. within
the meaning of one other Act of Parliament which was made in the forty third
year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth, Entitled (An Act to avoid and
prevent diverse Misdemeanors in idle and lewd Persons) and whereas it then
appeared unto me that C. D. of etc. was Owner of the said Woods, etc. and I did
therefore according to the said first before mentioned Act, order and appoint
that the said A. B. should within 6. days then next ensuing, give the said C.
D. etc. the Sum of etc. of lawful Money of England for recompense and
satisfaction for his Damages: And that the said A. B. should over and above
pay down then presently to the Overseers, for the use of the Poor of the Parish
of T. in the said County, where the said Offense was committed, the Sum of etc.
of like Money, and forasmuch as the said A.B. did not according to the said
order and Appointment give or pay the Moneys aforesaid, These are therefore in
his Majesty's Name to charge and command you the said Constable and
Borshoulders, and every of you, forthwith to convey the said A. B. to the
aforesaid House of Correction, and him there deliver to the Keeper of the same
together with this Precept, commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him
into the said House, and him there detain by the space of (...) Days next after
such your receipt of him; hereof fail not at your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10. day etc. Anno etc.
2. Nota, The Justice may, if he think fit, not send the Offender to the House
of Correction, but may make a Warrant to the Constable, etc. to whip him, which
may be made with the same recitals, as in the last Precedent Warrant etc. thus.

These are therefore in his Majesty's Name, to charge and command you to whip
the said A. B. for the said Offense; hereof fail not etc.

VIII. Kilb. Precedents 225. A Mittimus to the House of Correction for the
second like Offense, on 15 Car. 2. 2. 3. N. 3.

To the Constables and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of the House of Correction for the said
County aforesaid at B. in the County aforesaid. Kent ss.
Whereas etc. ut supra, and after 43 Eliz. 7. thus; and forasmuch as the said
A. B. was once before Convict of the said Offense, and was thereof so Convicted
as before, These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Charge and Command you
the said Constable and Borsholders, to convey the said A. B. to the aforesaid
House of Correction, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, together
with this Precept, Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the
said House, and there keep him one Month to hard labor; hereof fail not at
your perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
IX. Kilb. Precedents 226. An Order against the Buyer of stolen Wood, etc. 15
Car. 2. 2. 4. N. 1.

Kent ss.
Forasmuch as upon Examination by me this day, according to an Act of
Parliament lately made, Entitled, (An Act for the punishment of unlawful
cutting or stealing or spoiling of Wood and Underwood, and destroying of young
Timber Trees) it appeared unto me that A.B. of etc. did within six days last
past buy a burden of Wood, (Piles, Sticks, Underwood, young Trees, Bark or
Bass, Gates, Styles, Posts, Pales, Rails, Hedgwood, Broom or Furz) of E. F.
being a Person justly suspected to have unlawfully come by the same, and that
the same was unlawfully come by, and unlawfully taken from C. D. of etc. and
was of the value of etc. of lawful Money of England, I do therefore, according
to the said Act, Award that the said A. B. shall pay to the said C. D. the Sum
of etc. of lawful Money of England, being the treble value of the Wood etc.
aforesaid.

Given under my Hand Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
X. Kilb. Precedents 227. A Warrant to levy Money upon the Buyer of stolen Wood,
15 Car. 2. 2. 4. N. 2.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
every of them. Kent ss.
Whereas lately by Examination by me taken, according to an Act of Parliament
lately made, Entitled, (An Act for the punishment of unlawful cutting or
stealing or spoiling of Wood and Underwood, and destroying of young
Timber Trees) it appears unto me that A. B. of etc. did within six days last
past, buy a burden of Wood etc. of E. F. being a person justly suspected to
have unlawfully come by the same, and that the same was unlawfully come by, and
unlawfully taken from C. D. of etc. and was of the value of etc. of lawful
Money of England, I did therefore, according to the said Act, Award that the
said A. B. should pay to the said C. D. the Sum of etc. of lawful Money of
England, being the treble value of the Wood, etc. aforesaid, and forasmuch as
the said A. B. has not paid to the said C. D. the aforesaid Sum of etc.
according to my said Award; These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Charge
and Command you to levy the said Sum of etc. by Distress and Sale of the Goods
of the said A. B. rendering to him the Overplus, and after you have so levied
the said Sum of etc. forthwith to pay the same to the said C. D. hereof fail
not at your perils;

Given under my Hand Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
XI. Kilb. Precedents 228. A Mittimus against the Buyer of stolen Wood, etc. for
want of Distress, on 15 Car. 2. 2. 4. N. 3.

To the Constable and Borsholders of the Hundred of A. in the said County, and
to every of them, and to the Keeper of his Majesty's Goal for the County
aforesaid at T. in the said County. Kent. ss.
Whereas lately etc. prout supra and forasmuch as you the said Constable have
returned unto me, that in default of such Distress you cannot levy the
aforesaid Sum of etc. These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Charge and
Command you the said Constable and Borsholders and every of you, to Attach the
said A. B. and him safely convey to his Majesty's Goal aforesaid at his own
Charge, and there deliver him to the Keeper of the same, together with this
Precept, Commanding also you the said Keeper to receive him into the said Goal,
and him there safely keep one Month without Bail; hereof fail not at your
perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal the 10 day etc. Anno etc.
Wool, see Drapery.
Women.
Rape, Baron and Feme.
I. LAmbert Precedents 7 b. pl. 19. An Endictment for the Rape of a Woman-Child
under Ten years of Age, on 18 Eliz. 7. 4. N. 1.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod G. D. de B. in
Com. predict' Waterman, tertio die Julij Anno Regni etc. apud B. predict' in
dicto Comitat' in Domo Mansionali ibidem cujusdam A. S. Holster, Vi and Armmis
in quandam M. N. de R. predict' in dicto Comitat' puellam infra etatem 10
Annorum tunc existent' insultum fecit ac tunc and ibidem eandem M.N. felonice
ac carnaliter cognovit, ac eandem M. N. nequiter abusus est contra pacem dicti
Domini Regis nunc, ac contra formam Statuti in Parliament' Dominae Reginae
Elizab' tent' apud Westm' in Com. Middlesex, Anno dicti Regni sui 18 in
hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi.

II. Lambert Precedents 8. pl. 20. An Endictment for the Rape of a Maid of
above Ten years old, on 13 Ed. 1. W. 2. cap. 34. See P. 11 H. 7. 22. pl. 11.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod B.C. de E. in
dicto Comitatu Tavernor, 5 die October. Anno Regni etc. apud E. predict' in Com.
predict' in quodam loco ibidem vocat' le Bower Vi and Armis in quandam A. K. de
E. predict' in Com. predict' Virginem aetatis 16 Annorum tunc ibidem in Pace
Dei and dicti Domini Regis existent' insultum fecit ac tunc and ibidem eandem
A. contra voluntatem ipsius A. felonice rapuit and carnaliter cognovit contra
Pacem dicti Domini Regis nunc ac contra formam cujusd' S^atut' in Parliament'
Domini Edw. olim Regis Angliae primi tent' apud Westm' in Com. Middlesex Anno
Regni sui 13 in hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi, Crompt. 259. pl. 88.

III. Lamberts Precedents 8. pl. 21. An Endictment for taking away a Widow
against her will that has Lands, on 3 H. 7. 2. N.

Kanc. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod A. B. de C. in
Com. predict' Singing-man, secundo die Apr. Anno Regni etc. Vi and Armis in
Domum Mansionalem cujusd' A. B. de C. predict' in Com. predict' Viduae, infra
Parochiam de C. predict' in Com. predict' intravit, quae quidem H. B. tunc
seisita fuit in Dominico suo ut de feodo de and in diversis terris and
tenement' in C. predict' in Com. predict' Clari Annui valoris 10 librarum ultra
omnes reprisas existent' ac immediate postea ( viz. dicto secundo die Apr. Anno
supradicto) idem A. B. predict' H. B. tunc and ibidem in dicta Domo sua in Pace
Dei ac dicti Domini Regis existent' ex dicta Domo sua Mansionali contra
voluntatem ipsius H. B. illegitime ac felonice extraxit eripuit, and abduxit ac
eandem H. B. postea scil. tertio die dicti Mensis Aprilis Anno supradicto in
Ecclesia Parochiali de C. predict' in Com. predict' cepit in uxorem suam ubi
idem A. B. dicto tempore extractionis and abductionis predict' non clamavit nec
clamare potuit eandem H.B. tanquam wardam suam aut tanquam Nativam suam in
magnam Pacis dicti Domini Regis nunc perturbationem ac contra formam cujusdam
Statuti in Parliament' Domini Henrici nuper Regis Angliae s^ptimi tent' Anno
Regni sui tertio in hujusmodi casu provisi ac editi, West. Symb. 2 part 135.
Sect. 224.

IV. Crompt. 258 b. 259. pl. 87. An Endictment for a Rape on 3 Ed. 1. W. 1.
cap. 13. Dalt. 281. cap. 107.

Staff. ss.
Juratores pro Domino Rege super Sacrament' suum presentant quod cum in Statut'
in Parliament' Domini Edw. nuper Regis Angliae primi Anno Regni sui tertio
tent' editi inter caetera ordinatum existit quod nullus Rapiat neque capiat
Ancillam infra aetat' existent' per assensum suum vel sine assensu suo, neque
dictam Ancillam vel aliam faeminam contra voluntatem suam, and si aliquis h^c
fecerit, ad sectam illius qui hoc sequitur infra 40 dies Dominus Rex sibi
faciet Communem Justitiam: and si nullus Incipiat sectam in hac part infra 40
dies Dominus Rex sequetur and illi qui invent' fuerint culpabiles habeant
Prisonam duorum Annorum and postmodum redimantur ad voluntatem Domini Regis
prout in eodem Statuto before continetur: Quidam J. B. nuper de A. in Com.
predict' Statutum predict' minime ponderans nec paenam in eodem content' verens
J. O. Ancillam filiam H. O. and infra etat' existent' 40 diebus elapsis apud W.
in Com. predict' tertio die September. Anno etc. violenter cepit and rapuit
contra formam Statuti predict' ac contra Pacem etc.

V. Dalt. 268. 269 cap. 104. Note, That a Woman Convicted of or for felonious
taking of any Money, Goods, or Chattels, above the value of 12 d. and under 10
s. or as Accessory to any such Offense, the said Offense being no Burglary nor
Robbery in or near the Highway, nor the felonious taking of any Goods from the
Person of another privily, shall for the first Offense be branded in the Hand,
and further punished by Imprisonment or Whipping at the Discretion of the Judge
or Justice before whom she shall be so Convicted, 21 Jac. 6.. 1. N. 2.

Workmen, see Apprentice. Writs, see Process. Yarn, see Drapery. Year, see
Days.
A Recital of several GENERAL and PARTICULAR HEADS of Reference.
A
ACTION. Addition, See Nosm. Abjuration, See Oath, and Coron. Accessory, and
Abbettors. Affray, Assault, Battery, Riot, Tumult. Ale. Apprentice. Agnus Dei,
See Pope. Appeal, Approver, See Coron. Aliens. Arrest, See Imprisonment,
Capias, Attachment. Appearance. Arraignment, See Coron. Indictment. Arms, and
Armor, See War. Assize, See Measures. Archers, See Bows, Shooting. Assistance,
and Aid, See Force. Assemblies, See Conventicle, Riot. Averment. Agait, or
Await, See Coron. Afferemy, See Amerciament, Forfeiture. Abbey. Allegiance, See
Oath. Almshouses, See Poor. Apples, See Fruiterers, Trespass. Apparel.
Administrators. Admiral. Abearing, See Good-behaviour. Alias dictus, See Nosm.
Additional duty, See Taxes. Authority, See Power and Jurisdiction. Adultry, See
Bastardy. Attaindre. Annum Diem and Vastum, See Coron. Absolution, see Pope.
Accounts, and Accountant.
B
BAttery, See Affray, Trespass. Badger, See Corn. Baker, and Bread, See Corn.
Baylment, and Mainprise. Bailiff. Barretors, See Maintenance, and Peace.
Bastards, and Bawdry. Beer, and Brewers, See Ale. Boat-men, and Barges, See
Sewers. Bows, and Butts, see Games, Shooting. Bowls, See Games. Brass, See
Mettle. Bridges, See Ways. Buckstalls, See Forest. Buggery, See Coron.
Butchers, See Cattle. Bulls, See Pope. Butter and Cheese, See Victuals. Battery
and Battle, See Affray, Trespass. Bloodshed, See Coron. Homicide. Bark, See
Woods, and Tanners Leather. Bargain and Sale, See Market Overt. Bears, See
Cattle and Games. Bigamy, See Marriage. Breach of the Peace, see Peace. Burning
of Houses, See Fire. Beggars, See Poor. Beads, See Pope. Blockwood, See
Drapery. Bonds, See Recognizance and Bail. Burglary, and Breaking houses, See
Coron. Breaking of Prison, See Imprisonment. Bushel, See Measures. Baron and
Fem. Books. Burials, See Church. Bricklayers, See Masons. Buying of Titles, See
Maintenance. Bankrupts. Bath and Bucstone, See Poor, License. Banishment, See
Ouster le mere. Behavior, See Good-behaviour.
C
CAlculation, See Days. Calves, See Cattle. Captains, See War. Cattle.
Certificate. Certiorari. Challenge, See Inquest. Champerty, See Maintenance.
Chance-medly, See Coron. Charge, See Sessions. Chastisement, See Apprentice.
Church. Clergy, See Coron. Clerk of the Peace, See Peace. Clerk of the Market,
See Market Overt. Confession, See Proof. Confederacy, Conspiracy. Cloth, See
Drapery. Cod, See Fish. Coertion, See Dures. Commission, See Justices.
Condition, See Recognizance. Conies, See Cattle, and Forest. Conjuration.
Creditors, See Account. Constable. Corn. Coron. and Coroner. Conventicles, See
Religion, Riot. Corporal pain, See Pain, Judgment. Country Courts, See Courts.
Curriers, See Leather. Custos Rotulorum, See Peace. Cutting out, See Trespass.
Cut-purses, See Coron. Corruption of Blood, See Coron. Collusion, Covin,
Cheats, Cosening. Cries, See Fresh-suit. Castles, see Wars. Cause of Suspicion,
see Intendment. Chandlers. Chiding, See Affray. Common Prayer, See Religion.
Concealment, See Omission. Cottages, See Poor. Cross-bows, See Games, War,
Shooting. Common. Customers, see Merchants. Costs, see Damages. Chattels, see
Coron. and Forfeiture. Churchwardens. Cinque Ports. Circumstances, see
Examination and Proof. Claim, see Market Overt. Conviction, see Attainder and
Proof. Counterfeits, see Forgery. Coinage, see Money. Children, see Infant.
Commitment, see Imprisonment. Cowpers, see Trades. Crows, see Fowl. Courts.
Causeys, see Ways. Car-men. Carriers, see Ways. Citation, see Ordinary. Coin,
see Money. Cursing, see Oaths. Cheese, see Victuals. Coffee house, see Ale.
Congregation, see Riots. Cordwainers, see Leather. Chimny-mony, see Taxes.
Collectors, see Account.
D
DEer, see Forest. Death, see Coron. Demurer, see Pleading. Denial of Offense,
see Proof. Deputy, see Officer. Dyers, see Drapery. Discontinuance, see
Process. Disturbers, see Assembly. Discretion, see Justices. Draw-latches, see
Coron. Deceit, see Collusion. Damages. Departure, see Apprentice. Divine
Service, see Religion. Dogs, see Cattle. Deodand, see Coron. Drunkenness, see
Ale. Doves, see Fowl. Drovers, see Cattle. Dures, see Imprisonment. Dignity.
Deeds, see Inrollment. Denizen, see Alien. Drapery. Ded. potestat. see Oath.
E
ECclesiastical Persons, Causes, and Jurisdiction. Eggs, see Fowl. Egyptians,
see Poor. Endictments, see Indictm. Enquiry and Enquest. Escape. Escheator, see
Officer. Escheats, see Records. Estophel, see Pleading. Example, see Coron.
Examination and Evidence, see Proof. Execution. Extortion, see Fees. Exaction,
see Fees. Enterludes, see Games. Embezelling, see War, Collusion. Enfant, see
Infant. Evesdroppers, see Coron. Evidence and Proof. Embracery, see Maintenance
and Enquest. Extolling Foreign Power, see Pope. Enter, see Force. Encumbent,
see Ecclesiastical Persons. Excommengement. Exportation, Transportation, see
Ouster le mere. Exile, see Ouster le mere. Excise, see Taxes, Ale.
F
FAlse Imprisonment, See Imprisonment. Fairs, See Market Overt. Felon, See
Coron. Felo de se, See Coron. Fines, See Amerciaments. Fish and fry of Fish.
Forfeitures. False Tokens, See Collusion, Forgery. Fencers, See Games. Flesh,
See Cattle, Days, Fish. Force. Forestallers, See Market Overt. Fresh Suit.
False News, See Slander. Farms, See Husbandy. Ferrets, See Forest. Feasants,
see Foul. Fighting, See Affray. Fuel, See Measures. Fraud, See Collusion.
Forgery. Franchises. Forest. Felony, See Coron. Foul. Fasting, See Days,
Religion. Freuterers, See Trades, Market Overt. Common Fame, See Coron.
Featherbeds, See Drapery. Fullers Earth, See Drapery.
G
GAmes. Goales, See Imprisonment. Goldsmith, See Mettle. Good Abearing,
Behavior. Guns, See War and Games, Shooting. Gally half pence, See Money.
Grasiers, See Cattle. Greyhounds, See Cattle. Glass-Men, See Trades. Gaugeors,
See Measures. Grain, See Corn. Green-wax, See Process and Seals.
H
HAbeas Corpus, See Imprisonment. Hares, See Forest. Harvest, See Poor. Hawks,
See Fowl. Hay and Oats, See Corn, Hostler. Hearing, See Justices, Trial.
Hedge-breakers, See Trespass. Herring, See Fish. Highways, See Ways.
Homicide, See Coron. Horses, See Cattle. Horse-bread, See Corn. Hospital, See
Poor. Horn, See Trades. Hunting, See Forest. Husband, See Bar. and Feme. Hue
and Cry, See Fresh Suit. Hand Guns, See Games and War, Shooting. Harborers, see
Hostler. Houses of Correction, See Poor. Harness, See War. Hundred, See
Franchises, Sheriffs, Constable. Hydes, See Leather. Headboroughs, See
Constable. Husbandry. Hatts, See Apparel. Hearth-money, See Taxes. Hostler.
I
JEsuits, See Pope. Indictments. Information, See Action, ^ur Statute.
Engrossing, See Market Overt. Innkeeper. See Hostler. Inn-holder, See Hostler.
Inrolement. Iron works, See Mettle. Jurisdiction, See Justices. Justices.
Issues, See Inquest, Forfeiture. Judgment, See Justices. Juglers, See Games.
Jurors, See Enquest. Imbezilment, See War and Records. Imbraceors, See Inquest
and Maintenance. Infants, See Enfants. Imprisonment. Incontinency, See
Bastardy. Inmates, See Cottages. Inquest, See Enquest. Idiot. Incumbent, See
Encumbent. Images, See Religion. Inventories, See Ordinary. Infidel, See
Religion. Jews. Intendant. Jews, See Religion. Idlers, See Poor.
K
KIng, See Prerogative. Killing, See Error. Kidders, See Corn, Cattle.
King's Bench, See Justices, Certiorari.
L
LAborers, See Apprentice. Larceny, See Coron. Leather. License. Livery, See
Maintenance. Logwood, See Drapery. Law, See Pleading. Leet. Lent, See Days,
Fish, Religion. Libels, See Slander. London, See Franchises, Justices.
Lunaticy, See Infant. Leap Year, See Days. Linen Cloth, See Drapery.
Liberties, See Franchises. Lying in wait, See Coron. Long Bows, See Games.
Loyterers, See Poor. Lords Day, See Days, Religion. Ladder, See Corn. Latten,
See Mettle. Letters of Administration, See Administration. Lace, See Drapery
and Merchants. Letters, See Ways. Liquors, See Ale.
M
MErchants. Marriage. Masons. Mainprise, See Bail. Maim, See Affray, Trespass.
Mavet, See Corn. Manslaughter, See Coron. Mass, See Pope. Master, See
Apprentice. Menace, See Affray. Mean Acts, See Days. Minstrels, See Games.
Misprision, See Treason. Mitigation, See Amerciament, Forfeiture. Mittimus, See
Imprisonment. Mortuary, See Tithes. Multiplication, see Money. Murder, see
Coron. Militia and Musters, see War. Maintenance. Market Overt. Measures. Milch
Kine, see Cattle. Menace, see Affray. Mariners, see Admiral. May-Poles, see
Games. Millers, see Corn. Ministers, see Ecclesiastical Persons, Religion.
Mis-feasans, see Officer. Messages, see Ways. Monasteries, see Abbey. Month,
see Days. Marches, see Wales. Marshalsey, see Coron. Marshes, see Husbandry.
Money. Mettle. Malice, see Intendant.
N
NOsme and Name and Addition. Next Justice, see Justices. Noble, see Dignity,
Peers. Notice. Nets, see Fish. News, see Slander. Night-walkers, see Coron.
Night, see Days. Non sane memory, see Enfant. Nuisance. Navy, see Admiral,
Ships.
O
OAth. Obligation, see Bail, Recognizance. Offices of the Justice, see
Justices. Officer. Ordinary. Oppression, see Fees. Orders of Sessions, see
Justices. Overseers, see Poor. Oats and Oat-meal, see Corn. Obedience, see Oath
and Pope. Orchards, see Trespass. Oils, see Merchants, Measures. Ouster le
mere. One Justice, see Justices. Omission, see Amendment.
P
PArdon. Parson, see Encumbent. Partridges, see Fowl. Parks, see Forest.
Peace. Pedlers, see Poor. Peers, see Dignity. Penal Laws, see Information.
Perjury, see Oath. Pety Larceny, see Coron, Trespass. Pety Treason, see
Treason. Physicians. Plague, see Poor. Plays, see Games. Plaints, see
Information. Poor. Pope. Pourdike, see Sewers. Power of the County, see Force.
Power, see Authority and Justices. Possession, see Seisin, Execution.
Poisoning, see Coron, Homicide. Preachers, see Encumbent, Religion. Praemunire,
see Pope and Coron. Presentment, see Indictment. Priests, see Pope. Privy
Sessions, see Justices. Privilege Peers, see Dignity. Prisoners, see
Imprisonment. Proclamation, see Notice. Process. Promoters, see Information.
Prophesying, see Conjuration. Punishment, Pain and Penalty, see Forfeiture.
Purveyors. Putting out Eyes, etc. see Trespass. Pewter, see Mettle. Principal
and Accessory, see Accessory, Coron. Pleading. Panel, see Enquest. Pictures,
see Religion. Ponds, see Sewers. Precept, see Process. Pensioners, see Poor.
Pillory, see Coron. Pound, see Replevin. Pursuit, see Fresh Suit. Proof. Pety
Constables, see Constable. Parliament. Paving, see Ways. Poulterers, see Fowl.
Parishes, see Poor. Pyracy, see Admiral. Plow-land, see Husbandry. Posse
Comitatus, see Sheriffs, Riot. Presumption, see Intendant. Post Office, see
Ways. Property, see Chattels. Pety Sessions, see Constable:
Q
QUarter Sessions, see Justices. Quorum, see Justices. Quakers, see Religion.
Quarelling, see Affray.
R
RApe, See Coron, Women. Ravishment, See Coron, Women. Recognizance. Records,
See Justices. Regrator, See Market Overt. Release, See Peace, Recognizance.
Replevin, See Bail, Cattle, Process. Request, see Process. Restitution, see
Force. Rescous, See Escape, Imprison. Force. Resistance. See Escape, Imprison.
Force. Rewards, see Pain. Riot and Rout. Rivers, see Sewers. Rogues, see Poor.
Robery, see Coron, Fresh Suit. Rome, see Pope. Razure, see Records. Recusants,
see Pope. Rates, see Taxes, Poor. Reconciliation, see Pope. Religious Houses,
see Abbey. Return, see Certificate. Religion. Rebellion, see War, Riot. Removal,
see Poor, Settlement. Relation, see Days. Reparation, see Ways. Ransom, see
Amerciament. Revenue, see Taxes. Recordare, and see Certiorari Removing, see
Certiorari
R
SAcrament, see Religion. Sabbath, see Days. Sanctuary, see Coron. Salmons, see
Fish. Scavage or Shewage, see Merchants. Schoolmasters, see License. Seals,
see Deeds. Seisin, see Force. Seminaries, see Pope. Sermons, see Religion.
Servants, see Apprentice. Sessions, see Justices. Pety-Sessions, see Constab.
Sewers. Sheep, see Cattle. Sheriffs. Shoomakers, see Leather. Soap, see
Measures, Markets. Soldiers, see War, Shooting. Star Chamber, see Riots.
Statutes, see Parliament. Subpoena, see Process. Subsidy, see Taxes.
Suggestion, see Inormat. Supremacy, see Oath. Supersedeas. Sutety, see Bail,
Recognizance. Suspicion, see Intendment, Coron. Swearing, see Oath.
Subornation, see Proof, Oath. Sedition, see Slander. Silk, see Drapery.
Strangers, see Alien. Sacrilege, see Coron. Saltpeter, see War. Sectaries, see
Religion. Shooting, see Games and War. Stolen Goods, see Larceny, Coron.
Stewards, see Leet. Stock, see Account, Poor, Taxes. Summons, see Process,
Warrant. Sunday, see Days, Religion. Supplicavit, see Peace. Swans, see Fowl.
Searchers, see Merchants. Se defendendo, see Coron. Setlement, see Poor.
Slander. Stocks, see Imprisoment. Submission, see Pope. Suits, see Information.
Surplusage, see Account. Supervisors, see Poor, Ways. Spinsters, see Drapery,
Wool. Scotland. Ships, and Shipwright, and Seamen, see Admiral. Silver, see
Mettle. Stabbing, see Coron. Smoak-mony, see Taxes. Skinners, see Leather.
Strays, see Chattels, Coron. Stealing, see Larceny, Coron. Striking, see
Affray.
T
TAnners, see Leather. Taverns, see Wine. Testimonial, see Poor. Thirdboroughs,
see Constable. Tillage, see Husbandry. Tile-making, see Masons. Tinkers, see
Poor. Tithes. Toll, see Market Overt, Taxes. Traverse, see Pleading. Treason.
Trespass, and Affray. Trials, see Proof, and Process. Troop, see Riot. Truce,
see Admiral. Turn, see Sheriffs. Tales, see Enquest. Trunks, see Fish. Taxes.
Tales, see Slander. Theft, see Coron, Transportation, and Ouster le mere.
Traveling, see Ways. Tippling, see Ale. Tokens, see Forgery, Collusion. Trades,
see Apprentice. Treasure, see Money. Threats, see Dures, and Affray. Tin, see
Mettle. Tobacco, see Husbandry, Merchants. Timber, see Wood. Tumult, see Riot.
Two and Three Justices, see Justices.
U
VAgabonds and Vagrants, see Poor. Venire facias, see Enquest, Process.
Vessels, see Measures. Victuals. Unlawful Assemblies, see Riot. Unlawful Games,
see Games. Undersheriff, see Sheriff. Universities, see Franchise. Usury.
Utlary. Vi laica, see Force. Undertakers, see Purveyors. Villain, see Poor.
Upholster, see Drapery. Violence, see Affray.
W
WAges, see Apprentice, Fees. Wainlings, see Cattle. Warrants, see Process.
Warrenors, see Forest. Wax. Weapons, see War. Weights, see Measures.
Witchcraft, see Conjuration. Wines. Woad, see Drapery. Woods. Wool, see
Drapery. Women. Watch and ward, see Fresh Suit. Wild-fowle, see Foul.
Way-laying, see Coron. Ways, Wagoner, Waynes. Watermen, see Sewers, London.
Wears, see Sewers. Witness, see Proof. Wales. Writs, see Process. Waifs, see
Chattels, Coron. Weavers, see Drapery. Workmen, see Apprentice. Wife, see Bar
and Feme.
Y
YArn, see Drapery. Year, see Days.
FINIS.

