A jolly Company of jovial Blades,
Who laugh and sing, and are as merry as the Maids.

They sing and roar, and freely spend their Chink,
And to each other in full Bowls they drink:
They scorn such puny pinch-guts as are saving,
They think good Sack is only worth the having.
And being fully bent to spend their store,
They drink their Liquor off and call for more.
Thus while they freely tope off Sack by quarts,
They drive away all sorrow from their hearts.
Tune is, General Monk has advan'd himself since he came from the Tower.


IT was of late, my happy fate
to meet with a Ioviall Crew;
Of merry Blades, and lidely Lads,
who drank till the Sky look blew.
Being void of care, no money they spare
but all with free conesnt,
Drank wine good store and then caled for mor
so merrily they were bent.
Hang sorrow quoth one, why should we make moan,
so long as our money does last?
Away with this sadness, it is folly and madness,
to think what is past.
Let Us drink and bouze, and bravely carooze,
and least that the time should seem long
Give ear unto me, my task it shall be,
to sing you a gallant new Song.
The second Part to the same Tune.
BE merry my hearts, and call for your quarts
and let no Liquor be lacking,
We have money good store, and intend for to rore,
until we have set all a packing.
Come Drawer make haste, let not the time waste
let every man have his due,
For to save shoes and trouble bring in a quart double
for he that made one made two.
Come take off your drink, and speak what you think,
strong liquor will make you speak truly
For certainly we, no Drunkards can be,
so long as we are not unruly,
Then drink and be civil, intending no evil
and be not offended with me,
For what I had before, I Will have one quart more
for he that made two, made three.
The greedy Curmudgin, sits all ye day grudging,
at home with his bread and small beer,
For to hord up base pelf, he starves himself.
scarce eats a good meal through the year
But we will not do so, how ere the world go,
so long as we have any store,
I think we will not lack, go fill us more Sack,
for he that made three made four.
Why sit you so sadly, since I call so madly,
I scorn to leave you in the lurch,
The reckoning i will pay, e're I go away,
else hang me as high as the Church
Yet some men will say, that is not the way
he must pinch that intends for to thrive,
It Is no matter for that, let us laugh and be fat,
for he that made four, made five.
Such love I intend to my dearest friend
that I can not tell how to express it:
when with him I meet, his company's so sweet
yt I would not willingly miss it.
I scorn such a slave, as his money will save
or any that use such base tricks.
Come on my brave blades, be as merry as ye Maids
for he that made five made six.
Now whilst I am here, i will call for my Beer
and freely my money i will spend,
Let no man take care, for pa^^ing his share,
if need be, i will pay for my friend.
Pluck up a good heart, let sorrow depart,
with the Drawer I will make even,
So with merry content, our time shall be spent,
for he that made six, made seven.
Drink off our cups round, let sorrow be drowned
in this same cup of good Sherry,
I cannot endure, to sit thus demure,
for hither we came to be merry.
Then be of good cheer, ye reckoning i will clear
and eke with the Drawer make straight,
For now I Am set a mading, I needs must be adding
and he that made seven, made eight:
Yet at home I confess, with my honest Besse
I practice good husbandry well,
To mantain my calling, and keep me from falling,
as all my Neighbors can tell;
they plead ^e at large for maintaining my charge
though sometimes to drink I in cline:
Yet I scorn for to shrink go fill us more drink
for he that made eight made nine.
Here Is a health to my friend, yt^ has a Song penned
in prais of good liqor that is old,
Drink off your cups round, whilst Music does sound
in hope it will keep us from cold,
And now to conclude my verses so rude,
you are all welcome Gentlemen:
Yet ere you depart i will give a quart,
for he that made nine, made ten.
This being said, the reckoning they paid,
and in friendly manner departed:
there is none of them had any cause to be sad;
but all went away merry-hearted.
And when they do meet, again in the street
then unto the Tavern thy'l hye:
And there they intend their money to spend
which no body can deny
FINIS.
London, Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wight.


