THE NEW Returna Brevium, Or the LAW returned from WESTMINSTER And restored in
brief to its Native, Ancient, and Proper Habitation, Language, Power, Purity,
Integrity, Cheapness, Briefeness, Plainness.

Rescued out of the Sacrilegious hands, barbarous disguises, aenigmatical
intricacies, lucrative constructions, extorted verdicts, falls Judgments, and
bribeful Executions of her perjured Imposlors, falls Interpreters, Iailers,
Catchpols, Attorneys, etc

Whereunto is added the Petition of Right, granted by Parliament in the 3 year
of King Charles, and confirmed by this (Although to be found in larger Volumes)
for cheapness to the Generality to inform themselves what is their Rights.

Written by John Jones of the Neyath in Com. Brecon Gent.

Micha. 6. v. 8. He has showed thee O Man, what is good. And what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard Anno Dom. 1650.

TO The right Honorable Oliver Crumwell LORD Lieutenant of IRELAND etc.
Heroic Sir!
LOng and earnest have been the desires, and prayers of many thousands of
faithful hearts for your safe and happy return into England, which God for
his own glory, your honor, and our comforts, has now opportunely brought to
pass with such testimonies of his blessings upon your actions, manifested by
your successes in his battails, as may beejustly terrible to all his, and your
Enemies; and truly joyful to all his servants, and your friends; of whom it is
to be feared, that as God has but few firm in his election, so you have but
few faithful in your assistance. Be pleased therefore that it may be inquired
in the Assembly, whose promises to your self, and your dependants, whose
Votes in public, and Vows in private have most vvilfully failed you and
yours: I shall not presume to inquire what breaches have bin made of
performances in matters most nearly concerning you, and your Army best known
to your self: but what has been performed of those promises made to you, and
your Army for the relieving of your daily Orators, Prisoners for Debt,
wrongfully restreined, contrary to Magna Charta, and all the true Laws of the
Land, which men sitting in Parliament publicly profess, and have often svvorn
to maintein: what ridiculous Acts even those men have made to delude you and
your Orators, their own and all Gods people, to cross those Laws more then
before, and to support their extortions, and mercenarie practices in all the
ways of Injustice, in an higher measure than their Predecessors: what Justice
can be expected from such Justicers? what merci can be exspected from God to
continue upon that Land that shall suffer such Mountibanck-mock-lawes to live,
much more to sit, and be Legis-lators amongst them? oh! let such buyers and
sellers of Law and Justice be thrown out of the Temple, and the House of the
Lord be purged of such abominations. The valiant and Religious Patriot Colonel
Pride (in your absence) endeavored to work some proportion of grace into those
men, to foresee and prevent their own confusion; but the Adders would not hear:
O make them (Sir!) make these subtle Serpents innocent against their wills;
unsting them, unskin them; for their Cases are far more precious then their
Carkases. I have here following demonstrated their uselessness in this
Commonwealth? which may it pleas your honor to peruse at your leisure, protect
in your favor, correct in your wisdom, and Act in your Justice; so God shall
further prosper you and your posterity, the Commonwealth honor you and them,
and with the rest of your Orators, and theirs, I shall be ever yours to
Command during life,

John Jones.

THE NEW Returna Brevium; OR The Law returned from WESTMINSTER etc.
Diverse are the Speeches of diverse Contrivers of a pretended Reformation of the
Law of England, according to the diversity of their opinions, and self ends
premised therein; for the effecting whereof, they would have their several
Propositions disputed; some for Alterations, others for Additions, others for
Substractions; all for Corrections; but few or none knowing how to mend Magna
Chart. more then Magnificat; nor really studying, but how to mar both. Observe
how the work directs it self how it would be don: For as says the Mirror
of Justice written by Horn in King Ed. the 1. his time pa. 8. It was ordained
(viz. by King Alphred long before Mag. Chart. or the Norman Conquest) that
Right should be don from 15 days to 15 days, before the King and his Judges:
and from month to month in the Counties (if their largeness required not a
longer time:) And that every three weeks, right should be administered in other
Courts. And every free Tenant had ordinary Jurisdiction, etc. And before pa. 1.
The Sheriffs and Bailiffs caused the Free Tenants of their Bailywicks to meet
at the Counties and hundreds, at which Justice was so don, that every one so
judged his Neighbor, by such judgment as a man could not els-where receiv in
the like cases, until such time as the Customs of the Realm were put in
writing, and certainly established. And although a Freeman commonly was not to
serve without his assent; neverthe-less it was assented unto, that Free Tenants
should meet together in the Counties, Hundreds, and Lord's Courts (if they were
not specially exempted to do such Suits,) and there they judged their
Neighbors. And again pa. 8. It was ordained, That every Plaintiff have a
remedial Writ from the King (who reserved all Pleas of the Crown, and above 40
s to himself) to his Sheriff in this form.

Questus est nobis etc. viz Complains to us A. that B does him such and such
wrong, We therefore committing to thee our Turn in this behalf, command thee
to hear and determine that cause. Their Jurors were Judges: And why do Judges
now at Westminster (that can be no more absolute Judges by their Commissions,
then Recorders of Cities by their Charters, Sheriffs in Counties and Stewards
in liberties were by their Writs, at this time when Free English men understood
their laws then known and practiced in English) usurp more then those Judges
did, or these ought? viz. to be more then only pronouncers of the substance
of Jurors verdicts as well for Law as Fact; which pronunciation is and ought to
be but as a Declaration of Kings assents to the due execution of that Law,
which they and their people agreed upon in the great Charter, and its
confirmation; to let the people know by these Judges, that then were, and still
are, and ought to be called the Kings or the States, as authorized by their
Writs and Commissions to pronounce their Masters consents for their parts to
convict the party guilty as the Judges of the people (viz. the Jurors do by
their verdicts, which are or ought to be their true sayings both for Law and
fact for the peopl'es part and their own; which consents of Kings or States now
called Judgments (because a full conviction of the guilty of both parts) if
denied or delayed after verdicts, to be pronounced there accordingly, by the
Judges called the Kings or States. A Writ to command them to proceed to
Judgment, and an alias plur and Attachment ought to be granted by the
Chancery-States, as you shall finds in Fitz not. br. fo. 143. to imprison them
till they do it, which is not usually don by themselves in every cause in Court,
but by the protonotarie of course entered upon Record, unless respite be
required upon good cause showed. And the execution which ever issues in the
name of King or State relates to the Judgment, Conviction, which implies
both the Judgments of Kings or States and people as aforesaid.

Would not therefore the common practice of the Laws and their pleadings in
English as at first they were be more commodious and useful to instruct all
understanding English men for their own good to become experimental sufficient
Lawyers in their own causes, then the modern custom of hotch potch French and
Latin imposed by Lawyers for their own gain to instruct fevv others of their
own generation, to cheat the universalitie of the Nation of their rights and
understandings, and make themselves, and their Counsels most learned in others
affairs.

And again, That every one have a Remedial Writ from the Kings Chancery
according to his plaint, without difficulty, and that every one have process
from the day of this plaint, without the Seal of Judge or party. And again pa.
10. That after a plaint of wrong be sued, that no other have Jurisdiction in
the same Cause before the first plaint be determined etc. And again that all the
King's Courts should be open to all plaints, by which they had original Writs
without delay as well against the King or the Queen, as against any other of the
People, for every Injury, but in case of life, where the plaint held without
Writ: Why all at Westminster sit not betvveen terms? And all elsvvhere all the
year long? Certiorari's, Corpus cum caussa, suppersedias, etc. issued thence,
till the Judges at Westminster can be there at leisure to determine all
matters, which the multiplicitie of rich men's causes so monopolized thither
cannot afford the poor to end theirs while they live commonly.

And again page 11. That all Free Tennants shall be obedient, and appear at
the summons of the Lord of the Fee; And if a man caused another to be summoned,
elsewhere then in Fees of the Avowants, or oftener then from Court to Court, they
were not to obey such Summons. Why then should any Freeholder of the County
of Middlesex, or any liberty thereof (except Westminster, and St Martins
legrand London) appear upon Summons at Westminster Hall, which lately was the
Fee of the Dean and Chapter of St Peter's, and now is at the States dispose, to
whom they pleas.

And again page 12. That the Lords of Fees might summon their Tenants by the
Award of their Peers, to the Lord's Court, or the County, or the Hundred, at
all times that they detein, or deny their services in deed or word; and there
they shall he acquitted, or forfeit their allegiance and all their Tenancie
with the appurtenances, by the judgment of the Suitors. And per contra, the
Lords doing wrong to their Tenants, shall forfeit their Fee to the Chief Lord,
by the same judgment. Observe the Freemen of every liberty then were, as still
they ought to be Judges of their Lords for their fees, as well as their other
neighbors for their tenancies, and to end their differences there within their
proper Fees respectively; and why not so still? And so let the chief Officers,
Justices of Peace, and others of the Liberty of Westminster suffice for Judges
for that precinct.

And page 13. That offenders guilty of death should not be suffered to remain
among the guiltless. Why Convicts for felonies, etc. in Newgate etc. amongst
prisoners for debt?

And that the Goods and Chattells of Usurers should Escheat to the Lord of the
Fee. This law restored, would enrich the Commonwealth, purge it of many moths
and Cankerworms, and teach men to live by their own labors, and not by others.

And pa. 14. That none should be ordained Ministers above the number of
Churches; and that the poor should be sustained by Parsons, Rectors, and
Parishioners, so that none should die for want. How many die so daily now
adays within every parish and parsons view? So much and more affirmed by
Master Horn to be the Common unwritten Laws and Customs of England before
Magna Charta; the Lord Coke in his preamble to his Institutions upon it, says,
It is but a written Charter, or Declaration in writing of the ancient laws of
this Land, agreed upon by King and People to be published, and preserved
inviolable on both parts for ever, and no new law made. Hereby further
appears what has been said of the agreement between King and People, that
none should be judged by the Kings Judges but by verdict of their Peers, called
in this Charter due process of Law. In and by the 9th Chap. of which Charter,
it is declared, That the City of London shall have the old Liberties and
Customs which it has used to have; Moreover we will, and grant that all other
Cities, Buroughs, Towns, and the Barons of the 5 Ports, and all other Ports
shall have their Liberties, and free Customs. Are not all these Liberties and
Customs grown obsolete, and daily overruled at Westminster? And in the first
confirmation of the said Charter 25. Ed. 3. ca. 2. It is further declared, That
all Instices, Sheriffs, Majors, and other Ministers having the Law to guide
them, (viz. Mag. Chart. Forest, then written and published) shall allow the
said Charter to be pleaded before them in Judgment: and cap. 2. That if any
judgment shall be given henceforth contrary to the points of the great
Charter, it shall be undon: where upon (says the Lord Coke) the Laws of the
Realm have the office to guide the Judges in all causes that come before them,
in the ways of right Justice, which never yet misguided any that certainly
knew them, and truly followed them.

By these Collections of Mr. Horn before Magna Charta, and Confessions of the
Lord Coke since, sufficiently appears That the Laws (if published to the
people as they ought) would be sufficient to guide them all, in all the right
ways of Justice. But the Justices at Westminster that would guide the Laws, as
Popes Scriptures, by their own Interpretations, having purposely disguised them
in Pedlers French, and barbarous Latin, that few but themselves can construe;
and forms so errorable as they can devise for themselves to mend when they
list; which happens sometimes for the rich, but rare or never for the poor; and
thereby denying, delaying, and selling Justice at their own rates; And their
Frye, sitting in the house, are the subverters of the Laws, as their
Predecessors always were, and thereby the continual causers of all the Civil
Wars of England; and besides all that, (under color of Justice) murderers of
more English men then all the Wars, Plagues, and Famine, which reigned in
their times, destroyed without them: Witness their Statutes made and
maintained against Magna Charta, for their murdering of Debtors in Prisons,
with tortures and famine, when their extortions and their Gaolers have left
them no means to buy bread: And for the unlawful divorcing, scattering, and
starving of their Wives and Children by the bargain, and robbing their
Creditors of those means that should pay their Debts in part, or all; and for
protecting of Cheators, that take their Prisons for Sanctuaries, to leav so
much of other men's estates with the right owners curs and their heirs, to their
posterity, as their Judges and Gaolers extortions and their own riot cannot
consume in their own time; As also their last Acts formerly mentioned for
releas of Prisoners, which entangle their bodies and souls more then before;
And many other Statutes to intricate the Laws with such contrarieties, as none
but such as have the Genius of their makers can reconcile: which when it is
don, tends wholly to make themselves great and rich, and the People their
slaves and beggars.

For Remedy whereof, it is to be desired in the name and right of the public,
that the House would be pleased to be swept and cleansed of such cobs, and
cob-webs, and to vote and vomit out of the sanctified bowels of that sacred
Senate those execrable excrements that poison their intrailes, and deliver them
to public Justice, which their ravenous lives, and extorted possessions
suffice not to satisfy; but may in Gods mercy appeas his wrath, stay his
Judgment, and expiate this Land of that wickedness which they have wrought
among us, and accumulated upon us.

This don, The work follows, and teaches it self how it would be don as
aforesaid; declaring it self that frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per
pauclora: vain is the labor of many workmen, where few may serve the Turn with
far less charge, and more conveniencie. And breiflie, vain, expenceful and too
burthensom to this Commonwealth are the several Courts hereafter mentioned,
upstarted over us, one after another, since the first publishing of Magna
Charta, as Heresies sprung immediately after, if not with the first preaching
of the Gospel: viz. Out of the Court lately called the King's Bench, issued the
Common Pleas, and the Eschequer, which took their leav of it in Magna Charta,
and left it to follow the King; and so I conceiv it ought to do still, for that
there is no use rightly to be made of it, but to hear and determine the Pleas
of the Crown, which the Lord Coke upon Magna Charta says were wont to be
determined by Stewards in their Leets, Sheriffs in their Turns, Recorders in
Corporations, and country Judges in Signiories, which had jura Regalia; all
which now, Justices of Peace having more power in matters determinable by
common Law, then Justices in Eire had (if rid of the sovereigntie usurped over
them by their fellow-Justices, their Certioraries, etc.) may eas of much labor.
Moreover, the chief Justice of this Court ought to be but the King's deputy
by writ; and no King in being, no such Deputy can be. Hugh de Burgo Earl of
Kent, chief Justice under King Henry the 3d took his oath with his Master, to
observe and maintein Magna Charta, and soon after persuading the King to break
it, became the first Perjurer of his place in that point; as the Lord Cook upon
Art. sup. Chart. declares at large. Since which time, the practice of this
Court, being but to murder debtors over whom it has no jurisdiction, and
consequently perjurie and injury to the Commonwealth; why may it not be
spared as well as the King? While (as says the Lord Cook aforesaid) all
Majors, etc. have the Law to guide them, and now Englished unto them, where
then can be the desect of Justice, but in the Justices (as before) that will
not execute them? since it is Law it self that the Laws are to be interpreted
so, that there shall be no failer of Justice to the people. And few or no Laws
besides Magna Charta, and it is confirmations, will serve to do that without
those superfluous number of volumes which Lawyers have contrived for their own
Reports of Cases, and crastie disputes, arguments, and cavils passed among
them; but to be used by such as have mind and leisure to read them, as
Divines may the Works of the wantonest Poets, to pick out their flowers for
their Pulpits, and leav their scurrilities to others of their Autor's genius.
Or as Interludes, in which all parts were not all bad, and though all
prohibited to be publicly acted, yet may Terence be read in Schools.

And may not those Statutes that relate to the Justices of either Bench, etc.
be executed without them, as well as those that relate to the Bishops, are
without them? And this Court thus spared, will spare the Commonwealth in fees
and extortion above five hundred thousand pound per Annum, besides unknown
bribes, and their known salarie of 4000ll. per Annum, as Sir John Lenthal and
his 4000 prisoners or thereabouts, between Thule and Callicute; and Mt Henley
with his host of Scribes, whose Van is at Michael's mount, and Rear at
Barwick, (if convented, and compelled to consess truth) can declare at large.

The Chancerie was no Court of Judicature, nor personated by a Lawyer, but
commonly by a Monk, or Bishop, (as we have seen lately in England and Ireland)
whose office was to follow the King with the Seal, and to seal Writs gratis at
the King's cost, as the Lord Coke affirms, and Rast. fol. 65. cites the
Statute of Art. super chart. and shows that the breaches of those Articles
were the first thing given to the power of the Chancellor to judge of (who
being likely a a Bishop, had charge as a Bishop by virtue thereof, to
excommunicate the breakers thereof:) In the 36th year of the reign of King
Edward first, cap. 4to from which little fountain sprung that Nilus that ever
since overfloweth all England, not only once every seven years, but seven
times at least in every year. The Chancerie (a Court of Conscience forsooth)
raised upon pretense of equity, and relief to such as complained of
oppressions against the breakers of this Statute, which was the first
confirmation of Magna Charta; and no sooner thus raised, but it despised both
its raiser, and the cause, extolled it self, and overtopped all the Courts of
England; disusing to grant the ancient Commissions in Eire to whom their
Counties chose; and of Oyer and Terminer to any that had occasion to use them,
as lavvful was according to Fitz Herbent Not. brev. fo. 112. and Cromp. s p.
fol. 51. and all Writs to any without excessive sees, and extortion, contrary
to all laws, the Oath of a Judge, and the practice of the office it self, as it
was formerly gratis: and neglecting to send Magn. Char. to every Sheriff
yearly, to be read four times in full Counties, and to every Church to be
read twice yearlie: And the writ set down by the Lord Cook to be issuable to
all Sheriffs to apprehend all subverters of the Law, and to commit them to the
common Gaol; which I consess is politickly forborne, least Chancellors and and
the rest of their brother Judges should be taken for the chiefest delinquents
in that kind, and carried from Westminster to Newgate as (I dare swear) they
have often deserved: But when I consider how ready their supersedease's are to
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, etc. when they pleas, and their Injunctions to
stay Suits at common Law, (most proper to be determined there) and the
disregard they make of the late Statute of 15to Hen. 6. 4to which forbids
them such matters, I confess no need they have to fear Sheriffs to displeas
them; but marveil how they can be so uncharitable, as to separate mercy which
they call equity, from Justice, being that as Justice without equity is
merciless rigor, so Equity without Justice (if any such could be) would be
an unjust iniquity, and both these (notwithstanding they would seem to divide
Equity from Justice) are found individuals in Chancerie, as Equity and
Justice were in Courts of common Law, before Chancerie was; and so ought to be
still, as Mercy and Justice ever were and will be in the individual trinumine
chief Justice of heaven and earth, whose mercy is above all his works; but
Chancellor's works are commonly above all mercy, when they can find no time,
normeans to end any Cause, till both parties find the end of their money, and
their time lost to gain Lordships to Chancellors and their Heirs, for who saw a
Lord Chancellor but had a Lord Baron at least to his heir, except Sr Francis
Bacon: and who saw againer to himself, or his heir by a Suit in Chancerie,
except it might be John John's the cunning Merchant, or one that had less right
to land then Keeper Coventrie could think fit to purchase in his man's name,
and yet gained a precious decree against the right owner. Wherefore this two
door'd ordoubleleav'd Court of Chancerie and Rolls, being most pernicious to
this Commonwealth, which it generally beggereth to enrich it self by encroaching
upon all men's liberties, and drawing all those matters to Westminster which
might be decided at home, with far more speed, justice, equity, and
conveniencie; and less charge, pains and attendance to both parties, where they
are best known, or to be known in their own Court. Let this Court be spared,
with the other, and the Commonwealth will be further spared of the treble
charge of the former yearly, as the Warden of the Fleet and his prisoners, (as
numerous as the King's Bench men) and the numberless Armado of Chancerie
Caterpillars can sufficiently witness, if they pleas: whereof one thousand
pounds per annum would be a competent salarie for a Keeper of the Seal, and
fifty pounds per annum for his man to attend it: And another thousand pounds
per annum to ten Clerks to do the office of six, (anciently blew bonnets, two
thousand pound per ann. a piece or more) with allowance of Parchment, ink, wax,
candles, firing, lodging, and a fit office to write all necessary Writs for
all the Commonwealth. And the Clerkships of the Crown and Hanaper may be
united in one person, (as in Ireland they were in Mr Edgworth, and since in Mr
Carleton) who may be thought worthy of five hundred pound per annum, and all
accommodation for his office, without any fees; and forty pound per annum a
piece for three under Clerks to assist him to dispatch all businesses belonging
to either of the said offices without fees likewise.

The Court of Common pleas at Westminster would be as well spared as any, for
that all Common Pleas are common to all Courts in Cities, and Counties, and
ought to be tried there, (as the Lord Co. upon Magn. Char. on the County
Court confesses) which sparing, would spare the Common wealth per annum no
less then the greatest of the former two.

The Court of Exchequor reduced to it is proper jurisdiction, officers, and
fees, concerning the public Revenues, may be continued for that service
only, and suffice to maintein the Warden of the Fleet, and some of his men, to
walk between the Fleet and the Court, to guard Chequer-Accomptants to their
Quietus, and this would spare the Kingdom another Ten thousand pound per an. as
the Wardens of the Fleet, the two Remembrancers, and Mr Long can tell.

Courts and Justices of Assizes, Nisi prius and Gaole-deliveries, are as
necessary for England, as Landlopers for the Netherlands, where the Boars claw
their backs, and their dogs bite their shins for their intrusions: or as droans
are to Bee-hives, whence the Bees have good cause to chase them, for devouring
their honey. For all matters of Assizes and Nisi prius belong to County
Courts, Hundred-Courts, Courts Baron, and Corporation Courts (as the Lord Coke
confesses as aforesaid) and Cromp. affirms in his jurisdiction of Courts,
fo. 240.) and matters of Gaole-deliverie belong to Sheriffs turns, Leets, and
Sessions of the peace, as the said Autors affirm, and the Commissions of the
peace and Charters of Corporations can prove and warrant. Wherefore those three
Courts spared (as well they may and ought) the Common wealth will be further
spared of two annual Visitations of several swarms of Westminster locusts, the
charge whereof I refer to the consideration of them that bear it and usually
pay it.

The Court of the Marshalsey raised to that exorbitancie that King James and
King Charles did, may and ought to follow their fortunes and their households;
and more I shall not say of it, but that it is full of extortion and injustice,
being never owned by Law beyond the verge, and that being vanished with the
Kings person; so ought that Court. The sparing of this Court would spare the
Commonwealth a great deal of charge more then I can calculate; but Mr Say an
honorable Member of the House may advertise the rest thereof, with the advice
of Mr Sergeant Green, and others late Judges and officers of that Court.

The sparing of all these Courts, and the charge thereof amounting to, if not
surmounting three millions per annum, and the confirmation of Mag. Cart. and
the Petition of Right, once more by this Parliament, would also spare to the
Commonwealth, and its better service, the lives and employments of many
thousands of able men wrongfully imprisoned for debt, and convert the lives and
employments many thousands of Attorneys, Sollicitors, Gaolers, Catchpols,
Decoyes, Setters, etc. to better uses both for their souls and bodies, and for
the public benefit. Then Sheriffs Turns, Hundred Courts, Leets, Court Baron,
Sessions of peace, and Corporation-Courts, restored to their ancient and right
jurisdiction, which fall to them of themselves, which when those aforesaid are
taken away, would be all-sufficient, and only necessary to hear and determine
all the causses of England, reserving Appeals to such as shall have cause, to
Parliament or Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer to be assigned, as Fitz H.
and Cromp. affirm anciently lawful, and usual, proof being made first of the
partiality, or injustice of the proper Court, and no bare accusation,
allegation, or presumption to serve for the issuing of such Commissions as now
is used. Except causes proper for Coroners, Escheators, Pipe powder Courts, and
Clerks of the Market; of whose misdemeanors, Justices of Peace have power to
hear and determine, but not to hinder in due execution of their Offices, which
are all necessary in their kinds in every County, and specially Coroners and
Clerks of the Market the first for discovering of murders, etc. whereof God
requires an exact account, (as Scriptures and Reynolds History sufficiently
witness. And the other for the punishing of frauds in weights and measures,
which Solomon says are abominations to God; yet nothing more common amongst
us, the more fearful his judgments upon us without timely repentance and
future amendment. And for the superintending of the defaults of those that have
power to correct such offenses, and do not.

All these Courts Officers and Offices that are thus necessary will be no
more chargable to the Commonwealth hereafter, then always they have been
hrretofore, but as useful now as ever; and more profitable to the Commonwealth
now, then ever before, because that in this time of Reformation, these Officers,
as others, being chosen of approved persons for their Integrity, will
endeavor (like their Superiors) the amendment of all offenses, which they
have power to chastize; whereas their Predecessors (imitating their Superiors)
to their own ruin, intended their own private gain by public transgressions,
and to that end increased iniquities in themselves, and others.

If any offer to plead, or object the customs and usages modernly observed time
out of mind, against this reducement, and restoration of the Law, and its
practice, to their ancient usages; I answer, Mala Consuetudo non est
observanda: An evil custom is not to be continued; and Customs against Law
are unlawful to be used: And to what end is Reformation, but to take away
such customs? And Statutes lately made to support them, by those that raised
and used them, for their own gain and others damage? contrary to all the Laws
of God and Man, and especially of Magna Charta, and its confirmations, wherein
appear the right and Primitive customs and usage of this land, agreeable to
them, claiming therefore to be restored, as in Justice they ought, and the
other to be abolished, as likewise they ought.

And being com to speak of ancient Customs to be restored, and modern to be
abolished, I cannot choose but remember the Poor, (as most men do) in the last
place: for it was a custom as ancient as Christianity, for Christians to give
lands, moneys, and goods in a large measure to relieve the poor, till Monks,
Friars, and other Abbey-lubbers (as unsatiable, as idle) dulled men's charities
with their continual beggings in the name of the poor, and grew sacrilegious,
robbed spittles, made that which was common to the poor, as well as themselves,
proper to themselves, and gave out of that which was none of their own, for
assistance to countenance that Sacrilege, the first Fruits, Tenths, etc. to
the Pope, who had as much right thereunto by their gift, as the Devil; and
consequently King Henry the 8th. as much as the Pope, and his successors
(whether Kings or States) as much as he. Whosoever conceive's I write too
boldly, or speak too plainly herein, let him read (not only Histories foreign
and domestic, but) the Records and Statutes, extant and in force amongst us,
videlicet, That of Carlisle de Asportatis Religiosorum 35to. Ed. 1. And that de
terris Templariorum 17o. Ed. 2 And those of the dissolutions of Henr. the 8th.
between which first and last he may find many more to inform his conscience,
so that his heart may think, his tongue speak, and pen write much more then I
do in this matter: All that I desire is, that the poor may be looked upon, if
not with an eye of pity, yet with an eye of wisdom, taking notice that if the
wedg of Achan be not enquired for, discovered, and recovered, the Nation may
rue it: And that Popes, Kings, Bishops, etc. that cared not how lean they made
the poor, while they might make themselves fat with their provisions; and those
that exspected their reversions, have cause by this time to be sensible of
their Sacriledg.

And that therefore the Spirit of Reformation would be manifested in the works
of Charity; and if such as have griped the patrimony of the Church into their
claws, can find in their hearts to restore to the poor no part of that
interest which all the said Statutes and many more, and all the writings of
the Fathers, and many of our own modern Bishops (who unjustly detained all
they could from them) abundantly confess and testify they ought to have in all
Ecclesiastical possessions, not as the Alms of the Incumbents, but as their own
rights by the express wills and donations of of the Primitive Founders of
Churches, Hospitals etc. and other devout Donors, and Benefactors to such
places, from time to time so excessively bountiful to the Clergy and
Corporations for the poors sake, that the Statutes of Mortmain were made to
restrain them.

All which notwithstanding the Clergy possessed no less then a third part of
England and France (as Sir Walter Rawleigh and Sir Nathanael Brent have
written) but not to their own uses (as they wickedly converted it) but as
Administrators to and for the poor, as the same Autors, all the Fathers, and
Littletons Tenures de frank Almonie, and Tenant in common sufficiently witness.
Yet may the Parliament be pleased that Commissions for charitable uses be
granted to discreet persons throughout England and Wales, not without Fees,
wages, and accommodations for themselves and their Officers, competent for
their attendance in that service, and loss of time in their own affairs, being
Charitiie begins at home, and no man can or ought to neglect his own charge
to follow others profit gratis, which mkaeth the Commission now in London and
elsewhere ill executed, as the distressed of Ireland by woeful experience can
lamentably verify. Nor let the number for a Court exceed 3, for the eas of the
charge, which must be either charitably allowed and paid by the State, or
deducted (as the late Lord Privy Seal in the book of order approved by the
Council Table 6to Car. and the Additional Act for the Sabbath, etc. declare to
be lawful for prosecutors) out of the poor's right. Nor let such Commissions
be limited by the Statute of 43 Eliz. 4. as now it is, which Statute appears
by its exceptions and jurisdictions reserved to Bishops and Chancellors to be
a Prelatical Chancerized confederacy to delude and defraud the poor at their
pleasures; witness the heaps of lost labored decrees made thereupon, remaining
unexecuted in the Petty-bag Office. And Philip Thomas his experiment in the
carriage of many thereof in Abbots, Lauds, Coventries and Littletons reigns;
which he may declare the freer since the death of those Lions. Nor let the
Clerk of they Crown for such damnable Fees, and extortion of 50 s or more, as
is now used for a Commission for every County, be allowed, but as it is used
for Commissions of the peace, which if don gratis, would be more charitably
don for the poor, then for Justices; and he may shorten his labor by making
one Commission for several Counties for charitable uses, which he may not do
for the peace for diverse reasons. Nor let such Commissioners want power in
their Commission to put their Orders, Judgments, and Decrees in execution (as
all other Oyers and Terminers have) without relation to any other Court then
Parliament for any alteration whatsoever. Nor power to punish vagrants, etc.
and set such as are able, to work.

This granted, the poor of England, which to the shame thereof, beyond all
other Countries Christian or Heathen daily perish in streets, fields and
ditches, defrauded of larger provisions made for them by Laws and Legacies,
then any other Nation can parralel, and deluded like Tantalus for his apple,
may by this mea^s be enabled to catch into their empty, vain, gaping, begging
mouths, and hungry panches, some crumbs of some Almshouses, to prolong their
days, to direct their prayers for their benefactors, to ascend like sweet
incense to the Lord, in stead of the unsavouriness of their putrified members,
to annoy their oppressors and offend others; And such as are able to work, may
be employed for benefit to themselves and others, and so the streets and fields
be cleared of those loathsome sights and importunate clamors which Forrainers
admire, and Domestics abhor, yet neither help: All which I humbly submit to
all honorable, charitable, and religious considerations, which God guide for
his own Glory, and their own good, Amen.

Postscript.
I Hear I am charged with using other heads then mine own in these my poor
labors. Truly I cite my Autors as the only heads I dare trust to defend me
and mine from the hands of their degenerate successors, and such others as
(regarding their ill-gotten wealth more then their souls) malign my endeavors
in seeking to restore those springs that flow from my said Autors (the pure
heads thereof) to their proper Channels, and dismay such heads and hearts as
might and would give me helps, or write better themselves; so that all the
helps I can get of them, is but to tell me, that they would not write so plain
as I do in this m^atter for thousands of pounds.

Whereto I answer, they have so much to lose, and I but my life and labor,
which for truth, and its plainness, I am ready to sacrifice to Gods providence,
which I find not careless of my protection, having raised me honorable
friends without any merit or exspectation of mine, but only of their own
worthiness, amongst whom the Right nobly-minded, as well as descended Gentleman
William Steward of Laken Heath in the County of Suff. Esquire affects me for my
affection in particular to himself, in general to al, hearteneth me more then
many to proceed in my work, not for its workmanship, but its meaning, not for
its plansibility at present, but its possibility in future, not for its
dictaste to angel-tong'd Lawyers, corrupt-lung'd Gaolers, etc, whose
exorbitances, not persons, are distastefull to him, and all good Christians;
but for its seasonableness, timously to inform them to mend themselves speedily,
or submit to be mended by more indifferent judgments; not for any profit that
may thereby redound to him in private, more then shall to all in public; not
for any prais he desires (which I must witness he deser veth above many
thousands) to himself; but for the glory of God, which he zealously intends
in all his studies and actions, and honor of most worthily-honored personages
(of his kindred and alliance) which he conceives will be much improved by
their accumulating their merits in the accomplishment of this work of
Reformation religiously begun, and indefatigably pursued by them, continually
promised by others, universally exspected by all (except those promisers that
never meant to be performers) and particularly pointed at in this Treatise,
and my former, so far as I humbly conceiv necessary for Law, and Officers
needful for the Commonwealth: For which vigeat, floreat, duret, shall be my
daily prayers. Amen again.

Anno III. Caroli Regis. THE PETITION Of Right granted in the third year of the
late King, and confirmed this present Parliament for the good of the
Commonwealth.
To the Kings most excellent MAJESTY.
HUmbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the king, the Lords Spiriual and Temporal
and Comtmons in Parliament assembled, that whereas it is declared and enacted
by a Statute made in the time of the reign of king Edward the first, commonly
called, Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo, That no Tallage or Aid shall be
laid or levied by the king, or his Heirs in this Realm, without the good will
and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and
other the Freemen of the Commonaltie of this Realm. And by Authority of
Parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward
the third, it is declared and enacted, That from benceforth no person should
be compelled to make any Loans to the King against his will, because such
Loans were against reason, and the Franchise of the Land. And by other Laws of
this Realm it is provided, that none should be charged by any charge or
Imposition, called a Benevolence, nor by such like Charge, by which the
Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
your Subjects have have inherited this Fraedom; That they should not be
compelled to contribute to ante Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not
set by common consent in Parliament.

Yet nevertheless of late, diverse Commissions directed to sundry Commissioners
in several Counties, with instructions, have issued; by means your people have
been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend certain sums of money
unto your Majesty, and many of them upon their refusal so to do, have had an
Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Statutes of this
Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and give
attendance before your Privy Council, and in other places; and others of them
have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry other ways molested and
disquieted. And diverse other charges have been laid and levied upon your people
inseveral Counties, by Lord Lievtenants, Deputic-Wievtenants, Commissioners for
Musters, Justices of Peace, And others by Command and Direction from your
Majesty, or your Privie-Councel, against the Laws and tree Customs of the
Realm.

And where also by the Statute called, The great Charter of the Liberties of
England, It is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liverties, or his free
Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of king Edward the third, it
was declared and enacted by authority of Parliament, that no man of what estate
or condition that he be, should be put out of Land or Tenements, nor taken
nor imprisoned, nor dis-herited, nor put to death without being brought to
answer by due Process of Law.

Nevertheless against the tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good Laws
and Statutes of your Realm, to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects have
of late been imprisoned without ante cause showed: and when for their
deliverance they were brought before your Justices by your Majesty's Writs of
Habeas corpus, there to undergo and receiv as the Court should order, and their
Keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your Privie-Councel, and yet were returned back to
several prisons, without being charged with ante thing to which they might make
auswer according to the Law.

And whereas of late great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners, have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and ye inhavitants, against their
wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the
great grievance and vexation of the people.

And whereas also by authority of Parliament, in the five and twentieth year of
the Reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted, that no man
should be forejudged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter,
and the law of the Land: and by the said Great Charter and other the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm, no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the
Laws established in this your Realm, either by the customs of the same Realm,
or by Acts of Parliament; And whereas no offender, of what kind soever, is
exempted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by
the Laws and Statues of this your Realm: Nevertheless, of late time diverse
Commissions under your Majesty's great Seal have issued forth, by which certain
persons have been assigned and appointed Commissioners with power and untoritie
to proceed within the land, according to the Justice of Martial Law, against
such Soldiers or Mariners or other dissolute persons jeyning with them, as
should commit any murder, robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage, or
misdemeanor whatsoever, and by such summarie course and order, as is agreeable
to Martial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to Proceed to the
trial and condemnation of such offenders, and them to cause to be executed and
put to death according to the Law Martial.

By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the said
Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of the
land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they might,
and by no other ought to have been judged and executed.

And also sundry grievous offenders by color thereof, claming an exemption,
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Of ficers and ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused, or forborne to proceed against such offenders, according to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said offenders were
punishable only by Martial law, and by authority of such Commissions as
aforesaid. Which Commissions, and all other of like nature are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most excellent Majesty that no man
hereafter be compelled to make or yield any Gist, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament. And that none
be called to make answer, or take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be
confined, or otherwise molested, or disquieted, concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof. And that no Freeman, in any such manuer as is before
mentioned, be imprisoned or detained. And that your Majesty would be pleased
to remove the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your people may not be so
burdened in time to com. And that the foresaid Commissions for proceeding by
Martial Law, may be revoked and annulled. And that bereaster no Commisions of
like nature may issue forth to ante person or persons whatsoever, to be
executed, as aforesaid, lest by color of them ante of your Majesty's Subjects
be destroyed, or put to death, contrary to the Laws and franchise of the Land.

All which they most humbly pray, of your most Excellent Majesty, as their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare that the Awards, doings, and
proceedings, to the prejudice of your people, in any of the premises, shall
not be drawn hereafter into consequence or example. And that your Majesty
would be also graciously pleased. for the further comsort and saretie of your
people, to declare your Royal will and pleasure, That in the things aforesaid,
all your Officers and Ministers shall serve you, according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, as they tender the Honor of your Majesty, and the
prosperity of this Kingdom.

Which Petition being read, the second of June, 1628. the Kings Answer was
thus delivered unto it.
THe King wills, that Right be don, according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm; And, that the Statutes be put in due Execution, that His Subjects may
have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrary to their just
Rights and Liberties: To the preservation whereof, He hold's Himself in
conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative.

But this Answer not giving satisfaction, the King was again petitioned unto,
that he would give a full and satisfactorie Answer to their Petition in full
Parliament.

Whereupon the King in person, upon the seventh of June, made this second
ANSWER.
My Lords and Gentlemen!
THe answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the Judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined,
but that it should have given you full satisfaction; but to avoid all
ambiguguous interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my
meaning, I am willing to pleas you in words, as well as in substance; Read your
Petition, and you shall have an answer, that I am sure will pleas you.

And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the
Crown, The Clerk of the Parliament read the Kings Answer thereto in these
words, Let Right be don as is desired.
Soit droit fait come est desire.

Which being don, the King in Person said thus:
THis I am sure is full; yet no more then I granted you in my first Answer; for
the meaning of that was, to confirm all your Liberties: Knowing, according to
your own Protestations, that you neither mean, nor can hurt my Prerogative: And
I assure you, my Maxim is, That the People's Liberty strengthen's the Kings
Prerogative, and that the Kings Prerogative, is to defend the people's
Liberties.

Ye see now, how ready I have showed my self to satisfy your Demauds, so
that I have don my part; Wherefore if this Parliament have not a happy
Conclusion, the sin. is yours, I am free of it.

AND On the last day of the Session; June 26. 1628.

His MAJESTY'S Speech to both Houses, Before His Royal assent to the Bills,
was this.
My Lords and Gentlemen!
IT may seem strange that I com so suddenly to end this Session: therefore
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the Cause, though I must
avow that I own an account of my Actions to none but God alone. It is known to
every one, that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance; how
acceptable every man may judge; and for the merit of it, I will not call that
in question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

Now since I am certainly informed that a second Remonstrance is preparing for
me, to take away my profit of Tonnage and Poundage (one of the chiefest
maintenances of the Crown) by alleging that I have given away my right
thereof, by my Answer to your Petition.

There is so prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Session some few
hours before I meant it, being willing not to receiv any more Remonstrances,
to which I must give a harsh answer.

and since I see that even the House of Commons begin's already to make falls
Constructions of what I granted in your Petition, lest it be worsinterpreted
in the country, I will now make a Declaration concerning the true intent
thereof.

There Profession of both Houses, in the time of hammering this Petition, was
as ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying, They had neither intention nor
power to hurt it.

Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but only
confirmed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects: Yet to show the clearness of my
intentions, that I neither repent, nor mean to recede from any thing I have
promised you, I do here declare, That those things which have been don, whereby
men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the Subjects to be trench't upon
(which indeed was the first and true ground of the Petition) shall not
hereafter be drawn into Example for your prejudice: And in time to com (in the
word of a King) you shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnage and Poundage, it is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant (I am sure) by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here, to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time, to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted you
in your Petition: But especially you, my Lords, the Judges, for to you only,
under me, belong's the interpretation of Laws; for none of the Houses of
Parliament, joint or separate, (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have
any power, either to make or declare a Law without my consent.

Here follows the Confirmation of the said Petition by this present
Parliament (as it is to be read in the Act, Entitled, An Act for the
declaring unlawful and void the late proceedings touching Shipmonie, and for
the vacating of all Records and process concerning the same,) in these words
viz.
BE it declared and enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons in this present. Parliament assembled, and by the authority
of the same, That the said Charge imposed upon the Subject for the providing
and furnishing of Ships, commonly called Ship-monie, and the saidex-trajudicial
opinion of the said Justices and Barons, and the said Writs and every of them,
and the said agreement or opinion of the greater part of the said Justices and
Barons, and the said Judgment given against John Hampden, were and are
contrary to and against the Laws and Statutes of this Realv, the Right of
Property, the liberty of the Subjects former Resolutions in Parliament, and
the Petition of Right made in the third year of the Reign of his Majesty, that
now is. And it is further declared, and enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and every the Particulars prayed or desired in the said Petition of
Right, shall from henceforth be put in Execution accordingly, and shall be
firmly and strictly holden and observed, as in the some Petition they are
prayed and expressed.

Observe that the greater part of Justices and Barons, used to direct Writs and
Agreements, and give their Opinions and Judgments contrary to and against the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, the Right of Property, and the liberty of
the Subjects. And why therefore suffered longer so to do? and their unanimous
animals sit in Parliament to make Laws by their advice to their own ends, and
public mischiefs?

FINIS.

