A Letter of a sad Tragedy by Prince GRIFFIN at Sayton, near Chester: And his
several attempts against the Lady Causely.

And the bloody murder for which he is fled into Scotland: AND A Copy of a
Letter from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

WITH A Petition from diverse Colonels and other Officers under Major General
Laughorne, to the House of Commons.

merh 8th



London, Printed for A. C. and A. W. 1648.

The Copy of a LETTER Concerning Prince GRIFFINS attempt against the Lady
Caufley, in Cheshire.
Sir,
THough your London Ladies have been so abused by Prince Griffin, who was wont
to outface his wretched acts at London, yet his late proceedings here has
made him to fly his Country.

He being lately at the City of Chester, took to himself thoughts of
surprising the chastity of the Lady Caufley, Sir Hugh Caufleys wif, (a very
virtuous, and godly woman) the prime beauty of these parts, by repute.

Upon his address, to her, this noble Lady abhorring him, showed as much
slighting of his immoderate offers as could be, and had him exceedingly in
disdain, being troubled at his applications to her.

Prince Griffin, seeing that he could not find any entertainment, or
encouragement by further personal solicitation to her, fell upon another way
to attempt her chastity by alluring snares.

And he sent unto her, to her husbands house at Sayton on the Hill, some three
miles from Chester City, a messenger, with a Letter and a Token, of Silk
Stockings, Ribbands, Gloves, and other fine Knacks, to which women, are usually
allured, with many enticing complements, to surprise her chastity. Subscribing
himself her humble Servant.

But when she saw his name at the subscription of the Letter, she (before the
messengers face) threw the Letter and the Tokens all into the fire with
disdain, And sent back the bearer with as much distaste as could be expected.

After he received news of this repulse, he again attempted another onset, to
make some sport, And sent again a second Messenger with other presents of fine
Knacks to the Lady. And because she threw the other into the fire, therefore
now he sent Crackers Squibs and wildfire in the Paper with them, (as if
because he could not take this Lady by storm, he would try to blow her up.)

These presents being delivered to her, with a letter she opened it in her
husbands Sir Hughes presence, and seeing Griffins name, she again, as before,
threw them all into the fire.

But the wild fire and crackers flew about the room and put them to a little
fright for the present.

Had he left off here it had been better, then after fell out more sad, for
Prince Griffin, with three or four more of his Comrades came to the house and
asked for her, and being denied access to her, he began to be something rash,
and uncivil, insomuch that he provoked the servants.

And one of Sir Hugh Caufleys men, making some opposition against him, Prince
Griffin drew his sword and run him into the body therewith: And another of his
company (with a Pistol) shot him: And the man is since dead. Since which
Prince Griffin is fled into Scotland, to take sanctuary in Edinburgh, but it is
hoped that justice will meet with him one way or other; which will be
endeavored by diverse Gentlemen in these parts, And by

Chester City the 4 of March 1647. Your Servant GEORGE JONES

To the Honorable House of Commons in Parliament Assembled.
The Humble Petition of the Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, Captains,
and other Officers and Soldiers, under the command of Major General Laughorne.
Shows,
THat as they have from the beginning of the late unhappy wars, with constant
resolution in their several capacities, served the Parliament, to the great
impairing, if not utter ruin of their private estates, frequently exposed to
extraordinary hazards, being so far remote from relief, and receiving less
fatisfaction, by way of pay, then any Army in the kingdom, so has it been
their continual care, to prevent the least jealousy of disloyalty to their
trust, to the full satisfaction (we hope) of all honest and well-affected
people. And that now likewise they are called upon to disband, they offer in
all humility, to lay down Arms, upon the conditions proposed by the
Parliament, waving disputes of your Petitioners merits, seeing it has pleased
the Lord so far to assert the Religion, Laws, and Liberties they first
engaged for; yet are your Petitioners justly aggreeved at malicious aspersions
lately published, unjustly tainting the honor of their Major General, and all
his Forces, as ready to affist and join with Poyer to maintain the castle of
Pembrook against the Parliament, whereas a more false imputation could not be
devised, their Major General having sent them express Order, and the
Petitioners resolutions being likewise settled, for present submission to the
Orders of disbanding. Your Petitioners humbly desire your Honors will not
permit them to be so contumeliously traduced, and remain unvindicated, but that
M. Joh. Elliot, the professed Author of accusation may be enjoined to justify
the same, or make your Petitioners reparations, and in the Interim, and until
he make answer to what charges of Delinquency, your Petitioners have ready to
exhibit, against him, for executing the commission of Array in Pembrookshire,
defrauding this Army of the provisions sent them by the Parliament, and by
endeavoring to defame all those who have ever truly and faithfully served the
Parliament, and other notorious dis-services to the Parliament. Mr. Elliot may
be incapable to have the custody, or dispose of your petitioners Arms, or
further proceed in his usurped Agency, for the Country, and that your
Petitioners may be further looked upon, as becomes the Parliament in honor
and justice to reflect upon such as have done them so faithful service,

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Rice Powel, Tho. Langhorne, Hugh
Phillips, Hugh Laughorn Will: Powel Roll: Woogan Ed: Aybonon Adam Beale, Philip
Bowen, Rich: Esmond Hen: Bowen Jo. Morgan, Val: R^^d Pat. Cozen Le: Assom, Ed:
Monsell Jo: Harries Charles Woogan Hugh Bowen Will: Shales W: Shuttleworth
Mar^^ Goodwin: Vaugh. Laughorn Robert Pigget Mark Bowen Geo: Keame Tho:
Harlow. Ed: Williams Will: Parry Tho: Talbot Jo: David's Val: Savayle Hen:
Woogan Jo: Adams Ja. Carre Jo: Simonds.


Mr. Speaker,
HAving received the enclosed Petition of the Officers of the Forces in
South Wales under Major General Laughorne. I could do no less at their
request then present the same unto you, desiring that you will tender the same
to the consideration of the House and that they will take some speedy course
for the granting the Petitioners satisfaction in their just desires, I remain,

Your Humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax.
Queen Street March 4 1647.
FINIS.

