traveler beholds globe (...) OR THE VISION OF GOD by that learned Dr Cusanus

Thou calst all things out of nothing, and they are.

Are to be sold by Io: Streater at the sign of the Bible in budg roe 1646.
cro^



Ophsalmi Aplu OR The single Eye, Entitled the Vision OF GOD

Wherein is infolded the Mystery of Divine presence, So to be in one place
finitely in apperance, as yet in every place no less present, and whilst He
is here, He is universally every where infinitely himself. Penned by that
Learned Dr. CVSANVS, and published for the good of the Saints.

By GILES RANDALL.

PSALM. 139. 7. VVhither shall I fly from thy Spirit,
VVhither shall I go from thy presence.
LONDON, Printed for John Streater, at the Sign of the Bible in Budge-Row.
1646.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
NOthing is, or ever was endeavored, by most men, with more industry, and
less success, than the true knowledge of the true God. And as in the vision
and knowledge of him stands Joh. 17 3.
life Eternal; So in the nonknowledge, or wrong knowledge of him, or any thing
for him which is not himself, lies all loss and misery. This point therefore
being that one thing necessary in the true knowledge or dark ignorance,
whereof confisteth life and death, good and evil, God and the Devil, if this
corner stone be rightly founded, and the whole structure superstructed thereon,
it proves wisdoms house, withstandeth all assaults, and trials, but otherwise
it is the house of folly, and the Tower of confusion and destruction. That
there is a God, almost all men are convinced.

But who or what this God is, almost all men are ignorant of. After the
knowledge and worship of this God, all men are so principled and carried on;
that rather then they will be, or thought to be without him, and the knowledge
of him, the Creature will creat his Creator, to himself, and his fancy shall
give essence and being to this God.

All men may be reduced under foureheads or notions; first there are Atheists
who own no God. Secondly professed known ignorant, who acknowledge implicitly a
God but him to them an unknown God. Thirdly there are the ignorant knowers,
who thinking they know God, know nothing else than God setting up some thing
for God which by nature is not God. Fourthly there are the true knowers who
know the Joh. 17 3.
only true God truly. The first has not so much as a conceit of a God, The
second conceives a God but ignorantly without substance or so much as Image who
or what. The third does conceive a God not in substance but Image, The fourth
not conceives, but knows, not God in Image, but essence, and substance, not
any thing for God but the true and substantial God of these four states of
men, the last only is the state of knowledge, The other three states of
ignorance, which arise from their proper cause, darkness: And that is positive
in the first, Negative in the second, Privative in the third state, But light
it self is only extant and existent in the last state. The first errs in
denying a God, The second in not knowing a God, the third in not knowing the
true God, and this two ways either in the Adjective or Adverbe, in the
Adjective, they know not the true God, or in the Adverbe they know not this
true God truly Many are guilty of the first error, more of the second, most of
the third, but few and few^st are the partakers of the perfection of the last.
And as there is gradation in the three first states, so is there in the evil
of them, the first bad, the second worse, the third worst, and so much is it
the worst as it is Satanized and tra^sformed into an Angel of light, it being
Religious, Sublimate, Idolatry.

Reader by what has bin* spoken thou may gather that God is either known or
not known, if not known whence it fl^w s either from positive, Negative, or
privative darkness, and of all these the last is worst wherein man is most
active and seemingly seeing and knowing. How miserable therefore are we
deceived who the more we seek, the farther we are off from the true knowledge
and finding out of God: that herefore thou may herein be premonished and
premunite against such mistakes, observe that God is one simple infinite
indivisible being, and must be known as he is which no finite can do or be
capable of. Some men because they acknowledge from many undeniable principles
that he is infinite, are so elevated that they abstract him as they think from
all things, and think they have found his true being when as the truth is, they
that abstract him from all things as being to infinite for all things; do
herein yet mistake, for he is in the creation, and there to be known, for
although God is neither any one thing, many things or all things of your
creation, yet is he all and in all, and by us to be seen clearly therein,
he being all and in all, p. 19. Romans 1. Yea when they have aprehended him above
all yet do they confirm him within their own fancies and imaginations which
are no less finite than any other thing. Thus they deal with him as the
people in Isaiah with their wooden Gods, they hew, chop, shred, and out off
what seems them good, and when it is brought to the Idea of their own brain
then it is God, and the rest they burn as not essential to that God they have
shaped out to themselves, and this is to ^ne the god head and Divine essence
with the whole glory of the Gospel into mere conceit and sublimat vanity, and
this is spiritual and invisible Idolatry, even as to make corporeal shapes
and sensible appearances of him is gross visible, and bodily Idolatry.

Be thou admonished Christian brother in this point; it is the easiest matter
that may be to miscarry herein, it being the nighest and deepest of all
secrets, the knowledge of God consists in opposites and contradictories to
the wisdom of the flesh, and he is least known by reason of his seeming like
that which not withstanding is farthest from himself, for as all being
substantial and real has also a false, and imaginary being the shadow of
the true being; as the height has its opposite, d^, etc So there is the true
God and his contrary even the fa^se, and as in material substances, not the
essence or substance is the object of sense but color magnitude, and other
accidents, even so not the real essence of God is the nearest sense, but
something for God in the seat of God, being nothing esse than God, and contrary
to God. But the sound and unerring knowledge of him stands in your knowledge
of your man Christ Jesus, and whosoever has seen him has seen the Father
also, for he is not a dead (...)
Image of him, but lively or living (...)
Image of the invisible God, yea the (...) 1 Timothy 3.16. Mat. 1.23.
fulgor or brightness of his glory, and character of his person, for God is
manifest in the flesh which is the great mystery of godliness, 2 Cor. 4.6.
and till he be Emmanuell God with us, God in us, there is no true vision or
knowledge of him, for as nothing is in the understanding, but what is in the
sense, first and as nothing in the sense is a vaileable till it live in the
light of the understanding within and at home; so there is no true living
knowledge of God within us, till he be in us formed in the face of Jesus
Christ. This is the divine argument of this little work selected, and culled
out of the most elaborate pieces of that learned Dr. Cusanus; whose argument
herein is chiefly and only to shadow forth unto thee, the being and existency
of the infinite God with and in the finite; which is suitable to the state of
his recipient subject, for because the infinite cannot be infinitely received
by the finite, nor can the infinite become finite as in himself, yet is he so
in the finits capability as finite and contracted, giving himself forth in a
wonderful manner so, that he that is immovable moves, and the unchangeable
changes with thee, and though no alterationin time, place or other thing can
be unto him or in him. Yet is he so immovable as yet moveable and so
inseperably assistent with his creature in every thing that he that is neither
here nor there properly is yet here and there, and so here as if not there,
and so with thee as if with none else, wonderously giving himself all to every
one, as if he were all but to one, so that if the expressions may be borne
withal, he is finitly infinite, and infinitely finite, he is immoveably
moevable, and meveably immovable, the Active and the Passive, the receiver and
the received, because he that is infinitely above thee, makes himself to be to
thee what he is in thee and makes thee to be what thou art in him, he clothes
himself with flesh, reason, sense, and the form and nature of a servant who
yet is above all and Lord over all, this is a high and hard saying, who can
bear it, yet I say unto thee Reader, if God give unto thee, a seeing eye, and
understanding heart to read, and this author in the spirit of light and truth,
these things will be easier and more facile to thee which is the desire which
he desires for thee who is a lover of thee in the truth of Jesus.

G. R.

AN INTRODVCTION
I Will now lay open unto you my dearly beloved Brethren, what I had before
promised concerning the easiness of mystical Divinity, for I Judge you whom I
know to be led with a zeal of God worthy to have this treasure opened unto
you, though very precious and most fruitful: But first I beseech the Almighty
who only can express and declare himself to give me his word from above, and
utterance that according to your capacity, I may expound these wonders which
are revealed above and beyond the sight of sense, reason and understanding: And
I will endeavor after the most simple and ordinary manner to bring you
experimentally into the most sacred darkness where while you shall be feeling
and perceiving the presence of the unapproachable light, every one of you shall
attempt in the best man that God shall give you leave continually to come
nearer and nearer and here by a most sweet morsel to foretast that supper of
eternal happiness, whereunto we are called in the word of life by the Gospel
of Christ blessed for evermore.

THE PREFACE.
OF all the means whereby I can endeavor after the manner of men to list you
up to divine things, J held it best to do it by a simititude: But amongst
humane works, I found no Image more fit and convenient for our purpose, then
the Image of one that sees all things, where though there be every where great
store, yet least you should fail in the practice, which requires such a
sencible figure, I send your Charity such a Table as I could have for the
present, containing a Picture of one that looks every way which I call the
Image of God (man:) This you shall fasten in some place, for example on a
Northwall, and then shall all you Brethren stand about it, a little distance
from it, and look upon it, and every one of you shall find by exporience,
that from what place soever be lookes-upon the same, it shall seem that none
but himself alone is seen or looked upon by the Picture, and that Brother
that stands on the east side of it, will imagine that the face looks
eastwardly at him only, so be that stands on the south side will think it
looks southerly, and he on the west westerly; And first you will wonder how it
can be that it should look upon you all, and every one of you at once, for the
imagination of him that stands in the East cannot conceive the Ficture looking
any other way namely to the west, or the south, Then let the Brother which was
in the East place himself in the west, and he shall perceive the countenance
fixed on him in the west as it was before, when it was in the East, and because
he knows the Picture to be fixed and unmoved, he will admire the change of the
unchangeable countenance, And if fixing his eye on the Image, he walks from
the west to the East, be will find that the eye of the Picture goes
continually along with him, and if from the East he return to the west, it
will in like manner not forsake him, and be will wonder how it was unmoveably
moved, Neither shall his imagination be able to conceive how it should possibly
be moved with another that meets him, and goes with a contrary motion, And if
for further trial, he makes his Brother looking still upon the Image, go from
the East to the West, whilst himself at the same time goes from the West to
the East, and meeting him, ask him if the eye or sight of the Picture go along
with him, and shall hear that it does so (though it go along with himself
too) he will believe him, and if be should not believe him, he would not think
it possibe, and so by his Brothers relation, and telling him hew ill come at
length to know that the countenance of the Picture accompanies all men though
they go contrary ways.

He shall therefore find by experience that that immovable face is so moved
to the East, that it is at the same time likewise moved to the West, and so to
the South, that is it likewise moved to the North, and so to one place that it
is also moved to all places, and so relates to one motion, that it relates to
all at one and whilst be cunsiders how that visage forsakes no man, he sees
likewise how it takes so dilligent care of everiy one, and seems to observe
him who looks upon it, so particularly as if it took care for no body else, in
so much that it cannot be conceived by him whom it beholds how it should look
after any body else, And be shall further perceive how it takes as particular
notice of the least Creature, as it does of the greatest, and of the whole
universe.

Now from this sensible appearance my purpose is to lift up you, my most
beloved Brethren, by a certain practice of devotion unto mystical divinity,
when I shall have premised three things necessary hereto.

The Vision of God.
That the perfection of appearance is verified of the most perfect GOD.

CHAPTER I.
HEre in the first place we must suppose that nothing can appear about the
sight of the Image of God, but that it is much more truly in the sight or
vision of God for God which is the height of all perfection, and greater then
can be thought is called (...) in the Greek because he sees and beholds all
things.

Therefore if a painted face can appear in an Image, as if it looked upon all
things, and every thing at once, certainly this being of the perfection of
sight cannot less truly agree unto the truth, than it does apparently to the
Image or appearance: For if one sight be in us more sharp and quick than
another, and scarce discerning the things that are near, and another discerning
the things that are far off, and reaching the object quickly, and another
slowly, there can be no doubt but that the absolute sight (from which is, all
the sight of things that see excells all the sharpnes, swiftness, and strength
of a^l that actually do see, or that can be made to see.

For if I look to sight in the abstract which I have in my mind free from all
eyes and Organs, and consider how that abstracted sight in his contracted
being, namely as they that see, do see by that sight is contracted unto time
to the several parts of clymates of the world, to singular and indivituall
objects; and to all other such like conditions, and that sight in the abstract
is on the other side as much drawn away, freed, acquitted, and absolved from
those conditions. Then I very well understand that it is not of the essence of
sight to respect or look upon one object more then another, although it
inseparable accompany sight, in the contracted being thereof, that whilst it
looks upon one thing it cannot look upon another, or absolutely upon all
things. But God as he is the true uncontracted sight or seeing is not less
than may by the understanding be conceived of the abstract sight, but beyond
all proportions, more perfect, wherefore the appearance of sight in the Picture
cannot so well as the conceit approach or come near the height of the
excellency of absolute vision or sight, and consequently it is no whit to be
doubted, but that whatsoever appears in that Image is excellently and
perfectly in the absolute sight.

That absolute sight comprehends all manner of seeing.

CHAP. 2.
NOw thou must after these things understand that sight is varied in things
that see, according to the variety of the contraction thereof for our sight
follows the affections of the Organs and the mind, therefore some one man
look now lovingly and cheerfully, by and by sadly and angerly, one while
childishly, then manly, afterward seriously, and agedly. But sight freed from
all, contraction does at once and altogether comprehend all and every manner of
seeing, as being the most adequate measure and true examplar of all sight: for
without absolute sight, there can be no contracted sight, and absolute sight
comprehends in it self all manners of seeing, and so also that every one and
yet remains utterly free and absolute from all variety, for in absolute sight
are all the manners of contradictions of seeing uncontractedly; For every
contradiction is in the absolute, for absolute sight is a contradiction; of
contradictions it being an incontractible contradiction; Therefore a most simple
con^raction Covieides, or is the same with an absolute, And without contraction
no thing is contracted, so absolute vision or seeing is in every sight, because
every contracted seeing is by it, and cannot be at all without it.

That the things which are spoken or affirmed of God do not differ really.

CHAP. 3.
ENter next into a serious consideration how all things that are said or
affirmed of God cannot really differ, because o^ the highest and most perfect
simplicity of him thought we in diverse respects ascribe diverse names and
Attributes unto him; But God being the absolute reasons; or being of all
formal reasons complicateth, or foldeth up in himself all reasons; whereupon
we attribute unto God seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling touching, sense,
reason, and understanding and such like, according to the several reasons of
the signification of every word, yet in him seeing is not another distinct
thing from hearing, tasting, touching smelling, and understanding, and so all
Divinity is said to be put in a circle, because one of his Attributes is
affirmed of another. And for God to have a thing is for him to be that thing,
or his having is his being his moving is his standing, his running is his
resting, and in like manner all his other Attributes, so that although we
ascribe unto him, moving in one respect, and standing in another, yet because
he is the absolute reason in which all alterity or othernesse is unity or
oneness, and all diversity is Ioencitie or self samenesse: Therefore that
diversity of reasons or formality (as we conceive diversity, which is not
Identity it self) cannot be in God.

That Gods Vision or sight is called his providence, his Grace Eternal life.

CHAP. 4.
Unto the Image of God approach thou now my Brother, that give thy self to
contemplation. And first place thy self in the East, then in the South and
lastly in the West. And because the sight or eye of the Picture looks upon thee
every where a like, and forsakes thee not whethersoever thou go, thou shall
be thereby stirred up unto speculation and provoked to say.

Lord, in this Image of thee do I now behold thy providence by a certain
sencible experience, for if thou forsakest not me who am the most base and
vile of a^l things, certainly thou will never be wanting to any thing. For so
art thou present to all things, and every thing as unto all things and every
thing is present to that being without which they cannot be, and so art thou
the absolute being of all things, present to each thing, as if thou tookest no
care for any thing else. And this comes to pass because there is nothing but
prefers its own being before any thing else, and the manner of its being to
all other manners of being and so defends its own being, that it had rather
the being of all other things should go to ruin and destruction than its
own. For so do thou O Lord look upon every thing that is, that it cannot be
conceived by all, that is, that thou have any care other then that that only
thing might be in the best manner that it can possibly be, and that all other
things that are may serve only to the intent that that which thou look upon
may be after the best manner.

Thou O Lord do not suffer me by any imagination to conceive that thou love
any thing else besides me more than my self seeing thine eye is never of from
me alone, And because there the eye is where the love is, therefore do I find
thou love me, because thine eyes are always most attentively upon me thy
servant.

Lord thy seeing is loving, consequently as thy sight regardes and looks upon
me, so attentively that it never turns it self from me so thy ove; And
because thy love is always with me, and thy love is no other thing then thy
self that love me, therefore thou art always with me. Lo^d thou forsakest
me not, thou preferrest me on every side, as taking most dilligent care of me;
Thy being O Lord forsakes not my being, who am only so far forth as thou art
with me: And thy seeing being thy being, therefore I am because thou look
upon me, And if thou hide thy countenance from me, I shall not subsist. But I
know that thy seeing is that greatest goodness which cannot but communicate it
self to every thing capable. Therefore can thou never forsake me as long as
J am capable of thee. To me then it belongs as much as J can to become more and
more capable of thee continually: And I know the capacity which makes a union
is nothing but likeness, and all incapacity proceeds from unlikenesse

If I therefore make my self by all possible means like to thy Goodness,
according to the degrees of likeness I shall be capable of the truth, thou
have given me O Lord a being, and that such a one as may continually make it
self more capable of thy goodness, and this power which I have from thee
wherein I hold the lively Image of the power of thy omnipotency, is that free
will by which I may either enlarge or restrain the capacity of thy grace,
enlarge it I say by conformaty when I strive to be good because thou art good,
just because thou art just, and merciful, because thou art merciful when all
my endeavor is turned to nothing but thee, because all thy endeavor is turned
to me, when I look most attentively to thee alone, and never turn away the
eyes of my mind, because thou embracest me with contin^all sight, when I turn
my love to thee alone, who being love, art turned to me a lone.

And Lord what is my life, but those embraces whereby the sweetness of the
love does so amorously compass me, I love my life exceedingly, because thou
art the sweetness of my life.

I now behold as in a Glass in an Image, in a shadow eternal life because it
is nothing else but that blessed vision whereby thou never ceasest to see and
look upon me most lovingly, even to the in most of my soul. And thy seeing is
or in thee to see is nothing else but to quicken me continually to send unto
me the most sweet love of thee, by the sending of that love to inflame me to
the love of thee, by inflaming to feed me, by feeding me to set my desires on
fire, by fireing my desires to give them drink of the dew of gladness, and by
giving them drink to send unto me a fountain of Water, and by sending that to
increase and perpetuate it, and to communicate this immortallity, to give me
the never fading glory of this heavenly, high and greatest Kingdom, and to
make me partaker of that inheritance which is only thy sons, and to appoint
me a, possession of that eternal felicity where there is the Garden of all
delights that can be desired than which there can nothing better either be
devised by Man or Angel or be by any manner of being, for it is the absolute
greatness of every rational desire, than which a greater cannot be.

That the vision of God is called his mercy, his motion and operation.

CHAP. 5.
EVer infinite is the multitude of thy sweetness which thou have laid up for
them that love thee, for it is an inexplicable treasure of gladness most full
of joy, To taste that thy sweetness is by an experimental touch to apprehend
and to lay hold upon the sweetness of all di^ectable things in their
principal or beginning. It is to reach or attain unto the reason and
formallity of all desirable things in thy wisdom, to see therefore the
absolute reason or formality which is the reason ^^formality of all things, is
nothing else but to taste thee O God, in the mind because thou art sweetness it
self, the being of life and understanding.

Thy seeing O Lord what is it other when thou look upon me with the eye of
pity, then that thou art seen by me? In seeing me thou give thy self to
be seen by me which art a hidden, an invisible God. No man can see thee but as
far forth as thou give thy self to be seen; neither is thy being seen
any thing else but that thou see him that sees thee.

I see in this thy Image, how prone and ready thou art O Lord to show thy face
to all that seek thee, for thou never shuttest thine eyes, nor never turnest
them any other way* And although I turn my self away from thee when I turn
my self wholly to any other thing; yet for all this thou changest not thy ^ye
^or thy c^untenance.

If thou do look upon me with the eye of grace. I am the cause thereof,
because I am divided from thee by turning my self to some other thing which J
prefer before thee, yet do not thou for all this wholly turn thy self from
me, but thy mercy follows me, if at my time I would return to thee that I
may be capable of grace.

For that thou look not upon me, is because I look not upon thee, but
refuse and contemn thee.

O infinite piety, how unhappy is every sinner that forsakes thee the
fountain of Life, and seeks not thee in thy self but in that which in it
self is nothing, and so had still been if thou had not called it out of
nothing? How mad is he who seeks thee that art goodness, and whilst he
seeks thee goes back from thee, and turns away his eyes for every one that
seeks, seeks nothing but good, and he that seeks good, and goes back from
thee, goes back from that which he seeks.

Therefore every sinner goes astray from thee, and wanders farther off, but
when he returns to thee thou without delay meetest him, and before ^ee looks
back to thee, thou with a Fatherly affection casts upon him the eyes of thy
mercy, neither is thy mercy any thing but thy seeing. Therefore thy mercy
follows every man as long as he lives whethersoever he goes, as thy sight
never forsakes any man. And as long as a man lives thou ceasest not to follow
him and by sweet and internal admonitions to stir him up to cease from his
errors, and to be turned to thee that he may live happily. Thou Lord art the
Companion of my pilgramage whithersoever I go, thy eyes are always upon me,
And thy seeing is thy moving, therefore thou art moved with me, and ceasest not
from motion as long as I am moved. If I rest, thou art with me also, if I
ascend thou assendest if I descend thou discendest, whithersoever I turn my
self thou art present.

Neither do: thou forsake me in the time of tribulation, as often as I call
upon thee thou art near for to call upon thee is to turn my self to thee,
and thou can not be wanting to him that turns himself to thee, neither can
any man be turned to thee except first thou be present, for except thou were
present and did solicit me. I should not know thee at a^l, and then how
should I be turned to thee whom I did not know: Thou art therefore my God that
see all things, And for thee to see is to work, therefore thou workest all
things, Not unto us, therefore O Lord not unto us, but unto thy great name
which is (...); do I sing eternal glorrie, for I have nothing that thou do
not give, neither could I hold that which thou give except thou thy self
did keep it, thou therefore ministrest all things unto me, thou art the Lord
powerful, and pitiful, which give all things, thou take care of all
things, thou art the dispencer that dispencest, thou preservest all things, And
all these things do thou which art blessed for evermore, work by thy only and
most simple sight and beholding.

Of the seeing face, to face or the seeing of Gods face.

CHAP. 6.
RIght gracious Lord and God, the longer I look upon the countenance, the more
sharply it does seem unto me that thou bendest the edge of thine eyes toward
me. And thy looking upon me makes me consider how this Image of thy face is
therefore thus sensibly figurd, because a face could not be painted without
color nor is color without quantity: But I see not with those fleshly eyes
that beholds this thy Picture, but with the eyes of my mind, and understanding
the inevitable truth of thy face which is here represented by a contracted
shadow, which true face of thine is free from all contraction, for it is
neither subject to quantity nor quality, nor time nor place being the absolute
form which is the face of faces.

When I consider therefore how that face is the truth and most adequate measure
of all faces, I am amazed at it for the face which is the truth of all faces is
not subject to quantity, therefore neither greater nor less, yet it is not
equal to any one because it has no quantity, but is absolute and
superexalted. It is therefore the truth, which is equality exempt from all
quantity. So therefore, I comprehend that thy face, O Lord goes before every
face formable and is the exemplaty truth of all faces, and that all faces are
the Images of thy incontractible and imparticipable face.

Therefore every face that can behold thy face sees nothing other or diverse
from it self, because cause it sees its own truth, or the truth of it self.
Now the exemplar truth cannot be other or diverse, but those things are
accidents to the Image in as much as it is not the true examplar; As therefore
whilst I look upon this painted face from the East, it appears to look upon
me, so also, And in like manner if from the West or South, it seems
accordingly to look upon me, And howsoever I change my face or posture, the
face seems still to be turned toward me; So is thy face turned to all the
faces that behold thee.

Thy sight O'Lord is thy face he therefore that beholds thee with an amyable
face shall find no other, but that thy face looks aymeably upon him, and how
much more aymeably he shall study to look upon thee so much more aymeably
shall he find thy face toward him: He that shall look upon thee angerly shall
likewise find thy face such toward him, and so he that looks upon thee
cheerfully. For as this fleshly eye looking through a Red Glass, or Green
Glass, think all it sees of the same color so every eye of the mind that is
muffled up in contraction, and passion, judges thee that art the object of the
mind according to the nature of contraction, and passion; Man can judge but
like a man, for when a man Attributs a face unto thee, he seeks not for it,
out of the (latitude of the) species or nature of men because his judgment is
contracted within beneath humane nature, and so in judging exceeds not the
passion of this contraction: So if a Lion should ascribe thee a face, he would
give thee none but a Lions face, an Ox an Oxes, an Eagle, an Eagles.

O Lord how admirable is thy face, which if a young man should conceive, he
would imagine it young, if an old man, aged, if a man manly, who could conceive
this only examplar or pattern of all faces most true, and most adequate to be
so of all faces, as that it is, nevertheless of every one, and so perfectly of
every one, as if it were so of none other, certainly he must needs out go and
pass beyond all forms and figures of all formable faces; And how could he
conceive a face, when he must transcend all faces, and all likeness, and
figures of all faces, and al conceptions that can be made of a face, and all
Color, Ornament, and beauty of all faces; Therefore who so feign would see thy
face, as long as he conceives any thing at all is far from the sight of it,
for every possible conception of a face is less then thy face, O Lord, and
every beauty and fairness which can be imagined is less than thy beauty,
every other face has beauty, but is not beauty it self, but thy face O Lord
has beauty, and this having, it is to be it, there fore it is absolute beauty,
which is the form that gives, being to every beauteous form.

O face most comely, whose buty, all things that has the happiness to see it
are not sufficient to admire. In all faces is the face of all faces seen, but
under a veil or covering, and in a dark shadow, but revealed not, it is not
seen until above all faces, we enter into a secret and hidden silence, where
there is neither knowledge nor conception of a face, for this Mist Cloud,
Darkness, or ignorance, into which the seeker of thy face enters when he
surmounts all knowledge, and conception is that beneath which the face cannot
be seen, otherwise then under a veil, but the mist it self reveals that
there is thy face above all veiles or Coverings. As our eye, whiles it seeks to
see the light of the Sun which is the face thereof, first it beholds it under a
veil or Coverture in the Stars in Colors, and in all things that partake the
light thereof, but when it strives to see it revealedly, and manifestly, it
transcends all visible light because all such is less than that which he
seeks, but because he would feign see the light which he cannot see, he
knows this, that as long as he sees any thing, it is not that which he would
see, and consequently he must go beyond all visible light, and he that would
so transcend all light that may be seen, must of necessity enter into that
which wants visible light which to the eye is (that I may so say) darkness and
when he is in that darkness or mist, then if he know himself to be in the
mist, he knows himself now to be come to the face of the Sun, for from the
Excellency of the light of the sun does that darkness and mist in the eye
proceed, and by how much he knows the darkness to be greater, so much more
truly does he in that mist attain to the invisible light, so O Lord and no
otherwise do I see the unaproachable light, beauty and shining of thy face may
be without veil or shadow approached unto.

What is the fruit of the Vision of Gods face, and how it may be had.

CHAP. 7
ADmirable is that sweetness wherewith thou* now feedest my Soul O Lord, and
so great that it must needs help it self by all means possible as well with
those things whereof it has experience in this world, as by those most
acceptable similitudes which thou inspirest. For because thou O Lord art that
power and beginning from whence althings, and thy face, that power and
beginning from whence all faces are, that which they are. Therefore I turn my
self to this great and taull Nut-Tree, and seek to see the principle or first
beginning thereof, and I see with my sensible eye, that it is great tal, broad
spread, Colored, laden with boughs, leaves, and Nutts. Then by the eyes of my
mind, I see that that Tree was once in the seeds, yet not as I now behold it,
but virtually or in power, I diligently consider the wonderful virtue of that
seed* in which this whole Tree, and all the nutts, and all the power and virtue
of the seed of those Nutts, and all the Trees that are potentially in the
virtue of the seeds of those nuts have bin, and I see that that power is not,
nor ever will be in any time that can be measured by the motion of Heaven fully
explicable, yet that power of the seed though inexplicable is but contracted,
because it has no power other than in this particular speces or kind of Nutts.

Wherefore though I see the Tree in the seed, I see it only in the contracted
power thereof, then do I consider O Lord the seminary virtue of all the Trees
of diverse speces, or sorts contracted unto every several speces, and in those
very seeds, I see the Trees in power. If therefore I would see the absolute or
abstracted virtue and power of all the virtues of those seeds; what the virtue
is and what the principle or beginning that gives virtue to all seeds, I must
of necessity go beyond all seminall virtue which can be known or conceived and
enter into that ignorance, wherein there remains nothing at all of the
seminall virtue or vigor, and then in that mist I find a most stupendous
power and which no power which can be taught or imagined can approach unto
which as the beginning, giving us being to every virtue and power seminall, and
not seminall, which absolute and super exalted virtue and power, seeing it
gives to every seminall virtue, such power as complicates and foulds up in it
self potentially, the Tree and all things required to a sencible Tree, and
which follow the being thereof, certainly then that beginning, and cause must
as a Cause have complicitly and absolutely in it self, whatsoever it gives to
the effect thereof, and so I see that that virtue and power is the face or
Pattern of every arborall face and of every Tree where I see that Nut-tree not
in its contracted seminall virtue, and power, but as in the Cause and making
power of that seminall virtue. And consequently I see the Tree to be a certain
explication of the seminall power, and the seed a certain explication of the
Almighty power, And I see that as the tree in the seed is not the tree, but the
power of the seed, and that the power of the seed, is it out of which the Tree
is explicated or unsolded, so that there is nothing to be found in the Tree
which proceeds not from the virtue of the seed so the seminall virtue and power
in its cause, which is the power of powers, is not the seminal power, but
absolute power. And so is the Tree in thee my God, thy self my God, and in
thee is it the truth and exemplar or pattern of its own self, likewise, also
the seed of the Tree in thee is the truth and pattern of it self both tree
and seed, thou O God art the truth the pattern or exemplar, and that power of
the seed which is contracted is the power of the nature of the speces, or fort
which is contracted to the speces, and is in it as a contracted beginning But
thou O my God art absolute power, and therefore the nature of all natures.

O God whither have thou brought me that I should see thy absolute face, to be
the natural face of all nature, the face which is the absolute Entitie of all
being, the art and knowledge of every thing knowable. He therefore that sees
thy face, sees all things openly, and there is nothing hid unto him, He knows
all things, he has all things, O Lord which has thee, he has all things that
sees thee, for no man sees thee, but he that has thee, no man comes to
thee, because thou art unapproachable, no man therefore can take thee, except
thou give thy self unto him, how have I thee O Lord that am not worthy to
appear in thy sight? How can my prayer come unto thee, that art by any means
unapproachable? How shall I desire thee for what is more absurd then to desire
that thou who art all things in all things should give thy self unto me, and
how will thou give thy self unto me, unless thou give thy self with all
Heaven, and Earth, and all things which are in them.

Nay how with thou give thy self unto me, except thou give give thy self unto
me, and while I thus rest in the silence of Contemplation, thou O Lord
answerest within my heart, saying be thou thine own, and J will be thine own.

O Lord the sweetness of all sweetness, thou have placed me in my Liherty,
that I may if I will be mine own; Hereupon if I he not mine own, thou art not
mine, for then should thou necessitate libearty, seeing thou can not be
mine, except I be mine own. And because thou have put this in my liberty,
therefore do thou not necessitate but expect that I should choose to be mine
own the fault therefore is in me, not in thee O Lord, which contractest not
thy greatest goodness, but powrest it out most plentifully upon all that are
capable. And thou O Lord art my goodness, and how shall I be mine own,
except thou O Lord shall teach me. But this thou teach me, that sense
should obey reason, and reason bear rule. If therefore sense obey reason, I am
mine own, yet has reason nothing to direct her, but thee O Lord which art the
word and the reason of reasons.

Whereupon I now see that if I hear thy word which cease not to speak
within me and which shines continually in reason, I shall be mine own free,
and not the servant of Sin, and thou will be mine, and give me the sight of thy
face, and then I shall be safe, blessed be thou O God in thy gifts, which only
art able to comfort my soul, and to erect and quicken it up unto a hope of
attaining and enjoying thee, as thine own gift, and the infinite treasure of
all, desierable things.

How Gods seeing is his loving, Causing, Reading, and Containing all things in
himself.

CHAP. 8.
Restless is my heart O God because thy love has inflamed it with such a
de^^re that it cannot rest but in thee alone. I began to pray the Lords Prayer,
and thou inspiredst me to consi^er how then art our Father, Thy loving is thy
seeing; thy Fatherhood is thy seeing which does so fatherly embrace us all, for
we say Our Father; for thou art the universal and singular Father: And every
one saying our Father, implies that thy Fatherly love comprehends thy Sons,
all and every one for a Father so loves all his Children, that he loves, every
one, because he is the Father of all, as well as of every one, and loves every
one of his Sons so that every one thinks, himself preferred before all the
rest.

If therefore thou act a Father, and Our Father, surely the love of a Father to
his Son preventeth the love of a Son to his Father as long as we are thy
sons and look upon thee as soones, thou ceasest not to look upon us as a
Father, therefore thou sha^t be our fatherly putveyor having a Fatherly care or
us, Thy seeing is thy providence.

If we thy sounes do abdicate thee Our Father we cease to be sons, nor are we
then free sons in our own power, but we go into a far Country, separating
our selves from thee, and then we undergo a grievous slavery under a Prince
which is Enemy to thee O God: But thou O Father though for the liberty given us
as being the sons of thee which art liberty it self, thou suffer us to go
away and spend our liberty, and best substance after the corrupt desires of our
fences, Yet do thou not forsake us utterly, but art present continually,
soliciting us, speaking in us, and calling us back to return to thee, ready
always to look upon us with the former fatherly eye, if we return and convert
to thee.

O God of pity look upon me, who being pricked with compunction for the
miserable slavery of the slippery filthiness of Swine, where I dyed for
hunger, do now return that I may howsoever it pleases thee, be fed in thy
house, feed me with thy sight O Lord, and teach me how thy sight sees all that
sees, and every thing that may be seen and every Act of seeing, and every
seeing power, and every power that may be seen, and every thing that arises
from them, forthy seeing is causing. Teach me O Lord how at one glance thou
deservest them all together, and severally, when I open the Book to read, I
see confusedly the whole lease, and if I will distinguish every letter and
word, I must of necessity turn my self particularly to every one in Order, I
cannot read but one letter after another, and one line after another but thou O
Lord look upon and read all the paper together without any delay of time
and if two of us read the same thing, one a pace, and the other slowly, thou
read with both, and seem to read in time, because thou read with them
that read and see, and read all things together above time.

Thy seeing is thy reading, thou from eternity have seen and read together
beyond al delay of time, all the Books which have been or may be written, and
at the same instant, thou read them successively with them that do so read
them neither do thou read one thing in eternity, and another with them that
read in time, but being always the same, and after the same manner, because
thou art not changeable, being fixed Eternity, and eternity in that it forsakes
not, time seems to be moved with time, a thong indeed motion and eternity is
rest.

Lord thou see and have eyes, thou art therefore an eye, because with thee to
have is to be, and for this Cause in thy self thou seeft all things, for if in
me seeing were the Eye, as it is in thee my God, then could I see all things in
my self, because the eye is of the nature of Glass, and a glass though never
so little will figuratively represent a great Mountain, and all things that
are in the surface thereof, and so the species of all things are in a glasly
eye, yet because our sight does not by means of the glasly eye see any thing
but that particular whereunto it turns it self, because the power thereof
cannot but be particularly determined by the object, therefore it sees not all
things that are contained in the Glass of the Eye, but thy sight being an Eye,
or a living Glass sees a l things in it self, nay being the Cause of all
visible things, therefore it contains, and sees all things in the Cause, and
reason of all things that is in it self.

Thy eye O Lord proceeds to all things without turning, our Eye turns it
self to the object, because our sight sees by a corner that has quantity, but
the Corner of thy Eye O God has no quantity, but is infinite being a Circle,
nay an infinite Sphere: for thy sight is an Eye of infinite Sphericity or
roundnesse, and perfection, it sees therefore all things round about and
above, and below, O how wonderful is thy sight which is ((...), (...)) God ^o
all that search for (...) How fair and amiable to all th^^ love thee, How
terrible to all that have for saken thee O my God: for thou by thy sight O Lord
quick^est every spirit, make glad every one that is blessed, and put to
flight all sorrow: look therefore mercifully upon me and my soul is safe.

How the sight of God is both universal and Particular, and what is the way
thereto

CHAP. 9.
Dear Lord, I cannot but wonder how (seeing thou look upon all, and every
one as this painted Image which I behold, figures out unto me) in thy visive or
seeing power, the Universal conicides with the singular: But then I wonder
that therefore ^y imagination conceives not how this may be done, because it is
in my own visive power that I seek for thy Vision which is not contracted to
a sensible Organ as mine is, and therefore am I deceived in my judgment. Thy
seeing O Lord is thy offense. If therefore I look to humanity which is one and
simple in all men, I find it both in all and every man, And although in it
self it be neither Easterly, nor Weasterly, nor Southerly, nor Northerly, yet
in Easterly men it is in the East, and in the Westerly men in the West, and so
though motion and rest be not of the essence of humanity, yet it is moved with
men that move and rests with them that rest, and it stands with them that
stand all together at one and the same instant, because whether men move or be
not moved whether they sleep or rest, humanity forsakes not men. Whereupon if
this nature of humanity, which is contracted and no where found without men; If
I say that be so, that it be not more present to one man than another, and be
so perfectly present to one as if it were present to none other, much more
deeply then shall humanity incontracted (which is the pattern and Idea of this
contracted nature, and which is as the form, and the truth of this contracted
form of humanity) never forsake humanity contracted in the Individualls, for
it is the form which gives being unto the formal nature it self. Therefore
cannot the specificall form be without it, when as by it self, it has no
being, for it is from tha^ which is by it self, before which there is none
other.

Therefore that form which gives being to the species, is an absolute form,
and that art thou O God, which art the former of Heaven; and earth, and all
things.

When therefore I look to the contracted humanity, and through that to
absolute humanity, that is seeing in the contracted the absolute, as in the
effect the cause and in the truth the Pattern; then meetest thou me my God as
the samplar or pattern of all men* and man by himself that is absolute.

And when likewise in all other species and kinds I turn my self to the
form of forms, in all these do thou occur, or present thy self, as the
Idea or Samplar. And because thou art an absolute or most sample-samplar or
pattern, thou art not compounded of many Samplars, but art one most sample and
absolute samplar, so that of all and every thing that can be formed, thou art
the most true and adequat samplar. Therefore thou art the essence of essences*
giving to contracted essences to be that which they are: for without thee O
Lord nothing can be: If then thy essence pierce all things, thy sight must
needs do so too, being thy essence.

As therefore none of the things that are, can fly from their proper being, so
neither from thy essence, which gives, being to the essence of al things, and
so by consequence not from thy sight neither. Therefore thou O Lord see all
thing, and every particular together, and thou art moved withal things that
are moved, and stand still with all things that stand still and in as much as
there are things found which are moved, when other things stand still,
therefore thou O Lord stand still, and are moved both at once, for if motion
and rest be both found together at the same time, contracted in diverse things,
and nothing can be besides or without thee, then there is neither motion nor
rest without thee, but unto every one of them all art thou present O Lord,
together and at once, and to each of them wholly, and yet thou art neither
moved nor rests, because thou art superexalted and absolute or free from all
those things which can neither be named or conceived. Thou stand therefore,
and thou go, and yet thou neither stand nor go, and that this painted
face shows me full well, for if I be moved, the face thereof appears to be
moved, because it forsakes me not: And if whilst I move, another that beholds
the face stand, still the countenance likewise forsakes not him, but stands
still with him that stands. Yet can it not properly agree to an absolute face
or sight that is freed from these respects, either to stand or be moved in that
it is above all station or motion, in most simple and absolute infinity after
or beneath which infinity, is motion and rest, and opposition, and whatsoever
can be said or conceived.

Whereupon I find by experience, how it is necessary for me to enter the mist,
and to admit the covicidence of opposites above all capacity of reason, and
there to seek the truth where I meet with* impossibility, and above that the
nighest intellectual ascent, when I shall come to that which is unknown to
every unde standing, and which every understanding* judges farthest off from
truth; there art thou O my God which art absolute necessity.

And by how much more that misty impossibility is known to be more dark, and
impossible, so much the more does necessity shine and is the more unvayledly
present and draws near.

Wherefore, I thank thee O my God, because thou show me there is no other
way of coming unto thee, but that which seems to all men, even the most
learned Philosophers utterly unaccessible, and impossible, because thou have
shown me that thou can not elsewhere be seen, than when Impossibility meets
and crosses me, And thou O Lord which art the food of strong men, have animated
me to do violence to mine own self, to believe, because, Impossibility
coincident with necessitate. And so I have found the place where thou will
revealedly be found, which place is environed with Coincidence of
Contradictories, which is the wall of that Paradise wherein thou dwell,
whose gate is kept by a most high spirit of reason, and if that be not
overcome, the entry will not be opened. Beyond the Conicideuce of
contradictories, therefore thou will or may be seen, but not on this side
of it.

If therefore impossibility be necessity in thy sight O Lord, then there is
nothing that thy sight does not see.

How God is seen beyond the conicidence of contradictories and how seeing is
being.

CHAP. 10.
DRead God, I stand before the image of thy face, which I look upon with my
sencible eyes, and with my ineternall eyes, I labor to behold that truth which
is signified in thee, and it comes into my mind O Lord, how thy seeing
speaks, for thy speaking is nothing else but thy sight, being they do not
really differ in thee, which art absolute simplicity it self. Then I do
clearly find by experience, that thou see all things together, and every
thing severally: for I my self when I Preach at one and the same time, speak
one word to the whole Church assembled together, and to every one that is
amongst them, and in that word which I speak to all, I speak to every one,
That which the Church is to me, that unto thee O Lord is the whole world, and
every particular Creature that is or can be, so therefore thou speak to al,
and every one, and those things to which thou speak, thou see O Lord,
which art the chiefest consolation of all that trust in thee, thou inspirest me
to praise thee from the contemplation of my self, for thou have given me one
face as thou please, and that is seen generally, and particularly, to all to
whom I preach, my own face is therefore seen by all, and my simple speech is
wholly heard by all and every one, but I cannot distinctly hear all them
speaking together, but one after one: nor distinctly see them altogether, but
one after one, yet if there were in me so great power, that hearing and being
heard, should coincident and be all one, and seeing, and being seen, as also
speaking, and hearing (as in thee O Lord which art the Highest power) then I
could both hear and see all at once, and every one in particular by
themselves, and as I could speak to every one in particular, at once, so in the
same instant, while I speak, I could see and hear the answers of all and
every one. Now then as being placed in the Door of the coincidence of
opposites, which the Angel keeps in the entrance of Paradise, I begin to see
thee O Lord for thou art there where to speak, to hear, to see to taste, to
touch, to reason, to know, and to understand, are all the same thing, and where
seeing coincides which being seen and hearing with being heard, and tasting
with being tasted, and touching, with being touched, and speaking with hearing,
and creating with speaking. If I could see as I am visible or to be seen, I
were not a Creature, and if thou O Lord should not see as thou art to be
seen, thou were not God Almighty, thou art Visible unto all Creatures, and
see all for in that thou see all, thou art seen of all, otherwise they
could not be Creatures, because by thy vision they are. And if they should not
see thee, seeing they could not take from thee their being; the being of the
Creature is thy seeing, and being seen.

Thou speak by thy word to all things that are, and call to bring the
things that are not, Thou call therefore that they may hear thee, when they
hear thee, then they are, when therefore thou speak, thou speak to all
things, and all things to whom thou speak hear thee. Thou speak to the
Earth, and call it to humane nature, and the Earth hears thee, and its
hearing is to be made man Thou speak unto nothing, as if it were something,
and nothing hears thee, because it was made something, which was nothing.

O infinite power, thy conceiving is to speak, thou conceivest Heaven, and it
is as thou conceavest, thou conceivest Earth, and it is as thou conceivest,
while thou conceivest, thou see, and speak, and workest, and whatsoever
can be said. But how wonderful art thou O my God, thou speak once, thou
conceivest once, how then art thou althings together, but successively many
things, how are so many diverse things from one conception, thou enlightnest me
that am upon the Threshould of the Door, by telling me that thy conception is
most simple eternity it self and there is nothing can possibly be done after
most simple eternity, for infinite duration which is eternity it self,
includes, and comprehends all succession. Therefore whatsoever appears unto
us in succession, is not after thy conception which is eternity, for thy one
and only conception which is thy word, complicates, and infoulds all things,
and every particular, and thy Eternal word cannot be manifold nor diverse nor
variable, nor changeable, because it is simple Eternity.

So I see O Lord, that there is no thing after thy conception, but all things
are because thou conceavest them and thou conceavest them in Eternity, and
succession in Eternity, is Eternity it self without succession, even thy
word O Lord God: Thou have no sooner conceaved any thing that appears unto us,
temporally than it is: for Eternity in which thou conceavest all temporal
succession coincides in the same now or instant of Eternity nothing can there
be past or to come, where to come and past coincides with the present; But that
things in this world are according to before and after, is because thou did
not before conceave those things that they should be, if thou hadest sooner
conceived them, they had sooner bin, but in whose conception soever there can
fall first, and later, that he can first conceave one thing, and after
another, he is not Almighty, but because thou art God Almighty thou art within
the Wall in Paradise: And that Wall is that Coincidence, where after
coincides with before, or latter, with first where the end coincides with the
beginning, where Alfa and Omega are the same.

Things therefore are always because thou speak that they may be, and they
are not before because thou speak not before, and when I read that Adam was
before so many years, and that such a one was borne to day, It seems to me
unpossible that Adam should be then, because thou then would, and the other
borne to day, because thou now would; And yet thou did not will Adam to be
sooner, than thou would him that was born to day, but that which seems
impossible is necessity it self, for now and then are after or beneathe thy
word, Therefore they meet with him that comes to thee in the Wall which
invirons the place where thou dwell in Conicidence; For now and then
conicides in the cirele of the Wall of Paradise: But thou my God art and
speak beyond now and then, which art absolute Eternity.

How in God succession of time is seen without succession.

CHAP. 12.
O My God, I have experience of thy goodness which art so far from dispising
me a miserable sinner, That thou on the other side do sweetly feed me with
a certain desire or longing, for thou have inspired into me a most welcome
similitude, as touching the unity of the mental word or conception, and the
variety thereof in those things that appear successively: For the simple
conception of a most perfect Clock leads me a more feeling and savoury sight
of thy conception and word, for the simple conception of a clock, complicates
or wraps up all temporal succession, And put case that a Clock be a
concep^ion, then though we hear the sound of the 6th hour, before the 7th yet
the 7th is not heard but when the concep^ion commands, neither is 6th sooner in
conception, then the 7th or 8th but in the simple conception of a Clock, there
is no hour before or after another, although the Clock never strike but when
the conception bids: And it may be truly said when the Clock strikes six,
that then the Clock strikes six; because the conception of the Master will have
it so and because a Clock in the conception of God is a conception, it may a
little appear how succession in a Clock is without succession in a word or
conception and how in that most simple conception are folded up all motions and
founds, and whatsoever we find in succession, and that whatsoever happens
successively does not by any means exceed the conception, but is an
explication of the conception because the conception gives being to every
thing: And that therefore nothing is sooner than it comes to pass because it
was not sooner conceaved than it might be; Suppose then a conception of a
Clock to be Eternity, and then the motion in the Clock is to be succession,
therefore eternity does both, infold, and unfold succession, for the
conception of a Clock which is Eternity; does both complicate and explicate all
things.

B^essed be thou therefore O Lord my God. which feedest and nourishest me with
the milk of similitudes, until thou give me stronger meat: Lead me O Lord
God by these paths to thee, for except thou lead me, I shall saint by the way,
because of the frailty of my corruptible nature, and the foolish Vessel which
I bear about me: I return again in conifidence of thy help, O Lord to find
thee beyond the wall of confidence, complication, and explication, and as I go
in and out by this door of thy word and conception, I find most sweet pasture
and food, when I find thee explicating thy power, I go out, when I find thee
both complicating, and explicating; I go in and out, I go in from the
Creatures, to thee thou Creator, from the effect to the cause, I go out from
the Creator to the creatures, from the cause to the effect, I go both in and
out together, when I see how going out is going in, and going in at the same
instant going out, As he that numbreth does at the same time, both explicate
and complicate, explicate the power of unity, and complicate number into
unity. For the creatures going out from thee, is for thee to enter into the
Creature, and to explicate is to complicate, And when I see thee God in
Paradise, encompassed there within the wall of the conifidence of contraries, I
see that thou do neither complicate nor explicate disjunctively nor
copulatively; For disjunction and communion are both a like, the wall of
connifidence, beyond which thou art absolute and free from all that can be
either said or thought.

That where the invisible is seen, the uncreated is created.

CHAP. 12.
CRown of my joy and happiness thou have appeared unto me, sometimes as
invisible from every creature because thou art a God secret and hidden, and
infinite, and infinite is incomprehensible by any manner of comprehension, Then
thou appearedst to me as visible to all things, for every thing is so far
forth as thou see it: and that could not be in act; except it did see thee,
for vision gives being, because it is thy Essence; So thou my God art visible,
and invisible thou art, invisible as thou art, and thou art visible as the
creature is, which so far forth is as it sees thee, by every thing that sees,
in every thing that may be seen, and in every act of seeing art thou seen,
which art invisible, and absolute, and free from all such things, and
infinitely superexalted; Therefore O Lord I must leap over the Wall of
invisible vision where thou art found; and the Wall is all things, and nothing
both together, and thou which meetest or appearest to us as though thou were
all things, and nothing at al both together, dwell within that high Wall
which no wit can by its own power ever be able to climb.

Sometimes thou appearest unto me, so that I imagine thou see all things in
thy self, like a living Glass, in which all things shine, and because thy
seeing is thy knowing, then it comes into my mind that thou do not see also
things in thy self as in a living Glass, for then thy knowledge should arise
from the things: Sometimes thou presentest thy self to me, that thou see
all things in thy self, as power or virtue, by looking upon it self, As the
power or possibility of the seed of a Tree, if it should look into and behold
it self, would in it self see the Tree in power; because the virtue of the
seed is potentially the Tree, and then again, me thinks that thou do not
see thy self, and all things in thy self, as power or possibility, for to see
a Tree in the power of the virtue, differs from that vision by which the Tree
is seen in act, and then I find how thy infinite virtue or power is beyond
all specular and seminall virtue, and beyond the conicidence, radiation or
reflection of the cause, and also the thing caused, and that that absolute
virtue is absolute vision, which is perfection it self, above all manner of
seeing: for all the manners which explain the perfection of seeing are without
any manners, thy Vision which is thy Essence, O my God.

But suffer most merciful Lord that I thy vild Creature may yet speak unto
thee; If thy seeing be thy creating, and thou see nothing but thy self, but
thy self art the object of thy self, (for thou art both the thing seeing and
the things seen, and the act of seeing, how then do thou creat other things
from thee, for thou seem to creat thy self as thou see thy self, But
thou comfortest me O life of my spirit, for although I meet with the wall of
absurdity, which is of the Conicidence of creating and being created, as though
it were impossible that creating and being created should coincide (for to
admit this, seems to be as if one should affirm, that a thing is before it
is, for when it creates it is, and because it is created it is not) yet it
hinders not, for thy creating is thy being, neither is it any other things at
once to create, and to be created, than to communicate thy being unto all
things, that thou may be all things in all things, and yet remain absolute
from all things, for to call to being things that are not, is to communicate,
being to nothing, so to call is to create, to communicate is to be created.
And beyond this Coincidence of creating and being created, act thou God
absolute and infinite, neither creating nor in possibility of being created,
although they are all that they are because thou art.

O thou heights of riches, how incomprehensible art thou, as long as I conceive
a Creator, creating, I am yet on this side the wall of Paradise, so as long as
I conceive a Creator in possibility of being created, I have not yet entered,
but am in the wall, but when I see thee as absolute infinite, whereunto neither
the name of a Creator creating, nor of a Creator in possibility of being
created can agree, then I begin to see thee revealedly, and to enter into the
Garden of delights, because thou art no such thing as can be said, or
conceived, but infinitely and absolutely super-exalted above all such things.
Thou art not therefore only a Creator, but infinitely more then a Creator, though
without thee nothing is done, or can be done: To thee be praise and glory for
ever and ever, Amen.

That God is seen absolute infinite.

CHAP. 13.
THou Lord God, thou help of them that seek thee, I see thee in the Garden of
Paradise, and I know not what I see, for I see nothing visible, only this I
know, that I know not what I see, nor ever can know it, name thee I cannot,
because I know not what thou art; And if any man say thou art named by this or
that name, in as much as he names thee, I know that it is not thy name, for
every term of the manner of significations of name is a Wall, beyond which I
fee thee.

And if any man express any conception, by which thou may be conceived, I
know that conception is not the conception of thee, for every conception is
terminated in the Wall of Paradise, And if any man express any similitude, and
say that according thereunto thou art to be conceived. I know likewise that
similitude is nor thine, so if any man declare any understanding of thee, as
though he would give a means to understand thee, this man is yet far from
thee, for from all these, art thou separated by a most high Wall: This Wall
seperates thee from all things that can be said or thought, for thou art
absolute from all things that can fall into any man's conception, Therefore when
I am highest of all lifted up, then I see thee infinity, therefore art thou
inaccessible, incomprehensible, unnameable, unmultipliable, and invisible, and
so he that will ascend to thee must get up above every term and end and
things, finite. But how shall he come unto thee, the end whereat he aims, if
he must assend above the end, He that mounts up above the end, does he not
enter into that which is indeterminate, and confused and so inregard of the
understanding, into ignorance and obscurity, which are intellectual confusion;
The understanding must therefore become ignorant, and be placed in the shadow
if it would see thee, But O my God what is this ignorance of the understanding,
is it not a learned ignorance, therefore can not thou O God be approached
unto, as being infinite, but by him whose understanding, is in ignorance, and
namely such a one as knows himself to be ignorant of thee, How can the
understanding conceive thee which art infinity; The understanding knows it
self ignorant, and that thou can not be conceived, because thou art
Infinity. For to understand Infinity, is to comprehend that which is
incomprehensible.

The understanding knows it self ignorant of thee, because it knows thou
can not be known, unless that which is unknowable be known, and the
invisible seen, or the inaccessible approached unto. Thou my God art absolute
Infinity, which I see to be an infinite end, but I can not conceive how an end
should be an end without an end. Thou O God art the end of thy self, because
thou art whatsoever thou have, if thou have an end thou art an end, Thou art
therefore an infinite end because thou art the end of thy self, for thy end is
thy essence, the essence of the end is not determined or limited in another
end, but in it self, the end therefore which is the end or bound of it self
is infinite. And every end which is not the end of it self is a finite end,
thou O Lord because thou art the bound that boundest all things, therefore art
thou the end or bound whereof there is no end or bound, and so the bound without
bound, or infinite bound which passes all reason, for it foulds a
Contradiction.

When therefore I affirm a boundless bound or an infinite end, I admit
darkness to belight, ignorance, knoledge, and that which is impossible to be
necessary or of necessity; And because we admit that there is a bound of that
which is bounded, we must necessarily admit of an infinite or last end or
bound without abound, but we cannot but admit infinite being, therefore we
cannot but admit the infinite Consequently we admit the Coincidence of
contraries, above which is the infinite. And that Coincidence is a
contradiction without a contradiction, as an end without end.

And thou O Lord say unto me that as alterity in unity is without alterity,
because it is unity, so contradiction in Infinity is without contradiction,
because Infinity. Infinity is simplicity it self, but contradiction cannot
be without alterity, yet alterity insimplicity is without alteration, because
it is simplicity, for all things that are said are affirmed of absolute
simplicity* coincide or are the same with it, because there to have, is to be,
the opposition of opposites, is their opposition without opposition* as the end
or bond of things infinite is no end or bound without end or bound.

Thou therefore O God art the opposition of opposites, because thou art
infinite, and because thou art infinite, thou art infinite it self: In
infinity is opposition of opposites without opposition.

O Lord my God, the strength of the weak, I see thee to be infinity it self,
therefore to thee, there is nothing other or diverse or contrary, and adverse
for he that is infinite does not suffer with himself any alterity, because
(being infinity) there is no thing besides or without it, for absolute
infinite, includes and invirons all things. Therefore if there were infinite
and something besides it, it were not infinite nor any thing else, for infinite
cannot be either greater or less, therefore thereis nothing besides or beyond
it, for if infinity did not, include within it self al being it were not
infinite* And if there were no infinite, then were there no end or bound nor
alteritie, nor diversity, which without alterity of bands and terms cannot be
Infinite, therefore being taken away, there remains nothing, there is
therefore infinity, and it complicates all things, as nothing can be besides
it, and hereupon here is nothing other, or diverse unto it, Infinity therefore
is so all things that it is none of them all.

To Infinity therefore, there can no name agree, for every name may have a
contrary, but to unnameable Infinity, there can be nothing contrary, neither
is Infinity the whole, whereunto is opposed a part, nor can it be a part, nor
can Infinity be great, or little, nor any thing which can be named, neither in
heaven or in earth, above all these is Infinity, Infinity is to nothing
either great or less or equal.

But while I consider Infinity neither to be greater nor less to any thing
imaginable, I say it is the measure of all things being neither greater nor
less. And so I conceive it the equality of being, such an equality is
Infinity, yet is it not so equality, as mequality opposed unto it, but there
equality is inequality, for inequality in Infinity is without inequality
because it is Infinite, so equality in Infinity is infinity, Infinity equality,
is an end without end; whereupon though it be neither greater nor less, yet is
it not equality, as contracted equality is understood, but it is infinite
equality, which is not capable of more or less, and so it is not more equal
to one then to another, but so equal to one that to all, and so to all that to
none of all, for that which is infinite is not contractable, but remains
absolute, if it were contractable by Infinity, it were not infinite: It is not
therefore contractable to the equality of the finite although it be not equal
to any thing, for how should inequality agree with the infinite, whereunto
agrees neither more nor less.

Therefore that which is infinite, is neither greater nor less, nor inequall
to any thing imaginable, and yet it is not, therefore equal to that which is
infinite, because it is above every finite thing, to wit, by it self, that
which is infinite then is it utterly absolute, and incontractable.

How high art thou O Lord above all things and with all how humble, because in
all things: If infinity were contractible to any thing nominable, as a line,
or a surface, or a species, or kind, it would draw to it self that whereunto
it were contracted, and it implies that the infinity should be conttactible,
for it should not be contracted, but attract; for if I say that the infinite is
contracted to a Line, as when I say an infinite Line, then is the Line
attracted or drawn to that which is infinity, for a line cease to be a line
when it has no quantite or end, an infinite line is not a line, but a line in
infinite is infinite: And as nothing can be added to that which is infinite, so
the infinite cannot be contracted unto any thing, to make it other then
infinite, infinite goodness is not goodness but infinite, infinite quantity
is not quantity but infinity, and so in all things.

Thou art a great God of whose greatness there is no end; and therefore I see
thee, the unmeasurable measure of all things, as the infinite end of all things.

Thou art therefore O Lord without beginning and end, because infinite, thou
art the beginning without beginning, and the end without end, and so the
beginning that the end, and so the end that the b^ginning, and neither
beginning nor end, but above them both even absolute, Infinity it self
blessed for evermore.

How God complicateth or infoldeth all things without alterity.

CHAP 14.
O Lord God by the infiniteness of thy mercy I see thou art infinity
incompassing all things. There is therefore nothing without thee, but all
things in thee, nothing that is another thing from thee: Thou teach me O
Lord how alterity which is not in thee, is not likewise in it self, neither
can it be, nor does that alterity which is not in thee, cause that one Creature
is different from another, although indeed one be not the other, for the Heaven
is not the Earth, though it be true that the Heaven is the Heaven, and the
Earth the Earth.

If I therefore seek for alteritie which is neither within thee nor without
thee, where shall I find it, and if there be no such thing, how then is the
earth another Creature then the heavens, for without alteritie this cannot be
conceived, but thou speak in me O Lord and say that of alterity there is
no positive principle or beginning, and so it is not for how should alterity be
without beginning, except it self were a beginning, and Infinity; But alterity
is not the principle of being, for it is called alterity of not being, for
because one thing is not another, therefore it is called Alterum or another,
alterity therefore cannnt be the principle of being, because it is so called
from not being, neither has it principle of being when it is not from being.

Therefore is not alteritie any thing but that Heaven is not Earth, it is
because Heaven is not infinite it self which contains all being.

Whereupon because infinity is absolute infinity, it comes to pass that one
thing cannot be another.

As the being of Socrates, includes all the being of Socrates, in which simple
being of Socrates there is not alterity or diversity, for the being of
Socrates, is the individual unity of all things that are in Socrates, so that
in that one being is complicated the being of all things which are in Socrates,
namely in the very individual simplicity, where there is nothing found other,
or diverse: But in that one and only being all things which have any being
belonging to Socrates are, and are explicated, and without or besides it, they
neither are nor can be, although withal in that most simple being, the eye be
not the ear, nor the head the heart, and the seeing is not hearieg, nor sense
reason, nor does this happen out of any principle of alterity, but presupposing
the most simple being of Socrates it comes to pass that the head is not the
feet, because the head is not the most simple being of Socrates, And therefore
the being thereof does not include the whole being of Socrates.

And so I see (thou O Lord giving me light) that because the simple being of
Socrates is altogether incommunicable, and uncontractable to the being of any
Member whatsoever, therefore the being of one Member is not the being of
another* but that most simple being of Socrates, is the being of all the
Members of Socrates in which all the variety and alteritie of being which is in
the Members is simple unity, as the plurality of the forms of the parts is
unity in thy form of the whole, so it is in some sort O God between thy being
which is absolutely infinity, and all those things that are, absolutely I say, as
the absolute form of being of all contracted forms. Thence it is that the
hand of Socrates, being separated from his body, though after it be cut off, it
be not any more the hand of Socrates, yet it remains still in some being of
Carcass, and that is because the form of Socrates which gives being, does not
give being simply, but a contracte d being, namely the being of Socrates, from
which the being of the hand is separable, and yet may remain under another
form, but if the hand were once wholly separated from the uncontracted, being
which is infinite and absolute, it would altogether cease to be, brcause it
were then separated from all being.

I thank thee O Lord my God, who as far as I am able to conceave largely,
show me how thou art Infinity it self, complicating and enfolding the
being of all things in most simpl power which were not infinite, except
infinitely united, for power united is the stronger. Therefore that power which
is so united that it cannot be more, is infinite and omnipotent. Thou art God
Almighty, because absolute simplicity, which is absolute infinity.

That actual Infinity is unity, in which the figure is Verity.

CHAP. 15.
REgard thy servant in mercy, Lord, though he be a fool, save from what thou
grantest, that he may speak unto thee his God.

I see it this painted face the figure of Infinity, for the sight is
indeterminate either to object or place, and so infinite, for it is not more
turned to one then to another of them that look upon it, And although the
sight thereof be in it self infinite, yet it seems to be terminated by every
one that looks upon it, because it looks upon every one that looks upon it so
determinately, as though it looks on him alone and nothing else.

Thou seem therefore unto me O Lord as possibility and being absolute and
infinite formable and determinable by every form for me, for we say that the
formable possibility of the matter is infinite, because it can never be
finished, but thou answerst in me, O infinite light that absolute power, or
possibility is infinity it self, which is beyond the Wall of coincidence,
where possibility of being made Coincides with possibility of making where
power coincides with Act matter although it be in power to infinite forms, yet
it cannot have them all at once actually, but the power is terminated by one,
and that removed by another. If there fore the (posse esse) may be, of the
matter should coincide with the Act, it would so be power that it would be act
also, and as it was in power to infinite formed, so it would be actually formed
infinitely. Now Infinity in act is without alteritie, and it cannot be
infinity, but it must be unity, There can not therefore be infinite forms in
Act, but actual infinity is unity. Thou therefore O God which art infinite it
self, art thy self, one God, in which I see all may be is in act, for
possibility absolute or free from all power contracted to matter or any passive
power whatsoever is absolute being, for whatsoever is in infinite being is the
most simple infinite it self, so to may be all things in the infinite being is
the infinite being it self, likewise also actually to be all things in the
infinite is the infinite being it self; Wherefore the absolute may be, and the
absolute being in Act in thee my God are nothing but thou my infinite God, thou
my God art all may be.

The may be of the matter is material, and so contracted, and not absolute, so
the sensible and rational may be is contracted, but to be altogether
uncontracted coincides with simply absolute, that is infinite.

When therefore thou my God appearest unto me as matter formable, because thou
receivest the form of every one that beholds thee, then thou liftest me up to
see how he that looks upon thee, does not give thee form, but in thee he
beholds himself, because from thee he receives that which he is. And so what
thou seem to receive from the beholder, that thou give as being the living
glass of eternity which is the form of forms; In which glass whilst one
looks he sees his own form, in the form of forms, which is the glass,
and judges the form which he sees in that glass to be the figure of his
form, because it is so in material pollist glass, though the contrary
thereof be true, because, that which he sees in the Glass of eternity, is not
the figure but the truth of that which himself (the beholder) is the figure.
The figure therefore in thee in God is truth and the samplar or pattern of all
and every thing that is or may be.

O God which art wonderful to every understanding, thou seem sometimes as
if thou were a shadow, and thou art light, For when I see how according to my
Change the sight of thy Picture seems changed, thy face also seems changed,
because thou appearest to me changed as if thou werst the shadow that follows
the alteration of him that walks. But because I am the living shadow, and
thou the truth, I judge by the change of the shadow that the truth is changed.
Thou therefore O my God art the shadow, but so that, thou art the truth also,
thou art the image of me, and of every thing, but so that thou art the exemplar
and pattern also.

O Lord God the enlightner of hearts, my face is a true face, because thou that
art the truth have given it me, My face is also an Image, because it is not the
truth it self, but the Image of the absolute truth, therefore I do complicate
and infold in my conception the truth and the Image of my face, and I see that
in it the Image coincides with the faciall truth, so that in as much as an
Image in so much it, it true. And then thou showed me O Lord, how according to
the mutation of my face, thy face is both changed and unchanged, changed
because it forsakes not the truth of my face, unchanged because it follows
not the change of the Image: Wherefore as thy face forsakes not the truth of my
face, so it follows not the changing of an alterable Image, for absolute truth
is unalterability, the truth of my face is mutable, because it is so, the truth
that it is also the Image, but thine is unchangeable, because it is so an Image
that it is also the truth; Absolute Truth cannot forsake the truth of my face,
for if it should forsake it my face which is mutable, truth could not subsist.

So do thou seem to me O God (because of thine infinite goodness)
immutable, because thou forsakest not the mutable Creature, but because thou
art absolute goodness thou art not mutable, because thou do not follow
mutability, and thy most performed depth O God that do not forsake, and
withal do not follow the Creatures: O inexplicable piety that offerest thy
self to him that beholds thee, as if thou tookest being from him, and
comfortest thy self to him that he may love thee the more, by how more like
to him thou art, for we cannot hate our selves, therefore we love that which
participates and accompanies our being, and we embrace our likeness, because
we are represented in the Image in which we love our selves.

Thou show thy self O God as our Creature out of humility of thine infinite
goodness, that so thou may draw us unto thee, for thou do draw us to thee
by all means possible, that a free reasonable Creature can be drawn by. And
in thee O God Creating Coincides, which being created, for the Image which
seems to be Created by me is the truth that creates me, that so at length I
may understand how much I ought to be bound unto thee, when in thee loving, and
being coincides, for if I ought to love my self in thee my similitude, and
then be especially bound unto it when I see thee love me as thy Creature, and
Image, how cannot that father love his son, who is so a Son, that he is a
Father also, And if he be much to be loved which is a son in estimation and a
father in knowledge, art not thou most of all which in estimation exceedest a
son, and in knowledge a Father.

Thou God would that filial love should consist in estimation and thou will
be esteemed liker then a son, and be known more intimate then a Father,
because thou art love, complicating and enfolding, as well filial, as paternall
delection. Be thou therefore which art my sweetest love, my God blessed for
evermore.

That God except he were infinite could not be the end of our desires.

CHAP. 16.
O My God the fire cease not to burn, nor more does the love of desire which
is carried toward thee, which art every desirable form, and that truth which
in every desire is desired, wherefore since I have begun from thy melliflous
gift to taste thy incomprehensible sweetness, which the more infinite it
appears is so much the more welcombe unto me, I see that for this cause thou O
God art unknown to all Creatures that in this most sacred ignorance, as in an
in unmeasurable, and inexhaustible treasure, they may have the greater rest,
for much more joyful is he that finds such a treasure as he knows is
utterly innumerable and infinite, then he that finds such a treasure as is
but finite, and may be numbered. Hereupon this most sacred ignorance of thy
greatness is the most desired and longed for food of my understanding,
especially when I find such a treasure in my field, and therefore the treasure
is mine own. O fountain of riches thou will be comprehended in my possession
and yet remain incomprehensible and infinite, because thou art the treasure of
delights, whereof no man can desire an end, how should the appetite desire not
being, for whether the will desire not being the appetite cannot rest but is
carried into Infinity.

Thou descendest O Lord that thou may be comprehended, thou remainest
inunnumerable and infinite, and did thou not remain infinite thou could
not be the end of the desire, for the intellectual desire is not carried to
that which can be greater or more desirable; But every thing on this side,
the infinite may be greater, therefore the end of the desire is infinite; Thou
then O God art infinity it self, which alone I desire in all my desires, and
the knowledge whereof I can come no nearer than to know that it is infinite. By
how much more incomprehensible, therefore I may comprehend thee my God, so much
more do I attain unto thee because I do the more attain the end of my desire,
whatsoever therefore I meet withal that labors not to show thee
incomprehensible, that I cast away, because it seduceth me.

My desire then is in that which leads me to thee, because it casts away all
that is finite and comprehensible, for in these it cannot rest, being by thy
self led unto thee, as the beginning without beginning, and the end without
end. Therefore is my desire led by the eternal beginning (from whom it has
that it is a desire) to the end without end and that is infinite; That I
therefore a poor man should not be contracted with thee my God, if I had
known comprehensible proceeds from hence, because I am led by thee unto thy
self incomprehensible and infinite.

I see thee O Lord my God in a certain mental rapture, because if the sight
be not satisfied with seeing* nor the Ear with hearing, then much less is the
understanding with understandding: Therefore that which it understands, does
not satisfy the understanding, neither is it the end thereof nor can that (on
the other side) satisfy it which it understands not at all but only that
which it understands in not understanding, for that intelligible which it
knows, does not satisfy nor that which it knows does not satisfy, nor
that which it knows not all but that which it knows so intelligible, that it
can never be fully understood, that only can satisfy. As he that has an
insatiable hunger cannot be satisfied with a little meat, nor with that meat
(though never so much) that he cannot come at, but only with that meat which
he can both come at, and which though he continual^y swallow, yet can it
never be all swallowed, being such as in swallowing is not diminished because
it is infinite.

That God cannot perfectly be seen except he be seen unitrine, or one in
three.

CHAP. 17.
Fair and amyable have thou shown thy self unto me O God that more thou
can not be, for thou art infinitely lovely O my God therefore thou can never
be loved by any thing as thou art worthy of love but by an infinite lover, for
except there were an infinite lover, thou were not infinitely amiable, for thy
amiablenesse which is to be inpossibility of being infinitely loved, is because
there is a possibility of loving infinitely, from which, and the possibility of
being infinitely loved arriseth an infinite Bound of love of the infinite
lover, and the infinite amiable, and is not multiplicable.

Thou therefore O my God which art love, art the love, loving, and the love
amiable, and the love which is bond of the love loving, and the love amiable, I
see in thee my God a love loving, and a love amiable: And in that I see in thee
a 1. loving love and an 2. amiable love, I see the 3. bond of either love, and
this is nothing else but what I see in thy absolute unity, in which I see a
unity uniting a unity that may be united, and the union of both: And
whatsoever I see in thee my God that thou art, Thou art therefore that infinite
love which without the loving, and the amiable, the Bond of both cannot to me
seem natural and perfect love, for how can I conceive the most perfect and
natural love without the loving, and the amiable and the union of both, for
that love should be loving and amiable, and the bond of both: I find is
contracted love that it is of the essence of perfect love, And that which is of
the essence of perfect contracted love, cannot be wanting to absolute love*
from whence contracted love has all its perfection, and how much more simple
love is, so much the more perfect, but thou my God art most perfect, and simple
love therefore thou art to most perfect and simple, and natural essence of
love, for hence it follows that in thee being love, three is not one thing
that loves, and another that is loved, and another that is the Bond of love,
but the same even thou thy self, O my God, because therefore in thee the
lovely coincides with the loved, and it is all one to be loved, and to love,
certainly the bond of Coincidence is an essential Bond, for there is nothing
^n thee which is not the essence it self: Therefore they which seem unto me
to be three namely the loving, the lovely, and the Bond are the most simple
absolute essence, therefore they are not three but one.

That essence of thine O my God which appears unto me to be most simple, and
(that I may so say) most one is not most natural and most perfect without the
things before named.

The essence therefore is threefould, and yet there are not three things in it,
because it is most simple. The plurality therefore of the three forenamed is so
a plurality, that it is nevertheless a unity, and so is the unity a unity*
that it is also a plurality, the plurality of three is a plurality without a
plural number, for a plural number cannot be a simple unity because it is a
plural number: There is therefore no numerall distinction of the three,
because that is essential, one number being essentially distinct from another,
And because the unity is Tryne, it is not a unity of the singular number, for
the unity of the singular number is not Trine.

O most wonderful God, which neither art of the singular nor plural number,
but above all plurality and singularity, one in three, and three in one: I see
therefore in the Walls of Paradise, where thou my God art, plurality coincide
with singularity, and that thou dwell far far beyond that.

Teach me O Lord how I may conceive that possible which I see to be of
necessity, for there meets an impossibility that the plurality of three without
which I cannot conceive thee to be perfect, and natural love is a plurality
without number, As he that says one, one, one, thrice says thrice one and
yet he says not three but one, and this one thrice one he cannot say thrice
without three, although he say not three, for when he says one thrice, he
repeats the same, and does not number for to number is to altar one, but to
repeat one and the same thrice, as to plurifie without number. Therefore that
plurality which I see in my God, is an alterality without alterity, because it
is an alterity which is Identitie.

For when I see the loving is not the lovely, and that the bond is neither the
loving nor the lovely, yet do I not so see the loving not to be the lovely, as
though the loving were one and the loving, the lovely and the Bond. There is
therefore one love, without the which none of the three could be, I am one
which am the loving, I am the same which am the lovely, and I likewise am all
one which am the Bond arrising from the love wherewith I love my self, and yet
I am one and not three things.

Suppose then that my love be my essence as it is in my God, then in the unity
of my essence, there would be the unity of the three foresaid, and in the
Trinity of the three foresaid unity of essence, and they would be all in my
essence contractedly after the manner that I see them to be in thee truly and
absolutely, yet for all that love, loving would not be love lovely, nor the
bond, and that I find by this practice and experiment.

For by love loving which I bear to another thing without my self, as it were
to an extrinficall lovely, there follows a Bond of my essence whereby I am
bound to that thing as much as in me lies, which thing is not joined to be by
that Bond, because paradventure it loves me not, whereupon though I love it so
that my loving, love extends it self upon it, yet my loving love does not draw
with it or to it my lovely love, for I am not lovely to it, for it cares not
for me, though I love it extremely, as the Sun sometimes cares not for his
Mother though she love him never so tenderly. And so I find by experience
that love loving is neither love lovely, nor the Bond, but I see the loving is
distinguished from the lovely and the Bond, which distinction nevertheless is
not in the Essence of love because I cannot love either my self or any thing,
else besides my self without love, so love is of the essence of all the three;
And so I see that the essence of those three foresaid is most simple though
among themselves they be distinct.

I have in a similitude O Lord expressed some manner of foretaste of thy
nature, but mercifully spare me for attemp^ing to figure out the unfigurable
taste of thy sweetness, for if the sweetness of an unknown Apple be unfigurable
by any Picture or figure, and unexpressible by all words, who am I miserble
sinner that go about to show thee that art unshewable, to figure the visible
that art invisible, and to offer or present to the taste that infinite and
utterly in expressible sweetness of thine which I never yet deserved to taste,
and by those things which I express, I rather make it appeal little than
great, But so great is thy goodness O my God that thou suffer even the
blind men to speak of light, and to set forth the praise thereof, of which
notwithstanding they neither do nor can know any thing that can be revealed
unto them: But Revelation goes not so far as taste, the ear of faith reaches
not that sweetness which is utterly untasteable. And this thou have revealed
to me O Lord, that the Ear has not heard, nor has it entered into the heart
of man the infiniteness of thy sweetness which thou have prepared for them that
love thee; This thy great Appostle Paul has revealed unto us, which was
ravished beyond the Wall of Coincidence into Paradise, where only thou that art
the fountain of delights, can be revealedly seen, I have labored to
subject my self to a rapture, trusting to thine infinite goodness, that I
might see thee that art invisib^e, and might reveal an unreveleable vision,
and how far I have gone thou know, but I know not: howsoever sufficient for
me is thy grace whereby thou assurest me thou art incomprehensible, and
erectest me to a firm hope that thou being my guide, I shall at length come to
the fruition of thee.

That unless God were trine or three in one, he were not felicity.

CHAP 18.
DId all men open the eyes of their mind, which they have by thy gift O Lord
attained, they might see with me how thou a jealous God because love loving
can hate nothing, for in thy self a lovely God, thou complicatest all things
lovely, thou love every loving thing that so they might see as I do, by what
bond or league thou art united unto all things. Thou O Lord inlargest thy love
unto all men, and love so all things in general, that withal thou love
every thing in particular, But many are they that do not love thee, because
they prefer something before thee. But if love lovely were not distinct from
love loving, thou would be so lovely unto all men, that they could love
nothing besides thee and all reasonable spirits would be necessitated to the
love of thee. But thou art so noble O my God, that thou will have it in the
liberty of reasonable souls whether they will love thee or no, wherefore upon
thy loving it follows not that thou art loved.

Thou therefore O my God, art by the bond of love united unto al things,
because housprea dest abroad thy love upon every Creature of thine, but every
rational spirit is not united unto thee, because it bestows not its love upon
thy loveliness, but upon some other thing whereunto unto it is united and knit.

Thou have espoused every reasonable soul by thy loving love, but not every
spouse loves thee her husband, but for the most part some other whereunto she
cleaves, but how could the soul of man thy spouse O my God, attain thy end
except thou were lovely that so by loving thee that art lovely, she might
reach the bond and most happy union.

Who therefore can deny thee to be God, three in one, when he sees that thou
were neither a noble natural nor perfect God, nor his spirit had free will*
nor himself could come to the fruition of thee and his own happiness except
thou were three and one.

For because thou art the understanding that understands, the understanding
intelligible, and the Bond of both, therefore the understanding created may
attain in thee its intelligible God, union with thee, and felicity. So being
thou art the love lovely, the created loving will, may in thee its lovely God
attain union and felicity, for he that receives thee God the reasonable
receptible light, may come to such a union of thee that he may be united to
thee as a Sun to his Father.

I see O God by thy illumination that a reasonable nature cannot attain to a
union with thee, but because thou artaminable and intelligible, wherefore man's
nature is not possible to be united to thee a loving God (for so thou art not
his object) but he may be united to thee as his lovely God, because that
which is lovely is the object of that which loves, So in like manner that
which may be understood is the object of the understanding, and we call that
the truth which is the object.

Wherefore thou my God because thou art the intelligible truth, the created
understanding may be united unto thee, and so I see that man's reasonable nature
may be united only to thy divine and amiable nature, and that man receiving
thee the receptible God, passes into that Bond which may for the strictness
thereof be called by the name of filiation or sonne-ship, for then the Bond of
filiation we know no stricter. And if this Bond of union be the greatest, then
which a greater cannot be, this must needs come to pass, because if thou the
lovely God can be more beloved by a man, then is that Bond come to the most
perfect filiation, that, that filiation may be perfection complicating all
possible filiation, by which all sons do attain their last felicity and
perfection. In which highest son filiation is as Art in the Master, or the
light in the Sun, but in others as Art in the Scholars or light in the
Stars.

How Jesus is the union of God and Man.

CHAP. 19.
I Give unspeakeable thanks to thee my God, the life and light of my soul, for
now I see the faith which by the Revelation of the Appostles the Catholic
Church holds namely how thou a loving God begettest of thy self a lovely God
and that thou the lovely begotten God at the absolute Mediator, for by thee is
every thing that is or can be, for thou the willing or loving God in thy self
the lovely God complicatest all things, for every thing that thou O God
willest, or conceivest is complicated in thee the lovely God, for there cannot
be any thing except thou will it to be: All things therefore in thy lovely
conception have their cause or reason of being, neither is there any other
cause of all things, but because it so pleases thee, nothing pleases the
lover, as a lover, but the lovely; Thou therefore a lovely God art the Son of
God a loving father, for in thee is all the complaisance of the Father. So all
being creatable is complicated in thee the lovely God.

Thou therefore a loving God, when as of thee is a lovely God, as the Son of
the Father in as much as thou art God the loving Father, of God thy lovely Son;
art the Father of all things that are for thy conception is thy Son, and all
things in him, and thy union, and thy conception, is the Act and operation
arising, in which is the act and explication of all things; as therefore of
thee the loving God, is generated the lovely God which Generation is
conception, So from thee the loving God, and thy lovely conception begotten by
thee, proceeds thy act, and thy conception which is the knot knitting, and the
God uniting thee, and thy conception, as to love unites the loving, and the
lovely in love, and this knot is called the spirit for the spirit is as motion
proceeding from the mover and the moveable: consequently motion is the
explication of the conception of the mover.

All things therefore are to be exp^icated in thee, God the holy Ghost, as they
are conceived in thee God the son.

I see then because thou God do so enlighten me, how all things in thee God
the son are God the Fathers as in the reason, conception, cause or samplar,
and have the son is the medium of all things as the reason or form, for by
the mediation of reason and wisdom, thou God the Father workest all things,
and the spirit or motion puts the conception of reason in effect, as we find
by experience, that the Arc in mind of the Artificer, is put in effect by the
mediation of the motive power which is in the hands; Then I see O my God thy
Son is the medium or mean of the union of all things, that all things by the
mediation of thy Son may rest in thee.

And I see blessed Jesus, the son of man most Highly united to thy son, and
that the son of man could not be united to thee God the Father, but by
mediation of thy son, the absolute Mediator.

Who is not most highly ravished that does attentively consider these things.
Thou my God openest unto me wretch, such a secret that I see man cannot
understand thee the Father, but in thy son which is intelligible, and the
Mediator, and that to understand thee is to be united unto thee. Man may
therefore be united unto thee by thy son which is the mean of the union and
humane nature most highly united unto thee in what man soever in be cannot be
more united to the mean, then it is united, for without the medium it cannot
be united unto thee.

It is therefore most united to the mean, yet it is not made the mean;
whereupon though it cannot be made the mean, seeing it cannot be united unto
thee without a mean, yet it is so joined to the absolute mean, that between
it and the son who is the absolute mean, nothing can mediate, for if any
thing could mediate between man's nature, and the absolute mean, t^en were it
not most highly or absolutely united unto thee.

O good Jesus, I see in thee man's nature to be most highly joined to God the
Father by the highest union, even a greater then by which it is joined to God,
the son the absolute Mediator.

Therefore humane filiation, because thou art the son of man is in thee Jesus
most highly united to the divine filiation, that thou art worthily and truly
called the Son of God and man, for in thee nothing mediates between the Son of
man, and the Son of God.

In the absolute filiation which is the Son of God is complicated all
filiation, whereunto thy humane filiation O Jesus is superamely united,
therefore thy humane filiation subsists in thy divine, not only complicitly,
but as the attracted in the attracting, and the united in the uniting, and the
substantiated in the substantiating.

Therefore in thee O Jesus there is no possible separation of the Son of man
from the Son of God, for separability is where the union might be greater, but
where the union cannot be greater, nothing can mediate: separation therefore
can have no place where nothing can mediate between the things united, and
where the united subsists not in the uniting the union is not the highest, for
there is a greater union where the united subsists in the uniting, then where
the united subsists a part, for separation is the greatest remoteness from
union.

So I see in thee my Jesus how humane fiiation by which thou art the son of
man* subsists in the divine filiation by which thou art the Son of God, as in
the greatest union, the united with the uniting; To thee O God be glory for
ever.

How Jesus is understood the complying of the divine and humane nature.

CHAP 20.
VEry clearly do thou show unto me O never failing light, that that greatest
union whereby man's nature in thee Jesus is united unto the divine nature, is
not by any means like to an infinite union, for the union by which thou O God
the Father art united unto God thy son is God the holy Ghost, and therefore an
infinite union, for it reaches unto absolute essential Identitie, but it is
not so where the humane nature is united to the divine, for the humane nature
cannot pass into an essential union, which the divine as that which is finite
cannot be infinitely united to that which infinite, for then it would pass into
the Identitie of the infinite, and so it would cease to be finite, when the
infinite were verified of it. Wherefore this union by which the humane nature
is united unto the divine nature, is nothing else but an attraction of the
humane nature to the Divine in the highest degree, so that the humane nature
whilst such cannot be attracted any higher:

It is therefore the greatest union of his humane nature (as humane) to the
divine, because there can be no greater, but it is simply the greatest, not
infinite as the divine union.

I see therefore by the benignity of thy grace in thee Jesus the son of man,
the son of God, and in the son of God I see the Father; for in thee the sun
of man I see the Son of God, because thou art so the son of man that thou art
also the son of God and in the finite attracted nature, I see the infinite
attracting nature, I see in the absolute Son the absolute father, for the Son
as Son cannot be seen unless the father be seen, I see in thee Jesus a
divine filiation, or sonneship, which is the truth of all filiation, and
likewise a most high human filiation which is the nearest image of absolute
filiation.

As therefore the Image between which and the Pattern or samplar there cannot
mediate a perfect image, do most nearly subsist in the truth of that whose
Image it is, so do I see thy humane nature subsisting in the divine nature:
Therefore I see all things in thy humane nature, which I see in thy divine. But
I see them after an humane manner in thy humane nature, which are the divine
truth it self in the divine nature.

Those things which I see in thee after a humane manner O Jesus, are the
similitude of the divine nature, but a similitude is without a mean joined to
the Pattern or samplar, so that a more like can neither be nor be imagined in
the humane or reasonable nature, I see are sonable humane spirit most strictly
united to the divine spirit, which is absolute reason, and so the humane
understanding, to the divine understanding and all things in thy understanding
O Jesus, for thou O Jesus as God understandest all things as God, and this
understanding is to be all things; Thou understandest all things as man, and
this understanding is to be the similitude of all things, for a thing is not
understood by a man but in a similitude a stone is not in the understanding of
a man as its proper cause or reason, but as in its species or similitude.

In thee therefore O Jesus the humane understanding is united to the divine, as
the most perfect image to the truth of the Pattern. As if then I should
consider the Ideall form of an Arc in the mind of the Artificer, and the
species of an Arc made most perfectly, and according to the Idea by the Master
himself, how then the Ideall form is the truth of the species, and united
unto it as the truth unto the image in one Master. So in thee O Jesus the Mr.
of Masters, I see the absolute Idea of all things, and the similitudinarie
species of the same most highly united, I see thee O good Jesus within the Wall
of Paradise because thy understanding is both the Truth and the Image, and thou
art both God and a Creature infinity and finite. And it is not possible thou
should be seen on this side the Wall, for thou art the coup^ing of the
divine creating nature with the humane created nature.

And I see this difference between thy humane understanding, and any other
man's, that no one man knows all things, which may be known by man, because
no man's understanding is so joined to the samplar of all things as the
similitude to the truth, but that it might be more nearly joined and set more
in act* and therefore the understands not so many things, but that he might
understand more by his access unto the samplar of things, from whence every
thing that is an act has actually. But thy understanding does actually
understand all things that are intelligible by man, because in thee humane
nature is most perfect and most joined to its samplar or Pattern, for which
union thy humane understanding exceeds every created undarstanding in the
perfection of understanding; Therefore all reasonable spirits are far beneath
thee of all whom thou O Jesus art the Master and the light and thou art the
perfection and fullness of all things, and by thee as by the Mediator, they
came unto the absolute truth, for thou art both the way unto the truth, and the
truth it self, then art both the way unto the life of the understanding, and
the life it self; Thou art the odor of the food of gladness, and also the
taste that makes glad: Be thou therefore O sweet Jesus, blessed for ever more.

That without Jesus therei is no possible felicity.

CHAP 21.
Jesus the end of all, in whom as in the last of their perfection all Creatures
rest thou art utterly unknown to all the wise men of this world; because of
thee we affirm contradictories to be most true, thou being both the Creator
and the Creature, the attracting, and the attracted the finite and also the
infinite, they say it is folly to believe this possible, They fly thy name
therefore and receive not that light wherewith thou have enlightened us, but
thinking themselves wise, they continue fools, and ignorant, and blind for
ever, But if they would believe that thou Christ, God and man, and would
receive and entertain the words of the Gospel, as the words of so great a
Master, then would they clearly see that all things in comparison of that
light, that there is hid in the simplicity of thy words, are most thick and
palpable darkness and ignorance; Therefore only the little ones that believe do
obataine this most gracious and quickening Revelation, for there is hid in thy
most sacred Gospel which is the heavenly food, all desirable sweetness,
which cannot be tasted but by him that believes and eats. And if any man
believe and receive it, he shall find it most true by experience that thou
came down from Heaven, and art the only Master of truth.

O good Jesus thou art the tree of lif in the Paradise of delights for no man
can be fed with desirable life but from thy fruit, Thou O Jesus art the
forbidden food to all the sons of Adam, which being expulsed out of Paradise,
does seek their living in the earth in which they labor.

It behooves every one therefore to put off the old man of presumption, and put
on the new man of humility which is according to thy self, if he hope ever to
taste of the food of life within the Paradise of delights.

There is a nature of the new and old Adam, but it is in the old Adam animal,
and in the new Adam spiritual, because in thee Jesus, it is united to God
which is a spirit.

Every man therefore must as by humane nature common to him and thee, so in one
spirit be united to thee O Jesus, that so in his nature which is common to thee
O Jesus, he may come to God the father which is in Paradise.

To see God the Father therefore and Jesus Christ his Son is to be in Paradise
and Glory, Joy,
everlasting, because he that is without Paradise cannot have such a vision,
seeing neither God the Father nor thou O Jesus art to be found without
Paradise, every man therefore has attained felicity which is united to thee O
Jesus, as a member to the head, no man can come to the Father except he be
drawn by the Father.

Thy Father therefore O Jesus drew thy humanity by his Son, and by thee O Jesus
the Father deaweth all men.

As therefore thy manhood O Jesus is united to the son of God the Father, as to
a mean by which the Father drew it, so every man's humanity is united unto thee
O Ies^s, as to the only mean by which the Father draws all men. Thou art
therefore Jesus, without whom it is impossible that any man should attain
felicity, Thou art O Jesus, the Revelation of the Father, for the Father is
invisible to all men, and only visible to his Son, and next thee to him who
shall by thee and thy Revelation be found worthy to see him.

Thou art therefore he that unitest every blessed man, and every blessed man
subsisteth in thee as the united with the uniting.

Not one of the wise men of this world is capable of happiness not knowing
thee.

No happy man can see the Father but with thee O Jesus within Paradise. Of the
happy contradictories are verified as of thee O Jesus, seeing he is united
unto thee in a reasonable natural and one spirit: for every happy spirit
subsists in thine, as the quickened in thee quickening, Every happy spirit sees
the invisible God, and in thee O Jesus is united unto the unapproachable and
immortal God, and so in thee the infinite is united to the Infinite, and the
incomprehensible is comprehended by eternal fruition which is the most
pleasant felicity that can never be wasted nor spent; have mercy upon me O
Jesus, have mercy upon me and grant that I may revealedly see thee, and then my
soul is safe.

How Jesus seeeth and works.

CHAP. 22.
Never can the eye of the mind be satisfied with the sight of thee O Jesus,
because thou art the compl^ment and fulness of all mental beauty.

And in this Picture I guess at the wonderful and stupendous sight: O more
then blessed Jesus, for thou Jesus whilst thou did walk in this sensible
world, did use fleshly eyes like unto us, for with them no otherwise than we
do, thou did see one thing and one thing, for there was in thine eyes, a
certain spirit which was the form of the Organ, as the sensible soul in the
body of a living wight. In that spirit there was a noble discretive or
discerning power, by which O Lord thou did clearly and distinctly see this
thing colored thus, and that other thing otherwise; And more highly yet by the
figures of the face, and eyes of the men thou saw, thou wast a true Judge of
the Passions of the soul anger, gladness, sorrow, and yet more subtly by a
few signs did thou comprehend that which lay hid in the mind of man, for
there is nothing conceived in the mind which is not in some sort signified in
the face, and principally in the eyes (being the Messengers of the heart) for
in all these Iudicia or signs, thou did much more truly reach the inwards
of the soul, than any created spirit, for from some one though very ^mal sign
thou did see the whole conception of a man, as understanding men do by a few
words see through a long preconceived speech, which is to be explicated at
length, and as well learned men if they cast their eyes never so little upon a
book* are able to recite the whole intent of the writer as though they had
read it through: In this kind of seeing thou O Jesus did far excel all the
perfection, swiftness, and sharpnes of all men past, present and to come and
yet this vision was but humane, which was not done without a Carnal eye,
nevertheless it was stupendous and admirable, for if there be men found that
by long and subtle discussion are able to dicipher any Carracter* and to read
the mind of the writer in Characters and signs then newly invented, and never
seen before, thou O Jesus did certainly see all things under every sign and
figure. If it be read that there was sometimes a man found which by whatsoever
signs of the eye ^aw the thought of him that asked him, although he sang some
verse or meeter in his mind: Much better O Jesus did thou apprehend and
understand every conception by every motion of the eye. My self saw a deaf
Woman which by the motion of her Daughters lips which she saw did understand
what soever she said as well as if she had heard her. If this by long custom
be thus possible in them that are deaf and dumb, and the Religious which
speak to one another in signs, much more perfectly did thou O Jesus which
did actually know whatsoever was to be known as a Mr. of Masters, give
judgment true and in fallible of the heart and its conceptions in the least
and to us invisible becks, and nods, or signs.

But to this thy humane and most perfect vision though infinite and contracted
to the Organ, was the absolute and infinite vision united, by which vision as
God, thou saw all things and every thing at once as well absent as present,
as well past as to come.

Thou therefore O Jesus did by thy humane eye see visible accidents, but by
thy absolute divine sight the substance of things. Never any man besides thee O
Jesus saw the substance or quoditie of things whilst he was in the flesh.
Thou only did truly see the soul and the spirit and whatsoever was in man:
For as in man the intellective power is united to the animal visive power, so
that man sees not only as a living Wight, but also discernes and judges of a
man. So absolute seeing was in the Jesus united to the humane intellectual
power which is discretion, or descerning in the animal sight.

The animal visive power in man subsists not in it self, but in the
reasonable soul as in the form of the whole, so the visible intellectual
power subsists not i^ it self, but in thee O Jesus the absolute visive power.
O thy admirable sight most sweet Jesus, we find some times by experiences how
with our eye we see somebody passing by, but because we took no heed to
discern who it was, we cannot tell him that asks us the name of him that
passes by, though we know him well enough, and knew there was some body passed
by; We did see him, therefore animally but not humanely, or we saw him as we
were living wights, but not as we were men, because we did not apply our
discretive, or discerning power: By which we find that the nature of the
powers, although they be united in the one form of a man; yet they remain
distinct, and have distinct operations. So in thee O Jesus I see after a
certain like manner the humane intellectual nature united to the divine
nature, and that accordingly as man thou did many things, and as God many
wonderful things above man.

I see O most merciful Jesus the intellectual nature in respect of the
sencible absolute, and not as the sencible is finite, and tied to the Organ as
the sensible visive power is tied to the eye, but unproportionably more
absolute is the divine power above the intellectual: For the humane
understanding to the end it may be but unto act, has need of phantasmata or
appearances in the fantasy, and they cannot be had without senses, and senses
subsist not without a body, and therefore the power of humane understanding is
contracted and small needing the aforesaid things. But the divine understanding
is necessity it self, not depending nor needing any thing but all things need
it, without which they cannot be. I do more attentively consider how there is
one discursive power which by reasoning discourses and seeks, and another
which judges and understands, for we see a Dog discourse and seek his
Master and discern him, and hear his calling, and this discourse is in the
nature of Animalitie in the degree of the specificall perfection of a Dog,
and there are yet other living wights found of a more clear discourse
according to the more perfect species or kind, and this discourse in man comes
nearest to the intellectual power that it may be the supreamnesse of sensible
perfection containing under the intellectual, many and innumerable degrees of
perfection as the species or kinds of living wights do make plain unto us,
for there is no species or kind which has not the degree of perfection proper
unto it self, and moreover every one of the degrees has its latitude within
the which we see the individuals of the species partake it diversely, But the
intellectual nature in like manner under the Divine, has innumerable degrees
of sensible perfection; so in the divine nature are complicated all degrees of
intellectual perfection, of sensible likewise, and all other things. So in
thee my Jesus I see all perfection, for being most perfect man I se in thee the
understanding united to the rational* or discursive power which is the
supreamnesse of the sensitive power. And so I see the understanding in reason
as the thing placed in its place, as a Candle in the Chamber which enlightens
the Chamber, and all the Walls and the whole building yet according to the
degree of distance more or less.

I see next the divine word united to the understanding in its supreamenesse,
and the understanding it self to the place where the word is received as we
find in our selves the understanding to be the place where the word of the Mr.
is received, as if the light of the Sun should be joined with the aforesaid
Candle.

For the word of God illuminateth the understanding as the light of the Sun
does this world.

In thee therefore my Jesus I see the sensible life illuminated by that
intellectual light: I see the intellectual life to be a light enlightening and
enlightened; and I see the divine life illuminating or enlightening only; For I
see the fountain of light in that intellectual light, to wit the word of God,
which is the truth enlighting every understanding; thou therefore art only the
light of all Creatures because thou art so a creature that thou art also the
blessed Creator.

How Jesus dyed and yet the Union with life remained.

CHAP 23.
Jesus the most savorie food of the mind how admirable do thou appear unto
me when I behold thee within the Wall of Paradise? for thou art the word of
God humanified and man deified, and yet thou art not as it were compounded of
God and man. For amongst those things that compound, proportion is necessary
without which there can be no composition, but between finite and infinite
there is no proportion: Nor art thou the confidence of the Creature and the
Creator in such sort as the Coincidence makes one thing to be another, for the
humane nature is not the Divine, nor contrary wise, for the divine nature is
not changable or alterable into another nature being eternity it self, nor
does any nature whatsoever, because of its union to the divine nature pas into
another nature, as when the Image is united to its truth for it cannot then be
said to be altered, but rather to go back from its alterity, because it is
united unto its proper truth which is inalterability it self.

Nor can thou O sweet Jesu be said to be a middle nature, between divine and
humane, when as between them there cannot be any middle nature partaking of
both, for the divine nature is not partakeable, being wholly absolutely most
simple: Nor could thou then O blessed Jesus be either God or man.

But I see thee O Lord Jesus, one supposition above all understanding, because
thou art one Christ after the same manner that I see thy one human soul in
which as in the soul of any man, I see there was a corruptible sensible
nature, which did subsist in an incorruptible intellectual nature.

Nor yet was that soul compounded of corruptible and in corruptible, neither
did the sensible soul coinside with the intellectual, but I see an
intellectual soul to be united to the body by a sensible power, quickening the
body; And if the intellectual soul should cease to Quicken and Enlighten the
Body though it were not separated from the body, yet would that man be dead,
because his life would cease, notwithstanding the body were not separated from
life, being the understanding is the life thereof. As when a man intellectually
labors and seeks by the means of his sight to discern one that is coming,
and yet being carried away with other considerations, his attention cease
about that inquiry though his eyes be still fastened upon it, his eye is not
separated from the Soul, though it be separated from the discretive or
discerning attention of the Soul. But if that rapture should not only cease
from the discretive quickening, but also from the sensitive quickening that eye
were dead, because it were not quickened: Yet for all that it were not
separated from the intellective form which is the form giving being: As a dry
hand is united to the form which unites the whole body.

There are sound men as Saint Augustine relates, which can retract or draw back
the vivifying spirit, and so they appear dead and feel nothing, supposing it
to be so.

In this close, the intellectual nature would remain united to the body,
which body would not be under any other form than it was before, nay it would
have the same form and remain the same body, neither would the quickening
force cease to be* but would remain in union with the intellectual nature,
although actually it did not extend it self into the body, I see that man
truly dead because he wants the vivifying life (for death is the want of the
quickner) and yet that body would not be dead separated from the life which is
the Soul thereof. After the same manner most merciful Jesus, I do behold
absolute life which is God inseparably united to the humane understanding, and
by it into the body, for that union is such a one that a greater cannot be, and
a separable union is much inferior to such a union as cannot be greater:
Therefore it was never true, nor ever shall be that thy divine nature was
separated from thy humane, consequently neither from the soul nor the body,
which are those things without which humane nature cannot be, although it be
most true that thy Soul ceased to quicken thy body, and that thou did truly
suffer death, and yet wast never separated from the truth of life.

If that Priest whom Saint Augustine mentions had whatsoever power it were to
take vivification out of his body by drawing it up unto the soul, as if a
candle that enlighteneth a Chamber were alive and should draw up those beams
by which it enlightens the Chamber into the Center of its light, and its
drawing up were nothing but a ceasing to inflame; what marvel is it if thou
Jesus being the most free and living light have power to lay down, and to take
up thy quickinnig soul, and when thou would take it up thou sufferedest
death, and when thou would resume it by thine own thou did rise again.

Now an intellectual nature is called a humane soul when it quickens or
animates a body. And the soul is said to be taken away when ^ane understanding
cease to quicken, for when the understanding cease from the Office of
quickening and in this respect separateth it self from the body, it is not
therefore simply separated.

These things thou inspirest o Jesus that thou might show thy self to most
unworthy me, as far as I am capable, and that I may in thee contemplate that
mortal humane nature has put on immortality, that all men of the same humane
nature may in thee attain resurrection and divine life.

What then can be sweeter, what more pleasant then to know this, that in thee
O Jesus we find all things that are in our nature, which only can do all
things and give most liberally and up, bradest no man. O inexpresible mercy
and pity, thou God which art goodness it self could (...) satisfy thy
infinite clemency and bounty except thou gave us thy self: Neither could
this be don more conveniently for us that are the receivers then that thou
should assume our nature because we could not approach unto thine, so thou
came to us and art named Jesus the Savior blessed for evermore.

How Jesus is the word of life.

CHAP. 24.
THy gift, thy best and greatest gift inables me to contemplat thee my Jesus
preaching the words of life and bountefully sowing the Divine seeds in the
hearts of the hearers, And I see them go away which receved not the things of
the spirit: But I see thy Disciples abiding it which began to taste the
sweetness of that Doctrine which, quickneth the soul, for all whom that first
and chiefest of all the Appostls Peter confessed that thou Jesus had the word
of life, and wondered that they which seek life would go from thee: Paul heard
from thee Jesus in a rapture the words of life, and then neither sword nor
famine of body separate him from thee: No man could ever forake thee that had
tasted the words of life who can separate a Bear from Honey, after he has
once tasted the sweetness of it; How great is the sweetness of truth, how
most delectable a life does it give above all bodily sweetness, for it is
absolute sweetness, from whence flows all that by any taste is desired: What
is stronger than love by which every lovely thing has to be loved? If the
knot or Bond of contracted love be sometimes so great that the fear of death
cannot break it, what a knot is there of that love rasted from whence is all
love? I wonder not that all cruelty of pains was accounted nothing by other of
thy Soldiers of Jesus, to whom thou gave thy self, the life to be tasted
aforehand.

O Jesus my love, thou have sowed the seed of life in the field of believers,
and watered it with the testimoney of thy blood, and showed by bodily death,
that truth is the life of the reasonable spirit, the seed grew in the good
ground and brought forth good fruit, thou show me O Lord how my soul is the
breath of life in regard of my body into which it breaths and infloweth life,
And it is not in regard of thee O God, but as it were a power or possibility of
life: And because thou can not but grant the things that are asked, if they
be asked with a most attentive faith, thou inflowest or inspirest me that there
is in a Child a soul which has a vegetative power and force in act, for the
Child grows; It has likewise a sencitive power in act, for the Child
feels, it has likewise an imaginative power, but not yet act, it has
likewise a discursive power, whose act is yet more distant; And it has an
intellectual virtue, but in a power yet more remote and further off, so we
find by experience, that one and the same soul is first in act inregard of
the inferior powers, and afterward in regard of the superior that first he is
an animal man before a spiritual man.

So likewise we know by proof that there is a certain numerall virtue in the
Bowels of the earth which may also be called a spirit, and that it is first in
power or possibility to be made a minera of stone, and another to be made a
minera of Salt, and another of Metal, and that there are diverse such spirits
according to the diversity of Sons, Salts, and Mettalls, but yet that there is
one spirit of the Minera of Gold, which by the influence of the Sun, or of the
Heaven, is continually more and more purified, and at length fixed into such
Gold as is not by any Element to be corrupted or distroyed, and that in it
there shines exceeding much of the incorruptible light of heaven, for it is
very like the corporal light of the Sun.

And the like we find also of the vegitable and sensitive spirit, for the
sensitive spirit in a man does much conform it self unto the moving and
influentiall virtue of Heaven, and does successively take increase under the
influence of Heaven; until it be put in perfect act: And it is brought out of
the power or possibility of the body, and therefore the perfection of it
cease as soon as the perfection of the body fails.

Then is there an intellectual spirit which in the act of its perfection
depends not of the body but is united unto it by means of the sensitive
virtue, This spirit because it depends not of the body, is not subject to the
influence of the heaven, by bodies, neither depends it of the sensitive spirit,
and so not of the moving power of Heaven; but as the movers of the heavenly.

Orbs are subject to the first mover, so likewise this mover, which is the
understanding, but because it is united to the body by the mean of the
sensitive power, therefore it is not perfected without the senses, for all that
comes unto it from the sensible world comes unto it by means of the senses.

And therefore there can be nothing in the understanding which has not first
bin in the sense; And by how much the sense is purer and perfecter, and the
imagination clearer, and the discourse bitter, by so much the understanding in
its intellectual operations is less hindered, and more perspicatious.

Now the understanding is fed by the word of life, under whose ifluence it is
placed as the movers of the Orbs but differently, as also the spirits that are
subject to the influences of Heaven are differently perfected: And it is not
perfected but accedentally by the sensible spirit as the Image does not
perfect, although it excite to enquire the truth of the samplar or pattern, as
the Image of the Crucified does not inflow devotion; but stirsup the memory
that devotion may be inflowed, and because the intellectual spirit is not
necessitated by the influence of Heaven, but is wholly free, therefore except it
do by faith subject it self unto the influence of the word of God, it is not
perfected as a Scholar that is free, and in his own power, unless he subject
himself unto the word of his Master, by beleeveing he is not perfected for
he must trust and hear his Master.

And the understanding is perfected by the word of God, and grows, and is made
every day more capable and apt, and more like to the word, And this perfection
which thus comes from the word from whence it had its being, is not a
corruptible perfection, but a perfection deiforme or formed by God, as the
perfection of Gold is not corruptible, but of the form of heaven. And every
understanding must by faith subject it self to the word of God, and most
attentively harken to that internal teaching of the highest Mr. and by hearing
what the Lord says in it, It shall be perfected.

Wherefore thou O Jesus the only Master has preached, that faith is necessary
for every one that comes to the fountain of life, and have shown that
according to the degree of faith, the influence of the divine power is present.
O Savior Christ, two things only have thou taught, Faith and Love: By faith
the understanding comes to the word, and by love it is united to it, By how
much more it comes unto it, by so much more it is increased in power, and by
how much more it loves, by so much more it is fixed to the light thereof, and
the word of God is within it, [the understanding] and it needs not seek for it
without it self, for he shall find it within, and by faith he shall
approach unto it.

And that he may come nearer he shall obtain by prayers, for the word will
increase faith, by the Communication of its light.

I give thee thanks O Jesus because by thy light I am come thus far, for in
thy light, I see the light of my life, how thou the word inflowest, life to all
that believe and perfectest all that love thee. What other Doctrine was ever so
short and effectual as thine O good Jesus, thou perswadest nothing but to
believe, and thou command nothing but to love, What is more easy then to
believe God, what more sweet than to love him? How sweet is thy Yok; and how
light is thy burden O ray Mr. thou promisest to them that keep this Doctrine,
whatsoever can be desired, for thou requirest nothing that is hard to him that
believes, nothing denied to him that loves. Such are the promises thou make
to thy Disciples and they are most true because thou art truth which can
promise nothing but true things, nay thou promisest nothing but thy self, who
art the perfection of every thing that may be perfected. To thee be praise, to
thee be Glory, to thee be thanksgiving through all ages Amen.

How Jesus is the consumation.

CHAP. 25.
YEt what may that be O Lord that thou sendest into the spirit of that man whom
thou perfectest? Is it not thy good spirit which is wholly in Act, the virtue
and power of all virtues, and the perfection of all perfect things, because it
is he that works all things. For as the power of the Sun descending into
the vegitable spirit, moves it that it may be perfected, and so by the means
of a good Tree, there is made good fruit, but a most acceptable and natural
decoction of a heavenly heat. So thy spirit O God comes into the intellectual
spirit of Good men, and by the heat of divine love, concocts the virtuall power
that it may be perfected, and made most acceptable fruit unto it.

We find by experience that thy simple spirit infinite in virtue is many ways
received: for it is otherwise received in one where it maks a prophetic
spirit, and otherwise in another where it makes a cunning and skillful
interpretor, and otherwise in another where it teaches knowledge, and
otherwise in other men, For there are diverse gifts thereof, and they are the
perfections of the intellectual spirit as the same heat of the sum in diverse
Trees perfecteth diverse fruits.

I see O Lord that thy spirit is not wanting to any spirit, because it is the
spirit of spirits, and the motion of motions and it fills all the world, but
it disposes all things which have not the intellectual spirit by that in
tellectuall nature, which moves the Heaven, and by the motion thereof all
things that are under it, only the disposition and dispensation in the
intellectual nature, it has reserved unto it self a Love: For it has
espoused to it self this nature, in which it has chosen to rest as in a
Mantion house, and in the Haven of truth, for no where else can this truth be
received in it self, but in the intellectual nature.

Thou O Lord which workest all things for thy self have created this whole
world for the intellectual nature. As a Painter which tempreth diverse Colors,
that at length he may paint himself, to the end he may have his own Image
that his Art may therein rest and take delight, that so being himself one and
unmultipliable at the least, he may be multiplied after the best manner
possible in the nearest similitude. And He makes many figures because the
similitude of his infinite virtue and power cannot be after a more perfect
manner explicated, but in many things and all intellectual spirits are to
every spirit opportune. For if they were not innumerable, thou being an
infinite God could not be known after the best manner: for every
intellectual spirit sees some thing in the my God, which if it were not
revealed unto others they should not approach unto thee their God after the
best manner possible. Therefore the spirit being full of love, reveal their
secrets one to another, and by this means the knowledge of the beloved is
increased, and the desire unto it, and the sweernesse of joy is inflamed.

Neither yet O Lord God have thou made the accomplishment; of thy work without
Jesus thy Son whom thou anoyntedst above his fellows, who is therefore
Christ, In whose understanding rests the perfection of every creatable nature,
for it is the last and perfectest unmultipliable likeness of God, and there
can be no one such supreme one: For all other intellctuall spirits are by the
mediation of that spirit similitudes, and by how much more perfect, so much
more like unto it, And they all rest in that spirit, as in the last of
perfection of the Image of God, of which Image they have attained some
similitude and degree of perfection.

I have therefore by thy gift O God all this visible world, and all the
scripture, and all administering spirits to help me profit in the knowledge of
thee, all things excite me to be turned to thee.

All Scriptures labor for nothing but to show thee, all intellectual spirits
have no other exercise but to seek thee and reveal what they have found of
thee. Above all things thou have given me Jesus for a Master the way of life,
and the truth, that so there might be nothing at all wanting unto me.

Thou comfortest me by thy holy spirit, by it thou inspirest the choice of
life, holy desires: Thou asurest me by a foretaste of the sweetness of that
glorious life to love thee the infinite good.

Thou ravishest me that I am above my self, and do before hand see that place
of glory to which thou invitest me, Thou show me many delicate and savorie
dishes that draw me by their most excellent odor, thou suffer me to see
the treasure of riches, life, joy, beauty, Thou discoverest the fountain from
whence flows every desirable thing as well in nature as in art, Thou keep
nothing secret, thou hidest not the vain of love, nor peace, nor rest.

Thou offerst all things to me most miserable man whom thou have created of
nothing.

Why do I therefore stay? why do I not run after my Christ in the odor of
this ointments? Why do I not enter into the joy of my Master* What holds me
if ignorance of thee O Lord and the vain delights of this sencible world have
withholden me it shall now hold me no longer, for I will O Lord (because thou
give me power to will) leave the things of this world, because the world
will leave me, I make have to the end I have almost finished my course I will
prevent the world in bidding it farewell, because I labor toward the Crown,
draw me O Lord (for no man can come to thee except he be drawn by thee) that
being drawn by thee, I may be freed from this world and join to thee the
absolute God in the eternity of a glorious life. Amen.


