A full and true RELATION Of the great Battle fought between the Kings Army,
and his Excellency, the Earl of ESSEX, upon the 23. of October last past
(being the same day twelve-moneth that the Rebellion broke out in IRELAND:)

Sent in a Letter from Captain Edward Kightley, now in the Army, to his friend
Mr. Charles Lathum in Lumbard-street London.

WHEREIN MAY BE CLEARLY Seen what reason the Cavaliers have to give thanks
for the Victory which they had over the Parliaments Forces.

Judges 5.31. So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but let them that love
him, be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might.

LONDON, Printed, November the 4. 1642.

LOving Cousin,
I shall make so near us I can a true, though long relation of the battle
sought between the Kings Army and our Army, under the conduct and command of
my Lord General: on Saturday October 22. our Forces were quartered very late,
and did lie remote one from the other, and my Lord General did quarter in a
small Village where this Battle was fought, in the field called great Kings
field, taking the name from a Battle there fought by King John as they say: on
Sunday the 23. of October about one of the Clock in the after noone, the
Battle did begin, and it continued until it was very dark, the field was
very great and large, and the Kings Forces came down a great and long hill,
he had the advantage of the ground and wind, and they did give a brave charge,
and: did fight very valiantly; they were 15. Regiments of Foot, and 60.
Regiments of Horse, our Horse were under 40. Regiments, and our Foot 11.
Regiments: my Lord General did give the first charge, presenting them with 2.
pieces of Ordnance, which killed many of their men, and then the enemy did
shoot one to us, which fell 20. yards short in plowed Land and did no harm,
our soldiers did many of them run away, to wit, blew Coats, and gray Coats,
being two Regiments, and there did run away, 600. horse, I was quartered five
miles from this place, and heard not any thing of it, until one of the clock
in the afternoon, I hasted thither with Sergeant Major Duglis troop, and
over-tooke one other troop, and when I was entering into the field, I think
200. horse came by me with all the speed they could out from the battle,
saying, that the King had the victory, and that every man cried for God and
King Charles. I entreated, prayed, and persuaded them to stay, and draw up in a
body with our Troops, for we saw them fighting, and the Field was not lost,
but no persuasions would serve, and then I turning to our three troops, two of
them were run away, and of my Troop I had not six and thirty men left, but
they were likewise run away, I stayed with those men I had, being in a little
field, and there was a way through, and diverse of the enemy did run that way,
both horse and foot, I took away about ten or twelve horse, swords, and
armor, I could have killed 40. of the enemy, I let them pass disarming them,
and giving the spoil to my Troopers; the Armies were both in a confusion, and
I could not fall to them without apparent loss of my self and those few which
were with me, the powder which the Enemy had was blown up in the field, the
Enemy ran away as well as our men, God did give the victory to us, there are
but three men of note slain of ours, namely my Lord Saint John, Collonell
Essex, and one other Captain, whose name I have forgot; Captain Fleming is
either slain or taken prisoner, and his Cornet, he had not one Officer which
was a soldier, his Wagon and money is lost, and diverse of the Captains money
and Wagons are lost, to great value, our foot and Dragooneers were the
greatest Pillagers, we had the Kings Standard one hour and a half, and after
lost it again: We did lose not above three hundred men, the enemy killed the
Waggoners, women, and little boys of twelve years of age, we took
seventeene Colors, and five pieces of Ordnance, I believe there were not less
then three thousand of the enemy slain, for they lay on their own ground,
twenty, and thirty of heaps together, the King did lose Lords, and a very
great many of Gentlemen, but the certain number of the slain cannot be
known, we did take my Lord of Lindsey, General of the Foot, being shot in
the thigh, who dyed the Tuesday morning following, and his body is sent away to
be buried, the Lo: Willoughby his son was taken, Lunsford, Vavasour, and
others, being prisoners in Warwick Castle; on Monday there did run from the
Kings Army 3000. foot, in 40. 50. and 60. in Companies, we kept the field all
Sunday night, and all Monday, and then marched to our quarters, and on Monday
the enemy would have given us another charge, but they could not get the foot
to fight, notwithstanding they did beat them like dogs, this last Relation of
the enemy I received from one which was a prisoner and got away.

Banbury is taken by the King, there was 1000. Foot in it, the Captains did
run away, and the soldiers did deliver the Town up without discharging one
Musket. It was Gods wonderful work that we had the victory, we expect to
march after the King. The day after the Battle all our Forces, horse and foot
were marched up, and other Forces from remote parts, to the number of 5000.
horse and foot, more then were at the Battle, now at my writing, my Lord
General is at Warwick, upon our next marching we do expect another Battle, we
here think that the King cannot strengthen himself, for the soldiers do
still run daily from him, and I believe if we come to fight, a great part of
them will never come up to charge. The Kings guard were Gentlemen of good
quality, and I have heard it, that there were not above 40. of them which
returned out of the field, this is all I shall trouble you with, what is more,
you will receive it from a better hand then mine: Let us pray one for another,
God I hope will open the Kings eyes, and send peace to our Kingdom. I pray
remember my love to all my friends, if I could write to them all I would, but
for such news I write you, impart it to them, my Lieutenant and I drink to
you all daily, all my run-awayes, I stop their pay, some of them for two days,
some three days, and some four days, which time they were gone from me, and
give their pay to the rest of the soldiers, two of my soldiers are run away
with their Horse and Arms: I rest, and commit you to God,

Your loving Cousin, Edward Kightley.
The Rebellion in Ireland, and our Battle were both the 23. of October.




