AN ELEGY, ON The Deplorable, and never enough to be Lamented Death, of the
Illustrious, and Serene CHARLES the II. KING OF Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc. who Departed this Life, (on Friday the 6th. of February, between
11 and 12. of the Clock, in the Forenoon: And was Interred at Westminster, the
14th. of the same Month, being the 55th Year of his Age, 1684/5
HAng all the Streets with Sable Sad; and call
The Royal Palace Black; and not White Hall:
Weep Sacred Beads of Loyal Tears, and true,
Of Orient Pearl; but Occidental Hew:
Since Britains Phoebus has forsook the Stage,
Before he reached the Tropic of his Age.
The interval betwixt our Setting Sun,
And Rising Sovereign, 'ere his Light begun
Was short; yet (till our Sorrow found Relief)
We were near deluged in the Seas of Grief.
Yet (tho our Sovereign does our Mourning 'swage,
And gives our joy of Grief the Weather-gage.)
We'll make no Bonfires, for (it were in vain)
Our flowing Eyes would Weep them out again.
All Israel when Good Hezekiah Di'd
To his last Breath, true Loyal Honor paid;
Where Is then the Boldest Critic can deny
Great CHARLES his worth a Doleful ELEGY;
His Worth, to Times last Period shall Endure,
In spite of Envy or the Grave Secure:
And Children yet Unborn with Tears shall pay
A Mournful Tribute to his sacred Clay.
He from his Childhood was of great Renown;
He bore his Cross before he wore his Crown.
Brancht in the stock of Trouble ('it is well known)
His Fruit was Ripe, the Blossom yet unblown.
Great-Britains Bane, and Blush Eclipsed his Sky,
Ere England knew his Soveraignity:
But as his Sun ascended the Noonday,
All Clouds (like Vapors) vanished quite away:
And the Bright Calmes of Peace did still remain
Through the whole Circle of his Halcyon Reign.
Then Rest (dear Saint, tho now Entombed in Dust)
Until the Resurrection of the Just.
And let our Mourners mitigate their Grief,
Because our Sorrow does admit Relief:
The Vail of Death no Christian needs dismay;
The King of Kings himself did guide the Way.
And (since our Sore a Salve along does bring)
God save Great JAMES, our Second Sovereign King.
Let his Dominions preface Black with White;
Since Rising Phoebus dissipates our Night:
Let Loyal Subjects all both cry and Sing
Like Birds Revived in the returning Spring.
Let Court and City raise their joyful Voice
And Loyal Sighs still Echo back Rejoice:
Till Plotters all Conspiracies lay by,
And Treason turn to purest Loyalty.
Hence then projecting Traitors, stand aloof;
His Loyal Throne is sure, and Treason-Proof:
Lest set on Edge by old Seditious Smec,
Your Treasons Trap turn round upon your Neck.
His Presence may no Rebels Old Resort,
Nor base Achitophels frequent his Court;
But Reign in Peace, whilst we have in our Eye
CHARLES still alive in JAMES'S Royalty.
But since he is Dead and gone let this sad Verse
(Tho undeserving) yet attend his Hearse.
EPITAPH.
HEre lies Great CHARLES the just the Good,
As ever came of Royal Blood:
To Troubles Born, he Early knew
What Kings (as Men) are subject to:
His Morning Glories were orecast,
And by some fatal Star Oppressed.
But as his Sun ascended Noon,
The cruel Comet did fall Down,
In Peace he Lived, in Peace he Di'd;
The Kingdom and the Churches Guide.
The Guardian of the swelling Main;
The Terror of the DUTCH and DANE.
At his Commands all War did Cease,
And Europe Owes to him her Peace.
Diseases at his Power did Crouch,
And own the Virtue of his Touch.
Let KINGS and PRINCES in him Glory,
And make his Reign their Directory.
P. K.

LONDON, Printed by George Croom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's Castle. 1685.


