The KING of SPAINS Cabinet Council Divulged; OR, A DISCOVERY of the
PREVARICATIONS of the SPANIARDS With all the Princes and States of Europe, for
obtaining the Universal Monarchy.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for J. S. and are to be sold by Simon Miller, at the
Star in St Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHap. 1. The hatred of the Spaniards toward the Protestants and their
Religion, page 1 Chap. 2. The prevarications of the Spaniards in order to the
Pope and his Elections. page 9 Chap. 3. The prevarications and excesses of the
Spaniards toward the rest of the Catholics, page 17 Chap. 4. Of the Spanish
Inquisition, page 24 Chap. 5. The prevarications of the Spaniards against the
Empire. page 30 Chap. 6. The prevarications of the Spaniards against the Kings
and Kingdom of France. page 40 Chap. 7. The prevarications of the Spaniards
against the Kings and Kingdom of England. page 48 Chap. 8. The prevarications
of the Spaniards against the King and Kingdom of Portugal. page 54 Chap. 9. The
prevarications of the Spaniards against the Low Countries page 59 Chap. 10. The
prevarications and excesses of the Spaniards against the Kingdom or Principate
of Catalonia. page 62 Chap. 11. The prevarications of the Spaniards against the
Kingdom of Aragon page 69 Chap. 12. The prevarications against the Kingdom of
Naples. page 73 Chap. 13. The prevarications of the Spaniards against Italy and
the Commonwealths thereof. page 77 Chap. 14. The prevarications of the
Spaniards against other Kingdoms page 80 Chap. 15. The Spaniards ardent desire
of Monarchy and rule. page 87 Chap. 16. The Ambition, Arrogance, boasting and
scorn of the Spaniards. page 94 Chap. 17. The Spaniards perfidious violation of
Leagues and Promises. page 97 Chap. 18. The Spaniards Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation. page 101 Chap. 19. The ingratitude of the Spaniards toward such
as oblige them. page 104 Chap. 20. What the Spanish succors are, page 110
Chap. 21. The tricks of the Spaniards in contracting Marriages. page 114 Chap.
22. The hatred of the Spaniards toward the Germans. page 117 Chap. 23. How the
Spaniards treat and keep peace. page 120 Chap. 24. The Briberies and pecuniary
Corruptions of the Spaniards. page 123 Chap. 25. The Spaniards are Murderers.
page 126 Chap. 26. The Cruelty and promiscuous Tyranny of the Spaniards. page
129 Chap. 27. The Cruelties and Barbarities of the Spaniards in America. page
132 Chap. 28. The rapacity, avarice, lust, adultery, and other vices of the
Spaniards. page 137 Chap. 29. Other Arts and Tricks of the Spaniards to work
their designs. page 145 Chap. 30. The various Apothegmes and Observations
concerning the Spaniards. page 151 The Conclusion. page 157
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed for, or sold by Simon
Miller at the Star in St Paul's Churchyard.
In Folio.
THe Civil Wars of Spain, in the Reign of Charles the 5th Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, wherein our late unhappy differences are paralleld in
many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767, to the death of King James.

The History of this Iron Age.

Dr. Lightfoot his Harmony of the N. Testam.

In large Quarto.
John Barckley his Argenis, Translated by his late Majesty's special command.
The Prose by Sir Robert le Grise, The Posie by Tho. May.

In Quarto.
The Harmonious consent and Confessions of Faith, of all the Protestant
Reformed Churches, professed in all the Kingdoms, Nations and Provinces of
Europe, published with Authority, to prevent the spreading of Errors and
Heresies.

Camdens Remains concerning Britain, with many choice Additions, by W. D. Gent.

Christ tempted, the devil Conquered, being an Exposition on part of the fourth
Chap. of St. Mathews Gospel, by John Gumbledon Rector of Coyly in Glamorgan.

Abraham's faith, or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England, to be the only true faith of Gods Elect: By J. Nicholson Minister
of the Gosp.

The Anatomy of Mortality: by George Stroad.

Aynsworth on the Canticles.

Paul Bayne, his Diocesans Trial.

The Supreme Power of Christian States and Magistracy, vindicated from the
insolent pretenses of Gulielmus Apolonius: By E. Gralle.

A Treatise of Civil Policy; being a clear decision of 43 queries, concerning
prerogative right and privilege in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Samuel Rutherford Professor of Divinity of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Pinchin his meritorious price of man's Redemption cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and Planets
have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Large Octavo.
The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000 seeming contradictions are
fully and plainly reconciled.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies.

The History of England, Illustrated with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings
and Queens since the Conquest.

Small Octavo.
Ed. Waterhouse Esquire; his Discourse of piety and charity.

A view and defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful
in these times.

Mr. Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits, who are now very busy
amongst us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of scheams or figures of heaven, ready set for every four minuits of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England from the reign of William the
Conqueror, to the death of the late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue and the five Senses for Superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God or not.

The Poor man's Physician and Surgeon.

Duodecim.
Doctor Smith's Practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Poselius Apothegms.

Faciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Drexelius School of Patience.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier his combat with the three arch enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

In 24.
The New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

FINIS.
The Causes of the Public Hatred of the King of Spain, and the Spanish Nation.
CHAP. I. The hatred of the Spaniards toward the Protestants, and their
Religion.
TO shun the suspicion of fancying to write Iliads after Homer, I will not now
make a large Martyrologie, which of it self, were enough to fix a Title to this
Chapter; nor will I compile Histories of the Belgic, or Low Country War,
especially of that which was waged by the Duke of Alva; for those are both
sufficiently known, and there is store of them to be had. This I shall only
say, and this for their sakes, who think the Spaniards will prove milder to
them, because they imagine to themselves, that they are included in the
Pacification of Religion (they who are commonly called by the envious name of
Calvinists being excluded) then to the Reformats, as they term them; that they
are superlatively mistaken. For whosoever they be that differ in opinion from
the Spaniards, whether in matter of Religion, or in order to their long-dream'd
of Monarchy, are all alike to them.

1. The cruelty which the Duke of Alva exercised upon them of the Reformed
Religion in the Low Countries, is notorious enough; yea, and himself, a little
before his end, boasted, that by his command above eighteen thousand persons
passed through the hands of the Executioner, with different sorts of
punishments, for Religions sake.

2. Philip the second, freely and boldly answered the Emperor Maximilian, his
Cousin-German by the Fathers-side (who, having sent his Brother Charles into
Spain) exhorted him to moderation in the business of Religion, That he had
rather lose all his Provinces, then seem to grant, or favor any thing, which
might be prejudicial to the Catholic Religion. Thuan. lib. 133.

3. The Spaniards in the Pacification of Colein, 1580. were wont to say, That
the Protestants would be well served, if they were stripped of all their goods,
and forced to go seek new Countries, like Jews, Egyptians and Nubians, who
wander up and down like Rogues and Vagabonds, without any place of abode.

4. The Citizens of Aquensis had been much more mildely dealt with in the year,
1605 had it not been for the importunate flatteries of King Philips
Ambassadors, as Thuan. testifyes, lib. 133.

5. The Spaniards once took the French in the Isle of Florida, and hanged them
all with this title, This I do not as to French, but as to Lutherans. Camer.
horis subcessivis, c. 98.

6. In the year 1577. when by the Emperors demand, there was a Conference
appointed between the Kings Ministers, and the States of Holland, the said
Ministers urged only this, That the liberty of any other Religion whatsoever
might be excluded out of the Low Countries, and the Catholic only admitted,
which was the cause of dissolving the Conference, re infecta.

7. Ought the Count of Bructerons calamity to be silenced, whose Castle the
Admiral unjustly, and violently seized upon, took his person prisoner, ejected
his wife and children, plundered his goods, killed the Countrymen whom he found
there, yea, and wickedly murdered the very Count himself, together with his
Kinsman, and a Preacher, contrary to his word which he had given them; and this
for no other color, but out of hatred to the Reformed Religion, which he most
constantly professed, and from which he would not be removed by any menaces
whatsoever. See Speculum Arragonicum, as also Speculum Tragicum.

8. Philip King of Spain, in the year 1590. the 8. of March, made a
Proclamation at Madrid, wherein he declared, that after France was cleared, he
would make War upon all such Provinces as were infected with any Sectarian
Contagion. Ancellus apud Thuan. lib. 118. in oratione ad Principes Germaniae,
1570. where the words of the Proclamation are also recited.

9. If there were no other example to be found of the Spanish hatred against
the Gospel and Gospellers, that most cruel Fact of Alphonso Dias, a Spaniard,
would suffice, The example of Dias.
who caused his brother Juan Dias to be killed by his own Executioner, because
he embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel, in the year 1546. and however the Law
were prosecuted against the said Fratricide, he yet obtained his Pardon by the
intervention of the Emperors Letters.

10. The King of Spain, by his Duke of Parma, urged the Senate of Aquensis, to
banish them of the Reformed Religion out of the City, as Peter Beck a Canon of
that City confesses, cap. 13. Comment. sui de urbe Aquensi.

11. Cardinal Granvellanus was often wont to boast, that he would reduce the
Catholic Religion in all places, though a hundred thousand men were to be
burnt in an hour, and that he would begin with Saxony and Orange. See Gaspar
Grevinus, in sua Institutione, p. 192.

12. The Emperor Maximilian the second, most faithfully advised, and entreated
the King of Spain, to treat the Flemmings more gently in matter of Religion,
but he could obtain nothing, as himself writes in a certain Letter of his to
Lazarus Swendius, 1579. the 22. of February from Vienna. This Letter is to be
read, lib. 16. Apoph. Baudartii. See also Speculum tyrannidis Hispanicae in
Belgio per totum.

13. And who ever either saw, or heard of a greater fact of barbarous tyranny,
and hatred against Religion, then that which by the instinct of some ill
Instruments, the Archduke Albert committed, in a certain Maid called Anne
Vandenhoven at Brussels, whom he caused to be set quick in earth, and
smothered? Martyrologium, Meteranus, Speculum Hisp. Tyran. in Belgio. p. 91, 93.

14. It may also be a most sufficient testimony of the hatred of the Spaniards
against the Protestants and Lutherans (and chiefly the later) that when they
have a mind to dishonor any one very much, or call him by any injurious name,
they call him, Vellaco Lutherano, i. e. Lutheran Knave; so that even by this
reproach they who are willing, and glad to be styled Lutherans, may be
sufficiently taught, what they are to hope for from the Spaniards, when the
Protestants are suppressed (who are as much oppugned by others, as by the
Papists) to wit, that they shall be served with the same sauce.

15. When, after the Smalcaldick war, and the taking of John Frederick, Elector
of Saxony, Wittenberg was yielded to Charles the fifth, the Spaniards
petitioned the said Charles, to give them leave to dig up the dead body of
Luther, and burn it; but the Emperor refused it, saying, Let him rest; for if
he has done ill, God will revenge it: I am Emperor of the living, and not of
the dead. He further added, Let him alone, I desire to see him no more; for I
saw him enough at Worms. Zingrefius p. 2. Apoph. p. 11.

16. Charles the fifth, presently after the Diet of Auxburgh, ought to have
surprised and oppressed the Heretics, and Luther by Art, under some other
pretext. See Thomas Campanella, a Spanish Friar, Discursu de Monarchia Hisp. c.
16.

17. In the first place it was an extreme error, to let Luther go off alive,
from the Dyets of Worms and Auxburgh: And then, it was indeed well done of
Charles the fifth (I say) to keep his word with Luther, whilst he was at the
Diet; but afterward, in his going home, he should have surprised him, and
after having already suppressed the Protestant Princes, have utterly extinguished
them. The same Campanella, c. 27.

18. That Peace was to be granted for a time, and sometimes the Heretics (says
Campanella) were to be flattered with magnificent banquets, c. 27. And besides
it was an error in Charles the fifth (says the same Campanella) that he did not
suppress the Countries of the Electors of Saxony, and Brandenburgh, and of the
Landgrave of Hassia, etc. by thrusting out the Inhabitants, and making them
slaves, and planting new Colonies therein, and depriving the Free Cities of
their Privileges, c. 16. These things may also be referred to the 22. chap. of
the hatred of the Spaniards toward the Germans.

19. It is also showed by the same Author, c. 1. to what end the Goths,
Italians, and Spaniards together, ought to conspire against them ( i. e. the
Protestants in Germany) utterly eradicate their Sects after having subdued
them, and place new Colonies in their stead.

Thuanus, lib. 28 in his History De Concilio Possiaceno in Gallia, shows, that
the hatred of the Spaniards against the Reformed Religion, is more then Odium
Vatinianum.

CHAP. II. The Praevarications of the Spaniards, in order to the Pope, and his
Election.
IT may chance to seem strange to thee Reader, that in the Catalogue of the
Spanish Praevarications, amongst all the Powers and Kingdoms of the world, the
Pope of Rome should also come into the number, yea, and that in the second
place, and as it were in the Front. But thou must know, that such is the
ambition of this Nation, and the conception of its Monarchy, that they cannot
forbear their most Holy Father, when there is question of their own ends,
having no respect ^o his Holiness, nor considering at all, that he uses to
style them, his most Catholic, most Beloved, and First begotten sons: And this
is the very cause, why I thought fit to put, and show the Spanish
Praevarications against his Holiness in this second place.

Let my kind Reader therefore know, that the Spaniards, at the choosing of a
new Pope, employ all their studies and labors, that either a Spaniard by
birth, or a Favourer of the Spanish Party, may be elected: This may be showed
by many examples, and first in the year 1591. when after the Death of Pope
Urban the 7th. there grew a great contention amongst the Cardinals about a
Pope; the Spaniards desiring, forsooth, one who was a sworn friend to their
Party; yea, and they at length prevailed for the Election of Nicholas
Sfondrato, a most sworn Crony of theirs. Thuanus.

2. The same thing happened in the year 1592. after the death of Innocent the
9th. when the Free Election was again hindered by the Spaniards, through the
assistance of Ludovico Madrucus, who was of their party; and when Antonio de
Columna, King Philips Ambassador, went into the Conclave himself, with
resolution, that before the said Conclave were shut, Antonio Sanctio should be
nominated, and created Pope; and yet he was stoutly opposed by Francisco
Sfortia, and Columnio Sfortia, who threatened and prepared force against force,
and added, that before that should be, blood should be seen run out of the
Conclave, down the stairs to St. Peter's Church. Many reproaches were thrown
upon Sanctio; and the Cardinals being divided, grew into a long dispute, till
yet at length, by the intervention of some pecuniary corruptions from the
Spanish Faction, Hippolito Aldobrandino was elected Pope. Thuan. lib. 103.

3. The Spaniards at present, by their Factions, reign in the Popes Court; and
however they make not what Popes they will (because their too much greatness is
much suspected) yet do they hinder such as they will not have by their
ambitious Courtships, from rising to that dignity: and they of the House of
Austria are in such a degree of favor at Rome, that it is believed by the
Senate of the Holy See, that the conservation of Religion, and the dignity of
the said See, depends upon them. Thuan. lib. 134. Therefore, after the death of
Clement the 5th. the Spaniards fearing least Noble Cardinal Caesar Baronius,
the writer of the Ecclesiastical Annals, should be chosen Pope, revoked a
complaint, which was begun against him during the life of the said Clement, by
certain Letters supposed to be written by Lorenzo Suarez Figuera Duke of Feria,
and Viceroy of Sicily, brought into the Congregation by Ptolemaeo Gallo
Cardinal of Coma, and Dean of the College, and recited by Don Francisco Mexia
Avila, a Spanish Cardinal, because they were written in that language: at the
reading whereof Baronius, who was present, was not a little troubled, and
taking his grounds (after his fashion) out of the holy Scripture, suddenly
answered, Et melius est mihi mori, quam ut evacuetur gloria mea;
It is better for me to die then lose my honor.


Now there was a place in the eleventh Book of his Annals, where he had
written, that the Right, which the Kings of Spain claim to themselves in the
Monarchy of Sicilie, was grounded upon false and suspected testimonies, etc.
See Thuan. lib. 134. and though Baronius excused himself, yet afterward, when
his Works were Printed at Antwerp, the eleventh Tome was prohibited, and those
Copies which were set forth at Rome, were also prohibited in the King of Spains
Territories.

4. The stupidity of some Catholics is to be wondered at, who refuse to do
nothing in favor of the Spaniards, when in the mean while, nothing is more
familiar to the Spaniards, then to make a stalking horse of the very Pope
himself, as it clearly appears in the Controversy of Portugal, An. 1579. when
the Pope, by Philippo Sega, his then Ambassador with King Philip, willing to
interpose his Authority, and desiring that the composure of the business
between him and Henry might be referred to his arbitration; King Philip, at
first, by the advice of Juan de Sylva, made a show of relishing the Popes
kindness very well; and till he had transacted with Henry, baffled Sega with
various shifts and protractions, Thuan. lib. 69.

6. But was not Rome it self taken, pillaged, and vexed the Pope, and Clergy
forced to yield themselves in the Capitol, and then to ransom themselves with a
huge sum of money, ( viz. Four hundred thousand Ducats in gold) besides a
certain gratulatory coin, which was made with this Motto, In spem prisci
honoris? Luckius, p. 64. And this was the fourteenth seizure of that City.
Erasmus in his Epist. 26. lib. 22. says, that Pope Clement was most inclemently
treated. The Emperor indeed excused himself, that it was done without his
knowledge; but it is ordinary with the Spanish Nation, either to deny their
wicked actions, or to stuff and palliate them with specious pretenses.

7. That the Spaniards do not much value the Pope of Romes authority, if by any
means they could work their ends otherwise, it is apparent by that war, which
the Duke of Alva in his Kings name, waged against his Holiness in Italy, 1556.
of which, Thuan. lib. 17. and 18. where it is related, how the said Duke had a
design to take Rome it self.

8: When the Spaniards had pulled Perez out of the Church wherein he had taken
Sanctuary, the Popes Nuncio, for the maintenance of the Privileges of the
Church, urged that the said Perez might be restored to the Church from whence
he was taken, but could effect nothing. See In relatione rerum Perezii, p. 31.

8. The Vice King of Sicily or Naples, put to death a certain Nobleman of that
Kingdom, a Kinsman of the Popes, notwithstanding the Popes intercession.

9. How the Spaniards gulled the Censure of Pope Urban the 8th. against Poza
the Jesuit, Alphonso de Vergas in his relation teaches at large. See also the
Appendix to that relation.

10. Thomas Campanella a Spanish Dominican Friar, in his Discourse of the
Spanish Monarchy, cap. 6. says, We must labor to get a Spanish Pope, or rather
one of the house of Austria.

11. That the Spaniards bear not that reverence, and respect which they
pretend, to the Bishop of Rome, but abuse his Authority for their own Interest,
is clear enough out of Ancellus, in his Speech which he made to the Princes of
the Empire, 1597. Thuan. lib. 118.

12. What stone did the Spaniards leave unmoved, in the Election of Clement the
8th. to wit, that by the exclusion of him, a more Hispaniolized Pope might be
chosen, and chiefly Sanctorio; though yet for all that, Clement were elected,
who after he had absolved Henry the fourth, King of France from his
Excommunication, the Spaniards said openly, That the Pope was worse, and more
an Heretic, then he whom he had absolved. Perionius in his Epistle to Henry
the fourth, Thuan.

13. When Leo was chosen Pope, the Spaniards reclaimed much against it,
especially Cardinal de Avila, who, when Pope Leo was nominated, cried out as
loud as he could, Treason, Treason! I protest, I protest! He is an enemy to the
Catholic King! See Perionius in his Epistle to the King. And Hulsius in Leon.
ii. They had a design to poison the Pope, nor was it far short of truth, for he
lived but 25. days, and the Spanish Arts are known.

14. In like manner did the Spaniards behave themselves, at the Election of
Urban the 8th. which when they were not able to hinder, they set forth a Libel
at Rome, wherein they asked, Whether the Pope were a Catholic, or no? To which
Pasquil answered, Peace, peace, He is most Christian; And at the Popes Arms,
they jeered thus, Mella dabunt Gallis, Hispanis spicula, verum
Spicula si figunt, vita cum melle carebunt.
Their Honey France; to Spain their stings they will give:
If stings they fix, nor Bees, nor Honey'l live.


But another answered, Pope Urbans Arms were, as I remember, three Bees.
Vrbani Imperium, vis dicam, quale futurum?
Dum dominantur apes, copia mellis erit
What Urbans sway shall be, will thou needs know?
Whilst Bees bear sway, still shall their Honey flow.


CHAP. III. The Praevarications, and excesses of the Spaniards, toward the
rest of the Catholics.
THE rule whereby I have purposed to my self, briefly, and as it were, by
Indexes, to show the Praevarications of the Spaniards, permits me not to
recount whole Histories, of their excesses, and Praevarications toward the
rest of the Catholics themselves for the confirmation of the Argument of this
Chapter: it will suffice, slightly, and cursorily to hint such Histories, and
Authors, as have written them more at large.

2. In the year 1580. when the war was hot in Portugal, besides other
extraordinary cruelties committed by the Spaniards against the Catholics and
Clergy, they came to the Church of St. Roch, near the Almeda (which is the
Jesuits College, and whither many people, out of respect to the Jesuits, and
for safety sake, had transported their goods of most value) and thrusting out
the Italians, under color of Friendship, and as if they had been sent by their
Commanders to guard the Place, partly by force, and partly by theft, they
plundered the said goods, and carried them to the Navy, then near at hand.
Thuan. lib. 70. And many of the Clergy, who would not adhere to the Spaniards
in their Invasion of Portugal, were killed, and destroyed by them, as is
delivered by the Historians who wrote that War.

3. When Charles the 5th. sent his Spanish Soldiers against the Turk, under
the conduct of Antonio de Leva, the said Soldiers used all kinds of baseness,
coveteousness, and libidiousness, toward the Catholics in Austria, plundring,
and firing of Towns, as if they had been amongst their open enemies.

4. Who can choose but be stricken with extreme horror, to read the sacking of
the City of Antwerp 1576. as it is described by Thuan. lib. 62. when it began
to be a vulgar saying amongst the Spaniards, to them of the same Religion,
(when they begged them to spare them for Religions sake) If you have a good
faith, that is for your souls; but if you have much money, that is for us, and
our Trunks.

5. The fine Latin Speech, and the form of condemning men, which Vargas the
Spanish Inquisitor was wont to use, when, being drunk and drowzy, he pronounced
the same Sentence upon all such as were accused, unseen, and unheard; viz.
Haeretici franxerunt templa and simulachra, Catholici nihil fecerunt contra,
ergo utrique debent patibulari: The Heretics have broken the Churches, and
Images; the Catholics have done nothing to the contrary; therefore they must
both be hanged.

6. Nor is that usual scoff of the Duke of Alva, related by Thuan. lib. 42. to
be silenced, viz. That one Salmons head was more worth then fifty Frogs heads:
for the said Duke fulfilled this verse, Tros Tyriusque fuat, nullo discrimine
habendi: Be they Protestants, or Catholics, if they be not Hispaniolized, etc.
away with them. Hereof the Counts of Egmond, Horn, Montigni, and other Noblemen
had sad experience; yea, and all the Catholic part of the Low Countries
likewise. Witness so many Towns taken, sacked, and dispeopled. Witness those
Towns, which even yet, being loaded with Spanish Garrisons, are brought almost
to the utmost calamity, by various exactions, pressures, and burdens. Witness
the Clergy of Portugal heretofore; and at present, the Kingdom of Catalonia,
omitting that of Arragon, Sicilie and Naples. Witness some Bishops of the
Empire, one whereof, to another great man, brake out into these words: I see,
and foresee, that the Spaniards seek nothing more, then that we, and other
Bishops, may speedily die, and bequeath our Bishoprics, and habits to them by
Will. But what do we read? Yea, even whilst we are yet living, they are
plotting and struggling, to pull them from us, and put them upon themselves.
And further, says he, It is not enough for them, to have invaded the Electoral
Land, but they will needs mount up to our Altars, and place themselves near the
Virgin and her child. We need not (says he) go far; for the Archbishop of
Trevirs, and the Abbot of Maximinus can testify by experience, etc.

13. Philip the second, King of Spain, in his Pardon which he granted them who
had resisted him in Portugal, ever excepted sacred Persons, so that he gave
leave to all people, either to kill, or severely punish them. For when that War
of Portugal was ended, it is known, that two thousand Religious men, in the
Islands and in Portugal, either by the sword, or some other mischief, lost
their lives for the said Wars sake. Thuan. lib. 75. anno 1582.

Philip the second, son to Charles the fifth, confiscated all the goods of the
Archbishop of Toledo, and caused him to be poisoned, because he had said (and
that constantly indeed) that the said Charles last Confession was, that he
confided only in the merit of Christ. See Baudartius, lib. 16. Apoph. where
also is rehearsed that contemptible Epitaph made upon Charles the fifth.

Hic jacet intus,
Carolus quintus.
Ora pro eo bis vel ter,
Ave Maria and Paternoster.
15. Anno 1576. in that fury, and direption of Antwerp, raised by the
Spaniards, wherein they spared none of what Religion soever, they ran up and
down the Markets, and streets, crying out as loud as they could, Todo, todo,
todo; All, all, all; Dineros y no palabras; Moneys and not words. They brake
open gates and windows with their guns, and weapons, crying, Fuora, fuora,
vellacos, Out Knaves, out; and one of the chief of them, caused these words to
be wrought upon his pillow, Castigador de los Flamengos; The Chastiser of the
Flemings.

16. At Mechlin, they plundered all the Archbishops of that Town, and all the
Bishops of Namurs, his Church-stuff; the damage whereof was valued at some
millions of gold. See Speculum Hisp. Tyran. in Belgio, p. 41.

17. At Owdenard, they threw some of the Clergy into the water. Ibid.

18. The Spaniards likewise sufficiently testified their cruelty toward the
Catholics, when the Admiral of Arragon invaded Westphalia, the Bishopric of
Munster and Paterborn, nor spared so much as the Bishopric of Colein. See
Speculum Arragonicum, and Specul. Hisp. tyran. in Belgio, p. 99, 100, 101, etc.

19. The Spaniards did more hurt in the Indies by their cruelty, then good by
their Religion; yea, they were often cause, that the Religious men were
murdered and ill used by the Indians, as Bartholome de la Casa teaches in his
spec. Hisp. tyran. in India. And the same moreover says, that the Spaniards
could not endure, that the said Religious men should be there, and teach, in
regard that thereby the Indians were not so much their slaves, as being better
informed; yea, and they took it ill, that any of them should be converted to
the Christian Faith. The same Barthol.

20. The Noblemen of Catalonia discover remarkable examples of the Spanish
Praevarications against the Catholics, and Clergy, in their Catholic
Complaint, especially p. 4.10, 12. See below, Cap. de Cataloniae regno relata
nostra.

21. Nojo Moncata, who first profaned the Church in the Vatican at Rome (never
violated before, and dedicated from the times of the very Goths and Vandals, to
St. Peter and Paul, the Saints Guardian of the City,) was a Spaniard. Jovius in
ejus Elogio.

22. The Spaniards use Churches for their safe^^, as Sanctuaries; and yet if
others fly thither for refuge, they violently pull them out and carry them
away, without any respect to the Sacredness of the place, or privilege;
whereof the Reader has an example in Perez, in the Kingdom of Arragon. And
Anno 1640. the Vice-King of Naples drew a certain Grandee of Naples out of the
Church, and put him to death.

CHAP. IV. The Spanish Inquisition.
THat all mischiefs were brought into the world by this Pandora, the more
sincere, and more prudent Catholics themselves cannot deny, how much soever
the Fathers of the Council of Trent defend it, and how much soever the
Spaniards, like some Divine Palladium (as without which their Religion can
hardly stand) adore it. Whereof Thuan. lib. 104. says thus.

1. The Inquisition is a Benc^^^r Tribunal) in Arragon, to enervate or weaken
the Rights of their Countrey-Liberty, invented by the Kings against such as
bore public Offices. The Inquisitors, a kind of men, of a more then Scythick,
or barbarous nature, ingenious for the invention of most unheard of torments,
thought nothing sharp and bitter enough to torture men's bodies, without sparing
either sex or age. Robertus Abbatius. The Citizens of Lisbone offered King
Philip five and twenty hundred M, as the Author of the Book of the Inquisition
says: not that the said Inquisition might be taken away; but that, in the
terrible jurisdiction thereof, this temperament might be kept, That no body
might be imprisoned, without first knowing his accusers name, and expressing
the heads of his Crime; that so the accused, by the knowledge thereof, might be
able to prepare his answer before his condemnation: And in short, that the
prisoners might be heard, according to custom in other Trials, before sentence
were pronounced against him. But the Inquisitors would not endure to have their
terrible power so circumscribed; for it rambles up and down to express its
jurisdiction at pleasure, and has this privilege in it, to give credit to the
testimonies of base and perfidious fellows, of whom no account is had in other
causes. By this trick was weakened the liberty of Lumbardy, and the Kingdom of
Naples; the Arragoneses privileges broken; the Lisbonezes and Portuguezes by
degrees disarmed. Author anonymus ad ordines Belgicos An, 1605. apud Thuan.
lib. 133.

2. It was the Duke of Alva's design having reduced the Low Countries to a
hard servitude, and destroyed the Noblemen, to build a Castle for the Spanish
Inquisition, or Tyranny, from whence he might send Armies, to destroy the
Germans, English and French, under color of establishing Religion; but the
truth is, to impose their Monarchy upon the whole Christian World, which the
Spaniards have long had in their thoughts; and for the achievement whereof,
there is nothing so detestable in counsel, nothing so horrible in fact, nor
nothing so dishonest in issue, but they hold it lawful for them; witness Mounts
and Berghs, seat upon the public trust, with leave of Margaret, Duchess of
Parma, into Spain, and unworthily put to death, so many Noblemen beheaded, and
more then 20000 innocent persons butchered by the Hangman. The States in their
answer to the King of Denmark, 1597. Thuan. lib. 11.9.

3. The perverse and preposterous form of the Trials of the Inquisition,
against all natural equity, and lawful order, is observed in the explication
of that jurisdiction, as also the barbarousnesse of the torments, wherewith
(contrary to truth) whatsoever the Deputies should think fit to fancy, they
extorted confession from the wretched and innocent prisoners; whereby it
happened, that they said, that it was not invented so much for the maintaining of
piety, (for which there was another way showed by the ancient Discipline of the
Church) as for that, by ruining the fortunes of all, freemen might by this
means be brought into danger. Thuan. lib. 3. where he likewise recounts how the
Dominican Inquisitors being ejected by the Neapolitans, there arose tumults
about it. Anno 1542.

4. How much the Dominican Inquisitors were also hated by the people at Rome,
and how odious the Inquisition grew to the Romans after the death of Pope Paul
4 Thuanus teaches, lib. 23. Anno 1559.

5. Charles 5. An. 1550. granted the Inquisitors power to question not only the
common people, but the Magistrates also, and make them swear to answer to their
Interrogatories, and discover their knowledge; besides, that part of the goods
of the accused, was proposed to the Informers for a reward: and so a large gate
was opened to calumnies and vexations both against all the subjects of the
Low Countries, and all such strangers also, as for any respect of business
betook themselves thither, whereof the number was very great. Thuan. lib. 6.
where it is also related, how the people of Antwerp, by the intercession of the
Emperors sister Mary, got this Decree to be mitigated, and the hateful name
of Inquisition to be abolished.

6. The Spanish Inquisition, in the space of hardly thirty years, has most
cruelly consumed, by various afflictions, and sundry kinds of deaths, a hundred
and fifty thousand persons of the reformed Religion. Balaeus de Act. Pont.

7. The Spanish Inquisition spares not so much as the blood of Kings; many are
ready to show from hence, that they affirm, that Charles, son to King Philip
the second was questioned by the Inquisition for saying, That the Flemings were
to be more mildly handled, which saying is reported to have hastened his death;
yea, it is held for certain, that the Inquisitors disputed, Whether the bones
of Charles 5, were not to be dug up and burned, because he seemed before his
death, to be inclined to the opinion, that man is only saved by Faith through
Christ.

8. A certain Spanish Inquisitor called Diego Hesselio, in the Low Countries,
was wont in the afternoon when he was drunk and drowzie, to exercise his bloody
Trials; and when he was asked his sentence, rubbing his eyes for sleep, he would
say, To the gallows, to the gallows; and so the wretched prisoners were carried
to the gallows. See Speculum Hispan. Tyran. in Belgio, p. 70.

9. The bloody Judge Vergas was also bold to say, That the overmuch connivency
of the King, and the Duke of Alva, lost the Low Countries. Ibid.

10. The Spanish Inquisition, against the Rights and Privileges of the Kingdom
of Arragon, unjustly forced Antonio Perez out of prison at Saragoza, whither he
fled for safety, and clapped him up in their own Jayl, out of which he was
nevertheless again delivered by a concourse of the people, See the Relation of
Perez, p. 57, etc.

11. Poza the Jesuit congested various erroneous opinions in his Book, and
dispersed them amongst his Countrymen the Spaniards: the Pope prohibited the
Book. But the Jesuits despising the Popes censure, published it at Lions, and
wrought so far with the Spanish Inquisition, as not to confirm the said
censure, as it has not done hitherto. Alonzo Vargas of Toledo, cap. 17.
Relationis suae Anno 1641.

CHAP. V. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against the Empire.
THe Emperor Charles 5. though by nature a most mild Prince, and most constant
in his word, was like notwithstanding, by the continual whisperings of the
Spaniards, whom he had about him, to be carried away to the contrary, as it
appears in the cause of Luther, in the cause of Frederick Elector of Saxony,
and of Philip Landgrave of Hessia. For what endeavor did they not use to make
him deprive Luther of his Pass, and the public faith, and abandon him to their
disposal. But he generously bid them be gone, saying, Though there were no
faith in the world, yet shall it be found in me.

2. The kindlers of that war which he waged against the Protestants, were
certainly no other but his Spanish Counselors.

3. And that the Landgrave was not faithfully dealt with, was not so much to ^e
imputed to the Emperor, as to the Duke of Alva, and the Archbishop of Arra^,
who interpreted the word of Captivity not to be so understood, as if he were
not to be detained at all, but that he was not to be perpetually detained. And
it is also to be ascribed to the bloody counsels of the Spaniards, that John
Frederick Duke of Saxony, fell into hazard of his life, by a sentence already
pronounced against him by the Emperor, N^r was it any bodies work but theirs
(for they could do all things with Caesar) that the Religion and form of
Government was changed, in many free Cities of the Empire; and that those
captive Princes, for five years together, to the huge dishonor of the German
Nation, were carried up and down by the Emperor as it were in triumph. These
and the like enormities exercised by the Spaniards through the whole Empire in
Charles his time, the Reader may find in Sleidens Commentaries.

6. An. 1597. Francisco de Mendoza very earnestly urged the Emperor in K.
Philips name, that the Vice-County of Vezonson, (which being hereditary in the
Family of the Cabillers, was transferred by lawful succession upon the
Nassaws) being now devolved upon the Empire by the prescription of Willi^^
Prince of Orange, might be tranferred upon the said Philip, with the Title of
Deputy.

7. The Emperor being desired to constitute a Governor and a Senate in the
Territory of Cleve, and Gulick: he answered, that he must consult thereof with
the Princes of the Empire; and for the rest that he would take care that a man
very well affected to the Reformed Religion, should be sent into those
Dutchies; but that King Philip must have a strict eye over all by his officers,
though still with this caution, not to raise suspicion in the breasts of them
to whom that succession belonged. Thuan. lib. 9. c. 118,

8. The same Mendoza treated with the inhabitants of Newburgh, Franckfurt, and
others, about appointing a Church for the Catholics. Ibid. etc.

9. The Spaniards had long since (in hope) devoured the Duchy of Cleve; which
afterward by their Hispaniolized Counselors, after the decease of the Prince,
they in part obtained. Acta Principum.

10. The same Francisco de Mendoza, anno 1598. invaded the said Duchy of Cleve
and Gulick, with 20000 men of various nations, took Orso, and other Towns, and
made incursions into Westphalia, and the neighboring places, and seized upon
Alpen, though it were declared Neutral. In the same manner served he the
Countess of Moersen, who, though she made her complaint to the Archduke Albert,
got nothing but words for her labor. He likewise attempted the City of Cleve,
which is the Princes seat, and he perfidiously killed and burnt Wirich, Count of
Bruchen, after he had surrendered himself and his Castle to him upon Quarter. He
also took other Towns Buderick, Dinslack, Holt, Rese, and Wesal, he
sufficiently oppressed and afflicted; the Counties of Swartzenburgh, and
Benthemien he devasted, nor spared he the County of Altenburgh, or the
Bishopric of Paterburn, etc. To omit other insolences and excesses surpassing
all measure, which were done and committed in the Empire, whereof Thuan. lib.
121. Metteranus, and the Author Speculi Tyran. Hisp. in Belgio, p. 94, 95, 96,
97, etc.

11. With what right, and to what end the Spaniards thrust themselves into the
business and cause of Aquensis, Gulick and Mulhemien, even a blind man may see,
to wit, with the self same right, and to the self same end, that the Duke of
Parma in his Kings name, seized upon the County of Moersen: and the like aim
had the Spaniards, in seizing upon Rheinbergh, and other Towns in the Empire.

12. With no better seasons did they invade the lower Palatinat, the Duchy of
Simmeren, and the Bishopric of Trevirs, there they committed the former
excesses and prevarications in the Empire; and indeed it is but like them, to
keep Frankental against the express Articles, and their promise made to King
James of England, to restore it to his daughter the King of Bohemiah's Widow:
But they think it a piece of policy to cheat Kings with oaths, as men do
children with nut^.

13. Anno 1598. a Citizen of Gro^ninghen being taken, Letters were found about
him to Ezard Earl of East Freezland, wherein he was bid by a Courtier of the
Archduke Alberts, to fly speedily to King Philips protection, which was offered
him. Thuan, lib. 122.

14. At the same time, by the instigation of King Philips Ambassador, and
Mendoza, a sentence was pronounced against the Citizens of Aquensis. Ibid.

15. Anno 1584. when there arose a war between Gebhard Archbishop of Colein,
and the College, the Spaniards instantly thrust themselves into the business,
however the Emperor and Princes often admonisht the Duke of Parma to withdraw
his Soldiers out of the Empire, Thuan. lib. 78.

16. Ancellus the French Ambassador in his speech to the Princes of Germany,
Anno 1597. says; In Italy there are few Countries which turn from the Empire
under pretext of protection, do not groan under the cruel yoke of the
Spaniards: Nor is Germany to hope better, in which the Town of Berk upon the
Rheine, is already, against all right and equity, held by a foreign Garrison;
and the Castle of Starkenburgh in Westphalia is daily fortified with all
expedition. The excursions of the Spaniards as far as into Hassia these former
years, are notorious, etc. Thuan. lib. 118. Germany has two potent enemies
hanging over her head; the one, the Turk, a plundering, indefatigable,
terrible, and insuperable Prince, the other the Spaniard, who craftily, and by
the ruin of the Princes his Ally's, opens his way to the Empire. It must be
warily considered whether of these two is to be thought the more formidable, by
comparing the Alcoran with the Spanish Inquisition: and whether it be better to
have to do with the Eastern or Western Turks. The Author of the Exequies of the
Pacification of Prague, printed at Roterdam, 1593. writes, that the Spanish
Ambassador at Ratisbon, visited the Electors, house by house only, like a
perpetual Dictator, and dictated to their pens what his Kings pleasure was. p.
32. and a while after he adds, Unless the Electors shake off the Lethargy, and
the Lords of the Chapters in the principal Churches, look more attentively to
their business, it will shortly come to that pass, That upon the
Ecclesiastical Electors ^ill be obtruded the Albani, Farnesii, Leopoldi, and
upon the very Chapters themselves, and Collegiat Churches, the proud Leirae,
Vergosii, and others of that stuff, (whose character is sufficiently known in
the Belgic History) who value as much the Nobility of Germany, as Bethleem
Gabor did Priscians Rules, who having often made the Assembly laugh with his
Latin, handsomely answered, Quid curaremus Priscianum Grammaticum, qui non
metuimus Imperatorem Romanorum? Why should we care for Priscian the Grammarian,
when we fear not the Emperor of the Romans? Idem ibidem, p. 33.

17. The Spanish Ambassador was wont to brag at the Diet of Ratisbone, that his
King maintained three Electors there, and fed them amongst his Flocks; ye^, and
th^^ his King Ferdinand ruled the then King of Kings. In Exeq. Pacif. Pra^. p.
66.

18. Anno 154^. The Spaniards, who marched under the conduct of Charles 5.
ass^ulting partly by force, and partly by cunning, the City of Constance, had
already seized upon the Suburbs; where, after they had committed many outrages,
being repulst by the inhabitants, they fired it and retreated. Sleid. lib. 21.
Com sui.

16. The States of the Empire assembled at Norimbergh 1640, amongst other
things, earnestly petitioned the Emperor, that he would command the Spaniards
(as disaffected to the Empire) to depart from his Council, and assembly of
Princes, as very well understanding, that that Nation uses to fish in other
men's Pools, the better to obtain their own ends.

19. The Princes of Germany did not without ground suspect Charles the fifth;
as if, under pretext of Religion and establishing the Empire, he looked upon his
own private advantage, and the translation of the Empire by right of
inheritance, upon his own family. Thuan. lib. 107.

20. The Spanish faction highly threatened Matthias K. of Hungary, to deter him
for giving free exercise of Religion to the Austrians and Hungarians, whereby
it clearly enough appears, how much the Spaniards esteem the house of Austria,
with the rest of the Catholics, and how much they hate them of the Reformed
Religion. By the same way they overruled the Emperor Rodolph, for granting
liberty of Religion to the Bohemians and Silesians. Metteranus lib. 30. Anno
1608, 1609.

21. Thomas Campanella, a Spanish Friar, in his Discourse of the Spanish
Monarchy, c. 5. speaks thus, of adding the Empire to the Spanish Kingdoms, The
Pope must make it his business to excommunicate the three Protestant Electors,
threatening them, that unless they return to the Roman Church, he will deprive
them of their Electoral dignity: And then, it were better, if the King of Spain
would get himself chosen Emperor, and so invade Germany with a great Host, and
subdue it; but he must do it under pretext of going into Hungary.

CHAP. VI. The Praevarications of the Spaniards, against the Kings and Kingdoms
of France.
AS France is nearest to the Empire in limits, so is it also nearest to the
plots and tricks which are framed against it by the Spanish Nation. For, in
regard that no kingdom is a greater Remora to the Spanish Monarchy then France:
therefore do the Spaniards bend all their forces and studies, to the conquest
thereof; insomuch as I could discover the whole Magazine of their plots,
designs, and prevarications against it, were I not hindered by other reasons:
but amongst many it may suffice for the present to bring some few. I will
silence the wars between Charles and Francis, because they were public, as
also other Martial differences, and will only touch upon some clancular
attempts, and such as were exercised secretly, and under color, if not of true
friendship, yet certainly with no show of open hostility.

1. In the first place, we meet with the League of the Henotickes, who affected
to be called Zelots; in which action, not only and singly of the Spaniards,
but a manifold prevarication might be observed, of which conspiracy, or Holy
League, (as they would needs have it styled) the Noble Historian Thuan says
thus, lib. 90. Never was there Portent in France, to be compared with that
pernicious faction, who fancied to be called Zelots: for having seduced the
hearts of the common people, the Towns and Cities throughout the whole kingdom
revolted from their lawful King and Magistrate, and letting the Spaniards into
the kingdom, laid all France open to foreign and pernicious enemies to the
French name; insomuch as that a certain learned man, not unpleasantly said,
That though the Prodigy which appeared in Nero's time, (when, in the Agro
Marruccino, the whole Olivet of Vectius Mercellus was carried over the high
way, and plowed lands instantly brought in its stead) were very great, yet the
French were a greater miracle to us in our days, namely to see Spain come into
France, and Frenchmen to behold Spaniards strutting in the middle of Paris.
Thua. Lib. 90.

2. That King Philip of Spain entered into league with the Guisians, to the
disadvantage of the kingdom of France, may be read as well elsewhere as in
Thuan, lib. 81. where the conditions of the league are also expressed.

The crown of France is desired for Isabel.
3. An 1593. the Duke of Feria, Ambassador to the King of Spain, most highly
extolled Clara Eugenia Isabella, the Spanish Infanta, in an Assembly of the
Noble men in France, desiring at last, that in the choice of a King, (though
Henry the fourth were already King) the said Infanta might be remembered, Thuan.
lib. 106. which was manfully opposed by, etc.

The Petition for Isabel iterated by the Spaniards.
4. The same petition was likewise afterward renewed with the States, and most
vehemently urged by John Baptist Taxis, and Inigo Mendoza. Idem Thuan. lib. 16.
But these men were refuted by some who posted up papers in certain places;
wherein, amongst other things were found these: If the French should do this,
they would not only be condemned of high treason for betraying their Country
to their enemy (and nominatively the Spaniard) but also show themselves mere
madmen, by trusting the security of their Religion with that faithless Nation,
(the greatest part of them being Marianists, and such as held it a common
crime, not to know God) and render their wives, children, and whatsoever is
dear and good to them, to the lust and cruelty of those white Mores, (whose
ways were not to be endured even by their own subjects) to be greedily and
cruelly dealt with, and thereby stir up the most just hatred, revenge, and
arms of the neighboring people and Princes against themselves, to whom the
Spanish ambition is (with good reason) both extremely suspect, and hateful, in
regard they seek nothing else, but that under pretense of Religion they may
every where usurp a tyrannical Rule, thereby to deceive the simple, and suffer
the wicked to transgress with impunity, etc.

5. The Spaniards observing that this business of the Infanta would not
succeed, The crown of France desired for Ernestus.
propound Ernestus (to whom Isabella was to be married) to the Confederates,
but finding a rub also there, they proposed, The D. of Lorrain is propounded to
the French for their king, by the Spaniards
that the Noble men would choose some one of the Princes of France, as aiming
at the Duke of Lorrain, to whom Isabel was afterward to marry. But at length
they nominated the Duke of Guize, promising to give him the Infanta to wife,
and asking Low Britany for her Jointure. They prescribed also other insolent
conditions to the French, as if, forsooth, they had been sent into the full
possession of France, and had treated with conquered people; which yet was
understood by Meduan and Bassompierre, and therefore they rejected their
propositions. See Thuan lib. 106. and lib. 107.

7. The Spaniards under the pretext of succouring their Allies and
Confederates, seize upon some Towns, whereof the Citizens of Lions being
sensible 1594, secured themselves betimes, and agreed with Henry the fourth.
Thuan. lib. 108.

A plot against the life of the King of France, framed by the Spaniards. The
attempts against Henry 4.
8. Fontano and Steven Ibarra, Ministers of the King of Spains, suborned Emanuel
Andrada, with huge promises, to poison the King of France with a Nose-gay,
Thuan. lib. 109.

9. The high endeavors of the Spaniards to alienate the Pope from Henry the
fourth, are described by Thuan. lib. 107.

10. Philip the second, at first, by private plots, but afterward by open
force, brake into France, and fisht as it were with a golden hook, for the
ill affected persons. Thuan. lib. 110.

11. Henry the fourth complains grievously of the Noblemen of France upon the
discovery of the new plot, Anno 1604. That the Spaniard would want no matter
for his crimes, for that he could not reduce his mind from the vice it got on
the other side of the Pyreneans, nor cease to draw his subjects to wicked
actions, etc. Which letter is exhibited by Matthaeo in Historia Franciae, lib.
7.

12. By what means the Spaniards attempted to intercept Masseilles, Anno 1596,
and how Menargus was punished for it, is taught by Matthaeus, lib. 1. tom. 3.
Hist. Fran. and Thuan. lib. 116.

13. The King of Spains various prevarications against France, are deduced by
Henry 4. in denunciatione belli Provinciis Philippi, Thuan. lib. 3.

14. The Spaniards incited Peter Owen, a Carthusian Monk, to murder Henry the
fourth; but the King pardoned him, notvvithstanding he were condemned, Thuan
sub finem, lib. 118.

15. The Spaniards, however there were peace on both sides, complotted with
Biron, Anno 1610. by Fontano Parario, Thuan, lib. 125.

16 What was their design Anno 1602. when it was agreed between the King of
Spain and Biron, to seize upon King Henry when he was a hunting, and send him
into Spain, Thuan. lib. 128.

17. Fontano, Anno 1600, (at which time there was peace between France and
Spain) had forty thousand men, and forty pieces of Ordnance ready, wherewith he
intended to invade. France, because King Henry was then busy with the war of
Savoy, Thuan. lib. 128.

18. What pernicious counsels Taxis and Sunica, King Philips Ambassadors took
in France against the kingdom of France, is manifest out of the confession of
Balsack, Count of Eutrage, Thuan. lib. 134. As also out of another, with other
Noblemen at the same time; as out of another with Merargus Governor of
Marseilles, where King Henry's speech is likewise related, wherein he both
freely and largely upbraids Sunica King Philips Ambassador, with the Spaniards
plots, Thuan lib. 134.

20. Santa Cruz King Philips General, after his victory against the French near
the Tercera Island, condemned and executed 28 Noblemen, about 50 Gentlemen, and
300 common men, Thua. lib. 75.

21. In like manner Valemundo, General of the Spanish Army in Florida,
perfidiously broke his word with Ribald, and Otigni, and most cruelly murdered
above 600 French men after Quarter given, and caused their eyes to be plucked
out after they were dead, and to be stuck upon the points of their pikes, as
Thuan amply describes, lib. 41, Anno 1568.

22. The Spaniards, howbeit they had made peace and league with Charles the
eighth, yet by private dispatches of letters and Agents to all parts (and
especially to Venice) they brake it, and instantly made war upon the French, as
Comines testifies, lib. 5. belli Neapolitani, p. 926.

23. An. 1614. Francisco Suarez, a Spanish Jesuit, set forth a scandalous Book
against the State of the kingdoms of England and France, which was publicly
burnt at Paris, by order of Parliament; howbeit the said Book was set forth by
the approbation of Joan Alvarez, Provincial of that Society.

CHAP. VII. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against the Kings and Kingdom
of England.
WE have staid long enough in a continent, let us now pass the Sea, and see
whether the King of Spain have shown himself more faithful to the English then
to the French, and others. Not a whit. Read what follows, and you will find
with me, that a Wolf is every where a Wolf, Attempts against Q Elizabeth.
and would as well take and devour the marked as unmarkt sheep. And to begin
with Queen Elizabeth, it cannot be denied, but that the Spaniard used all
possible means to deprive her both of her kingdom and of her life. Thuan
testifies, lib. 44. Anno 1569. that Mary Queen of Scots, by the instigation of
the Spaniards, and others, endeavored to innovate things in England; and to
that end Rudolphus Robertus came into England, to solicit the English to
disloyalty, and promise them great matters from the Pope, and the King of
Spain, and he was employed by the Queen, as her chief Minister and Assistant.

2. That the Spanish Ministers by their Emissaries the Jesuits, induced the
Duke of Norfolk, Anno 1572. to undertake dangerous designs against Queen
Elizabeth, was not doubted of by the wiser sort of those times; yea, and he was
brought to lose his head for it. Hist. Belg.

3. In the year 1601. the King of Spain, by the instigation of Garnet Robert, a
Jesuit, endeavored to trouble affairs in England; but that enterprise being
detected, vanished into smoke. Metteranus lib. 27.

4. That the King of Spain did direct all his enterprises, that by the Jesuits
he might molest the affairs, and innovate Religion in England, so many
reiterated designs, but most of them being frustrated, the writing made
against the Jesuits in England 1602. in which among other titles they have this
name that they are the King of Spains Trumpeters.

I cannot forbear to speak of that stupendous Fleet which was sent against
England and the Queen, Anno. 1588.

5. The King of Spain trecherously thinking to destroy Queen Elizabeth, and to
possess himself of the English Nation, provided a mighty Navy, consisting of
one hundred and thirty ships, where of Galeasses and Galleons seventy two
goodly ships like to floating Towers, in which were Soldiers 19290. Mariners
8350. Gally slaves 2080. great Ordnance 2630. On the twentieth of May they
weighed Anchor from the River Trigas, but were by tempest so miserably
dispersed, that it was long ere they met again: But they sent before to the
Prince of Parma, that he with his Forces consisting of fifty thousand old
Soldiers, should be ready to join with them, and with his shipping to conduct
them into England, and to land his Army at the Thames mouth. But God so
ordered, that partly by distress of weather, and partly by the valor of the
English, they were driven back with infinite loss and disgrace.

6 Fontano, a Spaniard, with a vast sum of money (to wit, 50000 Pistols)
corrupted Doctor Lopez, to poison Queen Elizabeth, as the said Lopez himself;
together with Emanuel Ludovicus Tinotius, and Stephanus Errera, freely confessed.
Thuan. lib. 109.

7. Ibarra attempted the same plot upon the said Queen, by Edmond of York,
Cousin german to him who perfidiously betrayed the Fort of Zutphan to the
enemy: as also by Richard Williams, besides another youth, and other accomplices,
for which he promised them 40000 Pistols.

8. Anno 1601. the Spaniards were brought into Ireland by Hugh Earl of Tiron,
but were but scurvily entertained there. Thuan. lib. 125.

9. When, in the year 1603. certain Engglish were taken and executed for a
conspiracy against the King, Carolus Ligneus, Count of Aremberg, who was then
Ambassador there from the Archduke Albert, was suspected to have conspired with
them, Thuan. lib. 129.

10. The King of Spain, not long after the death of Mary Queen of Scots,
ordered the Duke of Parma, then Governor of the Low Countries, to promise in
his name, the King of Scotland, both men and money, against the Queen of
England, thereby the more easily to revenge his mothers death. And to that end
the said Duke sent Robert Bruss, a Scotch Gentleman, into Scotland, with a
great deal of money. Besides, that the Scotch King was put in hope to marry the
Infanta of Spain, provided that he embraced the Roman Religion, which was
proposed by one William Crich^on, who then belonged to the Popes Nuntio, and
had formerly been Rector sometime of the Jesuits College at Lions, and he
endeavored to persuade Bruss, either by force or fraud to kill John Metelan,
High Chancellor of Scotland; and because Bruss abhorred so wicked a fact,
Crichton accused him to Fontano, who clapped him up in prison for fourteen
months together. See Hospinian.

11. How cunningly some of the Spanish Emissaries endeavored to persuade James
(then King of Scotland, and afterward of England too) that it was necessary
for him to have a league and friendship with the King of Spain, saying that it
would much advantage him to have the favor of the Spaniards. Thuan. lib. 83.

12. The dangerous designs of the Spaniards, by the Jesuits and their
Emissaries, to destroy both the Queen and Kingdom of England, Anno 1596. is
described by Thuan and others in the English Complaint to Pope Clement the
eighth.

13. Diverse outrages and Acts of hostility have been committed by the Spaniards
against the subjects of England in their Colonies of the West Indies.

14 Anno 1605. Certain English men being on the North side of Hispaniola, were
enticed a shore by a Priest named Father John, on promise of secure trading,
were inhumanly and barbarously murdered by the Spaniards. The Master was tied
naked to a tree, and most cruelly pinched and stung to death.

15. An. 1608. The Richard of Plymouth trading to Virginia, was assaulted by
the King of Spains ships, and notwithstandding the Master produced the Broad
Seal of England, he with all the men were condemned to the Galleys, where some
were with much cruelty, beaten to death.

16. With what tricks and juggles the Match in Spain, between the late King
Charles, and the King of Spains daughter, was treated, prolonged, and at last
quite eluded, is sufficiently known to such as were employed in that business.
So that Spaniards are every where Spaniards,

CHAP. VIII. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against the King and Kingdom
of Portugal.
WHen Sebastian King of Portugal, Anno 1578. resolved to undertake that
Expedition into Africa, (fatal both to him and his Kingdom) Philip King of
Spain, seemed, forsooth, at first, to disapprove, and dissuade it; but it was
observed by the wiser sort, that he was not real in the business, as promising
much, and performing little; yea, and sometimes instantly denying his promises,
Thuan. lib. 65.

2. King Philip of Spain by his Emissaries the Jesuits, deterred Henry
successor to Sebastian aforesaid, as well by menaces as other persuasions, from
his purpose of subrogating John Duke of Braganzia in his place, in respect of
his age, howbeit all the Nobility of Portugal favored the said Duke; yea, and
he also wrote Letters to the common people of Lisbon, to debauch them, and gain
them to himself, which he at length, in his Npehew, Anno 1640 achieved. Thuan.
lib. 65. sub finem.

3. None have ever more sharply resisted free election for want of Maleissue,
and in a dubious right of succession to the Crown of Portugal, then King
Philip and his adherents, Thuan. lib. 69.

4. Philip, by Ferdinand of Castile, deterred Henry, King of Portugal, from
marriage, that by his dying a Batchelour, he might more easily come to the
Crown of Portugal. Thuan, lib. 69.

5. Thuanus says, that Philip intended to prosecute his right to the Kingdom
of Portugal by way of Arms, as putting more confidence in his might then in
his right, or in the opinions of his Lawyers.

6. Philip made many large promises to King Henry, and the Portuguezes, by the
Duke of Ossuma his Ambassador, to make him King; which afterward were not
half performed. Thuan. lib. 69.

7. Whilst the suit was still depending, and King Henry yet living, King Philip
armed himself against Portugal; which Henry perceiving, began to boggle, as
being persuaded by Leo Euric, a Jesuit, that he would merit heaven, if he would
appoint Philip for his Successor. Thuan. lib. 69.

8. The matter being come to blows, Philip referred the business to the
Divines, (the Jesuits and the Franciscans) to be discust at leisure: A fine way
of proceeding, and proving his cause! For they, excluding the Popes authority,
because it was a mere earthly business, etc. gave their votes for Philip.
Thuan. lib. 69. And howbeit the Pope indeed first by Sega his Nuntio, and
afterward by Alexander Riario, were urgent with Philip to desist from war, til
the business were composed, yet could he effect nothing at all with him. See
Thuan. lib. 70. Anno 1580. but put off the Conference with various reasons,
delays, and excuses.

10. The Duke of Alva took Cascaio by force; and although before it were done,
the besieged put forth a white Color, and desired a Parley, the Spaniards,
notwithstanding in hope of prey, stormed the Town* and put Diego de Meneses,
whom they found there, together with Enric Perei ra Governor of the Castle,
with some others, to death, Thuan. lib. 70.

11. An. 1581. King Philip of Spain at his coronation, gave the Nobility of
Portugal a general pardon for what was past; but the event answered not their
expectation: for not only Antonio Prior, Francisco Portugallo, Count of
Vimioso, and Bishop Juan Garda, brother to the said Count, together with fifty
more principal men of the contrary faction, and all religious men, were
excluded from it. Thuan. lib. 73.

12. Philip readily granted the Portuguezes all such of their requests as were
of almost no moment; but such as were of any concernment, he either flatly
denied, or answering them ambiguously in the margin eluded. Thuan. lib. 73. In
the same manner he also denied the requests of the Nobility.

13. How Philip gul'd the demands of such of the Portuguezes as had rendered him
faithful service in the acquest of the Crown, Thuan teaches, lib. 75. saying,
That either the Kingdom of Portugal, in right, belonged to him, and then they
were bound in justice to help him get it, or not; and so they were traitors to
their own Country: but whethersoever it were of both, he owed them nothing,
and that it ought to suffice them that he had given them their lives.

14. How inexorable and severe Philip showed himself to some sacred persons,
who were against him in his acquisition of Portugal, see by the Letters above,
Chap. 2. for two thousand of them perished in that war. Thuan. lib. 72.

15. Immediately after Philip got the Kingdom of Portugal, he utterly outed
the Portuguezes, and preferred Spaniards in the government thereof; Whereupon
Thuan. lib. 78. Anno 1583. It troubled the Portuguezes, that Francisco
Villefanga, a Castilian, and not a Portuguez, was made high Treasurer of
Portugal.

16. Michael de Vasconcellis, the Spanish Kings Secretary, showed himself so
proud and insolent in the said Kings Council at Lisbon, that he forbore not to
strike some prime persons, who came to him upon business. Others of the chief
Nobility, he condemned, and sent to the Galleys, and used other insolences Ex
Relationibus Portugalliae. Anno 1640.

17. Comines near the end of his fifth Book of the Neapolitan war, says,
that the Spaniards do naturally hate and contemn he Portuguezes.

CHAP. IX. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against the Low Countries.
TIme, and the greedy Readers expectation require me now to return out of
foreign parts, into our Low Countries, and show what things have been cruelly,
perfidiously, trecherously, and lecherously, both done and suffered then by the
Spaniards, before and, after this war, which has already been begun, (and with
no less variety, then heat, and courage of the parties contending) continued
since the year 1566. But in regard there is so great a cloud and bulk of them,
that one my sooner grasp the sky in ones hand, then relate them either with
tongue or pen: Besides, that there be many other Authors extant, of both
Religions, who have collected them with as much faith as care, and have
inserted them in their Histories according to the series of years; I will
forbear to tire my pen with setting them down. There are few who have not seen
the History of Emanuel Metterano, together with the continuation of William
Baudert, written in Low Dutch; as also the Relations of P. Boorn, of the same
War: besides the History of Eberhard Raid; to be silent of the noble Historian
Jacobo Augusto Thuano, the Livies of the French Kingdom, by whom both the
beginning and success of the Low-Countrey-war, are written with great
elegancy, and integrity; where we may also see what plots were contrived
against the Noblemen, and especially against them of the house of Orange, both
Father and Son, how many Towns taken, and miserably plundered, and the
Inhabitants more then barbarously treated: how many rebellions raised by the
Spanish Soldiers; and how miserably the subjects and Citizens (especially they
of Antwerp and Mecklin) were abused and pillaged: yea, how many thousands died
by the Hangmans hands, excluding such as perished in the wars. To which may
also be added the Martyrology of Corvinus, and the Apology of the Prince of
Orange, besides the speech of Ansellus to the German Princes, together with
other Apologetick writings, set forth by the Noblemen of the Low Countries;
likewise Speculum Hispan. Tyran. In which book the Reader will find such things
as will amaze him, principally page 35, 36, 37. at Brussels, Mounts in Hennault
upon the Moze, Lile, Tornay, Roterdam, Mechlin, Zutphan, Nard, Harlem, Antwerp,
(the sacking whereof exceeded all the rest, above 8000 Citizens, and Soldiers
being massacred in it) besides that they extorted and took from the Inhabitants
above forty Tuns of gold, excluding Jewels, and other things of price, etc.

For these, and other causes, I shall not weary my own hands with writing, nor
the Readers eyes with reading of these things; but will make a leap over the
sea into Catalonia.

That excellent book of Thomas Camponella, a Spanish Friar, must not be left
out of this Catalogue, wherein be shows above thirty ways, for the King of
Spain to subjugate the Low Countries: as first, by sowing the seeds of discord
amongst the Inhabitants, Secondly, by throwing them out of their Country; to
which he adds this advantage, that the King should fly to Jasons Arts, and
procure some Medaea, that is, some promiscuous marriages.

CHAP. X. The Praevarications and Excesses of the Spaniards against the Kingdom
or Principal of Catalonia.
THe States and Noblemen, chiefly the Magistrates of Barcelona, Anno 1640.
published a Book called, A Catholic Complaint to King Philip; wherein first,
they demonstrated their fidelity and constancy in his service, freeness, zeal,
submission, and other deserts toward him, whereby they justly deserved and
ought to be more gently, and better used by the Spaniards; for, as they write,
chap. 7. whilst the war lasted between him and the King of France in the County
of Rossillion, Anno 1640. they maintained 30000 men for seven months together.
Gathered and presented him an infinite sum of money at several times, for his
necessary uses, without order, insomuch that scarce any Province has deserved
more and better. But what thanks received they? Those, which in their Preface,
or Epistle to the King, they complain of, to wit, that they had been bitterly
treated by his Soldiers, who (as they write c. 4.) had extorted a great deal
of money from the Husbandmen; that they had committed various sacrileges in
Monasteries, Churches, and other sacred places, plundered Churches, and fired*
them, broken Fonts, burnt consecrated Hosts, violated the Images of Christ and
the Virgin. In the seventh chapter they show how the favor which they had
merited, was bestowed upon the Spaniards, for that they bad been traduced by
them to the King, to have run out of the field; and afterward they accuse the
Spaniards of envy and falsehood, and purge themselves to the King, of the crimes
objected against them, saying, that the Spaniards make other men's merits and
honor their own, and by all means extenuate, obliterate, and forget the
praises of others. They recount the various Arts of the Spaniards, adding, that
since the year 1620, the Spaniards had done nothing in Catalonia but vex,
torture, and suppress the Catalonians in manifold manners, infringed their
ancient privileges and immunities, and took them quite from them, traduced and
accused them to the King, sowed differences and discords betweeen the King and
the States of the kingdom, utterly averting his Majesty's heart from them,
imposed unnecessary charges upon the King and kingdom, exhausted the Country
with exactions and expeditions, and brought it even to beggary: Adding
moreover, that now they were worse, and more cruelly used by their Associates,
and Auxiliaries the Spaniards, then they formerly were by their professed and
open enemies the Mores: that the Count of Fonteclaro, squeezed a great sum of
money out of the Company of Merchants, violated their wives and daughters, killed
their husbands, and others, plundered their goods and estates, fired their
villages, many whereof they express by their names, That Leonardo Mala, the
kings Captain, seized upon the Gates of Villa Franca, extorted money from the
inhabitants for going in and out; and that adulteries, rapes, murders,
plunders, house-breakings, and firings, were but sport and pleasure to the
Spaniards. That Baron Lisaga took away their goods, and sold them by outcry,
fired their houses, and committed an infinity of other tyrannical facts and
insolences against the Catalonians. And although they complained of these
excesses to the kings Officers, and Ministers, they had effected nothing but to
be sent back with scorn; which irritated the Soldiers to commit still greater
outrages. They complain likewise, that the kings Officers were still desirous
of wars, and to prolong them; yea, and to sow wars out of wars, thereby
to gain time and opportunity to vex and burden the people, and enrich
themselves and theirs; as finding that it was better to be rich Soldiers in
war, then poor and contemptible Fellows in peace, chap. 8. They often complain
that one (and he no rich Countreyman neither) was forced to quarter and
maintain above a dozen Soldiers, which was enough to devour them to the very
bones: and when there was no more left to give them, that they plucked them by
the Beards, dragged them about the floor, beat them and crippled them with their
swords, abusing them moreover with most bitter scoffs, saying, Go now, and sell
thy wife and children, and give us meat and drink. They besieged the Castle of
Antonio de Fulvia (a man of prime Nobility, and beloved by all for his
integrity of life) burnt the gates, pillaged the Country peoples goods,
brought thither to be secured, and most cruelly massacred the said Antonio,
with some others, in the very Church, with a sacred Image in his hand, and left
him naked on the ground.

Cap. 10. They relate how in a certain village called Gava, the Spaniards
proceeded, by killing, ravishing of wives in the presence of their husbands,
hanging men by the arms to extort their money from them, and beating of a
Priest in the Church, saying, Though it were the Apostle Paul himself, and had
the Sacrament of the Altar in his hands, he should not be better used. And in
another place, they stole all the ornaments out of the Church, ravished young
women, and murdered their parents who came to help them; and all this without
punishment; nay, they say, that the Spanish Officers and Ministers severely
forbad the Lawyers to undertake the cause or defense of the Catalonians: Their
petitions were derided, and the Inhabitants prohibited under pain of death, to
complain of the injuries done them; so that the Spaniards do often more cruelly
and hainously handle their Friends and Associate^ then open Enemies.

In Catalonia there is nothing seen or heard, but women bewailing the
murtherings of their husbands, and husbands the ravishing of their wives, and
abusing of their marriage beds: old men complaining of the violating of their
daughters, and the daughters lamenting the loss of their chastity: Orphans
howling for the violent death of their parents, and both Citizens and
Contrymen invocating the help of Heaven in these calamities, etc.

Chap. 12. They recount how the City of Perpinian was vexed, besieged, and
fifty two Fireballs thrown into it, and five hundred sixty four houses
consumed with fire, and 1115. pillaged; not so much as the very Churches
spared, and the Monastery of the Carmelites, together with other sacred places
plundered by the Spaniards, who took above eight thousand Ducats, in despite
of the intercession of the Bishop, and the Religious. The Inhabitants of
Perpinian disarmed; no body permitted to go out of the Town, and the Townsmen
imprisoned. The complaints which were made hereof to the Spaniards, were either
not accepted, or plainly rejected, or else put off till other times. Many of
the prime Citizen were taken and cast in prison without cause, and there
retained for some months, before they could know why; no justice administered,
the rents of the Bishop, and Clergy of Barcellona taken away; all Jurisdiction,
both Temporal and Spiritual transferred upon the Spaniards, etc.

They also complain of the Spanish Kings ingratitude, concluding thereby, that
they were forced to take arms against their wills, etc. But I will stay here,
and remit my Reader to their Catholic complaint, out of which I have taken
this.

CHAP. XI. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against Arragon.
What I have written elsewhere, that the Spaniards endeavor to diminish the
ancient liberties and immunities of other Kingdoms and Provinces, thereby to
give the inhabitants an occasion to rebel, and themselves a fair pretense to
chastise them (as they call it) and to invade, depress and plunder others, and
do all things according to their lust, is testified by the process, and suit of
Antonio Perez, which I will briefly relate here.

Philip the second, resolved for some suspicions, to destroy Escovedo,
Secretary to Don Juan de Austria his brother, and that by some clancular Art
not to offend his said brother, to whom Escovedo was chief Favorite; which
thing he brought to pass by Antonio Perez, his own Secretary, and aemulator of
Escovedo. But Escovedo's friends and kindred, petitioned the King, that this
murder might be revenged upon the murderers employed by Antonio Perez. The
King who had incited Perez to this fact, and promised him protection and safety
under his hand, craftily, after a thousand tergiversations, and as many sharp
instances of the Escovedo's, at last imprisoned Perez to satisfy them, and by
this means secure his life, whom they plotted to destroy. After a long
imprisonment, wherein Perez was sometimes proclaimed free, and then instantly
clapped up again, and at length also rackt; the Letters, wherein the King had
commanded him to do this act, were, the greatest part of them, extorted from
his wife, by the fraud of her Confessor, or Ghostly Father, and she, together
with her children, also taken, and all their goods sold by an out cry; so that
poor Perez had nothing left him but his life, and even that in imminent danger
too. But he made his escape to Saragosa in Arragon; whither the Kings Officers
pursuing him, took him out of Sanctuary, and threw him in Jayl, from whence he
was freed, and taken again, and delivered to the Kings Governor. The
Saragosians angry hereat, as a thing against their privileges, making a
concourse of the people, forced him out of that Inquisition, and killed some of
the Kings Officers in the tumult, and so Perez being freed, and absolved by a
public sentence of Justice, evaded. After he had been three years in this
misery, sometimes a prisoner, and sometimes a freeman, sometimes condemned, and
sometimes absolved, the king by the instigation of the Spaniards, to revenge
this injury done them by the Saragosians, sent an Army into Arragon, under the
conduct of Antonia Vergas, which that State by vigor of their privileges,
opposed. But the king wrote kind Letters to such of them, as whom, afterward
by the dissembling of Vergas, he chiefly punish^; for as soon as Vergas was
admitted, he first laid hold of them, to whom the king had written so kindly,
and afterward of the rest of the principal Officers of the kingdom; restoring
them who had formerly been thrown out of their places by the Deputies, as
traitors to their Country, and subverters of the Laws. He confiscated the
estates of most of them; he also seized upon the Lord chief Justice of Arragon.
whose name was Juan de Nuzza, and twenty hours after admitting of no excuse, or
defense, caused him to be beheaded, and his estate to be confiscated. The
Citizens were deprived of their privileges; so that that murder of Escevedo
proved highly damageable to Perez, destructive to the kingdom of Arragon,
reproachful to the King, dishonorable to the Spaniards, and scandalous to the
whole world. Ex relatione Historiae de Perezzio.

The Catholic Kings Governor in Arragon, sent once for the Advocate Misero
Sarces, who conceiving that the Governor wanted his advice, came speedily to
him; and as soon as he came, the Governor caused him to be strangled, without
any lawful proceeding at all. Ex eadem relatione.

Perez, whilst he was in prison, was fain to live upon alms, amongst the kings
Ministers in Arragon, his Majesty's Officers having taken away all his goods;
yea, and pulled off his very child^ens shirts. Ibidem.

The Spaniards also most injuriously treated the Religious, because out of
compassion they had undertaken to protect and mediate for Perez; as seizing
upon them, and plundering them, and casting them in prison; insomuch as a
certain Canon died of grief. Ibid.

In which relation many things are described of the attempts of the Spaniards
against that kingdom and their privileges.

CHAP. XII. The Praevarications against the kingdom of Naples.
IN the description of the kingdom of Naples, which is in Thesauro Politico
apotelesmate 62. the Author says thus.

1. That the Spaniards have extenuated this Body (i. e. Naples) monstrously,
and yet they hold it with such suspicion, that not content to have duld the
heart of it, and broken all its members, they labor still by all means, to
hinder it from gathering strength, lest it should afterward abhor physic, and
with great loss of reputation, and disadvantage, extrude the Physician.

2. King Ferdinand of Spain, after the death of Queen Joan (howbeit she by her
Will transferred the kingdom of Naples upon Rene, brother to the Duke of
Anjou) took it, and made himself free Lord thereof, pretending that it was
reverted to the Church, etc.

3. The Spaniards always take a course to have the Popes favorable to them,
in the cause of the kingdom of Naples, and to lessen and depress all such as
maintain the report of any other power in the said kingdom.

4. The Spaniards sometimes grant the Neapolitan Noblemen some Offices,
especially in the Court, but public administrations to none, or very seldom,
and with great limitations.

5. Whilst the King of Spain committed the government of all things in the
kingdom of Naples to the Spaniards, and suffered no complaints to be made of
his Ministers, the insolency and licentiousness of the said Spaniards sweld so
big, that abusing the kings design, they tyannically satiated their
intolerable pride by the depression of others.

6. That the Vice-kings Officers and Governors have ingrost all the riches of
all the Provinces. Ibid.

7. By how much the severer an Officer professes himfelf in the kingdom of
Naples, especially toward the Nobility, in so much the more favor and esteem
is he with the Spaniards, by whom he is advanced in Court, and exalted to
higher degrees and titles.

8. The aforementioned Author also complains of other burdens imposed and
daily to be imposed upon that kingdom; as of an extraordinary Donative, of
certain * Granos, Granos (is as I remember) about an English penny, or somewhat
more in value.
which every Fire or Family is bound to pay for the quartering of Soldiers,
and for salaries to the Vice-kings Train, of seven Granos for the guard of the
Towers, of five Granos for the Field-Sergeants, of nine Granos for the
reparation of the ways; of the tax for five foot Soldiers, upon a hundred
fires; of yearly pensions, of the new tribute put upon wrought and unwrought
silk; of the tax upon Cards, which is farmed at 20000 Crowns a year, and other
emunctions of this kind.

9. He complains that the King of Spains Vice king commanded the Neapolitans
once to make and eat the bread of a certain root called Panis porcinus, or
Hoggs bread; which proclamation was nevertheless forthwith suspended under
pretext, that it was commanded only to try, whether in time of need that bread
would suffice.

10. He complains that the Vice-king would needs crown a certain fellow called
Catinario, who was rich indeed, but not considerable otherwise, in despite of
the Order of Knighthood.

11. He complains, that he took the Princes daughter out of a Monastery by
force, under pretext to try, whether she had a mind to marry, or no, when the
true reason of it was, because he resolved to match her to his own son.

12. He complains that when the States of the kingdom intended to send the
Donative of the kingdom to the King by their own men, the Vice-king would
needs send it by his men, and forced them to deliver it to him.

14. He complains, that he got in a short time, seven thousand pistols a year
for his wife, and as much for his son Bernardino, out of the Church Revenewes,
etc. That Dispute was written An. 1579. in the beginning of April. and it is to
be seen in Thesauro Politico Casp. Ensi. part. 3. Apothegmate 62.

CHAP. XIII. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against Italy and the
Commonwealths thereof.
IT would be a business of too much length for me, by going through a series of
Histories, to pick out all the prevarications of the Spaniards against Italy,
and the Princes and Republics thereof, and insert them into this Narration;
especially since some of them against the Pope, are already alleged, and other
are to be alleged, Cap. de Praevaricationibus, etc. And yet in regard that
though there be so various Principates, and so various Commonwealths, there is
yet scarce any, which complains not of the Spanish domination and ambition, it
seems fit to allege at least some of them, and omit the rest, to avoid
prolixity.

1. What monuments of their ambition they have expressed toward the Pope and his
dominions, is said above. What intention they have toward the Republic of
Venice, is very well known to the said commonwealth, though she think fit to
dissemble it; and yet she has not forgotten how craftily they carried
themselves in the Confederation, or war against the Turk; and in the
Controversy between Paul the fifth and Her. Nor do I think the Genuezes have
also forgotten what their designs were against them, both in and after the time
of Dory. How they seized upon the Duchy of Milan, Sleiden shows. In the
Countries of Piemont and Savoy, and other territories, they have erected very
many monuments of their prevarications, and are daily erecting more. What the
Sienneses and Florentines have suffered by the Spaniards, is taught by the
Historians both of this and the former Age. I willingly pass by the Dutchys of
Mantua, Montferat, Ferrara, Appulia, and Calabria, nor will I touch the
kingdoms of Naples and Sicily. because every body knows by what tricks they got
those, and how unworthily the Spanish Ministers treat the Noblemen and subjects
thereof, insomuch as that, according to Histories and Relations, for never so
slight a cause, as sometimes for an inconsiderate word, their lives and
fortunes are in danger.

2. How the king of Spain invited Charles the eighth king of France, to make
war upon Italy. Comines 5. lib. Belli Neopolitani near the end.

3. Anno 1617. Whilst the vvarres yet lasted between Ferdinand of Austria, and
the Commonwealth of Venice, the Vice-king of Naples invited and encouraged
the Turks to make war upon the Venetians; but the Turks made an impression
into Sicily, and carried away great booty. Baudart. lib. 38. Vt etiam Epistola
ipsa.

4. It is written also in the same book, how the Ambassador of Savoy complained
to the Princes of Germany, at the Diet at Hailbrun, of the breach of Articles.

5. Anno 1618. in the beginning of May, was discovered a dangerous plot and
treason of the Spaniards against Italy and the Republics thereof, when they
intended by their Emissaries, to set Venice in many places on fire, and kill
the Senators; but the business being detected, many of the Conjurators were
hanged, many stifled, and many executed other ways. Baudart. lib. 38.

6. At the same time the Spaniards attempted to surprise Cremona; but the
business had the same issue which the plot upon Venice had. Ibid.

CHAP. XIV. The Praevarications of the Spaniards against other Kingdoms.
THe King of Sweden smelling the Catholic Kings designs, howbeit he could hope
for nothing from the house of Orange, yet he despised all the said Kings great
promises, and refused him the use and loan of his great Vessels, whereof he
has good store; and for that reason the Poles several times rejected the
Austrians, lest by the addition of so vast a kingdom to Bohemia and Hungary,
the City of Dantz, by the benefit thereof, should forbid commerce, and force
the Hollanders to submit. Thuan. lib. 107.

2. Nor was it without some remorse of conscience, that when Philip the second,
and his Father were a dying, they desired that the business of the kingdom of
Navarre might be looked into by Lawyers and learned men; to wit, because they
were convinced that they held it unjustly, by the exclusion of the right heir.
Thuan. lib. 120.

3. The reason why the Spaniards gape for the possession of Saluces, and the
Territories adjoining, is, because they can most conveniently send Soldiers
from thence into the Low Countries; and therefore Fontano, Anno 1600. earnestly
urged the Popes Nuntio, that the King of France might yield up the County of
Bress. Thuan. 125

Anno 1605. Don Pedro Guzman Fontano, Vice-King of Lumbardy, summoned most of
the Princes of Italy, by the President and Treasurers of the Extraordinary
Revenews of the Duchy of Milan, and for that cause a proclamation was made by
the said Fontano's authority, in King Philips name, which was smartly answered
and opposed by the Family of the Malaspines, and had almost given an Alarm
amongst the said Princes, had not most of the Embassador^ in King Philips Court
interceded with him, and at length obtained that the prosecution of the
business might be protracted, and suffered to vanish. Thuan lib. 134.

5. Anno 1606. there arose a controversy between Pope Paul the fifth, and the
State of Venice, about certain Privileges; which when it was almost brought
to a friendly composition, by the endeavor of Henry the fourth of France, the
Spanish faction, (the chief whereof were Cardinal Pompeio Arrigovio, Paulo
Sfondrato, and Ferdinando Pacero Duke of Ascalonia) by the pravalency of King
Philips Ambassador with the Pope, the business was not only frustrated, but
also brought to open war, and the Pope excommunicated the Venetians; and Philip
forthwith by lettters artificiously penned, offered his service to the Pope, and
to that end Fontano listed Soldiers apace; and yet nevertheless he sent
Francisco de Castro, as Extraordinary, to Venice, with intention, that if the
matter inclined to a peace, (which he having kindled the war at first, began
already to suspect) he might praecept the honor of the pacification from the
King of France, or at least have a great share in it, by his intervention. But
the common report in the Court of Rome was, that Philip, according to the Rule
of his Ancestors, was glad to hear of such Disputes amongst other Princes,
concerning the Popes Supremacy, as in relation to Civil Government, yea and to
have them agitated up and down in Spain it self by connivencie, as conceiving
them not to belong to him at all, he being very potent, and using to quash the
Popes attempts in all his dominions with a word, well knowing that his
Holiness dares not so much as hiss against him; which was sufficiently
demonstrated afterward in the business of Sicily; yea, and the Spaniards
boiling with the heat of ambition, convert such wars and feditions as spring
from thence, to their own private advantage; as lying in ambush in the mean
while, to see if any of the weaker Princes be prescribed, that so they have an
occasion to invade their Dominions, as it happened in the seizure of the kingdom
of Navarre, even in our parents days. Thuan. lib. 137.

7. When Ferdinand, King of Spain and Arragon, Anno 1501. attempted the Kingdom
of Naples, and took the City of Tarento, with Ferdinand son to Frederick King
of Naples in it, he swore to him by Gonsalvo, before the Altar, that he would
leave him the liberty of a King; but yet he slighted his oath, sent him
prisoner into Spain, and reserved the kingdom for himself.

8. By the exhortation of Ferdinand, called the Catholic, Henry the eighth,
King of England, sent 6000 English into Spain to join with the Spaniards in the
invasion of the Duchy of Chira: but Ferdinand, who had a quite other design,
sent them against John Albert, King of Navarre by the right of Catherine de la
Fosse, who being wholly unprovided (for Ferdinand carried his business with
high dissimulation toward him) fled into France; and so Ferdinand seized the
kingdom of Navarre without any cost or pains. Speculum Tragicum. Anno 1612.

9. It is no news for the Spaniards to sow sedition in diverse kingdoms at one
and the same time, as they did Anno 158^. in France and England. Thuan. lib.
179.

10. Anno 1581. The Spaniards sowed discord amongst the Knights of Maltha, by
setting Matuirno Scuto Romaegassio, against John Bishop of Casserio Avernio,
chief of that Order, and casting him in prison; from whence he was cited to
Rome to his trial; whither he came, and stoutly acquitted himself, howbeit he
dyed during his abode there. Thuan. lib. 74.

12. The Spaniards raised seditions in Scotland, and solicited with vain
promises some Noblemen to a revolt, some of whom were beheaded for it. The
States to the Letters of Ernestus. Anno 1594. Thuan. lib. 109.

13. Antonio de Laeva, a Spaniard, and Governor of Lumbardy for Charles the
fifth, being besieged at Milan, thought fit to spare neither things Humane nor
Divine, for the maintenance of his own honor and Caesar's dignity; and in stead
of pay, granted every City, and every Citizen thereof to be most inhumanly
plundered by the Soldiers, that by the ejection of the Duke of Milan, Sforsa
might enjoy the command of so great a Principate. Paulus Jovius, lib. 6.
Elogiorum.

14. Hugo de Moncada governed Sicily after such a fashion, that he left many
monuments of avarice and cruelty behind him; for he put many Sicilian Gentlemen
to death, and amongst the rest, the Lord of Camerata, for that he lived
somewhat seditiously, according to the ancient looseness of that Nation. Paul.
Jov. lib. 6. Elog.

15. How cruelly did they use the Hussites in Bohemia, as beating them,
dragging them, cutting children in two, and throwing them to their mothers,
saying, Jam habes sub utraque Now thou have it under both, alluding to the
ceremony of the Hussites, who took the Sacrament under both species.

16. Thomas Campanella in his Discourse of the Spanish Monarchy. Chap. 26.
faith, That the King of Spain must take care that none but a Catholic king be
elected to the Crown of Poland. And therefore wise and noble Ambassadors must
be sent to C^achoven to give weight and authority to the Spanish union amongst
the Electors, and prevail to have one of the King of Spains younger sons chosen
King of Poland. And the people of Scandinaven and Dantzick must also be moved
to set forth a Fleet to sea against the English, etc.

CHAP. XV. The Spaniards ardent desire of Monarchy and Rule.
IF that old saying, Semper imperare, and superiorem esse aliis, Always to
command, and be superior to others, be innate to any Nation, it is certainly
so, more to the Spaniards then to any other; since all their actions,
cogitations, and consultations tend to that end, and therefore they may most
clearly consent and say with Caesar, Si violandum est jus, regnandi causa
violandum. If right must be wronged, it must be wronged for Powers sake. For
this reason they are not afraid, by public writings, to admonish and exhort
their king; yea, and to show him the ways and means how he may arrive to the
universal Monarchy, amongst whom Thomas Campanella is the Ringleader. Nor did
Charles the fifth seem to have laid slight foundations for this Monarchy, when
besides those kingdoms which he possessed by right of succession in the West, and
elsewere, he was also made Emperor of the Romans, to which were yet added
other titles afterward; and it has been hitherto the only business of the
Spaniards, to be always in wars, that so they may be ready upon all
occasions to produce that Monarchy of the whole Christian world, which they
have long since conceived. For to this end were there so many matches proposed
for the Infanta Isabel, and the Crown of France so impudently as it were put to
sale: to this end were the seditions raised in Scotland, etc. The same craft
was used in the Bishop of Strasburghs cause, and in the Duchy of Cleve,
Gulick, and the Imperial City of Aquisgrane. Ordines ad Ernesti Lit. anno
1594. apud Thuan. lib. 109.

5. The Spaniards hold this as a Delphick Oracle, and most infallible
prophecy, That the last Monarchy shall be fixed in Spain, and that for this
reason, that in regard it came in order, from the East to the West out of Asia
into Greece, and returned for a few years into Asia again, under Alexander and
his successors, at length out of Greece to Rome, therefore it necessarily
follows, that it must be established in Spain, as being the most Westward of
all other Countries. Thuan. lib. 133.

6. The Spaniards for the settling of their Monarchy by wars, fraud, and other
plots, destroy as many as are able to oppose them; as Anno 1584. when Andino
(according to most men's opinions) was poisoned, whereof he being dead, the
Prince of Orange was also forthwith killed, by one hired of the Duke of Parma;
and the Queen of England aimd at by the same Arts, at the same time, lib. 79.

7. That the kings of Spain labor for nothing more, then by subduing all other
Kings and Princes, to make themselves Monarchs of the whole Christian world,
Ancellus teaches in his speech to the Princes of Germany, Anno 1597. apud
Thuan. lib. 118.

8. At the election of Charles the fifth, Anno 1519. one of the Episcopal
Electors said, That the Spaniards having once gotten the Empire, would hardly
restore it again to its liberty. Sleidanus.

9. The Spaniards for the better security of their Monarchy, do not only
permit, but allow, and persuade, even incestuous marriages, lest by the
division of kingdoms, forsooth, their Monarchy should suffer an eclipse. Thuan.
lib. 107.

10. Moreover, for the greater assurance of their said Monarchy, they labor to
destroy the Noblemen of their Provinces; to streighten their privileges and
liberties, to impose new taxes, and to reduce the inhabitants from their old
plenty and riches, to poverty and misery. Ordines Belgici in responsione
Schwartzenburgio, Legato Caesario data anno 1575. Thuan. lib. 60.

11. Another earnest endeavor of the Spaniards is, to take off all free
Elections; which was done Anno 1570. in the kingdom of Portugal and at present
in the election of the Emperors, and in the kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary;
yea, and by the exclusion of the right heirs, to advance their own Kings to
kingdoms, as in the said kingdom of Portugal. Thuan. lib. 69.

13. When Philip the second had married his daughter Isabel to the Archduke
Albert, and had assigned him the seventeen provinces for a portion. his son
Philip was troubled at it, as if he had not had kingdoms enough even without
those Provinces; which when the Father observed, he comforted him, saying,
Quidvis promittas, quid enim promittere laedit.
That he had indeed promised those Provinces, but that there were many bywayes
and tricks to be found out, to shun the performance. Speculum Hisp. Tyran. in
Belgio. p. 108.

14. The Duke of Larma heretofore made a speech to an Assembly of the States of
Spain in Arragon, wherein he told them in most eloquent words, That the King of
Spain had free power either by right or wrong, to get and occupate other
kingdoms, that so he might come to the long hoped for Monarchy: For it was
f^r, that since there was but one Head, (namely the Pope) in spiritual affairs;
so there should be also but one (namely the King of Spain) in temporal; and
that he was therefore called Catholic, because he ought to be the universal
Monarch of the world. Now the wiser sort do justly conceive (these are the
words of Ancellus to the Princes of Germany, Anno 1597.) That the inexpleble
covetousness of the king of Spain, was not to be contained within the limits
of the Rhine, and that they were reputed his enemies, by him, whosoever should
endeavor to stop, or hinder his design, to fix the Monarchy of the whole
world in his family. Thuan. lib. 118.

15. The Spaniards are so much inflamed with desire of Power, that they never
fail in all their kings dominions, to change their Native Officers and
Ministers of the said dominions, with all kinds of calumnies and lies to the
King, till they work him to deprive them of their employments and offices, and
substitute Castillians in their places; which more disgusted the Catalonians,
then any thing else, as may be seen up and down in their complaint, anno 1640.
where they beseech the king to be more circumspect in this point, and
especially chap. 34.35.

16. Antonio de Leva, charged Francisco Sfortia with various grievous calumnies
to the Emperor, and used all means possible to get him thrown out of the
government of the Duchy of Milan, and himself put in his place. Paul Jovius,
lib. 6. Elog.

17. Charles the fifth was excessively earnest with his brother Ferdinand, to
abdicate the Roman Empire, and transfer it upon his son Philip, or at least to
make him his Deputy of Italy, and the Low Countries. But Ferdinand answered
him, That he was called Augustus, or the enlarger of the Empire, and therefore
he could not grant ought thereof to any other. Zniegrefius part. 1. Apotheg. p.
112.

18. It being asked why the king of Spain had an ambition to be preferred even
before the Emperor: and answer being made, That Europ was like a man's Body,
and that Spain represented the Head: And for this reason the King of Spain
would go before the Emperor: Livius Fink Graecensis replied, If so then
Germany wins the day, for she is like the Belly, and it is clear that the Belly
rules all, and all obey the Belly. Znicgrefius, p. 1. Apotheg. p. 309.

CHAP. XVI. The Ambition, Arrogance, Boasting, and Scorn of the Spaniards.
AS it happened to C. Caesar, and Cn. Pompeius, that the one could not endure a
Superior, and the other an Equal, so is it also with the Spanish Nation. For,
conceiving themselves only to be Eagles, and to fly above the clouds, they look
upon all others as Dolopes, or creepers, as they frequently testify, both by
their words and deeds.

When Anno 1579. the difference arose about the Successor to the Crown of
Portugal, the Spaniards to terrify the Portuguezes boasted thus, That there
was no power equal to that of the Spaniards, who as often as they had had
wars, had vanquished France, led the Princes of Germany in triumph, put the
Turk to flight, and freed Maltha from the Barbarians. Thuan. lib. 97.

2. King Philip the second, after the seizure of Portugal (whether justly or
unjustly I say not) caused money to be coined with this Inscription, Non
sufficit orbis. Luckius in Nummis. p. 279.

3. When the Spaniards besieged Leyden, they said, That the stars in the
Firmament would be pulled down with ones hand, before that City would be freed
from the siege. Olerus in Lauro Nassovica, page 30.

4. The pride of the Spaniards is such, that if they see themselves reduced to
streights, they will not first ask conditions of peace, but seek it by some
second or third hand, as they did anno 1597. when they suborned the Emperor,
and he the king of Denmark, to move the Princes to a pacification. Thuan. lib.
119.

7. A certain arrogant and proud Spanish Count asked a certain Gentleman coming
out of the Court, what was said of him in Court? The other answered, Nor bad
nor good. The Count being angry, cudgel'd him, and presently after gave him
fifty Ducats, saying, Go thy ways now to the Court; and tell what I have done
to thee; to wit, both bad and good. Florista Oratione de gloria.

The Duke of Alva used to say, That he would bring the Low Country people to
obedience in despite of Heaven and Earth; and also that the Sun and Moon
should lose their light, before h^ would remit or take off the tax of the tenth
penny. Metteran. And Juan de Vergas, that bloody President of the Council was
also wont to say, Vergas habet virgas, Vergas has Rods.

9. When the Professors of Lovain complained to him, for having taken Prince
Philip of Orange out of the University, and violated the privileges of the
said University, he answered, Non curamus vestros privilegios. Such as himself
was, such was his Latin.

10. That Navy which was sent against England 1588. the Spaniards termed
Invincible, and compose these verses upon it, alluding to the Queen of England.

Tu quae Romanas voluisti spernere leges,
Hispano disces subdere colla jugo.
Thou, who the Roman Laws scornd'st to obey,
Shall learn to bow thy neck to Spanish sway.
But hese words were indeed but Wind and Smoke.

11. The Duke of Alva caused a most magnificent Trophie of Brass to be set up
at: Antwerp, with various Elegies of his own exploits, as Thuan describes it,
lib. 44. Anno 1569. upon which the Duke of Areschots jest may be seen beneath.
cap. 33. Apotheg.

12. The Spaniards after they had so miserably used the Indians, were wont to
brag, that God had given them those victories, because they made so just a war
against Barbarians and Infidels. Bartholomaeus de Casa.

CHAP. XVII. The perfidious violation of Leagues and Promises.
NO wonder that this vice is common to the Spaniards with the Africans; For in
regard that they are, for the most part, their successors, they seem to be also
heirs of their vices, amongst which perfidie was not the least; and therefore I
have thought fit to show some examples thereof, that so this Chapter may have
credit.

True it is, that King Philip sometimes promised the United Provinces pardon
for what was past, and made proclamation thereof; but the States being taught by
the examples of others, were not so credulous as for that reason to lay down
Arms, or consent to a wily and fallacious pacification. For so, an 1576. Don
Juan de Austria feigning conditions of peace with the States, was convicted
of fraud by that, that amongst the Letters of Hieronymo Rhoda, there was found
one, That he should first court his Contrymen with fair words, and by other
means and assistance reduce Holland and Zealand, and then he should punish the
rebels according to their merit; mean while that he should carry himself
warily, and conceal his design with exquisite Art. Thuan. lib. 62.

1. How true and faithful the Spaniards be to their Associates, the case and
end of Gomeron may show, whom Fontano cunningly enticed to Brussels, cast him
and his two brothers in prison, and afterward beheaded him in the sight of
Han^e, (which Orvilliers would not yield up to him) without any respect to the
Nobleness of his Family, or that he served the Henoticks, who yet were most
zealous to the Spaniards, etc. See Thuan. lib. 112. Anno 1595. Nor did they
deal much more faithfully with Mercuriano, chief Captain after Metuanio of the
Legists; for they endeavored by all means to alienate the Nobility from him,
and force him to live as they pleased. Thuan. lib. 113.

7. How the Spaniards have performed their promises to such as had done them
any kindnesses, the example of the Portuguezes shows. Thuan c. 3. lib. 78.

8. Don Juan. de Austria, Anno 1577, being put in mind of the Contract made and
signed by the States, said, That the States must show more prudence, then to
complain, if the Kings interest were advanced by the breach of conditions.

9. It is the Spanish Maxim, That the promises of Princes made to their
rebellious subjects, are not binding.

10. Lewis the 12. King of France, said, That the perfidie of the Paenes and
Carthaginians was anciently much celebrated; but that now the Spaniards
sufficiently supplied their places.

11. Anno 1577. Don Juan de Austria renewd the pacification of Gant with king
Philips Provinces, and took away the Spanish Soldiers, but forthwith brought
them back again, and so made the later worse then the former: And when he
resolved to cut off the head of Peter Pan of Mecklin, and was informed that it
was against the Pacification, he answered, That the pacification only concerned
such as were banished, and not such as remained in their Country. A fine
interpretation. Speculum Hisp. Tyran. in Belgio. p. 106.

12. Howbeit the Spaniards made a peace with Charles the eighth; King of
France, and many other magnificent promises, yet they sent private Letters and
Agents to various Princes, and chiefly to the Venetians, and made war against
him, not only by themselves, but by others also. Comines lib. 5. Bello
Neopolitani.

13. The Duke of Ossuna, the Kings Deputy in the Kingdom of Naples, Anno 1617.
presumed to maintain, 1. That Agreements and Oaths obliged Princes of smaller
Countries to keep them, but not his King, because forsooth he was the greatest
and most potent of the Christian world. 2. That all the Kings promises and
engagements ought to be accommodated to the resolutions of his Councels, and
the variations of times. 3. That the Kings Ministers were not bound to what the
King commanded, but to what was advantageous to the King and Kingdom. Baudart.
lib. 38. Anno 1617.

CHAP. XVIII. The Spaniards Hypocrisy and Dissimulations.
AS the Spaniards fall short of no nation in the breaking of Promises and
Engagements, so do they also excel in the Art, and skill of Hypocrisy and
dissimulation, whereof there be many old and modern examples; amongst which,
that great one of Philip the second may be noted, who when Anno 1579, he
invaded the kingdom of Portugal with his Army, and knew well enough
notwithstanding, what sinister reports went up and down of him, not only in
Portugal, but even in Italy too, finding it fit to indulge Fame a little, by a
dissimulation very familiar to him, as if he had repented himself of that
enterprise, would needs have the whole business examined by the Rule of
Conscience: for, on the one side he found himself solicited by the Pope, and
on the other, censured by the opinion of men, as if he had violently invaded
another kingdom, (having calculated the Title in Law to which the weaker
submitted) and consequently oppressed the liberty of the kingdom which he
ambitionated, and the States thereof complaining, that their right was thereby
taken from them; and alleging besides, that they were bound by oath not to
obey him; for the avoiding of which difficulties without difficulty, he
committed the business to the D^vines, an Assembly of Divines to be discust at
leisure, who forthwith gave him their votes, affirming, That he ought not to
submit the disputation of his right to any body, no not so much as to the Pope
himself. Thuan. lib. 67.

2. When, Anno 1614. in the transaction of Xant, for the Controversy
concerning the Duchess of Cleve and Gulick, the business was already Articled
and subscribed, and the main point remaining was, that the Spaniards should
draw their Soldiers out of Wezel, one of them laughed, and said, Do you think
us to be men of so narrow consciences, as to suffer our selves to be forced to
observe words and subscriptions?

4. Bartholomaeus de la Casa, in his book of the Tyranny of the Spaniards in
the East Indies, says, That they would needs cloak all their cruelties,
enormities, tyrannies, rapes and murders, under the pretext of Religion and
conversion to the faith, and reduction to the king of Spains obedience, when
yet those wretched people knew less of God and Faith, then they did before the
Spaniards came thither: And as for the rest, they wre softer then wax, and
milder then sheep, and never rebelled against the king, but were most ready to
obey the commands, even of the common Soldiers. And how often they have
deceived the West-Indians with Hypocrisy and feigned kindness, is demonstrated
by the Histories of the Invasions and Seizures of those Countries, and chiefly
that of Athanasius juga, printed at Amsterdam, Anno 1624.

CHAP. XIX. The Ingratitude of the Spaniards toward such as oblige them.
NOw as for you Lords, and Gentlemen, who serve the Spaniards, you may learn
to know what thanks and favor you are to expect from them; to wit, such as
the Countryman received from the Fox which he had brought up. And you Germans
in the first place, who have been so often pincht in your Ancestors, learn
once to be wise, like the Fish from the hook.

1. To begin with Charles the fifth, he most dishonorably removed Ferdinando
Gonzaga, who had highly deserved of him, from the government of Milan, deprived
him of all command and dignity, and most ungratefully and unmercifully put him
to death: Which fact is not yet so much imputed to the Emperor, as to the envy
of the Duke of Alva. Thuan. lib. 75. But most memorable is the example of the
Counts of Egmund and Horn, and chiefly of the former, of whom Thuan. lib. 41.
says thus, This was the end of Count Egmund, when he was 46 years old, a man
for splendour of birth, and military virtue* to be compared with few of his
time, and who in the battles of St. Quintin and Graveling (the story whereof
was attributed to him by the consent of all men) had most highly deserved of
King Philip; and yet there was then no account at all made of so many gallant
and happy actions.

3. To Egmunds case may justly be added the tragedy of Florentio Momerantio,
Baron of Montigny, who being sent as Ambassador from the States, into Spain,
was there taken, miserably treated for some years, and at length put to death,
without any respect at all to his blood, or merits; whose story is recounted
at large by the Author of Speculum Tragicum.

4. Fontano Ibarra, and the rest of the most powerful in the Kings Council,
out of love to their own Nation, and a natural scorn of others, paid the
Spanish soldiers when they mutinied, without taking any notice of the
Italians, and other Nations; which they resenting very highly, that for so many
labors and dangers, they reaped injury for a reward, miseries for comforts,
punishment for patience, and despair for ease, began also to mutiny at
Areschot. Thuan. lib. 109. Thus Francisco de Velasco, when he retired from
Henry the fourth, shut himself and his Spaniards up in the town of Graves, and
shut the French and the rest who served both Meduanio and him, out of the town,
and sent them wounded, as a scorn to the enemies, and the peasants; howbeit
they were more mildly used by Henry the fouth, then by their own Commander.
Thuan. lib. 112. anno 1595.

6. Duke Maurice of Saxony, and others, although they deserved superlatively
well of Charles the fifth, yet because they would not receive the An Imperial
decree so called.
Interim, by the instigation of his Spanish Councillors, he threaned to
proscribe them.

7. Charles Croy, Prince of Cimay, and son to the Duke of Areschot, Anno 1584.
delivered up Bridges to the Spaniards, but received but small, yea no honor,
or recompense from them for it. Thuan lib. 79.

8. Selly, Egmund and Campaniac, three of the king of Spains Captains were
offered by the States to be changed for Lanoy, who was taken by the Spaniards,
with a great president of civility toward a stranger (for he was a Frenchman)
but with a greater testimony of an opinion of his virtue; which was the reason,
as it is believed, that king Philip by the persuasion of Cardinal Granvellano,
would not consent to the freedom of an Officer of so great reputation; which
did not a little imbitter the Nobility of the Country, to find themselves
daily exposed to danger, with little hope of life, and none at all of liberty,
if they chanced to be taken; and so Selly and Egmund were shut up in the Castle
of Rammekens, with a closer and stronger guard, where Selly four years after
died with grief, often exprobrating the Spaniards with ingratitude, and
lamenting that his own and his brothers merits were so little valued by the
king. Thuan. lib. 71. anno 1580.

9. The greatest satisfaction for ones merits toward the Spaniards, is to
expect no recompense thereof, but for the most part also disfavour of the king,
by the instigation of that envious Nation. Proceres Cataloniae c. 33. where
they add, That the Duke of Alcala suffered so many injuries and abuses for his
many deserts, that he languished with grief, and died. In like manner the
Marquess of Aytona, to whom the preservation of Flanders was only to be
ascribed, had so many troubles cast upon him, that it hastened his death. And
the Duke of Feria, because he ever carried himself so well, was accused for
having distributed a sum of money to the Soldiers. Consalvo de Cordua dyed
with mere sorrow, when he found his warlick exploits to be so slighted. The
Duke of Ossuna, to whose prudence all the kingdoms of Spain might be
committed, was himself committed, and dyed with grief of mind. etc. Nor did the
Duke of Braganza, or the Marquess de Monte Real, obtain their rewards, and
dignities, expected from king Philip, from whence they both of them had
suffered much affliction; the former, a while after deceased, lamenting that
his Country was brought under the Castillian yoke, and the kings promises not
performed. Thuan. lib. 78.

10. The ingratitude of the Spaniards toward Marquess Spinola, may appear by
this, That the king did not only not pay him his promised Sallery, but did not
also satisfy those debts, which he had contracted in the said kings name, and
for which he had past his word; so that when he died, he left nothing to his
son but debts, for which he durst not claim his inheritance.

11. The Ingratitude of the Spaniards toward such as do them service, and
especially the Germans, is showed by Thuan. lib. 16. where he says, That the
king paid the Spaniards, and neglected the rest. But Count Henry Vandenberg
lays it more open, when in his Letter to the Infanta Isabel, Anno 1632.
amongst other things he complains, That without any respect to his forty years
services done the King of Spain (in which time he lost six brothers in his
Majesty's wars) he had not only received no thanks, but moreover by the envy
of the Spaniards (and especially of the Marquess of Leganes) he was deprived of
his charge of chief General of the Kings Army: That the Flemings were every
where thrust out, and Spaniards preferred, who every way oppressed and suppressed
them, and contemned their Nobility. That they labor by all means to protract
the war, thereby the better to exhaust and impoverish the Belgic Provinces:
That they were angry if they had not always the best Commands in the Army:
That they shot his Image through at Brussels, and defaced it: Tha they
intercepted and concealed the Kings Letters to him, etc. Which later complaints
were taken out of his Letters to the Lords of Brabant.

CHAP. XX. What the Spanish succors are.
AS it was said by I know not whom of the Ancients: A socio infido, qui
concilium petit vel accipit, ex poculo inaurato venenum haurit. He who asks or
takes counsel of an unfaithful companion, drinks poison out of a gilded Cup.
The same may they also say, who have recourse to the succors of the Spaniards:
for the Spaniards what they dare not do openly (as hindered either by some
reason of Blood or Religion) that they indirectly attempt, with a vain offer,
and ostentation of defense. Cardinal Perron, and others agree in this opinion;
for in his speech to Pope Paul the fifth, concerning the pacification with the
Venetians, he argues thus; That the Spaniards through their in-begotten
ambition, would make use of their time, and so it would come to pass, that his
Holiness by the Sectaries on the one side, and the Spaniards on the other (who
sell themselves for Auxiliaries) would be most unhappily endangered and vexed.
And presently after, The Spanish succor will be unsafe, and very small
besides; for they are for the most part burdensome, and importunate to their
friends. Thuan. lib. 137.

2. Anno 1575. When there was a disturbance betwixt the Nobles and Citizens of
Genua. K. Philip craftily feigned himself to be troubled at those dissentions
and gave leave for Corn to be brought out of Sicily, for the use of the City.
But Don Juan de Austria ingenuously confessed, That he consented to the war
against the Genuezes; and that he had rather (when he saw them who were in the
City refuse equal conditions) have them try it out amongst themselves, then
fly to any other Prince, but such as were Philips friends for their
protection: nor did his Ministers cease more and more to inflame the Nobles
against the Citizens; But by the intervention of Princes, his hope was eluded
Thuan. lib. 61.

3. That the Spaniards succors prove, for the most part, to the ruin of them
to whom they are given, may be learned by the ruin of Frederick of Arragon:
for Gonsalvo, king Ferdinands General, feigning that those Forces which were
sent for his destruction, were sent for his relief, under color of securing
his said Forces, seized upon some Towns of Calabria, by Fredericks own consent,
and a while after laid open both his own and his Kings designs: yea, and
Fredericks son was also detained, and sent into Spain, and there kept prisoner,
contrary to his word given. See the story in Spec. Tragic. anno 1501.

5. The private differences of aemulation which arose between Meduanio, the
chief of the Henotick faction, and the Duke of Parma, were increased by
suspicions, as if the said Duke by king Philips order, had undertaken an
Expedition into France, that so under show of friendship and aid, he might take
all the authority from Meduanio, and putting Garrisons into the places taken,
oppress the French, who aspired to liberty with the hard yoke of slavery.
Thuan. lib. 99.

6. For the succor which the Spaniards gave the Duke of Newburgh in the
controversy about Cleve and Gulick, neither the said Duke himself, nor any of
his subjects, have any great reason to thank them: for they did not only
exhaust those Principates, but carried all things according to their pleasure,
as if forsooth they had been the lawful Lords thereof.

7. The Spaniards under show and pretext of succouring their sociates and
confederates, seek how themselves may be able to surprise and draw Cities to
their own power and possession; which had almost happened to the Citizens of
Lions in France, Anno 1594. had they not perceived the fraud, and reconciled
themselves with Henry the fourth. Thuan. lib. 104. who says moreover, lib.
107. that the Spaniards are wont to undertake the protection of kingdoms, but
that those protections at last draw domination with them. Thus was the kingdom
of Bohemia and Hungary (which are otherwise carried by election) and thus was
the Commonwealth of Genua subdued, under the color of protection. But the
protection of an inferior is useless; of an Equal, fruitful; of a Supeperior
suspect and perilous.

CHAP. XXI. The tricks of the Spaniards in contracting Marriages.
THere was a proverb amongst the Ancients, Eadem fideli^ duas dealbare
parietes, To whiten two walls with one Chalk, which we interpret thus, with
one daughter to get two sons in law.

1. That the Spaniards have this Art in daily practice, the better to advance
their interest thereby, it plainly appears by the many matches* which they
pretended for the Infanta Isabel, a^ sometimes to Guise, sometimes to Ernesto,
and sometimes to others. Thuan. lib. 106. 107.

2. The marriages with the daughters of Spain have scarce succeeded well to
any; for either they have been barren, as Eugenia was; or the causes of wars,
as the Duke of Savoyes wife was; or scrues into the secrets of the Princes
their husbands, as those of the house of Austria are Anonymus.

3. Philip the second, king of Spain, caused his lawful wife Isabel, the king
of Frances sister, to be killed, that so he might marry his own sisters daughter.
Thuan. lib. 71.

4. Amongst the Austrians and Spaniards it is no news for brothers to marry
their sisters daughters; so Ferdinand of Austria, son to Ferdinand the
Emperor, married Anna Catharina, the Duke of Mantua's daughter by his own
sister Elianor, anno 1580. as before him, Philip, a Prince of the Family, did
Anne, his sister Mary's daughter, by the Emperor his cousin german. Thua. lib.
71.

5. When Anno 1581. the match was treated between Andino and Queen Elizabeth of
England, king Philip by his Ambassador, expostulated with the king of France,
and afterward labored to sow seditions in France. Thuan lib. 73.

6. What detriment the Spanish matches and friendships have brought upon
France, is taught by Evagrius de Origin and Gestis Francorum, lib. 1. fol. 40.
and lib. 2. fol. 66. and lib. eod. fol. 86.

7. What good did the English get by the marriage of king Philip to Queen Mary?
And what the Portuguezes, but that by this pretension, that kingdom fell into
the hands, and under the yoke of the Castillians?

8. The Spaniards assign their daughters great portions, but they keep not
their words.

9. Thomas Campanella, cap. 30. says, that it imports, that the kings of Spain
never marry any woman of the House of Austria, unless he grow thereby to be
heir of some new Country.

CHAP. XXII. The hatred of the Spaniards toward the Germans.
IT is no new thing for the Spaniards to envy the felicity of the Germans; ^or
they did it many years ago. About he year of Christ 1419. the King of Spain
forbad the German Merchants to sail in the Spanish Seas, and punished such of
them as he took in disobedience to that Order, he took 40 ships, and killed all
the Merchants. Albert. Cratzius in Sax. suo. l. 11. c. 3.

2. The Spaniards do all they can to obscure and lessen the fame of the German
Nation; which Avila did in his Pamphlet, whereof Albert, Marquess of
Brandenburgh, Anno 1522. complained, Thuan. lib. 9.

3. How unjustly and rigidly they treated the Citizens of Mentz (men of their
own Religion) upon whom the Bishop put two thousand for a Garrison, at that
time when Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden. (i. e. anno 1631.) made war in
Germany, is demonstrated by the Histories of that war, and especially by
Cornelius Danckhard in his History of the Swedish affairs.

4. Anno 1582. when the Spaniards and French fought at the Tercera Island,
Santa Cruz the Spanish General, left the German Soldiers to Hieronymo Ladron,
to punish them as he pleased. Thuan. lib. 75.

5. Ancellus in his speech to the Princes of Germany, Anno 1597. says, That
the King of Spain was not so well affected toward Germany, in regard he
plainly neglected the imminent danger of his common country from the Turk, and
assisted the Emperor and his Contrymen with so small succors: And
moreover, that he sought his own advancement by the overthrow of the house of
Austria. Thuan. lib. 118.

6. How rigidly, and contrary to the Electoral dignity, Charles the fifth
treated John Frederick, Duke of Saxony, and Philip Landgrave of Hessia, is
amply described by Sleydan; as also of the cruelties and outrages of the
Spaniards in the Duchy of Wirtenbergh.

7. The Spaniards used to commit such Towns as are either far off, or ill
fortified, to the trust and government of the Germans, to the end that if they
be lost, the dishonor, and infamy thereof may redound to the Germans, and not
to themselves; which, besides other, appeared in the rendition of Lingen and
Groll, which were governed by Herman, and Frederick, two brothers of the house
of Bergh. Thuan. lib. 119. Anno 1597.

8. An. 1590. The General of the Spanish Army, hanged sixty German Soldiers
at once, because they demanded their pay; and afterward made an example of an
hundred and fifty more, by cutting off the right hands of some, and the three
fore-fingers of others.

9. The Spaniards in Charles the fifths time, being distributed up and down in
Garrisons in Germany, exercised no less enormities upon the said Emperors
party, then upon the other. Sleidanus.

10. In the distress of the Palatine, when the Spaniards seized upon the lower
Palatinate, it happened that a poor Tailor having let fall some passio^ate
words, was taken and carried before the Captain, who asking him ^o great a sum
of money, as he was neither able to pay it, nor to provide any body to be bound
for it, he forthwith caused the man to be hanged, without compassion of his
wife and seven children who begged for him. Relationes.

11. If the king of Spain (says Campanella) would seize upon Germany, he must
first be made Emperor, and then under color of going against the Turk, march
into Hungary, and so surprise the Protestants suddenly at unawares, together
with the Imperial Cities, before they are able to oppose him (as Charles the
fifth cunningly did) and make new Colonies, and new laws, with Italian
Ministers, because that Climate endures not the Spaniards, etc. c. 23. Disc. de
monarch. Hisp.

CHAP. XXIII. How the Spaniards treat and keep Peace.
That the Spaniards show bread in one hand, and hide a stone in the other;
treat peace, and prepare for war, shall be proved in this Chapter.

1. In that treaty of the Emperor Maximilian, the Spaniards basely, and
deceitfully guld the Princes, by taking the Towns of Boure, Leerdam, Schoonhof,
Owdtwateren, Bommel, and Zirzea.

2. The Pacification and Union of Gant, 1576. was sworn to and approved of by
king Philip, but not kept.

3. The conference at Colein was pretended to be liked of, but in the Interim,
the people of Hennault, Arras, and Mastricht, were solicited to disloyalty.

4. The Conference being begun in Flanders, Queen Elizabeth's Deputies were also
invited to it; and in the mean while, that formidable Fleet, anno 1588. was
prepared and sent to surprise England. Thuan. lib. 119. where the States at
large express the fraudulent Arts of the Spaniards.

5. That the Spaniards peace is not to be trusted to, is taught by the Lords of
the United Provinces in their answer to the Emperor Rodolph, Anno 1591. and
there was many stamped by them at that time, with this Emblem, A Holland virgin
fits sweetly sleeping under a quick-set hedge, with this adscription, Pax patet
insidiis: and upon a sudden her enemies break through the hedge, assault and
surprise her. Then she sits again under another hedge waking, with a Sword and
a Guard by her, with these words, Tuta salus bello est; and the breach being
stopped, the enemies designs are frustrated. Luckius in Numismatis. p. 328.

6. When the Truce was made between Spain and Holland, the Spaniards said, That
the King made a step backwards, thereby to leap the further forwards upon
occasion.

7. That the conditions of the truce were not heartily and sincerely kept by
the Spaniards, may appear by the States answer to Peck.

8. It is undoubted, that the Spaniards treat peace to no other end, then to
collect their forces, and work their designs by any means they can to scrue
into the secrets of their adversaries, to corrupt some, and draw them to their
party; and to sow the seed of discord amongst others, which has been tried by
France, Flanders, and Savoy, and may be seen in various discourses of de jure
Publico; and what is more common then Lipsius his Consultatio Epistolica.

9. All endeavor must be used (says Thomas Campanella Discursu de Monar.
Hisp. c. 23.) to breed perpetual discord between the Marquess of Brandenburgh,
the Landgrave of Hassia, and the Duke of Saxony; between the Duke of Brunswick
and the Palatine of the Rhyne; between the Duke of Wirtenbergh and the lower
States of Germany, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. The Briberies and Pecuniary corruptions of the Spaniards.
THe Kings of Spain have learned to fight as well with silver and golden pikes,
as their Soldiers with iron ones; yea, and perhaps they effect ten times more
with those then these; and therefore they spare no Bribes, how great soever, to
the Counselors and Secretaries of Kings and Princes, to render them obnoxious
to themselves; or to tempt and seduce the Governors of Towns and Castles, etc.

1. Nicolas Hosta Villaroy's Secretary, had a yearly pention of MCC crowns to
reveal his Masters secrets to the Spaniards; who when the business was
discovered, endeavoring to save himself by flight, was drowned, and his body
proceeded against according to Law. Thuan. lib. 132.

2. Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham, being Ambassador in Spain Anno 1605.
had ptesents made him by that king, which were said to be worth above XXXM
pounds, besides the presents sent to his wife, his sons, and son in law; yea,
and Willongs, Norrice, and others of his train, were also richly presented; and
finally, a pension of XIIM pounds (as it is reported) promised the said
Ambassador. Thuan. lib. 133.

3. The Spaniards offered the Counselors of Frederick, Elector of Saxony, a
great sum of money at the election of Charles the fifth; and they asking their
foresaid Master; whether they should take it, or no, he answered, Yes, you may
take it; but know withal that afterward you must be no more any Counselors
of mine. Znickgrefius Apothegmate.

4. When Anno 1607. The consultation of Truce began between the Archduke and
the States of Holland, Friar Ney forthwith began to tempt some men with money,
whereof Barnefeldt publicly complained. Thuan. lib. 138.

5. Ancellus in his speech to the Princes of Germany, Anno 1597. says, That
the King of Spain uses all means possible to corrupt the Ministers of Princes
with gifts and bribes; yea, and sometimes also with menaces, and by their means
to get their Masters into his power, and under color of Protection to
circumvent them, and hurry them up and down at his pleasure.

6. I forbear to relate the corruptions of the Governors of Towns, and
Castles, etc. For the treacherous conditions of Gertrudenbergh, Geldres,
Zutphan, Doesburgh, etc. are sufficiently known.

7. The Spaniards got the lower Palatinate rather by money then force of Arms:
for as one said, Hispanicos duplones facere duplices nebulones. The Spanish
Dublons make double Knaves. And Thomas Campanella cap. 26. says, That the
Spanish Gold has a great strength.

CHAP. XXV. That the Spaniards are murderers.
DOlus an virtus, quis in host requirat? This was anciently a Symbol of the
Heathens; but it is now the fifth Gospel of our Spaniards. We have already
spoken of other juggles and frauds; but there is yet one trick more whereby
when they cannot do their business by open wars, they endeavor to destroy
Kings and Princes by secret, deceitful, and murtherous plots: Nor need we
fetch examples from the Indies, as having plenty of them in Kingdoms and States
near at hand: for who is so great a stranger to the proceedings in France in
our times, but that he knows, that the Spaniards incited Peter Auden, a
Carthusian Monk, to kill Henry the fourth. Thuan. lib. 118. sub finem. And of
their practices against the Queen of England, I have spoken sufficiently before.

2. The Prince of Orange was no less then six times attempted to be murdered
by the Spanish Emissaries and sicariss, as, 1. Au. 1589. by John Jaurege.
Thuan. l. 75. 2. by Nicolas Salcedo, etc. who also endeavored to kill Allenson
Duke of Brabant. 3. by Peter du Vignon. 4. by Balthazar Gerardi, who also often
sought to murder Prince William, and at last effected it upon the sixth of
July, 1584. Thuan. lib. 79. Spec. Hisp. Tyran. in Belgio, p. 84.

3. In the same manner was Prince Maurice of Orange exposed to the danger of
his life by men corrupted by the Spaniards with money to that end, who
voluntarily confessed it, and were punished according to their deserts; amongst
whom was Michael Renichove, 1594. 2. Peter du Four. 3. Peter Pan, and others,
of whom Thuan and Metteran.

4. I will omit to speak of persons of meaner quality, who have perished by the
Spanish treachery, since it appears both by History and experience, that
nothing is more treacherous, and more practical in this Art, then the Spanish
Nation.

5. A certain Spaniard having murdered two women, and being condemned to die
for it, the Governor of Gant (a Spaniard) said, That it was not fit that so
honorable a person, then employed in the Kings service (for he was a common
Soldier) should be put to death for killing of a paltry woman or two. Met.
lib. 27. 1606.

6. Indeed, there is nothing more frequent with the Spaniards, then to poison
and destroy privately, such as they cannot do openly, according to the Flemish
Proverb, Yemandt even Spaensche Vijgh koocken. To dress any one a Spanish Figg.

CHAP. XXVI. The Cruelty and promiscuous tyranny of the Spaniards
ALthough it be evident enough by what I have already related, that there is
nothing more cruel, nor more barbarously tyrannical then the Spaniards; yet
will it be convenient for the confirmation of the argument of this chapter, to
allege some examples thereof here, that so I may seem not to neglect the
Readers satisfaction; and from whence can I more properly take my rise, then
from the Low Countries? For how many of the prime Nobility did the Duke of Alva
destroy, partly by the hand of the Executioner, and partly by the wars? etc.
He condemned them promiscuously, both Gentle and Simple, to nasty Jayls, caused
many of them to be dragged to death unheard, and unconvicted; confiscated their
Estates: The Trees through all Holland he made frequently serve for Gallows,
where men were hanged, and their wives put to Spaniards against their wills;
yea, and some women were put to death, because by disguise, or otherwise, they
helped to save their husbands. At Vtrick he hanged a man for suffering his son
(who was banished) to lodge one night in his house; and another, for giving a
poor Widow, whose husband was put to death for his Religion, a little corn;
and a third, for sending his friend, who was banished in England, a little
money. He rebaptized some children, and caused some to be cut out of their
mothers vvombs, and stabbed with daggers. Some wives were violated in the
sight of their husbands, and if they resisted, they were hanged, as was done at
Lyle, test Speculo Hisp. Tyran p. 36. But it would be too long to relate all,
and therefore I remit my Reader ad Spec. dictum. p. 36, 37, 38, 39, etc. where
the tyrannies of the Spaniards at Lyle, Tornay, Roterdam, Mecklin, Zutphan,
Narden, Harlem, Owdwater, Mastrickt, and Antwerp, are described.

Anno 1576. The Spaniards mutinying for want of pay, took Antwerp, and killed
two thousand Citizens and Soldiers, besides such as were drowned, or burnt,
they hanged some Women naked, with huge heavy stones at their feet; drove
stakes through the natural parts of others, and extended some upon the Racks
by the Breasts, as they also hung some men (with as much immodesty as cruelty)
out at their windows by the genitals, crying and howling with torment, till
they either ransomed themselves with money, or confessed what they had hidden.
They rackt children before their parents, and killed them, etc. whereby they
got so much money, as by the computation of such as knew it, amounted to forty
tuns of gold, that is two millions of Pistols, besides Plate, Jewels, and other
things of price. Nor was the damage of the fire much less, where they also got
so much, that a common Soldier would make nothing to play ten pistols a throw
at Dice, some made Hilts to their Swords, others to their Daggers; yea, and
some whole Corslets and Helmets of beaten Gold, Thuan lib. 62.

Anno 1610. The Inquisition of Spain prevailed with the King to banish all the
Mores out of the kingdoms of Granada, Andaluzia, Valentia, and Murcia, and
transport them into Barbary, where many thousands of them perished with hunger,
thirst, and other cruelties cast upon them, partly by the Spaniards, and partly
by the Barbarians. Metteranus.

CHAP. XXVII. The Cruelties and Barbarities of the Spaniards in America.
BEcause some may perhaps make slight of the barbarous Excesses of the
Spaniards upon the Low Country people, saying, That they were the kings
enemies, as having revolted from him, and therefore they ought to be treated
like enemies, as they had deserved (though that way of correction exceeds all
measure) let us now see whether they have carried themselves more gently to
the Americans, the Indians, and others beyond our Orb.

1. That the Spaniards had no right at all to those Countries, as being so
far distant from Spain, and governed by Kings of their own, and never so much
as in the least sense provoking them to a war, the more moderate Spaniards
themselves are forced to acknowledge; yea, and they say moreover. That when the
Spaniards came first thither, they were received, entertained, and treated like
Gods, or sons of Gods, abating them only the adoration, worship, and observance
of their chief Gods.

2. Bartholome de la Casa, a Dominican Friar, and a Bishop, lib. de Tyran.
Hisp. in India occident. dedicated to Charles the fifth, and his son Philip,
and printed at Sevil, Anno 1552. says, That the people of that Nation were as
peaceful as sheep, not very covetous, nor ambitious, content with little,
solitary, and almost Heremetical, against whom came the Spaniards like greedy
wolves, and not only like wolves, but like Lions and Tigers. He further adds,
That in the space of forty years, above twelve millions, yea above fifteen
millions of men were destroyed by the Spaniards in those Islands. A certain
Spanish Captain ravished a Kings wife. Others knocked out the brains of small
children, and crushed them against the Rocks and stones, sindged and burnt the
bodies of some Lords and Princes of the Countries, and threw them to their
Dogs, beat down their houses, and fired them, and forced them out; hanged
queen Anacaon and another, condemned some men to work in the Mines, and their
Wives to the Country labors, affording them little or no food; so that in
tract of time those kingdoms grew quite dispeopled; they used them in stead of
Mules and Asses, driving them long journeys, overladen with insupportable
burdens; in such sort, as that once, of four hundred, there returned no more
then six; they took all their victuals and provisions from them, and starved
above 30000 of them at once. They forced the great-bellied women to carry
packs, etc. In Nova Hispania they destroyed above four millions of men in
twelve years time, and in the City of Mexico, they treacherously massacred the
flower of the Nobility, and afterward many Citizens, etc.

3. The same Author also says, That to write down all the tyrannies of the
Spaniards exercised in Guatimala, would require a Book of a foot and a half
thick. Nor were their proceedings otherwise in Naco, and the Honduras, where
in 12 years compass, they destroyed above two millions of men. It was to no
purpose at all for the poor Indians to oblige the Spaniards; for they became
the more cruel by their kindness and simplicity; as torturing them a thousand
vvayes to make them confess where their gold was, tumbling them into deep
ditches and pits upon stakes pointed with iron, to lengthen and increase their
torments, and dragging their children into slavery, etc.

4. In the kingdom of Guatimala, in the space of sixteen years, they killed
above five millions by various tortures: Nor gave they their prisoners any
sustenance, but granted them leave to catch, and eat other Indians, etc.

5. In the kingdom of Excalisco they burnt eight hundred Villages, and sold
the sons of Princes to one another for slaves. In Jucatano a Princes son was
sold for a Cheese, and a hundred Indians for a horse; they hunted the Indians
like wild beasts, and gave them as a see to their Dogs.

6. The Indians have been so ill used by the Spaniards, that they abhor the
name of a Christian, and had rather dye in war, then live in slavery to the
Spaniards. In the kingdom of Venecula they destroyed above five millions of
persons, and used the like cruelty in the kingdom of Florida; as overloading
the people with burdens, and when they fainted, cutting off their heads, and
leaving them in the highways. In the Island de la Plata they killed above
1503 men at once; yea, and amongst the rest they also basely murdered such as
came to serve them.

In the Isle of Cuba 7000 infants were starved in three months time, the
Spaniniards having so exhausted their mothers with continual labor and
hunger, that their breasts grew dry, and so the poor babes could not be
nourished. Bartholo. de la Casa.

8. Spain (says de la Casa) is in great danger to be invaded and destroyed by
other Nations, for this tyranny. And again toward the end of his book. Unless
the King (says he) do better preserve and provide for the Indians, there is
nothing more sure, then that God will most grievously punish, if not quite
overthrow Spain. Thus writes, thinks and foretells a Spaniard, of the Spaniards.
And his authority ought to be so much the greater, in regard he was an eye, and
not an ear witness thereof.

9. Thomas Campanella, in the last Chapter of his Discourse of the Spanish
Monarchy, copiously complains of the tyranny, avarice, and cruelty of the
Spaniards in both the Indies,

CHAP. XXVIII. The rapacity, avarice, lust, adultery, and other vices of the
Spaniards.
POpe Julius the second was wont to call the Spaniards, Volucres coeli, Birds
of Heaven, alluding to their pride and ambition, to outstrip and soar above all
others. But since he was pleased to call them Birds, why did he not rather name
them Stymphalidas, or Harpyes, since the rapacity, theevishnesse, and
greediness of that Nation is so well known, by extruding lawful heirs from
their kingdoms, and unjustly and violently invading, seizing, and impoverishing
them? By contaminating all things, sacred, profane, private, and public, and
hooking them into their clutches? Witness the Kingdoms of Naples, Navarre,
and Portugal, besides their rapacities and thefts in the Low Countries, where
it is reported by some Historians worthy of credit, that the Duke of Alva drew
yearly fourscore tuns of gold out of the confiscated Estates, besides the
ordinary tributes; insomuch as that in six years time, he extorted, 52 millions
of gold from those provinces.

2. The exaction of the tenth penny upon all vendible commodities, sufficiently
shows their greediness of gold; for when the States so earnestly beseeched
the said Duke to forbear that Tax, he answered. That he would not remit it,
though all the Low Countries were sunk thereby, and though Heaven and Earth
came together. And this was not the last and least cause why the States took
Arms, and renounced their obedience to the Spaniard.

Many other examples there are; as of the plunder of Antwerp and Mecklin; their
proceedings in Portugal and the Tercera Islands; the new Taxes against the
privileges of the kingdoms of Naples, and Sicily, and the like, which are not
necessary to be repeated here, in regard they have been cited before in various
chapters of this book.

But amongst other causes of the public hatred of the Spanish Nation, their
lusts and promiscuous adulteries are not to be omitted; though yet because they
may seem to be excused by some, by the common example of military exorbitances,
and in regard also that there be too many of them to be comprised in this short
Discourse, it shall suffice to remit the Reader to these Authors, Thuanus,
Metteranus, Everardus a Raid, and others* however, it will not be tedious to
recite some few of those which were committed by them in the Low Countries.

1. Anno 1598. When Don Francisco de Mendoza devasted the Dutchies of Gulick,
Cleve, and Mounts, the Spaniards amongst other things, plundered the Monastery
of Schlehenhorst, stripped the Nuns, crowded them together, and ravished them.
Thuan. lib. 121.

2. At the same time they bound the Judge of Dussimont in a Cellar, and seven
Spaniards lay with his wife before his face.

8. In the village of Giffick they endeavored to ravish a Woman with child,
who when she had long resisted them, they thrust a sword into her womb, and
killed both her and her fruit.

4. At Bulcholz they attempted to force the Burgomasters daughter, and her
father coming to help her, they killed him, and then tied her to his dead body
and ravished her. Ibidem.

5. The same Author, lib. 66. recounts a generous revenge, taken by the
daughter of John Milet, a Country man, upon a Spanish Captain, who had
violated her chastity: and instantly after he brings another, how a Lawyers
daughter revenged her self upon a Spaniard, who vitiated her, by stabbing him
with his own dagger, and how at his death he left her his heir.

6. How libidinously they carried themseves in the Indies, with all sorts of
persons; yea, even with Queens themselves Barth. de la Casa shows at large, in
Spec. Tyran. Hisp.

The Spaniards are also naturally (in respect of other Nations) great lovers
and cryers up of themselves, and contemners of others.

1. Thus Pedro Roycio Mauraeo, a famous Spanish Poet, at that time (to wit,
1548) being once with Langius, a German, and king Ferdinands Ambassador, and
hearing his servants waiting at table, speak Dutch with a hard and affected
kind of tone and pronunciation, jeeringly said, The Germans do not speak, but
thunder; and turning toward the Ambassador, I believe (quoth he) that God out
of his indignation, made use of this Thunderbolt, when he threw our
Forefathers out of Paradise. To whom Langius answered, And I think it very
likely on the other side, that the Serpent used this smooth and flattering
Spanish tongue when he cheated Eve. Mordamus in vita Langii.

2. The presentation of the Golden Fleece was studiously and craftily invented
by the King of Spain to feed men's vanity. Illicium. Thus the Emperor in king
Philips name, presented Sigismund Bathorius with the Golden Fleece at Prague,
anno 1567.

3. So great is the insolency of the Spaniards, that even in extreme necessity
they cannot show their want; which the Count of Mont-major in Sicily found with
sad experience, Anno 1604. For when he was speaking to the vice-king in the
behalf of the Sicilians, to moderate the exportation of Corn, thereby to
prevent a scarcity, or dearth, which he well foresaw was suddenly like to
follow; the said vice-king took him scornfully up, as if he had spoken too
sawcily to him, and caused him to be killed by his Guards before his face.
Thuan. lib. 3. an. 1604.

Many other vices of the Spaniards we have already demonstrated in other
chapters of this Book, and therefore forbear to recapitulate them here;
however it be not amiss, to reiterate some few examples of their falsehood and
juggling, in regard that this is the main hinge upon which their most important
designs depend.

1. It is the Spanish fashion easily to complain of others, when themselves are
only guilty; as Don Juan de Austria did, Anno 1577. when by his Ambassador he
accused the States of Holland to the Emperor, the Electors, and the Queen of
England, that they had not kept the peace, when himself had broken it before.
Thuan lib. 94.

2. Barth. de la Casa against Sepuluenda says, That it is not true that the
Spaniards (as they write in the Indies) converted every year so many thousand
men from Gentilism to Christianism: But this (says he) is true indeed, that
the Spaniards since their coming to the Indies, have butchered and sacrificed
more Indians for avarice and rapacities sake, then the Indians had done to
their Idols in a hundred years together: And that the Spaniards did falsely
accuse the poor innocent and simple Indians to the King, of such crimes, as
whereof the most wicked in the world could not be guilty.

3. The king of Spain promised Saladin, Count of Isenburgh, at the taking of
Mounts in Hennault, that if he would be ruled by him, he would not only make
him Archbishop of Colein, but that the City of Colein her self should settle
him as her Lord. But falsely all. Fruchchessius in Literis ad Colonienses apud
Thuan. lib. 179.

4. A certain Franciscan Friar, to prevail with Ferdinand king of Spain for the
expulsion of the Jews, secretly made a Table of lead, wrote what he thought
good therein touching the said expulsion, (with threats, etc. if it were not
done) hid it in a sacred place, and caused it three years after to be dug up
by a Comerade of his, as if it had been some divine thing, and a Prophecy; but
the king observing the fraud, neglected it. Majolus in Canicularibus 351.

5. Howbeit envy seem to be a vice of prosperity only, and proper to the rich,
yet are the Spaniards so much possessed with it, that it seems to be as it were
hereditary to them; as Thuan. lib. 75. says of the Duke of Alva, That he was
most ambitious in confidence of his own merits. A Detractor of the virtue of
others; and (by the vice of his Country) contumelious toward other Nations,
and imperious and severe to such as were just. And by and by, The envy and
hatred of the Duke of Alva (says he) made Charles the fifth deal so
ungratefully with Gonzaga. Ibid.

CHAP. XXIX. Other Arts and Tricks of the Spaniards to work their Designs.
THe other ways which the Spaniards use for the acquisition of Kingdoms, are
very many, but chiefly six: 1. Persuasions to the people, and mercenary
sermons, especially of the Jesuits. Thus was it carried in that French League,
against Henry the third, and Henry the fourth, and in the acquest of the
kingdom of Portugal by the Jesuits. 2. Force of Arms. 3. Bribes and
Corruptions. 4. Marriages and Alliances. 5. Presentations of the Golden Fleece
to various Lords of the Spanish Union. 6. If they suspect any one, to destroy
him, as they did Egmund, Horn, and the Battenburghs, etc. Or if that cannot be
done, to send him by all means out of their Territories, as they intended to do
Mansfeldt, and Prince Maurice of Orange, by making them Generals against the
Turk, with large praises of their valor and prudence. Thuan. lib. 120.

1. The Spaniards ever have, and still do, take extremely ill the Confederation
of the Swissers with the French; and therefore when Henry the fourth, Anno
1602. desired to renew it, Fontano Governor of Milan, moved every stone to
hinder it, Thuan. lib. 129.

2. It is a very familiar thing with the Spaniards to hinder Leagues and
Confederacies, thereby to obtain their ends. Thus Pedro Guzman, Toledo,
Fontano, Vice-king of Lumbardy, Anno 1605. to disturb the confederation
contracted between the Venetians and the Swissers, made severe proclamations at
Milan, whereby he inconvenienc't the commerce of both, and at an appointed
place, ( viz. a Rock five miles from Nova-Camo, having Clavenna and the
Veltelin on each side) built a Castle with five Forts Royal, and called it by
his own name, to hinder the importation of Corn to the neighboring parts: yea,
and he sowed so many seeds of dissension amongst the Swissers, that it was like
to have proved their utter ruin. Thuan. 134.

3. Charles the fifth seeing Genua to be a convenient place, as well for other
causes, as chiefly for the transportation of Forces out of Spain into Italy,
and therefore intending to fortify it, could never bring Dory, either by
threats or promises, to give way to the building of a Castle in it, that is, to
the putting of a yoke upon his Country; wherefore he thought fit to take
another course to bridle the City, which was to borrow the Genuezes money
(which is upon the matter their whole support) at what rate they pleased;
conceiving that thereby he should quickly (by degrees) draw the wealth of those
greedy men to himself, and so have the City in his debt, that is, the
affections of the Citizens at his disposal. Which trick his son Philip, in
imitation of his fathers example, being involved in the Low Country war (which
was hugely expensive) used and took occasion to draw vast sums of money of the
principal of the Nobility, for which he paid huge interest, and assigned the
chief taxes of the Indies and Spain for the payment thereof. Thuan. lib. 61.

4. Anno 1577. Some letters of Don Juan de Austria to king Philip, were
intercepted, wherein amongst other things, they advised him to sow discord
between the Gentry and Commonalty of the Low Countries about Religion and
liberty of conscience. lib. 64.

It was the Maxim of Escovedo, and now of the Spaniards in general to breed and
cherish dissension amongst the Princes of the world, that so since they could
not check them altogether, they might check them apart.

6. The Spaniards permit no Councels or Assemblies amongst their Noblemen*
because they hold them very prejudicial to their affairs, and therefore they
flatly prohibited them to the Lords of the kingdom of Portugal. Thuan. lib. 78.
Anno 1583.

7. Another of the Spanish practices is, to take lawful heirs out of the
Dominions of their ancestors, as they did Anno 1583. when Augusta, Philips
sister, under color of visiting a Monastery of Nuns, took away Julian of
Lancaster, Heiress to the Principate of Avern, to the high displeasure of the
Portuguezes, who conceived themselves by this example, to be hurried into a
wretched captivity to the Castillians. Thuan lib. 78.

8. The Spaniards in the Duke of Alvas time, made it their business to provoke
the Low country men to novelty and war, by diminishing and taking away their
Privileges and Immunities; yea, and they openly boasted, that that was the
only thing they aimed at, that so they might have a fairer pretext to rifle
the goods and estates of the people, and destroy Cities and Provinces. Spec.
Hisp. Tyran. in Belgio. p. 35. Thus the aforesaid Duke stripped the Citizens of
Vtrick of their privileges, Anno 1571. And thus also did the Spaniards in this
age of ours, serve the Catalonians, etc. Status Barcenonenses, and Catalauni in
quer. sua Cath. hinc inde, imprimis, c. 8.12.29.

9. The Spaniards, if at any time, any Commander or Governor of theirs, commit
any remarkable crime, to save themselves, lay hold of some poor, innocent and
undeserving Soldier or other, and sacrifice him to the Hangman to satisfy for
their wickedness. One example whereof is related by Janus Duza Satyra. 40, sub
finem: and the like was also done heretofore in the mutiny at Vtrick, and at
the firing of Duiburgh in Cleve.

10. Thomas Campanella, Disc. de Monar, Hisp. c. 14. says, Care must be taken
that the sons of such Lords and Noblemen as live in Kingdoms distant from
Spain, and under the Spanish Government, may have Spaniards to their Tutors to
Hispaniolize them in habit, manners, and customs; and when they are grown
potent they must be humbled, and under pretext of honor, be d^spatcht to some
Office or employment, far from their Lordships, where they may spend more
then they get; and if the King chance to go on progress, he should do well to
lodge at their houses, thereby to put them to extraordinary charges. And he
further says chap. 15. That as soon as the King has conquered any Nation, he
must take away the immovable goods of the people, allow them only food and
clothing, and make them till the earth, forcing their sons to be either
Soldiers or Husbandmen.

11. Nor must this practice of the Spaniards be past over in oblivion, namely,
that they use to call Lords and Earls, and such as are richest, and most in
power and favor with the people, in any of their Dominions, to the kings
Court, under any pretext whatsoever, as of bearing an Embassy, or commanding
an Army, etc. out of hope whereof they are not wont to appe^r without great
magnificence and sp^endor; and when they have made their appearance, the
Spaniards pretending sometimes one thing, and sometimes another, delay and
detain them, not only one, but many years, till by expectation they have spent,
and wasted the greatest part of their estates, and are fain to pawn them to
others. And this practice they chiefly observe in the kingdom of Naples.

CHAP. XXX. The various Apothegmes and Observations concerning the Spaniards.
A Certain Spaniard called Ferdinando Soto, coming into the Isle of Florida
said, He was the son of God; to whom one of the natives answered, If your God,
whose son thou say thou art, commands you to invade the Dominions, Provinces,
and Estates of others, and there to kill, slay, snatch, wrest, steal, spoil,
whore, adulterate, etc. we tell you plainly, that we cannot believe in such a
God.

Another Indian speaking with Hieronymo Benzoon, said, What kind of people are
these Christians? They take away our bread, our honey, our sugar, our clothes,
our wives, our daughters, our silver, our gold, and what ever we hold dear.
They will not work, they are cheaters, thieves, robbers, and plunderers; before
they go to Mass, they brawle scuffle, and hurt one another. And when Benzon
told him they were not all such, he replied, I never yet saw a good and honest
Spaniard. Joan. Petit. in Chron. Holland. lib. 6.

Martin Luther was wont to say, That as the Spaniards write otherwise then they
read, so they think otherwise then they speak.

At the siege of Frankendal, a certain Captain fell into the hands of the
Spaniards, who bidding him yield himself, and they would give him quarter: he
cried out aloud, I will have no quarter of the Spaniard, but quarter in heaven;
and so after he had received many wounds, dyed with his sword in his hand.

The Spaniards having once petitioned Charles the fifth to remove all the
drunken Germans from his Court, he at length convocated all the Germans, and
showing them the petition of the Spaniards, pretended to go along with them;
which the Spaniards perceiving, most earnestly besought him to stay. Idem. page
94.

A certain Spanish Captain asked a subject of the Palatin, why they so strongly
and faithfully adhered to their Prince, since he had been the cause of their
being so oppressed and exhausted in war by strangers? The other answered, Why
should we not love him, and stick close to him; for we paid not so much to him
in a whole year, as to you in a month? Znickgref. p. 1. Apotheg. p. 336.

A certain Gascon called Pyrrhinuncule, coming to his Inn, and having a
Ducklin oyld and garlickt, set to Table, a Spanish traveller suddenly stepped in,
and casting his eye upon the Ducklin, Sir, (quoth he) may a friend be welcome to
you? What is your name sir, said the Gascon? the Spaniard strutted and
answered, Don Alopanzo Ansimarchides, Hiberoneus Alorchides. Marry out, quoth
the Gascon, Four Spanish Lorsd to one poor little Bird? God forbid: here is but
enough for Pyrrhinuncle alone; for small things become small persons. Simon
Majolus in Canicularibus. p. 326.

The Spaniards traduced the Germans to Charles the fifth, (and especially the
Souldlers) entreating him to make a proclamation, to forbid them drunkenness,
To whom he answered, I should effect as much with them by such a Proclamation,
as I should with you, by forbidding you fornicacation, adultery, and rapacity.

Hector Vogelman, Chancellor of Wirtenbergh, being asked by Duke Frederick his
Master, what rarities he had seen in Spain, answered, Mountains of pride, and
valleys of tears, and happy is he who believes it without going to see it.

A Spaniard seeing a Fleming at dinner with a boyld Capon without Limmons,
cried out with great vvonder, What is a Capon without Limmons? The Fleming
answered, And what are Limmons without a Capon?

Spinola, at the treaty of the Truce between the King of Spain and the States,
showed Prince Maurice some golden Apples and Citrons, and bragged that they
grew twice a year in Spain; but the Prince showed him a Holland Cheese, and
said, This Fruit grows every day with us in Holland.

Bartholome de la Casa, a Spanish Bishop so often cited in this Book, lib. de
Descrip. Tyran. Hispan. in India. Describes the Spaniards with various
Epithets, and Titles, and amongst others he says, That they are hellish
Tyrants, plunderers of the Empire, that by too much greediness of gold, they
sold, and still sell, denied, and still deny Jesus Christ,; that they are not
Christians, but Devils; Not servants of God, or Ministers of their King, but
Traitors, Destroyers, Robbers, and Overthrowers of the Laws and Ordinances of
their King, Villains, fell Tigers, devouring Wolves, fierce Lions, pestilent
men, more mischievous then any plague from heaven, voracious Dragons, wild
Beasts, Butchers, Hangmen, etc.

The Book entitled, Speculum Indiae occident. printed at Amsterdam in Low
Dutch, says thus, A Spaniard is like the Devil, the more good a man does him,
the more will he plague him; but such as value him not, and care not for him,
he lets alone.

The Nobility of the Kingdom of Maguara, being advised by the Spaniards, to
render themselves to the obedience of the king of Spain, and embrace the
Christian Religion, said amongst themselves, That they could not perceive, that
they should receive a better Religion then they should forsake, in regard (say
they) that we see no more good nor righteousness in their actions, then in our
own; and our faith does us no hurt, as long as our Gods defend our religion,
and are favorably inclined thereto. But their religion brings us much mischief
and unsafety, and therefore neither can their Gods be good, nor can the
Christians be any where welcome, for that they endeavor to overthrow and
extirpate such merciful Gods, and such a merciful Religion.

The Emperor Charles the fifth being to depart out of the Low Countries for
Spain, most earnestly commended those Provinces, and the Nobility thereof, for
their singular faith and loyalty toward him (for which indeed he
extraordinarily loved them) to Philip 2. his son, exhorting him to love them,
cherish them, and advance them as his most faithful subjects, and not to show
too much favor to the Spaniards, (whose natures he very well knew, as having
had them always about him), nor suffer them to contemn, oppress, or in any
wise abuse the said Nobility and subjects. For (said he) I very much suspect
the innate haughtiness and pride of the Spaniards, if they get to the helm of
the Government, they should convert, pervert, and evert all, and run the ship
against the Rocks. And some of the Dutch Nobility standing not far off,
pointing them out with his finger to his aforesaid son, See thou my son
(said he) those Lords and Gentlemen; Those are they upon whose faith I have
hitherto relied, and whom I have chiefly trusted, rely thou also upon them, and
trust, them, etc. But Philip quickly forgot this advice of his Fathers, and
trusted chiefly to the persuasions of the Spaniards, and consequently both he,
and his Successors, received such fruit as they desired not from them.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Have now showed you enough, and more then enough indeed of the Spaniards;
and yet if any body fall short of his satisfaction herewith, I remit him to the
various Authors, which I have cited, and alleged in this small Book. But
methinks it should suffice the courteous reader as well as it does me for the
present, to have demonstrated that there is no Nation which has given more and
greater testimonies and prejudices of prevarications and exorbitations both in
this and in the other world, then the Spaniards; and therefore have they most
deservingly incurred the hatred of all other nations. I will add no more, but
only declare in this writing, that such as (either blinded by the Spaniards
gold, or enticed by their briberies) make it no scruple of conscience to serve
them to the destruction of their Country, Religion, and Liberty, do not only
not perform the duty of good Patriots, or true-born men of their said Country,
but are rather Sinons, who lay open the walls, and gates thereof to the common
enemy, and make a bridge for the Trojan Horse to come to invade, fire, and
destroy our Ilion, ah truly Ilion! But God avert that evil both from them and
us. Amen.

FINIS.

