THE Rioters in Lindsey Level, and their Abettors, would have it thought that
our Ancestors were such ignorant men, as to make all the Laws and statutes by
which the Commission of Sewers is empowered to remove the surrounder of waters
with such limitations as are utterly impossible to remove them, and would so
construe those Statutes, as if they were only made to mock men, to show a
public good, and to sorbid the doing of it. But by a true sense of those
Statutes it appears that the wisdom of those times did foresee, that by
Draining the Fenns, a new Province would be added unto England, and did
therefore make Laws fully impowring a Commission of Sewers according to their
judgment and wisdom, to do these public works so honorable and profitable
unto this Nation; so that the words in the Statutes ought in all reason to be
so interpreted as to enable men to perform what they require them to do, and
according to this, the Drainers of Lindsey Level have proceeded, and therein
followed the steps of all proceedings in all undertakings of this nature, all
which have been confirmed by all former Parliaments, not admitting of such
construction of the said Statutes, as will make all such works utterly
impossible and contradictory in themselves, as our Rioters would have it now
understood. The long Parliament did Order a Bill to settle Lindsey Level,
which is in Master Scobels hands.

2. It is conceived that no man will deny, but that a Parliament has power by
an Act, to authorize the Draining of any part of England on good arguments, and
the opinion that such a work may prove beneficial to the Public good of the
Nation; which is all that can be said, before a work be done! I suppose then
that this Parliament has an infallible argument to invite them to settle and
secure Lindesey Level, which is a work already done, and so eminently
honorable and profitable for the public good; and to no man's prejudice, though
many frivolous clamors be made of the Drainers dogs that barked at the Rioters
when they pulled down their Masters houses, (and such like stories) as also the
Hospital Lands (and others) exchanged for their own good, though Master
Cresset is pleased to call it taking to much land from them, which really is
so: I say if all complaints of this nature, be referred unto a Commission of
uninterested persons to hear and determine as it is in Bedford Level Act,
they will be soon accommodated, so as no man can receive prejudice, but be all
benefited by this draining.

3. It is considerable, that seventy two thousand acres that never paid penny
to public contribution, will by this Draining contribute and ease other parts.
[That the customs will increase very much, and that seventy thousand pounds
ready money, may come into the Exchequer, for land belonging to the State, when
this work is done] That many thousands of poor people will be imploid about
Flax, Hemp, and other Manufactures, and in Husbandry very considerable, where
one Drayner in two years, did plant above a hundred thousand Trees, built a
house that cost 3000 pound, and employed for three months in one Summer, six
hundred people to bring in his harvest of Cool and Rape seed, which grew on
Land where Fish did use to swim at Midsomer before the Draining; and for which
the said Drayner was sued for Tithes, and made to pay them, and yet the Rioters
testimonies in the consented Report, do all swear positively, that the
Drainers never were in possession, which makes those testimonies invallid,
because contradictory. Of all which building and plantation, there is now no
sign left, being all destroyed and carried away by that Riot, when those
public works were ruined.

4. If the addition of a new Province to England be a Public good, it does
concern the Nation in point of honor, as well as profit, to encourage private
men by their private hazard and charge to undertake the like public works.
For what can be more censurable in a Nation, than to suffer such treasure to be
lost so many years for want of industry? Or to see those men destroyed by a
Riot, for doing that which our ancestors have so often invited them to do, and
this Riot done while the cause depended in hearing before a Parliament, and in
contempt of several Orders of both Houses, issued for confirmation thereof:
And yet these Rioters with their Abettors are rewarded by 13 years possession
of the Drayners lands for ruining those works, as if the act were praise
worthy; while their Abettors do plead Law for those that have by that Riot
destroyed the foundation of al Law (as much as in them lies) al which the
Drayners do humbly submit unto the judgment of this Parliament, and do hope for
some reparation from the Rioters and their Abettors, that may enable them to
repair those public works, and will deter others from the lika Riots
hereafter.

William Killigrew.
Postscript.
IT is humbly conceived, that in honor and justice no man will believe those
scandalous reports which the Rioters and their Abettors do whisper in men's
ears against the Drayners, and their works of Draining nor give any credit
unto the several printed Libels which have been by them delivered at the
Parliament Door against the Drayners, all which their great Abettors dare not
so much own, as to subscribe their Names to them; and are therefore reputed as
false scandalous Libels, defaming men that rather deserve Statues of Brass,
for the good by them done unto the Commonwealth, which their Adversaries and
their Ancestors have ever endeavored, but could never effect.

January 18. 1654. William Killigrew.




