THE KING OF DENMARCK. THE King of France, The King of Spain, The States of
Venice Navies on the Seas, intended for ENGLAND. WITH, The Cause of their
coming, and their intents. As also the just Number of all their Navies, and
the Soldiers with them, and where each Navy lies. Likewise, the Danes and
Italians Resolution concerning His Majesty. And the Names of the Captains of
each NAVY, Captain Keevalo Dunous for the Danes. Captain De Sunae Bewit for
France. Captain Don Pedringano for Spain. Captain Hupah Fenao for the Italians.

London Printed for J. Bandon, 1642.

THE KING OF DENMARKS Navy.
AFter the confusive distractions in this Kingdom of England, intelligence
being spread abroad to most neighboring Nations, concerning his Majesty most
particularly, and amongst others the King of Denmark hearing of the same,
first convocated a Council, and when he perceived the pronenesse, and eager
readiness of the Danes: whose propensity was greater then he expected, he
forthwith by the unanimous consent of his Counsel, concluded to raise a Fleet,
which he would send over to the English Coast respectively. They elected
immediately Keevalo Dunous to be their chief Commander, and set forward with 75
sail the 13 of this present month of March, but they stayed two dais on shore,
expecting a good wind, and so they set forward the 15. day having a good gale,
tryumphing in great pomp, etc. There are above 40000. Danes in all, and it is
supposed, that their number will be shortly augmented. They lie now at the
Coasts of Ireland, and they sent a message to the King of their loyalty to his
Majesty, and the cause of their coming and intents were only to vindicate the
abusive injuries done against his Royal person: but the King (whose care and
vigilance extends to the prosperous security of his subjects, whose clemency is
adorned with such patience, that he had rather suffer wrong himself, then bath
the same in cloudy tevenge to the detriment, and hazard of his Kingdoms) would
not accept of their service, and discreetly denied their entertainment.

But they continue at the Irish Coast still, and if they hear not further
answer from His Majesty speedily, they will return again into their Country,
which God grant they may, as soon as they please.

The King of Frances Navy
THe French King hearing of the turbulent divisions in Eng^and, and some abuses
done to his Brother, known particularly by the private information of a dear
Friend, and moved by the same to assist his Majesty, summoned a Navy, under
the command of Captain De Sunae Bewit, and intended to set forward for England.
The certainty of this News is credible, a though there has been some
ementitious Pamphlets that have heretofore bin fictitiously published,
intimating that the French fleet was provided long since, but it was not
intended before now of late: and although the other was a lie, would this were
so too, but it is too certain. They have fifty six sail, and about thirty
thousand soldiers, loaded like wise with great provision of Arms.

They lie in the narrow seas, and were discryed by two English Merchants ships,
who espied them there, and reported it at London for truth.

And noe question but they will be at England very suddatnely, if they be not
timely prevented, for besides that number, twice as many more are resolved to
second them, and do now wait in readiness: they come likewise to maintain
his Majesty's cause; but I hope his Majesty will neither accept of their
service, nor have any cause to use them.

The King of Spaines Navy.
THe Spaniard (like a crafty For) harh always weighted for his prey on
England, which has been the sole object of his greedy intentions. Witness
first that formidable and invincible Armado in 88. which was sufficiently
potent to have blasted the whole Kingdom at one brunt, had not the divine
protection averted it from us.

Now likewise the King of Spain perceiving a sedition, and various confusion in
the Kingdom, has provided a fleet consisting of 23. ships, under the Command
of Captain Don Pedringano, to the number of 8000. soldiers, waiting on the
Seas for his opportunity. These ships were espied a hundred leagues distant
from the Spanish Coast, some think his intent hereby is for the defense of his
own Country, but that seems improbable, in regard it is so far remote from
their own shore: others think verily that his meaning is to aid, and assist his
Majesty upon just occasion: but in my opinion I conceive his intent is to wait
rather for his own prey, and watching his opportunity: for those that are too
officious in warlike affairs, especially in a foreign Kingdom, will rather
regard their own ends, then any others, for they will alwais turn to the
strongest side: But I hope all his evil intentions, and private stratagems
will fall on his own head.

The States of Venices Navy.
THe Italians seriously understanding some wrongs offered unto his Majesty,
acquainted the States of Venice with the same. Who immediately sat in Council
about it, and after some mature deliberation concluded to set out a Navy to
assist his Majesty, which was unanimously confirmed, and assented unto their
fleet consists of 48. ships, under the Commad of Captain Hupah Fenao, there
being at the least 36000. soldiers, being also provided with strong ammunition
of arms: they lie now within less then 40. leagues from the Downs, and are
suddenly intended to appropinquate the English Coast, being all unitely
resolved to maintain the Kings own person from all injuries, or abuses: but I
hope the Kings clemency will mittigate their anger, and no doubt, but that His
Majesty will not entertain them, having no cause of any such vindication.

COnstancy is an Antidote against fear: wherefore let us be sincerely constant
in our minds, and we may easily expel fear from our thoughts. First constant
to God, constant to our King, constant to our Parliament, constant to our
selves, and lastly constant to truth and equity. These being truly performed,
we need not to fear either any foreign or domestic enemy, As for these Navies
aforementioned, they may perhaps cast a repercussive fear and astonishment into
the minds of some: but if we be really true, and constant in our minds, we need
not fear them.

As for those injuries, and abuses done to His Majesty, which they intend, and
are resolved to vindicate, for my own part, I am ignorant of any; which if
there were, I believe His Majesty is more loving, and tender over his Subjects,
then for some particular abuse to depopulate the whole Kingdom in revenge of
the same. And the Parliament are so judicious in their pious way, and in all
their mature Counsels, that if any known, and unjust injury sholy be offered
unto his Majesty, they would (I am confident) according to Equity and Justice
correct the same. And they are so vigilant, and careful for the safety, and
security of the Kingdom, that if any enemy should violently oppose us, they
would be speedily provided for them in defedce of the Realm. God grant that
the King and Parliament may so unitely accord, and correspond together, that no
cause of Fears, and Iealousies, that no suspicion of injuries, may be reflected
on either.

FINIS.

