The Idiot IN FOUR BOOKS. The first and second of Wisdom. The third of the
Mind. The fourth of statick Experiments, Or experiments of the Balance.

By the famous and Learned C. Cusanus.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Crown in Fleet Street, between the two Temple Gates, 1650.

THE FIRST BOOK
wherein The speakers are The Author. The Idiot. The Orator.

Author. IN the Roman forum or Market place, a certain poor Idiot, or private
man, met a very rich Orator, whom courteously smiling he thus spoke unto.


Idiot. I marvel of thy pride, that being wearied with continual reading of
innumerable books, thou art not yet led to humility: without doubt this
proceeds from nothing else, but that the knowledge of this world, (wherein
thou think thou excellest all other) is a certain foolishness before God,
and thereupon pusses men up, whereas true knowledge humbles them; I could wish
thou would apply thy self thereto, because there is the treasure of
gladness.


Orator. What presumption is this of thee poor Idiot and utterly ignorant,
that thou thus undervaluest the study of learning, without which no man
profits or advances himself.


Idiot. It it not presumption great Orator, but charity which will not suffer
me to keep silence; for I see thee given to seek wisdom, by much; but vain
labor, from the which if I could call thee back, so that thou thy self
might see thine error, I know thou would rejoice that the snare were
broken, and thy self escaped; the opinion of authority has perverted thee,
and made thee like an horse, which being free by Nature, is by art tied to the
Manger with a halter, where he eats nothing but what is given him; for thy
understanding being bound to the authority of writers is fed with strange, and
not natural food.


Orator. If the food of wisdom be not in the books of wise Men, where is it?


Idiot. I do not say it is not there, but that the natural food is not there
found; for they that first applied themselves to write of Wisdom, had not
their increase and nourishment from the food of books, which as yet were not:
but by a natural nourishment were brought unto the state of perfect men, and
certainly they did far exceed in wisdom all those that think they have
profited by books.


Orator. Although peradventure, some things may be known without the study of
Letters, yet difficult and great matters cannot possibly, seeing that sciences
increased by additions.


Idiot. This is that I said, that thou art led by authority, and so deceived;
some body has written this and thou believe him; but I say unto thee, that
wisdom cries out in the streets, and her cry is how she dwells in the
highest.


Orat. By that which I hear, it seems thou think thy self wise being
indeed an Idiot.


Idiot. This is, it may be, the difference between thee and me; thou think
thy self wise, when thou art not, and hereupon art proud; but I know my self
an Idiot; and hereupon am more humble, and in this peradventure more learned.


Orator. How can thou being an Idiot, be brought to the knowledge of thy
ignorance?


Idiot. Not by thy books, but Gods books.


Orator. Which are they?


Idiot. Those which he wrote with his own finger.


Orator. Where are they to be had?


Idiot. Every where.


Orator. Then in this market place.


Idiot. Yes, for I said that wisdom cries out in the streets.


Orator. I would feign know how.


Idiot. If I could see thee desirous to learn, and yet not out of curiosity, I
would reveal great matters unto thee.


Orator. But can thou do it in brief, that I may have a taste of thy
meaning?


Idiot. I can.


Orator. Let us then withdraw our selves a little out of the way, into this
next barbers shop; there we may sit and talk more quietly.


Aut. It pleased the Idiot, and so in they went, and turning their faces to the
market place, the Idiot thus began his Speech.


Idiot. Because I told thee that wisdom cries out in the streets, and her cry
is, that she dwells in the most high places, this now will I endeavor to show
thee. And first tell me what do thou see here done in the Market place?


Orator. I see in one place moneys telling, in another wares a weighing, and
over against us, oil a measuring, and other things.


Idiot. These are the works of that reason, by which men excel beasts; for
bruit beasts can neither number, weigh, nor measure. Now be well advised
Orator, and tell me by what, and in what these things are done.


Orator. By discretion or discerning.


Idiot. Thou say well; and by what things does discretion number? Is it not
by one?


Orator. How meanest thou?


Idiot. Is not one once one? two twice one? three thrice one, and so forward?


Orator, It is so.


Idiot. Therefore all numbering is done by one.


Orator. So it seems.


Idiot. As then one is the beginning of Number, so is the least weight the
beginning of weighing; and the least measure the beginning of measuring. Let
therefore the least weight be called an ounce, and the least measure an inch;
then, as we number by one, so we weigh by an ounce, and measure by an inch; so
also from one is numbering, from an ounce weighing, and from an inch measuring;
so likewise in one is numbering, in an ounce weighing, and in an inch
measuring; are not these things so?


Orator. Yea.


Idiot. But by what may we attain or reach unto unity? by what an ounce? and
by what an inch?


Orator. That I cannat tell, yet sure I am that unity is not reached by number,
because number is after one; so neither an Ounce by weight, nor an inch by
measure.


Idiot. Thou say very true Orator; for as that which is simple is in nature
before that which is compound; so the compound is in nature after the simple.
And therefore the compound cannot measure the simple, but quite contrary; from
whence we gather how that by which, of which, and in which, every thing
numerable is numbered, is not attingible by any number: and that by which, of
which, and in which, every thing ponderable is weighed, is not attingible by
weight; and likewise that by which, of which, and in which, every measurable
thing is measured, is not attingible by measure.


Orator. This I see clearly.


Idiot. Translate then this cry of wisdom in the streets into the highest where
wisdom dwells, and thou will find much more delectable things, then in all
thy trimest and bravest books.


Orator. Unless thou, expound thy meaning, I understand thee not.


Idiot. And unless thou entreat me affectionately, and from thy heart, I am
forbidden to do it, for the secrets of wisdom must not be opened to all men
promiscuously.


Orator. I much desire to bear thee; for the few things I have already heard
have inflamed me; the things which thou have premised, show some great matter
behind; therefore I earnestly beseech thee go forward with that thou have
begun.


Idiot. I know not whether I may easily reveal so great secrets, and make
manifest so profound a depth; yet I cannot forbear, but that I must needs
comply with thee. Behold brother, the highest wisdom is this, to know how in
the said similitude, that which is inattingible, may be reached, or attained
inattingibly.


Orator. Thou speak wonders and discords.


Idiot. This is the cause, why hidden things ought not to be communicated unto
al, because when they are laid open they seem gross absurdities unto them: Thou
woundrest why I speak things that contradict one another; thou shall hear and
taste the truth. And I say, that what I have before affirmed of Unity, an
ounce, and an inch, must likewise be affirmed of all things concerning the
beginning of all things; for the beginning of all things, is that by which, in
which, and of which, every thing principiable, is principiated (that is every
thing that may have a beginning, has a beginning) and yet attingible by
nothing principiated. That is it, by which, in which, and of which, every
intelligible thing is understood, and yet it self inattingible by any
understanding, that is it by which, in which, and of which, every thing that
may be spoken, is said, and yet it self unspeakeable by any language. So is it
that by which, in which, and of which, every terminable thing is determined,
and every limitable thing limited, and yet it self interminable by any term;
unlimitable by any limite. Innumerable such like true propositions may thou
make, and fill therewith all volumes of Orators, and add unto them others
without numbers that thou may see how wisdom dwells in the highest; for that
is highest, that cannot be higher; and only infinity is that hight. Whereupon
wisdom (which all men by nature desire to know, and consequently seek for
with so great affection of the mind) is no otherwise known, then that it is
higher then all knowledge, and utterly unknowable, and unspeakable, by all
language, and unintelligible by all understanding, and unmeasurable by all
measure, and unlimitable by all limits, and interminable by every term, and
improportionable by every proportion, and incomparable by all comparison, and
infigurable by all figuration, and unformable by all formation, and unmovable
by all motion, and unimaginable by all imagination, and insensible by all
sensation, and unattractable by all attraction, and untastable in all taste,
and unhearable in all hearing, and invisible in all sight, and unapprehendable
in all apprehension, and unaffirmable in all affirmation, and undeniable in all
negation, and undoubtable in all dubitation, and unopinable in all opinion; and
because in all speech it is unexpressible, there can no end be devised of these
speeches, being incogitable in all cogitation by which, in which, and of which
are all things.


Orator. Without doubt these things are higher then ever I hoped to have heard
from thee; cease not I pray thee, to conduct me thither, where I with thee may
most sweetly taste some of these high and sublime speculations: for I see thou
art never satisfied with speaking of that wisdom, and I cannot but think there
is exceeding sweetness in it, which except thou feltest in thy inward taste,
it would not so much allure thee.


Idiot. It is wisdom which tastes, then which there is nothing sweeter to the
understanding. Neither are they by any means to be thought wise, which speak
by word and not by taste. And they speak feelingly of wisdom, which by it do
so know all things, that they know nothing at all; for by wisdom, and in it,
and of it, is all internal relishing and taste; but it, because it dwells in
the highest, is not tastable by any relish or taste. Therefore it is untastably
tasted, inasmuch as it is higher then all tastable, sensible, rational, or
intellectual. And this is to taste untastably, and afar of, as if the
smelling a thing should be called an untastable fore-taste; for as the odor
multiplied from the thing that is odorable, taken or received by another,
allureth us to the race, to run to the ointment in the smell of the
ointments; so the eternal and infinite wisdom shining in all things, inviteth
us, by a certain foretaste of its effects, to be carried to it with a
wounderfull desire: for whereas life it self is an intellectual spirit, which
has in it self a certain con-nate fore-taste, whereby it does, with so great
desire, search for the fountain of its life which without that fore-taste, it
could neither feeke nor know it self to have received, if it found it; hence
it is, that it is moved to its proper life; for it is sweet unto every spirit
continually to ascend to the principle or beginning of life, though it be
unapprochable; for this is continually to live more and more happily, to ascend
more and more to life; and when by seeking its life, it is brought thither,
that it sees it the infinite life, then it so much more rejoices, by how much
more it sees its life immortal, and so it comes to pass, that the
unapprochablenesse and incomprehensibility of its life, is its most desired and
longed for comprehension, as if a man had a great treasure of his life, and
should come to this, that he knew that treasure of his to beinnumerable,
unweighable, and unmeasurable, this knowledge of the incomprehensibility is his
most pleasant and wished for comprehension, not as it relates to the
comprehendor, but to the most lovely treasure of his life; as if any man should
love any thing because it were lovely, he would be glad, that in the lovely
there should be found infinite and inexpresible causes of Love. And this is the
lovers most joyful comprehention, when he comprehends the incomprehensible
loveliness of the thing beloved; for he would not so much rejoice to love any
second loved object, that were comprehensible, as when it appears unto him
that the loveliness of the thing beloved is utterly unmeasurable,
undeterminable, and wholly incomprehensible. This is that I may so say the
joy-joyfullest comprehensibility of incomprehensibility.


Orator. Peradventure I understand thee; thou shall judge whither I do or no;
for this seems to be thy intention, that our beginning by which, in which, and
of which, we are and are moved, is then tasted by us, as the beginning, middle,
and end, when its vital sweetness is untastably tasted by the affection, and
incomprehensibly comprehended by the understanding; and that he that goes about
by way of taste to taste it, and comprehensibly to comprehend it, is utterly
without either taste or understanding.


Idiot. Thou have rightly understood me, Orator; for therefore they that
think wisdom nothing else then that which is by the understanding
comprehensible, and happiness nothing else then that which is by them
attingible, are far from true eternal, and infinite wisdom, but are turned
to that which is finite, finding a certain determinable rest, where they
think the gladness of life to be, but it is not. Hereupon finding themselves
deceived, they are in torment, because where they thought happiness was, unto
which they turned themselves with all their power, there they find sorrow and
death; for infinite wisdom is the never failing food of life, of which our
spirit lives eternally, which can love nothing but Wisdom and truth, for every
understanding desires being; its being is living, its living is understanding,
its understanding is to be fed with wisdom and truth, whereupon it follows
that the understanding which tastes not clear wisdom, is as an eye in
darkness; for it is an eye, but it sees not, because it is not in the light,
and because it wants the delightful life which is in seeing, it is therefore
in pain and torment, and this is death rather then life; so the understanding
being turned to any other thing then the food of eternal wisdom, shall find
it self without or besides life, wrapped up in the darkeness of ignorance,
rather dead then alive; and this is the interminable torment, that the
understanding should have a being, and yet never understand; for it is only
the eternal wisdom in which every understanding can understand.


Orator. Thou tellest me things both good and rare, now proceed I pray thee,
to show how I may be lifted up to some manner of taste of eternal wisdom.


Idiot. The eternal wisdom is tasted in every tastable thing; it is delight
in every delightful thing. It is the beauty in every thing beauteous. It is
the appetite in everyappetible thing, and so say of all desirable things, how
can it choose then but be tasted? is not thy life pleasant to thee when it is
according to thy desire.


Orator. Yes, nothing more?


Idiot. Seeing then this thy desire is not but by the eternal wisdom, in
which and of which it is, and this happy life likewise, which thou desire is
not but from the same eternal wisdom, in which it is, and without which it
cannot be, hence it follows that in all the desire of intellectual life,
thou desire nothing else then the eternal wisdom, which is the complement
of thy desire, the beginning, middle, and end thereof. If therefore this desire
of immortal life, that thou may live eternally happy, be sweet unto thee,
thou do already find within thy self a certain fore-taste of the eternal
wisdom; for there is nothing desired that is utterly unknown, as among the
Indians there are apples, whose foretaste because we have not, we do not desire
them; but being we cannot live without nourishment; nourishment we desire, and
of nourishment we have a certain fore-taste that we may live sensibly;
therefore a child having a certain fore-tafte of milk in his own nature,
when he is hungry is moved unto milk; for we are nourished, by those things of
which we are. So the understanding has its life from the eternal wisdom, and
of that it has (such as it is) a certain fore-taste, whereupon in all
feeding, which, that it may live, is necessary unto it, it is not moved but to
be fed from thence, from whence it has this intellectual being. If therefore
in all thy desire of intellectual life thou would mark from whom the
understanding is, by what it is moved, and to what; thou would find in thy
self, that it is the sweetness of eternal wisdom, which makes thy desire so
sweet and delightful unto thee, that thou art carried with an unspeakeable
affection to the comprehension of it, as unto the immortality of thy life.

And if thou look upon the example of iron, and the lodestone, thou shall
find that the iron has in the lodestone a certain beginning of his
effluence, or flowing out; And whilst the lodestone, by its presence stirs
up the heavy and ponderous iron, the iron with a wonderful desire is carried
contrary to the motion of nature by which for its heaviness it ought to press
downwards, and is moved upwards by uniting it self to its principle: for
except there were in iron a certain natural fore-taste of the lodestone, it
would no more be moved to the lodestone than to any other stone; and except
there were in the stone a greater inclination to iron than to copper there
would not be that attraction and drawing.

Our intellectual spirit has accordingly from the eternal wisdom, a
principle or beginning of being so intellectually, which being is more
conformable unto wisdom, than any other not intellectual being. Hence the
irradiation or immission into a holy Soul, is in the stirring up a desirefull
motion: for he that by an intellectual motion seeks wisdom, he being
inwardly touched to the fore-tasted sweetness, forgetting himself, it is
received in the body, as if he were without the body; the weight of all
sensible things cannot hold him until he unites himself to the attracting
wisdom: and this makes the soul that by an amazing admiration forsakes the
sense, grows so mad that it makes no account of ought else besides that
wisdom, and to such a one it is sweet to leave this world, and this life,
that they may the more readily be carried into the wisdom of immortality.

This foretaste makes that which appears delightful, abominable to holy men,
who the sooner to attain unto it, do most evenly and patiently bear all
corporal torments. It instructs us, that this our spirit being turned unto
it, can never fail; for if this our body cannot by any sensible ligament or
tie, hold the spirit? but that letting go all performance of duties to the
body, it is most greedily carried to that eternal wisdom; then surely though
the body fail, it can never fail; for this assimilation and likeness, which
is naturally in our spirit, by which it is not quieted but in that wisdom it
self, is, as it were, the lively image thereof; for the image is not quieted
but in that whereof it is the image, and from which it has the beginning,
midst, and end; now the living image, by its life, does of it self put forth
motion toward the Sampler, in which only it rests; for the life of the
image cannot rest in it self, being but the life of the life of truth, and not
its own; hereupon it is moved to the sampler, as to the truth of its being. If
therefore the sampler be eternal, and the image have life in which it
fore-tasteth its sampler, and so be desirefully moved unto it; and seeing that
motion if it be vital or lively, cannot reft but in the infinite life, which
is eternal wisdom; hence it follows, that that spiritual motion can never
cease which does never infinitely reach or touch infinite life; for it is
always with a most pleasant desire moved to reach it, which because of the
delightfulness of the attraction is never loathed; for wisdom is the most
s;avoury meat, which so satisfies, that it never diminishes the desire of
taking it, so that the delight of that eternal feeding never cease.


Orator. I do assuredly understand that thou have very well spoken: only I
see there is a great deal of difference between the taste of wisdom, and
whatsoever can be said of the sense of tasting


Idiot. Thou say right, and it pleases me well to have heard this word from
thee, for as all knowledge of the taste of that thing which was never tasted,
is empty and barren, until the sense of tasting do reach it; so likewise of
this wisdom, which no man tastes by hearsay, but he only tastes which
receives it in his internal taste, and he bears witness, not of those things
he has heard, but which he has experimentally tasted in himself. To know the
many descriptions of love which the Saints have left unto us, without the taste
of love, is but a certain emptiness. Wherefore for him that seeks eternal
wisdom, it is not sufficient to know those things which are read of it; but it
is very necessary, that having found by his understanding where it is, he then
make it his own, as he that has found a field, wherein there is a great
treasure, cannot rejoice in or enjoy that treasure, being in another man's and
not his own field; therefore he sells all and byeth that field, that he may
have the treasure in his own field; he must then sell, and give away all his
own things; for the eternal wisdom will not be had, but where the haver kept
nothing of his own, to the end he might have that; and that which we have of
our own, are our vices; and that which we have of the eternal wisdom, are
nothing else but good things. Wherefore the spirit of Wisdom dwells not in a
body subject to sins, nor in an evil willing soul. But in his own pure
field and sapientiall clean image, as in his holy temple; for where the
eternal wisdom dwells, there is the Lords field, bearing immortal fruit; for
it is the field of virtues which wisdom tilleth, from whence grow the fruits
of the Spirit, which are Righteousness, Peace, Fortitude, Temperance,
Chastity, Patience and such like.


Orator. Thou have abundantly explained these things; but now answer me I pray
thee, is not God the beginning of all things?


Idiot. Who doubts it.


Orator. Is the eternal wisdom any thing else but God?


Idiot. Far be it we should say it is any thing else. It is God.


Orator. Did not God form or create all things by his word?


Idiot. He did.


Orator. Is the Word God?


Idiot. It is.


Orator. Is wisdom so?


Idiot. To say that God made all things in wisdom, is no more to say, then
that that God created all things by his word; but consider how all that is
might be, and might so be, and is, and God that gives it the actualnesse of
being, is he with whom there is power by which the thing might be produced from
not being to being; and he is God the Father, which may be called Entity or
Unity, because he does by his omnipotence necessitate that to be which was
nothing; for God gives it such a being, that it is this, (as heaven for
example) and nothing else; neither more nor less. And this God is the word,
the wisdom, the son of the Father; and may be called the equality of Unity, or
Entity. Then there is a being; and being so united, that it is, and this it
has from God, which is the connection knitting all things together; and it is
God the holy Spirit, for it is the Spirit that unites and knits together all
things in the univers, and in us. As therefore nothing begets unity but it is
the first principle not principiated; or the first beginning not begun; so
nothing begets the Father who is eternal; and equality proceeds from (or is
begotten of) unity: so the son from the Father; and the knot or bond proceeds
from unity and its equality; so the holy spirit from the Father and the son;
wherefore every thing, that it may have being, and such a being in which it
is, has need of a unitrine principle; namely of God three and one, of whom
there might much more be said, if the time would give leave: the wisdom
therefore which is the equality it self of being is the word or reason of
things; for it is as an infinite intellectual form; for the form gives to
the thing that it is formed. Therefore an infinite form is the actuality of al
formable things and forms, and the most precise equality of them all; for as
if there were an infinite circle, it would be the true samplar of all figurable
figures, and the equality of the being of every figure; for it would be a
triangle, an hexagone, a decagone and so forth; and the most adequate measure
of them all, though a most simple figure; so infinite wisdom is simplicity,
complicating all forms and the most adequate measure of them all, as if the
most perfect Idea of omnipotent art should be the art it self, and most simple
form of every thing formable by art. So that if thou look upon the form of a
man thou shall find the form of the divine art, the most precise sampler
thereof, as if it were nothing else at all; then the sampler of the form of a
man; so if thou look to the form of Heaven, and turn thy self to the form
of the divine art, thou shall not be able to conceive it any other thing then
the sampler of this form of Heaven. And so of all forms formed or formable.
The art or wisdom of God the Father, is the most simple form, and yet the
only and most equal example of infinite formable forms; although variable. O
how admirable is that form whose most simple infinity all formable forms
cannot explicate, or show the uttermost of? And he only, that by a most
sublime understanding, lifts himself above all opposition, sees it to be
most true; as if any man would mark the natural force which is in a unity, he
should see that power, if he would conceive the same to be in act, as a cetaine
form visible by the understanding only, and that afar of; and because the
power of a unity would be most simple, it must needs be a most simple infinity.
In the next place, if the fame man would turn himself to the form of numbers
in considering a duality a or a tennality, and would then return to the actual
power of a unity, he should see that form which is put to be the actual power
of the unity, to be the most precise samplar of duality, tennality, or any
other numerable number; for this would the infinity of that form do (which is
called the power of unity) that whilst thou look to duality, that form can
be neither greater nor less, then the form of duality, whereof it is the most
precise samplar.

Thus thou see that one and the same simple wisdom of God, because it is
infinite, is the most true samplar of all formable forms; and this is his
reaching, by which he reaches all things, boundeth or limiteth, and disposes
them; for it is in all forms as the truth in the image; the samplar in the
thing exemplified; the form in the figure, and preciseness in assimilation or
likeness; and although it do most liberally communicate it self to all
things a being infinitely good; yet can it be received in nothing as it is,
because in another thing it is otherwise received. And being it cannot be
received in any thing, but after another manner, it is yet received after the
best manner that may be; but unmultipliable infinity is better explicated in a
various reception; for great diversity does better express
unmultipliablenesse; from whence it is that wisdom being in diverse forms
diversely received, brings it to pass that every form called to Identity is
partaker of wisdom, as well as it can; that some things partake it in a
certain spirit exceedingly distant from the first form, which scarce gives an
elementall being; others in a more formed spirit, which gives a mineral being;
others in a yet more noble degree, which gives a vegetable life; others in a
higher, which gives a sensible life; after that in such a one as gives an
imaginative power; then a rational, and lastly, an intellectual life; and
this is the highest degree that is, the nearest image of wisdom. And this
only is the degree that has aptitude or fitness to lift it self up to the
taste of wisdom; because in those intellectual natures, the image of
wisdom is the lively intellectual life; the power whereof is of it self to
show or put forth a vital motion; which motion is by understanding to go
forward to its proper object; which is absolute truth, that is eternal
wisdom; and that going foreward being to uunderstand, is also to taste
intellectaully; for to apprehend by the understanding, is by a certain most
welcome taste as well as it can, to attains and reach to quiddity; for as by
the sensible taste which reaches not the quiddity, yet in outward things there
is a certain pleasant sweetness perceived by the sense, which sweetness is
from the quidditie: So by the understanding there is tasted in the quidditie an
intellectual sweetness, which is the image of the sweetness of the eternal
wisdom, which is the quidditie of quiddities, and an unproportionable
comparison of one sweetness to another.

Let these things that have been said, suffice for this short time, that thou
may know that wisdom is not in the art of oratory, or in great volumes,
but in the separation from these sensible things; and in the turning to the
most simple and infinite form; and that thou may understand how to receive
it in a Temple purged from all vice, and by fervent love to cleave unto it,
until thou may taste it, and see how sweet that is which is all sweetness,
which being once tasted, all things which now seem great, will grow vild and
base unto thee; and thou will be so humbled, that no arrogance, or any other
vice will remain in thee; because with a most chaste and pure heart thou will
inseparably adhere unto wisdom once tasted; choosing rather to forsake this
world, and all things else that are not it, then it; and living with
unspeakeable gladness, thou will dye; and after death eternally rest in it by
a most amorous embracement; which the ever blessed wisdom of God it self
vouchsafe to grant both to thee and me. Amen.


The end of the first book of the Idiot.
The second Book of the Idiot.
Wherein the Speakers are The Author. The Idiot. The Orator.

Author. IT happened that the Roman Orator, after the words he had heard from
the Idiot concerning wisdom, was exceedingly stricken with admiration, and
went unto him, whom when he had found lurking about the Temple of Eternity, he
thus spoke unto him.


Orat. O man most desired and looked for, help my weakness, that I may with
some ease feed upon those difficulties which transcend my mind, and
understanding: otherwise, it will little avail me to have heard from thee so
many high Speculations.


Id. There is no difficulty more easy than to contemplate divine things,
where the delight coincides with the difficulty. But tell me, what is it thou
desire?


Orat. That thou would tell me how (seeing God is greater than can be
conceived) I ought to frame my conception of him?


Id. As thou would do of conception.


Orat. Explain thy self.


Id. Thou have heard how in every conception he that is unconceivable is
conceived: there comes therefore a conception from a conception, to him that is
unconceivable.


Orat. How shall I then make a more precise conception?


Id. Conceive precision; for God is absolute precison it self.


Orat. What is then to be done by me, when I purpose to frame a right a
conception of God?


Id. Turn thy self unto rectitude or rightnesse.


Orat. And when I labor to frame a true conception of God, what must I then do?


Id. Then bend thy mind upon Truth it self.


Orat. What if I mean to make a just conception?


Id. Turn thy self to justice.


Orat. And when I seek to make a good conception, what must I then do?


Id. Lift up the eyes of thy mind unto Goodness


Orat. I wonder whither it it that thou sendest me in all these cases?


Id. See how easy the difficulty is in divine things, that it always offers
it self to the seeker, in the same manner that it is sought for.


Orat. Without doubt there is nothing more wonderful.


Id. Every question concerning God, presupposes the thing questioned; and that
must be answered, which in every question concerning God, the question
presupposes: for God, although he be unsignifiable, is signified in every
signification of terms.


Orat. Declare thy self more at large I pray thee; for I am so transported with
wonders, that I can scarce hear what thou say.


Id. Does not the question, whether a thing be or no, presupprose the Entitie?


Orat. Yes.


Id. Therefore when it is demanded of thee, whether God be, (or whether there
be a God?) answer that which is presupposed, namely that he is; because that is
the Entitie presupposed in the question. So, if any man shall ask thee, what is
God? considering that this question presupposes a quidditie to be; thou shall
answer, that God is absolute quiddity it self. And so of all things. Nor need
there be any hesitation or doubt in this; for God is the absolute
presupposition it self, of all things, which (after what manner soever) are
presupposed, as in every effect the cause is presupposed. See therefore,
Orator, how easy Theological difficulty is.


Orat. Certainly, this is a very, grrat and yet a stupendous facility.


Id. Nay, I say unto thee, that God is infinite facility it self and it does
not agree to God that he should be infinite difficulty; for it must needs be
(as thou shall hear anon of crooked and straight) that difficulty pass into
facility, if it ought to agree to the infinite God.


Orat. If that which in every question is presupposed, be in divine matters an
answer unto the question: then of God there can be no proper question, because
the answer coincides with it.


Id. It is a very good inference; and add unto it, that God being infinite
straightness, and absolute necessity, a doubtful question reaches not him,
but all doubt is in him certainty; whence we also infer, that any answer unto
any question concerning God, is not a proper and precise answer; for precision
is not more than one and infinite, which is God: for every answer partakes of
the absolute answer, which is infinitely precise. But what I said unto thee,
how that in Theological questions, the presupposed is the answer, must be
understood in the same manner that the question is made, and so taking it, this
is sufficiency; because whereas in God, neither the question, nor the answer
to the question, can reach precision: therefore after the manner wherein the
question approaches to precision, in the same manner the answer presupposes.

And this is our sufficiency which we have of God, knowing that precision
inattingible, cannot by us be reached, but after some manner that partakes the
manner of absolute precision. Among the which, being diverse and manifold, that
partake the only manner of precision, the foresaid manner comes nearest unto
absolute facility, and is our sufficiency, because we cannot reach any other
which is easier and truer.


Orat. Who would not be amazed at the hearing of these things? For whereas God
is absolute incomprehensibility, thou say that comprehension comes so much
the nearer unto him, by how much the manner thereof does more partake of
facility.


Id. He that does with me behold how absolute facility coincides with absolute
incomprehensibility, cannot choose but say as I do. Whereupon I do constantly
affirm, that by how much the universal manner to all questions formable of God
shall be more easy, by so much more true, and more convenient it is, as
position (or affirmation) agrees to God.


Orat. Make this somewhat more plain.


Id. That is, as we admit some things may be spoken of God affirmatively: for
in that Divinity which denies all things of God, we must speak otherwise;
because there the truer answer is to every question, a negation: yet by that
means or manner, we are not led to the knowledge what God is, but what God is
not.

There is moreover a consideration of God, as neither position, nor ablation
(that is neither affirmation nor negation) agrees unto him, but as he is above
all position and ablation; and then the answer is, to deny affirmation,
negation and copulation. As in case it should be demanded, Whether God be?
according to the way of position, it must be answered out of that which is
presupposed, to wit, that he is, and that the very absolute presupposed Entity:
Bat according to the way of ablation (or negation) it must be answered, that he
is not: when by that way, none of all those things that may be spoken, can
agree to him that is unspeakable. But by the way, which is above all position
and ablation, it must be answered, that he is neither, to wit, absolute Entity;
nor that he is not, nor both together (namely that he is and is not) but that
he is above all. And now I think thou understandest what I mean.


Orat. I understand now that thou would say, that in words using divinity,
where we admit speeches of God, and the power of language is not utterly
excluded, there thou have brought the sufficiency of difficult things, into the
facility of the manner of forming truer Propositions concerning God.


Id. Thou have well apprehended it; for if I would lay open unto thee, the
conception which I have of God, my speech, if it must stand thee in stead, must
needs be such as has significative words, that so in the power of the word,
which is alike known unto us both, I may lead thee to that which is sought; and
that which is now sought, is God. And therefore this is Sermocinal, or
word-using Divinity, whereby I endeavor, by the power of language to lead thee
to God, the easiest: and truest way that I can.


Orat. Let us now, I pray thee, return to those things that were formerly
premised by thee, and explain thou them in order. In the first place thou
saidest, that the conception of conception (seeing God is the conception of
conception) is the conception of God. Now, is it not the mind which conceives?


Id. Without the mind there is no conception.


Orat. Seeing then to conceive belongs to the mind, certainly, to conceive an
absolute conception, is nothing else but to conceive the Art of the absolute
mind.


Id. Go on, for thou art in the way.


Orat. But the art of the absolute mind, is no other thing then the form of all
things formable; So I see how the conception of conception is nothing else but
the conception of the Idea of divine Art. If I say the truth, tell me so.


Id. Thou speak exceeding well; for absolute conception can be nothing else
but the Ideal form of all things which can be conceived, which is the equality
of all things formable.


Orat. This conception, as I think, is called the word of God, or the reason
((...).)


Id. Howsoever it be called by learned men, in that conception are all things.
As we say, that those things which without reason foregoing, come not into
being, are formerly in reason; and all things which we conceive to be, have a
reason of their being, that they may be after the manner in which they are, and
no otherwise. Therefore he that looks with a profound mind, into the simplicity
of absolute reason, which by way of priortity, complicates all things in it
self, he makes a conception of conception by it self, or absolute conception:
and this was the first thing that I premised.


Orat. Enough of this: now go on to show how the conception of absolute
precision, it a more precise conception of God.


Id. I am not now at leisure to repeat the same thing in every particular:
neither do I see it to be so seasonable for thee, considering that by one, the
way is opened for thee to all.

But take it notwithstanding, very briefly Precision, straightness, truth,
justice and goodness (of which thou have heard) are the same thing: Yet do not
believe that I mean, as all divinity is circular, one of the attributes
verified of another; as we say, that from the necessity of Gods infinite
simplicity, the greatness of God is his power, and back again, his power is
his greatness: and so of all those things that are by us attributed to the
essence of God. But these things of which I now speak, we find by experience,
do coincide in our ordinary talk. For when we hear any body express a thing as
it is indeed, presently one says that the expresser did it precisely, another
rightly, another truly, another justly, another well. And thus we find it true
in our daily speech. Neither does he who said he did it precisely and rightly,
mean any other thing, then he that said he expressed it truly, justly, and
well. And this thou grantest in thy self to be true, when thou markest how he
that said neither more nor less than he ought to have said, has reached and
attained to all those; for preciseness is no more to say than that which is
neither more nor less. In the same manner neither right, nor true, nor just,
nor good, admit either more or less; for how can that be precise, right, true,
just, or good, that is less than precise, right, true, just, and good? And if
that which is less than precise, be not precise, and less than right, be not
right, and less than true, be not true, and less than just, be not just, and
less than good, be not good; it is manifest, as well that which admits
more, is none of these: for precision which admits more, to wit, which can
be more precise, is not absolute precision. And so of right, true, just, and
good.


Orat. In those things then, that admit more or less, there is no conception
to be formed concerning God.


Id. Thou inferrest very well; for seeing God is infinite, those things that
admit of more or less, are not like unto him. Wherefore in those things, one
cannot ascend or descend into infinity, as we find by experience in number, and
the division of a continued quantity.


Orat. Therefore in this world there is no precision, nor rightnesse, nor
truth, nor justice, nor goodness, being we prove by trial, that one thing is
more precise than another, as one picture is preciser than another. So of
rightnesse; for one thing is righter than another, and one thing is truer than
another, and one thing juster than another, and one thing better than another.


Id. Thou conceivest me well; for those things as they are absolute, and free
from more or less, are not of this world. For there is nothing to be found so
precise, that it cannot be preciser: and nothing so straight, that cannot be
straighter: or so true, that cannot be truer: or so just, that cannot be
juster: or so good, that cannot be better. That pecision therefore, that
rightnesse, truth, justice, or goodness, which are to be found in this world,
are certain participations of such absolutes, and images, of which those others
are the samplars: samplars, I say, in the plural number, whilst we refer them
to the diverse reasons, and forms of diverse things; but they are indeed but one
samplar, because they coincide in that which is absolute.


Orat. I long extremely to hear thee concerning this point, how there it but
one absolute samplar of so great varieties of all things.


Id. He that is but little conversant in these Theological Speculations,
thinks this to be exceeding difficult: but to me there seems nothing more
easy and delightful; for the absolute samplar, which is nothing but absolute
precision, rightnesse, truth, justice, or goodness, complicates al
exemplifiable things of which there can be any precision, rightnsse, truth,
justice, and goodness, much more perfectly then thy face complicates all the
formable images thereof, of all which it is the precision, rightnesse, and
truth; for all the images of thy face, which may be painted, are so far forth
precise, right, and true, as they partake and imitate the living image of thy
face. And although it be not possible that one of them should be painted just
like the other, in all respect, without any manner of difference, seeing
precision is not of this world, and that which is another thing, must needs be
after another manner: yet of all those truths there is but one samplar.


Orat. Thou speak well, as to the unity of the samplar, but not to the
equality: For my face, although it be the measure of the Truth of the picture,
because the picture is judged by the beholding of my face, how much, or how
little it fails in the likeness; yet it is not true, that my face is the most
adaequate measure of them all, by every manner of measure; because it is
always either greater or lesser.


Id. Thou say true of thy face; because it has quantity, and being capable
of more or less, it cannot be precision, neither the adequate measure of
another thing. For in this world wanting precision, and adequate measure; and
likeness is impossible. But if thou conceive an absolute samplar, it is
otherwise; for that is neither great nor small, for these things cannot be of
the reason (or formality) of a samplar: for a Pismire being to be painted, is a
samplar as well as a mountain that is to be painted, and so back again:
therefore an absolute samplar, that is not capable of more or less, being
precision and truth, cannot be either greater or less, than the exemplified:
for that which cannot be less, we call the least, and that is most little; and
that which cannot be greater, we call the greatest, that is the most great.
Absolve therefore or free maximity or greatestnesse from that which is most
little, or most great, that thou may see maximity in it self, and not
contracted in small or great, and thou shall so see absolute maximity, before
great and little, so that it cannot be greater or less, but is the greatest,
in which the least coincides. Wherefore such a greatest as it is the absolute
samplar, cannot be either greater or less than any exemplified thing possible
to be given; and that which is neither greater nor, less, we call equal.
Therefore the absolute samplar is equality, precision, measure, or justice,
which is the same thing, truth and goodness, which is the perfection of all
exemplifiable things.


Orat. Yet further, I pray thee, instruct me, how infinity does agree with
absolute rectitude, or rightnesse?


Id. Very willingly: Thou know that by how much greater any circle is, so
much greater is the Diameter thereof.


Orat. I confess it.


Id. Well then, though a circle, which is capable of more and less, cannot be
simply the greatest, or infinite; yet let us suppose such a circle to be
infinite, shall not then the Diameter thereof be an infinite line?


Orat. It must of necessity be so.


Id. And the circumference being infinite shall be the Diameter; for two
infinites cannot be, seeing each of them, by the addition of the other, may be
greater. And the circumference it self could not be crooked, for it were
impossible it should be neither greater nor less than the Diameter, if it were
crooked; Seeing there is one and the same habitude (or proportion) of the
crooked circumferences of all circles to the Diameter, which is a habitude more
than triple or threefold. If therefore the circumference be equal to the
Diameter, it shall also be the Diameter it self and a right line. For this cause
also thou see, how the Arc of a great circle, is liker to a right line than
the Arc of a little circle: And therefore by this reason, the circumference of
an infinite circle, must needs be right or straight: whence it is manifest,
that crookedness which is capable of more or less, is not found in the
infinite, but only rightnesse or straightness.


Orat. The things thou speak do much please we, because they do very easily
lift me up to that which I seek: proceed, I pray thee, to show, how infinite
straightness or rightnesse is the samplar.


Id. This thou clearly discernest by thy self, that infinite rightnesse has it
self so (or is of the same habitude) to all things; as an infinite line, if
there were any such, has it self to all figures; for if infinite rightnesse,
which is necessarily absolute, were contracted to a line, being contracted, it
must needs be found the complication, precision, rightnesse, truth, measure and
perfection of all figurable figures. Therefore absolute rightnesse being
considered absolutely, and uncontractedly to any line, or any other thing
whatsoever, is likewise absolutely the samplar, precision, truth, measure and
perfection of all things.


Orat. These things are no ways subject to doubt, only show how an infinite
line is the precision of all figures; thou toldest me Yesterday, how an
infinite circle is the samplar of all figures, and I understood it not, and
willing to be more clearly informed of it, I came unto thee again, and now thou
say an infinite line is precision, which I less understand.


Id. Thou have heard how an infinite line is a circle, so a triangle,
quadrangle, Pentagone; so all infinite figures coincide with an infinie line.
Hereupon, an infinite line is the samplar of all figures which can be made of
lines; because an infinite line is an infinite act or form of all formable
figures. And when thou look upon a triangle, and liftest thy self up to an
infinite line, thou shall find it the most adequate samplar of this triangle;
after this manner consider an infinite triangle, this infinite triangle is
neither greater nor less than the aforesaid triangle. For the sides of an
infinite triangle are infinite, and an infinite side being the greatest, in
which the less coincides, is neither greater nor less than the given side. So
then the sides of an infinite triangle, are neither greater, nor less than the
sides of the given triangle. So neither the whole triangle is greater or less
than the given triangle; wherefore it must needs be, that an infinite triangle
is the precision, and absolute form of a finite triangle. But the three sides
of an infinite triangle, must of necessity be one infinite line; because there
cannot be many infinite lines: So it would come to pass, that an infinite line
is the most precise samplar of the given triangle: and as I have said of a
triangle, so likewise of all figures.


Orat. O wonderful facility of difficult things! I see now that all these
things do most evidently follow the position (or granting) of an infinite line;
namely, that it is the samplar, precision, rectitude, truth, measure or
justice, goodness or perfection of all figures, figurable by a line. And I see
that in the simplicity of its straightness, all things figurable, are
complicitely, most truly, formally, and precisely, without all confusion, or
defect, infinitely more perfectly than be they can figured.


Id. Blessed be God, who has used me, a most ignorant man, as an instrument,
such as it is, to open the eyes of thy mind for the beholding him with
admirable easiness, after the manner that he has made himself visible unto
thee; for when thou transferrest thy self from straightness contracted to a
line, to absolute infinite straightness, then in that straightness thou shall
see complicated, every thing formable, and the kinds of all things, as I have
said before of figures. And thou shall further see, how straightness it self
is the samplar, precision, truth, measure or justice, goodness or perfection
of all things, which are or can be; and the precise and unconfounded actuality
of all things that are, or are possible to be made; so that to whatsoever kind
or thing being, thou turnest thine eyes, if thou lift up thy mind to infinite
straightness, thou shall find it the most precise, and no way defective
exemplar truth thereof. As put the case thou see a man, which is straight, and
a true man, thou shall see that he is nothing else but that straightness,
truth, measure and perfection, So contracted and terminated is a man. And if
thou consider his straightness which is finite, and lift up thy self unto
infinite straightness, thou shall straight see how infinite and absolute
straightness can be neither greater nor less than that straightness
contracted to a man, whereby the man is a straight and true man, but is the
truest, justest, and best precision thereof. So infinite truth is the precision
of finite truth; and absolutely infinite, the precision, measure, truth and
perfection of every thing finite. And as we have said of a man, so understand
of all things else.

Thus now thou have that which is granted us to contemplate in eternal
Wisdom, that thou may behold all things in a most simple rectitude, most
truly, precisely, unconfusedly, and perfectly, though in an Aenigmatical mean,
without which the vision of God cannot be in this world, until he shall grant,
that without any shadow, he shall be made visible unto us. And this is the
facility of the difficult things of wisdom, which according to thy fervor and
devotion, God vouchsafe to make every day more clear both to thee and me,
until he translate us into the glorious fruition of the truth, there to remain
eternally. Amen.


The end of the Second Book of the Idiot.
The Third Book, concerning the Mind.
Wherein the speakers are The AUTHOR. The PHILOSOPHER. The ORATOR. The IDIOT.

CHAP. I. How the Philosopher came unto the Idiot to learn something of the
nature of the Mind. How the Mind is of it self the Mind, and by its Office the
Soul, and has its name from measuring.
Author. WHen many people from every part, flocked to Rome, because of the
Jubilee, with wonderful devotion, it was reported that a certain Philosopher,
the chiefest of all that then lived, was found upon the bridge, whom the
passengers did much admire. A certain Orator very desirous of knowledge,
sought for him carefully, and knowing him by the palenesse of his face, his
long robe, and other things that showed the gravity of a contemplative man, he
courteously saluting him, demanded.


Orat. What cause is it that holds thee fixed in this place?


Phil. Admiration.


Orat. Admiration seems to be the spur of all men that desire to know any
thing. And therefore I cannot but imagine, seeing thou art accounted the chief
among learned men, that it is some great cause of admiration, that makes thee
so attentive.


Phil. Thou say well, my friend; for when I see innumerable people pass by,
from almost all climates, in so great press, I do wonder at so great a
Uniformity in the faith of them all, in so great diversity of bodies: For
though there be no one of them like another, yet there is one faith of them
all, which from the ends of the earth, has brought them hither with so great
Devotion.


Orat. Certainty, it must needs be the gift of God, that Idiots do more clearly
see and reach by faith, than Philosophers by reason; for thou know how great
enquiry he has need of, that does by reason handle the immortality of the
soul, which notwithstanding, there is none of all these that does not, by faith
alone, bold most assured; which makes them take such a deal of care and pains,
that after death, their souls may be darkened with no sin, and so taken up into
a most bright desired lift.


Phil. Thou tellest me a great matter, and a true one, O my friend; for I have
spent all my time in going about the world, and addressing my self to wise men,
that I might be more assured of the immortality of the soul. In as much as the
knowledge of a man's self, was, in times past, enjoined by the Oracle of Delphi,
that the mind should know it self, and feel it self conjoined to the divine
mind: but to this hour I could never, by the clearness of reason, so perfectly
reach unto that which I desire, as this ignorant people does by faith.


Orat. If I may in civility ask, I pray thee tell me, what moved thee, who
seem a Peripatetick, to come to Rome? do thou think to find any man here,
by whom thou may better thy self?


Phil. I had heard that in this place, out of the Temple in the Capitol,
dedicated by Titus Attilius Crassus to the mind, there were found many writings
of wise men concerning the mind: But I have peradventure lost my labor,
unless thou, which seem to me a good and understanding Citizen, help me.


Orat. That Crassus dedicated a Temple to the mind, it is certain: but whether
there were any books there concerning the mind, and what they were, after so
many sackings of Rome, no man can tell. But least thou grieve for thy lost
labor, thou shall hear one that is in my judgment an admirable man, though an
Idiot, discourse of what things soever thou, wilt.


Phil. I pray thee let me, as soon as ever thou can possibly.


Orat. Follow me then.


Auth. And when they came near the Temple of Eternity, they went down into a
little place under ground, and there finding the Idiot making a wooden Spoons,
the Orator thus spoke to him.


Orat. I am ashamed, Idiot, that thou should be found by this great
Philosopher, thus busied about these rustical works; he will never believe
that he shall hear any speculations from thee.


Id. I do willingly employ my self about those exercises which do continually
feed both my mind and my body. And if this man whom thou bring be a
Philosopher, I do not think he will despise me ever the more, for being a
Spoon-maker.


Phil. Thou say very well; for even Plato is said to have practiced painting
between whiles, which it is thought he would never have done, if it had been
any hinderance to his contemplation.


Orat. It may be too, that Plato had from the Art of painting, familiar
examples, by which he made great matters very easy.


Id. So do I, in this my art, symbolically enquire and seek for whatsoever I
list, and so feed my mind, and then I change my spoons for other necessaries,
and refresh my body, and so, as much as is sufficient for me, I get all that I
have need of.


Phil. It is my fashion, when I come to any man that has the report of a wise
man, to be principally, solicitous and careful of those things that do most
trouble me; and to compare writings of the learned one with an other, and to
seek out the meaning of them. But thou being an Idiot, I know not how to get
thee to speak, or how to occasion some discourse, that I may see what
understanding thou have of the mind.


Id. I do not think there is any man alive, needs less compulsion to speak his
mind, than I do; for being that I confess my self an ignorant Idiot, I never
fear to answer any thing. Learned Philosophers, and such as have the reputation
of knowledge, deliberate carefully, because they have need to fear falling:
Therefore if thou will plainly tell me, what it is thou would have with me,
I shall as plainly answer thee.


Phil. I cannot in few words express my self; if it please you, let us all
sit, and talk together.


Id. It pleases me well.


Aut. And when they had set stools in a triangle, and placed themselves in
order, thus spoke the


Orat. Thou see, O Philosopher, the simplicity and plainness of this man,
that uses none of the Ceremonies ordinary in the entertainment of a man of
suck worth: now make trial of him in those things which (as thou say) do
most trouble thee, he will conceal nothing from thee which he knows, and I
think thou will confess thou were not brought hither in vain.


Phil. All these things please me well: Now let us go to the matter: in the
mean time be thou silent, I pray thee, and let not our long discourse seem
tedious.


Orat. Thou shall find me rather desirous to have you continue your discourse,
than as one weary of it.


Phil. Tell me then, Idiot, for so thou say thy name is, if thou have any
conjecture of the mind?


Id. I think there is not, nor ever was, any perfect man, that did not frame
some conception of the mind, such as it was. I for my part, have a conception,
that the mind is the bond and measure of all things; and I conjecture it is
called Men's a mensurando, the mind from measuring.


Phil. Do thou think the mind is one thing, and the soul another?


Id. I do certainly think so; for the mind subsisting in it self is one thing,
and in the body another. The mind subsisting in it self is either infinite, or
the image of the infinite. And of these minds which are the image of the
infinite, being they are not the greatest, or absolute and infinite, subsisting
in it self, I admit that some may animate humane bodies, and then I grant, that
the same are, by virtue of their office, souls.


Phil. Thou grantest therefore, that the mind and the soul of a man are the
same, the mind by its self, the soul by its office?


Id. I grant it, As the sensitive and seeing part of the eye, in a living
Wight, is one power.


CHAP. II. How there is a natural word, and another imposed according to it;
and how there is a simple beginning, which is the Art of arts; and how the
eternal Art of the Philosophers is complicated.
Phil. THou saidest the mind was so called of measuring; amongst all the
several derivations of the word, I read of no man that holds that point. The
first thing therefore I entreat thee is, that thou would open unto me the
cause of thy so saying.


Id. If we must diligently enquire of the power of the word, I am of opinion,
that that power, which is in us, and notionally complicates all the samplars of
things, which we call the mind, is not properly named. For as humane reason
reaches not the quiddity of things, so does not the name; For words are
imposed by the motion of reason: For we call one thing by one name, and for a
certain reason; and another thing by another, and for another reason: and one
tongue has proper names, and another more barbarous and remote; therefore I
see, that where the propriety of names is capable of more or less, there the
precise name is not known.


Phil. Thou make haste to high matters, Idiot; for according to what thou
seem to say, therefore are names ^esse proper, because they are imposed at
pleasure, as seemed good to every one that imposed them by the motion of reason.


Id. I would have thee understand me more profoundly than so; for although I
confess, that every name is by the coming of the form unto the matter united
to the thing, it being true, that the form gives the name, that so names are
not from the giver, but from Eternal, and the imposition is free: yet I do not
think that there is any other than a congruous name imposed, although it be not
a precise one.


Phil. Explain thy self, I pray thee, that I may know what thou meanest.


Id. Very willingly, and now I turn my self to this art of spoon-making. And
first I would have thee know, that I do without any haessitation affirm, that
al human arts are certain images of the infinite and divine art, I know not
whether it seem so to thee, or no.


Phil. Thou requirest high matters, and I think it not fit to answer them
publicly.


Id. I wonder if ever thou read any Philosopher that is ignorant of this,
that appears so plainly of it self: For it is manifest that no humane art ever
reached the precision of perfection; and that every humane art is finite, and
bounded; for one art is bounded or limited in its bounds, and another in
another, and every one is different from the rest, and no one does complicate
all.


Phil. What do thou infer from this?


Id. That every humane art is finite.


Phil. Who doubts it?


Id. And it is impossible there should be many infinite things really distinct.


Phil. I confess, that likewise, for the one of them would be bounded, or
determined by the other.


Id. If then this be so, is not the only absolute beginning infinite? For
before a beginning there is no beginning, as appears by it self, lest the
beginning should be principiated. Therefore Eternity is only infinity it self,
or the absolute beginning.


Phil. I admit it.


Id. Therefore the one and only absolute Eternity is infinity it self, which
is without beginning: wherefore every finite principiated thing, is from the
infinite beginning.


Phil. I cannot deny it.


Id. Therefore every finite Art is from an infinite Art. And so it must needs
be, that an infinite Art is the samplar, beginning, middle, end, measure,
standard, truth, precision, and perfection of all Arts.


Phil. Proceed to that which thou make haste unto; for no man can dissent
from thee in these.


Id. I will therefore, out of this Art of Spoon-making, apply symbolical
examples, that the things I shall say, may be made more sensible.


Phil. I pray thee do so; for I see thou hold the way to those things after
which I labor.


Ant. Then the Idiot taking a Spoon in his hand, thus proceeded.


Id. A Spoon befides the Idea of our mind, has no other samplar: For although
a Carver, as a painter, do draw examples from things which he goes about to
figure; yet so do not I that of wood make Spoons, and of clay little dishes and
pots. For I do not in these imitate the figure or shape of any natural thing
whatsoever: for such forms of Spoons, dishes and pots, are perfected by man's
art alone; and therefore my art is rather perfecting than imitating created
figures, and in this liker unto infinite Art.


Phil. This pleases well enough.


Id. Suppose then that I would explicate my art, and make sensible the form of
Spoonnesse, by which the Spoon is constituted, which though in its own nature,
it be by no sense attingible, as being neither white nor black, nor of any
other color, sound, smell, taste, or touch, yet if I will labor to make it
sensible in that manner that it may be done. Whereupon by the diverse motions of
the instruments which I use, I do bore and make hollow the matter, that is
wood, until in it the due proportion arise, wherein the form of spoonnesse
does conveniently appear. Whereupon the truth and precision of spoonnesse,
which is unmultipliable, and incommunicable, cannot by any instrument, or any
man be made perfectly sensible. And in all spoons nothing but the simple form
it self, after a diverse manner, more in one, and in another less, but in none
precisely. And although the wood it self takes the name from the coming of the
form, that as soon as that proportion arises, in which spoonnesse appears,
it is called a spoon, that so the name may be united to the form; yet the
imposition of the name was at pleasure, because another might have been
imposed. And though it be at pleasure, yet it is not another, and quite diverse,
from the natural name united to the form, but the natural name shines (after
the coming of the form) in all the diverse names by whatsoever diverse nations
imposed. The imposition of the name therefore is done by the motion of reason;
for the motion of reason is about things which fall under sense, whose
discretion, concordance, and difference reason makes. So that there can be
nothing in reason, which was not first in sense. So therefore reason imposes
names, and is moved to give one name to one thing, and another to another. But
because the form in its truth, is not found among those things about which
reason is conversant, therefore reason ends it self, and determines in
conjecture and opinion. Whereupon generals and particulars, genera and species,
as they fall under names, are (Entia rationis) beings of reason which reason
made to it self, out of the concordance and difference of sensible things: and
in that respect, being by nature after the sensible things whereof they are the
similitudes, the sensible things being destroyed, those cannot remain.
Whosoever therefore, thinks that nothing can fall into the understanding, that
falls not into reason, he also thinks that there can be nothing in the
understanding that was not first in the sense, and consequently he must
necessarily say, that the thing is nothing, but as it falls under a name, and
his study is in every inquisition, deeply to search after the quid nominis,
quiddity of the name. And this enquiry is very pleasing unto man, because it
discourses by the motion of reason. This man would deny that forms in
themselves and in their truth separated, are otherwise tha^ as they are beings
of reason; and would make no account of samplars, and Ideas.

But they that admit something to be in the intelligence of the mind, which was
not either in sense or reason; as for example, The exemplar and incommunicable
truth of forms which shines in the sensible things, they say that the samplars
or Ideas do by nature, go before the sensible things, as the truth goes before
the image; And this order they give, that first, according to the order of
Nature, is humanity in it self, and of it self, namely without any praejacent
matter, and then man by Humanity, and that he falls under a name, and
afterward the species in reason: and that therefore all men being destroyed,
humanity as it is a species, that falls under a name, and is a being of reason
which reason has found out, by the sinilitude and likelinesse of men, cannot
subsist; for it depended of men which are not; but for all this, that humanity
by which men were, does not cease to be, which humanity falls not under the
name of species, as names are imposed by the motion of reason, but is the truth
of that species that falls under a name: whereupon though the image be
destroyed, the truth remains in it self.

And all these deny that the thing is nothing but as it falls under a name; for
in that manner as it falls under a name, Logic and reasonable discourse
considers of them, and accordingly they do logically enquire into the nature of
the thing, and commend this way of so doing; but they rest not there, because
reason or Logic is only conversant about the images of the forms. But they
that labor Theologically to look into matters beyond the power of the name,
turn themselves to samplars and Ideas. And beyond these I think there can no
more ways of inquisition be given. If thou that art a Philosopher, have read
other, thou may peradventure know them; but this I think.


Phil. Thou do wonderfully handle all Sects of Philosophers, both
Peripateticks and Academicks.


Id. All these, and what differences of ways soever may be imagined, are
easily agreed, when the mind lifts it self up to infinity: For (as this Orator
can more at large inform thee, by what he has heard of me) the infinite form
is the one only and most simple which shines in all things, as the most
adequate samplar of all and every thing formable. Whereupon it shall also be
most true, that there are not many separate samplars and Ideas of things, which
infinite form no reason can reach: therefore being unspeakable, it is not
comprehended by all names imposed by the motion of reason. And so the thing as
it falls under a name, is the image of its unspeakable, proper, and adequate
samplar. There is therefore one unspeakable word, which is the precise name of
all things, as by the motion of reason they fall under a name; which
unspeakable name, after its manner, shines in all things, being the infinite
nominability of all names, and the infinite word of all things possible to be
by word expressed; so that every name is the image of the precise name; And
this was all which they all labored to say, though peradventure it might have
been better and clearlier spoken: for they all necessarily agreed, that there
is one infinite power, which we call God, in which all things must needs be
complicated. Nor did he mean any other thing, that said humanity as it falls
under a name, is the precision of truth, then that unspeakable infinite form,
which, while we look upon the form of man we call the precise samplar
thereof; that so the unspeakable, whilst we look upon the images thereof, may
be named by the name of all things, and one most simple samplar according to
the specificall differences of things exemplified, and by our reason formed may
seem to be many samplars.


CHAP. III. How the Philosophers are to be understood, and accorded; of the
name, of God and precision; how one precise name being known, all are known; of
the sufficience of things knowable; and how the conception of God, and our
conception do differ.
Phil. THou have wonderfully explained that saying of Hermes Trisimegistus,
that God may be called by the names of all things and all things by the name of
God.


Id. Do but complicate this word To name, into the coincidence of the highest,
by thy understanding, and all things will be plain: for God is the precision of
every thing; and therefore if we had precise knowledge of any one thing, we
must necessarily have the knowledge of all things: So if the precise name or
one thing were known; then would the names of all things be known, because
precision cannot be on this side God. Hereupon he that could reach on precision
might reach God, who is the truth of all things that may be known.


Orat. Declare thy self, I pray thee, concerning the precision of a name.


Id. Thou know, Orator, how we forge mathemeticall figures out of the power
of the mind. And therefore when I would make tryangularity visible, I make a
figure, in which I make three Angels, that in that figure so habituated and
proportioned, triangularity may appear, whehewith the name is united, which let
it be supposed to be a Trigonus; I say then if Trigonus be the precise name of
a tryangulare figure, then I know the precise names of all polygones, or many
cornered figures; for then I know that the precise name of a quadrangulare
figure ought to be a Tetragone; and of a five cornered figure a Pentagone, and
so forward: And by the knowledge of one name, I know the figure named and all
polygones that may be named, and the differences and concordances of them, and
whatsoever else in this point may be known. In like manner I say that if I knew
the precise name of one work of God, I should know all the names of all the
works of God, and whatsoever might be known; And seeing the name of God is the
precision, of every name nameable, it is apparent, that in that name alone all
and every thing may be known.


Orat. This thou have after thy fashion palpably explained.


Phil. Thou have laid down a strange way, Idiot, to accord all the
Philosophers: for when I seriously consider, I cannot but agree with thee, that
their meaning was no otherwise then thou say: by this which none of them all
could deny, that God is infinite; in which only saying are complicated all
things that thou have said, wonderful is this sufficience of all things
knowable, or that may be any wise delivered. Descend more particularly to the
treatise of the mind, and say, supposing that the calling of the mind men's, be
from the reason of measuring; what will thou have the mind it self to be?


Id. Thou know how Divine simplicity complicates all things; of this
complicating simplicity, the mind is the image: it then thou shall call this
Divine infinite simplicity, mind, it shall be the samplar of our mind. If thou
call the Divine mind the universality of the truth of things, thou shall
calours the universality of the likeness of things, that it may be the
universality of notions. The conception of the Divine mind, is the production
of things, the conception of our mind, the notion of things. If the Divine mind
be absolute entity, then the conception thereof is the creation of beings: and
the conceptions of our mind the likeness of beings; for those things that
agree to the Divine mind, as to infinite truth, agree to our mind as the
nearest image of truth. If all things be in the Divine mind, as in their
precise and proper truth; all things are in our mind, as in the image, or
similitude of their proper truth, to wit, notionally; for knowledge is by
likeness. All things are in God, but there the samplars of things; all things
are in our mind, but here the similitudes of things. As God is the absalute
entity, which is the complication of all things that are, so our mind is the
image of that infinite entity, which is the complication of all images, no
otherwise then the first picture of an unknown King, is the samplar of all
other copies that are painted according to it: for the knowledge, or face of
God, descends not, but in the mental nature, whereof truth is the object; and
further it descends not, but by the mind, so that the mind is the image of
God, and the samplar of all the images of God after it self. Therefore look how
much all things, after the simple mind, do partake of the mind, so much do they
also partake of Gods image; so that the mind of it self is the image of God,
and all things after the mind, no ways but by the mind.


CHAP. IV. How our mind is not the explication, but a certain image of the
eternal complication: how those things that are after the mind are not such an
image. How the mind is without notions, and yet has a conere ate judgment;
and why the body it necessary for it.
Phil. Hou seem, out of the great fullness of thy mind, as though thou
meantest, that as the infinite mind is the absolute formative power; so the
finite mind is the conformative or configurative power.


Id. I do indeed for that which is to be said, cannot conveniently be
expressed, and therefore is the multiplication of speech very profitable. Now
mark further, than an image is one thing, and an explication another; for
equality is the image of unity, for from unity once arises equality.
Therefore is equality the image of unity; yet is not equality but plurality,
the explication of unity: therefore is equally the image of the explication of
of unity, not the explication. So do I mean, that the mind is the most
simple image, of the divine mind, amongst all the images of divine
complication. And so is the mind the first image of that divine complication,
which by his simplicity and power, complicateth all images of complication. For
as God is the complication of complications, so the mind which is the image of
God, is the image of the complication of complications: and after the images,
are the plurality of things which explicate the divine complication. As number
explicates unity, motion rests, time eternity, composition simplicity, time the
present, greatness a point, motion a moment, inequality equality, diversity
identity, and so of the rest. From hence gather the admirable power of our
mind, for in the virtue thereof, is complicated the assimulative power of the
complication of a point, by which it finds in it self a power, wherein it
assimulates it self to every greatness.

So also because of the assimulative power of the complication of unity, it
has power to assimulate it self to every multitude. And so by the
assimulative power of the complication of now or the present, it has power
assimulate it self to all time; and so by the assimulative power of th
complication of rests, to all motion; and of simplicity to every composition,
and of identity to all diversity; and of equality to all inaquality, and of
conjunctionto every dis-junction. And by the image of the absolute
complication, which is the infinite mind, it has power by which it can
assimulate it self to every explication: and many such things thou see of
thy self, may be said, which our mind has, because it is a certain image of
the infinite simplicity which complicateth all things.


Phil. It seems then, that only the mind is the image of God.


Id. So it is properly: because all things that are after, (or beneath) the
mind, are not the image of God, but only ly so far forth as the mind shines,
or appears in them: as it more shines in perfect living wights, then in
imperfect ones; and more insensible things, then in vegetables; and more in
vegetables, then in minerals; so that creatures that want the mind, are rather
explications, then images of the Divine simplicity: although according to the
shining or appearing of the mental image, in explication, they do diversely
partake of the image.


Phil. Aristotle said, there was no notion concreate (or made together with)
the minder or soul, because he likened it to a smooth and shaven table: but
Plato says, there were notions concreated with it, yet that for the moles and
weights of the body, the soul forgot them; what do thou think to be the truh


Id. Undoubtedly our mind was, by God, put into this body, to the profit and
advantage thereof; and therefore it must needs have from God all that, without
which it could not acquire that profit and advantage, it is not therefore
credible, that there were notions concreated with the soul, which it lost in
the body: but because it has need of a body, that the concreated power may
proceed unto act. As the visive power of the soul cannot see actually, except
it be stirred up by the object; and that cannot be, but by the representing of
multiplied specis by then esn of the organ, and so it has need of the eye.
Even so the power of the mind, which is the comprehensive and national power,
cannot porceed to its opperations, except it be stirred up by sensible things,
which it cannot be but by the mediation of sensible phantasmis. Therefore it
has need of an organicall body, and such an one, without which it could not be
stired up. In this therefore, Aristotle seems to have thought aright, that
there are no notions of the soul concreated from the beginning, which it lost
by being incorporated. But because it cannot profit, if it want all udgement,
as a deaf man can never profit to become a lutenist, because he has in himself
no judgment of harmony, by which he may discern whether he do profit,
therefore our soul has a concreated judgment without which it could not
profit. This judging power is naturally concreated with the mind, by which, of
it self it judges whether discourses be weak, strong, or concluding. Which
power if Plato called a concreated notion, he was not out of the way at all.


Phil. How clear is thy delivery, which every man that hears, is forced to
assent unto. These things must be diligently marked, for we plainly find a
spirit in our mind speaking and judging this good, that just, the other true,
and reprehending us, if we decline from the just; which speech and judgment it
learned not, and therefore it is connate or concreate.


Id. By this we prove, that the mind is that power which though it want all
notionall form, yet being stired up, can assimilate it self to every form, and
make notions of all things: like, after a manner, to a sound eye which is in
darkness, and never saw the light, for it wants all actual notion of visible
things; yet coming into light, and being stirred up, it assimilates it self
to the thing visible, that it may make a notion.


Ora. Plato says, that judgment is then required, when the sense ministers
contrary things at once.


Id. He spoke subtly, for when the touch confusedly finds hard and so ft, or
heavy and light, one contrary in another, then there is recourse to the
understanding, that it may judge of the quiddity of both so confusedly
perceived, that there are many things discreet.

So when the sight confusedly sees great and little, is there not need of the
discretive judgment of the understanding; what is great, and what little? but
if the sense were of it self sufficient, there would no recourse be had to the
judgments of the understanding, as in the sight of that which is light, when
there is nothing presented which is contrary to it.


CHAP. V. How the mind is a living substance, created in the body; and of the
manner how; whether there reason be in bruit beast: and how the living mind is
the description of the eternal wisdom.
Phil. ALmost all the Peripateticks say, that the understanding, which thou
seem to call the mind, is a certain power of the Soul; and that to
understand is an accident, what say thou to it?


Id. The mind is a living substance, which we find by experience, does
inwardly speak and judge in us, and which of all spiritual powers, that we
find in our selves, is more then any other power assimulated and made like to
the infinite substance, an absolute form. The office of the mind in this body,
to quicken it, and from hence it is called the soul; wherefore the mind is a
substantial form, or a power that after its fastion, complicates in it self
all things; and by quickening the living soul, whereby it animates the body,
complicates the vegetative and sensitive life, and the power discoursive, and
intellectual, and intelligible.


Phil. Will thou have the mind, which thou confessed to be also the
intellectual soul, to have been before the body, and afterward incorporated,
as Pythagoras, and the Platonists mean?


Id. In nature, not in time; for I compared it, as thou hardest, to the sight
in darkness: now the sight was not actually before the eye, but only in
nature; wherefore because the mind is a certain divine seed, that by its own
power, does notionally complicate the Samplers of all things; therefore is it
by God (from whom it has this power, in as much as it received its being) at
the same time placed, and in a convenient earth, where it may bring forth
fruit, and of it self notionally explicate the university of things; otherwise
this seminall power had been given it in vain, if there had not been given
withal, oppertunity to break into act.


Phil. Thou speak weightily. But I much desire to hear how this is done in
us.


Id. The divine manners or ways, are never to be reached precisely; yet we
make guesses and conjectures of them, some more clear, and some more dark
ones. I think this similitude which I will tell thee, sufficient. For thou
know that the fight by its own proper nature, does not discern, but in a
certain Globe, and confusedly perceives the obectacle meeting it within the
spear of its motion, the eye which objectacle is generated by the
multiplication of the species of the object into the eye. Therefore if the
sight be present in the eye with out discretion, as in infants, where the use
of discretion is wanting, then the mind comes so to the sensible soul, as
discretion to the sight, by which it judges between colors. And as this
visive disc etion is found in perfect brute living wights, (as in Dogs that
know their own masters by sight) and is by God given unto the sight, as the
perfection and form of seeing; so unto man's nature, besides that discretion
which is found in bruits, there is given a higher power, that is unto annimall
discretion, ust as that is to the sensible power, so that the mind is the
form of the annimall discretion, and the perfection thereof.


Phi. Exceedingly well and sweetly, but me thinks thou drawest somewhat near
the oppinion of the wise Philo that said there was reason in beasts.


Id. We find by experience that there is in brute beasts a descretive
discourse, without which their nature could not well subsist. Whereupon their
discourse, (because it wants the form, namely the understanding or mind) is
confused, for it wants judgment and knowledge; and because all discretion is
from reason, therefore Philo seems to have said as he did not without reason,
or absurdly.


Phil. Declare I pray thee, how the mind is the form of the discoursing
reason.


Id. I have already told thee, that as the sight sees, and knows not what it
sees, without discretion to inform, enlighten, and perfect it, so reason
syllogyzeth, and knows not what it syllogizeth without the mind, but the
mind enforms, enlightens, and perfects raciocination or discourse, that may
know what it syllogizeth; as if an Idiot, not knowing the power of words should
read some book; reading proceeds from the force of reason, for he reads by
running through the difference of letters, which he compounds and devideth; and
this is the work of reason, and yet be knows not what he reads: and let
there be another, which reads and knows, and understands what he reads. This
is a certain similitude of reason confused, and reason formed by the mind,
for the mind has the descretive judgment of the reasons, which reason is
good, and which is sophistical: so that the mind is the discretive form of
reasons, as reason is the discretive form of senses and imaginations.


Phil. From whence has the mind this judgment, for she seem to give
judgment of all things?


Id. It has it from hence, because it is the image of the Samplar of all
things; for God is the Samplar of all things. Therefore whereas the Smplar of
all things shines in the mind, as the truth in the image, it has in it
self, that where it looks, and according to which it gives judgment of
outward things; as if there were a living Law written, that Law (because
living) would read in it self the things that are to be judged. Right so the
mind is a living description, of the eternal and infinite wisdom: but in cur
minds, from the beginning, that life is like unto one that is a sleep, until
it be stirred up by admiration, proceeding from sensible things, to be moved
then by the motion of its intellectual life, it finds described in it self that
which it seeks. But thou must understand, that this description is a
resplendance or shining of the Samplar of all things, after the same manner
that the truth shines in its image.

As if the most simple, and indivisible sharpness of the corner of a Diamon,
exceeding well pollished, (in which the forms of all things did shine) were
alive, then would it by looking into it self, find the similitudes it might
frame, notions of all things.


Phil. Thou speak very strange and delectable things. This example of the
sharp pointed Diamond pleases exceedingly; for by how much more sharp and
simple, that corner were, by so much more clearly would all things shine
therein.


Id. He that considers in himself the power of a looking glass, how it is
before all quantity, if he conceive it alive by an intellectual life, in
which the Samplar of all things shines, may make a tolerable conjecture of
the mind.


Phil. I would hear whether thou can paradigmatically, apply this thy art to
the creation of the mind.


Id. Yes I can.


Auth. Then taking a fair spoon in his hand, he said.


Id. I would make a glazed spoon: I sought out first a wood exceeding hard and
close: I applied my instruments, and I wrought out a convenient proportion, in
which the form of a spoon did perfectly appear: afterward I polished the
surface of it so, that in the shining form of a spoon, I made the form of a
glass, as thou see, for though it be a fair spoon, yet withal it is a
glazed spoon. For thou have in it all kind of glasses, namely concave, connext,
straight and calumnare, in the base of the handle straight glass; in the
handle it self a columnar; in the concavity of the spoon a concave glass; and
in the convexity a unequal one. The glassie form, then, had no temporal being
before the spoon, but to the perfection of the spoon, it was by me added to the
first form of the spoon that it might perfect it: so that now the specular form
contains in it self the form of the spoon, and yet the specular form is
independent of the spoon; for it is not of the essence of a glass to be a
spoon. Therefore though the proportions were broken, without which the form of
a spoon cannot be; as put case the handle were separated from it, it would
cease to be a spoon; but yet the form of a glass would not cease to be. Even
so God by the motion of the heaven, out of fit matter has brought a
proportion, wherein animality might shine, after a more perfect manner,
whereunto he afterward added the mind, as a living glass by the means which I
have said.


CHAP. VI. How wise men, in a simbolical kind of speaking, have called number
the samplar of things; of the wonderful nature thereof. And how it is from the
mind, and the incorruptibility of Essences. And how the mind is an harmony, a
number moving it self, a compisition of the same and that which is diverse.
Phil. THou have aptly appyed it; and in saying there is one intellect, thou
openest how the production of things is: and how proportion is the place, or
be, or region of form; and matter the place of proportion. And thou seem to
be much of the opinion of Pythagoras, who held all things to be of or from
number.


Id. Whether I be a Pythagorean or no, I know not; this I am sure of, that no
man's authority moves me, though sometimes it offer to do so. But I think the
Pythagoreans, which, as thou say, do Philosophize all things by numbers,
very grave and witty men. Nor do I believe that they meant our mathematical
number, which proceeds from our mind, for it is manifest, that cannot be the
beginning of any thing; they speak symbolically and rationally, of the number
which proceeds from the Divine mind, of which mathematical number is but the
image. For as our mind is in relation to that eternal infinite mind; so the
number of our mind, to the number of that mind; and we give that number our
name, as we give to that mind, the name of our mind; and we are much delighted
to be conversant in number, as in our own proper work.


Phil. Lay open, I pray thee the motives, that may move one to say, that
numbers are the beginnings of things.


Id. There can be but one infinite beginning; and this alone is infinitely
simple. But the first thing principiated, or that has a beginning, cannot be
infinitely simple (as appears by it self) neither can it be propounded of other
things compounding it; for then it were not the first thing that had a
beginning, but the things that compound it, must in nature go before it. We
must therefore admit, that the first thing that had a beginning, is so
compounded, that yet it is not compounded of other things, but of it self: and
our mind cannot comprehend how any such thing should be, except it be number,
or as the number of our mind. For number is compounded, and compounded of it
self, (for so eaven and odd, is every number compounded) so, number is
compounded of it self. If thou say that the third number is compounded of
three unities, thou speak as though one should say, that the wales and the
roof, do severally make an house: for if the walls be a part, and the roof a
part, a house is not compounded of them, nor more do three unities apart, make
the number three. Therefore if thou consider unities as they constitute a
ternary, thou considerest them united, and that then three unities united are
nothing but a ternary; and so it is compounded of it self, and so of all
numbers: Nay that which is more, while in number I look upon nothing but
unity, I see an uncompounded composition of number, and a coinsidence of
simplicity and composition, or of unity and multitude; yea, if I yet look more
sharply into it, I see a compounded unity of number, as in the harmonicall
unities, diapason, diapente, diatessaron: for an harmonical habitude is a
unity, which without number cannot be understood. Moreover, from the habitude
of a semitone, and a doubled mediety, which is as the habitude of the side of a
square to the diamiter, I see a more simple number, then the reason of our
mind can reach unto. For habitude (or proportion) is not understood without
number, and yet that number must be at once both odd and even, of which, a long
discourse, and very pleasant might be made, if we did not make have to other
things. We have now therefore learned, how the first thing that was begun, is
that whereof number bears the Type. Nor can we by any other means come nearer
the quiddity thereof, seeing the precision of the quiddity of whatsoever thing
it it be, is by us utterly inattingable, otherwise then in an enigma or figure.
For the first thing that had a beginning, we do symbolically call number,
because number is the subject of proportion, for there can be no proportion
without number. And proportion is the place of the form; for without a
proportion fit and agreeable to the form, the form can in no case shine or
appear, as I said, that the proportion befitting a spoon, being broken, the
form cannot remain, because it has no place: for proportion is as it were the
aptitude of the specular surface to the resplendence of the image, which not
abiding, the representation cease. Behold how the infinite unity of the
samplar, cannot appear but in an apt proportion, and that is in number. For the
eternal mind does act, as a musician which would make his conception sensible;
for he takes many voices, and brings them into a proportion agreeing to that
harmony, that in that proportion, the harmony may sweetly and perfectly appear,
when it is there as in its place, and the respendence of the harmony is varied
according to the variety of the proportion that is fit for it; and the harmony
cease, when the aptitude of that proportion cease. From the mind therefore
is number and all things.


Phil. What, is there not a plurality of things without the consideration of
our mind?


Id. Yes; but it is from the Divine mind; wherefore as in regard of God,
plurality of things is from the Divine mind; so in regard of us, plurality of
things is from our minds: for only the mind numbers, and the mind taken away,
there is no discrete number. For in that the mind does singularly and
particularly understand one and the same thing, we when we consider it, say it
is one thing: in that it does singularly understand one thing, and that once,
it is in truth the equality of unity. But when it understands one thing
singularly, and by multiplying it, we judge the things to be more, in saying
two: because the mind understands that which is singularly one and the same
thing, twice, or by doubling it. And so of the rest.


Phil. Does not a ternary consist of a binary and a unity? and we say that
number is a collection of singulars; how do thou then say, that it is of the
mind?


Id. Those ways of speaking must be referred to the way of understanding;
because to collect is no more, then to take one and the same common thing, and
multiply it about the same things. Therefore when thou see, that without the
multitude of the mind, a binary or ternary is nothing, thou see well enough,
that number is from the mind.


Phil. How is the plurality of things, the number of the Divine mind?


Id. Because from that the Divine mine understands one thing so, and another
thing otherwise; the plurality of things arises. Therefore if thou look
narrowly into it, thou shall find the plurality of things to be nothing but the
Divine minds manner of understanding: So I conjecture one may without blame
say, that the first samplar of things, in the mind of the Creator, is number.
This appears by the delight and beauty, that is in all things which consists
in proportion as that in number. Hereupon number is the principal step leading
unto wisdom.


Phil. The Pythagoreans said so first, then the Platonists, whom also Severinus
Boethius imitates.


Id. Likewise, say I, that the samplar of the conceptions of our mind, is
number: for without number it can do nothing. If there were no number, there
would neither be assimilation, notion, discretion, nor measure. For without
number things cannot be other and other, or discrete: nor can it be understood
how one thing should be substance, another quantity, and so of the rest.
Therefore seeing number is the manner of understanding, nothing can be without
it understood. For the number of our mind, being the image of the Divine mind
the samplar of things, is the samplar of notions. And as unity is before all
plurality, and this unity uniting is the uncreated mind, in which all things
are one; after one plurality, the explication of the power of that unity, which
power is the entity of things, the equality of being, and the connection of
entity and equality; and this is the blessed Trinity: So in our mind is the
image of that Divine Trinity: for our mind is likewise a unity uniting, before
all plurality by the conceptible mind; and after that unity that unites all
plurality, is plurality, which is the image of the plurality of things; as our
mind is the image of the Divine mind: and plurality explicates the power of the
unity of the mind, which power is the image of entity, equality and connection.


Phil. I see that by number thou reachest to mavelous things. Go too
therefore, because Saint Dionisius says, that the essences of things are
incorruptible, can thou demonstrate this by number?


Id. When thou considerest that number is made of the multitude of unities, and
that alterity does contingently follow multiplication; and markest the
composition of number to be of unity and alterity, the same and diverse, even
and odd, divisible and indivisible: And that the quiddity of all things had its
beginning from being the number of the Divine mind; then thou may after some
fashion reach unto it, how the essences of things are incorruptible, as unity,
whereof is number, which unity is entity. And how things are so or so by
alterity, which is not or the essence of number, but accidentally following the
multipliciation of unity. So alterity is of the essence of nothing: for
alterity pertains to destruction; because it is division, from whence is
corruption, and therefore it cannot be of the essence of the thing. Thou see
moreover how number is no other thing then the things numbered. From whence
thou may conclude, that between the Divine mind and things, there mediates
no number, which has any actual being; but the number of things are the
things themselves.


CHAP. VII. How the mind of it self works out the forms of things, by way
of assimilation; and reaches absolute possibility or matter.
Phil. TEll me I pray thee, do thou think our mind is a harmony? or a
number moving it self? or a composition of the same and diverse? or of an
essence divisible and indivisible? or an entelechia? for such manner of
speaking the Platonists and Peripateticks use?


Id. I do believe that all they which have spoken of the mind, might use
these or the like speeches, moved by those things which they did experimentally
find in the power of the mind; for they found the judgment of all harmony
to be in the mind; and that the mind out of it self fashioneth notions, and
that it so moves it self, as a living discretive number would of it self
proceed to make discretions. And again they found that it proceeds in any
particular, collectively, or distributively, either according to the manner of
simplicity, and absolute necessity, or of absolute possibility, or necessity of
complexion, or determinately, or of a possibility determinate, or because of
the aptitude of a perpetual motion. Because of these and the like experiments,
it is probably to be believed, they said those or the like things of the mind
or soul. For to say that the mind is of the same and diverse, is to say it is
of unity, and alterity; after the same manner that a number is compounded of
the same, in regard of the common or universal of that which is diverse, in
regard of singulars, or particulars; which both are ways of the minds
understanding.


Phil. Go on, I pray thee, to declare how the mind may be said to be a number
moving it self.


Id. I think no man can deny, but that the mind is a certain divine living
number, excellently proportioned to the resplendence of manifesting, and
showing of the divine harmony, and complicating every sensible, rational, and
intellectual harmony; and whatsoever can be better expressed about this matter.
Insomuch that every number proportion, and harmony which proceeds from our
mind, does as little reach or come near our mind, as our mind does to the
infinite mind. For the mind, though it be a divine number, yet it is so a
number, that it is a simple unity, by its own power putting forth its number.
So that look what proportion there is between God and his works; the same
there is between the works of the mind, and the mind it self.


Phil. There are very many that would have our mind to be of the divine
nature, and most merely conjoined to the divine mind.


ld. I do not think they meant any otherwise then as I have laid, although
they had another manner of speaking. For between the divine mind and ours,
there is the same difference, that there is between doing and seeing; for the
divine mind by conceiving creates, but ours by conceiving assimilates, in
making notions or intellectual visions. The divine mind is a power, making
things to be; but ours an assimilative power.


Orat. I see that the Philosopher has not time enough to satisfy himself,
and therefore I have kept silence a long time; I have heard many, and very
pleasing things; yet would I feign hear further, how the mind of it self,
puts forth the forms of things by way of assimulation?


Id. The mind is so assimilative, that in the sight it makes it self like
visible things; and in the hearing to audible things; in the taste, to things
tastable; in the smell, to things odorable; in the touch, to things tangible;
in the sense, to things sensible; in the imagination, to things imaginable; and
in the reason, to reasonable things. For the image in the absence of sensible
things, is as some sense without the discretion of sensible things; for it
conformes it self to sensible things absent, but confusedly, and without
discerning of state from state. But in reason it conformes it self to things
with discerning of state from state. In all those places our mind, is carried
in the spirit of the Arteries; which being stirred up by meeting with species
multiplied from the objects to the spirits, assimilates it self by the things
to the species; that by assimilation it may give judgment of the objects:
Whereupon that subtle spirit of the Arteries, which is enlivened by the mind,
is so by the mind conformed unto the similitude of the species, which was
objected to the motion of the spirit; As soft wax is by a man, having the use
and art of the mind, configured unto the thing then presently presented to the
workman: for all configurations whether in the art of carving, painting, or
hammering, cannot be done without the mind, for it is the mind which terminates
all things. Therefore if we could imagine a piece of wax informed by the mind;
then the mind being within it, would configure it, or make it like to every
figure presented unto it; as now the mind of the Artificer, being applied from
without labors to do. So likewise of clay, and every flexible or fashionable
thing. So in our body, the mind according to the various flexiblenesse of the
spirits of the Arteries in the Organs, makes diverse configurations, subtle and
gross; and one spirit is not configurable to that, to which another is;
because the spirit in the optic nerve, cannot be met withal, and incountred
by the species of sounds, but only by the species of colors; and therefore is
configurable to the species of colors, and not of sounds, and so of the rest.

There is likewise another spirit which is configurable to all sensible
species, which is in the Organ of the imaginative power, but after a gross and
indiscreet, or undistinguished manner. And there is another in the Organ of the
ratiocinative, or discursive power, which is configurable to al sensible
things, discretly and clearly. And all these configurations are assimilations
to sensible things, when thy are done by the means of corporal spirits,
though never so subtle; wherefore, when the mind makes these assimilations,
that it may have the motions of sensible things, and so is drownned in the
corporal spirit, then it acts as the soul animating a body, by which
animation the power of a living wight is constituted.

And hereupon the soul of brute beasts makes the like assimilation after its
manner, (though more confused) that it may after its manner attain to notions.

But our power of the mind, from such notions as these so elicited and drawn
out by assimilation, makes Mechanic arts physical and logical conjectures,
and reaches things in the manner, whereby they are conceived in the
possibility of being, or matter, and in the manner, whereby the possibility of
being, or matter is determined by the form. Wherefore, seeing that by these
assimilations it reaches none but the notions of sensible things, where the
forms of things are not true, but shadowed with the variableness of matter:
therefore all such notions, are rather conjectures then truth; for this cause I
say that the notions which are reached by rational assimilations, are
uncertain, because they are rather according to the images of forms, then the
truths. Afterward our mind, not as drowned in the body which it animates, but
as it is the mind of it self; yet in possibility of being united to the body,
while it looks unto its immutability, makes assimilation of forms, not as
they are drowned in the matter, but as they are in and of themselves, and
conceives the immutable quiddities of things, using it self for an instrument,
without any organicall spirit. As whilst it conceives that a circle is a
figure, from whose center all the lines drawn to the circumference are equal:
after which manner of being, a circle without the mind, cannot be in matter;
for it is impossible there should be given in matter two equal lines; and it
is less possible, that such a circle should be figured; and therefore a circle
in the mind, is the Samplar and measure of the truth of a circle in the
pavement. So we say that the truth of things in the mind, is in the necessity
of complexion; to wit, after the manner that the truth of a thing requires, as
we have said of the circle. And because the mind, as in it self, and
abstracted from matter, makes these assimilations, therefore it assimilateth it
self to abstracted forms. And according to this power it shows or puts forth
certain mathematical sciences, and finds its power to be that it can
assimilate it self to things, as they are in the necessity of complexion, and
make notions; and it is stirred up to these abstractive assimilations, by the
Phantasmes or images of forms, which it lays hold on by the assimilations
made in the Organs. As by the beauty of an image, one is moved to enquire the
beauty of the Samplar; and in this assimilation the mind is, as if absolute
pliablenesse, abstracted from Wax, Clay, Metals, and all other flexible
things, were living by a mental life, that it could of it self assimilate it
self to all figures, as they subsist in themselves, and not in the matter; for
such flexibility, in the power of its living flexibility, that is in it self,
would behold that the notions of all things are, in as much as it could
conform it self to all things. And because the mind is not yet satisfied
with this, because it sees not the precise truth of all things, but in a
certain necessity determined to every thing, as one thing is so, and another
thing so, and every thing compounded of its parts: and it sees that this manner
of being is not the truth it self, but the participation of truth, that one is
truly so, and another thing truly otherwise, which alterity cannot agree to the
truth in it self, in its self, considered in its own absolute and infinite
precision: whereupon the mind looking to its simplicity, to wit, as it is not
only abstracted from matter, but incommunicable to matter, or after the manner
of a form not unible, uses this simplicity as an instrument, that it may
assimilate it self to all things, not only abstractedly, but also in its
simplicity incommunicable to matter. And after this manner it beholds all
things in its simplicity; as if it should see all greatness in a point, and a
circle in the center: and there it sees without all composition of parts, and
not as this is one thing, and that another, but as all things are one, and one
all things. And this is the beholding of absolute truth, as if one could, after
the last-before-spoken manner, behold how entity it self, is in all beings
variously participated. And if after this he could in the manner (of which we
now speak) above participation, and all truth, simply behold absolute entity it
self; such a one might truly, above the determinate necessity of complexion;
now see all things which erst he saw in variety, without it, in absolute
necessity, most simply without number, greatness, and any alterity. And in
this highest manner, the mind uses it self, as it is the image of God, and as
God; which is all things, shines in it, namely, when, as the living image of
God, it does with all its power, turn it self to its Samplar. And in this
manner, it sees all things one thing, and it self the assimilation of that one
thing, by which it frames notions of the one, that it is all things, and so
makes Theological speculations: where, as in the end of all notions, it
sweetly rests, as in the most delectable truth of its life; of which manner,
there can never be enough said; but these things which I have thus spoken
without curiosity, and after a plain manner, thou may by thy elegant style
make more polite, and wel-come to the reader.


Orat. I had no desire, but to bear what I have heard, which thou have plainly
declared; and that will be to them that seek the truth, elegance enough.


Phil. I pray thee, declare further, how the mind reaches indeterminate
possibility, which we call matter?


Id. By a certain counterfeit way, and a contrary manner, whereby it passes
from a necessity of complexion, to an absolute necessity; for seeing how all
bodies have to be formed by corporiety, taking that away it sees all it law
before it as a certain indeterminate possibility. And those things which
before it saw in corporiety distinct and determinate, as being in act, now it
sees confused and indeterminate, inpossibility. And this is the manner of
universality, by which all things are seen in possibility; yet it is not the
manner of being, because it is not power-being or posse esse.


CHAP. VIII. How it is the same thing, to the mind to conceive, to understand
notions, and to make assimilations. And how sensations are made, according to
the naturalists.
Phil. ENough of this, least we exceed our purpose now tell me, if in or to the
mind, to conceive, be to understand?


Id. I have said that the mind is the power of conceiving; so that being
stirred up, it moves it self by conceiving till it understand. Wherefore
understanding is the perfect motion of the mind.


Phil. When is it said to conceive?


Id. When it makes the similitudes of things: or, if thou had rather say,
notions, or kinds, differences, species, proper, and accident. For God created
in the soul the power of conceiving, and the mind does the things aforesaid;
yet are all these one and the same thing, the power of the mind, conception,
similitude, notion, kind, and species. And although we do not call it the same
thing to understand and to conceive, yet whatsoever is understood, is
conceived, and whatsoever is conceived is understood: but only that which is
actual is understood, and not conceived.


Phil. How meanest thou that?


Id. To conceive is nothing but to comprehend either after the manner of
matter, or form, or some other way; but that which is actually, is said to be
understood; that is, the property of it is comprehended by the mind. The mind
is also said to understand, by which it is moved, and the beginning of the
motion is rather called passion; the perfection of it, understanding. But as a
disposition and habit are the same, considering a disposition tends to
perfection, and after perfection is a habit; so the passion of the mind and the
understanding are one and the same thing.


Phil. Yet the understanding does not seem to say, or imply perfection.


Id. Thou say well; properly the mind is said to understand when it is
moved; although it be not called unstanding, but after perfection.


Phil. Are therefore all these one and the same, to wit, the power of
conceiving, conception, similitude, notion, passion, and understanding?


Id. They are so the same, that the power of conceiving is not any of them:
because it is called a power, from an aptitude, which it has from its
creation; a conception, from the imitation, because it imitates the matter or
form, namely, in that it comprehends after the manner of the matter or form of
the compound.

And in what respect it is called conception, in the same also it is called the
similitude or notion of the thing; and these names are truly predicated one of
another, and every one of them is called understanding.


Phil. I wonder how conception can be called understanding?


Id. Although the conception be called from imitation, and understanding from
perfection, yet it is perfection, which is the cause why understanding is
called conception: for then does the mind conceive, when the understanding is
lead to perfection.


Phil. Paradventure thou will likewise admit that the understanding should be
called the passion of the mind?


Id. Yes that I will; for the understanding is the motion of the mind, the
beginning whereof is passion.


Phil. Therefore conception is a passion too?


Id. It follows not, as thou see of thy self. In like manner although the
kinds and species be the understanding, yet are they not therefore passions of
the soul; for the passions of the soul vanish, and yet the kinds and species of
things remain.


Phil. Enough of this, seeing diverse men speak diversely thereof. But tell me,
how do thou call that power of the mind by which it sees all things in the
necessity of complexion; and that other by which it sees them in an absolute
necessity?


Id. I that am an Idiot, do not much regard words, yet I think that power may
conveniently be called discipline, whereby the mind looking to its own
immutability, considers the forms of things without matter; because that by
discipline and learning men come to this consideration of the form. But that
power, by which the mind looking to its own simplicity, does therein behold all
things without composition, may be called intelligence.


Phil. It is read, that some men call that power which thou call doctrine or
learning, intelligence; and that which thou call intelligence,
intelligibility.


Id. It does not displease me; for they may conveniently be so called.


Orat. I could wish to hear from thee Philosopher, how the Naturalists suppose
sensations are done; for in this I think thee more skillful then the Idiot,
who will also be glad if thou will so do.


Phil. I should be glad if I could rehearse any part of that which I have
heard. That which thou required is thus: The Naturalists say, that the soul is
mixed with a most thin and subtle spirit, scattered clean through the Arteries;
so that, that spirit is the carryage of the soul; and the vehiculum or carryage
of that spirit, is the blood. There is therefore one nerve or artery full of
that spirit, which is directed to the eyes, so that near unto the eyes it is
forked, and being filled with that spirit, it comes to the bals of the eyes
wherein is the apple; that spirit then so dispersed through the arteries, the
instrument of the soul, by which it exercises the sense of seeing; Two
arteries full of the same spirit, are directed to the ears; likewise to the
nostrils, and to the palate, are certain arteries directed; and that spirit is
diffused by the marrow even unto the extremities or ends of the joints. That
spirit which is directed to the eyes is most active and nimble: and therefore
when it finds any outward objects, the spirit is repercussed or stricken back,
and the soul is stirred up, to see that which it meets withal. So in the ear
it is repercussed with the voice, and the soul excited to comprehend: and as
hearing is done in a most thin air, so is smelling in a thick or rather fumous
air, which when it enters the nostrils, by its sumosity retards the spirit,
so that the soul is excited to comprehend the odor of that fumosity. Likewise
when a spongious humor enters the palate, the spirit is retarded, and the soul
excited to taste; So the soul uses the spirit diffused through the marrow, for
the instrument of touching: for when any solid thing meets with the body, the
spirit is offended, and after a manner retarded, and thence is touching. About
the eyes, the soul uses a fiery power, about the ears an aethereall, or
rather a pure ayrie one; about the nostrils a thick and fumous ayrie one; about
the palate, a watery power; about the marrow, an earthy one; And this according
to the order of the four elements. That as the eyes are higher then the ears,
so the spirit which is directed to the eyes, is higher and superior, and may
after a manner be called fiery. So that in man, the disposition of the senses
is in a manner like the disposition of the order of the four elements,
whereupon seeing is swifter then hearing, and therefore we see the lightning
before we hear the thunder, although they be both at once. Moreover the strong
subtle and acute direction of the beams of the eyes, makes the air give way
unto it, and nothing can withstand it, except it be gross, earthy, or watery.
Seeing then the spirit is the instrument of the senses, and the eyes, nostrils,
and other sensories, are as windows and ways by which that spirit may go out
to perceive, it is manifest that nothing is perceived but by a let or obstacle,
that (as soon as any thing hinders it) that spirit which is the instrument of
perceiving may be retarded, and the soul being as it were retarded, may
confusedly by the senses comprehend the thing that hinders it. For the sense,
of it self, terminates nothing: and if when we see any thing, we put a bound in
it, that is not the work of the sense, but of the imagination which is joined
to the sense. There is moreover in the fore part of the head, in the
fantastical cell, a certain spirit much more subtle and nimble then that
which is diffused through the Arteries, which when the mind uses as its
instrument, it is made more subtle, that though the thing be absent, it can
comprehend the form in the matter, which power of the soul is called
imagination; because by it, the soul conforms unto it self the image of the
thing absent; and it differs in this from the sense, because the sense
comprehends the form in the matter, only while the thing is present; but
imagination does it as well, when the thing is absent, but confusedly, so that
it discernes not the state, but comprehends many states together confusedly.
But there is in the middle part of the head, to wit, in that cell which is
called rational, a most subtle spirit, thinner far then that in the
fantastical cell, and when the soul uses that spirit as her instrument, it is
yet more subtible, insomuch that it discerns state from state; yet does it
not comprehend the truth of things, because it comprehends forms mingled with
matter; but matter confounds the thing formed, so that the truth of it cannot
be comprehended. And this power of the soul is called reason. After these three
manners the soul uses a corporal nstrument. By it self the soul comprehends,
when it takes it self into it self (or retires into it self) so that it uses
it self for an instrument, as we have heard from thee.


CHAP. IX. How the mind measures all things by making a point, a line, and a
surface: how one point it both the complication and explication of a line, and
of the nature of complication; and how it makes adequate measure of diverse
things: and by what it is stirred up to do it.
Orat. THe Naturalists that after experience have made these things manifest,
are much to be commended, cettainely, because they are fair and pleasant
things.


Id. So does a lover of wisdom deserve great praise and thanks.


Phil. I see the night draws on, and therefore I will have thee, Idiot, make
haste to many things that are yet behind, and expound unto us, how the mind
measures all things, as thou toldest us in the beginning.


Id. The mind makes a point to be the term of a line, and a line the term of
a surface; and the surface, it makes the number of the body; therefore
multitude and magnitude are from the mind, and so it measures all things.


Phil. Declare how the mind makes a point.


Id. Because a line is the joining of one point to another, or the term of a
line. Therefore when thou will think a line, thy mind may consider in it self
the joynings of the two halfs thereof; which if it do, it will be a line of two
points, because of the two terms thereof, and the joining of the two halfs
which the mind has propounded to it self. Nor are they diverse kinds of points,
the term of a line, and the joining; for the joining of the two halfs, is
therefore the term of the lines. And if the mind give unto either half its
proper term, it will be a line of four parts. So by how many parts soever the
fore-imagined line be divided, look how many terms there are of those parts,
of so many points shall the said line be judged to be.


Phil. How does the mind make a line?


Id. In considering length without breadth: and so it makes a surface, in
considering breadth without solidity. Although, indeed, neither a point, nor
line, nor surface can be actually; seeing only solidity does actually exist
without the mind. So the measure and term of every thing is from the mind; and
though wood and stones, have a tertaine measure and term besides our mind, yet
they have them from the uncreated mind from which every term of things
descends.


Phil. Do thou think a point to be indivisible?


Id. I think a terminal point indivisible, because of a term there is no
term; and if that were divisible, then it were not a term, because it had a
term.

Nor more has a point any quantity: nor can a quantity be made of points; for
of those things that have no quantity, it cannot be made.


Phil. Thou agreest well with Boethius, saying, if thou add a point to a point,
thou do no more then if thou add nothing to nothing.


Id. Therefore if thou join together the terms of two lines, thou make
indeed the line the longer, but yet the conjunction of the terms shall make no
quantity.


Phil. Do thou then say, there are many points?


Id. Neither many points, nor many unities; but seeing a point is the term of
a line, it may everywhere be found in the line: yet there is in it but one
point, which being extended is a line.


Phil. There is therefore nothing in truth found in a line besides a point?


Id. True; yet for the variableness of the matter which is under it, there is
there a certain extension. As there being but one unity, yet is number said to
consist of many unities, because of the alterity of those things that are
subjects to unity. A line therefore is the evolution (or flux) of a point; so
is a surface of a line, and solidity of a surface: so that take away a point,
and all greatness fails; take away unity, and all multitude fails.


Phil. How do thou understand that a line is the Evolution (or unwinding) of
a point?


Id. By evolution I mean explication, which is nothing else then for a point to
be in many atoms, so that it is in every of them conjoined and continued. For
it is one and the same point in all atoms (or indivisibles) as one and the
same whiteness in all things that are white.


Phil. What do thou understand by an atome?


Id. According to the consideration of the mind, that which is continued is
divided into that which is ever divisible: and multitude (or number) increases
into infinity. But dividing them actually, we come to a part, which is actually
indivisible, which I call an atome: For an atome is a quantity, which for its
littleness is actually indivisible. So in the consideration of the mind,
multitude has no end, which yet notwithstanding is actually terminated: for
all the multitude of things falls under a certain determinate number, though to
us unknown.


Phil. Is a point the perfection of a line, being it is the term thereof?


Id. It is the perfection and totality thereof, which complicates in it self a
line. For to point a thing is to terminate it, and where it is terminated,
there it is perfected; and the perfection thereof, is the totality of it.
Therefore is a point the term of a line, and its totality and perfection,
which complicates in it self a line, as a line explicates a point. For when I
say in Geometry, that the total perfection of a line, is from this point, A
unto B, then before the drawing of the line, from A to B. by by the points A.
B. have I already designed the totality of the line, namely that the line must
not be drawn out any further. Therefore that which actually, or intellectually
is to include the totality between this, and this; that it is to complicate a
line in apoint. And to explicate it, is to draw a line particularly from A to
B. and so a line explicates the complication of a point.


Phil. I had thought a point had been the complication of a line, as unity is
of number; because as there is nothing in number but unity, so there is nothing
in a line, but a point everywhere.


Id. Thou have not said amiss. It is the same thing in diverse words; and the
same manner of speaking, may thou use in all complications; for motion is the
explication of rest, there being nothing found in motion but rest. So now, (or
the instant) is explicated by time, because there is nothing found in time, but
nows or instants. So of the rest.


Phil. How say thou, there is nothing in motion but rest?


Id. Because to move, is to fall from one state to another; for as long as a
thing is in one state, it is not moved, and so there is nothing found in motion
but rest. For motion is a departure from one; therefore to be moved, is a
departure from one, unto another one: So that to pass from rest to rest, is to
be moved. And to be moved, is nothing but an ordered rest, or rest
successively ordered.

He does much profit himself, that seriously considers complications, and
their explications; especially, how all complications are images of the
complication of infinite simplicity, and not explications thereof, but images,
and are under the necessity of complexion. And the mind, the first image of
the complication of divine simplicity, by its own power, comprehending the
power of these complications, is the place or region of the necessity of
complexion; because those things that truly are, are abstracted from the
variableness of matter, and are not materially but mentally; whereof already
sufficiently.


Phil. I wonder, seeing as thou say, Idiot, the mind is the measure of
things, why it is carried to the measure of things, with so great desire?


Id. That it may reach its own measure; for the mind is a living measure,
which by measuring other things, reaches its own capacity. For it does all
things, that it may know it self. But though it seek the measure of it self
in every thing, yet it finds it not; but where all things are one thing, there
is the truth of its precision, because there is the adequate Samplar thereof.


Phil. How can the mind make it self the adequate Samplar of so diverse things?


Id. As an absolute face might make it self the measure of all faces; for when
thou considerest that the mind is a certain absolute measure, which can be
neither greater, nor less, being uncontracted to quantity: And furthermore
that it is a living measure, measuring by it self, as though aliving pair of
compasses, should measure by themselves, then thou reachest how it maks it self
a notion, measure, or samplar, that it might in all things reach it self.


Phil. I do understand the like in a compass, which is of no determinate
quantity, because a compass, yet is extended, and contracted, that it may be
like the things determinate. But tell me, does the mind assimilate it self to
the manners of being?


Id. Yea to all of them, for it conformes it self to possibility, that it may
measure all things possibly: so to absolute necessity, that like God, it may
measure all things unitedly and simply; so to the necessity of complexion, that
it may measure all things in their proper being; and unto determinate
possiblity, that it may measure all things as they existe. For it measures
symbolically, by way of comparison, as when it uses number, and Geometrical
figures and accomodates it self to the likeness of such things. Wherefore, to
him that looks narrowly into the matter, it appears, that the mind is a
living and uncontracted similitude of infinite equality.


CHAP. X. How the comprehension of the truth, is in multitude and magnitude.
Phil. LEt it not be grievous unto thee, to continue thy disourse until
night, my dear friend, that I may still enjoy thy presence; for to morrow I
must of necessity be gone; and therefore I pray thee, expound unto me that
saying of the learned Boethius, what he means when he says, that the
comprehension of the truth of all things, is in multitude and magnitude.


Id. I think that in multitude, he had relation to discretion, and in magnitude
to integrity or wholnesse. For he does rightly comprehend the truth of a
thing, which discerns, or distinguishes it from all other things; and he also
reaches the integrity or wholnesse of a thing, beyond which, or short of it,
the whole being of a thing cannot subsist. Therefore learning or discipline in
Geometry, determines the whole being of a Triangle so, that it cannot be either
beyond, or on this side, either more or less.

In Astronomy it determines the whole being of motion; by the doctrine or
discipline of greatness is had the term and measure of the whole being of
things; as by that of number, the discretion of things; for number does much
avail to distinguish the confusion of things that are common; likewise to
collect the terms and communion of things; But greatness is available to
comprehend the term, and measure of the whole being of things.


Phil. If magnitude do distinguish the integrity from all things, there is
then nothing known, unless all things be known.


Id. Thou say the truth; for the part is not known, except the whole be
known; for the whole measures the part. For when I do cut a Spoon out of the
wood by parts, one piece after another, while I fit every part, I look to the
whole, that so I may make a well proportioned Spoon; so that the whole Spoon
which I have conceived in my mind, is the Samplar which I have an eye unto,
while I frame every part thereof. And then can I make a perfect Spoon, when
every part keeps its due proportion in order to the whole; likewise also ought
every part compared to part, to observe its integrity or wholenesse. Therefore
it must needs be that to the knowledge of one Spoon, there proceeds the
knowledge of the whole, and of the parts thereof. Wherefore if God, who is the
Samplar of the universe be not known, there is nothing of the whole university
of things known; and if the university be not known, it is manifest that
nothing can be known of the parts thereof. So that the knowledge of God, and
of al things, must go before the knowledge of any thing in particular.


Phil. Tell me further, I pray thee, why he says that without the Quadrivium
(or four ways in one) no man can righty philosophize?


Id. For the reason aforesaid; for because in Arithmetic, and music is
contained the power of numbers, from whence is had the description of things;
and in Geometry and Astronomy, is contained the Doctrine of greatness, from
whence flows all the comprehension of the whole being, therefore can no man
Philosophize without the quadrivium.


Phil. I wonder whether he meant, that all that is, is either greatness or
multitude?


Id. I do not think he did, but that all that is, falls under greatness or
multitude, because the demonstration of all things is made according to the
power, of the one or the other; for magnitude terminates, multitude discerns.
Therefore the definition which terminates and includs the whole being, has the
power of magnitude, and pertaines unto it; and the demonstration of
definitions, is necessary according to the power of magnitude; but division,
and the demonstration of divisions according to the multitude; moreover the
demonstrations of syllogismes, are made according to the power, both of
multitude and magnitude. For that of two propositions, the third is concluded,
it is of multitude; but that it consists of universals and particulars, it is
of magnitude. He that had more leisure then we have, might also deduce from
hence, how quantities and qualities, and the other predicaments, which give us
the notice of things, descend from multitude; but how this is done, it is
hardly known.


CHAP. XI. How all things in God are in a trinity, and likewise in our mind:
and how our mind is compounded of the several manners of comprehending.
Phil. THou spakest somewhat above, of the trinity of God, and the trinity of
the mind; I pray thee declare how all things are in God in trinity, and
likewise in our mind.


Id. You Philosophers do affirm, that the ten most general kinds do contain
all things.


Phil. Yes without doubt.


Id. Doest-not thou, as thou considerest them in act, see that they are divided?


Phil. Yes.


Id. But when thou considerest them before the beginhing of being without
division, what else can they be but eternity? for connection is before all
division. Therefore it must needs be, that before all division, they were
united and knit together. But connection which is before all division, is most
simple eternity, which is God. Furthermore, it cannot be denied, that whereas
God is perfect; and perfect is that whereunto nothing is wanting; hereupon it
follows, that the universitie of things, is in perfection, which is God. But
the highest perfection requires that it be simple and one, without Alterity
and diversity; and therefore all things in God are one.


Phil. It is a plain and pleasant demonstration thou make; but show how in
trinity.


Id. This were to be handled in another place, that it might be spoken of more
clearly; but since I have determined to deny thee nothing to my utmost power,
take it thus. Thou have already heard, that from eternity all things in God are
God. Consider therefore the university of things in time; and being that
nothing impossible is made, do thou not see that the universitie might have
been made from eternal?


Phil. My mind assents unto't.


Id. Therefore in thy mind, thou see all things in that their may-be-made,
or posse fieri?


Phil. Thou say well.


Id. And if they could have been made, there must needs be something that could
make them before they were; a posse-facere, before a posse-fieri.


Phil. There was.


Id. So before the temporal university of things, thou see all things in
him, that could make them.


Phil. I do see them so.


Id. Well then, that the unversity of things which thou considerest with the
eye of thy mind, in the absolute could-be-made, and the could-make, might come
into being, was there not necessary a bond, knot, or connection between them
both, the could-be-made, and the could-make; or else that which could-be-made
by him that could-make, had never been made?


Phil. Thou say exceeding well.


Id. Thou see then before all temporal existence, all things in the knot or
bond, proceeding from the absolute could-be-made, and the absolute could-make:
but these three absolutes, are before all time simple eternity. And therefore
thou see all things in simple eternity after the manner of a Trinity.


Phil. Most sufficiently.


Id. Mark then diligently how the absolute could-be-made, and the absolute
could-make, and the absolute knot, are but one infinitely absolute, and one
deity; And that could-be-made is in order before could-make; for every making
presupposes that it could be made, and could-make has what it has, namely
that it could-make, from could-be-made, and the knot or band from them both.
Therefore, whereas order says that could-be-made precedes, therefore is unity
attributed unto it, in which unity is precedence: and unto could-make is
attributed equality, which presupposes unity; from both which is the bond or
knot: and let these things, if so it seem good, be sufficient of this matter.


Phil. Only one thing more, and that is, whether God do understand as three
and one?


Id. The eternal mind understands all things in the unity of unity equality,
and the bond of both: for how should God understand even in eternity without
all succession, without entity, the equality of entity, and the knot of both?
which are Trinity in unity. Not that God pretermits something after the manner
of matter, or understands by succession, as we do; but his understanding,
being his standing, essence, is necessarily in a Trinity.


Thil. Now add unto it, whether it be so also in our mind, after the manner
thereof?


Id. I hold for certain, that all things principiated or begun, hold in
themselves the likeness of their principle or beginning; and that therefore in
all things is found a trinity in unity of substance, after the likenese of the
true Trinity and unity of substance, of the eternal beginning. In all things
therefore which are principiated, there must needs be found the could-be-made,
which descends from the infinite power of unity, or absolute entity; the
could-make, which descends from the power of absolute equality, and the
composition of both, which descends from the absolute bond. Whereupon our mind,
the image of the eternal mind, in that eternal mind as the similitude in the
truth, labors to find out its own measure: For our mind is to be considered as
a high power in regard it is the similitude or the Divine mind: in which mind
of ours to be able to be assimilated, to be able to assimilate and the knot of
both, are in essence one and the same thing. Therefore cannot our mind, except
it be one in Trinity, understand any thing, no more then the Divine mind. For
first whilst it moves it self that it may understand, it premises something in
the likeness of couldbe made or matter, whereunto it joins another in the
likeness of could-make or form; and then in the likeness of that which is
compounded of them, both, it understands. And whilst it comprehends after the
manner of matter, it aches kinds; whilst after the manner of form, it makes
differences; and whilst after the manner of the compound, it makes species or
individuals.

So also whilst it understands after the manner of a proper passion, it makes
things proper; and whilst after the manner of something adventitious, makes
accidents. And it understands nothing except it knit it together by some manner
of matter premised, another manner of form coming upon it, and the manner of
the compound. And in this succession, wherein I said some things are premissed
after the manner of matter and form, thou feast our mind understands after
the similitude of the eternal mind: for the eternal mind understands all
things together, and after all manner of understanding, without succession. But
succcession is a descent from eternity, whose image and smilitude it is:
therefore it understands in succession, whilst it united to the body which is
subject to succession. For this is attentively to be noted, that all things, as
they are in our mind, are together in matter, in form, and in the compound.


Thil. The things thou speak, are very delightful; but that which thou
said last, was so attentively to be noted, I pray thee expound more plainly.


Id. Very willingly. Look upon this nature which is an animal, or living wight:
for sometimes the mind comprehends it as it is a Genus, or kind, and then it
consider the nature of a living wight as it were confusedly, and unformedly
after the manner of matter: sometimes it considers it as it is expressed by the
name of humanity, and that is after the manner of forms; sometimes after, the
manner of the thing compounded of that kind or Genus, and the differences that
come unto it, and being so in the mind it is said to be in connection. So then,
that matter, and that form, or rather that similitude of matter and form, and
that which is considered after the manner of the compound, is one and the same
notion, and one and the same substance. As when I consider an animal, as
matter; and humanity as form coming upon it, and the connection of them both, I
say that matter, that form, and that connection is one substance. Or whilst I
consider color as the matter, whiteness as the form coming to it, and the
connection of both, I say that matter, that form, and that connection of that
matter and that form are one and the same accident. And in like manner in all
things.

Norl et it move thee, that when the mind makes ten most general kinds, the
first beginnings, that then those most general have no common Genus or kind,
which may, as matter be premised unto them; for the mind can consider a thing,
after the manner of matter; and the same after the manner of the form coming to
it; and the same after the manner of the compound: as whilst the mind considers
the possibility of being substance or any other of the ten predicaments (for it
may rationally be said, that manner is the possibility of being, either
substance, or accident) and the mind considers the same as form coming upon
it, as it is matter; and as it is compounded, whether it be substance, or any
other of the ten. So that those three are one and the same most general. In
that university therefore of things, which is in the mind, all things are in
trinity, and in the unity of trinity, after the similitude, as they are in the
eternal mind.


Phil. Have not then the ten most general, these manners of being, without the
consideration of the mind?


Id. Those ten most generals, are not in themselve, but in the mind, and are
understood after the manner of the matter, after the manner of the form, or
after the manner of the compound; yet in their inferiors, they are considered
to have these manners of beings. Neither if thou rightly mark, can they in
themselves without the mind, be either after the manner of the matter, form
or compound, which thou shall especially find true when thou observest, how
quality as it is in it self an accident, cannot be said to be but in its
inferiors. So as special, or particular state, as it is in the mind, after
the manner of matter; it may peradventure be said, that it cannot be
considered, being the, (special, and individual state is the same, being
sundry ways considered. We will therefore say, that peradventure it is not in
it self, understood after the manner or matter, but in its superiors.


Phil. I am content, but I would have thee (show me, how those things which are
in act, are after the manner of a trinity, according to that thou have said.


Id. That will be easy for thee to see, if thou note that all things as they
are actually, are in matter, form, and connection. For this nature, humanity,
as it is a possibilty of being man, is matter. as it is humanity; it is form;
and as it is man compounded of them both, it is the connnexion: so that one,
and the same thing, is both possibility of being man, the form, and the
compounded of them both, and there is one nature of the thing. Likewise also
this nature, which is expressed the name of whiteness, as it is a possibility
of being whiteness, it is matter; the same otherwise taken, is form, and the
same in the compound of them both; but so, as that that matter, that form, and
that compound of both is by nature the same quality.


Phil. If to be in matter, be to be possibly, and to be possible, be not, how
then are all things that are in act said to be in matter?


Id. Let not this trouble thee, which thou may conceive how it may be
understood without repugnance; for I do not mean actual being, as repugnant
to being in matter; but it is so to be understood, that all things as they are
in act, that is here and in these things, are in matter; as for example, in wax
is the possibility of being a Candle, in copper of being a basin.


Phil. Yet one word more, I beseech thee; why is the individual trinity called
one?


Id. In God, from the unity uniting, which is the true substance; in other
things, from the unity of nature, which is as it were, a certain image of the
unity uniting, which properly is substance.


Phil. When it is said, that unity is one, and equality one, whence is that?


Id. From the unity of the substance.


Phil. And when our divines take unity for the Father, equality for the Son
and the knot or bound for the holy Ghost as the Father is one, and the Son is
one, whence is that?


Id. From the singularity of the person, for there are three singular persons
in one divine substance; as I have heretofore shown.


Phil. To the end I may the better understand the things thou have told me let
me know I pray thee, whether thou think our mind is, compounded of those
manners of comprehending? for then our mind being a substance, those manners
must needs be the substancial parts thereof: if this be thy meaning, say so?


Id. Plato would have the mind compounded of a divisible, and indivisible
substance (as thou (said even now) and this he took from the manner of
comprehending: for whilst it understands after the manner of form, then it
comprehends individually; for a thing formerly. understood, is then
individually comprehended. And therefore though we cannot well say humanities,
yet we say men, because the thing understood after the manner of the matter, or
of the compound, is divisibly understood: for our mind is the power of
comprehending, and the whole virtual, compounded of all the virtues of
comprehending: and therefore every manner, being a substantial part thereof, is
verified of the whole mind. But how the manners of comprehending, are
substantial parts of that power which is called the mind, it is very hard to
say or know.


Phil. Help me a little, good Idiot, in this so difficult matter.


Id. The mind does virtually consist of the power of understanding, reasoning,
imagining, and perceiving; so that the whole mind is called the power of
understanding, the power of reasoning, the power of imagining, and the power of
perceiving; wherefore of these it consists, as of its elements; and the mind
after its manner, reaches all things in all things. And because all things, as
they are in act, are in the sense as it were in a Globe, and undistinctly; and
the mind in a reason, discreetly or distinctly; hereupon it is the most
express similitude between the manner of the being of all things, as they are
in act, and as they are in the mind; for the power of perceiving in us, is the
power of the mind, and therefore the mind it self, as every part of a line, is
a line: For greatness considered of its self, without matter, is a fit example
of what thou demandest; being that every part thereof is verified of the whole,
and therefore is of the same entity with the whole.


Phil. Seeing the mind is but one, from whence has it these powers of
comprehending?


Id. It has them from unity, for that it understands commonly after the manner
of the matter, or of the compound, it has it because it is unity uniting; that
it understands singularly, it has it likewise from unity, which is
singularity: that it understands formerly, it has it from unity, which is
immutability; and that it understands divisibly, it has it from unity; for
division descends from unity.


CHAP. XII. How the understanding in all men is not one: and how the number of
separated minds is not numerable by us, but known to God.
Phil. THere are yet some things, wherein I would feign know what thou
think; some Peripateticks say that the understanding is one in all men;
others, as certain Platonists, say that there is not one intellective soul,
but that our souls are of the same substance with the soul of the world, which,
as they say, comprehends all our souls: yet they say our, souls do differ
numerically, because they have a diverse manner of operartion; but that they are
all after death, resolved into the soul of the worlds Tellus what thou think
of it?


Id I affirm (as thou heardest) that the mind is the understanding; but how
there should be one mind in all men I cannot conceive. For the mind having an
office by which it is called die soul, does therefore require a convenient
habitude of the body adequately proportioned unto it; which as it is found in
one body, is not to be found in another. As therefore the identity of
proportion is unmultipliable; so is the identity of the mind, which without an
adequate proportion of the body, cannot animate For as the sight of thine eye,
could not be the sight of any other, though it were separated from thine eye,
and joined to another eye, because it could not find the same proportion in
another eye, that it had in thine; so neither the discretion which is in thy
sight could be the discretion in the sight of another. So neither could the
understand of that discretion, be the understanding of an others discretion.
Therefore I conclude it not possible that there should be one understanding in
all men.

But because number seems to be taken away, when the variableness of the
matter is taken away (as appears by that I have already said) and that the
nature of a mind, out of the body is free and acquitted from all variety of
matter, therefore it may be that the Platonists said that our souls are
resolved into one soul, which is the common comprehender of all ours. But I do
not think this resolution true: For although we cannot understand how number
should be multiplied, when the variety of matter it taken away; yet for all
this, that purality of things cease not, which is the number of the Divine
mind. Therefore the number of separated sustances, is no more, unto us a
number, then it is, no number, because it is so numerable by us, that yet it is
neither even nor odd; neither great nor small; nor does it in any thing agree
with a number numerable by us. As if any man should hear an exceeding great
voice, made by a mighty army of men; and yet he should not know that it was an
army that made it; it is manifest that in the voice which he hears, every man's
voice is different and distinct; though he that heard it, could not give
judgment of the number, and therefore judges it to be one voice, because he
has no means to reach the number. Or as if in one chamber many candles were
burning, and the chamber enlightened by them all, yet the light of every candle
remains distinct from the light of another, as we find by experience, when
they are carried out of the room one after one, because the light is diminished
when every one that is carried out, carries his light with it. Suppose
therefore, that the burning candles in that chamber should be all put out and
yet the light remain, and that one should come into that chamber so
enlightened, he although he saw the lightsomenesse of the chamber, yet cannot be
possibly reach the distinction and discretion of the lights; nay he could not
conceive, how there should be plurality of lights there, except he knew that
there were the light of many candles put out; and if he did know this, namely
that there were many, yet he could never numerically discern or distinguish
one light from another. The like examples thou may bring in the other senses
and help thy self how the impossibility of numerical difference, may, in regard
of us, stand with the knowledge of plurality: but he that shall more diligently
observe, how natures abstracted from all variety of matter, that is any ways
intelligile by us: yet in regard of God, who is infinitely absolute, are not
simply abstracted from all change, seeing they may be by him changed and lead
into destruction, in as much as God alone does according to his nature, dwell
in imortality; be sees withal that no creature can possibly escape the number
of the Divine mind.


CHAP. XIII. How that which Plato called the soul of the worlds and Aristotle
nature, is God which works all things in all things? and how he crealeth the
mind in us.
Phil. ENough of this; what say thou of the soul of the world?


Id. The time will not suffer all things to be discursed; but I think Plato
called, that, the soul of the world, which Aristotle called nature; and for my
part, I suppose that neither that soul nor that nature, are any other thing
then God, which works all things in all things, and whom we call the spirit
of all things.


Phil. Plato said that that soul does indelibly contain the samplars of
things, and move all things. Aristotle said, that it was wise nature that moves
all things.


Id. It may be Plato meant, that the soul of the world, is as the soul of a
servant that knows the mind of his Lord, and executes his will; and this
knowledge he called notions or samplars, which are never defaced by oblivion,
that the execution of the Divine providence may not fail. And that which Plato
calls the knowledge of the soul of the world, Arisiotle would have to be the
sagacity of nature, which had understanding to fulfill the will of God.
Therefore to that soul of nature, they attributed the necessity of complexion,
because it is determinately necessitated so to do, as absolute necessity
commands; but that is nothing but the manner of understanding, namely when
our mind conceives God as the Architectonicall Art, whereunto there is
another art of executing subordinate, that the divine conception may proceed
into being: but in as much as all things do necessarily obey the will of the
almighty, therefore the will of God needs no other executor, for in omnipotence
willing and doing do coincide: As a glasse-maker, whilst he makes glass, blows
in a breath which executes his will; in which breath is the word or conception,
and the power; for unless the power and conception of the glasse-maker were in
the breath which he sends forth, there would not arise, or be made, such a
glass. Conceive therefore an absolute creative art, subsisting by it self, that
the art may be the workman, and the mastery the master; this art has in its
essence necessarily, omnipotence, that nothing can resist it; wisdom, to know
what it does; and the connection of omnipotence with wisdom, that what it
wills may be done. That connection, having in it self wisdom and omnipotence
is the spirit, as it were, will, or desire; for of things impossible, and
utterly unkown, there is neither will nor desire. So in the most perfect will,
there is wisdom and power, and by a certain similitude; it is called a spirit,
because motion is not without, spirit; insomuch that whatsoever causes motion
in the mind, and all things else, we call a spirit. And by motion, all men do
what they will do. Therefore the power of a creative art, which is an absolute
and infinite art, or the blesshed God, does all things in his spirit or will,
in the which is the wisdom of the Son, and the omnipotence of the Father, that
his work may be of one individed Trinity. Of this connexin, spirit, or will,
the Platonists were ignorant, which did not see this spirit to be God, but
thought it to be principiated by God, and to be the soul of the world, as our
understanding soul animates our body. Nor did the Peripateticks see this spirit
which thought this power to be nature hidden in all things, from which is
motion and rest, when indeed it is God absolute blessed for evermore.


Orat. How it rejoices me to hear so plain an exposition; but I pray thee help
us again with some example, to conceive the creation of our mind in this our
body.


Id. Thou have already heard of this matter; but because variety of examples,
makes that which in it self is unexpressible, somewhat more clear, I will obey
thee. Behold, thou know that our mind is a certain power having the image
of that Divine art we spoke of. Therefore all things which are most truly in
the Divine art, are truly in our mind, as the image thereof. Therefore our mind
is created by that creating art, as if that art would create it self. And
because that infinite art is un-multiplyable, it behooveth that there arise an
image thereof even as if a painter would paint himself, and himself being not
multiplyable by painting himself, there should rise his image.

And because an image, how perfect soever (if it cannot become more and more
perfect, and conformable to the samplar) is never so perfect, as any imperfect
image, which has power to conform it self more and more without limitation to
the unapproachable samplar, for in this the image, after the best manner it
may, does imitate infinity. As if a painter should make two pictures of
himself; whereof the one being dead, should seem actually more like him; but
the other should be alive, and though for the present, less like, yet such a
one, as being by its object stirred up to motion, could always make it self
more and more conformable to the samplar; no man would doubt that this second
picture were more perfect, and more expressing the art of the painter: So every
mind, yea even ours, though created beneath all others, has from God, that as
well as it can, it is a perfect, and living image of the infinite art.
Therefore it is three and one, having power, wisdom, and the connection of
both, after such a manner, that as a perfect image of the art, being stirred
up, it can more and more conform its self to its samplar; So that our mind,
though in the beginning of its creation, it have no actual resplendence of the
creating art, in Trinity and unity: yet it has that concreated power, that
being stirred up, it can make it self more and more conformable to the
actuality of the Divine art. And therefore in the unity of its essence, is
power, wisdom, and will: And in-its essence do coinside the master, and the
mastery, as in a living image ot the infinite art, which being stirred up, can
all ways without end, make it self more and more conformable to the Divine
actuality, the inaccessible precision of the infinite art always remaining.


Orat. Most wonderfully and plainly; but I pray thee how it the mind infused by
creation?


Id. Then haft heretofore heard me of this argument: Now take the same thing
again by another example.


Ath. Then the Idiot taking a glass, and letting it hang down between his
finger and thumb, he touched the glass and it gave a found, and after a little
while, the glass was cracked and the sound cease. Then said the


Id. In this fame hanging glass, by my power, there arose a certain power
which moved the glass, whence came sound; and when that proportion of the
glass in the which the sound was, and by consequence the motion resided was
dissolved; the motion there ceased, and likewise upon the ceasing of the
motion, the sound. But it that power had not depended upon the glass, and
therefore would not have ceased upon the cracking of the glass, but have
subsisted without the glass; thou should have an example how that power is
created in us, which makes motion and harmony, and then cease to make it,
when the proportion is dissolved, though for all that, it does not cease to be.
As if I, in giving thee a Lute, should in and with the Lute give thee the skill
and cunning to play upon a Lute, if the art and skill did not depend upon the
given Lute, though given in and with the Lute; then although the Lute were
broken, yet the art and skill for all that would not be dissipated, though
there were never a Lute found in the whole world that were fit for thee.


CHAP. XIV. How the mind is said to come down from the milky way, through the
planets to the body, and so to return: and how the notions of separated
spirits are indelible, and ours delible.
Phil. THou bring fit and fair examples, for things so strange, and remote
from sense; and because the Sun is ready to set, and so we can stay no longer
together; tell us I pray the what the Philosophers mean, in saying that the
souls came down from the milky way, through the Planets into bodies, and so
return to the milky way again? and why Aristotle willing to express the power
of the soul, begins at Reason, saying, that the soul from Reason ascends to
doctrine, from doctrine to intellectibility? but Plato, contrariwise, makes
intellectibility the beginning, and says, that by degenerating,
intellectibility is made doctrine, or intelligence, and intelligence by
degenerating becomes Reason.


Id. I know not their writings; But peradventure the first that spoke of the
assent and descent of souls, meant the same that Plato and Aristotle did: For
Plato looking to the image of the Creator, which is chiefly in intelectibility,
where the mind conforms it self to the Divine simplicity; there placed the
beginning, and made it the subfstance of the mind, which he will have remain
after death, and that by the order of nature precedes the intelligence; but
degenerates into intelligence, when it goes, back, from the divine simplicity,
in which all things are one, and will behold all things in it self, as every
thing has a proper being distinct from another; afterward the mind does more
degenerate, when by the motion of reafon, it comprehends things not in it self,
but as the form is invariable matter, where it cannot hold the truth, but
declines into an image. Now Aristototle, who considered all things, as they
fall under names imposed by the motion of Reason, makes Reason the Elenment or
beginning; and peradventure he says, that Reason by discipline which is done
by names, ascends unto intelligence, and afterward higher unto
intelletibility: And therefore he makes reason the Element to the ascent of the
intellest: as Plato made intellectibility to the ascent thereof. And so there
seem to be no difference between them, save in the manner of considering.


Phil. Be this so: But tell me why all the Philosopers say, that every
understanding is of substance and accident; how is this true of God, and the
first matter?


Id. The understending concerning God, is an inflexion from the understanding
of this name, Ens, or being: because the being of not being, that is being
imparticipably understood is God: And this understanding is the same, with that
which is of substance and accident, but another way, that is inflexly
considered. Wherefore the understanding conserning God, comprehends all
understandings of substance and accidents, but is simple and one; but the
understanding which had ot the first matter, is a certain bending from that
which is had of a body, for if thou understand abody un-bodily, that is,
without all corporeal forms, thou understandest the same thing which signifies
a body, but after another manne, because un-bodily which is without doubt, the
understanding of the matter.


Phil. Do think that the celestial mind's created according to their
intellectual dgrees have also indelible notions?


Id. I think some Angels intellectible, as those of the highest orders; some
intelligentiall as of the second, some rational as of the third; and that in
every order there are likewise so many degrees, that there are in the whole
nine degrees, or quires; and that our minds are so beneath the lowest degrees
of such spirits; and above every degrees of corporal nature, that they are, as
it were, the connection of the university of things; the term of perfection of
the lower nature, and the beginning of the higher. For I think that the minds
of the blessed spirits that are without bodies, do in rest possess invariable
notions; and such as are not by any oblivion to be defaced, because of the
presence of the truth, which incessantly offers it self by way of object. And
this is the happiness of those spirits, that have attained the fruition of the
Samplar of things. But our minds, because of their informitie, do often forget
the things they knew, though there remain the concreated aptitude to know them
again. For although they cannot without a body, be stirred up to an
intellectual progress; yet because of their carelessenesse, aversions from
the object, and distractions to diverse and sundry things, and because of the
bodily troubles, they lose their notions. For the notions that we get here, in
this variable and unstable world, according to the conditions thereof, are not
confirmed. For they are as the notions of Scholars and learners, that begin to
profit, but are not yet brought to the Mastery: But the notions here acquired,
when the mind proceeds from the variable world to the unyariable, are
likewise translated to the invariable mastery: For when particular notions pass
into the perfect mastery, they cease to be variable in the universal mastery,
which before were particularly fluid and unfrable. So we are in this world
docible, or to betaught in the other, we are Masters.


CHAP. XV. How our mind is immortally, and imorruptible.
Phil. IT now remains that thou speak what thou think of the immortality of
our mind, that being instructed concerning it, as much as may be in one day; I
may rejoice that I have profited in so many things.


Id. They that make the intellectabilitie, the element or beginning of the
descent of the understanding, do not think that the mind depends of the body.
And they that make reason the beginning of the ascent of the understanding, and
intellectability the end, do not admit that the mind dies with the body. But I
cannot imagine that they who have any taste of wisdom, would ever deny the
immortality of the mind; as I have already, as things came then into my mind,
made it plain to the Orator. So he which considers, that the beholding of the
mind reaches to that which is invariable, and that by the mind, forms are
abstracted from variability, and are translated, into the invariable region of
the necessity of complexion, he cannot doubt, but the nature of the mind is
free from all variability. For it attracts to it self, what it abstracts from
variability; for the invariable touch of Geometrical figures, is found not in
pavements, but in the mind. And as long as the soul enquires and seeks
through Organs, that which it finds is variable: but that which it finds, when
it seeks by it self, is stable, clear, bright, and fixed; and consequently
not of the nature of things variable, which it reaches by sense, but of things
invariable, which it finds by it self.

Moreover the demonstration of the immortality of the mind, may be hunted out
by number; for being a living number, that is a number numbering, and every
number incorruptible in it self, although considered in variable matter, it
seem variable; the number of our mind cannot be conceived corruptible; how
then can the Author of an incorruptible numbe seem corruptible? Nor can any
number evacuate the power of the minds numbering. Therefore, whereas the
motion of Heaven is numbered by the mind, and time is the measure of motion;
time it self shall never evacuate the power of the mind, but that it shall
abide as the term, measure, and determination of all things measureable. The
instruments of the heavenly motions, proceeding from the mind of man, do
plainly show, that motion does not so much measure the mind, as the mind
measures motion; so that the mind by its intellective motions, seems to
complicate all successive motion, the mind puts forth of it self the discursive
motion, and so it is the form of moving; seeing then whatsoever is dissolved,
is dissolved by motion, how should then the form of moving be dissolved by
motion? The mind being the intelluali life, moving it self, that is, putting
forth its life, that is, its understanding; how can it choose but live always?
A motion moving it self, how can it ever fail? for it has life intimately
conjoined, by which it is always living; even as asphear which is always
round, by a circle compact unto it.

If the composition of the mind be the same, with a number compounded of it
self; how is it possible to be resolved into that which is no mind? So if the
mind be the coincidence of unity, and alterity, as number, how is it
divisible,? seeing that in it divisibility coinsides with indivisible unity, if
the mind do complicate the same and diverse, as understanding, divisibly and
unitively, how shall it be destroyed? If number be the manner of the minds
undestanding, and in its numbering explication, coincide with complication; how
shall it fail? for that power hat in explicating complicates, as it is
manifest the mind does, cannot be made less; for he that numbers explicates
the power of unity, and complicates number into unity, for a denary is a unity
complicated of ten; so he who numbereth, does both explicate and complicate.

The mind is the image of eternity, but time the explication. And the
explication is always less then the image of the complication of eternity.
Now he who notes the jndgement of the mind concreated with it, by which it
judges of all reasons, and that reasons are from the mind, sees that no
reason can reach to the measure of the mind, Our mind therefore remains
unmeasurable, infinible, and in terminable by any reason, which only the
uncreated mind measures, terminateth and boundeth, as the truth does its
living image, which is of it, in its and by it. How should the image perish,
which is the respendence of incorruptible truth, unless the truth should
abolish and put out its shining brightness, and resplendence. As therefore it
is impossible, that infinite truth should withdraw its communicated
resplendence, because it is infinite goodness; so it is impossible that the
image thereof, which is nothing but the conmunicatd resplendence of it, should
ever fail; as it is impossible that when the Sun by his shining has made day,
it should ever cease to be day, till the Sun leave shining. The Christian
religinon likewise which has this year brought this innumerable people to
Rome, and thee, Philosopher into a vehement admiration of them, which has
always appeared in the world, though in diversity of manners, proves that the
immortality of our mind, is naturally implanted in us, as the humanity of our
nature; for we have no more certain knowledge that we are men, then that we
have immortal mind, when the knowledge of both, is the common assertion of
men. And these things thus spoken by an Idiot, I pray thee take in good part;
and if they be not such, as thou upon the Orators undertaking, did think to
have heard, yet some thing there may be, which peradventure may bring thee some
help to higher things.


Ora. I have been during all this holy and sweet talk, much admiring thy
mind, that has so profoundly disputed of the mind: And now I find by a most
assured trial, that the mind is the power that measures all things, I thank
thee, Idiot, both on mine own behalf, and on the behalf of this stranger,
the Philofopher, whom I brought, who I hope, will go away much comforted.


Phil. I do not think, that ever I lived an happier day then this, I know not
what will follow; I thank thee, Crator, and thee, Idiot, whom I know to be a
very speculative man, praying that cur minds being stirred up with a
wonderful desire, by these days conference may be happly brought to the
fruition of the eternal mind.


The end of the third Book of the Idiot.
The fourth Book concerning statick Experiments; OR, Experiments of the
Balance.
Wherein the Speakers are The Author. The Idiot. The Orator.

Autbour. THat Roman Orator did much frequent the company of the Idiot, that
he might sometimes hear the conception of the man, which were always welcome
unto him. Upon a time as the Orator commended the Balance, the rule of
justice, and an instrument right necessary for the Commonwealth, he was thus
answered by the


Id. Although nothing in this world can reach precision, yet we find by
experience, the judgment of the Balance, one of the truest things amongst us;
and therefore it is every where in request: but till me I pray thee, seeing it
is not possible that in the same bigness, there should be the same weight, if
the things be of a diverse Original: whether has any man yet written of the
axact, and experimentally tried differences of weights.


Ora. Not that I have either read or heard.


Id. I wish that some body would give the world such a consignation, I should
esteem it above many volumes of other Books.


Orat. I think no man could do it better then thy self, if thou would
undertake it.


Id. It were an easy manner for any man to do, for my part, I have no leisure.


Orat. Tell me the profit of it, and the means how to do it, and I will see
what I my self, or some other, at my entreaty can do at it.


Id. By the difference of weighty, I think we may more truly come to the
secret of things, and that many things may be known by a more probable
conjecture.


Ora. Thou say true; for so I remember a certain prophet says, Pro. 16.11.
The weight and the Balance are the judgments of that Lord, who has created
Wisd. 11.17. all things in number weight and measure, who Prove. 8.28. weighed
the fountains of waters and the greatness of the Earth, in a Balance, as the
wise man says.


Id. If therefore a like measure of the water of one fountain, be not of the
same weight, with the like measure of the water of another; certainly the
judgment of the Balance, will in this case better show the diversity of the
nature of the one and the othery, then any other instrument.


Orat. It Is true, And Vitruvius writing of Architecture, bids us choose such a
place to dwell in, as bath light and airy waters, and avoid them places, whose
waters are heavy and earthy.


Id. As then the water of the same fountains seem to be of the same weight and
nature, so the waters of diverse fountains, seem to be of diverse weights and
natures.


Orat. Seem, say thou? As though they were not so indeed.


Id. I confess that the time may alter them; though sometimes nor possibly to
be perceived; for without question, the water has one weight at one season,
and another at another. As likewise there is one weight of the water, near the
fountain or head, and another farther off. But these differences being scarce
persceptible, are accounted as nothing.


Orat. Do thou think it is in all other things, as thou say it is in
weter?


Id. Yes truly, for the same greatness of whatsoever things are diverse, never
has the same weight. Therefore there being one weight of blood, and another of
the Urine; and of both these, one in a sound man, and another in a sick man;
one in an old man, another in a young man; one in a German, another in an
African, were it not very convenient for a Physician, to have-all these
differences noted?


Orat. Nay more then that, for by these weights consigned, me might makg
himself admirable.


Id. For I conceive a Physician might give a truer judgment of the Urin, by
the weight and color both together, then by the deceitful color alone.


Orat. Most certain.


Id. So also the roots of Herbs, Stocks, Leaves, Fruits, Seeds, and Juyces,
having their proper weights if now the weights of all Herbs were consigned,
with the diversity of places; the Physician might better reach the nature of
them all by the weight and smell, then by the deceitful taste.


Orat. It is very true.


Id. Then by comparing the weights of the Herbs, to the weight of the blood or
Urin; he might know by the concordance, and difference of the medicines, what
dose to prescribe, and many strange prognostics might he make, and by statick
experiments, come by a more precise conjecture to whatsoever may be known.


Orat. It it much to be admired, that among so many painful searchers, all
men have been so negeligent in the signiture of wrights.


Id. Do thou not think, that if one had an hour glass made with water, and
out of a straight and narrow hole thereof, should suffer so much water to
run into a Basin, as would run, whilst the pulse of a sound young man
would stick an hundred; and then should do the like, whilst a sick man's
pulse strock a hundred, that there would be a great deal of difference
between the weights of those waters?


Orat. Who doubts it.


Id. By the weight of the water, therefore a man might come to the diversity of
the pulse, in a young man, and an old man, in a sick man, and a sonnd man; and
so by consequent, to the truer knowledge of the disease, seeing there must of
necessity be one weight in one disease, and another in another. And therefore
there might a more perfect judgment be given by such an experimental
difference of the pulses, and weight of Urin, then by the touch of the one, and
the color of the other only.


Orat. Thou say right.


Id. If one should further take particular knowledge of the fetching of the
breath, by the said habitude of waters, might he not give a more precise
judgment?


Orat. I confess he might.


Id. For if, while the water runs out of the houre-glasse, one should tell a
hundred breathings in a child, an a hundred in an old man, it is not possible
the waters should be of the fame weight. The same I say of other diverse ages
and complexions. If then a Physician were certainly informed of the weight of
the breachings of a sound man, or a child, or a young man, or the like that
were sick of diverse infirmities; without doubt he might more certainly come to
the knowledge of health, and the declining from health, and so to the
administration of remedies, by such an experiment.


Ora Yea, even to the conjectures of the period.


Id. Thou say well; for if he should find a young man the weight of an aged
and decrepit man, he might the more certainly guess at his death: And many
more such admirable conjecstures might he make. Moreover, if in fevers he
would, by the like means, note hot and cold paroxysmes by the difference of
the weights of water, might he not the more truly reach to the efficacy of the
disease, and the opportunity of the remedy?


Orat. Certainly be might; for be should find the victory of one quality over
another, of heat over cold, or on the contrary: and according to the habitude
he found, he might apply the remedies.


Id. I say further, that in diverse Nations, and Regions, and Times, these
things would be found diverse, though in the self-same age. Therefore though it
were difficult, yet it were exceeding profitable, that the differences of
weights were designed according to all these circumstances.


Orat. It is so as thou say.


Id. Nay, It seems unto me that the weight of all things is to be considered,
as the middle of the diversity of weights, of things in the middle climate, I
mean, in diverse climates. As if we would consider the weight of a man, in
comparison to some other living wight; then we must take a man, not in the
latitude as he is a Northern mane, or a Southern, where there may be excess
on both sides, but rather as inhabiting the middle climate.


Orat. Thou say very well. The Ancients have called that climate, Dia
Rhodon, because it extends it self from the East to the West by the Islands
Rhodes. But I pray thee, if thou should seek the weight of a man, in
comparison to some other living creature, what way would thou go?


Id. I would put the man into one scale, and the like weight of some other
thing into the contrary scale, to take the certain weight of the man withal;
Then would I put the man into water, and take the weight of him again when he
came out again: and mark the difference of those two weights; the like would
I do with the other living creature; and by the diversity of the weights, I
would note the thing I sought. Then would I look to the diversity of the.
weight of the man and the other weight, out of the water, and according to this
I would moderate the weight found, and write it.


Orat. I do not understand this moderation.


Id. I will show thee.


Auth. Then the Idiot took a light piece of wood, whose weight was as three;
and in respect whereof water of the same bulk or bigness would weigh as five;
he divided the wood into two unequal parts, whereof the one was as one third
part, and the other as two thirds, he put them both into a deep flaggon, and
holding them down with a stick, he powered water upon them, then pulling away
the stick the two pieces of wood rose to the top of the water, and the greater
piece sooner then the less: Then he said,


Id. Thou see now that the diversity of motion, in the Identity of
proportion, proceeds from hence, that in light wood, I the greater the wood be,
the more lightness there is in it.


Orat. I see it, and it pleases me well.


Id. That is my meaning, that so moderation should be made; for if a man should
have more weight and be more heavy then the other living creature, only for his
bigness, then he must needs sink faster into the water then the other.
Wherefore then it behooveth that by diminishing the moderation of the known
difference, it must be done proportionably according to the excess.


Orat. I understand now. But tell me, how does the water resist the sinking of
the wood?


Id. As a greater heaviness resists the less: for if thou press a round
piece of wood into wax, and then pull it out again, and fill the place with
water; and then take the weight of the water, and of the wood; thou shall find
that if the weight of the wood exceed the weight of the water, of the wood will
sink; if not, it will swim; and a proportionable part of the wood will, be
above the water, according as the weight of the watter exceeds the weight of
the wood.


Orat. Why do thou speak, of a round piece of wood?


Id. Because if it be a broad piece, it will swim more lostily, in that it
occupyeth more of the water: and therefore ships in shallow waters, had need be
of more broad bottomes.


Otat. Continue the purpose begun; whether the weights of animals may be
otherwise reached?


Id. I think they may: For if one should fill a great, vessel full of water to
the top, and then put that into another greater; and then, take the weight of a
man, as he is out of the water; and afterward make the man go into the vessel
full of water, and take and weight the water that runs over; and proceed in
like manner with another man, or beast, or any other thing; and by the
diversity of weights, thou may by a subtle inquiry, find that thou seek
for.


Orat. Thou proceedest with a great deal of subtilety; and I have heard that by
the same invention, the difference of metals have been found, and that some
have noted, how much the fusion of an ounce of wax gathers of gold, silver,
copper, and so of all metals.


Id. Certainly he was much to be commended that by the fusion of wax understood
the greatness, for he saw that if an ounce of gold filled the place of an
ounce of wax, that then the weight of it, must needs be just as much, as the
weight of an ounce of wax, and so of other metals; for it is most, certain
that there is one weight of gold, and another of silver, and another of other
things, in the same bulk of bigness, and that every thing has one weight in
the air, and another in water, another in oil or some other liquor. And if
any man had all these weights ready noted and set down, he might readily know,
how one metal is heavier then another in the air, and how much in the water.
So that any mass of metal given, might by the diversity of the weight
thereof in the air, and in the water, be known of what metal, and what
mixture the mass is. And as I have said of air and water, so also may be said
of oil, or any ather liquor wherein the experiment may be made.


Orat. So indeed, without the melting of the mass, or separation of the
metals, one might know the mixture: and the device were good in moneys, to
know how much copper there is in gold and silver.


Id. Thou say true, and it were good to know the sophistical work of
Alchymie how much they come short of truth.


Orat. If any man then would purpose to write a book of weights, he must as it
seems, note the variety of every metal; for Hungarian gold is of one weight,
and fine gold, which they call aurum obryzum of another; and so of all the
metals.


Id. By what has been spoken it appears, that as in fountains, so in minerals
there is found diversities of weight: yet gold wheresoever it be found is
always heavier then any other metal: although the species thereof be found to
be varyed within a certain latitude: and so of the rest.


Orat. But whether might not the habitude or proportion of the value of metals
be found out, by the habitude or proportion of their weights?


Id. Lead is likest unto gold in weight, but not in perfection; and therefore
we must not take heed to one weight only, but to every kind of weight; for if
one look to the weight of the fire of fusion as well of gold as of lead; he
shall find that lead comes not so near gold, as any other metals does. And if
one look to the weight of the fire, in the melting of iron, he shall find that
iron comes nearer unto gold, then any other metal does; although if he look
to the weight of heaviness he shall find it comes not so nigh: Therefore we
must look upon all the weights, and not upon the weight of heaviness only,
and so we shall find that silver is next unto Gold.


Orat. Vitruvius says, speaking of the natural heaviness of Gold, that it
alone is drowned in quicke-silver, though it be of never so small a weight,
when other mettalls swim aloft, though they of never so great a bulk.


Id. Quicksilver it naturally conjungible to all the metals, because of
something, which it has in common with them all; but it does more amorously
cleave and adheare to Gold, as that which is not perfect to its own most
perfect nature. And for this cause, they that spend their time in Alchimy,
strive to tame quicksilver in the fire, until it do not only, not fly from
the fire it self, but until it likewise hold fast and fixed with himself,
all other mettalls whereunto it is joined. And not thus far alone, but until
it also strain and compact them all into the weight of Gold, and color them
with a fixed and permanent color, their own fluxible, and malleable moisture
abiding still.


Orat. But do thou think, that they can by this means bring their purposes
to pass?


Id. Precision is always inattingible, but how much they profit, the Balance
must show, without which they can do nothing certain. For by the judgment of
the fire, and the Balance, the truth of this question must be resolved.


Orat. Might not all precious stones be weighed in like manner.


Id. No doubt of it, they might all be one by the same device, for a Diamond
has no weight; in respect of the same bigness of lead, and a Sapphire another.
And by the diversity, may the habitude or proportion of lead to eithers weight
be known, and so of all stones. And therefore it were very good to have these
weights written down, by the way of a statick experiment, which the differences
of their Orginalls, that if there were any sophistication done with Berill, or
colored Crystal, they might be known and found.


Orat Yea and further, there being one weight of a stone, in the air, another
in water, another in oil, it were good these diversities were had, that
without any habitude to lead, or any third thing, the difference of the
weights might he known.


Id. Thou say very well.


Orat. Tell me, if thou bast any device, whereby the virtues of stones may be
weighed.


Id. I think the virtue of the Lodestone might be weighed, if putting some
Iron in one scale, and a Lodestone in the other, until the balance were
even, then taking away the Lodestone, and some other thing of the same weight
being put into the scale, the Lodestone were holden over the Iron, so that
that scale would begin to rise; by reason of the Load-stones attraction of the
Iron, then take out some of the weight of the other scale, until the scale
wherein the Iron is, do sink again to the aequilibrium, or equality still
holding the Lodestone unmovable as it was; I believe that by weight of what
was taken out of the contrary scale, one might come proportionably to the
weight of the virtue or power of the Lodestone. And in like manner, the
verture of a Diamond, might be found hereby, because they say it hinders the
Lodestone form drawing of Iron; and so other virtues of other stones,
consideration, being always had of the greatness of the bodies, because in a
greater body, there is a greater power and virtue.


Orat. Might not a workman try also by this means, how much Mercury, and how
much Sulphur every metal contains? and so of stones likewise.


Id. Certainly he might somewhat near find out such things, by the concord and
difference of weights: as also the elements of quicksilver, by the diversity
of its weight in the air, in water, and in oil, compared to oil, water, and
ashes of the same greatness weighed against it; and so of sulphur also. So
that a man might by this means come to a true conjecture of the Elements of
all metals and stone, and the weight of those Elements.


Orat. These be fine things, but might not the same be done in Herbs, and all
the kinds of woods, flesh, living creatures, and humors.


Id. In all I think. For weighing a piece of Wood, and then burning it
thoroughly, and then weighing the ashes, it is known how much water there was
in the wood, for there is nothing that has a heavy weight but water and
earth. It is known moreover by the diverse weight of wood in air, water and
oil, how much the water that is in wood, is heavier or lighter then clean
spring water, and so how much air there is in it. So by the diversity of the
weight of ashes, how much fire there is in them: and of the Elemens may be
gotten by a nearer conjecture, though precision be always inattingible. And as
I have said, of Wood, so may be done with Herbs, flesh and other things.


Orat. There is a saying, that no pure element is to be given, how is this
proved by the Balance?


Id. If a man should put an hundred weight of earth into a great earthen pot,
and then should take some Herbs, and Seeds, and weigh them, and then plant or
sow them in that pot, and then should let them grow there so long, until he
had successively by little and little, gotten an hundred weight of them, he
would find the earth but very little diminished, when he came to weigh it
again: by which he might gather, that all the aforesaid herbs, had their
weight from the water. Therefore the waters being engrossed (or impregnated) in
the earth, attracted a terrestreity, and by the opperation of the Sun, upon
the Herb were condensed (or were condensed into an Herb.) If those Herbs be
then burned to ashes, may not thou guess by the diversity of the weights of
all; How much earth thou founderst more then the hundred weight, and then
conclude that the water brought all that? For the Elements are convertible one
into another by parts, as we find by a glass put into the snow, where we
shall see the air condensed into water, and flowing in the glass. So we find
by experience, that some water is turned into stones, as some is into Ice; and
that there is in some fountains a hardening and petrifying virtue, which
turns the things that are put into them, into stone. For so say they, there is
a certain water found in Hungary, which through the power of the vitriall
which is in it, turns Iron into Copper; for by such powers and virtues, it is
manifest that the waters are not purely elementary, but elementated. And it
were very pleasant to have the weights of all those waters, of such diverse
virtues, that by the diversity of their weights in air and oil, one might
come the nearer to the conjectures of their virtues.


Orat. Might one not do so with the earth?


Id. Yes, even with the earth; because one earth is fruitful, and another
barren; and in one earth are found stones and minerals, and not in another:
therefore to the searching of the secrets of nanature, it were exceeding
advantageous to know the diverse weights of diverse earth's, in water, air, and
oil: So by the diversity of the weights of wines, waxs, oils, gummes, alums,
onyons, leeks, garlic, and all such things; I think the virtues that are
diversely in them, might be in some measure found out; and we might give a
near conjecture of the weight of the whole earth: for the circumference of it,
and the Diameter are both known; from whence may be had the capacity and the
contents, and the number of miles, therefore numbering but one solid inch of
earth, from thence may easily be deduced the weight of the whole capacity.


Orat. These things would scarce be written in a huge volume.


Id. Experimental knowledge requires large writings, for the more they are,
so much the more easily may we come from the experiments, to the Art which is
drawn from them.


Orat. Peradventure a man might in time rise by subtle conjectures, to the
weight of the Air.


Id. If any man would in the one part of a great pair of Balance, put a great
deal of wool, dry, and hard pack't up, and in the other stones to a just
counter poyse in a place and air that were temperate; he should find by
experience, that when the air declines to moisture, the weight of the wool
would increase; and when it inclines to dryness, it would decrease; and by
these differences he might weigh the air, and might give likely conjectures of
the change of the times and weather. So if any man should desire to konw the
diverse strength of the Sun in diverse climats, if he would take and weigh a
thousand grains, either or wheat or barley from the most fertile field of the
one and the other, by the diversity of the weights, he might try the diverse
power of the sun, for if the number and the field be alike fruitful in any
place, the difference cannot be but in the sun. So may thou also hunt out
the different vigor of the sun in mountains and vallyes, so it be in the same
line of rising and setting.


Orat. Whether might not a man, by letting a stone fall from a high tower, and
letting water run out of a naorow hole, into a Basin in the mean time; and
then weighing the water that is run out, and doing the same with a piece of
wood of equal bigness, by the diversity of the weights of the water, wood,
and stone, attain to know the weight of the air?


Id. If a man should do this, in diverse towers of an equal height, and at
diverse times, he might come near a likely conjecture. But yet he might sooner
reach the weight of the air, by the diversity of figures or shapes, in things
of equal heaviness. As if I would let one pound of lead fall from a high
tower, that were round, and take the water that ran from an hourglass in the
mean time; and then would do the same again with the like weight of lead,
that were broad, letting the water run in like manner: I might by the diverse
weights of the waters, reach to the weight of the air: For we find by
experience, that birds do abide more still when they spread their wings,
because they take up more air; as also that which is heavy, does sooner sink
in the water, if it be round, then if it be square. And peradventure the air
may yet be more easily weighed: as if equal bellows. were equally filled, in
diverse times and places, for by the motion of those equal bellows, water being
dropped through an hourglass, by an equal height, during the time of the
motion, and that weighed, by the proportion of water to water, of the diverse
times and places, it might be easily known. For look in what proportion the
more ponderous water did exceed, in the same proportion did the lightness of
the air of that bellows, exceed the lightness of the other bellows, whose
water weighed less.

But the best way of al, is to take an empty glass full of air, suppose the
glass weigh just a pound, if then stoping the hole with wax, thou put it down
into the water, and that one pound weight precisely, will hold it down under
water, being laid upon it, then thou may precisely say, that the air in the
glass is of the lightness of two pounds. So may thou know very near, the
proportion of the lightnsse of on air to another, in diverse places, times and
regions.

By the like device also, by rneanes of a bellows, may thou weigh smoke or
wind: for if thou take a bellows full of air, and then shut them in the
smoke, pressing out the air, and after pull them open, the smoke will fill
the bellows, which thou may weigh as air, and so make trial whether smoke
or air be lighter, and by how much: and so may thou do with wind. Thou
might also by the motion of the smoke, whilst so many drops of water
distill in the hourglass, and the motion of fire, during the distillig of so
many drops, guess at the lightness of fire, above smoke, or air. No,
whatsoever we have said of water-hour-glasses, may perhaps be better tried by
Sand-hour-glasses, made of glass, or some fine earth, with one hole in the
top, and another narrow one in the bottom of the vessel, that may be stopped
with wax, or with ones finger, until the very instant, that the trial of
weights were to be made: then opening the narrow hole in the bottom, and
taking the sand that runs into the basin, during the time of the motion of the
light or heavy things; if the sand be weighed as I said of the water, by the
weight of one sand to another, the weight of things might be known by a very
near guess. And as by the foresaid devices by diversity of figures, the
weight of the air might be conjectured; so of the water likewise, and on the
other side, the various capacity of figures or shapes.


Orat. I have heard that some by means of a certain instrument, have gone
about to find out the depth of the Sea.


Id. It might be done with a piece of Lead, made after the fashion of the moon
of eight days old, yet so, that one horn of it be heavier, and the other
lighter, and on the lightest horn let an apple, or some other light thing be
made fast, with such an instrument, that the lead pulling down the apple after
it to the bottom, and first touching the ground with the heaviest part thereof,
and so laying it seife along accordingly, the apple then loosed and freed from
the horn, may return up again to the top of the water, provided that thou
have first the knowledge how long such a lead will be sinking, and the apple
rising in a water of a known depth; for then by the diversity of the weights of
the water, or sand of the hour glass, from the time of the throwing in of the
lead, and the apples return in diverse waters, thou may find what thou
seek.


Orat. I believe that the deepnesse of the waters may be searched both by this,
and other means. But tell me, may it not also be guessed at, by this means
what way a ship makes in the sea?


Id. As as how?


Orat. By throwing an apple, as far as one can, out of the prow, or forepart
of the ship, and then letting the water run frm the houre-glasse, till the ship
come to the apple, and comparing the weight of the water at one time with the
weight of it at another time.


Id. Both by that, and otherwise, as the shooting an arrow from a crossebow,
and the ships coming to the arrow with the weight of the water in the mean
time.


Orat. The knowledge of the strength of bows and other engines, may as it
seems, be proportionably enquired, by the flowing of the water out of the
houre-glasse, from that point of time, wherein the shaft is shot diametrally
upwards, and returns unto the earth again, provided that in diverse engines,
the shafts be always equal.


Id. Not only the strength of bows, and engines, but of winds also, the
flying of fowls, the running of men, and beasts, and whatsoever is of the like
kind, may conjecturally be sought out by these statick experiments, and the
running of water from an houre-glasse.


Orat. How may the strength of a man be known by this means?


Id. Make a pair of scales even, then let a man lay hold of one of them, and
in the other put as much weight as he can by the utmost of his strength pluck
up from the ground till the balance be even: (which will be found more true
(say I) if he have a rest to stay one or both his feet against) then take the
weight of that which he has pulled up, and deducting the weight of the man
himself, all the remainder of the weight is portioned to his strength.


Orat. Might not the breath of a man be so weighed?


Id. There is one weight of the same man, when he draws in or holds his
breath, another when he breathes it out; one weight of a man, whilst he lives,
another when he is dead; And so in all living things. And therefore it were
good to have these differences noted, in diverse living things, and diverse men,
and diverse ages of men, that so by conjecture, a man might ascend to the weight
of the vital spirits.


Orat. Might we not by the same way, hunt after the heat and cold, the dryness
and moistures of the weather?


Id. That we might assuredly; for if in frosty weather, thou mark the weight
of the water before it be frozen and after, thou shall find it differ: For
seeing ice swim above the water, thou must needs know it is lighter then water;
and therefore according to the intensenesse of the cold, there is a greater
difference of the weight; Or if thou weigh green wood, and after a time, find
the weight of it altered, thou shall know hereby the exceise of heat and cold,
moisture and drought.


Orat. May not the time of the day be so weighed?


Id. If thou let the water run out of the houre-glass from the Sun rising one
day, till the Sun rising on the morrow; and then shall let it run another day,
beginning at the Sun rising, by the proportion of the water, that ran last, to
the weight of that which ran the first day, thou may know the hour and time
of the day.


Orat. It may be one may so know the time of the year?


Id. Yes, if for a year together, thou every day, let the water run through an
hourglass, from the sunrising to the sunsetting; and observe the weight,
thou may by the balance at any time give a near guess, both at the day of
the month, and hour of the day, though in those days which are shortest, the
difference be less certain then in others.


Orat. I see that by this invention one may reach even the motion of the
heavenly bodies, as Nimrod is said to have done, and Hipparchus to have written.


Id. Thou say true, though in this case there be great need of a diligent
discourse, for if any man noting a fixed star in the Meridionall line, would
gather and note the water, running from the hourglass, until the return of
the same star to the same place, and would do the like with the sun from his
rising, to his rising again the next day, he might find the motion of the sun
to the east, by the diversity of the lesser-nesse of the waters weight, of the
stars motion from the meridional line, to its return to the same place,
respectively to the motion of the Sun, from his rising to his rising, for by
how much less it were by so much, less in comparison to the weight of the
whole, were the motion in order to the equinoctial circle, not to the Zodiac,
which is not described upon the poles of the world, but its own. So if any man
would by the same star try, how much the Sun were moved in fifteen days, he
might do it in the same manner, by the diverse distance of the Suns rising
respectively to the place of that star in the Meridian line, As for example, if
to day the distance of the place of that star, in the line from the Suns
rising, be found in some proportion by the hourglass, to the weight of the
water of the whole revolution of the star; and in fifteen days after, it be
found in another proportion, by the diversity of these porportions the motion
might be proved, so it be always in the equinoctial.


Orat. May the motion in the Zodiac be thus found?


Id. It may certainly, by the the motion of the Sun, from noon to noon, and
from the East to the East; and from the East to the West: for by these
differences, the declination of the Zodiac, from the equinoctial might be
reached.


Orat. And what may be done concerning the variety of the motions, which is
said to be caused by the Eccen trick?


Id. That also may be found out, when in a year thou shall find the
enequality in the Zodiac, in equal days; for the Sun moved in the summer
time from the equinoctial, returns not unto the equinoctial again, in the
same number of days that it does in winter, as it does in winter, when it
returns sooner; for it would not be found to have spent just so many days, in
going from Libra to Aries, as from Aires to Libra. By which difference would
appear the eccentrick, or little circle of the spicycle, by the difference of
the motion.


Orat. And what of the greatness of the Suns body?


Id. By the weight of the water, that runs in the houre-glass, in the
equinoctial, from the beginng of the rising of the Sun, until he be quite
above the Horizon, in the habitude unto the water of the stars revolution, is
known the nearest habitude of the greatness of the Suns body unto his sphere.
Yet there is another way to find out the greatness of of the Suns body, in
the Eclipses thereof.


Orat. As how?


Id. we will find out the motion of the Moon, as we have done that of the Sun.
Then by the eclips, and motion thereof through the shadow of the earth, we seek
the greatness of the Moon in order, or proportion to the diverse shadow of the
earth: by which we conjecture the middle porportion, to be that of the Moons
greatness unto the earth. Then by the motion of the Moon, and the eclips of
the sun: we hunt after the suns distance from the earth, and his greatness:
and though it be a subtle enquiry, yet is it but conjecturall.


Orat. By what thou have already said, it should seem that all diversities of
motions, and eclipses of the Sun and Moon, yea the progresses of all the
Planets, their stations, retrograditions, directions, and eccentricities may be
known by one and the same divise, of the balance and hourglass.


Id. Thou may do it thy self, if thou labor subtilty to collect the
differences.


Ora. What think thou of the judgments of the stars.


Id. I think that by the variety of the weights of the water, in several
years, and certain other differences in the weights of woods, herbs and
grain, one may guess at the future plenty or scarcity of Corn, better and
sooner by experiments past, then by the motion of the stars. For if in March,
there be such a proportion of weight found in water, air and woods, then will
follow fruitfulness of the earth; if otherwise, barrenness, or at the best
mediocrity. The like of wars, pestilence, and all other ordinary things. And
this is the root, whereby in these second causes we hunt after the judgment
of the stars. As by the increase, or decrease of marrow in living Creatures,
Fishs, and Seacrabes, in Trees and Rushes, we seek to know the age of the
Moon; and by the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, her place in the heavens,


Orat. I have heard that the Egyptians used to foresee the disposition of the
year, by the plentyfull or scarce overflowing of Nilus.


Id. There is no country, where, if one would mark it, a man might not find
the like judgment; as by the fatness of fishes and creeping things, in the
beginning of winter, we conjecture that there will be a great and long-lasting
cold, against which wise nature provideth in living Creatures.


Orat. What think thou of the questions made to Astrologers, might there not
be found by thy divice, an equal answer to them all?


Id. Although not an equal one, yet I think (because thou shall in every
regard find me a meare Idiot) there may be this way, some answer made. But how
a conjecture may be given of all things that are demanded, it inquires a great
enquiry. Nor is the manner how to do it fit to be written in books, though
peradventure the answerer can not gather the weight of the answer, but by the
weight of the question, for the incitation or stirring up, of him that moves
the question, to ask, seems to be moved by some foresight of the future
event, though himself see not from whence the motion comes; as he which feels
somewhat in his eye, which he sees not, asks of another, that he would see
what it is that hurts him.


Orat. I think thou meanest, as in the wheel of Pythagoras, by the various
combination of the name of the asker, his mother, the hour of the day, and the
light of the moon, there is a way taught of giving answers: Or as a Prophet
makes judgment from lots, or casual reading of Sibills books, or the Psalter;
or from houses or Geomantick figures, or the chattering of birds, or the
bending of the flame of fire, or the relation of a third man, or any other
casual chance that interveines.


Id. There have been such that have indirectly sought to give answers, by
conference which they had with the asker, in making him tell some news of the
disposition of his country, if the impulsive spirit must needs manifest it
self in long discourses. For if the demander inclined to sad talk, such was
the event of the thing thought to be; is if to glad and merry speech, then the
isse would be accordingly. But I imagined conjectures might be formed
accordingly to the face, garments, motion of the eyes, form of words; and of
weights, looking upon the Lot of those things which I bide the demander again
and again should be brought unto me; yet the more precious conjectures were
from him, from whom some truer thing fell without premeditation, in whom a
certain presaging spirit seemed to speak, nevertheless in this matter, I
neither think the art possible, nor that he that has it, can communicate his
judgment, nor that a wise man ought to employ himself about it.


Orat. Thou say very well, For St. Austine reports that in his time, there
was a certain drunken companion, who could discern the thoughts of men's minds,
discover thieves, and show other secret things, after a strange manner, and yet
was in the mean time, a light vain follow, and no wise man.


Id. I know that I my self have foretold many things as the spirit gave it to
me, and in the mean time, was utterly ignorant of the cause. At length I
seemed to see, that it was not lawful for a grave man to speak without cause,
and so ever after I held my peace.


Orat. Seeing then there is enough said, concerning these motions of the stars,
add something now of Masick.


Id. To music, the Experiments of the Balance are most profitable. For by the
diversity of weights of two Bells, that sound a tone, it is known in what
proportion of harmony the tone consists. So also by the weight of Pipes, and
of Waters that fill the Pipes, is known the proportion of a Diapason,
Diapente, and Diatessaron, and all other Harmonyes that are any ways formable.
Likewise by the weight of Hammers, form whose blows upon an Anvil, there
arises any hammer; and by the weight of drops, that drop from some Rock
into a Pond, and make diverse sounds, and of Pips and all other musical
instruments, the reason is best, and most precisely reached by the Balance.


Orat. Is it so in voices and songs?


Id. Yes, generally all harmonicall concords are most subtly found out by
weights: yea, the weight of a thing is properly the harmonicall proportion,
arising from the various combination of diverse things. Also the friendships and
enmities of living Creatures, and of men of the same species, and whatsoever
else, is weighed by harmonicall concordances and contrary dissonances: So the
health of a man is weighed by harmony, and sickness by that which is contrary
to harmony; nay, after the same manner also, lightness and heaviness,
prudence and simplicity, and many such things, if thou mark diligently.


Orat. What think thou of Geometry?


Id. I think the nearest proportions of the circle, and the square, and all
other things which belong to the difference of the capacity of figures, may
fitly be proved by weights, then any other ways. For, if thou make a vessel
like a column of a known Diameter and height, and another like a Cube of the
same Diameter and height, and then fill them both with water, and weigh the
water; by the diversity of weights will appear unto thee, the proposition of
the square to the circle. And by this means thou may give a guess at the
squaring of a circle, and whatsoever, about this, thou desire to know. So if
thou take too equal plates, and bending one of them round into a circle, make
thereof a piller-fashioned vessel; and of the other make a cubick square
one, and then fillest these vessels with water; Thou shall by the differing
weights of water, know the different capacity of a circle, and a square of the
same circumference. So having many such plates every way equal, thou may
search the differences of the capacities in a triangled, a five cornered, a six
cornered vessel, and so forth. In like manner, by weight thou may come to
the knowledge of capacities of vessels, of what shape soever; and to
instruments of measuring and weighing. How Balances are made. How one pound
weight can life up a thousand, by the distance thereof from the Center, and the
various descent, either straight or crooked. And how all the subtle
instruments of Ships, and other engines ought to be made. And therefore I
think this statick knowledge very profitable, for whatsoever belongs to
Geometry. Thou may also, if thou will, and be crurious weigh, the numbers
of Hairs, Leaves, Grains, Sands, in one bushel, or of any thing else, if
putting a small quantity in the Balance, and taking the weight and number of
them, thou afterward weigh the whole. For by the proportion of weight to
weight, thou may know the proportion of number to number.


Orat. Thou have now explained the causes, why thou wishest the weights of
things were taken by the balance, and orderly written. It is very likely the
book would be exceeding profitable: great wen would be solilited, that in
diverse provinces they might be consigned, and brought into one; that so we
might be the more easily lead to many things, that are yet hidden from us: For
my part I will not cease to further the doing of it every where.


Id. If thou love me, be diligent in it, and so farewell.


FINIS.
Printed or Sold by Will. Leak at the sign of the Crown in Fleet Street,
between the two Temple Gates,
These Books following.
MAn became guilty, or the corruption of nature by sin, written in French by
John Francis Senault, and englished by Henry Earl of Monmouth. Yorks Heraldry.
Bible of a very fair large Roman letter quarto. Orlando Furioso. Callis
learned Readings, on the statute 23. of Henry 8. Chap. the 5th. of Sewers.
Perkins on the Laws of England. The persons Law. Topics in the Laws of
England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs. Vade mecum of a Justice of Peace. The
Book of Fees. Sken de significatione verborum. Delamans Use of the Horizontall
Qurdrant. Mathematical Recreations. Wilbyes second set of Music 3.4.5. and 6.
parts. Corderius in english by Brinsley. The Fort Royal of the Scriptures, or
a Vade mecum concordance, presenting to the world one hundred heads of
Scriptures, most of them common placed for public use. Dr. Fulkes Meteors.
Malthus Fier-workes. Nies Gumery and Fireworkes. Cato Major, with Annotations,
by Will. Austin Esquire Mell Helliconium, by Alexder Rosse. Nosce te ipsum, by Sir
John Davis. Annimadversions on Lillis Grammar. The History of Vienna and Paris.
The Spanish Mandevile of Miracles. Lazarillo de Tormes. Christ passion, with
Annorat by George Sands. Hero and Leander, by Christopher Marlow, and George
Chapman. Aicilla or Philotas, loving folly. Epigrams Divine, and Morrall, by
Sir Thomas Vrchard. Mayers Catechism 80. A direction or discovery of an notable
fraud committed by R. B. a seminary Priest of Rome, upon two of the Articles of
the Church of England. Eccersitatio Scolastica, 80 Perkins young man's guide to
godliness. Millitary instructions 80. The old Religion, by Ios. Hall

Plays.
Henry the fourth. Philaster. Maids Tradgedy. King and no King. The grateful
Servant. The strange discovery. The Hollander. Othello the more of Venice.


