The Kings Majesty's MESSAGE To His Highness the Prince of WALES, CONCERNING
The Lord General Fairfax, and the Army; and His Propositions and Desires
therein, to be communicated to the Right Honorable the Earl of Warwick, Lord
high Admiral of England.

Dated from Hurst Castle, the 6. of December, 1648.

Also, His Majesty's letter to the Parliament, touching the Aru^y, and the
confinement of his Royal person to the said Castle; with his desires to the
Citizens of London, touching the same.

And Lieutenant Genesis Crumwels Declaration in reference to the King, City, and
Kingdom. Signed O. Crumwel.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Printed for G. Wharton, 1648.

A LETTER From Lieut. General CRUMWEL To the Citizens of London. Concerning
the Kings Majesty, the Parliament, the City, Army, and Kingdom.
Right Honorable,
HEre has lately been called a General Council of Officers, consisting of
the Northern Brigade, whose results acquiesse and tend ^hiefly to the safety
and preservation of your Honorable City, and to the welfare and tranquillity of
our English Nation; as appears by the most excellent demonstration of Lieu.
Genesis Cromwell, at the Council table, in presence of diverse Colonels, Lieut.
Colonels, Majors, and Captains, who declared, That he was willing to wade
through all troubles and difficulties, for preservation of the peace and
tranquillity of this bleeding Kingdom, and would sacrifice his life for the
peace and liberty of the subject, and for dissipating the dismal cloud of
Malignancy, which threatens ruin to all the well-affected within the Nation.

And for the better propagating of the said work, the said Lieutenant General
(our worthy and ever honored Patriot) has declared his ardent and zeafous
affection to his Excellency the Lord General; protesting, That he will live
and dye with him, for the obtaining and faciliating the just Demands and
Desires of the Army, specified in their late Remonstrance, and that he does
most really and freely coucur with them, for the speedy executing of impartial
Justice upon all Offenders whatsoever; intimating, that he does verily believe
they are things which God puts into the hearts both of Officers and Soldiers,
and that the great Jehovah of Heaven is pleased to manifest his presence unto
them, in pursuing and prosecuting so pious^e work, so much tending to the
honor of his holy Name and the peace and tranquillity of all his people on
Earth; which declaratory expressions, have prefented to his Excellency the Lord
Genesis Fairfax, and

Signed O. CRUMWEL.
Knottingsley near Pontefract 2. December. 1648.
A Message from the King concerning the Army.
Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty having seriously perused the Remonstrance of the Army, finds it
to be of so high a nature, that He cannot but stand amazed at the sense,
scope, and method thereof, and does declare, That He should rather sacrifice
His life, for His People, and a good Couscience, than be guilty of the
Engagement of modelling and establishing a new Governmen; but withal
remonstrates, That He approves of their Proposals for rectifying the Law, and
purging the abuses and errous thereof, for the ease and liberty of His people,
desiring that all their Results and Consultations may redound to the honor of
these bleeding Nations, etc.

And his Majesty has further declared, that (notwithstanding the present
distractions, and dissolving of the Treaty, yet) He desires from His very heart
and soul that the peace of His Kingdoms may be speedily established, and the
liberty of the Subject preserved und unviolated, whatsoever becomes of Him, etc.

Col. Ewers uses his Majesty with much civility and respect, and the
deportment of the Soldiery takes deep impression in his Majesty's heart, which
causes a great change and alteration in his Majesty's Royal Breast, and it is
hoped few days will produce a convincement from his Majesty of all his former
errors.

Diverse shipping lie hovering upon this Coast, and it is supposed they would
fain attempt a design for rescuing the King from the power and protection of
the Army, but strong Guards are placed, and much vigilance used for the defense
and safety of this Island.

Newport ^ December. 1648.
A Declaration of the proceedings in Parliament, concerning the KING.
BOth Houses having received a Letter from the Lord General Fairfax, for the
gaining to such ends as have been proposed in the Armies late Remonstrance, and
pressing them to the present apprehension of the dangerous Juncture of
affairs; the Commons began to consult upon the same, whose debates sor'd up,
and flew exceeding high; some moving that his Excellencies Commission might be
made null and taken from him; Others, that the Army might be required to
retreat 40 miles from London, and others moved, that the City might be put into
a posture of War; but Sheriff Brown stood up, and made an excellent Speech,
declaring, That there was nothing to be expected from the City, and that for
his part he would endeavor the preservation of the peace thereof, and to keep
a right understanding between his Excellency, the City, and Army. And Mr Pryn
declared his sense and resolution touching the Army, cyting many presidents,
that many have been voted traitors for disobeying auth^rity of Parliament, but
for his part he would not say that any were such. After some disputation and
debate thereon, the House voted that a Declaratory Letter should be presented
to the General, a coyy whereof follows,

May it please your Excellency,
THe House taking notice by your Letter of the 30. of Novem. touching the
present motion and design of the army, ^a^e commanded me to let you know, that
upon mature deliberate judging, that it may be dangerous both to the City and
army; it is their pleasure that you ^move not the army near London; and to the
end the country may not be burdened with free quarter, nor the army want their
due support, they have commanded me to acquaint you, that they have signified
their pleasure to the Lord Major, Aldermen, and common council, that they
forthwith provide the sum of 40000. l. or so much thereof as they can possibly
raise at present, and pay the same to the Treasurers at wars, to be forthwith
sent unto you for our army, which being all have in command, I remain

Your humble servant, VVil. Lenthal Speaker.


His Majesty's Declaration upon his coming into Wiltshire.
MY Lords, You are come to take your leave of me, and I believe we shall scarce
ever see each other again: but Gods will be done, I thank God I have made my
peace with him, and shall without fear undergo what he shall be pleased to
suffer men to do unto me. My Lords, you cannot but know, that in my fall and
ruin, you see your own, and that also near to you; I pray God send you better
friends then I have found. I am fully infoamed of the whole carriage of the plot
against me and mine; and nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling
I have of the sufferings of my Subjects, and the miserice that hang over my
three Kingdomr, drawn upon them by those who (upon pretenses of good) violently
pursue their own interests and ends. His Maj having thus declared himself, the
Comm^ssioners kissed his Maj. hand, and took their leave. And on Friday morning
last, his May. was guarded by a troop of horse from the Isle of VVight, to
Hurst Castle in Wilsthire, where he is now secured, Cap. Mild^ay, cap. Ioyner,
cap. Weston, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Cutchside, Mr. Reding and Mr. Lewen, being
appointed Attendants for his Majesty's person.

SIR, Since his Majesty's coming to this Castle, he has been used with much
civility and respect, and (according to our information from one of his
Majesty's attendants) has sent a letter to his Son the Prince of Wales, to
advertize him of the Armies removing his person from the Isle of Wight, to
Hurst Castle upon the consines of Wiltshire, requiring him to use his utmost
endeavors for a good accommodation and correspondency between the two Navies,
and to mediate with his Lordship for a mutual reconciliation between his
Majesty, the Parliament, and the Army. And by the same intelligencer, it is
further intimated, That the King has likewise sent a letter to both houses of
Parliament, advertizing them of his present condition since his present
confinement to the said Castle, desiring them to proceed in a Parliamentary
way, in reference to their rights and privileges, and to endeavor a right
understanding between his Excellency, the Parliament, City, and Army. Which
letters are said to be transmitted from his Majesty.

Hurst Castle December. 6. 1648.
FINIS:

