A NEW and USEFUL CATECHISM; Very necessary and teachable, both for Children
and young Christians.

Wherein is contained, by way of Question and Answer, a brief Discovery of
these Things; 1. What is God. 2. How he may be known. 3. What Man's State is,
by reason of the Fall of Adam, and his own actual Sins. 4. What Christ is, and
the glorious Remedy God has provided for Sinners, in sending his Son into the
World. 5. That the Scriptures are the undoubted Mind and Will of God, for Men
and Christians to walk by; evident by six Reasons. 6. What our Duty is to
Christ, in Matter of Worship and holy Conversation. 7. Some few Questions and
Answers, relating to the Duty of Children and Servants in particular.


The third Edition, Corected and Amended, with large Additions, by MANASSETH
KING, Pastor to the Church of Christ in Coventry.

Parents, bring up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord,
Ephesians. 6.4. London, Printed in the Year 1693.

TO THE READER.
FOr as much as I have observed, that among the many great and little Books,
there have been scarce any that have minded this Work, of publishing any thing
tending to the instructing of Youth in the Things of the Lord, in such a way as
may be by Parents or Masters easily by way of Question asked, and by way of
Answer easily learned by Children or Servants: I have therefore, as one of
those that bear good will to the Education of Youth, and the Edification of
others; and so far as I know my own Heart, to the eternal Salvation of all whom
Jesus Christ has died for, have singly in this intended the Glory of God, in
whose Hand is all our Breaths, and do humbly offer this as tending thereto in
this ensuing Dialogue; desiring that if my Knowledge may not be so great as
others, nor my Judgment so regulated according to the Scriptures of Truth as
others, that it may not prejudice them against what Truth they may find, nor
hinder, but rather further them to the bringing forth a more excellent Piece of
this Nature; and then I am sure God will have the Glory, Souls may have the
Benefit, many Families that too much, yea, I judge sinfully neglect the
instructing of their Children or Servants under their Charge, receive more
Benefit: not knowing, as the Apostle says, but thou, O Man, may save thy
Wife. So what know thou, O Father, but thou by thy care in bringing up thy
Child in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, may save thy Child, thy
Servant; thy Patterns or Examples being daily agreeable to thy Instruction: and
thy neglect of this Duty may be sad upon the Day of thy Account, when the Blood
of any poor Soul living in thy Family may be required at thy Hand, because thou
did not do thy utmost in the use of the Means God has appointed to reclaim
them from Evil, and the Snares of Death, and to bring them to the understanding
of the Will and Work of God appointed for them to observe. Among the rest of
those great Endeavors of many of the Lord's People in other things, I do here
present thee with a few Questions and Answers grounded upon Scripture, which I
shall beg thy Esteem of no farther, than thou find them agree with the Law
and Testimony, Isa. 8. and desire from my Soul, that every Man and Woman, Child
and Servant, may learn to know the Things that belong to their Peace, and may
escape the Snares of Death; in which I desire to remain one that am commanded
to love my Neighbor as my self.

Manasseth King.

The Child's Instructor: OR, Brother Benjamin Keach 's Verses.
O Child most dear, incline thine Ear,
And hearken to God's Voice:
His Counsel take, and that will make
God's Angels to rejoice.
Be not like those, that Grace oppose,
And give their Minds to play:
But let thy Mind be well inclined,
In seeking Wisdom's Way.
Learn in thy Youth, God's holy Truth,
Christ's blessed Cross to bear:
And so shall thou, though hated now,
In Heaven have a share.
Don't lie nor swear, to steal don't dare,
Have a care of such Evils:
For such must die, and in Hell lie,
With damned Souls and Devils.
In a right way, thou must obey,
Thy Father and thy Mother:
As also right, in God's dear sight,
To love Sister and Brother.
Let not vain Pleasure, nor earthly Treasure
Thy Soul seek and desire:
For these things know, God will o'rthrow
with his consuming Fire.
Spend all thy Days in righteous Ways,
God's holy Name to hallow:
That at thy last, thy Days being past,
A blessed End may follow.
And though thou die, and in Grave lie,
Yet Christ will thee awake:
And Angels send thee to attend,
And into's Kingdom take.
Where thou shall rest, with Saints the best,
And pray that so may I,
And have the Crown of blessed Renown,
God's Name to magnify.
That thou with Christ in Paradise,
For ever may dwell.
Thus do thou pray, both Night and Day,
And so dear Child farewell.
A New and Useful CATECHISM.
QUestion. What is God?

Answer. A Spirit, a King Immortal, only Wise, Holy, Merciful, Just,
All-seeing, a Heart-searching Jehovah, Joh. 4.24. 1 Timothy 6.15. 1 Pet. 1.15.
Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 86.5. Prove. 15.3. Isa. 45.21.

Quest. How may he be known?

Answ. By his Works, Attributes, and his Word, Romans 2.14, 15. Micah 7.18. Isa.
9.6. Job Chap. 38, 39. Exodus 34.6, 7, 8.

Quest. What are his Works?

Answ. He made Heaven, Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, in six Days,
and rested the seventh Day, and saw all things to be exceeding Good.

Quest. What is wonderful in his Works further?

A. His making all Things of Nothing, his preserving all things by his Mercy
and Power, calls for the Waters out of the Sea, pours them out upon the
Earth, Amos 5.8. Gives the Sun for a Light by Day, and the Moon and Stars by
Night; gives the Rainbow as a Sign that the World shall be no more drowned,
placing Virtue, and Operation in every Herb, Tree, Plant, for the use and
benefit of his Creature, Man. And for a further discovery, take notice of Job
38 and 39 Chapters, Genesis 9.13. Genesis 1.28, 29, 30.

Quest. What are his Attributes?

Answ. His Wisdom, his Holiness, his Justice, his Mercy, his Faithfulness, his
Allseeingness, and his Infiniteness in them, and Immortality and Immutability,
1 Timothy 6.15. 1 Cor. 10.13. Rev. 15.4. Psalm. 139.2.

Quest. What is his Word?

Answ. That which declares him so to be, and proceeds from himself, Psalm.
19.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Quest. Why did God create all things?

Answ. For his Pleasure all things are and were created, Rev. 4.11.

Quest. Did God create any Man on purpose to damn him?

Answ. No; for he says, As I live, I desire not the Death of a Sinner, but
rather that he may turn and live, Ezekiel. 18.22, 23, 24. and 33.11.

Q. What was Man made of?

A. Dust of the Earth, Genesis 2.7.

Q. After what manner was he made?

A. He is said to be created after God's own Image, having Dominion over all
the earthly Creatures, Genesis 1.27, 28.

Q. What did God give to Adam at the first?

A. He gave him a pleasant Paradise, and a Law; That of every Tree in the
Garden he might eat; but of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil he should not
eat; for in the Day he eat thereof, he should surely die, Genesis 2.17.

Q. How came Adam to break the Law given unto him?

A. By the Woman's yielding to the Serpent, did take and eat of the forbidden
Fruit, and she gave to her Husband, and he did eat, Genesis 3.6.

Q. Did Eve being, tempted or provoked to eat by the Serpent, or Adam by the
Woman, excuse their Sin?

A. No; for God passes Sentence upon them both, and also upon the Serpent.

Q. What Misery fell they under as their Punishment?

A. To the Woman God says, I will greatly multiply thy Sorrows, and thy
Conceptions; in Sorrow shall thou bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be
to thy Husband, and he shall rule over thee, Genesis 3.16.

Q. What did God say to Adam?

A. Because thou have hearkened to the Voice of thy Wife, the Ground shall be
cursed for thy sake; Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth; thou shall in
the sweat of thy Face eat thy Bread, until thou return unto the Dust; for Dust
thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return. He was also ashamed of his
Nakedness, feared to appear before his Maker, turned out of Paradise, and
Cherubims set to keep the Way of the Tree of Life with flaming Swords, that he
might not eat thereof, lest he live for ever, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19, 22, 23, 24.

Q. Here is sad News of Death, and Mortality, and Pain, and losing of a
pleasant Paradise: How came the happy News of Life immortal, and enjoying of a
heavenly Paradise?

A. Through a second Adam, Christ Jesus, who has abolished Death, and has
brought Life and Immortality unto Light, through the Gospel. 2 Timothy 1.10. Heb.
2.14. 1 Cor. 15.22. Genesis 3.15.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. The Son of God, the Savior of poor, lost, worthless, straying Sinners.

Q. How may that appear?

A. By the Wonders wrought at his Conception, at his Birth, by himself whilst
on Earth personally, at his Transfiguration, at his Baptism, at his Death, at
his Resurrection.

Q. What was wrought in a miraculous way at his Conception?

A. Mary with Child by the Holy Ghost, and not after any ordinary manner, Mat.
1.16. Joseph being espoused unto her, thought to put her away, not knowing what
was done; but an Angel appeared to satisfy him, and directed him to call his
Name Jesus, for he should save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21.

Q. What Wonder was done at his Birth?

A. A Star arose out of the East, which the Wisemen followed, till it stood
still over the Place where the young Child lay, Mat. 2.10.

Q. What else was done at his Birth?

A. Their rejoicing and worshipping of him; Herod's cruel Design frustrated, as
relating to the killing of the Babe, by the Lord's appearing unto them in a
Dream, and sending them another way, Mat. 2.12.

Q. What else was wonderful?

A. An Angel appearing unto two Shepherds in great Glory, saying, Fear not, for
I bring you glad Tidings, which shall be to all People; for unto you is born
this Day, in the City of David, a Savior, Christ the Lord.

Q. What else was wrought wonderfully at his Birth?

A. A heavenly Host immediately appearing, praising God, and saying, Glory to
God in the Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men, Luke 2.9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14.

Q. What Wonders were wrought in his Lifetime?

A. Disputing with the Doctors at twelve Years of Age; rebuking violent
Diseases, and they departed by the Word of his Mouth, Joh. 4.10. turned Water
into Wine, John 2.9. raised the Dead, cleansed the Lepers; the Lame walk, the
Blind see, the Deaf hear, the Dumb speak, Mat. 11.5. Rather than he will give
Offense, causes Money to be taken out of a Fish's Mouth, Mat. 17.27.

Q. What else was wrought by Christ in his Lifetime?

A. The Wind and the Sea obey him, and are calm at his Command, Mat. 8.26, 27.
Five thousand fed with five Loaves, and two little Fishes, Mat. 14.19, 20, 21.

Q. What was wonderful at his Baptism?

A. The Spirit of God lighting upon him as a Dove, as he came out of the Water,
testifying that he was the Son of God, in whom he was well-pleased, Mat. 3.16.
Also at his being transfigured upon the Mount, his Face did shine as the Sun,
and his Raiment white as the Light, a bright Cloud over-shadowed them, and a
Voice out of the Cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17.2.

Q. What was done at his Death?

A. The Vail of the Temple rent, to signify the End of those Types, he being
the Substance, Heb. 9.11. and Darkness over all the Earth, from the 6th Hour to
the 9th Hour, Luke 23.44. the Earth did quake, and the Rocks rent, and the
Graves were opened; and many of the dead Bodies of the Saints which slept,
arose after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, Mat. 27.51, 52, 53.

Q. What Wonders were wrought at his Resurrection?

A. A great Earthquake; an Angel descending from Heaven, and came and rolled
the Stone from the Door, and sat upon it; his Countenance like Lightning, and
his Raiment white as Snow: and for fear of him the Keepers did shake, and
became as dead Men, telling the Women that Christ was risen, showing them the
Place where the Lord lay; and said unto them, Go quickly and tell his
Disciples, he is risen from the Dead. Matthew. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Q. How long was it from his Death to his Ascension?

A. Forty Days, speaking to them of the things concerning the Kingdom of God,
Act. 1.3.

Q. What was done at his Ascension?

A. Two Men standing by the Disciples in white Apparel, testifying that the
same Jesus whom they had seen ascend into Heaven, should so come in like manner
as ye have seen him go into Heaven, Acts 1.11.

Q. What was done after his Ascension?

A. The Disciples being together, and praying upon the Day of Pentecost, they
received the Promise of the Spirit, and were filled with the Holy Ghost, so as
that they were able to speak to the understanding of all Nations; and Gifts
bestowed upon them and others, for the Edification of the Church, perfecting of
the Saints for the Work of the Ministry: this appears from these Scriptures,
Acts 2.3. Ephesians. 4.8. 1 Cor. 12.7.

Q. What did the Lord Jesus come into the World to do?

A. He came to seek and save them that were lost, to give the knowledge of
Salvation and Remission of Sins; to give Light to them that sat in Darkness,
and the shadow of Death; to guide our Feet in the Path of Peace, Luke 19.10.
and 1.77, 78, 79. and 24.47. and to destroy the Works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.

Q. How came Man into his lost miserable Estate?

A. By Sin.

Q. What is Sin?

A. It is the Transgression of the Law, Romans 7.7. 1 John 3.4.

Q. What Means has Christ used to seek and save them that are lost?

A. He has, by the means of Death, redeemed us from him that had the Power of
Death, even the Devil; and delivered them who through fear of Death, were all
their Lifetime subject to Bondage. He was wounded for our Iniquities, broken
for our Transgressions; the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and through
his Stripes we are healed: He poured out his Soul unto Death, and made
Intercession for Transgressors.

Q. Did he do this for all Men?

A. Yea, all have, like Sheep, gone astray; and the Lord has laid upon him the
Iniquity of us all.

Q. How does it appear that Christ died for all Men?

A. From the Types under the Law; from the Testimony of all the Prophets; from
the Testimony of an Angel, and of the Heavenly Host; from the Testimony of
Christ and his Holy Apostles.

Q. How from Types does it appear that Christ died for all Men?

A. As the Paschal Lamb being slain, was a Sign of Safety and Deliverance to
Israel; so Jesus Christ is called the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the
World; and is called the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World;
and that saves all that believe from Wrath to come. Rev. 13.8. Joh. 1.29. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.

Q. How else?

A. By the brazen Serpent, that as truly as it was lifted up by Moses, for the
healing of all that were stung or bitten; so Christ is held forth and lifted
up, for the comfort of every poor distressed Sinner; that whosoever believes,
might not perish, but have eternal Life. John 3.14, 15, 16.

Q. How else by the Manna?

A. That as the Manna fell for all Israel to gather, and be nourished in the
eating of it; so Jesus Christ came, the true Bread from Heaven, to give his
Flesh for the Life of the World, that all those that believe on Jesus Christ,
and feed on him by Faith, might be nourished up to eternal Life, John 6.51.

Q. How else does it appear?

A. By the Testimony of an Angel, saying, Fear not, I bring you glad Tidings,
which shall be to all People; for unto you is born this Day, in the City of
David, a Savior, Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10, 11, 12.

Q. How else?

A. Immediately a Heavenly Host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, Peace, good Will toward Men, Luke 2.13, 14.

Q. How else does it appear?

A. By the Testimony of all the Prophets, Acts 10.47. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in him, should have remission of
Sins.

Q. How else does it appear?

A. From the Testimony of Christ, who says, The Bread which I give, is my
Flesh; which I give for the Life of the World, John 6.51. By the Testimony of
his Apostles, who thus judge, that if one died for all, then they which live,
should not live to themselves, but unto him that died for them, and rose again,
2 Cor. 5.14. Who say, that he by the Grace of God, tasted Death for every Man,
Heb. 2.9. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due Time. And
this Truth, Paul was ordained a Preacher of among the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2.6, 7.
Who say, that he is not only a Propitiation for our Sins, but for the Sins of
the whole World, 1 John 2.2.

Q. What farther Means does he use to seek and save them that are lost, or are
by reason of Sin in a damnable Condition, if dying therein?

A. He rose again for the Justification of poor sinful Man, in which he has
given assurance unto Man of his Resurrection, and that there is a Day that he
must come to Judgment, Acts 17.31. Also appointing, that the Gospel should be
preached to every Creature, Mark 16.13, 16. Also affording his Spirit to
convince Men of Sin, if they believe not, John 16.8, 9. Also by the glorious
Benefits of his Ascension, did and does furnish Men with Gifts for the Work of
the Ministry, to be Ambassadors for Christ, to beseech Souls to be reconciled,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

Q. What farther Means does he use to bring Men to Happiness?

A. By virtue of his Intercession, Vengeance is staid from coming speedily and
suddenly upon Men, Luke 13.8. Isa. 53.12. Also his patient waiting upon Men
from time to time; Warnings given by his Severity upon some, promising
Happiness and Eternal Life, if they believe and obey; threatening Eternal Death
and Damnation, if they believe not, and are disobedient, Prove. 1.20. Jer.
13.27. Mat. 11.21. John 3.36. 1 Cor. 10.12.

Q. Did Jesus Christ die for all Men, that they might be saved?

A. Yea; for he complains, saying, Ye will not come unto me, that you might
have Life; and he came not to condemn the World, but that the World through him
might be saved: And John came to bear witness of that Light, that all Men
through him might believe, John 5.40. and 3.17. and 1.7.

Q. Are Men saved only by the Death of Christ?

A. They are said to be reconciled by his Death, but saved by his Life, Romans
5.10.

Q. What is that which renders Men Enemies unto God, and under his Wrath?

A. Evil wicked Works, Col. 1.21. Ephesians. 2.2, 11.

Q. What are the Works of the Flesh?

A. Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies, Envying,
Drunkenness, Murders, Reviling.

Q. Shall any such inherit the Kingdom of Heaven?

A. No. Gal. 5 19, 20. 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 5.6.

Q. Will not Omissions of Good hinder from Eternal Life, as well as Commissions
of Evil?

A. Yea; for Christ says, the not giving to him when he was an hungry; the not
clothing of him when he was naked; the not visiting of him when he was sick;
the not coming unto him when he was in Prison; he will take this want of Mercy
to his little Ones that believe, as done to himself; and these shall go away
into everlasting Destruction, Mat. 25.41, 42, 43.

Q. What is required of all Men guilty of committing Evil, or omitting Good?

A. Confessing their Sins before the Lord, and being humbled for them, with a
Resolution to forsake them, through a constant watchfulness against them. Prove.
28.13. Luke 24.27. Acts 17.30. 2 Cor. 7.10.

Q. What Rule has God left us to guide and direct, what to avoid, what to
believe, and what to do?

A. The Holy Scriptures, which are able to make the Man of God wise unto
Salvation, and to furnish him to every good Work; and are profitable for
Instruction, Correction, Comfort. Acts 24.14. and 17.11. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Q. How may it appear that they are the Mind of God, for us to walk by?

A. 1. By the wonderful Miracles wrought to confirm the Words spoken by Christ,
and his Apostles and Prophets, recorded therein. 2. By the constant fulfilling
of the Prophecies and Promises therein contained. 3. By the entire Purity of
the teaching of God contained in them, leading from Sin to Holiness, from Earth
to Heaven, from Death to Life, from a carnal State to a Spiritual, from
Darkness to Light. 4. From the wonderful preservation of them, that neither
Time nor Tyranny could extinguish. 5. By the sweet Harmony and Agreement
against those Evils that Men are most inclined to commit. 6. By the powerful
Operation of them, in converting Thousands.

Q. Wherein does their Profitableness farther appear?

A. By hiding them in the Heart, they keep from Sin, and the Path of the
Destroyer, and are a Means to bring to believe, Psalm. 119.9. Joh. 20.31. Romans
15.4. 1 John 3.9.

Q. When there is Faith and Repentance manifested, what does the Scripture
require such Men to do in the next place?

A. They are, after the manifestation of Faith and Repentance, to be baptized
with Water, into the Name of Father, Son, and holy Spirit, Mat. 28.19. Mar.
16.16. Act. 2.41. and 10.48. and 18.8.

Q. In what manner is this Ordinance to be administered?

A. We find no mention made in Scripture of Sprinkling being the manner; but
Christ, our glorious Pattern, came up out of the Water, and the Spirit of God
lighted on him as a Dove. Philip and the Eunuch are said to go down into the
Water; and when Philip had baptized him, they came both up out of the Water,
Acts 8.39. The Apostle Paul tells the Saints, speaking of the signification
of Baptism, as also the manner, says, Therefore we are buried with him in
Baptism; and burying is a covering the whole Man, putting the Party baptized
under the Water, Romans 6.2. Joh. 3.23.

Q. What does Baptism signify?

A. A death unto Sin, a rising unto newness of Life; that which the believing
Subject ought to have in his mind then, and to appear reckoning himself dead to
Sin, and one minding a new Life afterward, Romans 6.2, 7. Col. 2.12.

Q. What Privilege or Benefit has the Believer, by being ^aptized with Water
into the Lord's Name?

A. He is in the way to receive the precious Comfort of the Holy Spirit, and
Remission of his Sins, and to have fellowship with the Church in all other good
Duties, as being a visible Member thereof, added by Faith, Repentance and
Baptism; as appears by these Scriptures, Acts 2.38, 39. and 2.41. and 22.16.

Q. How many Baptisms be there?

A. Three.

Q. Which be they?

A. Baptism of Water, and of the Spirit, and of Afflictions.

Q. Who are the Administrators of VVater-Baptism?

A. Faithful preaching Disciples may administer it to Men and Women, Mat.
28.19. Acts 8.37, 38. and 8.12. and 22.16.

Q. Why may not Infants be baptized, seeing it is no where forbidden?

A. Revealed things belong to us and our Children; but we find not that
revealed as any part of the Will of God: also in doing that in Worship to God,
which we have neither Precept from God, nor Example from Christ, is
Will Worship; and that is forbidden, Levit. 10.2. Col. 4.23.

Q. Who are the Administrators of the Baptism of Affliction?

A. The World and the Devil, Rev. 2.10.

Q. Who are the Administrators of the Spirit's Baptism?

A. God and Jesus Christ only are the Administrators of that, Mat. 3.11. Joel
2.18.

Q. What is the Spirit's Baptism?

A. It is the extraordinary Measures of the Spirit given from God, whereby
Persons are enabled to work Miracles, speak with Tongues, Mat. 3.11. Acts 1.5.
compared with Acts 3.4. and 11.16, 17.

Q. What are we to look for after this short Life is ended?

A. Resurrection from the Dead, by the wonderful Power of God, and made
incorruptible, and come to Judgment, and receive according to the Works done in
the Body, either eternal Happiness, as the End of the Faith of the Lord's
People, or else eternal Damnation as the just Reward of all those that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.9. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Q. What must Men expect in this World in following Christ, leaving their vain
Conversation, and witnessing against the Evil of the Times and Days wherein
they live?

A. They must, in living Godly, suffer Persecution, and expect to have Men lay
their Hands on them, and put them into Prison; scourge them, and put them to
Death; despise their pure holy Profession with names of Blasphemy, Heresy,
Delusion; saying all manner of Evil falsely for his Name sake, Luke 6.22, 24.
Acts 24.

Q. What is needful then for Men to learn that intend to follow Christ in this
Vail of Misery?

A. Self-denial and Contentation, to labor to increase in Faith and Patience,
to see more in reproach for Christ's sake, than in a Kingdom of carnal sinful
Delights, Heb. 11.24, 25. Wisely to sit down and count the Cost, Luke 14.27, 28.

Q. What is, or will be the Danger of drawing back from Truth, when a Man once
professes it?

A. They had better they had never known the holy Commandment, than after to
turn from it; they are such in so doing, that God's Soul will have no pleasure
in; they shall also be filled with their own Ways, lie open to strong
Delusions, because they received not the Truth in the love of it; such as are
unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven, and are compared to Dogs returning to their
own Vomit; and wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness
for ever. Luke 9.42. Psalm. 125.5. 2 Pet. 2.20. 2 Thessalonians. 2. chapter Prove. 14.14.

Q. What Duties are the Church of Christ to observe, after they are gathered
by Faith, Repentance, Baptism, and intend to profess Christ?

A. They are to assemble together at their appointed Times, to edify and build
up each other in their most holy Faith; to provoke to Love and good Works, and
not to forsake the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some is,
Heb. 3.13. and 10.24, 25.

Q. What are they to do first of all when they come together?

A. To agree to make Supplication unto the Lord by Prayer, Intercession, giving
of Thanks for all Men, Kings, and all that are in Authority, that under them we
may lead a godly and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1,
2, 3.

Q. What is Prayer?

A. It is a reverend Asking of those Things we need, agreeable to the Lord's
holy Will, Jam. 5.13. Psalm. 69.13.

Q. What is Intercession?

A. It is a suing earnestly for Mercy for others unto the Lord, Jer. 7.16.

Q. What is Thanksgiving?

A. It is a being seriously sensible of the Mercies of God, either Temporal or
Spiritual, and glorifying of him by praising or giving Thanks unto God for
them, Luke 2.38. Acts 27.35.

Q. In what manner must we pray?

A. In Faith and Love, lifting up pure Hands without Wrath or Doubting, 1 Timothy
1.8. Jam. 1.6. Mark 11.25.

Q. Is this Duty privately to be observed?

A. Yea, much by every Christian Man, to watch unto Prayer, to go often about
the Work, and not to be weary of it; solemnly setting apart Time every Day for
the Work, that he may be kept from Evil, and enabled to do his Duty, Luke 18.1.
1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Mat. 6.6.

Q. What other Duties are required of Church Members?

A. Loving meek Admonitions given to those that transgress; condemning what is
good, with the most gaining winning Terms that may be, for the preventing of
Evil, and bringing to a godly Sorrow. Gal. 6.1. Rev. 2.1, 2. 2 Cor. 2.11.

Q. What ought the Reprover of Evil to do farther?

A. Examine himself, and cast out the Beam out of his own Eye, then will he
clearly see the Mote that is in his Brother's; not upbraiding with former
Evils, lifting up his Heart to God for a Blessing and Direction how to give it
to the Party offending, Mat. 7.3, 4. Luke 19.3.

Q. What farther?

A. If a private Offense, to tell the Offender between thee and him alone,
avoiding Talebearing: if he hear not, take another or two, that in the Mouth of
two or three Witnesses every Word may be established: if he hear not then, tell
the Church. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

Q. What then is the Church to do?

A. They are publicly to enquire into the Evil, and the guiltiness of the
Party sinning; and to manifest the Danger of Sin, with the vileness and
odiousness thereof; lovingly to beseech the Party offending, to turn from it:
And in case they see Stubbornness, plainly and sharply to reprove, and
afterward to account him as a Heathen Man and Publican, Mat. 18.17.

Q. What is the Duty of the Reproved?

A. To love them that do it; to esteem the Wounds of a Friend, better than the
Kisses of an Enemy; to account the Smitings of the Righteous, as a Balm to help
a Soul when wounded by Sin; to suspect and search their own Hearts, and find
out their own Iniquity; to confess to God, and to them, that they have
offended, and not to hide their Evils under any Pretense or Excuse whatsoever;
and then there is a Promise of Mercy, Prove. 28.13. Jam. 5.15. Prove. 9.8.

Q. What is the Man that has sinned, farther to do that he may have comfort?

A. He is to apply the Promise of Mercy; to remember that he has an Advocate
with the Father; to walk humbly and watchfully, both toward God and Man, 1 John 2.1. 2 Cor. 7.10.

Q. What then is the offended Brother to do?

A. Freely to forgive, pass by, and not remember nor upbraid the Person
afterward with his Evils; to desire the forgiveness of his Trespasses, as he
forgives his Brother his; and to pray that his Brother may be healed. Mat.
18.35. and 6.12. Jam. 5.16.

Q. What further is the Church of God to do?

A. To break Bread in remembrance of Christ's Body being broken; to drink of
the Fruit of the Grape, in remembrance of his Blood being shed for them, Matthew.
26.28. Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26.

Q. What is set forth to the believing Soul in this Ordinance?

A. The great Love of the Lord Jesus in dying for them, in redeeming them by
his Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18. in being broken for their Transgressions, wounded for
their Iniquities; becoming Sin, that knew no Sin, that they might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Isa. 53.2, 3.

Q. What else is to be minded in this Ordinance by the Believer?

A. A constant feeding upon the Benefits of Christ's Death by Faith, whereby a
Soul may discern Christ's Body broken to be Bread indeed, and his Blood being
shed to be Drink indeed, nourishing of the believing Soul to Eternal Life, John
6.51, 54.

Q. What farther is to be minded?

A. A New Testament dedicated in his Blood, and an end put to all the shadowing
Sacrifices in the Time of the Law, the middle-Wall of Partition being broken
down; and in the slighting of his Will and Testament, it is a slighting of his
Blood; according to Scripture, Heb. 10.28, 29. and 9.15, 16, 17. and 12.25.

Q. What is the Receiver of this Ordinance to do by way of Preparation?

A. To examine himself, to lay aside every Sin, and to keep the Feast with
unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth, 1 Cor. 5.8. and 11.28.

Q. What is the Administrator to do?

A. He is to take the Bread, and bless the Lord, and to seek a Blessing from
the Lord upon his Appointment; and to speak such words that may affect the
Hearts of the Receivers with the unspeakable Gift of God, even Christ; and
after to deliver it as that which is broken, and to be eaten in remembrance of
the Body of Christ being broken for them; and after the same manner to take the
Cup, delivering of it as that which does show forth the Blood of Christ, and
the New Testament in his Blood, which was shed for them, and many, for the
Remission of their Sins. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. Luke 22.19, 20.

Q. After the Ordinance is thus Administered, what is then to be done farther?

A. A solemn hearty praising, blessing, singing unto God, for his unsearchable
Riches of his Grace in Christ unto them, 1 Cor. 14.15: Mat. 26 30.

Q. What is the Danger of eating and drinking Unworthily?

A. They eat and drink Damnation to themselves, in not discerning the Lord's
Body, 1 Cor. 11.27.

Q. What is farther to be done by the Church?

A. If any speak or have received Understanding, Utterance, Boldness from the
Spirit; as they have received, every one to minister the manifold Graces of
God: If any speak, to speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 14.1, 29.

Q. May any gifted Brother in the Church preach?

A. Yea, for they may all prophesy one by one, that all may learn and be
comforted: And Christ says, No Man lights a Candle to put under a Bed, or a
Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that the Household may have Light. Mind his
Counsel in the next words, 1 Cor. 14.30. Mat. 6.15, 16.

Q. What farther is to be done by the Church of God in assembling together?

A. Contributing to the Necessity of the poor Saints, as God has prospered
them, 1 Cor. 16.2. Acts 6.1.

Q. In what manner ought this to be done?

A. He is to give cheerfully, willingly, avoiding grudging and vain Glory, 2
Cor. 9.7. Romans 12.13.

Q. What Encouragement have charitable Christians in this Work?

A. They may assure themselves, that in doing of it sincerely, Christ will take
what is bestowed upon his Members in their Necessities, as done to himself,
Mat. 25.36. as being the Blessed of the Lord; as lending to the Lord, and he
will pay again; as those that sow Liberally, shall reap Bountifully; for God is
able to make all Grace abound. Psalm. 41.1. Prove. 19.17. Mat. 25.36. 2 Cor. 9.6,
7.

Q. Who is the Church of God to do good unto in this respect?

A. To all, but especially to the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.10.

Q. What farther is to be done by the Church of Christ?

A. They are to look out from among themselves faithful Men, Men of Wisdom,
full of the Holy Spirit, qualified according to the Directions given by Paul to
Timothy, 1 Epist. 3.1. for the Work of Bishops and Deacons, Titus 1.6.

Q In what manner are they to be chosen, that are to be Elders or Bishops?

Q. They solemnly are to apply themselves by Prayer and Fasting unto the Lord,
for direction whom to choose, and as near as they can appoint such Men in the
Work, that are qualified for it, and sutably gifted to feed the Flock with
wholesome sound Doctrine; then to ordain them by the laying on of the Hands of
the Eldership, Acts 14.23. and 13.2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Timothy 3.

Q. What is the Work chiefly of the Elders?

A. To feed the Flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost has made them
Overseers; to watch for their Souls, as one that must give an Account for them,
Heb. 13.17. to provide seasonable Matter for them, both for Instruction,
Correction and Comfort; and to labor to hold forth sound Doctrine by a due
Study, and premeditating upon the Will of God, 1 Timothy 4.15. 2 Timothy 2.15. Mat.
24.45. And so giving every one their Portion in due Season, being Patterns or
Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

Q. Are the Deacons to be ordained by laying on of Hands?

A. Yea, so was the Example, Acts 6.6.

Q. What is to be done in order to choose them?

A. Their Qualifications are to be minded on the Churches part, and as near as
they can to choose Men according to the Pattern, 1 Timothy 3.8.

Q. What is their Work?

A. To over see the Poor faithfully, and carefully to distribute the Church's
Contribution, that the Poor may not justly complain, Act. 6.1, 2.

Q. What Care ought the Church to take of them that labor in the Word and
Doctrine?

A. To account them worthy of double Honor, not to receive evil Thoughts of
them without just Cause; nor any Accusation against an Elder, without two
Witnesses; and to obey them in their ruling, according to Christ's own Word, 1 Timothy 5.17, 19. Heb. 13.17.

Q. What further are they to do?

A. They that are taught in the Word, are to communicate to him that teaches
in all good Things, according as they shall be made free by the Power of the
Gospel, Gal. 6.6. Phil. 4.17.

Q. Are they thus to be contented to Labor?

A. Yea, and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, they shall receive a Crown
of Life, if Faithful, Free, Ready, Constant, Humble in the doing of their Work,
1 Pet. 6.2, 3, 4. So was Paul's Charge to the Elders, Acts 20. as also his own
Example, Acts 20.33, 34.

Q. What is the Duty of Saints in Affliction?

A. To pray for Mercy, to exercise Patience, to examine themselves, to loath
their Sin, with a Resolution to turn from it. Jam. 5.14. Lam. 3.40. Job 24.31.
Joh. 5.14.

Q. What are they to do further?

A. They are to send for the Elders of the Church, and they are to pray over
them, anointing them with Oil in the Name of the Lord. And there is a twofold
Promise: First, That the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick. Secondly, That if
he have committed Sin, it shall be forgiven him, Jam. 5.14, 15, 16. This
Promise of Recovery must be considered, if God have not otherwise determined;
for it is appointed for Men once to die: and if Recovery should always be of
sick Members, then none in the Church should die.

Q. Was this ever practiced by Christ's Disciples? etc.

A. Yea; they anointed with Oil, in the Name of the Lord, many that were Sick,
and healed them, Mark 6.13. Although there be no more in the Oil, than there
was in the brazen Serpent, yet being commanded by the Lord, there is Virtue in
it, and God's Promise is to his own Way: Therefore let none despise and run out
of God's Way, as Asa did, 2 Chronicles. 16.12, 13.

Q. What are Persons to do when merry?

A. They are to sing Psalms, and Spiritual Songs, according to their
sensibleness of the Lord's Mercy to themselves, or the Church of God, and to
speak forth their Experiences of God's Goodness, Mercy, either Spiritually or
Temporally enjoyed; for the Praise of God, for the raising up each others
Hearts, Exodus 15.12. Isa. 26.1. Jude 5. Luke 2.29.

Q. Is Singing, giving of Thanks, Praising, Blessing God, all one?

A. Yea; the Apostle's words make it so appear, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 17.

Q. What are Christians Duty to all Men?

A. To do to all Men as they would be done by, Mat. 7.12. Luke 6.31.

Q. What is their Duty to Enemies?

A. To pray for them that persecute them; to do good to them that hate them; to
bless them that curse them; to feed, if hungry; if thirsty, to give them Drink,
Romans 12.20. Mat. 5.44.

Q. How must they learn this Duty?

A. By considering that Christ laid down his Life for them, while Enemies, Romans
5.8. by a serious consideration, that God would have Love and Mercy showed to
them that are Evil, that Saints might be like God; that Men might that way be
provoked to turn unto the Lord; and if not provoked by the Lord's Patience and
Mercy, nor his Peoples, it will justly make their Torments insupportable, Mat.
5.45. Romans 12.20. even as sad as Coals of Fire upon the Head.

Q. What are Christians Duty to Magistrates?

A. To obey them in all things commanded by them, that are not contrary to the
Law of the Almighty God; not for Wrath, but for Conscience, sake.

Q. What must we do when we cannot actually obey?

A. Patiently suffering, as did the three Children, Daniel, Paul and Silas,
Peter and John, when Governors required that to be done which God forbad, or
commanded that to be avoided that God enjoined. Romans 13.5. Acts 4.19. and
16.21, 23. Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. and 6.10.

Q. How are Men elected, or chosen by the Lord?

A. They are said to be chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the World,
Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.2.

Q. How are Men in Christ?

A. By Faith, Romans 11.20, 23.

Q. How then comes Faith?

A. By hearing the Word preached, Romans 10.17.

Q. How comes the Word of Remission of Sins and eternal Life to be preached?

A. By the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Q. How came Jesus Christ to die for our Sins?

A. It was the Lord's free Love, in sending him into the World, John 3.16. Luke
24.47. 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 15.

Q. But seeing Men are chosen through the sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the Truth, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. How then are they chosen in him before
the Foundation of the World?

A. In the Purpose of God, they that believe are his Chosen.

Q. How make you that appear?

A. God calls things that are not, as tho they were, Romans 4.17. And so he
said to Abraham, I have made thee a Father of many Nations, yet not the Father
of one Child at that time, but Ishmael, Genesis 17.5. but not of Isaac, in whom
his Seed should be called, Romans 9.7.

Q. How does it farther appear that Men are Elect, according to the
foreknowledg of God, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, 1 Pet.
1.2. and yet are said to be chosen before the Foundation of the World, in
Christ?

A. Christ is called a Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the World; yet not
slain many thousand Years after, till he was a Man in the Flesh: so Men are
said to be chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the World; yet not chosen
till they have the Sanctification of the Spirit, and believe the Truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. He has set apart the Godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3.

Q. How are Men said to be ordained of old to Condemnation?

A. Not as Men, but as wicked ungodly Men, who turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness, denying our Lord Jesus Christ, and the only Lord God, Jude 4.

Q. How does this farther appear?

A. Because that God manifests upon Oath, that he desires not the Death of a
Sinner, but that he may turn and live.

Q. How does it appear that God does not ordain any to Destruction, but as they
are wicked and abuse his Grace?

A. By his lamenting the Ruin of them that have perished, and had the things
hid from their Eyes that pertain to their everlasting Peace, Matthew. 23.37. Luke
19.41, 42. Also by the Lord, minding, that Man's Destruction is of himself,
Hos. 13.9. Acts 13.46. Also for this Cause God shall send them strong
Delusions; and for this Cause he gave them up to vile Affections; so that there
was a Cause of their Ruin when they had a being, and not before they had a
being. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Romans 1.14. Psalm. 81.10, 11.

Q. What are Childrens Duty toward their Parents?

A. Children obey your Parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing unto
the Lord, Col. 3.20. compared with Ephesians. 6.1, 2. Exodus 20.12.

Q. What is the Danger of disobeying, slighting, or making light of Parents?

A. Some eminent Judgments have taken hold of those that have so done, and it
does much provoke the Lord.

Q. What Judgments have fallen upon Children, for making light of their Parents?

A. Ham, the Father of Canaan, for his Contempt of his Father Noah, was cursed,
and was Servant to the rest of his Brethren, Genesis 9.22, 23, 27.

Q. What else befell disobedient Children?

A. He that smote his Father, or he that cursed or reviled his Father, was,
according to the Law of God, to be put to Death, Exodus 21.15, 17. His Lamp to
be put out in obscure Darkness, that curses Father or Mother, Prove. 20.20.

Q. How does it appear that some eminent Judgment is likely to fall on them?

A. The Eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it,
Prove. 30.17. Disobedience to Parents is reckoned up among the Sins that God
has punished, Ezekiel. 22.7, 14. among the Sins that God will punish; and that
which makes the Days with other Evils perilous, 2 Timothy 3.2.

Q. Are Parents to be obeyed in any thing actually, that contradicts the Mind
of the Father of Spirits?

A. In this respect we must honor God more than Father or Mother, or
Governors; as Christ says, Call no Man Father, for one is your Father, which
is in Heaven, Mat. 23.9.

Q. What Privilege have those Children that are obedient to their Parents in
the Lord?

A. It is called the first Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6.3. God blessed
the Rekabites, the Sons of Jonadah, and honored them highly, because they did
not violate their Father's Command, but observed it, Jer. 35.5, 6, 7, 8, 9:
compared with the 18 and 19 verses.

Q. What was done to the Children that mocked the Prophet because of his bald
Head?

A. They were cursed; and two Bears came forth out of the Wood, and slew forty
two Children, 2 Kings 2.23, 24.

Q. What may this Judgment of God teach Parents?

A. Much; to caution and instruct their Children to take heed of despising,
reproaching or mocking any, though wanting any thing in Person or Substance
that others enjoy.

Q. What was done to Gehazi for Covetousness and Lying?

A. The Leprosy of Naaman the Syrian clave to him and his Seed for ever, and he
went out white as a Leper, 2 King. 5.25, 27.

Q. What was done to Ananias and Saphira for lying?

A. They fell down both dead at the Apostles Feet, Acts 5.1, 2, 3.

Q. What must be the Portion of Liars?

A. They shall have their part in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, that
tormenteth for ever and ever, Rev. 21.8.

Q. What did Moses say to the Brethren that strove with each other?

A. Rebuked them, saying, Wherefore smitest thou thy Fellow? And Abraham said
to Lot, when their Herdsmen were at strife, Let there be no Strife between me
and thee, for we be Brethren; Exodus 2.13. Genesis 13.8. It was the Charge of
Joseph to his Brethren, saying, See that you fall not out by the way, Genesis
49.24.

Q. What is the Duty of Servants to their Masters?

A. Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear; not only to the Good and
Gentle, but also to the Froward, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21.

Q. But what Service ought a Person to perform to those whom he engages to
serve?

A. Diligently, faithfully, humbly behaving himself in his outward Business;
avoiding Eye-service, purloyning, or taking little Matters without Consent or
Knowledge of his Master, or stubbornly answering again; or despising or
slighting of them, because they are Brethren. Ephesians. 6.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 6.1.
Titus 2.9, 10.

Q What Encouragement has a Servant to be subject to the Froward, to be
Faithful, to be Humble, Diligent, avoiding Eye-service, not answering again?

A. The Grace of God in sending his Son to die, teaches those Lessons, Titus
2.11. also knowing, that whatsoever good Thing any Man does, the same he shall
receive of the Lord, whether Bond or Free. Also the Law of Equity, which the
Law of God gives a being unto, would have Servants do as they would be done by;
and so Masters to deal by their Servants, as they would have their own
Children, when they come to be Servants, dealt by; considering those words,
Mat. 7.2. Mark 4.24. What measure you meet, shall be measured to you again:
Therefore let Master and Servant, Father and Child, all prepare according to
the Measures of Knowledge received, doing the Will of God from the Heart.

And this shall be the Conclusion of the Matter, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man, Eccles. 12.13. Remember thy
Creator in the Days of thy Youth: say daily, What am I, what do I, whither go
I? Thy last Hour, and Eternal Judgment, do not forget.

THE END.
APPENDIX.
May 1693.
BEing desired by Brethren to reprint this short Catechism; and moved thereto
at the Association of several Messengers and Elders assembled together at
Nantwich, April 19, 1693. And looking upon my poor Endeavors to be far short
of what might be done in order to the instructing of Youth, and what some have
done; yet in answer to the desire of that Christian Assembly, and the fervent
Desires of many in the Countries, I have been made willing to cast my Mite
again into the Treasury of the many Endeavors, to promote the instructing of
Youth in the things mentioned, agreeable to the Will of God, in this short
Catechism; and leave the Matter therein to the Acceptance of some, and the
Censures of others; but the Truth therein contained to the blessing of him that
ordains Strength out of the Mouths of Babes; and can make it profitable to
those that without Pride or Prejudice consider of the Answers to each Question,
grounded upon the Holy Scriptures.

I have briefly added an Epistle to be seriously considered by young Men and
Women, in twelve Particulars: Which I do hope may be profitable in this Day,
when so much Pride, Profaneness, and slighting the Duties of their particular
States, that they are liable to in this poor mortal Pilgrimage; begging of God
it may be a Blessing to some, and the Counsel of God live upon their Souls,
when I, by reason of Decays, must shortly be in the dark shade of the Grave,
where there is no Work to be done for the Honor of God, and Good of poor
Souls, whom the great God has so loved, that he has sent his Son to die for
them, that they might live to him. Joh. 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.15.

The Things spoken a little unto are these.

I. To young Christians, as Servants. II. To their Estate as Freemen. III. To
their Estate, as believing and obeying Christ. IV. As to the sad Estate of Men
not believing nor obeying the Lord Jesus. V. As to a married Estate, and being
in a dear conjugal Union. VI. As to the State of some single and unmarried.
VII. As to your State, if Prosperity attend. VIII. As to your State, if
Adversity attend, or a poor Condition. IX. As to your State, if persecuted for
Righteousness sake. X. As to the Duty in preparing for Death. XI. Consider of
the Judgment to come. XII. Be much in every Condition, praying and praising of
a good God.
I. Then to consider as a Christian Man or Woman, as a Servant. Remember God's
Eye is on you, tho your Master's Eye is off you. Remember, Souls, if you be
faithful, humble, diligent, God will reward you, tho your Masters should abuse
you. Remember the wise Man's words, There be four things that disquiet the
Earth; one is a Servant when he rules, Prove. 30.22.

Consider well the faithfulness of Jacob to Laban as a Servant, Genesis 21.38, 39.

Consider the faithfulness of Joseph in Potiphar's House; and how God was with
him, Genesis 39.1, 2, 3, 4.

Consider the faithfulness of Daniel, that the Enemies could have nothing
against him but in the Matters of his God, Dan. 6.4, 5.

Take heed of a lying Tongue, vain Company, or giving way to youthful Lusts;
have an Eye to God's All-seeing Eye, Genesis 39.9. at all times and in all places;
worship him according to his Will revealed in his holy Word: And then it will
be your Happiness, tho Masters oppose you: your Bodies stand engaged in
temporal Service to your Masters, but your Consciences stand engaged to God in
the Matters of Faith and Worship only to serve God. 1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought
with a Price, be ye not the Servants of Men. A wise Servant shall have rule
over a Son that causes shame; and shall have part of the Inheritance among the
Brethren, Prove. 17.2. Make Conscience of your Master's Business, as if it were
your own.

II. Consider, in the Fear of God, to mind your Duty as Freemen, then looking
upon your selves to be the Lord's Servants, using your Liberty so as to honor
him. Some young Men have had some sweet Appearances of Piety, minding the
things that may lead to Glory and an everlasting Kingdom; and yet have lost
their Convictions, and slighted Truth, and the Ways of Christ, and not prized
his Word: Therefore receive these Cautions, and take heed of vain Company; it
has been the Devil's Bait to destroy thousands; O stand not in the Way of
Sinners. Consider seriously of these Scriptures, Prove. 4.14. Psalm. 1.1. Prove.
13.20. 1 Cor. 15.33. Take heed of prayerless graceless Yokefellows, for
sinister worldly lustful Ends; put Snakes into your Bosom, that will rather
sting you than comfort you; hinder you in your Duties, than further you in
Piety: This was the Sin of the old World, Genesis 6.2. This drew away Solomon's
Heart from God in his old Days, 1 Kings 11.4. Therefore in this Case be much in
Prayer, and a divine heedfulness in minding Religion more than Riches, and
Piety more than Portion, and meek Disposition more than gorgeous Apparel, and
Discretion more than outward Jewels. Consider of Prove. 31.30. 1 Cor. 7.39. Be
careful in buying and selling, of doing as you would be done by; avoid vain
Words. Remember the great Oracles of Heaven, Do Justly, love Mercy, walk Humbly
with thy God, Mic. 6.8. O think on these things with great reverence, of that
God that enjoins them, and in whose Hand is thy Breath.

III. Consider, young Men, of the Necessity of true Faith. And know this is the
Work of God, That you believe on him whom he has sent, John 6.29. even on
Jesus Christ; close with him as your Priest, Prophet and King. O it is blessed
Jesus that makes an Atonement by his precious Blood: O joy in God, and in the
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom you by Faith receive the Atonement, Romans 5.11. It Is
he that is a perfect Sacrifice, Heb. 7.19. In his Name Repentance and Remission
of Sins is commanded to be preached among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem,
Luke 24.47. They being great and grievous Sinners, yet they must have the offer
and Call to Repentance, and the gracious tenders of Remission of Sins in his
Name. O Soul, consider, it is he that died for thee, that thou might live to
him, 2 Cor. 5.15. O Soul, it is he that God has set forth to be a Propitiation
for Sin, through Faith in his Blood, Romans 3.25. O it is his Soul that became Sin
for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.
It Is his Righteousness that is declared for the Remission of Sins that are
past, through the Forbearance of God; Romans 3.25. It Is he that Angels come to
proclaim, like an Herald from Heaven, saying, Glory to God in the Highest,
Peace and Good will toward Men. O let the Consideration of his Love in
redeeming thee by his precious Blood, lead thee to say, Lord, what would
thou have me to do? And mind his pure Word for direction in thy Duty, that is
preserved, recorded, and was confirmed with diverse Signs and Miracles, and
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 2.3, 4, 5. He that will have a Faith that is not
attended with conformity to the Will of God, and Sayings of Christ, will be in
a Storm, like a House without a Foundation. Therefore, Souls, hold fast the
Doctrine of the Holy Apostles of our Lord, Acts 2.42. And be mindful of the
Commandments of the Apostles of Christ, as well as to be mindful of the Words
of the Holy Prophets, 2 Pet. 3.2. which are by faithful Men to be kept till the
coming and appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5.21. and 6.13, 14. Rev. 3.10.
John 20.31. Labor to have such a Faith that leads to conformity to Christ,
both in Heart and Life: For the Devils believe there is a God, a Christ; and
they tremble at God's infinite Power and Majesty. And you young Men and Women,
under the Riches of his Goodness, and believing the unsearchableness of his
Mercy and Grace in a dear Savior bestowed on you, are concerned greatly to
obey him; consideringthat he will shortly come in flaming Fire, to render
Vengeance upon all those that under his Calls of Grace matter not. See 2 Thessalonians.
1.8. Romans 2.4. Does he say, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved;
and he that believes not, shall be damned? If Baptism be that which is to
follow Faith, do not slight Christ in that Duty. Cornelius is promised by the
holy Angel, that in sending for Peter, he shall tell thee what thou ought to
do, Acts 10.5, 6. You find Peter commands Water Baptism to those that had
received the extraordinary Measures of God's Spirit: Consider Acts 10.47. So
that this may be fairly concluded, that angels are subservient to the Gospel
Ministration: For Peter had, with the rest of the Apostles, the Commission of
Christ given to them, by him that had all Power in Heaven and Earth, Matthew.
28.19, 20. So Saul, after the Lord met him as he was going to persecute the
People of God; and upon his Question, Who art thou, Lord? The Answer is, I am
Jesus! O Jesus, a Savior; and thou persecutest me in my Members and Followers.
Upon hearing this Voice, he falls down trembling, and says, Lord, what
would thou have me to do? Go to Ananias, he shall tell the what thou must
do. Ananias had a Vision, and is by the Lord sent unto Saul, and directed unto
the Street, and to the House, even to Judas, to enquire for one Saul of Tarsus;
who was observed by the Lord to e praying. See Acts 9.6. compared with ver. 10,
11. and when he came, laid his Hands on him, and tells him, Jesus that
appeared to him by the Way, sent him to him, that he might receive his Sight,
and be filled with the Holy Ghost: And immediately there fell Scales from his
Eyes, and he received Sight forthwith; and arose, and was Baptized, Acts 9.18.
compared with Acts 22.16.

O Souls, you that have not yet conformed to this blessed Duty, you are greatly
concerned to put on a holy Profession of Christ, by submitting to holy Baptism,
Gal. 3.27. and minding the Errand of that holy Duty all your Days, viz. a dying
to Sin, and rising to newness of Life, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. Col. 2.12. For if
Baptism be submitted to, and not the End or Errand of it minded, it is like a
Sword of a Magistrate without Justice, and like a Sign without having any thing
within: for the Church of England say right, That Baptism is an outward Sign of
inward Grace, but none of this they can behold in an Infant, that they say is
by Name a Child of Wrath; or many of them say so: it is like Seals without
minding the Conditions specified; or like a Soldier listing himself under his
Captain, and after refusing his Commands in fighting against his Enemies; which
things will not be born by Men.

O Souls, do not slight the Will of God in point of Duty in this respect, and
all others commanded by your Lord; for know, That Faith without Works is dead;
And would you be content with a dead Faith in a dying Hour, and in the Day of
your Account? Consider James 2.19. compared with the 26th Verse.

I speak the more to this Duty, because some have changed both the Subject and
the Manner: Others cry down this and other Ordinances, as if ceased: Others
live below what they profess in this righteous Service. I could say much to the
Danger of falling under such Delusions, which the good Lord keep you from.
Surely we may cry out with the Prophet, It Is time, Lord, for thee to work; for
Men make void thy Law. Therefore mind those Duties that relate to that blessed
Privilege, of having a Place in God's House; for they are blessed that dwell
there, Psalm. 27.4. and 84.4. Acts 2.42. Esteem others better than your selves;
walk humbly; prize Gospel-Opportunities, slight not assembling with the Church
of Christ, Heb. 10.22, 23.

Labor after such a Faith that pacifieth the Heart: I may assure you, in the
Fear of God, and in the Truth of God, this is also a Faith of a right kind,
Acts 15.10. When the Faith you have in Christ, in dying for your Sins, leads
you, and works Death in you to your Sins, it is Faith of a saving Nature, Titus
2.11, 14. Gal. 1.4. O Souls, when there is such a Faith that believes Promises
and Prophecies, though Providence seem to contradict them, as if such things
should never be, Romans 4.17, 18.

O Souls, consider of the Necessity of Faith:

It Is that which, laying hold on the Blood of Christ, justifies, Romans 5.1.

It Is that which overcomes the World, and the Devil, Joh. 5.5. I Pet. 5.3.

It Is that which will assure you of Eternal Life, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 5.20.

It Is Faith in Christ that makes your Prayers acceptable with God, James 1.6. 1
John 3.22, 23.

It Is that which is the just Man's Life, Heb. 10.38.

It Is that which is the poor Man's Riches, James 2.5.

It Is that which makes good Works acceptable and rewardable, Heb. 11.4.

And without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

IV. Consider the sad State of not believing with a Faith of a right Kind.

1. No Remission of Sins. O dreadful is that Soul's State that dies an
Unbeliever, the Wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36.

2. No Relation to God as a Son without Faith. O to come to a Deathbed, and to
Judgment, and be no Child of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, will be dreadful.

3. No access to God, nor no acceptance with God without Faith, Heb. 11.6.

4. No resisting of Satan without Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. Unbelief slights Christ as
Priest, Prophet, and King: Matters not his Blood to cleanse the foul Soul, nor
his Righteousness to clothe thy naked Soul; it lays thee open to the Motions of
the Devil, to his Instruments, in all obscene, lewd, filthy Words and Actions,
dreadful Intemperance, Lying, Swearing, Deceit, Hypocrify, Envy, Wrath, and all
manner of Pride, Vainglory, etc. listening to the Apostles of the Devil;
Factors of Hell in their filthy flesh-pleasing Songs and profane Ballads; and
all the black Guard that wait on the Devil, rejoice at thy not mattering what
he commands, and can run into what he forbids.

5. Unbelief makes God a Liar. O woeful Impudence! He that believes not God,
has made him a Liar, because he believes not the Record he gave of his Son, 1
John 5.10, 11. And this is the Record he gives of his Son, He has given to us
Eternal Life. And the not closing with Christ, is to reject the Lord's designed
Way of Salvation; to prefer the Light within to be our Savior, or Conviction
to be our Savior, or our own Works to be our Savior, is to set up Idols in
our Hearts, instead of our only dear Redeemer, that has done that for every
Man in his own Body, being a perfect Sacrifice for Sin, by bearing our Sins in
his own Body on the Tree. This ought to be applied by Faith inwardly, and works
a change both in Heart and Life, and teaches to deny all Ungodliness, and to
live to him soberly, righteously, and godly.

It Is in him that the Father declares he is well pleased, Mat. 17.5.

It Is in him that poor Sinners are called to Behold; saying, Behold, Behold me
to a Nation that is not called by his Name, Isa. 65.1. and 53.6.

It Is he that is lifted up, even as Moses lifted up the brazen Serpent; that
whosoever believes on him might not perish, but have Eternal Life, John 3.14,
15. the true Christ of God, God and Man; and to reject him, is to stumble at
him that God has designed by Faith in him to be thy Savior, Romans 9.32, 33.

V. Young Men and young Women, as to your single State, or unmarried; mind what
is offered to consideration in the third State of Life frees from many
Encumbrances. Take heed of pretending Love, where there is nothing in true
reality intended; for God is the Avenger of such wicked hypocritical Dealings
in any Matter: and then in such a Matter and Case, see 1 Thessalonians. 4.5, 6. And
though good Paul could wish that all where as he; yet from those natural
Inclinations that are in some, it is better to marry than to burn in Iustful
Desires. I shall in this Case say, as our Lord says of some that make
themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake, He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it. Mat. 19.12. 1 Cor. 7.9.

VI. As to your State as married. O consider of your Duties in that near and
dear Union, laid down in several divine holy Directions in Scripture.

1. Remember your Wife is Flesh of your Flesh, Bone of your Bone; and Christ
says, They twain shall be one Flesh, Matthew. 19.5.

2. Remember they are the weaker Vessels, and give honor to them, 1 Pet. 3.9.

3. Remember a good Wife is from the Lord; prize them very highly, that are the
Benedictions of your glorious Creator; see Prove. 19.14. and 18.22. she is a
great help Meet to poor Man; she is like the Merchant's Ship, she fetches her
Food from far, fetches former and latter Experiences, and strengthens Hope in
God under present Difficulties; she fetches the Counsel of Heaven in divine
Laws; the Comfort of Heaven in great and precious Promises: Thou must depend in
a lower sense, upon her Loyalty, Care, Diligence, Chastity: see Prove. 31.11th
Ver. compared with the 14th. The Law of Kindness is in her Mouth, Prove. 31.26.

4. Love her in Reality, as Christ loved his Church, so as to support, nourish,
comfort, avoiding Bitterness in Words or Actions, Col. 3.19.

5. Labor to live with her as a Man of Knowledge, in much Wisdom at all times,
affording Instructions in Meekness, and by good Examples of Piety, in holiness
of Heart and Life, provoking of them to Love and good Works, but not to Strife.
O Soul, let there be no Strife, except ye strive who shall be most holy, most
humble, most zealous for good Matters, most charitable, and most self-denying.

6. In these things live together as Heirs of the Grace of Life, that your
Practice be not hindered. Remember that the Wife is called the desire of the
Eye; and Job says, I have made a Covenant with mine Eyes, why then should I
look upon a Maid? Job 31.1. Ezekiel. 24.16. Give not way to lustful Desires after
any other, nor to evil Concupiscence; and deal not treacherously with the Wife
of thy Covenant. This was a Sin of old, that tho some covered his Altar with
Tears, he regarded them not; see Mal. 2.13, 14. Remember thou must as an
Husband and as a Wife give an Account to God how thou have lived in thy
relative Duties toward her, and she toward thee. And therefore you Wives
labor after the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit: See that you reverence
your Husbands, and in your Virtues be as a Crown to them, 1 Pet. 3.4. Ephesians.
6.22, 24. Prove. 12.4. O do no unseemly things, in Words or Actions, to be as
Rottenness in his Bones, Prove. 12.4. Remember he is thy Head, and yet thou art
concerned in Matters of Faith and Worship, there to own God and Christ above
the dearest Relation in the World.

VII. If you have Prosperity in outward things, consider;

1. It comes not from the East or from the West, but from the Lord of the whole
Earth, Psalm. 75.6, 7.

2. All things here are uncertain and unsatisfying, and soon taken from you, or
you from them, Eccles. 5.10. Prove. 23.5.

3. You are Stewards with what God puts into your Hands, and must shortly give
an Account, Jam. 5.1, 2, 3, 4.

4. If you have not true Wisdom to use it, you may be destroyed with it: Prove.
1.32. The Prosperity of Fools destroys them. Psalm. 73.12.

Consider, the World is like a Lottery: some come into it with their Heads full
of Winnings, and go out of it with their Hearts full of Losings. Take heed of
being lifted up with Pride, under Riches or Honor: Consider, Pride goes
before Destruction; and an haughty Spirit before a Fall, Prove. 16.18. Remember,
he that traveled upon the highest Stage of this World's Glory, and had Wisdom
to find out the Excellency of natural Things, from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the
Hysop on the Wall, and to make trial of all things for satisfaction under the
Sun, 1 King. 4.33. Yet in all his great Enjoyments, he proclaims, All was
vanity and vexation of Spirit. If Prosperity attend, take heed of Covetousness,
Pride, Uncharitableness. O do Good in the World, with the things of the World.
Take heed, dear Souls, of abounding with Superfluities, while some of God's
Children want Necessaries. The divine Charge is given to those that are Rich,
That they be not high-minded; that they trust not in uncertain Riches, but in
the living God. Be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up for
themselves a good Foundation for the time to come. This way to lay out, even to
do good to all, especially to the Household of Faith, is the way to lay up, 1 Timothy 6.18, 19. And the liberal Soul shall be made fat, Prove. 11.25. O be using
the World as Strangers do their Inn; they count a Bait no Let. O let all the
Providence of God attending you, as to Health, Strength, as to Trade, as to
yearly Revenues, as to a good Wife or good Husband, as to good Children, as to
Reputation, lead you in things given, to admire the Giver; and to love things
given so far, as you may honor the Giver. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy
Substance; and there is promised an Increase. O Soul, if the Streams be sweet,
what is the Fountain! And if the Creature be sweet, what is the Creator! O
Souls, serve God with all, labor to love God above all; and be content to be
at his dispose in all: 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Mat. 10.37. Isa. 39.7, 8. Job 1.21.
Consider, in great Prosperity you live upon Alms; have nothing but what the
great God gives you, and live daily on his bountiful Benevolence; and as he
descends with Favors to you, so do you ascend with Thankfulness to him: Give
us this Day our daily Bread, our Lord teaches us to pray; and cannot we live
well one Day without Bread? then let us ask it every Day, and be thankful for
it. David rose at Midnight to praise God; but it is hardly some Men's Midday
Work. Hide not your Face from your own Flesh: While some poor Relations are in
Want, if thou have Prosperity, look not with a scornful, but with a pitiful Eye
upon them; Thy own Friend, and thy Father's Friend, do not forget, Isa. 58.7.
Prove. 27.10. Job in his Prosperity caused the Widow to sing; and pulled the
Poor out of the Jaw-teeth of the Wicked: And the Blessings of them that were
ready to perish, came upon him; read the 31st Chapter of Job. O how has the
Abuse of Prosperity, and growing Proud, overturned Sodom? Ezekiel. 16.49. brought
down that great Monarch Nebuchadnezzar, overturned Belshazzar; smote Herod with
Worms for taking the popular Applause of the People, who died immediately, Acts
12.23. Those that slight Christ's Work and Way for the love of these worldly
things, shall never taste of his Supper, Luke 14. 18-24.

How have some, for the love of this World, and the things therein, forsook the
Assembly of the true Church, and the divine Institutions; and fallen in with a
false Church, a false Ministry, and countenanced a company of vain Traditions
in the pretended Worship of God; and for fear of humane Fury, fell under the
Fury of divine everlasting Vengeance; and are in danger (without true
Repentance) for rejecting Light, to be cast into utter Darkness? O Souls,
tremble at that Word that says, They shall drink of the Lord's Wrath, poured
out without Mixture, Rev. 14.9, 10.

Consider Moses, Heb. 11.24. the three Children, Dan. 3. Daniel's Case, Peter
and John's Case, Acts 4.5. Antipas his Case, and the Church's Courage in that
Day, Rev. 2.13. The Case of Stephen, and all the blessed Martyrs. Some were in
great Prosperity outwardly, but did not neglect what God commanded, nor
cowardly comply sinfully, but hazarded all, even Life it self.

Watch and pray in these things, that Prosperity be not your Ruin, by
complying with sinful Temptations, while you shall dare to put a Blot upon
God's [Not:] Touch not, taste not, handle not, after the Commands and Doctrines
of Men, Col. 2.21.

VIII. As to Adversity, or being in a poor low Condition in this World,
remember these things:

1. That Godliness with Contentment is great Gain. As it is not the bigness of
the Cage that makes the Bird to sing, without a secret Instinct; so it is not
having little of this World that should cast thee down, since commanded by the
Lord to be content with such things as ye have, Heb. 13.5.

2. Consider, A little with the Fear of God, is better than the Riches of many
Wicked, Psalm. 37.16. Consider Eccles. 4.6. Prove. 16.8. Consider, dear Souls,
it is better to be in the meanest Condition in this World that possible may be,
with the Enjoyment of Christ and Truth, than in the highest Condition without
him and it: In a word, it is better to suffer with him, than reign without him:
Consider, it is better to be with a Lazarus in his Rags and Sores, keeping
Integrity, than to be with a Dives in his Riches and Robes, in a State of
Wickedness and Sensuality, Psalm. 73.12. Luke 15.19, 20, 21, 22.

Have some their Beds of Ivory, stately Places of Rest? O but, poor Believer,
have thou Rest from the damning Guilt of Sin? Rest from the Curse of the Law?
Rest from an accusing Conscience, through Faith in Christ? Mat. 11.28. O
would thou part with this for theirs? Surely no.

Have they the Fat of the Flock, and their curious Dainties? And what if thou
have mean Food and coarse Bread, but art partaker of Christ by Faith as the
true Bread of Life, and art nourished by him up to Eternal Life? John 6.51, 54.
O do thou enjoy the Fullness of God's House, Christ as held forth in his Word
and Ordinances? Surely, poor Soul, thou could not part with him for all the
Epicurean's Dainties.

Have they their Wine in Bowls, and thou the Water of Affliction? yet art
refreshed with his Love, that is better than Wine, yea better than Life, Cant.
4.10. O how has the Wine of his Love cheared thy wounded Spirit, when nothing
else would avail! Psalm. 63.3.

Do Men in their Pomp chant to the Sound of the Viol, and have their melodious
Sounds? O but, poor Soul, have thou heard the joyful Sound of Remission of
Sins, and Everlasting Life through a dear Redeemer, and art framing thy Soul
and Body to the teaching of this joyful Sound? O be content, thy Enjoyments are
far beyond theirs. Consider Psalm. 89.15. O the blessed sound of the Gospel in
the Benefits of his Death, Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession may make
thee exceeding joyful.

Poor Soul, have they their choice Ointments and Perfumes; and thou have thy
smoaky House and poor Enjoyments? Yet, Soul, consider, if thou have the
Anointings of God's Spirit, this is far beyond what they enjoy, 1 John 2.27.
The Spirit quickens, the Spirit comforts, the Spirit leads into Truth: Take
heed of that Spirit that leads from Gospel-Institutions and Commands, that is a
Cheat of the Devil. The holy Apostles say, He that is of God, hears us; and
hereby know we the Spirit of Truth from the Spirit of Error, 1 John 4.6. The
Spirit witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Sons of God; and seals us
to the Day of Redemption. And Soul, is not this far beyond all the pleasant
Artificial Savours in the World? Well, be content, Soul, if you have your Hell
here, and your Heaven hereafter, it is well enough: Rejoice in hope of the Glory
of God, Romans 5.2. Though poor in this World, yet if rich in Faith, thou art
happy, Jam. 2.5.

And now I beseech you, take heed of those things that bring some into a low
poor Estate in this World.

I shall give some Hints at some of them:

1. Beware of Slothfulness; this brings Poverty like an armed Man on some,
Prove. 6.11.

2. Beware of Suretyship: Why should thy Bed be taken from under thee? Prove.
6.1. and 22.27.

3. Take heed of lustful sinful Desires of strange Women; though their Lips
drop as an Honeycomb, such have been a Snare to many: A Dart has struck
through the Liver; and their Wealth has been in the House of Strangers, Prove.
5.3, 10.

4. Beware of rejecting of Instruction, or sober Reproof; this brings Poverty,
Prove. 13.18.

5. Beware of loving costly Superfluities, Wine and Oil, when there is no need
of them, Prove. 23.21. and 21.17.

6. Take heed of covetously withholding more than is meet in point of Charity,
to Objects of great Misery; this tends to Poverty, Prove. 11.24.

7. Beware of giving to the Rich, and withholding from the Poor, Prove. 22.16.

8. Take heed of delighting in the Company of vain Persons; such shall have
Poverty enough, Prove. 28.19.

9. Take heed of Oppression, though thou be poor, of oppressing the Poor: Prove.
28.3. It is like a sweeping Rain that leaves no Food.

Now I beseech you consider of these Cautions, that Men oft-times make
themselves poor by such things as ought to be avoided.

IX. Something briefly offered, in case it shall be your State to be
persecuted; which all that will live godly in this World must and may expect,
until that glorious Day come that God will make a new Heaven and a new Earth.

And as to your being persecuted for Righteousness-sake, either for doing what
God Commands, or for not doing what he Forbids:

1. Commit your Souls to God in well-doing; fear him, trust in him, let him be
your Fear and Dread, Isa. 8.13.

2. Rather in the forementioned Cases, choose to suffer than to sin.

3. Keep a good Conscience, for that will bear you up under all hard Trials;
Integrity will afford daily Joy, Acts 24.16.

4. Be purely suffering in a principle of Love to God and Christ, if ever you
would be owned by God and Christ; if otherwise, all Suffering may be nothing, 1
Cor. 13.3.

My Friends, give me leave, that have been five times in Prison for my Lord's
Cause, and sometimes beaten, and often fined, to beseech you to avoid these
things in suffering, if God permit Trials to come upon you.

1. Take heed of unbelief of Promises: O that Promise, If ye be reproached for
the Name of Christ, happy are ye, 1 Pet. 4.14. They that suffer for
Righteousness sake, happy are they, great is their Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.10,
11. They shall have in what they lose, an hundred fold in this present time,
and in the World to come Eternal Life, Mat. 10.30. Surely a faithful Sufferer
experiences sweet Comforts from God in the enjoyment of his Spirit, comfort of
his Promises, Providence waiting, great Grace attending. O the sweet Comfort
and Discoveries! when John was banished into the Isle of Patmus, or a place of
Death, he never met with the like Discoveries before, in order to a manifesting
in his fourfold Visions what should shortly come to pass; never the like
Discoveries before, Rev. 1.9. The three Children had a glorious Presence; in
the fiery Furnace they were preserved, and those that cast them in, were
destroyed; their Enemies convinced no God was like their God, Dan. 3.29. and
6.26. Daniel in the Lion's Den, an Angel guarding of him, Lions restrained from
hurting of him, the Informers destroyed before they came to the bottom of the
Den, Dan. 6.24. Paul and Silas in the Dungeon, their Backs bleeding, their Feet
in the Stocks, they at Midnight praising God and praying; the Prison shaking,
the enraged Jailer trembling, and he and his, after the Word was preached to
him, and all that were in his House, believing; and to Christ in holy Baptism
conforming. Thus you see there may be an hundredfold more than formerly was
enjoyed of divine Comfort and Strength, Acts 16.24, to 34. Discoveries,
Preservation, some out of weakness have been made strong. O consult, Soul, that
little Book of Martyrs, Heb. 11. Besides what shall be accomplished when the
Saints shall possess the Kingdom; yea, the greatness of it under the whole
Heavens shall be given to them, Dan. 7.27. Rev. 5.10. Psalm. 45.16. Rev. 20.4,
5, 6.

2. Souls take heed in a suffering Day of Self-confidence. When Self-denial
will help thee to be a faithful Martyr, Self-confidence will make thee but an
unfaithful Soldier, an impatient Sufferer, and a sinful Complier: much of this
I have seen in the Days of our late Trials. He that trusts his own Heart, is a
Fool, Prove. 28.26. Peter promised much out of a Temptation, but fell foully
under the Temptation. O stay on him that gives Strength to them that have no
Might, Isa. 40. ult.

3. Take heed of carnal Counsel in a suffering State. There are many will say,
Save your selves by complying; and leave off bearing their Testimony, and
comply, contrary to their Light, cowardly; God disowned, Conscience wounded,
Comforts clowded; and in saving themselves here, without infinite Mercy may
lose Eternal Life hereafter, Luke 9.24, 25.

4. Take heed of over-loving Self, or the World more than Christ and Truth; it
will bring you to a dreadful Day, in which you shall not be worthy of Christ.
Remember you are not your own, but were bought with his precious Blood, when
you deserved nothing but Wrath; and think not much to hazard your All for him.
Consider, the Cross is interlaid with the Crown. Love not the World, nor the
things (1 John 2.15.) that are in the World, neither equal with God, nor above
God; it will declare, if you so do, that the Love of the Father is not in you,
Mat. 11.37. Rev. 1.10.

X. O consider something as relating to the irresistible Decree of God, even
Death and Judgment, Heb. 9.27. O consider, it will not be long e're thou must
be struggling with thy last Enemy: O restless Death, when Weakness will be
attending, Strength failing, natural Spirits expiring, Death-Sobs attending,
Friends weeping, and you departing from the World, Friends and Relations: O
happy then, yea fully blessed, if dying in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. where John is
commanded to write it. O presume not upon a long Life, it is a great hinderance
to a good Life. O for God's sake, and for your eternal Welfare-sake, do not
forget your dying Hour, nor your latter End, lest you come down wonderfully,
and there be none to help you, Lam. 1.9.

1. God does affectionately wish it, Deuteronomy. 32.29.

2. God does graciously direct you to hear Counsel, and receive Instruction,
that ye may be wise in your latter End, Prove. 19.20.

3. Labor to live so as you would wish when your Eyes come to be closed, Prove.
5.11. Numb. 23.10.

4. Whatever your Hand finds to do, that is agreeable to the Lord's holy
Will, do it with all your Might, knowing there is no Work to be done in the
Grave, Eccles. 9.10.

5. Remember you must die; but the Time when, the Place where, the Manner how,
you know not. Evil falls out to Man, and he knows it not, Eccles. 9.12.

(1.) In order to your dying Hour, let Time and Duty go together, Mat. 24.46.

(2.) Let a holy Reverence of God attend you in all Actions, Places and
Conditions, 1 Pet. 1.17.

(3.) Let the Contemplations of God's Love in Christ to you, engage you to say
daily to your own Hearts, What am I? what do I? whither go I? O Souls, as it is
the Wisdom of Men to set their House in order, and to make their Wills in
disposing of what they have; so let it be thy Work to set thy Heart in order,
that thou may have nothing to do but to die when thou come to struggle
with thy last Enemy, and Time must be here no longer. O remember the golden
Sands of Time are running out apace, and the Glass of Time will never be
turned, till it be turned in eternal Weal or Woe.

XI. Consider of Judgment to come. O Soul, if Death take thee Secure, Carnal,
Hypocritical, Murmuring, unfaithful to thy Light, Disobedient or Lukewarm, or a
Backslider, or Covetous, or a Complier with some secret Sins; as Death takes
you, so Judgment will find you; and all the Manifestations of God to you shall
be discovered when the Books shall be opened: And no sooner the Judge shall
speak, but Conscience shall say, True, Lord; and God himself will be a swift
Witness against thy secret Sins, not repented of: Act. 3.19. Mal. 3.5.

Remember, this was one great Doctrine that the Apostles of our Lord were to
preach and testify, That it was he that was ordained of God to be the Judge of
Quick and Dead, Acts 10.42.

O young Man remember, for the Desire of thine Eyes, and the Way of thine
Heart, for these things God will bring thee into Judgment, Eccles. 11.9. O
Christians, grudg not one against another; yea, behold, the Judge stands at the
Door, Jam. 5.9. Have fervent Charity one to another, that is the Bond of
Perfectness; and be diligent, that ye may be found of him in Peace, without
spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3.14. Mat. 18.34, 35. O do not hide your Talents,
but improve your Measures given; and remember, it will be sad to have that
Sentence pass, Take that unprofitable Servant, cast him into utter Darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 25.30. O forget not to think
of his appearing, that will certainly render to every one according to his
Works, Mat. 16.27. Rev. 22.12. O Soul, think often of that Jesus that died for
you, will shortly come to judge you; the last Trump sounding, the Judge
descending, holy Angels attending, Graves opening, the Dead rising; Hypocrites,
Unbelievers, disobedient Persons, weeping, wailing; secret Counsels of all
Hearts shall be discovered: Therefore live in this present Day, with a holy
preparation for that Day, in taking heed to thy Thoughts, 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccles.
12.14. Take heed to thy Words, Mat. 12.36. O take heed of idle Words. Swear not
at all; it is forbidden, Mat. 5.34. Jam. 5.12. Take heed of Lying, Cursing,
Backbiting, Railing. Grievous Words stir up Wrath, Prove. 15.1. Look to your
Actions, and do not omit what God commands; nor dare to commit what he forbids.
Eternal Judgment is a Christian Principle, Heb. 6.2.

And now that ye may be helped to mind these things, I come to the last thing
propounded, and that is Prayer.

XII. O poor young Man, have thou cause to flee youthful Lusts, to follow after
Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, and keep such Company as call on God out
of a pure Heart? 1 Timothy 2.11. Have thou, poor Soul, a Devil to resist, a World
to over come, some Corruptions to mortify, a deceitful Heart to watch over, a
Gospel to obey, a Kingdom to obtain? O Souls, watch and pray; make Conscience
of secret Prayer, and be earnest for those things Jabez begged of God, 1 Chronicles.
4.10. For your encouragement, remember, He that seeks God early, shall find
him; O a blessed Promise! Prove. 8.17. Pray earnestly for the divine Operations
of the holy Spirit, with the blessed Fruits of it. Christ has promised, if
they that are evil, know how to give good things to their Children, how much
more shall your, heavenly Father give his Spirit to them that ask it? Luke
11.13.

O pray for Wisdom as Servants, to discharge your Duty in your Places, that the
Name and Doctrine of God be not blasphemed.

O pray for Wisdom as Freemen, that you may always be concerned in serving God
in true Holiness and Righteousness all your Days.

O pray for a Faith of a right kind, and say as the Apostles, Lord increase our
Faith; mind what Christ has done, is a doing, and will do.

As to a married State, pray for Wisdom to discharge your relative Duties;
Husband to Wife, and Wife to Husband, living in the Fear of God. As to your
State unmarried, devote your selves so much the more to wait on and serve the
Lord, if Virgin Disciples, as John the beloved Disciple is said by some Authors
to be, and holy Paul.

If in a prosperous Condition, beg a humble, thankful, charitable Heart;
remembering you are Stewards for God. And as to your State in meeting with
Adversity, beg Patience, Contentment; admire the least Mercy under the greatest
Misery, Lam. 3.22.

As to your State if persecuted; beg Wisdom, Courage, Constancy, of him that
gives Strength to them that have no Might.

As to your Duty in preparing for Death; O pray that you may have your Light
shining, your Lamps burning, and you like Men waiting for the coming of the
Lord, and be filled with his Spirit, waiting, praying for the blessed
Influences of the Spirit of God upon your Souls, using all the means you can to
obtain it. And if Messengers, hearing that you have received the Word, pray for
you that you may receive the Holy Ghost, join heartily with them; and in laying
gentle Hands on you, if you receive more of the Spirit, you will be more for
the Honor of God, the Comfort of your Brethren, and walk as Lights in the
World, and be as Salt in the Earth. O labor to have Salt in your selves, and
Peace one with another, Mark 9.50.

I shall close up this little Matter with those words, 1 Pet. 1.17. If you call
on the Father, who without respect of Persons judges according to every Man's
Work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear; Yea, give all diligence to
those seven things that lead to the Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1. consider 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11 verses. And labor to live so, as you may wish when your Eyes come to be
closed, and when you come to Judgment, Eccles. 11.9. and 12.14. And pray for
the Lord's Laborers, and I will beg that Truth may live in your Souls when I
am dead, and may shortly meet those that fear God, and keep his Commandments,
in never-ending Glory.

FINIS.

