THE KINGDOMS GRAND QVERE.

What warrant there is for such Proceeds about the KING.

Resolved by a Presbyterian MINISTER.

ALSO A Quere taken from the REPRESENTATION of the judgment of the Ministers
in the Province of LONDON. Delivered to the General, Jan. 18. 1648.

WITH Resolutions to them both for better satisfaction of tender Consciences,
that scruple the late Proceeds of the Parl. and of the Army with the KING.

Numb. 35.1.30, 31. And the Lord said, who so kills any, the murderer shall
be put to death. Ye shall take no satisfaction, but he shall surely be put to
death: So ye shall not pollute the land, for blood defiles the land. And there
can be no expiation for the bloodshed, but by the blood of him that shed it.

1 Kings 2.31. Fall upon him, that thou may take away the innocent blood that
be shed, from us, and from the Land.

LONDON, Printed by M.S. for H. Cripps, in Pope's Head Allie, 1648.

The Kingdoms Grand Quere about proceeds with their KING.
SIR,
YOU were pleased to ask me if Malignants had feed me, when I pleaded so for
the King. Take it as you please, I Will make bold to ask you, has not your
Benefice see'd you, that formerly you were for the King, and suffered under it,
and could plead as all other Ministers did.

1. That we must obey the King as Supreme, actively or passively.

2. That he that resists powers resists the Ordinance of God; For the powers
that are, are of God.

3. That the best weapons of Christians are Prayers and Tears, and that they
are called to suffer, not to rebel.

But now when you see the King as low, as David was, when his Soldiers were
ready to stone him: and that the Parliament has greater power, now you are for
the Parliament, yea and for the Army too, that now have their turn to do what
they list. O Tempora! O mores! Tempora mutantur, et nos mutamur in illis. This
may as truly be said of our English Clergy, as ever of any; There were never
greater Turn-coats then Black coats. In King Henry the eight's time, they
were all general first for the Popes supremacy, then for the Kings. 2. With
King Edward the sixth, they changed their Religion, and were Protestants. 3.
With Queen Mary, they were Papists again. And 4. with Queen Elizabeth, they
turn Cat in pa^, and of above 9400. Ecclesiastical promotions, not one hundred
of the Parsons stood firm, all the rest turned their Religion, before they
would be turned out of their Livings, as Cambden shows, in the year 1559. the
2. of Queen Elizabeth.

And now you, that were for Episcopacy, are all generally for Presbytery, on
the like ground: I wis, you say your conscience now is better informed: but let
me put some Queries to you.

1. What conscience have you to plead for the Rights of the Parliament, and of
the Subjects, and yet to deny or cut off the Rights of the King and his
Successors?

2. If the King be guilty of blood, as you say, so was David, so was Manasses
of very much blood: But what authority has man to depose the Lords Anointed
now, more then they had to depose David, or Manasses? will not God judge Kings?

3. And if you wrong the Lords Anointed, will you not bring Gods curse upon
you, and upon the Kingdom?

4. Are not other Nations like to come against us to ruin us and our Posterity?

5. Will you depose our King, before you have set up another King, or agreed
about one, to set all the Land together by the ears, and the longest sword
take all?

6. And lastly, shall not all our cries and miseries that you bring upon us
pierce the Heavens? and will not God hear, and curse you and your Posterity for
it?

I have done: you must bear with expressions from a heart full of bitterness:
And disdain not to show me, if you have ought to answer: Which if you do
not, I shall have cause to judge, it is because you cannot, and that you are
condemned of your own conscience.

January 25. 1648. Yours to serve you if you were for God and the King, etc.

Answer to the former letter.
SIR,
THough my time be short and precious, through urgent occasions, yet I must not
omit to return you an Answer, though but in brief, that have spoke your heart
and the heart of many; and that would count my silence disdain, disability, or
selfe-condemnation.

And first to the first, That Kings should be obeyed actively or passively. I
still do grant it generally in an ordinary way: and I must add that the Hebrew
(...) Melek, King, from (...) to rule; is He, or They that rule in a Kingdom
as Chief: as the Greek (...) Basileus (as it were the Basis or foundation of
the peoples right or welfare) of (...) to reign. I say this title King is
given in the Scriptures to all, and to any that reigned; whether it be one
King, or one Judge, as Moses is called King, Deuteronomy. 33.5. and the Judges are so
called, each of them, Judge. 17.6. Or secondly, if two had the chief rule, as
two Consuls in Rome; or three Tribuni Plebis; or Ten, called Decemviri; or if
one called Dictator or one called Caesar, or Emperor; or if one called Papa, in
a general Church Power, and then with such a Civil power. All these, I say,
in Scripture are called Kings: See Notes on Revel. 17.8. So all those in Rome
that succeeded Kings, are there called Kings. And the Ten Horns which are
called Ten Kings; The States of Holland are reckoned one, and the States of
Scotland another; (not excluding the late time of 1638. 39. when they cast off
Bishops and Ceremonies) Revel. 17. What Ruler or Rulers God and the People set
up to be Chief over them, during that time; these are to be obeyed in such
manner as is aforesaid, 2 Samuel 16.18. Whether it be King, (as in Rome, Tarquine
was King till they deposed him, and banished him for his villainy to Lucretia)
or two Consuls, which Rome put in stead of the King, or Caesar, who got the
Rule by the Army, etc. This not hindering, but that all people, except the Jews
(as in the answer to the second Quere) might alter their own Government, so
often as they had cause and power in their hands.

To your second, He that resists authority or power, sins. It Is true, be it
higher, or a petty Constable: but I may resist his force, if forcibly he would
rob me, or ravish or wrong me; it is no sin, if I can, to right my self.

To your third, Though Christians are to suffer as Christians, as the Apostle
Paul did; yet as freeborne, they may and should, as cause is, stand upon that
freedom, as the Apostle did, Act. 16. ult.

And to your fourth, It Is to be lamented, that the most Ministers have still
changed with the times; but you know, many go the broad way, (witness the
first Century of scandalous Ministers, justly cast out by this Parliament) and
few the narrow way to life: and that, as Rome and Babel was not built in a day,
so what is of Babel is known by degrees more and more, and so we are to change
for the better still. If any change to Presbytery not out of conscience, but
for by-ends, such God will judge. I confess I have formerly eyed preferment
here: but now through Gods mercy I do more eye better and enduring preferment.
And now to your Queries.

To your first, It Is granted, that Rights that are Divine, or Natural, no man
ought to deny or cut off: but positive rights may and sometimes ought to be cut
off: As Popes power in England, Abbots, Abbasses, Priors, etc. When such are
found inconvenient or hurtful; that power which gave them, and put them up,
whether Sword or Choice, the same power may, and should put them down again.

To your second, David and Manasses were not Kings only by positive, but by
divine express laws. First, David, 1 Samuel 16.11. Then David's Successors,
whereof Manasses was one for ever, 1 Chronicles. 17.11, 12.14. 2 Samuel 17.16. Psalm
18.50. 2 Kings 8.19. 2 Chronicles. 21.7. etc. So in the Sanhedrin were some of
David's house, till Christ came, who is King for ever, Genesis 49.10. with Luke
1.32, 33.27.63. with Numb. 36.8, 9. For otherwise the express repentance of
David and Manasses, could not satisfy the express law (without respect of
persons.) That the murderer must surely dye, and no satisfaction must be
taken. -- For blood pollutes the Land, and defiles it, and there can be no
expiation for the Land for blood, but by the blood of him that is guilty, Numb.
35.31, 32, 33, 34. Genesis 9.6. Rev. 13.10. Deuteronomy. 16.19. Now in our Land, either
is the Parliament chiefly guilty of the blood of many thousands, who sent to
attach the Kings Counselors, and then the King raised an Army near York: or
else is the King thereby chiefly guilty. The chiefly guilty of blood ought to
dye by the law of God, and of nature, though sometimes the guilty, are too hard
for others to punish, and escape for a time, as Joab did: Yet when such are
subdued, they must dye: as in 2 Samuel 3.29, 30. 1 Kings 2.5, 6.29.32.

To your third Quere: If you wrong the Lords Anointed, will not God curse, etc*

Answ. No Kings are by Scripture warrant called the Lords Anointed, but only
such as were Kings by Gods express rule, or expressly before named and
appointed by him; not any other Kings that were by positive law only.

Secondly, It Is no wrong to do justice impartially: but it is for a blessing
to a Kingdom, and a curse to neglect it, 1 Kings 2.32, 33. Number. 35.33, 34.
Ier. 5.1.5, 6.

To the fourth; Other Nations will come and ruin us. If God give quietness,
who then can trouble, Job 34.29. when judgment was done on Isreal's enemies,
then God gave them rest round about, 2 Chronicles 20.29, 30.

To the fifth; Will you depose our King, before you have another King? What
necessity has England more then Holland of a King? do all go by the ears
there? What approved Author blames them, or their Government, more then such as
have Kings. Or who blames Rome, that changed their Kings into two Consuls
yearly chosen, banishing their wicked King Tarquin for his base adultery: and
them into ten chief Governors, and when they began to tyrannize, deposing
them, and setting up two Consuls, and then one Dictator, etc. and who blames
them for it? The Senators wisdom prevented broils.

To your last, The time is near when all Tyranny, Oppression, Law-vexations,
Ware shall all cease. Several Nations are casting off cruel yokes. See Isa.
40.14. Dan. 2.34, 35.45. Dan. 7.26. And who knows whether our Army and
Senators may begin to make up the breaches of many Generations whereby both we
and our Posterity may bless the Lord for them, Isa. 58.12. However, Fiat
justitia, et nobiscum erit Dominus. Your bitterness in some expressions I
pass over, and shall remain,

Jan. 26. 1649. current. Yours, if you are Gods and the Kingdoms,

A SECOND QUERE from the Representations of the judgment of 47. Ministers in
the Province of London, in their Letter to the General; delivered Jan. 18.
1648.
WHat warrant has the Army, who in reference to the power of Magistracy, are
but private persons, to usurp an Authority over the King and Parliament,
contrary to our Oaths, our Vow and Covenant, to preserve the rights of
Parliament, and the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation
and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom?

For answer hereunto: As when the chief Priests, and Scribes and Presbyters,
or Elders, put this Question to Jesus, By what authority do thou these
things? and who gave thee authority to do these things? Jesus answered and
said unto them, I also will ask you one question; answer me, and I will tell
you by what authority I do these things, Mar. 11.27. So say I herein, I will
ask you one or two Questions: what authority had the high Priest Jehoiada to
join in a Conspiracy with Captains of Hundreds, and to gather Levites
together, and to order a third part here and there, and to make laws for the
Kingdom, when he and they in reference to the power of Magistracy, were but
private persons; that yet they order things, as if they were chief Magistrates
of the Kingdom? And by what law or president in all Israel do they take upon
them to oppose and depose, and put to death; the person that swayed the Scepter
(who originally came in by force) what ever Oaths of Allegiance, or Vows they
had made to keep Allegiance: and though they had been obedient to that power
for several years. The Lord had said of the house of David, that his sons
should reign for ever: But where has he said so of the house of Stuarts, more
then of the house of King Harold, whom William the Conqueror by force deposed,
and more then the Brutans (now called Welsh) whom the Saxons drove from their
rights here. If any have such rights to the Kingdom, it is in some of those
Brutans, if reigning, more then Priests office must be by succession.

Secondly, The REPRESENTATION of the general Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland
(printed for Richard Bostocke, July 5. 1645.) in the Name of the whole
National Kirk, expressly charged the K. with the guilt of the shedding of the
blood of many thousands (to use their words) of your Majesty's best Subjests,
and permitting Mass and other Idolatry in your own Family, etc. And you kow
the Scripture says, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer
which is guilty of death, but he shall be surely put to death, Numb. 35.31. The
Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of
him that shed it. Now when Jehoiada, and those private persons, with respect to
the power of Magistracy, had caused the murderer that swayed the Scepter to be
put to death; then the Lord showed his approbation in giving the City rest and
quiet thereupon, 2 Chronicles. 23.1.15.21.

The second Quere is therefore: How is it, if ye be Ambassadors of Christ, as
you say, that you lift up your voices against the Army, that would not have the
guilt of blood to lie upon this Kingdom; and have done in some respect like
Iehoiada, upon an urgent occasion, though these seem to have more authority,
being clothed with the authority of the Kingdom, from the high Court, then
more pure, to fight for the Privileges of Parliament and liberty of the people
against all Opposers in the Kingdom, and the Kings person no further, which he
has violated, as the Scottish Kirk charge him, and you know (and there were
opposers thereof in those so betrusted in Parliament, which was the most
unsufferable of all.) And yet that you lift not up your voice against the
Parliament, when they were like by corrupt ones swayings) there to conclude a
Treaty, without satisfying justice for the blood of many thousands that one
person is guilty of, and not exempt by Gods word from justice? Would you have
the Land defiled with blood, and Gods wrath upon the Land, rather then to have
justice done upon that one person? Are you not partial in justice? Is it for
no private interest? Is it not because some of you fear the loss of your
Tithes, that some of you have drawn on some others to subscribe? And did the
Ambassadors of Christ ever exact, or take Tithe, as you read of? Were any
ordinary Ministers to receive Tithe, but only the legal Ministers, that were
also bound to pay a Tithe thereof for a heave offering to the high Priest, and
the people must eat of the Tithe before the Lord, Numb. 18.26.28. Deuteronomy. 14.22,
23. What God has joined, why do you sever? or what God has equally anulled,
why will you uphold any part thereof more then other, any of you? And why is
not your contest as much against this course, all of you, but only for private
interests?

Have you not read what David did warrantably in case of private extremity,
and those that were with him, which was not lawful for him or them in an
ordinary case to have done, Mat. 12.3, 4. And does not Jesus Christ rehearse
this, and is it not written for our instruction? what warrantably may be done
in case of private, much more public extremity, by persons empowered for
public good, may be done warrantably I say for that end, what ordinarily
would be unlawful.

By what authority did many persons high and low in Scotland raise Arms
against the authority of their late Parliament, 1648. or against those Forces
that were raised by the authority of that Parliament, that had broke their
Covenant, in invading England, and did seek the ruin of all that opposed
their proceedings? what president or law had they to take up arms against
them? Or to make laws of themselves before a lawful Parliament, and contrary
to the last Parliament, and to the declared privileges and liberties of the
Subjects, That none should be chosen to be of the next Parliament, nor be
Electors of them, but that were so and so qualified? was salve populi suprema
lex, the safety of the people, the supreme law, a warrant for them alone, and
for no others? do you blame others for the like course, and condemn them? Are
you not then partial, and walk as men, not as Christians?

Whether is it not to be lamented, that many persons that have been in high
esteem, when they preached the Gospel of Faith and love, should come to have
a beam in their own eye, and yet be insensible thereof, and then be lifting up
the voice, and crying aloud against their Brethren, because a mote (if so much
as that) is in their brethrens eye. In the fear of God consider whether it be
not thus with any of you? Have none of you blasphemed and railed against those
that were in the highest Court of the Kingdom? Have none of you been
partakers of the late Scottish invasion against the authority and good of the
Kingdom? Have not some of you of the Assembly acted there directly contrary to
the Commission by which you sat there, viz. Requiring that you should act
nothing there but according to their appointment? Have not some of you
publicly contested against the Parliament, of whom you desired to have great
power in the Kingdom, because they yielded not to the giving of you an
unlimited power in almost ten thousand Courts of Judicature in the Kingdom, as
that forced the Parliament to complain, April 17. 1646. before you would yield
to set upon the Church-governments Reformation, that you had power to do? And
this your contest (if not contempt) you published to the world; and all this,
it is feared, out of self-love, or selfe-ends, seeing and corrupting your
judgments.

And now before you have publicly recanted for this, but the root of it
abiding in you, to hear you crying out against others for wronging authority,
because in such an extremity, and for such good ends, they have done something
like the act of Jehoiada (that famous excellent act) in the behalf of the
Kingdom. Consider what is said, and the Lord give both to you and to us more
understanding in all things, Amen.

FINIS.

