A short TREATISE OF BAPTISM. Wherein is declared that only Christ's Disciples
or believers are to be baptized.

And that the baptising of Infants has no footing in the word of God, but is a
mere tradition, received from our forefathers.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, I am very brief in a matter of great concernment, though I
know too well that the opposers of this truth are very large, bringing in in
stead of Scripture, their far fetched consequences, though by such consequences
as they bring I find that many of the grossest errors that can be are held
out: as free will, falling away, and the like, and what makes so many
differences of Religion among those that seem to be guided by the word: but
their holding of points by consequences; for the word is one and the same and
therefore I desire thee and all Gods people, to stick to Gods naked truth laid
down in his word, and not by consequences to overthrow plain Scriptures.
Farewell.

Thomas Kil^^p.

John 4.1. Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John.


BY Disciples is meant all in whom the work of grace is wrought, as appears
Act. 1.13, 14, 15. and 2.41, 47. and 6.1. compared together. By Baptism is
meant the baptism of water, John 3.22, 23. Baptism is a Greek word, and most
properly signifies dipping in English: and therefore the parties baptized are
said to be baptized not at but in Jordan, Mark 1.5, 9, 10. and in Aenon, John
3.23. Act. 8.38, 39. Math. 3.16.

Then note, John. John baptized many, and Christ baptized more. But all that
John baptized were Disciples, and all that Jesus baptized were also disciples.
They were disciplized by the teaching and then baptizing, according to Christ's
commission, Matthew. 28.19.20. Mark 16.16. which is all one commission: they must
first be disciplized by teaching, (for so the word in Matthew. signifies) and
then be baptized: or first believe, and then be baptized, Mark 16.16. want of
faith does hinder baptism in Gods account, but nothing else, Acts 8.36, 37.
the Eunuch believing with all his heart, was admitted to baptism, otherwise he
could not: and they that had the Holy Ghost given to them, whereby they
manifested repentance unto life: could not rightly have baptism denied them,
otherwise they might, Act. 10.45, 46, 47. and 11, 15. And this is every where
the tenure of the Scripture, as in Mat. 3. all over, Mark 1.4, 5. Luke 3.3, 7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. in all which places, we may plainly see two things;
John's preaching, and the peoples practice: the heads of his teaching were that
they should repent, and be baptized for the remission of sin. In the peoples
practice we may see, first, they came out of all the Regions (where he had
taught) to Jordan; secondly, they confessed their sins; thirdly, they were
inquisitive about the mind of God, Luke 3.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. fourthly,
they were baptized of John in Jordan. The like preaching did Peter preach, Act.
2.38. saying, repent and be baptized every one of you, for the remission of
sin. The Apostle would have every one to be baptized, but first he would
have them every one to repent. And the same practice was practiced by Gods
people there: for they that gladly received the word were baptized, ver. 41.
the like preaching was preached by Philip. And the like practice was practiced
by those that were converted by him. For when they believed Philip preashing to
them the things concerning the kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus Christ,
they were baptized both men and women, Acts 8.12. The like preaching was
preached by Paul; and the like practice was practiced by the Jayler and his
household, Act. 16.31, 32, 33, 34. in which see three things. First, Paul spoke
the word of the Lord to him and all his: secondly, he and all his believed on
God: thirdly, he and all his were baptized straightway. The like preaching he
preached to Crispus, and other Corinthians, Act. 18.8. and the like was
practiced by them, for they hearing, believed, and were baptized. The same was
preached to Lidias and hers; and the same was practiced by them, Acts 16.13, 14,
15. the same might be seen by the Eunuch, and by Cornelius and his friends,
and consequently by all Gods people.

Observe also 3. arguments.
First, Christ gave his Disciples commission concerning baptism, to baptize
believers, Mark 16.16. and this reaches to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.19,
20. therefore not to baptize them, or they not to be baptized, is to disregard
his commission, and to baptize others (especially so known) is to go beyond
his commission.

Secondly, want of faith, or of the new birth, is the only bar to baptism,
therefore they that enjoy these things may also enjoy baptism, but none else,
Acts 8.36, 37. and 10.45, 46, 47.

Thirdly, the Scripture holds out no other baptism in any place, but of such
as have faith, or repentance wrought in them, therefore they being not
baptized, Gods word is taken from them, and to baptize others is to add to it,
the danger of which see Revel. 22.18, 19.

Application.
This informs us of a great mistake about baptism, even among Gods people
themselves. Some are for it, as it is in the public assemblies, with all the
appurtenances, being so taught. 2. Some find the signing of the party with
the cross to be man's invention, and if that were left, they think it were
right. 3. Some find sureties no where spoken of in Scripture, and if that were
remedied, they think it complete baptism, not minding perhaps the blasphemous
speeches, which is worse then any of them: as that the child thus baptized is
regenerate and borne anew: and that Jesus Christ has sanctified the river
Jordan, and all other waters to the washing away of sins, which is horrible
blasphemy, attributing that to water which is peculiar to the blood of Christ,
1 John 1.7. Also in regard of the subject, there is great mistake. Some think
being so taught, that the children of al professed Protestants are to be
baptized. Some think the children of believers: others think only the
children of such believers as are members of some particular Church are to be
baptized, and none else: whereas if they would but search the Scriptures, and
embrace this truth, all these newfound and scripturclesse baptismes would fall
to the ground at once.

Secondly, they that baptize children, or any that cannot manifest faith, are
guilty of the profanation of Gods ordinance. It Is not their descent from godly
parents will serve turn, as appears Luke 3.8, 9. though the Jews had high
thoughts of themselves in this respect, John 8.44. and the Gentiles were ^^^ly
swaid that way, as 1 Timothy 1.4. the which opinion is sharply reproved by John,
by Christ, and by Paul in those Scriptures.

Thirdly, hence we learn that they that are fit subjects of baptism, I mean
they whose hearts the Lord has touched with his fear, and yet keep off from
baptism, are guilty of the neglect or contempt of Gods ordinance: the danger
of which see an example of in the Pharisees and Lawyers, for when the Publicans
justified God and were baptized with the baptism of John, they rejected the
counsel of God against themselves, and were not baptized of him, Luke 7.29, 30.

Fourthly, this may teach Gods people to beware of judging and censuring the
professors of this truth, as if they were too nice or too precise, for this
discovers in them (though Gods people) the remainders of the old man, for
naturally we are all given to speak evil of the things we know not, or have
not formerly been brought up in: the open profane people speak ill of
Puritans (as they call them) because they run not with them in the same excess
of riot, 1 Pet. 4.3. and those called Puritans speak evil of Brownists (so
called) for they out strip them, and they speak evil of us, we going one step
higher, to wit, in point of B^p^isme: thus did Praisgod Barbon of late, his sin
being open I may give him open reproof, 1 Timothy 5.20. who in stead of proving
the lawfulnes or baptising infants, taking on him so to do, in the mean time
derides us, and leaves that undone. Much like to peevish Jonah, 4.2. who in
stead of praying to God fell a quarrelling with God. But my earnest desire is,
that I and Mr. Barbon, and all Gods people, though differing in judgment,
might not differ in affections, but that there may be love and tender
affections among us, seeing we are brethren, and that we use no such violent
speeches to one another, or to any, since we have learned that the wrath of man
does not accomplish the righteousness of God, Iam. 1.10. and that the wisdom
from above is pure and peaceable, and easy to be entreated, and that the
fruits of the Spirit are love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, etc
hatred, debate, emulations, wrath etc, are the works of the flesh, Gal. 5 21.22*

You deride us in your book about the rise, matter, and manner of baptism,
the two last are clearly proved by Scripture already, the rise of it being
once lost, is the only thing to clear; of that therefore a few words. Our
baptism received in our infancy (being corrupted) is notwithstanding true or
false: if true, though corrupted (as you hold) then needs must the other
ordinances be true, the Church also true, for nothing (I conceive) is more
corrupted (if so much) as baptism, as in the first use; and then it follows
that you do ill in leaving true ordinances, and true Church state, and should
then return again. Ob. We shift off the corruptions only. Ans. Then should
you go to the root, and strike at the greatest corruption first, which is I
conceive in the subject. Your only course then would be to let your infants
remain unbaptised, and then such as you and others (upon trial) judge to be
in covenant, and precious in Gods account; you might safely baptize by virtue
of your baptism, if yours be true, though corrupted, as you hold it is; and
not doing so, you go a wrong way to work to root out corruption. But for my
part, I believe Christ will at no rate own the baptising of infants for his
baptism, and therefore not true. And then it follows that it being false, is
to be renounced as well as the Church state being false, and true baptism as
well as true Church state is to be erected; except we turn Familists and
Libertines, to let all alone, and live loosly, which opinion is held out, for
ought I know, only by such as are given up to their own lusts.

Ob. But where is your warrant for so doing? I answer, That every Scripture
that gives you warrant, or any of your judgment, to erect a Church state,
gives us the same warrant to erect baptism, since the one cannot be done
without the other, for none can put on Christ (that is visibly by outward
profession) but such as are baptized into Christ, that is into the way, or
profession of Christ, for so is the meaning, Gal. 3.27.

So that as a certain company of you agreeing in one, may become a body with
every ones mutual consent: just so might we or you take up this ordinance too,
I mean if it be so that otherwise we cannot partake of it (as once it was) and
also know that Christ puts not impossibilities upon us; and we are no where so
enjoined, that if we cannot know absolutely a people that has upheld it ever
since John, then not to partake of it, but we are absolutely enjoined to be
baptized, Mark 16.16. Which is an impossibility if that must needs be a tie.
Again, if Christ had so tied us, then would you be put to a great strait, to
prove that baptism that you have partakt of to be so upheld, which thing I
believe you cannot possibly do; you must take the Popes word for it, or else
some History or other, which I dare not credit as I do the Bible.

After this you affirm many things (I think unsound) desiring the Reader to
judge of three things especially. First you affirm that all the children
lineally descending from the faithful, are in the everlasting covenant of God,
and are the children of the promise, and many such expressions; but the word
says, if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs by promise,
Gal. 3.29. and the children of the flesh are not the children of God, but the
children of the promise are accounted for the seed; the children of the promise
are there put in opposition to the children of the flesh. But to be brief,
weigh also these places following, Gal. 3.7, 9, 14. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. 2 Cor.
1.20. 1 Timothy 4.8. Again you say, that the children in the Church at Colosse
were baptized is plain, Col. 3.20, 21. I am sure it is plain that those words
do not say so. But I think you mean there is a plain consequence, as thus,
There were children in that Church, Col. 3.20, 21. but no Church does consist
of unbaptised persons; therefore those children were baptized. I grant this
fully, that a Church, cannot consist of unbaptised persons, and that some there
had parents living, and were children in this sense, since the Apostle there
writes to children, but I think the Apostle does not write to infants, which
you drive at, though I think ashamed to express it. For any man endued with
reason might gainsay that; and I wonder that you being so exceeding large in
the foregoing matter, should so pass this place over as you do. 3. You
affirm that Jesus Christ gave plain and express order and command to baptize
children, which you will make appear thus; whole nations were to be baptized,
but children are a part of nations, therefore to be baptized: by the same ground
it appears that you do unbeleevers and their children wrong, excluding them,
since they are a part of nations. But if Christ did plainly command that
children should be baptized, as you say he did, Math. 28.19. you need not go
so to work to make it appear. A plain command will appear to every ones
view that reads it. But I desire you henceforward to father your errors your
self, and not because they should pass say the Scripture plainly says it,
for so doing you wrong the Scripture, and double your sin.

FINIS.
York.
portrait


