A Wonderful DELIVERANCE OR Gods abundant mercy in preserving from the
Cavaliers the town of DRAITON Jn the County of HEREFORD.

Declaring how many Troops of the Cavaliers came against the said Town, with
an inten^ to have plundered it and put the inhabitants to the Sword, Men,
Women, and Children.

Also manifesting how they were happily discovered by a scout of our
Draggooners, who gave an allarum to several Troops of Horse and Foot, which
where Quartered in the adjoining Villages, by whose assistance the town was
preserved, and a wonderful victory obtained over the Cavaliers.

Being the true Coppie of a Letter sent from Mr. Tho. Kittermaster of Hereford,
to Mr. William Knowles in Holborne, dated October. 14. 1642.

London, Printed by T.F. for I.H. October 20. 1641

A true Relation of the Proceedings of both ARMIES.
Declaring the hopeful success of the Parliaments Forces against the
Cavaliers, and how Prince Roberts Horse was killed under him.
WOrthy Sir,
my best wishes salute you, your Letter happily came to my hands on Friday at
night where you desire a fair correspondency, notwithstanding the distance of
place, as has formerly passed betwixt us, imparting such news and passages to
each other, as our knowledge and the places where either of us abide, may
furnish us with, I assure you Sir, that the performance of your part of
Frienship requires the like in me, for News, J should be loath to be numbered
amongst those that write only upon bare imagination, to sweeten their own
desires, though they often appear improbable, but J presume upon my own
knowledge, and my Eyes are the just and faithful witnesses of what J write,
and J shall do nothing without their directions, therefore J shall write to
you nothing but what J know for truth, our Country howsoever they seem
strongly for the other Party, yet in their hearts they are for the King and
Parliament, however they have been abused in idle Pamphlets.

We have credible information, the King intended to advance toward you, but
has waved his resolution toward London, and divided his Army into two bodies.

One of which Divisions His Majesty himself leads, the other Part Prince
Robert commands, who with a flying Army posts before him, and as J have heard
a true relation plunders many Villages by the way, but our Commanders with
undanted resolutions, their Troops being filled with courage, are resolved to
follow them, and bravely to venture th^^^ li^es in the maintenance, of the true
Protest^^^ Religion, the defense of the King, the Rights and Privilidges of
Parliament, against all malignant Parties, both Papists and Cavaliers.

All which Commanders with an unanimous consent do most Christianlike declare
their firm resolves in the behalf of their King and Country.

And could they meet the Papists and bloodthirsty Cavaliers in one
distinguishable Body, they would then publish their true zeal to Protestant
Religion, their Loyalty to his Majesty, and their faithful service to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament.

But howsoever they are resolved by Gods assistance to follow both Armies, and
to defend all those that shall make resistance or endeavor to withstand the
Cavaliers.

This may appear by this ensuing relation.

Prince Robert with his Troops did intend to plunder Drayton, but our
Commanders having intelligence of his purpose, sent Forces to intercept him,
which was as follows.

They having intelligence by a scout of Draggoners, six Troops of Horse, and a
thousand Foot were sent to intercept them.

Twixt whom held a dangerous skirmish, for the space of an hour, yet being at
that onset over-prest with odds upon Prince Roberts party, which had not their
courage been answerable to their Cause and minds, in rights behest of King and
Parliament, they alone had not been lost but the Town also, who likewise lent
their aid and assistance, otherwise they had been plundered and utterly ruined.

But God, who still guards the fighters of his battles, did likewise to their
Courage add their victory.

For they with undanted resolution, (to whose aid was brought two Troops more
of Horse, with two hundred Dragooneers) assailed them on the right wing of
Prince Roberts Army, which new refreshing, they supposing more supplies were
ready for to back them) began by degrees to retreat, which our party
perceiving, with fiery resolution redoubled heir former courage, and with
joyful acclamations, symptoms of a hopeful victory, which did so dismay the
adverse party with fear, that we got ground of them, and forced them to a
present flight.

In which flight a worthy Gentleman, not to be forgotten for his brave courage
and approved valor Mr. John Ramsey Coronet, behaved himself so bravely, that
he deserves to have our loves and future memory; for he not only dismounted
Prince Roberts Coronet, but farther brake into their ranks, slew a Lieutenant,
and so bravely behaved himself which gained him many followers as envious of
his Fame to gain themselves like honor, in which flight Princes ROBERTS Horse
was shot under him, and he was forced to take a Troopers horse to save him
from their pursuit, and had not this aforesaid worthy Gentleman Mr. John Ramsey
Coronet, received a dangerous wound in the Thigh, he questionless had taken
Prince Robert or fallen in the attempt, yet howsoever this to his fame be it
spoke, he brought the trophy of the other Coronet which he dismounted to his
Colonel, who so with love received him for his Service, and gave him a
Lieutenants place. And had not the Evening prevented the pursuit of Prince
ROBERTS army, they had given them a greater overthrow.

The number of the slain on the other side as yet J cannot send you, but in my
next Letter J shall, believe no flying tales that the Army mutinies, they are
but false rumors raised by some malignant spirits, for believe it their
resolves are firmly knit, in the defense of the King and Parliament to live
and die.

So much news and no more at this time can J afford you, J beseech God to
send us peace and a speedy happy union betwixt the King and Parliament, so J
rest, hoping to hear from you.

Yours to be commanded T. Kittermaster.
Hereford, this 14. of October, 1642.
FINIS.

