THE PATHWAY TO JUSTIFICATION, PLAINLY PROVING I. What it is to be justified.
II. That justification is by the faith of Jesus, and not by the works of the
Law. III. They only are justified that believe in Christ. IV. What it is to
believe into Jesus Christ. V. The difference between the Law of faith and the
Law of works, also the difference between the work of faith, and the works of
the Law is plainly stated. VI. Many objections are answered.


Written by Thomas Kilcopp.

ROM: 3.21. The righteousness of God (without the Law) is manifest, being
witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even that righteousness of God, which
is by the faith of Christ unto all, and upon all that believe.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

THE PATHWAY TO JUSTIFICATION.
GAL. 2.16. Even we have believed into Jesus Christ, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for by the works of
the Law shall no flesh be justified.


PAVL wrote this Epistle purposely to withdraw the Galatians from the works of
the Law. They which had by Paul's preaching received the truth, were now by
false teachers drawn aside to Jewish customs, as Circumcision, the observing
of days, times, months and years, for which Paul chides them, disdainfully
terming such customs another Gospel, and weak and beggarly elements, and
oftentimes he terms them the works of the Law, this term is usual. Paul has in
chiding of them 3 onsets, one ends with the 2. chap. another with the 4. and
the last with the Epistle.

In his first onset is a reproof for turning to another Gospel, meaning the Law
and the works of it.

Secondly, He exhorts them to let him be accursed that preaches otherwise then
what he had taught them, ver: 6, 7, 8, 9.

Thirdly, So to do he brings two Motives: first, because what he had taught
them was not of man but of God, verse. 10, 11. for they knew that he had been so
zealous of the Jews Religion as to persecute the Church and truth of Christ,
till God by revelation made truth known to him, revealing Christ in him, and
then without the least demur he preached the truth.

2. Another Motive to constancy in the truth, is his own example for 17 years
together, of which he brings two instances; first, his not suffering false
brethren to circumcise his companion Titus, chap. 2. to verse. 7. secondly, in
not suffering Peter one of the three chief Apostles to bauk with the truth, in
shunning to eat with the Gentiles, to the end of the chap. in which instance
note.

1. He did reprove Peter, and that to his face.

2. The cause why, for he was to be blamed, ver. 11.

3. Peter's sin, he for fear of the Jews did shun to eat with the Gentiles, ver.
12, 13.

4. His words of reproof, and therein first, he reasons the case with Peter,
why he a Jew, who had already lived as the Gentiles should hereby force the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews; secondly, affirms to Peter these words, We
who are Jews by nature and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing a man is not
justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we
have believed into Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for by the works of the Law shall no
flesh be justified, the last part of the said affirmation, I speak from,
wherein see 1. an end to obtain, to wit, Justification; 2. the means to obtain
it, to wit, Christ's faith and our belief, without the works of the Law. We have
believed into Jesus Christ, this is the preparative means on our part, that we
might be justified, this is the end to obtain, by the faith of Christ, this is
the executative means on Christ's part, and not by the works of the Law:
Levitical shadows tend not to justification; See here, a distinction between
belief and justifying faith; one is ours, the other Christ's; the one a
preparative, the other the executative means, our belief precedes Christ's
faith to justification, but the works of the Law are wholly excluded, but the
preparative means on our part is not a bare belief, but a belief into Christ,
the word is not (...) but (...), that is, not in, but into, as Scholars
affirm. Doctrines are these,

First, That justification is the chief end to obtain here: This is the promise
to Abraham, the price of our high calling, but to this all do ascent, but the
truth here held forth, and which will be opposed is this; That our believing
into Christ is a mediate, and Christ's faith the immediate means of our
justification, without the works of the Law.

This I shall first prove, and then declare the marrow of it, to prove it I
shall prove four things.

1. That Christ's faith is a means of our justification.

2. That our belief into Christ is a means also.

3. Our belief is a mediate, and Christ faith is the immediate means.

4. And all this without the works of the Law.

That justification is by the faith of Christ, and that it is not by the works
of the Law, is the thing affirmed. That our belief is a means preparative, and
Christ's faith the alone means executative, is here included, We have believed
into Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, mark it, they
had already believed into Christ, and to this end, to be justified by Christ's
faith, but see it also by other Scriptures.

First, That Christ's faith is a means of justification, for God does justify
the circumcised by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith; Romans 3.30. by
faith, to wit, the faith of Christ, for Paul after his conversion to Christ,
desired to be found in Christ, that is, says he, not having my own
righteousness, but that which is by the faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by faith, Phil: 3.8, 9. none are justified, but by the faith of
Christ.

Secondly, Man's believing into Christ is also a means leading thereto, for
Christ Jesus is set forth to declare Gods righteousness, that he might be
just, justifying him that believes into Jesus, Romans 3.26. None are by Christ's
faith justified, that do not first believe into Christ, because God is just in
justifying.

Thirdly, Christ's faith is the alone immediate means, nothing comes between
that and our justification, but man's belief is a means mediate, or at a
distance, for Christ's faith comes between man's belief and his justification,
for Gods righteousness is witnessed by the Law and Prophets, even that
righteousness of God which is by the faith of Christ, unto all, and upon all
that believe; Romans 3.21, 22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that
the promise by the faith of Jesus might be given to them that believe, Gal.
3.22. here we see that the promise, even the righteousness of God, is by the
faith of Jesus, that is the immediate means, but those that it comes to and
upon, those to whom it is given, do first believe this is a means too, but at a
distance. God works all things after the counsel of his own will, that we
might be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ, In whom ye
trusted after ye heard the word of truth, in whom also after ye believed, ye
were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, the earnest of our inheritance,
Ephesians: 1.11, 12, 13. We see here how according to the counsel of Gods will,
belief is after hearing, and being sealed with the holy spirit is after
believing, and our inheritance is after sealing: for the seal is but the
earnest thereof; justification is before glorification, belief before
justification, and Gods word before our belief: Note further, that Christ's
coming and dying is that that procures our light by his word, this slain Lamb
has prevailed to open the book (of Gods will) Rev. 5. And Christ came because
the father in love sent him, God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten son, that whosover believes into him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.16.

The first and most remote cause of man's justification, is the Fathers love
sending his son: The next, not so remote as that, is the sons coming and dying:
The third, not so remote as either of them, is man's enjoying the effect of
Christ's death: to wit, light with life: The fourth cause, not so remote as the
three former, is man's well using life and light: The fifth and last cause, a
cause not remote, but immediate, is the faith of Christ: The three first causes
are common to all mankind, God so loved the world, and (by his son) fashioneth
all their hearts alike, Psalm. 33.14, 15. Enlighteneth every one coming into the
world, John 1.9. but man's belief is the first, and the faith of Christ the last
special cause, all men have not faith, but one is a mediate, the other an
immediate cause.

Fourthly, The works of the Law are no means at all, a man is justified by
faith, without the deeds of the Law, Romans 3.20.27, 28. and so much for proof:
But to prove these things and yet to misunderstand all, is to no purpose;
Therefore see 1. What it is to be justified. 2. What the faith of Christ is by
which we are justified. 3. What it is to believe into Christ. 4. What is meant
by the works of the Law.


First, To be justified is to be made just, justify, is (in the plainest
English) make just, as purify is make pure, purification, is making pure, or
as glorify, is make glorious, glorification, making glorious, so justify, is
make just, justification, is making just; to be justified is to be made just,
or righteous, as by Scripture also may appear, For as by one offense, judgment
came on all to condemnation, so by one righteousness the gift is toward all,
to the justification of life, for as by one offense many were made sinners, so
by one righteousness shall many be made righteous, Romans 5.18, 19. It is not by
the offense of one, but by one offense, that many are sinners, as the
Translater confesses in the Margin. We are not condemned for Adams act, God is
not so partial or unequal in his dealings with man, as to set the child's tooth
on edge, for the fathers eating sour grapes, as Ezck: 18. but by one offense,
that is, lusting to sin as he did, death came on all, because all have sinned,
verse. 14. We need not the imputation of his sin to condemn us, for we have all
lusted to sin as well as he, which first lusting of every man is the mother
that conceives sin in him, read James 1.13, 14, 15. see another proof, He that
knew not sin was made sin, (a sin offering, as Isa. 53.) for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.21. the justified are made
righteous.

Obj: But declaring just, is figuratively termed justifying, some justify the
wicked for a reward, and God justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5.

Answ. But they are wicked that do so justify the wicked, and a just God
cannot so do, though he be exceeding gracious and merciful, yet he cannot clear
the guilty, Exodus: 20.7. and 34, 7. Numb: 14.18. God can justify, that is, make
just one that was ungodly, but cannot account him just till he be so; If I sin
says Job (a believer) thou markest me, and thou will not acquit me, Job 10.14.
But if the unjust become just, doing what is lawful and right, God will account
and declare him just, and not impute former sins to him, in case he sin no
more; as in Ezck: 18, 7, 8, 9. and Ezck: 33.14, 15, 16. God cannot wickedly
justify, by declaring the ungodly to be just, while he remains unjust, but
when he is just, God can justly account and declare him just, though he has
been unjust, and so to be justified is to be made just.

Thirdly, But see also what the faith of Christ is, by which we are made just,
and herein. 1. What Christ's faith is. 2. How we are justified by it. 3. How we
may know we are justified.


First, What is Christ's faith? 1. His word is so called, The faith which Paul
once destroyed, Gal. 1.23. The faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, James 3.1.
Revel: 2.13. and 14.12.

Secondly, Christ's Spirit is so called, as the comparing of Scripture will
evidence, as, We have access to the father by one spirit, access with
confidence by the faith of him, Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12. Being justified by faith
we have peace with God, and access to this grace wherein we stand, Romans 5.1,
2. Here we see, that the Spirit of Christ is the faith of Christ whereby we are
justified. Again, Christ is said to dwell in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
that is, by his Spirit, for he dwells in none otherwise, as Romans 8.9, 10, 11.
Ye are not in the flesh but in the spirit, if the Spirit of God dwell in you,
but if any have not the spirit of Christ, he is not his, and if Christ be in
you, etc. We here see that if the Spirit of God or Christ dwell in us, then
Christ is in us and we are his, but else not, so that Christ by his faith, that
is, by his spirit dwells in the justified, and the Spirit of Christ is called
the faith of Christ, for it is indeed the spirit of faith, 2. Cor. 4.13. though
the word of Christ is the faith of Christ in the fruit, the Spirit of Christ is
the faith of Christ in the root, and that by which we are justified. It is not
his word meant here, for that precedes believing, but Christ's justifying faith,
is after our believing; and so, no less then the Spirit of Christ justifies:
But ye are washed, but ye are justified, in the name of Christ, and by the
Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. He that is least in Zion shall be called Holy;
When, even when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughter of
Zion, by the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burning: Isa. 4.3, 4. so
that Christ's spirit only is his faith by which we are justified.

Secondly, See how we are justified by the faith or Spirit of Christ.

Answ. By the conveyance of it and not otherwise, not by a bare imputation, but
by a gift. Having given us his holy spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4.8. He that keeps his
commandments dwells in him, and he in him, hereby we know we dwell in him,
and he in us, even by the spirit which he has given us, 1 John 3.24. and 4.13.
They that receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life, etc. Romans 5.17. He shall receive a blessing from the Lord, even
righteousness from the God of his salvation; Psalm. 24.5. See how justification
is the blessing of Abraham, a gift of righteousness, given and received, and
so the justified are partakers of the Divine nature, therefore Let the Heavens
drop from above, let the skies pour down righteousness, and bring salvation;
also, let the earth open, that righteousness may spring up, etc. Isa. 45.8.

Thirdly, How know we that we are justified by the faith, or spirit of Christ?

Answ. They to whom Christ's spirit is given, are joined to the Lord and but one
spirit 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is born of the spirit is spirit, John 3.6. they are
as Christ is; Christ dwells in them, and they in him, yea Christ lives in them,
and they live by his faith, and all old things are done away, and all things in
them are become new, thoughts, words, deeds and nature are new, they being new
creatures, are changed from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2
Cor. 3.18. and 5.17. their love being perfected they (thenceforth) cannot sin,
because they are born of God. He keeps himself pure, and the wicked one
cannot touch him, 1 John 3.9. and 4.17. and 5.18. The old man is crucified, and
body of sin destroyed in them, and for this very purpose, That thenceforth they
should not serve sin, being dead, and risen with Christ, they are freed from
sin, Rom: 6.5, 6, 7. The very root of sin is took away if once justified, and
so much to the second particular.

Thirdly, See next what it is to believe into Christ, and so 1. What to believe
into Christ. 2. What of Christ we must believe into. 3. What belief, is a
belief into Christ. 4. That belief into Christ is a means of justification.


First, To believe into Christ is to come unto, or into him by believing, such
as enter not into him by believing, do not believe into him; He that comes to
me (says Christ) shall never hunger, and he that believes on (into) me shall
never thirst, John 6.35. He that comes to God, must believe that God is, etc.
Heb. 11. none can come to him without believing, but many believe without
coming, but they believe not into Christ, except they come to Christ by
believing; and therefore Christ exhorts men thus, If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink, and then explaines it thus, he that believes into me, as
says the Scripture, out of his belly shall flow, etc. John 7.37, 38. so then,
to believe into Christ, is to come by believing to him.

Secondly, What of Christ must we believe into, or come into; 1. Not into his
person, which is far above the highest heaven, Ephesians. 4.10. 2. Not into his
Spirit, entrance into that, himself gives us, by his own faith, after we have
believed into him; but

Thirdly, In general to believe into Christ, is to believe into his word; John
8.30, 31. As he spoke these words many believed on him, (into him) and to
these, says Christ, if ye continue in my word, ye are my Disciples indeed. 1.
He preached to them; 2. They believed into him; 3. These he encourages to
continue in his word, so that, to believe and abide in his word, is to believe
and abide in him. If that which ye heard from the beginning shall remain in
you, ye shall continue in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John 2.24. I am the
true vine (says Christ) ye the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him
shall be fruitful, and what is this abiding in him, he tells us, If (says he)
ye abide in me, and my word abide in you, etc. John 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
therefore let us while we have the light believe into the light, that is, into
the word; believe into that, and ye believe into Christ, thus in general.

Particularly, To believe into Christ, that is, into his word, is to believe
into his name, and into his conversation.

First, Into his name, as many as received him, to them gave he power to become
Gods children, even to them that believed into his name, John 1.12. and they
are condemned for not believing into him, which believed not into his name.
John 3.18. We must believe into the outside or profession of his name, by
yielding to the Ordinance of dipping. Go ye therefore and disciplize all
Nations, dipping them, into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, Mat.
28.19. and into the inside of his name, which is holiness, by ceasing to sin;
Holy and Reverend is his name, Psalm. 111.9. Let every one that names the Lord
Jesus depart from iniquity; 2 Timothy

Secondly, Believe into his conversation, that is, so to believe, as to put off
(as concerning the conversation) the old man which is corrupt, and put on the
new man, which is after God created in righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24. Put yeon the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts of it, Romans 13. We see here, that to put on a new
conversation is to put on the Lord Jesus Christ; also to put it on or to enter
into it, we know to be one and the same thing. Holiness, the inside of his
name, is but the outside of his conversation, and perfect right eousness, the
inside of his conversation, we believe into: When with the heart we believe
unto righteousness, and witness with the mouth unto salvation, Romans 10.10.

Obj: Is not the use of ordinances coming to Christ?

Answ. Thereby we draw nigh with our bodies, but if our spirit be not also
brought unto him by submission to his will, our bodily drawing nigh, will be in
vain, Matthew. 15.9.

Thirdly, See what belief is termed a believing into Christ, or unto Christ. It
is only a practical belief, that brings us to Christ, to his conversation, for
belief with works is dead, that moves not, but lively stones, by a lively
belief, come to Christ the living stone, 1 Pet. 1.1. to the 7. sinning is going
from Christ, and obedience, is coming to him. Draw nigh to God and he will draw
nigh to you, how so, he tells us, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and purisie
your hearts ye double minded Jam. 4.7, 8. Come unto me (says Christ) all ye
that are weary and I will give you rest, how must we come? he tells us, Take my
yoke upon you and learn of me, and ye shall find rest to your souls; Matthew:
11.28, 29. He is the author of eternal salvation, to all that obey him. He
saves to the utmost all that come to God by him; Heb. 5.9. with Heb. 7.25.
nothing but obeying him, is coming to God by him.

Fourthly, Believing into Christ, or, obedience to his commands; is a
preparative to justification, none are justified, till they first keep Gods
law, and all such obtain it. It is not the hearers of the Law that are just
before God, but the doers of the Law, shall be justified. Romans 2.13. such as
first obey him, he saves with an eternal salvation. If justified, then saved
from the power, or root of fin, and so fin can bud no more in them, therefore
cleanse hand, tongue, and heart from sin, and thou shall receive the blessing
from the Lord, even righteousness, (a righteous spirit) from the God of thy
salvation, Psalm. 24.5. He that believes into me (says Christ) out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water, and this spoke he of the spirit, which
they that believed on him should receive, John 7.38.39. Christ's justifying
spirit is not obtained without obedience preceding; and if perfect obedience
precede, justification will through grace succeed. He that has my
commandments and keeps them (says Christ) he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him and will
manifest my self to him. This admirable promise made a Disciple ask him, how it
was, or why it was that he would manifest himself to them and not to the
world, and Christ again gives him the cause, saying, if a man love me, he will
keep my word, and my father will love him, and we will come and make our abode
with him, John 14.21, 22, 23. If we keep in a way of sin, Christ cannot come to
us, to justify us, but if we leave sin and walk in the way of righteousness,
he will come to us, for he meets such as rejoice in working righteousness,
which remember him in his ways, Isa. 64.5. let the sinner leave sin, and walk
in all the statutes of life, without sinning again, and he shall live; that is,
shall be justified, Christ shall live in him, and his life thenceforth shall be
by the faith of the Son of God, Ezekiel: 33.15. Gal. 3.20.

Application.
Then seek justification by a Godly life, While ye have the light believe into
the light, that ye may be the children of the light; John 12.36. Add to belief
virtue, giving all diligence that all virtue may abound in you; for, then ye
will not be barren in knowledge, then ye will make your calling and election
sure, and then ye shall never fall, because an entrance will be ministered unto
you, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.
Therefore sow to your selves righteousness, reap mercy, plough up your follow
ground, for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and reign righteousness
upon you; Hosea 10.12. Thus says the Lord, keep judgment, do justice for my
salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed; Isa. 65.1.

Secondly, Let this doctrine be always taught, That believers be careful to
maintain good works, being profitable to men, Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of the life that now is, and that that is to come;
Tit: 3.8. 1 Timothy: 4.8. of justification here, and glorification hereafter, but
if they draw back, God will have no pleasure in them: and so much to the third
particular.

Fourthly, See what the works of the Law are, without which justification must
be, and herein 1. What works are called the works of the Law. 2. Why
justification cannot be by them. 3. Application.


First, To know what the works of the Law are, we must know what Law is spoken
of, for the doing what any Law requires, is the work of that Law, as Exodus:
18.20. Christ and the Jews did in general by the Law, mean all the writings of
Moses, as Matthew. 7.12. John 1.47. in which Law, are weighty matters, as
judgment, mercy and faith, and slighter matters concern the Levitical worship,
as Tithes and the like, Matthew: 23.23. and Paul, whose words we have in hand,
calls sometimes the whole, and sometime each part, the Law.

First, Sometime (though seldom) he calls the weightier part, even the ten
commandments the Law, as in these words, He that loves fulfilleth the Law,
for this, thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not
bear false witness, thou shall not covet, or any other command is comprehended
in this saying, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, love does his
neighbor no ill, therefore is love the fulfilling of the Law; Rom: 13.8, 9,
10. By Law here is meant the ten commands, also the same in Gal: 5.14.

Secondly, He most usually calls the shadows of the Levitical Priesthood the
Law, and so, if the Priesthood be changed, there is of necessity a change also
of the Law. Were Christ on earth, he could not be a Priest, for there are
Priests which according to the Law offer gifts. Again, Sacrifice and offerings,
and burnt offerings, and sin offerings thou would not, nor had pleasure
therein, which are offered according to the Law; Heb: 7.12. and 8.4. and 10.8.
In such places speaking contemptibly of the Law, he means by the Law, only
Levitical shadows: but pressing us to keep the Law, then by the Law he means
the ten commands. Also, when Paul speaks of both, and would distinguish between
them, then the substance is called the law of faith, and shadows called the law
of works, and this without variation: and as shadows only, is called the Law of
works, so only the observation of shadows, he calls the works of the Law, as
for instance, Romans 3.27, 28. since Justification is by faith, boasting (says
he) is excluded, but by what Law? by the Law of works, Nay, but by the Law of
faith, therefore we conclude, a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of
the Law. The Law of works, or works of the Law is put in opposition to faith,
or the Law of faith. Weak and beggarly elements only are the works of the Law,
without which justification is, as may further appear.

First, From the scope of this place, these words being part of Paul's reproof
to Peter; Peter a Jew, knowing the partition wall broken down, had eaten with
Gentiles, and afterward through fear of some Jews which came from James he
withdrew, for which Paul sharply reproves him, in which reproof he first
reasons the case with Peter, Why he a Jew that had already lived as the
Gentiles, should now (in so doing) compel the Gentiles to live as do the Jews,
and then affirmed to Peter these words, We who are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a man is not justified by the works of
the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, have believed into Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the
Law, etc. so that, what Paul before called, living as the Jews, he now calls,
the works of the Law, and looking yet backward, we find the same termed, the
Jews Religion, which is here termed, living as do the Jews, or works of the
Law, as ch: 1.13, 14. Also looking forward, we find the same termed, wordly,
weak and beggarly elements, which is here termed, living as the Jews, and the
works of the Law, with the nomination of some particulars, as observing of
days, times months and years; ch: 4.3.9, 10, 11. and so it is not good works,
but beggarly rudiments, and they only are the works of the Law, by which no
flesh is justified.

Secondly, This very term ( the works of the Law) never was by Paul or any
Apostle applied to good works: as the rule of righteousness, or law of faith,
was never termed, the law of works, so obedience thereto, or good works, was
never termed, the works of the Law. Read and consider, Rom: 3.27, 28. Romans
9.30, 31, 32. Gal: 3.10. It is not submission to the Law of faith, but to that
law which is not of faith, which are termed the works of the Law.

Thirdly, The current of Scripture confirms this, for to say we are justified
without good works preceding, is as contrary to truth, as darkness to light.
For,

First, We are said to be Justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law, but
not without first keeping the Royal Law, if that be not first exactly kept, we
shall never be justified, for it is not the hearers, but only the doers of the
Law, that shall be justified: Rom 2.13. yet without the works of the Law, that
is, without sin offerings, though according to the Law.

Secondly, All that are of the works of the Law are under the curse, Gal. 3.10.
What is every one that keeps the Royal Law accursed? or, does every good work a
man does, curse him? or does perfect walking, make him perfectly cursed? Nay,
but the contrary, only breakers of the Law are cursed, and only keepers of the
Law are blessed. Thou have rebuked the proud, they are cursed which do err from
thy commandments, but, Blessed are the undefiled in the way, walking in the
Law of the Lord: Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, that seek him with
their whole heart. They do no iniquity, they walk in his ways, Psalm. 119.1. 2,
3.21. Who so looks in the perfect. Law of liberty, and continues in it,
being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man is blessed in
his deed, James 1.25. See here, how they only are blessed that keep the Law,
that do no iniquity, and they only are cursed that break it. There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh,
but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. Yet very true, That all are accursed, that are
of the works of the Law: All that bring sin offe^ings, according to the Law,
for they are sinners, else they needed no sin offering, only beggarly elements
are the works of the Law, and all that observe them are accursed.

Secondly, See why we cannot be justified by the works of the Law.

First, Because they are but mere shadows, and outsides, and reach not the
heart at all; Whereby were offered gifts and sacrifices, which could not make
him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the conscience, which stood
only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal rites, etc. The Law
having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very substance, can never
with those sacrifices offered year by year make the comers thereunto perfect.
Heb. 9, 10. and 10.1.

Secondly, The works of the Law brings curse and condemnation, no flesh can be
justified by it, for thereby is the acknowledgement of sin, Romans 3.20. Sin
offerings were appointed, in case men sin, not else, and so the bringers of a
sin offering, did thereby acknowledge themselves sinners, and therefore cursed;
therefore as the New Testament is the Ministry of the Spirit, Life,
Righteousness, so this Law of works is the Ministry of the Letter, Death and
Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

Thirdly, We cannot be justified by the works of the Law, for they nullify
Christ's Priesthood, were he on earth he could not be a Priest, since there are
Priests that offer according to the Law, Heb. 8.4. and therefore we cannot be
justified by the Law; and these are the reasons. Now for Application.

First, To inform us of the difference between Law and Law, works and works,
shadows and substance, and first of each Law: 1. That was the Law of Moses,
this is the Law of Christ; John 7.23. Gal. 6.2. 2. That was the Law of works,
this is the Law of faith, Romans 3.27, 28. 3. That was the yoke of bondage, this
is the perfect Law of liberty. Gal. 5.1. James 1.25. 4. That was a Law of
commands, contained in ordinances, mere shadows and not substance, Ephesians: 1.15.
Heb. 10.1. but this is the Royal Law, James 2.8. 5. That was the old, this is
the new Testament, Heb. 8.19. and 9.1. 6. That is termed the letter and the
flesh, but this is termed the Spirit; 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.3. 7. That is termed
Jerusalem, that now is, and in bondage with her children; this is Jerusalem
above, who is free, and the mother of us all; Gal. 4.24, 25, 26. 8. That was a
Ministry or conveyance of the letter of death and condemnation, whose glory is
done away; but this is the Ministry or conveyance of the spirit of life and
righteousness, exceeding that in glory, and still remaining; 1 Cor: 3.6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. 9. That was written by man in many great stones, set in the ground
and plaistred, Deuteronomy. 27.1, 2, 3, 4. but this God wrote in two small tables
carried in Moses hand; Exodus 34.1.4. 10. That Law made nothing perfect, but
this the bringing in of a better hope does; Heb. 7.19. See now the different
works of each; first, in general. 1. Those were the works of the Law, these the
work of faith and labor of love; Gal. 3.10. 1 Thessalonians. 1.3. 2. Those were
worldly, weak and beggarly elements, these are good works, Gal. 4.3.9. Tit.
3.8. particularly they differ. 1. Intheir circumcisions, that was but the
circumcision of the flesh of an outside Jew, this is men's circumcising their
hearts from sin, to be infide Jews, in the spirit, not in the letter, Romans
2.28, 29. with Jer. 4.4. 2. That fleshly circumcision gave admittance to their
passover, and other fleshly privileges; Exodus: 12.48. but heart circumcifion
admits to all Gospel privileges; as prayer, Job 11.13, 14, 15. hearing, James
1.21. baptism, Mat. 3.6, 7, 8. breaking bread, etc. 1 Cor. 11.3. In freewill
offerings, those were of beasts, and by such sacrifices they covenanted with
God, Psalm. 50.5. But these are our bodies, which we present as a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable, being devoted to Gods will, Romans 12.1. Psalm.
119.38. 4. Touching Gods house, that was built of stones, and stood at
Jerusalem, and thither they brought their sacrifices, to be offered by that
carnal Priesthood, but of this Saints are stones, lively stones, built up a
spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; 1 Pet. 2.5. Deuteronomy. 11.5. Touching passovers,
they did yearly feed on a Lamb, spotles in body and limb, with the mouth of
their bodies, with sour herbs, and unleavened bread; and in this posture,
standing with shoes on their feet, staves in their hand, their bodily loins
girt, ready to march to their earthly Canaan, Exodus 12. but we must hourly feed
on Christ our passover, spiritually eating his flesh, drinking his blood (to
wit his conversation by imitation) with sorrow for sins past, and with the
unleavened bread of sincerity and truth, our feet shod with the Gospels
preparation, in our hand the sword of the Spirit, girding up the loins of our
minds, looking for, and hastening to the coming of the Lord, and our heavenly
Canaan, the new earth, John 6. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8, Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Pet.
1.13. 2 Pet. 3.12, 13.6. About sin offerings, they had such a beast as the Law
required, with confession of sin, by laying their hand on the head of their
offering, but Christ is an offering for sin, even for all mankind; Isa. 53.
Heb. 2.9. which procures pardon or forbearance for all, that they confessing
and forsaking sin may be accepted and obtain justification through the blood of
Christ. 7. Touching washings, their work or service stood only in meats and
drinks, and diverse washings and carnal rites till the time of reformation;
Heb. 9.9, 10. but Gods will in this is our sanctification, that we wash our
robes (our conversations) and make them white in the blood of the Lamb; 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. Rev. 7.14. 8. For rejoicing Godward; they rejoiced every New Mood,
with singing, trumpets sounding, music playing, melodious to the ear of man;
Psalm. 81.1, 2, 3. but we must rejoice in the Lord always, and speak to our
selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual-songs, (to wit meditation on Gods
mercies) singing and making melody in our hearts to the Lord. Phil: 4.4. Ephesians.
5.19. 9. Touching Tithepaying, in that Priesthood, men that dye received
Tithes, but in this, he that lives; Heb. 7.8. We must give to further his
truth, and relieve his distressed brethten, and what is so given, will be found
in his record, as given to him: 3 John 5.6, 7, 8. with Matthew. 25.40. 10. In
many appurtenances those works had a golden outside, a table, and staves to
bear it, all gilded, dishes, spoons, cups, candlesticks, snuffers, tongs, all
of pure gold, Exodus: 25. a linning ephod and a girdle, all wrought with gold,
breast plate, chains, bells, all of gold, and on Aarons head a plate of the
purest gold when he entered the holy place, and with this Motto, Holiness to the
Lord, Exodus: 28. a golden outside holiness; But Gods commands, and man's
practical belief, are better then the purest gold; Psalm. 19.10. 1 Pet. 1.7. our
garments of fine clean and white linen is the righteousness of Saints;
Righteousness is our breast plate; Truth is our girdle wherewith our minds are
girt; Churches that hold forth truth by word and deed are our golden cand
lesticks, Read and weigh Rev: 19.8. Ephe: 6.14. 1 Pet. 1.13. Rev. 1.12, 13. 20.
In a word, the Law or withered Testament, had divine Ceremonies and a worldly
sanctuary and tabernacle, outside services and promises till the time of
reformation; but Christ is come and has a more excellent Ministry, better
promises, better services, a Minister of the holy things and of the true
Tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man; Heb: 7.8. and 9. Chapters, for
was the Ministration of condemnation glorious, much more does the ministration
of righteousness exceed in glory, was that that is done away glorious? much
more is that that remains glorious, 2 Cor. 3.9, 10, 11.

The second Use.
Expect not ever to be justified without preceding good works; it is, and must
be without the works of the Law; It is not, nor can be without good works
preceding, we must do the law before justification; Rom: 2.13. Was not Abraham
our father justified by works, when he offered his son Isaac on the Altar, so
that his belief wrought with works, and by works was his belief perfected, and
Scripture fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to
him for righteousness, see then, how that by works a man is justified, and not
by belief only; The works by which he was justified was obedience, making no
demur at the most difficult command, as the offering of his only son, if God
bid him.

Obj: But Paul says he was not justified by works, he only believed, and that
was counted righteousness; Rom: 4.5.

Answ: Paul does not oppose James, for he was not justified without preceding
good works, or obedience, which James speaks of; yet without the works of the
Law, which Paul speaks of; Paul means here, only such works which the Jews
were under, and Gentiles not under, and by the ungodly he means only the none
worshipper in the Jews way, as the scope of the place may evidence to any that
wink not. Paul had declared, chap. 3. that God is just in justifying only such
as believed into Jesus; and so boasting is excluded, not by the law of works,
but by the Law of faith: therefore concludes that a man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the Law, and so God is a God not to the Jews only, but to
the Gentiles also, justifying the circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision by
faith; which he further prosecutes, chap. 4. proving by two instances, that
since justification is through faith, and not through works, therefore it comes
to Gentiles as well as to Jews. His first instance is Gods dealing with Abram,
he being circumcised, and a sacrificer, might also ( Jew like) have boasted
before men of his works, but not with God; Since, God did not reckon such works
for his righteousness, but his practical belief, and so with all, (says he)
their belief (to wit, belief perfected by works as Abraham's was) is counted to
them for righteousness. His other instance is David's describing a blessed man
to be one to whom right teousness is imputed without works; to wit, without
circumcision, and such works as made the Jews a people distinct from all people
else, and so Paul applies it; saying, Came this blessedness on the Jews only,
nay, but on the Gentiles also, for faith was reckoned to Abrvham for
righteousness before he was circumcised, who afterward received the sign of
circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had before
circumcision, and so became father to all that believe though uncircumcised,
that righteousness might be imputed to them also, and the father of
circumcision, even of such as walk in the steps of that faith which Abraham had
before; for the promise was not to Abraham, or his seed through the Law, but
through the righteousness of faith; for, if they that are of the Law, (under
circumcision) be heirs, faith is void and the promise effectlesse, but it is of
faith, and therefore of grace, and so sure to all the seed, all which are of
Abraham's belief, be they Jew or Gentile: So we see Paul's drift in both Chapters
isto prove, that since justification is not by the law of works, but by faith,
Gentiles may have right to it as well as Jews, and so the works without which
we are justified, are the works of the Law, and the Law through which Sonship
is not, or through which the promise does not pass, is the law of works, as
chap. 3. and so, these ungodly ones (as translated) which God justifies, are
before and after called Gentiles and uncircumcision, not meaning sinners, while
they continue in sin, or before they do good works, but the contrary, such
ungodly ones as walk in the steps of Abraham's faith, obeying every command as
Abraham did, and the blessed ones to whom (as David says) God imputes not sin,
were so sanctisied that in their spirit was (left) no guile, Psa. 32.2, 3. yet
without works, without circumcision, and such works as distinguished Jew from
Gentile, but not without the works of obedience, as James declares.

The third Use.
See the errors abroad about justification, (laid down as Objections) answered
and confuted.

Obj: The laboring for a personal righteousness, or to be accepted with God
for well-doing, are the works of the law, or to seek by our well-walking to
please God, is our own righteousness.

Answ. Be not deceived, for God is not mocked, whatsoever any one sows, the
same shall he reap, he that foweth to the flesh shall reap: destruction, and
none reap life everlasting that do not first sow to the Spirit; Gal. 6.7. No
personal glory hereafter, without personal righteousness now, and therefore
Paul and others labored to be accepted of God for well-doing, and persuaded
others to it also, because that every one shall at the judgment seat of
Christ, receive according to that be himself has done in the flesh, whether
good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.9, 10. and says he, Col 1.10. Walk worthy of the Lord
unto all well pleasing. How to? He tells us being fruitful in every good work,
God who abominateth the works of the Law, is not pleased without good works,
and Paul and others that accounted their own righteousness but dross and
dung, did by good works seek to win Christ, and to please him.

Obj: The Law (meaning the righteous rule) commands more then any can do, but
enableth not, and knows no surety.

Answ. Though the law of works is a yoke of bondage, the law of faith is not
so; Christ yoke is easy, his burden light, his commands are not grievous,
Matthew. 11. 1 John 5.3. They may be easily kept, for all the ten Commandments
in their several branches and appurtenances in their utmost extent, can but
require the right ordering of thought, word and deed, and can thou not do
this? speak sinner, can thou not choose but devise mischief on thy bed? and
if Satan dart in vain thoughts, can thou not choose but lodge them? art thou
necessitated to harbor them? Jer 4.14. or, art thou not able day and night to
meditate on Gods Law? as Psalm. 1.2. and 119.97. Secondly, Can thou not leave
off cursing, and swearing, and lying, and railing, and foolish jesting; Ephesians:
4.25. and 5, 4. Psalm. 34.13. or, art not able to speak of wisdom, or confer of
judgment; Ps. 37.30. Thirdly, Art thou necessitated to oppress, or defraud,
to cheat or steal, or kill, or commit adultery, etc. Or, is not a rich sinner
able to cloth the naked, feed the hungry, harbor the destitute, Job 31.32. or
to further Gods worship? or is any not able to yield to baptism, to prize
Church meetings, and breaking bread in remembrance of Christ, and to prize
prophesying? Is any necessited to oppose Gods truth or people, or to persecute
them? or to believe lies, that so they might be damned: speak sinner and thy
conscience shall tell thee, that God has enabled thee to shun all he forbids,
and to do all he bids thee: Work out with fear and trembling thy own salvation,
for God has enabled thee to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

Obj: The Law is a long way to Christ, we must go all along till we come to
perfection, before we can be justified.

Answ: There is no other, therefore no nearer way: Its only the doers of the
Law hall be justified, Romans 2.13. your new and nigh way of imputation is the
highway to destruction, for if Christ's righteousness be reckoned yours, while
you are a sinner, by the same rule his glory must be reckoned yours when you
are in hell.

Obj. No sin in the world can debar people from Christ, sinners as sinners are
the objects of justification.

Answ. The least sin remaining debars from Christ, for we must separate from
sinners, and sin too, so as not touch the unclean thing before he will receive
us, 1 Cor. 6.18.

Obj: There is a passive receiving of Christ without a hand, when God foreeth
open man's spirit, and powers in his Son in despite of the receiver.

Answ. This contradicts Christ, who says, Behold I stand at the door and
knock, if any man will open to me, I will come into him and sup with him, and
he with me, Rev. 3.20.

Obj: The new Covenant requires no condition on our part, and if we look to
get by our duties it will be but a knock.

Answ: Yea but it does, the condition required before the promise of
justification is made over to us, is no less then perfection; Genesis 17.1, 2.
Walk before me and be thou perfect, and I will make my covenant with thee, etc.
Incline your ears to me, says God, hear, and your soul shall live, and I will
make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David; Isa:
35.3, 4.

Obj. A man is justified when his sin is not, and Christ's righteousness is
imputed to him though he sin, and God sees it as fighting against his holy
Spirit, but sees it not so as to condemn him.

Answ. It has been shown that to be justified is to be made righteous, and
that by the gift of the Holy Spirit, and though declaring the wicked to be
just, is termed justifying him, yet such justifying is abominable to God, for
his ways are judgment without iniquity, just and right is he; Deuteronomy. 32.4. He
cannot do that abominable thing which his soul hates, he cannot see sin in any,
but so as to condemn them, if a believing Job sin, God marketh him, and will
not acquit him from his iniquity; Job 10.14. We must cease sinning before God
can cease condemning; Romans 8.1.

Obj: If a believer sin, Christ is reckoned the finner, and not he, for Christ
does all for him, others must do all themselves, and God cannot be offended at
them, but at Christ, God is well pleased in Christ, not with him.

Obj: It is a desperate thing to serve a rit of condemnation on a believer,
though he fall into as gross a sin as the reprobate does, the reprobate is cursed
but not he, he is no no more cursed then if he had not sinned.

Answ. A righteous God which hates sin, hates also the sinner, and loves the
righteous walker, read Psalm. 11.5, 6, 7. They and only they that sin against
him will he race out of his book, Exodus the soul that finneth it shall dye,
Eze: He that does righteousness is righteous as he is righteous; 1 John 3.7.
God cannot hate one for the sin of another, and it is a wicked conclusion to
say, God is offended and displeased with Christ, for he could not be well
pleased in him, were he not well pleased with him; He loved truth and hated
iniquity, and therefore God his God did anoint him before his fellows; Psalm.
45.7 He always kept his fathers commands, and therefore did always abide in
his fathers love: John 15.9, 10. and so shall we, if we so do.

Obj: Christ is by imputation the greatest sinner under the whole cope of
Heaven; Psalm. 40.12. for were he not a sinner he could not die for sin.

Answ. Some words in that Psalm are applied to Christ, being as true in him as
in David, but v. 12. is not true in Christ, though true in David, and so are
not applied to Christ, and Christ dyed for sin not as a sinner, but as a most
holy sin-offering, had the Father reckoned him a sinner in dying for sin, then
must he die; first, for his own sin, and again for the peoples sin: Nay, had
Christ been imputed a sinner in dying for sin, then must we all have perished,
and he also, although he had so died ten thousand times over, for a sin
offering is most holy, and so accounted, as Lev. 6.17. and 7.6. and so was
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

Obj: Some were elect from eternity, and for them only Christ dyed, and for
them he satisfied justice, purposed faith, repentance and salvation, his death
is sufficient for all, but intended to be efficacious only to some.

Answ. O how partial would God be if this were true, but he is impartial, as
Christ dyed for all alike, and makes all hearts alike, all souls being his,
Ez: 18. So is he a like ready to elect one as another in case the one be as fit
for election as another, for he electeth or sets apart for himself the man
that is Godly: Ps. 4. The Father himself (says Christ) loves you because you
have loved me, and believed that I came from God, John 16.27. We are bound to
bless God for you brethren (says Paul to a zealous people) Beloved of the
Lord, because God has chosen you from the beginning, through sanctification of
the Spirit and belief of the truth; 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. We see here that God
electeth only his special beloved ones, which special love of the Father to the
creature, is occasioned by love, and belief Godward in the creature, and by
obeying the truth, these believers do purify their own souls, as expressed 1
Pet. 1.22. and when their Spirits are sanctified by believing and obeying the
truth, then comes Gods election; I say he elects them through the
sanctification of their spirit, and belief of the truth; first, God preached
truth, then they believed and obeyed it: 3. their spirits came hereby to be
sanctified: 4. then God elected them, and not before.

Obj: But they were elected from the beginning.

Answ. True, but not from the worlds beginning as some dream, but when by
believing they had purified their souls thence forward are they the elect of
God. Elect according to the fore knowledge of God, through sanctification of
the spirit, unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ, 1 Pet.
1.2. As election is before justification, or blood sprinkling, so
sanctification of the Spirit is before election. Obj: But one place expressly
says, as he has chosen us in him before the world began, Ephesians. 1.4. Ans. Had
not the translator favored this error, he had translated it from the
foundation of the world, and then it would not have contradicted truth, for we
elected ones have been elected from, or ever since that time, even through the
sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth, and not otherwise. Abel
in the first age of the world was elected after he had purified his Spirit by
believing and obeying truth; So was Enoch in another age, Abraham in another
age, Paul in another, and I hope some in this age also, and so, though Gods
elect be chosen in Christ ever since the first age of the world, yet not chosen
till after they are Godly, or till by belief they have sanctified or purified
their own souls. Again, what man or woman was there ever since the world began,
but has been deceived by sin, (except the man Christ Jesus only) but neither
Satan, not falls teachers can deceive the very elect, to make them sin, it is I
say impossible for any to deceive them, Math. 24. Though they before election
have been deceived as well as other.

Use. Then sinner be not disheartened to press after Godliness, for fear thou
art not elected (as some have been) for if thou art not elected, it is thy
fault, and if thou art not as yet elected, thou may be, if thou will
earnestly practice Godliness, and purify thy soul by obeying truth. God is
as free 1. to elect, then to justify thee as any; he is as free for one as for
another, witness his freeness to wicked Cain; Abel by belief offered a better
sacrifice then he, and obtained witness that he was righteous; Heb. 11. And God
respected Abel and his offering, but not Cain nor his offering, at which Cain
was wroth, and his countenance fell, then God says to him, why art thou wrath,
and why is thy countenance fallen, if thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? or else sin lies at the door, Genesis 4. Why wroth Cain, thy conscience
shall witness that I rejected thee not without a cause, and why is thy
countenance fallen? Do thou think thou art reprobated and past hope, and that
my hatred is to thee irrevocable; no Cain, no such thing, I am as ready to
accept of thee as of Abel, if thou will live as Abel does; and though hitherto
thou have deserved displeasure, shall thou not be accepted if henceforth thou
amend? let thy own conscience judge; God is thus equal handed and open hearted
to all, if any sinner hearken to God, and turn from his evil ways, God will
repent of the evil he purposed to do to them, and will not do it, Jer. 26.3.
and 36.3. If a man will alter his actions, God will alter his purpose, to elect
a few and reprobate many, without cause in the creature, but because he will do
it, is partiality, and partiality is not grace but cruelty, but to seekall men's
good: is graciousness, and thus God is, he sent his son, and his son came into
the world purposely to save all. Joh. 3.17. and 12.47. Exercises patience on
purpose thut none should perish, but that all might repent; 2 Pet. 3.9. and if
sinners but speak well, it cheereth God, and he heartily wishes their hearts
were so, for their own good. De. 5.28, 29. But though God be so equal handed
and open hearted to all, yet Lord how few attain justification; when the old
world was filled with people, only one even Noah was in the way to justification,
who in time became heir of that righteousness which is by faith, Genesis 7.1. Heb.
11.7. In Jobs time, how many went the way to attain it, none all the earth over
was like him, Job 1.8. he in time attained it, Job 42.5, 6. How many in the
Jews times (though a Church of God) who were for multitude like the sand, yet
but a remnant saved. Isa. 10.22. even one of a City, or two of a Tribe, Jer.
3.14. And in Paul's time, but a remnant, yet that was harvest time, Romans 11.5.
Joh. 4.35, 36, 37. Lord how few then are there in our times, which are but
gleaning times of the justified, for our merciful Lord is just also, and cannot
wickedly justify any, but will finish the account and cut it short in
righteousness, the Lord will make a short account on the earth. Romans 9.28.

FINIS.
Page 9. line 16, for with, read without.


