A DISCOURSE OF A true Englishman, Free from Selfe-interest, concerning the
interest ENGLAND has in the Siege OF Graveling.

June 28th printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for Thomas Walkley. 1644.

A Discourse of a true Englishman, free from Selfe-interest, concerning the
interest ENGLAND has in the siege of Graveling.
OUr domestic affairs employing the best seeing men of the Realm, I having
no share in so great actions, conceive it my part to represent unto them, and
the rest of my dear Country men, what evils are invading us from abroad. I
fear that whilst England labors in her best subjects for the restitution
of our peace at home, dangers of no small consequence, arising from foreign
practices, may grow past remedy.

Nature which has separated England from the rest of the world by a broad and
deep sea, serving in stead of ditch and wall, seems to tell this Island, that
her true interest is to keep herself Mistress of this Sea, and by all
possible means to hinder her neighbors from overmuch power in this her ditch
and wall; the power at sea of each particular of them must be less than hers,
if she will be safe, and in as much as she can procure, the power at sea of
each particular neighbor must be equally balanced with that of the other, one
must not overtop the other, they must join together. This for many years she
has exactly observed, aiding sometime this, sometime that, never permitting
any to command her seas, still keeping her neighbors divided and opposite
among themselves, who had they joined, might have given her just cause of
fear. Queen Elizabeth always held this course, judging the greatness and
s^fetie of this Kingdom to depend thereon, to this she was induced by these,
or the like reasons.

1 Englands chief prerogative and g^orie is to command her seas, this
prerogative and glory will be easily lost, if all neighboring ports and
coasts come into the rule of one Prince or State.

2 Whiles these havens and coasts remain divided among the Spanyard,
Hollander, and French, which nations are at enmity among themselves, England
is free from fear, no one of them being powerful enough to invade her; and if
any one should attempt the invasion, selfe-interest would enforce the other to
assist her. But if all come into the hands of one Master, his power will be
dreadful to England, if he invade, who shall assist this Island?

3 Neighboring Countries remaining as they are, at contention among
themselves, and almost in perpetual wars, England grows rich, having free
traffic with them all; but if the French possess the coast of Dunkirk, the
freedom of Englands trade must depend on them, they may hold this Island to
unequal terms, because in arising strifes there will be none to take Englands
part.

4 The Spaniards being Masters of Dunkirk, Ostend, and Graveling, it has
always been in this Islands power to live at peace with them, and good cause
why, the true interest of the Spanyard is to be at peace with us. Experience of
many years yields good proofs, no act of hostility, no suspicion of wrong
has come from thence; so that England by long trial being assured on that
side, it behooves her to apprehend the danger of new neighbors in those towns:
the certainty of good neighborhood ought by her to be preferred unto the
uncertaintie of others, as yet not by her experienced.

5 The French have always been held in jealousy by the English pasted wars,
actual pretenses of the one against the other; the memory which the French
retain of succor sent from hence to Rochell, that opinion the English cannot
choose but have, that the French will powerfully maintain our Queens
interests, when they have ended with Spain, doing in the mean while what
possibly they can to assist her, must needs persuade the Parliament, that
Graveling once had by the French, this Kingdom must expect them, specially if
to the former motive we adjoyue common experience, that the French love to be
always in war, if not abroad, rather than fail at home.

6 The plot of the siege of Graveling was laid by treaty and agreement between
the Hollanders and the French; in this agreement the French permit unto the
Hollanders the conquest of the town and haven of Dunkirk, which they presume
will presently follow the taking of Graveling. Now I leave unto any wise men's
judgment, what interest England, especially the Parliament, may have in
hindering the Hollanders from the possession of this haven, considering that by
this means it falls into the hands of the Prince of Orange, who is Admiral of
Holland, and Master of all their Sea-forces, besides his power by land, who
sees not the fair pretenses he may have to intermeddle in the civil wars of
England, and the titles he may bring forth for more than this?

7. The Parliament having the administration of this Realm, and possessing the
Navy thereof, its honor and interest exacteth such a government, as may
hinder while it lasts, all detriment, from within and from abroad, which it
shall do most securely by collecting such experienced maxims, by which this
Kingdom has subsisted hitherto, and by which it has maintained unto it self
strength, wealth and splendour. In so doing it will more freely possess the
Subjects love, who by this must see they seek the true interest of the Crown.

Against these reasons two Objections may be opposed. 1. That England is too
much employed in her own affairs, hindering her from attending to foreign
business. 2. That the Parliament cannot succor Graveling, without danger of
provoking France, and drawing the French Force upon England.

To the first of these Objections I easily answer; First, that Englands Civil
Wars should rather incite than hinder the Parliament from succouring Graveling:
This Kingdoms divisions causing it is weakness, should also cause an
apprehension of France her growing Great and strong, by adjoynig Graveling to
her dominions. This apprehension should produce an effectual desire to hinder
this growth and strength as I have already made manifest.

Secondly, to succor Graveling no forces of ours are needful to the Spaniard
but those of Sea, such of these as are in the Parlia, possession, are not so
much employed for the present, as a sufficient part of them may not for some
few days, be assigned for this expedition. It seems a thing most certain to
me, that this town being of so great consequence to the Spaniard, he will most
readily free us from all charges in this action, and not only this, but also
afford us no small present gain in case we give him this assistance.

To the other Objection of provoking France, and drawing her Forces upon
England, for my part I see no pretext France can take against the Parliament,
in regard of this help, seeing that it will be afforded by the Parliament for
the indemnity, and security of this Kingdom, and according to those maxims
England has always used without violation of her amity with France. Secondly,
England wrongeth none in using her right. Now this Kingdom possessing the
Dominion of her seas, may with just cause hinder the invasions and usurpations
of those, who with her prejudice seek to spoil her neighbor. 3. According to
the ordinary use and course of W^r, such succors as these induce no breach of
peace. The Hollanders who have neutrality with the Empire, sent notwithstanding
aid to the Castle of Hermetsteyn, and the town of Dorsten, besieged by the
Imperiallists, and contributed the value of great sums to the Sweden, and to
the Widow of the H^ssian, without giving cause of War against them, unto the
Emperor: At this present they supply the Sweden with Ships and men against the
Dane, continuing amity notwithstanding with this King. The French themselves
have done the like, for the Hollanders against the Spaniard, even at that time
they were in peace with Spain, they gave aid of men an^ money to the King of
Sweden, against the Empire, not having any open War with the Emperor, whence
it plain ensues, that such succors cannot be esteemed acts of Hostility
according to the examples and maxims of the French and Hollanders themselves.

4. In case such aides would provoke the French, it is certain that after the
raising of this siege, the Spaniards and the Empire will give them work
enough, so to hinder them from any enterprise against England. Farther, if the
French shall actually enter into War against this Realm, in regard of the
frustrating their hopes of Graveling, Spain no doubt will oblige her self to
defend it, and keep it free from harm, ensuing from the said Instruction.

5. The suffering France to get means to do hurt unto England is much more to
be feared, than the giving to the French a pretense for doing her harm, France
cannot hurt unless she has power and means, but if the French get power,
and means to hurt, this will be executed by them here, although pretenses
fail, as they have done, not only once elsewhere, and not only in one place,
where they have broken solemn Treaties without any cause, yea, without color
of Justice.

6 When France shall be in case to invade England, pretenses will never want,
old quarrels, aid given to Rochell, the interest of the Queen of England, and
other like will suffice. So that England's security consists not in avoiding
to provoke France, which is sufficiently stirred up by her own ambition, and
her desire to devour this Kingdom, but England must procure security to her
self, by taking away from France means and power to hurt her. The will to
hurt England can never fail in the French.

Lastly, if a more particular treaty with the Spanyard about this business
please the Parliament, other means and ways questionless will be found out,
by which a satisfying security for England against France will appear. So
that the aid which England shall give to Spain in this present occasion, shall
appear no way prejudicial to this Kingdom.

FINIS.

