The Kings Forces Totally ROVTED By the Parliaments Army, under the Command of
Major General POYNTZ and Cheshire-Forces, on Routon-Heath, within two miles of
Chester, Sept. 24. Together with The state of the Siege at Chester; AND A List
of the Lords, Knights, Commanders and common Soldiers slain and taken
prisoners; There being above One thousand prisoners taken, and the whole Army
Routed.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons. Sept.
29. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
Honorable Sir,
WE still keep the Suburbs of Chester, and yesterday joining our forces with
Major General Poyntz, God gave us a great Victory over the Kings Army, whereby
God has not only given us, but the Kingdom much cause of joy and
thankfulness: We have such earnest business at present upon us, that we our
selves cannot have time to represent to you the particulars, but have commanded
the Chaplain to our Forces, who was an eye witness to all that was done, to give
you a full account thereof: All that we shall trouble you with at instant, is
to renew our humble requests, that you will be pleased to expedite our
Remonstrance, and procure a speedy Order for moneys to be with all possible
speed conveyed to us; otherwise, we shall not be able to keep such Forces
together, as are necessary for this work: And so with tender of our Service,
rest

Your most humble Servants, G: Boothe. Ph: Mainwaringe. Rog: Wilbraham.

Chester Suburbs, Sept. 25. at 3. post Meridiem.
A true Relation of the great Fight, and Routing the Kings forces on Routon
Heath, Sept. 24.
IT pleased God upon Saturday morning, Sept. 20. 1645. about break of day to
deliver into the hands of the Cheshire forces, though few in number, under the
command of Col: Michael Jones, and Adjutant Louthian, The Suburbs of the city
of Chester, formerly accounted for to Sir Will: Brereton; in which expedition
(though by storm) we lost but one man; the Enemy fired most part of the
Suburbs; Cow-lane, St. John's lane, and the street without the North gate; our
care was to hasten to the taking of the City, without which the diseased county
could never be cured. Upon the Lords day we brought in our Artillery, fixed a
battery, and upon Monday made a great breach in the wall, resolving to storm it
at night, which we endeavored in 3. or 4. places, but the Ladders proved too
short, and the breach too high on the inside, so they made their retreat with
the loss of two men, and some wounded. The Suburbs were entered by Captain
Gimbert, the breach by Captain Finch, both of them stout and trusty men; though
God deferred that mercy we hoped for, in gaining the City, he gave us a better,
the utter Routing and spoiling of the Kings Army; which was thus performed.

Our Intelligence upon Monday Sept. 21. was, that the King was at Chirke
Castle, intending for Chester: Upon Tuesday, two trusty men were sent to seek
Major Genesis Poyntz, who was appointed to follow the King, but we heard nothing
of him; they meeting with him at Whitchurch, and acquainting him with our
present condition (who were like to be Stormed that night) he hastened away,
marched all night, though tired with long marches before: About six a clock
Wednesday morning, he advanced within a mile of the Enemy, three miles from
Chester, the one not knowing of the other; upon notice, both set themselves in
a posture; General Poyntz upon Hatton Heath, divided from the Enemy on the
Milne Heath by a Lane, they being betwixt him and the City: he first charged
them though upon a disadvantage, because the Enemies whole body was not come
up, but had a repulse, in which that gallant Gentleman Col: Graves was sore
wounded, and Col: Bothell, but not so dangerously; about 20. men slain, many
wounded; but we hear the Enemies loss was greater, however, upon the retreat,
it was noised that Gen: Poyntz was utterly Routed, which was sad nevvs to our
Forces in Chester; who upon consultation, at first thought it fit to quit the
Suburbs, least the Army miscarrying, all should be lost; but upon Intelligence
that Poyntz kept his ground and stood in a body, they resolved to keep what
ground they had gotten for the gaining of Chester, and to assist Genetall
Poyntz with Horse and Foot, which he sent for, and they promised: The signal
of their march from the Suburbs, was the discharge of two piece of Ordnance, at
which there was great shouting in General Poyntz camp, who without us could
neither charge the Enemy, nor make good their Retreat if need should require:
God in his good Providence deferred the work to that time of the day, that we
might find the fruit of many Prayers made for us, it being the monthly Fast,
and by this accession to vindicate our innocence, who were asperst for a
factious county, and mutinous Soldiery, though we can profess it before God
and the world, that we know not that county where the Gentry and Commanders
are more firmly semented in the band of true affection then this, nor a
Soldiery more obedient to commands, constant upon duty, and now free from
mutinies. Many of the Gentlemen of the county resorted to us, gave their best
assistance for the carrying on of this Work, upon whose shoulder no small
burden lies to regulate these troubled affairs: It was agreed by them, that
Col. Jones, a dextrous and resolute Soldier, should go out with the command of
Horse and Foot, 350. and 500. The Foot were led by Col. John Booth governor of
Warington, who was very forward in that Expedition: Adjutant Gen: Louthian a
man of known worth, was to keep the suburbs; a work of great trust and courage.

When these forces joined with Genesis Poyntz there was great joy in the camp, the
Enemy formed themselves into a body upon Routon Heath, two miles from Chester,
and stood in Batalia, being about 5000. as their own party confess, having
drained their Garrisons: We hastened toward them in the best posture we could,
the Horse was the Battle, because many, the wings were Foot because few; they
had the Wind and Sun; we had God with us, which was our Word, counterpoising
all disadvantages, and countermanding all strength; a little before 5. a clock,
we joined in a terrible storm, firing in the faces of one another, hacking and
slashing with svvords neither party gained or lost a foot of ground, as if
every one were resolved there to breath their last: Whilst the dispute was so
hot and doubtful, our Musketeers so galled their horse, that their Rear fled,
perceiving their loss by them, upon whom they made no Execution: Their Van
perceiving that, faced about, and fled also: We had nothing then to do, but to
pursue and make Execution, which we did to purpose, for though the ways were
strewed with Arms, Portmantles, Cloak-bags, and Horse, we left those to any
that would pillage, and fell to Execution: Some part we chased to Holt
bridge, the most toward Chester; some say the King was in the field, others
that he went out with a party, next after mentioned; but certain it is, he
went out from the City by the North gate, and thither retreated, for that gate
is without our Works.

A memorable service was performed by the Shropshire Forces, at the appointment
of Livetenant Louthiane, who were part of them that kept the suburbs. When
Colonel Jones was marched out to join with General Poyntz, there issued out
after him through the North-gate (with which party its affirmed the King went)
about six hundred horse and three hundred foot of the Kings and Queens
Regiments and General Gerrards Lifeguard. Adjutant Louthiane sent after them
about two hundred of the Shropshire horse, commanded by Livetenant Colonel
Coote in chief, the second division by Colonel Prince, the last by Ma:
Fenwicke and two hundred foot commanded by Captain Daniell, these gallantly
performed what they undertook, routed and chased the enemy, slew the Earl of
Leichfield and others, took diverse principal officers and followed the
execution four miles.

After we thought the work was ended, the enemy made head again, and they
that escaped in the field and about Chester, joined in another body, fell upon
part of our forces with advantage (for they were desperate seeing they had lost
the day) drove them to our mud walls, where the guards made execution on them,
and some small measure upon ours in the rear, through mistake: so they fled
toward Bridgetrafford being ignorant of the Foot, where they were driven into
deep ditches, and boggy places. The Country men set on them there, took one
hundred horse and sixty persons. Others fled into the forest where they are
met with.

Whilst we were thus engaged in the field the enemy taking advantage of the
small number left in the suburbs attempted the regaining of them in many
places; but were every where gallantly repulsed with loss by adjutant
Louthiane.

We cannot give a particular account of the number of the slain, which were
many, neither know we our own loss, but that it is very small. We have
taken the Earl of Portlands brother, with many considerable persons: Knights,
and officers, above one thousand prisoners; And its probable that of the five
thousand they say was in the field, the King will hardly rally one thousand,
we desire the honor of this victory may be given to God alone, to whom alone
it is due, his Instruments behaved themselves gallantly, the Cheshire Horse
were kowne most courageous, we desire not vainly to glory in any thing God
has done by us, but let the world say whether we have been backward in the
work committed to us as some have suggested.

Let Soldiers judge what it is for so small a force to maintain the leaguer
at Beeston, take and keep the outworks of Chester, to assist others a far
off, and these in the field, and run all hazard, rather than quit a foot of
what we have gained. Neither will we fix here: These are but the beginning of
action to us, since our new moddle, so successful, so much despised.

Upon Parliamentary supplies already Petitioned, we trust in him, whose
soldiers we are, to give as good account of our after proceedings, both in
reducing this County and asisting the neighborhood.

Prisoners taken at, and after the Rowting of the Kings Forces on Rowton Heath
within two miles of Chester, the twenty fourth of September, 1645.
Knights and Colonels.
SIr Philip Musgrave Major General. Colonel Sir Thomas Dawbrichcoate.
Colonel Sir Thomas Dacres. Colonel Sir Michael Constable. Colonel sir Thomas
Goare. Colonel sir Henry Stradling. Colonel Johan Philiem Heitter. Colonel
Weston, son to the late Lord Treasurer. Colonel Gifford. Colonel Cromwell.
Colonel Fletcher.
Lieutenant Colonels.
Lievten. Col. Matham. L. Colonel Millington. L. Colonel Hatton. L. Colonel
Salkeld. L. Colonel Ruly. L. Colonel Broughton. L. Colonel Rutherford.
Majors.
Major Williams. Major Morris. Major Magduggell. Major Magdoole. Major
Lacymouth.
Captains.
Captain Martin. Captain Swinlue. Captain Henshaw. Captain White. Captain
Gibbon. Captain Starling. Captain Sheley. Captain Connyers. Captain
Johnson. Captain Dixon. Captain Press. Captain Louther. Captain VVilley.
Captain Moreton. Captain Simpson. Captain Bell. Captain Boulton. Captain
Vaughan. Captain St. Michaels, Capt. of the Queens Troop, with him a Scarf
taken, which the Queen took from about her neck, and gave him to wear as
Colors for her.
Lievtenants.
Lieutenant Cottrell. Lieutenant Morgan, Lieutenant Bartrom. Lieutenant
Astelby. Lieutenant Story. Lieutenant Colborne. Lieutenant Constable.
Lieutenant Mansfield. Lieutenant Skipwith. Lieutenant Jefferson. Lieutenant
Power. Lievrcnant Brook. Lieutenant VVhitney. Lievrcnant Ellyott.
Cornets.
Cornet Elsing. Cornet Julyan. Cornet Rainsford. Comet Morley. Cornet Peirson.
Cornet Fitz-VVilliams. Cornet Smith.
Quartermasters.
Thomas Shelden, the Kings Quartermaster. Quartermaster Collizer. Quartermaster
Low. Quartermaster Brere. Trumpets five. Corporalls two. Gentlemen of the
Kings Lifeguard, seventeen. Twenty more Gentlemen. Troopers between eight
hundred and a thousand. Master Sherburne of Stannyhurst. Master William
Leighton. Master Lewis Darcy. Master Henry Boucher. Master James Mountague.
Master Gilbert Markham. These very considerable Gentlemen.
Slain.
Two Lords, 2 Knights, 1. Colonel, 1 Lieutenant-Collonel, and three hundred
and more Officers and common Soldiers.
FINIS.

