To the Honorable the House of Commons, the humble Petition of Colonel Edward
King of the County of Lincoln Esquire.
Shows,
THat Your Petitioner in this just War has by all means endeavored to approve
himself faithful, having taken up Arms, and hazzarded his life in the
Parliaments lowest condition, for the peace and happiness of this Kingdom in
Obedience to their Orders, enduring with much patience imprisonment,
necessities, distresses, and dishonor; choosing with constancy rather to
suffer the spoiling of his goods, and sequestring his estate by the Enemy, then
to assist them, or take Arms against his Religion, or Country: being well
assured that according to the Declaration of both Kingdoms of the 30 of
January 1643. The Honorable Houses of Parliament in their Wisdoms and
Justice would not see him neglected, much less ruined by those that are in
authority under them: Notwithstanding which though Your Petitioners losses have
been great, his estate become of little value to him, his Wife and Children
been forced to fly from their habitation at such time as the Earl of
Newcastles Army was prevalent in that County, yet Sir Hamond Whichcott Knight,
Thomas Lister Esquire, John Archer and others of the Committee of that County,
have of late put in Execution obsolete Ordinances of Parliament, long since
expired for the taxing and collecting of money upon Your Petitioner and his
tennants for taxes due when the County lay under the power of the Enemy, and
was plundered and wasted by them, and have by color thereof issued out Warrants
to treble the sums taxed upon him and them, to sequester their estates and
imprison their persons, and not regarding your Ordinances, of their extort
power by virtue of the Ordinance of the third of April 1645. for assessing and
taxing the sum of 2800. l. a month upon the County for the maintenance of
Horse, Foot, and Dragoons supposed to be raised by the Inhabitants of the same
for their necessary Defense, have taxed and levied diverse great sums of money
upon Your Petitioner, and his Tennants, contrary to the true meaning and intent
thereof, refusing out of their corrupt and unfaithful ends, to approve of such
Officers as were nominated by the County at a free and full Election, misusing,
altering, and subverting Your Ordinances, and exposing the County to be taxed,
plundered, and wasted, by the Enemy, which might have been defended had they
dealt faithfully and approved of the Officers nominated as was Ordained. At
this present Robert Dawson Your Petitioners Tennant is in prison by color of
the said Ordinance, though long since expired and out of date: Your Petitioner
likewise shows that he being by Commission under the hand and Seal of the
right Honorable the Earl of Manchester by virtue of the Ordinance of the
eleventh of October 1643. authorized to put in execution all Ordinances for the
raising of money within the County of Lincoln, did cause diverse woolls and
other goods of Malignants to be seized apprised and sold and the money paid
unto the Treasurer according to his Lordships appointment, since which time one
Nehemiah Rawson Gentleman and (...) Gainesborough to trouble and vex Your
Petitioner, and all those that were employed by him in the said service, have
brought several actions at the Common Law against him, and them, pretending a
property in the States goods, though Your Petitioner and those employed by him
did not any thing but in Execution or performance of the Ordinance for
sequestrations, for which they pray to be protected, and saved harmless, by
the Power and Authority of both Houses, as in the said Ordinance is expressed;
Your Petitioner likewise shows, That diverse false, malicious, and untrue
complaints, have been preferred against him, before the Honorable Committee of
both Kingdoms, by William Berry Gent. one of the Committee of Lincolnshire, by
the subornation of Thomas Lister, John Archer, and some others of the said
Committee, and prosecuted with much violence, and countenanced very unjustly,
with an intention and determination to ruin and undo him, against whose
injustice, and malice Your Petitioner by the mercy of God defended himself,
but being put to great and excessive charges, obtained neither damages nor
costs against them, whereupon they or some of them taking encouragement have
prosecuted your Petitioner this two years with unjust complaints before
several Committees to his great damages, contrary to the Laws and Statutes of
this Kingdom: Your Petitioner likewise shows, That being nominated High
Sheriff of the County of Lincoln in the year of our Lord God 1643. after he
had received his Patent, and took his Oath, he served you with cheerfulness,
and for the better performance of the said Office, raised, and armed a Troop of
Horse by Commission from the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester and
maintained the same with the assistance of his Friends and countrymen: and when
he received Orders from the Earl of Manchester for their pay expecting
encouragement from the Committee of Lincoln for undergoing so great a trust
and employment according to Your Ordinance of the twenty ninth of January 1643.
Your Petitioner was not only denied by them, the pay due unto him and his
Troop, but received many discouragements from some of the Committee, and as
yet has not received any allowance for his extraordinary Charges expended in
the execution of his said office; Your Petitioner likewise shows that the
Parliament is a debtor unto him in the sum of 2625. l. as at the foot of his
account delivered upon Oath to the Grand Committee of Accounts may appear. 624.
l. 3. s: 6. d. of which money was assigned upon the 27. of January 1644.
according to Ordinance of Parliament by the Earl of Manchester, the Commissary
General and two of the standing Committee at Cambridge, and ought long since
to have been paid unto him, and for which Your Petitioner had an Order from the
Earl of Manchester for the payment of the same: Notwithstanding all which Sir
Thomas Trollope, Thomas Lister and others of the Committee of Sequestrations
have sent for your Petitioner and his Father, and demanded from them the sum
of 250. l. as a debt due by them to Mr Edward Standish of Newarke whose estate
is sequestered; Your Petitioner likewise says, That by undue practices, false
suggestions and untrue surmises, they have shamefully slandred him, and diverse
other Gentlemen well affected to the Parliament, and to suppress them procured
their names to be left out of all Committees, nominating Malignants and men of
mean quality to serve in their places, to the oppression and undoing of a
great number of the well affected, which is contrary to your Ordinances: Your
Petitioner likewise says, That contrary to the Order of this honorable House,
and the commands of the Right honorable the Earl of Manchester, he has been
by the manifold crafts of Thomas Lister and others of the Committee discouraged
and outed from all his Commands, to his great discredit and wrong, to the
prejudice of your affairs, and to the great decay and impoverishing of the
Inhabitants of Lincolnshere, by which undue practices your Petitioner has been
caused to spend above 500. l. in his just defense, and is without all remedy by
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm not having any whither to fly for relief
but to your Justice. And lastly your Petitioner shows that upon the 28. of
October last there being an Election to be made at Grimsby in the County of
Lincoln for a Burgess to serve in Parliament, Your Petitioner declaring
himself to stand for that place, was by the procurement of Sir Christopher
Wray served with a Warrant upon the 17. of the said Month to appear before the
Northern Committee at Westminster within eight days after to answer words
contained in a Paper supposed to be spoken by him, which he performed, and none
being present to make proof of the Charge against him, was for the present
dismissed and thereupon made his return into the County with a Resolution to
stand for the place, and coming to Grimsby upon the 27. of the said Month, he
was informed by the Mayor and Burgesses That upon the 21. day Sir Christopher
came to the Town, and by threats forced the mayor to proceed to Election upon
the day following, where being present, by undue practices and threats, he
gained and procured voices for Mr William Wray his son, being then and yet an
Infant and beyond the Seas, and caused an Indenture to be signed and sealed by
the Mayor for him, against whom and others your Petitioner complained before
the Committee of Elections and Privileges, in the beginning of November
following, and has according to Order ever since the 11. of February attended
with his Council and Witnesses, to his great Charge, the discontent and
discouragement of his Witnesses, and as yet cannot obtain an hearing.

Now in what a sad and slavish condition your Petitioner is in, having wasted
and consumed all his substance in your service, being thus oppressed by his
fellow Subjects as before is mentioned, He refers to the Justice, Wisdom,
Piety, and Consideration of your Honorable House; Humbly praying he may be
releeved in the premises, and receive such Moneys as are due unto him, to
supply his necessities, according to the faith wherewith Your Honorable House
stands engaged unto him, by Your Covenant, Ordinances, and Declarations,

And Your Petitioner, etc.


