KING CHARLES HIS FAREWELL. LEFT As a Legacy to his dear CHILDREN; Written a
little before his Death. Containing Many Excellent Admonitions and Directions
how to demean themselves in all Estates and Conditions. WITH His Prayers in
the time of His Troubles.

LONDON; Printed for SKG 1649.

depiction of a man or King Charles I seated on a throne beneath a curtain,
handing a book to a young man or Charles II kneeling before him; Charles I
wears a cloak with the emblem of a cross within a sun; above, an arm emerging
from a cloud holds out a crown

KING CHARLES HIS FAREWELL.
SON, if these Papers, with some others, wherein I have set down the private
reflections of my Conscience, and my most impartial thoughts touching the
chief passages, which have been most remarkable, or disputed in my late
troubles come to your hands, to whom they are chiefly designed; they may be so
far useful to you, as to state your judgment aright in what has passed;
whereof a pious is the best use can be made; and they may also give you some
directions, how to remedy the present distempers, and prevent (if God will) the
like for time to come.

It is some kind of deceiving and lessening the injury of my long restraint,
when I find my leisure and solitude have produced something worthy of my
self, and useful to you; That neither You nor any other may hereafter measure
My Cause by the Success, nor my Judgment of things by my Misfortunes, which
I count the greater by far, because they have so far lighted upon You and some
others, whom I have cause most to love as well as my Self, and of whose
unmerited sufferings, I have a greater sense than of mine Own.

But this advantage of wisdom You have above most Princes, that You have
begun, and now spent some years of discretion, in the experience of troubles,
and exercise of patience, wherein Piety, and all virtues, both Moral and
Political, are commonly better planted to a thriving (as trees set in winter)
then in the warmth, and serenity of times, or amidst those delights, which
usually attend Princes Courts in times of peace and plenty, which are prone,
either to root up all plants of true Virtue and Honor, or to be contented only
with some leaves, and withering formalities of them, without any real fruits,
such as tend to the public good, for which Princes should always remember
they are born, and by providence designed.

The evidence of which different education the holy Writ affords us in the
contemplation of David and Rehoboam: The one prepared, by many afflictions for
a flourishing Kingdom, the other softened by the unparaleld prosperity of
Solomon's Court, and so corrupted to the great diminution, both for Peace,
Honor, and Kingdom, by those flatteries, which are as unseparable from
prosperous Princes, as Flies are from fruit in summer; whom adversity, like
cold weather, drives away.

I had rather you should be Charles le Bon, then le Grand, good then great, I
hope God has designed you to be both, having so early put you into that
exercise of his Graces, and Gifts bestowed upon you, which may best weed out
all vicious inclinations, and dispose you to those Princely endowments, and
employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those,
over whom God shall place you.

With God I would have you begin and end, who is King of Kings; the Sovereign
disposer of the Kingdoms of the world; who pulls down one, and sets up
another.

The best Government, and highest Sovereignty you can attain to, is, to be
subject to him, that the Scepter of his Word and Spirit, may rule in your heart.

The true glory of Princes consists in advancing Gods Glory, in the maintenance
of true Religion, and the Churches good; Also in the dispensation of civil
Power, with Justice and Honor to the public peace.

Piety will make you prosperous; at least it will keep you from being
miserable; nor is he much a loser, that loses all, yet saves his own soul at
last.

To which Center of true happiness, God, I trust, has and will graciously
direct all these black lines of affliction, which he has been pleased to draw
on me, and by which he has [I hope] drawn me nearer to himself. You have
already tasted of that Cup whereof I have liberally drank, which I look upon as
Gods Physic, having that in healthfulnesse which it wants in pleasure.

Above all, I would have you, as I hope you are already; well grounded and
settled in your Religion; The best profession of which, I have ever esteemed
that of the Church of England, in which you have been educated; yet I would
have your own Judgment and Reason now seal to that sacred bond which education
has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not other men's
custom or tradition, which you profess.

In this I charge you to persevere, as coming nearest to Gods Word for
Doctrine, and to the primitive examples for Government, with some little
amendment, which I have otherwhere expressed and often offered, though in
vain. Your fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary for your
souls then your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them.

For I have observed, that the Devil of Rebellion, does commonly turn himself
into an Angel of Reformation; and the old Serpent can pretend new Lights; when
some men's Consciences accuse them for Sedition and Faction, they stop its mouth
with the name and noise of Religion; when Piety pleads for peace and patience,
they cry out Zeal.

So that, unless in this point You be well settled, you shall never want
temptations to destroy you and yours, under pretensions of reforming matters of
Religion, for that seems even to worst men, as the best and most auspicious
beginning of their worst defignes.

Where, beside the Noveltie which is taking enough with the Vulgar, every one
has an affectation, by seeming forward on an outward Reformation of Religion,
to be thought zealous, hoping to cover those irreligious deformities, whereto
they are conscious, by a severitie of censuring other men's opinions or actions.

Take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public Discriminations
in matters of Religion, contrary to what is in your Judgment, and the Church
well settled: your partial adhering, as head, to any one side, gains you not so
great advantages in some men's hearts (who are prone to be of their Kings
Religion) as it loses you in others, who think themselves, and their
profession first despised, then persecuted by you: Take such a course as may
either with calmness and charity quite remove the seeming differences and
offenses, by impartiality, or so order affairs in point of power, that you
shall not need to fear or flatter any faction; for if ever you stand in need
of them, or must stand to their courtesy you are undone: The Serpent will
devour the Dove: you must never expect less of loyalty, justice, or humanity
then from those who engage into religious Rebellion: Their interest is always
made Gods; under the colors of Piety, ambitious policies march, not only with
greatest security, but applause, as to the populacy; you may hear from them
Jacob's voice, but you shall feel they have Esau's hands.

Nothing seemed less considerable than the Presbyterian Faction in England, for
many years; so compliant they were to public order; nor indeed was their
Party great, either in Church, or State, as to men's judgments: But as soon as
discontents drove men into Sidings (as ill humors fall to the disaffected
part, which cause inflammations) so did all, at first who affected any novelties
adhere to that side, as the most remarkable and specious note of difference
(then) in point of Religion.

All the lesser Factions at first were officious servants to Presbytery their
great Master: till time and military success discovering to each their peculiar
advantages, invited them to part stakes, and leaving the joint stock of
uniforme Religion, pretended each to drive for their party, the trade of
profits or preferments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the Church and
State, but even of Pesbytery it self, which seemed and hoped at first to have
engrossed all.

Let nothing seem little or despicable to you, in matters which concern
Religion and the Churches peace, so as to neglect a speedy reforming and
effectual suppressing Errors, and Schisms, which seem at first but as a
handbredth, by seditious Spirits, as by strong winds are soon made to cover and
darken the whole Heaven.

When you have done justice to God, your own soul and his Church, in the
profession and preservation both of truth and unity in Religion. The next main
hinge on which your prosperity will depend, and move, is, That of civil
Justice, wherein the settled Laws of these Kingdoms, to which you are rightly
heir, are the most excellent rules you can govern by; which by an admirable
temperament give very much to Subjects industry, liberty, and happiness; and
yet reserve enough to the Majesty and Prerogative of any King, who owns his
people as Subjects, not as slaves; whose subjection, as it preserves their
prosperity, peace, and safety; so it will never diminish your Rights, nor
their ingenuous Liberties; which consists in the enjoyment of the fruits of
their industry, and the benefit of those Laws to which themselves have
consented.

Never charge your Head with such a Crown, as shall by its heaviness oppress
the whole body, the weakness of whose parts cannot return any thing of
strength, honor, or safety, to the Head, but a necessary debilitation and
ruin.

Your Prerogative is best showed, and exercised in remitting, rather then
exacting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse, than legal tyranny.

In these two points, the preservation of established Religion and Laws, I may
(without vanity) turn the reproach of my sufferings, as to the worlds censure,
into the honor of a kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of my own
Conscience. The troubles of my Kingdoms having nothing else to object against
me but this, That I prefer Religion, and Laws established, before those
alterations they propounded.

And so indeed I do, and ever shall, till I am convinced by better Arguments,
than what hitherto have been chiefly used toward Me, Tumults, Armies, and
Prisons.

I cannot yet learn that lesson, nor I hope ever will you, That it is safe for
a King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the public Interest, and the good of the community.

How God will deal with Me, as to the removal of these pressures, and
indignities, which his Justice by the very unjust hands of some of my Subjects,
has been pleased to lay upon Me, I cannot tell: nor am I much solicitous what
wrong I suffer from men, while I retain in my soul, what I believe is right
before God.

I have offered all for Reformation and Safety, that in Reason, Honor, and
Conscience, I can; reserving only what I cannot consent unto, without an
irreparable injury to my own soul, the Church, and my people, and to you also;
as the next and undoubted Heir of my Kingdoms.

To which, if the divine Providence, to whom no difficulties are insuperable,
shall in his due time after my decease bring you, as I hope he will: My
Counsel and Charge to you, is, That you seriously consider the former real or
objected miscarriages, which might occasion my troubles, that you may avoid
them.

Never repose so much upon any man's single counsel, fidelity, and discretion,
in managing affairs of the first magnitude, (that is, matters of Religion and
Justice) as to create in your self, or others, a difference of your own
judgment, which is likely to be always more constant and impartial to the
interest of your Crown and Kingdom than any man's.

Next, beware of exasperating any Factions by the crossnesse, and asperity of
some men's passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by you, grounded
only upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts and
suburbs of Religion.

Wherein a charitable connivence and Christian toleration often dissipates
their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies: and puts the despised and
oppressed party, into such Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full
revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly assisted by
that vulgar commiseration, which attends all, that are said to suffer under the
notion of Religion.

Provided the differences amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws, and
Government, or Religion established, as to the essentials of them, such motions
and minings are intolerable.

Always keep up solid piety, and those fundamental Truths (which mend both
hearts and lives of men) with impartial favor and Justice.

Take heed that outward circumstances and formalities of Religion devour not
all, or the best encouragements of learning, industry, and piety; but with an
equal eye and impartial hand, distribute favors and rewards to all men, as
you find them for their real goodness both in abilities and fidelities
worthy and capable of them.

This will be sure to gain you the hearts of the best, and the most too: who
though they be not good themselves, yet are glad to see the severer ways of
virtue at any time sweetened by temporal rewards.

I have, You see, conflicted with different and opposite factions; (for so I
must needs call and count all those, that act not in any conformity to the Laws
established, in Church and State) no sooner have they by force subdued what
they counted their common Enemy, (that is, all those that adhered to the Laws,
and to Me) and are secured from that fear, but they are divided to so high a
rivalty, as sets them more at defiance against each other, than against their
first Antagonists.

Time will dissipate all factions, when once the rough horns of private men's
covetous and ambitious designs, shall discover themselves, which were at first
wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation, and Liberty: As the Wolf is not less cruel, so he will be more
justly hated, when he shall appear no better than a Wolf under Sheeps
clothing

But as for the seduced Train of the Vulgar, who in their simplicity follow
those disguises, My charge and counsel to you, is, That as you need no
palliations for any designs, (as other men) so that you study really to exceed
[in true and constant demonstrations of goodness, piety, and virtue, toward
the people] even all those men, that make the greatest noise and ostentations
of Religion; so you shall neither fear any detection, (as they do, who have
but the face and mask of goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just
expectations of your people; who cannot in Reason promise themselves so much
good from any Subjects novelties, as from the virtuous constancy of their King.

When these mountains of congealed factions shall by the Sunshine of Gods
mercy, and the splendour of your virtues be thawed and dissipated; and the
abused Vulgar shall have learned, that none are greater Oppressors of their
Estates, Liberties, and Consciences, than those men, that entitle themselves,
The Patrons and Vindicators of them, only to usurp power over them: Let then
no passion betray you to any study of revenge upon those, whose own sin and
folly will sufficiently punish them in due time.

But as soon as the forked arrow of factious emulations is drawn out, use all
princely arts, and clemency to heal the wounds; that the smart of the cure may
not equal the anguish of the hurt.

I have offered Acts of Indemnity, and Oblivion, to so great a latitude, as may
include all, that can but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious to the
Laws; and which might serve to exclude all future jealousies and insecurities.

I would have you always propense to the same way, when ever it shall be
desired and accepted, let it be granted, not only as an act of State policy
and necessity, but of Christian charity and choice.

It is all I have now left Me, a power to forgive those that have deprived Me
of all; and I thank God I have a heart to do it, and joy as much in this
grace, which God has given Me, as in all My former enjoyments; for this is a
greater argument of Gods love to Me, than any prosperity can be.

Be confident (as I am) that the most of all fides who have done amiss, have
done so, not out of malice, but misinformation, or mis-apprehension of things.

None will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, than those Subjects, who
sensible of their Errors, and our Injuries, will feel in their own Souls most
vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some reparations
for their former defects.

As your quality sets you beyond any Duel with any Subject, so the Nobleness
of your mind must raise you above the meditating any revenge, or executing
your anger upon the many.

The more conscious you shall be to your own merits, upon your people, the more
prone you will be to expect all love and loyalty from them, and to inflict no
punishment upon them for former miscarriages: You will have more inward
complacency in pardoning one, than in punishing a thousand.

This I write to you, not despairing of Gods mercy and My Subjects affections
toward you, both which I hope you will study to deserve, yet We cannot merit
of God, but by his own mercy.

If God shall see fit to restore Me, and You after Me, to those enjoyments
which the Laws have assigned to Us, and no Subjects without an high degree of
guilt and sin, can divest Us of, then may I have better opportunity, when I
shall be so happy to see you in peace, to let you more fully understand the
things that belong to Gods glory, your own honor, and the Kingdoms peace.

But if you never see My face again, and God will have Me buried in such a
barbarous Imprisonment and obscurity, [which the perfecting some men's designs
require] wherein few hearts that love me are permitted to exchange a word or a
look with Me, I do require and entreat you as your Father, and your KING, that
you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or
dis-affection from the true Religion established in the Church of England.

I tell you I have tried, and after much search, and many disputes, have
concluded it to be the best in the world, not only in the Community, as
Christian, but also in the special notion, as Reformed, keeping the middle way
between the pomp of superstitious Tyranny, and the meannesse of fantastic
Anarchy.

Not but that (the draught being excellent as to the main, both for Doctrine
and government in the Church of England) some lines, as in very good figures,
may happily need some sweetning or polishing, which might here have easily been
done by a safe and gentle hand: if some men's precipitancy had not violently
demanded such rude alterations, as would have quite destroyed all the beauty
and proportions of the whole.

The scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object, and urge to you
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or your own thoughts in this, That scarce any one who has been a
beginner, or an active Prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the
Laws, and Me, either was, or is a true Lover, Embracer, or Practiser of the
Protestant Religion established in England: which neither gives such rule, nor
ever before set such examples.

It Is true, some heretofore had the boldness to present threatening Petitions
to their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction (but of
worse Spirits) have now put in execution; but let not counterfeit and
disorderly zeal abate your value and esteem of true piety, both of them are to
be known by their fruits; the sweetness of the Wine and Figtree is not to be
despised, though the Brambles and Thorns should pretend to bear Figs and
Grapes, thereby to rule over the Trees.

Nor would I have you to entertain any aversation or dislike of Parliaments,
which in their right constitution with freedom and honor, will never injure
or diminish your greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of love,
loyalty, and confidence between a Prince and his People.

Nor would the eveats of this black Parliament have been other than such
[however much biased by Factions in the Elections] if it had been preserved
from the insolences of popular dictates, and tumultuary impressions: The sad
effects of which will no doubt, make all Parliaments after this more cautious
to preserve that Freedom, and Honor, which belongs to such Assemblies (when
once they have fully shaken off this yoke of Vulgar encroachment) since the
public interest consists in the mutual and common good of both Prince and
People.

Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave, and Honorable ways
to contribute their Counsels in Common, enacting all things by public
consent; without tyranny or Tumults. We must not starve our selves, because
some men have surfeited of wholesome sood.

And if neither I, nor you, be ever restored to our Rights, but God in his
severest justice, will punish My Subjects with continuance in their sin, and
suster them to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness; I hope God
will give Me and You that grace, which will teach and enable Us, to want, as
well as to wear a Crown, which is not worth taking up, or enjoying, upon
sordid, dishonorable, and irreligious terms.

Keep you to true principles of piety, virtue, and Honor, You shall never
want a Kingdom.

A principal point of your honor will consist in your deferring all respect,
love, and protection to your Mother, My Wife; who has many ways deserved well
of Me, and chiefly in this, that [having been a means to bless Me with so
many hopeful Children; (all which, with their Mother, I recommand to your love
and care) She has been content with incomparable magnanimity and patience to
suffer both for, and with Me, and You.

My prayer to God Almighty is, (what ever becomes of Me, who am, I thank God,
wrapped up and fortified in My own innocence, and his Grace) that he would be
pleased to make you an Anchor, or Harbor rather, to these tossed and
weather-beaten Kingdoms; a Repairer by your wisdom, justice, piety, and
valor, of what the folly and wickedness of some men have so far ruined, as to
leave nothing entire in Church or State; to the Crown, the Nobility, the
Clergy, or the Commons; either as to Laws, Liberties, Estates, Order, Honor,
Conscience or lives.

When they have destroyed Me, (for I know not how far God may permit the malice
and cruelty of My Enemies to proceed, and such apprehensions some men's words
and actions have already given Me) as I doubt not but My blood will cry aloud
for vengeance to Heaven: so I beseech God not to power ont his wrath upon the
generality of the people, who have either deserted Me, or engaged against Me,
through the sartifice and hypocrisy of their Leaders, whose inward horror
will be their first Tormenter, nor will they escape exemplary judgments.

For those that loved Me, I pray God, they may have no miss of Me when I am
gone; so much I wish and hope, that all good Subjects may be satisfied with the
blessings of your presence and virtues.

For those that repent of any defects in their duty toward Me, as I freely
forgive them in the word of a Christian KING; so I believe you will find them
truly zealous, to repay with interest that loyalty and love to You which was
due to Me.

In sum, what good I intended, do you perform, when God shall give you
power: much good I have offered, more I purposed to Church and State, if times
had been capable of it.

The deception will soon vanish, and the Vizards will fall off apace; This
mask of Religion on the face of Rebellion (for so it now plainly appears since
My restraint and cruel usage, that they fought not for Me, as was pretended)
will not long serve to hide some men's deformities.

Happy times I hope attend you, wherein your Subjects [by their miseries] will
have learned, that Religion to their God, and Loyalty to their King, cannot be
parted without both their sin and their infelicity.

I pray God bless You, and establish your Kingdoms in righteousness, your
Soul in true Religion, and your honor in the love of God and your People.

And if God will have disloyalty perfected by my destruction; let My memory
ever, with My name, live in you; as of your Father, that loves you, and once a
King of three flourishing Kingdoms; whom God thought fit to honor, not only
with the Scepter and government of them, but also with the suffering many
indignities, and an untimely death for them; while I studied to preserve the
rights of the Church, the power of the Laws, the honor of my Crown, the
privilege of Parliaments, the Liberties of my People, and My own Conscience,
which, I thank God, is dearer to Me than a thousand Kingdoms.

I know God can, I hope he will yet restore Me to My Rights. I cannot despair
either of his mercy, or of My Peoples love and pity.

At worst, I trust I shall but go before you to a better Kingdom, which God
has prepared for me, and Me for it, through My Savior Jesus Christ, to whose
mercies I commend You and all mine.

Farewell, till We meet, if not on Earth, yet in Heaven.

Monday, 29. January, 1648. A true Relation of the KINGS Speech to the Lady
Elizabeth, and the Duke of Gloucester, the day before His Death.
HIS Children being come to meet Him, He first gave His blessing to the Lady
Elizabeth, and bad her remember to tell her Brother James when ever she should
see him, That it was his Fathers last desire, that he should no more look upon
Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his Sovereign;
and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies. Then
said the King to her, Sweet heart you will forget this: No (said she) I shall
never forget it while I live: And pouring forth abundance of Tears, promised
him to write down the Particulars.

Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his knee, said, Sweetheart,
now they will cut off thy Fathers head; (upon which words the Child looked
very steadfastly on him.) Mark Child what I say, they will cut off My Head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long
as your Brother Charles and James do live; For they will cut off your Brothers
heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at the last: and
therefore I charge you, do not be made a King by them. At which the Child
sighing, said, I will be torn in pieces first. Which falling so unexpectedly
from one so young, it made the King rejoice exceedingly.

Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeth's own hand.
WHat the King said to Me the 29. of January, 1648. being the last time I had
the happiness to see him; He told Me, He was glad I was come, and although He
had not time to say much, yet somewhat He had to say to Me, which he had not to
another, or leave in writing. Because he feared their Cruelty was such, as that
they would not have permitted him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve
and torment My self for Him; for that would be a glorious death that he should
dye; it being for the Laws and Liberties of this Land, and for maintaining the
true Protestant Religion.

He bid me read Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hookers Ecclesiastical Policy, and
Bishop Laud's Book against Fisher, which would ground me against Popery.

He told me he had forgiven all his Enemies, and hoped God would forgive them
also; and commanded Us, and all the rest of my Brothers and Sisters to forgive
them; He bid me tell my Mother, That his thoughts had never strayed from her,
and that his love should be the same to the last.

Withal, he commanded me and my Brother, to be obedient to her. And bid me
send his Blessing to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendations to
all his friends: So after he had given me his Blessing, I took my leave.

Further, He commanded Us all to forgive those people, but never to trust them;
For they had been most false to him, and to those that gave them power, and he
seared also to their own souls; And desired me not to grieve for him, for he
should dye a Martyr, And that he doubted not but the Lord would settle his
Throne upon his Son, and that We should be all happier, than We could have
expected to have been, if he had lived: With many other things, which at
present I cannot remember.

ELIZABETH.

THe KING said to the Duke of Gloucester, that He would say nothing to him but
what was for the good of his soul: He told him, that He heard the Army
intended to make him King; but it was a thing not for him to take upon him, if
he regarded the welfare of his Soul; sor he had two Brothers before him: and
therefore commanded him upon his Blessing, never to accept of it, unless it
redounded lawfully upon him: And commanded him to fear the LORD, and He would
provide for him.

Copia Vera.
An Epitaph upon King CHARLES.
So falls that stately Cedar; while it stood
That was the only glory of the Wood;
Great Charles, thou earhly God Celestial Man,
Whose life like others, though it were a span:
Yet in that span, was comprehended more
Then earth has waters, or the Ocean shore;
Thy heavenly virtues, Angels should rehearse,
It is a theme too high for humane Verse:
He that would know thee right, then let him look
Upon thy rare incomparable Book,
And read it over; which if he do,
He Will find thee King, and Priest, and Prophet too,
And sadly see our loss, and though in vain,
With fruitless wishes call thee back again.
Nor shall oblivion sit upon thy Hearse,
Though there were neither Monument nor Verse.
Thy sufferings and thy death let no man name;
It was thy glory, but the Kingdoms shame.
J. H.

A Perfect Copy of PRAYERS Used by His MAJESTY In the time of His Sufferings.
Delivered to Doctor JUXON, Bishop of London, immediately before His Death. Also
a Copy of a Letter from the PRINCE.
A PRAYER in time of Captivity.
O Powerful and Eternal God! to whom nothing is so great that it may resist;
or so small, that it is contemned; look upon My Misery with thine eye of Mercy,
and let Thine infinite power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of
deliverance unto Me, as to Thee shall seem most convenient; let not Injury, O
Lord, triumph over Me; and let my faults by Thy hand be corrected; and make not
my unjust Enemies the Ministers of thy Justice: But yet my God, if in Thy
Wisdom this be the aptest chastisement for my unexcusable transgressions; if
this ungrateful bondage be fittest for my over-high desires; if the pride of
my (not enough humble) heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto Thy
will, and cheerfully embrace what sorrow Thou will have me suffer: Only thus
much let me crave of Thee, (Let my craving, O Lord, be accepted of, since it
even proceeds from Thee) that by Thy goodness which is Thy self, Thou will
suffer some beam of Thy Majesty so to shine in My Mind, that I, who in My
greatest Afflictions acknowledge it My Noblest Title to be Thy Creature, may
still depend confidently on Thee. Let Calamity be the exercise, but not the
overthrow of My virtue. O let not their prevailing power be to my destruction.
And if it be Thy will that they more and more vex Me with punishment; yet, O
Lord, never let their wickedness have such a hand, but that I may still carry
a pure mind, and steadfast resolution ever to serve Thee, without fear or
presumption, yet with that humble Confidence which may best please Thee; so
that at the last I may come to Thy eternal Kingdom, through the Merits of Thy
Son our alone Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another Prayer.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, look down upon me Thy unworthy servant,
who here prostrate my self at the Footstool of Thy Throne of Grace; but look
upon me, O Father, through the Mediation and in the Merits of Jesus Christ, in
whom Thou art only well pleased; for, of my self I am not worthy to stand
before Thee, or to speak with my unclean lips to Thee most holy and eternal
God; for as in sin I was conceived and born, so likewise I have broken all
thy Commandments by my sinful motions, unclean thoughts, evil words, and
wicked works; omitting many duties I ought to do, and committing many vices
which Thou have forbidden, under pain of Thy heavy Displeasure: as for my
sins, O Lord, they are innumerable, wherefore I stand here liable to all the
miseries in this life, and everlasting Torments in that to come; if Thou
should deal with me according to my deserts. I confess, O Lord, that it is
Thy Mercy, (which endures for ever) and Thy compassion (which never fails,)
which is the cause that I have not been long ago consumed: but with Thee there
is mercy and plenteous Redemption; in the multitude therefore of Thy mercies,
and by the Merits of Jesus Christ, I entreat Thy Divine Majesty, that Thou
would not enter into judgment with Thy servant, nor be extreme to mark what
is done amiss, but be Thou merciful unto me, and wash away all my sins with
that precious blood that my Savior shed for me. And I beseech thee, O Lord,
not only to wash away all my sins, but also to purge my heart by Thy holy
Spirit, from the dross of my natural corruption; and as Thou do add days
to my life, so good Lord, I beseech Thee, to add repentance to my days, that
when I have past this mortal life, I may be partaker of Thy everlasting
Kingdom, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer and Confession, made in and for the times of Affliction.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, as it is only Thy goodness that admits
of Our imperfect Prayers, and the knowledge that thy mercies are infinite,
which can give Us any hope of Thy accepting or granting them; so it is our
bounden and necessary duty to confess our sins freely unto Thee; and of all
men living, I have most need, most reason, so to do, no man having been so
much obliged by Thee, no man more grievously offending Thee: that degree of
knowledge which Thou have given Me, adding likewise to the guilt of My
transgressions. For was it through ignorance, that I suffered innocent blood to
be shed by a false pretended way of Justice? or that I permitted a wrong way of
Thy Worship, to be set up in Scotland? and injured the Bishops in England? O
no; but with shame and grief I confess, that I therein followed the
persuasions of worldly wisdom, forsaking the Dictates of a right-informed
Conscience: Wherefore, O Lord, I have no excuse to make, no hope left, but in
the multitude of Thy mercies; for I know My repentance weak, and My prayers
faulty: Grant therefore merciful Father, so to strengthen My repentance, and
amend My prayers, that Thou may clear the way for Thine own mercies, to
which, O let thy Justice at last give place, putting a speedy end to My
deserved afflictions. In the mean time, give Me Patience to endure, Constancy
against Temptations, and a discerning spirit, to choose what is best for Thy
Church, and People, which thou have committed to My Charge. Grant this, O most
merciful Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer in time of imminent danger.
O Most merciful Father, though My sins are so many and grievous, that I may
rather expect the effects of thy anger, than so great a deliverance, as to free
Me from My present great danger; yet, O Lord, since Thy mercies are over all
Thy works, and Thou never failest to relieve all those who with humble and
unfeigned repentance come to Thee for succor, it were to multiply, not
diminish My transgressions to despair of Thy heavenly favor: wherefore I
humbly desire Thy Divine Majesty, that Thou will not only Pardon all my
sins, but also free Me out of the hands, and protect Me from the malice of My
cruel Enemies. But if thy wrath against My heinous Offenses will not
otherwise be satisfied, than by suffering Me to fall under my present
afflictions, Thy will be done; yet with humble Importunity, I do and shall
never leave to implore the assistance of Thy heavenly Spirit, that my cause, as
I am Thy Vicegerent, may not suffer through my weakness or want of courage. O
Lord, so strengthen and enlighten all the faculties of my mind, that with
clearness I may show forth Thy Truth, and manfully endure this bloody Trial,
that so my sufferings here may not only glorify Thee, but likewise be a
furtherance to my salvation hereafter. Grant this, O merciful Father, for his
sake who suffered for Me, even Jesus Christ the Righteous. Amen.

FINIS.
A Copy of a Letter which was sent from the PRINCE to the KING; Dated from the
Hague Jan. 23. 1648.
SIR;
HAving no means to come to the knowledge of your Majesty's present condition,
but such as I receive from the Prints, or (which is as uncertain) Report, I
have sent this Bearer Seamour to wait upon your Majesty; and to bring me an
account of it: that I may withal assure your Majesty, I do not only pray
for your Majesty according to my duty; but shall always be ready to do all
which shall be in my power, to deserve that blessing which I now humbly beg of
your Majesty upon

SIR; Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient son and servant CHARLES.
Hague Jan. 23. 1648. The Superscription was thus,

For the King.


