THE Grand Statute: OR The LAW of DEATH unalterable; OPENED and APPLIED IN A
SERMON Preached May 11. 1660. At the Funerals of that pious, useful, and much
lamented Gent. Mr. John Cope in the Parish Church of St. Mary-Bothaw LONDON.

By John Kitchen, M. A. Minister of St. Mary-Abchurch LONDON.

Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? Job 7.1. Quid in rebus
humanis certius est morte? quid incertius hora mortis invenitur? Bernardus.
(...). Liban. Sophist. Progymn. London, Printed for Francis Kitchen and John
Garway, and are to be sold at the sign of St. Paals Church in Pauls-Chaine.
1660.

To the truly virtuous, my ever Honored Friend Mrs. Hannah Cope.
My dear Friend,
THE late sad dispensation of Providence wherewith the Lord was pleased to
exercise you, in snatching out of your bosom, the sweetest flower of your
Earthly Comforts, put me upon preaching that to your Ear which is now presented
to your Eye: The Lord print it upon your heart! I confess I should much more
gladly have served you in any other Office of love and labout, had it seemed
good in the eyes of the infinitely wise and all-disposing providence of God to
have spared me this pains: which yet I very willingly undertook in compliance
with your requests, though with a very sad and sorrowful heart.

I did not then more willingly preach it, then I do now unwillingly publish it,
could I have resisted your incessant importunity; both because I have ever
desired to shun that Trajan^ like vanity (as I may call it) of affecting to be
a paper flower, Constantinus Magnus Trajanum Imperatorem ob aspersos passim
titulos in aedificiis herbam paricta riam vocabat. Cluverius. Historiar.
Epitome.
and especially also considering how much of the waters of the Sanctuary run
waste, even out of the Press as well as the Pulpit: Pasquils, Libels, and
Ballads being more in use and esteem in this generation then Sermons: God grant
that this present glut and surfeit be not a forerunner of future famine and
scarcity.

For my delay in detaining it thus long from your view, partly my absence from
home, partly my employments at home, and especially my irresolution, till of
late, to send it, may be I hope a sufficient Apology.

And now it is come, it has no other message to deliver save only to stir up
your pure mind by way of remembrance, 2 Pet. 3.1.
That you may be mindful your own Mortality, and that you your self are under
this irrevocable Decree and indispensible Law that is now executed upon your
dear deceased Husband.

I know you are enough sensible that he is gone; oh but remember that you must
follow! and be confident of this, that the joy of your meeting will abundantly
out-balance the grief of your parting. 2 Cor. 4.17.
These light afflictions, says the Apostle, which are but for a moment, work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And in the mean-time,
two things considered might methinks abundantly support you under this trial.
1. 1 Cor. 10.13.
That no affliction has happened unto you but that which is common unto men; and
2. That this affliction has happened unto you in no other manner; but that which
is peculiar to children; for discipline, not for destruction; to chastise you,
Heb. 12.7.
not to cast you off. The God of Heaven make up this loss to you and yours, in
the more plentiful communications of spiritual blessings, both graces and
comforts; which is the prayer of

Your much obliged Friend And Servant in the Lord, John Kitchen.
Abchurch. July 30. 1660.
TO THE READER.
READER,
THe thoughts of Death can never be unseasonable, the hour of death being ever
uncertain. Most men put far away the evil day; therefore they need frequent
Monitors to put them in mind of their mortality. The Author of this Sermon
has taken good pains to alarm and quicken secure sinners to a serious
meditation of, and a speedy preparation for their dying hour. The subject of
the Sermon being so solemn, and the matter of it so well digested and
composed, it is well worth the inspection and perusal of all.

Edmund Galamy. Thomas Watson.

THE Grand Statute: OR, The Law of Death unalterable.
HEB. 9.27. And as -- It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
judgment. So --


FOR the Coherence of the words with the Context, be pleased to take notice of
Saint Paul's drift in this Chapter, which is this; namely, to compare Law and
Gospel together, and hereby to prove the Gospel-Administration to be far more
excellent than the Mosaical Economy, and Legal dispensation; And this he does
briefly, but fully, in a few words, but in many particulars.

In the 23. ver. there is the Comparison instituted.

In the rest you have the Comparison illustrated.

In the 23. ver. It was therefore necessary says the Apostle, that the
patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these, meaning the
Legal Ceremonies before mentioned, but the heavenly things themselves with
better sacrifices than these: (...). Theoph.
this is the comparison; Gospel Ordinances are (...), they are heavenly things,
so called for their stability, for their perpetuity, for their sublimity, for
their spirituality, whereas the Legal Ceremonies they were at the best but
(...), the patterns of heavenly things, these were the substance, those were
but the shadows; those were meaner, these were better sacrifices; it is true,
those were necessary pro hic and nunc, and they were beautiful in their season,
but God had provided better things for us. Heb. 11.40.


This he proves and illustrates in the next verse to the end, and that in four
particulars: 1. We have a better Priest. 2. We have a better offering. 3. We
have a better place. 4. We have a better manner.


1. A better Priest we have; theirs was an high Priest indeed, to wit, Aaron
ver. 25. the high Priest entered into the holy place; but ours is an higher
Priest, to wit, Christ ver. 24. Christ is entered into heaven.

2. Better offerings we have; their offerings were the blood of others, namely,
of other things; Bulls and Goats, and Rams, and Lambs were their sacrifices,
intimated verse 25. the high Priest entered -- with the blood of others; but our
offerings are the blood of Christ himself, the Priest himself; he is both Priest
and Sacrifice too, ver. 26. he has appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice
of himself.

3. A better place we have, their places of propitiation were the Tabernacle,
and Temple, places made with hands, Bazaliels hands, and Aholiah's hands, and
the workmens hands, ver. 24. (...). Occumenius.
He is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures
of the true; but our place of propitiation is heaven it self, ver. 24. but into
heaven it self He is entered, now to appear in the presence of God for us, an
house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.

4. A better manner we have, their offerings were repeated, and that often, to
note their imperfection; every year new offerings, ver. 25. -- The high Priest
entered into the holy place every year with the blood of others; but our
offering is but once, and once for all; not toward the end of the year, but
toward the end of the world, verse 26. with 25. Nor yet that he should offer
himself often, -- for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of
the world, but now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself.

And this he proves and illustrates in the two last verses.

1. Laying down his (...), or (...) for his medium and proof in the words of my
Text. As it is appointed unto men once to die. --

2. Applying his (...), or (...) for his illustration in the words following,
So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, etc. q. d. There Is no man
dies any more than once; but our offering and sacrifice is a man, the blood of
Christ, God-man, therefore he must and can die but once; It is appointed unto
man once to die; but after this, judgment.

In the words there are two of those quatuor novissima, Mors Judicium Gloria
Gehenna Bern. in Se^m.
two of those four last things that the Ancients have advised us often to
remember and consider; Death, Judgment, Considera tres re and non venies in
transgressionem, unde veneris, e sordibus: quo tandem sis abiturus, inpulverem:
coram quo rationem es red diturus, coram Sanct. Ben. R^f. Akiba. Particutare
sigillatim, statim dum moriuntur. Carthus.
Heaven, Hell, here are two of them, not only named, but stated.

1. The certainty of Death after sin. He has appeared to put away sin -- as it
is appointed unto men once to die.

2. The Celerity of Judgment after Death, but after this Judgment, (...),
immediate post, as the phrase imports. John 19.38.

I Will handle the first of these only, The certainty of Death. It is appointed,
etc.

Wherein you have three Doctrines observable.

1. Death is the Lot and portion of all men sooner or later, first or last: It
is appointed unto men -- to die.

2. Death comes but once to men naturally, It is appointed unto men once to die.

3. Death ever comes by, and never comes but by Gods appointment: It is
appointed unto men, etc.

I shall God willing, handle them all, and therefore I can but paraphrase upon
each particular.

1. Doct. Death is the lot and portion of all men sooner or later; for the
evidence of which we must know, that there is a threefold death mentioned in
Scripture. Mors triplex est Culpae, Gratiae, Naturae. Ambr. lib. 5. in Luc.
1 A sinful death. 2. A spiritual death. 3. A penal death; adeath of grace,
which is sinful; a death of sin, which is gracious and spiritual; a death of
the person, which is penal; or there is, 1. A death in sin. 2. A death to sin.
3. A death for sin.

1. A death sin sin, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened who were dead in sins;
and this is a sad death, this is a woeful death; many are thus dead and no body
misses them, no body knows them, no body laments them, saying ah my brother! or
ah sister! ah my wife, or ah husband! Jer. 22.18. (...). Philo lib. de profugis.
ah my Lord, or ah his glory! there are thousands of these walking ghosts go up
and down the streets every day, and that without observation; such a one was
she, as merry as she was, 1 Timothy 5.6. The widow that lives in pleasure, is
dead while she lives; the husband is dead, the husband is dead, every one
knows that; Oh but look to it! for Gods sake look to it; the widow may bedead
also, if she be not careful and watchful, the widow that lives in pleasure is
dead, yea twice dead, Jude 12.

2. A death to sin, as Barzillai was dead to David's Courtship, to whom all his
royal and pompous entertainment would seem but as dry and saplesse things; 2 Samuel 19.35. Can I discern between good and evil? Can thy servant taste what I
eat or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing-men or
singing-women? He was dead eyed to his Pageants, and dead pallated to his
banquets, and dead eared to his music; so dead to pride, and dead to lust, and
dead to covetousness, dead to the world, and dead to self, etc. and this now
is a good death, this is a right (...) indeed, this is an happy death; Sneton
in Augusto.
and oh that every living soul in the Congregation was thus dead! oh that this
Funeral Sermon might be the Funeral of all your lusts! this you have mentioned
in Colos. 3.3. for ye are dead, i. e. dead to sin; and in Romans 6.2. so
expounded; How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

3. A death for sin, the work turned into wages, (...) Basil. Soluc. Orat. 4.
the crime made the punishment, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, Romans
6.21. The end of sin is death.

Culpa morique fuit, paena morique fuit.
Death was our sin, and it was fit
Sin should be punished by it:
Now this last death is twofold, or at least in reference to the subject
thereof to be doubly considered:

1. The death of the Surety, or the death of Christ for us; and this is a
glorious death, this is a Christians triumphant death, we can boast of this
death against all the world, against all the Devils in Hell, against all
accusations of conscience, against all exactions of Justice; 2 Samuel 11.17.
this will smooth the wrinckles of Gods brow, and appease his anger and
indignation, as that of Uriah's did David's; Uriah the Hittite is dead also,
that pleased David; so Christ our Sacrifice is dead also, and that pleases God.
Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God
that justifies: Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died: Nay, we can
boast of this death even against death it self, O death where is thy sting? O
grave where is thy victory? thanks be to God which gives us the victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.55, 57. There are two parts of that triumphant
(...), sung accordingly by both parts of a Saint: O death where is thy sting?
that the soul sings: O grave where is thy victory? that the body sings: Thanks
be to God which gives us the victory; that both sing; over the sting of death,
by sanctification: over the stroke of death by resurrection: and both through
the death of Christ who by death has slain death as the * Hydrus est animal
habitans in gurgitibus fluminum, Cro^odilis feraliter inimicum: hic itaque cum
viderit Crocodilum aperto ore dormientem provolvitur in limo luti ut faucibus
illius facilius possit illabi tunc in os Crocodili dormient is perniciter
insilit, and deglutitus, viscera ejus cuncta dilaniat, donec es extincto, de
cadavere vivus and victor erumpat. Quid Crocodilus nisi mors, and Tartarus?
quid Hydrus nisi Christus? quid limo obvolui nisi humanae carnis luto vestiri?
Petrus Damian. lib. 2. Epist. 18.
water-Snake does the Crocodile.

2. The death of the party, or the death of us, and this is twofold; consisting

First, In the separation of the soul from the body, and this is a little
troublesome death, especially to nature, these two old acquaintance play loath
to depart when the time comes; Inducias etiam ad horam, as he said: Oh reprieve
me! though it be but an hour, and 'twill be sweet; nay beloved, a child of God
himself may sometimes be so fearful of this King of terrors, that at the
approach of death he may be forced to cry quarter: Job 28.4.
So did David, Oh spare me! that I may recover strength before I go hence and
be no more, Psalm. 39.13.

Secondly, In the separation of soul and body both from God to all eternity,
M^tth. 25.41.
and this is the bitterness of death, this is the dregs of death, this is
death armed, Animae mors separatio est a Deo uti corporis mors est ipsius ab
anima disjunctio Nicetas
death with a sting and poison too: called in Scripture the second death,
Revel. 20.14. death and hell were cast into the lake of fire, this is the
second death. The death in the Text is to be understood of the death of the
party for sin, Anaxogoras. Plutar. de consola^. a^ Apol.
consisting in the separation of soul and body one from another, and so it is
appointed unto men once to die; unto men, i. e. unto all men, a man, and a
mortal, signifying one and the same thing; (...). Liban. Sophist. in D. mosth.
Apollog.
scio me genuisse mortalem, said that Philosopher, when news came that his son
was dead; I knew I had begot a mortal: it being as certain that every man
shall die, as it is certain that he lives, Psalm. 89.48. What man is he that
lives and shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the
grave? Selah: mark that says the Psalmist, Cui nasci contigit mori restat.
Seneca.
he puts a note of attention and observation upon i^; though it be an ordinary
truth, it deserves an extraordinary consideration: and it is not only asserted
by Scripture, but it is sealed by the experiences of all the world.

And indeed who has not a speculative notion of this truth? The practical
improvement is the main considerable, as Solomon says, for the living to lay
it to heart, Eccles. 7.2.
that is the duty.

Use is, 1. Of information. 2. Of Exhortation.


1. Hence we see the mischief and misery of sin, it has brought death, and
ruin upon all Adams posterity! if sin had not been committed, death had not
been appointed; he has appeared says the Apostle, to put away sin, as it is
appointed to men to die, (viz.) because of sin; if we had not sinned, we had
not died; upon the death of the soul, came in the death of the body; the kernel
was corrupted, (...). Phil, Allegor. lib.
and the shell became rotten and withered: Genesis 2.17. In the day thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die, it is in the Hebrew, dying thou shall die; dying
in eating, thou shall die for eating; dying as the sin, thou shall die as the
scourge; dying as the crime, thou shall die as the curse; dying in the soul,
thou shall die in the body, yea and in soul also to all eternity.

I know there are that deny this truth, Audenter determinamus mortem non ex
natura secutam hominem, sed ex culpa. Ter. ul. de Anim. (...), etc. Just.
Mattyr. Resp. ad Graeces
that temporal death is the punishment of sin, as Pelagians and Socinians upon
different grounds and reasons, which I shall here neither canvase, much less
go about to confute; only propound to sober judgments that of the Apostle; and
(...), as he said, Paul for my money, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death,
death temporal as well as eternal, as is clear by that, Romans 5.12. By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, (viz.) natural death, temporal death.

2. Is it so, that death is the lot and portion of all men? Then let us be
exhorted seriously and in good earnest 1. Praevidere. Providere.
To look for it. 2. To provide for it.


1. Be exhorted oh Christians to look for death, for it is certainly a coming;
Incertum est quo in loco te mers expectet, itaque tu illam omni loco expecta.
Seneca Epist. 26.
God has not told us when we shall die, nor where we shall die, nor by what
means we shall die, nor how we shall die, slowly or speedily, lingringly or
suddenly, with the solemnity of a sickness, or without, in the field, in the
shop, at the table, in the bed; no, these things are locked up within Gods
Cabinet-councel; It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, (...)
Chrylost. Homi. de morte.
says Christ, which the Father has put into his own power, Acts 1.7. It Is
not, it is not; what? it is not lawful for you, it is not expedient for you, it is
not indeed good for you to know these circumstances of time, and place, and
manner; only this you may know, and do know, that die you must; all have died
hitherto, and you must follow, expect it; Art thou greater than our father
Abraham which is dead? said they, John 8.53. so say I, thou rich man, thou
strong man, thou young man, thou good man, thou great man, art thou greater
than our father Abraham that is dead? Josh. 23.14. Isa. 40.6.
I go the way of all flesh says Joshua: what man, art not thou flesh? mark,
all flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of grass;
flesh withers soon, but the goodlinesse of flesh sooner; the beauty of flesh,
and the strength of flesh, and the honor of flesh, and the wealth of flesh;
alas it may be these things a great while before flesh be gone; as the flower
fades and is blown away before the stalk is dried up; so true is that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 39.5. Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity,
Selah.

2. Let me hence persuade you to provide for it, as it is your wisdom to look
for it, so it will be your interest and security to provide for it, make a
virtue of a necessity; must you die? oh be willing to die, oh be ready to die;
That Is a gallant speech of the Apostles, 2 Timothy 4.6. I am ready to be offered,
says Paul, i. e. I am ready to die, says he, and the time of my departure is
at hand; oh if Paul's departure had been at hand, and he had not been ready to
depart, it had been a very sad thing; but here was Paul's comfort and safety,
death was ready for him, and he was ready for death: I am ready to die; oh how
unready are many men to die! how unready is the drunkard to die! how unready is
the worldling to die! how unready is the voluptuous person to die? in one word,
how unready is the Christlesse man to die! For the Lords sake Sirs make it your
business to be ready to die, that you may be able to say, Why is his chariot
so long a coming, Judge. 5.28.
and why tarry the wheels of his chariot? I am ready to be offered. Three
things must be done ere you can be thus ready to die.

1. Exodus 10.17. 2 Cor. 11.23. Mors complectitur omnis generis calamitates
propter peccatum in hac vita tolerandas, quae sunt mortis caduceatores, and
nuncii. Gerhard.
Make sure of Christ; there is but one malady in the world, and that is sin; and
there is but one grief and pain in the world, and that is death; and accordingly
there is but one remedy in the world to cure this malady, and to sweeten or
remove this pain, and that is Christ; Oh labor for an interest in him. When
Noah knew that the Flood was coming, he gat him an Ark, and he gat him into the
Ark also, Genesis 6.22.7.7. My Beloved, let me tell you the Floods's a coming, let
me warn every man and woman this day, as Noah did the old World, that there is
a Flood a coming; possibly an universal deluge of wrath and judgment upon the
whole Nation, for the crying sins and abominations thereof; however this is
certain, that thine and my particular flood is approaching, to sweep us out of
the Land of the living, and to hurry us into the botom of the grave; Death's a
coming be sure; the harbingers of death are come already upon some of us,
Aches, and Pains, and Consumptions, and other languishing diseases, and old
age, and hark! the sound of their Masters feet is behind them. 2 Kings 6.32.
Arca Noe est Christus and Ecclesia Christi, ita ut qui^unque ext a hanc Arcam
inveniuntur regnante diluvis peribunt. Aug. lib. 15. de Civitate Dci, c. 26
Oh therefore get your Ark ready, and get into your Ark; hasten to the City of
refuge before you be overtaken; get Christ and make sure of Christ; it is
dangerous trusting to opinion only, and profession only, and other men's Esteem
only, and a few groundless hopes only; oh make sure work in this matter! man,
thou can never be too sure of Christ, get into Christ if thou mean to
escape; It Is not enough to be upon Christ by outward profession there are many
thus who yet are damned notwithstanding a Savior; but you must be in Christ by
justification and Renovation, by a lively faith and an exemplary life.

Doubtless there were many of the old World, that kept a great deal of
scuffling and scrambling to get upon the Ark, when they saw the Flood was come
indeed; and there happily they might sit a little; but alas! now comes a blast
of wind and blows off one, and then comes a wave of water and dashes down
another, and so they all perish in the deluge; Genesis 7.23.
only Noah and his Family who were in the Ark were saved; Ah Sirs, you must be
in Christ, you must be in the Ark, if you mean to be saved from death, and
hell, and the deluge of wrath to come: Turn to that place in Rev. 20. ult.
Liber vitae idcirco recte dicitur liber ^gni, quia cuncti Electi quorum nomina
in illo scripta sunt, non aliter quam per Agnum Iesum Christum Justificati,
renati, and conformes imagini suae facti, salvabuntur Rupertus in Apocal.
and compare it with chapter 21. ult. Whosoever was not found written in the Lambs
book of life, might in no wise enter into Heaven, but was cast into the lake of
fire; why the Lambs book of life? wah they must be justified, they must be
renewed, they must be mortified, they must be sanctified, as well as elected;
they must be in the Lambs book of life as well as Gods book of life, if they
will escape death; This Lamb has overcame death as David overcame Goliath,
namely with his own weapon; All Israel feared the Giant till David came, and he
cut off his head with his own sword: Just so it is here, to those that are out
of Christ death is (...), the King of terrors, as Job speaks, Job. 18.14.
(...). B^^i. Selenc, Orat. 32.
and all have reason to fear him but Christ comes, and he cuts off his head
with his own sword, he kills death by death; get into Christ, and you make a
perfect conquest of death, that you need not fear it; Rev. 12.11. They overcame
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, and then they
loved not their lives unto the death: then they were ready to die, then they
were willing to die, then they feared not death; they feared to live rather
then to die; they loved not their lives unto death. Oh how should a poor soul
tremble to die, that is out of Christ! I do not know any such miserable
spectacle in the world, as a Christless dying man: if a man was dying, and not
Christless, he might be comfortable, yea exceeding joyful: he might sing Simeons
song, Luke 2.29.
Egredere anima mea, now Lord let me be gone; if a man was Christless, and not
dying, it might be somewhat tolerable: for happily the next meeting of Christ
in an Ordinance, might be toward him his time of love; oh but to be a
Christ-less, dying man to be Christless and dying too; that is intolerable;
Awake, awake oh soul, thou art a dying, God knows whether ever thou shall hear
a Sermon more; oh get Christ, and get into Christ, and that speedily, or thou
art undone.

2. Entertain thy thoughts much with premeditations of death beforehand; think
with thy self thus, What if I should die now! O (...). Clemens Alex lib. 4.
Stromat Wards Sermon.
what If I should die to morrow! what if I should be the next corse that should
be followed to the grave! this would tune thy spirit into a dying frame, this
would make thee moderate thy joys, thy griefs, thy cares, thy loves, all thy
passions and affections: enough soul, enough, I must die ere long, and what
needs all this? I have read a story of one, that observing a riotous young
Prodigal and Gallant to spend his time loosely, and wantonly, and sinfully from
day to day, gave him a Ring with a Death's head engraven upon it, on this
condition, that he should one hour daily for seven days together look on it and
think on it: and it wrought (says name Author) a marvelous change in the young
man's life; oh beloved, if you would but think on it a little every day, Eccles.
7.2.
if the living (as Solomon says) would but lay it to heart now and then, what
a change might be hoped for in men's lives and conversations! as your interest
in Christ would make you habitually prepared, so these fore-thoughts of death
would make you actually prepared to die: Those that put away from them the evil
day, what did they do? Amos 6. They lay upon beds of Ivory, they stretched
themselves upon their couches, they ate Lambs out of the flock, they drank wine
in bowls, they chanted to the sound of the Viol, and anointed themselves with
chief ointments, i. e. They minded nothing, but eating, and drinking, and
singing, and sleeping, and gave themselves over to all manner of luxury,
pleasure, and licentiousness; whereas if they would but have suffered a death's
head to have come to the Table, it would have marred their mirth, (...).
Ep^ctet. ap. Melis. l. 10. Orat. 19.
and spoiled all their seasting and revelling, as the handwriting upon the
wall, did Balishazzers quaffing; a Mean Mean, a numbering of their days a while
by a serious consideration and meditation of death, would have brought them to
a sober moderation in all things, and made them more fit to live, and more
ready to die: Horses when they are to run a race, are usually exercised in the
place beforehand, that they may be acquainted with the rise, and fall, and
level of the ground, lest they should stumble; Christian, that thou may not
stumble when thou come to die, but may die willingly, cheerfully, readily;
oh it is good to be in the ground aforehand, good to meditate on death before it
comes; get a sight of this Basilisk before it approaches thee, and then thou
may stand and outstare it without harm; it may hit thee, but it cannot hurt
thee.

3. Look beyond death into Eternity: a bare and naked consideration of death
will little avail upon the mind to sobriety and reformation; it will not
mortify one lust, nor make a man a pin the better either for living or dying;
those Ephesian Beasts and Corinthian Swine that Paul met with, they could
quaff, and carouse to one another even out of a deaths head, they could revel
and be drunk, though they were presently to reel into their graves, 1 Cor.
15.32. Let us eat and drink, (say they) for to morrow we shall die; oh but to
consider death and its consequents together, videre id manticae quod in tergo
est, (...). Cyril. Alexand. 5. Tom. part. 2. page 404. Oration de exitu animi
vere aurea.
to look upon death with its after-claps, death and judgment at the heels,
death and hell following it, death and eternity after death; this if any thing
will certainly awaken the drowsy and secure sinner, to make him look about
him; oh eternity, eternity! this never-never-never-never-never -- ending life
of weal or woe is that astonishing consideration that puzzles the thoughts of a
finite capacity; who can look down from the shore of time into the botomless
ocean of eternity without amazement! Is it no matter how thou dyest when
eternity follows upon it? eternal happiness to comfort thee, or eternal misery
to torment thee? sure if these things were considered, we should be every
moment thinking of death, and providing for death: it is the prison makes the
Sargeant terrible, and it is the gallows makes the Judge formidable, and it is
Judgment and Eternity that makes death so considerable; after this judgment,
says the Text.

Doctr. 2. Death comes but once to men naturally: in the ordinary course of
nature men die but once. Nimirum ordinary. Gomarus.
It is appointed unto men once to die.

Some say that this word (...) once, is modus Praedicati non Subjecti; it is
not say they, to be referred to dying but to appoynting, and so they quite
alter the sense: thus, it is once appointed unto men to die: and not as we read
it, It is appointed unto men once to die. But this reading, though it may
possibly agree with the Apostles Grammar, yet it does not agree with his
Logic; though it may happily stand in the Text, it cannot stand in the
Context; the Apostle is here proving that Christ must be offered but once, and
he proves it thus: It is appointed unto men once to die: you will spoil his
Argument if you do not so read it:

However if this place should be intricate, other places are plain; Job 14.14.
If a man die, shall he live again? his meaning is, No, he shall not live a
natural life again, to die a second time, Luke 12.4. Be not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: after the body be
once killed, there is no slaughtering it over again. If other places were as
dark, yet experience puts it out of doubt, naturally and ordinarily men die but
once.

It Is true, the damned die in Hell, and the Godly die, De cons^eta and naturali
hominum condition lequitur; nam ^^od L^z rus and alti aliquot bis m^r^^^ ^^nt,
extraoadinarium fuit. Beza. in loc.
while they are upon earth; but that is a praeternatural and this is a
supernatural death; men die but once naturally; and it is true also that there
are Scripture-instances of some that have died twice, as the Shunamites Son,
and Jairus daughter, and the Naimite, and Lazarus and others, but this was
extraordinary, to magnify the wonderful power of God in their present
resurrection; men die but once ordinarily. The truth is plain, oh that the
improvement might be as profitable! and it serves Beloved, for a twofold use.

1. To mitigate our fear of death. 2. To instigate our care of death.

1. It serves to mitigate our fear of death: if we must die but once, why then
are we so fearful of dying? (...). Libanius Sophist. Demost. Apolog.
why should death be so terrible to us? it has but one stroke, it has but one
shot, and if we rout it, it can never rally more.

Death comes once, we cannot avoid it, and it comes but once, why should we
fear it? that place I mentioned before, is pertinent to this purpose, Luke
12.4. Be not afraid of them that kill he body, and after that have no more that
they can do; they are then at Hercules his pillars as we say, they are
non-plust, they have done their worst: oh but I Will forewarn you whom you shall
fear; in the next verse, fear not death, and fear not the instruments of death;
but fear the God of death, fear him that has power to cast into Hell, I say
unto you, fear him.

This consideration carried Luther on so vigorously and undauntedly in his work
of Reformation, Quid si me occidat Papa, aut damnet ultra Tartara Occisum non
suscitabit ut bis and iterum occidat. Luther. Tom. 2 mihi p 270.
that he could die but once, and he mattered not for their cruelty and
persecution; what will the Pope do? says he, (writing to his Father in his
book de votis Monasticis) perhaps he will kill me, but potestne resuscitare?
can he raise me again to kill me a second time, and so to slaughter me ore and
ore again? no, that is my Comfort. Christians, death is like an huge Monster
that overthrows himself at one blow by his own bulk, and striking once, he can
never recover himself for a second blow; Come, come, said that precious
Minister on Tower Hill, it is but one blow, and then we are in Heaven; wah fear
not Christians, death has but one blow, and let him do his worst.

2. It serves to instigate our care of death; if we must die but once, sure
then we should labor to die well; this should provoke us to be careful how we
die; that which is but once done, methinks that should be well done; of all
Contracts, you will look to your Marriage, for that is supposed to be but once
done; so it will be your wisdom to look to your dying, for that is but once in
all your life: you cannot correct your former death, by an after-dying; if you
do not live well, you may happily live better; but if you do not die well,
there is no second Edition of death: Paraeus in loc.
and this is Paraeus his hint upon the place; si semel tantum moriendum, ut
semel pie moriamur operam demus; do it well, says he, for you must never do it
more; Beloved, to die well, is

1. To die twice; we use to say, that which is well done, is twice done; and
here Christians, that must be twice done that is well done; you must first die
unto sin, Haec sunt que faciunt invi^^^ mori. 1 Samuel 25.37.
before you can well die unto nature; if your lusts be not dead before you die,
your hearts will be dead when you come to die, and you will have no heart to die.
Nabal his heart was dead, when he came to die; why? he had living lusts, and
therefore he had a dead heart: oh look to the work of Mortification! those sins
are deadly, Quid saciet homo ut vivat? mortificabit seipsum: quid faciet homo
ut mo^iatur? vivificabit seipsam. Rabbini apud Buxtorf.
that are not dead: they are mortal, if they are not mortified; the life of thy
lusts must go for the life of thy soul. Come, come, be not so foolishly pitiful
to young Absalom; the gentlier thou handlest thy darling and bosom-lust, the
more it will prick, and sting, and wound thy conscience one day: if thou
would die quietly, safely, comfortably, do not threaten thy lusts, or
restrain them a little, but kill them, stab them; thy life must go for theirs
else; no meeting of the first death, and no freedom from the second death,
without a part in the first resurrection: Col. 3.3. Ye aredead, and your life
is hid with Christ in God; but you are dead first.

2. To die well, is, To have nothing to do but to die when you come to die;
Says the Prophet to Hezekiah, Set thine house in order, for thou must die, Isa.
38.1. q.d. let every thing be done, let all thy business be dispatched, let
there be nothing wanting to entertain death; alas Christians! how much are men's
houses, and how much are men's hearts out of order usually when death
approaches! many men have every thing to do when they come to die; then send
for the Minister, then receive the Sacrament, then restore the bribe, never
before: every thing to do when they come to die. Poor souls! is your glass run,
and your sun set, and all your work to do? what, is your sickbed made of
brass, and your cords of iron, that it must bear the burden of your whole life?
Mat. 6.34.
when sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Does your pain require all
your groans, and have you any left for your sin? it is egregious deceit. Eccles.
9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might, Dum polles
viribus.
or as the Syriack has it, do it whilst thou have might; do it vigorously, and
do it speedily; repent, and repent heartily and quickly; reform, and reform
vigorously and speedily; for there is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither thou go.

3. To die well, is, To be sure to live well; we must not think to have
Lazarus's death and Dives's life, like him in Plutarch, that would live with
Croesus, as he said, but he would die with Socrates; no; Balaams wishes are
foolish and fruitless: Numb. 23.10.
if you would die well, Christians, you must have a care to live well; qualis
vita, finis ita; if you would die quietly, you must live strictly; if you would
die comfortably, you must live conformably; if you would die happily, you must
live holily. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace, Psalm 37.37.

Doctr. 3. Death ever comes by, and never comes but by Gods appointment; (...)
It is appointed unto men -- to die: Statutum est, nimir^m fixo, imm bili and
indispensabili Dei decr^to. A Lapide.
statutum est, it is the Satute-Law of Heaven more firm then the Medes and
Persians: it is no Ordinance or Temporary Sanction that time may abrogate, but
it is an Act and Statute of the supreme Legislator never to be repealed. All our
deaths with all the circumstances thereof, when, where, how, why, they are all
foreknown and fore-appointed by God. Thou turnest man to destruction, says
Moses, and say, return ye children of men, Psalm. 90.3. whoever may be the
inst^ument, it is God alone that is the chief Agent in life and death; he has
potestatem necis and vitae; he spoke at first and the creature was made; he
does but speak again, Dicta Dei sunt facta; verb^ Dei sunt opera. Greg.
and it is destroyed; thou turnest (viz.) in that thou say, Return: if a
Sparrow cannot fall to the ground without Gods appointment, surely then not a
body to the grave; for ye are of more value than many Sparrows. Mat. 10.29.
Ver. 31.
It Is an excellent Note that Expositors give from that Zech. 6. the three first
verses, of the vision of Chariots of red horses, and black horses, and white
horses, and bay horses coming out from between two brazen mountains; I turned,
and lift up mine eyes and looked, and behold, says the Prophet, there came four
Chariots out from between two Mountains, Montes sunt duo. i.e. men's and
voluntas, sapientia and Decretum, Dispositio and Definitio, Praeordinatio and
Executio. A Lapide. Pemble in loc. Paraeus in loc. Trap ib.
and the mountains were mountains of brass: In the first Chariot were red
horses, in the second black, in the third white, in the fourth bay horses, i.
e. all the various dispensations of providence to the Church and people of God
in the world, they are all foreseen and fore-appointed by God himself: The red
horses, and the white horses, or the pale horses, as it is in the Revelations,
these come forth from the brazen mountains, intimating that death, all kind of
death, the death of war, the red horses, the death of peace, the white or pale
horses, it happens and falls out according to Gods purpose and immutable decree,
that is as firm and stable as brazen mountains which cannot be removed.

Use. Does Death ever comeby, and never come but by Gods appointment? Then when
any of our nearest or dearest friends and relations are taken out of the world
by death, this consideration should work us 1. To comfort; or at least 2. To
silence and submission to the hand of God.


1. To comfort if it be possible; I am sure it is very reasonable; this may
comfort us in the death of our friends, because nothing happens to them, but
what God appoints and determines; should we not take comfort when the will of
God is done? David would not be comforted while his child was sick, he would
neither eat, nor drink, nor anoint; but when the child was dead, then David was
comforted, 2 Samuel 12.20. what was the reason? was David glad that the child was
dead? no: but he saw that the will of God was done, and that was David's
comfort; Christians, are you Christians? why, it was Christ's delight to do the
will of God; it was Christ's meat and drink to do his will and to suffer his
will also; how am I straightened till it be accomplished! says he, Luke 12.50. oh
show your selves Christians, Quam praeposterum est qamque perversum ut cum Dei
voluntatem fieri postulemus, quando evocat nos and accersit de hoc mundo Deus,
non statim voluntatis ejus imperio pareamus! Cypr, de Mortalit. Sect. 12.
(...). Philost. in vita Apollon.
and now the will of God is done, be you comforted. Let not your cries
contradict your prayers; you pray, thy will be done on earth, now it is so, do
not repine at it; if it be an accident and come by chance, weep on; but if it
be appointed, be you comforted.

2. At lest let me prevail with you in the second place, to silence and
contentment, if I cannot work you to comfort; if comfort will come hereafter,
well and good; but I pray let there be contentment now; what will you lift at
the brazen mountain? will you be fighters against God? you know what Pilate
said, What I have written, I have written; and so says God, what I have done, I
have done: remember, it is appointed, do not put'h finger 'ith eye and cry, but
lay the hand upon the mouth, and be silent. Aaron held his peace, Levit. 10.3.
what Aaron was this? why look into Psalm 106.16. Aaron, the Saint of the Lord,
Saint Aaron, he held his peace; is it Saint-like think you, to murmur, and
fret, and repine against the providence of God, and the appointments of God?
is it comely so to do? comely, did I say? nay beloved is it safe so to do? but
consider

1. Your Friend is well I hope; he is not dead, but sleeps: and if he sleeps,
he shall do well, John 11.12. he is not lost but gone. Mors non est interitus,
sed introitus; (...). Philostrat. in He^oicis. Fratres nostros non esse
lugendos de s^cuio liberatos, cum sciamus nos eos (...) amitti sed praemitti:
and paulo post nec accipiendas esse atras vestes quando i^i indumenta alba jam
sumpserint. Cyprian de Mortalit. Sect. 14.
non est exitus, sed transitus; says Cyprian, Death is not an End, but an
Entrance; it is not a Destruction, but a Translation; man does not cease to be,
but only to appear. Why will you grudge him his happiness? why will you mourn
when he rejoices? Joh. 20.15. Jesus said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou?
whom seek thon? Mary stood by the Sepulcher weeping, ver. 11. Mary, why
weepest thou says Christ, q. d. do thou look for him in the Sepulcher? art
thou grieved, because he is in the grave? thou art mistaken, he is not here, but
gone; he is risen; Mary might weep perhaps looking down into'th grave; but
could she find in her heart to weep looking up into heaven? oh do not commit
Mary's solaecism, pointing downward, when you should look upward. Object. True,
he is well, and he has gained, we do not question; but what shall we do in the
meanwhile? though he has gained, we have lost; an Husband, says one, a Father,
says another, a Brother says a third, a Friend, say all; and in truth we do not
weep for him, but we weep for our selves. Why

2. Consider God can, and to Faith God will, make a supply of all? trust God;
he now tries you to see how you can trust him; said Elkanah once to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.8. Hannah, Hannah, am not I better to thee then ten sons? why God seems
now to speak the very same language, Hannah, Hannah, am not I better to thee
then ten Husbands? am I not better to thee then ten Fathers? am not I better to
you all then ten thousand Friends? Oh be silent, be silent.

But methinks I see abundance of objections crowding in, and beloved, I beseech
you give me leave to confine the rest of my Sermon, at least to suit it to one
particular ear; let me say with the Messenger to Jehu, 2 Kings 9.5. My Errand
is to thee, even to thee.

Object. Oh says one, I have lost my husband! what is dearer than an husband?
Genesis 2.23. (...). Omnia mea est maritus. Plutarchus de uxore Phocionis
If I had lost all my estate, if I had lost all my other friends, if I had lost
my children, it would not have smarted half so much; I have lost one child
after another, that never cut me to the heart like this, this goes near
indeed, totouch my very bone and my vrey flesh; nay, I could methinks have
given my life for his, Oh my husband, my husband! would God I had died for
thee: it is my husband, and would you have me to be silent? yes, you to be
silent. For

1. I am verily persuaded you have a better husband; let those mourn for the
loss of earthly comforts, that have no heavenly: your Christ is your better
husband; let one forsake father, and mother, and cleave to's wife, or husband,
and they twain shall be one flesh, Matthew. 19.5. aye but let one forsake father,
and mother, and wife, and husband, and all to cleave to Christ, Matthew. 10.37.
and they twain shall be one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. If Christ be your Husband, be
willing to part with this husband; you know it was Eve's comfort in a like
case, Genesis 4.25. God (says she) has appointed me another seed instead of
Abel. Why, God has left you another husband instead of this, Thy Maker is thy
husband, Isa. 54.5. But

2. Be silent, why so? (...), it is appointed, there is no murmuring, there is no
repining, there is no lifting at the brazen mountain; it is appointed.

Object. Aye, but I have lost a good husband, a careful, provident, faithful
husband, I never had need to care for any thing in my life, he brought me every
thing to my hand, I wanted nothing; and he was a loving husband too, none knows
my loss; many others when they lose their husbands, they do not lose properly,
but are rather eased on them, they were not comforts, but burden^; they do not
lose them, but rather gain by the bargain: they were pests, and plagues in the
house and parish where they lived; yokes they were rather than yokefellows.
They might look into the gra^e, and say, there lies my drunken husband, and
there lies my unclean husband, and there lies my careless and prodigal
husband; Oh but mine was a loving, loyal, careful husband, and would you have
me to be silent? yes, you to be silent. For,

1. Bless God that you had such an husband, and that you had him so long;
every mercy lays on an obligation to duty; should not I be silent in the loss
of him, now God commands me, since I was so comfortable in the enjoyment of
him, whilst God allowed me? Job 2.10. What? shall we receive good at the hand
of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil! See if you have discharged your
duty to so good an husband; let that, that take up your thoughts. But

2. Be silent, why? (...), it is appointed.

Object. Oh but he was an honest, godly man, as well as a good husband, and
there are few of those: others have the loss of him as well as I, an upright,
faithful, conscientious man; his friends and neighbors bewail and lament him,
and would you have me to be silent? yes, you to be silent. For

1. It Is a great comfort to you now, O beatum illum hominem qui excedit cum
nomine bono ex hoc mundo. Rabbin. apud. Buxtorf. 2 Samuel 18.33. 2 Samuel 12.20.
that he has left the savor of a good name behind him, he is dead, but his
name shall not die; Psalm. 112. 6. The just shall be had in everlasting
remembrance; moreover he was more sit to dies, and this made him more willing
to die; why then do you grieve? David lamented Absalom; David lamented not the
child; why so? the one was not fit to die, but the other was. But

2. Be silent, why? (...)still, it is appointed.

Obj. Oh but I shall never see him more, and this grieves, Acts 20.38

1. Take heed what you say; if you murmur, you may never come to see him again;
the murmuring Israelites were cut off from the Land of rest, 1 Cor. 10.10. If
you do not believe, you may indeed lose him for ever, they entered not in
because of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. They longed for, they aimed at, they went
toward, they came near, oh but they entered not in, because of unbelief: of all
the enemies they had to grapple with, unbelief was the strongest, The Anakims
were soon routed, the Zamzummims presently conquered, the walls and bulwarks
easily demolish't, the river Jordan instantly retreated, but their unbelief
stood to it, and beat them off the field; the frontires of the Land of Promise
were guarded against them by the strength and force of their own unbelief, oh
take heed of that. But

2. Be silent, why? (...), it is a brazen mountain, and it cannot be removed: if
now you have any farther dispute with God, go answer the Prophet, Isa. 41.21.
Produce your cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons, says the
King of Jacob. No no beloved, it is impar congressus, you will have the worst;
resolve therefore to conclude with Job, Chap. 40.4, 5. Behold I am vile, what
shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth; Once have I spoken, but
I will not answer, yea, twice, but I will proceed no farther.

And now beloved, I would have dismissed you all, could I have prevailed with
mine own heart and tongue to have been silent. Psalm. 112.6. Tres sunt coronae,
corona Le gis, Corona Sacerdotii, Corona Regni; Corona autem famae bonae
superat bas omnes. Pirk. Avoth cap. 4.
But when I consider that the just is to be had in everlasting remembrance,
though we have buried the body of this our deceased friend and brother, yet I
would not willingly bury his name, which is as a sweet ointment poured forth
amongst all that knew him. And we have great need of holy Examples to be spurs
and provocations to piety in this loose and lukewarm generation. And for my
own part, I must acknowledge I have often times much more profited by the
reading, (...). Nazianz Orat. in laud. Cyprian. (...). Ch^ys^st. Hom. 31. de
Philog.
or hearing of the life of some pious and exemplary Christian, or Minister,
then I have done by many Sermons: it has carried along with it such a powerful
and irresistible influence to provoke to imitation. What I shall say, shall be
very briefly, partly because of the strait of the time which I see has outrun
me; and partly because it is not my usage and custom to paint the sepulchers of
the dead, or speak any thing in this kind, wherein a little may be many times
too much; and partly because I am very sensible together with the rest of my
brethren, how this kind of practice has been abused to flattery and falsehood;
And if the brazen Serpent it self be made an Idol, it is not only lawful, but
commendable to break it in pieces and call it Nehushtan; and lastly, because I
would not, 2 Kings 18.4.
oh I would not gash those wounds again, and set them a bleeding afresh, by
reviving the sense of so great a loss, which I have endeavored to bind up and
heal.

There Is none of us can be ignorant, oh that none of us might be insensible!
that there is this day a good man fallen in Israel; so I call him, a true
Nathaniel, 3. Ep. Jo. 12.
a Demetrius indeed, who had a good report of all men and of the truth it self:
no Epithet methinks so fitly becoming him as this, and which I have heard
again and again rung in mine ears, Good Mr. Cope is dead, good Mr. Cope is
dead, and this sure is a great loss; a good man is a stake in the hedge: a good
man is a pillar in the building, a good man is a prop in the place and Parish
where he lives.

I have sometimes compared the great men of the world, and the good men of the
world to the Consonants and Vowels in the Alphabet.

The Consonants are the most and the biggest Letters, they take up most room,
and carry the greatest bulk; but believe it, the Vowels though they are the
fewest, and least of all the Letters, yet they are most useful: they give the
greatest sound of all, there is no pronounciation without Vowels: Oh beloved,
though the great men of the world take up room, and make a show above others,
yet they are but Consonants, a company of mute and dumb Consonants for the most
part: the good men they are the Vowels, that are of the greatest use and most
concernment at every turn: A good man to help with his prayers, a good man to
advise with his counsels, a good man to interpose with his authority, this is
the loss we lament, we have lost a good man: death has blotted out a Vowel,
and I fear me, there will be much silence where he is lacking: silence in the
bed, and silence in the house, and silence in the shop, and silence in the
Church, and silence in the Parish; for he was everywhere a Vowel, a good man in
every respect.

He was good relatively, and he was good personally. He was relatively good, a
good Husband, and a good Father, and a good Master, and a good Neighbor, and a
good Chapman, and I am sure he was a good Friend, Expertocrede Roberto.

He was personally good also, which was the root of all: he was a serious,
sober, well-grounded, experimental Christian: he made as much conscience in
receiving of good, as he did in doing of good: he knew that his love to himself
must be the Standard of his love to others: and though he was no self-lover,
yet he did truly love himself: he remembered that of the Wiseman, Prove. 29.24.
Whosoever is partner with wickedness, hates his own soul; he was a lover of
himself in this sense, he loved his better part, his soul, his conscience, his
spiritual and eternal interest: he durst never think of self-deceit without
horror and astonishment. A form of godliness he was never ashamed of, oh but
the power of godliness he incessantly endeavored: that he knew could not incur
so much hatred from men, as the want of this would indignation from God: and
therefore that Scripture I perceived used to be very much, and very close upon
his spirit, Psalm. 129.23, 24. Search me O God, and know my heart, try me and
know my thoughts, and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting. Maximum amicitiae venenum superbia Placo ait nullum Regem non
ex serv^ esse oriundum, nullum non servum ex Regibus ^^odestia itaque and
familiaritas radix est and altrix honestae famae Ant. Thysius. I. C.


As to his Civil conversation amongst men, it is happily known unto most of
you, better than to my self, his cheerfulness, his open-heartednesse, his
freeness, his kindness to his friend; void of all affectation, morosity,
pride, conceitednesse, and those other pieces of self that are the bane of
civil and humane society: he had learnt in things sinlesse, and indifferent, to
be made all things to all men, that he might not be burdensome to any.

For his trading in the world, wherein God has blessed him with a very plentiful
estate, I have observed how accurate, how punctual, how just and impartial he
would be, even to the dust of the balance; a great ornament to his Christian
profession. Though he might sometimes perhaps eat the bread of carfulness,
(for believe it, he was no sluggard or idlebee in his particular calling) yet
he abhorred and loathed from his very soul to eat the bread of violence, or
the bread of oppression, or the bread of deceit, and falsehood, and lies in his
trading; Insomuch that I have often heard him feelingly, and passionately
bewail the great mystery of iniquity that was in trading in London. And he
would have been glad to have had more exact principles and rules drawn him
forth for the government of his shop; a rare thing!

He was so far from blinding conscience, or bribing conscience, or smothering
conscience, in this particular, that nothing was more welcome to him than that
which did but hit conscience, and awaken conscience, and direct conscience. And
I observed, that when Providence cast me upon a large discourse on that
subject, how heedfully and delightfully he attended it; and when I had spoken
much about the nature, offices, and acts of conscience, and about the
defilement of that faculty, and the necessity of its holiness and renovation,
and had exhorted my people to get an holy conscience, and to keep an holy
conscience, and told them I would proceed in to show them how they must use an
holy conscienceg, all affairs of life, and especially in buying and sellinth
This good man waiting for this, and coming often will a greedy appetite to make
a meal of this dish, and stcfinding me upon diversions, and digressions on
other occasional subjects, at last he accosts me with this language, cheerfully
I confess it was, but to me exceeding piercingly: Sir, said he, When will you
make conscience of preaching on conscience? an expression that I received in
the words of the Poet, (...), etc. Methought they were non verba, sed fulmina;
not words, but thunderbolts that flew out of his mouth; I took it then as a
word from heaven, and 'twas a reproof that yet sticks in my sides; feign would
this good man have ransackt conscience to the bottom.

As to his religious conversation; and that which did more immediately concern
the worship of God, I have known him much more intimately of late, than
heretofore; so that he might have said to me, as Paul did to Timothy, 2 Timothy
3.10. Thou have fully known my manner of life, purpose, faith, patience, etc.
and I bless God for those family-repetitions, conferences, prayers, I have
enjoyed with him lately, since God was pleased to make so sad a breach in my
own family.

As to duty, he would be spiritual in it, he would be universal in it;
sometimes complaining he had lost a duty, and lost a Sermon, when he had not an
opportunity to be present; but he would oftener complain, he had lost himself in
a duty, and lost his heart in a Sermon, so sluggish, and so dead, as he said;
he was never satisfied in a Duty, without communion with God in that duty: He
heard out of conscience, and not out of curiosity; and although the quickness
of his apprehension, and the pregnancy of his parts, and the activity of his
spirit, being always (...), digging into the mine of truth, I say, though
these might be apt to betray him to temptations, to gad up and down to hear and
see what the new lights of the times could hold forth, yet the sobriety of his
judgment, and the consciousnesse of his duty checked that curiosity; and he
would hear without distinction, any pious, sober, Orthodox Minister. He did not
judge of men by factions or parties, whether they were Presbyterian, or whether
they were Episcopal, or whether they were Independent, but he judged then as he
does now, whether they were holy or no, or whether they were sound or no, or
whether they were sincere or not sincere; Not sincere did I say? Nay, herein
his judgment was not positive and peremptory, but only negative and
suspensive; his Reprobation; pardon the expression, was a pure and mere
preterition; he blotted no man out of his book of estimation, only he did not
take every man in; And though he had an Eagles eye of judgment, to discern
the depth and acumen of the highest; yet he had a large skirt of charity, to
cover the infirmities of the meanest and weakest; he esteemed all the Ministers
of Jesus Christ for their work-sake.

He would be universal in duty as well as spiritual; he was for prayer,
hearing, conference, fasting, aye, and Sacraments too; it is true, it was a good
while ere he saw the absolute necessity of that Ordinance of the Supper; but
when he was convinced, oh how did he bewail the neglect, and how constant was
his attendance ever after, not missing one day but that which he was deprived
of by sickness!

And now I come to the last scene of his life; When God locked him up, and made
him his close prisoner, he was not long sick, but he had it seems been
troubled with a Chronick distemper that ushered in his death. It was my
unhappiness not to visit him (through ignorance of his condition) for about a
week of his sickness, when I came to him, I found him weak, but exceeding
sensible of his soul, and everlasting state into which he was passing; indeed
he was insensible of his worldly affairs, minded neither wife nor child, nor
any thing, which was a wonder to me, and that even then he should answer so
solidly and pertinently to spiritual points; which put me in mind of a passage
I have read concerning Melancthon, Carmin. in vit. Melancthom.
that he was so taken up with solicitous thoughts about the state of the Church
and Reformation in his days, that he forgot the death of his daughter. This
good man was so ravished, transported and swallowed up with thoughts of his
soul, and his God, and his future happiness, that he minded not present
enjoyments; we then prayed, and he was much strengthened and comforted, as he
whispered to us.

But afterward we prayed again, and then so vigorous was he in duty, that
eyes, and hands, and feet, and all the parts of his body were so active and
restless, stirring and moving upward, as if the soul would have carried the
body along with it to heaven instantly; here he wept much as it was observed,
though he had been languishing for so many days together; After the duty he
expressed himself in the evennesse of a sober, humble, wained, self-resigning
spirit, willing to go, but waiting to be called, and continuing in this temper
a few days longer, placide dormivit in Domino, he slept sweetly in the Lord.

FINIS.

