A WARNING FROM THE LORD TO THE TEACHERS and PEOPLE OF PLIMOVTH. With a few
QUERIES TO The Parish Teachers of this Nation, that have great sums of money
for teaching the people.

From them which are scornfully called QVAKERS, but witness the Teaching of
Christ.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the west end of Paul's, 1656.

A WARNING FROM THE LORD to the Teachers and people OF PLIMOVTH, etc.
The word of the Lord to the Teachers and people of Plymouth.
Fear the living God, and repent while you have time, and hearken to that in
your conscience, which cries for equity: Is there not something within you that
cries for it? Oh I listen to it, that the bonds of iniquity may be broken, that
equity (which is oppressed in you) may go free to serve the Lord; for behold,
thus says the Lord, I have sent my Sons and Daughters from far, I have raised
up Prophets amongst you, I have placed my witness in you, which shall stand for
ever with, or against you. But some of my Messengers you have imprisoned, and
others you have evil entreated; what could I have done more for you than I
have done, says the Lord? But you have rejected all my counsel, and slighted
the day of your Visitation, and would none of my reproof; and would not that I
should Reign over you: Therefore behold, thus says the Lord, I will proceed in
judgment against you, and there shall be none to deliver you out of my hand,
says the Lord, for in as much as you have rejected my counsel, and kicked
against my reproof, I will reject you, I will not hear your prayers, for they
are an abomination to me; and the songs of your temple shall be turned into
howling, your feasting into fasting, your mirth into sadness, for your Sabboths
and appointed seasons are a burden to me, I am weary with them, says the Lord,
and my soul shall be avenged on such a generation as this is, for the Poor is
oppressed by the Rich, and the cry of the poor is entered into my ear, says the
Lord, therefore will I ease me of my enemies, says the Lord, and avenge me of
my adversaties; for the great day of the Lord is coming, in which you must give
an account for what is done in the body, whether it be good or evil, and he
will plead with you by sword and by fire, and he will cut you down, O ye
fruitless Trees! and burn you up root and branch, even you, which live in pride
and earthly mindedness, and feed upon dainty Dishes, Dives-like; Oh remember
Dives end! and Lazarus who was in Abraham's bosom, for the sins of Sodom
abound amongst you, idleness and fullness of bread; it shall be more tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment than for you, for if the mighty
works had been done amongst them, they would have repented.

Behold, I have done a wondrous work amongst you, and you see and cannot
believe, but blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed. You cry
out for a sign, but there shall be none given you, for you are a proud,
stiff-necked, and haughty people, but your lofty looks shall be brought down,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Howl ye Rich men, for the misery which is coming upon you, for the rust of
your Silver and Gold shall eat you through as a Canker, and shall rise up in
judgment against you.

Howl ye proud Priests, for the misery that is coming upon you, for ye shall
run to and fro, as drunken men, and none shall be to pity you. Woe to you that
have fed your selves with the fat, and clothed your selves with the wool, and
the people perish for want of knowledge; ye run and I never sent you, says the
Lord, therefore ye shall not profit the people at all: If ye had stood in my
counsel, ye should have turned many away from the evil of his doings, but
because ye have departed out of my counsel, I will spread dung on your faces,
yea I have cast dung on your faces already; and now the false Prophet rides on
the beast, but they both shall be cast into the Lake, which is prepared for the
devil and his angels.

And woe to all you corrupt Magistrates, who are persecuting the innocent and
the just, witness your practice at Exeter Prison; it had been better that a
Mil-stone had been hung about your necks, and you cast into the sea, than to
have offended one of those little ones.

Therefore thus says the Lord, I will be avenged upon you my adversaries;
though the wicked go on hand in hand, they shall not go unpunished. Woe to all
you covetous Merchants and tradesmen, of what sort soever, who with fair words
deceive the simple, contrary to that in your conscience, which shows you
should not lie, but speak the truth one to another, for that is the true Light,
and the witness of God, which testifies against sin and evil, and is the
condemnation of all such as act contrary to it.

Woe to all you covetous Lawyers, Drunkards, Swearers, Whoremongers, Adulterers,
and all that tells and makes a lie, no such shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven. Woe to all you that speak evil of things you know not.

Woe to all you that are separated, but not by my spirit, and covered with a
covering, but not with my spirit. Woe to all you proud and lustful ones, who
feeds on dainty dishes, and spends the creation upon their lusts. Cumber not
the ground ye fruitless trees, for the Lord God of life and power is come to
judge the world in righteousness, and to sweep the Land of evildoers, that the
earth may enjoy her Sabboths; and tetrible will his coming be to the wicked, to
all that are found to act contrary to that in their conscience; for all faces
shall gather paleness before him, and all mouths shall be stopped, and none
shall plead ignorance, nor say they knew not that they should not lie, swear,
back bite, or be proud, for ye know ye should not do so by the Light: therefore
all people be warned, and to the Light return, this is the way to salvation,
repent, while ye have time prise it, flight not the day of your visitation,
least the Lord pluck ye away suddenly, and you go down into the pit, and
there be no remedy, and there be none to deliver you out of my hands. And this
is the word of the Lord God to you all, choose whether you will hear or forbear,
I have cleared my conscience to you, that in your consciences shall witness for
me eternally, when the book of conscience is opened, and shall condemn all you
that are contrary to it.

From one who is a lover of your s^uls, and should rejoice to hear that any of
you is turned from the evil of his doings: Margret Killin.
Ye Inhabitants of Plymouth, remember and consider this, that the way of the
Ransomed, the Redeemed ones, ye know not, whose feet are turned out of the path
of the Just.

Barbara Patison.



Queries to the Parish-teachers of this Nation, who have great Sums of Money
for teaching the people.
Que: 1. What is the ground and cause, and reason of your people to observe the
time, called Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, as it is called by you and
your people, which are your Flock?

2. What is the cause, and ground, and reason, that against such times
aforesaid, they deck themselves with new suits of Apparel, and have some
certain Play-Daies, and much destroying of the creatures at those times, upon
the lusts of the people, which are your Flock?

3. What is the ground, and cause, and reason, that about the time called
Christmas, there is so much provided of the creatures, that which the people
calls good Cheer, which abundance is provided against that time, and wasted
upon the lust, and destroyed, and this is in most places through the Nation,
amongst the parish-Teachers, people, which are your Flock?

4. What is the ground, and cause, and reason, why people disguise themselves,
and play at Gold-games, as they call them, and have Wassel-Cups, as they call
them, in the time called Christmas, and so much great doings at houses, called
Gentlemen's houses, at that time; so we desire you which calls your selves
Ministers and Orthodox men, to give the ground out of Scripture, for the things
that your people practice, out of the Apostles practice, and where Christ or
his Apostles commanded any such things: give us some example out of Scripture
for such things before mentioned, which your people practice, and whether this
be a good example, to eat and drink and rise to play? and whether it be not
forbidden in the Scripture, yea or no? 1 Cor. 10.7:

5: Whether such as live wantonlie on the earth, sporting themselves in the
day time, are not them that live in hypocrisy, speaking high swelling words
of vanity, and such as kills the just, who lives in wantonness upon the earth?
and whether such as lives in pleasures are not dead while they live, yea or
nay? 2. Tim 5, 6.

6. Whether such as provide so much of the creatures against those times,
called, Easter, Whitsuntide, and Christmas, be not such as the God of the world
has blinded their eyes, who mind earthly things, whose God is their belly,
and in their shame they glory, These: 3.19:

7: Whether such as live in those things before mentioned, shall not perish in
their own corruptions? And you that profess your selves to be sent of Christ to
watch for the peoples souls, and your people lives in these things, whether
their blood will not be required at your hands, yea or nay? Ezekiel. 7:18.

8: Whether all these observations of these times, Christmas, Easter, and
Whitsuntide, the fine apparel made against these times, the fine Diet, and
past-times, and pleasures in these things, whether all these be not pleasing to
the flesh, yea or nay? And whether those that observe the day and profess the
name, be not they that crucify the life, yea or nay? whenas the Apostle said,
I am afraid of you, least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.10,
11.

And this is for all the natural Teachers to answer, and to give grounds from
the Scripture why they observe these things before mentioned, or where the
Apostles did observe any of the Saints days, either Matthew Mark, Luke, or
John, Peter, James, or any other:

I am the light of the world, and lights every man that comes into the
world, says Christ, that all men through him might believe; and this is the
Light which shows you sin and evil, which if you love the light, you love
Christ, if you hate the light, you hate Christ, whose deeds are evil, and you
know your deeds to be evil; with the Light which comes from Christ, who says,
learn of me, I am the way, and the truth, and the life, and no man comes to
the Father but by me who owns the light that every man is enlightened withal,
nor none believes in the truth but who believes in the Light, that lights
every man that comes into the world, that they might belive; and all they
that profess the Scriptures, and profes a belief, and do not believe in the
light, they are all as as the scribes and pharise^s, who professed the
scriptures, and a belief in God, and Christ that was to come and did not believ
in the light: therefore to the light in every one of your I speak which come
from Christ, who says, learn of me, I am the way to the father; and here you
will find your teacher, which will bring you of of all your teachers of the
world, lying on your beds, and going up and down about your occasions, if you
love it, if you hate it, here is your condemnation, the Light.

I am the Light of the world, and lights every man that comes into the
world, says Christ; learn of me, I am the way to the Father, no man comes to
the Father but by me, who lights every one that comes into the world, that
all men through him might believe; and this is the Light that shows you sin and
evil, that you should not lie nor swear, nor be drunk nor take Gods name in
vain, and shows you evil thoughts, evil notions, and evil desires; this is
the Light that comes from Christ, who says, learn of me; this teacher you will
find as you are lying in your beds, and as you are going up and down, and when
they say, lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, you need not go forth: it
will bring you to ceas from all the hirelings which Christ speaks of, and bring
you to cease from all who have the chiefest places in the assemblies, and stand
praying in the Synagogues, which Christ cried woe against, Mat. 23. and to
forsake all such as are seeking for the fleece, which the Lord sent Ezekiel to
cry against, Ezekiel. 34. and to forsake all such prophets and priests as bear
rule by their means, which the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against, Ier. 5. and
to forsake all such as seek for their gain from their quarter, which the Lord
sent Isaiah to cry against Isa. 56. and to forsake all such as divine for
money, and make a prey upon the people, which the Lord sent Micah to cry
against, Mic. 3. these was in the light, which cried against the false teachers
before mentioned; and those which be in the lightnow cannot hold them up that
hears Christ, and obeys the commands of God, who says, this is my beloved son,
hear him, and all the children of the Lord are taught of him, as you may read
in Is^i^h: the ministers of the world they say the letter is the light, the
Scriptures is the word, the steeple house is the Church, sprinckling of infants
the baptism, which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, the Church is in
God. These. 1.1. God is the word* Christ is the light, Ioh. 1. And the Saints
witnessed the one baptism, by one spirit, into one body; and these are contrary
to the scriptures, therefore who are taught of God denies their teachings and
practice who through feigned words and covetousness makes merchandise of the
people goes in the way of Cain, and after the error of Balaam, who preaches for
gifts and rewards, as you may read in Peter, in Jude, and the last chap of the
Romans.

From them who are scornfully called Quakers, but witness the teaching of
Christ.


