A REPLY TO A MOST untrue Relation made and set forth in Print, By Certain
VINTNERS, in excuse of their Wine PROJECT.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

A Reply to a most untrue Relation made, and set forth in Print, by certain
VINTNERS, in excuse of their Wine PROJECT.
To contend with men that deny their own public Acts, is a hard task; yet
for better manifestation of truth to the Honorable House of Commons, its
necessary that somewhat more be said, touching the Wine PROJECT.

IT has been already set forth, and plainly showed, even by the orders of
Vintners Hall. That the retailing Vintners of London contrived that Project at
their common Hall in November, 1637.

That they prosecuted it, and petitioned for it; And as it appears by the
Project it self, that none but the Vintners could have contrived it. So the
truth is, the covetousness of the Vintners, with their desire to Monopolize
the sole retailing of Wines, and their pride and malice to the Coopers put them
upon it.

Their covetousness; For they propounded, and would have no less then 4. l. a
Tun on all French, and 8. l. on Spanish Wines, to pay the King 40. s.
restitution of 6000. l. liberty to dress meat, sell Sugar, Beer, and Tobacco:
restraint of Wine Licenses in or near the City, enlargement of their Charter,
and other great benefits: and all this for bare 40. s. a Tun to the King.

Their pride and malice to the Coopers. They would not have a Cooper to live,
but as their servant, the poor Coopers must not sell a rundlet of Wine, they
must be suppressed, to advance their Lords and Masters, the London Vintners,
that so they might Monopolize to themselves the retaile of Wines both in City
and Country. That was the Vintnersend by this Project, for by it they tied up
the Merchant from selling to Coopers or Country Vintners.

And albeit the truth of these particulars appears clearly by the Project it
self, and the Vintners orders: yet the Vintners are not ashamed to affirm,
and that in Print too, in the front of their untrue relation.

First, that the generality of Retailers disliked this Project. Secondly, that
whatsoever they did in it, was by compulsion. Thirdly, that they received great
and insupportable loss by it.
What truth is in these men? Does it not plainly appear by their own Order of
the 22. of November, 1637. That the generality of Retailers contrived it at
their Hall, and have they not all taken the benefit of it, viz. a penny and two
pence in the quart?

Is it then to be believed that they disliked it?

And what can be more manifest, then that it was the design and work of the
generality. For the whole Comittee could not, much less could Alderman Abel,
or any particular man, conclude any thing in it without the consent and
direction of the generality, as appears fully by the Orders of the sixth, the
22. and the 27. of November, 1637.

The Comittee was from time to time to give account of their proceedings to the
Generality, and were so limited by the orders of the generality.

Does it not appear by their foresaid Order of the 27. of November, that they
petitioned for it?

Did they not ratify and confirm it at a general Court, as by their Order of
the seventh of February 1637. and by eight subsequent Orders made at their
common Hall?

How vain then is their pretense of threats, or compulsion.

As to the third, That they received great, and almost, insupportable loss by
it.

Do not all men know that from February 1637. to December 1640. the Vintners
have taken on all French Wines 4. l. a Tun, and from February 1637. to this
day, being above three years and an half, on Spanish Wines 8. pound and 12.
pound a Tun, above the set price, and not paid the 40. shillings to the King,
one full year and half.

All these excessive gains they have exacted by color of this their Project.

Ought they not then to be ashamed to set forth in Print, that they have
received great, and insupportable loss by it?

But what falsehood will not these Vintners affirm for truth, and what truth
will they not deny and outface, who say, they have great loss by this Project,
when their gain is so notorious, and deny their own Orders which they made at
their common Hall?

Their Orders which they would now deny, have been several times proved at
the Comittee, and out of those their own Orders (against which no modest or
honest men would contend) they have upon ten several hearings, been four
times voted by the Comittee, to be the Contrivers and Prosecutors of this
Project, and Delinquents, and they have been twice so voted by the whole house
of Commons in these words.

Die Mercurij 21. Iulij 1641.
Resolved upon the Question.

THat the Company of Vintners by their own offer of 40. shillings per Tun
upon Wines to his Majesty, and demands of liberty to raise a penny per Quart
upon French, and two pence a Quart upon Spanish Wines, and prosecuting the
business, as appears by their own Orders, are Contrivers of the said
unlawful Impositions, and are Delinquents.

Resolved upon the Question.

THat all those Vintners that were parties to the Indentures, Sharers and
Contrivers of the said Imposition of 40. shillings per Tun, and one penny per
Quart are Delinquents, and ought to give satisfaction to the Commonwealth.

In these Votes there can be no error: For it appears clearly by the
Vintners Book of Orders of their Hall, That they offered the 40. shillings a
Tun, and demanded liberty to raise a penny, and two pence a quart, and
prosecuted the business; An infallible proof against them, in which there can
be no corruption, and against which no exception can be taken; their own Book
condemns them.

And the Vintners and seven Counselors for them were heard by the Comittee,
above ten several days with much patience; and upon the testimony of their
own book of Orders they were on the 17. of June, 1641. Voted by the Comittee
to be the Projectors, Contrivers and Prosecutors of the said Project, and
Delinquents; and that Uote was four times confirmed by the Comittee.

These Uotes standing good against the Uintners, as they are most just, Master
Kilvert is much comforted in a strong Faith, That he shall show just cause to
the Honorable House of Commons to alter their Uotes against him.

First, in regard that since that Uote against him, he has made a material
part of the truth to appear, which then he could not so clearly manifest.

Secondly, for that he is ready now to make the whole truth of the business,
fully and clearly to appear, both touching the creation and execution thereof.
And in truth, it is another thing then it appeared to the Comittee to be, when
he was Uoted.

The part of the truth, which he has already made to appear, is:

That the retailing Vintners contrived this Project amongst themselves, at
their common Hall, in November, 1637. Petitioned for it, and prosecuted it.

That which he is now ready to prove, is

First, that he was not present at, or privy to, the framing or contriving of
the said Project; nor came, or sat amongst the Vintners in their Assembles at
their Hall, or elsewhere, until they had contrived, and concluded upon the
said Project, and that the chief Vintners present at those meetings, have
often acknowledged as much.

Secondly, That a principal witness examined against him, when he was voted
by the Comittee, has since his examination acknowledged (as the truth is) that
he was mistaken in the maine point of his testimony.

Thirdly, that all those that testified against him, when he was Voted by the
Comittee are parties to the Project, and Delinquents; viz.

Parties to the Original contriving the Project.
Parties to the Indentures of creation, of the Project:
And

Parties that took benefit by the Project.
So that they all spoke in excuse of themselves.

These particulars he could not so fully prove before the Vote, being much
straightened in time by Master Hearne, of Counsel for Alderman Abell, who spent
almost two days in recrimination of Master Kilvert, against truth, and the
direction of his clyent, and lest not Kilvert two hours for his defense.

And sithence these particulars are so material, and necessary to master
Kilverts just defense, he cannot doubt of the goodness of the House of Commons
(so great lovers of truth) that they will be pleased to admit him to prove the
truth.

Lastly, touching the Execution, It appears fully by a Letter written, and
sent to Alderman Abel and master Rowland Wilson, by George Griffith, and
confessed by Griffith before the Committee, that the said Griffith projected
and designned the manner of Execution of this Project, and he accordingly put
it in Evecution, and had 200. pound a year Fee for the same.

The Letter and Instructions follow in these very words.

Worshipful,
LAtely meeting with some Judicial men who were conferring about your present
Contract, some said it would be a profitable business, if well managed; and
confessed that none so fit to manage it as our Company: I was bold to reply,
that I was assured it would be well managed, and that we had as able men, both
wett and dry Vintners in our Company, to contrive and do it as any otherwhere
could be selected: and therefore to make good my word, and that the event
should prove it, I being a member of our Company, and one of the Assistance, I
hold it my duty to note any thing that will any way advance the said Companies
honor and profit: and therefore I present the above written unto your
Worships, which I acknowledge to be mean to your abilities and grave
experience; Yet if you please but to peruse it, and to make use of any thing
therein fit for your better remembrance, I shall take it as a favor: and so to
God Almighty recommending you, and all your Worships good endeavors. I shall
ever rest

Your assured faithful brother and Servant, George Griffith.
13. Feb. 1637. To his respected good friends the Worshipful, WILLIAM ADELL
Alderman, ROVVLAND WILSON Esquire, and to all the rest of the Vintners selected
to be Contractors with his Majesty, these present.
To the Worshipful Alderman ABELL, and the rest of the Contractors.
Advice for the better advance of the Worshipful Company of Vintners Contract,
now with his gracious Majesty, and Licenses with the Right Honorable, GEORGE,
Lord GORING.
THe Contractors to have a special care to obtain as large a grant, as can be
granted, and in particular.

1. That the two Articles first proposed, be absolutely confirmed; especially,
those that concern the liberty, fredome, and good of the Retailing Vinmer, as
is best known to your Worships.

2. That in the Grant a provizo be made, That his Majesty and his Heirs
shall put no further Custom, Impost, or charge on Wines, then is at the making
of the Grant.

3. That defalcation be made in case of wars with France or Spain.

4. That defalcation be made in case of plague, or great mortality.

5. That defalcation be made in case any Merchant or Retailer should refuse to
pay the 40. shillings per Tun, and that the Contractors using all possible
means, and cannot by Law or power compel payment, in such case fit his
Majesty make defalcation.

6. That his Majesty grant an ample Commission to some eminent Nobleman, and
to the Contractors and their Deputies, to take and leavie the 40. shillings per
Tun, and for the future, that the Merchant register their sales in thirty
days, or in default that he pay the 40. shillings per Tun, for such Wines
as by the Custom-house, or otherwise, it shall appear he has received.

7. That before the day of the commencement of the Contract, that a general
search be made in all Sellars of Wines, and register be taken of them, that the
Contractors may receive the 40. shillings per Tun.

8. That his Majesty's rent be made payable once, or at most, but twice in one
year.

9. That the Contract be made for at least 14. years, and if that will not be
granted, then to be well advised, whether you will take the Lord Gorings
Licenses from him or his Majesty, if you can procure 14. years from his
Majesty, then all to be taken from his said Majesty; otherwise, under your
favor, I hold it fittest you take the Licenses, and continue it from the Lord
Goring, and my reason is, that if from his Majesty you have but a short time,
and the Contract by your Industry made profitable, others may Farm it
hereafter from you, which if you have the Licenses, they will not be so ready,
or so able to do, and so by that means you may be afsured to have it for 14.
years.

10 That whereas Sir John Rainenam K. has the Licenses for Cornwall and Devon.
it is very fit for you likewise to take it in, which may be easily done, and
hope on reasonable terms, and to move him to grant it, you may advise, that
all Merchants that imports Wines into those parts, must pay 40. shillings per
Tun, and that you will not grant the Retailers in those parts, to sell for a
penny a Quart above the rates, except they will come in to you.

11. That you have his Majesty's Proclamation, signifying his gracious pleasure
for payment of the 40. shillings per Tun, etc. as Counsel shall advise.

When your Contract is finished, then these following Officers to be had, and a
convenient house for meetings.
1 A Receiver general, to account on oath for all he receives, and pays
out, and he to give good security for what value he shall be entrusted with.

2. A Secretary.

3. An able Accomptant.

4. A Beadle.

5. A messenger to attend the Commissioners.

6. Such other Officers (as one at the Custom-house to take the entries of all
Wines) as you shall hereafter find necessary, for the agitating of the
business in person abroad in the Country.

Now, as by the Orders of Vintners Hall it appears, and is so Voted, that this
Project was contrived by the Company of Vintners: So it also appears by this
Letter of Griffith, (who was one of the principal Contrivers) That it was
designed for the advancement of the Company, and the benefit of the generality:
and that Griffith was the principal Projector and contriver in the execution.

On the seventh of February, 1637. at a general Court at Vintners Hall, the
Project was confirmed by the Generality, and the Contractors named; and six
days after, viz. the 13. of February, Griffith writes to the two principal
pillars of the Company, and directs the form and manner of execution, for the
best advancement of the Company.

So that now this whole business being found to be the work of the Company,
both in the creation and execution, Master Kilvert is most confident of the
justice of the Honorable House of Commons, That they will not punish him for
the Vintners offense, there being no Petition, or complaint against him, other
then the recrimination of the Counsel of Alderman Abell, and the Vintners.

The truth of the fact touching Kilvert, now manifestly appearing otherwise,
then when he was Voted; It can no way derogate from the Honor and Justice of
the Honorable House of Commons to recall their Uote.

Which he most humbly prays, they will vouchsafe to do in their wonted
goodness, the rather, sithence by his endeavor and sole charge a great sum
of money will be justly raised from the several Vintners, that have unjustly
taken it from the Subject, by color of this their Project.

For the gain that the Vintners have made by this Project, It has been
already shown and proved before the Comittee, to amount to above two hundred
thousand pounds.

This their gain has risen three several ways.
First, by beating down the Merchants prices, by which alone they have gained,
in these three last years, above sixty thousand pounds: this was proved
before the Comittee, by Merchants of worth, and appears by the Merchants
prices of the sales of their Wines, certified by order of the Comittee.

Secondly, By the penny a Quart on al French, and two pence a Quart on Spanish
Wines, Whereby they have gained above one hundred and thirty thousand pounds,
more then they have paid to his Majesty, as by account of the Wines imported
in that time, and sold to Vintners, may appear.

Thirdly, By their super-Project upon Spanish Wines, in selling Malligaes and
Sherries at the price of Canarie, which is 12. l. a Tun above the set price,
And by this particular, they have gained thirty thousand pounds since February,
1637. when they first took the benefit of their Project.

Their pretenses of Undergage, Lees, Lecage, long keeping, decay on their
hands, and bad debts, are slight Maskes for their falsehood.

Touching Vnder-gage.
It was proved before the Comittee, by the testimony of worthy Merchants,
Captain Langham, Captain Rowden, and others,

That all Gascoigne Wines are full gage, and overgage, and those smaller Wines
which want of gage are cheap Wines, 3.4.5. nay, 6. l. a Tun under the set
price; and no vessel of French Wines wants the value of 20. shillings a Tun in
gage.

And for Lees, Lecage, and long keeping, they have little relation to the penny
a quart, for the charge and inconvenience to the Vintners was the same upon 6.
pence a quart, as it is upon 7. pence at most, within the seventh part of 40.
shillings a Tun.

For the decay of Wines on their hands: Their Wines were as subject to that
before.

But its especially provided by the Contract; that they are not to pay, neither
did ever Vintner pay for any decayed Wines.

Bad debts is as absurd a pretense as the rest, for the penny and two pence a
quart occasions no bad debts.

How deceitful then are the allegations and pretenses of the Vintners? when no
word of truth is found in any one of them.

And what can be said in their defense. That have still kept this Project on
foot to this day, in all parts of their own private gain, and the Subjects
greevance, and that in contempt of the Votes of the Honorable House of Commons.

For although they excuse it by the dearth of French Wines this last Vintage,
yet all men know, that Spanish Wines have not been so cheap for many years,
And the Vintners (notwithstanding the Vote) have continued the two pence a
quart on those Wines being 8. pound a Tun to this day, and paid the King
nothing.

And it is a known truth that they gain 6. pence in every 14. pence for a
quart of Malliga and Sherry, and 5. pence in every quart of Canary.

And they have this year drawn three quarts of Spanish for one of French Wine.

And it appears by the several Entries in the Custom House at London, only,
That from Michaelmas 1639. to Michaelmas 164^. being but two years, there was
imported of Spanish Wines, 19901. Tuns.

The Lecage whereof being taken out at 15. per cent. there remains in neat
Wine, full 16915. Tuns.

Which at 4. pound a Tun, comes to 67660. pound.

And thus for Spanish Wines only two years at 4. pound a Tun, and the
Vintners, for almost 4. years have taken from the Subjects for those Wines, 8.
pound, and 12. pound a Tun above the price.

Now whether the Vintners that were parties to the Indentures, Sharers, and
Contrivers of the said Imposition of 40. shillings a Tun, and a penny and two
pence a quart, and that have so long taken the benefit of it, much exceeding
the sum of two hundred thousand pounds shall make restitution, or
satisfaction to the Common wealth, according to the said Votes of the
Honorable House of Commons, of the 21. of July last, and in what proportion,
is solely in the wisdom of the High Court of Parliament to determine.

FINIS.

