A NEW-YEARS-GIFT FOR Mercurius Politicus.
THe Season of the year require's
Both gratitude and grate-ful fires,
To warm the Body and the mind
Of friends, both debonary and kind.
Each man consult's for him what is best,
And now recount's his Interest.
The Nobles to their Kings present
Some precious Gemm, or Ornament;
The Peasants of their Lords address
Their rural Christ-mas Charites;
The Clients to their Lawyers give
Such thanks, whereby their Causes thrive;
Who, to their Persons will be nigh,
Approve, their Interest will not Lie;
For if you will a Saint appear,
Your offering must renew the year;
Sir John! he cannot hold forth right,
Unless crammed Capons him invite.
Is It possible a Ju^^ice can
At New-years-tide turn Pelican?
Or that the Clerks revenew be
Kisses from Bawdes without a see?
No, no! their rents are better paid,
Else Peace might for Poor-John go trade.
Will any think, Will Lilly write's
For Sweden, (though the King now bite's
His fingers ends, and would have feign
His Chain at Golden-burg again,)
B^t that the old years Stars portend,
The King at Dco^ns-day will him send
A Medal, for a Xenium,
Made of the Danes old Kettle-Drum.
No man (that is wise,) but will review
His Interest, whether false, or true,
Either in State affairs, or less,
(But Fools, you know, they cannot guess.)
Then since that Maxim is so clear,
Adieu to the old Julian year.
My Interest leads me to prefer
The New-year in thy Character.
POLITICVS INTELLIGENCER;
(As famous as old Megg Spencer,)
Pragmaticus; The Spy; what not?
Britanicus; The Counter-plott
Of Hell; the Hawkers various Legion;
The Mercury of the infern Region;
One that is new come from Newgate for
To be the Scots Compurgator;
To Sat the Case of England right,
And clear the Presbyterians fight;
To make the Royallists confess
King Charles to be Eteocles;
And the rude Levellers convince
That Lucifers their lawful Prince;
No Regiment like a Free State,
Valor and Arts to propagate.
None but the King's long Parliament
To be our Supreme Government!
All this and more, in Forty nine,
Is vough'd from Francis Guicciardine
By Thee, thou many-headed Beast,
Thou Pimp for every Interest!
No sooner yet old Noll conspire's
To wing his Phanton desires,
And to Usurp the Supreme Power,
But then Le Vostre Servitour!
The Case is altered then (My Lord!)
A Parliament! the most abhorred,
Contemptible, prodigious Rout.
The Mockery, reproach, and flout
Of our new Turn-coat* Pamphlettor,
In praise of his Lord Proditor.
But when God's providence deposed
Our short-reign'd Lords, and (unsuppos'd,)
Restored the noble Parliament,
Come let me speak! Mar. Nedham, Gent.
Recraft's his cursed perfidie,
And says, that Interest will not lie:
And who but he! (for old John Cann
No more can do, than can a man!
He write's against the Cavalliers,
And pull's the Presbyterians ears:
He cures the wounds, which late he gave
To the Parliament's repute: The brave
She General, my Lady Doll,
He brings to the Tower without control.
But when ambition move's the Sphaer,
And Lambert will have no Com-peer;
And that a second violence
(Acted with traytr'ous insolence,)
Is offered to the Parliament,
(One day, we hope, which they 'l resent!)
Who but POLITICVS again!
Sir Arthur, and Hab. Morley's slain!
Monck, Lawson, Land, and Sea's subdued!
The Citizens (like Buzzards) mewed!
The Devil and his Damm to-boot
Have brought the Lunars under foot!
Our News does more in Print, than we
From Ports-mouth, or else where can see!
We call Free-Parliaments, and then
Send them as free to the Moon again,
Or to the Grand Abyss; for yet
At Wallingford they have not set.
Thou Juggling damned Imposter! pray,
Thou yet may live one New Years day;
And not like Doctor Lamb be palted,
Till Tiburne has thy Crest exalted.
Expect no mercy, or reprieve!
It Is better than thou should deceive
The world again, the world should be
Annihilate: What Need have we
Of such an Arch-Ardelio, when
There are so many honest men?
Who friends are to the good Old Cause,
Our native Liberties, and Laws;
And are not mercenary Sephs,
No Robinsons, nor Deanes, nor Goffs.
If thou survive, thou art such a Pest,
As will all Nature's frame infest,
That Is habitable; Beg we then,
Thou may be quickly Trust. Amen.
It Is time ill spent to treat on Thee,
'Till thou have been at the Triple-tree:
And then thy Life we-'l descant on,
After thy last Confession:
And all the Ballad-mongers, (Slaves
To thee, and such a Pack of Knaves,)
In doleful Tone thy Dirge shall sing,
Of Pagan Fisher's own making!
For he will Pentameters (most sure,)
As good as Ovid has, procure.
Impunitas peccati praebet ansam peccandi.
W. KILBURNE.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Milbourn in Jewen-Street, near Jacobs-Well.


