A Paper delivered and dispersed by Sir William Killigrew.
I. BY reason of the many greater Affairs in Parliament, the Bill for
perfecting the Earl of Lindseys Fens, has not yet found a time to be read: by
which unhappy delay the season of this year is near spent for works of this
nature; and if the work begin not till next Summer, the profit of that year
must be also lost. By this unhappy delay also new Obstructions are now raised
against this public work; For I am credibly informed by several persons of
quality, that the people have been lately invited and encouraged at Boston to
come up in great numbers to make new clamors, by telling them that they have a
good cause, and but few friends in Parliament; that three or four only spoke
for them; that when the Vote passed, but thirteen were for the Country, and
twenty seven against them; that their Fens would be lost unless they did come
generally up to petition; and if that failed, then they should bring up their
wives and children to the Parliament door, and there leave them.

II. I do conceive, by these invitations and encouragements, many poor
ignorant people are persuaded to sign Petitions they understand not, and may
be did never see. And to make the noise and clamor greater, many rich men of
Boston, with others bordering on the eight hundred Fens, are now come up (who
would have no draining, that so themselves with their great stocks may still
continue to eat out the poor Commoners, and do therefore well to declare in
their last Friday books, that the poor Commoners have no interest in the Fens,
but by their Landlords right: which is a pretty preamble to rob the poor people
of their Commons, in case their design should follow of enclosing all the
Commons.) These men also are now come up to petition against the Drainers, in
hope to stay the Act from passing, thereby to keep the said eight hundred Fens
from being drained, and thereby to defraud the State of eight thousand Acres in
that Fens belonging to the late King, as Lord of the Soil, and Drainer of the
said Fen.

III. I shall not trouble my self to answer their railing books given abroad on
Friday last, because the substance of the same books has by them been
published long since, and long since fully answered by books of mine: nor much
value what their Petition or themselves can say after so many years hearing,
and such full debates at so great a Committee, where all the House had Voices;
and after a Bill ordered by this honorable House to be brought in to perfect
the said draining: for I do humbly conceive, there being no new act done by the
Drainers, these men's repetition of old clamours fully answered, can signify
nothing but some few men's endeavors to delay the Act, in hope to starve the
Drainers while the cause depends; filling men's ears with terrors of the
peoples discontent, as if two or three hundred Riotters, with their Abettors,
signing a Petition, or as many rich men's coming up with a Petition were the
voice of the whole people of Lincolnshire! and as if all England did desire the
Fens should not be drained! when as most of this Nation do wonder that any
should oppose so general a good.

IV. I do glory in my part of the merit of this work, because I may safely say
that no work of this nature was ever carried on with a more general consent,
and applause of the most eminent Lords, Owners, and Commoners of the Country;
or with more equity pursued, or less prejudice to any man, or has produced a
greater improvement (I mean proportionable to its quantity) nor has any such
work been brought to a greater perfection. In consideration whereof, I cannot
apprehend that the whole Land shall be taken from us; but my fears are, lest
some artificial delays, or prejudicial accommodation be found to bring us to
ruin, to wit, by recompencing our charge, hazard, and losses, which the whole
twenty four thousand Acres will not now do, nor can the Country ever perform
it by a sum of money, though they and we should agree to it. My only hope is,
that the Parliament will think it just and honorable to settle us by the same
like Act with Bedford-Levell, having the same title and merit. In which Act
there are provisoes to meet with, and prevent all mischiefs and inconveniences
which have, or may happen to any person concerned in this work of draining. It
is therefore a vain thing by Petitions to anticipate the intentions of the
Parliament, who intend so much their good, if Lindsey-Levell be established by
the like Act with Bedford-Levell; the profit of these works being done, will
encourage the draining of all the Fens in England, as a high improvement to the
public good of this Nation, and therefore worthy of the Parliaments
protection; for which there are arguments enough to convince any opinions to
the contrary.

1 June, 1651. William Killigrew.


