A DEEP GROAN, FETCHD At the FUNERAL of that incomparable and Glorious
Monarch, CHARLES THE FIRST, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.

On whose Sacred Person was acted that execrable, horrid and prodigious
Murder, by a traiterous Crew and bloody Combination at Westminster, January
the 30. 1648.

-- Heu fausta Britannia quondam
Tota peris ea morte sua, Mors non fuit ejus
Sed tua, non una haec, sed publica mortis imago.
Written by D. H. K.

May 16

Printed in the Year M. DC. XL. LX.

A DEEP GROAN, etc.
TO speak our Griefs at full over thy Tomb
(Great Soul) we should be Thunderstruck and dumb:
The trivial Offerings of our bubling eyes
Are but fair Libels at such Obsequies.
When Grief bleeds inward, not to sense, it is deep;
We Have lost so much, that it were a sin to weep.
The wretched Bankrupt counts not up his sums,
When his inevitable ruin comes:
Our loss is finite when we can compute;
But that strike speechless, which is past recruite.
We Are sunk to sense; and on the Ruin gaze,
As on a curled Commets fiery blaze:
As Earthquakes fright us, when the teeming earth
Rends open her bowels for a fatal birth;
As Inundations seize our trembling eyes;
Whose rolling billows over Kingdoms rise.
Alas! our Ruins are cast up, and sped
In that black Total -- Charles is Murdered.
Rebellious Giant hands have broak that Pole,
On which our Orb did long in Glory roll.
That Roman Monsters wish in act we see, Caligula.

Three Kingdoms necks have felt the Axe in Thee,
The Butcherie is such, as when by Caine,
The fourth Devision of the world was slain.
The mangled Church is on the shambles laid,
Her Massacre is on thy Block displayed,
Thine is thy peoples epidemick Tomb,
Thy Sacrifice a numerous Hecatombe.
The Powder-mine's now fired; we were not freed,
But respited by Traitors thus to bleed.
Novembers plots are brewed and broached in worse,
And January now compleats the Curse.
Our Lives, Estates, Laws, and Religion, All
Lie crushed, and gashing in this dismal fall.
Accursed day that blotted'st out our Light!
May thou be ever muffled up in Night.
At thy return may fables hang the sky;
And tears, not beams, distill from Heavens Eye.
Cursed be that smile that guildes a Face on thee,
The Mother of prodigious Villainy.
Let not a breath be wafted, but in moanes;
And all our words be but articulate groans.
May all thy Rubric be this dismal Brand;
Now comes the miscreant Doomes-day of the Land.
Good Friday wretchedly transcribed; and such
As Horror brings alike, though not so much.
May Dread still fill thy minutes, and we sit
Frighted to think, what others durst commit.
A Fact that copies Angels when they fell,
And justly might create another Hell.
Above the scale of Crimes; Treason sublimed,
That cannot by a parallel be rim'd.
Raviliack's was but under-graduate sin,
And Goury here a Pupil Assassin.
Infidel wickedness, without the Pale;
Yet such as justifies the Canniball.
Riot Apochyphall of Legend breed;
Above the Canon of a Jesuits Creed.
Spirits of witchcraft; quintessentiall guilt;
Hels Pyramid; another Babell built.
Monstrous in bulk; above our Fancies span;
A Behemoth; a Crime Leviathan.
So desperately damnable, that here
Even Wild smells Treason, and will not appear.
That Murdering-peece of the new Tyrant-State,
By whom't has Shot black Destinies of late;
He that belched forth the Loyal Burleighs doom,
Recoyles at this so dreadful Martyrdom.
What depth of Terror lies in that Offense,
That thus can grind a seared Conscience?
Hellish Complotment! which a League renewes,
Less with the men, then the Actions of the Jews.
such was their Bedlane Rabble, and the Cry
Of Justice now, amongst them was Crucify:
Pilates Consent is Bradshawes Sentence here;
The Judgment hall's removed to Westminster.
Hayle to the Reeden Scepture the Head, and knee
Act over again that Cursed Pageantrie.
The Caitiffe crew in solemn pomp guard on
Mocked Majesty as not to the Block, but Throne,
The Belch agrees of those envenomed Lies;
There a Blasphemer, here a Murderer dies.
If that go first in horror, this comes next,
A pregnant Comment on that ghastly Text.
The Heavens never saw, but in that Tragic hour,
Slaughtered so great an Innocence, and Power.
Bloodthirsty Tigers! could no stream suffice
T'allay that Hell within your Breasts but this?
Must you needs swill in Cleopatra's Cup,
And drink the price of Kingdoms in a sup?
Cisterns of Loyalty have deeply bled,
And now you have damm'd the Royal Fountain Head.
Cruel Phlebotomie! at once to draine
The Median, and the rich Basilick vein:
The tinctures great that popular murder brings,
It Is scarlet deep, that is died in blood of Kings.
But what! could Israel find no other way
To their wished Canaan than through the Red Sea?
Must God have here his deading Fire and Cloud,
And he be the Guide to this outrageous Crowd?
Shall the black Conclave counterfeit his hand,
And superscribe their Guilt, Divine Command?
Does th'ugly Fiend usurp a Saint-like grace?
And Holy Water wash the Devils face!
Shall Dagons Temple the mocked Arc enclose?
Can Esau's hands agree with Jacob's voice?
Must Molech's Fire now on the Altar burn?
And Abel's blood to Expiation turn?
Is Righteousness so lewd a Bawd? and can
The Bibles Cover serve the Alcoran?
Thus when Hel's meant, Religion's bid to shine
As Faux his Lantern lights him to his Mine.
Here, here is sins non ultra, when one Lie
Kills this, and stabs at Majesty.
And though his sleepie Arm suspend the scourge,
Nor does loud Blood in winged Vengeance urge,
Though the soft hours a while in pleasures fly,
And conquering Treason sing her Lullabie.
The guilt at length in fury he will inroule
With barbed Arrows on the trayt'rous Soul.
Time may be when that John-a-Leyden King
His Quarters to this Tomb an Offering bring,
And that Be-Munster'd Rabble may have eyes
To read the Price of their dear Butcheries.
Yet if just Providence reprieve the Fate,
The Judgment will be deeper, though it be late.
And Aftertimes shall feel the curse enhanc'd,
But how much They Have the Sin bequeathed, advanced.
Mean time (most blessed shade) the Loyal eye
Shall pay her Tribute to thy Memory.
Thy Aromatic Name shall feast our sense,
'Bove balmie Spiknard's fragrant Redolence,
Whilst on thy loathsome Murderers shall dwell
A plague sore, blayne, and rotten ulcers smell.
Wonder of Men and Goodness! stamped to be
The Pride, and Flourish of all History.
Thou have undone the Annals, and engrossed
All the Heroes Glory which the Earth e're lost.
Thy Privilege it is only to commence
Laureate in Sufferings, and in Patience.
Thy wrongs were 'bove all sweetness to digest;
And yet thy sweetness conquered the sharp test:
Both so immense, and infinitely vast,
The first could not be reached, but by the last.
Mean Massacres are but in death begun;
But Thou have Lived an Execution.
Close coffined up in a deceased Life;
Had Orphan Children, and a Widow-Wife.
Friends not t'approach, or comfort, but to mourn
And weep their unheard plaints, as at thy urne?
Such black Attendants Colonied thy Cell,
But for thy Presence, Car'sbrooke had been Hell.
Thus basely to be Dungeon'd, would enrage
Great Bajazet beyond an Iron Cage.
That deep indignity might have layne
Something the lighter from a Tamerlaine.
But here Sidonian Slaves usurp the Reins,
And lock the Scepter-bearing Arms in chains.
The spew'd-up surfeit of the glut'nous Land;
Honored by scorn, and clean beneath all brand.
For such a Varlet-Brood to tear all down,
And make a common Football of the Crown.
T'insult on wounded Majesty, and broach,
The blood of Honor by their vile reproach.
What royal eye but thine could sober see,
Bowing so low, yet bearing up so high?
What an unbroken sweetness graced thy Soul,
Beyond the world, proud conquest, or control?
Maugre grim cruelty, thou keepst thy hold;
Thy thornie Crown was still a Crown of Gold.
Chaste Honor, Might enraged could never defloure,
Though others the Use, Thou claim'dst the Right of Power.
The brave Athenian thus (with lopp'd-off Hands)
A stop to swelling sails by's mouth commands.
New Vigor roused Thee still in thy Embroyles,
Antaeus-like, recruiting from the Foyles.
Victorious fury could not terror bring,
Enough to quell a captivated King.
So did that Roman Miracle withstand
Hetrurian shoales, but with a single hand.
The Church in thee had still her Armies; thus
The World once fought with Athanasins.
The Gantlet thus upheld; It is decreed,
(No safety else for Treason) Charles must bleed.
Traitor and Sovereign now inverted meet;
The wealthy Olive's dragged to the Brambles feet.
The Throne is metamorphiz'd to the Bar,
And despicable Batts the Eagle dare.
Astonishment! yet still we must admire
Thy courage growing with thy conflicts high'r.
No palsied hands or trembling knees betray
That Cause, on which thy souls fure bottomed lay.
So free and undisturbed flew thy Breath,
Not as condemned, but purchasing a death.
Those early Martyrs in their funeral pile,
Embraced their Flames with such a quiet smile.
Brave Coeur-de-Lyon Soul, that would not veil
In one base syllable to beg thy Bail!
How did thou blush to live at such a price,
As asked thy People for a sacrifice?
The Athenian Prince in such a pitch of zeal,
Redeemed his destined Host, and Commonweal;
Who bribed his cheated Enemies to kill,
And both their Conquest, and their Conqueror fell.
Thus thou our Martyr died'st: but oh! we stand
A Ransom for another Charles his Hand.
One that will write thy Chronicle in Red,
And dip his Pen in what thy Foes have bled.
Shall Treas'nous Heads in purpule Caldrons drench,
And with such veins the Flames of Kingdoms quench.
Then thou art least at Westminster, shall't be
Filled in the Pompous List of Majesty.
Thy Mausalaeum shall in glory rise,
And Tears, and wonder force from Nephews Eyes.
Till when (though black-mouthed Miscreants engrave)
No Epitaph, but Tyrant, on thy Grave.
A Vault of Loyalty shall keep thy Name,
An orient, and bright Olibian flame.
On which, when times succeeding foot shall tread,
Such Characters as these shall there be read.
Here CHARLES the best of Monarchs, butchered lies;
The Glory of all Martyrologies.
Bulwark of Law; the Churches Cittadell;
In whom they triumphed once, with whom they fell:
An English Solomon, a Constantine;
Pandect of Knowledge, Humane and Divine.
Meek even to wonder, yet of stoutest Grace,
To sweeten Majesty, but not debase.
So whole made up of clemency, the Throne
And Mercy-seat to Him were always one.
Inviting Treason with a pardoning look,
Instead of Gratitude, a stab He took.
With passion loved; that when He murd'red lay,
Heaven conquered seemed, and Hell to bear the sway.
A Prince so richly good, so blessed a Reign,
The world n'ere saw but once, nor can again.
-- Humano generi Natura benigni
Nil dedit, aut tribuet moderaso hoc principe major
In quo vera dei, vivensque eluxit imago:
Hunc quoniam scelerata cohors violavit, acerbas
Sacrilego Dens ipse petet de Sanguine poenas
Contemptumque sin Simulachri haud linquet inultum.
Parodia ex Buchanani Geneth: Jacobi sexti. (...)
