The unlimitted Authority OF Christ's Disciples cleared, OR The present Church
and Ministry vindicated. Or Christ's Disciples Authority for the practice of
his Commands is unlimitted.

BEING A brief answer to a Book entitled (A sober Word to a serious People.)
There the Writer says, Christ gave his Commissions not to Disciples as
Disciples, but to Apostles.

But here is by Scripture proved, that the Authority and Commissions, given to
Disciples, (as Disciples considered) are of a far larger extent, then the
Authority or Commissions given to Apostles.

Written by THOMAS KILCOP.

Bind up the Testimony, seal the Law among my Disciples, Esa 8.16. O my Dove,
that art in the Clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the stairs; let
me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; f^r sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance comely. LONDON, Printed by J. C. 1651.

TO THE READER,
CHristian Reader, there came to my hand a Book (with no name to it) entitled,
(A sober word to a serious people.) It opposes all Churches or Ministry, that
this day be, and none (as yet) has put forth any answer thereto; wherefore I
thought my self engaged, to spend my mite of opportunity therein. In the said
Book are multiplicity of words and Scriptures quoted over and over: therefore
for brevity sake, I mind only (yet exactly) the pith of it, and give thereto a
brief, and punctual Answer, even by the word of truth, being very brief, the
Reader should be the mere observant. Try all things, hold fast that which is
good, 1 These. 5.21. Do men contend against truth? Oh then contend against such
men. Do they make void Gods Commands? Oh then exalt them, it is time for thee
Lord, to work (says David) for they have made void thy Law: therefore I love
thy Commandments above Gold, yea fine Gold; therefore I esteem all thy
precepts, concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way.

The unlimitted Authority of Christ's Disciples cleared.
The first part
CHAP. 1.
IN that Book he minds what the better sort of Seekers (so called) can do,
and what they cannot do, they ought (says he) p. 2. to read, pray, and give
Alms, from Acts 8. and 10.1.2. and this for several ends, p. 3. but for the
present Churches and Ministry, they see no ground: these being Christ's grand,
capital, and comprehensive institutions, to which he gave gifts, for comparing
these with the word they conform not, p. 4.

I answer; Christ requires not only reading, praying, and almes-giving; but
also Church-meeting and Ministry, as, forsake not the fellowship that you have
among your selves, exhort one another daily, love brotherly fellowship, Heb.
3.13. and 10.25. 1 Pet. 2.17. such as gladly received his word were baptized,
and they continued in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, Act 2.41, 42.

Why can you not conform to one as well as to the other, since Christ requires
the one as much as the other?

1. These (says he) are great and capital institutions.

I answer, the more great and weighty, the rather to be obeyed, they were
hypocrites that tythed Mint and Annis, and left the weightiest matters of the
Law, Mat. 23.23, 24.

2. To these (says he) Christ gave gifts.

I answer, if by gifts he mean the gift of faith, love, joy, etc. surely if
these be wanting, not Church and Ministry only; but praying, reading, and
alms giving also, are alike vain; for who can call on him in whom they believe
not, Romans 10. and if we give all our Goods to the poor, and have not love, it
profits not. 1 Cor. 13.3. and reading, if without faith profits not; for,
without faith it is unpossible to please God. Heb. 11.5. but it by gifts he
mean tongues and Miracles, as I judge he does) then I reply, that miracles were
to confirm the word, and not to beget obedience to it in such as before knew
it, tongues also, were not for them that believe, but for them that believe
not: these gifts were not given to make knowers obey, but to make non knowers
to know, Mark 16.20. 1 Cor. 14.22. Heb. 2.4. Do you own the Scripture to be
Gods word, and therefore read it, though you saw no miracle to confirm it? much
more should you obey it though you see no miracle: or do you in some things
conform to it without seeing miracles? you might do so also in other things on
the same ground, and you cannot disobey it for want of miracles, without
disowning it on the same account, and as well might you for want here of
disobey it in every thing as in some thing.

But the inference of these words (to these he gave gifts) is, that the Church
or Ministry that has them not, is not Christ's Church or Ministry, and then,
Christ may be obeyed though these be rejected.

I answer, the Scripture says, these tokens shall follow them that believe,
Mark 16. but it does not say, such tokens shall accompany the Ministry, and be
in every visible Church: therefore you might rather question (as some do)
whether any in the world do believe, since these are wanting: then for want of
these, to question the truth of the Church and Ministry, which those by you
judged believers do enjoy.

2. You herein question the truth of the Church and Ministry, that have been
as much as those that now are; for John a Gospel-Minister, Mark. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.
did no Miracle, John 10.41. and though the Corinth. had all gifts, 1 Cor. 1.7.
and the Galatians had some, yet we read not of any in the Churches of
Macedonia, or Asia, or the Ephesians, Bereans, Philippians, or almost any
Church spoken of.

Obj. God has set such in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29.

I answer, it is in that place evident, that the Church there specified, is no
particular Church, but the Church general, called elsewhere the general
Assembly of the first born written in Heaven, Heb. 12. of which if we be not
Members, not only Church and Ministry, but our readings, prayings, and
distributions are little worth.

But if we be of this Church general, (as all believers be) then may we
acceptably pray, read, etc. and as acceptably associate, preach, break bread,
and what not? for if justified by faith, we have peace Godward through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by him also we have access to this grace, wherein we stand,
Romans 5.2. Rejoice not in men, for all is ours, Paul, Apollo, things present, or
to come, all is ours, and we Christ's, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23.

3. These says he, if compared with the word conform not.

I answer, as much as your praying, reading, or Almes-giving do; though we
examine only his own quotations. The Eunuch and Cornelius, who acceptably read,
prayed and gave Alms, had quickly, the one a man, the other an Angel, sent them
to estate them into Gospel Church and Ministry, which he has not to this day
enjoyed: therefore his own practice conformeth not to his own quotation.

Obj. They are not so unsuitable as to be disowned.

I answer, I say the same of the present Churches and Ministry, their
unsutablenes may be paralleled by some owned in Scripture for Churches, and the
Temple (he says elsewhere) was a Type of the Gospel Church State; but in
that, though the free hearted could not come nigh the first pattern, how does
God encourage them notwithstanding, Haggai 2.4, 5, 6. therefore if you can
pray, and read, etc. though you therein come short of the primitive pattern,
you might also conform to the present Church and Ministry among the free and
upright hearted, though they come short of the first pattern. And so much to
that.

CHAP. 2.
IN the said Book he also says, though some say the Commission, Mat. 28.19,
20. was given to Disciples as Disciples, or to preaching Disciples; but Christ
(says he) p. 5. singled out some from others to preach, Mat. 10.1.16. Mark
3.13. Luke 6.13. and this Commission, Mat. 28. was given to the same persons,
p. 6.

I answer, that Commission, Mat. 10. was in its extent limited both for time
and persons, it was to be expenced.

by -- singled out men only to the ^ews before Christ's death.
But this Mat. 28. is every way unlimitted, it extends to all Nations. all
Ages.


And may be, yea must be dispensed by Disciples.

Obj: It was given to the very same persons.

I answer, it was given to them, and also to the rest that were with them, as
Luke 24:33. to the end.

2 If it had been given personally to no more then the eleven; yet were they
when that was given, Mat. 10. called Apostles; but now called disciples, verse
16. and Christ could as easily have called them Apostles as Disciples, had he
herein considered them as Apostles, and not as Disciples.

3 If it had been given to them only, and if they had now also been termed
Apostles; yet it would plainly appear to be given to them not considered as
Apostles, but as Disciples; yea so, as to include therein the whole body of
Disciples in all Nations, and in all Ages, as much as they.

For these are herein bid (...) [by teaching to make Disciples all Nations]
with this addition, verse 20: teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you, and lo, I am with you always, etc: teaching them, to wit,
the disciplised, whether Jew or Gentile, to observe, to do, to practice all
things, every Gospel Command, whatsoever I have ever since I estated to you, in
Gospel Worship Commanded ^ou.

But Christ had taught these to be baptized, ^o pray, to preach, to baptize, to
assemble, to break bread. Act. 2.41.42. Ergo the disciplised, must do the same,
of what Nation or age soever, therefore as praying Disciples may pray, so
preaching Disciples may preach, uniting Discipls may unite, if they have
ability they want not authority, being Disciples, and so we being Disciples,
learners of Christ, hearkners to Christ, have authority to practice what we
find in Scripture be Christ's Gospel commands.

Consider also these things.

1. Were those to whom in person this commission was given, Apostles, then, the
same Gospel commands, that Apostles were to observe, must Disciples observe
also.

2. Were they Jews, then, the Gospell-commands that Jews were to practice, must
Gentiles practice also.

3. Were they with Christ, and was this before Christ's ascension, then the same
commands that were to be observed while Christ was present, and before his
ascension: must be observed after his ascension and in his absence.

4. The same authority given before his death to singled out men, is after his
resurrection given to them and others as Disciples but then it was limited to
Apostles, but now to Disciples boundless Therefore the authority of Disciples
is far greater then the authority of Apostles.

5. Since this commission was given to Disciples before they had received the
promised power from on high, we learn that Disciples authority was as great
before they received that power as after, and then, the said power is ability,
not authority.

6. Was this commission given to the eleven, and the others with then, as Luke
24.33.47, 48, 49. Those that could work miracles, and those that could not too;
then, such Disciples as cannot work miracles, have as much authority as those
that can, And so much to this also.

CHAP. 3.
In the next place he propounds 4. questions. p. 6. and gives thereto 4
positive answers in substance thus.

1. As of old: administrations were committed to choice men, Ex. 28.1.2. so
now, is preaching and baptizing to a Ministry. p. 7. Mar. 3. Lu. 6. Acts. 10
1. and 1, 2.17.25.

I Answ. As then the Levits were chosen for ^riests, and Aarons family for high
Priests. Ex. ^8.

So now is Christ our high Priest, and his disci^^es are Priests. Heb. 3.1. 1
Pet. 2.5, 6. and faith^^ll preachers are choice men.

His quotations were minded in the 2d. chap. Only here are two more added by
him, as Act. 1. Acts 10. but both do gain, say, what he draws from them.

Act. 1. declares, first, That, that which he jumbles together, are distinct,
and Judas had a share in both, Ministry and Apostleship, verse 25. Seconly,
That Apostles did not only preach and baptize, but were also eyewitnesses of
Christ's death and resurrection. v. 22.

Thirdly, this place shows plainly that the Ministry was bounded in
Discipls, and that Disciples have authority to rectify what by Scripture they
find to be amiss, yea authority to place men into offices, yea into
Apostleship, and so disciples authority is greater them Apostles authority: for
Peter stood up among the Disciples and said Men and brethren, this Scripture
must be fullfilled. etc. verse 15, 16. and then his advice being given to verse
22. the effect is, and they appointed two: they, to wit, the disciples, the men
and brethren, before specified: and verse 24. it is said further, and they prayed
etc. and they gave forth the Lots etc. they appointed, they cast Lots, they
numbered him with then Apostles; thus his own quottaion is sufficient against
him.

Ob. Verse 1 He gave commandment to the Apostles whom he had chosen, and Act
10 but to us chosen before of God and he commanded us to preach etc.

I Answ. That he now did give Commandments to those before chosen and called
Apostles, is true, but that his commands were given but to them, or that they
were herein considered, not as disciples is false, for.

First, as they were given to them, so to the rest with them,

Secondly, they were to teach the disciplised, to observe the same, as in chap.
2

And so in act 10, 41, 42 He appeared openly, not to all the people, that is,
not to all the Jews, good and bad, but to us chosen before of God, not us
Apostles only, but to us brethren, to 500 at once, 1 Cor. 15, 6 even to us
which did eat and drink with him after he rose again, and he commanded us to
preach, etc. us that eat and drank with him, which is the eleven and the rest
that were with them, as Lu^ 24.33, 43, 48, 49. and so much to this,

His second affirmation is in p. 8 that the said Ministry is expressed Ephesians 4, 12,
13 for number, names, and, and duration; all these are set in the Church, ^^s
institutions to abide 1 Cor 12, 28. p. 9, to perfect, (...) edify; some in the
world to precede the Church, ^^me placed in it, to edify p. 10, Must Saints be
^^rfected and edified, not by one, but by all these? p. 11. then is Christ's
ministry breeding, and feeding; one prepares gathers, the other builds
further, both are one ministry, fruits of one purchase, both needful, one to
convert and enlighten, the other to edify and strengthen, therefore to
continue together; the latter has not been without the former he thinks, as p.
12

I Answ. Is conversion by the first part of this ministry, and edification by
the latter; then the first must be now, or no conversion now; and the latter
now, or no edification now; and then, well may he opose a Feeding ministry,
that has not pertak't of the breeding ministry.

Secondly, The denying this ministry now to be, is the belying that place,
Ephesians. 4. for that (as he said) declares not only the number, names, end, but
also the duration of Gospel-ministerie, and that, till all the saints meet, to
a perfect man. It is to perfect, till all are perfected (converted as he says)
by this it appears now to be, except conversion be past.

Thirdly Persons ministering are Ministers, that about which they minister is
the ministry; the breeding and feeding ministry is where conversion and
edifying is; The Jews had Moses and the Profits, when they had their writings;
in the same sense now, have we the Apostles, and Prophets; which is a ministry
both breeding and feeding; it is breeding Joh. 20.30* 31. Many other signs he
did which are not written in this book, but these are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that in believing ye might
have life through his name.

And feeding 1 Jo. 5.13. These things have I written unto you that believe in
the name of the Son of God; that ye may know ye have eternal life, and may
believe on the name of the Son of GOD.

Yet these writings neither beget nor feed, if God assist not, neither did
Paul's personal planting, nor Apollos watering, except God gave the increase.

Fourthly let us honor the Ministry above Ministers. God begets by his word
Jam 1.18, sometime through the mouth of one unbegot himself as we see, Esa 42
19 20

His opening of Perfecting Edifying
I oppose not

CHAP. IIII.
HIs third affirmation is, Scripture does not clear Church gathering, without
Ministry and Baptism preceding p 12

I Answer, true, and we by the aforesaid ministry were converted, and were
also baptized, before we congregated.

He adds some say believers may consent to be a Church, etc. and as a visible
church appoint one to baptize, etc.

I answer none but self-seekers will so say, who being before leaders would be
so still, and so found out this by way: others after baptism, by consent
became a Church.

But this he opposes also, as if we now err from our first principles, for
says he, we now take not one in, though he consent, till the Church (as in
Christ's name) Judge him fit; but (says he p 13) who at first declared in
Christ's name to us, that Christ accepted of us as a Church? but some were
disigned thereto (says he) a preceding ministry converting and espousing
them p 14 1 Cor 4 15 2 Cor 5 25. and 11.2 and 8 5.

I answer, as now the whole Church Judges of the fitness of such as would be
added, so at first, every particular was approved of by the whole; and so we
swerve not from our first practice.

And that some were designed, to judge whether Christ would accept of a people
etc. is false and against the Gospel; for as touching believing who ever
comes to Christ, he will in no wi^e cast off, Joh. 6. so also in obedience, if
the mind be willing he accepts according to what we have. 2. Cor. 8.12. he
dispiseth not the day of small things. He respects tender Grapes: Cant. 2.14
15. and so, he designeth some to strengthen weak hands, to confirm feeble
knees: to say to the fearful in heart, be ye strong, etc. Esa 35.3.4. he
designeth none, to tell people (though they set themselves to serve the Lord,
yet it is questionable whether he will accept of their so doing, and his
quotations prove no such thing. Paul in one, tells the Cor. that he was their
Father, he had begot them through the Gospel, in another he says, that he in
Christ's stead entreated them to be reconciled, in the third place, he says, he
had espoused them to a Husband, and in the last place, speaking of the
Macedonians says, they gave themselves up* first to the Lord then to us by the
will of God; here note, first their voluntary act, they gave up themselves.

2dly. to whom, first to the Lord, then to us, (says he.)

3dly. by whose appointment? by the will of God.

Had the Apostles been designed to judge whether peoples submission would be
accepted off, then should they have first given up themselves to them, and then
to the Lord, if the Apostles had judged them fit. Se how opposite his
quotations are to him, and he to them.

It Is one thing to beget people by the word, to entreat people to be reconciled:
and to be as judge, to judge whether such as are begotten, on are reconciled,
shall be accepted off, is another thing, to espouse that is, to persuade them
to accept of Christ's espousalls, by declaring his readiness, to accept of any
that give themselves up to him, is one thing, and to judge whether though
people do so, Christ will accept of it, is another thing; some were by Christ
designed to the first, but not the latter.

This Speech of his therefore tends to eclips Gods grace to sadden his
people, to bolster up people in disobedience to their own hurt and Gods
dishonor, who is glorified by peoples being Christ's Disciples. Joh. 15.8. Luke
7.29.30. and so much to the third particular.

CHAP V.
HIs last affirmation is, that the present Ministry, is not Christ's, his being
p. 15. called immediately Mat. 10.1. and 28.16. Ga^. 1.12. with suitable gifts
Mar. 1.15. Act. 1.4, 8. these are Ministers of Christ 1. Cor. 4.1.

Or called mediatly that is, hereto impoured, by Apostles, for the Church: and
with their suffrag and election. p. 16. Act. 6. Tit. 1.5. these are the
Churches Messengers 2 Cor. 8 23. Phil. 2.25. these must be called by Apostles,
or Apostolical Ministry Act. 14.14.23. or by the Bride into whose Custody
administrations were left, 1. Cor. 11.2 who convey gifts on them. 2 Timothy 1 6

But the call of the present Ministry, was not immediate, nor by Apostles, nor
by a true constituted Church, espoused by some hereto designed, as 1. Cor. 11 2
according to the established order (faith and Baptism) and so, a powerless
people call a giftlesse Ministry, p 17, 18 who wanting gift study arts,
fullfilling Es. 28 7 8 till that enlightening be. Rev. 18 1 and 14 6 In the
mean while, believers make not have. Es. 24.28 16 and 37.32.

I Answer first, does Christ give call to the Ministry, a first, a second and
a third way, then they, that are called the first way only, or second, or third
way only: are notwithstanding rightly called, and if there be a fourth, or
fifth way, then such as are called thereto, the fourth, or fifth way, though not
the first, second or third, are notwithstanding rightly called, and so, the
present Ministry may be rightly called, though not called either of the three
first ways.

But Phillip and others scattered ones, Act. 8. and 11. which were not
Ministers of the Word before were called to the ministry of the word and
Baptism.

1. Not by Christ immediately.

2. Nor by Apostles with Churches election.

3. Nor by the Church, but 4ly. By a providence, (being scattered) there is
therefore a providentiall call.

5. The Evangelist Titus was left in Creta to redress what was wanting, and
ordain Elders in every City, only minding, that they be rightly quallified.

6. Paul bad Timothy not to hinder any that should desire this Office, in case
they that desire it, are suitably qualified, this is a sixth way.

So then if the present Ministry, be thereto called, neither of the three
first ways; yet are they rightly called, if by either of the three last ways,
Providentiall, Evangelicall, or desirable, if they be suitably qualyfied, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.

But is their call neither of the three first ways,

1. To Disciples Christ gave his commission, they have authority given them,
and they have given call to this Ministry.

2. The Apostles Ministry, I mean the Scripture calls those that are
suitably qualified thereto.

3. Christ immediately has inwardly called, and sterd them up thereto, which is
authoritive for the practice of a precept already given out, as Hagg. 1.14.
thus for our call.

2dly. Our Churches being in the right faith and order, Col. 2.5. (I mean in
the main) and consisting of Discples, they are not powerless, as in chap. 2.
is shown, and if our Ministers do instrumentally convert and edefie and be
indude with extraordinary vertuousnesse, as, if they be blameless the Husband
of one Wife, having children not accused of riot, nor unrulie if he be, not
self willed, not soon angry, ^ot given to wi^e, nor filthy lukar, no striker,
but a lover of Hosptality, and of good men, being, sober, Just, Holy Temperate,
able to convince, then is he sutably gifted, Tit. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Timothy 3.1,
2, 3. any man that is thus qualified is sutably gifted: Therefore says Paul to
Timothy, if any desire the office, etc: and to Titus, bidding ordain Elders, he
adds if any be blameless, the Husband of one wife, etc. Showing plainly,
that these are the suitable gifts.

2 Though Timothy had a gift conveyed, we read not so of all, neither is it
minded as a requisite to a right call

3. Neither was it conveyed, by virtue of his call, but by laying on of hands.

4. Neither was it the gift of Miracles; for he might by stirring it up enlarge
it.

And the signs, to wit, Miracles that did follow, or accompany the word Mark
16 are not minded as a Ministers Caracter, neither can it so be, for some
Ministers of Christ wanted these, and some false Ministers have them as John 10
41. with Dutr. 13 1, 2, 3. and Mat. 24.

And they that were bid wait for power Act 1 were not bid: not to Preach or
Baptize till then, but to bide at Jerusalem, and not to go to the Nations to
teach them till then; and so this power is not authority, but ability to teach
Nations, which they had not, till with the gift of Tongues they were empowered.

And if studiousness in the Scripture, be the art he says we have instead of
gifts; I am sure, Paul bid gifted Timothy do this. 1 Timothy 4 13, 14, 15,

3. They called Messengers of the Churches 2 Cor. 8 23 Ph. 2 25 are such as
were with some Message sent from one Church to another.

4 The enlightening he speaks of, is but a clearer discovery of received truths,
for who so teaches otherwise, is to be accursed; Gal, 8 and the best way to
know, is to practice what we do know; John 7 17. and 8 31,

5. Without all dispute, Believers do make have to keep Christ's commands, Psalm.
119 59 6^ Act 2 41 and 16 33 and so much to the substance of this Book.

The second part.
THough his Answer to Objections, hangs on these hinges, and what has been
spoken, might serve as answer to what follows, if seriously weighed, yet to
clear the truth the better to the weaker sort; I shall also wave his
Objections and his Answers to them

The first Objection propounded and answered by him, is for substance thus,

1 Ob. Commission to Preach and Baptize, was given to Disciples as Disciples,
Mat. 28 and Disciples while disciples so did; John 3 22 24 Mat. 4 21.

He Answerth, Christ was then with them, but when he left them, he deligated to
them, the power that after his resurrection was given him, Mat. 28. John 17 18
now, they are in Christ's stead, then Disciples, now Master Builders; their
Ministry is Apostleship, not Discipleship, Act 1.2 and 2 41.

I Reply, Though Christ be not present now, as then he was, yet are his
commands as forcible now, as they were then; he will destroy at his next
^omming such as disobey him in the time of his ab^^nce; Luke 19 14 17.

2. The same men, (then Disciples, now master builders) are employed in the
same work now, that they were then.

3. And must teach Disciples now to do, what he then taught them, as minded,
chap. 2.

4. If Christ had not power given him till after his resurrection, (as he
says) then their preaching and baptizing is his presence, was as powerless as
ours in his absence.

To the second branch of the question he answers.

1 They might be Apostles before John's imprisonment, though mentioned after.

I reply, not so, for it is said, they baptized in Jordan, and John in Enon;
for John was not yet in prison.

2. He answers if they were only Disciples, yet Baptism was not theirs but
Christ's, authoritatively he did it: but he that has authority, can judge of
the fitness of those he baptizeth, as did John, Philip and Peter, Mat. 3. Acts
8 38. and 10.40.

I reply, was their Ministry Christ's authoritatively, so is ours; for, we as
Disciples, do those things that they were bid in Mat. 28. to teach Disciples to
do.

2 They could not judge infallibly of the fitness of those they baptized,
witness the unfitness of many that they did baptize. Also, John confessed that he
that came after him, was he that had his fan in his hand, and which would
thoroughly purge his floor.

3 Before he said power was given to Christ after his Resurrection, and now
(says he) it was Christ's authoritively, a flat contradiction:

His third answer is, be it granted, that Disciples did preach and baptize, not
only with, but a part from Christ: yet their practice is not our pattern,
Christ being till his death, a Member and Minister of the Jewish Church, and
they subservient to him, Romans 15.8. but after his Resurrection he gave power to
preach and baptize, not to Disciples as Disciples,

I reply, he was not a Minister of that Church, he preached the Gospel to the
Jews, and so was a Minister of the Circumcission, in the same sense after
Christ's death was Paul a Minister of the Gentiles, and Peter of the
Circumcision, but not of the Jews Church.

2 Had he been a Minister of that Church, it were not to his purpose, except in
this he had executed that Ministry; but in preaching and baptizing they
executed Gospel-Ministery: therefore well may their practice be our pattern.

And that he did also after his resurrection impowr Disciples as Disciples: I
have shown in chap. 2. from Math. 28. for he called them Disciples, bid them
teach the Disciplised, to do what ever he had taught them to do, etc.

2. Obj. Gifted Disciples, men able to preach may Baptize Act. 8. and Act 11.

He answ. They may not, excepe they also have power. 70. more were gifted, yet
was the commission given only to the eleven. p. 22.

I reply, If it had been given only to them personally, yet being given to them
as Disciples, and they bid teach Disciples to do the same; it must needs
include preaching Disciples, but to the eleven and others with them, it was
given, as before shown, and so to the 70. if they were with them, (and may be
they were) for, whom he apeared to, and gave commission to; those he also at
the same time bid wait at jerusalem, etc. and (accordingly, wait they did, to
the number of 120. which is above 70. read Luk 24.32. to the end, with Acts
1.13.14.15.

His second answer is, that there is difference between preaching and declaring
in p. 23, 24, 25. and that the scattered Disciples did but declare: only Philip
preached, and baptized, and good reason; he being admitted to the service of the
Church, and wa^ an Evangelist, one of those mentioned; Ephesians. 4, 13 as Act. ^ 5.
and 21.8. and conversion by this means was to the Apostles so rare, that they
sent Peter and John, which needed not, had their Ministry been sufficient, p.
26.

I answ as Disciples declared and Baptized; so they may now, and if conversion
by such, were rare then; slight not the same now.

2dly. Peter and John were not sent to mend what Disciples had done; but to do,
what Disciples could not: Disciples administered the word and Baptism, but
conveyed not the Spirit, Act 8.16, 17.

Also they were sent to Phillips converts, so that he opposes Baptism
administered by that Preacher, as much as the baptism administered by declarers,
but he would have the reader think otherwise

3dly. Did Philip preach? then Disciples may, for his Deaconship was not to
minister the Word, but to serve tables, Act. 6.2. and he was not an Evangelist,
till after he had by preaching evangelized, nor so called, til long after.

His third answer, If these Disciples did prea^h, yet not baptize, p. 27. or if
they did baptize, they were baptized Members of a Church, if this be our
pattern, let us be, 1. Members of a true visible Church they were, and have
gifts called extraordinary, they had.

3dly. Have Christ's power and presence with us promised, Mat. 28. for they went
not forth to preach without miracles. p 28. Mar. 16.20.

I reply, Disciples did baptize, since Philip did (as before minded) and others
too, for as they declared, the hand of the Lord went so with them, that many
believed, and were added or turned to the Lord, Act. 11. how added? after
believing, but by Baptism for Act. 2.41. they that gladly received his word
were baptized and that day there were added three thousand.

Secondly, as we want the gift of Tongues, so did they, they could declare the
word but to their Countrymen Act. 11.19.20. but they that Tongues fell on,
could speak in any Tongue to any people Acts 2. and as they were of a visible
Church, so are we, though we limit not preaching and baptizing so to it as on
consideration, to be, by one that is no visible Churchmember; for John preached
and baptized, and in so doing began the Gospel. Mar. 1, 2, 3, 4. before a
Gospel visible-Church had a being also though these had been of a visible
Church, yet now their Church State was broken by persecution, yea all people
were preached to, and baptized, before they became a visible Church (as he
confeseth.)

3ly. Here is no mention of their miracles, and that none went out to preach
without, or that miracles must be wrought by every preacher is directly false:
for John did none it preached Jo. 10 41.

Fourthly, if miracles be the promised presence, then John had it not, but this
presence, Mat. 28. is an accepting, or likeing presence, so as Paul was present
in spirit, when absent in body Ioying at their faith and order. Coll. 2.5.

Fifthly, were, miracles this promised presence (as it is not) yet it being a
promise anixt to a duty we should, first, do the duty, to wit, all things that
were commnaded them, and then expect the promise.

Ob. 3. Paul was not sent to baptize but to preach, yet did baptize, he that
does the greater, may do the less.

He ans. not sent to baptize, not in express words said baptize as it was to
others: so he authoritively might, they must. p. 29. 30. as Peter might preach
to the Gentiles.

Secondly, institutions (says he) are not one inferior to another.

I reply, If Paul was not by express word bid baptize, and yet authoritively
might, by the same rule we may preach and baptize; though not by name called
out thereto, for he could not authoritively go beyond his particular
commission, but by virtue of the general commssion given to Disciples, he
being one and the same Commission gives the same Authority to other Disciples
also. Yea the same to Disciples, as to Apostles, the same to Gentiles as to
Jews, the same to us since, as to them before Christ's ascension.

2. He said p. 4. these two are the grand and capital institutions of Christ:
and here, his institutions are not inferior, one to another, a contradiction.

4. Obj. Mat. 28. is not fulfilled, if a Ministry be not to the worlds end.

He answers, if it were given only to the eleven, then we are otherwise to
understand, (worlds end) Jer. 1.5.

2. If it respect a successive Ministry, it is either breeding or feeding, or
both: neither of which has been visible: yet Christ not unfaithful, since it is
conditional, though for our eternal state, his foundation is sure, yet in
temporalls, he forsakes such as forsake him, and particularly in the Ministry,
to this purpose is page 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. but the number of Saints being
not yet perfected, we may expect enlightening, if we cry mightily, page 38. 39.
40.

I reply, What he in 8 or 9 pages goes to prove, I grant, to wit, that this
promise is conditional, and so need not to wave such proofs, but being so?

1 Let us perform the condition, and then expect the fullfilling of the promise.

2 This is that condition that God has engaged himself to work in his people,
he will teach the humble his way, Psalm. 25.9. therefore though Gods foundation
be sure, yet we may question our being in this foundation, if God teach us not
his way.

3 Because we are not so enlightened as we may be, we should therefore walk by
rule, so far as we have attained, Phil. 3.16. and though we come short of what
we should do, or hereafter may do, yet heartily endeavoring, God accepts
according to what we have, Haggai 2.4.5.

4. The best way for more light is to practice what we have, John 7.17. and
8.31. which if we do not, what we have will be lost, and though we cry we shall
not be heard, Prove. 1.28.

5. Obj. We may not expect more Apostles, for the last have been, 1 Cor. 4.9.

He answers 1. that the same word in Luke 14.9. is lowest.

2 Be it last, it is the last that has been, not that shall be; for by whom
shall Israel be gathered, or Gentiles converted, Jer. 32.37, 38. and 22.3. Mark
13.10. Mat. 24.14. p. 41.

I reply, why not the last that shall be, fore, if Paul and others that Christ
(as you say else where, singled out) be the lowest, who are the chiefest, and
if they be the last, to wit, that had been, who were before them, and so the
first, and if these (as he says) be Church presceders and part of the
foundation, Christ being the chief Corner stone, then the last that shall be,
for no other foundation may be laid nor this laid again who ever brings
another Gospel, then what has been brought, is to be accursed, Gal. 1. 1
Cor. 3.

And others beside such personal Apostles have been employed in gathering Jew
and Gentile into the true fold, Mat. 10. Act. 8. and 11. why not again.

Obj. 6. Apostles writings may be called Apostls.

He ans. In a figure they may, Esaias was a Prophet to the Eunuch into whose
hands his prophecy came, but he needed a guide, and so do we, and God that sent
him one, may send us one if he see our need etc.

I reply, as he grants we have the Apostles in their writings, so I grant we
need a guide, but a guide directs in ways we know not, and is useless in
known ways; he knew not of whom the Prophet spoke; and so needed guiding; but
we know this and much more.

We know we should believe in Christ, should pray, should be baptized should
assemble, should teach, hear, break bread, etc. as God gives ability and
opportunity.

Secondly, God himself will guide the meek in judgment he will teach the
humble his way, Psa. 25.9.

Obj. 7. Paul took care for Churches, taught Timothy how to behave himself in
the Church, did also bid him teach the same things to faithful men, who might
teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2.

He ans. True, but Paul foretold a falling from it.

I reply, and therefore he bids the truly Godly to contend earnestly for the
faith that was once given them.

Obj. 8. May not the Saints (being Kings by Christ) restore worship as King
Josiah did 2 2 King. 22.

He ans. Such Laws God gave Prince Moses Ex. 39 32.42.43. and Josuah (types of
Christ) and David had a pattern of the Temple 1 Cor. 28. the Kings built and
restored, but the people (though a royal priesthood Exo. 19.6. and kingly
people, 1 Cor. 16.12.) went not to repair without their King; therefore the
first builders should be restorers.

Christ administered once by himself, then by Appostles, but never by the people
etc. but by chosen men p 4^.45. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor 12.29. Act. 10.41.
furnished with such a power and presence of Christ as declared them to be sent.

I reply, as Christ has administered by himself, and his Apostles: so also by
the people, to wit Disciples, for first (as has been shown) those to whom that
general and durable commission Mat. 28. was given, were bid teach the
Disciplised Nations, or peoples, to do the same things that themselves were
taught to do, and the Apostle Paul, bids the people to follow him as he did
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. and to the people he says ye ought so to walk as you have
us (us Apostles) for an example and Christ commends the people, for trying and
so finding them liars which said they were Jews and were not Rev. 2. and who
cast lots for an Apostle in Judas room, namely the people, the men and
brethren the Disciples Act. 1. yea to the Church or people Paul says. what
soever you have heard and seen, and learned, and received of me; those things
do, and the God of peace shall be with you Phil. 4.9. and so for restoring, the
people must contend earnestly for the faith (straight ways, as Act. 13.) that
was once given, Jud. 3. Christ bids the people repent and do their first work
Rev 2.5. thus we see Christ has not only administered by Apostles but also, and
equally by other Disciples, and they when need is, ought to restore worship,
and therefore when they do so; they do it not without their King. And though
some of his quotations declare what Officers be in Christ's universal Church
(as before minded) yet not one says, he never administered by the people to
wit, Disciples.

Quest. Is not the Apostles ministry, as efficacious, to possess people of
liberty, and put them on their duty, now, as formerly; since they should teach
Nations to observe, what ever was commanded them? Mat. 28. 2 Timothy 2.2.

He premiseth, that their Ministry, was in word only or power, 1 These 1.5. the
power, is outward or inward Act. 19.6. Romans 15.18.19. Heb. 2.4. be it outward,
inward, or both obedience; is answerable Mat. 7.22. Luk 10.17. Gal. 5.22.23.26.
2 Cor. 2.4.

Then his answer is, we are by their Ministry, so far put on duty as it
comes with power 1 Cor. 1.5. 2 Cor. 3.6. and 4.5. and though believers had
the spirits demonstration, yet are they not furnished to obedience without
power, Luk 24, 45.49. Act. 1, 2, 4: and 10.38. both ability to say thus says
Christ, and authority so to say, Act. 4.7. Mat. 9.6.8.

I reply, First it is in word only to them that obey it not, and in power to
those in whom it produces obedience.

Secondly outward power of conformity may be without the inward -- but the
inward is not without the outward, If Gods Law be in the heart, the tongue
speaks to edifying, the feet shun slyding Psa. 37.31 Though some have the form
of Godliness, that deny the power, none have the power that deny the form.

Thirdly the power specified, These. 1.5. is not, (as he would have it visible
gifts, as tongues and miracles, but it is, what he by that place opposes, to
wit, real and visible obedience.

Fourthly the power promised and waited for, Luk, 24.45 49. is not (as he would
have it) the power of authority; but of abillity, Authority to pray, preach,
choose Officers and the like, was given, when that commission, Math. 28 was
given, these they might do, and did do, while they waited, therefore was their
waiting for the power of ability to teach all Nations, which they had not til
tongues fell on them, they had authority to Disciplise the Nations, when the
Commission so to do, was given them but they must abide at Jerusalem til
ability be also given.

He whose heart is Godward, having abillity and opportunity, wants not
authority, for [as was shewn] authority has its residence among Disciples, and
so in this that he most glories in, he mainly mistakes.

Quest. Were not miracles rather to confirm the word, then to witness persons
being sent? Heb. 2.4

He ans. as to confirm the word, Mar. 16 20: so also to witness persons being
sent, Christ's works testified that the Father sent him, Io. 5 36 and 11 42 and
20 21 and as the Father sent forth him so he sent forth them, Jo. 17 18 Act
413, 14 ^6 therefore their works testify their being sent of Christ the signs
of an Apostle were wrought among you 2 Cor: 12 12.

I Answer the people oposing Christ, he tells them of several that bore
witness of him, as first John chap. 5. v 33. 2dly his works v 36 Thirdly the
Father v 37. Fourthly the Scripture v 39 all these were witnesses of his being
the Messiah: that so by coming to him they might have life v 40:

That miracles was (among others) one witness that Christ is the Messiah is
true, but that they were also appointed to witness who are the witnesses of
Christ is false, for John who did bear witness of Christ, wrought none, Ioh.
10 41 also some that opose the truths of God, have wrought miracles, and shall
again Deuter. 13 1, 2, 3 Rev. 13.1^.

Ob. As he was sent, so he sent them into be World John 17, 18.

I answer though in some things these be sent as he was, yet not in every
thing, not with miracles to witness that they are Messiahs, as he was sent
with miracles to witness himself to be the Messiah, but as he was sent to bear
witness to the truth, so were they, and so was John, who wrought not miracles,
as Christ did.

Secondly those sent by Christ into the world; as he was sent into the World;
are not Apostles only, ^or only miracle workers, but other Saints those that
were given him out of the World which received and kept his word, which knew
him to be sent of God as verse 6, 7, 8 even such as are not of the World, as he
is not of the world; are the very persons, that he sends into the world, as
he was sent into the world as v 14 16, 17, 18.

Obj. But the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you.

I answer that miracles are not the Caracter of an Apostle, was lately shown.
Secondly this place would have proved it, if the fol^owing words were not
added, with signs, wonders, and mighty deeds, these signs and mighty deeds,
are an overplus, to the signs of an Apostle.

Thirdly the same Apostle does to the same people declare other things to be
the signs of an Apostle, as his having seen Christ, and his having brought
them into the direct ways of Christ, so in 1 Cor. 9.1.2. Am not I an Apostle?
am not I free? have not I seen Jesus Christ our Lord? are not ye my work in the
Lord? if I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you: for ye are
the seal of mine Apostleship in the Lord, here are Apostles Charactorized
indeed, even by the Apostle himself minded as ^^aractors without doubt.

Therefore would professed Christians try again whether they have share in the
Apostles ministry, let them not try it by the miracles that the instruments of
their good have wrought: but whether the Doctrine taught them, and the ways
they are brought into, be indeed the truths and ways of Christ, as 2 Cor 13
verse 5.

Question Gifts are to be improved, for edification: and how can it be orderly
done out of a Church state.

He answers, as the gift is, so must be the improvement, and where these are,
the Church is so glorious they need not take care how to improve them out of a
Church.

Be it wisdom knowledge faith, miracles healing prophecy, etc. or be it joy
hope, love and the like, the spirit is not wanting to teach improvement p. 50.

I reply, by this rule exhortations and dehortations be in vain, in vain says
Paul, stir the gift that is in thee, 2 Timothy 1 6 in vain says Peter, let
every man as he has received the gift, so administer, 1 Pet. 4 10. in vain
says John, these things I write to you that your joy might be full.

He answers further, what was ever written is for our learning, they in the
Templestate and wilderness, are our types, 1 Cor. 10, 11 2 Cor. 6.16 Rev. 11
8. but some worship was to be in the Temple only Duter. 12. but prayer,
private, or public, should be in the land of their Captivity, p. 50.51. 1
King. 1 and 44.50 51. etc. 4, 5, 16 to teach us, that now, something is
peculiar to a Church (as binding and loosing etc.

I answer, it has been shown first, that we are a Church, and that preaching
and baptizing has been by John out of a visible Church state, though binding
and loosing has not.

He adds, some say we have truth, others say we have: builders and stones are
at odds; If the true ministry were on foot, would this confusion be, is not
might therefore your vision, and a rent your Girdle; but God has given us hope
if we cry mightily.

I reply, this declares it so with some, but not withal, when Michah and
others contended, the word of the Lord came to me says one, it is not so says
the other, but Michah had the word of the Lord, and night was not his vision.

Also that famous Gospel Church at Antioch, contended about Circumcisition,
Act. 15. and some had truth on their side, but the Church could not
distinguish, and yet a Church of Christ still, and as they had recourse to the
Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, so may we to the Apostles writings, and if
need be to other Churches.

Ob. but says he) the builders and stones are at odds.

I reply, So it was with Paul the Corinthians (though he had beg it, builded,
espoused them) they questioned the truth of his Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9.1, 2, 3.
and 2 Cor. 11 4, 5, 6 and 13.3. yet Paul a true an Apostle, they a true Church,
and had the true ministry.

Obj. How shall Gods name be great among the Gentiles? Mat. 1.11.

He answers, God will provide, he can bring it about Mich. 2.7 10 and 3 5 6 7
and 4 Esa 22, 7 Romans 10 15.

I reply, Though God can and will bring his work about; yet it shall not be to
our honor or comfort, if we refuse to help, yea, though he want not might, yet
such as come not forth to help the Lord, are cursed bitterly, Judge. 4 8, 9 and
5. 23, 24.

Secondly, in the time of Captivity some dwelt in fieled houses when Gods house
lay waste, they said, the time is not come, but God sharply reproves them, and
gives them to know they should have gained time for his as well as for their
own.

Obj. No ministry no believing, how can they believe on him of whom they have
not, heard or hear without a preacher, Romans 10.14.

He answer by they is meant the Jews p. 55. 56 they must have a preacher ere
they believe, they have heard and rejected, and so are blinded, till the time
come, for the dispersed to come to Zion,

I reply, that by they is meant the Jews, I fully grant, and yet he answers not
the Objection for the Apostle draws their particular from the general, faith
comes says he) by hearing, and hearing, by the Word preached; so that no
preaching no hearing, no hearing, no believing, how then can they, (the Jews)
believe except they hear, or hear, without a preacher?

He adds, not, but that some Jews and Gentiles may hear of God and Christ
and believe to salvation without a special sending to preach, but the Nation
shall not.

The Samaritans and Cornelius believed without authoritive preaching, some may
by a Godly life, some by the scattered ones declaring, who were so far from
being sent that they were sent after, p. 58 59.

Therefore though faith come by hearing; yet may some believe that have not so
heard, and this adds strength to the mourners of Zion, and to free them from
the Bull; not to question the present ministry lest also they question their
own believing, etc.

I reply, If some Jews (though not the Nation) may believe without preaching,
then may some gentiles also; and it is but some, that now do belive and obey.

2dly, If some, may believe without preaching, why may not more do so also.

3dly. If some believe without so hearing, then was the Apostle out, in saying
faith comes by hearing, and hearing, by the word preached.

4thly, If Paul speak truth in saying faith comes by hearing and hearing by
the word preached, then surely where believing is, has been preaching, though
we say otherwise.

5thly, It is where the word has been declared, that holy life tends to
conversion, it convens not without; but jointly with the word, 1 Pet. 3.1.

6ly, Were those scattered far from being sent, and yet declared and baptized,
then may Disciples also do so now, though no more sent then they were,

7thly, They that were sent (as he says after the scantered ones,) were not
sent, to declare null, nor yet to mend, what they had done; but to do what they
could not do; to lay (...) hands and convey the spirit.

8ly, The b^ll he speaks of; has not been so much among the Churches as
among the non-Church ones, they have not only questioned the present ministry
but their own believing also, for want of miracles etc.

9ly, Though there does arise comfort; not only to the Churches but to such as
have not light therein; if their conscience can truly witness, that they have
a willing mind; then God accepts according to what we have; and so it was
with the Eunuch and Cornelius; etc. but if our not being of a Church, and in
Christ's way be not, through want of light but want of love thereto, then is our
case very dangerous, and the true hearted shall not abide long ignorant hereof;
as was shown, and so it was with the Eunuch and Cornelius, and others

And therefore hinder not the work of Christ, as ye will answer it before the
Apostle and high Priest of our profession, at the great day of his appearing;
who will reward every one, according to what he did in the flesh whether good
or bad.

^ Mind further these ten Notes.
I Apostles practice is Disciples pattern, Phil. 3 1 These. 3 6, 7. II When
people set up God for their God, or when God sets up any for his precious
people they are engaged to walk in his ways, to keep his Ordinances, his
commands and laws Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. III The worshipping God as he appoints, is
walking in his way, Levit. 26 3. IIII Such as see themselves in wrong ways,
ought to enquire for the good old way and to walk therein, Ier. 6.16. V God is
by promise engaged, to teach all that are humble and inquisitive, the knowledge
of himself and his ways, Prove. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psa. 25: 9. VI The Scripture
is a guide, to find out Gods ways and commands, to the Law and to the
testimony if they speak not according to this word there is no light in them,
Esa 8 20 the Jews by reading Scripture found dwelling in Boothes, a Law for
them to observe, and so betook themselves to the practice of it with great joy,
for they had been so long without it, that they know it not to be a Law til
they found it so to VII be by reading Scripture. And as this being given to
Israelites, Israelites might obey it, so Gospel commands were given by Christ
to disciples, and therefore Disciples may set to the practice of them, Matthew.
28 19, 20 Bind up the testimony among my Disciples Esa. 8: 16 VIII They whose
hearts are now as free, to obey Christ as once they were to ferve sin are
Christ's Disciples or servants, Romans 6.19. IX Miracles do not declare, who are
Disciples, or who have authority to practice Christ's commands, for 1 False
Prophets shall in latter days, work mira^les, 2 These. 2 9 2 To believe and
obey without seeing miracles is commendable, and the contrary reproveable, John
4.48 and 20*29 1 Pet. 1 8. 3 The miracles that in Scripture we read of, are in
all ages useful, John 20 30 31. 4 Signs are for such as believe not, 1 Cor.
14. 5 Miracles seekers are by Christ termed adultereus, Mat. 12 39.
X Church meetings is Disciples duty also for: 1 One main end of the ministry
is the gathering Saints together. Ephesians. 4. 2 To such as gather together in
Christ's name has he promised his presence i.e. acceptance Math. 18. 3 The most
necessary duties cannot be observed, without Church-meetings; we are to break
bread in remembrance of Christ, but this cannot be done without Church
assembling Act. 20.7. 1 Cor. 11.

We need often to exhort each other which cannot be except we assemble; Heb. 3
and 10 25 neither can public prayer be without Church meeting Act. 1

4 We are to love brotherly fellowship, 1 Pe. 2.17.

Page 29 line 17, for on read* no.

FINIS.

