A Free, Plain, and Just Way Concerning Communion and Excommunication, At, Or
from The Lords Table. With A Christian Account Concerning the same. With
Answers to the Objections to the contrary.

In which is showed, that the Church to day has no more power to excommunicate
from the Lords Table, then it had yesterday power to separate from the Altar,
unto which sinners were exhorted by the Church to go; whereby their praises and
repentance. And that the pretended differences in Baptism, are no just ground
of separation.

Written by Willam Kaye, with Christians approbation, with submission to the
general Oversight.

He takes away the first, [the sacrifice of the Altar] that he might establish
a second [Christs sacrifice held forth at the Lords Table.]

Having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus by a
new and living way, which he has consecrated for us through the veil which is
his flesh, Heb. 10.1, 2, 8, 9, 19, 20.

The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ, etc.
1 Cor. 10.16. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. 1 Cor. 11.28.

Printed in the year, 1655.

A Christian account concerning the acknowledgement of Communion and
Excommunication.
Humbly presented to all Christians to judge thereof, and to undeceive such as
have heard of it as falsely reported.
TO persevere in the Christian profession, moderation, truth, and unity, speaks
so much your experience in your effectual calling, as that you know that it is
not so much a matter of admiration, to find out the straight way of
Reformation, by following of Christ in the for-saking of Antichrist, as it is
to finish our Course, saithfully, and orderly; for if the spirit of Core, and
Demas, have more place left in them for schism, pride and worldlyness, as a bow
over bent they will break, start a side, or shipwrake their professions.

Not then to please men, but God, is to fight with the wolf, which would
devour the sheep, and red Dragon which does watch to distroy the truths which
are to be brought forth, as the food for the souls of Gods elect people; so
that a faithful pastor must stand as a Rock, against which the waves of the
envious sea of reproaches may break it self, as not able to break down the
standard of sincere professors, for whose sake it is the specicall duty, of
ever Gospel-minister, not only Christ-like, to be sanctified, but also even to
dare to be sacrificed, John. 10.

To suffer then any of the flock of Christ to want their most precious food,
as I judge my self, were justly to condemn me to be either mercienarily
unfaithful, or politickly subtle, contrary to self-denial, and simplicity,
the shining jamage of Christiantie, that all stumbling stones might be cast out
of the way of Gods people, I having earnestly sought God, to make the way to
his supper plain before me.

As the Lord has returned, I most humbly present this Christian consent,
concerning Communion and Excommunication as the Lords Table; with my sermon
Entitled the Doctrine of the martyrs Remembered, and a Declaration, both holding
foth in part, the Doctrine with some discoveries of undew, negligent
administrations, and causeless separation.

And now I do most humbly appeal unto you in every respect fit judges, whether
any Christian that desires to be honest and faithful to the profession which
according to his light he does acknowledge in Baptism, has any just accasion
to complain, that this way is too strict, or that he is debarred from
Receiving.

Or that any ought to judge one an others conscience for out submiting unto
Baptism as they acknowledge it.

And further, in that we profess to worship, Praise, renew our selves as we
have sinned against our Creator, and merciful Father, in going unto the throne
of Grace, as from the beginning, held forth in the new and Living way, as in
Christ revealed, and in that we profess to judge no man's light, Jew nor
Gentile, so as to persecute them, nor to separate from any Christian that shall
according to his light, that is in him, walk up to the rule in acknowledgeing
his Baptism as he has atained.

And in that we profess, as from the beginning, the Magistrates power in the
Church, and avoid all schisms and factions.

Therefore we call the world to witness, whether we hereby give any occasion,
or provoke any man though of contrary judgment to persecute or Reproach us, if
they be either honest or reasonable, we desireing to be informed (all seeing
but in part) wherein we are erring from the primitine Churches: we desiring,
That the communion of Saints is an Article of Faith, by which God is the Father
of all believers.

W. Kaye.

A Free, Plain, and Just Way Concerning Communion and Excommunication, At, Or
from The Lords Table.
1. Concerning admission into Church Communion to the Lords Table.
ALL Christians that shall willingly acknowledge their Baptism, according to
the measure of Light that they have Phil. 3.16. comp. with Romans 14.14, 15.
attained to, holding forth their belief in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and
shall desire also to receive the Lords Supper 1 Cor. 11.28.
upon examination of themselves, through Gospel-repentance, and to 1 Cor. 11.29.
discern the Lords Body, for the strengthening of their Faith, to endeavor, to
Mat. 5.16.
glorify God in the observation of prayer in private with Mat. 6.6. Act. 10.2.
Christians profess prayer both in private and public.
Lords Day-worship, reading and hearing the Scriptures read in public, with
prayer, preaching, Act. 7.20. Act. 16.13, 14.
singing of Psalms, Fasting, and Church Government, with approbation and
submission to the Mat. 26.30.
Magistrates power therein, as well as in civil jurisdiction: That an orderly,
honest, sober, peaceable, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.2 Theff, 2.4.
and humble conversation toward all men, might be preserved; ought to break
Bread together with Gods people, at the Lords Table.

2. Concerning Separation or Excommunication.
ALl such Christians, as are or shall be admitted, as abovesaid, ought not to
be excommunicated, or separated from the Lords Table for any sin or error, by
which they shall be overtaken (for which there remains a Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.
sacrifice) If they shall either by Heb. 10.26.
private, or public Christian exhortation or advice be gained, so as not
wilfully to refuse to receive the Supper of the Lord, by which Christian
Ordinance they have a blessed opportunity, to Mat. 18. Praises and repentance
are perfected by the discovering of Christ's body,
perfect their Praises and Repentance.

3. The ground why any should receive, that graciously desire it.
ALl Christians that would walk according to the light that's in them, by which
a sacrifie for sin as in Cain and Abel was held forth from the beginning, must
expect that Christ be the same to us to day, as he was yesterday to our
forefathers, with further improvement of light and liberty. Therefore though by
Christ the Only Heb. 10.1, 2, etc. 8, 9, 19, 29.
Sacrifice for our sins, the sacrifices of Beasts as a shadow thereof are
totally abolished, yet has he established a second in his Supper, to hold
forth his Body by the blessed Bread and Wine, as the Commemoration of his
sacrifice, which therefore ought often to be administered in every private
Oversight, with the submission to the General, for the soul-uniting, reforming,
and comforting of Gods people, whereing they Jeeking the welfare of their
souls, ought no more to be deprived of this hidden Manna, then to have their
Bodily food taken from them. Objections to the contrary answered.

Object. 1. With contrary judgments in respect of Baptism there is no
Communion.

Answ. If men's judgments only differ, in not attaining to the same measure of
knowledge in all circumstances concerning Baptism (defects and imperfections in
prayers, singing and in the Lords Supper, arising either through ignorance or
frailty, being made perfect as well as the imperfections in Baptism, through
Christ's Mediatorship) therefore though with the Apostle we may condemn each
others opinion, and say we know and perceive by the Lord Jesus, that it is Romans
14.14, 15.
nothing, yet must we not notwithstanding, as the Apostle teaches us; we
cannot condemn any man's conscience in his endeavoring to submit, as he has
Phil. 3.16.
attained unto the rule: to measure then our selves by our selves, and so
compare our selves by our selves, so as to set at naught our Brethren, whom God
commands us not to judge, looking after the rule, as they have attained, is not
equal. Or it is not the mind of Christ in respect of difference of judgment
in attaining to the rule to separate or refer to Communicate with such as walk
in imitation of Christ in all his commandments.

Object. 2, The Church of Cornith did Excommunicate the incestuous person; and
we are required, that if a brother be a drunkard, an idolater, an adulterer, a
covetous person, or extortioner, not to eat or drink with him, or bear him
company.

Answ. The Church of Cornith, or private brethren, had not power of
Excommunication, and therefore Paul not leaving it to them to judge, bade them,
as he had already judged, to put away the wicked person, as he wished in
another place they were cut off that troubled the Church; which putting away,
and and cutting off, must not be done without a fair trial by witnesses and
judgment in case of denial, or not except they shall not be gained upon
admonition; for none can be excommunicated without lawful proceeding, according
to the rule, An Heretic was to have two admonitions, Tit. 3.10.
or appointment of Jesus Christ, as he has ordered to judge any offender which
is to be admonished by one or more, if by the first he be not in a private way
grieved; and then to tell it to the Church, which Church by the mouth of their
Pastor or Angel, is in the name of Christ, and in Christ's stead to exhort,
allure and persuade the offending Brother to be reconciled to God by the blood
of Christ's Sacrifice, held forth in the Lords Supper; A man must not be
excluded for impenitency, till he rejectth the means whereby he may be
penitent, or refuse to look up to Christ, as by the brazen Serpent.
so that the Church must not Excommunicate before a man do wilfully refuse to
profess Repentance, or to Communicate: for as it was never so from the
beginning, so it is unreasonable for the Church to Excommunicate a man from the
Lords Supper, if he shall be penitent; as it were for a man to withhold his
neighbor, that is both wounded and besmeared, to go to the Physician and
fountain to be washed and cured. The Church then cannot Excommunicate a sinner
that thirsts after reconciliation, or deprive any Christian of his spiritual
food, and garment of Righteousness; seeing Christ is preached to such, offered
to such, invites such, and says that he will not in any wise cast away any that
comes unto him.

Object. 3. If men be not excluded for the breach of their profession in
Baptism, but may have liberty to profess repentance, they may run from sin to
sin, and so continue without repentance.

Answ. This conjecture is as unreasonable, as it is to suppose that to suffer a
man to hear the word preached, were the cause of unbelieving, though it be true
that all that hear become not believers: therefore if we have the Spirit of
Jesus, we must not be offended with unprofitable hearers, because it is their
right and the means appointed for their salvation; which to oppose them in, is
to shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men. So in the like manner we must not be
offended, though these that profess their Baptism, and so are admitted to the
Lords Table, shall often receive without visible fruit of Reformation, because
it is their privilege and means of heart-Reformation and Christian communion:
for if they belong unto God, they shall in his appointed time become worthy
partakers; and if not, the Devil Judas-like will enter into their hearts,
whereby they shall persecute or forsake their profession, or the external
judgment of God will fall upon them, as it did on some of the Corinthians, so
that they shall not, as is objected, long continue; for the Devil cannot endure
to be long tormented with the blood of Christ held forth in this Ordinance.

Obj. 4. This is an easy way, or opens the door too wide, or gives too much
liberty.
Ans. It is no more easy then our fathers that lived under the Law enjoyed,
save that they were burdened with ceremonial cleansings, and sacrificing of
their flocks, whereby they gave the meat from their mouths, and we may have by
Bread and Wine the sanctified refreshments both of body and soul; and therefore
that the yoke is made easy to be born, is not to be objected against, but to
be highly prized.

Obj. 5. How can it be proved that the Lords Supper in all intents does succeed
the use of the Altar which is abolished?
Ans. Though he has taken away the first, the Sacrifies of the Law offered on
the Altar, yet has he established a second, Heb. 10.9, 10. the sacrificing of
Christ himself held forth in the Lords Supper, the New and Living way to go to
the Holiest by his blood, Heb. 13.9, 10. The Altar and the Lords Table compared.
For as they that went to the Altar perfected their repentance and praises, to
strengthen their faith in the belief of Christ the Lamb, slain from the
beginning, with further expectation that Christ should be revealed; so in this
every one that is to come to the Lords Supper is in like manner, 1. 1 Cor. 11.28.
To exaime themselves to the reforming of their lives, or perfecting of
repentance. 2. To 1 Cor. 11.
discern the Lords Body, once sacrificed for them. 3. To have their faith
strengthened in the remembrance of his second coming. And 4. To celebrate
praise, a 1 Cor. 11.26.
feastival; so that the Doctrine of the Altar, 1 Cor. 5.
and the Lords Supper held forth in the second, succeeds the first, or the
sacrifice of the Altar, in all uses, and intentions.

Obj. 6. This brings us unto the old way again.
Ans. If by the old way be meant that we should observe that old way that
Christ and his Apostles, and Primitive Churches, and their successors for six
hundred years after Christ observed, when were Golden Pastors, Golden Pastors
and wooden Cups.
and Christians did often receive with gladness of heart, praising God, living
in simplicity, sincerity, and holiness; it were a mercy then to see this good
and old path, for which our Martyrs contended for, restored: Note.
For as we have more and more digressed from the old way, we have by little and
little, run into the ways of Schism, causeless separation, errors and
profaness, so that Christianity is almost brought to prophecy in sackcloth,
and that he that opposes error makes himself a prey, if not a sign and
wonder. Therefore if God intend to bless this Nation with his wonted presence,
when Christians unitedly, and faithfully according to their light did
communicate, then we shall see the old way again restored, and so we shall be
called the repairers of the Breaches.

Obj. 7. We know none but you that hold this opinion.
Ans. Then are you not acquainted with many solid, Artic. 28.
sober and zealous Christians, the Ancient Fathers, and Modern Divines, and
ignorant of the Doctrine or Article of the Church of England, that have made
free passage to the Supper of the Lord, as ever God made to the Altar for the
humble, thirsty, and penitent, so far from drawing back, Mr. Prinns Separation
separated.
as that they did rather through zeal to their souls, compel them to
communicate. But especially you have not seen Mr. Prinns Book, our zealous and
faithful witness of the Truth, who has very notably defended a new way to the
Lords Table, so that I know none that held the contrary opinion, but Tyrannical
Antichrist and some professing Saints, for whom I mourn to see them write after
Romes copy, in their private Church Discipline of exclusion from the Lords
Table: As though the Church Keys were turned into Door-bolts; and the sweet
honey of the Kingdom of Heaven should be changed into the juice of sower Grapes
of the Degenerated vineyard, in that penitent groans are slighted by Politic
suspensions, though they have not a letter or consequence of Scripture, to
judge of their brethrens hearts, for the space of a week, day, or hour in
respect of repentance, whereby to exclude them from the Lords Supper, which is
not only called the sign of that love which Christians should have one to
another; Doct. of the Church of England.
but it is called the Sacrament of our Redemption; In which way to see it
freely and duly administered to the glory of God in the unity and consolation of
all Saints and poor sinners, is the way that is only aimed at: for the
profession of which I eat my hidden Manna, in suffering the hatred and reproach
of some persecuting spirits.

Obj. 8. It appertains not to the Magistrate to have to do in Church
Government.
Ans. Though it be well known that the Magistrate had ever supreme power in the
Church, and that the Gospel-disciples then might and were owned till Antichrist
opposed them, yet it cannot be proved, that either under the Law or in the New
Testament that private Brethren of any Church, ought to Judge, or rule in
matters of Excommunication, or matters of Law; for then they should be Rulers
and not ruled. To have then a Magistrate to appeal unto, and that the
Magistrate with the Ministers take the General oversight, Se more of this in my
Declaration.
and judge all private oversights, is to make them Nursing Fathers, and the
Churches to grow in Grace, Truth, and Unity.

FINIS.

