JURISDICTIONS: OR, THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF Courts Leet, Courts Baron, Court of
Marshallseys, Court of Pypowder, and Ancient Demesne: TOGETHER WITH THE MOST
NECESSARY Learning of Tenures, and all their Incidents, of Essoynes,
Imparlance, View; of all manner of Pleadings, of Contracts, of the nature of
all sorts of Actions, of Maintenance; of diverse other things, very profitable
for all Students of Innes of Court and Chancery: And a most perfect Directory
for all Stewards of any the said Courts.

Heretofore writ in French by the methodically learned, JOHN KITCHEN of
Grays-Inne, Esquire

And now most exactly rendered to more ample advantage in the English tongue;
with a demonstrative Table, pointing out all matter of consequence, throughout
the whole Work.

Whereunto is added the authentic forms of all manner of Writs, with their
several returns in English, very useful for all men in this Commonwealth,
as they be now used.

LONDON, Printed by T: Roycroft, for M: Walbancke at Grays-Inne Gate, and H:
Twyford, in Vine Court in the Middle Temple, 1651.

TO The Students of the Innes of COURT, AND CHANCERY: JOHN KITCHEN wishes
happiness.
TO the end no failer in the administration of Laws, from which the
Commonwealth receives its establishment, may through ignorance be admitted, as
much as my abilities have prompted me unto, for direction of such as keep
Courts, I have here preferred at once, both to profit and censure, both which I
shall as justly expect, as that I am confident, my endeavors are neither
fruitless nor free from Errings; having neither been industriously idle, nor
blessed with infalibility; yet such as they are, I most seriously wish them to
your advantage, who are many of you employed in the keeping of Court Leets,
Court Barons, and other Courts, and Jurisdictions.

And therefore I have here in this Book collected all such cases out of our
Books of Law, under such general heads and notions, which are upon any
occasion to be discussed, so that those, who either have not the said Books at
large, or have them, and yet want time to peruse them, may here for sweatlesse
labor receive satisfaction in exchange, whereupon I have fixed my hopes, that
ignorance the natural Mother of Error (which has so much fostered it self,
in those employments, into which many Ignaro's have thrust themselves, with
ignorance and confidence of equal size) will lose its no-being in Judicial
performances; and that the knowledge of the Law in this kind, may prove
impulsive to the Love of Justice, which is always the less regarded, by how
much, Ignorance is her Enemy, Ignoti nulla Cupido. For desire and nothing are
the same, where the understanding is not felicitated with apprehension; which
here I teach as far as it is essential for any man, Quatenus, he is a Steward
of Courts, in which duty I wish him Jurisprudentiall for his own Honor, and
the Public benefit, desiring nothing in requital but your kind accepctance.

From GRAYS INN.
THE PREAMBLE.
FIRST,

Secondly,

Thirdly, How ancient these Courts are,

And first, Fortescue, leaf the 30. says, As a natural body cannot be
without a head, so a Realm cannot be governed without a head, which is the
King: And there he further says, That whenever of many, one is constituted
amongst them, one shall be Governor, and the rest shall be governed. Britton,
leaf the 1. says, The King is ordained of God, that the Peace be kept; the
which cannot be well without Law. And Fortescue also says, All power is of our
Lord God. Bracton says also, That the King is Gods Vicar upon Earth, to
separate right from wrong, Justice from Injustice, that all which are Subjects
to him should live honestly, and none should hurt another; but that to every
man which is his own by a rightful contribution should be given; for he is
called King by well Governing.

Stamford, leaf the first, says, The King is the preserver, nourisher, and
Defender of all his people, and that by his great travel, study, and labor,
his people only enjoy their lives, Lands, and Goods: But all those which they
have in peace and tranquillity, and that by the Law. And as the body of a man
cannot live without the head, but will fall down unto the ground; so the
Commonwealth cannot be governed without a head, which is the King. Also Seneca
says, Where there is not a Governor, there the people will be confounded,
Prove. Chap. 11. Where there is not a Governor, the people go to ruin, Romans
chap. 13. There is no power but of God; and which are the true Powers, are
ordained of God.

The Person of the King, and the Queen his Wife.
By the Commentaries, leaf the 45. By the 7. of Edw. 2.34. The King is a
Corporation. See 1 H. 7. leaf 10.21 Edw. 4. Title Age, it is no Plea that the
King is within Age, 1 Edw. 6. title 373. the King shall have his Age as Duke of
Lancaster, and not as King, by the Commentaries, leaf 213. See Stamford 10. If
the King grant a Lordship to one in Fee, the Grantee shall not have his
Prerogative, but if he grant that for life to the Queen and Prince, that
remains in the King; and for that the Queen and Prince shall have
Prerogative; and though that the Queen is a person exempt from the King, and
may sue and be sued in her own name; yet that which she has is the Kings, 1
H. 7. leaf 29. where a Reversion was to the Queen; Aid shall be of the King by
Townsend, and by some of both the Benches. Stamford, 75. Petition shall be to
the King himself only, and not to the Queen or Prince.

3. H. 7. leaf 14. The Queen is as a common person, and as a Woman alone, to
let for life, and to make personal things.

11. H. 7. leaf 7. The King lets to the Queen for life, and she leaseth at
will: In Trespass against the Tenant at will, he shall not have aid of the
King, for he is a stranger to the Patent of the King, 7. H. 7. leaf, 17.

18. Edw. 3. leaf the first, Phillip, the Queen, brought a Quare impedit, and
held that the Queen may bring a Writ in her own Name, and shall find no
pledges, and for that it shall not be in the Writ, Vnde, etc. 20 Edw. 4. leaf
1. Fitzherbert, 101.

21. Of the Book of Assizes, 13. the said Phillip brought Deceit of a Fine
levied by Tenants in ancient Demesne at the Common Law.

19. Edw. 4. leaf 2. J. B. grants to the Queen, the next Advowson of the
Church of Dale, and she alone of that brings her Quare Impedit.

49. Edw. 3. leaf 4. The King may give to the Queen for her life, and she may
have an action alone, and so cannot another married Wife.

The Law.
And for that, that it is necessary and expedient to show for what causes the
Laws were ordained, Fortescue, leaf 31. says, That as by Senews the compact
of the body is knit together, so by Law (which of binding is so called) this
mystical body is bound together, and kept in one: And Plowden, leaf 9. b.
says, The Law is appointed to the King to govern his people, and that by
three Laws, that is to say, General Law, Customs, and Statutes: In Matthew.
chap. 22. it is written, That Christ sent forth his Servants that they should
call to the Wedding; that is to say, He sent his Prophets and Preachers, and
they would not come; and there it is said, That he again sent out other
Servants, saying, Go and invite, and that is intended our Law, which commands,
constraines, and bridles us to come to God, and to fear and obey, God and the
King, and to keep us in Peace, and to make that every one may hold in peace and
tranquillity, his Goods, Lands, and lives, and all that we have. Heraclites
says, That without Laws, by no means a City can be in safety, but without
Walls it may: And Fortescue, leaf 10. says, That thou may fear God, the
Laws call thee, and in leaf 11. That humane Laws are no other then Rules, by
which Justice is taught. The Prophet David says, Where there is no Order,
there everlasting horror does dwell; and without Law there can be no Order; See
Saint German, leaf 7. saying, Law is ordained for the salvation of the
Soul, and for to fulfill the Laws of God, and to draw the people to fly
evil and to do good; And see in the Doctor and Student, leaf 8. the six
grounds of the Law.

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly,

Fifthly,

And sixthly,

Bracton says, The Law makes the King; let the King therefore attribute unto
the Law, that which the Law has given unto him; that is to say, Dominion and
Power; he is not truly King, where will does rule and not Law. And Fortescue,
fol. 8. says, The Law is a sanctified holiness, commanding holy things, and
forbidding the contrary; and likewise, fol. 9. says, That Laws made by man,
which to this does receive power of God, and they are likewise constituted by
God.

Plowden, fol. 55. b. As Subjects of the King are borne and inherit Lands, so
to inherit Laws; so that Laws being the Inheritance of the People, the
Stewards cannot by Letters, or otherwise, gainsay nor take from the Tenants the
Law.

By the Commentaries, fol. 229. Saxon Law was, that the eldest Son should
inherit; and Brittons Law was Gavelkinde, as in Kent and North Wales.

By the Commentaries, fol. 18. Words of Law may be broken for necessity, as in
the case of Revenger, 14. H. 7.29.

7. H. 7. fol. 7. If a Prisoner be in Famine, and has not sustenance, if he
break Prison, it seems not to be Felony; for the Law of God was ordained to
call us, and if we will not come, then our Law, to bridle us sharply to come to
God; and our Law has regard to necessity and charity; and for that, 20. H. 7.
fol. 2. where a married Wife is thrown, or struck with a Horse, or is in
sickness, one may assist her, and give her meat and drink.

20. H. 7. One administers about a burial, that is no Administration, for it
is a work of charity.

Doctor and Student, fol. 4. Beasts have certain rule given to them by nature,
necessary for their being, but the Law of Nature and Reason moves a man to
good, and is written in the heart of every man, to move him what is good to be
done, and what is to be avoided. The Law of God is given by Revelation, and
light of understanding, and there the Law of God ordaines man to eternal life,
and is Law to the happiness of this life; and this Law is to do as you would
be done unto, and this Law will that Justice be done to every man, and that no
wrong be done.

Doctor and Student, fol. 2. There are four manner of Laws, that is to say,
The eternal Law of nature, and Reason, the Law of God, and the Law of Man.

By Marlebridge, Chap. 1. it is enacted, That as well the greatest as the
smallest, should have and receive Justice in the Kings Court, and that none of
another, revenges or destructions should make by his will, without
consideration of the Kings Court.

Westminster the 1. Chap. 1. Common Right should be made to all, as well to
Poor as to Rich, without regard of any: See Stamford, fol. 56. of Justice.

2 Edw. 3. cap. 9. No command, either by the great Seal, or Privy Seal, to
disturb or delay common right. And for so much, the Justices should not
forbear to do right in any point.

18 Edw. 3. The Statute of the Oath of the Judges, is, If any Letters to the
Justices come contrary to the Law, that you shall do nothing for such Letters,
but certify the King of it, and resolve before to execute the Law,
notwithstanding those Letters.

And to conclude of these matters, You ought to consider, that God created Man,
only to serve him, and created all other creatures in the World, for the
service and use of Man; as the Prophet says, Thou have subjected all things
under his feet, all Sheep and Oxen, and likewise the Beasts of the Field, Birds
of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea, which walk through the paths of the Sea;
so that all was made for the use of Man, and yet without Law a man cannot enjoy
that; and God being mindful of Man, to serve him as the Prophet says, What is
Man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man, that thou have regard
unto him: And for that God has ordained Kings to govern, and to keep men in
obedience, to serve and obey God, the King, and his Laws, for to disobey is
detestable: And Paul to the Romans, Chap. 13. says, Every soul is subject to
the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, which powers verily are
ordained by God; so that whosoever resists that power does resist the
Ordinance of God: And Peter, Chap. 2. says, Be subject to every humane
Creature, for the Lord, and to the King as Saperiour. And then for that, that
the King is ordained of God, to make his people to serve God, and to keep his
people in obedience: If you disobey the King, you break that which is
commanded contrary in the Scriptures, and so you disobey God: And you see that
if God had not been mindful of us, and had not created and ordained the King
to govern us (being of frail nature) and that by Laws to bridle our frail
nature, none could enjoy his Lands, Goods, nor his life in safety: And for
that, that the Law is so necessary. Now let us see when, and how, these Courts
Leets, and Court Barons began.

Fineux, The beginning of these Courts Leets ordained.
12. H. 7. fol. 18. says, That at the beginning all the administration of
Justice was in the Crown, and where the King was, there was the Law
administered: Then afterward, for the multiplicity of the people, was the Court
Leet for punishment of offenses, and annoyances to the Commonwealth within the
Precinct of that, and the Articles and pains are ordained to that end, and it
is called, The view of frank pledge, for that the King there may be certified
by the view of the Steward, how many people are within every Leet; and also to
have account and view by the Steward, of their good government and manners in
every Leet: And also the Leet was ordained to have every person, of the age of
twelve years, which had remained there by a year and a day, to be sworn to be
faithful and loyal to the King; and also for that, that the people there
might be kept in peace and obedience, these Courts Leets were ordained.

And Court-Barons were ordained to determine Injuries, Court-barons ordained.
Trespasses, Debts, and other actions, as afterward it appears, where the
debt or the damages are under forty shillings: And also for that, that the
Lords of the Manors and Court-Barons, have given their Tenants their Lands and
Tenements, before the Statute of Westminster. the third, to hold of them, for that
also Homagers of Court ought to inquire in this Court, that their Lords shall
not loose their Services, Customs, nor duties. And also it was ordained to
make their Suites there, and so to show them obedient to their Lords, and that
nothing be made within the Manor, to be an annoyance or hurtful to the
Inheritances of the Lords of the Manors, which should not there be inquired
of, and presented for the Lords of the Manors, as afterward. by the Articles
more plainly appears. And so now you see here briefly, that the Realm cannot
be governed without a King; and that the King for that cause is appointed of
God, and that the King govern by the Law, Roy Ley.
and cannot govern his people without Law; and also you have heard, how
ancient and how necessary these two Courts are for governance of the People.

And now for that these Courts are held within Manors, and that a Court Baron
is incident to a Manor; It is fit to know how Manors did begin, and within
what Manors Court-Barons are held, and in what not.

Parkins, fol. 127. says, That the beginning of Manors was when the King gave
a thousand Acres of Land, or a greater or lesser parcel to one and his heirs,
to hold of him and his heirs: and before the St. of Quia emptores terrarum
(because buyers of Land) one seized of Lands did infeoffe one of ten Acres,
another of twelve Acres, and the third of twenty Acres, every one of them to
make service unto him; and so by continuance of time out of mind, etc. he had
a Manor. Also in the 33. year of H. 8. Comprize, etc. 31. Plow. fol. 169. a.
A man cannot make a Manor at this day, for notwithstanding, that a gift in
tail be made to diverse, to hold of the giver by Services and Suit of Court,
though by that there be a tenure, yet it cannot make a Court, for that cannot
be but by Prescription: And if a Manor be, and all the Freeholders but one
Escheate, Manors cannot be without Court Baron.
or if the Lord purchase them, it is no Manor; and there cannot be a
Court Baron without Suitors, and not with one Suitor only, 35. H. 8. Tenures,
102. 23. H. 8. Court Baron, 22. Suit, 17.

Fitzherbert, 3. C. If one hold of another, as of a Signiory Ingrosse, which is
not a Manor, he has no Court Baron.

Fitzherbert, 8. b. Where a man gives all his Land in Tail, there is a
Signiorie Ingrosse, and he shall have no Court; but if he were seized of a
Manor, and give parcel of the Demesnes in tail, it is otherwise.

22. H. 6. Title 2. Services is parcel of a Manor, but not the Land of the
Manor, unless it be Copihold, for if a man has a Manor in the County of
Westmerland, and one holds Land of that Manor, which Land is in the County
of DARBY, he shall demand that Manor in the Counties of WESTMERLAND, and
DARBY.

18. of the Book of Assizes, 3. If a man seized of a Manor, do alien four
Acres in fee, this is separated, and no part of the Manor; but if the Husband
seized of a Manor in right of his Wife: alien four Acres for life, and
afterward grant the Reversion of that in fee to P. and afterward P. purchase
the whole Manor, to which the Husband and Wife levy a Fine, Sur connusance de
Droit.
upon acknowledgment of Right, as that which he had of their gift. The Fine
extends to the four Acres which were severed, for they were parcel in
reversion, as of the Manor.

And in the 36. H. 8.4. Two Coparceners make partition of a Manor, so that
each of these have a parcel in Demesnes, and a parcel in Services: Now each
of these has a Manor, and each of these have two Suitors, but otherwise it is
if one have but one Suitor, he cannot hold a Court Baron: But 12. H. 4.25.
Partition is made of a Manor, that one Coparcener shall have the Demesnes and
the other the Services, the Suit to the Court is suspended, and during that
there shall be no Court Baron held: And 8. H. 3.4. and 34. H. 6.53. It is held
that a Court Baron is belonging to a Manor of common right, so that within
every Manor shall be a Court Baron, unless there be no Suitors there, or that
by partition the Suit is suspended, as it is before said: But note that diverse
are called Manors, within which are not any that hold of these Manors, but
only Copiholders at the will of the Lord, according to the Custom of the
Manor, and there are no Freeholders which hold by Charter; and yet these
Lordships are called Manors, and in these are Court-Barons, 19. H. 8.17.
Court Baron is belonging to a Manor.

And now though the honorable Judges of both Benches, and the Honorable Lord
chief Baron, and the other Judges there of Record, at this day are altogether
given to administer Justice to all, without respect of any Persons, R. 2.
Maint. 2.
according to the Statute of the 1. of Edw. 3. Chap. 14. which is, that right
be made as well to poor as rich; and that none send Letters in disturbance of
the Common Law; so that praise be to God, their whole inclination to the
administration of Justice, may be a sufficient example to all Stewards, to
administer Justice, and not to have regard to Letters: Yet in some
Court-Barons, I have seen such subverting of Justice by Stewards, some by
Ignorance and wilfulness, and some Stewards to please their Lords, and for
fear of loosing their Fee, being but Stewards at the will of their Lords, and
some for Letters, and other causes, that Justice many times has not place
there, to the perilous example and overthrow of Estate; and for that, that
henceforth hereafter Justice in these Courts may be the better administered,
before that I shall treat of the Courts aforesaid, I think it is convenient to
write to the Stewards, these sentences ensuing, to be a Glass to Stewards to
read their better remembrance to administer Justice, and for that it thus
follows.

Who works Justice, he shall be advanced. Eccles. 20.

Blessed are they which hunger and thirst for Justice, for they shall be
satisfied, Matthew. 16.

Justice advances a Nation, and it makes a miserable people to be pacified,
Prove. 19.

He that justifies a wicked man, and condemns the just man, he is most
abominable with God, Pro. 17.15. Unless your Justice abound more then that of
the Scribes and Pharisees, you cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew.
18. The souls of the Just are in the hands of God, Wisdom. In the straight
path of Justice, but the contrary way leads to death, Prove. 12.

Love God, and thy neighbor as thy self, then if you do not Justice, how do
you love him, who is Justice and truth, and how do you love your neighbor as
your self, Matthew. 22. Justice surely is immortal and everlasting, Injustice
is the wages of death; love Justice you that Judge the Earth, Wisdom 1.

Riches do not prevail in the day of revenge, but Justice shall free from
death, Prove. 2. God shall give to the Just the reward of their labors,
Wisdom 10.

And if any love Justice, his labors have great virtues, sobriety and virtue,
then which there is nothing more profitable in this life to men, Wisdom 1.

Nothing truly can be honest, which wants Justice, Tully in his Offices.

From Justice, as out of a certain Fountain, all rights do spring, for a
just man has a will to give to every man his own, Bracton.

Another Cause of doing Justice.
It is appointed for all men once to dye, and afterward to come to Justice:
And as Athanasius says, At whose coming all men shall rise with their bodies,
and shall give a reason and account of their own works, and they that have
done good shall go into life everlasting, but they that have done evil into
everlasting fire.

What men have done this present time of life,

Shall reap the Harvest, when Go and Come is rise, Rev. 14.

Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, for their works follow them.

Corinth. 1. Chap. 3. Every one shall receive his reward according to his work.

2 Corinthians. 4. Who sows in blessedness shall reap in blessedness; if
Christ had not been borne of the Virgin Mary, and dyed for us, no man could
have come to eternal life; therefore believe and do Justice, and then shall
ye have the aforesaid thing promised. And note, That though Christ has
redeemed us, yet if we do evil, it is written, We shall go into everlasting
fire; and for that, obey and fear to break the Commandments of God: and
then, in doing of Justice, you do the Commandment of God, for which you shall
have the thing promised; that is to say, Eternal life; for not all which say
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but those that
do the will of the Father, says Saint John: Therefore if you will have
eternal life, do Justice, and also remember that death does not delay, no man
knows his day; and therefore prepare your life, and do Justice, because no
man knows his end; and as Fishes are taken with a hook, and Birds taken with
a Snare, so the body of a man in the day of evil.

The third Cause of doing Justice is to have a good Report.
Have a care of a good name.

It is better to have a good name then much Riches.

Cursed is the man that neglects his good Name.

It is better to have a good Name then precious Ointments; and to conclude, he
says, What profits, If you shall gain the whole World, if you shall loose
your own soul.

First, the Steward shall make a Precept to warn the Court by reasonable
warning, as by six or more days, as follows; and it is the better, if it be
by fifteen days, according to the common days in the Bench.

The Precept.
J. K. Steward to the Bayliffe thereof, health; Prebenda de Islington.
I command likewise and appoint, that diligently you give to understand the
view of Frankpledge, of the Court there to be held, against the Thursday, that
is to say, the sixteenth day of October next coming after the date of these
presents, and have there this command: And as, etc. Dated under my Scale, the
first day of this month of October, the year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. 21.

Then enter your beginning of your Court-Rollin manner following.

The view of Frankpledge with the Court, J. F. Prebenda de Islington. Order de
tenor Leet.
Clerk there held the Thursday, Viz. The sixteenth of October, the year of the
Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, Queen, by the grace of God, of England, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. the 21. held by J. K. the Steward
there.

It is good to make this entry, that is to say, Held by J. K. Steward there: If
there be any Copiholders there, for that the Name of the Steward is in the Copy
to the admittance; then after this entry the Steward shall cause the Bayliffe
to make Oyes, three times, if it be a Leet, for this is the Kings Court, though
the other has that by Grant, or by Prescription.

In the year 21. Edw. 4. fol. 37. is, that where either adjournment of the
Term, or other matter for the King, B. Proclamation 6.
is: There at the beginning there shall be three Proclamations made, and in all
other matters which are not for the King, but one Proclamation; and for that at
the beginning in the Court Baron shall be but one Proclamation; and in Court
Leet (for that it is the Kings Court) shall be three Proclamations, Scilicet, O
yes three times shall be made.

Note that none may make Proclamation, but by authority of the King, or Majors,
and such like, where they have used it by Custom, 22. H. 6. fol. 19.

Then forthwith after the three Proclamations made, the Steward shall make the
Bailiffe to say, All manner of Persons which are resident, or Deciners, and do
owe Suit royal to this Leet, come in and make your Suit, and answer to your
names, every one upon pain and peril which shall ensue.

And after that all are called, and all which are absent are marked to be
amerced, then the Steward shall cause again (if it be in a Leete) to be made
three other Oyes.

And forthwith after the three Proclamations made, the Steward shall cause the
Bailiffe to say,

If any man will be Essoyned, and in Court Baron, If any will be Essoyned, or
enter any Plaint, come you in and you shall be heard.

And then the Steward ought to say, Essoynes and profer, of Suit and Plea three
times, and in the end Essoyne for this day; and then the Steward enter the
Essoyne in the Court Roll, as it follows in the entry of the Court Roll.

Then after this the Jury shall be impannelled, and first, one shall be sworn,
and after three or four together, and the Oath shall be as follows.

You shall enquire and faithfully make presentment of all things which I shall
give you in charge, The Oath of the Jury.
your Companions counsel, the King, and your own, you shall keep, and you
ought to present the truth, and nothing but the truth, So help you God.

But in the Court Baron there shall be omitted in the Oath (to keep the Kings
counsel) for that is no Court of the Kings, as a Leet is.

Note in the 27. In Feloni tantum.
of the Book of Assizes, p. 65. a Juror was arraigned in the Kings Bench as a
Felon, for that he was one of the Indictors of certain persons of felony, and
discovered the counsel of his* Companions, and in Leet it is counsel of the
King: Yet (Seck) if he were attaint, what Judgment shall be given.

And when the Foreman of the Jury for Court Leet, or Court Baron is sworn,
three or four shall come to the Book together, and shall be sworn together,
as before is said.

To which the Steward shall say, The same Oath which J. S. your Foreman has
taken of his part, you for your parts well and truly shall observe and keep,
So help you God; and so the rest shall be sworn by three or four together,
as in a Leet, at least there shall be twelve sworn.

For 6. H. 4. fol. 2. is, Jurors Leet.
that a Presentment in Leet shall be by twelve, and not by fewer; otherwise
every Presentment there is traversable: And 3. H. 7.4. If any stranger be
there, if there be not sufficient residents there to be impannelled, the
Steward may impannell a stranger there, for that it is to enquire for the King,
and for redressing matters which are annoyances to the Commonwealth; and if
more be sworn then twelve (as they may be for the King) yet if twelve of them
agree, and the residue not, it is a good Verdict, and it used very often to be
fifteen, sixteen, or seventeene of the Jury in the Leet; but a Jury to try an
Issue between parties by twelve only, as it appears by 21. Edw. 3. fol. 31.
and 29. Edw. 3. fol. 43. And that a Verdict of eleven shall not be taken, 41.
of the Book of Assizes, p. 11. Jury, or Court Baron.
yet in a Court Baron there may be impannelled and sworn there less then
twelve to inquire of Articles for the Lord.

The cause that the Jury shall be sworn, is, That the end of all controversy
to confirmation is an Oath, and this is the cause that the Juries are sworn,
and not otherwise credited: And see Fortescue, fol. 54. The trial in this
Realm by trial by twelve, is a good trial and necessary, as at large by him
appears.

Exhortation to the Jury.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, this concerns every man; then I pray
you, How have you the fear of God? How do you keep his Commandment, which is
the whole truth, if you do not regard your Oath: Remember also Jeremiah, Chap.
4. which says, You shall swear in truth, in Judgment, and in Justice, and so
remove love, fear, hate, and hope; that is to say, that you do nothing for
love, nor for fear, nor for malice, hatred, hope of benefit and gain, but to
present justly; and you ought to remember who says, Be not overcome of evil,
but overcome in good evil, Saint Paul: you shall not receive gifts, because
gifts blind the eyes.

But you ought to present justly, Deuteronomy. Chap. 16. Woe to them that call good
evil, and evil good, Isai. 15. Thou shall not anoint thy fist, nor bear
false witness against thy neighbor, Exodus. Chap. 20.

The lips of a Liar, are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 6.

It is just Judgment, where not the person but the works are considered,
Plato. And so from your hearts, expel all affection, and be yea mindful how
many threatenings God has appointed for breaking of an Oath.

First, the Prophet says, Thou hate all that work iniquity, thou destroyest
all which speak a lie, Dan. 5.

He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall dye with the death, Levit.
Chap. 14.

Thou shall not live because thou have spoken a lie, Zechariah 13.

Ananias and Saphira for a lie in selling a Field, forthwith were slain, Acts
Chap. 5.

And so you see what peril and indignation is from God, for not regarding your
Oath, and to utter the truth you shall be sure to be the children of God, which
is truth, and you shall obtain quietness to your selves, and to all your
neighbors, and your Commonwealth shall flourish with virtue, and offenders and
sinners shall be punished, and abolished; for the Leete is appointed to that
end.

And note, that at the beginning, there might be every year as many Leets as
he would, which had that in his Manor.

And after that Leets were ordained to be held but twice in the year, Rastal,
County, etc. 2.
by the Statute of Magna Charta, Chap, 35. Scilicet, betwixt the Month of
Michaelmasse and Easter.

6 H. 7. fol. 2. Presentment of Felony in the Turn of the Sheriff, held after
the Month of Easter is void, although it were for the King; for the Statute
is, That the Sheriff in this case shall loose his Turn, which is as much to
say, all in that shall be void, 38. H. 6. fol. 7. the same. But by
Prescription, Leets are held a day certain in the year: And after the
authority of the Leet, was enlarged by the Statute, de 18. Edw. 2. called the
Statute, De visu Franchi plegii: And after by diverse others, Rastal, Leet 1.
for what things are inquirable in Leets, as in the Charge more at large may
appear; and all the Articles are but for the advancement and preservation of
the Commonwealth, as by the Articles of your charge, more at large may also
appear: And in so much now, that you see for what cause Leets were ordained,
and how the authority of them is enlarged, for Government of the Commonwealth:
Now you ought to consider, that you which are of the Jury are chosen in such
manner as the Angels of God are at the last day of Judgment of man; for as it
is written, Then shall the Angels come out, and shall separate the Ill from the
midst of the Just: And so you ought to separate the Just from the Ill persons,
and you ought to see that the offenders be punished, and the Just preserved;
for as the Touchstone is provided to try the pureness of the Gold and Metals,
so are you chosen the Touchstone to see the Weed to be taken from the Corn,
and the Corn to be preserved; and you ought to see the King and the
Commonwealth preserved, and Justice to be administered, which is the
preservation of the King, Justice.
and his Commonwealth; and so for that, that you see your duties, and consider
your Oath, I will declare to you the Articles of your Charge.

The Charge in Leet.
First, You ought to consider, 27. H. 8. fol. 2.
that some offenses (as petty Treasons and Felonies, which are against the
Crown and Dignity) are inquirable and presentable in a Leet, but not
punishable there; but by the Statute of 1. Edw. 3. the last Chapter, Rast.
Indictment, 2.
they ought to be written and Indented, and one part to remain with the
Steward, and the other with the Jury, and it ought to be delivered to the
Justices of Assise, at the next Goal delivery held within the County.

And first, these following are to be inquired of, and to be certified, as
afterward is said.

First, Treasons.
You ought to inquire, if any counterfeit the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or the
Arms of this Realm; and by the 25. Edw. 3. Rastal, Treasons 1. they are high
Treason, and yet inquirable here, as Felony, and to be certified as is
aforesaid.

2. Also if any counterfeit the Money of this Realm, Counterfeit Money.
or of another Realm being current in this Realm, it is high Treason, 1 Mary,
Rastal, Treason 21. And by Stamford, fol. 3. but inquirable here as Felony.

3. Also is the counterfeiting of the Seal manual, Scale.
Privy Signet, or Privy Seal, and are inquirable here as Felonies, Rastal,
Treason 1. 27. H. 8. c. 2.

4. Also the Clipping, Clipping.
washing, or filing of Money, is high Treason, by 5. Eliz. and inquirable here
as Felony, Rastal, Treason 29.

5. Also if any Servant kill his Master or his Mistrisse, Kill his Master.
or Priest, or any other Religious, kill his Ordinary, by the 35. Edw. 3. C. 2.
Rastal, Treason 1. is petty Treason, and inquirable here, as Felony, 12. Book
of Assizes, 30.

6. Also if any Woman kill her Husband, Wife, Husband.
it is petty Treason, and is inquirable here as Felony, 19. H. 6. fol. 47.

7. Also cutting out of tongues of men, Felonies.
and putting out their eyes of malice, is Felony, and here inquirable, 5. H.
4.5. Rastal, Felony, 4. 19. H. 6. f. 47.

8. Also Murder is, Murder.
when any of malice pretended, kills another feloniously, and is inquirable
here, 14. Edw. 3.

9. Also Manslaughter is here inquirable, Manslaughter.
that is to say, When a place is not appointed to fight, but only they fight
together, and the one kills the other when they meet by chance, Stamford,
fol. 18. a. it is here inquirable.

10. Also if one kill the other (in defending of himself) he shall loose his
goods: Se defendendo.
The same Law, where one kills another by mischance, Stamford, 15. a.

11. Ravishing of a Woman, Rape.
as trespass is inquirable, and where it is not presented before the Coroner,
Stamford 23. b. 18. Ed. 2. Rastall, Rape. 2.

12 Rape as Felony, which is Felony made by the Statute, is not inquirable in a
Leet, nor any thing given by Statute, unless it be inquirable by express
words, but that which is made petty Treason by Statute, is inquirable as Felony
by the Common Law, 11 H. 7. fol. 22

13 Burglarers are those, Burglary.
which in time of Peace break Houses, Churches, Walls, Towers, or Doors,
after the Sun set, and before the rising thereof, though he carry away nothing,
if their intent may appear that it was to rob or kill, or to commit other
Felony, it is Burglary, inquirable here, Stamford, fol. 30. b.

14 Robbery, Robbery.
is when a man takes any thing from the person of another Feloniously, though
it be but the value of a penny it is Felony, and Inquirable, Stamford 27. d.
22. of the Assizes. 29.

15 Also burning of a House Feloniously done is Felony by the Common Law,
Burning of a house
and also is burning of Barnes in the night, and inquirable, Stamford 36. a.

16 Burning of a Barn in the night adjoining to a House is Felony by the Common
Law, 11. H. 7. f. 1. Robbing Churches.


17 Also robbing of Churches or Chapels, and taking of any Ornaments out of
them Feloniously is Felony, and inquirable. Theft.


18 Theft is the taking of another Goods with a fraudulent mind of stealing,
against his Will whose Goods they are, and if it be above the value of twelve
pence he shall be hanged, and Theft is here Inquirable, Stamford 24. L. Rescous.


19 If any rescue any which is taken for Felony, that is Felony, and here
inquirable, 1 H. 7.9. Taking Doves.


20 Also taking Doves in the Dovehouse in the night with Felonious intent, is
Felony, and here inquirable, but not where they are taken in their roost, out
of the Dovehouse. Stamford, fol 25. C. 22. book of Assizes 95.18 H. 8. fol. 2.

21 Also taking of young Pigeons, Young Pigeons.
or young Goshaukes in their nests in the night is Felony, and inquirable here.
14. H. 8. 18. Ed. 4 fol. 8.

22 Also the taking of Fish feloniously out of ponds, Stews, Fishes.
or Trunks in the night is Felony, and here inquirable: But otherwise it is
where it was taken in the River, there it is no Felony, 22 book of Assizes, 95
Quere, 18. Ed. 4. fol. 8.

23. Also the taking of tame Dear with a Felonious intent, Dear.
is Felony, the same Law the taking of Signetts, Swans marked, and Peacocks,
and here inquirable, Stamford, fol. 25. C. 18 H. 8.2.

24. Also if any one receive a Felon, Receiver.
well knowing of the Felony which he had done, that is Felony and here
inquirable, Stamford, fol. 41. E.

25. And note that all other Felonies which are Felonies by the Common Law,
Felons by the Common Law
as these are, are here inquirable, and see these after in Felony, otherwise
the King shall loose year, day, and wast, and the Lord his escheat.

26. Accessaries are inquirable here, Accessory.
and that is, if one procure or command another to do a Felony, but is not
present when the other does that, this Procurer or Commander is Accessory:
Accessory after the Felony, is, where one receives a Felon and knowing of the
Felony, Stamford, 40. G.

27. Escape voluntary, Escape.
is, when one arrests another for Felony, and after lets him go where he will,
that is Felony, and here inquirable, Stamford 32. I.

28. Escape negligent, is when one is arrested for Felony, and after escape
against the will of him that arrested him, and be not freshly pursued, and
taken before the Jailer loose the sight of him, that is fineable, and here
inquirable, Stamford 33. b.

29. Petty larceny, Petty larceny.
is the taking of any thing with a Felonious intent, under the value of twelve
pence, as Hens, Geese, Pigs, or small things out of Windows, Stamford fol. 24.
G. and these are here inquirable.

30. Note that the Lords of which the Lands are held shall have the Lands of
escheat, where their Tenants are attaynt in petty Treason or Felony, and the
King shall have (year, day, and wast) by Magna Charta, cap. 22. Ra. f.


And for that it is inquirable, what Lands and Tenements these persons so
offending have, and what Goods, for the King unless the Lord has the Chattells
of the Felons by Charter of the King, 9. H. 7. fol. 23.

31. And so note that all these matters in the Charge aforesaid, are inquirable
and presentable as is aforesaid but not punishable here, but shall be certified
by the Steward in the Sessions, as is aforesaid, 27. H. 8. fol. 2.

But now the residue of the matters of the Charge which ensue, are inquirable
and presentable, and are also punishable in a Leet, and shall not be certified
as these aforesaid shall be.

1 First you ought to inquire if the Suitors and Deciners, Deciners.
scilicet, if any of them which are resident appear in person, or not, and if
any of them make default, to present their names, 18 Ed. 2. Rastall, Leet 1.
the same book, Chapter 10.

2 Also if the cappitall Pledges appear, Pledges.
for it appears by 45 of Ed. 3. fol. 27. that Pledges shall be found for
every one that comes within the Lordship to be of good behavior, as the
manner is, and it is inquirable if every one has found suertyes, 18. Ed. 2.

3 Also if any has dwelt within the Lordship by a year and a day, The age
twelve years.
and be of the age of twelve years and not sworn to the Queen to be loyal and
faithful, that is inquirable.

4 Also if any villains of the Lord are fugitive and remain elsewhere out of
the Lordship, Villains.
and are not in the Demesnes of the King by a year and a day without claim,
are inquirable. 18. Ed: 2.

5. Also if any customs or services due to this Court are neglected, how, by
who, and in what Bailiffs time that was, Customs.
18. Ed. 2.

6 Also if any annoyances be made upon the Land, wood, Anoyances
and water, that blocks, stocks, ditches, hedges, made, or a ditch made or
filled to the annoyance of the People, or if any other thing be done to the
noyance of the People, that is to the multitude, and not only to one, is
inquirable, 18. Ed: 2.

7 Also if any Walls, Houses, Pales, Wages.
or Hedges be made or erected to the noyance of the People, it is inquirable,
18. Ed: 2.

8. Also if any common ways, waters, ditches, or paths are turned out of
their right course, it is inquirable, 18. Ed 2.

9 Also if any bounds are straightened or carried away, 18 Ed. 2.

10. Also if any Lay-stalls are made in high ways to the noyanee of the
People, or if any carrion be cast into the high way to the noyance of the
People, it is inquirarable.

11. Also if any make any encroachment upon the Kings high way.

12. Also if any commonly or openly break the peace, Trespass.
as making frayes in disturbing and fighting the People, it is inquirable.

13. Also if there be any common Barretors in the Lordship, as Scoldes,
brawlers, to the noyance and disturbance of their Neighbors, present their
names.

14. Also if any break the common pound, Pound.
to take distress from thence, present their names.

15. Also if there be any outcries made against the Laws to the disturbance of
the People, it is inquirable.

17. Also if any Ease-droppers, Ill members for a Commonwealth.
which stand under Walls or Windows, by night or day to hear tails, and to
carry them to others, to make strife and debate among their Neighbors,
present their names.

18. Also if any be common breakers of Hedges, present their name.

19. Also if any keep and maintain any bawdrey in their Houses, it is a cause
to break the Peace, and is a vice which corrupts the Commonwealth, and for
that it is here inquirable, 27. H. 8. fol. 17.

Quatuor his casibus procul dubio cadet adulter,
Aut hic pauper erit aut subito morietur;
Aut cadet in causam qua debet judice vinci,
Vel aliquod membrum casu vel crimine perdet.
By these four changes, without doubt, an adulterous person shall fall, either
he shall be poor, or shall suddenly dye, or shall fall into some cause, that
he shall be condemned by the Judge, or shall loose some member of his Body by
chance or by the crime.

20. Also if there be any vagabonds or wanderers, and those which walk by
night, and sleep by day, and if there be any which are common haunters of
Tavernes or Alehouses, and go about, and having nothing to live of, are
inquirable, 4. H. 7. fol. 2. In Leet is inquirable of nightwalkers.

21. Also if any go of Thieves messages, it is inquirable.

22. Also if any take Pigeons in the Winter by nets or Ingines, it is
inquirable.

23. Also if any by any way corrupt the common Waters, by whittening, by Lime,
or by Flax, or Stuff laid in the Waters, by which the Waters are corrupt, it is
inquirable.

24. Also if any has, or uses any false Measures, Deceit of Artificers. False
Weights.
of Bushles or Gallons, Yard or Else, or false Weights or Balances, are
inquirable, 8. H. 6. chap. 5. Magna Charta, chap. 25. 51. H. 3. Title Weights,
and Measures, 5.

25. Also if any use double Pounds or Measures, Double pounds.
that is to say, a small one to sell by, and a great one to buy by, in deceit
of the People, it is inquirable, 27. Ed. 3.10.

26. Assise of Bread and Beer, that this be held, Assise of Bread.
scilicet, that every one sell according to the price of Corn, is inquirable,
and that it be made wholesome for Men.

27. Also if Tiplers sell by Cups and Dishes, Tiplers.
or Measures sealed, or not sealed, is inquirable.

28. Also if Butchers, Fishmongers, Innkeepers. At reasonable prizes.
Haglers, Poulterers, Cooks, Vintners, and all other which sell Victuals, if
they sell at reasonable prices, and not at excessive, having regard to the
prices that Victuals are sold in places near, and he which is convict shall
pay the double that he has received to the party damnified, and let it be
inquirable, 23. Ed. 3.6. 10. H. 7. fol. 8. by Brian and Hussy, a Victualer
shall be constrained to sell his Victual, if the buyer offer ready Money,
otherwise not.

29. Also if Butchers, Fishmongers, Butchers.
or other Victualers sell any corrupt Victual not wholesome for men's Bodies,
it is inquirable.

30. Also that Innkeepers, Inkeepers.
shall not sell Hay nor Oats but at reasonable prices, and shall not take for
the bushel above one half penny above the common price in the Market, and
shall take nothing for Litter, and that is inquirable, 12. R. 2.8. Rastall,
Victual 8.

31 An Innkeeper may bake his Bread for Horses in his House in any throughfare
Town, which is not a City where common Bakers dwell, and if he bake and do not
make it according to the prices of Corn, he is to be punished in a Leet, 32.
H. 8.14. Rastall. Horsebread.

31. Also if any Innkeeper or other person, harbor any suspected persons,
perceiving or knowing them to be of ill behavior, it is inquirable.

33. Also if Millers take excessive Tole is inquirable, Mills.
and they ought to take for Tole but the twentieth or twenty fourth grain,
according to the custom, and according to the strength of the Water.

Or if any Miller within the Lordship change the Corn which he has to grind,
it is inquirable.

34. Also it is inquirable, Artificers
if all Artificers make good Ware as they ought, and if any of them make deceit
in it to deceive the People, you ought to present their names.

35. Also if any Constable, Misdemeanour de Officers
Alecunner, Bailiff, or any other Officers within this Lordship, have duly and
well done their Offices or not, is inquirable.

36. Also no Purveyor, Purveyors
shall make any purveyance for the Queens House, of any thing of the value of
forty shillings or under, unless he do it for ready payment to the party, upon
pain of loosing his Office, and to pay the value to the party greived, and if
he do the contrary, if the Constable or Tithingman upon complaint unto them do
not make resistance to the Purveyor, they shall forfeit to the party greived
the value of the thing taken, and double Damages, and that is the Misdemeanour
of the Constable, and of these Misdemeanors and all other such Officers, is
inquirable, 20. H. 6. chap. 8. Rastall, Purveyors 31. And also the Constable
ought to see the Peace and watch to be observed as it ought, 11 H. 4. fol. 27.
That Purveyor, Buyer, or taker for the King, after he is allowed and paid of
the King, shall be Debtor to the party; but till payment, the King himself is
Debtor.

See more after in the Office of the Constable, For the Office of the King and
Lord.
and what is inquirable touching his Office, fol.

37. If any Treasure be found, that is to say, Treasure hid in the ground, and
no man knows who hid the Treasure, that is to the King, unless it be to the
Lord by specialty in writing, or by prescription

If any Estreys be, Estrey.
it is inquirable, and that is if any Horses, Sheep, Hogs, Beasts, or Swans,
which have come into this Lordship, and have been there by the space of a
twelve month and a day, and not claimed, then the Lord may have the property
of them by prescription, but they ought first to be impounded in an open pound,
proclaimed in the Church, and two Market Towns next adjoining, and if none
claim them, then they shall be seized, and ought to be put in some several
ground, and not in any Covert or Wood, that the owner cannot find them, for if
they be in Covert, the property is not changed, though they be there a year
and a day.

39. If any Weife be, it is inquirable, Weife.
and that when the Theife upon the Hue and Cry is pursued, or otherwise for
easing himself of the carriage, without Hue and Cry, he waifes the Goods by him
Feloniously stolen, or any part of them and fly away, this is forfeit to the
King, and the Lord may have it by prescription, Stamford, fol: 180.

40. If any fugitive be, that is, Fugitive.
if it be found by Indictment of Murder before the Coroner, that he fled, or if
he be indicted of Felony, and acquit and found that he fled, then he shall
forfeit his Goods to the King, and the Lord may have them by Charter, and not
by prescription, and that is inquirable.

41. If any Horse or Mare be put upon the Common and be scabbed, or having an
infectious disease, Scabbed Chivall.
he shall forfeit to the Lord of the manner ten shillings. 32 H. 8.13. Rastall
Horses etc. b. and this is inquirable.

42. If the Exigent be awarded against one indicted of Felony, by the award of
that his Goods are forfeited, though he be afterward acquit of the Felony, and
the King shall have his Goods, and the Lord by Charter, and not by prescription
or without Charter, and this is inquirable.

43. If any be outlawed in Debt, Trespass, Outlawry
or other personal Actions, his Goods are forfeit, and the King shall have
them and not the Lord, unless that it be by Charter and not by prescription,
and this is inquirable, 18 Ed. 2.

44. If a common Fine has used to be paid here, Common Fine.
that ought to be inquired, that it be paid according to the usage and that it
be collected according to the usage, for it is collected commonly by the
Head-Burrough, and it is commonly due to the Leet at Michaelmasse.

45. Note that every one that has view of Frank pledge ought to have a Pillory
and Tumbrell to execute Justice, and also in every Town or in the Leet a pair
of stocks, and for lack of them the Town shall forfeit five pound, and that is
inquirable.

Wreck of the Sea.
ANd for that, that by the Statute of 15. R. 2. chap. 3. Wreck of the Sea may
be tried and determined by the Law of the Land, that for that, and for the
profit of the King and the Lord, it is inquirable in the Leet.

The Kings Prerogative, chap. 11. the King shall have Wreck of the Sea
throughout the whole Realm, and Sturgeons taken in the Sea or other where
within the Realm, except some privileged places, be the Kings.

9. H. 7. fol. 20. A man may have a Wreck of the Sea by prescription.

10. H. 7. fol. 6. By Wood. If I have Wreck by prescription, and a Stranger
seize it, and not my Bailiffe, I shall have an Account against him.

Westminster 1. chap. 5. is, that Goods in a Ship where a Dog or a Cat scapes
alive, are no Wreck, but are delivered to the Town or Lord, and if any come
within a year and a day, and claim them, and prove them to be his Goods, they
are without delay delivered unto him, and if none come within the year and a
day, they are the Kings. And if the Wreck belong to another then the King, it
is done in the same manner. And who shall do otherwise, and of that is attaint,
he shall be committed to prison, and Fined at the Will of the King, and shall
pay damages likewise.

If the Goods in this case are fresh Victuals, as flesh meat, fresh Fish,
Apples, or Oranges, or such things which will not endure for a year, and the
Sheriff seeing them, sells them, and delivers the Money taken for them to
the Town to answer for it, it is good, and yet it is contrary to the words of
the Statute, but it stands with reason.

45. H. 6.32. If the Kings Goods be Wreckt, and not claimed within a year and
a day, yet the King shall have them, otherwise it is a common person.

Then there are diverse other matters which follow, of which you may inquire by
express words in the Statutes, as of the Statute of Apparel, and other
Statutes ensuing.

In the year, 24. H. 8. Chap. 13. Rastal, Apparel the fifth.

If one has not in Land a hundred pound, he cannot use Velvet, in Jackets. If
one has not in Land a hundred pound, he cannot use Velvet, in Dublets. If one
has not in Land a hundred pound, he cannot use Velvet, in Purses.
Damask Silk Chamlet Taffaty in Gowns. Damask Silk Chamlet Taffaty in
Coats. Damask Silk Chamlet Taffaty in Outtermost Garments.
Forty pound cannot use Chamlet, nor Silk, in Gowns. Forty pound cannot use
Chamlet, nor Silk, in Outtermost Garments.
No Velvet, in Jackets. No Velvet, in Jerkins. No Velvet, in Caps.
Nor any Silk, but Satin in Dublets. Damask. in Dublets. Taffatie in
Dublets. Sarsnet in Dublets.
Sarsnet in Facing their Gowns. Chamlet in Facing their Gowns. Taffaty in
Facing their Gowns.
Twenty pound, no Silk in Gowns. Twenty pound, no Silk in Cloaks. Twenty
pound, no Silk in Hose, and c.
No Satin Damask Taffaty Sarsnet in Dublets. No Satin Damask Taffaty
Sarsnet in Coyfes.


But they may wear Chamlet in Jackets.

Five pound cannot use any Silk in Dublets. Five pound cannot use any Silk in
Jackets. Five pound cannot use any Silk in Gowns. Five pound cannot use any
Silk in Cloakes.
But Chamlet in Dublets. But Chamlet in Jackets.
Furs.
NOne under the degree of an Earl, may use Sables.

Forty pound cannot use Foynes. Forty pound cannot use Jennets gray. Forty
pound cannot use Martins. Forty pound cannot use Squirrell. Forty pound cannot
use Fox. Forty pound cannot use Gray.
Cony, Hare, Or other Furr growing within this Realm. Cony, Hare, Or other
Furr growing within this Wales. Cony, Hare, Or other Furr growing within this
Ireland.
Twenty pound Black Cony. Twenty pound Budge.
Under twenty pound Gray Cony. Under twenty pound Black Lamb. Under twenty
pound White lamb.
Chains of Gold.
NOne under the degree of a Knight may use any Collar of S S.

None may use a Chain of less weight then ten Ounces of Gold.

Forty pound may use Aglets, Buttons, Brooches.

Those persons which are excepted in these Statutes Queens Counsel. Barons of
the Exchequer Sergeants at Law. Apprentices at Law. Physicians of the King.
Majors. Recorders. Master or Wardens, which are, or have used this room.


These may use as before the making of the Statute they have used.

Forfeiture.
THE thing used against the Statute, is three shillings four pence a day: The
Statute is in his Garment, (In) is taken here, for (In) or (Upon) his Garment.

Year the first and second of Philip and Mary, no person borne within the
Dominions of the King, other then the Son and Heir of a Knight, or above that
degree, or which might expend twenty pound yearly, or was worth two hundred
pound in Goods.

Should use Silk in Hatt. Bonet. Nightcap. Girdle. Scabbard. Hose. Shoes.
Spur-Leathers.


The forfeiture is for every day, ten pound.

If any man keep Servants which offend in these premises, and do not put him
out of his service, within fourteen days after that he has notice of it, or
if he put him out of his service, and afterward retain him again, within a
year, he shall forfeit a hundred pound.

Artificers.
IF any Butcher, Brachetour, Baker, Poulter, Cook, 2 Edw. 6. chap. 15.
Tipler, etc. conspire, covenant, promise or make any oath not to sell Victual
but at certain prices.

Or if a Workman or Laborer, conspire not to work but at certain prices, or
not to finish that which another has begun, or that they will not do but
certain labor in a day, or not labor but certain time of the day, it is
inqiurable.

The forfeiture for the first offense ten pound, and twenty days Imprisonment,
with Bread and Water, the second offense double.

Archers.
IN the year 33. H. 8. chap. 9. Every man being the Kings Subject under the
age of forty years, not lame nor having any Impediment, ought to shoot in a
long Bow, and shall have a Bow and Arrows as it follows, that is to say.

Every Man Child in a house of the age of seven years to seventeen years
shall have a Bow and two Arrows, and at seventeen years to forty, a Bow and
four Arrows, none under the age of twenty four ought to shoot at Pricks
nor at twelve score or above with Shaft or Flight.

The forfeiture is six shillings eight pence for every three Months wanting
these Bows and Arrows.

The Master or Father ought to provide for these of seven to seventeen,
otherwise be shall pay the forfeiture, and every Servant taking wages of
seventeen or upwards, shall pay the forfeiture.

The forfeiture for such shooting at Pricks is four pence the shoot, and at
eleven score and under, as above, six shillings eight pence the shoot, by the
same Statute.

Butts shall be made in every Town upon pain of forfeiture for every three
Months for default of them twenty-shillings.

Crosse-bowes and Hand-guns.
NOne may shoot in any Handgun, 33 H. 8. chap. 6.
Demihake Hagbot, ot Crossebow, or keep it in his house to that intent nor
otherwise, unless he may dispend a hundred pound upon pain to loose for every
time ten pound.

Every person that will shoot, or carry, use, or have in his House, or other
place, any Hand-gun, other then such a one which shall be in the Stock and Gun
of the length of a yard, or any Hagbut, or Demy-hake, other then such as shall
be in the Stock and Gun, of the length of three quarters of a yard, shall
forfeit ten pound.

And every person having Lands, Fees, Annuities, or Offices, of the yearly
value of a hundred pound, may seize and take their Gunns aforesaid; and also
every Crosse-bow of any person, not having Lands, Fees, or Offices, to the
value of a hundred pound a year.

None unless he have a hundred pounds by the year, may carry in the high
ways, in his Journey, any Crossebow bent, or Gun charged, unless it be in
time of Service of War upon pain of ten pound.

Every one which shoots in a Handgun, Demihake, or Hagbut in a City or market
Town, or within one quarter of a mile of them, shall forfeit ten pound for
every shoot.

If a Master command his Servant to shoot in a Handgun, Demihake, Hagbut, or
Crosse-bow, at a Dear, Foul, or other thing, unless it be at a Bank, or
Butt of earth, or in time of War, shall forfeit ten pound.

But there is a Proviso, that Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Servingmen of every Lord
spiritual and temporal, and of Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, and the
Inhabitants aforesaid, of Cities, Buroughs, or Market Towns, to shoot at any
Butt or bank of earth, so that the Guns be of the length aforesaid.

And the Lords, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and the Inhabitants aforesaid,
may also keep them to shoot at Butt or Bank, and so may every person (two
miles distant from any Town) keep them for defense of their Houses.

Also it is lawful for every one, charged by 4. and 5. P. and M. to find
Hagbut, to have that in his House.

Cordiners. 5. Eliz. chap. 8.
NOne ought to cut or gash any Hydes of Bull, Ox, Heyfer, or Cow, and if any
Tanner offer any so gashed to sell, he shall forfeit for every one twenty pence.

None shall kill any Veale to sell being under the age of five weeks, upon
pain for every one six shillings eight pence.

None may, together at one time, be a Butcher and a Tanner, upon pain of six
shillings eight pence.

No Tanner shall be a Shoemaker, Currier, or Butcher at one time, upon pain to
loose the leather wrought, or the value.

Nor Tanner tan any hide of a Bull, Horse hide, Sheepskin, upon pain of
forfeiting the same.

No person may cut any Oak apt to be barked, where the bark is of the value
of two shilling the load, but between the first day of April and the last of
June, unless it be for building or repairing of a House, upon pain of the
loss thereof and the double value.

None may buy any rough hides in the hair, but the Tanner, but salt hides for
Ships.

No Currier ought to curry any leather in the House of any Shoemaker.

And none ought to curry leather ill tanned.

Crow-nets. 24 H. 8. chap. 10.
IT is inquirable if there be no Crow-nets, the Lord shall have the half of
ten shillings, which shall be forfeited by the Parish or the Town, for default
of having them, for this Statute is revived by 8. Eliz. chap. 15.

And the Statute of 14. H. 8. is, if Inhabitants of any Parish, where there are
ten Householders dwelling at the least, and do not provide Nets to take Crows,
Choughs, and Rookes, and keep and ^enew the same netts when occasion shall be,
and lay that with a shrape of chaff to take the Crows, etc. they shall forfeit
ten shillings to the Queen and Lord of the Leete.

Or if Crow-nests are not thrown down in the beginning when they begin to breed,
they shall be amerced.

Fry of Fish, 10 Eliz. chap. 17.
NOne ought to take and destroy any young brood or Fry of Fish in any waters
or Rivers, salt or fresh, nor kill any Trouts or Salmons out of season, and the
forfeiture of every branch of this Statute is twenty shillings.

None may kill or take any Pike or Pickrell not being in length ten inches Fish
or more, nor any Salmon unless in length sixteen inches Fish or more, nor any
Trout not in length eight inches or more, nor any Barble not in length twelve
inches or more.

None ought to take any Fish with any manner of net, nor with any other engine
or devise (angling excepted) but only with a Net or Tramaile, whereof every
meash shall be two inches and a half in breadth.

Also where Smelts, Loches, Mynds, Bullheads, Gudgeons, and Eeles, have been
used to be taken, it shall be there lawful to use such a net, as they have
used before for that purpose.

Note that the Steward of the Leet ought to charge the Jury of offenses made
against this Act, otherwise he shall forfeit forty shillings, and if the Jury
conceal any thing, then he may impannell another Jury, to inquire of their
concealment, and if that be found, they shall forfeit twenty shillings to the
Lord of the Manor.

If any by day or night, break or destroy the head or dam of any Pond, Poole,
Mote, Stanke, Stewe, or several Pit in which is the Lords Fish, to the intent
to steal the Fish, he shall pay to the Lord treble damages, and shall be
imprisoned three Months, and after to find surety for seven years for his
good behavior.

Note, this Statute is general, 5. Eliz. chap. 21.
every one to have remedy.

The same Law is for Dear chased out of the Lords Lands enclosed, or killing
any Dear of the Lords. And taking of any Hawks in his Land, or eggs of them,
he shall have the same punishment by the same Statute.

13. Eliz. chap. 10. provideth, and is inquirable, If any kill or destroy any
Phesant or Partridge, with any Ner, Snares, Ginns, or devises in the night,
That he shall forfeit for every Phesant twenty shillings, and for every
Partridge ten shillings, one half to the Lord of the Manor where it is, and
the other to the Informer: And that none Hawk or Hunt with Spaniells in any
Land where is Corn or other Grain then growing, (unless it be in his own
Land) at such time as any eared or codded Corn shall be then growing upon the
same Land, before the same be shocked, hiled, or cocked upon pain of forty
shillings to the party.

Also it isinquirable, if a Fisher for his part do his duty in bringing Fish to
the Market which is good and wholesome for men, not corrupt, and that he sell
the same at reasonable prizes and without taking excessive gains, scilicet,
for every twelve pence bestowed shall have but clear gain one penny, and if it
be stinking, that it be burnt openly forthwith.

Games unlawful, 33 H. 8. chap. 9.
NOne for his lucre or gain ought to keep any House, Alley, or place of
Bowling, Dicing, Tabling, Carding, Tennis, or other unlawful Gaming, upon pain
every day forty shillings.

And every person using the same to loose for every time six shillings eight
pence.

And if the Constables and Bailists do not make search every Month, they shall
be amerced forty shillings the Month.

No Artificer, Husbandman, Handycrafts man, Apprentice, Journyman, or Servant
of an Artificer, Mariners, Fishermen, Watermen, or any Servingman, ought to
play at any unlawful Games aforesaid, but at Christmas time upon pain to
loose twenty shillings for every time, and in the Christmas to play in their
Masters Houses, Noble men.
or in their presence.

No person ought to bowl in any place out of his Garden or Orchard, pain six
shillings eight pence.

But it is lawful for Noble men, and every one that may dispend a hundred
pound per an. in Lands, or profits for life to license their Servants and
others coming to their Houses, to play at Bowls, Cards, Dice, and other
unlawful Games, and ought not to undergo the penalty of this Statute.

Horses, 32. H. 8. Chap. 13.
NO Stone-Horse being of the age of two years, unless he be foureteen handful
high, shall be put to pasture in any common, forest or chase, upon pain of
forfeiting the same Horse.

The said Lands ought to be yearly driven at Michaelmass, by the Lord,
Tithingman, Constables, etc. or within fifteen days after, upon the pain of
forty shillings, and if upon the said driving, there be found, any Filly or
Fool or Gelding not able to bear Foles, or not able to work, the same shall
be killed and buried.

None ought to put upon a Common any Horse, Mare, or Gelding, infected with
Scab or Mange, upon pain of forfeiting ten shillings.

Note, that the presentment against this Statute, ought to be certified by the
Steward at the next Sessions of the Peace, upon pain that he shall forfeit
forty shillings.

Hue and cry. 18. Ed. 2.
ALL commonly are taken and called at the Summons of the Sheriffs, and at the
cry of the Country, to pursue and arrest the Felons, when occasion shall be, as
well within Liberties as without, 3. Edw. 3. chap. 9.

And if the Robbers escape, the hundred with the Liberties thereof, shall make
recompense to the party robbed within half a year after the Robbery
committed, Winton 13. Edw. 1. chap. 2. And if it be upon the borders of the
Hundred, then both Hundreds shall make recompense.

Westminster 1. chap. 9. To take Felons, the Statute will that all commonly be
ready at the commandment and at the Summons of the Sheriff, and at the cry of
the Country, to pursue, to arrest Felons, when occasion shall be, as well
within Liberties as without, and shall give a Fine to the King for not doing.
See the Statute of Winton in the time of Edw. 1.

The Office of the Crown, title Coroners 2. Have power to inquire if Hue and
Cry be made, and if all follow the Hue and Cry, and he that does not, and upon
this is convicted, he shall be attached to appear before the Justices of the
Goal delivery.

21. Edw. 1. If a Forrester, Park-keeper, or Warrener, shall find Malefactors
wandering to make some damage there, after the Hue and Cry raised to the Peace
of the King, they that will not stand and yield themselves, but to execute
their malice and to continue it, and to the disturbance of the Kings Peace do
fly away, and by force and arms defend themselves; If they shall kill these
Malefactors, they shall not for this occasion be called before the King and the
Justices.

High Ways, 2. and 3. P. and M. chap. 8.
FOr amending of High Ways to Markets, shall be chosen Tuesdayes or
Wednesdayes in the week of Easter, two Surveyors, and if any chosen refuse,
the pain is twenty shillings, and by that Statute every Laborer ought four
days to work, and their days shall be appointed the next Sunday following in
the Church, and to be made before Midsummer.

He which has a Carve of Land or pasture, or a Cart, shall be there four
days with it and two men, upon pain of ten shillings a day.

And every Housekeeper, Cottiger, and Laborer, not being hired Servants by the
year, shall be there four days upon the pain of twelve pence a day, and
ought to labor eight hours in the day.

Provided that every one before charged, 5 Eliz. chapter 13.
labor 6. days, and that gives Liberty to take Rubbish, small stones of
quarries, sand, gravel, or Synders, and to gather stones upon other men's
Lands, and provideth liberty to turn the course of Waters out of the
Highwaies, and that Ditches of every part of the Highwaies be scowred by them
adjoining, 8 H. 7. fol 8.
and that Trees, Hedges, and Bushes, be cut by the owners, which grow adjoining
to the Highwaies, 18 Eliz. chap. 9.
according to the Statute of 5. Eliz. by which the ways ought to be opened,
and the People to have ready passage.

Every one chargeable as a Cottiger by former Law, and assesse in goods at five
pound or forty shillings in Lands (if he dwell not in London) shall find two
men every one of the six days.

And if one dwell in one parish and has part of a Carve of Land there, and
part in another parish, he shall find a Cart where he dwells.

And if one have two plough Lands in two several parishes, he shall find in
every one a Cart.

Pain ten shillings for not scowring of Ditches and cutting Bushes according
to the Statute, fifth year of Elizabeth.

Pain twelve pence the Rod for not ditching and scowring Ditches, pain for
casting out that which is scowred in Ditches into the High way, for every load
twelve pence.

The half of all forfeitures by these Statutes shall be to the Churchwardens
to bestow upon ways. Wardens of the Church.


Hats and Caps, 13. Eliz. chap. 16.
EVery person within the age of six years, ought to use upon the Sabbath and
Holy days, if it be not in the time of their Travel out of the Town, upon
their Head a Cap of Wool made and dressed in England.

Except Maidens. Dames. Madams and Gentlewomen. Noble Personages. Every Lord
and Knight.


Gentlemen of twenty Marks, and their heirs, such which are in any Office of
worship in City or County. Are excepted also.

Wardens of worshipful Companies in London. Are excepted also.

The Forfeiture is three shillings four pence the day, one half to the Lord
of the Leet, the other to the Poor.

Also the Parents, Gardians, Governors, and Masters ought to pay the
Forfeiture for their Children, Servants, and Wards, 21. years till they be out
of their charge.

Hemp.
IF any water any Hemp or Flax in any River, 33 H. 8. chap. 13.
runningwater, stream, or any other common Pond or water, where Beasts are
used to be watered, but only upon the Land where pits appointed for the same, or
otherwise in the several Ponds, they shall forfeit twenty shillings, and
remedy given to sue for the same in a Leet by Action of Debt, bill, plaint,
information, or otherwise.

Musters, 4. and 5. P. and M. chap. 3.
HE that refuses to come to Musters before any person authorized to take it,
shall be imprisoned for ten days, if he do not pay to the Queen forty
shillings: And if any person appointed to take Musters, receive any Money to
release any appointed to serve, he shall forfeit ten times as much as he
receives.

Mortmayne, 7. E. 1. West. 2. c. 32.
NO man entered into Religion, or other whatsoever, to buy or sell Lands or
Tenements, or under color of gift, or Term, or by reason of any others title
whatsoever, to receive Lands or Tenements of any body, or by any other Art or
Wit, to presume to appropriate it unto himself, upon the forfeiture thereof,
by which the Lands and Tenements aforesaid should come to Mortmain by any
means. If any shall do contrary to this Statute, it is lawful to the chief
Lord of the Fee, within a year, from the time of the alienation thereof, to
enter and to hold in fee and Inheritance, and if the chief Lord be negligent,
then the next chief Lord may enter within half a year after, and so every
Lord shall have half a year till it come to the King.

Riots, 1. M. 1. chap. 12.
IF any persons to the number of twelve assemble unlawfully, to alter and
change Laws, to break Enclosures, Banks, Conduits, Stankes, Fishponds,
Houses, Barnes, or to burn Stackes of Corn, or such like Riots, and
Proclamation be made by the Sheriff or Justice of Peace, and notwithstanding
they remain together by the space of an hour, after the Proclamation made,
every such attempt is Felony, every Coppy-Holder being a Yeoman, Husbandman, or
Labourer, being of the age of eighteen years, or under forty, not sick, nor
having reasonable excuse, and being required by the Justice, Sheriff, or his
Immedidiate Lord, to serve, to apprehend the persons aforesaid, and refuse, he
shall forfeit his Estate during his Life, and his Lord may enter.

The Farmor being a Yeoman, and refusing, is in the same case to his Landlord.

Also it is Felony if a Man, Woman or Servant, or other person without
compulsion, bring, send, or deliver, any Money harness, Artillery, Weapons, or
Victuals, to any persons assembled in such manner, and not depart to their
Houses upon Command, or Proclamation made, as is aforesaid, and if any number
besides the number of those which are assembled, and upon Proclamation made, do
not depart, Justice of Peace, or chief Officers of the City or Borough
corporate, may raise power to suppress them.

And if any Officer kill any of those rebellious persons, or maim them, they
shall be free.

Also if any person knowing such pretended rebellion, and do not reveal the
same within twenty hours after such knowledge had of it, he shall be
imprisoned by the space of three Months without Bail or Mainprise, unless he
be otherwise discharged by the Justice of the Peace.

Also if any refuse, being able to suppress such Offenders, he shall suffer
Imprisonment for a year without Bail or Mainprise.

Also if any hinder or let, that Proclamation cannot be made, this is Felony.

Note that this Statute ought to be read or openly declared in every Leet.

10. H. 7. fol. 12. If one come and enter into Land, with more then is
accustomed to have attending upon him, that shall be said with force.

21. H. 7. fol. 39. One may make an assembly of People in his House to aid him,
for that it is his Castle, but not to go to Market, although he be threatened.

17. Edw. 4. fol. 4. Where there is an assembly in manner of War, and no Act
done, it is no assault by Pigot, if they draw no Weapon, etc. Quere.

Riot is not, unless three at least, which do an unlawful act.

An unlawful assembly, is, if the People assemble themselves together, for an
ill purpose, though they do nothing.

Rout is, where there assemble a number, and after march or ride, or go apart,
or move to ill in their own quarrels, though there be no act done, title five
in Marrows reading, as to throw down enclosures in their quarrel, this is a
Rout.

14. H. 7. fol. 28. If a Disseisor have a possession by three years, and
holds with force, Action upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. does not lie against
him, but he may be indicted upon that Statute, for this is for the King.

7. Ed. 4. fol. 18. Indictment of forcible entry upon the Statute of the eighth
year of H. 6. was removed into the Kings Bench; and the Justices there might
well award Restitution, as the Justices of Peace might have before them, 4. H.
7.19. 32. H. 6. fol. 2. Says in forcible entry, where the Defendant pleads
Title, that they ought to traverse, (without that) he entered with force; see,
1. H. 7. fol. 19.

7. H. 6. fol. 14. Presentment of the forcible entry, the Defendant pleads to
the (force and arms) not guily, and it is not good, but he ought to plead over
to the Desseisin but in Trespass not guilty is good.

15. H. 7. fol. 17. Where the Plaintiff makes title and traverseth the Bar,
and the title is found for the Plaintiff, they shall not inquire of the force,
for it is implied, and so if the Bar be not found.

1. H. 7. f. 19. If the Title be found, they need not, nor ought not to inquire
of the force, and for that that the Plaintiff alleges that J. S. the
Defendant entered with ten persons, and does not name their names, it is
uncertain and not good.

2. H. 7. fol. 16. It is said, that if one disseiseth another to the use of
two, that they two are Disseisors by their agreement afterward, not with
force, and if it be found against the Disseisor, he shall be attaint of force.

6. H. 7. fol. 12. Forcible entry upon points of the Statute, the Defendant
pleads not guilty, and found by Verdict, that he entered peaceably and not with
force, and for the Statute is in disjunctive the plaintiff shall recover, 3.
Ed. 4. fol. 20.10. Ed. 4. fol. 13.

10 H. 7. fol. 14. It seems a Tenant for years shall not have an Action upon
the Statute, of 8. H. 6. For it is in the realty, and one cannot be
Impannelled, for that he cannot expend forty shillings by the year, 3. Ed. 4.
fol. the last, 8. Ed. 4. fol. 9.

11. H. 7. fol. 15. Feoffment with warranty, and rely upon warranty, it is good
upon the Statute of 8. H. 6. for it is in the realty, but not upon the Statute,
1. H. 7. fol. 12.9. H. 6. fol. 19.

Queen, and assurance of her Power.
IN the year 5. Eliz. chap. 1. If any extol or set forth the authority of the
Bishop of Rome, against the form of this Statute, he runs into a Praemunire. And
this Statute is to be read and declared in the Leer.

Tracing of Hares, 18. H. 8. chap. 11.
NOne may Trace, destroy, or kill Laveret in the snow, with Dog, Bitch, or
otherwise, and who does so, shall forfeit six shillings eight pence.

Wines, 7. Edw. 6. chap. 5.
NO person may utter by retaile by small measure, any Gascoigne Wines, or
French Wine, but after the Rate of eight pence the gallon at the most, nor any
Rochell Wine but after the Rate of four pence the gallon, nor any other Wine at
a higher price then twelve pence the gallon at the most, upon the pain of five
pound every offense.

None shall have a vessel of Wine in his House above ten gallons, to spend
there, unless he be worth a thousand Marks in Goods, or a hundred Marks in
Lands, or be the Son and Heir of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, or Lord, upon the
pain of ten pound.

Note, that Vintners of London have a toleration for them and others authorized
by them, by Letters Patents from the King for diverse years to come to
dispense with them, that they shall not sell according to the price comprised
in the Statute.

Now if all the defaults and pains which were presented at the last Leet, are
amended or not as they ought, and present them, and of them and of all other
matters and defaults, common annoyance to the Commonwealth, you shall inquire
of and present.

Then after this charge is given, the Steward shall command the Crier to make
Proclamation, and after Proclamation made, three times, then the Steward shall
say.

If any can inform the Steward, or the Jury, of any petty Treason, Felony,
petty Larcinie, Annoiances, or Bloodshed, Pound broken, or of Rescous, or of
any other thing made against the Peace, or of any person of common ill
behavior within the Leet, or any workmen using common deceit, or of any common
Misdemeanour of any Officer, or other person there, or of any Weife, Estrey,
Treasure found, or of any other thing here inquirable, come you in and you
shall be heard.

Then if any come in, let him be sworn to give evidence to the Jury.

And after that, the Steward shall say to the Jury, go together, and inquire ye
of the matter of your Charge, and when you are agreed, I shall be ready to take
your Verdict.

The end of the Charge.
A breviate of the Charge.
HEre follows a breviate of the Charge, which will suffice for the Steward,
which is perfect in the Charge, for his remembrance is sufficient.

And first, what Articles are inquirable by the Statute, 18. Ed. 2. fol. 82.
Which follow.

Fairfax, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 82. Which follow, says, There is no Statute, but
rehersall of Laws inquirable in Leet.

Petty Treason, As clipping of Money. And falsifying Money.
Felonies, As common Thieves. Receivers of Felons. Of small Thieves, as of
Sheep, Hens, and Corn stolen.
Escape, Of Thieves, and men imprisoned, and let go without warranty.
Rape, Of ravishing a Woman which is not presented before the Coroner.
Suitors, that is to say, Resiants which owe suit royal. And capital pledges
and Deciner, Of these of twelve years and not sworn.

Customs and Services forborne.

Annoyances made in Lands, Woods, and Waters, of Walls, Houses, Ditches,
Hedges, made or pulled down to the annoyance of the people.

Of Ways and Paths taken away or stopped; of Waters wrong turned, or stopped, or
taken away; of corrupters of Water by Lyme, Flax, etc.

III persons for the Common wealth. Of them that go of errands for Thieves. Of
common breakers of Hedges. Of maintainers and keepers of Bawdry. Of those which
sleep in the day, and walk in the night, and have nothing to live on. Of
those which daily haunt Taverns, and have nothing to live on. Of those which
catch Pigeons in the Winter with Nets or Ingins.
Trespass. Of blood spilt. Of Play made. Of common Barretors and Scolds. Of
breaking the common Pound. Of outcries against Laws.
Misdemeanour of Officers. Of rescuing from the Officer of the King. Of
Constable which keeps not the peace. Bayliffe, Purveyor.
Constable, Apprehend Felons. See the Watch kept. That he arrest men armed.
For good Government, let there be Stocks. Pillory. Cuckingstoole.
Suspect Persons, Vagabonds, and Rogues.
Assise of bread and Beer, Inholders.
Of false measures, Deceit in Artificers.
of Butchers. False Balance and weights, of Victualers. Double measures and
weights, of Millers. Treasure found of Outlawes. Of Hue and Cry raised, and not
pursued. Of flyers to Sanctuaries and Churches. Profits for the King, and some
for the Lord.
Goods of Felons. Estreys and Weifes, Scilicet, If they fly. Exigents upon
Indictments. Felony. Common Fine.
These Articles ensuing, are inquirable by express words of the Statutes here
ensuing; that is to say, Apprentice which has not Land to the value of twenty
Shillings, 7 H. 4. chap. 17.

Apparel, by 24 H. 8. chap. 13. and by 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, chap. 2.

Artificers, by 2 Edw. 6. chap. 15. and by 24 H. 8. c. 12.

Archers, by 33 H. 8. chap. 9.

Butts, by 33 H. 8. chap. 9.

Crosse-bowes and Hand-guns, by 33 H. 8. chap. 6.

Shoomakers and Tanners, by 5 Eliz. chap. 8.

Crow-Nets, by 24 H. 8. chap. 9.

Fry of Fish, by 1. Eliz. chap. 17. and by 5. Eliz. chap. 21.

Games unlawful, by 33 H. 8. chap. 10.

Horses, by 32 H. 8. chap. 13.

Hue and Cry, by 18 Edw. 2.

High ways, by 2. and 3. Phil. and Mary, and by 5. and 18 Eliz.

Hats and Caps, by the 13 Eliz. chap. 19.

Hemp and Flax, by 33 H. 8. chap. 17.

Musters, by 4. and 5. P. and M. chap 3.

Mortmaine, by 7. Ed. 1. Rastal 3.

Riots, by 1. Mary chap. 12.

Takers of the King, by 20. H. 6. chap. 8.

Tracing Hares, by 14. H. 8. chap. 10.

Wines, by 7. Ed. 6. chap. 5.

Waifes and Straies, Goods of Felons.

Decayed House of Husbandry, for the benefit of the King and Lord of the Manor
4. H. 7. chap. 19.50. Eliz. c. 2.

Then let us see what things are argued and allowed in our Books to be
inquirable in Leet, and what not.
FIrst, Things at the common Law are inquirable, and not defended by Statute,
unless that the Statute makes mention by express words, what are inquirable,
1. R. 3. fol. 1.3. H. 7. fol. 1.6. H. 7. fol. 4. and 11. H. 7. fol. 22. the
same.

Petty Treason is inquirable, but as Felony at the common Law, 6. H. 7. fol. 4.
It is said, that Treason, Petty Treason.
as forging of Money is inquirable, 9. H. 6. fol. 44. Clipping of Gold and
Silver are inquirable, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 22.

Petty Treason and ancient Felonies, that is to say, Felonies, at the Common
Law but not the death of a man. Fellonies.


And Rape as Felony, is not inquirable but as Trespass, 7. H. 6. fol. 13.6. H.
7. fol. 4.

Presentment in Leet of Felonies, Rape.
at the common Law is good, but presentment there of Felonies by the Statute is
not good, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 22. Felonies.


You cannot inquire there of the Death of a man, 41. book of Assizes 30, and
the Lord which inquires of that shall be fined forty shillings. Death.


You may inquire there of all Felonies at the Common Law, but not of the death
of a man, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 22.

You may inquire there of all Felonies at the Common Law, and not of Felonies
by Statute, unless it be by express words given, 6. H. 7. fol. 4.11. H. 7.
fol. 22.

The Steward may certify presentment of Felony taken in Leet before him, at
the next Sessions, 27. H. 7. fol. 2.8. H. 4. fol. 18.

Of Felonies and Fraies, Trespass.
are inquirable, 10 H. 6. fol. 7.

Adjudge, that assault upon a person only is not inquirable there, but of
Bloodshed it is, 8. Ed. 4. fol. 5. and 4. H. 6. fol. 9. Common Nuisance to a
number of men is inquirable, but not an assault made to one, but Frayes.

If a Stranger make a Fray within the Leet, and be not taken, the Deciners
shall be amerced and it is inquirable there, 50. Ed. 3. fol. 5.

Bloodsheds are inquirable, 1. R. 3. fol. 1.22 Ed. 4. fol. 22. the same.

Presentment that one has received one by the year into his service, Age of
12 years not sworn.
not sworn to the Queen, is good, and he shall be amerced 41 Ed. 3. fol. 26.

Purprestures are inquirable, Purpresture and Nuisance. Laborers.
but the Steward has no power to inquire of Liveries, nor of things defended
by Statutes, 1 R. 3. fol. 1.3 H. 7. fol. 1.

You cannot there inquire of the Statute of Laborers, 6. H. 7. fol. 4.

Stopping the Highway is there inquirable, The way.
27. H. 8. fol. 32. For that it is a common annoyance to all the Subjects of
the Queen.

All common Annoyances and Purprestures made within the Leet are there
inquirable, Nuisance.
8. H. 7. fol. 4.

Purprestures in high ways are inquirable there, The way.
and one was presented and amerced in a Leet for not clensing his ditch
adjoining to the high way, 47. Ed. 3. fol. 12.

Inquiries are there of Bridges and Causies, Bridges, waters.
and of common ways spoiled, of Gorss put into waters, of Commons, of waters
stopped, or forced or turned, of Walls or Ditches made to the hindrance of
Passengers in the common ways, by Britton. fol. 31.

Common nuisance, Nuisance.
as Ditches and Hedges, made to the disturbance of the common People, shall be
there inquired, 9. H. 6. fol. 44.10 H. 6. fol. 7.

Turn and Leet are all as one, Turn of the Sheriff.
and they may inquire of common Annoyances, as of Bloodshed, and of
night-walkers, but not of a Close broken, for that is particular, but they may
inquire of a Ditch not scowred, or of a Bridge broken, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 22.

Presentment in Leet that J.S. has enclosed such Land, Nuisance.
which ought to lie in common for the Inhabitants of the Town, is a void
Presentment, for it is wrong, but no common Annoyance, 27. Assise 9. and 27.
Ed. 3. Fitzh. nuisance 6. Br: 30.

Leet has power to amerce a man for an annoyance, and also to award that the
Offenders shall be destreined to amend that.

Of Bread and Beer shall be there inquirable, Bread and Beer. False measures.
Mortmain
and not in the turn of the Sheriff, but seek, 18 H. 6. fol. 13.

False Weights and Measures are there inquirable by Britton, fol. 32.71.

Of a Tenement aliened in Mortmain, are inquirable there, by Britton, fol. 32.

Presentment in Leet that he is a Tanner, Tanner.
and Shoemaker, is not good, 3. H. 7. f. 1. For it is no offense at the common
Law, but given by a Statute, but see 50 Eliz. chapter 8.

Of forestallers and taking of Victuals to the use of the King more then need
by Britton, fol. 33. are inquirable. Takers of the King. Nightwalkers. Weifes.


It is allowed that night-walkers are there inquirable, 4. H. 7. fol. 1.

Weife cannot be presented in the hundred, but in the Leet, 44. Ed. 3. fol. 19.

It may inquire of corrupt Victual, 27. H. 8. fol. 2. Title Leet, 16.9. H. 6.
fol. 53.

Waters.
DOctor and Student, fol. 177. The King is bound by old custom of the Realm,
as Lord of the narrow Seas, to scowre the Sea from Sea Pirates, Britton 84.

The Sea is common, and also right to fish in the Sea.

8. Ed. 4. fol. 10. It is said there, that every one may fish in the Sea by
common right; and by Choke, if the Water ebb and flow upon my Land, every one
may fish there

Fitzh. 113. a. The King may see that Rivers and Sewers of the Sea be defended,
and for that may award a Commission by common Law, and so may of Bridges and
Ways.

Fitzh. 93. g. Action upon the case lies against a Neighbor, which has Lands
between him and the Sea, which does not make his Banks, or scowre his Ditches,
by which his Land is drowned.

19. Book Assise. It was found by Commission that the River of Lee which
runs from Ware to Waltham and so to London, is the high Stream of the King.
Quere.

22. Ed. 3. fol. 22. If Water run betwixt two, and by little does diminish the
Soil of the one, and does increase the other, if there be not bounds fixed, if
this increasing had been so little that one could not perceive it, but if it be
by hasty increase, there the other by this shall not loose his Soil unless
the River be an arm of the Sea.

And note that every Water which flows and ebbs is an arm of the Sea, so long
as it flows and ebbeth, 22. Ass. 93.

4. Ed. 4. fol. 29. Trespass of fishing in his several fishing, the Defendant
prescribes to have common of fishing there, and may prescribe to have that
appendent to Land as well as common appendent.

4. Ed. 3. Title Trespass, 222. Trespass in his free fishing, this is intended
to be in another Soil.

34. Of the book of Assise 11* Assise of common fishing in Tyse, from such a
place to such a place, and makes Title in his plaint, for that it was profit to
take in another Soil, and shows that one had fishing, belonging appurtenent
to his Manor, and by deed granted that to him.

43. H. 3. title 441. Br. Assise, Assise of freehold and Plaint of a fishing,
and good.

7. H. 7. fol. 13. Trespass in his several fishing, the Defendant prescribes
that the Abbot was seized of a Manor, and prescribes to have free fishing
from such a place, By Wood. A man may have free fishing in another water, but
not several.

17. Ed. 4. fol. 6. Why by force and arms he fished in his several fishing,
the Defendant pleads that the place where, etc. is his Freehold, and by Choke
it is no Plea but an Argument, contrary by Brian, for a several fishing is in
his own Soil by him, and free fishing is in another Soil, which Littleton,
granted 18. Ed. 4. fol. 5. It was adjudged a good Plea by the whole Court, 18.
H. 6.29.

20. H. 6. fol. 4. Trespass for fishing in his several fishing, the Defendant
says that the Soil covered with water is his Freefold, and is held a good
Plea to the Action, 22. Ed. 4. Title 116. Bar, F.

18. Ed. 5. fol. 4. A man shall not have an Assise only of water without Land,
so if he says, that the place is only covered with water which is his
freehold, it is a good Plea in trespass.

7. H. 4. fol. 9. Action upon the case lies, for that the Defendant ought to
repair a wall of the Thames, and does not, by which his Land is drowned, 7. H.
4. fol. 32.

Magna charta, chap. 23. All Kedels shall be put down from henceforth almost
throughout all England, unless upon the Sea Coasts.

There are but two Writs in the Register for fishing, that is to say, In a
several fishing, and in a free fishing, see the Register in, 34.95.103.

Petty Treason is the first branch in the Charge, and for that something is to
be remembered, which I find in our books touching these Treasons.
IF Coiners of the Tower make Money of false Metal, or less in weight by
half, it is Treason, and he which utters it knowing, is a Traitor, 3. H. 7.
fol. 10.

Where a Servant kills his Mistress or traitorously slew her, he shall be
drawn and hanged, and yet the Statute is, where the Servant kills the Master,
for it ought to be as well to one as the other, 19. H. 6.47.

A Woman of the age of thirteen years was burnt, for that that she killed her
Mistress, which proves that this is Treason, for otherwise she should have been
hanged, 12. book of Assizes 30.

A Woman shall be burnt for Treason, as for killing her husband, and hanged for
Felony, Britton, fol. 16. 1. R. 3. fol. 4.

Sorcerers attaint shall be burnt, Britton, fol. 16.

Counterfeiting the Kings Seal, or Money, was petty Treason, and Charter of
pardon in all Felonies would serve in petty Treason, for it is Felony, Stamf.
fol. 2. but now by the Statute of 25. of Ed. 3. chap. 2. of Treasons it is made
high Treason.

The second branch in the Charge is Felony, and for that something is to be
said, what are Felonies by the common Law and what not.
IF one shoot at Butts, and kill a man by swarving of his hand, it is no
Felony for which he shall dye, the same Law of tiling a House and a stone fall
and kills one, but if he hurt one, trespass lies, 22. H. 7.29.

If one shoot at Pricks, and his hand swarve, and he kill one, it is no Felony
for which he shall dye, and for that which is not voluntary he shall have a
pardon of course, but if he hurt one it is a trespass, though it be against his
will, and so it is where one cuts a Tree upon his own Land, and that falls
upon another Land against his will, it is a Trespass, 6. Ed. 4. fol. 7.

One cuts a Purse with three shillings in the same, and loses his right
Thombe, and so it is inquirable in Leet as Trespass, and not as Felony now by
the Statute, 10. H. 3. tit. 434.

If one feloniously in the night burn a Barn adjoining to a House, it is
Felony, 11. H. 7. fol. 1.

To play at Sword and Buckler together, and one kills the other, it is
Felony, otherwise it is if they play together by the Commandment of the King,
and one kill the other, 11. H. 7. fol. 23.

If one resist a Felon which would rob him, and kill the Felon in resisting
him, it is no Felony, and he need no Charter of pardon, 22. Assise 55.

If a Theife kill a Merchant, and his Servant in pursuing hastily the Theife
kill him, it is no Felony in the Servant, 21. H. 7. fol. 26. Assise. 33.

If one be present when one is murdered, if he do not strike nor aid him, nor
consent, nor cause him to do it, he shall not be indicted, contrary if he be
any of those, 14. H. 7. fol. 3.

If diverse are present when a man is killed, and one of them killed him, the
others are principalls, if they come for the same cause, 21. Ed. 4. fol. 84. In
the time of H. 8. tit. 351. A man bound to keep the Peace, procures another to
break it, this is the forfeiture of his recognifance.

If one be present and move one to kill another, which is done, it is Felony in
him though he strike not, 13 H. 7. fol. 10. the same, 4 H. 7. fol. 18.

An Infant within the age of ten and twelve years kills one and was hanged,
3. H. 7. fol. 13.

Felony is not but where a thing is taken with a Felonious intent, that is,
That is so privily, that he intends that he from whom it is taken, shall not
know, 21 H 7. fol. 15.

If one take his own goods from him that has the keeping of them privily, and
charge his Bailiff, that is Felony in taking his own goods, 5 H. 7. fol. 17.

Taking of Treasure trove or wreck with a Felonious intent is no Felony, 2^
book of Assizes 99.

Taking of Charters feloniously in a box concerning Land is no Felony, 10 Ed.
4. fol. 16.

If my Butler steal my plate in my House, it is in my possession and it seems
is Felony, 3 H. 7. fol. 12. The same Law where my Shepherd steals my Sheep,
22 H. 7. fol. 15. 12 H. 8. fol 3. If I deliver my Butler my Plate, it is said
it is no Felony, and taking of that is no Felony, this is where they are not
delivered.

It was held by all besides Nedham, that if a Carrier has a Bail, etc. or a
Pack to carry and breaks that and takes the Goods out, it is Felony, Tavern.
for the Goods were not delivered but the Pack. The same Law if a Tavern Cup
be delivered to drink and be taken away, is Felony, for it is in the possession
of the master, and so it is of a Horse in the stable of his Master, and a
Horse-keeper takes him, but otherwise it is where he delivers him to ride, or
Plate delivered to your Butler, for this taking is not by force and arms, 13
Ed. 4. fol. 9.

A Woman shall not be arraigned for stealing her husbands Goods, abridged book
of Assizes fol. 71.

Taking of Pigeons, or Fish in their savings is no Felony, otherwise it is out
of a House or a Trunck, for there it is Felony, 22. book of Assizes 98.

Taking of Pigeons or other Beasts wild in their wildness is no Felony, 12 H.
8. fol. 4. by Br. 22. Book of Assizes 95.

Taking of young Doves in their nests in a House is Felony, and so it is of
Pikes out of a Trunck, contrary out of a River, taking young Goshaukes in a
Park is Felony, otherwise it is where they are old Goshaukes, 18 Ed, 4. fol. 8.

Cutting of Trees is no Felony, otherwise it is if they were falled, and after
are carried away with felonious intent, 22 book of Assizes 22. and 12 Ed. 3.
Coron. 119.

Taking of Apples out of an Orchard growing upon the Tree, or cutting Trees, or
Corn growing, though they be taken with a Felonious intent, is not Felony, for
that they are parcel of the Freehold, but common breakers of Orchards, and
common Trespassours are inquirable in Leet as I intend, 18 H. 8. fol. 2.

Robbery is but from the person of one, 31 H. 6. fol. 16.

Robbery if it do not amount to two pence is Felony, for which he shall be
hanged, 22. book of Assizes 55.

Burglary of a House is, though he carry away nothing, the same Law of Robbery
which is of his person though it be to the value of a penny, but it is no Felony
that one shall be hanged, unless to the value of twelve pence, 22. book of
Assizes 39.

It is Burglary, that he broke his House to kill him though he did not kill
him, 13 H. 4. fol 20.

One intended to commit Burglary and was hindered yet hanged, 27 Assise 38.

It is no Felony if one intend to rob one, and does not but is hindered, but it
is Treason if he intend that to the King and do not the act; 13 H. 8. fol. 13.

A Boy would have carried out the Goods of his Master, and coming to the bed
of his Master sleeping and cut his throat, and he cried out and his Neighbors
came in and took the Boy and he was hanged, 15 Ed. 2. Coroner 383.

Burglers are those which break Houses or Churches, and though that they carry
out nothing they shall be hanged, Abridgment of the book of Assizes 75.

Note that presentiments of Felonies at the Common Law, are presentable before
the Steward in Leet, as appears by, 22. Ed. 4. fol. 19. and petty Treason is
Felony as it appears by Stam. fol 2.

Appeal of Robbery, the Defendant tenders to wage battle, and was afterward
outed of that, for that, that he was indicted before John Verney Steward in
Leet; and for that he did not show to whom he was Steward, and in what place,
it was naught, otherwife it had been good. By this it appears that presentment
of that may be before the Steward, Stamford fol. 2. Charter of pardon of all
Felonies serves in petty Treason, for it is Felony, and for that also
inquirable in Leet as Felony 22 Ed, 4. fol. 19.

1 H. 7. fol. 23. Sir Humfery Stafford showed that he had matter in Law, to
plead to an indictment, as sanctuary and prayed Council, and had Council upon
that showed in Felony or Treason.

3 H. 7. fol. 1. Infant of tender age, or one out of his wits kills one he
shall not be hanged, 21 H. 7. fol. 31.

3 H. 7. fol. 1. If the principal take Clergy, being arraigned or indicted, it
seems that the accessory shall go quit and clear if he have pardon, contrary
13 Ed. 4. fol. 3. upon acknowledging of Felony.

3 H. 7. fol. 1. One of the age of nine years which had discretion, to excuse
himself, was hanged for murdering of an other Infant.

3 H. 7. fol. 2. It seems where one challenges above the number of thirty
six upon one Indictment, he shall be put to Penance, and where it is in
Appeal hanged.

22 H. 8. chap. 14. No person arraigned for petty Treason, Murder, or Felony,
shall not be admitted to any peremptory challenge above the number of twenty.

4 H. 7. fol. 2. One arraigned and found it was in defending himself, and had
a pardon of grace.

14 H. 7. fol. 2. Where one indicted before a Coroner is afterward acquit, it
shall be inquired who killed him, 11 H. 4. fol. 91. the same:

11 H. 7. fol. 19. If a married woman make Felony, her Land is forfeited
forthwith, unless that her Husband be entitled to be Tenant by the courtesy.

21 H. 7. fol. 30. Clerks convict or attaint are not out of the same Law as
Aliens are.

1 H. 7. fol. 6. Rescuing a Felon is Felony, by the Common Law, of Breakers of
Prison by the Statute.

4 Ed. 4. fol. 10. One indicted of Murder such a day, and an Appeal sued
supposing the Murder another day, yet good, and shall be all one, for the day
is not matteriall and after the parties in the Appeal agreed, and the
Playntiff is nonsuted, he shall be arraigned at the Kings Suit.

21 H. 7. fol. 29. Where one shootes at Pricks and kills a man by the
swarving of his hand, it is no Felony that he ought to dye.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 2. Defendant in Appeal of Felony shall have Council but not in
an Indictment, unless he have matter in Law to plead.

6. Ed. 4. fol. 27. Indictment, That Alice S. he took feloniously, and knew
her carnally against her will, but feloniously ravished her and Indictment of
Murder, that of malice pretended he killed him is not good, but Murdravit, vid.
1. H. 4.1.

Bracton says, If there be any that strikes a Woman being with child, or
gives her poison by which he makes an abortive or a child now formed or having
life he commits manslaughter, 3. book of As. 4. or where one beats a
Woman with child which indeed was borne dead it is no Felony 22. book of
Assizes 94.

Stamford 22. It is requisite that the thing slain be in Rerum natura, and for
that to kill an Infant in his mothers belly is no Felony, Stamford 16.

22. book of Assizes 71. Two fight together and one comes to part them and
is slain, is Felony.

26. book of Assizes 22. A Felon in robbing of a House is slain, it is no
Felony in killing.

Stam: fol. 25. That cannot be Felony to steal wild beasts found in their
wilderness, nor for Doves being out of their Dove-coat, nor Fishes taken in
the River, for such stealing is not the taking of another Goods, but of a
thing, which none has property in.

But otherwise it is if he break the Pigeon-House and steal the young Pigeons
which cannot go nor fly for that is Felony. The same Law of taking of young
Goshaukes bred in my Park

18. H. 8. fol. 2. By Fitzh. and Englefeild, taking of young Pigeons in a
Dovehouse is not Felony. Quere for they are of a wild nature.

22. book of Assizes 3. One kills one outlawed of Felony, by Scroope it is
no Felony, but by Stamf. Otherwise it is where he is attaint by verdict.

35. H. 6. fol. 68. A husband attaint of Felony is slain, his Wife shall have
an appeal, but not his Heir, for there is no corruption of blood between the
Husband and his Wife.

34. H. 6. fol. 53. If a Felon read, and the Ordinary refuse him, the Prisoner
shall be spared and the Ordinary shall be fined, and if a Felon once fail to
read, yet the Justices may spare him and make him try to read again, and said
there that he shall have his Clergy under the Gallows, but inquire that:
Stamford says, Burglary may be in the day as well as the night, but all
Indictments are (by night) and for that quere, Title Clergy plac. 12. He which
breaks a House by day or night, any person being in that, and by that put in
fear, or robbed of any thing, he shall not have his Clergy, Stamford 129.

Forfeiture.
And for that, that you ought to inquire, what Lands and Goods those attaint of
Felony have, it is now to see what the King shall have and what the Lord, by
attainder of one in Felony and what not.
WE shall not keep the Lands of those which are convicted of Felony, but for a
year and a day, and then the Lands shall be delivered to the Lord of the Fee,
Magna Charta, chap. 22. see Stamford 190.

If the Lord entet after the year and day, where he ought to have a Writ to
put him in, the King shall reseise, 8. Ed. 2. tit: Trespass 48.

The King shall have all Chartells of Felons condemned and fugitives, and if
they have a freehold, then that forthwith shall be taken into the Kings hands,
and the King shall have all the profits by a year and a day. And that the
Tenement shall be wasted and destroyed, etc. and after the year and day it
shall be given to the chief Lords, Prerogative, chap. 16. Rastall 5.

Note that a man shall not forfeit his Lands in no case but where Judgment is
given, and that is in three manners, that is to say, Where one is Outlawed of
Felony, or abjures, or is hanged, for they make but three manner of Writs of
Escheate, that is, for which he is Outlawed for which abjured, and for which he
is hanged, and for that it is said if one rise against the King and is slain,
that he shall not forfeit his Lands until he be afterward attaint by
Parliament, as in use, 7 H. 4. fol. 33. the same, 7 H. 4. fol. 48.

See Stamford, fol. 49. The King shall have year day and Waste, and Chattells
forfeited.

Fitzh: 144. It seems that the King shall have year day and waste, where one
is convict of Felony, and that is the next years profits, for if one takes
the profits that year and day, the Lord shall have a Writ to the Sheriff to
deliver him possession, and he which has taken the profits shall answer to the
King for that.

Fitzh: 144. N. The King shall have the escheat of Tenements in Cities and
Borroughs, which are held of him in fee farm.

Fitzh. 6. b. The King as it appears by the Register shall have a Writ of
escheate returned into the Kings Bench, for the King may sue in what Court he
will.

31. Ed. 1. tit. descent 17. f. If the Son and Heir of A. be Outlawed in the
time of his Father of Felony, and after he purchase his Charter of pardon in
the life time of his Father, and after the Father dies, he shall not have the
Lands descended from his Father, but the Lord of whom they are held by escheate.

9 H. 5. fol. 9. the same, 1. Ed. 1. tit. descent 15. the blood is corrupt
which cannot take by descent.

26. Of the book of Assizes 2. If the Son be attainted of Felony in the Life
time of his Father and hanged, his Sister shall have the Land by descent from
the Father, and it shall not escheate.

46. Ed. 3. tit. descent 6. If the Father have a Son and a Daughter, and the
Son be attaint of Felony in the life time of his Father and dies, there the
Daughter shall have the Land, and if he survive the father, then the Lord by
escheate, 8 Ed. 1. tit. Assise 421.49. book of Ass. 4.

3. book Assise, Where the Tenant grants a rentcharge out of his Land, and
after that escheates, the Lord shall hold this charged, but otherwise it is
where a Tenant which holds of the King, charge and dies without Heir, 4 Ed.
4. fol. 2. If that be found by Office, yet it cannot be.

Natura brevium, 103. In a Writ of Escheat it is no Plea that he died not
seized, but it is a good Plea that he did not die his Tenant.

Fithz. 144. C, If the Tenant be disseised, and after dies without Heir, it
seems the Lord shall have a Writ of Esch eat, for that, that his Tenant died
in his Homage, 2 H. 4. fol. ninth, the same.

Fitzh. 144. If a man be beheaded for Felony or die after Judgment, before he be
put in execution by the Officer, yet the Writ shall say, for which he was
hanged, Na: Bre: fol. 104. the same.

11 H. 4. fol. 16. One may have escheate and ward before he be seized of the
services, Littleton 106. if a Signiory be granted by fine.

See 2 and 3 Ed. 6. chap. 8. Where one has a Rent, etc. The King is entitled
to the Land by attainder, and that is not found in the Office, yet he himself
shall have his Rent by the Statute.

And it is to see now, where a forfeiture shall be of Goods only and not of
Lands, and where not.
ONe indicted that he kills one (in defending himself) by Fairefax he shall
be arraigned and shall loose his Goods, 21 Ed. 3. fol. 18. and shall not
forfeit his Lands, 4. H. 7. fol. 2. fol. 18.

Where one kills one (in defending himself) or by mischance, he shall
forfeit his Goods and not his Lands, Stamford fol. 45.

If one kill another by misfortune he shall forfeit his Coods, and it behooves
that he have his pardon of grace, Stamford, fol. 185. the same, 26 H. 6. fol.
6. the same, and he shall not forfeit his Lands, 2. H. 4. fol. 20.

One arraigned pleads not guilty, and it was found that the dead struck the
other to the ground, and for haste fell upon the blade of him that lay upon the
ground, he lying upon the ground shall not forfeit his Goods, but if it were
found that he kills him (in defending himself) it is otherwise, 44 Ed. 3. fol.
44.

49. Ed. 3. fol. 5. Where a man is indebted to a man attainted by specialty,
the King shall have it, contrarily if it be without specialty, for the Debtor
may wage his Law against him which is attainted, contrary against the King, but
in the Exchequer it was held that debt to be forfeit to the King, 16. Ed. 4.
fol. 4.

A man cannot wage his Law against the King, 50. Ed. 3. fol. 1. Stamford 183.
See forfeiture, upon he made his flight, and fol. 184. upon an Exigent awarded,
and fol. 185. upon a Clerk convict, and fol. 187. of Lands and of a thing in
action and so further of Forfeiture.

Clerk convict shall forfeit all his Goods, but not his Lands but the Clerk
attaint shall forfeit his Lands, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 42. Fitzh. fol. 66. year, 20
Ed. 4. fol. 5.

Clerk convict shall forfeit his Goods, notwithstanding that after he makes
his purgation which now is not made by the Statute of 18. Eliz. chap. 7. And
then he shall forfeit the Issues of his Lands till he has made his purgation
8. Ed. 2. Forfeiture 34. and Stamford, fol. 185.

A Clerk convict is not out of the Law as an Alien is, for his Heir shall
inherit his Lands after his death, 3. H. 7. fol. 12 and 21. H. 7. fol. 31.

A Woman out of her wits kills her Husband, she shall forfeit nothing,
Stamford, fol. 45. Where a man distracted kill one he shall forfeit nothing 3.
Ed. 3. forfeiture 25.

Executors Outlawed shall not forfeit the Goods, which they have as Executors,
nor by attainder of Felony, 32: H. 6. fol. 34.

By award of Exigent in Felony, though he be acquitted afterward, his Goods
are forfeited, 44, Ed. 3: fol. 17: and Stamford fol. 184. D: 22 book of
Assizes 81.

By award of Exigent, Goods and Profits of his Lands are forfeited if the
Exigent be not erroniously awarded, Stamford fol. 47.

If one be indicted upon the view of the body, before the Coroner, of death,
all his goods are forfeited, though that he be acquit afterward, Stamford,
fol. 45. See 5. H. 4. 13. H. 4. fol. 15.

If a man be convict of Heresy, and be delivered to the Lay power, his Goods
are forfeited, though that he be not put in execution; but his Lands he shall
not forfeit, unless he be put to death, Doctor and Student, fol. 14.

One kills himself, he shall forfeit his Goods and not his Lands, 3 Ed. 3.
Tit. Coron. 201. 8. Ed. 2. Tit. Corone. 420.

The Goods of them which hang themselves are confiscate, 8. Ed. 4. fol. 4.

One put to his penance shall not forfeit his Lands but Goods, 14. Ed. 4. fol.
7.

For petty The every one shall forfeit his Goods, but not his Lands at this
day, 8. Ed. 2. Coron. 406. 22. Book of Assizes, 41. the same, 27. H. 8. fol. 27.

If Tenant in Tail be attaint of Felony or Treason, he shall forfeit his Goods,
but his Issue shall have his Lands: but by the Statute of 5 and 6. of Ed. 6.
chap. 11. For high Treason Tenant in Tail shall forfeit his Lands, 7. H. 4.
fol. 33.

By Outlary in Debt or Trespass, the outlawed shall forfeit his Goods but not
his Lands but the King shall have only the profit of his Lands, 21. H. 7. fol.
7. Yet the party outlawed may make a Feoffment, and it is good, 9. H. 6. fol.
52. verbatim.

One kills a man and flies, therefore his Goods are presently confiscated;
and see Stamford, fol. 183. Upon a making flight, found, though afterward he
be acquitted, he shall forfeit his Goods, 8. Ed. 2. Coron. 390.

If an accessory before the Felony fly, he shall forfeit his Goods, but
otherwise of him that is accessory after the Felony, Stamford, fol. 47. the
same, 4. H. 7. fol. 19. Where in arrest for Felony, one is slain in flying the
arrest; he which is slain shall forfeit his Goods, and yet he was not attaint,
Stamford, fol. 46.

Lands which a man attaint has at the day of the Felony done are forfeited,
but no Goods, but those which he has at the time of the Judgment.

By an Outlary in Felony he shall forfeit his Chattels; but if one give them
before the exigent they are not forfeited, 47. Ed. 3. fol. 24.

A man attainted for Felony shall forfeit his Lands, which he has at the day
of the Felony done, otherways it is of his Goods; for if he sell them before
the attainder, the sale is good: but note, that they are not given by Covin to
defraud the Queen, for then the Gift is not good, as I intend, 33 Ed. 3. Tit.
30.

To the Goods of one attaint, it shall have relation, but to the Judgment and
Conveyance of them before is good, by Perkins fol. 6.

If one commit Felony, and is attaint, and in the mean time betwixt the Felony
made and the attainder, he departs with his Goods, this Gift is good, Stamford,
fol. 48. the same, Stamford, fol. 192.

The Town where the Goods of Felons and Fugitives are, shall answer for them
always, and the Sheriff may seize the Goods, but not carry them away till he be
attainted, for he shall have them to live upon, Stamford, fol. 47.

And that no Sheriff, Rastal, forfeiture 14.
Bailiff of a Franchise, nor other person, ought to take or seize Goods of any
person arrested, and imprisoned, before the same person be convict or attaint
of Felony, according to the Laws, or that the same Goods be otherways
forfeited, upon pain of double value to the party greived: and note, who is the
party greived, and that is they in Prison, and not out; but he cannot seize his
Land, 1 R. 3. chap. 3.

By Hull, where a man is indicted of Felony, his Goods shall not be removed out
of his house, before he be attainted, for he shall live of his Goods, 7. H. 4.
fol. 48. Officer ought not to seize Chattels of a Felon before attainder, but
to sequester them that they shall not be stolen, and to make the party find
Surety, that they shall not be conveyed away, and if he do not, to put them
into the hands of neighbors to keep, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 24. See Stamford, 192. for
the time of Forfeiture, Relation.

Now for that, that diverse Lords of Leets have diverse Liberties and
Pr^viledges, and some are by the Kings Grant, and some by Prescription; let us
see what Liberties and things the Lord may have by the Kings Grant, and what
not; and what Liberties and things he may have by Prescription only, but not
without showing a Charter, and what he may, and then who shall have without
showing allowance, and who not.

THe Lord cannot have the Goods of Felons but by Charter and Grant of the King,
and not by prescription; but the Lord may have weif and stray by prescription,
21 H. 7. fol. 32.

One cannot prescribe to have the Goods of Felons and Fugitives, and to have
that by prescription, without showing a Charter, but to have weif, and stray,
and wreck of the sea, he may have by prescription only, 9. H. 7. fol. 20.
Abridg. Assizes, fol. 78. 2 Ed. 3. Fitzh. Coron. 241.

One may have (in fangtheef) that is to say, to have Theives taken within his
Lordship, to be adjudged in the Lords Court; and also (out fangtheef) that is
to say, Theives of your own Land, to be adjudged in your Court by prescription,
46. Ed. 3. fol. 16. A man cannot have the Goods of Outlaws, unless it be by
Charter. Abridgement of the Book of Assizes, fol. 78.

Your Lord may prescribe to hold plea, and to have that by prescription only,
but you cannot prescribe to have Conusance of plea by prescription only,
without showing the Charter of the King, 9 H. 7. fol. 10.

One may prescribe to have a Park and a Leet, and that by prescription only,
and may have that without showing allowance in Eire, 1. H. 4. fol. 5.

A man cannot have the Chattels of Fugitives without the Charter of the King,
for it is a thing of the Kings Prerogative, 46. Ed. 3. fol. 16.

The Abbot of Westminster prescribes to have Sanctuary for Felony and Treason,
and to hold pleas, and could not, without showing a Charter dated before
memory, to prove the beginning of that; and for that, that this is against
common right, he ought also to show allowance of that after the time of memory:
but he may have weif and stray, and view of Frank-pledge by prescription only,
and without showing allowance; but otherwise it is to have the Goods of Felons
and Fugitives, 2. Ed. 4. fol. 21, and 22.

Note, that the things that you may have only by prescription of common right,
you shall have without showing allowance, and the other things not without
showing allowance.

The allowance which you ought to show, shall be that which was allowed in the
Kings Bench, or in Eire, and not in the Common Bench.

Ancient grant of the King shall be taken, as it has been allowed, as the King
has granted to one his royal Rights, and the King is concluded by the
allowance in a Quo Warranto, in the Kings Bench, and not in the Common Bench,
10. H. 7. fol. 13, and 14.

Charter of H. 2. dated before memory, and allowance of that showed after
memory in the Common Bench; it is not good at this day, unless it be in Eire,
21. H. 7. fol. 29.

The Kings Bench is Eire, and more then Eire; for if the Kings Bench comes
into the County where the Commission in Eire is, that shall cease, 27. Assise,
1.

Grant of the King.
Where the King has granted to you by his Charter (the Goods of Felons) and
Fugitives, what things pass by this Charter, follows:
ALlowance in the Common Bench is not good, and allowance shall be within
memory, 9. H. 7. fol. 16.1. H. 7. fol. 23.

In the time of H. 8. Tit. Grants, 364. If the King grant Reversion, and
mis-recite the date of the Lease, but recites well the Estate, the thing, and
the name of the Lessee, it is a good Grant.

8. H. 7. fol. 4. Where the King upon information of the party, grants a
Manor, and recites that he had it by Forfeiture, and has it not by
Forfeiture, it is a void Grant, for the King is deceived; so it is said, where
the King grants a Reversion where there is no Reversion, he is deceived and
void.

26. H. 8. fol. 1. The King recites for the good service he has done in the
Wars, he grants, where he was never in the War, it is a good Grant, for the
recital is a matter in deed not material.

9. H. 7. fol. 27. Where the King grants upon a Petition for his service, such
a Manor of such a value, where it is of a greater, he is deceived, and it is
void.

9. H. 7. fol. 2. If the King makes one a Denizon, and recites where he was
born in France, where in truth he was born in Spain, this Grant and making him
Denizon is a good Grant, and the recital is not material.

9. H. 7. fol. 2. Diversity where the King of his mere motion, grants, and
recites, that what he has granted by his Patent, he ratifies, and confirms,
the King is estopped to say the contrary, but that he granted and ratified
that: but if it were (as I am informed) he is not estopped, and the King is
deceived.

37. H. 8. Tit. Patents, 10. It is said for Law, that false consideration in
Letters Patents shall not avoid them; as where the King for ten pounds to him
paid, gives such Land, and the ten pounds consideration is not paid, the
Patent is not void. Contrary of a Patent made upon false surmise, as that the
Land came to the King upon the attainder of J.S. and it is false, the Patent is
void.

6. H. 7. fol. 13. If an Office be granted by the King to one for life, and
after the King grants that to another, and do not recite the first grant, the
King is deceived, and the second Grant is void.

The King grants to you (the Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, for whatsoever
Offenses) you shall not have the Goods of one that stands dumb, for these are
Forfeits for Contempt, and this Grant shall be taken strictly, because it
rusheth upon the Kings Prerogative, 8. H. 4. fol. 2.

The King grants to one the Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, and of whatsoever
Offenders, the Granter shall have the Goods of him attaint for petty Treason,
and not for high Treason by these general words (for what Offenses soever) 22.
Book of Assizes, 40.

If one kill the Kings Ambassador, this is high Treason, and for that he shall
not have his Goods, but Goods of one attaint for petty Treason, by the Grant
(of Goods and Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, and for whatsoever Offenses) he
shall have, for that is Felony, 22. Book of Assise 49.

Where there is a Grant to you by a common person (all his Goods) A Lease for
years, nor a Ward pass not, for (Goods) are Movables, alive and dead, and not
Chattels, 4. Ed. 6. Brook Grants, 51.

And for that the King grants (all the Goods of Felons) you shall not have a
Lease for years of one attaint, for it is a Chattell real, Brook, Done, 438.

Plowden, fol. 424. Where one grants all his Lands and Tenements to one, there
a Lease for years may pass, where the King grants (all the Goods and Chattels
of Felons of his men) that is but his own Tenants, unless it be an ancient
Grant, and the Grant put in use of other Tenants, also 40. Book of Assizes, 41.

If one grant all his Goods, as well living as dead, a Rent charge, which the
Grantor has for years, passes by this Grant, 39. H. 6. fol. 37.

Where Chattels are granted to one, by this he has as well Chattels movables
as not movables, for a Lease for years is within this word Chattels, as it
appears by Bracton, Stamford, fol. 44. Prerogative.

Where Chattels are granted to one, he shall have the Corn of a Felon, growing
upon the Land of a Felon, at the time of the Forfeiture, and right of Actions
to the Goods, as where Goods by wrong are taken from a Felon, and where one is
indebted to a Felon by Obligation, or is accountable to a Felon for any
Receipts, Stamford, 45. Prerogative.

The King may have Debt due by Obligation to a Felon, and not which is due by
Contract, 16. Ed. 4. fol. 4.

Chattels.
IF a Disseisor sow the Land, and sever that before the Disseisee re-enter, the
Disseisee cannot take the Corn, for they are Chattels, and come by his
industry, but otherwise it is of Trees cut by the Disseisor, and made in
Fagots, or Grass made in Hay, which come by the Soil, 5. H. 7. fol. 16. and 2.
H. 7. fol. 2. the same.

39. Ed. 3. Tit. The Writ is of Goods and Chattels, and the Count of Corn, and
ten pounds in money, and for that that money is not Goods and Chattels, he
abridged that.

7. Ed. 6. Tit. Grants, 55. A man grants all his Lands and Tenements in D. a
Lease for years does not pass, that is, where he has Lands in fee in D. and
also a Lease there.

37. H. 8. Done, 41. It is said for Law, that if a man give all his Lands and
Tenements in D. by this a Lease for years does not pass, for (Lands and
Tenements) shall be intended, Freehold at the least.

10. Ed. 4. fol. 1. If an Executor give all his Goods and Chattels, the Goods
of the Teslator do not pass and clear, the Giver shall not forfeit them.

28 H. 8. fol. 4. by Elliot, If a man give all his Goods and Chattels, Hawks
nor Hounds do not pass.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 14. For that they are of a wild Nature.

9 H. 7. Tit. Grants, Brook, 87. If a man has Lands in Lease, and is seized of
other in fee, and make a Feofment of them both, and Livery only in the Land in
fee, the Land for years does not pass.

8 Ed. 4. fol. 4. by Pigot. Where a man gives to me a Deed of Feofment, then I
have not the Land, that is but a Chattell in me.

39 Ed. 3. Tit. Charters, 6. A man grants the next Advouson to J.S. and his
Heirs, it is but a Chattell, for it is but for one turn; the same Law for a
Lease to him, and his Heirs for twenty years, 136. the same, Book of Assizes,
22.

21 H. 7. fol. 26. A man seized in fee makes a Furnace of Lead in the midst
of his House, which was fixed to the Walls, and died, the Heir shall have that,
and not the Executors, for it is fixed to the Freehold, and not a Chattell;
the same Law is of Fats fixed in a Brew House or Dy-house; and at this day is
the like of Glass, though there it was held the contrary; but it seems where
the Termor fixes such things, he may take it within the Term, but after the
Term not; and the Heir shall have Table-dormants, and those things which
cannot be attached in Assise.

Stamford, 45. Chattels are as well Chattels movables as not movables, and
Leases and Chattels are the Corn growing, and right of Action, and an
Obligation made to a Felon, and Money out of a Bag, and Corn out of a Sack, are
Chattels.

10 Ed. 4. fol. 1. It seems where one gives all his Goods and Chattels, the
Charters of the Giver does not pass: See 4 H. 7. fol. 10.

38 Ed. 3. Tit. Charters, 24. It seems that Charters are but Chattels.

8 Ed. 4. fol. 4. If one give to me a Deed of Feofment, whereof I have not the
Land, this is but a Chattell in me.

21. Ed. 4. fol. 80. Writings may be laid to pawn for Money borrowed, by which
it seems that Writings are Chattels in diverse Cases.

37. Assise, 11. A Woman has Execution by Statute-Marchant of Land, and takes
a Husband, this is a Chattell, and for that the Husband may give it.

24. Fd. 3. Tit. Charters 5. by Thorp, The Escheator may seize the Ward, though
there be no Office found, for it is a Chattell, and vested in the King without
an Office.

4. H. 7. fol. 10. Where Tenant in Tail discontinues and dies, the Deed in Tail
belongs to the Heir, before he has re-continued his Estate in the Land, and it
is no Chattell, but an Inheritance; for if one give all his Goods and Chattels
he shall not have such Deeds.

Now let us see that the not using of Privilege and Liberty is the cause of
ceasing of that, and where not: I intend not using of Liberty, which is for the
benefit of the party, this is no cause of ceasing, but where it is for the
Commonwealth; not using is a cause of ceasing, and mis-using is a cause of
ceasing for ever.

IF one have Liberties and do not use them within memory, all is gone, 14. H.
7. fol. 1.

Not using of the Office of Clerk of the Market, is cause of ceasing, for that
is for the Commonwealth, 2. H. 7. fol. 11.

By Billing, by mis-using, and not using also of Market shall cease, 2. H. 7.
fol. 11. and 15. Ed. 4. fol. 7.

Where the Abbot of S. Albans had a Gaol by Franchise, and would not be at
costs with the Justices of the Gaoldelivery, to make Delivery of Prisoners, and
kept them long in Prison, for that it was seized into the Kings hands, 8. H. 4.
fol. 17.

If the Lord of the Franchise refuse to do a thing commanded by the Court, as
to bring in his Prisoners, it is a forfeiture of his Liberty, contrary where it
is commanded by proceffe, by Hussy.

If a Lord refuse to do right, or misuse his Franchise by himself or by his
Bailiff, or Deputy or do not use his Franchise, that shall be reseised, and all
Lords which have franchises shall attend upon the Justices of Assise in person,
or by their Bailiffs or otherwise they shall forfeit their Franchises 20. Ed.
4. fol. 5.

Confirmation.
NOte that there need be no Confirmation of a Charter of grant of Liberties,
after the death of every King as it is used, 1. R. 3: fol. 4. But otherwise it
is of Officers judicial, 33. H. 8. tit 203. If the King grant the Chattells of
Felons to one and dies, there need no confirmation of that, otherwise if there
were a Fair or a Market granted, or a judicial thing or a ministerial Office
granted.

Suit.
Then the next branch of Charge is Suitors and for that let us see, who are
resident which ought to make Suit at the Leet and who not.
SUite real is at a Leet, Residents.
and this is by reason of their residence, 12. H. 7. fol. 17.

Eitzh, 160. B. A man which is not resident but has Lands within the Leet,
shall not be destreined, (but where he is dwelling) to make suit to the Leet,
Marlebridge chap. 10, Who have Tenements in diverse Hundreds, have no necessity
to come to these Turns, unless in the Bailywicks where they are dwelling
where the Master is resident, and also his Servant in some Leet as well the
Master as the Servant, 2 H. 4. fol. 17.

Men of Religion, Clerks, Knights, nor Women shall not be Deciners, Fitzh,
fol. 160. C. Register, fol. 181. Britton fol. 19.

It is provided, that they have no need to come, Rast. County 2.
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, nor any religious Men,
or Women, Marlebridg chap. 10.

A man shall not make Suite twice to two Leets of several men for his
residency, but one time to one and another day to another he may, but one may
come twice to the Leet of one person, and yet may be charged to come to the
Turn of the Sheriff, 18 H. 6. fol. 13.

Every man ought to be attendant to a view of frankpledge, 21 Ed. 3. fol. 12.

For that the not scowring of Ditches adjoining to High ways and Bridges, and
also other annoyances in ways are presentable in Leets, and is another branch
of the Charge, let us see how they shall be done and what by the Common Law and
what now by the Statutes.
Ways.
IF a man have Land adjoining to the Kings High way he is charged of common
right to cleanse the Ditches without any prescription, 8 H. 7: fol. 6.
but if he be not next adjoining, it is otherwise, for there he is not
chargable without prescription, but it is said, that he whose land is next
adjoining to a Bridge, Purprestures.
is not held of common right to repair the Bridge, though the Bridge have been
there time out of mind, unless he have that made by prescription.

Magna Charta, Rastall. Banks 2. Bridges. Rastall. Bridges 1.
chap. 15. No Town nor Freeman shall be distreined to make Bridges unless
that of old they use to make them in the time of King H. our Grandfather, the
Statute of 22 H. 8. chap. 5. Gives power to the Justices of Assise to determine
the making of Bridges, where it cannot be held and proved what person certain
ought of right to make such decayed Bridges, and what shall be made by the
Inhabitants, or riding where such decayed Bridges are, by which it appears,
that he which has Land adjoining to a Bridge, is not chargeable to make the
Bridge unless it be by prescription. 2 Ed. 4. fol. 9.


By Moyle if any incroachings be made over the Kings Way as by a Ditch, House,
or Wall, it shall be punished by presentment in the Leet, and I collect upon
the opinion of this book, and upon 8. Ed. 4. fol. 9. And upon 27. H. 6. fol. 9.
and upon 6. Ed. 3. way 2. Where a Lord of a Manor has Land upon both parts of
a High way, that he shall have the Trees growing in the High way, and also
where a way is over a waste of the Lords, Way.
but where a Freeholder has Land of each part of the High way, he shall have
no Trees growing in the Highway, and where he has Land joining but upon one
part of the way he shall have no Trees growing upon that half of the way, 2.
Ed. 4. fol. 9. But Britton fol. 111. Says, that a Frec-holder shall have Trees
if it be not in the common High way.

He which does not scowre his Ditches adjoining to a Highway, Ras. High ways 6.
ought to forfeit for every rod not made 12 pence every time 18. Eliz. chap 10.
and before that by the common Law he which had Land adjoining to the High way,
ought to scowre his Ditches adjoining to the High way.

It is provided that the Hedges, Fences and Ditches next to either part of the
High ways or common traveling Ways, shall be from time to time scowred and
repaired, Ways.
and that all Bushes and Trees in them growing shall be cut by the owners, and
by, 8 Eliz. chap 10. for not doing of that, forfeit ten shillings, and these
points of the said two Statutes are inquirable in a Leet, 5 Eliz. c. 13.
Commission may be awarded for not repairing Bridges, Fitzh 113. a. and 127. d.

By Shelley, If one do not cleanse his Ditch but suffer that to drowned the high
way he shall be amerced, 12. H. 8. fol. 19.

And note that injuries made in the High way are presentable in Leet, as it
follows, but not injuries in private ways, but the party greived shall have an
Assise of Nuisance or an action upon the case, if he have no freehold, and yet
it is used to inquire if one stop private way, but it is to no purpose, if it
be not for evidence in an Assise of Nuisance as an inquest of Office, but it
seems to be good between Copyholders, which cannot have an Assise of Nuisance;
nor an action upon the case for stopping a way and the pain upon that is good
to be assessed.

By Fairefax, A Leet has power to inquire of common annoyances, but not of
particular, as if one stop my private way, or break my Close, that is not
inquirable, A. 3. fol. 1.

If a High way be not repaired, so that I be damnified by miring my Horse, I
shall not have an Action for that, but a presentment shall be of that in a
Leet, see 27. H. 8. fol. 27. and 5. Ed. 4. fol. 3.

If one sow my private Way to my Meadow, I shall have an Assise of Nuisance; and
it is not presentable in Leet, and where he streigrens it, action upon the case
lies, 33. H. 9. fol. 29. The same Law of my way stopped to the Church, 6 Ed. 4.
fol. 37. If one stop the water running to my Mill, I shall have an Assise of
Nuisance and it is not presentable in Leet, 2. H. 4. fol. 12.

The Freehold of a High way is to the Lord, and passage for the People is to
the King, and punishment for annoying of that may be to the Leet, 6 Ed. 3. way
2. and 2. Ed. 4. fol. 9.

In a High way, the King has but passage for him and his People, but the
Freehold and all the profits are to the Lord of the Soil, as Trees, etc. the
King shall punish annoyance made there, and the Lord shall have an action for
digging the Land there, 27. H. 6. fol. 9. and 8. Ed. 4. fol. 9.

He which has Lands adjoining to the way has the half of the way, unless it
be a common High way, for there it is otherwise, for there it is to the Lord,
Britton fol. 111.

Kings High way is that which leads from Town to Town, and common way is that
which leads from a Town to the Field to their Lands, 3. Ed. 3 Statham. Tit.
Ways.

It seems there are royal VVayes, or High ways, common ways, and private
ways, and to stop private ways an action lies.

Fitzh 124. If one be disturbed from his way he shall have a Quod permittat, B.
to have a certain way over the Land of the said A. in D. as he ought and was
wont.

33. H. 6. fol. 29. It seems where my way is straightened or impaired I shall
have an action upon the case, but if it be all stopped I shall have an Assise of
Nuisance, but by Prisot, if the stopping of the way be by the Land Tenant,
Assise of Nuisance lies, But if it be by a stranger an action upon the case
lies, but of a common annoyance that is made in the Royal way, none shall
have an action but present that in a Leet, or (...) and set a Fine upon him for
the King, and by Prisot I shall have an Assise of Nuisance or a Quod permittat,
against all the Tenants, though but one of them stop the way.

5. Ed. 4. fol. 3. If a common way be, and is not repaired by him which ought
to do it, so that I be in loss by that, I shall not have an action; but by way
of presentment in Leet, etc. 27 H. 8. fol. 32. see there.

Fitzh 184. Assise of Nuisance, he stopped the way or straightened the way in D. to
the hurt, etc. it lies, 48. Ed. 3. fol. 27. Arctavit viam a good form.

11. H. 4. fol. 81. etc. Where one has a way over a Bridge to his Manor,
which another ought to repair, and he suffers a decay, so that he cannot
pass, action upon the case lies.

Fitzh 183. Assise of Nuisance lies where a man has made an annoyance to my
Freehold which I have for my life in Tail, or in Fee, and so it follows
that a Termer for years shall not have an Assise but an action upon the case,
see, 27. H. 3. tit. Assise 437. If one let Lands for years, and after an
annoyance is made, the lessor shall have an Assise and not the Lessee.

11. H. 4. by Hanke and Culpepper if a man has a way, unity extincts it, 3. H.
6. fol. 42.

21. Book of Assizes 1. Where a way is extinct by unity of possession in the
Father yet it may be afterward revived by partition with Composition, for the
Composition makes that, and it is called a new way.

5. H. 7. fol. 7. A Way belonging cannot be made in gross by grant, for none
may have the Commodity of that, but he which has the Land to which the Way is
appendant, the same Law of common appendant, but otherwise it is common
appurtenant.

26 H. 8. fol. 4. Appendant cannot be aliened and severed in Drifts and Ways
to Closures, yet the Freeholder shall have the Trees, but commonly in high way
there is some waste in which the Tenants have common of pasture, and the Trees
growing there are to the Lord of the Manor.

17. Ed. 3. fol. 43. Is, that the Freehold and the Soil of a high street is
in the Lord of the Manor, and the People have nothing there but the passage,
and 8 H. 7. fol. 5. by Keble, the Soil and Freehold in the way is to those
which have Land adjoining.

2. Ed. 4. fol. 9. Where there is a common way throughout a Field, the
Freehold of the Soil is to the Tenant of the Land adjoining and not to the
King, for he has but passage for his People.

Incidents.
A Man cannot dispense with a Suite to a Leet unless by special words, 8. Ed.
2. tit. 28

2. H. 7. fol. 4. Partition is made of four Manors which descend to four
coparceners, that every one shall have a Manor except the Advowson, and by
that the Advowson is ingrosse and severed, and if all die but one, it shall be
appendant again.

8 H. 7. fol. 1. By grant of a hundred, Leet passes as Incident, for a Hundred
cannot be without a Leet, for a Leet is parcel of it, and to a Manor a Court
Baron is Incident and to homage fealty, and to a Fair a Court of Pipouders,
and it seems these cannot be severed.

Perk. fol. 22. Common appendant cannot be severed, nor Estovers to be burned
in a House, but a Villian regardent may be severed, and an Advowson appendant
and made in gross, for an Incident inseparable cannot be severed by grant, as
in the case next before, but Incidents seperable may be.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 22. Beasonable aid, to make his Son Knight or to marry his
Daughter and releife, for soccage after the death of his Tenant cannot be
released by general words, therefore release of all actions and demands
besides fealty and Rent by the Lord to the Tenant, shall not extinct these
Incidents, the contrary is said, if it be by special words.

19. H. 8. tit. Incidents 34. Court Baron is so incident to a Manor and Court
of Pipowders to a Fair, that they cannot be severed by grant, for if they
grant the Manor or Fair they cannot reserve such Courts.

7. Ed. 4. fol. 11. Lord and Tenant, the Lord releaseth to the Tenant the
distress, this is void, for the distress is Incident, the same of release of
Fealty to him which holds by Homage, for Fealty is Incident to Homage and is
inseparable.

26. book of Assizes 66 Lord and Tenant by Fealty, Escuage and Rent, and the
Lord grants the Rent, this is Rent seek and severed, for Fealty remains with
the Homage as Incident to it, the same Law where a Rent is Incident to a
Reversion, and yet these may be severed by special grant, 29. book of Assizes
20. the same, Littl. fol. 40. Where the Tenant holds by Homage Fealty and Rent,
if the Lord grant the Rent, saving to him the Homage, this Rent is Rent Seck
and severed, the same Law if he grant the Homage, saving the Rent, and where he
holds by Rent and Fealty, and grants the Rent saving the Fealty, or left for
life rendering Rent, and grants the Rent saving the Reverson, the Rent is Seck.

Rescous and pound breach is another branch of the Charge.
HE which destraines Beasts may put them in a close House if he will give them
meat, for the putting into the open pound is that the owner may give them
meat, 33. H. 8. tit distress 66.

If a man destraine without cause, the owner may make Rescous, but if he put
them into the pound, he cannot break it, for they are in custody of the Law,
see 40. Ed. 3. fol. 33. and Fitzh fol. 102. E.

It seems if a Lord destrain where Rent is not behind, the Tenant shall not
make Rescous, 4 Ed. 6. tit. distress 74.

If a man destraine wrongfully, the owner may make Rescous, 5. Ed. 4. fol. 7.
by Danby, 39. Ed. 3. tit 20.

If Beasts put into the pound dye, it is at the loss of the owner, though he
have tendered sufficient mends, for he might have a Replevin, Doctor and
Student, fol. 8.113.

I may impound a dead thing where I please, but if that corrupt by my default I
shall answer for it, 9. Ed. 4. fol. 2.

Fitzh 102. L, If the Lord do destraine where is no Rent nor service behind,
the Tenant cannot make Rescous.

9. Ed. 3. fol. 35. If a man destraine wrongfully, the owner of the Beasts may
make Rescous, but by 4. Ed. 6. it was agreed, if he destraine and impound them
the owner cannot take them out, for they are in custody of the Law, 5. Ed. 4.
fol. by Danby the same.

2. H. 4. fol. 18. If a man destraine my Beasts, which escape into his Land out
of the great waste, I may rescue them, but if I keep them, or put them there,
or by Hankford, if I have notice, that they use to go there, this is no escape,
and there I ought not to make Rescous, see, 7. H. 7. tit. 1.

2. H. 4. fol. 24. In Rescous, nothing behind, and also that he was never
seized and are good Pleas, Quere.

5. Ed. 4. fol. 7. Seizing is not Traversable in Rescous by opinion there, 6.
Ed. 4. fol. 12. The same, 8 H. 4. fol. 1.

21. H. 4. fol 40. By the Court where the Lord comes to destraine and sees the
Beasts, and the Tenant perceiving that, chaseth the distress out of his Fee,
the Lord shall not have a Writ of Rescous, for he has no possession of the
Beasts, but he may follow them and destraine them, but if they were chased out
of his Fee before the Lord see them, there he cannot destraine them, 44. Ed. 3.
f. 20. the same, Fitzh N. B. 102. G.

33. H. 6. fol. 58, A man attacheth a Horse in a corporate Town, and there he
is rescued, and chased into another County, upon fresh Suite the Officer may
take him again.

6. Ed. 4. fol. 12. By Yelverton, in Rescous, nothing behind is no Plea, for
if the Lord destraine, where no service is behind, the Tenant is at no
mischeife for the Tenant may have a Replevin, and in this Writ recover his
damages.

Fitzh 101. Rescous lies where a man destraines for Rent or for services or
damage doing, and those would impound, and another Rescues them, and if a
Collector or under Collector distreine for a fifteenth or a Bailiff or a
Sheriff or other Officer distraine for the King, and Rescous is made, they
shall have a Rescous and not the King, but if a Bailiff of a Liberty distraine
for the King and Rescous is made, the Lord of the Liberty shall have Rescous,
and if the Bailiff or Officer of a common person distraine, Rescous is made, he
which causes the distress to be made, shall have Rescous.

39. H. 6. fol. 42. Redisseisin to Coroners, and one alone makes a precept,
Rescous upon that is Justificable.

Assaults and Fraies.
For that, that Assaults and Fraies are inquirable, let us see which are
punishable in a Leet, and what not.
AS Saults are not inquirable and punishable, by presentment in Leet, but
bloodshed is, 8. Ed. 4. fol. 5. By Fairefax, Leet has no power to inquire,
but of those which make common annoyance at the common Law; as of Affraies and
bloodshed, but not if one has broken my Close, or if one has beaten me, but
if any Affray were, so that the Kings People were disturbed, for that is more
then particular, 1 R. 3, fol. 1.

If one come to make a Boothe, and does it not, and yet one makes a Fray upon
him, and upon him draw blood with his Sword or Dagger, it is punishable by
presentment in Leet, 11 H. 6. fol. 29.

If one assault to beat you, and you fly and he enclose you, or if you be at
Hedge or Ditch and then you beat him and wound him, this is not punishable in a
Leet, 34 H. 6. fol. 8. and 33. H. 6. fol. 20.

If J. S. makes an Assault upon a Stranger, and J. D. draws his Sword and beats
and wounds J. S. in defense of the Stranger, this is punishable by a
presentment in a Leet. But if a Servant beat and wound one which makes an
assault upon his Master in defense of his Master, he is not punishable by
presentment in Leet, 12 H. 8. fol. 3. and 9 Ed. 4. fol. 51.

If one lay his hands unlawfully upon any, unless that he arrest him, or part
two that fight, he is a trespassor, but that is not punishable by presentment
in Leet, 9 Ed: 4. fo. 3.

If one beat one in defense of his Goods this is not punishable in a
presentment in Leet, Book of Entries fol. 553. and 19. H. 6. fol 21.

Trespss of Assaults and Fraies.
TRespass by a Chaplain of Grayes Inn, the Defendant pleads of his own
Assault, and it was held, if he upon whom the Assault is made can escape with
his life, it is not lawful for him to beat the other which made the Assault,
but it is held, that I ought not to stay, till the other has given me a blow,
for paradventure he comes too short, 2 H. 4. fol. 9.10. Ed. 4. fol. 7.
Trespass of Grassetrod, and threatening of life and member, a man cannot
justify the menace of death, and for that to that he pleads not guilty, 21 H.
6. tit. 26. the same.

33 H. 6. fol. 20. Trespass of Threatening by Prisot, I cannot threaten one of
Life and Member, but if he upon whom the Assault is made fly, and the other
follows him so near that he cannot escape, or has him under him upon the
Ground, or has chased him to a Wall, Hedge, Water, or Ditch, there it is
lawful for him to say, if you will not depart that he to save his Life will
kill him.

3 H. 4. fol. 8 Trespass of Assault, Imprisonment and Battery, Defendant plead
to the Battery not guilty, and to the Assault, that the Plantiff came to such a
River; where the Defendant had a Mill, and would have stopped the River, and the
Defendant took him by the Arm, without that, that he made other Assault, and
to the Imprisonment, the Defendant pleads that the Plantiff Assaulted him, and
would have beat him, by which he prayed the Constable to arrest him, and he
came in aid of him, judgment if action and good.

22 H. 6. fol. 48. Trespass of a Servant beaten and Entry into his House,
year 7 H. 6. Defendant says that year 8 H. 6. he served a Subpena, upon the
Plaintiff, and that the Plaintiff and the Servant took him, and carried him to
his House and there detained him half a day which is the same Trespass, and to
any Trespass before not guilty, to the Battety of his Servant, which was of
his Assault at another day and to any Assault before not guilty. Bracton says,
he is not worthy of Peace, which will not keep it, Stamford fol. 30 a.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 40. Trespass of Assault and Battery and found the Assault
only, and Plaintiff recover, but shall not have action of Assault only, 42 Ed 3
fol 7 the same, and see 22 Assise 60.

9 Ed 4 fol 30 Trespass of Battery, it was held that if a man will take my
goods, I may lay my hands upon him, and rather beat him then suffer him to
carry them away, 19 H. 6. fol. 33 the same, that he may beat one in defense of
his Goods.

19 Ed 4 fol 189 Trespass of Battery, a man may Justify the beating of
another in his defense but by Catesby a man cannot beat another in defense of
his Son, but a Servant may beat one in defense of his Master or Mistress, 21 H 7
fol 39. the same.

Mortmaine.
Mortmaine is inquirable in a Leet, for that it is for the benefit of the King
and in the Kings Court. What is Mortmaine within the Statute and what not.
WHere one Abbot aliens to another Abbor, or Bishop to another Bishop and his
Successor, it is Mortmaine, Fitzh fol, 222, D. 16, Assise 1.

Where Land is divised to one to pay twelve pound to find two Chaplains for
ever to sing in the Church of Saint Albanes in Wood street for ever, if it be
behind, that the Chaplain may distraine, that is Mortmaine, see 32, Ed, 3,
10, and 40. Assise 29.

J. S. devises certain Land to his Executors, that they should provide a fit
Chaplain in the Church of D. to celebrate for ever, which Chaplain, shall
receive yearly out of the aforesaid Lands six marks, that is no Mortmaine, for
nothing is divised to the Chaplain, 4, Assise 27.43, Assise 27.

Four Acres were devised to one in Fee, so that he and his Heirs should pay
yearly six pound for the maintaining of one Chaplain to celebrate yearly for
ever in the Church of Saint Leonards in Estcheape, and that the Rector for the
time may levy it for ever, that is Mortmaine, 43 Assise 33.

J. S. devises Land and two shillings Rent, for the maintaining of a Chaplain
in the Church of D. yearly to celebrate, and I will that my Executors should
ordain the aforesaid Chaplain, and the Executors do nothing, therefore no
Mortmaine, 43 Assise 34.

If a Villain of a Bishop purchase Lands in Fee, and the Bishop enter without
license it is Mortmaine, 41 of Assizes 4, Fitzh 224, B. 41, Ed. 3. fol 16.

If a Feoffment be made to the use of a Bishop and his Successors, it is within
the Statute, De religiosis, and so it is where he takes profits, 8, Ed: 4. fol.
18.

A Bishop cannot appropriate an Advowson of which he is seized in Fee without
the Kings license, and if he does it is Mortmaine, Fitzh 223 H. see 21 Ed. 3.
fol, 5. seems contrary.

If one let to a religious man for a hundred years, and so from a hundred to a
hundred, during eight hundred years, this is Mortmaine, but it seems that a
lease to a Religious man for eighty years or for a hundred years is no
Mortmaine, but in the first case it is by color of a Term, and Mortmaine 29
H, 8, Mortmaine, 39.

Lease for eighty years to an Abbot by Martin is Mortmain, Quere, 4 H. 6. fol.
9.

The Tenant lets for life to J. S. the Remainder to a Religious and his
Successors, the Lord need not to make claim till the Tenant for Life be dead,
for if he in Remainder will wave, this is no Mortmaine, for if the Tenant will
make a Feoffment in Fee to the use of A. for life, and after to the use of a
Religious man and his Successors, that is not Mortmaine, till the Tenant for
life in use dies, and he in Remainder takes the profits, 29 H. 8. Mortmain 37.
Lord and Tenant.

Where one gives in Mortmaine, he ought to have license of the King to do it,
and of the chief Lord, otherwise they may enter for Mortmain, and before the
license there ought to issue out a Writ of (Ad quod damnum) to the King, but is
used to omit that and to have the license, without any Writ of (Ad quod damnum)
Fitzh 221, K.

Where an Abbot holds of J, S. by five shillings and J. S. releaseth to the
Abbot, this shall go by extinguishment, and for that it is no Mortmain, 22 Ed.
3. fol. 22.

47 Ed. 3. fol. 10. If alienation in Mortmain be, and the Alienee is disseised,
and the Disseisor dies seized his Heir is in by descent, yet the Lord may
enter within the year, for he has but a Title of entry and cannot have an
action, but contrary of him which has a Right of Entry and may have and Action.

39 Ed. 3. fol. 38. Lord and Tenant, the Signiory is granted to A. in Tail,
the Remainder to B. in Tail, the Tenant Alien in Mortmaine, the first Tenant
in Tail cannot enter within the year, and after the second Tenant in Tail
dye without Issue, and B. in Remainder enter within half a year, and held
that he could not, for the Tenant in Tail and he in Remainder have but one
Signiory, and are but one Lord, and both shall have but one year by the
Statute.

Fitzh 223 E. If a man will exchange Land with an Abbot or other body
corporate, that is Mortmaine, and he ought to have a License.

Fitzh 222 If an Abbot give Lands to another Abbot or a Corporation it is
Mortmaine, and ought to have a License and (Ad quod damnum) shall be sued, and
see the (Ad quod damnum) 221. R.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 29. Abbot purchase Lands with warranty by License, and is
impleaded and vouch, etc. and Judgment is given against the Abbot, and he
recovers over in value, it is not Mortmaine for the Lands recovered in value,
and he ought not to have license of the Lands recovered in value, for the first
license serves in that, see, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 18. Where an Abbot recovers in
value.

9 H. 6. fol. 9. If an Abbot have Rent out of my Land, and I grant to him that
he may distraine for the same Rent in other Land, this is no Mortmain, for he
has nothing but ancient Rent, and for that it is no Mortmain.

3 Ed. 4. fol. 14. By Laicon the Statute of Religious, holds place of common
and Rent charge, which is no Land nor Tenement, and yet the words of the
Statute are Lands and Tenements.

25 H. 8. tit 37. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant lets for life to J.S. the
Remainder to an Abbot and his Successors; The Lord need not to make claim till
the Tenant for life be dead; for if he wave the Remainder it is no Mortmain;
and held that the Appropriation of an Advowson without license is Mortmain.

Fitzh: 211. The King may give license to his Tenant to alien in Mortmain; for
he may dispense with the Statute, but a common person cannot, but the King and
the Mesne Lords may give license to a Tenant to alien in Mortmain; for the
Statute was made for the advantage of the Lords, and they may dispense with it.

Treasure Trove.
TReasure hid in the ground, and found, belongs to the King; and if it be
found in the Sea, it is to the finder, Britton, fol. 26.

He to whom the property is shall have Treasure found, because it belongs not
to the King, unless when no man knows who hid the Treasure, Statham, Tit.
Coron. and 22 H. 6. Coron. 446.

Punishment of taking Treasure found, is not of life and member, but shall be
by Imprisonment and Fine, Statham, Tit: Coron. and 22 Ed. 3. Coron. 265.

Treasure found belongs to the Lord the King, and not to the Lord of the
Liberty, unless by special words in the Deed of the Liberty contained, or by
prescription, Statham, Tit: Coron. and 8 Ed. 2. Coron. 436.

Treasure found, is a certain old hiding Money or other Metal, of which there
appears no memory, so that now it has no Owner; therefore all such Treasure
is no man's proper Goods, and by the old Law it was the finders; but now by the
Law of the People, it is made the Kings; Stamford, fol. 39.

Fstrey.
WHere the Lord has by a year and a day a Beast, and it be cried in the
Church, and in the Market, the property is changed, 39 Ed. 3. fol. 3.

A man cannot entitle him to an Estrey, till the year and the day be past, for
he to whom the property is, may take him within the year: but Statham seemed he
could not take it, without agreeing for his meat, 31 Ed. 3. Estrey, 4.

Detinue, Issue if sufficient was tendered for his meat before claim, or not,
44 Ed. 3. fol. 14.

Young Swans may be taken for a Stray, and Proclamation made in Fairs and
Markets, 7 H. 6. fol. 29.

If the Owner do not come within a year and a day, and be proclaimed in Markets
and Parish Churches, then the property remains to the Lord, Britton, fol. 26.

One justifies to have a stray in his Manor, (according to the custom used
in the Kingdom of England) he proclaimed them in two Markets, scil. in D. and
S. on the Market days; Brook, Estrey, 10.

If one have a stray by three quarters of a year, and after that strays, and
another happens it within his Manor, the second shall not have it, for he
has no property until the year and day, and Proclamation, 33 H. 8. Estrey, 11.

If a man have a Weif or a Stray by prescription, and another takes that out
of his Manor, he shall have Trespass, though he did not seize them before.
Fitzh. fol. 91. B.

One cannot take the Kings Beasts for a stray, though they were within the
Manor by two years, 39 Edw. 3. fol. 4.

If one has taken a stray, and does not proclaim it, the Owner may take it
again, though he comes to claim it after a year and a day; Britton, fol. 26.

Book of Entries, One which justifies for a stray shall make prescription, that
is to say, That according to the custom in the Kingdom of England used, he
proclaimed them in two Market Towns, scil. in D. and R. and so it seems, that
an Estrey shall be proclaimed in two the next Market Towns upon Market days;
and yet it seems that Strays shall be proclaimed once in the Church, and
twice in the Markets.

Waife.
Where Goods waived are seized by an Officer, the party shall not have them
again without fresh Suite, and sue an Appeal, and now upon an Indictment give
that in Evidence.
BY fresh Suite the first Owner shall re-have his Goods, which were stolen and
waived, if he make fresh Suit, and bring an Appeal, 21 Ed. 4. Tit. 16.

Trespass, the Lord justifies, for that they were stolen and waived, the
Plaintiff may say, that they were not stolen, or they were not waived, 12 Ed.
3. fol. 5.

Goods waived, the Owner may seize them twenty years after, if the Lord of the
Franchise, nor the King seize before: but if they are seized, yet if he bring
an Appeal, and make a fresh Suite, he shall have them again, 21 Edw. 4. Tit. 16.

Detinue, the Defendant as Lord justifies, that he took those as waife, and
good, 10 H. 6. fol. 22.

If one have a Waife, and it be taken out of his Manor, he shall have
Trespass, without seizing; and though he do not seize them; Fitzh: fol. 91.

Waifes and strays not claimed within the year and day, are the Lords, Britton,
fol. 26.

Where Goods are waived, and the Lord seises them, the property is changed,
that the Owner shall not have them without suing an Appeal, notwithstanding by
the 21 of H. 8. chap. 11. Rastal Restitution 2.

If he give Evidence to the Jury upon the Indictment, he shall have
Restitution, Brook Estray 8

If a man be robbed, and make fresh Suite, he shall be restored,
notwithstanding that he which has waived has seized them before, 7 H. 4.44.

If he make fresh Suite after the Felony, he shall have his Goods again
notwithstanding, that they were waived and seized; and there ought to be an
Appeal sued, and so to have them when they are seized, Stamford, fol. 186. A.

Authority of the Steward.
Then let us see the Authority of the Steward, and also of the Court Leet.
THe Steward may make his Precept by word to the Bailiff to distrain, and it is
good, 16 H. 7 fol. 14.

If a man refuse to be sworn of the Jury, he shall be fined, and the Steward of
the Lord may commit him to Prison, till he has paid his Fine, or amerce, or
distrain him for that, 31 H. 6. Leet 11, Quere of committing a Tenant to
Prison, for in Magna Charta chap. 29, is, no man shall be taken, etc.

The Steward may cause a stranger which comes within the precinct of the Leet,
to be sworn to inquire in the Leet where he has not sufficient residence, and
the Lord may sell the Distress taken in that, for that it is the Kings Court, 3
H. 7. fol. 4. 11 H. 7.14. the same, and 21 H. 7. fol. 40.

The Steward is Judge in the Court Leet, and in Court Baron the Suitors, unless
all the Suitors be Copyholders: and then I intend they are no Judges but the
Steward, for that they have but a base Estate, and the Freehold is in the
Lord, 12 H. 7. fol. 17.6 Ed. 4.3.

Note that where a false Judgment is sued, the Suitors are called Judges to
certify, etc. but yet the Steward ought to be skilled in the Law, and of
matters in Law, it seems he shall give Judgment, and not Suitors, for
Actions and matters in Law, and yet it is (before the Suitors) and though
ignorant persons in Law rule in Court Barons, and Liberties, that ought to be
by them skilled in Law; and when there is a Liberty and Court granted to a
Mayor, that is held by their Recorder or Steward which is intended to be
skilled in the Law, otherwise it seems a cause to re-seise it, so that an
ignorant person cannot meddle in matters touching the Law.

The Steward may send a Prisoner taken for Felony to the Gaol, 13 H. 4. fol. 12.

The St. is Judge of Rec. and may assess a Fine for contempt made in a Leet, and
the Lord shall have Debt for that, 7 H. 6. fol. 13. 10 H. 6. fol. 7.

Leets are appointed for the Commonwealth, Leet.
as for preservation of the Peace, and for that they are Courts of Record,
Fitzh: fol. 82. in the beginning.

It is said, that a Leet is a Court of Record, 21 H. 7. fol. 33.

Tenants in a Leet may make bylaws, 11 H. 7. fol. 14. and 21 H. 7. fol. 40.

The Seneschall of the Leet may compel the Suitors to swear, but otherwise it
is in a Hundred, 39 Ed. 3. and 44 Ed. 3.15. Leet 6.

Where one has a Leet, he has but the Amercements, and the day is to the
King, and for that the Steward represent the person of the King, 41 Ed. 3. fol.
27.

Suite at the Leet is called Suite real, for that, that that is the Kings
Court, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 23.

If the Steward of the Leet command the Bailiff to impannell a Jury to inquire
for the King, upon pain of forty pounds, and he refuse to do it, he may put
upon him the pain of forty pounds, and at the second time fifty pounds, or
more: and note, that upon all pains the Lord may have an Action of Debt, 7 H.
6. fol. 13.

23 H. 8. Tit. 34. Debt lies for pain, for not amending an Annoyance, and for
Usage: Distress.

If the Jury will not present the Defaults in a Leet, of which they are
informed, the Steward may assesse a Fine upon them, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 4.

If any Suitor, present in Court, refuse to be of the Jury, or if any make
another such Contempt, or any Contempt or disobedience in Court Leet, the
Steward may set a Fine upon him without affirming by Affirors: but when one is
amerced that shall be affirmed by Affirors, 10 H. 6. fol. 7.

When the Steward sets a Fine upon a Suitor in Court Leet, or other person, for
his mis-demeanour, this is called a Fine, and not an Amercement, and is not
traversable, 7 H. 6. fol. 13.

Judge of Record.
For that the Steward is a Judge of Record in Leet, it is expedient to see,
what a Judge of Record, and one by him may do, and what not.
IT seeemth that a Justice of Peace ought not to make a Precept to arrest one
for Felony, but if he do (for that he is a Judge of record) the Bailiff that
serves that is excused, for he cannot argue his authority, no more may the
Sheriff argue the authority of the Justices, 14 H. 8. fol. 18.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 3. A Justice of Peace may arrest a man for suerty of the Peace
by his discretion, and though he suffer him without a suerty, the party shall
not punish him for that he is a Judge of Record.

9 H. 6. fol. 60. Action of the case does not lie against a Justice of Record
supposing he has made a fall Record, or that he has caused false Entry to be
made; contrary against an Office, as against an Escheator for returning a false
Office, or against a Sheriff, for they are Officers of Record and not Judges.

12 H. 4. fol. 3. If a Judge of Record award one to Prison without cause, he
shall have no action against him, yet a Judge of Record; as a Justice of Peace
has been punished in the Star- Chamber, for misdemeanour, and so may the
Steward of a Leet, and so such a Judge of Record, for not regarding his Oath,
as Majors, Bailiffs, etc.

21 H. 7. fol. 22. If a Capias issue our of a Court of Record to the Sheriff
where is no Original, yet this excuses the Sheriff, but if the Servant of the
Sheriff arrest one by process made out of a Capias, and return his process,
and the Sheriff do not return his Capias, false Imprisonment lies against the
Servant, Fitzh. 21. B. one cannot assign Error, that the Jurors gave verdict
for the Defendant, and Judges enter that for the Plantiff.

Presentment in Leet.
Now let us (...) what presentment in Leet is traversable and what not, and it
seems where that touches a Freehold is traversable, and otherwise not.
PResentment in Leet by 4: and not by 12. That one has dwelt within the Leet
not sworn, etc. it was Traversed, but it seems if it were by 12. it shall not
be traversed, but shall have recovery by Writ of false presentment, 5 Ed. 3.26.

A thing presented in Leet is as Evangelist, if it pass the day in which it is
presented, but the same day you may have an action of false presentment against
the Jurors, and after without recovery, 21 Ed. 3. Tit. Bar. 271.

Presentment in Leet which touches Freehold is traversable, and other
presentiments not, 19 H. 8: fol. 11. and 41 Ed. 3 fol. 27. the same.

Presentment in Leet which touches a Freehold may be removed and traversed,
and every Presentment before Justices of Peace is traversable, 5 H. 7. fol. 3.
and 6 H: 7: fol. 2. the same.

Presentment of blood spilt is not traversable, for that does not touch
freehold, 2 R. 3.12.

If the presentment be not in a Leet, of things there presentable, afterward
they shall be presented, as it follows.
IF Presentment be not in Leet of things presentable there, then they shall be
inquired and presented in Turn, and if not there, then in the Kings Bench, 41
Ed. 3. fol. 27.

If things Presentable are not presented in Leet, they shall be presented in
Turn, and if not there, before the Justices in Air, and if not there, in the
Kings Bench, 10 H. 4. fol. 4.

Then let us see, what remedy the Lord shall have for Amerciaments in Leet, and
what recovery for a Fine, and what upon pain or by-Law, and it seems that for
Amerciaments he may distraine and for Fine Assesse, and by-Law broken shall
have a Debt or Distress.

Amerciaments.
FOR a Fine real he cannot distraine, but Amerce, and by prescription
distraine, and this is now in use in every Manor, and for Suite-Service
distraine without doubt, 12 H. 7.15.

One may prescribe to distraine for Amerciament in Law-day for it is incident,
9 H. 7.22.

He may in Leet Amerce and distraine for that, 8 H. 4. Tit. 15.

A man may in Leet Amerce for annoyance, and distrain for it, 19 Ed. 3. fol. 36.

One was Amerced in Leet for stopping in the High way, and his Horse in
another keeping was destrained for it, 47. Ed. 3.12.

The Lord may sell the Distress taken for an Amerciament in Leet, as the King
may sell the Distress, for that it is the Kings Court, 3 H. 7. fol. 4.

If Amerciament in Leet be agreed, the Lord may distraine without notice by
Finch, and by Which it is good Plea, that the Tenant would have paid if he had
had notice, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 9.

The Lord cannot distraine for Amerciament in Leet, in a place seized into the
Kings hands, for debt to the King, for this is privileged during the time, 47
Ed. 3. fol. 12.

Of common right the Lord may distraine for Amerciament in Leet, and for that
need not to prescribe, 10 H. 7. fol. 15.

The Lord may distraine for Amerciament for annoyance in the high way, or for
making Hedges cross the street, and avow for that, 4 Ed. 3.10. Avowrie 161.

The Lord may not distraine the Horse of another in the Inn of him Amerced,
nor the garment of another in a Tailors shop, where the Tailor is Amerced, 10
H. 7. fol. 21.

If one refuse to be sworn, or make any other contempt in Court, the Steward
may assess a Fine upon him, and the Lord may distraine for that, 13 H. 6. Leet
11.

For a Fine assessed by the Steward for a contempt in the Court, the Lord may
have debt, 10 H. 6. fol. 7. and 7. H. 6. fol. 13.

If a pain of ten pound presented in the Leet to be broken, the pain shall
not be otherwise acertained, and the Lord for that shall have an action of
Debt, but he cannot distraine and make avowrie but by prescription; but it is
now used in every Manor to distraine, as I think, 32 H. 8. Tit. 37.

The Lord may have Debt for Amerciament assest in Court Baron, 12 R. 2. Statham
fol. 62.

It seems the Lord shall have Debt for releife, and clearly the Executors shall
have Debt for releife, 32 H. 8.20.19. H. 6. Tit. 11.

Moderata miserecordia, does not lie where a Fine is alsessed by the Steward
for contempt in Court, nor where Amerciament is assessed, but where Amerciament
is not confirmed that lies if it be too high, Fitzher. fol. 72. C.

If one be amerced in the Sheriffs Turn, the Sheriff may distraine throughout
all the County, and if it be in a Leet, thoughout all the precinct of the Leet,
8 R. 2. Avowrie 194.

The Lord may distraine in the high street for Amerciaments in a Leet, 34 Ed. 2
and 19 Ed. 2. Avowrie 221.

Debt lies for the Lord for a Fine assest in Leet by the Steward, for not
returning the Pannall, or for other contempt, and it is good without
confirming, 7 H. 6. fol. 13. tit. 233.

For Amerciament in Leet, it seems one may take goods of another in the keeping
of him which is amerced, yet see how Issue was taken, that it was not the Horse
of Prior Tindall which was Amerced which was taken, 47 Ed. 3. fol. 12.

For not ch^ansing of a Ditch by the Predecessor of a Parson, Successor shall
not be punished for that Offense, the same Law of Father and Son, 5. H. 7. fol.
3.

Distress.
Where one may distraine, and what thing.
ONE lifted a Millstone off the stock, to be picked on the floor, it is not
so severed, but that it is parcel of the Mill, and cannot be distrained, and
so it is of Windows and doors, 14 H. 8. fol. 29.

10 H. 7. fol. 21. You cannot distraine the garment of another man in a Tailors
shop, 21 Ed. 4. fol. 49. the same.

9. H. 6. fol. 9. The Lord cannot distraine for his Rent, but in Lands held of
him, but the King may.

8 R. 2. tit. Avowrie 192. If one be Amerced in Leet, the Lord may distrain in
any place within the Precinct of that, and in the Turn of the Sheriff in any
place within the County.

34 H. 8. tit. 253. During the possession of the King, the Signiory of another
is suspended touching the Distress.

5 H. 7. fol. 15. If one be Amerced in a Leet, and another takes his leather
from him, and makes of that Boots and Shoes, yet these Boots and Shoes may
be distrained for this Amerciament within the Precinct of the Leet,

21 H. 7. fol. 13. The Lessor cannot distraine Fats fixed by his Lessee for a
dying Pan, and though the Lessee may remove them during his Term.

21 H. 7. fol. 26. Glass fixed by the Termor, the lessor cannot distraine for
his Rent as it seems, and the Lord cannot distraine Tables dormant in the
House of his Tenant, nor a thing which cannot be attached in an Assesse.

21 H. 7. fol. 41. The Lord cannot distraine Shocks of Corn for his Rent, but
doing damage he may.

27 Assizes 66. One cannot distraine in a Sanctuary, if it be not for Issues
for the King.

6 H. 4. fol. 11. One may arrest the Vicar in the Church by a Capias,
notwithstanding the Statute, 1 R. 2. For that is intended he shall not arrest
him saying Divine Service.

13 H. 4. fol. 42. If one proffer sufficient amends for wrongs which they have
done, one cannot distraine and avow that.

Marlebridge chap. 2. That no Lord may distraine out of the fee.

Marlebridge chap. 1. None shall make Distresses at his own will without the
consideration of the Kings Court.

Marlebridge chap. 15. It is not lawful for any to make Distresses out of
their Fee, nor in the Kings way, or in the common street, but for our Lord the
King, and for his Ministers, having special authority from him.

In what place a Leet shall be kept, and at what time.
A Leet by the Statute shall be held but twice in a year, that is in the Month
of Michaelmas and in the Month of Easter, by the intent of the Statute of Magna
Charta, c. 35.

Presentment in Leet held four days after the Month is void, 6 H. 7. fol.
1. and 38 H. 7. the same.

One may prescribe to hold a Leet at a day certain, though it be not within
the Month, and good, for it seems that Magna charta, is but Common Law,
otherwise he cannot prescribe against a Statute, unless he have another
Statute for the same, and if he hold that any other day it is void, which
makes in a Leet, 33 H. 6. fol. 7.

By Brian, Leet shall be held in any place within the Precinct of the
Lord-ship, where it pleases the Lord, for it is the Court of the King, as the
Kings Bench wheresoever it is, etc. 8 H. 7.4.

Twelve shall be of the Jury in a Leet, otherwise the Presentment there are all
traversable.
THere shall be at least twelve in a Turn, Rastall, Indict. 1.
and Turn and Leet are all one, Westminster 2. chap. 13.

Every Indictment and Presentment in Leet, shall be by twelve men at least, 6
H. 4. fol. 1.

Presentment that one had dwelt within view of Frank-Pledge by a year and a day
not sworn, etc. if it be not by twelve it is traversable, and if it be by
twelve, it is not traversable, 45 Ed. 3. fol 26.

If there be not twelve to be sworn, the Lord may cause strangers to be of the
Enquest, 3 H. 7. fol. 4.

By-Lawes.
For that, that By-lawes are made many times in Leets, something shall be said
of By-lawes, and I intend that Bylawes which are for the Commonwealth, shall
bind all, and other By-lawes shall bind but those that assent.
WHere a By-law is for a Commonwealth, it is good to bind all, though all do
not agree, as to make a Causey, Way, or Bridge; but By-law to repair a Church
is a Charge, for that it shall not bind but those that assent, 44 Ed. 3. fol.
19.

It is said, that Tenants in a Leet may make By-lawes, for that it is the Kings
Court, which shall bind them by their assents, and a Town may make By-lawes by
prescription, and that shall bind them, but not a stranger, as Bylaw, that
every one which puts in his beasts into the Common before, etc. shall pay ten
shillings, this shall bind them which assent, but not a stranger, 13 H. 8.
Leet 37.11. H. 7.14. and 21. H. 7.40. the same.

If a Town be amerced, and neighbors assess a Sum of every Inhabitant, and
agree to have I. S. to distrain for it, the distress is lawful, Doctor and
Student, fol. 74.

Where the greatest part of a Town agree to a By-law, which was charged, that
then it is good against them all, 8 Ed. 1. Assise 413.

By-law, that every one which holds land shall pay to the reparations of the
Church one penny, and for not paying shall forfeit to the Lord twenty pence; it
is not good, for the Lord has no damage, but the Churchwardens, and for that
it shall be forfeit to the Wardens, etc. but where a By-law is for a
Commonwealth, I intend for not doing shall be a forfeiture to the Lord, and
this is good, 21 H. 7. fol. 20.

One cannot prescribe to make Laws to alter inheritances, 49. Assise 8.

Inmates.
Though it be not specified in our Law who are Inmates, and who not, nor any
remedy provided against them, but only which have been used to avoid them by
By-lawes made in Leets, yet it is not impertinent to see who has been taken in
Law an Inmate, and who not.
IF one let part of his house in which he dwells to a Gentleman which keeps not
his table there, but goes to victualling-houses for his victuals, but yet
has certain rooms in the house, that is no Inmate: Also if one keep his
daughter married, and her husband by Covenant, or otherwise, and suffer them to
have certain rooms in his house, these were not accounted Inmates, and these
shall not have Common.

But if a man have a house, and let certain rooms of that to another to dwell
with him, he has been accounted an Inmate, unless he be of ability to live,
and shall not have Common in the Lords Waste or Feilds: But if one take one to
table, or to sojourn with him in his house, and let him certain rooms, he is
not accounted an Inmate, and he shall not have Common.

Also if the Inheritor of a house let a certain parcel of his house in which
he dwells, and severeth that from the other part, and make several doors to
the high street, it is now as two houses, and is not accounted as an Inmate,
but he shall have no common, otherwise it is if they have but one door to the
high street, for then it is accounted an Inmate, unless he be a sufficient
person to live of his Lands of himself, or by his Art or Trade, so that he be
not a poor Labourer; but at this day some take Inmates more strictly, and in
times past, none were punished in Leets by pains ordained in Leet, but idle
and bribing persons, which were common breakers of hedges, and other bribers
which live in others houses idly, or live suspect.

The Oath of the Reeve, or Bayliffe.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Lady the Queen, and
the Lord of this Manor in the Office of Reeve, or Bayliffe of the Manor for
this year to come, and you shall well and duly collect all such Rents,
Revenues, and other annual Profits as shall be chargeable, and issuing out of
the same Manor to you: And of that you shall make and give a lawful account
at the end of the same year, and in every other thing belonging to your Office,
well and truly to discharge in your Office during this year to come. So help
you God, etc.

The Oath of the Greve, or Hayward, or Beadell.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve the Queen our Sovereign
Lady, and the Lord of the Manor, in the Office of Greve, Beadell, or Hayward
of this Manor for this year to come, and you shall duly and truly execute all
such Attachments, and other Processes, as shall be directed to you from the
Lord or Steward of this Court, and you shall present all Pound-breaches which
shall be made within your Office, and also all Cattells, Strayes, and Waifs,
and in every other thing, well and truly hold you in the same Office. So help
you God, etc.

Oath of a Desiner.
YOu shall swear, That you I.S. from this day forward shall be faithful and
loyal to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, etc. and to her Heirs, and shall keep
unto her faith and loyalty of life, and of member, and of earthly honor, and
that you shall not conceal any ill or damage intended toward them, nor hear
any ill of them which you shall not defend them in, to your uttermost power. So
help you God, Britton, fol. 74. gives that.

Oath of Affirors.
YOu shall swear, That you will well and truly tax, assess, and affier all the
Amerciaments presented in this Court, and in doing of that, you shall not spare
any for love, fear, nor affection, nor raise, nor inhaunce any more grievous,
then shall be reasonable according to their deserts made, and not more, nor
less, nor for envy, nor for love assess or affier, but upon every one
severally, according to the quantity of their offenses made, and not otherwise.
So help you God, etc.

Oath of the Fealty.
YOu shall swear, That you shall be faithful and loyal, and loyally and
faithfully shall carry your self to the Lord of this Manor, for the Lands
and Tenements which you claim to hold of him, and you shall well and duly pay
to the Lord of this Manor, and his Heirs from time to time, all such Rents,
Duties, Customs, and Services, that you ought to pay, and make for the same
Lands at the times appointed. So help you God, etc.

Oaths of the Aletaster.
YOu shall swear, That you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign the Queen,
and the Lord of this Court, in the Office of Aletaster, or assise, within this
Lordship for this year to come, and you shall well and duly see from time to
time, that the sale of bread (brought to be sold) be duly weighed, and that it
contain such weight according to the prizes of grain, as by the Statute is
provided, that is to say, according to the prizes of Corn in the next Markets.
Also you shall have diligent regard during the time of your Office, to all the
Brewers and Tiplers within your Office, that they and every of them make good
and wholesome Ale and Beer for man's body, and that they do not sell any before
it has been tasted by you, and then to be sold according to the prizes limited
and rated by the Justices of Peace, and all defaults committed and done by the
Bakers, Brewers and Tiplers, or by any of them, you shall present at the Court
here, by which punishment may be ministered unto them for their offenses, and in
every other thing you shall well and truly behave your selves in your Office
for this year. So help you God, etc.

The Oath of the Constable.
YOu shall swear, That you will well and truly serve the Queen, and the Lord of
this Lawday, and you shall endeavor that the Peace of our Sovereign the Queen,
well and truly according to your power, be kepr, and you shall arrest all which
you see making Riots, Debates, or Frayes, or breaking the Peace, and you shall
well and truly endeavor your selves according to your knowledge, that the
Statute of Winton for Watch, Hue and Cry, and the Statutes made for the
punishment of sturdy Beggars, Vagabonds, Rogues, and other idle persons coming
within your Office, that the Offenders be punished; and you shall endeavor
your selves upon complaint to you, to apprehend Barretors, and riotous persons
making Frayes, and also apprehend Felons, and if any of them make resistance,
with force and multitude of Offenders, you shall make outcry, and pursue them
till they are taken, and you shall look to such persons as use unlawful Games,
and you shall have regard to the maintenance of Artillery, and you shall well
and duly execute all Process and Warrants sent unto you from the Justices of
the Peace of the County, and you shall make good and faithful presentment of
all bloodsheds, outcries, affrayes, and rescues made within your Office; and
you shall well and duly, according to your power and knowledge, do that which
belongs to your Office of a Constable to do, for this year to come. So help you
God.

Constables.
And for that that the Constable is here chosen and sworn, that is inquirable
here if he do his Office, and for that let us see what authority a Constable
has, and what he ought to do.
AT the Common Law before the making of the Statutes by which Justices of the
Peace were ordained to keep the Peace.

The chief Justice of England was appointed by the King, and he has authority,
and he was ordained to determine matters touching the Crown, and for
conservation of the Peace throughout the Realm, and he for that is the chief
Justice of the Peace.

Also by the Common Law before there was any Justice of Peace, Constables of
every Town were keepers of the Peace within their Towns.

If any be threatened upon complaint to the Constable, he may enforce the party
to put in a Suerty, and if he do not, commit him to prison till he has found a
Suerty, 4 Ed. 3. Bar. 102.

If any be stricken and in peril of death, the Constable ought to arrest the
Offender, and to keep him in Prison till it be known if he will live or die, or
till he have found Suerties to appear before the Justices at the
Goale-delivery.

If Felons or Murderers be in a Town, and the Constable has notice of that, it
is his Office and duty to raise People to take them, 1 R. 3. chap. 3. And if
any Felon be taken it is the Office of the Constable to carry him to the Goal,
and to cause others of the Town to assist him in so doing.

Constables were ordained for two intents, that is, to keep the Peace, and
also to apprehend Felons, and to take suerty by obligation of such persons,
that they find making Affraies.

Constables may arrest men which go or ride armed between Faires and Markets,
Rastal, Armor, 4.
and take their Armor as forfeit to the King, 2 Ed. 3. C. 3.

Constables ought to arrest such which go by night of whom there is Suspicion,
and deliver them to the Sheriff, Rastal, Robberies 4.
there to remain in hold, and also all suspected persons either by day or by
night are to be delivered to the Sherift, as above, by 5 Ed. 3. chap. 64.

Constables have power to examine Vagabonds, Rastal, Vag. 5.
and to compel them to find suerty for their good behavior, and if they
cannot find suerties, to commit them to the next Goal, by 1 R. 2. chap. 5.

Constables may arrest Servant laborer vagrant, unless he have a letter
containing the cause of his going, and the time of his return under the Kings
Seal, and may set him in the Stocks, till he have found suerties to serve, by
12 R. 2. chap. 3. Rastall, Vag. 5. Rastall, Arch. 2.


Constables have power to commit every one using unlawful Games, and to keep
them till the Offenders be bound in an obligation to the use of the King, that
he shall not use unlawful Games, by 6 H. 8. chap. 2.

Constables upon complaint may arrest Boate-men and Watermen which take more
then is appointed for them to take, and commit them to Ward for their
misdemeanor, Rastall, Pass. 8.
and to fine for the same, by 6 H. 8. chap. 7.

Constables have power to commit Beggars to the stocks, Rastall, Vag. 2.
Rastall, Vag. 9.
which Offend, by 22 H. 9. chap 12.

Constables ought to convey Rogues taken within their office to the next
Constable, that they might be conveyed to* Prison, upon pain of six shillings
eight pence for every offense, by 14 Eliz. chap. 5.

Also if a Constable do not make search every Month for unlawful keeping of
Games, and for unlawful playing if occasion be, and present the same, he shall
forfeit forty shillings.

The Constable is the keeper of the Peace, that is to say, The high Constable
for the Hundred, and the petty Constable in the Town, 12 H. 7. f. 38.

Constable may arrest one to find suerty of the Peace, and if he will nor
obey, he may take power to enforce him, and one may Justify that comes in
aid of the Constable to arrest one that makes an assault, 3 H. 4. fol. 10.

Constable may arrest one which makes an Assault, though it be of himself, 5 H.
7. fol. 6:

Constable was ordained to keep the Peace, and may take suerty for the Peace by
bond of one, if he be found making a Fray, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 18.

Constable may arrest one which makes a Fray and carry him to the next Goal
till he find suerty for the Peace, but not imprison him in his House, or put
him in the stocks, unless it be in the night, that he cannot carry him to the
Goal, for any other reasonable cause, 22 Ed. 4. f. 35. by Brian.

Constable may search for suspicious persons, and may arrest Night-walkers, 2
Ed. 4. f. 9.

Constable may search suspicious bawdy houses, where Women of ill fame are, and
may arrest suspected persons which walk in the night and sleep in the day, or
keep suspicious company, and if he be not of power to arrest them, he may have
aid of his Neighbors by the Law, 3 H. 7. fol. 10. that he may have aid, 13 H.
7. fol. 10. Title recognisance 14 Brook.

Constable cannot take a Recognisance to keep the Peace, but an obligation.

38 H. 8. tit. False Imprisonment 6. It is said, that one cannot arrest for a
Fray after it is done, without a Warrant, but before it be done, or whilst it
is a doing he may.

5 H. 7. fol. 6. Trespass of Imprisonment; the Defendant says that he was
Constable, and for that the Plaintiff made an Assault upon him and broke the
Peace, he took him and carried him to the Goal to preserve the Peace, 21. H.
4. fol. 21.

10 Ed. 4. fol. 20. Stocks are ordained properly to punish Vagrants and
Servants for wages, see, 7 H. 4. chap 17.

Britton fol. 17. None shall be put in Irons but those which are taken for
Felony, or for Trespass in Parkes or Chases.

West. 2. chap. 39. For resistance where a process is to be executed, that
Statute gives aid and opwer of the County against them which make resistance.

3 H. 7. fol. 1. It is held there that the Constable may take the power of the
County where there is a Fray, and specially to take Felons.

For that, it is the Office of a Constable to see that Watch be kept, let us
see how a Watch may be.
THe Watch ought to begin at the feast of Ascension, and ought to be held till
Michaelmasse all the night, from the setting of the Sun to the rising, and in
every City six shall be at every Gate, and in every Town they ought to watch
twelve men, and in every Village six men, or four, according to the number of
the Inhabitants of the Village; and if any stranger be arrested in the Watch,
he shall be kept until the morning, and if they find suspicion in him, he
shall be delivered to the Sheriff, and if no suspicion be in him, he shall go
free, and if any will not obey the Arrest, they ought to raise Hue and Cry, and
for arresting such a stranger none shall be punished, 13 Ed. 1. chap. 3.

Every one may arrest Night-walkers which go by the way, for it is for the
common profit, Rastall, Rob. 2.
4 H. 7. fol. 18. and 5 H. 7. fol. 5. the same.

Entry of Court Leet.
The view of Frank Pledge, Prebend of Islington.
there held on Thursday the 20. day of October, in the year of the the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, by the Grace of God of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. the 21.
RObert Martin by John a Style Essoyne of Course, Essoyne.
and so the others Essoyned. Jurors. Sworn for the King.

John Dee, Richardus Ree, John Penn, William Fenn, John Hye, Thomas Pie, John
Miles, Thomas Gyles.
Jurors.
William Neile, John Snell, William Riggs, Thomas Rich, Richard Cook, John
Turk, Richard Leake, John Peak. Presentment for the Queen.



First the Jury aforesaid say upon their Oath, That R.S. etc. at Islington
within the Jurisdiction of this Court, as a Felon of the Queen, did make a
hundred gold Angels, and three hundred Groats, Petty Treason.
falsely and feloniously (having not first gotten the Queens Letters Patents)
against the Peace of our said Lady the Queen, and her Crown and Dignity, and
against the form of the Statute in this case provided and Published.

Also they present, Felony in burning a house.
That one Tho. de I. predict Yeoman, such a day, etc. at I. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, by force and arms, etc. willingly and feloniously
(of pretended malice by him) did burn the house of one J.S. against the Peace
of the Queen, therefore the Bayliffe is commanded to seize all his Lands and
Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, that he may answer for them to the Lord of this
Manor.

Also they present, That W.P. of I. aforesaid, Labourer, such a day, Felon.
etc. at I. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, by force of arms, etc. and
against the Peace, the Close of one, etc. at I. aforesaid, broke and entered
into, and one silk coat, called Satin, of a black color, of the Goods and
Chattells aforesaid, etc. then and there found, feloniously took and carried
away: Therefore it is commanded, the bayliffe, etc.

Also they present, Accessory.
That W.S. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman, within the Jurisdiction of this Court, did
counsel, provoked, procured, encouraged, and abetted one L.M. etc. one Cow of
black color, price, etc. of the Chattell of one, etc. then and there found
feloniously to steal, take, and drive away, and the said L. by virtue of the
counsel, provocacation, procurement, encouragement, and abetment, the
aforesaid, etc. the said black Cow such a day, etc. year, etc. feloniously
stole, took, and drove away, etc.

They also present, That A. B. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman, such a day, Rape.
etc. at I. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, the Close and House of one,
etc. broke and entered, and upon one Katherine, etc. the daughter, etc. being
in the peace of God, and of the Queen, made an assault, and there against her
will did ravish her, and did carnally know her, against the peace, etc.

Also they present, Felon breaks a house.
That P.D. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman, such a day, etc. at I. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, about the hour of nine in the night of the same
day, the house and mansion of one, etc. as Felon of the Queens, broke and
entered, with an intent to make spoil there, etc. and six gold Angels of the
Goods and Chattells of the aforesaid, etc. then and there in a certain chest
being, feloniously took and carried away, against the peace, etc.

The same present, E.F. of I. aforesaid, Labourer, Robbery.
such a day, etc. at I. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, by force of
arms, and against the peace, etc. upon one T.D. at, etc. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, in the Queens high way, there being in the peace of
God and the Queen, did make an assault, and the same T. D. then and there
robbed, and sixteen groats of silver, and one Angel of gold, of the Goods and
Chattells of the aforesaid T.D. in a certain Clokebag of his, then and there
being, from the person of the said T. feloniously took and carried away,
against her Peace, Crown, and Dignity, etc.

They present, That the aforesaid T.D. appearing robbed, Hue and Cry.
made a great noise and exclamation, and the aforesaid E.F. as a Felon of the
said Queens; the said day and year from the place where he was so robbed, did
freshly follow to the aforesaid Town of D. etc. and that no Inhabitants there
upon the Hue and Cry aforesaid did follow, and so the aforesaid Felon escaped,
to the contempt of our said Lady the Queen, and against the form of the
Statute, so enacted and provided; therefore the said Town of, etc. in the
mercy, etc.

Also they present, That E. L. of I. aforesaid, Yeoman, Made flight.
such a day and year aforesaid, at I. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, a
certain Gelding of color white, price, etc. of the Goods and Chattells of one,
etc. in the common field there being, feloniously stole away, took and carried
away, and that the said E.L. for the foresaid Felony did convey himself away
and fled; therefore command was given to the Bailiff to seize two kine of the
Goods and Chattells of the said E.L. as Escheats and forfeitures to the Lord,
and that he should keep them safe to the use of the Lord, etc. or so to the use
of the Queen.

Also present, That when one B.R. of I. aforesaid, Escape^
Yeoman, was taken and arrested for suspicion of Felony, and set in the Stocks,
one I.F. of I aforesaid, Labourer, such a day and year, etc. at I. aforesaid,
the foresaid Stocks with force of arms, and feloniously did break, and the
foresaid B.R. then and there did suffer to go at large against the Peace;
therefore it is commanded as before, etc.

Also they present that T. J. of J. aforesaid, Felony.
Yeoman, such a day, etc. at J. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, a Calf
of the price, etc. Of the Goods and Chattells of one J. B. There and then
found, feloniously took and carried away, and that W. Q. The Bailiff of the
aforesaid Manor such a day and year, etc. at J. aforesaid, the aforesaid T. L.
for suspicion of the aforesaid Felony arrested, and that W. F. of J. aforesaid
Laborer, by force of Arms, etc. at J. aforesaid, the said day and year upon
the aforesaid W. Q. In the Peace of God and of the Queen being, did make an
Assault, and the aforesaid T. J. being in the custody of the said W. Then and
there feloniously took, carried away and rescued, and suffered to go free
against the Peace, etc. Therefore it was commanded as above, etc.

Also present that A. B. of J. aforesaid Yeoman, Felony of Pigeons.
such a day and year, etc. aforesaid, etc. at J. within the Jurisdiction of
this Court, about the hour of one in the night of the same day, a certain
Pigeon-House of such a ones, etc. did break, and enter, and forty Pigeons,
price, etc. of the Goods and Chattells of the foresaid, etc. from the house of
the same, etc. feloniously took and carried away, against the Peace, etc. and
therefore, etc.

Also present that J.W. of J. aforesaid Gent, such a day, etc. at J. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, a certain tame Dear carrying a bell about his
neck, price, etc. Of the Goods and Chattells of one, etc. Then and there found,
feloniously took away against the peace, etc. Therefore it is commanded, etc.

Also they present that one J. L. of J. aforesaid Yeoman, Felony of a Trunk
broken.
such a day and year, etc. at J. aforesaid within the Jurisdiction of this
Court, about the hour of one in the night of the same day, a certain Trunck of
one, etc. Broke and entered, and ten Fishes called Pikes, price, etc. Of the
Goods and Chattells of the aforesaid, etc. out of his said Trunck, etc. Then
and there feloniously took and carried away, against the Peace, etc. Therefore,
etc.

Also present that P. J. of J. aforesaid Yeoman, Petty Theivery.
such a day etc. the Close of one, etc. at J. aforesaid, borke, and entered, and
one Towell of the price of six pence, of the Goods and Chattells of the
aforesaid, etc. Then and there found feloniously took and carried away,
therefore it is commanded the Bailiff to seize all his Goods and Chattells into
the hands of the Lord.

Also present that W. B. and T. W. Of J. aforesaid, Sell in the Churchyard.
being Butchers, such a day, etc. within the view of the frank pledge, did
place their flesh, and other things to be sold in the Church and Churchyard of
J. aforesaid to sell. And the same where divine Service is celebrated, and men's
Bodies are buried, sold, against the Statute of Winchester in this case enacted
and provided, therefore they in the mercy.

Also present, Chattels waived.
that one M. S. came within the Jurisdiction of this frank pledge, and brought
hither certain Goods and Chattells by her stolen, that is to say, one linen
shirt price, etc. diverse other Clothes, videlicet, one Smock, one Petty-coat,
one Shirt, which all are worth twenty shillings, and no more, and which all
were hither by the said M. brought, and the said M. here within the
Jurisdiction of this Manor waved them, left them, and fled, by which all the
Goods and Chattells aforesaid came to the Lord of this Manor, upon which it
was commanded to the Bailiff to seize them into the hands of the Lord, as
escheats and forfeited to the Lord, and so he did, and the Chattells aforesaid
were delivered to the Lord in this Court. Common Fine.


Also they say that they give to the Lord for certainty for a common Fine at
this day by an old custom, six shillings eight pence. Deciners which make
default.


Also they present upon their oath, that John Rigg 4d. Richard Wrenn, 4d. and
John Williams, 4d. are Residents within the Precinct of this frank pledge, and
at this day made default, therefore every one of them in the mercy, as it
appears upon their heads.

Also they present that Richard Wrench 2 d. Not sworn in Deciner.
William Finch 2d. Robert Betts 2d. and William Gibbey 2d. did dwell within the
Precinct of this frank pledge, by the space of a year and day and more, and
not sworn to the Queen for Allegiance, therefore each of them in the mercy, as
it appears upon their heads.

Also present that R. C. of J. aforesaid Yeoman, Noyance of Water.
did turn the course of a certain brook leading to the House of the said T. H.
out of the right course that it was wont to run, therefore he was commanded, to
turn it into his right course about the seast, etc. upon pain, etc.

Also present, Boughs hindering.
that there is a certain Hedge of a great extent, and that the branches thereof
hang over the way called the Kings Lane, to the hurt of the Carriages carried
by the same way, in the default W. C. Therefore it is commanded him to cut or
crop those about the feast, etc. under the pain, etc.

Also present, Noysance of a Gutter.
that there is a certain Gutter leading from the House or Kitchen of T.J. by
which foul and stinking water from the said Kitchen is lead into the High way,
to the great damage of the Queens way, and all the carryages there carried by
the People of our Lady the Queen, therefore he is commanded to remove or stop
that about the feast, etc. upon pain, etc.

They present, Common way.
that the common way leading by the Field called the Prebend field, is the
common way to go and ride, and so has been used time out of mind, and that
the Gate and Bridge being beyond the furthest Bridge ought to be maintained and
kept by the Ter-Tenants, and now are not, therefore it is commanded to the Land
holders, the same Gate and Bridge to amend and repair before the Feast of
Saint John Baptist next coming, upon pain, etc.

Also they present, Nuisance of Dung.
that R. W. made a certain Dung-hil against his House near the Queens
Highway, to the noyance of the Queens People, therefore he was commanded to
remove and carry it away, about the Feast, etc. under the pain, etc.

Also present, Nuisance of a Ditch
that there is a certain Ditch unscowred and unclensed in default of R. S. to
the hurt, etc. therefore he in the Mercy twelve pence, and he is commanded to
scowre and cleanse the same about the feast, etc. upon pain etc. two shillings.

Also present that A. B. Widow is a common Intertainer and receiver of Whores,
Bawdyhouse.
and Women of ill report, and conversation, to the great hurt of her
Neighbors, therefore amerced two shillings two pence.

Also present that N. C. Widow is a common Scold with her Neighbors, Scold.
and common Hedge-breaker, and keeps one W. C. her Son in her House, and he is
of no good same or government, therefore she in the mercy, as it appears
above, etc.

Also present that one A.B. Servant W. C. Trespass.
the Lords Bailiff as he was driving certain Cattle of one R. G. to the Lords
Park, there to be imparked, came one J. P. with great violence into the
aforesaid Park, with a Sword, price five shillings, and then and there struck
the said A. B. with the same Sword upon his Head, and so shed the Blood of the
said A. E. by reason of which blow the said B. fell to the ground, as if he had
been dead. Therefore the said D. R. in the mercy, and is amerced by chief
suerties five shillings.

Also present that J. S. made a Fray within the liberty of this Court and drew
blood, therefore he in the mercy, three shillings four pence.

Also present that W. G. is Constable, Constable default.
and is not here at the view of the frank pledge, to present that which belongs
to his Office but makes default, therefore he in the mercy two shillings.

Also present that R. S. is an Ale-taster, Aletaster default.
and is not here at the view of frank pledge, to present that which belongs to
his Office but makes default, therefore he in the mercy two shillings.

Also present that R. B. and W. G. Common Apprisors default.
are common Apprisors, and should be here to present that which belongs to
their Office, and made default, therefore they in the mercy three shillings
four pence.

Also present that B. R. and C. D. Searcher of the Victuals.
are searchers of the Victuals, and should be here at the view of frank pledge
to present that which belongs to their Office, and made default, therefore both
of them in the mercy two shillings.

Also present that Tho. J. and Will. J. Scavengers default.
are Scavengers of the streets and ought to be here at the view of the frank
pledge, and made default, therefore either of them in the mercy six pence.

Also present upon their Oath that the twentieth day of May, Estrayes.
in the year of the Reign of our Lady Queen Elizabeth now the twenty first,
came into this Lordship one Horse color gray, as a stray, and remained in
custody ten days after Proclamation.

Also present that there is a Colt color bay, of the age of four years or
more, which came into this Lordship as a stray, the ninth day of September, the
year of the Reign of our sovereign Lady the Queen the twentieth, price twenty
four shillings, and stayed in the custody of the Bailiff by the space of a
year and a day, after three Proclamations at three several days made,
according to the form of the Statute, therefore the property of that Colt is in
the Lord.

Also present that W. M. twelve pence and R. B. twelve pence are common Bakers
of man's Bread, Bakers.
and at diverse times have baked unwholesome Bread, etc. Have broke the Assise,
therefore each of them is in the mercy, as it appears upon their heads.

Also present that Richard W. and J. D. are common Brewers of Drink, Brewers.
and brewed diverse times unwholesome Drink, and broke the Assise, therefore
each of them in the mercy, as it appreares upon their Heads

Also present that E. W. and W. X. by their Wives are common sellers of Drink,
Alehouse keepers.
and by unlawful Measures sell their Drink, and break the Assise, therefore
each of them in the mercy, as it appears upon their Heads.

First, It is ordained that R. B. shall make and scowre his Ditch at the foot
of the great hill, Pain set.
containing by estimation twenty perches, before the feast of Saint John
Baptist next coming, upon the pain of every perch thereof eight pence.

Also it is ordained that T. M. shall reform and lay, Punishment.
out a certain parcel of Land lately by him incroached between Wash lane and
Perham Rye common, before the Feast of All Saints next coming, under the pain
of every Perch not reformed and laid out, twenty pence.

Also it is ordained that none shall suffer his Beasts, that is to say, Pain.
Oxen, or Kine, to go and pass upon the common of this Lordship, nor in the
Lanes to the said Manor belonging, upon pain of forfeiting to the Lord for
every one of them, for every time two pence.

Also it is ordained that W. J. shall remove his Dunghill lying by the Queens
high way against his House, Pain.
before the feast of Easter next, upon the pain of forfeiture ten shillings.

Also it is ordained that J. F. Pain.
shall make and maintain a Bridge in his Close called great Colemans in the
way leading from Islington to Hogsden, upon the pain of forfeiting to the Lord
ten shillings.

Also it is ordained that every one yoke o^ ring his Hogs before the Feast of
S. Michael the Archangell next, and the same keep so yoked and ringed till the
Feast of S. John the Baptist, then next following, upon the pain of forfeiting
to the Lord for every Hog, for every week, three shillings six pence.

The end of the Court Leet.
The manner of keeping a Court Baron.
The Court of R.F.C. there held the Tuesday, that is to say, Prebend the 14.
day of May, the year of the Reign of Queen of Isling -- Elizabeth, by the
Grace of God, of England, France, ton. and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
26. held by I.K. the Steward.
IS. and I.D. and R.R.R. Essoyned of Common, Essoyne.
or Essoyned for the Suit of Court, by R.R. John Do, Robert Dodge, Richard
Roo, Thomas Lodge, The Homage.
John Den, Sworn. Adam Clarke, Richard Fenn, David Park, Walter Helen, Henry
Roo, Robert Allen. William Croo.

First, after the style of the Court is entered, you shall make once O Yes, and
then call the Suitors, and after that another O Yes shall be made, and then the
Steward shall say,

If any will be Essoyned, or enter any Plaint, come you in, and you shall be
heard.

And after your Essoyne entered, and your Plaint determined, then impannell your
Jury and swear them.

And after the Enquest is impannelled and sworn, make another O Yes, and then
you shall say, You good men which be impannelled, come near, and you and all
other keep silence, during your Charge.

An exhortation to the Jury.
YOu good men which are sworn, before that I enter to give to you the Charge,
I intend to show to you by what Authority you are assembled, and for what
purpose.

First, you ought to consider, that there are three causes of your meeting.

1. One cause is, for that you be resident, and dwelling within the Precinct of
the Leet here to be held, and for that you ought to appear.

2. The second cause is, for that some of you hold Land of the Lord of this
Manor, some as Freeholders, some as Copyholders, and by reason of some of
your Tenures, you ought to make Suit to the Court Baron of your Lord, from
three weeks to three weeks, if this Court be so warned.

3. The third is, you may here learn the Laws, to know what thing to follow,
and what to avoid, by which that which is good may be the better followed, and
ill things the better be avoided, being presented by you, and punished; and for
that, that every one may live, and enjoy that which he has with quietness,
and the Commonwealth may flourish, and virtue abound; and then for that you
may better inquire and present, I have ministered to you a corporal Oath, which
I counsel you to consider, and the parts of that, which are three, that is to
say, Truth, Judgment and Justice.

Truth, that you shall present nothing but truly, and that you shall not omit
any thing of the truth not presented.

With Judgment, that you shall present all things with good advisement, and
that you shall not be negligent to inquire out the truth in all matters to be
presented.

With Justice, that you shall not for favor, nor for corruption of reward, nor
for fear, nor for displeasure, nor for private hurt or profit which may come
to your selves, nor for malice, that you present any thing: And these three
principal things you ought well to regard in your Oath.

And at the last note, that you run not into wilful perjury, which if you do,
you condemn your souls, and provoke the anger of God, and get punishment to
your selves and your posterities in this world, and you get to you the torments
of the Devil and hell, after this life, for ever.

But if you keep well your Oath, you obtain by that, great profit and
commodity; for by that wrong shall be redressed, peace and tranquillity shall be
maintained, and right and public good preserved, and you shall live in quiet,
and hold your Goods, Lands, and Lives, in peace and quietness, and you shall
be accounted after this life, among the Saints of God, and shall have life
eternal; and over that observe you, that I may by the Law charge another Jury
immediately to inquire of your concealments and perjuries, and that you shall
find by putting great Fines and Amerciaments upon you, and imprisoning your
bodies: And to conclude, first, now if you remember your duties to God, as I
have said, that will move you to keep your Oaths, and the love that you owe to
the Commonwealth, with consideration of your selves, wives, sons, and
posterity, and the fear of God, and regard of honesty, and all these well
considered, then you will present justly, and truly the things which I shall
give to you in Charge; and I make an end, and the Articles of your Charge
follow.

Then follows the Charge in Court Baron.
The Charge in Court Baron.
FIrst, you ought to inquire of all persons which owe Suit to this Court, and
who make default, and present their names; and you ought to note, that all such
persons which hold any Land of the Lord by Suit of Court, in what place they
dwell, and of what age he is, that should make Suit to the Court, or otherwise
he ought to be amerced, and Amerciament is by custom, for by the Common Law
they shall be distrained, and that is called Suit-service, and that is by
reason of the Tenure, and if any such person which owes Suit to the Lord be in
Ward to the King, nevertheless he may be amerced, for not making Suit to the
Court of the Lord; but the Lord cannot destraine for this Amerciament during
his Wardship, yet after Livery, the Lord may destraine for the whole
Amerciament.

And if there be two Coparceners, Coparceners. Joynt-Tenants.
for which one Suit ought to be made, the eldest sister ought to make the Suit
only, and the other shall be contributary, Fitzh. 159. B.

And so it is of Joyn-Tenants, the Suit may be made by agreement by one, and
the other shall be contributary, by Marleb. chap. 9. but if one holds twenty
acres by Suit of Court, and alien that to twenty several persons, by the
Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, every one shall make Suit severally.

2. Rastal. Suit. 1.
Also if any Tenant be dead after the last Court, or before, and his death not
presented, you ought to inquire what Lands he holds of this Manor, and if
they were held by Knights service, Ward Releif.
Soccage, or by Copy, and what advantage the Lord shall have by his death,
Scilicet Wardship, Marriage, Releif, Escheate, or other Profits, and who is his
next Heir, and of what age, and in whose custody he is.

3. Also if any Tenant which holds by Knights Service alien his Land by
collusion to defeat the Lord of his Ward, and other Profits, it is inquirable.

4. Also if any Tenant which holds by Knights service be disseised, and dies
disseised, his Heir within age, the Lord shall have him in Ward; and if any
Tenant which holds by Knight Service die, his Heir male within age of 21.
years, the Lord shall have the Land in Ward, till the age of 21 years, and also
his Marriage, unless he be married, Littleton, fol. 19.

5. If the Father which holds in Knights Service marry his daughter within age,
to a husband of full age, and dies, the Lord shall not have the Wardship of the
Land, and if she were of full age, the Lord shall not have the Wardship of the
Land; but if she were within age, and marry to a husband within age, the Lord
shall have the Land in Ward till the age of 14. years, Natura brevium, fol. 98.

But if such Tenant die, his heir female being of the age of 14. years or
more, and not married, she shall not be in Ward, nor her Land, but if she were
within age of 14. years and not married, she shall be in Ward of Body and Land
till the age of 16. years, and if she were married in the life of her father,
within the age of 14. years, her land shall be in Ward till the age of 14.
years, and no more, Littleton, fol. 19.

6. And you ought to note, that there is Knights Service of a common person,
that is, where one holds of his Lord by Homage, Fealty, and Escuage, that is to
say, when it is assessed to more, more, and when to less, less, Littleton,
fol. 19. and where one holds by keeping a Castle, or by blowing a Horn, that
is Knights service.

7. And Soccage Tenure is where one holds by Homage and Fealty, or by Fealty
and Rent, or by Homage, Fealty, Rent, and by Suit of Court for all manner of
Services, or in Burgage; and if such Tenant die, his issue within age of 14.
years, then the next friend of the heir to whom the inheritance cannot
descend, shall have the Ward of the Land, and of the Heir till 14. years, and
then give an account to the Heir of the profits taken; but this Guardian shall
have his reasonable allowance for his costs and expenses, Littleton, fol. 22.
See Natura Brevium, fol. 97.

8. Releife by Soccage is as much as the chief Rent is by the year, which he
pays to his Lord, and this is due forthwith after the death of his Tenant in
Soccage, so that the Heir be past his age of 14. years, Littleton, fol. 24.

9. And if Land be held by Knight Service, and his Tenant dies, his Heir of
full age, the Releif is due to the Lord, and if he hold by an entire Fee of a
Knight, the Releife is one hundred shillings, and if he hold by the half of a
Fee, fifty shillings, and so according to the rate, Littleton, fol. 21. and all
these profits are inquirable.

10. Also if any Rent, Custom, Rent not paid.
or Service be withdrawn, which ought of right to be made, by whom it is
with-drawne, and what Custom and Service it is, and in what Bailiffs time it
was with-drawne, and where the land is, that the Lord may distrain for the
Arrearages, and what Rent that is, and how many years it has been withdrawn.

11. Lands concealed
Also if any Land of the Lord be withdrawn, or used by any without license of
the Lord, by whom it is, and how much Land has been so used, and of what value
by the year that is, is inquirable.

12. Also if any Villain of the Lord be, and what Goods, Villain.
Chattels, and Lands he has, what estate he has in them, that the Lord may
seize them, and what other things he has: And if any Villain withdraw his
Goods out of the Lordship without license of the Lord, or if a free man marry a
Villain woman, without the license of the Lord, it is inquirable.

Note, If a Villain purchase Lands, and do not alien them before the Lord
enter into them, the Lord shall have them: Otherwise it is if the Villain
alien them before the entry of the Lord; the same Law is of Goods, Litt. fol.
33. ^but the Lord cannot seize the Goods which a Villain has as Executor,
Litt. fol. 35.

If a Villain be made a Chaplain Secular, the Lord may seize him as his
Villain, and his Goods; but otherwise it is if he enters in Religion: Or if a
Free man espouse a Villain Woman without the license of the Lord, or by that,
this is inquirable.

If a Villain dwell in ancient Demesne of the King, which is in the Kings
hands, and has dwelt there by a year and a day, the Lord cannot seize him,
nor shall have a Writ of Nativo habendo, so long as he dwells there: But if
the Lord claim him within the year, that he comes into ancient Demesne, and
so makes his claim within every year and (...) day, then the Villain shall
not take advantage by his being there, and if the Villain dwell in another
Manor of ancient Demesne, which is in possession of another then the King, the
Lord may seize him, Fitzh. fol. 79. a. and from thence-going that, the Lord may
make his claim, if he go in ancient Demesne, is inquirable.

Also if any of the Tenants of the Lord be dead without Heir general or
special, Escheat.
then the Lord shall have his Lands by Escheat, or if any Tenant, seized in
Fee, be attaint of Felony, by Outlawry, Verdict, or otherwise, the King shall
have (year day and waste) and after the Lord by Escheat, and is inquirable. Or
if a Bastard purchase Land, and dye without issue of his body, the Lord shall
have his Land by Escheat: And note, That none shall have Lands of Fee-simple as
heir to any man, unless he be heir of the whole blood, Littleton, fol. 2.
And if the Tenant be disseised, and dies without heir, the Lord shall have the
Escheat.

14. Common.
Also if any which has no Common without number, charge the Common with more
Beasts then he ought to doc, according to the quantity of his Land, or if he
which has Common appendant, not Common appurtenant, put into the Common,
Beasts which are not commonable, as Hogs, Goats, and Geese, or if any digg in
the Common, unless it be for Gravel for the high ways, and fill it again,
or makes other trespass in the Common, or use the Common in any other manner,
without the license of the Lord, but to take his Common with the mouth of his
Beasts, or if any digg Turffs, or make other trespass upon the waste, or build
any house, or make enclosure of any part of it, it is inquirable.

15. Also if any Tenant within this Manor, Rechasing
which has two Farms, one of them within this Manor, the other within
another Manor, and at the time when the Feilds and Meadows within this Manor
are laid open, he brings his Beasts within this Manor, which he has kept upon
the Farm of another Manor, and by this surchargeth the Tenants within this
Manor, this chasing and rechasing is inquirable.

16. Mortmaine.
Also if any Tenant of this Manor has aliened any of his Lands in Mortmaine,
that is, to a Religious house or to a Bishop, Parson, Vicar, and to their
Successors, or to any other Corporation, where that shall go in succession;
that is to say, To them and their Successors, without the license of the King,
and the Lord of the Manor, it is inquirable. That the Lord may make his claim
within a year according to the Statute: Note, That by the Statute of
Religiosis, the Lord may enter within one year after the alienation; and if
the chief Lord immediate, be negligent, and do not enter upon this Fee within
a year, then it is lawful to the next Lord of that Fee, within the half
year following to enter, and at the last the King: And if any make a Feoffment
to one to the use of a House of Religion, or to the use of a Company, or
Brotherhood, this is Mortmaine: The same Law is where one exchanges with a
Corporation, that is Mortmaine; also if any religious person hold of any man by
Rent-service, and the Lord releases to him, this is Mortmaine.

17. Who is Tenant.
Also if any Tenant by Charter alien his Land, and has not given notice of
that to the Lord, and the Alienee has not made fealty to the Lord, nor Suit of
Court, that the Lord may have knowledge, who is his Tenant, it is presentable,
for that he may know upon whom to make his avowry, and of whom to have his
Services and Escheats.

18. Waste.
Also if any Termor for years, or for life, of any parcel of the Demesnes of
the Manor, has made waste in any House, Lands, Woods, or Gardens, you shall
present that, or if any holds two Tenements and has wasted one, as if he
remove Trees from one to the other, that is waste.

19. Trespass.
Also if any Trespass be made in any Demesnes of the Lord, that is to say, In
the Corn, Grass, Meadows, Pastures, Wood, Hedges, Waters, or if any Fish
within his Rivers or Waters, or if any Hauk or Hunt within the Demesnes of the
Lord, without his license, or within his Warren, these are presentable.

20. Trespass.
Also if any take any Honey or swarms of Bees within the Demesnes of the Lord,
or take any Hawks or Aeiry of Hawks, these are inquirable.

21. Also if any Bailiff, or Officer make any arrest for Rent, Rescous.
Custom or Service due to the Lord, and Rescous to him is made, you ought to
present the name of him which made the Rescous, and where and when it was.

22. Pound breach.
Also if any distress be put in the pound of the Lord, and be taken out
without authority of Law, this is a Pound-breach, and is inquirable.

23. Removeing meerstones.
Also if any remove or take away any meerstones or stakes between this Lordship
and another, or between Tenant and Tenant, you ought to present that.

24. Encroch.
Also if any has incroached any of the Lands of the Lord, scilicet, Land,
Meadow, Pasture, Wood, Furse, Moore, or any other vacant Land without the Lords
license, by burning his Hedges, Pale, or otherwise, that is inquirable.

Note, that all the void Land and Waste within the Manor is to the Lord of the
Manor.

25. Also if any within this Manor, Husbandry.
suffer any House of Husbandry with which was occupied twenty Acres of Land, to
decay, and to take from it any Land, the Lord of whom this is held, Rast. Husb.
1. and 6.
shall have the half of the profits of this to his own proper use, till that
be maintained again for Husbandry, 4 H. 7. chap. 19. and 5 Eliz. chap. 2. and
that for the benefit of the Lord is inquirable.

26. Also if any Tenant, has enclosed any Land, Common.
and keeps that in severalty, (which was wont to lie open) without the license
of the Lord and other Freeholders, that is also inquirable, for that no Tenant
of the Lordship shall loose his Common in that.

27. Also if any keep and withdraw any Evidences, Evidence of the Lord.
Court Rolls, Rentalls, or Evidences pertaining to the Lord of the Manor, is
inquirable.

28. Also if any thing pained before to be done, Punishment.
and is not yet done, in whose default that is, and you ought to present his
name.

29. Also if any Coppy-holder, Coppy-holder.
lets his Coppy-hold Land for longer time then for a year and a day, without
surrender, unless it be by the custom, that he may let for longer time, and
if he do, it is a forfeiture, and inquirable.

30. Also if any Coppy-holder, make a change of the possession of his
Coppy-hold, for Charter Land, or otherwise, that the Lord may have any
disadvantage, in mending of one and impairing of another, that is inquirable.

31. Also if any Coppy-holder alien any of his Coppy-hold by Deed, and make
livery of Seisin acording to the Deed it is a forfeiture, and inquirable, Lit.
fol. 14.

31. Also if any Coppy-holder cut any Tree which is a Hedg-row without license
of the Lord, is a forfeiture, if not by the custom of the Manor used time out
of mind, etc. This Coppy-holder has used to cut his Trees and Wood at his
pleasure, it is inquirable.

33. Also if any Coppy-holder, which has not his Wood by custom of the Manor
to himself, but his Lord has that there, if he lop or top any Trees of his
Coppy-hold in unseasonable time, by which that starveth, that is a forfeiture,
and is inquirable.

Note that Tenant at will by the Common Law, may take House-boote, Hedg-boote,
and Plough-boote, and cut that in seasonable time, and so may Tenant by Copy of
Court Role do of a Coppy-hold.

34. Also if any Coppy-holder suffer his House which is Coppy-hold to decay and
fall down, or do not repair that, but suffer that to be uncovered, by which
there is wast, that is a forfeiture and inquirable; if it be not by the custom
of the Manor, that they may suffer their Houses to decay and fall down, and
yet no forfeiture by the custom, and also in some Manors the Tenants may
suffer waste in their Houses, and also cut their Trees at their pleasures, and
shall not be punished, for it is lawful by the custom of diverse Manors.

35. Also if any Coppy-holder dye seized of any Coppy-hold, who is his next
Heir, and of what age he is, or if any Coppy-holder by the custom of the
Manor has surrendered any Coppy-hold into the hands of the Bailist, or any
Tenants, after the last Court to the use of another, for of every such
surrender the Lord ought to have a Fine, and the parties in whose hands the
surrender was made, ought to come to the next Court, and present the same
surrender so taken, and give it into the hands of the Lord to the use of the
Alienee, or otherwise he ought to forfeit his Coppyhold, if he have not a
reasonable excuse, insomuch that he does not bring in the surrender by him
taken, but does what lies in him to make the Lord loose his Fine, and also to
dis-inherit the other party, to whose use the surrender was made.

36. Also if any Tenant which holds by Harriot service, or Harriot custom, dye
seized of any Land or Tenement so held, and that a Harriot is due to the Lord,
and also if any such Tenant has aliened any parcel of his Land so held, the
Lord shall have for every of their several parts, diverse Harriots at their
several deaths, as if a man has two parcells of Land held by Harriot service,
and by several Titles, and dye seized of the same, the Lord shall have two
Harriots; and also you shall present if any Harriot be carried out of this
Lordship, by whom it is, and where they are.

37. Suit to the Mill.
Also you shall inquire if any Tenant of this Manor, which ought by reason of
his Tenure to make Suit to the Lords Mill, do make his Suit there, or not.

38. Also you shall inquire, if any one have fished, souled; hawked or hunted
within this Manor, or within the Demesnes of the Lordship, without license of
the Lord, and present their names.

39 Also if any has taken Pheasants, or Partridges in their nests, or the
eggs of them within the Demesnes of the Manor, or the eggs of the Swans of
the Lord, and present their names.

40. Also you shall inquire if all the defaults and plaints which were
presented at the last Court, were sufficiently amended, or not, and if all the
Laws and Orders before by you made, be observed and kept, or not; and further
you shall inquire of all other things, which in your consciences you believe to
be convenient to be inquired of, and you shall bring in your Verdict in writing
such an hour: And now you may depart, and inquire of your Charge, having regard
to that which you have sworn, and note that you keep well your Oath.

Hawkers and Hunters.
WEst. 1. chapter 1. forbids that none shall chase in another Park, nor fish in
another River, and if he do, he shall be imprisoned, and fined, and if none
will sue, the King shall have the Suit as in a thing made against the Peace,
and the King shall make inquiry from year to year, etc. Fitzh. 67. D.

Westminster. 1. chap. 20. It is provided for Offenders in Parks and in Rivers, that
if any of them be attaint by the Suit of the Plaintiff, it shall be accounted
good, and amends made according to the manner of the Trespass, and shall have
imprisonment for three years, and then shall be fined, and if he has not to
pay a Fine, he shall be banished or outlawed, and if the party sue not within
the year, the King shall have the suit.

39. H. 7. chap. 11. If any person, not having a Park, Chase, nor Forest,
keep any nets, called Deer-Hayes, o^ Buc^stalls, or stalk with bush or beast in
another Park, Chase, or Forest, without license, he shall forfeit ten pound
to any person which will sue for the same.

31. H. 8. chap. 12. Where Hunters in the day or night with vizards, or painted
faces, it was felony, now it is not.

5. Eliz. c. 21. Every one which wrongfully takes Hawks, or their eggs by
night or day, and be convict, shall pay treble damages, and suffer imprisonment
three years, but these Statutes aforesaid are not inquirable in a Leet.

43. Ed. 3. fol. 24. Trespass, why by force of arms his Deer, price forty
shillings (where it was wild) he took, and the Writ abated, 18. Ed. 4. fol.
14. the same.

3 H. 6. f. 58. Trespass, he entered into his Warren, and took a 1000. hares,
and does not say his, yet it is good.

Fitzh. 86. L. and 89. R. Trespass lies by force of arms, the young hawks of
his hawks, price so much, he took, and why he entered his Warren, and took
Hares, Coneys, and Pheasants, and not his, and good, for he has no property,
22. H. 6. fol. 65.

Doctor and Student, fol. 9. None has property of Birds, Foul, wild Beasts
of Forest, and Warren, yet the eggs of Hawks, Herons, and such like, are to
them which owe the Land.

Fitzh. 67. No man shall be taken and imprisoned for Vert or Veneson, if he be
not found with the manner, or indicted, Not. bre. fol. 41. the same. See
Britton, fol. 84.

18. Ed. 4. fol. 14. Where a man licenses me to hunt and kill a Buck in his
Park, my servant cannot come in by my commandment, for the license shall be
strict to him to whom it is given.

2. Ed. 4. fol. 5. Trespass, one cannot justify by license of a Keeper to
kill a Deer.

16. Ed. 4. fol. 7. Trespass, by force of arms he broke his Dove-house, and
took his Pigeons in the same, and good, but not abroad when they are out, and
have no mark, and are in the fields.

38. Ed. 3. fol. 12. Trespass for entering into his Warren, and took his
Pheasants, it was held that if the Defendant fly a Pheasant in his own land out
of the Warren, and his Hawke fly and kill in another Warren, his entry into
the Warren is a wrong.

Treheron in his reading showed, that Forest ought to be by Commission and
Proclamation, and that a common person cannot have a Forest, that is to say,
cannot make a Forest, nor use Forrest-Lawes, as it is said: And to a Forest
there are diverse Officers, and to this is incident a Court of Swannimote, but a
common person may have a Chase or Park by Grant or Prescription, and
Forrest-Lawes shall not be to a Chase, nor Court of Swannimote, the Statute of
13. R. 2 is not inquirable in a Leet, but before Justices of Peace, that is to
say, that it is that no Artificer, nor Lay man which has not Lands to the
value of forty shillings per annum, and no Clark which is not advanced to ten
pound per annum, shall not keep a Harrier, or other Dog to Chase, nor shall use
Ferrets, Hayes, Nets, Harepipes, nor Cords, nor other Engines to take or to
distroy wild beasts, upon pain of imprisonment for a year, yet it is
inquirable in a Court Baron, if any hunt or hawke within a Park, Chase, Warren,
or Demesne Lands of the Lord of the Manor without his license, and for that
something of that shall be said.

12. H. 8. fol. 3. Trespass lies for taking a Hound or Dear out of the
possession of the Plaintiff, and has possession, and not property.

12. H. 8. fol. 10. One has but possession of a Deer, and if they go out,
catch that catch may: and if any Hawke kill a Pheasant in your Land, it seems
that I shall have the Pheasant, and yet it seems, that one cannot hunt nor
hawke in another Land.

10. H. 7. fol. 30. Account lies against a Keeper for the Deer, for he has
possession as a Bailiffe; one may grant liberty to one to take every year a
Deer, or to the Keeper the shoulders of them killed.

13. H. 7. fol. 10. Where a Deer* is given to one, he may bring in his servants
to take it, for otherwise peradventure he cannot serve his Warrant.

13. H. 7. fol. 13. It is said, If one has license to chase, he cannot kill,
18. Ed. 4. fol. 14

15. H. 7. fol. 16. Fine for hunting shall be greater then the trespass.

21. H. 7. fol. 30. It is lawful for one to kill a Heart out of the Forest,
though he be proclaimed.

12. H. 8. fol. 4. says, That one may distrain a Brache doing damage which
enters into my Close to chase, 2 Ed. 3. tit. distress 20.

48. Ed. 3. fol. 8. He that has land adjoining to a Chase, may hunt Deer out
of his ground with a little Dog, but not with Begles, and by some if the Dog
follow them into the Chase, and the owner drives them back, yet if they kill
the beast, trespass does not lie. Seek 18 H. 6. f. 22. Held that if a man go
in the way adjoining to a Park, and his Dogs break his Leash, and kill a Dear
in the Park against his will, and he call them back, he shall not be punished;
but it seems that if he do not what he can to hinder them, it shall be a
trespass.

Fitzh. 19. If one incite or procure his Dog to bite a man, he shall have his
trespass upon that.

Assise.
IN so much that an Assise is brough of a Copyholder, some thing is to be
noted to you touching Assizes.

And first I intend, That if a Copi-holder of Inheritance dies seized of a
Copi-hold, and his heir enter (as he may) though there be no Court kept, and
he not admitted, and be outed by a stranger of that diss^isic, he shall have a
Plaint in nature of an Assise. Seek, for it is 13 Eliz. by the Justices, If
Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, dye seized, and his heir enter and take the
profits, he is no trespasser, though the Lord has not admitted him Tenant; and
though no Court were held there in seven years; and further there said, that
it was adjudged in the Chancery, That if Tenant by Copy of Court Roll has
issue two Daughters by diverse Women, and they enter and take the profits, and
one dies before any Court held, now her Cozen collateral ought to Inherit as
heir to her, and not the other Sister as heir to the Father, which proves
that this was a seisin according to their Custom: The same Law is if a
Copl-holder be admitted, and after is thrust out by another, or if another be
admitted to it, and by this, he that was first admitted is thrust out by him
which was secondly admitted, the first Admittee shall have a Plaint in nature
of an Assise of that disseisin.

Plowden, Com. fol. 528. Parson before Induction, cannot grant an anuity, for
he has no possession; so it seems if a Copi-holder dye seized, his issue shall
not have an Assise before admittance, Fitz. 177. a. Where Tenant for life; in
Fee simple, or Fee tail, is disseised of his Lands and Tenements, or outed of
that against his will, this is disseisin, and he shall have an Assise of novel
disseisin, Not. brevium, fol. 107.

Fitz. 195. c. Where my Father or my Mother, my Brother or my Sister, or my
Uncle or my Aunt, or Nephew or Niece, dye seized of any Lands or Tenements or
of Rents, of an Estate of Fee simple; now if a stranger take possession of this
Land or Rent after their death, I which am their heir shall have an Assise of
Mortdancester, Not. brevium, fol. 118.

So for a Copi-hold in Fee, If my Father, Mother, Brother, or Sister, Uncle,
Aunt, Nephew, or Niece, dye seized of that, and a stranger enters, I shall have
a plaint and make protestation to Sue in nature of a Mortdancester, and upon
disseisin as above, in nature of an Assise of novel Disseisin; and it seems I
have not seisin to maintain an action of my own seisin in the Lords Court,
unless I be Tenant to the Lord, and that is where I am admitted, for by the
admittance of the Lord, it shall be said (The Lord has granted seisin, and he
is admitted Tenant:) And by this he is Tenant to have an Assise, and not
before, yet before he may take the profits, though there be no Court to he
admitted, for it was no folly in him, but may have his action at the Common
Law, upon the possession of his Ancestour, which was admitted, though I were
not admitted: And so where my Father dies seized of a Copi-hold in Fee, and I
am admitted, and after another makes claim to it, and is also afterward
admitted and enters, he cannot have a Plaint in nature of an Assise of novell
disseisin against me, for 26 H. 8. fol. 3. If one he admitted, instituted, and
inducted, to a Benefice, and after another be presented, and outs him, he shall
have an Assise or a Trespass, but he presented cannot.

And so if there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Grandfather was
admitted, and dies, and the Father enters, and dies before admittance; the Son
in this case shall have a Plaint in the nature of a Writ of Ayell, and not an
Assise of Mortdancester. And by the Statute of 32 H. 8. chap. 2. it is Enacted,
that no person shall sue, have, or maintain any action for any Lands or
Tenements upon his own possession, above thirty years next before that began.
If the Lord of a Manor grant by Copy, the Tenements of a Copi-holder, without
lawful cause in Fee, or for life, and the Grantee enter, he which has right,
may have an Assise against the Grantee if he were first admitted: As the King
by his Letters Patents, grants to another my Land, and the Patentee enter by
force of this Grant, I shall have an Assise: If a Copi-hold descend, the heir
shall have a trespass at the Common Law before admittance, as above.

Seisin of Assise.
What Seisin is sufficient to have Assise, and what not.
THe Warden of an Hospital shall have an Assise of Rent, where his Predecessor
was seized, and not he himself, for the seisin of the Predecessor is the
seisin of the House, 15 Ed. 3. Tit. 39. accordingly of an Abbot and Prior,
Fitz. fol. 179. c. and 8. As. 16.3. As. 5. according also of a Chauntry Priest,
34. As. 5.

Assise is not maintainable against him which has but a free hold in Law, for
of that seisin, an Assise does not lie, and yet of that seisin a Wife shall be
endowed, Litt. fol. 152.

If a man which has a title to enter set his foot upon the Land and is outed,
that is a sufficient Seisin to have an Assise, 22 Ed. 3. Br. Seisin 52.

If one put in his Beasts to use my common by my commandment, this is a
sufficient Seisin for me to have an Assise, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 25.22 Assise 84.

Reversion is granted to J. S. and the Tenant for life attorne and dies, and J.
S. enter by the Windows, for that he cannot enter by the door and when one
half of his Body was in, he was pulled out, and yet that is a sufficient Seisin
to have an Assise, 8 book of Assizes fol. 25.

Seisin of Fealty is not sufficient Seisin to have an Assise of Rent, but it is
sufficient Seisin to make Avowrie, for all that is as well for the Rent as for
the Fealty, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 11. by Thorpe, 3. Ed. 3. Tit. 40: 3. Ed. 3. Journey
to Norfolk, 20. H. 3. Tit. 433. 49. Ed. 3.15. and 45. Ed. 3: 28.

A Lease is made for life reserving four Marks Rent, and the Lessor is seized
of twenty shillings of that, and takes distress for the remainant, and
Rescous is made, and though but twenty shillings be received, yet that is a
sufficient Seisin to have Assise of all, 8 Ed. 3 fol. 12. Tit. 141.8. Ass. 4.5.
E. 4.2.12. E. 4.7.

If the Lord of a Rent service grant the service to another, and the Tenant
attorn by a penny, and after the grantee distrains, and the Tenant makes
Refocus, here was no Seisin to have Assise of Rent, but if the gift of a penny
had been in name of Seisin and attornment, otherwise it is, 5 Ed. 4. fol. 2.
Littleton fol. 127. b.

Lord and Tenant are, the Lord grants the Rent of his Tenant by a Deed to
another saving to him the services, and the Tenant attorns to that, this is
Rent seck, and if the Rent be denied at the next day of payment he has no
remedy, but if the Tenant when he attornes or after will give a penny or a half
penny in name of Seisin of the rent, then if after the next day of payment, the
Rent be to him denied, he shall have an Assise and that is a sufficient Seisin
to have an Assise for all the Rent, Littleton fol: 42.

Seisin of parcel of Rent is sufficient to have Assise of all the Rent, 8 book
of Assizes 4.

Seisin of Fealty is not sufficient Seisin to have an Assise of Rent but Seisin
of Escuage is Seisin of Homage, 21 E. 3. fol. 52. Not. Brevium fol. 109.5. Ed.
2 Avowrie 209.

Using of common by Tenants at will, is sufficient Seisin for him in Reversion
to have Assise of common, If he or his Tenant at will be disturbed, 22 Assise
according Fitzh. fol. 180.

By Brudnell, of a thing transitory a man shall be in possession without
seizure, as my Tenant dies, his Heir within age I shall have a Ravishment of
ward without a Seiser, but I shall not have an ejectment of ward of Land which
is local, nor Assise of Land, without first having possession indeed, 14 H. 8.
fol. 27.

If one recover and be put in by a Clod in the half by the Sheriff, and he
against whom the recovery was, will not go out, yet that is a sufficient Seisin
to have an Assise 2 Ed. 2. Tit. execution 119.

If a man holds of the King in chief, and holds other Land of another Lord and
dies, his Heir within age, which intrudes at his full age, and paies his Rent
to the Lord, this is a good Seisin to have an Assise, notwithstanding that he
has not sued Livery, for the Signiory was not suspended by the possession of
the King, but only the distress, for after Livery the Lord may distraine for
his Arrerages, 34 H. 8. Tit. 48.47. Ed. 3. fol. 12. and 13. H. 7. fol. 15.

Pleas of Assise by Bailiff.
Also it is expedient for you to know what Pleas the Bailiff in Assise shall
plead, and what the Disseiser, and what the Tenant after the Bailiffe has
pleaded.
BAiliff may plead a Plea which is triable by Assise, and none other, 6 H. 7.
fol. 15.

Pleas of a Bailiff ought to be such which are triable by the Assise, and for
that he cannot pray aid of the King, 8. H. 7. fol. 12. and 1. book of Assizes
1. accordingly.

The Bailiff shall have any Challenge to an array and to the heads, 9 H. 7.
fol. 24. and Abridgment book of Assizes, fol. 48. the same.

The Bailiff may plead non-tenure or mis-naming of the Plaintiff, but not of
his Master and conclude, if, etc. 22 H. 6. f. 44.9. H. 7. f. 24.26 As. 61:

Bailiff may plead, that the Tenements are in another Town, for that is an
abatement, 9. H. 7. fol. 24 Abridgment Assise f. 47. and 6 H. 7. f. 15.
accordingly; but 22 H. 6. fol. 50. seems contrary, but a Bailiff cannot
disclaim, but an Attorney may, 13 Ed. 3. Tit. 8.

Bailiff pleads out of his Fee, Judgment if without specialty, etc. and he
cannot have that at this day, but in 2 Ed. 3. Tit. 10. he has this Plea, for
the Bailiff cannot have any Pleas, but where he may conclude over, and if it be
not found, no wrong no disseisin, etc. see the Abridgment book of Assizes fol.
47. and 2. Assise 4.

Bailiff may plead ancient Demesne, and conclude if it be not found, etc. and
conclude to Assise, otherwise Bailiff cannot plead ancient Demesne, for that,
that it is triable by the book of Doomes-day, and for that he cannot conclude
Judgment, if the Court will acknowledge, Abridgment book of As. f. 48. and 9.
book As. 2, see 6 H. 7. fol. 15.

Bailiffe may plead that the Plaintiff is seized the day of the Writ
purchased, and every other exception tryable, by Assise, 9 As. 4.

Bailiffe cannot plead that the Writ is purchased hanging another Assise, nor
not attached by fifteen days, for it is tryable by the Record, Abridgment of
Assise, fol. 48. 8 As. 2. and 8 Ed. 3. As. 40.

Bailiffe may plead that his Master is Parson of D. not naming Parson, and if
it be not found, no wrong, etc. 12. As. 4.

Bailiffe may plead misnaming and joynt-tenancy without Deed, 6 H. 4. fol. 15.
and 8 H. 6. fol. 56.

Bailiffe cannot plead Excommunication or outlawry, in the Plaintiff, for he
cannot plead a Dilatory Plea, unless it be tryable by the Assise, and that he
may conclude, and if it be not found, no wrong, no disseisin, 5 Ed. 4. fol 113.

Bailiffe may plead not attached, by fifteen days, Abridgment of Assise, fol.
47.

Pleas of the Disseisor.
THe Disseisor may plead release of actions personalls in bar, but not release
of actions realls, for none shall plead that but the Tenant, Litt. fol. 115.

The Disseisor may plead, that the Demandant has entered, hanging the Writ,
notwithstanding that, he goes to the Tenancy; and the reason which is there
made, is, for that that such Plea goes to excuse him of damages: And note, that
there it appears also, that the Disseisor shall plead every bar, unless sach
a Bar which goes to the Tenancy, or to extinguish the right of the Plaintiff
in the Land, as if he pleads release of all actions personals, or that the
Plaintiff has entered, hanging the Writ, that he may plead, but he cannot
plead release of right made to the Tenant of the Land, nor other plea which
goes to the Land, but he shall plead every plea to the Writ which does not
extend to the tenancy, as if he had no Tenant named in the Writ, or no such in
Rerum natura, and misnaming of the Plaintiff, or of himself, 35 H. 6. fol.
13. Contrary, 37 H. 6.3. by Choke: Therefore inquire.

The Disseisor shall not plead any plea to the Tenancy, which the Tenant by his
admittance has made good, 26 Book of Assizes, 49.

Disseisor cannot plead in abatement, that the Plaintiff has a Writ of an
older date hanging against him, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 25. and 23. Ass. 14.

Disseisor cannot plead ancient Demesne, without taking the tenancy upon him,
21 Ass. 2.

Disseisor cannot plead Record or Estoppell, for by the sailing of the Record,
he cannot loose the Land, 20 Ed. 3. Brook, Assise, 403.

Disseisor shall plead misnaming of the Plaintiff, and also that the
Plaintiff is covert of Baron, and if he allege outlawry in the Plaintiff,
he ought to have the Record in hand; and note, that the Disseisor in proper
person, or by Attorney, and not by Bailiffe, pleads that the Plaintiff has
another Assise hanging against him, as it appears, 8 Ed. 3. Ass. 140. See 28
Ass. 38.24 Ass. 91. and this seems by the Statute of Westminster. 2. chap. 15.19
Ass. 10. and 20 Ed. 3. Ass. 20.

Disseisor may plead entry of the Plaintiff after the last continuance and
joynt-tenancy, for he may plead all Pleas which excuse him of damages, or which
are in bar which do not extinct the right of the Land, 35 H. 6. fol. 16.

Disseisor may plead outlawry in the Plaintiff, that is, where the Tenant has
not pleaded and admitted the Writ, 29 Ass. 61. and 20 Ed. 3. Ass. 20.

It is said by Babington, That a Disseisor can not plead any plea in bar, but
no wrong, or that it arises to so much, 2 H. 6. fol. 1.

Pleas by Tenant.
Where after a Bailiffe has pleaded, or the Tenant himself, and the Assise
upon that adjourned, or award, or has imparled, the Tenant cannot plead new
matter, unless it be matter of a later time, or a matter following, or a
matter upon which may have Certificate, or the general Issue.
THe Tenant pleads to Assise by Bailiffe, and the Assise awarded, the Tenant
can plead no plea in bar afterward, but such upon which he may have
Certificate of Assise, 10 H. 7. fol. 12. 8 Ass. 17.

The Tenant pleads by a Bailiffe, and the Assise remains for default of
Jurors, and now the Tenant comes in proper person, and says, The Plaintiff
has received the Tenements of him, hanging the Writ, and has let to him for
years, and has, for that he comes in of later time, 10 Ass. 24.18 Ed. 3.
fol. 33.

If a plea be pleaded, and the Justices dye, all shall be pleaded anew, but if
they be at Issue, that shall stand, 5 H. 7. fol. 7. b. by Hussy.

After adjournment upon the Plea of the Bailiffe, the Tenant may plead matter
which comes of later time, 18 Ed: 3. tit. 33.

The Tenant himself after the Assise awarded, may leave his bar, and plead
the general Issue, but he cannot plead a new bar after Issue, 34 H. 6. fol.
10. and 29. 40 Ed. 3. fol. 48. b.

The Tenant pleads in Bar, and after the Jury has the view, and he leaves
his Bar, and pleads to the Assise, 34. H. 6. fol. 29. and abridg. Assis. fol.
138.

Where they are adjourned upon a point certain, he cannot plead new plea
afterward, unless pursuing, as, if the Tenant himself before adjournment,
had pleaded special Bastardy, he may plead afterward general Bastardy, 42
Ed. 3. fol. 12.

After adjournment upon a Plea in bar certain, he cannot plead new plea in
bar, but only the general issue, 8 As. 10. and 10 Ed. 3. tit. 157. and 44
Book of Ass. 1.

Where they are adjourned upon a Plea in abatement, and after the Writ is
awarded good, he may afterward plead in bar, 6 Book of Ass. 1.

Infant in Assise pleads Ontlawry of Felony in Bar, and at another day was
suffered to plead Release of the Plaintiff in Bar, 14 Ass. 15.

Assise, the Tenant pleads in Bar, and the Plaintiff joins Issue, and the
Court do not take the Assise the same day, and the next day the Tenant cannot
change his Plea, 11 H. 4. fol. 2. b.

Where the Tenant pleads to the Assise by a Bailiffe, if his Master have a
Release or a Writing, of which the Jury cannot have notice, then if the Assise
pass against the Bailiffe, yet the Master shall have Certificate upon this
Writing; the same Law is, if the Verdict be not well examined by the Justices,
and see more there, Fitzherbart, fol. 181. b.

The Tenant pleads in Bar, a Deed of the Ancester of the Plaintiff with
warranty, and the Plaintiff makes Title, and afterward he cannot plead in
abatement, that the Lands were in another Town, for that, that the Assise was
awarded, 10 Edw. 3. tit. 157. and 1 Ass. 17.

The Tenant pleads in Bar, and the next day pleads by a Bailiff to the Assise,
and may, for that the Assise was not awarded, Abridg. As. f. 47.

Where the Assise was awarded upon the Plea of the Bailiff, at another day
after, the Tenant comes and pleads Release, and has it, for that he may have
Certificate, Abridgment As. fol. 138.

The Tenant may relinquish his Bar, and plead the general Issue, otherwise it
is in Cosenage, Grandfather and great Grandfather, but he cannot plead a new
Bar, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 49. Ass.

Assise, the Tenant pleads in Bar the Deed of the Ancester of the Plaintiff
with warranty, and the Plaintiff makes Title, and after the Tenant waives the
Bar, and pleads in abatement, that the Lands are in another Town, and cannot,
1 Book of Assizes 17.

Assise, If a Plea be pleaded, and the Justices dye, all shall be pleaded a
new, but if they are at Issue they shall stand, 4 H. 7. fol. 7.

Where in (...) Assise a man shall have diverse Pleas to the writ and conclude
over, no wrong, no Disseisin, and where not.

NOte, that the party himself or his Bailiff may have diverse Pleas, where one
is not contrary to the other, concluding over, no wrong; as if he plead
mis-naming of the Plaintiff, if it be not found; no Tenant of the Freehold
named in the Writ, and if it be found, no such Town and such like; and
notwithstanding, and if it be not found, no wrong, for one is not contrary to
the other, but if he will say, that the Tenements are in another Town, and if
it be not found no Tenant of the Freehold named in the Writ, and if it be not
found no wrong, these Pleas he shall not have, for he shall not plead no Tenant
of the Freehold named in the Writ, etc. And after say the Tenements are in
another Town.

Note, though the book at large be, if it be found leaving out this word, (Ne)
yet the book of Entryes is, (if it be not found) and so it seems in reason that
it shall be as above, if it be not found, etc. 36 H. 6. fol. 1.

Where one pleads to a Writ and also in Bar, what Bar is that which does not
go to the point of Assise? scilicet, no wrong, but it is a Bar out of the
point of Assise, in such a case he shall not have both the Pleas, for by such
Bar the Plea to the Writ is waived, as in an Assise of Rent, the Tenant pleads
wrong naming of himself, and if it be not found, out of his Foe, he shall not
have these two Pleas, 3 Ed. 3.15. Tit. 172. Tit. 223.

It seems if the Tenant plead in abatement of the Writ, he shall not plead over
to the Assise, if his Plea to the Writ be not triable by the Assise, 22 Book of
Assizes 14.

In an Assise of Rent, the Bailiff pleads mis-naming of the Town, and if found
not so, etc. That another is Tenant of the Rent not named, for this is not
contrary, and it seems that in an Assise of Rent, the Tenant of the Land may
say that the Land whereout, etc. is in another Town, and if found it be not,
that he has a taker of the Rent not named, contrary it is in an Assise of
Land, 15 Ed. 3. Tit. 55.

In Assise by a Master and his Brethren of the fraternity of nine orders, of
Angels in he County Middlesex, Defendant plead no such corporation by this
name in this County, and if it be not found, not wrong, he shall not have them
both, for the first Plea is in Bar, and shall not have Bar and general
Issue, 22 Ed. 4 fol. 34.

Assise of Lands in Woxbridge, the Tenant pleads that they are in Collam and
not in Woxbridge, and if it be not found, no wrong, and he has, 11 H. 4. fol.
2. b.

It is said that in an Assise the Tenant or his Bailiff may plead tewnty
several matters in abatement or to an Assise, and conclude if it be not found,
etc. and is good, 1 Ed. 4. fol. 4. and 8 H. 6. fol. 9.

Where the Assise shall be awarded at large, that is to say, in point of
Assise, that is to say, to inquire of Seisin and Disseisin, and where in Right
of Damages, and where not.
ASsise, the Tenant pleads in abatement, that the Plaintiff has received the
Land of him hanging the Assise, and that he has let to him for years again,
and the Plaintiff says that he has continued his Estate which he had by
Disseisin, without that, that any Estate, present of him he take, and the
Assise was charged upon the point, and over upon the Seisin and Disseisin, 10
book of Assizes 24.

If the Tenant plead in Bar and the Plaintiff makes title, and the Tenant does
not traverse that, the Assise shall be awarded at large, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 24.

Where there is a good Bar pleaded, and an outing is confessed and the Bar is
traversed, or if the Plaintiff make Title, and that is found for the Plaintiff,
or if there be an ill Bar pleaded, that the Plaintiff need not answer, but say
come the Assise upon the Title, and it is found for the Plaintiff, in all these
cases the Plaintiff shall have judgment without inquiring of Seisin and
Disseisin, 6 H. 7. fol. 2.

Where the Plaintiff makes Title at large without answering to the Bar, and
the Tenant do not traverse this Title, he shall not answer to that, as that
confessed and avoided, or without saying, let the Assise come upon the Title,
but let the Assise run without any thing saying to the Title, there the Assise
shall be taken at large and not upon the Title, as in the Assise the Plaintiff
makes Title at large, and in the end says (and this he is ready to aver by
Assise, and the foresaid tenant likewise) the Assise shall be taken at large,
the reason as above, so it shall be done as it seems, where the Title is no
Title at large, but such which confesses the Bar and avoides it, and so it is
held by Sharde, 28 Assise 24.

Contrary Law is, if the Plaintiff in his Title traverse the Bar, and the
Tenant let^ the Assise ^un, there the Assise shall be taken to inquire of the
thing traversed, and also his Title, as it appears, 26 Ed. 3. fol. 61.

And the reason of this seems to be, for that, that in Assise the Plaintiff
shall not be received to traverse the Bar without making Title, and so the
Title there material, and so note that the Assise shall not be awarded at
large, but in such a case where the Title is not material, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 24.

When the Assise is taken at large, if they find another Title, the Plaintiff
shall recover, and the Assise if they will may inquire only of Seisin and
Disseisin, without being charged or compelled to find any Title, as in Assise
nothing is pleaded but no wrong, here the Assise may find Title if they will,
or otherwise say nothing but of Seisin and Disseisin, and also note that in
these cases before; the Assise is awarded at large, without inquiring of the
Bar.

And the reason is that that which is the Bar is waived; the same Law is where
the Bar is not good, and the Plaintiff makes Title, accepting the Bar, 28.
Assise 17.

If the Bar be ill pleaded, and the Title good, the Assise shall be awarded in
point of Assise, and not upon the Title, for if it be pleaded ill on the part
of the Defendant, the Assise shall be awarded in point of Assise, that is to
say, of Seisin and Diffeisin, 35 H. 6. fol. 54. By Fortescue, and 33 H. 6. fol.
40. by Littleton.

The tenant pleads for rain Release, and it is found against him,
notwithstanding the Deed of the Plaintiff, now the Assise shall be awarded in
right of the Damages, for an outing is confessed implicatively, by pleading a
Release, 23 Ass. 11.8. Ass. 15. but 30. Ed. 3. Fitzh. Ass. 100. The Assise
shall be taken at large.

The Tenant pleads Deed of the Ancestor of the Plaintiff in Bar, and found
false, by which it was inquired only of Damages, 17 book of Assizes 13.

The Tenant pleads foreign Release in Bar, upon which they were adjourned, and
the Defendant makes default, by which the Assise was awarded at large, see 26
book of Assizes 30. 30 Ed. 3. Tit. 100. and 17 book of Assizes 31.
Notwithstanding it seems where an outing is confessed, directly or impliedly;
and found for the Plaintiff, the Assise shall be awarded to inquire of Damages,
and not upon the Seisin or Disseisin only.

If the Tenant plead a dying seized, and does not acknowledge an outing Seisin
and Disseisin, shall be inquired, 8 H. 4.51.

When an Infant brings an Assise and the Tenant pleads a Deed of his Ancestor,
then the Assise shall be awarded to inquire at large, Natura brevium, fol. 169.

In point of Assise it is, when the Tenant pleads no wrong no Disieisin, and
out of the point, is properly when the Tenant pleads foreign Release, or for
rain matter triable in another County, and in right of Damages is when the
Tenant acknowledges over, and pleads matter which is found against him, or
acknowledges over, or demurrs in Law and that is adjudged against him, now the
Assise shall be taken in right of Damages, 15 Ass. 3.18. Ass. 8.23. Ass 36.26.
Ass. 41.28. Ass. 15.28 Ass. 14.17. b.

If the Tenant plead Release, and the Assise found for the Plaintiff, the Assise
shall be awarded in right of Damages; the same Law is, if the Tenant plead
Record and fail of that, the Assise shall be awarded in right of Damages, 8.
Book of Assizes 10.

The Tenant pleads foreign Release, by which they were adjourned in Bench, and
found not his Deed, and the Plaintiff release his Damages, and has Judgment
forthwith, 6. book of Assizes 4.

The Tenant pleads foreign Release in which are witnesses, and Process was
awarded against the witnesses which make default, and the Assise was awarded in
point of Assise, 18 book of Assizes 8.

Where the Tenant pleads a Record, and fails of that by the Statute of Assise
shall be awarded in right of damages, 27. Ass. 1.17 Ass. 2.13. Ass. 15. and
16. and 23. Ass. 3.

Note, that in Assise, where the Plaintiff makes Title at large without
answering to the Bar, and the Tenant do not traverse the Title, nor answer to
it as to confess and avoid, in saying comes the Assise upon the Title, and lets
the Assise run without saying any thing to the Title, there the Assise is taken
at large, and not upon the Title, as in Assise the Plaintiff makes Title at
large, and in the end says, he is ready to affirm this by Assise, and the
aforesaid Tenant likewise, 28 Ass. 24.

If the Tenant acknow ledge an outing in his Plea, the Assise shall be awarded
in right of damages, 1 H. 6. fol. 5.

6 E. 6. fol. 418. Assise against two, if one take the Entire tenancy, and
plead in Bar, and the other make also Plaintiff choose his Tenant, the same
Law, if one plead no wrong and the other plead a Bar, without that, that the
other has nothing, and every one take the Entire Tenancy.

In Assise against many, where the Plaintiff ought to choose his Tenant at his
peril, and where not.

ASSise against two, if every one of these take the whole Tenancy and severally
plead in Bar to the whole Tenancy, the Plaintiff ought to choose his Tenant at
his peril, but if one plead in Bar; and the other knowledgeth the action, or
says nothing, it is otherwise, 33 H. 6. f. 36. and 37.

Assise against two, it seems if one plead in abatement and the other in Bar,
if the Plaintiff mischoose his Tenant, it is not material, but he shall answer
to the Plea in abatement, but diverse seem the contrary, and it seems if both
plead in abatement, he ought to choose his Tenant at his peril, see 8. book of
Assizes 1. and 44 Ed. 3. fol. 23.

Assise against two, each takes upon him the whole tenancy, and pleads in Bar,
the Plaintiff mischoose his tenant and was barred by opinion, 20 book of
Assizes 4.

Assise against two, one takes the tenancy and pleads no wrong, and the other
takes the tenancy, without that, that the other has any thing and pleads in
Bar, there the Plaintiff shall be constrained to choose his tenant at his
peril, as well as if both had pleaded in Bar, and had accepted the tenancy
severally, and if it be found that he mischoose his Tenant, the Writ shall
abate, but he shall not be barred, 9 Ed. 3. Tit. 384.

The Plaintiff was admitted to choose his Tenant after adjournment, 23 Ass. 16.

Assise against two, each takes his tenancy and pleads, it seems here, that the
Plaintiff at his own peril shall choose his tenant, and that shall be first
inquired, and by some, if he mischoose his Tenant the Writ shall abate, 8 Ass.
1.

Assise against two, one pleads that he is a Villain of J. S. and the other by
Bailiff plead to the Assise, and the Plaintiff chose him which pleads by Bailif
to the Assise for his Tenant, and pray the Assise, and he comes and pleads in
Bar and was suffered the same day, 22 book Assizes 7.

Assise against an Infant and two others; where each one severally takes the
whole tenancy upon him, and pleads in Bar, the Plaintiff shall choose his
Tenant at his peril, and he chooses the Infant for the Tenant, and the
Tenant, and they found the Infant Tenant, and the two others Disseisors also,
and the Plaintiff recovers, but it seems there if he mischoose his Tenant, the
Writ shall abate, and for that, that the Diffeisin was made to the use of the
Infant, which did not enter and is Tenant only by agreement, for that it seems
it is here an Error to adjudge the Infant Tenant which had nothing but by
agreement to the Disseisin, 3 H. 4. fol. 16.

If the Plaintiff choose one to be his Tenant of all, which is not tenant, the
Writ shall abate, Abridgment of the Assizes, fol. 41. B.

By Fortescue in Assise against two, one takes the tenancy severally and pleads
in Bar, the Plaintiff shall not answer to their Pleas in Bar, nor to none of
them, but first shall choose his Tenant, then after may the Plaintiff answer to
his Bar sufficiently in time, and if he ill choose his Tenant, the Writ shall
abate, Abridgment of the book of Assizes fol. 116. a.

Return of Assise against J. S.
Pledges to prosecute Adam Clarke. David Park.


THe within named J. S. is attached by one Ox, of price twenty shillings.

The Rest of the execution of this complaint (and before the Justices of
Assise) and of this Writ, does appear in ^^^ertaine Scedule annexed to this
Writ. J. D. Esquire, Sheriff.

The Pannell.
THe recognition of an Assise of novell Disseisin, betwixt J. D. Plaintiff,
and J. S. Deforceant, of a Freehold in D. and then the names of the Recognitors
follow; and afterward,

The sum of the Jurors aforesaid, and every of them, John Heart. Richard Smart.


Manucaptors, summoners of the aforesaid Jurors, and every of them, John Do.
Christopher Croo. John Den. Richard Fen.


This by Plowden, Com. fol. 37. Ass. 12.

What is a good Title in Assise for the Plaintiff, and what not.

TEnant plead in Bar, it is no title for the Plaintiff to say, that he was
seized tell by the Tenant disseised and traverse the Bar, without conveying
unto him possesion by title before his possesion as by feoffment or otherwise,
27 H. 6. fol. 2.

Tenant pleads a feoffment made by J. S. to him and gives color, Plaintiff
says, that J. D. levied a fine upon release to him, and it is not good, but to
say that he was seized, and levied a fine, otherwise the title is good, so if
he be entitled by feoffment, or recover of a stranger, he shall say for title
that the stranger was seized, and infeoffed him, 10 H. 6. fol. 22.

Where the Bar is material, as diffent, feoffment of Ancestor the Plaintiff
with Warranty, Recovery, Fine, etc. Plaintiff shall not make title at large, but
ought in his title answer the Bar, as confess and avoid or traverse it, but
where it is a Bar at large, he may make title at large, without answering the
Bar, 34 H. 6. fol. 46. 35 H. 6.67. and the book of Entries 120. 5 H. 7. fol.
29.

Where the Bar is not sufficient, the Plaintiff may demur and need not to make
title, and where the tenant in his Bar gives sufficient title to the Plaintiff,
Plaintiff need not make title, as if the tenant says that his Father had him
eldest and the Plaintiff youngest, Plaintiff may say that the tenant is a Bastard
without making title, and is good, 20 H. 6. f. 38. and 39.

Where the Plaintiff makes title at large, the tenant may say, come the Assise
upon the title, and is good, 15 H. 7. f. 13.

The tenant pleads that he recovered against J. S. and the Estate of the
Plaintiff mean by abatement upon J. S. hanging the Writ, Plaintiff says, that
long time before the Writ that he himself was seized, and good, without showing
how he came to it, for the Defendant has given to him possession, seek 9 book
of Ass. 10.

The tenant pleads feoffment of the Grandfather of the Plaintiff with Warranty,
Plaintiff says that his Grandfather was seized, and he as Cosen and Heir to
him entered, and is good without showing how his Grandfather came to it, see,
10 Ass. 23. 9 Ass. 11.

The tenant pleads one Bar, the Plaintiff intitles himself by release with
collateral Warranty, and it is good, 17 Assise 18.

38 H. 8. Tit. 3.26. Br. Tit. Traverse, P. 26. if the tenant plead that his
Father was seized in Fee, and by protestation died seized, it is said that the
Plaintiff may make title by a Stranger, without that, that the Father of the
tenant was seized in Fee.

5 H. 7. fol. 29. Where the Bar is material, the Plaintiff shall not make his
title at large without answering to the Bar, but in Assise, 34. H. 6. fol. 24.

11 H. 7. fo. 28. If the Bar be ill, the Plaintiff may pray the Assise without
title.

6 Ass. Tenant pleads Fine of an Ancestor of the Plaintiff, to which the
Plaintiff says, the same Ancestor had but for life, the reversion in him, and
that he entered by forfeiture, and good, without showing how he has the
reversion.

Not. Bre. 109. If the tenant pleads Plea in Bar, and the Plaintiff makes him
title and traverseth the Bar, although the title of the Plaintiff be false yet
the tenant shall not have advantage, to take the Assise upon the title, but he
shall be driven to maintain his Bar, otherwise it is where the Plaintiff makes
him title and does not answer the Bar.

Abridgment of book of Ass. fol. 81. Where the title is found for the
Plaintiff, and there is no Disseissor, the Writ shall abate.

The tenant says that J. S. held the Land of him and died without Heir, by
which he entered, as in his Escheate and gives color, etc. the Plaintiff faith,
one H. enfeoffed him, and it is no title, for he ought to answer to the Bar as
well as where the tenant makes title by descent, 27 Assise 71.

Assise of Rent, it is no title to show that J. S. granted to him the Rent by
Deed or by Fine, but he ought to show how the Rent began, that is to say, If it
be a Rent charge, or a Rent service, or a Rent Seck, 31 Ass. 16.

Assise, the tenant pleads in Bar feoffment of the Father of the Plaintiff with
warranty, and the Plaintiff says, that his Ancestor died seifed, and this
descended to him, and allowed by Scroope without showing how he came to that
afterward, 10 book Ass. 23.

Where the tenant prays the Assise upon the title, and upon that the Assise
is awarded, the Assise cannot find other title for the Plaintiff, but he may
find matter, which may stand with the same title to enforce it, but if the
title be traversed, he cannot find another title, but only the point put in
the Assise, 28 book of Assizes 17.

An Act of Parliament, Fine or Recovery are of such a force, that if one be
bound by them, the Plaintiff cannot make title to this Land, unless by reason
of a title to him grown of later times. As if one recovers against me or my
Ancestor, and has execution, and after Lenten, and dye seized, my Heir shall
not make him title by his descent, against the Recovery, without showing he
has title after the recovery, the same Law of a Fine, see 10 H. 7. fol. 5.32.
H. 6.5. and 33 book of Assizes fol. 19.

Pleas in Bar and in Abatement.
IT seems a feoffment of the Plaintiff is no Plea in Bar, for that amounts to
no wrong, nor Desseisin 2 H. 4. fol. 20. the same 15 Ed. 4. fol. 11.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 11. A Lease for years or for life, the reversion to the
Plaintiff or a feoffment of the Plaintiff with warranty, and rely upon the
warranty, is a good Bar^.

Abridgment of Ass. fol. 31. The tenant may plead, that partition was made
between the Plaintiff and J. S. whose Estate he has, and it is a good Bar.

30 H. 6. fol. 1. Assise, the tenant says that the Lands put in view, and in
plaint are in another Town, and if it be found, no tenant of the Freehold
named in the Writ, etc. By the Court he shall not have the second Plea, for
none may say that the Land is in another town but the tenant, and so has
accepted the tenancy by his Plea.

30 H. 6. fol. 7. Assise, the tenant says that T. B. was seized and disseised
by W. W. to whom T. B. made release, and against his own Deed disseised W.W.
and infeoffed five persons, which infeoffed the Plaintiff, upon which W. W.
re-entred, whose Estate the tenant seized has, it is good, see Pleas in Bar
Tit. Abridg. Ass. fol. 30.

Abridgement Assise, fol. 41. If the Plaintiff choose one to be his tenant of
all, where he is not, the Writ shall abate.

Abridgement of Assise, fol. 42. A man cannot plead in Assise that there is
another hanging, to which he has appeared, unless that he take the tenancy
upon him, and for that it is no Plea for the Disseisor.

Bridgement Ass. 44. Death of one of the tenants shall not abate the Assise,
but for the portion, if he be a Disse^sor, and tenant of another parcel, 27
Ass. 45.40 Ass. 15.

Abridgement Ass. fol. 43. Assise of tenements in D. and S. the tenant says
that all is in S. if that be so, the Writ shall abate, for he cannot abridge a
whole Town, but see now by the Statute of 21 H. 8. chap. 3. where he may
abridge.

Abridgement of Ass. fol. 45. Assise of Lands in D. is no Plea if there be two
Dales, for that the Plaintiff shall recover, by the view of the Jury, 29 Ass.
59.

Abridgement of Ass. 106. Assise, tenant pleads in Bar, and after the Jury
has the view, he leaves his Bar, and pleads to the Assise.

Plaint in Assise.
PLaint of profits of an Office, though it has no form it shall not abate, as
first it ought to suppose disseisin, and after shall make title, and though it
were not so, it shall not abate, 12 H. 6. fol. 22.

Plaint of a Croft is good, but Precipe of a Croft is not good, Abridgment of
Assise, fol 130. b. and 8 Hen. 6. fol. 3.

Time of Ed. 6. Brook, tit. False Latin and form, 66. Wood was put before
Pasture in a Plaint of Assise, and exception thereof taken, yet good, though it
were contrary to the Register, by the Commentaries, fol. 169.

Plaint of a Croft, and was amended, 14 Ass. 13. and 25 Ed. 3. tit. 25. the
same, Brook, demand. 17.34.

Plaint of a piece of Land, containing in length twenty feet, and in breadth
ten, and is good, 14 Ass. 13. and 9 H. 4. fol. 3. the same.

Plaint by the Governor of an Hospital; it shall be of a House and not of an
Hospital, 8 Ass. 29 and Assise 137.

Plaint of two parts of Salt Coot, is good, ninth Book Ass. 12.

Plaint of a Garment, or thirty shillings, though it be uncertain, for that it
is according to the Deed, it is good, 11 Book of Ass. 8.

Plaint in Assise of a Garden lies, but not a Precipe, 22 Ed. 3. tit. 22. 5
Ed. 2. Brook demand. 39. and Fitzh. breife 797.

Plaint was of a Mill and does not say a water-Mill, nor VVinde-Mill, yet good,
21 Assise 23.

Plaint of a Garment and the specialty is of a Garment with furr, and the
plaint good, for the Garment conteines all, 22 Ass. 10.

Where the Plaintiff may abridge in Assise, and in what other Actions he may
abridge, and how.
IN a Writ of ward, the Writ is (of the custody of the Land and Heir) and is
not certain, and for that he may abridge as he may in assise and Writ of
Dower, 39 Ed. 3. Tit. Brief 10. and 32.

In trespass, the Writ is (of Goods and Chattells) and he counts of Corn,
and ten pounds, and for that, that Money is not (Goods and Chattells) he
abridged it, see, 8. Tit. abridgment 11. which says, that he ought to express
the Money in the Writ, and for that he did not, he abridged, 39 Ed. 3. Tit.
Breife 11.

In all cases where the Writ is (of a Freehold) and uncertain he may abridge
by June, as in assise of Dower, and a Writ of ward, 14 H. 6. fol. 4.

In ward for that the Demand is not certain, but of the (custody of the Land
and Heir) therefore the Plaintiff counts of the Manor of D. and twenty acres,
and the Defendant says that the twenty acres are parcel of the Manor, the
Plaintiff may abridge the twenty acres, 39 E. 3: f. 10. Brooks abridgment 10.

Assise of Land in great Dunmowe and little D. you cannot abridge all in one
Town, 8. H. 6. fol. 56.

Assise, and in Dower he may abridge, but he cannot abridge a whole Town, 14 H.
6. fol. 4.

Assise where a plaint is of a Manor, he cannot abridge, for that it is
entire, 19 H. 6. fol. 13.33 H. 6. Tit. abridgment 2.

Assise, plaint of Rent and Land, after that the Tenant has pleaded in Bar,
the Plaintiff shall abridge in right of the Land, 14 Ass. 9.

Plaint abridge in attaint, Rast. Assi. 17.
35 H. 6. fol. 13.

Assise of Common in forty acres, the Plaintiff cannot abridge, for that that
the Common is Entire, but at this day it is contrary by the Statute of, 31 H.
8. chap. 3.29. Ass. 10.

Plaintiff in every Assise at his pleasure may abridge, and for that also by
the Statute may abridge where the plaint is of a Manor, 21 H. 8. chap. 3.

After Verdict he cannot abridge.
IT is said, that after Verdict, the Plaintiff cannot abridge his Plaint, 28
As. 38.

Dower demanded may abridge after view, Edw. 3. fol. 3.

Assise, they were adjourned upon Title.
ASsise, they were adjourned upon Title, and for that, that they cannot agree
at the day of the Adjournment, after the argument, Plaintiff abridge and might,
10 H. 6. fol. 22.

After the Jury in Assise were together in the house before their Verdict came,
the Plaintiff, and abridged, and was suffered, 33 H. 7. Tit. 6. B.

Attornement.
WHen any Manor descends to the Lord, upon every descent to the Lord, it
belongs to the Steward at the first Court to make all the Tenants to make
Fealty; and also upon every purchase of Manor to enter the Fealty of every
Tenant which holds of that, and also to enter their Attornement and Seisin of
Services, to the end that the Lord may by this means distrain for his Services,
and the Tenants may hereafter be better known to him, and by 28 H. 8. Tit. 40.
Attornement may be made by Tenants to the Lord in his Court, to the Steward or
Purchasor, and not to his Servant in absence of the Lord.

For that something shall be said of Fealty, and where there ought to be
Attornement, and where not.
IT is said, that the Tenant that has made Homage to the Father, shall not
make Homage to the Son, for that he has once made Homage to his Lord, but yet
he shall make Fealty to the Son, though he have made it to the Father* but if
the Manor be recovered against the Father which has taken Homage, now he
shall make Homage again, Littleton fol. 29.

If a Manor be exchanged, yet there ought to be Attornement, otherwise the
Lord cannot distrain for the Arrearages, Perkins fol. 47, 56, 58.

If one alien his Manor by Deed indented of Bargain and Sale, and inrolls
that according to the Statute; that is good without Attornement, and the Lord
may distrain for his Services, and the same Law is of a Reversion so granted,
Rastall, Inrolment 2.
but of a Grant by Fine it is otherwise, 27 H. 8. chap. 16. 30 H. 8. Tit.
Attornement.

If the King grant Reversion of Lands, or grant a Manor to one and his Heirs,
or otherwise by his Letters Patents, the Patentee may distrain or avow without
Attornement, and he need no Attornement, 34 H. 6. fol. 7. Fitzh. fol. 60. J.
and 6 Ed. 3. Tit. 13. Natura brevium fol. 171. accordingly, 12 Ed. 4. fol. 3.

Where a Manor or Reversion is devised by Will in writing, that is good, and
shall pass without Attornement, 19 H. 6. fol. 24. Littleton fol. 132.
accordingly of Devise, where Lands were devisable by Custom, 34 H. 6. fol. 7.

The Lord may avow upon the Tenant by the Courtesy, and in dower, and upon him
which recovered against his Tenant without Attornement, for they are in by Law,
and need to have no Attornement, 36 H. 6. fol. 35.

If one have a Manor delivered in Execution by virtue of a statute Merchant,
or an Elegit, he may avow without Attornement, 20 H. 6. fol. 7.

Where a Manor Escheats, or the Lord have that as a Perquisite by his
Villain, he may avow without Attornement, Littleton fol. 132. 34 H. 6. fol. 7.
accordingly, and Fitzh. fol. 60. J.

If a man have a Common of Pasture to a certain number, or a Common of Estovers
certain, and grants them over, these shall pass without Attornement, for that
they are not to be taken by the hands of Tenants, but by the mouths of Beasts;
and where no attendance nor payment is to be made by the Tenant, there the
things may pass without Attornement, 31 H. 8. Tit. Attornement.

Where a man lets for forty years, and after lets the same Land to another, to
have the Land from the end of the first Term for twenty years, there need no
Attornement, and contrary when he grants a Reversion, to have the same
Reversion at the end of the first Term for twenty years then next ensuing,
there ought to be Attornement by Horewood, 37 H. 8. Tit. 41. and 1 Ed. 6. Tit.
4.

A man lets a House for Life, and after grants the Reversion of the said House,
to have from the Feast of Saint Michael, next after the Death of the Tenant for
Life, for 21 years then next following, this is go^^ without Attornement, for
this passes by (to have) the House as a Lease, and not as a Reversion; and
also the Tenant for Life is not attendant to him, 3 Mary Tit. 69.

One lets for twenty years, and this Lessee lets that for ten years rendering
Rent, and after this Lessee for twenty years grants the Reversion of the Term
Rent to a stranger, it behooves that the Lessee for ten years attorne,
otherwise it is if no Rent be reserved, 2 Ed. 6. Tit. 45.

If a man lets for ten years, and the same Lessee lets that to another for four
years, the Lessor makes a Feofment to a stranger, by sufferance of the second
Lessee, this is a good Feofment without Attornement of the first Lessee, 28 H.
S. Tit. Feofments 68. B.

Two joint-tenants, and one release to the other, it is good without
Attornement, 28 H. 6.

Then let us see what is good Attornement, and what not.
WHere a Reversion is granted, and the Tenant attorn by a Penny, it is good,
for it an Agreement, 8 Book of Assise 25.

A man grants four diverse Rents, and the Tenant attornes by a Penny, this is
good for them all, that is to say, for them all to distrain, but not for them
all to have an Assise, for it is not Seisin, 22 Book of assise 66.

Attornement ought to be made by the Tenant in the life of the Grantor, for
Attornement after is not good, 16 Book of Assizes 25.

A Lease is made for Life; and after the Reversion is granted to one, and the
Tenant for life surrender to him, this is a good attornement, 23 As. 18.

A man seized of two acres, or of two Mannours, lets one for years, and after
makes a Feofment of both, and makes Livery of that in Possession, yet the other
shall pass without attornement, 7 Ed. 4. fol. 20.

Where a Feofment and Livery is made of a Manor, that one has in execution
by a Statute, this Livery is as an attornement, if the Tenant by Statute enter
again, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 30.7 H. 4. Statham 46. the same.

If a man lets a Manor for years, and after outs the Termor and enfeoffes
another, and makes Livery, and the Termor re-enter, it is good without other
attornement, 5 H. 5. fol. 12. the same, 9 H. 6. fol: 16. the same, Littl. fol.
130.

If a Feofment be made, and Livery also, and do not out the Termor, nor he
attorne, it is not good, 5 Book of Ass. 1.17 Ass. 3.2 Book of Ass. 1. the same,
and 21 H. 7. fol. 7.

If my tenant for life lets his Estate to another upon condition, for default
of payment to re-enter, and after I grant the Reversion, and the first tenant
attorns, this is not good, for he has nothing at the time of the Grant of the
Reversion, 8 H. 5. fol. 10.

A man lets his Manor for life, and after grants the Reversion of that to
another, if the tenant for life attorne, it is good, and all the services of
all the Freeholders of the Manor shall pass without other attornement, 21
Ed. 3. fol. 34.

Payment of Rent is good attornement, 49 Ed. 3. fol. 15. Payment of Rent in
name of Seisin is agreement and Seisin, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 34.

Where they are compellable to attorne, and where not, and what Tenants are
compellable to attorne, and what not.
WHere a Reversion or a Manor is granted, unless it be by Fine, there lies
no Quid juris clamat to compel the tenant to attorne, but upon a Grant by
Fine, and not upon a Grant of Reversion by Deed, Not. brevium, fol. 170.

If a man alien his Manor, he need not that the tenants at will attorne, and
the same seems of tenants by Copy of Court-roll, Br. Tit. 44. Littleton fol.
125.

By Seisin by the hands of the tenant at will, the Lord by that cannot avow, 8
H. 6. fol. 65.

Tenant for life grants his estate to J.S. upon condition, and after the
reversion is granted by fine, and the first Tenant for life attorns, it is not
good, and he is not compellable to attorn, but J.S. 8. H. 5. fol. 10.

If I let for life, and after grant the reversion by fine, and after Tenant for
life grants over his estate to J.S. yet after attorns, it is good, for he was
compellable to attorn, and not J.S. 18. Ed. 4. f. 10. and 21 H. 6. fol. 61.

If Tenant in Dower grant over her estate to J.S. and after the reversion is
granted by fine, she is compellable to attorn and not, J.S. 10. H. 4. fol.
10.1. H. 4. fol. 18. the same.

If Tenant by the Courtesy grant over his estate, and after the reversion is
granted by fine, Tenant by the Courtesy is compellable to attorn, 18. Ed. 3.
fol. 3.

He which was Tenant, day of the fine levied, though he has granted over his
estate, is compellable to attorn, 18. Ed. 4. fol. 10. Also 18. H. 6. fol. 25
and 21. H. 6. fol. 6. the same.

After a fine engrossed and that delivered, the Tenant is not compellable to
attorn, for a Quid juris clamat lies against him, Fitzh. fol. 147. and 11. Ed.
3. Statham.

If I give lands in tail, reserving rent, and I grant that rent by fine, the
Tenant shall be charged to attorn, otherwise it is if I grant the reversion,
for there he is not compellable to attorn, 5. H. 5. Statham.

Where any person is not cempellable to attorn, and yet attorns, and their
attornement good, and where not.
TEnant after possibility of issue extinct, is not compellable to attorn, and
yet if he attorn, it is good, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 15.46. Ed. 3. fol. 13.

If Tenant in tail attorn it is good, and yet he is not compellable to attorn,
3. Ed. 4. fol. 11.

If Donor grant the reversion of Tenant in tail, to another in fee, if the
Donee attorn gratis, it is good, and yet he is not compellable, 12. Ed. 4. fol.
3.

If a Lordship or Manor be granted by fine, and after the Tenant which hold of
that, makes a feoffment or is disseised, if the feoff^e or disseisor attorn, it
is good, and yet they are not compellable to attorn, 18. Ed. 4. fol. 10.

If a man lets for 10 years, and the same lessee lets for four years
attornement of the second lessee is good, and yet he is not compellable to
attorn, and clear is attornement of the first, for he ought to attorn, 28. H.
8. tit. feoffments 68.

If I let for life, and grant the reversion by fine, and after the grant, and
before attornement, the Tenant for life lets over his estate to J.S. and he
attorn gratis, it is good, and yet he is not compellable to attorne, 21 H. 6.
f. 54. and 20. Ed. 3. Brook, Tit. 24.

Fine is levied of a Lordship, and before attornement the Tenant makes a
feoffment, and after the feoffee attorns, this is good, and yet he was not
compellable to attorn, but his feoffor was compellable, 18. Ed. 4. fol. 10.

Now let us see that the grantee by fine without attornement cannot have action
nor avow for rent, which is in lieu of action, nor have wast, but may have all
other things, as entry for forfeiture, and have escheat and things in seisin,
and take, and have aid.
WHere a reversion is granted by fine, the right passes, and for that Tenant
for life shall have aid, though he make no attornement, 12 E. 4. f. 3.37. H. 6
fol. 5. the same, 35. H. 6. fol. 5.

Where a Manor is granted by fine and Tenants do not attorn, the Lord cannot
distrain for rent, but shall have escheat of them, 10 H. 6. fol. 17.34. H. 6.
fol. 7. the same, 20. H. 6. fol. 7.

The Lord grants his Lordship by fine, the grantee shall have such things,
which lie in taking, as ward, but he cannot avow for rent, Natura brevium, fol.
172.

Grantee by fine of a Lordship cannot distrain; but shall have escheat and
ward, though there be no attornement. But if Tenant for life alien in fee, he
may enter for forfeiture, Tit. fol. 130. B. p. 131. A.

Wast before attornement is dispunishable, but the grantee may enter for
forfeiture or seizure but shall not have wast before attornement, 48 Ed. 3.
fol. 15. and 34. H. 6. fol. 7. the same.

Note that one cannot have an action without attornement, though the grant be
by Fine.

Attorney in Court Baron.
THey that have tenements in diverse Counties, and fear to be impleaded in a
County, or in a Court Baron, may make a general Attorney to prosecute for them
in all Pleas, Westin. 2. chap. 10.

It is likewise provided, that every free man which owes suite to the County
Court, tything, hundred, or to the Court of his Lord, freely may make his
Attorney, to follow his suits for him, so it appears that a Copi-holder cannot
so do but by assent of the Lord, he may compound to pay a certainty yearly, to
release his suit, and that which he holds he may freely by the Statute; and
it seems that the making of an Attorney, ought to be by writing sealed, and not
by word, Merton, chap. 10.

A Writ of making an Attorney or receiving, lies in Court Baron, to make the
Attorney to make suit, Fitzh. 175. B. there lies an Alias, pluries, and an
attachment, if he be not allowed, but Copi-holder shall not have that writ,
Fitgh. 156. D.

One may make an Attorney to make suit personal, which is in a hundred or
other Court Baron; but for suit Real, at the Leet or turn of the Sheriff, he
shall not make that by an Attorney, Fitzherbart, 25. C.

What action shall be sued in a Court Baron by plaint, and what not.
WHere one sues several plaints for five marks, the other shall have a
prohibition. And Detinue of writings shall not be sued there, and if he does,
the other shall have a prohibition, 5. Ed. 4. fol. 128.

Where 20 l. is parted in several plaints under 40 s. Prohibition lies. Note
there it is said. Supersedeas lies, and the Defendant there with safe
conscience may wage his Law. But see 48 Ed. 3. Fitzherbart, fol. 46. A.

The Lord himself shall have debt in his Court Baron, for that that the suitors
are Judges, time of Ed. 1. Tit. debt, in Fitzh. 177. 6 Ed. 4. fol. 3. Suitors
are Judges there.

Debt or trespalle may be sued in Court Baron by plaint, but that is where the
debt or damage is under forty shillings, that the Defendant in Trespass plead
his Freehold, or that the Plaintiff is his Villain, the Court shall cease,
otherwise a Writ of false Judgment lies, and also it is good exception to
the Jurisdiction of a Court Baron, to say that the contract was made out of the
Manor in another Town, 34 H. 6. fol. 53.

A man shall not have account in Court Baron, nor in County, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 19.

Plea ought not to be removed in debt or trespass from this Court, but where a
Debt or Damages amount above forty shillings or in replegiare, but I intend
there shall not be a plaint in Replegiare in every Manor, but in this Manor
where the Lord has ancient authority by Charter to make Replegiare, yet
diverse seem the contrary, see Fitzh. Na. Bre. 14 H. 8. fol. 17.

Trespass, Damages found eight pence in the common Bench, and the Plaintiff
recovers, but he cannot there count under forty shillings, and in Court Baron
he can-count above forty shillings, but under that, 19 H. 6. fol. 8.

That Debt and Trespass shall be sued in Court Baron Britton, fol. 61.

Detinue of Goods may be sued in a Court Baron, 6 ^. 2.

Every stranger which comes within the Manor may be sued there in Debt or
Trespass, under forty shillings, so that Debt, Detinue of Goods, and such
actions personalls (except account) where the Debt or Damages is under forty
shillings, it is determinable in a Court Baron by plaint there, 34 H. 6. fol.
53.

Trespass (by force of Arms) does not lie in a Court Baron, note that the
contrary is used, 7 Ed. 4. fol. 23. Sherif in the County may hold Plea by
Justicies of the great Summons, but Justicies shall not be in a Court Baron for
Justicies shall not be directed to the Steward but to the Sherif, and the
Sherif is Judge in a Justicies and Officer to the Court, but so is not the
Steward, 21 Ed. 4. fol. 79. Fitzh. fol. 139. F.

Note that Court Baron has no authority to hold Plea of Freehold, and of that
to give Judgment, for execution thereof that is a Dissesin to the Tenant, 22
Ass. 64. Glanvile 94. says, No man is tied to answer in the Court of his Lord
of a Freehold, without the command of the Lord the King.

Right patent may be directed to the Lord to be tried in a Court Baron, but it
cannot be tried there by great Assise, but it seems it may be tried by Battle
and if the Tenant join Battle, the Lord may give day to try it, but Fitzh.
fol. 4. E. says, if the Lord will proceed or Issue is joined upon the great
Assise, prohibition lies, and if Bastardy or any foreign Plea be pleaded, then
they have no Jurisdiction in Court Baron, and if they proceed, Prohibition
lies. Time of Ed. 1. Tit. Droit. 45. 1 H. 6. fol. 7.

If plaint of Debt or Trespass be sued there, and foreign matter is pleaded,
it shall not be tried in Court Baron, 1 H. 5. fol. 12.

If in a Writ of Right patent in Court Baron for Charter Land, the Lord will
not proceed to do right, the Demandant may go to the Sherif and have a (Tolt)
which is a command to his Bailif, that he take out the complaint and remove the
Plea into the County, and after that also by a (Pone) in the common Bench, but
the Tenant shall not have a (Tolt) but he shall have a (Recordare) with the
cause, and the Demandant may have a (Pone) without cause, Fitzh. fol. 3. F.

Note that a Writ of Right patent ought to be sued in the Lords Court and not
otherwhere, without the license of the Lord, Testimony of the King, by Letter
or otherwise, that he has given license and then he shall have his Writ,
because the Lord has remitted his Court in the Common Bench, Not. Brevium fol.
15.

None may distraine Free Tenants to answer of a Freehold nor of any thing
belonging to the Freehold, without the Kings Writ, Marleb. chap. 22.

Coppy-holders shall not be impleaded by the Kings Writ, but shall be impleaded
in the Court of their Lord by plaint, in nature of what Writ they will, Lit.
fol. 16.

Debt upon a Bill obligatory under forty shillings lies in a Court Baron.

Fitzh. 2. E. If a Right parent be sued there in Court Baron, and foreign
matter be pleaded there, or Issue joined to be triod by great Assise, there
shall go a Prohibition.

Fitzh. 39.6. The Tenant may have prohibition directed to the Sherif to
prohibit Bailiffs of the Court where the Mise is joined in a Writ of Right upon
the Grand Assise, unless Battle were there offered.

Marleb. chap. 20. None except the Lord the King, shall hold Pleas in his Court,
of false Judgment given in the Court of his Tenants, because these Pleas
especially belong to the Crown.

Fitzh. 4. E. If a Plea be held there which ought not, a Prohibition lies.

Fitzh. 47. b. Detaining of writings shall not be sued in a Court Baron.

Fitzh. 139. D. If a man hold plea in County of Trespass by force of Arms,
the Defendant may sue a Supersedeas out of the Chancery.

The same Law seems in a Court Baron, 8 Ed. 4. Tit. Jurisdiction.

B. 215. See, Fitzh. 85. G. That trespass shall be brought in Court Baron and
there see the form of the Writ, but it is not by force of arms there.

Britton fol. 61. That Debt and Trespass shall be sued in a Court Baron.

Fitzh. 85. G. Trespass Viscountile, there shall not be (by force of arms) in
the Writ.

8 Ed. 4. Tit. 115. Trespass does not lie in a Court Baron, (by force of
arms) for a Fine shall not be set but in a Court of Record, and for that it
shall not be there, (by force of arms) see Gloucester, chap. 8.

22 Ass. 64. If one implead more in a Court Baron without a Writ and recover
damages, where I plead to the Jurisdiction, and the Court ought to be outed;
yet if the Bailif make execution of these damages by command of the Steward,
he shall not be punished in trespass, for he does that which he ought to do,
till it be defeated by false Judgment, but if it were (before not a Judge) it
is void, and otherwise.

9 H. 7. fol. 12. Recovery in the common Bench of Lands in the Countries of
Lancaster, Durham, or Chester, is there (before not a Judge) otherwise it is
there of recovery of Lands in the (five Ports).

22 Ed. 3. fol. 30. Formedon in the Kings Bench and an Appeal in the common
Bench, recovery there in these are void, see 7 H. 4. fol. 3. and 8 Book of
Ass. 32.

Gloucester chap. 8. It is provided that the Sheriffs shall plead in Counties
the Pleas of trespass also, as they were wont to be pleaded, etc.

13 H. 7. fol. 20. Waste, to plead in that is not good, for that that Land
shall be recovered, and so in an (Eiectione firm,) and so it is in a
(Collegendum,) they shall not be sued here, and by Fitzh. 220. H. Plaintiff
shall recover his term and damages.

Littleton fol. 60. If there be two Tenants in common for years, and one put
the other out of possession, he shall have an (Eiectione firm) of his half,
for that it is to recover a real Chattel. So it seems that shall not be sued
here, nor an ejectment of Ward which is in the realty.

Fitzh. 220. H. Process of outlawrie lies in an (Eiectione firm) and yet he
shall recover his Land again, unless it be expired, and also his damages.

Littleton 93. A Writ of wast is a mixed action, so is an Assise of novel
disseisin, and a (Quare Impedit) and for that they shall not sue here.

Action upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. nor upon the Statute of R. 2. shall not be
sued here, for that that they are given by Statute: but an action upon the case
may be sued here if the damages are under 40. s.

Plaint in Precipe.
Trespass in one tenement with a Toft adjoining, containing four Acres of
land, agreed that this word (Tenement,) is uncertain. 3. E. 4. tit. 28. 11. H.
7. fol. 25. (tenement,) is no term to demand a house or shop. 45. Ed. 3. fol.
6. Precipe of land in D. it is a good Plea that there is no such town.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 22. Precipe in D. and S. for that, that D. is a hamlet of S.
and he demands a thing twice, the Writ shall abate.

8 E. 4. f. 6. Precipe does not lie in a hamlet, but in a town, or a place
known out of a town; but all Actions personal may be brought in hamlet, or
town, or place known.

Dower, Assise, and Scire facias, to have execution of a fine, it may be
brought in a hamlet.

16. E. 3. Precipe of a piece of land without certainty, is not good, but of a
piece of land containing so much, is good: see before, 11. H. 4. fol. 38.

13. H. 4. Tit. 33. Dower of a Mill, though after the witness of the Writ it
was made a (Toft,) it is good; otherwise if it were made a tossed before the
witness of the Writ. 14. H. 4. tit. demand 5. the same.

13. H. 6. fol. 8. Upon two Verges of the Land are built houses, and they are
meadow and pasture; they are now to be demanded as they are, not as before when
they were verges. Fitzh. 192.

6. Ed. 2. tit. 41. Precipe of passage over a water, etc. good.

27. H. 8. fol. 14. Precipe is not good of a Common, but of pasture for two
beasts is good. 4. Ed. 4. fol. 2. the same.

22. Ed. 4. fol. 13. by Jenney: A man shall have a Precipe quod reddat of a
house and garden, but he shall not have a Precipe of a garden alone.

For that, That Plaints shall be made for Copi-hold in nature of Precipe, let
us see of what, and how plaint of Precipe shall be made.
PRecipe may be of a chamber, and yet foundation may perish, for that it is not
in perpetuity. 5. H. 7. fol. 9. contrary, H. 6.

11 H. 7. fol. 24. Trespass may be brought of trespass in a hamlet, and
Precipe shall be brought of land in a town, and not in hamlet.

16 H. 7. fol. 7. Assise does not lie of a Rectory: Seek if an (Ejectione
firm) lies of that.

9. H. 7. fol. 21. Precipe of lands in D. by Bryan: over D. and nether D. is
good in abatement.

7. H. 4. fol. 9. Wast in D. it is a good plea in abatement, that D. is neither
town nor hamlet.

11. H. 4. fol. 38. Precipe that he should restore a certain portion of land,
is good by Hank and Hill.

6. Ed. 3. tit. Demand 41. precipe of 8 foot of land in length and 6 in breadth,
and good.

13. Ed. 3. tit. 32. and 33. Precipe of an Oxgange of land, is good: Contrary
of an Oxgange of marsh, for that cannot be gained, tit. demand 33. and 36.

40 Assis. 9. Precipe shall be brought in a town, and not in a hamlet. 34. H.
9. fol. 1. the same.

34. H. 6. fol. 20. Precipe shall be in a town, or of a Manor which is a place
known out of a town, and not in a Hamlet. But an Assise in a Hamlet is good,
and also in Dower.

Who has most Right, and Right ought to be sued there.
LIttleton fol. 91. If a man be disseised by an Infant, the which alieneth in
fee, and the Alienee dies seized, and his heir enter, the Infant within age, he
may have a (Dum fuit infra aetatem) or a Writ of Right, or (Entry) at his
election: for he has more right then the heir of the Alienee. But if the
Disseisee release to the heir of the Alienee, if now he bring a Writ of Right,
the issue shall be upon the mere right, and shall be fonnd for the heir, for
now he has more right by the release of the disseisee.

Littleton fol. 93. If a disseisor die seized, and his heir in by descent, if
the disseisee enter, and the heir of the disseisor brings an assise, he ought
to recover: But if he brings a Writ of Right, the issue shall be upon the mere
right, and there the heir shall be barred; for the disseisee has more right.

Right Patent is to be directed to the Lord, of whom the land is held, unless
it be held of the King or Queen, and it is as a Commission to the Lord; that he
shall do Right. And it may be removed by a (Recordare) by the Tenant with
cause, and by a (Pone) by the demandant without cause, and after that it be
removed in County, it may be removed by the demandant by a (Tolt) Fitzh. fol.
B. and Britton fol. 275. where the Tenant puts him upon the grand Assise, it
shall be removed, Fitzh. fol. 1. F.

Where Judgment final shall be, and where not.
IN a Writ of Right, Judgment final shall be given; but after the mise joined,
and upon every recovery upon departure in despite of the Court, Judgment
final shall be. As in Right against a Prior, which voucheth common Crier, which
en^reth into the Warranty, and the demandant Imparles, and at the day the
Vouchee departs in despite of the Court, and upon this Judgment final given.
26 H. 8. f. 10. 12 H. 7. f. 10. If the tenant in Writ of Right join with the
mise, and after depart in despite of the Court, Judgment final shall be
given. So if he join the Mise by a Champion, and makes default, Judgment final
shall be given; but if he make default at the Nisi prius, and upon a petty
Capias, yet he cannot save his default, Judgment final shall not be. The same
Law if he make default after default, before the Mise joined, Judgment final
shall not be.

Fitzh. fol. 11. If a man loose by default in a Writ of right before the mise
joined, yet he shall have a Writ of right against him which recovers. But after
the mise joined it is otherwise, for then upon default after the mise joined
the judgment shall be final as well against the defendant for his nonsuit,
as against the Tenant, if he make default afterward.

10 H. 6. fol. 2. Right, the Tenant vouches, and the vouchee comes in and joins
issue, and the demandant imparles till the next day, and at the day, the Tenant
was demanded and makes default, judgment final shall not be given against the
vouchee there.

1 H. 6. fol. 7. Where the mise is joined by battle in right, and after the
champion of the Tenant makes default, judgment final shall be given.

Time of Ed. 1 Tit. 44. if the Tenant make default after the mise joined, he
shall loose the land for ever, if he cannot save his default.

3 H. 6. fol. 37. If the Tenant in right says, that he has more right, ready
to try by battle, and the plaintiff rejoin, and day given, and at the day, the
Tenant makes default, And for that, that the Justices see a fine, by which the
Tenant has but an estate tail, they advise of the judgment, and clearly where
the Tenant makes default after the mise joined, if it were fee, judgment
final should be.

Process in Court Baron, is summons, attachment, and distress, which is
process at the common law, 34 H. 6. fol. 53. and 37. H. 6. fol. the same.

By Martin, one cannot have a Capias in Court Baron, nor execution there (by
Capias to satisfy) but the natural excution and process is, attachment of
goods, as after more at large appears, 3 H. 6. fol. 56.

Process upon plaints for Coppy-hold land, is the same process, which is at
the common law, in nature of what Writ the plaint is.

Amerciament in Court Baron for suit and otherwise, and what remedy for that,
and where it shall be moderate.
MOderata misericordia lies, where a man is amerced in a Court Baron
outragiously, and upon that also lies, Alias, pluries, and attachment. But if
the amerciament be affirmed by equals, moderata misericordia, does not lie, 10
Ed. 2. Tit. action upon the Stat. 34.

And note, that this is the cause, that in all Court Barons three are sworn to
ratify the amerciaments, after that the homage has presented the offenses,
and Bracton calls them Trustees, Amercers, and Affirmors, also it seems to be
by the statute of Magna Charta, chap. 14. and by Westminster, 1. chap. 6. which
is that a man be not amerced, but by his equals, Fitzh. fol. 75. A.

Debt lies by the Lord, for amerciament in his Court Baron affirmed, and there
held that the defendant may wage his law in this action, also amerciament may
be in Court Baron upon the plaintiff, if he be nonsuited, and upon the
defendant if it be found against him, or if he fail of his law, Statham, 12 R.
2. fol. 65.

A free man shall not be amerced for a small fault, but according to the manner
of that fault, and for a great one, according to the greatness of the fault,
saving to him his freehold, and to a Merchant saving his Merchandise, and to a
villain saving his waynage. And upon this Statute is (Moderata misericordia)
founded, as appears by the Register. And Glanvile says, there is also mercy,
because who by the oath of lawful men is amerced, shall loose nothing of his
honorable freehold, Magna Charta, chap. 14.

If the Lord of his own head amerce any Tenant or party in the Court Baron
without cause, the party may have a trespass, if he be distrained for that
amerciament, Fitzh. fol. 75. C.

If the Steward or the Bailiff will assesse any amerciament without confirming
by two upon their oaths, after that the homage has presented the offenders,
there is a special Writ, thereupon the Stat. of Magna Charta, chap. 14. upon
these words, that none shall be put upon the aforesaid mercies, but by the oath
of good and lawful men, so that the Steward cannot confirm the said
amerciaments, by this Statute, but the affirors or affirmors, Fitzh. fol. 76. D.

Amerciament in Court Baron, which is the 12. and 13. Article of the Charge,
for a Trespass done to the Lord, and what remedy for it.
LOrd of Court Baron may have an action of debt in his own Court for
amerciament due to him, Jurisdiction 117 Suitors.
for that, that the Suitors are Judges there, and not the Lord in his Lordship.
Time Ed. 1. Tit. 177. and Statham, 12. R. 2. fol. 5.

Debt lies by the Lord for amerciament assessed in Court Baron, and affirmed
there, and Bracton says, that the ascestors shall confirm, that they shall
oppress none for hate, nor ease others for love, and that they shall not
conceal those things which they hear, so that the Lord cannot amerce for
trespass done unto himself, unless by custom and usage, otherwise it is
extortion.

The Lord cannot amerce a man in his own Court, for trespass made to himself
by the Law, but he may by custom; but if he levy the amerciament, it is a
good bar in trespass, be the custom so or not, and if it be not used, it is
extortion, 12 H. 4. fol. 9.

It seems that for a small trespass made to the Lord, he may be amerced in the
Lords Court, and if it be confirmed and paid, the Lord shall not have trespass
of that, 14 Ed. 4.8. and 7. H. 4. fol. 8.

If Tenant be amerced in the Lords Court, for trespass to the Lord, it is
extortion, but if the Lord accept the amerciament, it is good satisfaction for
the prespasse, and good bar in trespass, 48 Ed. 3. fol. 8.

In trespass by the Lord, it is a good bar that the trespass was affirmed by
the Suitors, 48 Ed. 3. fol. 8. and 47. Ed. 3. fol. 19.

Attachment in Court Baron upon debt or trespass or in any other action, it
seems that he shall forfeit the thing attached upon default, and what thing
shall be attached, and what not, let us see.
By Billing, Wangford, and Needham, that in (Pone) in Court Baron the goods
attached, if he make default shall be forfeit to the Lord, tit. Court Baron, 1.
Brook report, that 37 H. 6. is contrary, but this is not in the long report, 34
H. 6. fol. 49.

If a Bailif attach a beast in Court Baron, and it was returned attached, and
does not come, it is forfeit to the Lord, 28 H. 6. fol. 9.

If the Sherif attach a Cow the property is not out of the defendant, till he
make default upon return of that, and if the Sherif leave the Cow attached with
the defendant, yet if he make default it is forfeit to the King, and the
Sheriff may take it with him at the first if he will, 9 H. 7. fol. 6.

By Brian, a plaint cannot be affirmed in a Court Baron, but the Court sitting,
and so attachment shall be awarded, the Court sitting, notwithstanding it is
used otherwise, 21. Ed. 4. fol. 79.

By Babington, that attachment shall be by a mere chattel, which shall be
forfeited by default of the party; but it shall not be by a chattel real, as a
lease for years, or a ward, nor for apparel, 7 H. 6. fol. 10.

That attachment shall be of chattels which a man may forfeit by outlawry, 26
H. 6. Tit assise, 14.

By Moyle, That no goods shall be attached but the proper goods of the party,
and not the goods which the party has in pawn, or that he has borrowed, 35 H.
6. fol. 25.

The precept of attachment is made, as it follows, etc.

IK. Steward to the Bailiff of the same, health; Prebend of Islington,
Attachment.
because I.S. complains against I. D. in a Plea of debt of 30 s. or in a Plea
of Trespass, if the Plaintiff sue a trespass, etc. or in a Plea of detaining,
etc. and find pledges to prosecute, etc. Therefore I command you, that you
shall attach the aforesaid I. D. by all his goods and chattels, to answer the
aforesaid I. S. in the Plea aforesaid, at the next Court there to be held, and
have there this precept and how, etc. Dated the 23. of April, the year of the
Reign of Queen Eliz, etc. 22.

By me I. K. Steward.
Note, that in a Court Baron a man shall be attatched by goods, and there shall
issue no Capias there.

Where the entry is, The great Court of J.S. there held, this is but a Court
Baron. And where the entry is, To the great Court with Leet, it is presented,
this is uncertain and not good; for the entries shall be several as it follows
afterward, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 17.



Bylaws.
I entend that Bylaws and Paints, which is the 21 Article of Charge, may be
made in Court Baron as well as in Leet.
IT is said that a town may make Bylaws, 11 H. 7. fol. 14. and 44 Ed. 3. fol.
19. and that where Bylaws are for the Commonwealth, are good; and it is
general, that Bylaws may be, and it is not material in what Court, so I
intend, for these causes were made in Court Baron.

Bylaws for inheritance shall not bind, but those which were parties to it,
and not any other which was no party, 15 Eliz.

One by-Law may order the Inheritance of a man, but cannot dis-inherite any, by
Manwood 15 Eliz.

By-Law may be made in Leet, and may be in a town by Harper, and shall bind
every one, if it be for the Commonwealth, and otherwise not, but only he
which agrees, and not an estranger, 11 H. 7. f. 14.

One avows taking of distress, and prescribes, that, etc. there was a custom
had, that all the tenants or the greater part of the tenants of this Manor,
and other the residents and Inhabitants within that Manor, or the greater part
thereof to the Court Baron of that Manor, held at the said Manor, were used
and acustomed to make Laws, called Bylaws, which proves that Bylaws may be
made in Court Baron as in Court Leet.

2 Eliz. Dier says, That a Steward by assent of the tenants in his Court could
not by the Law apportion himself, and the residue of the tenants, of their
Common for sheep, if they have that by the grant of the Lord himself; But if
they have that by prescription, otherwise it is: And they may agree, that he
which surcharges shall pay to the Lord so much, but then it behooveth the Lord
to show authority by prescription, that his tenants have made such Bylaws of
the Commons, and other things of Land, of time whereof, etc. and ought also to
prescribe, that he had used to distrain for that, but if such amerciament had
been paid without distress of their accord, this is good evidence to the
prescrption of distraining.

Copyholders.
Now let us see of Copyhold, which is the 22 Article of the Charge, and first,
what interest a Copyholder has by the Law, and what by the custom.
Trespass by Tenant by Copy, it does not lie against his Lord for his
Copyhold. Besides Danby and Bryan, 21 Ed. 4. But he shall have a Subpena
against his Lord, and not a trespass. 7 Ed. 4. fol. 19. And at ths day it is
held that a trespass lies.

Tenant for life by Copy, shall say in his pleading, that he is seized in his
demesne as of a freehold, according to the custom of the Manor, and if he
has fee, that he is seized in his demesne as of fee, according to the custom
of the Manor, and justify not that they have no freehold at the common Law,
but by the custom; so that Copyholder has fee and freehold by the custom,
and not by the common Law, as it seems by this book. 21 Ed. 4. fo. 96.

Trespass against the tenant by Copy, has aid of his Lord, 15 H. 7. fol. 10.
and 21 H. 6. the same.

Copyholder may have trespass against one of trees cut, though that the
Freehold be in the Lord. So by this it seems, that he may have trespass
against every one for trespass made upon the Land, but against the Lord, 2 H.
4. fol. 13.

The Dean of Paul's has a Lordship of Ploughers, and all the tenants are
tenants at will, and the freehold is in the Lord; and there i^ appears, that a
Copyholder may have a trespass at the Common Law, against one which makes a
trespass upon his land, but he cannot sue action at the Common Law for the
land, nor remove that suit out of the Court of the Lord, 1 H. 5. fol. 11.

The Lord shall have the wood of the Copyhold, and sell it, unless the
Copyholder have that by custom, as in many Manors he has, 2 H. 4. fol. 13.
and 43 Ed. 3. f. 32.

Tenant by Copy at will, which is called tenant of base tenure, if he be outed,
shall not have a Right close, but sue by Bill in the Court of the Lord, and in
times past a Copyholder was called a tenant in villenage, or of base tenure.
Fitzh. f. 12. B.

Tenant by Copy or by verge at will of base tenure, shall never have a
(Monstraverunt,) But the Copyholder in ancient demesne of freehold shall have
it, Fitzh. 14. D.

If my copyholder enfeoff one, I may enter for forfeiture, 11 H. 4. f. 81.

Tenant by copy cannot alien his land by a deed, for if he do, it is forfeit,
Littleton f. 15.

If a man lets a Manor for years, in which there are copy holders, and after a
copyholder dies, surrender and admittance by the Lord the termor in Court of
that Manor, is as well as if he had the fee simple, 4 Mar. tit. Copy, Br. 1.7.

Copyholders shall not have false Judgment, for then they shall be restored to
the freehold, or shall not lofe the freehold, but ought to sue by Bill, that is
to say, by Plaint in Court, 7 Ed. 4. f. 19. the same Littleton, f. 16. They
shall not be impleaded by the Kings Writ, but by Plaint in the Lords Court in
nature of what t^^ Writ will, Not. Brevium fol. 16.

Coppy-holders have an Estate of Inheritance according to the custom of the
Manors, yet they have no Freehold by the course of the Common Law, Littleton
fol. 16.

Tenant by Copy shall make scalty to his Lord and Tenant at will by the Common
Law, Lit. fol. 17.

It is said, though Coppy-holders have Inheritance according to the custom,
yet they have but an Estate at the will of the Lord, according to the course of
the Common Law, and cannot have Frespasse against their Lord; yet they may bar
their Lord in trespass brought by the Lord against his Coppy-holder, as it
appears, lit. f. 15. and 16.

Tenant by the Verge in ancient Demesne.
LAnds hold by the Verge, are not pleadable by the Kings Writ but by Bill, for
that, that the Freehold is in the Lord, but there is a diversity between
plow-holders of frank tenure, and Plow-holders of base tenure, which are
dwelling in ancient Demesne, for Plow-holders of Freehold are pleadeable by a
Writ of Right close, but Plow-holders of base tenure are those which hold by
Verge at the Will of the Lord, and the Freehold is in the Lord, and are not
pleadable by a Writ of Right close, 14 H. 4. fol. 1. and 34 Fitzh. fol. 14. C.

Tenant by copy which holds by the Verge in ancient Demesne, commits Felony
and was attaint, the King (has year, day, and waste) for that, that the
Freehold was in the Tenant in ancient Demesne, and yet they have no other
evidence then copies of Court Roll, otherwise it is of mere Coppy-holders
which are out of ancient Demesne, for the Freehold is in the Lord, I have seen
in the County of North: Coppy-holders of frank tenure out of ancient Demesne,
and have used a Writ of right close, and have no other Evidences but by
coppies, according to the custom of the Manor, but their Coppies are not at
the will of the Lord, 3 Ed. 3. Tit. Br. 22. Stamford fol. 50.

Fitzh. 11. Coppy-holder of a base tenure shall not have a Writ of Right close,
but ought to sue by Bill in the Lords Court.

Not. Bre: 11. Right close lies always between ploughholder and no
plow-holders may implead another plow-holder of Lands within ancient Demesne,
unless by this Writ, and shall make his protestation to sue in nature of what
Writ he will.

Britton fol, 16^: Calls Tenants in ancient Demosne Plow-holders, and says,
that Plow-holders are such which gain our Land.

Fitzh. 14. D. Those Tenants in ancient: Demesne which hold by the Verge by
Copy at the will of the Lord shall not have (Monstraverunt) against their Lord.

Where a Coppy-holder enters, and dies before be was admitted Tenant.
IT was held in the case of one Horewood, that where a Coppy-holder has a
Daughter by one Belly, and a Son and a Daughter by another, and dies, and after
the Son enters and dies before admittance, that the Daughter of the second
Belly shall have the Land, for it is (a possession of the Brother) and so it was
adjudged in the case of one Stegnes.

These Cases following I heard agreed for Law.
IF Tenant by Copy surrender generally into the hands of the Lord, and it do
not appear who shall have the Land, nor to what use the surrender is, then the
Lord shall be seized to his own use.

If Tenants by Copy let for years by license of the Lord, and after release
to the Lessee by these words in the Court (remise and release) it is void, for
that it ought to be surrendered into the hands of the Lord, and then the Lord
ought to grant the Reversion to the Lessee; for by Littleton fol. 15. It cannot
pass without surrender, and yet a Release is used of Coppy-hold in the Court
in presence of the Steward.

If the Lord grant parcel of his Demesne Lands, to hold by Copy, to one and
his Heirs, this Copy is not good, but at the will of the Lessor, for one
cannot make Coppy-hold at this day, but that shall be by prescription, which
has been demised and demisable by Copy, time out of mind, etc. But if a
Coppy-hold escheate to the Lord, or he enter in that by forfeiture, and at this
day grant that over to J.S. by Copy, this is good Copy, and yet, in 13 H. 4.
fol. 7. If Lands in ancient Demesne are escheated, and the King seiseth them,
and grants them over to J. S. they are frank fee and not ancient Demesne.

6 H. 4. fol. 2. But if a Coppy-hold shall be escheated to the Lord, and twenty
years after that, he grants them over by Copy again, they are Copyhold as
they were before, for that, that this Land has been demised and demisable,
time out of mind, etc.

If two be Joyntenants by Copy, and one of them makes waste in all the Land,
that shall not be forfeiture, but for his part, and also if a stranger cuts
Trees and makes waste without assent of the Coppy-holder, it is no forfeiture.

If the Lord of a Manor, to which there are Coppy-holders grant by Copy the
tenements of one tenant Coppy-holder without just cause, to another Tenant in
Fee or for life, and the Grantee enter by virtue of that grant, this Tenant
which has right, and which was admitted before, may have a plaint in nature of
an Assise of novel disseisin against the Grantee.

If the Husband surrender into the hands of the Lord, to the use of his Wife,
and does not say A. his Wife, it is a good surrender, for she is certainly
known by that name; the same Law is, if one surrender into the hands of the
Lord to the use of J. his Son, and has two Sons named J. it is to the use of
that J. which it is meant to.

If Tenant by Copy surrender his Lands by custom of the Manor, to two good
men out of the Court, to the use of a stranger, and that made for Money paid,
he which surrendered cannot countermand his surrender before the two good men
have presented it at the next Court, for it is much like acknowledging of a
Fine before a Justice of Record, but where the surrender is to two, to the use
of his Wife or Son, and not to a stranger for Money paid, by one lying in
extremity in peril of death, and after he revives, he may well countermand
his Surrender, before it be presented in Court, or after, if it be not by that
admitted afterward, and that is often used, and stands with reason, and so is
the Law as it seems to me.

If Tenant by Copy of Court-roll be attaint of Felony or Treason, the Lord of
the Manor may enter, for Tenant by Copy is but Tenant at will, according to
the Common Law, though he has Inheritance by the custom.

If a Copyholder surrender into the hands of the Lord, to the use of another
and his Heirs, if the Lord will not admit him Tenant, then the Land shall
remain in him which made the surrender, and yet he to whose use it was made,
may sue by a petition, or by a Subpena to be admitted.

If one which has no right, and was not admitted, surrender to the use of
another, and he to whose use the surrender is made, enters into the Land and is
admitted, yet he which has right may re-enter and out him, notwithstanding the
Grant of the Lord.

But it seems if a Coppy-hold descends to J.S. and he, before that he is
admitted Tenant, surrender that to the use of J. D. and the Lord by his Steward
in Court grant Seisin and admits him Tenant, it is said to be a good surrender,
and J. D. shall enjoy the Land against J. S. and his Heirs: Seek, for in the
case against Roo, the Issue was, if he were admitted according to the custom
of the Manor or not, Quere.
and yet this is no disproofe of this opinion, but if a Coppy-holder surrender
to the use of J. S. J. S. cannot surrender before he be admitted.

The Lord of the Manor (where the custom is that the Tenants hold by Copy)
is Chancellor within the same Court, Chancellor.
and may redress matters there in conscience where a Bill is exhibited to him,
Suitors.
so that the Coppy-holders are no Judges in the Court.

If an under Steward hold a Court Baron without authority of the Lord or high
Steward, Steward.
and the Lord agree and do not contradict the Steward, and there be surrenders
made, and admittances of Copyholders in the Court, this is good, but if he
take a surrender and admit one out of the Court without authority of the Lord
or high Steward, it is not good, notwithstanding a lawful Steward, as it seems
may take a surrender out of the Court, and admittance made out of the Court is
good, if it be entered in the Court-Roll, that he is admitted and has paid his
Fine, and has done fealty.

And if one holds but one Court by appointment of the Lord, where another has
a Patent to be Steward, and is absent, surrender taken and entered in this Court
is good, and also is admittance, 2 Ed. 6. Tit. 26.

Note that the high Stewards are for most part men of honor, Steward.
and great men by patent, and their under Stewards are men learned and are
appointed by them, and without Patent, and the use is, that they which are
under Stewards to such men, take Surrenders out of the Court, and they are well
taken by such under Stewards, and the parties are admitted in the Courts held
by them, that is in open Court, and also no doubt, when such under Stewards
take surrender out of the Court, and that is presented by the Homage, as the
usage is in the Court, and the party admit accordingly, this is good, for
without authority these are not, for if J. S. make a command to the Bailiff, to
warn the Court to be held such a day, and it is warned, and J.S. keeps the
Court and is not contradicted by the Lord, surrender taken by this J. S. out of
the Court, and presented and entered in this Court, is good, though that J.S.
have no Patent of his Office, for it is not without authority, for if he cannot
keep Court without a Patent, then to every Court it behooves the Steward should
show his Patent, which is not used, and was never in Issue, whether the Steward
had a Patent or not, nor if J. S. be Steward or not, and specially if he keep
the Court warned by his command by diverse days, before the Court kept, or if
the Lord agree that he shall keep the Court, and it is inconvenient that for
defect in the Steward which takes surrender out of the Court, and enters it in
the Court by the allowance of the Homage, but that it should be good, otherwise
one may say thirty or forty years after, that the Steward had no Patent of his
Office, which is inconvenient, and ought not to be.

Where the Steward of the Bishop of London of his Manor of Hornesey, has a
Patent of his Office with confirmation of the Dean and Chapter by the name of
Aldred Fitziames, where his name was Etheldred, surrenders taken by him out of
the Court, and at the next Court are entered, it is found by the Homage that
such surrender was made, etc. and at the same Court the Tenant is admitted
accordingly, and though that his Patent in time of the Succesfor after in
Assise against him be defeated by mis-naming or by other cause, yet the
Surrenders taken by Aldred Fitzjames (during all the time of twenty years
before his Patent was defeated) are good and perfect, for that, that the
surrender was, it is found by the Homage, and also for that he was the known
Steward, and also for that he is Judge, 33 H. 8. Br. Charge 58. Confirm. 30.

The same Law seems in the same case, if the entry were it is witnessed by the
Steward or at this Court it is enrolled, so, that is to say, that J.S. came
before the Steward (the Court being absent) and surrendered, etc. and in full
Court the admittance is accordingly, this is a good surrender, though it be not
entered, it is found by the Homage, etc. for the entry of admittance is.

The Lord by A. Fitziames Steward gave him Seisin thereof, and it is that the
Lord by his Steward admitted him, and for that it is good, insomuch that to
that is the assent and grant of him which surrendered, and also of the Lord.

The same Law if the high Steward to J.S. which has no Patent in writting of
his Office, takes a Surrender out of the Court, and at the next Court enters
that, at the next Court it is enrolled, so that J. S. came before the Steward
(the Court being absent) and surrendered, etc. And he to whose use the surrender
was made be admitted in full Court, this is a good surrender.

The same Law is like, if J. D. be Steward to a corporation without a Patent of
his Office, and takes surrender as above, out of the Court and at the next
Court enters it, at this Court enrolled, so that J.D. such a day came before J.
D. Steward and surrendered, etc. And he to whose use the surrender is made is
admitted in full Court, this is a good surrender, for that, that the Steward
does in a Court of copyhold, he does it as Judge and is allowed Judge by the
Lord.

The same Law is, if the Steward which is Outlawed in a personal action or
excommunicated, take a surrender out of the Court, and at the next Court enter
it, it is witnessed by the Steward, and such a surrender is made, and admits
him to whose use the surrender was made in full Court, though it was not found
by the Homage, yet this surrender is good.

If a Judge or a Justice be out of his Wits, yet the Fines, Judgments, and
other records which were before him shall be good, but contrary the gift of an
Office, or such like by him, for that is a matter indeed, and the others are
matters of Record, for a matter in deed may be avoided (by being out of his
Wits) contrary of matter of Record, 1 Ma. Tit. whilst he was not in his Wits 7.

The same Law is, if the under Steward takes a surrender out of the Court, and
at the next Court makes his entry of it, at this Court it is witnessed that J.
D. surrendered, and in full Court he to whose use the surrender is made, is
admitted, this is a good surrender, though it be not also (it is found by the
Homage) for when he holds Court, he is a Judge between the Lord and the
copyholders, and yet, 2 Ed. 6. Br. Court Baron 22. and copyhold the 26. is,
if the under Steward holds a Court Baron, and in full Court grants copyhold
without the authority of the Lord or high steward, this is good, contrary Law
where it is done out of the Court, for it seems if the under Steward grants
copy-holds, it is intended that if he admits any out of the Court without
authority, it is not good, for it is, the Lord granted by his Steward, and not
that the Steward granted, for he cannot grant. And also the high Steward may
admit out of the Court, by special usage and custom within the Manor used,
for one which holds by copy of Court roll, ought to have his Estate entered in
the Court held, and his admittance to be entered in the Court, and for that if
the under Steward or the high Steward which has no Patent, as above, take
surrender out of the Court, and present that in Court, and the Tenant be in the
Court admitted, it is good, for it is the Lord by his Steward has admitted,
and the admittance makes him a copyholder and the Entry of that in Court makes
him Tenant by copy of Court roll, for copyholder is he which holds by copy
of Court roll, so where one admitted in Court and the Lord allows a Steward,
is good.

If a copyholder of an Estate in fee, according to the custom of the Manor,
by license of his Lord let for twenty years rendering forty shillings yearly,
he may have an action of Debt in the common place for this Rent, or as it seems
he may distraine and avow, and yet the avowrie is in the nature of an action
real, and it seems no doubt if the Rent be reserved by Deed Indent, but that
he may distraine and avow, and yet if (he to whose use) before the Statute of
27 H. 8. lets by Indenture for years, rendering Rent, he to whose use shall
have Debt for that Rent, but he cannot avow, and if the Lessee in this case
make waste, he to whose use, shall not have an action of wast, 26 H. 8. f. 8.

The same Law is, where a copyholder by the custom of the Manor is not
punishable for waste, by license of the Lord makes a Lease for thirty years,
and the Lessee makes waste, the copyholder shall not have a Writ of waste but
shall sue in the Lords Court, to punish this waste by plaint, in nature of an
action upon the case.

If a coppy-holder of an Estate tail by license of his Lord let for twenty
years, rendering the ancient Rent, and dies, the Issue in tail may enter and
defeat the Lessee, but if the Tenant in tail of coppy-hold let for forty years
by the Lords license, and after the Lease makes a forfeiture of his coppy-hold,
and the Lord seises it, and grants that over again by copy to the Tenant in
tail and his Heirs, or to J. S. and his Heirs, it seems there the Issue of
the Lessor, nor J. S. nor the Lord cannot enter and defeat this lease.

The same Law is, if a coppy-holder of an Estate tail lets for forty years by
the Lords license and dies, and his Issue surrenders to J. S. and his Heirs,
this Issue nor J. S. cannot enter and defeat this Lease.

To this Court came T. R. and did demand license of the Lord to demise all and
singular his customary Lands and Tenements, situate, lying, and being within
his Lordship, to what person or persons the said T. R. pleased, to the term
and for the term of 21. years next following the date of this Court, to which
T. R. the Lord gave license in form aforesaid, for the Fine often shillings
paid in the Court, at the view of the Lord of this Manor.

And it is used that the Steward in full Court, licenses a copyholder to lease
a copyhold for 20. or 40. years, more or less, at their pleasure, in the
absence of the Lord, and this seems good, for he is Judge in the Court, and
when he makes it and enters it in the Court roll, the Lord cannot enter for
forfeiture, because of this lease, for when the Steward has entered it, that at
this Court T. R. craved license of the Lord to let, etc. to whom the Lord gave
license, etc. the Lord is estopped to say the contrary, but that he gave
license, the same Law is, where a coppy-holder is admitted in Court and is
entered in the roll, to whom the Lord by such a one his Steward, granted him
Seisin, the Lord cannot afterward gainsay this admittance, and this is to be
collected of the case aforesaid, in 2 Ed. Brok. Court Baron 22.

If a man lets a Manor for years, in which are copyholders, and after a
copyholder dies, the Termor of the Manor grants the Land by copy for three
lives, this is good, the same Law is if a Copyholder of Inheritance surrender
in the Court of the Termor of a Manor, to the use of one and his Heirs, it
is good, so that the Lord for the time being may take surrender in his Court,
but in the first case, such a Termor of a Manor cannot let a Copyhold
reserving less Rent then the ancient Rent, but ought to reserve the ancient
Rent or more, 4. M. 1.

But it seems if a Disseisor of a Manor be, and the Disseisor seises a
Copyhold by forfeiture, or Escheate, and grants that over by Copy to a
stranger, and the Disseisee enter in the Manor, this surrender shall not bind
the Disseisee, and yet if a Copyholder of Inheritance furrender in the Court
of the Disseisor to the use of J. S. and his Heirs, this is a good furrender,
and shall not be avoided by the Disseisees, nor otherwise by him which
surrender, nor by his Heir.

In pleading of a copy is, that the Lord by such a one his Steward did demise,
and not that the Lord did demise, and also that a Woman be alone, and privately
examined by the Steward, and it behooves in pleading, to say by such a Steward,
and name the name of the Steward, and for that it is good order to express in
the copy and the Court-roll that to this Court came J. S. and Alice his Wife
(she alone and privately being examined by J. K. the Steward) there, and to set
the name of the Steward to every copy, and also to every Court-roll, for
pleading in diverse cases, (...) the Lord by J. K. his Steward, granted him
Seisin by a Rod, etc. 8 H. 5. fol. 4. and 10 Ed. 4. f. 6.

Limitation.
THE Statute of 32 H. 8. chap. 2. extends to copyholds, for the Statute is,
that none shall make prescription, Title, nor claim, etc. above forty years,
etc. and that does a copyholder, and for that is within the Statute, 6 Ed 6.
Brook Limitation 2.

38 H. 8. chap. 1. Copyholder which is Tenant in common, is not compellable by
this Statute to make partition, for the Statute gives remedy for one Tenant in
common against another, by a Writ of (making partition) and it seems that a
Copyholder is not within the Statute of, 27 H. 8. chap. 10. of Jointure of
Women, for that Statute bars Women which have Joyntures before Marriage to have
Dower, that is of Lands given in Dower by the Law, and not by custom.

Where a copyholder by the custom may surrender his Land out of the Court,
into the hands of the Lord by the hands of two copyholders, or one to the use
of J.S. and a copyholder so makes surrender to two and one dies, or both dye,
before the next Court, and yet Homage finds it, this is good surrender, and J.
S. shall be admitted.

Tenant by copy of Lands of the nature of Gavellkinde has Issue two Sons, his
eldest Son has Issue a Son and dies seized, this Land shall descend to the
youngest Son and to his Nephew, the same Law is if the Son have Issue a
Daughter and dies seized, this Daughter and the youngest Son shall have this
Land by descent, and yet the Statute of Prerog. Regis, chap. 16. is, that Women
shall not share with Men.

Tenant by copy surrenders to the use of one for life, the remainder to the use
of one most near in blood, and has Issue two Sons, the eldest has Issue and
dies, the Tenant for life dies, the youngest Brother shall have the Land and not
the Issue of the eldest Brother, for the youngest Brother is more near of
blood to his Father, then is the ^on of his eldest Son, by which, 30 Ass. 47.
but the youngest Son is not next Heir.

Where the copyhold is of the nature of Borrough English, and this copyholder
having three Sons surrenders this to the use of his youngest Son in tail, the
remainder to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the Father engendered, and for
default of such Issue to the use of the right Heirs of the Father, and the
youngest Son dies without Issue of his Body, it is said that the eldest Brother
shall have this as Purchasor.

Two Joyntenants of one copyhold are, and one surrenders his part to his
companion for life, this is a severance of the Jointure, Lit f. 56.

Where the custom of a Manor is, that the youngest Son shall inherit by
descent the copyhold, and A. being a Villain, purchase copyhold there, and
the Lord seises them, and grants them out of his hands by copy, the y^^ngest
Son of the Grantee shall have this by descent.

If the tenant by copy of Court-roll has paid to his Lord more Rent then he
ought, and the Lord of that Surplusage of Rent was seized by the hands of his
tenant, yet the tenant shall avoid that in Avowry, for he is but tenant at will
by the course of the common Law, otherwise it is of very tenant of charter land.

Where a copyholder in Fee surrenders into the hands of the Lord to the use of
J. S. without more, all is in the hands of the Lord; and the Steward admits J.
S. to have and to hold to him and his heirs, yet J. S. has an Estate in Fee,
and yet the admittance is but allowance of J. S. to be tenant of such Estate
which is surrendered; but the use is in most courts to enter, that it was
surrendered to the use of J. S. without more, and the Steward enters, that the
Lord has granted to him Seisin, to have to him and his heirs, and taken good:
but it is better when one surrenders into the hands of the Lord, to say and
enter, to the use and behoof of J. S. for life, or to the use and behoof of J.
S. and his heirs: so that by (to the use and behoof) the Estate is limited,
that J. S. shall have it, and that makes the admittance accordingly to be good
without doubt, and yet the other is good, for by the surrender, all the
interest is in the Lord.

If the Homagers gives false Verdict in the court of copyhold, the party shall
not be bound, but he shall traverse that: but if such a Verdict be found for
the Lord, though the Verdict be false, yet the party cannot traverse that
there, but is put to his Petition, touching his land, or to sue in the
Chancery; for if the Verdict find false, that waste was made in the Tenements
of the Grandfather, the Son of the Father shall loose after his land, for that
it is a forfeiture which runs with the land; but seek, for it is made by the
person of the Father, and the Son has no remedy if the Verdict be true, but if
the Verdict be false, then his remedy is by Petition, and by no other remedy in
this Court.

If Tenant by copy makes a Lease for years by license of the Lord, and after in
the same Court the Tenant will release to his Lessee by such words (to remise
and release) such release seems void, for that that it ought to be a Surrender
into the hands of the Lord, etc. as he has surrendered and released, etc.

Use may be of Copy-holds, as well as of Freehold, but the Statute of 27 H. 8.
for uniting the possession to the use, does not extend to such tenures: Nor (he
to whose use) cannot forfeit the Land by cutting Trees, if it were not by the
consent and commandment of the Copyholder. If the Lord let several Copies
for one entire Rent and service, and the Tenant makes waste in any parcel of
them, and that be presented in his Court, he shall seize all the Copy as it was
entirely let.

A Rent of a Copyholder may be apportioned, as well as another Rent.

Tenant by copy of Court-Roll in the Court (sold and bargained) his copyhold
to J. S. and his heirs, J. S. was admitted, to have to him and his heirs
according to the custom; this is not good, for that it wants this word
(Surrendered.)

Tenant in tail by copy, the remainder over to I. S. in Fee, surrender his
Lands into the hands of two Tenants, to the use of I.N. and his heirs, and dies
before that be presented, and after that was presented, and I. N. admitted,
this is not good, but contrary Law, if Tenant in Fee had made that surrender,
and dyed as above: Seek.

By the custom of a Manor, some Lands are copyhold for three lives, and some
to them and their heirs, and the Lord grants by copy that which was for three
lives, after those three lives ended, to one and his heirs, this is not good;
but the custom of the Manor is good, though there be several copyholders of
several customs.

The Lord of a Manor within which are copyholders, and the Lord grants over
the Demesnes to I. S. in Fee, so that he has no Court; yet it is said, that
the copyholders may surrender as before they did: And that the Lord by his
Grant cannot destroy their surrender, and Copies.

The Lord may avow for Rent of his Copyholder before admittance, where it
descends to a copyholder; but he shall not be sworn of the Homage before
admittance.

If the custom of copyhold be, that the Lord may grant for three lives if all
dye, and then when the land is come into the hands of the Lord he is bound in a
Statute, and after he grants that over according to the custom, this Land
shall not be extended upon the Statute.

And if a copyholder be bound in a Statute, his copyhold land shall not be
extended, and if the Lord be bound in a Statute, the land of the copyholder
shall not be extended.

If an Infant be a Lord, and admits a copyholder to him and to his Heirs,
this is good, and he cannot avoid that by his Infancy, for he is but an
instrument to convey that according to the custom, and departs with no Estate.

If a copyholder will exchange, this is not good, unless there be a surrender
and admittance.

If a Villain purchase copyhold, and the Lord of the Villain enter, he shall
not have possession of the copyhold till he be admitted.

Copyhold shall not be forfeit by attainder of Heresy, for ^he blood is not
corrupted, for the Statute of, 5 H. 5. is not to be intended of copyhold
Lands, for it is said by the Statute, that he shall forfeit his Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, and that the Lord of whom the Lands are held
shall have the Lands after the King has (year day and waste) and this is
intended of freehold and not of Copyhold, but if a Copyholder be attaint of
Treason or Felony, as it is aforesaid, there the Lord shall have the Land, for
that that the blood is corrupt, and so there is none to inherit, but by
attainder in Heresy is no corruption of blood.

If a copyhold be furrendred to my use simply, and the Lord admit me upon
condition, this condition is void, for the Lord gives nothing, but is an
instrument to convey that according to the surrender; so if it be surrendered to
me for life and the Lord admits me to have to me and my Heirs, it is not good.

If a copyholder of a Manor takes a Lease for years of this Manor, seek
if his copyhold be extinct.

But if a copyholder makes a Lease of his copyhold to his Lord, this was held
no extinguishment of his copy, but a suspension.

But if the Lord by Indenture make a lease for years of copyhold land to his
copyholder of that, the copyhold is there held to be extinct, so if the Lord
make a feoffment to his copyholder of all his Manor upon condition, and
after enter for the condition, the copyhold is extinct, and if a copyholder
take a lease for years of the Manor, with a remainder over by Indenture, this
extincts the Copyhold.

If a Disseisor be of a Manor, whereof there are copyholders for three lives,
and he grant copies for three lives, and after the Disseisee re-enter, this
shall avoid the grant of the copies by the Disseisor.

But if the Lord of that Manor make a feoffment in fee upon condition, and the
Feoffee grants copies for three lives, and after the Feoffor enter for the
condition broken, he cannot avoid the copies.

If Tenant in tail or in fee of a Manor will grant Lands by copy, which were
no copyhold Lands before, and that has contiuned by diverse admittances after
as copyhold, and was never interrupted at any time by the Issue in tail, but
has been allowed for him, so that, that has continued by sixty or eighty
years, this is very good, and shall not be ever after avoided, but if it may
be showed to have been an Interruptation, then it is otherwise.

15 Eliz. If a copyholder surrender to the use of his Wife for life, the
remainder to him and his Heirs, and after the Husband surrender to J. D. and
his Heirs and dies, the Wife may enter by Dyer and Mounson Justices, and shall
hold for life, but the Heirs of the Husband are bound; otherwise it is, if the
remainder were to the right Heirs of the Husband, for they are purchasors of
this remainder, and may enter after the death of the Wife.

A Copyholder has a Son and a Daughter by one Belly, and a Son by another
Belly, and surrenders to the use of his Wife for years, and conveyes after her
death the remainder to his Son of the first venture, his Heirs and Assigns and
dies, the Tenant for years is admitted, the remainder in form aforesaid, the
Son of the first Belly dies without Issue, before admittance, and during the
Term: and Dyer says, that the possession of the Wife of the Termor or of the
Guardion is a sufficient possession to make (a Brothers possession.)

16 Eliz. Mounson says, Copyholders are within all statutes which speak of
Tenants, for if a copyholder had not been excepetd in the Stat of dissolution
of Monastries, the King had had them, which Geffrey and Bendlowes granted.

The Husband by surrender discontinues the copyhold which he has in right of
his Wife, the Wife is put to her (Cui in vita) and she is not aided by the
Statute of, 32 H. 8.

24 Eliz. A copyholder surrenders to the use of his last will, and devises
that his Executors shall sell the Land to J. S. and makes two Executors and
dies, and one Executor takes a Wife and surrenders to the use of J. S. the
Devisee, and was said that by the admittance of J. S. that he was copyholder,
though that the surrender be made by both the Executors.

Tail of Copyhold.
EState tail may be of a copyhold, and Formedon in descender may lie of that,
that is to say, may sue plaint, and make protestation in nature of a Formedon
in discender at the common Law, and good by all the Justices, for though a (
Formedon in discender) were not given but by Starute, yet this Writ now lies
at the common Law, and it shall be intended that that has been the custom
time out of mind, etc. See Littleton fol. 14. Plaint in nature of Formedon in
discender, and also Littleton says, that copyholder is, where within the
Manor the Tenants within the same Manor, have used time out of mind, to
have Lands or Tenements to them, and to their Heirs in Fee simple or see
Tail, and though that the Statute of Westminster 2 chap. 1. is, That the will
of the giver in writing should be observed (so that copyhold is not within the
Statute) yet in these Manors, within which, time out of mind, they have been
used to have Estates in tail in this Manor, and not in others are Estates
tail of copy-holds, 15. H. 8. tit. 24.

And now it is common usage, to cut of the Tail of copy-holdes within such
Manors where there is an Estate tail of copyhold, by common recovery in the
nature of a Writ of entry in the (Post) which after follows, and also by
recovery in nature of a Writ of Right, and join the Mise as follows
afterward, and another way is to cut of the intaile, and that is by
presentment, that the copyholder has made a Lease by Indenture for diverse
years, or other forfeiture, and then the Lord to seize for that, and to
surrender to the Purchasor; and these two ways are allowed for good.

It is said that five grounds of Law in England is and has been in diverse
particular customs, the which customs, though they are against the general
customs of Law, yet they are in effect and are taken for Law; and so I intend
that this custom of copyhold Estate (for that, that it has continuance by
prescription) is good by the Law, that the copyholder has an Estate by
custom and Law also, and that of that may be an Estate tail where that has
been used by prescription. Doctor and Student fol. 20.

Copyholders.
Copyhold Lands were before the Conquest, and it was called Folk-Land in the
time of the Saxons, and the Charter-lands are called Bock-land: And also
Bracton, Book 4. allows of Copyhold land, and says, That doing their Services
and customs, Their Lords cannot put them out: And so Copyhold Estates, have
in time of every King since the Conquest by all the Justices been allowed; so
that for the antiquity, and their continual alowance from time to time, the
Estates of Copy-holds are affirmed in Law; yet Fitzh. fol. 12. b. says, That
Copyholders in ancient times, were called Tenants in Villainage, or base
tenure: But this does not make them Villains, for Littleton, fol. 39. says,
That some Free men hold their Tenements, according to the custom of certain
Manors, by Villain Services, and yet they are not Villains, and though at
the beginning of Copy-holds, they had but a base Estate, and at the will of
their Lords, yet when they have continued their Estates by Copy, of time out of
mind, then doing their customs and services, as Copyholders ought to do,
they ought to enjoy their copy-holds, whether the Lord will or no; and it
appears by diverse Statutes, that copy-holds have been in reputation, for by the
Statute of 1 R. 3. chap. 4. and 19 H. 7. chap. 13. Copyholder which might
expend by the year 26, s. 8. d. shall be accounted of the same sufficiency to
be impannelled of a Jury, as he which might expend 20. s. per annum of
Freehold land, and by 2 Ed. 6. chap. 8. the interest of Copyholders are
preserved, notwithstanding they are not found by Office after the death of the
Kings Tenant; and by 13 Eliz. chap. 7. Lands of a Bankrupt, as well copyhold
as freehold shall be sold; so it appears copyhold Estates shall be regarded;
and those Demesnes which are in the hands of the Copyholders, are such
Demesnes as the services which they do, make a Manor, though the Lord have no
other Demesnes in his own hands, nor in his Farmors, Bailiff, or Servants, for
it is Demesnes, having regard to the Lord, for that, that upon every Surrender
the Lord has meddling, and grants it over in his Court.

And if you will admit that an Estate Tail by usage of time out of mind, may
be of Copyhold within a Manor, where it has been used by prescription, and
Plaints of (Formedon) have there been brought, why will ye doubt, but that it
may be well cut off by common recovery, in Plaint, in nature of a Writ of Entry
in the (Post) or at least in nature of a Writ of Right, and Mise joined upon
mere Right, and after Default made by the Tenant, and Judgment final given,
though that these Recoveries have not been used there by prescription, for they
are at the common Law, and Plaints in nature of these Writs are to be sued
there of copyhold.

It is said, that a Fine levied in ancient Demesne is of no worth, for it is no
Court of Record; but it is said, that common Recoveries may be sued there, to
cut off the Intail, and good, for that, that the land shall be pleaded there by
a Writ of Right close, and not otherwise, and copyholder shall be impleaded in
Court Baron of the Manor by Plaint, and not elsewhere. And for that the
Recoveries aforesaid, to cut off the Intail of a copyholder may be there,
though they were not there used before, if there be Estates Tail there, and if
usage makes the Estate Tail, and also usage makes the copyholder to have an
Estate of Inheritance by custom, and is good, 50. Book of Assizes 9.47 Ed.
3.38.

And though Littleton, fol. 16. If Lord out his copyholder, he has no other
remedy but to sue to his Lord by Petition, for he says, the Lord cannot break
the custom which is reasonable; but if such Lord will break the Custom, it is
no Reason to suffer such a Lord to be his own Judge, and to compel a
copyholder to sue to him by Petition. But for that that diverse Lords are of an
ill conscience, that before were as I have heard, for that diverse grave Judges
now hold, that a tenant copyholder may have Trespass against his Lord,
according to the opinion of Brian and Danby.

And this at this day seems reason, for though at the beginning copyholders
had but Estate at the will of the Lord, yet by the continuance of this Estate
of time out of mind, they have such Inheritance by the custom of the Manor
that the Lord (doing his Services) cannot out them, and the prescription goes
to the Land, and not to the Lord, nor to the occupation, for that is copyhold
land which has been let, and demisable time out of mind, etc.

If the Tenant by copy deny to do his Services, the Lord may enter for
forfeiture, if it be presented by the Homage; but if the Tenant by chance makes
a Default at the Lords Court, and does not deny his Service, it shall be
amerced, and is no Forfeiture; the same Law if his Rent be behind, and he does
not deny to pay it, that is no Forfeiture, but the Lord may distrain, but by
Littleton, fol. 51. If the Tenant upon demand be not ready to pay Rent Seck, or
if the Tenant nor none for him, be dwelling upon the Land to pay the Rent Seck,
when it is demanded, this denying is Disseisin; yet in the case aforesaid, I
conceive, that where a copyholder makes Default, and does not deny his
Services, or is not upon the Land ready to pay upon demand, this is no denial
which shall make a Forfeiture, for Forfeitures are not favored in Law, but to
be taken strictly according to the words, and that is to be intended upon
denying in deed by the Tenant, 42 Ed. 3. fol. 25.

And it seems that the Lord cannot enter for forfeiture, before that that be
found by Homage, but if a Copyholder alien by Charter, or commits Felony, or
Treason, and be attaint, these are Forfeitures without Presentment, and the
Lords may enter, for these are notorious and apparent to be against the
Custom, but otherwise it seems where a Copyholder makes waste.

12. Eliz. It was said, that if a copyholder will not be sworn of a Jury^ or
alien and make copyhold Freehold, this is forfeiture, for that, that the Lord
may enter without presentment, but for negligent acts, as for not doing of
service or Suite of Court, the Lord cannot seize without presentment by the
Homagers, and then agree if an Infant do not come within a year and day after
Proclamation made, yet he has not forfeited his copyhold, and this case was
between Hautree and his copyholder.

If copyholder lets by Indenture, which is forfeiture, and after surrenders to
the use of J. S. and he is admitted in, the Lord after shall not take advantage
of forfeiture, for the Homage are not to inquire of any forfeiture, but of
forfeiture made by the Tenants, and he which commits the forfeiture is not now
Tenant, and admittance to pay his Fine is agreement of the Lord, that he
admitted shall have that according to the custom, that is to say, he doing his
services shall have that to him and his Heirs, according to the custom of the
Manor.

It is said, that a copyholder cannot alien by Deed, for if he do so, the Lord
may enter for forfeiture, and so it is the like if he alien without Deed, in
such manner that the Land may pass, as if he lets for life without Deed, and
makes livery, the Lord may enter, but if he do not make Livery otherwise it is;
the same Law it is, if a copyholder bargain and sell his Land by Indenture,
and do not inroll it, nothing passes by this bargain, and for that it is no
forfeiture, Lit. f. 14.

If Tenant by copy of Court-Roll make a feoffment, the Lord may enter for
forfeiture, but this is to be intended, if he make a feoffment and makes
Livery, it is a forfeiture, but if he make no Livery, the Feoffee is but Tenant
at will, and it is no forfeiture, 11 H. 4. fol. 161.

Challenge.
For that, that you try Issues joined in Court Baron by assent by inquest of
the Homage, as you may, and not by wager of Law as it is, and also in trial of
Copy-holds, shall be by Oath of the Jury, and also for that some Challenges are
principals, and some are but for favor, first let us see what is a principal
Challenge.
Principal Challenge is said, where it is evident favor, as kindred, 21 Ed.
4. fol. 11. and 63.

Juror is of aliance, servant, or bears malice, that is to say, has
trespass against him, or a Juror is cozen to the Executor which brings the
action, and yet he shall not recover to his own use, and this is a principal
challenge etc. 20 Ass. 11.

Where a Juror is Gossip of the Plaintiff, it is a principal challenge, and he
shall be drawn off by the challenge, 2 H. 4. fol. 16.4 Ed. 4. fol. 1. the same,
19 H. 6 fol. 66. Contr. 6 H. 6. fol. 40.40. Ass. 20.

That the Plaintiff was retained with a Juror, that is, that the Juror was
master of the party, is a principal challenge, 2 H. 4. fol. 14.

That the Jury has past before for parcel of the same gift in Formedon, is a
principal challenge if he show record of that, otherwise it is but favor, 8 H.
5. fol. 11. and 7 H. 4. fol. 11. the same.

If a Juror (after he is impannelled) eat at the Plaintifs costs, or take
Money for his charges, it is a principal challenge, 13 H. 4. fol. 14. 22. R. 2.
Chal. 177. 8. Ed. 3. fol. 69.

Where Land is demanded and the Juror is cozen within the ninth degree, it is a
principal challenge, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 9.14. and 15 Eliz. Plowd. 426.

It is a principal challenge that the Juror held of J. S. that holds over of
the Plaintiff, 13 H. 6. Statham.

Where a Juror has a Lease of one party, and though he has granted his
Interest to another, yet he is within the Distress of his Lessor, to the using
an Action of Debt for the Arrearages, and for that is a principal challenge, 44
Ed. 3. fol. 5.44. Ass. 23.

Trespass, the Defendant says, it was the Freehold of J.S. and justifies as
Servant of J. S. it a principal challonge that the Juror was within the
distress of J. S. to E. 4. fol. 11. B.

Trespass, where the Defendant justifies as Servant to the Lord Dacres, it was
a principal challenge, that the Juror was within the distress of one which
held of the Lord Dacres, 15 Ed. 4. fol. 18.

It is a principal challenge that the Juror is cozen to the Wife of the
Defendant, for that, that the Issue of the Wife may be Heir to the Juror, 8 H.
6. fol. 15.

That the juror at another time had past against him in the same Issue, if he
show the Record it is a principal challenge, and otherwise but for favor, 11
R. 2. Tit. 106.21. Ed. 4. fol. 74. before 7 H. 4.

Juror was challenged for that, that at another time he past against the
Plaintiff for the same Debt, which was reversed by Error, and for that, that
he did not show the Record, it is no principal challenge, 33 H. 6. f. 1.

It is a principal challenge that the Juror was chosen arbitrator for one
party, but otherwise it is where he was chosen indifferent for them, 3 H. 6
fol. 24.

That the juror held of a Manor, whereof the reversion is in the Plaintiff,
is a principal challenge, 10 H. 7. fol. 20.49 Ass. 1. That the juror was of
Council with the Plaintiff and has taken his fee, this was the challenge, and
7 H. 7. f. 10. that it is no principal challenge.

It is a principal challenge, the Sherif or Bailif which makes the Pannell is
son in Law to the Defendant, 9 Ed. 4 f. 49.

Those which have been attaint of salse Oath, or were seen in the Pillory or
Tumbrill, or against whom there was Judgment of life and member, shall be
outed by challenge, and these are principal challenges, Britton fol. 134.

Those which pretend to have some right in the thing demanded shall be outed by
challenge, and this is a principal challenge, the same Law that the juror is a
Villain 9 Ed. 4. fol. 17. Villain is principal challenge 26 Book of Ass. 28.

That a juror was outlawed is a principal challenge, if he show the Record, 11
H. 4. fol. 40. Abridg. Book of Ass. 6. and 21 H. 6. fol. 30.

The same Law that a juror was attaint of conspiracy, 33 H. 6. fol. 55. 18. H.
8. f. 2. Writ of entry, they are at issue, and the Plaintiff says, that the
Sherif and two of the Coroners are his cozens, and the other two cozens of the
Defendant, and prays a Venire facias, to others, and shall not unless all
were his cozens, for if it were made by the cozen of the Plaintiff, the array
shall be quasht, but the Defendant cannot quash the array by that that it is
made by his cozens.

15 H. 7. fol. 9. Plaintiff cannot quash the array, for that that it is made by
his cozen, but may show that, and pray a (Venire facias) to the Coroners, but
because it does not lie in his knowledge, the Plaintiff may quash the array
though the Sherif is of consanguinity or affinity of the Defendant, but
otherwise it is of his own part.

19 H. 8. fol. 7. Defendant challenge the array, for that it was made by J.S.
cozen of the Plaintiff, and this found and the Array quasht.

10 H. 7. fol. 7. The Array was quasht for that, that the Plaintiff was Gossip
to the Son of the Sherif, or for any other cause of the Plaintiff.

15 Edw. 4. fol. 23. Trespass by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and they were
at Issue, and the Plaintiff says, that the Sheriff is his Steward, and some
of the Coroners are of his Robes, and the rest within his distress, and the
Defendant confessed it, and for that Process issued out to choosers, and the
array by choosers shall not be quasht, but (the heads.)

18 Edw. 4. fol. 8. Where the Array is made by choosers, this shall not be
challenged, but the (heads) shall be challenged.

8 H. 6. fol. 60. The Array in Assise was quasht, for that it was made by the
Sheriff himself, being Plaintiff, and it was also quasht, for that it was
made by the Coroners at the denomination of the Plaintiff, for that the Court
of Office, awarded Venire facias to Electors.

The challenge is principal Cozen of one party. Servant of one. Master of one
Party.


At other times, Brings trespass against one. Eats at the costs of one. Is
Lord to one.


Challenges, Is within the distress of one. Arbitrater of one. Convict of
horrible crime. Has right in the thing demanded.


Now let us see what is challenge for favor.
WHere one challenges for diverse causes, and concludes for favor, it is not
double, otherwise it is of principal challenge, 7 H. 6. fol. 44.

That the Defendant is Steward of a Manor of the Juror, or that he is within
the distress of the Juror, it is a challenge for favor, and not a principal
challenge, but that the Juror is within the distress of the Defendant, is a
principal challenge; but that the Juror has married the Mother of the
Defendant; if she be dead, and he had no Issue by her, it is no principal
challenge, 14 H. 7. Tit. Brook, 71.

The same Law where a Juror has married a Cozen of the Defendant, which might
be heir to him, during their lives it is a principal, but contrary, if the
Wife be dead without Issue, 14 H. 7. fol. 1. and 15 H. 7. fol. 9.

It is no principal challenge, that a Son of a Juror, has married a Daughter
of the Plaintiff, 3 Edw. 4. fol. 12.

Juror is, a Keeper of the Forest by the Kings Grant, and the Plaintiff is
Master of the Game, is no principal challenge, 16 Ed. 4. fol. 1.

It seems it is no principal challenge, if the Juror say he will pass with
the Plaintiff before he be sworn, or that he was labored, 21 H. 7. fol. 32.
7 H. 6. fol. 25. the same.

That the Defendant has Trespass against the Juror, depending, if it were
after the action brought, it was suspicious, and is no principal challenge, 20
Book of Assise, 11.

If a Juror be challenged for that, that one party has an action hanging
against him, if he do not show Record of that, it is no principal, Statham,
25 Ed. 3.

That the Wife of the Sheriff, or of him which makes the Pannell, is Sister of
the Plaintiff, ought to conclude of favor, 20 Ass. 21.26 Ass. 21. and 22.

Where a Juror is returned by name, Chamberlain, and Chambers appears, it is a
challenge for favor, and shall be inquired if he be known by both names or
not, 32 H. 6. fol. 23.

It is no challenge, that the Juror is Parishoner with the Defendant, 22 Ass.
25.

Attaint, It is no principal challenge, that one of the Grand Jury, and one of
the Petty Jury, have married two Sisters, 43 Ass. 46.

In Attaint, It is no principal challenge, that one of the Grand Jury, and one
of the Petty Jury are at debate, 50 Book of Ass. 4.

Juror was challenged for malice, which he had to the Plaintiff, and tried,
and found indifferent, 27 H. 8. fol. 25.

It is no challenge, that a Iuror appeared where he was not summoned, if he
were impannelled, 8 Ed. 3. 69 Fitzh. Challenge 4.

It is no principal challenge to say, that the Defendant is Tenant to the
Sheriff or Bailiffe, which makes the Array, unless it be for favor, 26 Ed.
3. Statham.

Common is the seventh Article which is inquirable.
ANd for that I intend, that when the Statutes ensuing were made for
Improvements, immediately the Lords have improved their Wafts as much as they
could, or otherwise they were so moved with charity and pity to the Poor,
that more they would not improve for Charity, I pray God that that may continue.

Because many great ones which infeoffed Freeholders of small Tenements in
great Mannours of extent, etc. may improve, when they that are infeoffed have
sufficient Pasture belonging to their Tenements, etc. Merton, chap. 4.

Westmin. 2. chap. 46. Recites Merton, and gives rate between Neighbor and
Neighbor; and it is, Where it is belonging to their Tenements: But if one
claim Common for a certain number, by Grant, the Lord cannot improve.

16 Ed. 3. tit. 9. If the Lord improve, not leaving sufficient Common, the
Commonner may break way to use his Common, See 17 H. 7. fol. 11. for breaking
way, 22 H. 7. fol. ult.

Fitzherbart 179. L. Where one has a Common belonging or appertaining, and is
distrained, he shall have an Assise of Common of pasture: Seventh Book of
Assise 16.

8 Book of Ass. 18. Assise, Tenant says he has improved, leaving sufficient
for the Plaintiff.

If a man grant Land and Common, the Grantor cannot improve against his Deed,
12 H. 3. fol. 25. That he cannot improve against a Deed, 3 Ed. 2. tit. 21.

If the Tenant have Common for all manner of Beasts, the Lord cannot improve,
notwithstanding I have heard the opinion of the Learned to the contrary, 34.
Assise 11.

It was held, that no man might improve in Feilds sowed, where they have
Common, when the Corn is reaped and carried, and in time of Wreck; for the
Statute is in Wastes and not in Feilds: And also it is held there, that Cottager
shall have Common, but not a Cottager newly erected, for he cannot prescribe, 5
Book of Assise 2. Jurney to Lecester.

The Tenant shall not have Common to Land newly improved, but to ancient Land,
hide, and gain, 10 Ed. 2. tit. 22. 5 Book of Ass. 2. the same.

The Statute is (as much as belongs to Tenements) that seems to extend as well
to Common appurtenant, as appendant: But Master Stamford said in Grayes-Inne,
That improvement is only against him that has Common appendant, and not
against him which has Common appurtenant without number.

Now let us see what is appendant, and what appurtenant.
Common appurtenant is, for all manner of Beasts, and appendant is but to have
common for Beasts commonable, Natura brevium, fol. 70. That appurtenant is,
with all manner of Beasts by prescription, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 3. by Fairfax.

By Prisot, Common appendant is to have common for Horses, Beasts, Kyne, and
Sheep, which are commonable, and which are most fit for the Ploughman, and not
for Geese, Goats, and Hogs, 37 H. 6. fol. 34.

If one has a common of Estovers by Grant, he cannot build another new House
to have Estovers to that, Fitzh. fol. 180. h.

Admeasurement lies between Commoners which have common appendant to their
Freehold, if one of them surcharge the common, by putting in more Beasts then
they ought to common, Fitzh. fol. 125. B. D.

He which has Common appurtenant to a certain number, or common by specialty
to a certain number, shall be admeasured: But he which has common appurtenant
without number, or in gross without number, shall not be admeasured, 26 H. 8.
fol. 4.

Common appendant, cannot be aliened and severed, but common appurtenant may, 5
H. 7. fol. 7. B. and 9 Ed. 4. fol. 39. A.

He which has Common appendant cannot use that common with other Beasts, but
those which are rising and lying upon his Land, 15 Ed 4. fol. 32.

Termor cannot put any Beasts into the Common, but those which he has to
manure his Land, or for his household, and not for to sell, 14 H. 6. fol. 6.

A man grants Land, and a Turbary, this does not make the Turbary appendant,
unless it were appendant from time out of mind, 8 Book of Ass. 9.

Common is to be taken by the mouth of Beasts, 31 H. 8. tit. 151.

Commoner has no interest in the Land, but to take that with the mouth of his
Beasts, and cannot have trespass (why he broke his Close) against one which
makes trespass in the common, but may distraine them doing damage, 12 H. 8.
fol. 2.

There are four manner of Commons, that is to say, Common appendant, Common
appurtenant, Common in gross, and Common because of Neighborhood, Natura
brevium, fol. 69.

Common appendant is to Land arable only, 26 H. 8. fol. 4. by Hales. It seems
it may be appendant to a Manor, Land, or Tenements, Fitzh. 139. L.

It may be appendant by reason of a House, Natura brevium, fol. 70.

Where one has Common because of Neighborhood in the Land of J. S. he cannot
put in his Beasts in the waste of J.S. but in his own Land, which may go if
they will into the waste of J. S. 13. H. 7. fol. 13. etc.

Assise of Novell Disseisin lies of Common of pasture, Turbary, and Fishing,
where he has that for life, or in tail, or in Fee, and is disturbed that he
cannot take his common; and the Writ shall be, he disseised him of a common of
pasture in D. and not disseised him of his Freehold in D. as where it is of
Land, for there it is always, he disseised him of his Freehold, Fitzherbart,
fol. 179. L.

Common appendant a man cannot use with Beasts of a stranger, unless he keep
them to dung his Land, but he cannot take in other Beasts for Money, which do
not manure his Land: See 6 H. 7. fol. 14. Fitzherbart 180 B.

If a man claim Common for Beasts without number, there he may put in other
Beasts of a strangers for Money in that Common; otherwise it is in Chase or
Forest where the Lord has Deer, Fitzh. 189. B.

He that has Common ought to use that with his own Beasts, or with Beasts
which dung his Land, or with Beasts allowed for their Milk, and cannot take in
any, 22 Book of Ass. 82.

He which has Common by specialty, cannot take in Beasts, but he that has
Common for Kine for their Milk, or for Beasts to manure his Land, for Sheep
allowed to dung his Land, for he has right in them for the time, 45 Ed. 3.
fol. 26.

A way appendant to a House shall not be made ingrosse, but Common appurtenant
and Advowson may, 5 H. 7. fol. 7.

Where the King grants Common to an Abbot and his Successors without number,
out of a Manor, and after he grants the Manor to another, and after the Abbey
is dissolved, it seems for that that it is Common without number, the King
shall not have it; but if it were Common certain, the King shall have it, 27
H. 8. fol. 20.

Common appendant shall be used with his proper Beasts and not with others
Beasts, and the Defendant was admitted to prescribe for Common appendant, 6.
Hen. 7. fol. 14.

He which has Common appendant, cannot use that, but with his own proper
Beast or Beasts, which dung his Land; but he which has Common for twenty
Beasts by Grant, or with Beasts without number, he may use that Common with
others Beasts, 11 H. 6. fol. 22. Fitzh. 180. B. the same.

A man need not prescribe in Common appendant, but it suffices to say, that he
is seized of three Acres in D. and that he has Common appendant, etc. 4 H. 6.
fol. 13.

He which justifies for Common appendant, need not prescribe in that also, 22
H. 6. fol. 10.

Common appendant cannot be but by continuance of time out of memory, etc. 5
Book of Ass. 2.

Courts.
In what place a Court Baron shall be held.
Court Baron by Brian shall be held in a place certain, but I have heard, that
it may be kept in any place within the Manor, that the Tenants have notice to
make their suit, and it is good, 8 H. 7. f. 4. A. and so it is, 24 Ed. 3. that
it need not be in a place certain, and by Glanvile, fol 19. It ought to be held
in a place within the Manor and not out of the Fee.

Which is Court Baron, and which is Court of Record.
COurt of ancient Demesne is no Court of Record, but it is a Court Baron, 9 Ed.
4. fol. 43. and 3 H. 4. fol. 16. the same.

Where the entry is (to the great Court) this is a Court Baron, as it is
aforesaid, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 17.

Where Suitors are Judges, Suitors Judges.
and where false judgment lies and not error, as in Court of a Manor,
Hundred, and County, these are Court-Barons, 6 Ed. 4. fol. 3. B.

Court by Commission before the Justices of Peace, that is to say, their Court
of Sessions, etc. are Courts of Record, 9 H. 6. fol. 3.

If a man be arrested in the Cinque ports, he shall have a (Homine replegiando)
if according to the Law and custom of the Ports he be repleevable, Eitzh. fol.
67. A

Great complaint was against the Officers of the Castle of Dover, for holding
Plea above forty shillings, where they have but a Court Baron, and for
arresting men by the body of their Warrant and (Gapias) but it seems they have
a Charter now, for it is used there to arrest, 5 E. 4. f. 127.

Trespass of imprisonment, the Defendant says, that there is a Court by
prescription within the Tower, and does prescribe to have (Capias) and not that
it is there (Capias) without prescription, and justify that by (Capias) etc.
And so this appears to be Courts of Record, 4 Ed. 4. fol. 6.

Error lies wherefalse judgment is given in any Court of Record, as in the
common Bench, or London, or other City where they have power to hold Pleas by
Charter, or by prescription, of every sum in Debt or Trespass, of the sum of
forty shillings and over, Fitzh. fol. 20.

If false judgment be given in Court of ancient Demesne, the Tenant or
Demandant shall have false judgment, which proves that it is Court Baron,
Fitzh. fol. 11.

Court of Pipowders is a Court of Record, Fitzh. fol. 18. H.

Where the Courts hold Plea by prescription above forty shillings, they are
Courts of Record, 6 Edw. 4. fol. 3.

Marshalsey is a Court of Record, for if they err, there lies a Writ of error,
10 H. 6. fol. 13.

Where they have conusance of every sum, as in London, and in other Cities and
Borroughs, are Courts of Record, 2 H. 4. fol. 4.34. H. 6. f. 52. the same; and
45 E. 3. fol. 1.

Error lies where false judgment is given in any Court of Record, as in the
common Bench, or in London, or other City, or in other place, where they have
power to hold Plea by Charter or prescription of every sum of forty shillings
and over, these are Courts of Record, Fitzh. fol. 20. D.

Leets and Turns of the Sherif are Courts of Record, for that they are for the
Commonwealth, Eitzh. fol. 82.10. H. 6. fol. 7. It is said that the Leet is a
Coutt of Record, and for that he cannot wage his Law in Debt brought upon
Amerciament in Leet.

The Kings Bench, Chancery, common Bench, and the Exchequer, are Courts of
Record, for that, that no Judge may sit as Judge there without Letters Patents,
Doctor and Student f. 11.

Ancient Demesne.
Insomuch that a Court of ancient Demesne is a Court Baron, let us see in what
action brought at the Common Law, ancient Demesne is a good Plea, and in what
not, and what action may be sued in ancient Demesne, and what not.
ANcient Demesne is no Plea in an action upon the Statute, R. 2. 2. H. 7. fol.
17.

It is no Plea in Trespass, but in Replegiare and Writ of Ward, 46 Ed. 3. f. 1.

It is no Plea in Trespass, 47 Ed. 3. fol. 22.

Ancient Demesne is a good Plea in Replegiare, and not in Trespass, 40 Ed. 3.
fol. 4.46. Ed. 3. fol.

Plaint of fresh force may be sued in ancient Demesne, without a Writ of Right
close, as it seems, but another plaint of Land cannot be sued there without a
Writ of Right close, 26 H. 6. fol. 5.

Ke-disseisin and Post-disseisin cannot be sued in ancient Demesne, for the
Sherif and Coroners cannot inquire there; but said that waste may be sued there
by a Right close 32 H. 6. f. 29.

If a man bring waste at the common Law, it is said that ancient Demesne is a
good Plea, 7 H. 6. fol. 37. and 8 H. 6. f. 83. The Opinion of all the Justices,
that it is a good Plea in wast, for that that by this recovery, judgment is to
recover the place wasted, and by this the Land shall be frank Fee, 1 H. 4. fol.
5. The Lord in ancient Demesne cannot hold Plea in Redisseisin and waste by
Hull, for that, that the Sherif is Judge and not the Lord.

Warranty of Charters may be sued at the common Law, and ancient Demesne is no
Plea, for VVarranty is by Deed out of the L^nd, Fitzh. 135.

Juris utrum, at the common Law, ancient Demesne is no Plea, for he cannot have
a (Right close) for that, that Frank-almaigne cannot be held there, but the
Tenure there is Socage, Abridg. Ass. fol. 16.6. Ed. 3. f. 20. the same, Statham.

Detinue of Charters at the common Law to plead ancient Demesne, is no Plea, 13
Ed. 3. fol. 67. Statham.

Fitzh. 136. In a Writ of Mesne, ancient Demesne is a good Plea.

In (Quid juris clamat) brought at the common Law, to plead ancient Demesne is
a good Plea, 20 Ed. 3. Statham fol. 20.

In an action upon the Statute of R. 2. brought at the common Law to plead
ancient Demesne is no Plea, but in account or Replegiare it is a good Plea, 21
Edw. 4. fol. 3.

Where damages are recovered in ancient Demesne, and Debt is brought in the
common Bench upon the same damages, it is no Plea for the Defendant to plead
ancient Demesne, 39 H. 6. fol. 3.

Ancient Demesne is a Court Baron, and the Suitors are Judges.
DEbt was brought in common Bench for damages recovered in ancient Demesne,
the Defendant pleads no such record, and is no Plea, for it is a Court Baron,
but no such recovery is good, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 44. B. 50. Book.

Suitors are Judges in ancient Demesne, 34 H. 6. fol. 38. Na. Bre. fol. 12. the
same.

Suitors are Judges in ancient Demesne, and not the Bailifs, 12 H. 4. fol. 17.

Plea shall not be removed out of ancient Demesne, unless for false Judgment,
13 H. 4. fol. 16. Fitzh. fol. 12. a the same, and that proves that this is a
Court Baron.

Suitors are Judges in ancient Demesne, for that it shall not be removed, for
that the Bailifs maintain, 3 H. 4. fol. 16. See 6 H. 4. fol. 2.

Upon (Pone) to remove Plea out of ancient Demesne, the Sherif returns that the
Suitors will not send the Record by which issued a Distress against the
Suitors, 18 Ed. 3. Statham.

False Judgment was brought in the common Bench upon a judgment given in
ancient Demesne, in a Writ of Right close, and though judgment was given in
that in the common Bench, yet the Land shall be ancient Demesne, as it was
before.

By Knivet, Fine levied in ancient Demesne is nothing worth, for it is no Conrt
of Record, but common recoveries are used there to cut off an intaile, 50 Ass.
9. No Land may be pleaded there by right close, and not else where.

How Land in ancient demesne is made frank Fee for a time, and how for ever.
DUring the time that Lands in ancient Demesne is in the hands of the King, it
is Frank Fee, but if the King grant that over to hold of the Manor again, it
is ancient Demesne again, 21 Book of Ass. 13.

If Recovery or Fine be in Common Bench of Land in ancient Demesne, the Land is
Frank fee, till it be defeated by the Lord, by Writ of Deceit, and when that is
defeat, it is void to bind the parties, 8 Ed. 4. fol. 6. See 3 H. 4. fol. 6.
accordingly.

If the Tenant in ancient Demesne enfeoffe his Lord of the Manor, being
common person, and not King, the Lordship is Frank see for ever, 9 H. 6. fol.
24. B. 3 H. 4. fol. 16. the same.

Where the King gives Land of ancient Demesne, to hold in Frank Almaigne, that
is Frank fee, 6 H. 4. fol. 2.

Where a Fine is in common Bench, of Land in ancient Demesne, is Frank fee; so
that after if a Recovery of that be in ancient Demesne, it is void (and before
not a Judge) 7 H. 4. fol. 3. B. 7 H. 4. fol. 29. the same.

If the King was once seized of Land in ancient Demesne, and let that for
life, it is Frank fee for the time, 11 H. 4 fol. 84.

Where Land in ancient Demesne is forfeit to the King by attainder, and the
King grants that over to another and his heirs, now they are Frank fee for
ever, 13 H. 4. fol. 7.

Where a Fine is levied of Land in ancient Demesne, in the Common Bench, the
Lord may defeat that by a Writ of Deceit; and yet if he to whom the Fine was,
etc. has a Release, with confirmation of the party, made after the Fine, his
Estate is good, notwithstanding that the Fine be defeated, Fitzh. 98. a.

The Lessor by his confirmation to his Tenant, may make the Land in ancient
Demesne Frank fee, but if he confirm to hold by meaner services, it is no
Frank fee, 30 Ed. 3. fol. 16.

Where Land in ancient Demesne Escheats to the Lord, for that, that the Tenant
dies without heir general or special, are Frank fee for ever, for he holds
them now of the Lord Paramount, 18 Ed. 3. fol. 19.

If the Tenant in ancient Demesne, answer the action in Precipe, in the Common
Bench, yet it is no Frank fee before Judgment given, 2 Ed. 4. fol. 26.

The Lord by his confirmation may alter the tenure, but not the estate of the
Land, where he confirms to hold at the Common Law, 49 Ed. 3. fol. 7.

Fine at the common Law, recovery, or where he is in by the Kings Charter, or
by feoffment of the Lord, these prove the Land frank Fee and not ancient
Demesne, Fitzh. fol. 13. C.

If the King be seized of Land in ancient Demesne, this is Frank fee, but if
the King demise it to another, the Land is ancient Demesne again, 17 Ed. 3.
fol. 52.

A man recovers in ancient Demesne Lands, which were at the common Law against
a man by Verdict of a Jury, and he against whom the recovery was, brought an
Assise upon that, and awarded, that he should recover Seisin, 30 Ed. 1. Tit.
Assise 379.

Note the tenure and trial of ancient demesne, and who shall plead ancient
demesne.
LAnds which are ancient Demesne are Soccage, Fitzh. fol. 11.

Tenants in ancient Demesne, are those which hold of the Manors which were in
the hands of Saint Edward the Confessor, at the time that the Book of Doomsday
was made; but the Lands written in that Book, to be in other men's hands, are
not ancient Demesne, Fitz. 16. E.

All the Lands which were in the seisin of Saint Edward the Confessor, when the
Book of Doomsday was made, are called ancient Demesne, and the Lands in other
hands, etc. Frank fee, Natura brevium, fol. 14.

If the Land be ancient Demesne or not, shall be tried by the Book of Doomsday,
49 Ed. 3. fol. 22. In Monstraverunt.

Assise, The Tenant pleads that the Land was ancient Demesne, and it was tried
by Assise in the Book of Notting, and also North. 8 Ed. 2. Statham, fol. 20.

Trial of ancient Demesne is by the book of Doomsday, and by that it was
certified that London was not ancient Demesne, 7 H. 6. fol. 34.

In Assise of Mortdancester, ancient Demesne was tried by the Country, 8 Book
Ass. 35. 9 Book Ass. 9. the same.

In Assise, the tenant says that it was parcel of the Manor of B. which is
ancient Demesne and the other says that it is not parcel, and upon this at
issue, and that was tried by Assise, 12 Book of Assizes 18.22 Book. of Assizes
45. the same.

Assise, none shall plead ancient Demesne but he which is Tenant, and not the
Dissei^or, 21 Book of Ass. 2.41 Ed. 3 tit. 22. the same.

If Land be in the book of Doomsday, written under the Title, Land of the
Bishop, and not Land of the King, yet though it be in the book of Doomsday, it
is no ancient Demesne, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 45.

Form of Pleadings, that the Land is ancient Demesne, and how he shall sue for
ancient Demesne, and for Copyhold in ancient Demesne.
BY Prisot, he which pleads ancient Demesne, shall say that the Land is held of
the Manor of D. which is ancient Demesne, and pleadable by a petty Writ of
Right close from time out of mind, and demand judgment if the Court will
acknowledge, 36 H. 6. fol. 18.

3. H. 6. fol. 48. But see by Thirne, and granted that frank Fee may be held of
a Manor of ancient Demesne, 11 H. 4. fol. 85.

Precipe, the Tenant says that the Land was parcel of the Manor of D. which
is ancient Demesne and pleadable by petty Writ of right close, time out of
mind, and demand judgment if the Court will acknowledge, and it is no Plea for
the Demandant to say to that, that it is frank fee, for that, that it does not
gainsay, but that the Manor is ancient Demesne, and that this is parcel, but
he ought to plead specially, how it is become frank fee, 41 Ed. 3. f. 22.12
Book of Ass. 16.22. Book of Ass. 45.

Right close lies always between Plow-holders, and no Plow-holder may implead
another Plow-holder of Lands in ancient Demesne, unless by this Writ; and
shall make in this his protestation to sue in nature of what Writ he will, as
his case is, Not. Brevium fol. 11.

They call Tenants in ancient Demesne Sokemaines, Britton fol. 105.

Copyholder of base Tenure shall not have a Right close, but ought to sue by
Bill in the Lords Court, but copyholder in ancient Demesne of free-tenure
shall have that, Fitzh. fol. 11.

The King shall have year, day, and wast, of Lands in ancient Demesne, if it
be so that the Tenant have sold them against his Lords will, and yet not the
Lands past by surrender, Stam. fol. 50. Note this is where the copyholders in
ancient Demesne have used time out of mind to sue for them by petty Writ of
Right close, and so is 14 H. 4. fol. 1. by Hank and 14. H. 4 fol. 34. and see 3
Ed. 3. Br. tit. copyhold 22. And in these surrenders of Lands in ancient
Demesne of frank tenure it is not used to say, (to hold at the will of the
Lord) in these copies, but (to hold according to the custom of the Manor) by
the Services before due, and is not said there, (at the Will of the Lord.)

Ancient Demesne is Socage Tenure, for they are called Sokemaines, Fitzh. 14. C.

By what Writ Execution shall be in ancient Demesne, and by what not, and shall
be free of Toll, etc.
EXecution of Writs in ancient Demesne cannot be, for that Execution is given
by Westminster. 2. chap. 18. and that the Statute is, if they be ejected of those
Tenements they have to recover by a Writ of new Disseisin, 22 Book of Ass. 45.

Upon a Statute Merchant execution was awarded of Lands in ancient Demesne, Br.
Tit. 37.

Debt against Heir, if he has Lands in ancient Demesne they shall be charged
as Assets, 7 H. 4. fol. 15.

Those Tenants of ancient Demesne are quit of Toll, and passages for Goods sold
and bought in Faires and Markets, and to be quit of Tax and Tallage of
Parliament; unless they be taxed by the Parliament, and to be quit of expenses
of Knights of Parliament, and shall not be put upon Juries and Inquests out of
ancient Demesne for Lands of ancient Demesne, Eitzh. 14.

Court of Pipowders.
Let us see the nature and authority of Court of Pipowders.
COurt of Pipowders is a Court of Record and the Steward is Judge, for that
that there are no Suitors there, and for that error lies there upon erroneous
judgment given, and not a Writ of false judgment, 6 Ed. 4. fol. 3.7 Ed. 4.
fol. 23. That error lies there.

It was held that a Court of Pipowders may be by custom in a City without
Fair or Market, and therefore where it was assigned for error upon a Record
given in a Court of Pipowders, according to the custom of the City held, etc.
And though it be not (in full Market or Fair) it was adjudged no error, 13
Ed. 4. f. 8.

Trespass of Goods taken, the Defendant iustifies as Bailif of the Town of
Rippon, by virtue of a command of execution of a judgment given against the
Plaintiff in Debt, in Court of the said Fair at Rippon, and for that, that the
Plaintiff did not make agreement for the Debt recovered against him within ten
days, after judgment given, he makes price of the Goods by Merchants of the
Town of Rippon, and for that makes agreement with the party, and this
Justification was good, 20 Book of Assise 90.

It was enacted that no Steward shall hold Plea in this Court, unless the
Plaintiff or his Attorney makes Oath that the fact or contract was made within
the Fair, and if it were the contrary he should forfeit 100 s. 17 Ed. 4. chap.
2. tit. Faires the fourth.

In Court of Pipowders the Plaintiff or his Attorney shall be examined by Oath
if the matter rose within the Fair, and the Defendant also may plead that
this arose in a foreign place, 1 R. 3. chap. 6.

Debt in the common Bench against Mawd, and counts that he had recovered ten
Marks against the said Mawd in Court of Pipowders at Everwick, and the
Plaintiff by Certiorare removes (the Tenor of the Record) in the Chancery, and
from thence by (Mittimus) into the common Bench to have execution, and
attachment was made upon the Original, at the ninth hour, and he appears and
pleaded, and a (Venire facias) went out, returnable at the third hour after
the ninth, and so in Court of Pipowders the process is from hour to hour, 7
H. 6. fol. 19.

The book of Entries, fol. 167. See there the form of the Count and (Precipe)
of summoning in this Court; and the Process of (Capias) and proceeding in Debt
in this Court, and Debt against a Jailer for escape in Title, Debt.

The book of Entries fol. 18. See (Scire facias) to have execution upon
judgment given in a Court of Pipowders, in an action of account brought there,
and removed into the common Bench to have execution of that judgment.

And it seems briefly that nothing shall be sued here, unless the contract or
deed were made within the Precinct of the Fair or Market, as it appears
above, and for that Informations of penal Statutes ought not to be sued in
this Court, of things and Offenses made out of Faires and Markets, as
insufficient tanned Leather, carried to be sold in Faires against the Statutes,
also this Court is ordained only for hasty redress of things there during the
Fair.

Court of Marshalsey.
FIRST, In the book called the Diversity of Courts fol. 110. It is said, that
the Court called the Marshelsey is an ancient Court of Record, and made to have
good government and order within the Kings House, for preservation of the King
and his Servants, and to this Court are certain bounds limited, by 13 R. 2.
chap. 3. that in all places where the King in his own person shall come and
make stay there, within the Verge limited to his Graces Court, that it shall
not pass the space of twelve Miles to be accounted from his Lodging, Fitzh.
141. B.

And in diversity of Courts it is said, that this Court has power to inquire
of Treason, Murder, and Felony, and to take appeals of them, and also of
Maymes, if they be made within the Verge, and between persons of the Kings
House.

And said there also, that if one of the House of the King sue another which is
not of the House, he shall plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court, and if they
will not this exception allow, he shall have a Writ of Error and that shall
be reversed in the Kings Bench, Fitzh. 242. A. Seek in trespass:

And the Judges in this Court, are the Steward, and Marshall of the Kings
House, for in these is the order of the Kings House.

Note that by the Statute, Articuli super chartas, c. 3. that the Steward and
the Marshall shall hold no Plea of Freehold, nor of Debt, Covenant, nor of any
bargain made between any of the Kings People, but only of trespass made within
the Kings House, or other trespass made within the Verge, and of Contracts and
Covenants, which one of the Kings House made with another in the same House,
and not otherwhere. And they shall plead no Plea of trespass, except the
parties were arrested by them before the King departed the Verge where the
trespass was committed, and they shall plead speedily from day to day, so that
it may be pleaded and determined, before the King depart out of the limits of
the same Verge, where the trespass was done, and if they cannot be determined
within the limits of the Verge, the Pleas there shall cease, and be determined
at the common Law, and the Steward shall not take conusance of Debt nor of
other things, but of such persons only which are of the Kings House, nor shall
hold any other Plea by obligation, and if they do any thing against this
Ordinance, let their doing be held for nothing, see, Fitzh. 241. B. D.

10. H. 6. fol. 13. Action was brought upon this Statute, for that the
Defendant impleads the Plaintiff in the Marshalsey for trespass, whereof one,
nor the other was of the Kings House, and there it is granted by the Court,
that of trespass within the Verge, one or the other shall be of the House, as
well as of action there upon other contract: Seek, for it seems otherwise by
the words of the Statute, and it is used now the contrary, diversity of Courts
agrees as above, see the title of, 38 Brook.

7 H. 6. f. 33. A Writ was sued upon the Statute (Articuli super Chartas) Ed.
1. chap. 3. That none shall be impleaded in the Marshalsey if one party were
not of the Kings House, there did aver the Defendant vexed him, etc. the other
says no such record.

Brook tit. Action upon the Statute 38. That the Marshalsey shall not hold Plea
of Contracts, unless, as well the Plaintiff as the Defendent are of the Kings
House, for if it be otherwise the Defendant may plead to the Jurisdiction, and
if the Plaintiff remove out of the Kings Service, hanging the Plea, the
Defendant may plead that, and abate the Jurisdiction and the Plea, contrary if
the Defendant remove out of the Kings Service, and there it was held though the
trespass made within the Verge lie there between any, though they be not of
the Kings House, contrary of Debt and Covenant, and therefore seek of action
upon the case there between strangers upon Assumpsit, for it seems that it is a
Contract.

6 R. 2. Tit. 49. Br. Action upon the Statute, Debt upon Recovery of Damages
before the Marshall, in an action of Covenant before the Marshal, that is a
good Plea to the Jurisdiction, that none of the parties was of the Kings House
at the time, etc. For the Statute of (Articuli super chartas) cap. 3. will as
above, and therefore it is (coram non Judice) if it be otherwise.

19 Ed. 4. fol. 9. By Littleton, and not denied, where one is outlawed in the
common Bench without Original, it is not void, but error, but Judgment given
in the Marshalsey between parties which are not of the Kings House, is void,
for they have no power to hold the Plea, and if execution of that Judgment be
sued, the other shall have trespass upon it.

Then for that, that the Statute of (Articuli super chartas) aforesaid, limits
what actions shall be sued in the Marshalsey, it seems that information upon
penal Statutes shall not be sued there, for the Attorney of the Queen, nor
informer shall not inform there, and this is no Suite between the parties that
the Statue of Artic. provides, and they are no such actions, and for that Mr.
Poole Steward there, did well to reject the informations of penal Statutes
aforesaid out of the Court, and in this Court and the Court of Pipowders the
Suite is, J.S. complains against J.D. and your information is, Memorandum,
that such a day J.S. came here into the Court, etc. And gave the Court so to
understand that, etc. And there is another form, and where there are diverse
Statutes which gives liberty to sue for penalties in any Court of Record of the
King by express words, yet it was never seen in any suite by information, for
such penalties in the Chancery, Court of Wards, Court of Requests, for suits
there are by English Bills and matters of conscience, and Leet is a Court of
Record of the King, and yet no information shall be there, and so it seems in a
Court of Pipowders, and they do not use in these Courts English, nor in Leet
where the matters are by presentment of the Jury to be informed there, nor in
Court of Pipowders, unless the Lord has the panalties by the Kings Grant, for
in these Courts the attendance of the Kings Attorney is not requisite, and who
shall account and pay the King, his half in these Courts, and for that it is
hard to sue information there, see 44 Ed. 3. Tit. 1. Action populer B.

And though that some Statutes by express words are, That it is lawful to sue
for these penalties of Statutes, in any Court of the King, of Record, this is
to be intended in such Courts which have been used, as in the Common Bench, the
Kings Bench, the Exchequer; and for that the Statute of Acton Burnell, fol.
136. is, That where an Extent upon a Statute Merchant is found too high; it is
forthwith that the extenders shall answer, for this is to be intended at the
day of extent, and not forthwith, 2 H. 4. fol. 19. So this is taken by
intendment, as above, 8 H. 4. fol. 11. Also the Statute of Donis
condicionalibus, the letter is, That Fine by Tenant in tail (in right is
nothing) for that is to be taken as wise men have taken it, that is to say,
That the Issue in tail be put to a Formedon, and cannot enter, 11 H. 6. fol.
19.

Also the Statute of the year 8 H. H. 6. chap. 10. is, That upon Indictment
shall go two Capias and Exigent, and that the second Capias shall be with
Proclamation, at a place which has addition: If he be Indicted in another
County then where he dwells, and it be not so, the Outlawry shall be void; and
this is taken by this Book of 11 H. 6. fol. 19. It shall be avoided by Writ of
Error, and not void, according to the express words of the Statute.

Also it is not used where Faires or Markets are granted, to grant to the Lords
of that, forfeiture of penal Statutes, that that is not granted to the Steward
and Marshall, and for these causes, Informations shall not be sued there.

Customs.
It is said that the fifth ground of the Law is particular Customs, and for
that Custom is inquirable by the third Article, Doctor and Student, fol. 20.

And for that it is expedient to say some thing of Customs, and first to write
such Customs to you, which I have seen allowed between Copyholders within
Mannours, where I have been at Courts.
FIrst, Heir.
Custom of some Manor is, that the youngest Son, or Daughter of the first
Wife, being married a Virgin, ought to inherit.

Custom of some Manor is, Dower.
That the Woman being espoused a Virgin, shall have all the Copyhold, whereof
the Husband dyed seized, for her frank bench; but the Husband may alien all or
part, without the Wife, and then she cannot claim Dower.

Custom in some Manor is, Heir.
among Copyholders, that the youngest Son shall inherit, as in Borrough
English, and if he have no Son, his younger Brother, as at Edmonton.

Custom of some Manor is, Heir.
that all the Sons, and all the Brothers shall inherit together, as in
Gavel-kind at Islington.

Custom of some Manor is, Heir.
That if the Tenant dies seized of five Acres or less, then the youngest Son
ought to inherit, but if it be above, then all the Sons, as in Gavell-kinde,
ought to inherit.

Custom of some Manor is, Clivenor.
If a Copyholder surrender his Land to the use of a stranger, that before the
stranger be admitted, Proclamation shall be made in the Court thereof; and if
the next of the blood will come in, or Clivenor Land mark, those next adjoining
to the bargain from the East of the Son, and will pay so much for the Land
surrendered, as he which made the bargain ought, together with all his costs,
which had the Land so surrendered, and then the Bargainee shall make Oath in
Court what he paid, and that shall be paid him forthwith in Court, and then the
next of blood, or Clivenor, which pay that shall be admitted, and shall have
the Land.

Custom in some Manor is, Where surrender is of Copyhold made to him and
his, that is an Estate of Inheritance in Fee by the custom, though it be not
to him and his heirs; And in some Manor it is to him and his in Villainage,
and yet it is a good Estate of Inheritance by the custom.

Custom of some Manor is, That surrender may be made into the hands of the
Bailiffe in the presence of two Tenants witnessing that; and in some Manor in
the hands of two Tenants, to the use of him to whom, etc. And in some Manor,
in the hands of one Tenant to the use of him which should have it; and all
these are good customs, and allowed.

Custom of some Manor is, Dower.
that the Wife shall have no Dower, nor the Husband shall not be tenant by the
courtesy: And the custom in some Manor, that she shall have the third part of
the Rent, and not any Land for her Dower, as at Bush.

Custom in some Manor is, Surrender
that surrender may be made into the hands of a tenant, in the presence of
other persons, to the uses, etc. and is good.

Tenant at will by the common Law, Waste.
may cut Trees to repair his Houses, and also may take House-boot, Hedge-boot,
and Plough-boot, and all this Tenant by Copy may do: And by the custom in
diverse Manors, copyholder may cut his Trees and Wood, and sell it at his
pleasure; and also to suffer the Houses to decay, and yet it is not forfeiture,
as it is at Islington.

Custom of some Manor is, Lease.
that copyholder may let that by Indenture for three years, without license
of the Lord, and in some for nine years, and in some Manor for more, and in
some Manor he may let from three years to three years, to the term of one
and twenty years, and is no forfeiture.

Custom of some Manor is, Harriot.
that where the copyholder is Inheritable, that the heir shall choose the
best Beast, and the Bailiffe of the Lord shall seize two of the next best
Beasts, and for a Cottage, two shillings in Silver, for Harriot shall be paid
and no Beast.

Custom of some Manor is, Fine.
to pay six shillings eight pence for a Harriot, and no Beast.

Custom of some Manor is, Ward.
that a copyholder pay but one penny for a Fine, though there be a hundred
Acres, or more; and in some Manor, six shillings eight pence for every
dwelling House, and also for every Acre six shillings eight pence, and for
every Cottage six shillings eight pence, and also six shillings eight pence for
every Hampsell; that is, an ancient House or Cottage decayed, six shillings
eight pence: And in every Manor the Fine is uncertain, but yet the Lord there
shall not take more for his Fine, then has heretofore been taken for a Fine;
and if he do otherwise, the remedy for the copyholder, is in the Chancery
against his Lord.

Custom of some Manor is, that if copyholder dies, his heir within age, the
custom in most Manors is, that the custody shall be committed by the Lord to
the next of blood, to whom the Land cannot descend: And in some Manors, the
Bailiffe of the Lord shall have the custody, and render the heir an account at
fourteen years of the profits; and by the custom in some Manor, at fourteen
years, the heir may choose to him a Guardian.

Custom in some Manor is, Workmen.
to have certain days of labor, in harvest for a day or two days; and in
some Manor he shall pay four pence for every day labor of that.

Custom of some Manor is, Releife.
that he shall pay for Releife upon a descent, but half that which is due by
common Law, as if he hold by six pence, he shall pay but three pence for
Releife; but yet he ought to pay that releife by the custom: Also if he come
in by Purchase, he ought to pay in the like manner, half his Rent as before is
said; that is to say, three pence, where his Rent was six pence.

Custom of some Manor is, to pay but one penny for releife, and not more nor
less, though his Rent be ten shillings.

Custom in some Manor is, Dower.
that if a man marry a Maid, and dye seized of copyhold, this Wife shall have
all the Land during her life, for her Dower; but if he marry a Widow, and dye
seized, she shall have no Dower.

Custom of some Manor is, that if one were no copyholder of that Manor
before, and purchase Lands, at first the Fine is arbitrable and granted at the
will of the Lord; but he nor his heirs after shall pay no Fine, but shall be
admitted free, without paying Fine for all the Lands which he after purchases
within the Manor.

If a man let to three for life, to have successively, yet this is a Joint
Estate, and (successively) is void; but by custom of copyhold (successive)
holds place, and one shall have it after the other, 30 H. 8. tit. Leases 54.

And note that you do not say, as many use to say, that there is such a
custom, when they see the Law to be contrary to their intent, as diverse
Stewards do, when for favor that they bear to one party, will aid him by
customs when there is no such custom to help him.

And I have heard a Steward say, By the custom of a Manor a Wife is dowable,
and by the custom that shall be assigned by the Homagers, without plaint in
nature of Dower against the Tenant of the Land, and without answer of the
Tenant, and without any process made against him, contrary to Fortescue, fol.
85. which is, That none is to be sued but by the Law: And the case was this,
That the Husband before that he took a Wife, made an Estate for life,
reserving Rent, and after he took a Wife and dyed, so that by the Law the Wife
is not Dowable of the Land; much more, she shall not be assigned there by the
Homagers; but says the Steward in such a case, she is by the custom of this
Manor dowable in this case; and such blind and unreasonable customs are
alleged many times amongst copyholders, where there is no President nor
usage in this case to be showed.

But you ought not to allow any custom, but that which has been used from
time to time, and from time out of mind, and there ought to be Presidents in
the Court-Rolls, or good proof of that to be showed to the Court accordingly,
otherwise it is not to be allowed for a custom.

And for that, that you ought to note, what custom ought to have lawful
beginning, as might take lawful effect by Grants at the beginning, for if it
be against common right and reason, it is not good; and for that you ought to
regard these Grounds and Customs.
FIrst, That it be reasonable, 2 H. 4. tit. 10. And for that custom that no
Tenant of the Manor, put in his Beasts, to use his common in Feilds sowed,
after the corn is taken off, till the Lord has first put in his Beasts, is
not good; for it may be the Lord will not put in his Beasts, and then the
Tenants shall loose their profits.

Also that it be according to common right, 42 Ed. 3. fol. 4. Prescription of
the Sheriff, that the Tenants of the place, ought to give to the Sheriff for
easement, for reward at the Turn of the Sheriff, half a Mark, and this is
against common right, for every gift comes upon his liberality, and at the
will of the giver; and for that it is not good; and also says, that the
Sheriff cannot prescribe.

Also that it be upon good consideration, 42 Ed. 3. fol. 4. In the case next
before, where the Sheriff prescribes, for that that there is nothing which
touches the King, of which he is charged in account, it is not good, for there
is no consideration: And as 5 H. 7. fol. 9. prescription, that if any pasture
Sheep upon his Land by day, that he may have Foldage of them in the night upon
his Land, it is good, for it is with consideration.

And you ought to note, that prescription, custom, and usage, are as Brothers,
and yet some thing they differ in their natures, for Prescription is, when by
continuance of time out of memory, one particular person has particular right
against another particular person.

And custom is, where by continuance of time out of memory, one right is had
concerning diverse persons; and usage is, by continuance of time, the efficient
cause of them both, and usage is the life of Prescription and custom; for
Prescription and custom have their being by usage of time out of mind, etc.

Custom or prescription that every one which breaks the Lords pound shall pay
three pound nine pence, is not good against a Stranger to the Lord, but that
every tenant which breaks the pound shall pay three pound nine pence to the
Lord, is good, for the Lord may give the Tenements of his Tenant to hold by
such, etc. 11 H. 7. fol. 14. So that at the beginning the Lord may create these
customs aforesaid amongst copyholders.

Custom to prescribe to have used fold-gate in the night for pasture in the
day, is good, for it is (one for another) and it is with common right, 5 H. 7.
f. 9.

Custom that the Tenant of time out of mind, has used to pay so much for the
Marriage of his Daughter, is good 43 Ed. 3. and 6. but Littleton fol. 46.
contrary.

Custom or prescription against common Right, is not good, and for that, that
it has been used in Leet, that if the petty twelve present false, and the
other twelve inquire of that, and find that false, shall be amerced, is not
good, the same Law for the Lord of the Leet, which has no Land to prescribe to
be Lord of Waste, 9 H. 6. fol. 44.

Custom or prescription of folding Sheep in the night gathered to the Fold, is
not good, unless it be as above for their pasture, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 13.

Custom or prescription that one may keep the distress till he be satisfied
at his Will, is not good, for it is against common right, Lit. fol. 46.5. H.
7.9.

Custom or prescription, that one shall have the Land to plow and sow, and
when the Corn is carried, another may have that as his several, is good, time
of Ed. 2. Tit. prescription, 55.

Custom or prescription to have Toll through, which is in the highway is not
good, for it is against common Right, but to have Toll travers, is good, 22
Book of Assise, 58.

Custom or prescription to have Warren in his Signiory Lands is good, but not
of Lands which are not held of him, 3. H. 6.13.43. Ed. 3.13. and see 44 Ed.
3.13.

Custom is good which is not against the Law of Reason nor the Law of God, as
customs of Gavelkinde, and Borough English, and Doctor and Student, fol. 20. B.

Custom that every Tenant of the Manor, ought to pay two Marks for Releife,
hold they more or less, is good, 40 Ed. 3. f. 6.

Custom that the Tenants of the Manor time out of mind, have used to choose
a Beadle for them, to gather the Lords Rents, is good, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 13.

Custom that none of the Town of D. shall put in their Beasts into the Field
after the corn taken off, until the Feast of S. Michaell is a good custom of
the Town, after 46 Ed. 3. fol. 24.

But custom that none shall put his Beasts into the Feilds after the corn
severed and carried, before the Lord put in his Beasts is not good, for
paradventure the Lord will never put in his Beasts, 2 H. 4.24.

Custom of the Town of Barton, or of a Manor, that a Wife shall have all the
Land of her Husband for her dower, or a half, or fourth part, is a good
custom, 2 Ed. 4.17. and 21 Ed. 4. fol. 64. by Choke.

It is held that custom, throughout the whole Kingdom is common Law, and one
cannot prescribe that it is a custom throughout the whole Kingdom, but it is
a custom in such a City or such a County, 34 H. 8. Tit. custom 59.30 Ed.
3.25. 2 H. 4. fol. 18. custom of County, 21 Ed. 4.54.

Custom of the Town which is no Borough nor corporation allowed there, but
see, 4 Ed. 3.38. in a reasonable part, and see 21. Ed. 4. f. 53. and 54.40 Book
of As. 27. and 45 As. 48. against the custom of the Villiage.

That he has been by prescription the keeper of a Wood, and custom to have of
every comer a measure of work, or three pence, and of every one which has a
Gate into the Wood, a Hen is a custom allowed, 11 H. 6.2.

Custom or prescription to have House-boote in the Lords Wood, is good, but
not to have Wood to sell, 11 H. 6. f. 11.

Custom that within the Manor of D. the Wife shall have the whole Land of her
Husband in Dower, whilst he is unmarried, and if she marry, that she shall
forfeit that, is good and allowable, 21 Ass. 11.

Custom that a Woman covert may demise and surrender her Copyhold to the use
of her Husband, this custom is not allowable; but custom that an Infant at
his age of discretion may surrender his copyhold, that is good; but contrary
of an Infant within age of discretion to make a surrender.

21 H. 7. fol. 26. Lord to prescribe that every Tenant of his Manor ought to
Impound distress* taken within his Manor, in his Pound, is not good, for he
may Impound in his own Land.

8 Ed. 4. fol. 19. Those which are Fishets in the Sea, may prescribe to go
upon the Land adjoining to the Sea to Fish, for that is for the Common wealth,
but to digg to fix the Stakes to dry their Nets, is against common right, and
is not good.

21 Ed. 4. tit. 50. Custom to turn his Plough upon the head-land of another,
is a good custom.

40 Edw. 3. fol. 9. Custom to pay to the Lord five Marks for Releife, and not
more, hold he more or less, is good.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 13. Custom that the Tenants ought to choose a Beadle amongst
them, to geather the Lords Rents, is good.

2 Mar. tit. Prescription, B. 100. Custom may be alleged, where there is no
person that may prescribe, as Inhabitants cannot prescribe, but allege
custom there, to have Common in D. for one goes with the person and another
with the place; and prescription with the person, by 21 H. 7. fol. 13. that is,
That all the Tenants have used to pay after their death a Harriot, is not good,
but that the Lord has used to have after the death, etc. he may prescribe.

18 H. 8. fol. 2. Inhabitants, by Fitzherbart, cannot prescribe to have Common;
but the Lord may prescribe for him and his Tenants, etc. of time out of mind,
etc.

7 Ed. 4. fol. 24. It seems that Inhabitants cannot prescribe to Intercommon,
because of Neighborhood, but Inhabitants may prescribe to have easement; that
is to say, That they have a way, or other thing of easement, but not to take
profit.

12 Ed. 4. fol. 2. It seems by Catesby, that the Inhabitants of D. may
prescribe, that they have used to pay but three pence for Toll.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 3. It is said, that the Inhabitants of D. cannot prescribe that
they have used to have Common in another Freehold, but that they have used to
have a way, 15 Ed. fol. 28. the same.

40 Ed. 4. fol. 18. Scholars of Oxford, and Justices of Assise may prescribe
to have principal of Houses, notwithstanding they are not corporate, for that
they are for the Common wealth.

26 H. 8. fol. 6. Parishoners may prescribe to choose two Churchwardens of a
Church, every year, and good.

11 Ed. 4. fol. 2. Sergeants at the Law may prescribe that they have used to be
Impleaded by Original, and not by Bill, and so prescribe in usage.

20 Ed. 4. fol. ult. Officer which has his Office at will, may prescribe, as
Chief Justice of the Bench, and other, which have used to give Offices.

22 Ed. 4. fol. 18. The Lord Chancellor of England, which is at will may
prescribe in usage; that is, to present to all Benefices under forty Marks,
which are in the Kings right; but he ought to prescribe in his Office; that is,
that all Chancellors, etc. and so many Justices prescribe, 20 H. 6. fol. 9. the
same.

12 H. 7. fol. 14. Officers may prescribe that they and all the Officers whose
Estate, etc. Have used and so forth, etc.

Note how one shall have a Rent or a thing which cannot be granted without Deed
by prescription.
13 Book of Ass. 4. Rent was recovered by Verdict in Assise, where the Assise
found, that he and those whose Estate he has, were seized of time out of
mind, and so note, Rent recovered by title of prescription, and the party
shows a deed by which he purchased the Rent, but not a Deed of the beginning of
it.

Littleton fol. 34. says, Such things which cannot be granted nor aliened,
without Deed or Fine, a man which will have things by prescription, he cannot
otherwise prescribe, but in him and his Ancestors whose Heir he is, and not in
him, and those whose Estate he has, for that, that he cannot have his Estate
without Deed or other writing, which he ought to show.

12 H. 7. fol. 14. One avows for that, that he and all those whose Estate he
has in the Hundred have view of Frank pledge, and that by reason of ten Acres
within that, he ought to make Suite at the view, etc.

22 Book of Ass. 53. Ass. One makes Title to Rent, that he and his Ancestors,
Lords of the Manor of D. and those whose Estate he has, of time out of mind,
have used the Rent, and this is good without showing a Deed of purchase of
that, being appurtenant to the Manor.

11 H. 6. f. 14. To say that he is seized of a Message, and twenty Acres, and
to prescribe that he and all those, etc. have used House-boote and Wood to
sell, it is not good, to prescribe to sell it.

Custom shall be taken strictly.
Custom of London is, that a Citizen and a Freeman may devise in Mortmaine,
but a Citizen which is a forrainer, cannot devise in Mortmain, for it shall be
taken strictly, 5 H. 7. f. 10.

5 H. 7. fol. 41. Custom that an Infant of the age of fifteen years may make a
Feoffment, yet a Lease and Release which mounts to so much, is not good.

22 Ed. 4. Tit. 17. Infant by custom of Gavelkinde at the age of fifteen may
make a Feoffment, yet he cannot make a Will upon the same Feoffment, for
custom shall be taken strictly.

Perkins f. 83. Where the custom is, that the Wife shall have half the Lands
of her Husband for her Dower, yet she shall not have the half of a Fair or a
Bailiwick, for they are not Lands and shall be taken strictly.

38 Ass. 18. By the custom of London a Citizen may devise Lands which are
within the same City in Mortmain, but not Lands out, and Forrainer cannot
devise Land in London in Mortmaine.

Costs against the Plaintiff.
THat in every Court in trespass upon the Statute of, 5 R. 3. chap. 7. Debt,
covenant by specialty or upon contract, Detinue of Goods, account, action upon
the case, or upon the Statute, for personal wrong ought to be remedied, if
after appearance of the Defendant the Plaintiff be nonsuited or a Verdict pass
against him, the Defendant shall recover his costs, 23 H. 8. chap. 15.

If any be troubled by attachment or arrested by Latitat, or in London, or in a
Court which has liberty to hold Plea, and no Count be put in within three
days after the Bail put in, otherwise appears (unless the Court of
discretion gives longer day) the Defendant shall recover costs and damages,
the same Law is if a Suite be discontinued after Count, or that the Plaintiff
be nonsuited, then the Defendant forthwith by discretion of the Court shall
recover costs, and the Statute gives Debt for the costs, 8 Eliz. Chap. 2.

But one arrested by Bill of Middlesex, shall not recover costs though the
Plaintiff do not count to be nonsuited.

If a matter pass against an Informer by Verdict or Judgment, the party shall
have costs, and shall have execution by a Capias to satisfy fieri facias, or
Elegit, but these two last Statutes do not extend to a Court Baron, 18 Eliz. C.
5.

22 H. 8. B. Tit. Costs 25. in (quare impedit) the Plaintiff shall not recover
costs, for that the damages are great, 35 H. 8. Tit. 258.

2 Ma. Tit. Costs 23. Debt by Lessor, if he be non-suted or barred, the
Defendant shall recover costs by the Statute, for it is upon a contract for
Rent.

2 H. 7. f. 13. Account, the Plaintiff shall not recover costs, but where the
Defendant is adjudged to account, and pleads Bar, etc. It is otherwise.

9 H. 6. fol. 66. He shall not recover costs, for that the damages are tremble
by the Statute, 14 H. 6. fol. 13. forcible entry the same.

In London by act of common Council in trespass by force of Arms, and in all
other Actions personalls, if the Plaintiff be nonsuited, or a Verdict against
him, and Judgment upon it, or Judgment upon demur against him, the Defendant
shall recover his costs by discretion of the Court, but if the Plaintiff sue as
Executor or Administrator, which is not upon his own act, the Defendant there
shall not recover costs, and yet trespass (by force of Arms) is not within
the Statute, 23 H. 8. chap. 14. to have costs.

Damages.
IT seems if one take my Beasts, and after they return to me again, I shall
have trespass for taking, but upon the evidence I shall not recover the value,
though the value be in the Writ, 11 H. 4. fol. 23. 1 H. 6. fol. 8. 19 H. 6.
fol. 34.

In what plaints Damages shall be recovered in Court-Barons, and in what cases
in Court-Barons and other Courts, and in what not.
In plaint in nature of Assise of novell disseisin, Grandfather and Great
Grandfather. Entry by disseisin, Dower, Nuper obiit, Mortdancester. Cozenage.
Replegiare. Covenant. Debt. Action upon the Case. Deceit and trespass.
Damages and costs shall be recovered by the Plaintiff.
Eight Marks were given in plaint of Land in Court Baron, Plowdens
Commentaries, f. 394. B.

If any avow for Rent, or doing damage, custom, or service, if the Plaintiff
be nonsuited, or otherwise barred, then the Avowant shall recover damages and
costs, as the Plaintiff ought: See 19 H. 8. fol. 8. and 12 H. 8. chap. 19.
Rast. tit. Avowry 1.

Descent.
THen for that, that the second Article, is to inquire who is Tenant, and what
advantage the Lord shall have by the death of his Tenant: It behooves to know,
who is in by descent to be your Tenant, that you may know of whom to have
releife, and who to be in Ward, and who not, and who shall be said in by
descent, and where by purchase, and where he shall not be in by descent.

Gift to one in tail, remainder to the right heirs of J. S. which was dead.
T. S. has that as right heir, and is in by purchase, and shall not pay
releife, nor be in ward, 40 Ed. 3.9. and 32 Ed. 3. Fitzh. Descent 8.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant aliens in Mortmain, and the Alience is disseised
and the Disseisor dies seized, his Heir is in by descent yet the Lord may
enter within the year for he has only a Title to enter and cannot have an
action, but contrary of him that has right of entry and may have action, 1 Ed.
6. Tit. Mortmaine 6. Bro.

Lease for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of J.S. the Tenant for life
dies, living J.S. the remainder is void and J.S. nor his Heirs shall not be
said in by descent to pay releife, nor otherwise shall have the Land as
purchasor, 9 H. 6. f. 24. Perkins f. 12. the same.

Lease for life the remainder to the right Heirs of J.S. and J.S. dies, Tenant
for life has aid of T.S. Son and Heir of J.S. and though he were within age,
he shall not have his age, and shall not pay releife nor be in ward if they
hold by Knight service and be within age, for that he is in as a Purchasor, 11
H. 4. f. 74.

Lease for life the remainder to another in tail, which dies his Issue within
age, and after the Tenant for life dies, the Issue is in by descent, and if he
be within age and hold by Knight service, he shall be in ward to the Donor, 33
H. 6. f. 5.

And for that, that in the said second Article of Charge, you ought to inquire
if any Tenant be dead, who is his next Heir. Let us now see where a Woman is
with child at the time of the death of her Husband Tenant, and by whom she
shall be Judged with child, and who shall be said in after the death of the
Husband as Heir, and shall be Tenant to the Lord, and who not.
IF the Husband Tenant dye seized, and his Wife with Child, and a Brother of
the Husband enter as Heir as he may, and after Issue is born, this Issue is
Heir to the Husband, and Tenant to the Lord, and not the Brother, though he
were Tenant and Heir before the Issue was borne, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 11.

A man Tenant has a Daughter, his Wife with child with a Son, and makes a
Feoffment upon condition and dies, and the Daughter enters for the condition,
etc. and after the Son is born, this Son shall not be Heir nor Tenant of this
Land, the same Law is where there is a Lease for life, the remainder to the
right Heirs of J.S. Tenant for life dies, the Daughter enters, and after the
Son is born, he shall not be Heir and Tenant of that Land, 9 H. 7. f. 25.
Plow. f 56.

Daughter enters after the Death of her Father Tenant, and takes profits, and
after the Son with which the Wife was with child, is borne, he may enter and
have that as Heir, and shall be in by descent and Tenant, but has no remedy
for the profits taken by the Daughter before he was born, 9 H. 6 fol. 26.

If a Woman Tenant seized in Fee has a Daughter, and being with Child with a
Son, the Husband dies, and after the Wife is ravished, and consents to the
Ravishor, and the Daughter enters by the Statute as next of blood, as she may,
and after the Son is born he cannot enter upon the Daughter and be Heir, and
Tenant to the Lord, Plowd. Com. f. 56. 5. Ed. 4. f. 6.

By Terms of the Law thirty, and Wilby, if a man Tenant seized of Land in
Fee, dies seized, his Wife privily being with Child with a Son, and another man
marryes her, and after the Son is born, he shall be adjudged the Son of the
second Husband and not of the first Husband, and shall be Tenant to the Lord,
of the Land of the second Husband, and Berrey Justice said, that the Infant
might choose which he would for his Father, 21 Ed. 3. f. 39. Otherwise it is,
if she had been great with Child.

If a Woman be with Child by her Husband Tenant, or by another, it shall not be
tried, but if she be with Child at the time of the death of her Husband or not,
shall be in Issue, for by, 1 H. 6. f. 3. If the Wife of J.S. go away with an
Adulterer, and has Issue, if J.S. her Husband be within the four Seas, the
Issue is Heir of J.S. for by whom the Woman is with Child it cannot be tried,
and for that it shall be intended by J.S. 41 Ed. 3. f. 11. and 7. H. 4. f. 9.
the same.

If a man marry a Wife which is great with Child by another man, and within
three days after Marriage she is delivered, and the Husband dies the Issue is
lawful, and Heir and Tenant to the Lord, and no Bastard, 18. E. 4. f. 30. a.

24 H. 8. Br. Title Bastardy 44. it was said if a man marry his Cozen within
the degrees of Marryage, and have Issue and are divorced in their lives, and by
that the Marriage is avoided, and the Issue is Bastard, contrary if one dye
before the Divorce.

21 H. 7. f. 41. If a Deacon takes a Wife and has Issue, this Issue is no
Bastard; otherwise it is of a Marriage between a Friar and a Nunn if they have
Issue.

11 H. 4. fol. 76. Said by our Law, if one marry his Cozen, their Issue is no
Bastard, till they are divorced, but shall take by Descent.

42 Ed. 3. fol. 11. If a man marry a Wife, and living that Wife, marry
another, and has Issue by the second, this Issue is a Bastard, notwithstanding
that the first Wife after dies, and shall not take by Descent.

For that, that in the same second Article of Charge, it is inquired if any
Tenant of the Lord be dead, who is Heir and Tenant to the Lord, let us now see
where the half blood is impediment, and where not.
TEnant gives Land to the Father for life, remainder to Rich. his Son in tail.
The remainder to the right Heir of the Father, the Father dies, Rich. enters
and dies without Issue of his Body, his Brother of the half blood shall have
the Land and not the Uncle of Rich. and shall be Tenant, and the half blood is
no impediment, 39 E. 3. tit. 5.

A man Tenant had Issue by two several Bellyes and dies, the eldest Son enters
and endowes his Mother, the Heir dies without Issue, the Tenant in Dower dies,
the youngest Son of the half blood shall inherit it, and shall be Tenant, 7 H.
5. f. 2. 58. Assizes 6. accordingly.

Father seized of an Advowson in gross has a Son and Daughter by one Belly,
and a Son by another and dies, and the eldest dies before presentment, the
youngest Son shall be Heir, and the half blood is no impediment, 3 H. 7. f. 5.
Fitzh. f. 36. O.

If the Father Tenant has a Son and a Daughter by one Belly, and a Son by
another, and lets to one for life and dies, and the Reversion is descended to
his eldest Son, which dies before the Tenant for life, this is no possession,
that the Daughter shall have the Land, but the Son of the half blood shall be
Tenant to the Lord, but if reversion of term of years were in the eldest Son
which dies before the Term ended, the Daughter shall have the Land, and shall
be Tenant to the Lord, and not the Son for half blood is impediment, 5 Ed. 4.
f. 9.

But in the case next before, where there is a Rent reserved upon the Estate
for life by the Father, and the eldest has the reversion and Rent and dies,
the Daughter there shall inherit, and the half blood is an impediment to the
Son to be Heir and Tenent, yet if the Father dies, and the eldest Son dies
before payment of Rent, there it is otherwise, 35 Book of Ass. 2.

If a man Tenant has Issue two Daughters by several Bellies and dies, and
they enter and make division betwixt them, if one dye without Heir general or
special her part shall escheate to the Lord, and not descend to the Sister of
the half blood, but if that Sister has an Uncle it ought to descend to him,
and if he enter and dies without Issue, it shall descend to the Sister of the
half blood, see, Littleton fol. 3. Natura brevium fol. 10.

If a man Tenant has three Daughters by on Belly, and a Daughter by another
and dies, and the four Daughters enter, and two of them by the first Belly
dye, now the third of the whole blood shall have three parts, and shall be
Tenant of that to the Lord, 10 Ed. 3. Tit. 13. and 10 Ass. 27. accordingly.

Note that the possession of a Brother to make the Sister inheritor, and not
the Son of the half blood, is only of fee, and not of fee tail, 32 Ed. 3.
Tit. 8.37 Book of Ass. 15. accordingly.

If the Donee in tail have a Son and a Daughter by one Belly, and a Son by
another and dies, and the Son of the first Belly enter, and dies seized without
Issue, the Son of the second Belly shall be Heir and Tenant to the Donor, and
not (...) the Daughter, Natura brevium, fol. 147.

If a man has a Son and a Daughter by one Belly, and a Daughter by another,
and Lands are given to the Father for life, the remainder to the Son in tail,
the remainder to the right Heirs of the Father, the Father dies and the Son
enters and dies without Issue, the two Daughters shall be Heirs and Tenants to
the Lord, for the Son was not actually seized of the Fee, 5 Ed. 1. Tit: 14.32
Ed. 3. Tit. 9.24. Ed. 3. fol. 24. and 37. Book of Ass. 4. accordingly.

The possession of the Brother, of Lands held by Knights service, there the
possession of the Guardian, if the Son dies in Ward, is possession of the heir
to make the Sister inherit, and to be Tenant to the Lord, and not the Son of
the half blood, 8 Ed. 3. tit. 12. and 8 Book of Ass. 6. accordingly.

Lands discends to two Coparceners, which are by several bellies, and one dye
before entry into the Land, the other shall have Mortdancester, as heir of her
Father of the whole Land, for that, that the other was never seized, 34 Book of
Assizes 10.

Escheats.
Where it shall Escheat and not descend, and where not. And for that in the
same second Article is also inquirable what advantage the Lord may have by the
death of his Tenant, that is to say, Ward, or Escheat: Now let us see what is
impediment by attainder, and otherwise, that the Issue of the Lands in Fee,
cannot be heir by descent, not that his Father and Mother were married, and
where the Lord shall have that by Escheat, and where not.
IF an Infant of the Age of seven or eight years marry a Wife, and his Wife
have Issue within one year or two after marriage, this Issue shall not be his
heir, and if he have no other heir general or special, the Land shall
Escheat, 38 Book of Assizes, 24.

If the Father being an Alien, has a Son, and after the Father is made
Denizen, and after has another Son, and after purchase Lands and dies, the
youngest Son is heir, and if he dye without Issue, the Lord shall have the
Land by Escheat, and not the eldest Son, for he is an Alien, Doctor and
Student, fol. 12.

The eldest Son is attaint of Felony in the life time of his Father, and is
hanged, the Father dies, the youngest Son shall inherit, and it shall not
Escheat: But if the eldest Son be attaint in the life time of his Father, and
survive the Father, the Land shall Escheat, 20 Book of Assizes 2.46 Ed. 3.
tit. Descent 6.49 Ed. 3. fol. 11. and 31 Ed. 1. tit. 17. accordingly.

If the Son be attaint of Felony or Treason, and after is pardoned, and after
that his Father dies seized of land, the Lord shall have that by Escheat,
rather then the Son, 13 H. 4. fol. 8.1 E. 3. lit. 15. accordingly: See before
that Doctor and Student, fol. 25.

Where the Husband is attaint of Felony, and purchase his pardon, and after
dies, his Wife shall not be endowed of Land, which he had before the attainder,
but it ought to Escheat; but of those which he purchases after, she shall have
Dower, and shall not Escheat, Littleton, fol. 11.

If the Husband seized of Land, commit Felony, and after alien, and after is
attaint, the Wife shall have Dower against the Feoffee; but otherwise it is if
it were Escheated, Not. bre. fol. 7.

If the Son be outlawed of Felony, in the life time of his Father, and has a
pardon, and after the Father dies seized of Land, the Son shall not have these
Lands, but the Lord by Escheat, though he has diverse Sons, 31 E. 1. tit.
17.11 H. 4. fol. 11. and 22 H. 6. fol. 38.

The Father outlawed of Felony, purchases a pardon, and after purchases
Lands, the Son he had before the Felony may inherit them, and the Lord shall
not have them by Escheat, 9 H. 5. fol. 9.

If one dye Tenant to the Lord, without heir general or special, as if the
Tenant be disseised, and dies without heir general or special, the Lord
shall have the Escheat of this Land, though he did not dye seized, for that,
that he dyed Tenant, 2 H. 4. fol. 9. 7 H. 4. fol. 18. accordingly, 32 H. 6.
fol. 31.36 H. 6. fol. 1.6 H. 4. fol. 5. the same; And Not. bre. fol. 103. the
same.

Where an Alien purchases, the King may seize, 11 H. 4. fol. 25. and 14 H. 4.
fol. 20. accordingly.

And if a Denizen purchase, and dye without Issue born within the obedience of
the Queen, this Land shall Escheat to the Lord.

If an English Tenant marry an Alien, she is forthwith upon the marriage, of
the Kings allegiance, and their Issue shall inherit, and it shall not Escheat,
Abridgement of the Book of Assizes, fol. 39.

Where there is Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant grants Rent charge, and dies
without heir general or special, the Lord shall have the Land by Escheat,
Rastall, Escheat 15.
but he shall hold it charged, 3 Book of Ass. 1. The same Law is of the Kings
Tenant, which grants Rent and dies, etc. and his heir in Ward by the Statute,
2 and 3 E. 6. chap. 8.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant is disseised, and the disseisor dies seized, and
the disseisee dies without heir, the Lord shall not have that as by Escheat,
for I intend he dies not in his Homage, 32 H. 6. fol. 31. B.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant lets for life, and dies without heir, though he
dyed not seized, the Lord shall have Escheat, 2 H. 4. fol. 9.

If one be attaint of high Treason, the King shall have Escheat, of whomsoever
he hold, notwithstanding if it be of petty Treason, the Lord shall have the
Escheate, 22 Book of Ass. 49.

If the Tenant be beheaded for Felony, the Lord shall have Escheat, and shall
say (for which he was hanged) Natura brevium, fol. 100. 8 E. 3. in the
Register, f. 165. accordingly.

If my Tenant within age, alien to one in Fee* and within age dye without
heir, the Lord may enter by Escheat, 16 E. 3. tit. Statham, fol. 84.3 E. 3.
Journey to North: See 6 H. 4. fol. 3. North: that he cannot enter, but he may
have Escheat.

It seems that the Lord cannot enter by Escheat, where his Tenants entry is
taken away; as if the Husband discontinue, the Lands of his Wife, and the Wife
dies without heir, the Lord cannot enter by Escheat, 32 H. 6 fol. 27. by
Littleton.

If a man go over the Sea without license, and there takes a Wife, and there
by her has Issue, if the Issue survive his Father, the Land of the Father
shall Escheat, 22 H. 6. fol. 38. by Newton.

1 R. 3. fol. 3. by Hussy, He which is borne beyond the Sea, and his Father
and Mother were English, that their Issue shall inherit by the common Law, but
by the Statute aforesaid it is clear.

The same Law is where an Alien borne, purchase lands of the King before he be
made Denizen, or if he be a Denizen, and purchase Lands, and dies without
heir borne under the obedience of the King, there the King shall have that
Land as Perquisite, in manner as Escheat.

Where the Tenant has an Estate in fee, and dies without heir general or
special, his Land shall Escheat to his Lord, Fitzh. 143. T.

32 H. 6. fol. 31. The Lord cannot enter, but where his Tenant might enter, and
for that if the Husband and the Wife discontinue, and the Wife dies without
heir, the Lord cannot enter by Escheate: And if the Tenant be disseised, and
the Disseiser dies seized, and his heir enter, and after the Disseisee dies
without heir, the Lord cannot enter.

37 H. 6. fol. 1. It seems by Fortescue, that the Lord shall have Escheat or
Ward, though his Tenant did not dye seized.

2 H. 4. fol. 9. The Lord shall have a Writ of Escheat, though his tenant dyed
not seized, for if he dye his tenant, that suffices: If my tenant lets for
life, and dies without heir, he does not dye seized; and yet the Lord shall
have the Escheat, 7 H. 4. fol. 18. the same.

6 H. 4. fol. 5. Lord and Tenant within age, the Tenant is disseised, and dies
without heir, the Lord may enter by Escheat: The same Law is if he being an
Infant tenant alien and dies without heir, the Lord shall have by Escheat.

Fitzh. fol. 144. A. If Tenant in tail dye without heir, he in reversion
shall not have a Writ of Escheat; But if Tenant in tail, the remainder to his
right heirs, and dies without heir; then the Lord of whom the Tenant in tail
holds, shall have a Writ of Escheat.

Fitzh. 144. E. Where the Tenant is a Bastard, and dies without Issue, this
Land shall Escheat, Tit. Escheat 34. B. Where there is a Bastard eldest, and a
legittimate younger, and the Bastard enters, and dies seized without Issue, the
Land shall not Escheat.

Natura brevium, fol. 103. If the Tenant be disseised, and is attaint of
Felony, the Lord may enter by Escheate, Abridgement of Assise, fol. 88. Lord
and Tenant, the tenant being within age, aliens and dies without heir, the
Lord may enter by Escheat.

6 E. 3. Statham, If my Tenant within age alien in Fee, and dies without heir,
I may enter by Escheat; the same Law is, if my tenant within age be disseised,
and dies without heir, I may enter by Escheat.

Stamf. 42. If any free tenant of any Bishop be attaint for Felony, during the
time of the vacation the King shall have Escheat of his Lands: By Prerogative,
chapter 14.

Fitzh. 144. O. If the Lord have title to have a Writ of Escheat, if he accept
Homage of his tenant, he shall not have a Writ of Escheat against him
afterward.

7 H. 4. fol. 18. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant is disseised, and dies without
heir, the Lord may enter, for right of entry may Escheat against a Disseisor;
but if the Disseisor dye, or alien, the Lord cannot enter by Escheat upon the
heir of the Disseisor, nor upon the Alience.

22 Book of Assizes 49. The King shall have the Lands by Escheat of one
attainted of high Treason, of whomsoever he hold, notwithstanding of petty
Treason the Lord shall have them.

29 Book of Assise, 61. Note that Lands in tail shall not Escheat for the
Felony or attainder of his Father, but by the Statute of 5 and 6 Ed. 6. chap.
11. for high treason the King shall have his Lands.

6 H. 7. fol. 9. by Keble. Right of entry may Escheat, as where the Disseisee
dies without heir, or is attaint of Felony, the Lord may enter.

7 Ed. 6. tit. 18. It was held, If there he Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent,
the Tenant is disseised, the Disseisee dies without heir, the Lord accepts the
Rent by the hands of the Disseisor, yet he may enter for Escheat, or have a
Writ of Escheat, and the receipt of the Rent no Bar; contrary, if he had avowed
for that in Court of Record, or if he had taken corporal service, as Homage,
etc. Contrary of acceptance of Rent by the hands of the heir of the Disseisor,
or of his Feoffee.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 2. by Belk: Where a man commits Felony, and after purchase
Land, or Land discends to him after, this is forfeited and Escheated, as well
as the Land which he had time of the Felony made.

22 H. 6. fol. 37. by Newton, A man seized of Land in fee, goes beyond the Sea
to B. out of the Kings Allegiance without the Kings license, and there marries
a Wife, and there has Issue, and dwells there all his life, and dies without
other Issue, his Land shall Escheat, and none other of the blood shall inherit.

1 R. 3. fol. 4. by Hussy, He which is borne beyond Sea, and his Father and
Mother English, and faithful to our King, that their Issue shall inherit by
the Common Law, but the Statute makes that clear, and his Lands shall not
Escheat.

9 H. 7. fol. 2. If Tenant of the King dies without heir, and none enters, the
Freehold is in the King, without Office by Escheate: But if Tenant of the King
alien in Mortmaine, it is not in the King without Office.

27 H. 8. tit. Office, 90. Br: Where one is attaint by Parliament, his Lands
are not in the King by Escheat, to grant over without Office.

29 H. 8. tit. 52. Charter of pardon, Br. The King may be entitled to goods
without Office, by Outlawry, but not to Lands.

38 H. 8. title, Thing in action, 211. Br: By the Statute of 31 H. 8. gives to
the King possession of Lands of Monastries without Office, for the words are,
that the King shall be in possession of them; yet if an Abbat were disseised of
four Acres of land, the King cannot grant that over, before entry made by him
into it.

Time of H. 8. tit. 119. Pre. Br: It seems that the King shall not have a
Precipe quod reddat, as a Writ of Escheat, but his title shall be found by
Office.

Time of Ed. 6. tit. Denizen 17. Where an Alien born purchases, the King shall
have it, but the purchase ought to be found by Office, 33 H. 8. tit. Fines
levied, 115.

Title Office before Escheator, 60 Br: King shall have Chattels without Office,
but not Ward.

2 H. 7. fol. 8. The King may re-enter without demand, where there is a clause
of re-entry in his Lease, but then that shall be found by Office.

Tit. Escheat 23. Br: Alien borne has Issue a Son, and after is made Denizen,
and after has Issue another Son, and purchase Land and dies, the youngest
Son shall have the Land, and not the eldest, nor the Lord by Escheat.

Tit. Escheat 29. B. Where a man is attaint of Heresy, and delivered to Lay
men to be burnt, yet he shall not forfeit his Land, unless he be put in
execution, and there by the execution the Lord shall have Escheat, unless the
Land be held of the Ordinary, then the King shall have it.

Enquest.
FOR that, that you try your Copyholders and other Issues by consent by Jury,
let us see how many shall be sworn of a Jury.

The Statute of Westminster. 2. chap. 13. is, that the Sheriff shall inquire by
twelve and not by less, and the same Law shall be in Leet, and for that, that
this Statute does not extend to Court Baron, Presentment of Articles there by
less then twelve may be, for one may hold Court Baron, though there be but two
Suitors, and then they may inquire by two, of Articles for the Lord, but hard
it is, when every one is inheritable to the Laws of the Realm, and the trial
of the Law is by twelve of Issue joined between party and party, that by your
not power, that is to say, that there should not be twelve Tenants of every
Jury, to take from me my Trial, which the Law gives to me, and if you will try
Issue by less then twelve, you may impannell three or four of the Friends to
the parties, and to have no number certain under twelve, but to have such a
number as the Steward pleases, and to be at his choice, how many shall be
sworn of a Jury, and how many shall be impannelled, is inconvenient where there
are more within the Manor to be impannelled, and 40 Ed. 3. f. 1. Where
conusance is granted to one Court, to have conusance, if this Court fail, that
it cannot make Law and Right, conusance shall not be in this case allowed, and
for that that at the Exigent Bailiffs demand conusance, and shall not have it,
for they cannot pronounce Out-lawrie upon that and in, Quare impedit, they
shall not have conusance, for they cannot award a Writ to the Bishop, 42 Ed. 3.
f. 3. Where one was Outlawed conusance was demanded, and could not have it,
for that he could not award, Capias utlegatum there, and so it seems if there
be not twelve to try the Issue they fail of power to minister Law and to do
Justice, and Copyholder may sue by Bill in Chancery, where there are not
twelve homagers within the Manor, or in action of of trespass at the common
Law, and the party ought to be admitted in the Lords Court, to the intent to
bring trespass at the common Law, and there Law is more truly administered then
in Court-Barons, and also if any sue in Court Baron for Copyhold, he shall
make his protestation to sue in nature of his Writ at common Law, and the
process and proceedings shall be according to the course of the common Law,
and they shall join Issue according to the course of the common Law; and there
(Venire facias) is, that they shall cause to come twelve free and lawful men
according to the course of the common Law, and for that it seems that trial of
Issues there between parties shall be by twelve and not by less.

And by Fortescue, fol. 54. and 57. (sworn together in the form aforesaid
twelve good and lawful men) so it appears by him that every Issue in every
Court shall be tried by twelve and not by less.

Enquest shall be by custom of the Realm between party and party, in a Court
of Record, by twelve at the common Law, Doctor and Student, f. 14.

Verdict of 11 shall not be taken, 41 Ass. 11.41. Ed. 3. f. 31. and 29. Ed. 3.
f. 33. accordingly.

Every Inquisition taken in the Sheriffs Turn shall be by twelve, and the same
Law is said there in a Leet by the Equity of the Statute of 6 H. 4. fol. 3.
Notwithstanding (seek) if less then twelve may try Issue between parties in the
Court of a Lord of copyhold or not, where there are not twelve within the
Manor, for it is held by some, that it shall be tried by less, and I have
seen a trial by three or four. But I intend it is hard, and specially where
there are twelve and more copyholders within the Manor, and also it appears
in the Register, that an Action was removed out of the Court Baron (because
there were but four Suitors) and so I conclude, Issue for Copyholders shall
not be tried by less then by twelve, 6 H. 4. f. 1.

18 H. 4. fol. 2 Charter of exemption that he shall not be Impannelled shall
not be allowed unless a full Jury appear.

39 Ed. 3. Tit. 23 A Writ of not putting in Assizes shall not be allowed in an
Attaint, nor in a Writ of right.

21 Ed. 4. f. 53. If a man have a Charter of Exemption and that showed to the
Sheriff, and he notwithstanding, impannells him, trespass upon the case lies
against him.

Fitzh. 205. A. A Writ not to be put in Assizes and Juries is founded upon the
Statute of Westminster. 2. chap. 39 and upon (Articuli super Chartas) which Statutes
declare that persons shall not be impannelled, that is, who is sick, lame, and
above 60. years old.

Fitzh. 266. Clerks which have Lands by descent, or by purchase, shall be
impannelled.

5 Ed. 3. f. 26. Presentment in Leet by four and not by twelve, that one had
dewelt within the Leet a year and a day not sworn, was traversed, but it seems
if he were presented by twelve, it shall not be traversed, but if it were
false, he shall have recovery by Writ of false presentment seek of this Writ.

45 Ed. 3. f. 26. Presentment in Leet that one has dwelt there by a year and
day and not sworn, shall be by twelve otherwise it is traversable.

3 H. 7.4. If there be not twelve to be sworn the Steward may swear a stranger
which comes within the view to be sworn in Leet.

The Lord may hold Court Baron though there are but two Tenants, 23 H. 8. and
33 H. 8. and then two may present Articles for the Lord, but where Issue is
between party and party it shall be by twelve, for the (Venire facias) is
twelve free and lawful men, which is trial by common Law, and that seems,
shall be the trial of Copyhold Land, yet Fitzh. 41. in right shall be great
Assise, that is, 24 of a Jury, and attaint shall be 24. but if in Court Baron
the (Mise) be joined to be tried by great Assise, there shall go a Prohibition,
etc.

Fitzherbart 107. C. Enquest of office, as in a Writ to inquire of waste, it
may be inquired by six or eight, 2 H. 4. f. 7. and 3 H. 6. f. 29. the same.

13 H. 8. f. 13. Where a Lord of Parliament is arraigned, there shall be
eighteen or twenty Lords of the Enquest, and they shall not be sworn.

20 H. 7. fol. 3. Jurors may drink after their Charge, and before their
agreement at their own proper charges, it seems their Verdict is good, for
there does not appear any corruption in them, nor that they drank for any
corruption, for all drank together, and every one was in as good plight to
resist as others are, etc.

19 Ed. 4. f. 6. After the Jury sworn, and before they enter into a House and
before their departure from the Bar they drink by license of the Justices, and
by the consent of the parties, and their Verdict good.

10 H. 4. f. 10 After the Jury was sworn the Plaintiff delivered a writing to a
Juror without the Court, and he showed that to his companions in the House, and
the Jury gave Verdict, and he shall not have Judgment, 11 H. 4. fol. 17. the
same Plowd. Com. fol. 519. the Jury gave a special Verdict and a Box of
Barbaryes conserved, Sugar Candy, and Licorish was found with one J.M. one of
the Jury after that he was departed from the Bar, J. M. was committed to the
Fleet till he had paid a Fine, and the Verdict good, see, 8 Ass. 35. and 20 H.
6. f. 26.

Trial.
IN Court Baron the trial is there by waging Law, but by the consent of the
parties it may be by the Country, 33 H. 8. B. Tit. Trial 143. 3. Ed. 6. Tit.
Pannell. 2. Where the Jury is of two tongues, for that, that the one is an
Alien and the other an English man, there shall be six Denizens sworn, and six
English men, otherwise the Jury shall not be taken, and so shall be (Tales) of
that.

4 Mar. b. Tit. Jurors 8. Jury took a Writing of the Plaintiff which was not
delivered to them in Court, and passed for the Plaintiff, and for that, that
this matter appeared to the Court by examination, therefore the Plaintiff shall
have no Judgment.

35 H. 8. B. Tit. Replead 54. It was in use in the Kings bench, though that the
Jury was ready to pass, there if there be a (Jeofaile) apparent in the Record,
the Jury shall be discharged.

26 H. 8. f. 6. Jurors after they are in the House return to hear evidence
again upon matter which they were in doubt of, and may.

14 H. 7. f. 1. The Jury eat and drink before the Evidence finished, or after
they are agreed depart and drink before Verdict they shall be Fined, and the
Verdict is good, but if he eat and drink after evidence given, and before they
agree, the Verdict is void.

And it seems that this matter shall be showed when the Jury comes in to give
their Verdict, and shall be examined, and not after. And it seems that the
Jurors may depart asunder by cause of great tempest of a House falling or fire
where they are.

Execution.
For that, that execution is used in many Court-Barons by (Levari facias) let
us see what Goods upon that, may be taken in Execution and what not, and the
order of execution.
GOods pawned shall not be taken in execution, for the Debt of him which pawned
them, during the time they are pawned, 34 H. 8 Pledge 28. and 4 Ed. 6.
Distress 75.

Where A. lets Oxen for time, and after A. is condemned, these Oxen during the
term shall not be taken in execution, 22 Ed. 4. f. 10.

Debt in Court Baron, the Plaintiff recovers by Judgment and shall have
execution, and the Beasts of the Defendant were taken and delivered to him in
Execution, 33 Ed. 3. Tit. Execution 133.

In Debt where three are bonnd jointly and severally and has of those three
several Judgments, and if Execution be against one, the other shall have a
supersedeas, but in trespass against three Execution against one does not
suffice, and the same Law is in a joint Debt, 4 Ed. 4. fol. 39.

By (Fieri facias) or (Levari facias) the Officer cannot break the Door nor
Chest to take Goods in Execution, for if he do, trespass lies against him for
the breaking only, 18 Ed. 4. f. 4. and 13 Ed. 4. fol. 9. by Choke,
notwitstanding, 8 Ed. 2. Tit. Executors 152. contrary.

If one recovers in Court Baron he shall not have execution by Eierifacias, nor
otherwise, but may distrain the Defendant after Judgment, and detain the
distress in their hands in safeguard till the Defendant has satisfied the
Plaintiff of the condemnation, 22 Ass. 72 Statham 11 Ed. fol. 93. Not. Bre.
fol. 165 and 4 H. 6. fol. 17 action.

Bailiff in Court Baron cannot sell the Goods in execution; but shall restrain
them as distress, notwithstanding, where it is used to make, Levari facias, it
is a good custom, and note that it is used in many Manors, that the goods are
praised, and execution made of them by, Levari facias, 22 Book of Ass. 72.

A Writ of Execution Judicii, lies, where Judgment is given in a Court Baron,
upon a Writ of right patent, or in debt or trespass, and the Bailiff will not
make execution, this Writ lies as well, as it lies where Judgment is given
in a Court of Record, and the Sheriff will not make execution, and if he will
not levy the execution upon the Goods, it was in vain to award this Writ,
Fitzh. f. 20. A.

Capias does not lie in Court Baron, and for that, the Capias to satisfy does
not lie to have execution, and Elegit does not lie there, etc. for this is
given by the Statute of, Westminster. 2. chap. 18.

29 H. 8. Tit. Execution. B. 132. Two are bound in an obligation jointly and
severally, if he sue one and takes his Body by a Capias to satisfy yet he may
take the other, but if one satisfy him, the other may plead that, 37 H. 8.
Tit. condition, B. 16. One taken by a Capias to satisfy, is in execution,
though that be not returned.

13. H. 4. Tit. Avowris 237. One avowes, for that, that J. S. was seized of a
place where, etc. And, let that to the Plaintiff for life, rendering Rent, and
after J.S. grants the reversion to B. who was bound in a recognsance to the
Avowant, and that the Avowant has that Rent delivered in execution, and good.

15 Ed. 3. Tit. Execution 93. Rent was delivered in execution upon a
Recognisance, time of Ed. 1. Title Audita querela, 402. If the Father be bound
in a Recognisance and dies and his Issue within age, the Execution shall not be
against him, for if it be he shall have an Assise.

Time of Ed. 1 Tit. 417. If a man takes a Wife and after be bound and dies, the
Wife is endowed, if she be outed by extent, she shall have Assise, 29 H. 8.
Tit. Stat. Merchant 40. If one sue Execution upon a Statute and he accept part
of the Land in name of all, he shall not have extent of the residue, but it
seems upon a (Nihil) returned upon the Testatum, he may have process into
another County.

2 R. 3. f. 8. Statute Staple was certified by the Mayor of the Staple, and the
Conisee upon that sues a Writ to take the Body, and to extend his Land in
Suff. and Middlesex only, and this Writ was not returned and by Certiorare he
caused the Mayor to certify the Statute again, and upon that he has a Writ
of extent in ten Counties, but not in Suff. and Middlesex, and this Writ is
not returned and he has the third Certificate, and the third Writ of Extent
into six Counties, but not in Suff. and Middle. and now has his Extent, and
has Land that the Cognifor has in right of his Wife which died, and for
threats durst not take the profits of the residue, and by all the Justices the
Cognisee shall have a Capias into the County where he took his first Writ, and
not otherwise, that is, into the County of Suff. and Middlesex only, upon the
fourth Certificate, and upon that the Conisor found suerties to the King and
party according to the Statute, 11 H. 6. chap. 10. He shall have a Scire facias
against the Conisee, to prove the matter in his Writ, and to be at the
Judgment in the Court, and if he fail of any, he shall forfeit his
Recognisance.

2 R. 3. fol. 9. If the Conisee of a Statute dies, his Executors or
Administrators if he dye Intestate shall have execution upon it, without suing
(Scire facias) or that the Conisor cannot have any Plea, although he have a
deed of Release, but if he have a Release he shall have an (Audita querela) or
a (Scire facias) and so it is where one which is no Executor sues an Execution,
the Conisor shall have this Writ, but upon recovery by the Statute of West. 2.
One may have a fieri facias within the year to have Execution, and after the
year may have Scire facias, and if a man be bound in two Statutes one after
the other, and he which has the last Statute has first Execution, the other
shall have a Scire facias and have execution, and if the Sheriff upon a Writ
to have execution returns, the Conisor dead, the Conisee shall have a Scire
facias against the Heir of the Coniser, and the Land Tenants.

25 H. 7. fol. 17. Where the Conisee to whom a Statute is made dies, his
Executors shall have Execution without suing Scire facias, for that it is given
by the Statute, but where one has a Judgment and dies, it is otherwise, West.
2. chap. 45. gives Scire facias upon Judgment, and upon Fine.

15 H. 7. fol. 14. Husband is bound in a Statute and Lands of his Wife were
extended, and after the Wife dies, and the Heir of the Wife enters, now may
the Conisee have a Capias for the Body of the Conisor, though he had not that
at the first, for that, that the Statute gives the Lands, Goods and Body, and
if execution be defeated by lawful entry, he shall not have a Re-extent, but
if the Conisor himself take the profits of the Conisee or that the profit be
destroyed by wildfire, or water, the Conisee may hold over his Term, and the
Conisor cannot enter during the Term of extent, but shall have a Scire
facias, and shall not have that before the Term ended, without aquittance, or
that he leave Money in the Court, and where the Conisee is satisfied within the
term by casual profit the Conisor shall have upon that a Venire facias, and
upon that a Scire facias, And if it be extended too low, the Conisor may lay
the Money in Court, and recover his Land, and if it be found too high the
Conisee may pray that the Extenders may take the Land, etc.

11 H. 6. fol. 8. If the Land extended be drowned by water within the Term,
the Conisee may hold over the Term, and the same Law where he is outed by a
Guardian in Knights service, 15 Ed. 4. f. 5.

22 H. 8. chap. 5. Where Lands delivered by reasonable extent in Execution,
have been recovered, or lawfully diversted from the Conisee of the Satute
Merchants, Statute Staple or Recognisances, before they have been fully
satisfied, and paid there Debts without fraud or covin, remedy given by Scire
facias against the Recognisors to levy the residue.

Where a Woman recovers damages in Dower in the Bench, she cannot have
execution there of those damages recovered by capias ad satisfaciendum, for
that, that the Capias does not lie in the Original, 11 H. 7. f. 15. and 2 H.
4. f. 7.

The Statute of Westminster. 2 chap. 18. gives Elegit, that is to say, That the
Sheriff shall deliver all the Chattells of the Debtor (except the Oxen and
Beasts of the Plow) and the half of his Land, and that does not extend to a
Court Baron but to Courts where Process is directed to the Sherift, and the
Statute is also when a Debt is recovered in a Court of the Kings, and
Court Baron cannot award the half of the Land in Execution, for it is no Court
of the Kings, but of the Lords, and he cannot meddle with Lands without the
Kings Command, but in other Courts Execution shall be of Lands, which has a
day of Judgment given, and of Goods in this Court, and Beasts which the party
has day of the Execution awarded, and see also execution of Recognisances and
of Statutes for your Learning.

Execution shall be of Land which has day of recovery, 7 Ed. 3. f. 93. and 21.
Ass. 2.

A man shall have Execution of Lands which he had day of the Judgment, and not
before Abridgment, Ass. fol. 93. 19. Ed. 2. Fitzh. Execution 249. Natura
brevium fol. 168.

A man shall have execution in Debt of no Land but of of that which the
Defendant had, day of the Judgment given, and of Chattels which he had day of
the Execution sued, Natura brevium fol. 107. and 2 H. 4. fol. 15.

It seems that all the half of the Lands which a Recognisor has which enters
into a Recognisance day of that, or after are liable in execution by Elegit, 24
Ed. 3. fol. 27. tit. Execution 90. Fitzh. 267. D. and 2 H. 4. fol. 9.

Note where one is bound in a Statute, Execution shall be of all his Lands
which he had day of the Statute acknowledged, or after in whose hands they come
by Feoffment or otherwise, but it is not said so of Goods and Chattells; And
for that they shall not have them in whose hands they come but those only which
he had in his hands day of the execution awarded.

But if the Cognisor, after the Statute acknowledged, lets his Land for years,
the Cognisee may out the Lessee, for the words are, in whose hands they come,
by Feoffment, or in other manner, Statute of Merchants, fol, 48.

To have execution of a Statute Merchant; first, you shall have a Writ of
Certificate in the Chancery, and there upon Certificate shall go a Capias,
returnable in the Common Bench, or Kings Bench; and then within one quarter of
a year, that it shall be taken, shall go an Extent of all his Goods and
Lands: See the Statute of Merchants; 37 H. 6. fol. 6. Fitzh. 130. G.

Statute Staple shall be certified as the Statute Merchant is, and upon that
shall go a Writ of execution to take him, and to extend his Lands, and this
shall be returned in the Chancery, and not into the Common Bench or Kings
Bench, as the Writ of execution upon a statute Merchant shall be, and upon
this shall go a Liberate, Fitz. fol. 131. D.

15 H. 7. fol. 14. Upon a statute Staple, he shall have the body, lands, and
goods by a Writ, and upon a statute Merchant: First a Capias, by a quarter of
a year, etc. and upon the return of that (Non est inventus) shall have a
Writ to have execution of his Goods and Lands.

Upon a statute Staple after a Certificate, shall go out a Writ to take his
body, and to extend his lands in what County he will; and if that be returned,
he cannot have Extent in another County, that is to say, a Liberate, 2 R. 3.
fol. 7.

Upon a statute Staple shall go a Capias out of the Chancery, returnable in
the Chancery to take his body, and to seife his lands into the Kings hands, and
at the day of return of that, Liberate. 37 H. 6. fol. 6.

Note that the Statute of Merchants, fol. 79. is, That an execution upon a
Recognizance shall not be made, as it is upon a Statute Merchant; but as it was
used by the Law, before the making of this Statute; and this was to have a
Scire facias, and upon that an Elegit, or a Fieri facias.

Upon a Recognizance there shall go no Capias, but it is used otherwise at this
day; that is, Scire facias returnable into the Chancery, and they use now to
award a Capias, Fieri facias, or Elegit, 48 Ed. 3. fol. 14.

Statute Merchant has two Seals, and one is the Seal of the paray, and for
that upon that he may have Debt to have execution; but Statute staple, only
the Seal of the party, 15 H. 7. fol. 15.

A man may sue Debt upon the Statute Merchant, Staple, or Recognizance: See
Statute Merchant, Fitzh. 122. D. and fol. 77. the same.

Note that there are four manner of Executions, and note Covin to defeat them
void.
THere are four manner of Executions, that is, of body by Capias, of Chattels
by Fieri facias, of Lands by Elegit, and after the year after Judgment, by
action of Debt, 11 H. 4. fol. 42.

Debt upon Recovery, shall not be within the year after Judgment, but after
the year, 5 Ed. 4. fol. 1.

If after Judgment one gives his Goods to one, to defraud me of execution, and
notwithstanding takes the profit of them, I shall have Execution of these
Goods, 22 Book of Assizes 72. 3 R. 2. the same, and 50 Ed. 3. the same.

All Conveyances of Lands and Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, Leases, Rent,
Common, or Profit, or charge out of Land, Judgment, Execution, Deeds by fraud
or Covin, to the intent to defraud Creditors and others, of their just and
lawful Actions, Suits, Debts, Accounts, Damages, Forfeitures, Harriors, and
Releifs, are void, only against the persons, their Heirs, Successors,
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, and every of them, whose Actions,
Suits, Debts, Accounts, Damages, Forfeitures, Harriots, and Releifs, by such
fraud shall be, or may be hindered, delayed, or defrauded, notwithstanding
fained consideration, expressing of use, or any other matter, or thing to the
contrary, 13 Elizabeth, chap. 5.

Debt against Executors, they plead gift of all the goods of their Testator by
Deed, without that that they administered other Goods; and the Plaintiff
averrs, that the gift was made to defraud the Creditors, 13 H. 4. fol. 9. See
16 Ed. 4. fol. 9.

Issue was taken if the Goods were made away to defraud Execution, or not, 43
Ed. 3. fol. 3.

Where Debtors make Gifts and Feoffments fained, of their Goods and Lands, to
their Friends and others, and take Privileges, Rastall, Debt, 5.
and take profits of their Lands and Goods so given by fraud, shall be a
Capias, and Proclamation, and after, Execution of his Lands and Goods, 2 R. 2.
Stat. 2. chap. 3.

Where Debtors make Gifts and Feoffments, Rastall, execution 5.
as it is said in the Statute of 2 R. 2. and fly to places privileged, and
take profits, that the Creditors shall have Execution of the said Goods and
Chattells, as if no such Gift: had been made, 50 E. 3. chap. 6.

26 H. 8. fol. 2. If a man takes a Wife which has Goods and aliens them by
Covin, supposing a Divorce to follow, and after they are divorced, the Wife
may averr the Covin, and have her Goods again.

33 H. 6. fol. 5. One buys in Market open, Goods taken by wrong, if the buyer
have knowledge of the wrong, the property is not altered.

14 H. 8. fol. 9. by Brook, If I by fraud and Covin, cause one to take your
Goods, and to sell them to me in an open Market, yet that shall not change the
property, for that I am party to the Covin.

At Northampton before the Lord Dyer, there was a Deed of gift of Goods showed,
and in that it was expressed by words to the use of the Donee, and yet it was
averred that it was by Covin.

44 Ed. 3. fol. ult. A Woman has good cause to be endowed, and she procured
J.S. to out the Tenant, and then she brought a Writ of Dower against J. S. and
recovered, and had Execution; the Tenant may have an Assise against her, and
recover.

22 Book of Ass. 1. Assise, The Tenant, hanging the Assise, enfeoffs another,
or suffers another to enter, end recover by Formedon, by elder gift, this Covin
shall not hurt the Plaintiff, but that he may recover.

38 Book of Assizes, Where one was outlawed of Felony, alleadges Imprisonment
at the time of the Outlawry, and it was replied, that he was in Prison by his
own Covin, and issue upon that.

41 Book of Assizes 2. A man has right of Action, and makes one by Covin to
enter upon him which is in by descent, and recovers, he shall be adjudged to be
in as an Abator, and not by Title.

Evidence.
AND for that, that you have not many times Council in your Court Barons, and
for that, that it is many times pleaded to the general Issue, where it ought
not: It is now expedient to show, what matter may be given in evidence upon
general Issue, and what not: And first where the Defendant pleads the general
Issue, and shows in evidence, that the Plaintiff has no such cause of Action
as is brought, nor no cause of Action, this is good evidence upon general
Issue.

Action upon the Statute of (Parco fracto) not guilty, and evidence that he
has no Park, is good, 19 H. 6. fol. 7.

Trespass in Warren, not guilty, and evidonce that he has no Warren, is
good, 10 H. 6. fol. 17. and 34 H. 6. fol. 7.

Trespass by Warden of the Fleet, not guilty, and evidence that he is not
Warden, is good, 4. Ed. 4. fol. 7. and 12 E. 4. fol. 7.

Trespass of a House broken, not guilty, and evidence that the Plaintiff has
no House there, is good, 22 H. 6. fol. 7.

Trespass, not guilty, and evidence that the place where the Trespass was
done, is the freehold of another, and not of the Plaintiff, is good, 4 E. 4.
fol. 5.

Debt against a Vicar for holding Farms: He has not against the form of the
Statute, and evidence that he had, for maintenance of his House, it is good,
27 H. 8. fol. 25.

Action upon the Case of finding his Goods, and converting them to the use of
the Defendant, not guilty, and evidence that they were not the Goods of the
Plaintiff, is good, 3 Mar. and 33 H. 8. Action upon the Case, 109. Otherwise
it is in Trespass, 27 H. 8. fol. 25.

Debt upon arrearages of account, he owes him nothing in manner and form,
and evidence, that there was no such account, is good, 2 H. 6. fol. 26.

Debt upon arrearages of Rent upon a Lease for years, he owes him nothing, and
evidence that he did not demise, is good, 7 H. 7. fol. 3.

Debt upon sale of a Horse for forty shillings, the Defendant may plead he
owes him nothing in manner and form, and evidence that the sale was of two
Horses for forty shillings, or that it was of an Ox for forty shillings, is
good, 21 E. 4. fol. 26. and 9 E. 4. fol. 1. by Moyle.

Waste, no waste made, and evidence that the House was burnt by the Kings
enemies, or by Thunder, or it was ruinous at the time of the Lease, is good:
And so every thing that is no waste, for that proves that the Plaintiff has
no cause of Action, 12 H. 8. fol. 1. and 22 H. 6. fol. 56. In maintenance, not
guilty, evidence that the thing that is done is no maintenance, is good.

Action of extortion against the Sheriff, which pleads that he took not, and
evidence, that by prescription he has Bar fee of every one which he takes,
and is good, for it is no extortion, 21 H. 7. fol. 17.

4 E. 4. fol. 5. Trespass, The Defendant pleads not guilty, and gives in
evidence, that it is the Feeehold of another, and good, for then the Plaintiff
has no cause of Action.

2 H. 6. fol. 26. Debt upon arrearages of account, he owes him nothing in
manner and form, and evidence that there was no such account, is good, for he
has no such cause of Action.

2 Mar. and 33 H. 8. tit. Action upon the Case, and Count upn finding the
Goods, and converting them to his own use; the Defendant pleads not guilty,
and gives in evidence that they were not the Goods of the Plainliffe, for he
has no cause of Action, 5 H. 7. fol. 3. the same,

10 H. 7. fol. 24. Cessavit, That he held diverse Lands by entire service; he
did not hold in manner and form, and gives in evidence, that he holds by
several services, is good, for he has no such cause of Action.

27 H. 8. fol. 25. Trespass of Goods carried away, the Defendant pleads that
the property of the Goods was not in the Plaintiff, and that is no plea in
Trespass, but in Replegiare: And some for that seem, that this is no good
evidence in Trespass, upon a Plea of not guilty.

9 H. 7. fol. 3. Debt for Rent upon a Lease for years, that he owes him
nothing, and evidence that he did not demise, is good.

Upon a general Issue, the Defendant by evidence to convey to himself
interest and title, is good evidence.
Trespass of Gashaukes taken, not guilty, and evidence that he had a Lease of
a VVood for years, where they were taken, it is good, for it is a title, 16 E.
4. fol. 2.

Trespass, The Defendant pleads his Freehold, and gives in evidence, a Fine
with Proclamation, it is good, for it is a Title, 27 H. 8. fol. 27.

Trespass, not guilty, and in evidence a Lease for years, is good, 12 H. 8.
fol. 2.

Account of receipt by the hands of J. S. the Defendant pleads he was never his
Receiver, and evidence, J. S. gave that to him, is good, 2 H. 4. fol. 13.

Action upon the case of finding Goods and converting them to his use, the
Defendant pleads not guilty, and evidence that they were pawned to him for ten
pounds, is good, 4 E. 6. Br: 113.

Trespass, not guilty, the Defendant may give a Lease for years in evidence,
contrary of a Lease at will, for this is determinable at pleasure, 25 Hen. 8.
General Issue 82.

Trespass of Goods taken, the Defendant may plead not guilty, and evidence
that he recovered, and had them delivered in Execution, and is good, 22 Book
of Assizes, 73.

Trespass, not guilty, and evidence that the property was to J. S, which gave
them to him, is good, 9 H. 6. fol. 11.

Assise by a Woman, no wrong, and evidence that her Husband enfeoffed him, is
good, 45 Book of Ass. 8.

Defendant upon a general Issue, if by evidence he acknowledges that he did
the wrong, and justifies it, and gives matter which goes to discharge him of
the act by Justification, this evidence is not good, but he ought to have
pleaded that.
Trespass, not guilty, and evidence that the property was to J.S. and that he,
as servant, and by his commandment took them, it is not good, for he
acknowledges by the evidence, that he made the trespass, and justifies that,
25 H. 8. General Issue, 81.

Waste, No waste made is pleaded, and evidence that the Plaintiff let to him
the House and Land by Deed, and granted to him by the same Deed, that he might
cut Trees to repair that, it is no good evidence: The same Law in Debt, he
owes him nothing, and evidence that the Plaintiff has released that to him:
The same Law in Trespass of Battery, not guilty, and evidence that he did that
(in defending himself) it is not good: The same Law in maintenance, not
guilty, and evidence lawful maintenance, it is not good, for these matters in
evidence are justifications, which go in discharge of the party, and not by
title, but by Justification, 12 Hen. 8. fol. 1.

Trespass, not guilty, and evidence that he had a Close adjoining, that the
Plaintiff ought to enclose, and for not enclosing they enter, it is not good,
for it is contrary to (not guilty) and is a Justification, 19 H. 8. fol. 6.

Trespass, not guilty, and evidence that it was the freehold of J. S. and that
he licensed him to enter, by virtue of which he entered, it is not good, for it
is Justification, 4 Ed. 4. fol. 5.

Trespass of Battery (not guilty) and evidence that it was made in his
defense, not good, 11 H. 4. fol. 63.

25 H. 8. Br: tit. General Issue, 81. In Assise or Trespass, if the Defendant
pleads no wrong, or not guilty, he cannot by evidence entitle a stranger, and
justify by his commandment: So for Common, Rent service, Rent charge, or
justify by license, these ought to be pleaded, and not given in evidence;
contrary of a Lease for years.

34 H. 8. Title, General Issue, 89. Debt upon an Escape out of execution,
Defendant cannot say that escaped not, and give in evidence that he was not
arrested, for that is in Plea.

27 H. 8.21. By Fitzherbart and Shelley, in Debt upon the Statute of 21 H. 8.
against a Vicar for taking Farms, the Defendant says, that he neither had,
nor kept to farm, against the form of the Statute; he may give evidence that
he took that for maintenance of his House, by the Proviso in the Statute,
notwithstanding ^awdwe^ denied it.

20 H. 6. fol. 24. Debt upon arrearages of account, the Defendant says, he
owes him nothing in manner and form, and gives in evidence that there was no
such account, and by Newton it is good, and yet he might have pleaded no such
account.

22 H. 6. fol. 56. Debt against Abbat for borrowing, he may account generally,
that the ten pounds borrowed came to the use of the House, and give in evidence
how, as in buying of Bread and Drink.

Evidence which is contrary to that in Issue, or which is not answerable to the
matter in Issue, is not good.
NOthing passed by the Deed, and evidence that it is not his Deed, is not good,
for it is contrary to the Issue, and to that which he acknowledged in his Plea
by Implication, 5 H. 4. fol. 2.

Mortdancester, The Tenant says, that he is ready to hear the Recognition of
the Assise, and in evidence that the Plaintiff is Bastard, it is not good, for
it is contrary to this thing, admited and employed, 22 Book of Ass. 3.

Covenant, Issue was, If the Defendant had made an Estate sufficient to the
Plaintiff of Higgens Close, or not, and evidence that it is not so much in
value, it is not good, for it is not answerable to the matter in Issue, 27 H.
8. fol. 35.

Trespass, The Defendant justifies for Common appendant, and gives in evidence
that he has Common by reaion of Neighborhood, it is not good, for it is not
answerable to the matter in Issue, 13 H. 7. fol. 13.

11 H. 4. fol. 63. Trespass of beating, not guilty, and evidence that it was
in his defense, it is not good, for it is a matter of justification and
contrarying.

7 Ed. 6. tit. 14. In Debt upon an Obligation made for Usury, If the Defendant
plead (it is not his Deed) he cannot give in evidence that it was made for
Usury, for it is contrarying.

5 Ed. 4. fol. 5. Debt upon obligation, for letting him to bail, and does not
name Sheriff, the Defendant gouht to plead that, and so not his Deed, but not
generally (not his Deed) and give that in evidence for it is contrarying.

3 H. 7. f. 5. Where two are bound jointly and severally, and one Seal is
broken, yet in Debt against the other or against him, he cannot plead (not his
Deed) and give that in evidence, for it is contrary, but he may plead the
special matter and conclude, so not his Deed.

5 H. 7. f. 2. If one plead nothing passed by the Deed, he cannot after give in
evidence that it is not his Deed, for it is contrarying.

9 H. 7. fol. 3. Derinue, the Defendant says, he does not detain, and he
cannot give in Evidence, that he has that in pawn, for it is contrarying.

Where the Evidence proves the effect and substance of the Issue, is good.
THE Plaintiff Pleads a Lease simply, and gives in evidence a Lease upon
condition, and for that, that the condition is performed, it is good, for the
evidence proves the effect and substance of the Issue, and for that it is good,
14 H. 8. f. 20.

38 H. 6. f. 9. The Array was challenged, for that, that was made at the
denominating of the Clerk of the Plaintiff.

Evidence that it was made by the Bailiff of the Franchise at his denomination,
is good.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 39. J.S. pleads a Feoffment made to him, and gives in evidence
that there was a Fine which is a Feoffment of Record, and is good.

27 H. 8. fol. 29. Action upon the case by the Husband of an Assumpsit made to
him, and given in evidence that it was made to his Wife, to which he agreed,
and is good.

14 H. 8. fol. 18. False Imprisonment, If the Defendant justify by Warrant, if
the Warrant were after the Arrest, the Plaintiff may say of his own wrong,
without that, that he had any warrant, and may give this matter in Evidence.

Foreign matter plead in Court Baron.
IF a Plaint be in the Court Baron of a Debt or trespass, and foreign matter
is pleaded there, it shall not be tried in Bench, though that this Court shall
be out of the Jurisdiction, but it seems shall be tried in the County where the
Court Baron is, or the foreign matter is alleged to be done, 1 H. 5. f. 12.

A man cannot remove a Plea out of Court Baron into Bench, but in a Replegiare,
and not in Debt or trespass, unless that the Damages are not to forty
shillings, 14 H. 8 f. 17. by Fitzh.

Note more before that.

Fine.
Where it shall be paid by Copyholder, that I have seen used, is as insues.
NOte, that it is commonly said, and the ground of paying Fines is, that a Fine
is due to the Lord upon every alteration, and change of Tenant, that is to say,
upon every admittance of every new Tenant, to the Lord by copy, as upon every
alienation by surrender, and admittance upon that, and upon every descent and
admittance upon that, also if a Copyholder surrender into the hands of the
Lord to the use of diverse and their Heirs, as to 2.3. or 4. and their Heirs,
upon the admittance of them the Lord shall have but one Fine, for it is but one
surrender and one admittance of a Tenant, and upon the death of the Survivor,
and the admittance of his Heir, then an other Fine, so that the Fine is to be
adjudged, due always upon admittance of Tenant and not without admittance.

And for that if two be admitted and one dies, the other shall have his part by
Survivor without new admittance, and shall not pay a Fine.

Also where a Surrender is made to the use of a Husband and his Wife, and to
the Heirs of the Husband, upon their admittance the Lord shall have but one
Fine, for it is one surrender, and both are but one new Tenant, and after the
death of the Husband and the Wife, upon admittance of the Heir of the Husband,
the Lord shall have another Fine.

Also where a surrender is made to one for life and after his death, the
remainder to another, and the Heirs of his Body begotten, and for default of
such Issue, remainder to a third and his Heirs; in this case admittance of the
Tenant for life, vests the remainder in the others, and diverse learned Stewards
take but one Fine only of admittance of a Tenant for term of life, and
nothing of those two in remainder, when the Remainder falls, but I have seen
that every one in the remainder, when they come to the Land shall make Fine,
though it be not the whole fine but a half, and every one is admitted when a
remainder falls, but it need not, for by the admittance of the Tenant for life,
the remainder is so vested that he in remainder need no other admittance, and
they are but one Estate and one surrender, the same Law is where there is a
surrender to one for life, the remainder to another and his Heirs, there shall
be but one Fine. But then it is good, that both be admitted together according
to the surrender, at the time of the surrender made.

Also where one out of the Court by custom, surrenders into the hands of two
Tenants to the use of himself for life, and after his death to the use of J.S.
and his Heirs, and dies before the next Court, and then all this is presented
at the next Court, he in the remainder shall be admitted, and pay but one Fine,
for it is impossible to admit one which is dead, and by the act of God his Fine
is gone, and now there is but one to be admitted, and upon one surrender, and
one being to be Copyholder shall be paid but one Fine.

Also where a Copyholder is admitted upon surrender he shall pay a Fine, but
if it be so that he have common recovery in plaint, in nature of a Writ of
entry in the (Post) upon his better assurance, and for to defeat an estate
tail, those which recover have Seisin by command (by Habere facias Seisinam)
and also they are in, in the (Post) and by the recovery, and for that no Fine
shall be there paid to the Lord but one, for the recovery was also but for
further assurance, and the surrender and all make but one Tenant by Copy, and
so there is due but one Fine.

Also where the custom is, that for every Cottage and for every House, the
Lord shall have upon every alteration and admittance of Tenant, for one Fine
three shillings, and there is a Cottage or a House is decayed, it is called a
Home-stall, and by the custom also, for every Home-stall he shall pay for a
Fine three shillings there, if the Tenant makes of one House two Houses or
build a new House, he shall not pay a Fine for these new Houses, nor for two
Houses, which before was but one, for the prescription does not hold place, but
for the old Houses.

Also where the custom is, that for a Fine for a license to let for years,
the Tenant shall pay for every House, which the Tenant lets for every year
that he has license, four pence, there if he make of one House diverse
Cottages, as of Barnes and Stables, diverse Cottages there for license to let
his House, he shall pay but four pence for every year that he has license to
let the whole, and not for diverse Houses, for otherwise the prescription does
not hold place.

Also if Tenant for life, and he in remainder or reversion, join in a
surrender to one and to his Heirs, he to whose use the surrender is made,
shall pay but one Fine, for it is but one admittance and not several, and one
surrender and not several, and there is but one Tenant admitted, the same Law,
where two Joynt-Tenants, two Tenants in Common, or two Coparceners, surrender
to one and his Heirs, shall be paid but one Fine.

Also a woman is married a Virgin, she shall have all for her Dower by the
custom, there it is used she shall pay a Fine, and it is reason, for that she
is admitted, the same Law is where a Woman has a third part by the custom
for Dower, but it is used commonly within Manors, to pay but half a Fine,
which is paid for Inheritance; but the custom of the Manor is to be
considered in this case.

If a Copyhold be surrendered upon condition, and the condition is broken, he
which surrenders may re-enter without paying Fine or new admittance.

Forfeiture of Copyhold.
WHere a Copyholder of Inheritance according to the custom of the Manor, is
Outlawed in an action personal, as in Debt, or other Action personal, he
shall not forfeit the profits of his Copyhold to the King, for that, that he
has but an Fstate at the Will of the Lord, and the Freehold is in the Lord,
but where a copyholder is attaint of Felony or Treason, the Lord shall seize
the Copyhold as forfeit to him, and not to the King, notwithstanding where one
holds by Charter and is Outlawed in Action personal, the King shall have the
profits of that Land, 9 H. 6. fol. 20.

But if he make a Feoffment after he is Outlawed, then the Feoffee shall have
the profits, 21 H. 7. fol. 7. accordingly: Yet it is otherwise as is aforesaid,
where a copyholder is Outlawed in a personal action.

If one by an Indenture, bargain and sell all his Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in D. and Inrol tha^ accorcording to the Statute of 27 H. 8. C.
16. and has in D. Lands held by Charter, and other Lands by copy, and after
levy a Fine, and suffers recovery of that accordingly; yet the copyhold is not
forfeit.

The same Law if a copyholder has so much Land in D. held by copy, and makes
a Feoffment of all his Land in D. and makes no Livery, this is no forfeiture,
for the Feoffee is but Tenant at will, the same Law is, if the copyholder let
to one for life, and makes no Livery, it is no Forfeiture.

The same Law is, if one enfeoff J.S. by Deed of all his Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in D. and holds in D. part by Charter, and part by copyhold,
and makes Livery of that held by Charter, these other Lands held by copy are
not forfeit, but if he make Livery in any part held by copy, there is
forfeiture of all his copyhold in D. expressed in the Deed.

But if one has in D. certain Lands in Socage by Charter, and certain other
by copy, and devise all his Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, in D. this is
no forfeiture of the copyhold there.

It is said that a copyholder cannot alien by Deed, and for that some collect
if A. let copyhold without Deed for years that, it is no forfeiture,
Littleton fol. 15. Yet inquire.

And Littleton fol. 45. is, Where Lord lets to his Villain by Deed for years,
he is made free, and without Deed it seems he is not made free, and, 24. Ed. 3.
in Villainage after, by Wilby without Deed is no infranchisement by Lease.

And so some say that a Lease by copyholder by Deed for years, is forfeiture,
and where it is without Deed, proving the Lease, it is no forfeiture, yet
inquire, but if it be not a perfect Lease by word for years, but by words of
implication, and gives no Fine nor other consideration, and the copyholder
gainsay that Lease, when it comes in question in the Lords Court, this seems no
forfeiture; also if a Stranger makes wast, as in cutting Trees growing upon the
copyhold, where by the custom of the Manor, the copyholder cannot make
wast, that is no forfeiture, the same Law is, where a copyholder by license of
his Lord, has let for years to J.S. which makes wast, this is no forfeiture
of copyhold of Inheritance,

Also if one within the view of copyhold, says to one, I will not out you,
during your life, or within the copyhold, he says, I am content that you shall
have my copyhold Land for term of your life, or lets to him for life, without
Deed, and without Livery upon the Deed, it is no forfeiture.

Where one has a Rent-Seck, if the Tenant upon demand, deny to pay it, or if
the Tenant be not then ready to pay, this is a denying, which is Disseisin, but
if the copyholder do not deny to pay his Rent upon demand, though he has no
Money ready to pay that, and so does not pay that, is no forfeiture, Lit. 51.
See, 42 Ed. 3. fol. 25.

If a copyholder be in prison diverse years, and by that means comes not to
make suit at diverse Courts, but is absent, yet this is no forfeiture of his
copyhold, the same Law is, if his Rent be demanded upon the Land, and he is in
prison in the Goal, this is no forfeiture; the same Law is, if he be hindered by
infirmity, or by stop of Waters to come to the Lords Court, or to pay his Rent;
it is no forfeiture.

The same Law is, if he be much in Debt, and in fear to be arrested, or if one
be bankrupt, and keep his House, and does not come to the Lords Court, but
makes diverse defaults, these are no forfeitures of their copy-holds.

But if he deny to come to the Court of the Lord, this is a forfeiture of his
copyhold.

But if the Lord claim a Fine, custom, or services, which is in doubt,
whether due or not, and the Tenants pray the Lord that the Homagers may inquire
if it be due or not, and says, if it be found by the Homagers upon their Oath,
that they are due, or if there can be Presidents showed, that it is due, he
will pay it, this is no forfeiture of his copyhold.

If twelve are assembled against the form of this Statute, then if any
copyholder, being a Yeoman, Handy-craftsman, Artificer, Husbandman, or
Laborer, and being of the age of eighteen years or more, and under forty
years, not Impotent, Lame, Maimed, nor having reasonable excuse, and being
required to serve the Queen, for any the causes in the Statute, and refuses, he
shall forfeit his copyhold during his life, 1 Marie chap. 12.

If a copyholder in Court Baron will say to his Lord, that he extorts, and
exacts Fines, and Services not due; or such unreverent words of his Lord, and
they be false, that is finable, but no forfeiture. But if he deny to be Tenant
to the Lord, and to be a Juror of the Homage, it is a forfeiture, but if a
copyholder indict his Lord, or gives in evidence in an action against his
Lord, or arrest him, or commence a Suite against his Lord in any Court of the
Queens, these are not finable, nor no forfeiture.

If Tenant in tail be of a copyhold, the remainder over in Fee, if the Tenant
in tail be attaint of Felony, it seems that the Issue in tail shall have the
Land, and not the Lord.

If a copyholder make a Feoffment of his copyhold, and the Feoffee dies
seized, and his Heirs levy a Fine of that, and five years pass, the Lord is
barred to seize the Land by forfeiture, as it seems.

Some Copyholder by the custom may make waste, and is no Forfeiture, and
waste by some Copyholder is Forfeiture.
LOpping of Trees by a copyholder is no forfeiture, but a copyholder cannot
lop Trees, and burn that in the house upon other Land or Manor, nor sell the
lops, unless by the custom he may make wast.

If a Guardian in Socage of a copyhold make waste, the Infant shall not
forfeit his copyhold, but only the Interest of the Wardship, but inquire. If
Lessee for years of a Copyhold make wast, and inquire when he is Lessee for
years by surrender, and when he is Lessee by the license of the Lord, it is
said, it is a forfeiture, but during the Term.

J. S. Seized in fee of an Acre in D. by Charter, and of another by copy, and
make a Feoffment and Livery in the Acre by Charter in name of them both, it is
no forfeiture of the Acre by copy, but if he make Livery in the Acre by copy in
name of both, the Acre by Charter passes and it is forfeiture of the Acre by
copy.

If a copyholder suffer a common recovery against him at the common Law, and
after surrenders to the use of another which is admitted, and after one or two
admittances pass upon surrender, yet after when the Lords takes notice of the
forfeiture, he may well seize it, for that forfeiture, for that, that the
copyhold was destroyed by the forfeiture. But otherwise it seems, if the
forfeiture do not destroy the Copyhold, as if he make wast or break any
custom, the Lord is barred by this admittance, as it seems.

If a copyholder levy a Fine, and five years pass after Proclamation, this
seems, bars the copyholder and his Heirs, but it seems does not bar the
Lord, but if a copyholder make a Feoffment and Livery of his copyhold, and
after levy a Fine, and six years pass, now the Lord is barred.

If two Joint Tenants by copy are, and one makes wast in all the Land, yet he
shall forfeit but one part.

If the Heir of a copyholder having notice of the death of his Ancestor, do
not claim within the year and day, after the death of the Ancestor, and
Proclamation made, he shall loose it for ever, but otherwise it is if he be
beyond Sea, or within age, or a Woman having a Husband, it seems she shall not
loose by not claiming.

Tenant for life of a Manor is, and copyholder of that commits wast, and the
Tenant for life dies, he in remainder may seize the Land for this wast, for
that it is a forfeiture which runs with the Land.

See before forfeiture, touched in the Title of copyholder.

Formedon.
In so much, that plaints are sued in nature of Formedon, for Copy-holds,
something shall be said touching Formedon, and first let us see where a
Formedon lies, and where not, and for that, that there are three manner of
Formedons, that is, Formed on in Discender, Remainder, and Reverter, in Fitzh.
Not. Brevium, and there declared how everyone lies, much shall not be said,
but what is in Fitzher. Natura brevium, touching the lying of a Formedon.
FOrmedon in Discender lies where the Donee in tail or free Marriage, aliens
that Land so given in tail, or is disseised and dies, his Heir shall have a
Formedon in Discender to recover these Lands so given in tail, Fitzh. f. 211.
A.

Where Tenant in tail aliens or is disseised, or if recovery be against him by
default, after default, and he dies, his heir shall have a Formedon, for the
heir shall not have other recovery of the possession of his Ancestor then by
Formedon, but if he be outed of his own possession, as if he be seized, and be
put out he shall have Assise, Natura brevium fol. 145.

Formedon lies by the heir of a gift made before the Statute of Westminster. 2.
Where the Donee after the Statute aliens and dies, and yet the Statute is, (to
gifts before made it shall not be extended) 12 H. 4. f. 9.

Where there is a Tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy, the reversion to another
in tail, if one intrude after the death of the Tenant in Dower or by the
courtesy, he in reversion shall not have Intrusion but Formedon, Fitzh. 204. D.

Woman Tenant in tail takes a Husband, which aliens, and after they are
divorced, and after the Wife dies, the heir of the Wife shall not have (A cui
in vita) but a Formedon, Fitzh. f. 204. K.

If Tenant in tail lets for life, and the Tenant for life aliens in fee, the
Tenant in tail shall have a (consimili casu) or a Formedon at his pleasure,
Fitz. f. 207. D.

Where land is given to one for life, the remainder to the Father in tail, if
it were executed in the Father, and he Alien, the Issue may have a Formedon in
Discender generally, or may have special Writ making mention, how it was given
for life, the remainder to his Father in tail, and one or other is good, 44 Ed.
3. fol. 6.

In conveyance of Degrees, ye need not name him Heir, but Son of him which was
not seized, but it is a surer way to name him Son and Heir to every one, if
he were seized or not, but he cannot omit any in his Writ which was seized.

If the Demandant omit in Formedon, one which held the Estate, that is to say,
who was seized, the Writ shall abate; otherwise it is in Scire facias, 4 Ed.
2. tit. 48. Formedon in Discender shall abate, for that he omitted one in the
Writ which held an Estate, 44 Edw: 3. fol. 40.

The Demandant in Formedon ought to make his descent, by all which held the
Estate otherwise, the Writ shall abate, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 9.

Though the Demandant be made heir to him which dyed in the life of his Father
which was not seized, yet the Writ shall not abate, but is good, 48 Ed. 3. fol.
7.

Where the Demandant in Formedon in Discender makes mention of any, and not of
all, the Writ shall abate, 49 Ed. 3. fol. 20.

Formedon, and the Register was showed, by which it was held that he ought to
make him Son to every one, and Son and Heir to him which last held the
Estate, but if he makes him Son and Heir to every one, that is more, and good
notwithwanding that every one did not hold the Estate, 11 H. 6. fol. 25.

The Writ is not the worse, though in the same it be mentioned that he is the
heir of one, or that he should have scarce been heir to him if he had lived, if
he be heir to him that last was seized, 11 H. 4. f. 70.
The Demandant in Formedon ought to name him Son and Heir to him that was
seized; But if one survive his father, and were not seized, he need not name
himself heir, but son only; but it is a sure way to name him son and heir, or
cozen and heir to every one, Fitzh. fol. 212. F.

Formedon abate, for that he made himself cozen and heir to the Donee, where
his father was seized after the death of the Donee, and no mention was made of
him, 10 Edw. 3. tit. 41.

Esplees shall be alleged in Formedon in reverter, in the Donor, and in the
Donee, and in formedon in descender and remainder, in the Donee only.
Formedon in reverter, It behooves to lay the Esplees in his Count in the Donor
and Donee, but in formedon in descender and remainder in the Donee only, 50
Ed. 3. fol. 1. Fitzh. fol. 220.

Formedon in remainder, he alleges Esplees in the Tenant for life, and not
in the Donor, and in formedon in reverter, in the Donor and Donee, 9 H. 6. fol.
53. 11 Ed. 3. tit. 31. the same, and 18 Ed. 2. tit. 20.

Formedon in remainder, he counts upon the matter without laying the Esplees in
the Donor, and it is good, 27 Ed. 3. tit. 36.

Of what things Formedon lies, and of what not.
Formedon lies of Gorse, but not of an Advowson, Fitzh. fol. 217. B. It lies
of pasture for 10 beasts, and not of common, but a Writ called quod permittat,
Fitzh. 212. B.

Formedon lies of Common in gross. Inquire of 15. Ed. 3. Statham fol. 95. It
lies of a Corody; that is to say, of Rent, and certain breads, by the opinion
of the Court, 18 Ed. 3. Statham, 10 book of Assise, fol. 11. Nuper obiit, was
maintained of a Corody.

Ward.
For that that in the second Article is inquired, if Tenant of the Lord dies,
if his Heir shall be in ward or not, and for that let us see where the Lord
shall have the Ward of the heir of his Tenant within age, which holds of him by
Knights service, and where not.
ANd note where the Heir of Lands held by Knights service, shall be said in by
descent, to be in Ward, and where not: If the father devises his Land held in
Knights service to his Son and Heir in fee and dies, hie Heir within age, he
shall be adjudged in by descent, and shall be in Ward; But if it were devised
to his Son and Heir, and to the Heirs of his body, the remainder to another in
fee; and dies the Son within age, he shall not be in Ward, for he is in as
purchasor, 3 H. 6. fol. 47.

Where the Heir recovers Land held in Knight Service, in formedon in discendor,
he shall be adjudged in by descent, and if he were within age shall be in ward,
2 R. 3. fol. 14. and 11 H. 7. fol. 12. Inquire, if he recover in Dum non fuit
compos mentis. See Fitzh. fol. 114.

If the Heir enter for the condition broken, in lands held by Knights service,
he shall be adjudged in by descent, and shall be in ward, if he be within age
when he enters, 11 H. 7. f. 12. 7 H. 4. f. 13. and 6 H. 4. f. the same.

If the Father and the Son purchase land held by Knights service, to them, and
to the heirs of the father, and the father dies, though the son within age, he
shall not be said in by descent to be in ward, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 36. But by 32 H.
8. chapter 1. If they be held of the King by Knights service, the King shall have
the ward of them.

Where two or more hold jointly lands held of the King by Knights service, to
them and to the heirs of one of them, and he which has the Inheritance dies,
his heir within age, the King shall have the ward of the body of the infant,
though that the other which has the Freehold be alive. See the Stat. of Wills
32 H. 8. chap. 1.

If an Infant in the life of his Father be made Knight, Rastall, Wills 23.
and his Father dies, he shall be in ward; but otherwise it is where an Infant
in ward is made a Knight, there he shall be out of ward, 2 Ed. 6. Tit. Ward 42.
Magna Charta, chap. 3.

Where Reversion discends to the Issue within age, he shall be in ward; but
where he has a remainder by purchase, is otherwise; and where he in remainder
dies, his heir within age shall be in ward, Stamf. fol. 6. and 7. the same. See
the Comment.

35 H. 8. tit. 119. A person twice in ward, where a woman was young with child,
as a man dies seized of land held in Knights service, his brother and heir
within age, the Lord seises the Ward, the wife of the Tenant being young with
child with a Son, and after the wife is delivered, the brother is out of Ward,
But if the Infant die, the brother yet within age, there the brother shall be
in Ward again; the same law where a Daughter is in Ward, and after the Son is
born.

28 H. 8. Tit Ward 86. If the King has an Heir in ward which is a woman, and
she marry to one before she be of the age of 14 years, there she shall be in
ward but to the age of 14 years, and then may sue Livery; for the two years to
make 16 years, are not given but to tender marriage, and for that she shall be
out of ward at 14 years.

The husband seized in fee of Lands held in Knights service, enfeoffs diverse
at this day to the use of himself and his Wife, and the heirs of their two
bodies begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the use of the right heirs
of the Husband, and the Husband and the Wife have Issue within age, and the
Husband dies, though the Wife live and has the Land, the Issue shall be in
Ward of the body, as it is said: The same Law, where a man seized in Fee of
Lands held by Knights service, makes a gift in tail to J. S. the remainder to
his right heirs, and dies, his Issue within age, he shall be in ward of the
body, though Tenant in tail have the Land.

If a Reversion of an Estate for life, or for years, be in my Father, and that
discends to me, I shall be in ward, but otherwise it is of a Remainder; but if
a Remainder of an Estate for life be in my Father, and that discends to me, and
after Tenant for life dies, I shall be in ward, 11 H. 7. fol. 19. 33 H. 6. fol.
6. 8 Edw. 3. tit. 23. and 33 Edw. 3. tit. 8.

By Choke, If Infant be Tenant for life, and the Reversion discends to him, he
shall not be in Ward, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 19.

Where an Estate is to an Husband and his Wife, and to the heirs of the body
of the Husband, the remainder to the right heirs of the Husband, the Husband
has Issue within age and dies, the Wife is* Tenant to the Lord, and for that
the Issue shall not be in ward.

And if Lands be let to one for life, the remainder to the right heirs of J.
S. the same J.S. dies, and Tenant for life dies, T. S. being right heir of J.
S. and within age, shall not be in ward, for he is a purchasor, 15 Ed. 4. fol.
10.

Tenant for life, the remainder to another in tail, he in remainder dies, his
Issue within age, the Issue shall be in Ward, if Tenant for life be dead, 33
H. 6. fol. 6.

Tenant for life, the remainder in Fee, dies, his heir shall not be in Ward,
for Tenant for life is Tenant.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant is disseised and dies, his Issue within age, he
shall be in Ward, Fitzh. fol. 142. B. C. D. Stamf. fol. 8. the same. 3 H. 4.
fol. 16. the same. Littleton, fol. 87. the same.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant has a Daughter within age, being his heir, and
he marries that Daughter to a Husband of full age, and dies, the Lord shall not
have Ward of the body; but if he marry his Daughter to a Husband within age,
she shall be in Ward, Natura brevium, fol. 98.

Tenant for life, the remainder in tail to the Husband and his Wife, the
remainder to the right Heirs of the Husband; the Husband and the Wife dye, his
heir within age, living the Tenant for life, the heir shall not be in ward,
Fitzh. 143. A.

A man makes a Feoffment before the Statute of Uses, to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to W.S. in tail, the remainder to the right Heirs of the
Feoffor, the Feoffor dies; and W.S. dies without Issue, the right heir of the
Feoffor being within age shall be in ward, for he is in by descent, for the Fee
was not out of the Feoffor: But where one makes a Feoffment in Fee, upon
condition, to re-enfeoffe him, and the Feoffee gives to the Feoffor for life,
the remainder to another in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the
Feoffor, and the Feoffor dies, and he in remainder in tail also dies without
Issue, the heir of the Feoffor within age, he shall not be in ward, 32 H. 8.
tit. Ward, 93.

Estate is made to one for life, the remainder to the Husband and Wife in
tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the Tenant for life; the Husband
and the Wife have Issue a Son, which has Issue two Daughters, and after the
Son and the Wife dies, and after the Son dies, and after the Tenant for life
dies, the two Daughters within age shall be in Ward, 28 Ed. 3. tit. 48.

Marlebridge, chap. 6. Gives the Lord remedy, where his Tenant aliens by
Collusion, to defraud the Lord.

Marlebridge, chap. 16. Gives Mortdancester for the heir in Ward against the
Lord, unless he may have his Land at full age.

Prerog. chap. 6. If a Woman before the death of her Ancestors which holds of
the King in chief, before the years of marriage, be married, then the King
shall have the Custody of her body, till the age that she may consent, and
then let her choose, etc.

If an Infant be married before the years of marriage, in the life of her
Father, and the Father dies, and the Wife dies, before the days of marriage of
an Infant, yet the Infant shall be in Ward, and shall be married again by the
Lord, Stamf. fol. 27. 5 Mar. tit. Ward, 124. it is held, That marriage is as
nothing, for she may marry another, without Divorce, within the years of
marriage.

A gift is made to one in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of J. S.
which was dead, T. S. has that as right heir; but if he be within age, he
shall not be in Ward, for he is in as purchasor, 12 Ed. 4. fol. 2. 7 H. 4.
fol. 5. 11 H. 4. fol. 72. and 15 Ed. 4. fol. 13. the same.

A Woman of the age of fifteen years, at the time of the death of her
Ancestor, shall not be in Ward, for the Lord shall not have Ward there till
sixteen, 35 H. 6. fol. 48. and 28 H. 8. tit. 86. If the King has a woman in
Ward, and she marry before fourteen, she shall be in Ward but to fourteen,
for the two years are given to tender marriage, and she is married: See
Westminst. 1. chap. 22.

Merton, chap. 6. Gives ravishment of Ward and double value: And Merton, chap.
7. gives the value of the marriage, West. 2. chap. 12. Magna Charta, chap. 6.
The heirs shall be married without disparagement.

Merton, chap. 7. Of Lords which marry those that they have in their custody,
to Villains or others, as Burgers, where they are disparaged: If such an heir
were within fourteen years, and of such years that she cannot consent to the
marriage, then if the Parents complain of that Lord, the Lord shall loose the
custody, till the age of the heir, etc. But if she were of fourteen years
and more, and agreed to such marriage, no punishment follows, Littleton 21. See
what are disparagements, and what not.

Now let us see where your Lord shall loose the ward, for that that he holds
part in chief, and what he shall loose by that.
THe Lord the King shall have the Custody of all the Lands of those, which of
him hold in chief, by Knights service, of which the said Tenants were seized
in their Demesne as of Fee, the day that they dyed, of whomsoever they held, by
the like services, etc. Prerogative, chap. 1.

If any hold of Us by Fee farm, or by Socage, or Burgage, and of another holds
Land by Knights service, We shall not have the custody of the Heir, nor of the
Land which is of another Fee, by the reason of Fee farm, or Socage, or
Burgage, Magna Charta, chap. 27.

11 H. 7. fol. 18. If one hold of the King in chief, and dies, his heir
within age, and has Lands descended from another Ancestor, the King shall not
have the Lands in Ward which descended from another Ancestor: And it seems if
a Remainder be in my Father, and that discends to me, I shall be in Ward of
the body, living the Tenant for life, otherwise it is of a Reversion, for
Reversion is a Tenement and held; but if a Reversion descend, and the Tenant
for life living, I shall not be in Ward; but if he dye first, otherwise it
is: And if my Father dye seized of a Remainder, and the Tenant for life after
dye seized, during the time that I am within age, I shall be in Ward.

32 H. 8. tit. Ward. 97. Where a man holds certain Land of the King in Socage
in chief, the King shall not have Livery of more then of the Land in Socage:
The same Law where he holds in Knights service of the King, Rastall, Ward 13.
and not in chief, the King shall not have more in Ward, but only that which
is held of him immediately.

If one hold of the King in chief, the King shall have all his Land in Ward,
as well held of him as of others: But otherwise it is, if he hold of the King,
only by Knights Service, Stam. fol. 6.

Though that the Tenant of the King be in possession of Lands held of others,
the King shall have them in ward by his Prerogative, Stamford fol. 7. Where the
Tenant of the King does not hold of the King in chief, the King shall not have
the ward of Lands held of other Lords, Stamford, fol. 10.

Grandfather, Father, and Son Infant, the Grandfather is seized of a Manor
held of J.S. and the Father of another Manor held of the King, in chief, the
Father dies, the King shall have the ward of that Manor, and after the
Grandfather dies, the King shall not have the Ward of his Manor; the Statute
of Prerog. is, That the King shall have the custody of all the Lands, etc. of
which the Tenants themselves were seized of in fee, the day that they dyed, and
for that, that the Father was not seized of that, the King shall not have it in
ward, 15 Ed. 4. f. 10.

If any hold of the King in fee Farm, Socage, or Burgage, and holds also of
another in Knights Service, the King shall not have the Lands, held of another
in Ward, by reason of those, Magna Charta, chap. 17.

Where a man holds certain Lands of the King, Rastall, Ward 3.
in Socage in chief, of these he shall not have Livery of more then the Land in
Socage, 32 H. 8. Tit. 97. Also where one holds of the King by Knights Service,
and not in chief, the King shall not have more in ward, but that only which is
held of him immediately, during the time that the Lands are seized in the Kings
hands in Ward; otherwise Lords shall loose their Rents, that is to say, that
they cannot distraine during that time, Stam. f. 9.

Where one holds part of his Land of the King in chief, and part of another
Lord, and dies, his heir within age, and the King seises the Ward of all, it
seems that the Rent of another Lord, and Service is but suspended, for the time
that it is in the hands of the King, 26 H. 8. fol. 9.

The Signiorie of another Lord, in the case next before is suspended, but from
the distress, during the possession of the King, 13 H. 7. f. 15.

If a man holds part of the King, and part of another Lord, and dies his Heir
within age, which intrudes at his full age, and paies the Rent to the other
Lord, this is a good Seisin, and shall bind him after he has sued his Livery,
for the Signiorie was not suspended by the possession of the King, but only the
distress, for after Livery the other Lord may distrain for the Arrearages due
before, see now, 34 H. 8. Tit. Seisin 48.2 Ed. 6. chap. 8. That the Lords shall
have their Rents during the minority, at the hands of the Kings Officers.

26 H. 8. Tit. ward 85. If the Kings Tenant alien in fee without license, and
dies, his Heir within age, the King shall not have ward, for that, that there
is nothing descended to him, for the alienation is good; saving the trespass
to the King, which is but Fine by Seisor.

1 H. 7. f. 5. If the Heir intrude upon the possession of the King, and levy a
Fine; this is void by the Statute of Prerog. chap. 13. Which is where one
intrudes, there arises unto him no Freehold, but if the Heir levy Fine
without intrusion that shall bind him and his Heirs.

Time of H. 8. Tit. alienation 22. Tenant of the King in chief cannot alien
for term of life without license, for he alters the Freehold.

Magna charta, chap. 4. If a Guardian by the Kings Grant, makes destruction or
waste, he shall loose his Guardianship, etc.

Magna charta, chap. 5. The Guardian shall keep up the Houses, Parkes, Warrens,
Stanks, Mills, etc. West. 1. chap. 11.

Where a Tenant lets for years and dies, the Lord by Knights Service in time
past might have outed a Farmor, during the Nonage; but it is not so at this day.
IF the Tenant let for years and dies, his Heir within age, the Guardian
shall out the Farmor, yet he shall have Covenant against the Heir at his full
age, for this Term which the Guardian has during his Nonage, 34 Ed. 1. Title
120

Guardian may out the Farmor, and yet at full age the Lessee shall have his
Term again, Britton fol. 163

It is held that a Guardian may out the Farmor for years, but not the Farmor
for life, 5 H. 7. f. 37. Fitzh. f. 142. C. the same, 33 H. 6. f. 47. the same,
and 14 H. 7. fol. 24.

Guardian cannot out Tenant by Elegit, but he may out the Farmor, Statham, 1
Ed. 3. Tit. 13. 1 Ed. 3. fol. 103 by Sharde.

A Guardian may out the Farmor, and so may out him which has execution by a
Statute Merchant, inquire of Tenant by Elegit, 33 H. 6. fol. 47. and 36 Ed. 3.
Tit. That Guardian may out Tenant by Statute Merchant.

Guardian in Knights Service cannot out the Termor, 36 H. 8 Lease 58. 35 H. 8.
Tit. 85. the same.

It is granted by all the justices, that the King shall not out the Farmor of
his Tenant, by reason that the heir of his Tenant is in ward, nor he which
has execution upon the Statute, nor Rent charge granted by his Tenant, nor
grant of next Advowson, Time of, H. 8. Tit. Ward 44.

Now if the Term be not found in the Office for the King, yet the Farmor shall
enjoy his Term, 2 Ed. 6. chap. 8.

Where there is Lord and Tenant, Rastall, Escheat, 15.
and the Tenant grants a Rent charge and dies; his Issue within age, the Lord
being Guardian, shall hold this Land charged, 3 Book of Ass. 1.

Seisin.
Seisin of the Guardians vests Freehold in the Heir, and Chattell in the
Guardian, and Seisin of the Lord of parcel suffices to have ward, but not to
avow for all, and see what Seisin is material.
WHere by Office one is found in ward to the King, that settles the profits in
the King, and the Freehold in the Heir, 1 H. 7. fol. 6. and 42 Ed. 3. f. 4.

Seisin of the Ward, is Seisin of the Son within age; so that if he dye without
other Seisin, the Daughter of the half blood shall not have this Land, 8 Book
of Assizes 6.

Possession of the Guardian is possession of the Heir, for if the Guardian be
outed, the Heir shall have Assise without other Seisin, 2 Ed. 4. f. 5.

Though the Freehold be in him which is in ward, yet if he (being in Ward) cut
the Trees of his Land in Ward; the Lord may have trespass against him, 5 H. 4.
fol. 2.

If the Tenant holds by Homage, Fealty, and Rent, and the Lord has been seized
of the Rent, but not of the Homage within memory; yet this suffices to have
the ward, 6 Ed. 6. Tit. Ward 122.

If the Tenant hold by Rent and Knights Service, and the Lord and his Ancestors
have been always seized of the Rent, but not of the Homage, Escuage, not of
the ward, yet if the ward fall: The Lord shall have the Ward of the Heir by
Seisin of the Rent, for the Seifin is not traversable, notwithstanding,
otherwise it seems to make avowrie, 7 Ed. 6. tit. 69.

13 H. 4. Seisin of Homage without Escuage is sufficient to have releife for
avowrie.

22 Ed. 3. Tit. 90. Tenure B. By the Seisin of Escuage, the Lord may distraine
and make Avowrie for Homage.

27 H. 8. fol. 25. Avowrie for Fealty and Rent, and Issue upon the Tenure,
Seisin of the Rent is not good evidence, nor Seisin of Suit of Court, for it is
another thing that the Avowrie is made for.

44 Ed. 3. f. 11. Seisin of Fealty is not iufficient Seisin to have Assise of
Rent, but sufficient Seisin to make Avowrie for all, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 23. the same

Seisin of Escuage nor releife, shall not be traversed, and for that where one
avows for Homage, Fealty, Releife, and Escuage, it is no Plea that he was not
seized of Escuage, nor of releife, for paradventure Escuage is not assessed by
Parliament within memory, 13 H. 4. f. 6.

Where one holds by Fealty and Rent, If the Lord were seized of the Rent, it is
sufficient to avow for all, see 29 Ed. 3. fol. 31. and 27. H. 8. f. 24. But the
Issue was upon the Tenure.

Where one holds by Fealty and Rent, Seisin of Fealty is sufficient to avow for
all, 45 Ed. 3. f. 28. and 44 Ed. 3. f. 10. See, 27 H. 8. f. 24.

Seifin of parcel of Rent is sufficient to have Assise of all, 8 Book of Ass.
4.

But if one hold by Fealty and Rent, Seisin of Fealty is not sufficient to have
an Assise of Rent, Not. Bre. fol. 109.

If one hold by Fealty, and Rent, Seisin of Fealty is not sufficient to have an
Assise of Rent, Abridg. Book of Ass. fol. 16.

Seisin of Rent by the Predecessor of a Parson, etc. Of a corporation, if it be
gainfaid to the Successor, it is sufficient to have an Assise of this Seisin,
Fitzh. fol. 179. C.F.

Seisin of Fealty is not sufficient to have Assise of Rent, 20 H. 3. Tit.
Avowrie 433.

Where one holds by Fealty, and ten shillings Seisin of parcel of the Rent
suffices to have Assise for all. Inquire time of Ed. 1. Tit. Avowrie 229.

One may avow for releif, without alleging any Seisin of it, 20 Ed. 3. Title.

One may have Escheat and Ward before that he be seized of the Services, 11 H.
4. f. 16.

Where one avows for that, that the Plaintiff has common in his Land, and has
used to pay to him ten shillings, and has used to distraine for that, it is
not good without alleging Seisin of that Rent, 26 H. 8. fol. 6.

Homage and Fealty.
And for that, that the third Article of the charge is to inquire of Services
withdrawn, and for that, that some Tenants make Homage and Fealty, and some
Fealty only, you ought to see the form in Master Littleton, fol. 18. and 19. Of
making of one and of another, and what shall be one and what the other, and
that none shall make Homage nor take Homage, but such a one which has an
Estate; in Fee simple or in Fee tail, in his own right or in right of another,
and if a Woman having Lands in Fee, or in tail; takes a Husband and have
Issue. The Husband in the Life of his Wife shall make Homage, but before Issue
it shall be made in both their names, and if the Wife dye the Husband shall not
make Homage.
HOmage shall not be made to Tenant in Dower, for it shall be made to none, if
he has not Inheritance, 22 Ed. 3. f. 19.

7 H 4. fol. 21. He which holds by Knights Service shall make Homage.

Litt. fol. 22. He that holds by Socage may hold by Homage, and shall make
Homage.

One cannot avow upon a Husband and a Wife, as of right of the Wife for Homage,
unless that the Husband has Issue by the Wife, but if he avow upon them, it
need not be alleged, but it shall be intended that they have Issue, see 44
Ed. 3. fol. 41. and 43 Ed. 3. fol. 13.

Corporation cannot make Homage, for corporation cannot appear but by
Attorney, 33 H. 8. Title Fealty 15.

Bishop or Abbot may take Homage, contrary of Parson of a Church, Time of Ed.
1. Tit. Fealty 12.

In a (Perque servitia) an Infant was constrained to attorn, and to make
Fealty, notwithstanding his nonage, 20 Ed 3. Tit. 19.

Tenant for years shall make Fealty to his Lessor, Lit. fol. 29. D. 9 H. 6.
fol. 43. and 5 H. 7. fol. 11. accordingly, where a Rent is reserved.

By all the Justices, that Tenant for years shall not make Fealty, for it is
(as I believe) to be intended not to the Lord, but to the Lessor, 10 H. 6. f.
13.

It seems that a Lessor may avow upon a Lessee for years as within his Fee, by
the Manor, and for that shall make Fealty to his Lessor, and may avow for
that, 40. Ed. 3. fol. 34.

If Rent of a Lessee for years be behind, the Lessor cannot avow upon the
Termor, as of Tenant upon the Land, but upon the matter, 47 Ed. 3. fol. the
last.

24 H. 8. Tit. Fealty 8. In the Exchequer held, that if Lands discends to me
which is held of J.S. by Homage, and I make to him Homage, and after other Land
discends to me by another Ancestor held of J.S. also by Homage I shall make
Fealty, but not Homage again, for I am become his man before, the same Law is,
if both the Tenements are held of the King by Homage, he shall not have two
Homages but one Homage only, Lit. f. 29

Tenant at will by the common Law shall not make Fealty to the Lessor, but
Tenant by copy at will according to the custom of the Manor shall make Fealty
to his Lord, Lit. in the end of the first book and f. 29. and 10 H. 6. f. 13.
accordingly.

If there be Lord and Tenant and the Tenant holds three Acres of the Lord by
Fealty and Rent, and aliens all the three Acres, the Lord is not held to change
his Avowrie without notice, and to avow upon the Feoffee, for Fealty and Rent:
But if he will he may; the same Law, if he alien but one Acre, not that the
Statute of Westminster the third is, that he shall hold for that particular,
yet this is upon notice, 8 Ed. 4. fol. 12. and 47. Ed. 3. fol. 4.

If the Tenant make a Feoffment, and there is no notice made to the Lord; and
the Tenant dies, the Lord may distraine the Issue, for Fealty and Rent, and
avow upon him, for it suffices that he dies Tenant, though he does not dye
seized of the Land, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 13.

If the Tenant be disseised and the Disseisor dies seized, the Lord there
cannot distraine the Tenant for Fealty, but the Issue of the Disseisee, 32 H.
6. fol. 31. and 34 H. 6. fol. 51.

If the Tenant hold by Fealty and Rent, if the Tenant make a Feoffment in Fee,
the Lord may distraine the Beasts of the Feoffee for Fealty and Rent: And make
avowrie upon the Feoffor till notice be given, and after notice given he shall
avow upon the Feoffee, if he tender the arrearages, otherwise not, for by the
Feoffment and notice he shall not loose the arrearages, but may distrain as
above, and avow upon the Feoffor for the arrearages. But I intend if the Lord
accept Fealty of the Feoffee he has lost the arrearages, 47 Ed. 3. f. 4.

Note that by the Statute of, 21. H. 8. chap. 9. One may avow the taking in the
Land if he will, as within his Fee and Lordship, as in Lands held of him;
without avowing or justiffing of any person certain.

Where one in ward of the King holds of a common person also by Homage or
Fealty, the Lord cannot distraine for Homage, or Fealty; during the time that
it is in the Kings hand, and yet the Signiorie is not suspended but only from
distress, so that after he may distraine, 13 H. 7. fol. 16.

If Tenant in tail which holds by Fealty makes a feoffment, yet the Donor
cannot avow upon the Feoffee for Fealty, but if one recover against a Tenant in
tail, the Donor ought to avow upon him, which recovers for the Fealty, and if
there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant were disseised, and the Lord accepts
the Rent of the disseisor, yet that shall be but as a Bailiff to the Disseisee,
and ought to avow upon the Disseis. otherwise I suppose of Fealty, 41 Ed. 3. f.
26.

If there be Lord and Tenant by Homage and Fealty, and the Tenant be disseised,
and the Lord accept Homage of the Disseisor, he cannot avow for Homage upon the
Disseisee, Fitzh. 142. E.

Hariot.
For that, that diverse Lords of Manors have Hariots, and these are to be
inquired for the Lord in Court Baron, in the second Article of Charge. It is to
be noted that there are two manner of Hariots, that is to say, Hariot custom,
and Hariot service, and for that Hariot custom is properly as it seems, after
the death of the Tenant for life and for years, and of every Estate, and also
is upon altenation.
IT is properly Hariot custom after the death of the Tenant for life, 8 H. 7.
fol. 11.

To have a Hariot after the Death of every Tenant, that is to say, for life and
for years, is a Hariot custom, 21 H. 7. f. 16. and f. 13. the same.

To have a Hariot after the death of the Tenant for life is Hariot custom, for
Hariot service is after the death of the Tenant in Fee, 21 H. 7. Tit. 5. Br.

Custom that every Tenant of every Estate ought to pay Hariot after his death,
is Hariot custom, 14 H. 4. f. 5.

Where the Lord is to have Hariot upon every surrender, or upon every
alienation, is Hariot custom, 3 H. 6. Tit. 8. b.

Note that a Hariot custom may be due after death or alienation, as the
custom will serve.

It seems Hariot service is properly after the Death of Tenant in fee upon
descent, and not upon every Estate, as before is said.
HAriot service is by reason of the Tenure, 8 H. 7. fol. 20.

Hariot service is by the Tenure and if the Tenant alien the Land without
notice, yet the Lord may distraine upon the Land for the Hariot, for it is by
reason of the Tenure, and the Land is charged, 8 H. 7. f. 10. B. 6. that is by
prescription.

Hariot service is after the death of the Tenant in fee, and not of every
Estate, 21 H. 7. f. 13. B. 5.

You shall see more for payment of Hariot service, title descent before, and
title releife after.

Where a Ha^iot is certain, the Lord may seize that as Hariot custom, and
note that for Hariot service, he may distrain, it seems where it is certain to
have the best Beast, that he may seize.
THE Lord may seize as well for Hariot service, where he is to have the best
Beast, as for Hariot custom.

But it is said in another place, that for Hariot custom he shall always
seize, and not distraine, for the property is in the Lord forthwith, 38 Ed. 3.
fol. 7. Br: 2.

For Hariot custom the Lord may seize, and if it be conveyed away he shall
have a (Detinue) and for Hariot service, if it be conveyed away he may
distraine, time of, H. 8. Br. 6. Doctor and Student f. 65.

The Lord has property in Hariot custom, and may seize that; and for Hariot
service he may distrain and not seize, 8 H. 7. f. 10. Br. 7.

He cannot prescribe to distraine for Hariot custom, though that it be
conveyed away, for that, that he may have a, Detinue, for the Law adjudges
possession in him, 13 Ed. 3. Br: 9.

It is adjudged that the Lord may seize Hariot service as well as Hariot
custom, See Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 96. between Woodland and others, and
16 H. 7. f. 5.

It seems where the Lord prescribes to have the best, he may seize for that,
that it is certain, 6 Ed. 3. Tit. but inquire.

Who shall pay Hariot, and who not, and when it shall be paid, and what remedy
upon putting it away.
ISsue in avowry, if he die his Tenant, for the Lord shall have Hariot, though
that the Tenant do not dye scised, for it is sufficient if he dyed his Tenant,
though that he did not dye seized, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 13. Br: 1. and 7 H. 4. fol.
17.

The Husband and Wife, and their Son purchase lands jointly hariotable, and the
Husband dies, the Lord shall not have a Hariot till after the death of the last
of them, 24 Ed. 3. fol. 50. Br. 4. and Fitzh. 3. 25 Ed. 3.7. and 19. R. 2. tit.
Hariot 5.

Where a man dies seized of two Houses hariotable, the Tenant shall pay two
Hariots, and note there the prescription that a Parson shall have the best
Mortuary, and the Lord the second best, and if the Lord shall have the second
best, was the Issue taken, 7 H. 6. fol. 26. Br. 3.

Beasts which are remaining within the Fee of the Lord, if they be removed out
of the Lordship, the Lord may take them for Hariot, where he is to have Hariot
after the death of every Tenant, 27 Book of Ass. 24.

If my Tenant which holds of me by a Hariot, aliens parcel of his land to
another, every one of them shall pay Hariot, for that, that it is entire, 34
Ed. 3. Fitzh. 3.

After the death of a Prior, Hariot shall not be paid, for that he has no
property in the Beasts, 32 Ed. 2. Fitzh. 7.

If a Husband, Wife, and their Son, are seized for their lives, the remainder
to their said Son in tail, after the death of the Husband the Lord shall not
have a Hariot, for he was not sole seized, 24 Ed. 3. Tit. 3.19 R. 2. Tit. 5.
The same: for it is said there, that if one do not dye sole Tenant, there shall
be no hariot paid, Recordare longum, If the Lord purchase the Tenancy held by
hariot service, then the hariot is extinct, by the unity of possession, for
that, that it is service annexed to the Land, but I intend that it is otherwise
of hariot custom, where the Lord grants over the land, 14 H. 4. f. 8. and 8 H.
7.11.

Note that hariot is due immediately after the death of the Tenant.

Trespass, the Defendant as Lord may justify taking of hariot within his Fee,
or if the taking were out, it is good, and the conveying it out is to no
purpose, but that the Lord may seize hariot out of his Lordship, for it is not
in case of the Statute, where the Lord distraines within his fee for his
services, 19 R. 2. Fitzh. 5.

The Lord may seize Hariot (which is the best Beast that his Tenant has, which
held of him by hariot) though they be in some place out of his Manor, for
that, that it is certain, 6 Ed. 3. Fitzh. 4.

If one which holds by hariot service, to pay the best Beast dies, and has a
Cow at the time of his death which is the best; though that the Executors sell
that, the Lord may seize that in the hands of him to whom she is sold, if the
Sale be not in an open Market, and not there, if without fraud, 16 Ed. 3.
Fitzh. 2.

By the custom of some Manor, and of most Manors; the Lord shall have only
one hariot, upon the dying seized of his copyholder, and descent, and not upon
every surrender.

But by the custom of some Manor, hariot is due upon every surrender for life
in tail, or in Fee, as well as upon descent and that in nature of a hariot
custom at the Common Law, and by the custom of diverse Manors, the Lord has
no hariot of some of his Tenants within the Manor and of some he has.

The Lord may seize for hariot custom, the hariot, and is to seize that of the
Goods of the dead, and for hariot service to distraine upon the land.

If a Copyholder of Inheritance of lands hariotable, lying in extremity, upon
his bed, surrender into the hands of two Tenants to the use of his eldest Son
in Fee, and dies before that surrender be presented in the Court, the Lord
shall have hariot, but if this surrender had been presented in Court, and the
eldest Son had been a^^^ted accordingly, and after the Father had dyed, there
the Lord shall have no hariot unless it be hariot custom due to him only by
custom, upon every alteration, and exchange of Tenant for life and in Fee.

The same Law is, if the Father copyholder of Land hariotable, surrencer in
the Lords Court to the use of himself for life, of the Son of his Daughter for
life, and after to the use of the Son of his Daughter, and to the Heirs of the
Son, and they are admitted accordingly, and after the Father dies, the Lord
shall not have hariot unless it be hariot by custom, due upon every Estate for
life, in tail and fee, upon every surrender which is due by the custom, but in
this case if the hariot were due by the death of his Tenants and discends to
the heir only, then the Lord shall not have the hariot.

If the Father being a Copyholder of Inheritance, or by the custom, the Lord
is to have Hariot upon every descent only, and he lying in extremes,
surrenders into the hands of the Steward, to the use of his eldest Son and his
heirs and dies, and after that surrender is presented in Court, and he is
admitted accordingly, it seems that the Lord there shall have a hariot.

But if the Father being Copyholder of Inheritance, or by, the custom (the
Lord having Hariot upon every descent only) surrender in full Court to the use
of his eldest Son and his heirs, and the eldest Son is admitted accordingly,
and after the Father dies there the Lord shall have no Hariot.

So it seems, if in this case the Father surrender to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to the use of his eldest Son and his heirs, and they both
are admitted accordingly, and after the Father dies, there the Lord shall not
have hariot.

34 Ed. 3. Statham, If my Tenant which holds of me by a hariot, alien parcel
of that land to another, every of them is charged to me of a hariot, for that
it is entire, and though the Tenant purchase the land again, yet if I be seized
of a hariot by another man, I shall have of him for every portion a hariot, and
that by the opinion of Wilby and Sharde

4 Ed. 3. Statham Tit. Avowrie, one avowes for hariot, Plaintiff demands
Judgment, for that he does not allead ^^eisin of the hariot, and it seems of
hariot custom he need not to allege Seisin, but otherwise it is of hariot
service.

6 Ed. 3. Statham Tit. avowrie, if one avow for hariot custom, he shall recite
the custom in his Avowrie.

24 Ed. 3. Statham Tit. avowrie, if one avow for hariot, and says, that he and
his Ancestors have been seized, time out of mind, yet he ought to allege a
special Seisin in him, or in one of his Ancestors, and to say by whose hand,
etc.

38 Ed. 3. Tit. 2. Br. It seems where the Tenant holds by hariot service, that
is, if he be to have the best Beast, the Lord may seize as well as for hariot
custom, for that it is certain, and for hariot custom he shall always seize
and not distrain, for that that the property is in the Lord, 27 Book of Ass.
24. 8 H. 7. f. 10.

13 Ed. 3. Tit. 9. Brook For hariot custom he may have an action against
whosoever conveyes it away, and a Detinue against him which denies it, for he
has property in the thing, and the Law adjudgeth possession in him without
seizure, as of the Body of a ward which is transitory.

Time of H. 8. for hariot custom, a man always shall seize, and if it be
conveyed away, he may have a Detinue, and for hariot service as here conveyed
away, he may distraine, but not for hariot custom.

3 H. 6. f. 45. Trespass, the Defendant prescribes in him and his Ancestors,
Tenants of the Manor of D. to have the best Beast for hariot upon every
surrender, and the Horse taken was the best, the Plaintiff says, that the
property of the Horse was not in the Tenant, time of the surrender, and a good
Plea.

Livery of Seisin.
For that, that you give in the second Article of Charge, to know what Estates
your Tenants have, for that something shall be said afterward, which is an
Estate in Fee, and which in tail, and also of other Estates, and first for
that to Feaffments, Gifts, and Estates, made in tail, and for life, by you to
others, there ought to be Livery of Seisin, let us see what is good Livery upon
the Land, and what within the view of the Land, and what not.
IF Liver (...) made and the Termor for years be not outed, this is not good,
21 H. 7. fol. 7.19 H. 6.56.2. Ass. 1.5 Ass. the last, and 7. Ass. 3. And he to
whom the Livery is made, stay a night with the Termor, and not out the Termor,
yet this is not good, Britton fol. 102. and 29 Ass. 60.

If Livery be made, and the Termor be not put out upon the Livery, or that he
attorn, it is not good, 5 Book of Ass. 8.

If a Feoffment be of two Manors, whereof one is in Lease for years, and the
Livery is made in the other which is not in Lease, this in Lease does not
pass, for there shall be Livery made in that also, or otherwise the Termor
ought to attorn, 11 H. 4. fol. 71.

To deliver a piece of Earth of the land, to him which takes the Seisin is a
good Livery, 2 Book of Assizes 1.

The Sheriff may deliver Seisin of Rent recovered, by Beasts, Grass, or Clod,
and it is good, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 22. Perkins. 42.

Office is granted in Forest, to which land is belonging, and Seisin is
delivered by a Horn and an Axe, and is good, 1 H. 7 f. 17. the old print.

A man makes a Feoffment to a Woman, and when he comes to the Church door to
be married, he delivers to her the Deed, and there shows to her the land and is
a good Livery, 39 Ed. 3. fol. 11 and 38. Ass. 22.

Where one is sick in his House, and delivers the Deed of Feoffment in name of
Seisin it is good, Perk. fol. 48

A Deed by (I have given and granted) or I have (given) only, suffices to a
Disseisor, if he deliver to him the Deed without other Livery, for it is a
confirmation, Littleton 121.

One lying sick in his House, makes a Charter of that, and says, take and keep
according to the Charter, and he takes Seisin, and the Feoffor be not out, and
yet good, so it is in the same case if he say take Seisin, and command all the
Servants to attend on him, 27 Book of Ass. 61. Perkins f. 43.44. and 43 Ass. 20.

There may be Livery within the view, as I deliver to the Feoffee a Deed of
feoffment, and I say that I will that you shall enter into the same lands, and
have them according to the Deed, it is good if you enter, Perk. fol. 43. and 18
H. 6. f. 16.

The Father infeoffs his youngest Son of a^ House, and the youngest Son come
into the Church of the same town where the House is, and says in the presence
of the Parishioners, Father so frankly as you have given to me the House, I
give that to you, and the Father goes to the house and enters and dies seized,
and is good; and the eldest Son shall have that and not the youngest, 39 Ass.
12. Per kins f. 44. the same, and 42 Ed. 3. Feoffment 54.

Note that it is notorious, and this the reason.

The Father makes a Feoffment and a Letter of Attorney to L. to make Livery,
and before the Deed delivered, commands L. to make Livery upon condition, and
he makes that upon condition, it is good, 28 Book of Ass. 439.

A man makes a Feoffment by Deed simply, but he delivers Seisin upon condition,
the Feostee takes it conditionally, and not by the Deed, 8 H. 5. fol. 8.18 Ed.
3. fol. 19. and 18 Ed. 4. f. 12. Littleton fol. 83.

The Father for advancing his youngest Son, makes to him a Charter, and a
Letter of Attorney, when he was of sound memory, and after by sickness comes
mad, so that he was dumb at the time of the seisin delivered, but by all signs
agreed, and this is a good livery, 25 Book of Assizes 4.

If a Lease be made for life by Deed, and the Lessor says, Go you and enter,
but no livery is made, though that he enter, yet by Newton, he has but an
Estate at will, and no Freehold, 18 H. 6. fol. 16.

When one makes a Feoffment, and delivers the Deed to the Feoffee, and said,
God give you joy, this is a good livery, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 17. Abridg. Ass. fol.
94. and 41 Ass. 10. but it seems it was within the view.

Feoffment is good of Lands by Deed, and delivering the Deed within the view of
the Land, so that the Feaffee enters accordingly; but if the Feoffor dye before
the Feoffee enter, then the Land discends, and the Feoffment shall take no
effect: Time H. 8. B. Feoffments 70.

A man makes a Feoffment to another, and delivers to him the Deed in the Land,
or upon the Land; this is a good Feoffment by all the Court, 35 H. 8. Brook,
Feoffments, 74.

Note by these is to be gathered, that where the Feoffor delivers the Deed,
within sight of the Land to the Feoffee, and he enter, this is a good livery
and seisin, but if he do not deliver the Deed within the view, nor use words
within the view, which may countervaile livery, I suppose freehold does not
pass.

If a Lease be made for life by Deed, and I deliver it out of the view, and no
livery of seisin, that he is but Tenant at will, by Newton, as it is said
before, 18 H. 6. fol. 16.

Note, where a Deed shall enure as a confirmation, without Livery of Seisin,
and where not.
A Lease for years is made, and after the Lessor makes a Deed by (I have
given, granted, and confirmed) to the Lessee, to him and his heirs, and
deliver to him this Deed, this is good without livery, 22 Ed. 4. fol. 37. and
19 H. 6. fol. 44. the same.

If I let to one for years, and after make to him a Deed by (I have given and
granted) to have the Land for life, or to him and to his heirs, and deliver to
him the Deed, he has an Estate according to the Deed without livery and
seisin; the same Law where a Disseisee makes a Deed by (I have given) to the
Disseisor, and delivers to him the Deed as before is said, Lit. fol. 121.

Feoffment to diverse, and livery to one, where both take, and where not; and
where one makes a Letter of Attorney by words, is not good.
A Man makes a Feoffment by Deed to twenty, and delivers the Deed and Seisin to
one, in the name of all, this is good to them all, but if he enfeoffe twenty
without Deed, and Delivers seisin to one in name of all, this is good to him
only: Time of H. 8. Br: Feoffment 72.15 Ed. 4. fol. 18. and 10 E. 4. fol. 1.
by Choke.

Tenant enfeoffs the Lord and another, and makes livery to the other, nothing
vests in the Lord, without his agreement, 10 E. 4. fol. 12.6 E. 4. fol. 4.

Where a Corporation and another are enfeoffed, livery to one is not good to
both, for that, that they take in Common, and for that livery shall be to both
of them, 7 H. 7. fol. 9. by Hussy.

Attorney by word cannot make livery, 19 H. 8. fol. 9. by Shelley and
Englefeild.

A man enfeoffe four by Deed, and one makes letter of Attorney to J. S. to
take seifin for him and the rest, and he takes seisin accordingly, the residue
take nothing by the seisin, 17 H. 8. Br: Feoff. 67.

Mortdancester.
Many times Mortdancester is brought of Copyhold Land, and for that some thing
shall be said of Mortdancester; and it seems if the Tenant traverse one point
of the writ, the residue shall not be inquired: Contrary is by 9 Ed. 3. fol.
30. Fitzh. Mortdancester 13.
IF one takes Issue upon one point, and found against him, the residue shall be
held confessed, 27 H. 8. fol. 12. and 39 Ass. 13. But Abridgement of Assise
fol. 120. If the Tenant plead in Bar which is found against him, the Assise
ought not to inquire of the points at large.

Mortdancester, If the Tenant traverse one of the points of the Writ, as to
say, that he is not next heir, and is found for the Plaintiff, there he shall
not inquire of other points, for when one point is traversed, all others are in
manner acknowledged, otherwise it is where he acknowledges no point, as
pleading that the Plaintiff is a Bastard, there they ought to inquire of the
residue of the points, Statham, 35 E. 3.

If the Tenant traverse one of the points of the Writ, the remainder shall be
held not gainsayd by Sharde, 14 E. 3. tit. Fitzh. 8.33 E. 3. Fitzh. 34.
accordingly.

Abridgement of Assise, fol. 118. The points of the Writ are three, that is,
First, if the Ancestor of the Demandant was seized in his Demesne, as of fee,
the day that he dyed. Secondly, If he dyed seized within fifty years last
past. Thirdly, If the Demandant be next heir.

The Tenant says, that the Ancestor of the Plaintiff did not dye seized in
fee, and the Assise charged upon all the points, 9 Ed. 3. tit. 13. and 9 Book
of Assizes 14. according, B. 21.

If the Tenant plead in Bar, without that, that the Father of the Demandant
dyed seized; if that be found against him, the points of the Writ shall not be
inquired, but if he plead to the Writ, it is otherwise, 27 H. 8. fol. 12. by
Fitzherbart.

Where the Tenant traverseth one of the points of the Writ, and the Assise is
awarded, and found for the Plaintiff, he shall not inquire of the other
points, but shall be taken confessed, Abridgement Book of Ass. fol. 118.

If the Tenant pleads Feoffment or Surrender, he ought to traverse the dying
seized.
IF the Tenant pleads matter in Deed, as Feoffment of the same Ancestor, they
ought to traverse the dying seized, but if he plead recovery, this is a Bar,
unless the Tenant convey title afterward, 6 Ed. 4. fol. 11. Mortdancester,
Natura brevium, 119.

By Thorpe, Feoffment of the same Ancestor is no Plea in Bar, but to the
Assise, for the Action is taken of dying seized after, that is to say, The day
that he dyed, or not, 34 Book of Assizes 20.

Where there shall be a re-summons, and where the Assise shall be awarded upon
default, and the points shall be inquired.
THe Tenant was Essoyned, and at the day made default, and re-summons was
awarded, and said, that it ought, 8 Book of Assizes 13. Inquire Fitzh. fol.
196. G.

The Tenant was effoyned and at the day made default, and adjudged that the
Assise shall be taken by his default, and that resummons shall not be but
immediately after Summons, 4 H. 7. f. 23. and 4 Ed. 2. Fitzh. 37.

A man cannot recover by default in this Writ without inquiring of the points
of the Writ, 31 Ed. 3. Tit. 58. Abridgment Book of Assizes f. 119.

The Tenant makes default by which resummons went out, upon which he comes and
pleads, and does not answer to the default.

Where it is found against the Tenant, upon Plea which trencheth to the action,
the points of the Writ shall not be inquired, otherwise it is upon a Plea in
abatement, see 39 Book of Assizes 13. and 29 Book of Assizes 48.

Mortdancester, If the Tenant plead non-tenure of parcel to the Writ, and if
found, etc. And is ready to hear the Recognisance of the Assise, the points
shall be inquired, 20 Book of Assizes 19. and 4. Ed. 2. fol. 39.

Mortdancester, the Tenant says, that he is ready to hear Recognisance of
Assise, the points inquired, 12 Ed. 3. f. 10.

If the Tenant plead non-tenure of parcel, he ought to plead over to the
Assise, that is, to pray that the Points be inquired, 12 Book of Assisee 8. and
Abridgment Book of Ass. fol. 122. See there.

Where Mortdancester lies.
IT lies for the Heir, where his Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt,
Nephew, or Niece, dies seized of any Lands of an estate in Fee, and an
Estranger abates, there the Heir shall have a Mordancester, and when his Father
were seized and disseised, the day that he dyed, yet it lies. Fitzh: fol. 195.
C.D.

If Tenent by the Courtesy alien, the Heir shall have Mordancester unless he
has assets by him, And if a Guardian hold over, the Heir at full age shall
have a Mortdancester: Fitzh: fol: 196. E. F.

Mordancester does not lie upon Lands devisable by Will, and it is reason, for
it is true, that the Ancester was seized, the day that he dyed, and that he
dyed seized, and the Tenant is Heir in appearance. Fitzh: fol: 196. I. 4 Ed: 2.
Fitzh: Mordancester 39.

It is a good bar to plead devise of the same Ancester, and so it seems where
there is a devise now by the Statute of Wills, Abridg: Book of Assizes, fol:
120. and 32 H. 8. Chap. 2.

One Coparcener shall not have a Mortdancester against another, where their
Ancester dyed seized, and one enters in all, and holds out his companion, but
(nuper obiit) and if the Ancester dye seized of an estate tail and one enter,
and deforce the other, he shall have a Formedon, and not a Mortdaneester.
Fitzh: fol: 196. L.

Mortmain.
For that that by the 9th. Article, it is inquirable of Mortmain, to the intent
that none shall give in Mortmain, but that the Lord may make his claim within
the time limited in the Statute. Let us therefore see, what is an alienation in
Mortmain, and what not.
IF Villain of an Abbot, or of a Corporation purchase, and the Abbot or the
Corporation enters, this is in Mortmain, and the Lord may enter within the
year. 41 Ed: 3. fol: 16. Fitzh: 224. B. Contrary of Land which discends to a
Villain. 41 Ed: 3.21. and 48 Ed. 3.27.

If a Feoffment be made to the use of an Abbot, or a Corporation, this is
Mortmain, and within the Statute, that the Lord may enter. 8 H. 4. fol: 16. Br:
11.

If an Abbot, Mayor and Commonalty, Dean and Chapter, or other Corporation,
alien to another Corporation or Abbot, without license, this is Mortmain,
Fitzh: 212. D. The same Law if one exchange with an Abbot or Corporation, this
is Mortmain, and the Lord may enter. Fitzh: fol: 223. E.

Lord, Dean and Chapter, or other Corporation are Tenants, and the Lord
releases to Dean and Chapter, or to the Corporation, his Rent without license,
this is Mortmain. But if he be licensed of the King, and of the chief Lord, and
(Ad quod damnum) be sued, or in the license of the King, this clause be, that
is to say, without any Writ of (ad quod damnum) then the Mortmain is not to be
inquired in no case, where such license is used, for that is dispensation, that
the King nor the Lord cannot enter for Mortmain. But if the Lord with license
in this case aforesaid, be Tenant in tail, or for life, and dies, I think it is
there inquirable. Fitzh: fol: 222. D. and 223. I.

But if the King grants to a Corporation liberty to purchase Lands and
Tenements to the clear yearly value of 40 li. provided that it be not held in
chief, as diverse Grants are: If such a Corporation purchase Lands and Tenements
held of the King, as of his Mannours of East Greenwich, Depford, otherwise West
Greenwich, Says Court, Lewsham fee, or held of the Queen as of her other
Manors, there it is not inquirable of Mortmain, but it is to be enquired in
the Leet, if they have purchased any Lands held in chief, or over such a value
in the Grant. And also it is to be inquired in Court Baron for the Lord. If any
Corporation have purchased any Lands or Tenements held of the Lords Manor
(notwithwanding the Grant, and license of the King aforesaid) for this shall
not be to dispense against the Lord for Mortmain.

Where anuity is granted to a Parson or a Vicar of a Church, or to a Prior or
an Abbot, by any tenant, It is no Mortmain to be inquired, for in anuity if
they recover, collusion shall not be inquired, for that does but charge the
Parson of the grantor, and not the freehold, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 6.34. H. 6. fol,
37.3. Ed. 4.14: 33. H. 6.27.20. H. 6.7. and 17. Ed. 3.5.

But if any Tenant of the Lord, grant by deed out of his Land, any rent charge
with clause of distress to any corporation, that is Mortmain, and inquirable.

The same Law is, If any tenant will, that a Corporation, shall have to them
and their successors, a rent charge issuing out of his Land, and will not that
his Parson be charged in any manner, by Writ of an uity, but has in the end of
his Deed, provided always that this present writing, nor any thing in that
specified, shall in no wife extend to charge my person by Writ or Action of
anuitie, but only to charge my Lands and Tenements of the yearly Rent
aforesaid, This is Mortmain, and inquirable. The same Law is, if any Tenant of
the Lord grant by Deed, that if the Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Commonalty, and
their successors, be not yearly paid at the feast of Christmas 20 s. that then
it shall be lawful for them to distrain for the same in the manner of D. this
is Mortmain, and inquirable. Littl: fol. 30. proves this a good Grant. See
Fitzh. 224, G.

But where personal things are given to a Corporation, as Horse, Cow, Ox,
Sheep, hoggs, or other goods, there in this case Mortmain is not to be
inquired, for these so given, are not within the statute, 10. H. 7. fol. 3.

If a Bishop or an Abbot, appropriate to themselves an Advowson held of a Lord,
of which they are seized in Fee without License, that is Mortmain, and
inquirable. Eitzh: fol: 223. H. and 5 H: 7. fol: 37. says, that an Advowson
lies in tenure: 40 Ed: 3. fol: 44. accordingly.

If a Fishing held of the Lord, be granted by the Tenant, to a Bishop and his
Successors, or to a Dean and Chapter and their Successors, this is Mortmain,
and inquirable. 40 Ed. 3. fol: 44. proves that it lies in tenure.

The Statute of Religious, fol: 79. is, That no Religious, or other whatsoever,
shall presume to buy or sell, any Lands or Tenements, either under color of
gift or term, or by reason of any Title whatsoever, or by any means
whatsoever, art or wit presume to appropriate them to him, under the penalty of
forfeiting the same, by which the Lands or Tenements may come into Mortmain, by
any means. And the Statute gives liberty to the next Lord (if he come within
the year) to enter, and if he be negligent and do not enter, then the next Lord
within half a year; and if not, then the King after the year and half may
enter, And it is inquirable in the Court Baron, for the benefit of the Lord
that he may enter within the year; and if the Lord be negligent, and do not
take his time limited by the Stature, then the King may enter, and that is
inquirable in Leet for the King.

25 H. 8. tit. 37. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant lets for life to I. S. the
remainder to an Abbot and his Successors, the Lord need not make claim till the
Tenant for life be dead; for if he will waive the Remainder, it is no Mortmain.

Non-Tenure.
In so much that you sue here plaints for Coppy-holder, and make protestation
in nature of what Writ serves your case, and many times non tenure in them is
pleaded, let us see where non tenure is a Plea, or is a plea of parcel and not
of all.
NOntenure is no Plea in a (Nuper obiit) for it is to try privity of blood, 7
H. 6. fol. 8. Fitzh. fol. 197. D. and F. accordingly, but abridgment, Ass. fol.
120. Non-tenure is a good Plea in Mortdancester.

If one plead Ancient Demesne, he cannot afterward plead Non-tenure, for none
may plead ancient Demesne but the Tenant, 41. Ed: 3. fol. 22.

If one plead Non-tenure of parcel, he ought to show that he is Tenant of
that. But if he plead Non-tenure of al, otherwise it is, 8 Ed: 4. fol. 6.11. H.
4. fol. 16. and 36 H. 6.6.

Non-tenure is no Plea in (Scire facias) to have Execution upon a Fine. 7 H. 4.
fol. 12.

Generally Non tenure is no plea in Scire facias to have Execution, for that
that nothing in that is demanded, but Execution is demanded only. But it seems
one may plead special Non-tenure, as to say that he was a Disseisor, and the
Disseisee has entered upon him. 7. H. 6. fol. 16.

Cessavit, and counts that the Tenant held a house of him by fealty and suit of
Court, he may deny that he is no Tenant of the whole house, for he cannot
tender the whole arrearages without his companion, and goes in abatement of
all. Rast. Non-tenure 1.
But Non-tenure of a parcel in a (Precipe) shall not abate for all. 21 Ed. 4.
fol. 25.

Non-tenure of parcel shall abate all the Writ, by the Common Law, and now by
the Statute but for the parcel, 36 H. 6. fol. 6.18. Ed. 4.41. Ed. 3.20. and 4.
Ed. 4.33.

Littleton fol. 126. Formedon, If the Tenant plead Non tenure, Judgment shall
be that the Tenant shall go without day, and after such judgment the Demandant
may enter.

26 H. 8. fol. 3. Attaint, He which was party to the first Record, cannot plead
Non-tenure, by Hare, but his feoffee may.

21 H. 6. fol. 62. Attaint against him which recovers, and the petty-Jury and
he says, that he was not tenant day of the Writ purchased, and held good.

6. Book of Assizes. Attaint against J.S. upon a verdict which passed for J. S.
in a Writ of Entry upon disseisin, and notwithstanding that J. S. pleads as
Tenant, yet for that, that he was not Tenant day of this attaint nor ever
after, the Writ shall abate by Non-tenure 14 Book of Ass. 2. Attaint, Nontenure
was good, but it was pleaded there by the Heir, or other person against whom
the recovery was.

Fitzh: fol: 107. L. Attaint, Non-tenure has been admitted a good Plea diverse
times.

8 Ed: 4.20. A man recovers in Court Baron in right, and the other brings false
judgment, and recovers that, and in Scire facias to have Execution, he which
first recovered, pleads special Non-tenure, to stay Execution, and said that
he shall have it.

9. H. 5. fol. 11. Scire facias to have Execution, if the Tenant pleads
Non-tenure specially, That is, that he has nothing but for years, the
Plaintiff shall not have Execution at his peri II.

Nuper obii.
In so much that (Nuper obiit) is a Plaint sometimes by Copi-holder of that in
Court Baron, something shall be said of that, and where it lies, and where not.
IT appears it lies where Lands discends to Coparceners, and after the death of
the Ancestor one enters into all, and deforceth the other, as where
Grandfather, Father, Brother, Uncle or other Ancester die seized of an estate
in Fee, and after their death, one of their Heirs enters, and deforces the
other Coparceners, here the Coparceners deforced shall have a (Nuper obiit)
against the other Coparcener which deforceth them. And if one Coparcener be
deforced by the other Coparcener, and a stranger, she shall have a (Naper
obiit) against her Coparcener, and this Jointenancy shall not abate the Writ.
And this Writ lies as well between Coheirs in Gavelkind, as between women
which are Coparceners, if one deforce the other. Fitzh. fol. 197. A. C.

Nuper obiit lies between sisters of the half blood, 3. Ed. 1 Tit. 5. Fitz. f.
179. G. Nuper obiit is maintainable, where her Ancester was carried out of the
same tenements, the day before his death against his will, by the other
Coparcener, and dies out of the same tenements, 4. Ed. 2. Tit. 10. Fitzh. 197.
L.

Nuper obiit lies of a Corody, 16. Ed. 2. tit. 11.10. Ass. 11. Br: 3. Fitzh.
179.

If there be two Coparceners, and one of them marries a Villain, and the other
deforce them, the Villain and his wife shall not have a Nuper obiit, 16. Ed. 3.
tit. Fitzh 17.

Officer.
Where your Officer, or Sheriff shall be punished for executing of Process,
as trespassor, and where not, and how he ought to carry hemself in executing
Process.
OFficer shall be punished in trespass, that by (Fieri facias) out of any
Court, breaks the door of a house to do execution, and for that only, and not
for taking the goods in execution. 18. Ed. 4. fol. 4.

It is held that an Officer cannot break the close to make a Replegiare where
there is a gate, unless that that be stopped, the same Law is of executing
Process out of a Court Baron, 21. H. 6. fol. 30.

Where one is indicted of trespass, and Capias awarded, or a Commission to take
the party indicted, and he shuts his gates, there the Officer may break the
gates, unless he may otherwise come to take him, for this is for the King,
otherwise it is to execute Process out of a Court Baron, 27. Book of Assise,
35.

Where erroneous Judgment is given in any Court, the Officer which does the
execution is excused. Contrary where the Court gives Judgment of Land, or
contract which lies out of their jurisdiction, for their trespass or Assise
lies against the Officer, 22. Ass. 64. Plowden 19^.

There is also a Diversity, where in Court Baron Judgment is given, that is
void or voidable, for where judgment and execution is there, of a thing whereof
they have no jurisdiction, there trespass lies against the Officer for
executing it, but if Judgment be there but erroneous, and so not void, false
judgment lies, and no trespass against the Officer, Plowdens Com. 394.
contrary Law.

Where an Officer by commandment of a Bishop arrests one for holding an opinion
that he would not pay Tithes, false Imprisonment lies.

The same Law where a Justice of Peace, lays his command upon one out of the
Sessions without other matter, and for that is Imprisoned.

Where one by a Capias out of the Court Baron arrests one, false Imprisonment
lies against the Officers 10. H. 7. fol. 17.

It seems if the Sheriff arrest one, by a Capias awarded against him, out of
the Common Bench, where there is no Original, yet false Imprisonment does not
lie against him, 21 H. 7. fol. 22. and 11 H. 4. fol. 36. the same, by Hank, i^
case of the Abbot of Glassenbury.

Held that the Sheriff may arrest a verger in the Church, or a secular man,
and shall not be punished by trespass. But by the statute of 1. R. 2. chap.
the last see Pulton title Arrests. If any arrest any Minister which is doing
Divine Service in the Church, Churchyard or other place, he shall be Imprisoned
and punished, etc.

If an Officer distrain or attache the horse of a Master, where the plaint is
against the servant, trespass lies for the master against the Officer, for the
Officer ought to take notice at his peril whose goods he distrains or
attaches, 13 H. 4. fol. 2.14. H. 4.24. 11 H. 4.90. and Doct. and Student 129.

Where an Officer arrests another man which is not defendant, or attache goods
which are not the defendants, he is a trespassor, if the Plaintiff show him
the party, of goods, and says he is the Defendant or not, 11 H. 4. fol. 90.

It seems that the Officer shall take notice at his peril whose beasts he
repleves, 14. H. 4. fol. 24.

If the Officer restrain any Prior, or other Prelate for debe or trespass when
he is in his journey riding, by his horse upon which he rides, where he may
distrain other goods, action upon the case lies against the officer, Quare cum
etc. Fitzh. fol. 93. I.

Where the Sheriff has a Capias, he may arrest one without showing it, and so
may a Bayliffe erant, But the servant of a Sheriff and of another, cannot
without showing the Warrant. The same Law is of a Bailiff of the Lord or
Beadle, which by custom serve Attachements or distress, They having a
command, may serve it without showing it. But so cannot they do, where they
have a command to summon Copyhold Land, or a command in nature of Grand cape,
Petit cape, habere facias visum, or Habere facias sefinam, 14 H. 7. fol. 9. 21
H. 7. fol. 37. 8 Ed. 4. fol. 14. and 10 Ed. 4. fol. 1.

If the Sheriff arrest one by a Capias, and after do not return the Writ, or
return (non est inventus) false Imprisonment lies against the Sheriff. But in
Court Baron no Capias shall be awarded, yet if the Officer there serve an
Attachment or distress and do not return his precept at the next Court,
Trespass lies against the Officer for the Defendant, and an Action of the Case
lies against him for the Plaintiff which sued the Action, for not returning of
the Precept, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 18. 3 H. 7. fol. 3.

If the servant of the Sheriff arrest one by Precept made out of a Capias, and
return his precept to the Sheriff, and yet the Sheriff do not return his
Capias, false Imprisonment lies against the servant. But by the 18. of Ed. 4.
fol. 9. it appears that it is otherwise, where the Baylife of the Liberty
arrests one by precept, out of a Capias made to him by the Sheriff, and
returns his precept, and the Sheriff do not return the Capias, there lies
false Imprisonment against the Sheriff, and not against the Bayliffe. But in
Court Baron, Bayliffe or Beadle which have a precept of the Steward, cannot
make precepts out of that to serve. 21 H. 7. fol. 22.20. H. 7. fol. 13.

One may arrest one in the presence of the Sheriff, which has a Capias by his
Commandment, and it is his arrest, without showing the precept, and Bayliffe or
Beadle of a Court Baron may attach or distrain any thing without a precept, in
the presence of the Steward, and by his Commandment. 8. Ed. 4. fol. 14. 21. H,
7. fol. 22.16. H. 7. fo. 14. See there.

Bayliffe or Beadle of Court Baron, distrain or serve Attachment, and the
Defendant makes rescous, and chaseth the thing destrained or attached out of
the Manor, and the Officer freshly follow and takes it again, and brings it
into the Manor again, and may well do it. 33. H 6. fol. 52. and 55. and 2 Ed.
4. fol. 6. accordingly.

If a Sarjeant at mace arrest one, and he resists, he may beat him, and others
(upon request) may aid him, 2. Ed. 4. fol. 6. B. and 3. H. 7. fol. 3.

By Hank, Officer cannot attach J. S. by my goods which he has to dung his
Land, or to plough it, or which he has in pawn, 11. H. 4. fol. 90. B. 31. H.
8. tit. 159. It is said, where one has an Office of charge: as to be Steward,
Bayliffe, Parker, etc. That the grantor may out them, and pay their Fee, if it
be so much certain, but not where they have profits of Court. etc. 34 H. 8.
tit: 243. the same.

28. H. 8. tit. 94. Deprivation of an Office which lies in grant, ought to be
by deed and not by word.

5. Ed. 4. fol. 5. Long report, the Act of the under Sheriff, or his Deputy in
the name of the Sheriff, shall charge the Sheriff, and for their act the
Sheriff himself shall be amerced, and no other.

39 H. 6. fol. 35. The opinion of the Justices was, That escape of a prisoner
is not a sufficient cause of forfeiture of the office of the Marshal, which
has fee in that, and held that the Marshal might grant that to another for
life, but his assignee cannot make a deputy; And the opinion of the Justices,
that not executing of an office, is a sufficient cause of seizure: Deputy
occupies to the use of the officer, and his forfeiture or misdemeanour shall
make the Officer to loose his Office, but the misdemeanour of the grantee for
life not, but of his own estate.

11 Ed. 4. fol. 1. Duke, or Marshal in fee, may make a Deputy for his Patent
is, to be executed by himself or his Deputy. The same Law of the Office of
Chamberlain of the Exchequer, which is also an Office of trust, for he keeps
the Records of the King, so that an Office of trust cannot be granted over. If
the Patentee has it not, to him and his Assignees, he cannot make a Deputy,
and there agreed, that he has that, in his own right, and Deputy is not but to
occupy in the Right of the Grantee. See Perkins, fol. 21. E. F. G. 10 Ed. 4.
fol: 16.

5 Ed. 4. fol. 27. Where an anuity is granted to keep a Park, if the Grantee
misuse that, by which the Dear are killed, that is forfeiture of his Office.
Littleton fol: 73. If a man grant by his Deed to another the office of
Parkership, Steward, Bayliffe, (...) there is annexed to that a condition in
Law, etc.

5 Ed. 4. fol: 10. The King grants to Garter the office of the King of Arms at
will, and 10 li. fee, for term of his life for that Office, If the Grantee be
put from the fee the office shall cease, for the Cause ceasing, the effect
shall cease. 7 Ed. 4. fol. 23. the same.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 5. If the King grant an Office to one which knows not how to use
it, It is said that the grant is void, and Justices may refuse him. 5 Ed. 4.
tit. 48. the same.

9 Ed. 4. fol: 6. The King grants Office, the Patentee may make title in
assise, without showing that it was an Office before. But if the grant was with
vales and fees it is not good, unless there be words (Constituimus) if there
were none before.

9 Ed. 4. fol: 6. If the King grant the Office of one of the Clerks of the
Crown to 2. the grant is good, but grant to two to be chief Justice is void,
for it is a Judicial office.

18 Ed. 4. fol: 8. The King grants the Office of chief prenotary to two that is
void, and the Justices may refuse to enroll it, for two cannot have the keeping
of the Rolls.

29 H. 8. Tit. 47. If a man has a fee of a Lord, and after is made a Justice,
this fee is not void, but after he is made Justice, he is not to take fee of
any but of the King. But where a Parson is made a Bishop, the Parsonage is
void, for he cannot be Ordinary to himself, nor punish himself.

3 H. 7. fol: the last. The King cannot grant the Reversion of an Office to J.
S. by that name, but reciting how, that such a one shall have and hold such an
Office for term of his life, of Our special grace We grant the Office
aforesaid to J. S. to have after the death, etc. See 32 H. 8. Chap. 27.

9 H. 7. tit. 44. If the Warden of the Fleet, do not bring in his prisoner
which is commanded by the Court, that is a cause of seizing his Office. And if
a prisoner condemned escape, he is to pay the condemnation.

11 Ed. 4 fol. 1. by Vavisor, Not attendance is a cause of forfeiture of the
Office.

Westminster: 1. Chap. 26. No Sheriff nor other Minister of the King, shall not take
reward to do his office, and who does, shall restore double to the Plaintiff,
and shall make Fine to the King.

Westminster: 1. Chap. 29. No servant, accomptant, nor other make any disceit or
collusion in the Kings Court, or consent to make that in deceit of the Court to
wrong the Court or party, and of that be attaint, he shall have Imprisonment
for a year and a day, and be not heard in Court to count for none, and if there
be another which counts he shall be imprisoned a year and a day.

Fitzh: 172. O. No Victualler ought to use to sell victual or wine, by great
or retail, so long as he is in Office, as Mayor, etc. To keep the assise of
bread and wine.

Fitzh: 173. A. Victualers shall not be chosen to office of Judge, in Towns and
Cities, but for default of others, and then they shall not sell victuals. See
of that diverse Statutes.

Process of Execution.
JOhn Kitchen Steward, to his Bayliffe health. Because Rob. B. has recovered
against W.E. 31. s. in a Plea of Debt, and 12 d. for charges and costs, of
which the said W. in the same Court was convicted by the Judgment of the
Court. Therefore you shall cause to be levied according to the custom the
aforesaid 31 s. in the said Court adjudged, and the said 12 d. for charges, and
you shall have the said money at the next Court to pay to the said Rob: for his
damages aforesaid, and have there this Precept, and how, etc. dated the 24th
day of April, the year of the Reign of the Queen, etc. 21.

Pound overt.
For that that in the 15th Article of the Charge, it is to be enquired, if any
Distress put into the Lords Pound be taken out without Authority, for that
let us see some things touching open Pounds.
SEveral pasture of one, is provided for the time, though it be not an open
Pound, for that is adjoining to the Kings high way, which is called an open
Pound. 5 H. 7. fol: 9

If a man distrain his tenant in Fee, for life, or years, for Rent, he cannot
impound in the same Land where he takes the Distress: but for damage doing he
may. 21 H. 7. fol: 39.

By Choke. If one take Beasts in the name of Distress, he ought to put them
into an open Pound, for that, that he which is distrained, may give to them
sustenance, otherwise he cannot give them meat. But if he distrain dead
chattels, I may put them where I will; but if they spoil in my default, I must
answer for them. 9 Ed. 4. fol: 2. B.

If Distress be taken out of the open Pound of the Lords of the Town, he which
distrains shall have a (Parco fracto) and not the Lord; and the remedy for the
Lord is presentment in the Court Baron. 21 Ed. 4. fol: 19. Fitzh: 100. G.

Where one distrains (doing damage) or for Rent, or service, and impounds them
in the common Pound, or in another Pound or place which is a lawful Pound, and
an other takes them out, he which distrained shall have a Writ called (Parco
fracto) of that taking out of the Pound. The same Law is if they were impounded
in a Close of his friend by his license, and are taken out, he which distrained
shall have a (Parco fracto) and his friend Trespass, why by force of arms he
broke his Close. Fitzh: 100. E.

If Distress be put in open Pound, and they dye, it is the loss of the owner:
but if they be put in another place, it is not so. And though sufficient amends
be offered, yet he cannot take the Distress out of the Pound, but ought to sue
a Replegiare; And then if it be found that sufficient was tendered, he shall
recover damages for the refusal. But if the Distress dye in open Pound,
though sufficient amends were offered, yet it is to the loss of the owner, so
that he ought to give to them sustenance. Doctor and Student fol. 113.

If Distress taken, doing damage be put in a Pound, the Defendant may
justify that he has Common in the place where the taking was, and made fresh
suit, and came to the Pound, and there he found that unlockt, and took his
Beasts, this is lawful upon fresh suit, and being unlocked. So it seems in all
cases, where the Distress is taken without reasonable cause upon fresh suit,
and Pound unlocked, the owner may take them out of the Pound. 30 Ed: 3. fol:
171.

3 H. 6. fol: 15. Defendant in Replegiare may say, that he put the Beasts in
open Pound, and there they dyed, and he shall not wage deliverance.

5 H. 7. fol: 9. If the Defendant in Replegiare take beasts and drives them
away, and does not put them in an open Pound, and they die, this is not in
default of the Plaintiff; But if he put them in an open Pound, within the
County, it is not to be said that they are conveyed away; but the Plaintiff at
his peril is bound to take knowledge where they are, and to give them meat.

39. H. 8. Tit: distress 6. He which distaines beasts may put them in a close
house, if he will give them meat, for the putting them in open pound, is but to
the intent that the owner may give them meat. 1 and 2 Phil: and Ma: chap. 12.
tit. Distress, That no distress shall be driven out of the hundred, unles to
the open Pound, nor above 3 miles, and one distress shall not be impounded in
several pounds upon forfeiture of 5 l. And for poundage of an Entire distress
a man shall not take above 4. d. poundage.

20. H. 7. fol. 1. Where the Lord destraines beasts and they are taken out of
the Pound, the Lord shall have a (Parco fracto) and the party may have
trespass, for the property lies in him by Forwick.

Fitzh. 101. Where a man distraines for doing damage, Rent, or service, and
puts them into the common Pound or into an other lawful Pound, and he which
owes the beasts or another person takes them out of the Pound, then he which
distrained, shall have a (Parco fracto) and if a man send his servant to
distrain for rent or service, and the servant distrain and put them into the
Pound, and a stranger takes them out of the Pound, now the Master shall have a
(Parco fracto) for it is the pound of the master, 21. Ed. 4. fol. 19.

Fitzh. 101. E. if a man distrain for Rent, doing damage, or services and puts
the beasts in the ground or close of another his friend by his license, and he
which ows them takes out the beasts, he which distrained shall have a (Parco
fracto) and not he which has the close.

Fitzh. 101. H. For amercement in hundred one cannot distraine, but the proper
goods of him that is amerced, and not others, but for rent or service is
otherwise, for the party may distrain the beasts, found in the Land which are
rising and lying and Impound them.

Releife.
IF one have a tenement in chief, and dies, etc. and after such Heir be in
Wardship, when he shall come to age, that is, 21 years, he shall have his
Inheritance without releife. But by the stature of Marlebridge chap. 10. and by
the Prerogative of the King the 3. chapt. the King shall have the first seisin,
nor the Heir shall not enter, before he has received it out of the Kings
hands, whatsoever Age he be of, Magna charta, 2. 3. and 4.

Where one holds of a common person by Homage, fealty, and escuage, and dies,
his Heir male being within Age of 21 years, he shall be in ward until 2^
years, and if he were not in ward but were of full age, that is, 21 years, then
the Lord shall have a 100 s. for a whole Fee for relief, and if he hold by a
moitie 50 s. and so who by more, more, and who by less, less. Litt. fol. 24.

But by Marlebridge chapt. 17. If the Heir within age be in ward and at full
age, the Lord will not suffer him to enter without Suit, but holds him out to
have relief, or otherwise holds him out that he cannot enter without plea, he
shall have a Mortdancester against his Guardian, and recover his damages.
Fitzh. fol. 196. F.

If one holds of the Lord in Socage, that is by fealty, and 10 s. payable at a
certain day and dies, then the Lord shall have 10 s. for relief over the 10 s.
which he paies for his Rent, and such relief is due forthwith of what age the
Heir be, so that he pass the age of 14 years, But if he hold by a Rose, that
shall not be paid forthwith, but when the time of the year is that they grow.
Litt. fol. 28. And this releif by Bracton and Britton is not so properly to be
called releif, as that which is paid at full age by him that holds in
Chivalrie, 16. H. 7. fol. 4. and 18. Ed. 3. Tit. Avowrie 99.

Note when a man holds of the King in chief, and of other persons by Knights
service, The King shall have the Ward of all, and the Heir shall pay relief to
every Lord at his full age, 24. Ed. 3. fol. 8. and fol. 24.39. Ed. 3. tit. 1.
the same, 26. H. 8. fol. 8. the same, and Not. bre. fol. 95. notwithstanding
see Stamf: Title Prerogative.

The Father dies seized, and the eldest brother of full age, dies before that
he enters, and before that he has possession in deed, the youngest brother
being of full age, he shall pay two releifs, one for the death of the Father,
the other for the death of the Brother, for that that both were Tenants to the
Lord, Time of Ed. 1. Tit. 12. and 13. Ed. 3. Tit. 6. the same.

If my Tenant enfeoffes his son and Heir of full age and dies, before the Son
gives notice to me, I shall have releif of him, for that that his Father dyed
my Tenant, to the avowrie, 7 Ed. 3. chap: 11.17. Ed. 3. fol. 3. Enquire. See 3.
H. 6. fol. 47.

Where Land is given to the Father for life, the remainder to his right Heirs,
the which tenements are held by Knight service, the Father dies, his Heir of
full Age, he shall pay releif, 32. Ed. 3. fol. 4.

Estate is made to the Father for life, the remainder in tail to his eldest
Son, and his Wife, the remainder to the right Heirs of the Father in fee, the
father dies, the eldest son and his Wife die without Issue, the youngest son is
in by descent, and shall pay releif, 40. Ed. 3. fol. 9.

Gift is made to one in tail, the remainder to the right Heirs of J. S. which
was dead, Donee dies without Issue, T. S. had that as right Heir, but is in as
a purchasor, and for that shall not pay releif. 12 Ed. 4. fol. 2.

A Lease for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of J.S. tenant for Lease
dies living J.S. the remainder is void, and J.S. and his Heir shall not be said
in by descent to pay releif, 9. H. 6. fol. 23.

Lease for life, the remainder to the right heirs of J. S. and J. S. has Issue
T. S. and dies, T. S. shall pay no releif, for he is in as purchasor, 11. H. 4.
fol. 72.

Lease is made to one for life, the remainder to another in tail, the remainder
over to J. S. in fee, he in remainder in tail dies, his Issue of full age, he
shall pay no releif, for tenant for life is tenant, but when tenant for life
dies he shall pay releif 33. H. 6. fol: 5.6.

Lord and tenant, the tenant lets for life, the remainder in fee to another,
and he in remainder dies, his Heir of full age shall pay no releif, for the
tenant for life is tenant to the Lord, Fitzh. 142. B.

Where an estate is to the husband and to his Wife: and to the Heirs of the
body of the husband, the remaindet to the right Heirs of the husband, the
husband has Issue of full age and dies, the Wife is tenant to the Lord, and
for that the Issue shall not pay releif when tenant for life dies he shall pay
releif. 5 Ed. 4. fol. 10.

If the Heir of full age recover, In a (whilst he was not Compos mentis, or in
dum fuit infra aetatem) or if his Father had made a feoffment upon condition,
and he enters for the condition broken, he shall pay releife, 11. H. 7. fol. 12.

Tenant in fee farm upon descent shall pay no releife, for that that his rent
is intended the very value of the Land, 45. Ed. 3. tit. 8. B. old tenures the
same.

20. H. 7. fol. 1. Debt lies for releife by Brud: Debt (is said) lies by the
Lord for releife, but it is held clear, that Executors of the Lord shall have
debt for releife. So it seems one may have debt for releife or distrain, 39. H.
6. and 32. H. 8. Brook. Releife. 11.

Notwithstanding that by will in writing, Lands are devised to another in fee,
yet the Lord may have releife and harriots, and may distrain for releife and
hariott, as he might have done before the making of that statute, and though
this statute never had been made, 32. H. 8. chapter 1.

Note that releife shall be paid to the Lord which has an estate in fee; or in
tail, for life or for years, for that it is a Perque Site incident to the
Lordship, and if the Lord dies, his Executors shall have the releife due to him.

The tenant shall pay but once releife in his life time, and he shall not pay
again by change of the Lord, Britton fol. 177. and Bracton accordingly, and
says, but once as long as the Heir lasts, 34. Ed. 1. Tit. Anowrie 233. fol.
1. If the releife be due to the Lord, and the Lord dies, that shall be a
chattell to his Executors.

14. H. 4. fol. 8. If one be enfeoffed before the statute to hold by a penny,
for all services, exactions, and all demands, yet releife shall be due by
Sherne.

Magna Carta chap. 2. If any holds of the King in chief, and owes us releif,
he shall have his Inheritance by the old releif, that is, the Heir or heirs of
an Earl of a whole County by a 100 l. the Heir or heirs of a Baron of a whole*
barony by a 100 marks, the Heir or heirs of a Knight of a whole Knights fee 100
s. at the most, and who less has, shall give less according to the old
custom of the Fee.

Magna Charta chap. 3. After the Heir be in Ward, when he comes to age, that is
21 years, he shall have his Inheritance without Releife.

By Glanvile and by Littleton for a whole service of a Knight, he shall pay for
Releife a 100. s. and to that agrees the Stat. of Mag. Char. Chap. 2. and the
Statute is over the heir or heirs of a whole Barony 100. Marks, and the
heir or heirs of an Earl of a whole Earldome 100 l. and Lit^f. 35. says,
that Tenant by grand Serjeanty shall pay for releife, the value of his Land by
a year, beyond all reprises.

If any hold of any Escheat, as of the honor of Wallingford, Notingham,
Bullen. and other Escheats which are in our hand, and are Baronies and dies,
his heir shall give no other releife then the Barons did, Magna Charta chap.
31.

Note that hariot service is to be paid by the common Law upon descent, as
Releife is to be paid upon difcent, and for that where Releife shall be paid,
let us see where one shall be said in by descent, in the title of descent
before.

Where land is given to be held by Homage, and having his services, rendering
yearly four Marks, for all services and demands, yet releife shall be paid,
for releife is a thing which grows by reason of services, and is incident, 18
E. 3. tit. avowrie 99.

Bracton says, he shall give releife, which succeeds by hereditary right, but
not he that purchases.

All Purchasors are quit of releife all their lives of land purchased, and also
those which held only for life, and also those who have married Wives, which
have been in ward to their Lords, nor he which was in ward to the Lord, ought
to pay releife, Brit. 177.

If Mesnalty descend to a Tenant, he shall pay the releife if he be of full
age, and holds by Knights service, and if within age, shall be in ward, where a
Reversion of Tenant for life discends to one he shall pay releife, but
otherwise it is, if one Tenant levy a Fine to one and his heirs, which dies
before entry, and after the heir of the Conisee has execution by (Scire
facias) he shall not pay releif, so it is if the Father recover in value or in
Mortdancester and dies, and the heir has Execution by Scire facias, shall not
pay releife, 11 H. 7. f. 12.

No feoffment upon collusion nor use shall defeat releif nor any other
fraudulent gift, Rastall, Uses 7. Rastall, Fraud 1. Covin.
for they are uses executed, releife shall be paid as well as of lands by the
Statute, 19 H. 7. chap. 15. and also by the Statute of 13. Eliz. chap. 5. All
fraudulent acts are void against their Lords, as touching their Hariots and
releifs.

If there are two Daughters, one within age and in ward, and the other of full
age, she shall pay releif for her part.

Abbot nor Corporation shall not pay releife after the death of the
Predecessor, for that, that they are in by election, and not by descent, and
the Corporation does not dye, 8 R. 2. Tit. 14. But by that book, one by
prescription or Deed, may have releife after the death of every Abbot, or
Prior, Statham 3 Ed. 3. Tit. 162.

Opinion is that after receipt of Homage, a man cannot avow for releife. But
Glanvile and Lit. say, that it is due immediately after full age, that is, if
they hold by Knights service, and by Lit. if they held in Socage it is due
forthwith as before it is said, if he pass the age* of foureteen years, 15
Ed. 3. Tit. 5. Britton fol. 178.

No releife be given before that the Lord be seized of his Homage, nor before
that the Lord have delivered him the writings of his Heritage, if he have them,
Magna Charta chap. 3. The Lord shall not have the custody, before he has taken
homage, but the Law is contrary at this day, see, Title fealty, Br. 9.

Suit.
OF making Suit truly, etc. none that by Deed is infeofted etc. does not make
Suit to Court, unless it be specified in the Deed, unless he and his
Ancestors have used to make it, and if he be distrained to make it in another
manner, it is against the form of the Feoffment, and where the writing is, to
hold by certain service, for all services as to hold by Fealty for all
services, shall make no suit. Marlb. chap. 9.

And over, Rastall, Suit. 1.
If the Inheritance, has more heirs, let it be appointed, that he that has
the eldest part, shall only make suit for himself, and partakers, and let them
contribute, the same Law is of Joynt-Tenants, Marlb. chap. 9. Fitzh. 162. C.

Where two Coparceners make partition, and one aliens her part to one, and the
other he^ part to another, the Lord may distraine which he pleases, but if one
make the suit, that shall discharge the other, 24 Ed. 3. Tit. Br. 4.

By Tremaile it is said, that suit real is due by reason of the Body, that is
for that, that the Body is resident within the precinct, and not by reason of
Freehold, and this is due at the Courts Royal, as at the Courts of the King
or Queen, as at Leets and VVapontakes, which are the Courts of the King or
Queen, and suit service is by reason of Freehold, that is, by reason of their
Tenure, that is, for that they hold of their Lord by suit to his Court, 45 Ed.
3. f. 23.

If a man have lands within the Precinct of diverse Leets, and be resident
within only one, he owes Suit but to that, and if he be distrained to come to
another Leet, he shall have a special Writ that he shall not distraine him,
and that is by, Marlebridge chap. 10. Fitzh. f. 160. B.

If there be three or four Coparceners and the eldest makes the Suit, she
shall have a Contributione facienda, Rastall, County 2.
against the others, to be Contributaries; the same Law is, where one
Joynt-Tenant makes the Suit for all by agreement, Fitzh. f. 162. C. and 1 H. 4.
f. 3. A.

If there be two Coparceners, for which one Suit ought to be made, and the
eldest Sister will not make the Suit, then the Lord may distraine the other
Coparcener, as well as the eldest; and then she shall have a Writ against the
eldest Sister, to compel her to make the Suit, Fitzh. f 159. E.

Fitzh. 159. C. If lands descend to many Coparceners, of which one Suit ought
to be made, if the Land be held of the King, then all the Coparceners ought to
make the Suit, as well after partition* as before, during the time that one is
in the Kings Ward: The Signiory is suspended of another Lord, which cannot
distraine. And so during the time, cannot distraine for Suit to the Lords
Court, 13 H. 7. f. 15. Fitzh. f. 158. C.

Fitzh. 158. Where the Tenant holds his Land to make Suit to the County Court,
or to the Hundred, or other Court Baron, wapontake, or Leet, and he that ought
to make the Suit is in ward to the King, or to his Committee, his Guardian
shall have a Writ, De exoneratione Sect, if he be distrained, Fitzh. 157. a.

And if he do, the King or the Committee shall have a Writ of Exoneratione
sect, to surcease, Fatzh. 157. A. and 2 Ed. 6. chap. 8. Does not alter in the
common Law in this point for suit to the Court, 4 Ed. 4. f. 23. and see 20 Book
Ass. 17. that the Signiory is suspended for the time.

Where one in ward of the King, and owes suit to another Lord, which
distraines him, the King or his Committee may have a Writ of Exoneratione
sect, during the time that he is in ward, Fitzh. 158. a.

If the King has Lands by Forfeiture, or by Escheat, and lets them for life or
at will, and the Lord of whom they are held will distraine for suit to his
Court, the Lessee shall have a special Writ to surcease, Fitzh. f. 159. A.

If Lands held of the King discends to many Coparceners, then all the
Coparceners ought to make the Suit, as well after partition as before, Fitzh.
f. 159. C.

If Tenant of the King alien parcel of the Land held of him, yet the King or
his Officers may distraine one of the Tenants for all the Rent, for though
West. 3. chap. 3. be that the Feoffee shall hold for that part, that the
Statute shall not bind the King, but another person cannot distraine, but for
the rate, Fitzh. f. 335. a.

But I say, if one holds two Acres by suit of Court, and aliens one Acre, the
Feostor and Feoffee shall make both suites, 43 Ed. 3. f. 4. b.

If two are severally infeoffed by one Tenant which holds of one Manor, of the
King, every of them shall make suit, 45 Ed. 3. Tit. Bar 211.

Suit by two is not severable, for if the Lord purchase parcel, the whole suit
is extinct by Mowbray, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 40. fee Littleton. fol. 49. for suit
cannot be apportioned, for that, that there cannot be contribution, for the
Lord cannot, etc.

Where one holds forty Acres by Fealty and Rent, and the Lord purchase twenty
Acres of that, the Rentin Assise shall be apportioned, 4 Book of Ass. 5.3. Book
of Ass. 18. Littleton f. 49.

Time of Ed. 1. Tit. Avowrie 226. Where ten Acres are held by Fealty and Rent,
and these ten Acres come into several hands, the Lord may distraine every one
but for his portion, by West. 3. chap. 3. for that is, there shall depart from
the chief Lord that part of the service to be taken by the hands of the
Feoffee, according to the quantity of the Land.

Rent service shall be according to the value of the land purchased, and not
according to the quantity, 18 E. 2. tit. Rastall, Attorney 4.
Avowrie 218.

Lord and Tenant, and is seized of two Courts, that is, one in D. and another
in S. and the Tenant holds of the Manor of D. by suite to this Court, and by
agreement of the Lord, the Tenant makes his suit to the Manor of S. aster that
the Tenant cannot have, against the form of the Feoffment and disagree, but the
Lord may disagree and distraine him to come to his Court of D. again when he
pleases, though it be that he has come to S. by the agreement by forty years
or more, Not. Bre. 106. 3 Ed. 3. Tit. Action upon the case 24.

Partition is between two Coparceners of a Manor, that is, that one shall have
the Demesnes, and the other the Services: Suit of Court is suspended, but if
one dies without Issue, the suit is revived, 12 H. 4. f. 25.

If land be held by suit, and parcel of that comes to the Lord, the entire
suit is extinct and determined, for the Lord cannot make contribution of suit
to his own Court, nor take that, 34 Ass. 15. Rastall, Attorney 1.


Every Freeman, freely may make an Attorney, to follow his suits for him to
his Lords Court, Merton chap. 10. and Fitzh. f. 156. E.

Contra formam Feoffamenti lies, Where a man infeoffs another before the
Statute of (Qua emptores terrarum) to hold of him by Homage, Fealty, and Rent,
by Deed, and after he will distraine for suit or other services to be made by
him, and none shall have this Writ but the Feoffee, or his heirs, Fitzh. 162.
E. Not. Bre. f. 106.

If the Lord confirm the Estate of his Tenant to hold by certain service, the
Tenant shall have a (contra formam Feoffamenti) upon this confirmation, 10 H.
3. tit. avowrie 243. and 26 Ed. 3. tit. 246.

Note as it is aforesaid, that suit of Court is not incident to a Tenure, but
is due by Formam charte, or by prescription, as before the said Statutes, Lords
are to distraine every Tenant to make suit to their Courts, and that suit is
called suit service.

If a man seized of two Acres held by one Hawk, makes a Feoffment of one, the
Feoffor shall hold by one Hawk, and the Feoffee by another, Littleton fol. so
shall it be of suit of Court, Brook Tenure 64.

Tenant in Dower shall not make Suit if the Heir have sufficient land to be
distrained, Naturae Brevium fol. 159. B.

Tenant in Fee.
It behooveth, that the Steward shall have knowledge of all manner of Estates,
because of making surrenders of Copyholders, and also because of their Suits,
Wards, Releifs, and Services, for if the Steward do not know the Estates of the
Tenants, how can he do Justice. And for that something ought to be said of
Estates, and first of an Estate in Fee.
WHere lands are given to the Abbot of Battle, and his Covent, he has Fee,
for that, that they are a Corporation, and Corporation i^ intended to have
continuance, 11 H. 4. fol. 84. Br. Inquire and see in the next case.

Where land is given to Mayor and Comonalty of London they have Fee, without
more saying, that is, without saying to have to them and their Successors, 11
H. 7. f. 12. Notwithstanding it seems, that Spiritual Corporation may die in
some case.

If I have Common in the Land of an Abbot, and I release to an Abbot, and not
to him and his Successors, the Common is extinct, but not for the life of the
Abbot, 26 H. 8. fol. 6.

Where land is given to two, to have and to hold to them and heirs, and (Suis)
is left out, they have but an Estate for life, and not Fee, 19 H. 6. f. 73. and
20 H. 6. f. 35. the same.

Devise to one for ever, be to him and his Assigns for ever, he has Fee, 19
H. 6. f. 9

Where a Devise is to one without more, that is, is not said what Estate is for
life only, 22. Ed. 3.

Where a Devise is to one and his Heirs Males, he has tail and not Fee, 27
H. 8. f. 32.

If land be given to one, to have and to hold to him and his Heirs Males, he
has Fee, Littleton fol. 6. and 9 H. 6. fol. 25.

A man devises his land to one, to give and sell, or to do with that at his
will and preasure, he has Fee without more, 19 H. 8. f. 9 and 7 Ed. 6. Tit.
Devise 39.

If a man devise his land to J.S. paying to J.D. a 100 l. J.S. has Fee, but if
be devise to J.S. without more, he has but for life, and in the first case, if
he do not pay that in his life time, yet if his Heirs or Executors pay it,
that suffices, therefore it seems payment is not a condition there, 29 H. 8.
Tit. Testament 18.

If lands are given to an Abbot or Prior, to have to him and to his heirs, yet
he has not an Estate but for life, for that, that his heirs cannot inherit;
otherwise it is, where land is given to a Bishop, or Parson, and his Heirs,
for they have Fee, 94 H. 5. f. 9.

If lands be given to B. for life, the remainder to C. in tail, the remainder
to the right heirs of B. the Fee is vested in B. if C. dye without Issue in
the life of B. as well as if the remainder were given to him and to his right
heirs, and the right Heir of B. shall be in by descent, if C. dye without
Issue, and not as a Purchasor, 18 Ed. 2. Tit. 109.

If Tenant in Fee bargain and sell his land by Deed Indent, and inroll within
six Months to another, though it be not to have to him and his heirs, he has
in Fee, 27 H. 8. f. 6. and fol. 10.32 H. 8. Tit. conscience the twenty fifth
the same.

If lands be given to J.S. to have to him in Fee simple, yet he has no Fee but
for life, 20 H. 6. fol. 36.

But if land be given to one to have to him and his heirs so long as such a
Tree grows, has Fee determinable, 27 H. 6.29. B

If a man lets land to J.S. to have and to hold to him and his heirs for
term of the life of J.D. he has Fee determinable, for if J.S. dye, living he
for whose life, the heir of the Lessee may enter, and not a stranger as
Ocupans, Lit. fol. 136. 8 H. 4. fol. 14. You shall see the same, 21 H. 8. Tit.
Estates 50. and inquire.

If a man devises lands to J.S. paying ten pounds to his Executors and dies,
J.S. has Fee by reason of the payment, without words heirs. The same Law is,
if one sell his land to J.S. without words heirs, he has Fee, 4 Ed. 6. tit.
estates 78.

Lease was made for eleven years, and for security of that, made a Writing,
that if he were disturbed he should have Fee, and Livery was made, and has Fee
upon disturbance, 10 B. of Ass. 15. 10 Ed. 3. Tit. Ass. 161. the same.

Lease is made to one for twenty years, and the Writing expresses over, that
after the twenty years, that the Lessee and his heirs shall hold it for ever,
paying ten pounds, and Livery is made, he has Fee forthwith; for if the Lessor
takes a Wife within the twenty years and dies, she shall recover Dower by
award of the Court, 31 Ed. 3. tit. Feoffment 119.

If a man lets for nine years upon condition, that if the Lessee be disturbed
within the term, that the Lessee shall have Fee; if the Farmor alien before
disturbance, this is disseisin to the Lessor, for the sea is not in the lessee
before the condition broken, 43 Book of Ass. 41.

If Lands be granted to one for five years, upon condition that if he shall
pay to the Grantor within the first two years forty Marks, that then he shall
have fee, or otherwise but for five years, and Livery and Seisin is made, he
has fee forthwith upon condition, Littleton 81. See 14 H. 8. fol. 25.
Diversity where the condition is precedent and where subsequent.

The Lord Lovell let to W. for life, and if the Lessor dyed without Issue of
his body, W. should have Fee, the Fee is not forthwith in W. Plowden, fol. 481.

Land is given to the Husband and his Wife in special tail, the remainder in
Fee to the Husband, which devises the Fee to his Wife, and dies without Issue,
the Wife is seized in Fee, 27 Book of Ass. 60. Lit. fol. 31. B.

If a Woman be seized in Fee, and devises that to her Husband and his heirs,
and dies, he has no Fee, Natura brevium, fol. 88. 3 Ed. 3. Journey to
Northampton, 33 Ass. 3. the same, 18 E. 4. fol. 11. B.

18 H. 8. tit Patentees 104. The King gives Land to J. S. and to his heirs
males, adjudged that the Grant is void, for that that the King is deceived in
his Grant, for this sounds in Fee simple, whereas it is said, the King intended
but an Estate tail, which is not so expressed: And therefore now he is but
Tenant at will; and contrary in the case of a common person: For Littleton,
fol. 6. says, Lands are given to another, to have and to hold to him and his
heirs Males, or to his heirs Females, or to whom the gift is made, has Fee
in a common persons case, for that there is no limitation in the gift, of what
body.

6 H. 7. fol. 13. If Office be granted to one for life, and after the King
grants that to another, and does not recite the first Grant, the King is
deceived, and it seems that the second Grant is void.

1 H. 7. fol. 13. Where the King of mere motion, forgave A B of all his Debts,
and was Sheriff, and after in the Exchequer he pleads that as Sheriff, and held
for that that it is of his own motion, and is general, yet he may plead that,
and it is a good Bar: Otherwise it is, where it is by suggestion, for where it
is of mere motion, it is intended the King is not deceived; but it seems if the
King pardon one all his Debts, he as an Executor shall not take advantage of
that: The same Law is, if two be indebted, and the King pardon one, the other
shall not take advanrage of that, for it was the only debt of him.

9 H. 7. fol. 2. Where a Grant of the Kings is of his mere motion, and the King
recites, that where he has granted by his Patent, he ratifies and confirms,
and over (We give and grant) this (give and grant) is not, but void, for the
King is Estopped to say the contrary, but that he granted and ratified that;
but if it were, as We are informed, he is not Estopped, and the King there is
deceived: And where it is of his mere motion, recyted that he holds for life,
he is Estopped to say contrary, but if it were, as We are informed, he is not
Estopped, and the King is deceived, and he holds not for life.

3 H. 8. fol. 7. held, Where a Grant of the King is not only of his mere
motion, but also of suggestion, there if any part of the suggestion be not
true, the whole Grant is void.

8 H. 7. fol. 1. Where the King upon information of the party, Grants a Manor
which he has by forfeiture, and has not that by forfeiture, it is void; for
he is deceived: So it is said where the King grants reversion, where there is
no reversion, he is deceived, and void.

27 H. 8. tit. Patents 100. It is said for Law, that a false consideration in
letters Patents shall not avoid them; as where the King for ten pounds to him
paid, gave such Land, and the ten pounds is not paid, the Patent is not void,
and shall not be repealed: Contrary of Patent granted upon false surmise, as to
falsify that the Land came to the King by the attainder of J. S. which is not
true, or such like.

26 H. 8. fol. 1. If the King grants Lands to J. S. and recites for good
service he has done, he grants, and it is not true, yet the Grant is good,
though the consideration is false.

27 H. 8. fol. 33. by 6 H. 8. fol. 15. Will, That the second Patent of an
Office shall be void, where another Patent is made before, during the will of
the King: If mention and recytall be not made in the second Patent, of the
first Patent made at the will of the King; if the Officer has Fee it is void;
otherwise it is if he have no Fee, as it seems, 3 H. 7. fol. the last. 6 H.
7. fol. 13. the same.

Where the remainder in Fee depends upon determination of Estate, and where
upon Condition, and where upon Contingent.
HUsband and his Wife seized in right of his Wife in tail, the Husband
enfeoffs other two, so long as J. S. and seven other persons live together, and
if it happen any of them to dye, that then the remainder to the Husband and his
Wife, and to the heirs of the Wife, and J.S. dies, and the Husband and the
Wife enter, as they may, for the remainder depends upon determination of
Estate, and not upon condition, for death is certain, and for that the Estate
is determined, 18 H. 8. fol. 3.

18 Ed. 3. fol. 2. A Fine was levied to the Husband and his Wife, and to their
heies Males, of their two bodies begotten; so that if the Husband dyed without
heir Male, that that should remain to the right heirs of the Husband, and is
received, for that does not depend upon condition, but upon a limitation upon
contingent of death which is certain.

27 H. 8. fol. 28. A Fine upon grant and render, by which the Conisee grants
and renders to the Conisor, the Lands in tail, upon condition that the Conisor
and his heirs, shall carry the Standard of the Conisee in Battle, and if the
Conisor or his heirs fail, that then that shall remain to a stranger; this
depends upon a condition, and by Fitzherbert, Fine cannot be taken upon a
condition, but if it be taken it is good: And by Fitzherbert, the Fee is in the
stranger forthwith, before the Tenant for life dies, otherwise it takes no
effect, for this word (that then it shall remain) referrs to the possession of
the Lands; that is, that then the possession of the Land after the death of the
Tenant for life should remain; but if one let for life upon condition, that if
he dye, etc. the remainder to a stranger, that is in him presently.

Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 487. Nichols Case; If a Lease be made upon
condition, that if the Lessee pay certain Moneys within the term, that he
shall have it in Fee, he has no fee forthwith, but upon the payment; but it
seems, this varies from the remainder.

If a man makes a Lease for life upon condition, that if the Lessor dye without
Issue, that then the Lessee shall have fee, the Lessee enters into Religion,
and after the Lessor dies without Issue, and after the Lessee is drawn out of
Religion, he shall not have fee; in so much that at the time of the condition
the fee could norvest in him.

21 H. 7. fol. 11. Gift is in tail upon condition, that if he alien in Fee,
that his Estate shall cease, and that this shall remain to a stranger, it is
not good; for an Estate of Inheritance cannot cease, also it cannot remain
without particular Estate, and it cannot be upon a condition repugnant.

Where your Tenant has the fee in him in expectancy, and not executed in him,
and where it is executed in him.
A Lease to the Father for life, the remainder to the eldest Son in tail, the
remainder to the right heirs of the Father, the Father dies, and the eldest
Son dies without Issue, the youngest Son shall pray releife, and the Fee was
but in expectancy, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 9.

A gift to three Brothers for life, the remainder to the middlemost in tail,
the remainder to the right heirs of the elder in Fee; the middlemost and the
youngest dye without Issue, the Fee is executed in the eldest, 40 Ed. 3. fol.
20.

Tenant for life, the remainder to J. S. in tail, the remainder to the right
heirs of the Tenant for life, the Tenant for life is impleaded, and has aid
of him in remainder, for that that the Fee is in expectancy, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 16.

Lease for life, the remainder in tail, the remainder to the Tenant for life
in Fee, yet if he make waste, he shall be punished in waste, for that he has
the Fee in expectancy, but not executed, Fitzh. fol. 60. B.

Gift in tail, the remainder to his right heirs in Fee, this remainder is not
executed, yet it is in him to grant, Perkins, fol. 19. 12 Edw. 3. the same, and
7 H. 5. fol. 2. the same.

Where one has an Estate in tail, Rastall, Treason 12, 19.
the remainder to his right heirs, and is attaint of Felony, he shall forfeit
the Fee, but the Issue has the Estate tail, 12 H. 4. fol. 3. But by the
Statute of 5 Ed. 6. chap. 12. and 26 H. 8. chap. 13. One attaint of high
Treason against the Queen, the Issue shall not have the Land intailed, 7 H. 8.
fol. 48. Fitzh. fol. 30. B.

Tenant in tail.
Land is given to R. and Katharine and to their Heirs, and to the other heirs
of the said R. If the said heirs of the said R. and K. Issuing dye without
heir of them, it is an Estate tail, 5 H. 5. fol. 6. Perk. fol. 35. a.
LAnd was given to one and to his Heirs, if he have Issue of his Body
begotten, and if not, that the Land should return, it is an Estate tail, 35
Book of Ass. 14.

Land is given to one to hold to him and his heirs, if he have an heir of his
own flesh, and if not, it should return, it is an Estate tail, 37 Ass. 15.

Land is given to one, to have to him and the heirs of his Body, and to one
heir of the said heir only, it is and estate tail for two Discents at least,
Plowdens Commenfol. 39. Book of Assizes 20.

Gift to the Brother and to his Sister, and to the heirs of their two Bodies
begotten, is an Estate tail, that is several tails, 18 Ed. 3. f. 39. and 17
Ed. 3. f. 51.

Land is given to a married man, and to a woman married to another man, and to
the heirs of their Bodies begotten, they have an Estate tail presently, 15 H.
7. fol. 10.

If Lands be given to one, to have and to hold to him, and his Heirs. And if
it happen that he die without heir of his Body, then it shall remain, etc. It
is an Estate tail, 5 H. 5. f. 6. and 19 H. 6. f. 75. the same.

Land is given to the Husband, and to his Heirs of the Body of Margaret his
Wife begotten, though that Margaret were dead at the time of the gift, it is an
Estate tail, 12 H. 4. f. 2. Lit. f. 6.

Lands was given to the Husband and his Wife, and to their heirs saving the
reversion, it is an Estate tail, 9 Ed. 3 Statham.

Lands were given to Maude, late the Wife of John Mandevill and to the heirs
of the said John which he begot of the body of the said Wife, the Wife has an
Estate for life, the Issue an Estate tail, 2 E. 3.7. and 17 E. 2. Tit. Fitzh.
23. Tail 7. and 23.

Where lands were given to one and his Heirs, of his body begotten, before the
Statute of Westminster. 2. he had fee conditional, and after Issue had, had power to
alien, and now by the Statute they have tail, Lit. f. 3.12 Ed. 4. f. 3.19. Ed.
2. Tit. 61. and 18 Book of Ass. 5. the same.

A man gives to the Husband and his Wife for their lives, and the longest liver
of them, the remainder to the Heirs of their Body, this is a good intaile
executed immediately, 35 H. 8. Brook. Estates 75.

Lands are given in frank-marriage, to have to them and to their heirs, it is
said that they have Fee, but if it were given to them in tail to have to them
and their Heirs, they have tail and Fee expectant, 45 Ed. 3. fol. 20. and 32
Ed. 1. there Fitzh. Tail 25. it is adjudged tail.

If Lands be given to a man and his Wife in frank-marriage, to have to him and
to his heirs, they have tail, for the frank-marrying shall not be defeated by
these Words afterward, 31 Ed 1 Tit 25.

Lands are given in Frank-marriage, the remainder over to a stranger, and for
that it cannot be an acquittall, it shall be called special intaile, 31 Ed 3
Tit guard 116 and 17 Ed 3 Tail 2.

Gift to one in tail, the remainder to his right heirs, he has tail and Fee
expectant, 7 H 5 fol 2.

Lease is made for life, the remainder to another in tail, the remainder to E.
Daughter of the Earl of Arundell, in tail, saving the Reversion, and all dye,
and E. is heir to the Donor, and has tail as Purchasor, but she has fee
expectant, and she shall have aid; but not age if she be within age, for that,
that the Fee is but in expectancy, 40 Ed 3 f 13.

24 H. 8. Tit. 33. Tenant in tail has Issue and aliens with warranty and
levies Assets and dies, the Issue cannot recover by Formedon, for the Warranty
and Assets is a Bar, and if the Issue alien the Assets, his Issue shall not
have Formedon, but his Issue shall have a Formedon, for no Assets discends to
him.

35 H. 8. tit. 39. Land is given in tail to the King, and after the King by
his Patent lets for years, or for life, and has Issue and dies, the Patent is
void, for it is no discontinuance, Tit. Descent. 35. for a Grant without livery
does not make discontinuance.

32 H. 8. If Tenant in tail lets for years, and dies without Issue, the Lease
is void, and he in remainder may enter.

5 Ed. 4. fol. 2. Tenant in tail shall not have a (Quo Jure) nor (Ne injuste
vexes) for they are Writs of Right.

14 Ed. 4. fol. 6. If one recover in a Writ of Right against Tenant in tail,
of a Rent, he has Fee till he be defeated.

The same Law if tenant in tail be disseised, the disseisor has fee till he be
defeated, and so has the discontinuee.

39 Ed: 3 tit: 18: Tenant in tail of a Lordship, by default of entry within a
year after the alienation, of the land in Mortmain, may prejudice him in
remainder in tail, and by consequence his issue.

Fitzherbert 224: Tenant in tail shall have a (Quod permittat) Fitzherbert 136:
shall have a Writ of Mesne, Fitzherbert 151 O: shall have a Writ of customs
and services in the Debet and Solet, Fitzherbert 134 C, shall not have a Writ
of (Rationabilibus divisis) which is a Writ of Right.

Fitzh. 10. D. The issue in tail shall not be estopped, by Seisin of more rent
in the time of his father, and for that he shall not have a (Ne injuste vexes)
but may avoid that in Avowrie.

Fitzh. fol. 9. If Tenant in tail has Issue two Daughters, and one enters in
all, the other shall have a Formedon, and not (Nuper obiit) nor (Rationabili
part.)

Fitzh. 39. If Tenant in fee of an advowson be disturbed, he shall have a Writ
of Right of advowson: But Tenant in tail of advowson if he be disturbed, shall
have a Quare Impedit, and not a Right of advowson,

Fitzh. 105. S. If Tenant in tail be barred in a Formedon by false verdict, and
after releases and dies, his heir shall have Attaint.

Fitzh. 158. L. The Issue in tail shall have Detinue against the Discontinuee
for the deed, by which the land was given in tail.

Fitzh. 155. If Tenant in tail lose by default, and dies without Issue, he
shall not have (quod ei deforceat) but a formedon.

7 H. 4. fol. 48. Tenant in tail before the Statute had fee conditional, and
now by the Statute has tail, and for that shall not forfeit for Treason nor
for Felony, but that the Issue shall inherit; but by the Statute now he shall
forfeit for Treason, Not. bre: fol. 102. If tenant in tail be attaint for
Felony, his Issue shall inherit.

12 H. 4. f. 3. If tenant in tail forfeit his land, his Issue shall inherit,
and yet his wife shall not be endowed, by Hank.

Litt. fol. 11. If a man be seized of land, and commits fellonie, and after
aliens, and after is attaint, his wife shall have a Writ of Dower against the
Feoffee, by Navisor: But if it be escheated to the King or Lord, she shall have
no Writ of Dower, see 8 Ed. 3. contrary in the like case Not. Brevium fol. 101.
If tenant in tail commit felony, for which he is attaint, the King shall have
escheat for his life.

5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 11. Where the Husband commits high treason, the Wife
shall not be received to demand her Dower.

Perkins fol. 61. If tenant in general tail takes a Wife, and has Issue by
the same Wife, and the Husband is attaint of felony and dies, his Wife shall
not be endowed, and yet by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. the Issue shall
inherit.

Stamf. fol. 194. By the Common Law the offender in felony or treason shall
forfeit the title that his Wife shall have by the marriage to be endowed of
the land. But by the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. cap. 12. though any person be attaint,
convict, or outlawed of any misprision of treason, murder, or felony, yet
their Wives shall be endowed. But by 5 and 6 Ed. 8. cap. 11. it is otherwise
of treason, as before is said, see 5. Eliz. cap. 1. and cap. 11. 18 Eliz. cap.
1. for certain treasons.

19 Ed. 2. tit. 61. Fitzh. Before the Statute of West: 1. after Issue had,
tenant in tail has power to alien, but not before Issue had.

4 Ed. 3. tit. 22. Fitzh. Land given in special tail, to have to them in fee,
and if they die without Issue of their body, that the land shall revert, etc.
this is adjudged a special intail.

24 Ed. 3. tit. 4. Fitzh. If lands be given to two Husbands and their Wives,
and to the heirs of their bodies begotten, it is held clearly that this is a
several intail, that their Issues shall have several actions.

Littleton fol. 52. If lands be given to two men, and to their heirs of their
two bodies begotten, the Donees have joint estate for their two lives, and yet
have several inheritances, that the Issue of one shall have one half, and the
Issue of the other the other half, 8 book of Assise 33 the same.

30 book of Assise 9: by Shard, If the Ancestor at one time was seized of an
estate tail, and after purchases in fee, and after charges the land and dies,
and his issue enters, he shall hold it discharged.

18 Ed: 2 tit: 856. Lands given to one, and the heirs of his body to be
begotten, is a good intail, and the issue before as after shall inherit.

4 Ed: 2 tit: 22: Lands given to the Husband and his Wife, and to the heirs of
their bodies, to have to them and their heirs, and if they die without heirs of
their body, that the land shall revert, and adjudged a special intail.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 6. Land is given in tail to be held of the chief Lords, it is a
void (Tenendum) and shall hold of the Giver, 3 book of Assise 8. 4 H. 6. fol.
19.

27 H. 8. f. 31. If Tenant of the King makes a gift in tail without license,
the King may choose the giver or the to whom it is given for his Tenant; but if
he take the ward of one, he shall not have the other.

5 H. 4. f. 3. Where lands was given to Eme, to have to the said Eme, and the
heirs of the body of John, late her Husband, the remainder to the right heirs
of Eme, and for that the heirs of John were not named before the habendum, he
has nothing, but Eme has an intail, etc.

12. H. 4. f. 2. Where lands was given to J.M. and to the heirs of the body of
Eliz. late his Wife begotten, and though Eliz. was dead at the time of the
gift, yet this is a good intail that W. the issue of J.M. of the body of Eliz.
shall inherit.

Littleton 6. If a man have issue a Son and dies, and land is given to the Son,
and to the heirs of the body of his Father begotten, this is a good intail, and
yet the Father was dead at the time of the Gift.

What Acts by Tenant in tail, shall bind his issue and others, and what not.
TEnant in tail, the reversion to the King, Rastall, Recoveries. 4.
makes a feoffment and dies, his issue enters, and is Tenant in tail, for he
cannot discontinue: And 34. H. 8. chap. 20. If he suffer common Recovery, or
Voucher, where the reversion is in the King, this shall not bind the issue, 40.
Ass. 36.

Fine levied by tenant in tail in possession, reversion, Rastall, Proclam. 3.
remainder, or in use, of full age, with Proclamation according to the Statute
of 4. H. 7. chap. 12. immediately after the Fine levied and Engrossed, and
Proclamations made, shall be a Bar against the Tenant in tail, and also
against his heirs claiming the tail. But if Tenant in tail, the reversion in
the King, levy such a fine, Rastall, Fines 9.
this is in such force and effect, as it was before the making of this Statute,
and not otherwise, 32 H. 8. chap. 36. See 30 H. 8. tit. Bar the 97. Assurance
6.

Tenant in tail is bound in a recognisance, and execution is sued by Elegit,
and this land intailed, is delivered in execution, and the Tenant in tail dies,
after that his issue may enter, notwithstanding this Act, without suing Audita
querela, 38 book of Assisse 5.

Tenant in tail grants a rent charge and dies, the issue enters and enfeoffes
I. S. and takes back an estate, the charge is determined, for by the entry of
the issue, the rent was extinct, notwithstanding execution upon the Statute was
executed against the Feoffee of the Tenant in tail, and not against his issue,
14 Book of Assizes 4. Inquire and see the case of Trapps, Plow. Com. f. 436.

5 H. 7. f. 12. Rent charge is granted by Tenant in tail, and after he dies,
this is determined.

If issue in tail be outlawed of felony, in the life time of his father, and
has a Charter of pardon in the life time of his father, and after the father
dies, the issue may enter, otherwise it is if the Charter were granted after
the death of the father, for then if he enter, the King shall seize for his
life, but his issue may enter, 29 Book of Assizes 60.

If Tenant in tail be bound in a Statute Merchant, and has issue and dies, and
execution is sued against the issue, this is disseisin to him, 17 book of
Assise 21.

If Tenant in tail grant a Rent charge and dies, the Rent is determined, and
shall not bind the issue, 5 H. 7. f. 14. B.

38 Ed. 3. tit. 13. Tenant in tail charge the land, enters into a Statute or
Recognizance and dies, it shall be void against the issue.

If one recover against the Tenant in tail, and the Tenant in tail dies before
he which recovers enters, or has execution, the issue in tail may enter, and
is not bound by that, 7 H. 4. f. 17. B. Littleton f. 155.

Tenant in tail of a reversion, acknowledges that by fine to one with
warranty, and dies, yet this shall not bind his issue, for it is no
discontinuance by the Common Law, 9 Ed. 4. f. 19. But by 32 H. 8. chap. 36.
this fine with Proclamation is now a bar after the year.

Tenant in tail of Rent, grants that to one with warranty, and dies, this
shall not bind the Issue, for it is no discontinuance, but at pleasure, that
is, if he bring a Formedon, and then warranty with Assets is a Bar, 15 Ed. 4.
fol. 6. 21 H. 7. fol. 10. and 13 H. 7. fol. 10. the same.

If the Tenant in tail exchange, or devise his land in tail and dies, this
shall not bind the Issue, but that he may enter, for it is no discontinuance,
9 Ed. 4. fol. 22.

Tenant in tail grants a Rent charge, for release of right in the Land, this
shall bind his Issue after his death, 44 Ed. 3. f. 22. 8 H. 6.23.

If Tenant in tail be attaint of Felony and dies, that shall not bind the
Issue, but that he may enter by the common Law, 12 H. 4. f. 3. Not. Bre. f.
102. the same.

Tenant in tail of full age, lets for 21. years according to the Statute of,
32 H. 8. chap. 28. reserving the ancient Rent or more and dies, this is a good
Lease, and shall bind the Issue.

If Tenant in tail let for 22. years and dies, this shall not bind his
Issue, but he may enter and our the Lessee, but yet he may have covenant
against the Excutors of Tenant in ta^le, though it were not warranted in the
Indenture, 48 Ed. 3. fol. 2. 18 Ed. 3. Tit. 13. the same

If the father Tenant in tail of land suffers recovery, and execution and
dies, or cause collateral warranty to he made, one or other shall bind the
Issue until, etc. for it is discontinuance, 3 H. 7. f. 13.

The Issue in tail in Formedon may falsify a recovery, by default had against
his Father, and also where it is by fained action, as there was a release made
to his Father not pleaded, and so recovery joint, Littleton fol. 155

The Issue in tail is not bound by a recovery against his Father but that he
may say that his Father discontinued, and took another intaile, and so was
seized of another intaile, then he demanded time of the recovery, 12 Ed. 4.
fol. 15. and 13 Ed. 4. f. 1. the same.

The Issue in tail is not bound by recovery against his Father, if his Father
were not Tenant, but one J.S. 14 Ed. 4. fol. 2. and fee Plowd. Com. fol. 1. the
case of Mansell.

If Tenant in tail infeoffs one against whom a (Precipe quod reddat) is
brought, or (an entry in the Post) and he voucheth the Tenant in tail which
made the Feoffment, and he over the common Vouchee, this double Voucher is the
most sure conveyance to Bar the Issue, by reason of the recompense in value,
and this is the common conveyance at this Day, where there is an Estate tail,
and this bars the Issue in tail forthwith, and also is a Bar to him, which
has over that in remainder in tail, by reason of the recompense, which the
first Tenant in tail has by his Voucher, 13 Ed. 4. f. 1. and 27 H. 8. Tit.
Recovery in value 28.

Recovery upon Voucher against Tenant in tail is a Bar, by reason of the
recompense in value, and recovery by Writ of Entry, in the Post, by single
Voucher, does but give the Estate which the Tenant in tail has in possession,
at the time of the recovery, so that if he were in of another Estate then in
tail, there the tail is not bound against the Heir, 23 H. 8. Tit. 32.

Note that a Fine levied by Tenant in tail, where the remainder is to another
in tail with Proclamations, if he dye without Issue, he in remainder has five
years to make his claim, and for that recovery is better for it is a Bar
forthwith, 30 H. 8. Tit. Recovery in value 30.

Of Lands in tail, the Issue in tail shall be bound, and charged of these
Lands to the payment of Debt which his Ancestor ought by obligation made to the
King, as I take it, 33 H. 8. chap. 39. inquire.

Land that a woman holds in Dower of her Husbands, shall be charged where the
Husband was indebted to the King, if the Heirs or Executors have not
sufficient, but where the title of Dower was before the Debt to the King,
otherwise it is, Fitzh. fol. 150. Q.

It seems that the Heir in tail, shall be charged for Debt due in the
Exchequer to the King, by his Father, if the Executors have not sufficient,
Fitzh. fol. 117. C.

Notwithstanding, if Tenant in tail Debtor of the King in the Exchequer, die,
his Issue shall not be charged, as it is held in Plowd. Comment. fol. 249. See
there, 440. For Debt of the King against the Heir in Fee, 32 H. 8. Tit.
Discont. 32. Recovery against the Tenant in tail, the Reversion or remainder
in the King in Fee, shall bind the Tenant in tail, and the Issue in tail,
but shall not bind the King, but now by the Statute of, 35 H. 8. chap. 20. It
shall not bind the Issue in tail but that he may enter, see M. 33. H. 8. Tit.
31. Recovery in value. Seek if the Statute of, 34. and 35. H. 8. Provides for
any Issues in tail, but only the Issues of the Donees of the King, for the
Preamble speaks only of those, but the Statute is, whereof the reversion or
remainder, is in the King, and for that it seems every Issue in tail, where
the Reversion or remainder is in the King may enter, but a Fine with
Proclamation, by such Tenant in tail, the Reversion or remainder in the King,
seems is not remedied by this Statute, but by, 32 Hen. 8. chap. 36. Where
Reversion is in the King, is no discontinuance, for though the Heir in tail
shall be barred by Fine with Proclamation, after Proclamation made, yet there
is an exception in the Ststute, of those whereof Reversion or remainder is in
the King, so that it shall not bind such Issue in tail, title assurance, 6.
see, 4 H. 7. chap. 24.

37 H^^. Where Tenant in tail is attaint of Treason before the Statute of 26
H. 8. His Son shall have the land, for he does not claim only as Heir but by
the Statute, and by the form of the gift, see the Statute of 5 and 6. Ed. 6.
chap. 11. That for high Treason Tenant in tail shall forfeit his Lands, Com.
f. 237.

27 H. 8. f. 6. If Tenant in tail sell Trees and dies, and after he that has
bought them cuts them, trespass lies, but if they be cut in his life time, it
seems the Buyer may take them.

18 Ed. 3. Tit. Disseisin 92 Where Tenant in tail is bound in a Statute and
dies, and his Issue enters, and the Conisee outs him by execution, which is an
act of Law, he is a Disseisor.

Plowd. Com. f. 235. before the Statute of Westminster. 2. he had but an Estate of
Inheritance and that was Fee, but this was in two manners absolute and
conditional, and Formedon in Reverter was at the common Law, and Formedon in
Remainder by the Statute.

1 H. 4. f. 6. If Tenant in tail by Estoppel, or livery suing, holds of the
King and dies, his Issue shall not be Estopped.

43 Ed. 3. f. 14. Presentment to an Advowson in the life of the Tenant in
tail, puts him during his life out of possession, but not his Issue.

38 Ass. 5. Tenant in tail is bound in Recognisance, and Execution is sued by
Elegit and this Land delivered in execution, and after the Tenant in tail
dies, his Issue may enter without suing, Audila querela.

17 Ass. 21. If Tenant in tail be bound in a Statute, and has Issue and dies,
and after execution is sued against the Issue, this is disseisin to him and he
shall have Assise though he comes in by process by Law.

14 Ass. 3. It seems if Tenant in tail be bound in a Statute and dies, and
after his Issue infeoffs J.S. that the Conisee may have Execution against the
Feoffee.

35 H. 8. fol. 38. If the King gives in tail by his Letters Patents, and after
the Donee surrenders the Letters Patents to the King, the tail by this is not
extinct.

38 H. 8. Tit. 39. Land is given in tail to the King, he is Tenant in tail
and cannot have greater Estate then the giver will depart to him, and if the
King let for years or for life, or make a Feoffment in fee, and has Issue and
dies, the Issue may enter, for this is no discontinuance.

Tenant in Frank-marriage.
GIft was to the Husband and his Wife in Frank-marriage, and this may be as
well after the marriage as before, 4 Ed. 3. Title Tail 6. Perkins fol. 48. C.

If a gift be made with a woman in Franke-marriage, which is not Cozen to the
giver, this is but for life. Old Tenures.

Gift in frank-marriage with the Son of the giver, his Cozen is no
frank-marriage. Time of H. 8. Tit. 10. but Fitz f. 172. H. and 7 E. 4. f. 12.
A. by Moile in the Prior of Spaldings case, seems contrary.

Gift in frank-marriage, (within the years of Marriage) with a Daughter, and
they were divorced at full age, at the Suit of the Husband, yet the Daughter
shall have all, for she was the cause of the gift, 19 Book of Assise 2. 19 Ed.
3. Title Assise 83.

If a gift be to the Husband and his Wife in tail, and they are divorced, it
seems that they have not now but a freehold, and though that they have Issue
before the Divorce, that shall not inherit: But if a gift in tail be made to
two men, or to one man and his Mother, or Daughter, and to the heirs of their
bodies, their several heirs of their bodies shall inherit, for that that
they cannot marry, 7 H. 4. fol. 16. and 17 Ed. 3. fol. 51. and Title tail the
15. This is where the Divorce defeats the marriage from the beginning.

Gift in Frank-marriage, rendering twenty shillings rent, this reservation is
void, 4 H. 6. fol. 22. by Martin: But the old Tenure is contrary, tit.
Frank-marriage, and 17 Ed. 3. fol. 66. also contrary.

If a gift be in Frank-marriage with his Cozen, rendering Rent, this is Intaile,
and not Frank-marriage, and if a gift be with a Woman in Frank-marriage which
is no Cozen to the giver, this is but for life: See before, the 45 Ed. 3. fol.
20.

If a man give in Frank-marriage, rendering Rent, the reservation is void, till
the fourth degree be past, 26 Book of Ass. 66.

Land was given to a man and his Wife in Frank-marriage, to have and to hold to
the Husband and his heirs, and adjudged they have tail, and not Fee, for the
frank-marriage shall not be defeated by words afterward, 32 Ed. 1. tit. Tail
25.

Reversion was given with his Daughter to one in Frank-marriage, and is good,
26 Ed. 3. tit. 27. Tail.

Gift is made with Agnes his Daughter to A. in Frank-marriage, and after A.
marries Agnes and dies, and he gives another Acre with Agnes to B. her second
Husband in Frank-marriage, and both are Frank-marriage, 31 Ed. 1. tit. Tail 30.

Gift in Frank-marriage, the remainder to J. D. in fee, is not good, for there
cannot be an acquittall, where remainder is given over: Time of H. 8. tit. 11.

19 Ed. 3. tit. 1. If Lands be given in Frank-marriage (to have) for their
lives, the (To have) shall not abridge, but enlarge the Estate, and for that is
is Frank-marriage.

2 E. 3. tit. 94. One gives Land to A. with Alice his Daughter in
Frank-marriage, to have and to hold to the aforesaid A. and his heirs, and it
seems Frank-marriage.

13 Ed. 1. tit. Formedon 63. I. gave R. and Alice his Daughter, Lands in
Frank-marriage, to have to the aforesaid R. and Alice and their heirs, or to
whom he will assign it, and the said R. did beget no heir of the said Alice,
nor the said R. and A. did not assign it to any in their life time, and it
seems that after the death of R. and A. without Issue, the Land ought to
revert to J. See 45 Ed. 1. fol. 20.

Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct
TEnant after possibility of Issue extinct, shall not have aid of him in
reversion, but he in remainder shall be received upon his default, 2 H. 4. fol.
17. 7 H. 4. f. 10 and 11 H. 4. fol. 14. the same.

Time of Ed. 1. Fitzh. wast 125. shall not be punished in wast. Nor shall be
compelled to attorn in a (Quid juris clamat) 46 Ed. 3.25. 39 Ed. 3. the same,
and 12 Ed. 4. fol. 3. the same.

If he alien, he in reversion may enter for forfeiture, 45 Ed. 3.25. 11. H. 4.
f. 14. the same, 10 H. 6. f. 1 and 39 Ed. 3. f. 20.

Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct shall not have wast, 2 H. 4. f. 21.
wast does not lie against Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct, 45 Ed. 3.
f. 25.

He shall not have aid, but if he alien, he in reversion may enter for
forfeiture, 10 H. 6. f. 1. 39 Ed. 3. f. 20. Lit. f. 7. and 11 H. 4. f. 14. the
same.

39 Ed. 3. tit. 17. Tail, Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct which is
impleaded, shall not have aid of him in reversion, but if he alien in Fee, he
in reversion may enter, and shall not be compellable to attorn, nor wast lies
against him, but if he makes default after default, he in reveresion may be
received.

Tenant by the Courtesy.
IF a married woman be Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct, and the Fee
discends from her Ancestor, and she dies, it is held that the Husband shall be
Tenant by the courtesy, 9 Ed. 4. f. 19. and 14 Ed. 3. f. 7.

Husband discontinues Lands of his Wife, and takes an Estate again to them in
fee, and has Issue, and the Wife dies, then the Husband shall not be Tenant by
the courtesy, 9 H. 7. f. 1.

If a man have Issue by his Wife Inheritrix, though she had Issue a Daughter
before she inherited, yet he shall be Tenant by the courtesy, 21 H. 3. Title
Dower 198.

If a woman Signioresse take her Tenant to Husband, and has Issue, and dies,
the Husband shall not be Tenant by the courtesy of Services, 1 Ed. 3. Tit.
Dower 70.

A man shall not be Tenant by the courtesy, unless his Wife have possession
in Deed of it, but of an Advowson and Rent, where she dyed before day of
payment, he shall be Tenant by the courtesy, 21. Ed. 3. fol. 49. the same.

If the Issue be born living, notwithstanding that he dies before he be heard
cry, the Husband shall be Tenant by the courtesy, for the Issue shall not be
taken, if the Infant were heard cry after he was born, but if he were born
alive or not, Perkins f. 89.

A man seized of Land in fee, is attaint of felony, his Wife shall loose Dower,
but if the Wife seized in fee be attaint of felony, and has Issue by her
Husband, and she is hanged, yet the Husband shall be Tenanr by the curtefie, 21
Ed. 3. f. 49.

A man takes a Wife seized in fee, and has Issue, he commits felony for which
he is attaint, the King pardons him, it seems he shall not be Tenant by the
courtesy, by reason of the Issue which he had before his attainder, but if he
had Issue after his pardon, it is otherwise, 13 H. 7. fol. 17.

If a man takes a Wife seized in fee, and she is attaint of Felony and hanged,
the King shall have the Land forthwith, if the Husband were not entitled to be
Tenant by the courtesy, 11 H. 4. f. 19. b.

Daughter and Heir endows her Mother, and after takes a Husband, and has
Issue and dies, the Mother after dies, the Husband shall not be Tenant but by
the courtesy of that, 8 Book of Affises 6.

3 H. 7. f. 5. If Rent discends to a Daughter which takes a Husband, and she
dies before the day of payment, the Husband shall be Tenant hy the courtesy.

Fitzh. f. 149. D. A man shall not be Tenant by the courtesy of Land of the
Wife, unless the Wife have possession in Deed of that Land, if it be not in
a special case, as of Advowson or Rent, where she dies before the day of
payment of the Rent.

Tenant in dower.
THE Wife after the death of her Husband shall remain in the chief House by
forty days after the death of her Husband, within which days her Dower shall
be assigned unto her, unless before it were assigned, and there shall be also
assigned unto her, the third part of all the Land of her Husband which was his
in his life time, Magna Charta chap. 7.

Of Widows which cannot have their Dowers without Suit, that is, that
whosoever shall deforce them of their Dowries of the Tenements of which their
Husbands died seized, and afterward the same Widows by Suit recover them,
they shall give unto the said Widows all their damages according to the value
of the whole Dowry, due unto them from the time of the death of their
Husbands, Merton chap. 1.

If a Woman of her own accord leave her Husband and departs, and lives with
an Adulterer, she shall for ever loose her action of recovering her Dower which
was due unto her of her Husbands Tenements, and be of that convicted, unless
her Husband of his own accord, and without cohersion of the Church shall
receive her, and suffer her to dwell with him, West. 2. chap. 34.

If the Hnsband be attaint, convict, or Outlawed of Felony, yet his Wife shall
be endowed, but if the Husband be attaint of Treason, his Wife shall not be
endowed, by 1 Ed. 6. chap: 12: 5 Ed. 6. chap. 11.

Where a woman shall beindowed, and where not
WHere the Husband Tenant of the King dies, and his Wife is committed to the
King, during that time she shall not have Dower, if she be not surprised of
Dower, 2 H. 4. f. 7. and 6 H. 4. f. 7.

It seems if a woman takes a lease by Indenture for years, that during this
lease she is not Dowable; but if she take the Lessor to Husband, and after he
dies, she is Dowable notwithstanding the lease, 6 H. 4. fol. 7. Fitzh. 149. E.
the same.

Dower shall not be, where the Husband dies having the reversion of a
Freehold, that is of a reversion of an Estate for life, as a man lets for
life, and afterward takes a Wife and dies, 2 H. 4. f. 27. 1 Ed. 6. tit. Dower
89. 7 H. 6. f. 9. by June.

Fitzh. 149. C. A woman may be endowed of a mine of Coals, but she cannot make
new mines, for that shall be said wast.

Where the Estate is made to the Husband for life, the remainder to another for
life, the remainder to the Husband in fee, the Husband dies, his Wife shall not
have Dower, unless that the Husband survive him in remainder for life, 46 Ed.
3. f. 16. B. by Finchden.

If a lease be made of lands for years to A. the remainder to B. for life, the
remainder to the right heirs of B. and after B. takes a wife and dies, during
the term of years, his Wife shall recover Dower: But execution shall cease,
during the term of years, Perkins fol. 67. A. 1 Ed. 6. tit. 89.

Where a woman is endowed of land which her Husband took in Exchange, she
shall not be endowed of the land given in Exchange, 31 Ed. 2. tit. Dower 204.
and 17 Ed. 2. tit. Dower 162. the same.

Where the Husband holds jointly with one, and no partition made, his wife
shall not be endowed, 8 Ed. 2. tit. 167. Littleton f. 9. the same.

Where the Husband enters in Religion, the heir shall inherit, and yet his
wife shall not be endowed; for the wife may have him again out of Religion, 32
Ed. 1. tit. 136. Perkins f. 91. D. the same.

If the Husband be Tenant in common with two others in Fee, and dies, now his
wife shall be endowed, but not by metes and bounds, Eitzberbert fol. 149. I:
Littleton fol. 9. the same.

If a villain takes a wife, and purchases land, and after the Lord enters, and
then the villain dies, the wife shall be endowed, 19 Ed. 2. f. 71.

A woman of eight years three quarters, at the death of her husband shall have
no Dower, Littl. 8. 12 Ed. 2. tit. 159. the same.

A woman of the age of ten years at the death of her Husband shall be endowed,
12 R. 2. tit. 54. and 8 R. 2. tit. 122. the same.

Where the Husband has an Office eo keep a Park, to him and to his heirs, his
wife shall be endowed of that, Pl. Com. f. 379.

If the Lord enter for Mortmayn, yet the wife of the Tenant shall have Dower,
Perk. f. 76. A. The same Law, if the Lord recover against the Husband in
Cessavit. the Wife of the Tenant shall be endowed, 34 book of Assise 15. where
the Husband dies without heir, and the land escheats, the wife shall be endowed.

Tenant by the Courtesy surrenders to the Husband in reversion, upon condition,
and enters for the condition, the wife of him in reversion shall not be
endowed, 14. Ed: 4. f. 6.

Where a man enfeoffs one upon condition, to re-enfeoff the feoffer again, it
behooves that be made to a man unmarried, or to a Chaplain that has no wife;
for if it be to a man which has a wife, she shall be endowed, 38. H. 8. tit.
Assurance 3.28 Book of Ass. 4. the same.

Lands is mortgaged to the Husband, and after the condition broken, the Husband
by agreement takes his money and dies, his wife shall be endowed, 42 Ed. 3.
fol. 1.

A woman has title of Dower, and enters upon the heir, and enfeoffs him by
Deed, she has given him her title of Dower included, and is not now Dowable of
that land, 11 H. 7. f. 20.

The husband Tenant in general tail, makes a feoffment, and takes back a
special tail, and his first wife dies, and he takes another wife and he dies,
and his issue enters, this second wife shall not be endowed, for the heir was
remitted, 41 Ed. 3. f. 30. and 46 Ed. 3. f. 24. the same.

Where land is given to the husband, and his wife in special tail, the
remainder to another in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the husband,
and the wife dies, and the husband takes another wife, and dies living him in
remainder, the second wife shall not be endowed of that land, 46 Ed. 3. f. 16.

Land is given to the husband and K. his wife in special tail, the remainder to
the husband in general tail, and K. dies without issue, and the husband takes
another wife and dies, this second wife shall be endowed, 50 Ed. 3. fol. 4.

Where the husband and his wife have special tail, the second wise shall not be
thereof endowed, 22 Ed. 3. fol. 9. B. Littleton 11. the same.

Where land is given to the husband and his heirs which he begets of the body
of Margaret his wife, which was dead at the time, and he takes Eliz. and dies,
this second wife shall not be endowed, 12 H. 4. f. 2.

If a woman go away with an Adulterer, into some land of her husbands, and be
not reconciled, yet she shall not lose Dower: otherwise it is if she were out
of the lands of her husband, 8 R. 2. tit. 253.

If a woman go away and dwell with an Adulterer, she shall not have Dower: But
if she were carried away, against her will, and was carried 20 miles, and
returns, and her husband dies, she shall have Dower, 43. Ed. 3. fol. 19.

47. Ed. 3. fol. 13. Where a recovery is by default, or a reddition against
the husband without title, the wife shall have Dower.

46 Ed. 3. fol. 23. Where a recovery is against the husband, the wife is
barred of Dower: But if the recovery were by default, it is remedied by the
Statute, and where by render, is aided by the Common Law, and other recovery is
not remedied.

Against whom Dower may be brought, and what Assignement is good, and what not.
WHere a Guardian in Socage endowes a Wife, it seems it is disseisin, for a
Writ of Dower does not lie against a Guardian in Socage, but against a Guardian
by Knights service it lies, 29 Book of Ass. 68.

Assignement of Dower by the Disseisor is good, if it be not by Covin of the
wife: The same Law is by Abator, or Intruder, Perk. fol. 76.

Assignement of Dower by the Tenant of the Freehold, is good, and ought to be
by him 12 Ed. 3. tit. 86. Perkins 78. the same.

Guardian in Socage cannot assign Dower, but Guardian by Knight service may, 3
Ed. 3. tit. 108. Perkins, fol. 78 G.

It appears that Guardian by Knights service may assign Dower, Fitzh. fol.
148 A.

Where the Husband was seized of diverse Tenements and Manners, and the Sheriff
assigns the Wife, which recovers one Manor, and a whole Advowson, it is
good, for it is an infinite work to assign part of every Acre, 12 E. 4. fol. 2.

If the Husband has three Manors, and during the marriage charges them with a
Rent and dies, if the wife take the third part of every Manor, she shall hold
it discharged, but if she take one Manner only, she shall hold two parts
charged, 17 Ed. 2 tit. 164.

It seems it is good bar in Assignement, that her Husband before the marriage
granted by Deed to her a Rent in the name of Dower, to which she agreed after
his death, 20 Ed. 4 fol. 3 in Dower, but inquire.

Rent assigned out of Land of which she is dowable without Deed, is good, but
out of other Land, it is not, 33 H. 6. fol. 2 B.

Assignement of Rent out of the same Land, of which she is Dowable, is good
bar in Dower, if she agree, 7 H. 6 fol. 36. Perkins fol. 76 D. the same.

If a woman recover in a Writ of Dower, she cannot enter without Assignement,
but in other Precipe, if one recover, he may enter, but here it shall be
assigned to her by the Sheriff, by metes and bounds, 40 E. 3. fol. 22.

Where the Woman recovers damage, and where the Tenant may say, he is yet ready
to excuse him of damages, if it be in Copyhold, and otherwise.
A Woman shall recover damages where the Husband dyed seized, if the Tenant do
not come in the first day ready to render Dower, Not: Bre: fol. 7.

If the Tenant come at the first day, and says, that he was always ready, the
Plaintiff may averr, that she has demanded Dower, and she cannot have it, 2
H. 4. fol. 8. and this found, she shall recover damages.

At the Summons returned, the Tenant comes, and says that he was always ready
to render Dower, and yet is, for the Plaintiff to say that he was not ready
always, is no Plea, but by Thirne she ought to show that her Husband died
seized, and she demanded in the Country, and you refused, but by Hank, the
bringing of the Writ is a demand in Law, but he agreed, that she ought to aver,
the dying seized of her Husband, if she will recover damages, 6 H. 4. f. 5.

Dower, the Tenant says that he was always ready and yet is, and the
Demandant avers that her Husband died seized, and says that he was not ready,
and for that this is no Issue, but she shall say that she demanded, inquest of
Office was awarded, which finds he died seized, and the Wife shall recover
damages from the time of his death, but where the Tenant was ready, though
that the Husband died seized, the wife shall not recover damages, 11 H. 4. f.
39. and 6 H. 4. f. 5.

Dower, the Tenant says that he has been always ready to render Dower, and
yet is, the Plaintiff says that her Husband died seized. And she required the
Defendant at D. and he refused, and the Issue shall not be, that he did not
refuse generally, but he offered, and she refused, without that that he
refused, 13 Ed. 4. f. 7.

Dower, the Tenant acknowledges the action, and the Demandant to have damages
surmiseth, that her Husband died seized, and has a Writ to inquire of
damages, and held that if the Tenant come at the first day, and will aver that
he was ready, and yet is, if the demandant cannot aver the contrary, the
Demandant shall not recover damages, 14 H. 8. f. 28.

If the Tenant be effoyned, yet he may say yet ready, for the Essoyne may be
put in by a stranger, 7 H. 7. f. 7. and f. the last. the same, 2 Ed. 4. f. 20,
and 14 H. 6. fol. 4. The same.

Dower after imparlance, the Tenant cannot say that he was always ready, and
yet is, 5 Ed. 4. f. 141.

Tenant for Life.
A Man devise all his Goods to his Wife, and would that his Son should have his
House after the death of his Wife, notwithstanding that it is not devised to
the Wife, she shall have that for her life, 13 H. 7. fol. 17.

Lease to a Woman as long as she lives unmarried, or as long as she behaves her
self well, it is for life conditional, 37 H. 6. fol. 28.

Land is given to one to have and to hold, so that he paies to the Grantor for
his Life 10 l. this is an estate for life, 3 Book of Ass. 9.

An Estate to one till he has levied ten pounds, he has that for life till,
etc. 21 Book of Assise. 18.

If I let to W.N. to hold till a hundred pound be paid, and without making
Livery and Seisin, he has an Estate but at will, and if there be Livery, it is
for life upon condition, to cease the hundred pound levied, 2 Mar. Brook Lease
67.

And so in the three cases next, it is to be intended Livery to be made.

J.S. Tenant for life aliens to B. to have to him and to his Heirs for the
life of J.S. B. has an Estate but for the life of J.S. 24 H. 8 Tit. Forfeiture
87.

If Lands be given to a man and his Wife and to the Heirs of their two Bodies
begotten, and they are divorced, now they have but an Estate for their lives,
7, H. 4. f. 18.

If I grant Rent to you without more, you shall have that for life, 7 Book of
Ass. 1.

If a devise be to one without more, he has an Estate for life, 22 Ed. 3. f.
16.

Tenant for years.
What Act determines a Lease for years, and who shall have the Corn, what is
a good Lease for years, and what not.
THE Husband seized in right of his Wife, lets for seven years and dies, the
Wife may enter, but if the Termor had sowed the Land in the life time of the
Husband, the Termor shall have the Corn, 7 Book of Assizes 19.

If the Lord enter upon a Copyholder for Forfeiture, and the Land be sowed,
the Lord shall have the Corn, 42 Ed. 3. f. 25

The Husband and the Wife lets the Land of the Wife for twenty years rendering
Rent, and the Husband dies, the Wife accepts the Rent, it is a good Lease, and
was not void, 3 H. 6. fol. 2.2 H. 6. fol. the same, and 21 H. 6.24.

If a Parson or a Prebendary let for years, rendering Rent and dies, though
that the Successors accept the Rent, the Lease is not good, 32 H. 8. tit.
acceptance 14.32 H. 8. Tit. Dean and Chapter 20.24 H. 8. tit. B. 19.38 H. 8.
Lease 18.

22 H. 8. tit. Ancestor 14. If Tenant in Dower lets for years, rendering Rent
and dies, the Lease is void, and acceptance by the heir of the Rent will not
make the Lease good, for it was void before, 9 E. 4. f. 37. by Nedham, If I let
Land for years in which is a Mine, I cannot enter and take that, nor Trees,
but I shall be punished.

The Bishop lets for years, rendering Rent and dies, and the Successor accepts
the Rent, this makes the Lease good, for the Bishop has Fee and may have a
Writ, of Right, 2 Ed. 6. tit. acceptance. 20.

The same Law is, where an Abbot lets for years, rendering Rent and dies, the
Successor accepts the Rent, the Lease is good, 21 Ed. 4. f. 5. B.

Where Tenant in tail lets for 21. years and dies, and the Issue in tail
outs the Lessee, as he may, and does not accept the Rent, the Lessee may have
covenant against the Executor of the Lessor, and recover damages though it be
not warranted, 48 Ed. 3. f. 2.

A Lease by Tenant in tail for 21. years, made according to the Statute,
rendering ancient Rent, or more; though Tenant in tail dye, this is a good
Lease against the Issue, but if Tenant in tail die without Issue, the Donor may
avoid this Lease by entry, 32 H. 8. chap. 28.

Tenant in tail the remainder over, lets for years rendering Rent, and dies
without Issue, and he in the remainder accepts the Rent, this shall not bind
him, insomuch that when the intaile is determined, the Lease is determined and
void, 1 Ed. 6. tit. acceptance 19.

Lease for years, and so from year to year, as long as both parties pleased,
after he has entered into every year, it is a Lease for that year, and a
Lease for a thousand years is good, 14 H. 8. f. 1.

Lease for three hundred years is good, and is but a Chattell, notwithstanding
the long time, 32 Book of Assizes 6.

If a man lets for sixty years, and so from sixty years to sixty years,
until two hundred years be ended, this is also one self same Lease, and good,
29 H. 8. tit. Lease 49. and Plowdens Commentaries 273. the same.

The Husband and his Wife, purchase to them and to the Heirs of the Husband,
and after the Husband lets for years and dies, the Wife may enter and avoid
the Lease for her Life, but if she die before the residue of the Term, it is
good to the Lessee against the Heir of the Husband, 33 H. 8. tit. Lease. 58.

And note by all the Justices, that the Guardian by Knight Service, shall not
out the Termor, where he has a Lease of his Tenant which dies, his Heir
within age, contrary was the Law in times past, as it appears before in the
title Ward.

Where it is agreed and granted to J.S. that he shall have twenty Acres, in D.
for twenty years, this is a good Lease for this word (Concessit) is as strong,
as devised, 37 H. 8. tit Lease 60.

If one license one to enter, and to occupy his Land for years, it is a Lease
for years in Law, 10 Ed. 4. f. 4. and 5 H. 7. f. 1. the same.

Tenant in tail lets for twenty two years rendering Rent and dies, and the
Lessee lets that over for ten years, and the Issue accepts the Rent of the
second Lessee, this is no confirmation of the Lease, for there is no privity
betwixt the second Lessee and him, 32 H. 8. Tit. Acceptance 13.

A man lets for ten years, and the next day lets the same Land to another for
twenty years, this is a good Lease for the last ten years of the twenty
years, which are ended after the first ten years; 26 H. 8. Tit. Lease 48. See
the time of, H. 8. Tit. Lease. 35.

Weston says, If I let for so many years as J.S. shall name, and after J.S.
in my life time names certain years the Lease is good for those years,
Plowdens Commentaries 273.

A man lets a House with the Appurtenances, no Land passes, but if a man lets a
House, with all the Land to the same belonging, there the Lands with that used
pass, and it is a good Lease of those, Plowd. Com. f. 273. 31 H. 8. tit. Lease
55. See. Plowd. Com. 85. b. and f. 170.23 H. 8. tit. Feoffments 53.

If a man lets for life to J.S. and the next day lets to W. N. for years, the
second Lease is void, if it be not granted of a Reversion, 37 H. 8. tit. Lease
48.

A man lets for years, to have after the Lease thereof made to J.N. ended, and
in truth J.N. has no Lease, this begins forthwith, 3 Ed. 6. tit. Lease 62.

A man has a Lease for years as Executor of J.S. and after purchases the
Reversion, the Lease is extinct and determined, yet it may be assets, 4 Ed. 6.
Tit. Extinguishment 24.

Leases made by a Bishop, otherwise then for 21. years or three lives, from
the time that such Lease begins, and where upon the old Rent is not reserved,
is void, 1 Eliz. not in Print, and for that a Lease made for thirty years by a
Bishop, and confirmed by the Dean and Chapters, under their Seal, shall not
bind their Successor, but if the Bishop, Dean and Chapter, join in a Lease
for thirty years; this is a good Lease, notwithstanding this Statute: And see,
Pulton tit. Ecclesiastical persons. What Lease by Spiritual persons, is good,
and what not. And see, 13 Eliz. chap. 10. That a Lease by Bishop, Dean and
Chapter, for longer time then twenty one years or three lives, is not good,
and by, 14 Eliz. chap. 11. They may make a Lease of Houses in Cities and
Borroughs, for forty years, and by, 18 Eliz. chap. 11. They cannot let where
there is an old Lease, which has continuance for three years, or more.

A man possessed of a Term for forty years, grants so many of them to J.S.
which shall be behind at the time of his death, and it seems it is void, for
the Incertainty, otherwise it is if it were by devise.

But if a man lets his Land, to have after his death for forty years this is
good, for this is certain, 7 Ed. 6. tit. Lease 66.

See, 8 H. 7. fol. 4. Grant of Rent, but if a man let for life and four years
over is good.

Tenant which holds in chief dies, his heir before Livery sued, makes a Lease
for years, this is good, if no Intrusion be found by Office, and if after the
Lease, the dying seized be found by Office, and no intrusion it has no
relation to the death of the Ancestor, unless for the profits and not to
defeat the Lease, 5 Ed. 6. Tit. Lease 57.

Tenant at will.
What acts Tenant at will may do, and what to him, and what by him are good,
and what not.
IF Tenant at will lets for years, in his own name: He is a Disseisor, 12 Ed.
4. f. 12.

Release made to the Tenant at will by the Lessor is good, Lit. f. 108.

If one alien his Manor, there need not that Tenant at will attoin, Lit. f.
125.

Tenant at will cannot grant over his Estate to any, for he has no Interest
certain, 27 H. 6. f. 3. B.

If a man lets to one at will, the Lessor dies, the will is determined, 21 H.
6. f. 42.

If Tenant at will be outed, this is Disseisin to the Lessor, and yet the
Tenant at will may enter without commandment of his Lessor, for the will
continues, 38 H. 6. fol. 28.

If Tenant at will make wast, action upon the case lies against him, and not
wast, 48 Ed. 3. f. 25. 11 H. 6. f. 38. the same. See, Lit. f. 15. and 12 Ed. 4.
f. 8. the same. 22 Ed. 4. f. 5. Trespass lies.

14 H. 8 f. 12. By Brown, If Tenant at will makes wast, action upon the case
lies, and by Roo, if my Father lets at will and dies, the will is determined.

Littleton fol. 14. If Tenant at will makes voluntary wast, he says, that the
Lessor shall have an action of trespass, but it seems he intended trespass
upon the case.

48 Ed. 3. f. 2. Action upon the case lies against Tenant at will, which makes
wast in burning of Houses willingly, and not action of wast.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 5. By Littleton, If I deliver to you my Gown, and you burn it,
action upon the case lies, and not trespass. By force of Arms, 43 Ed. 3. f.
30. If one has Goods by delivery, trespass does not lie against him, but
Detinue.

21 H. 6. fol. 43. is, That an action of wast does not lie against Tenant at
will, which makes wast but trespass.

41 Ed. 3. f. 24. Where a Miller takes more tole then he ought, action upon the
case lies against him, and not trespass.

2 Ed. 4. f. 5. If my Servant of a shop, which has power to sell, gives my
Wares, it seems that I shall have trespass against the Donee.

Tenant at will may cut Trees seasonable, but if he cut great Trees wast does
not lie, but action upon the case.

Tenant at will of a Mine may take the Oar and sell it, 12 Ed. 4. f. 8.

He which holds at will, has that at the will of both, and Debt lies for the
Rent reserved, 20 Edw. 4. fol. 9.

If the Lessee at will sow the Land, and after be outed, he shall have the
Crop, but if he be outed after the plowing, and before the sowing, he shall
loose the Costs of plowing, and the compost of that, 11 H. 4. fol. 90

Tenant at sufferance.
Who is Tenant at sufferance and who not, and what acts he may do.
TEnant at sufferance is where one of his own head occupies my Land, and claims
nothing, but at my will, and release to him is not good, Littleton f. 108.

There is no Tenant at sufferance, but he which first enters by authority, and
Lawfully, as a man lets for years, or for another life, and holds in further
after the Lease expired, or after the death of him for whose life, time of H.
8. tit. Tenant by copy. 15.

Tenant at sufferance is, when Lessee for years after the term ended,
occupies the Land by consent of the Lessor, without a Lease at will, 21 H. 6.
f. 42.

Tenant at sufferance may distrain doing damage upon the Land, and yet release
made to him is not good, 4 H. 7. f. 3. and he may have trespass.

Villainage.
For that, that in the fifth Article villainage is to be inquired in Leet and
in Court Baron, and is to be inquired, who is Villainof the Kings: Something
shall be said touching that, and first how they began, and where the Lord may
seize and have them, and how their Goods and Chattells and other things, and
how contrary, and how not.
Villains began after Noah's Flood, that is, when all things were in common,
and when they increased, and also were taken in Battles and one killed another,
to avoid this mischeife, it was ordained that none should kill another, but
those which they overcame should be their Villains, to use at their pleasure;
but not to kill them, Britton f. 77.

If the Villain buy Goods and sell them, or give them to another, before the
Lord seize them, then the Lord cannot seize them nor have them, otherwise it is
of the Kings Villain, Littleton f. 39

Lord and Villain, the Lord is indebted to one, which makes the Villain his
Executor, the Villain shall have Debt against his Lord, and the Lord cannot
seize and have the Goods which the Villain has as Executor, 3 H. 4. f. 15.
the same 47 Ed. 3. f. 16. Littleton f. 41. and 21 Ed. 4. f. 50. Old Tenures 2.

If a Villain die before the Lord seize his Goods or claim by word, the Lord
cannot seize them, not have them, but his Executors, 3 H. 4. f. 17.

If a villain purchase Lands and alien them before that the Lord enter, or buy
Goods and sells them before that the Lord seize them, the Lord shall not have
them, Lit. f. 39.

If the Lord seize Goods, and deliver them to the Villain again, if they be
taken from him, the Lord may have trespass, or take and seize them again, and
have them, 11 H. 4. f. 2. Lit. f. 39.

If he seises parcel of the Goods in name of all, that suffices for^ll.

The Lord has possession of Goods of his Villain by Seizure, of land by
entry, of Rent, Reversion, and Advowson, by claim, Perkins f. 6. Littleton. 40.

The Lord cannot seize his Villain in the presence of the King, and yet after
he may have him, 27 Book of Ass. 49.

If my Villain Infant be in ward of one, by reason that he holds of him by
Knights service, I may enter and seize the Infant, and out the Guardian, and
shall have him, 40 Book of Ass. 7.

The Lord cannot take and seize his Villain, out of the service of another,
which has retained him, unless that he has more Servants; but he may seize
the Goods, 39 R. 2. tit. action upon the case 52.

The Lord may take the Rent which a Villain has in possession, but not a
thing in action, as obligation of Debt or Covenant.

What is infranchisement, and what not.
IF a ^ree-man marry his she Villain, she is infranchised, Little. fol. 41.
And that their Issue is free, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 4.

If a she Villain marry a Freeman, she is made free for ever, and shall not
be a Villain again, unless by a special act afterward as being divorced, or
acknowledges her self a she Villain in Court of Record, ^itzh. fol. 78. G. 33
Ed. 3. f. 187. Statham, is that she is infranchised but during the marriage.

If a Villain woman marry a Freeman, she and all her Issue have a free Estate
for ever, and a Villain becomes free if he marry his Mistress; the same Law if
a she Villain marry her Lord, Brit. f. 78. a.

If a Villain dwell in ancient Demesne of the King, by a year and a day
without claim, he is infranchised, Fitzh. f. 79. A. But there held, if he
dwell in the ancient Demesne of another Lord then the King, by a year and a
day, without claim, he is not infranchised, 39 H. 6. tit. 20. and 39 E. 3. f.
6.

If the Lord and his Villain vouch together, where the Villain has purchased
Lands, if he be not from all benefit shut up, being called to warranty, it is
an infranchisement, 33 H. 6. f. 1.

The Reversion is granted, to a Villain and his Lord being Tenant for life
attornes, this does not infranchise the Villain, for the Lord gives nothing to
the Villain and he cannot otherwise have the Reversion, 11 H. 7. fol. 13.

If a man infranchise his Villain, with the whole sequel it behooves to be,
for those created, and to be created, some born before that infranchisement is
not made free, 15 H. 7. f. 14.

Though the Lord make Attorney, where his Villain is Plaintiff it is no
infranchisement, 22 Book of Ass. 4. and 29 Ed. 3. f. 24. the same.

If the Lord suffer his Villain to be sworn of a Jury in the Kings Court, it
is an infranchisment, Britton fol. 83.

Villain shall not be infranchised, for that his Lord sues a (Recordare) upon
a plaint of Replegiare, 5 Ed. 3. f. 187. Statham.

Tenant in tail of a Manor, to which is a Villain regardant, aliens the same
Land to the Villain and dies. The Issue recovers the Land against the
Villain, yet he may after seize the Villain, and he is not infranchised,
notwithstanding that he has brought action against his Villain, for he cannot
otherwise come to the Land, 24 Edw. 3. fol. 187.

If in an action a Villain imparle with his Lord, or has a day by (Prece
partium) he is infranchised, 9 H. 6. f. the last, and 22 Ed. 4. f. 36. the same.

If the Lord suffer his Villain to be made a Knight, it is an infranchisement,
Britton f. 79.

If the Lord infcoffs his Villain it is an infranchisement for ever, 12 H. 3.
tit. 42.

If the Plaintiff in a Writ of (Neife) be nonsuited, he shall not have again
in his life time any other (Nativo habendo) but the Villain by that is
infranchised during her life time, 6 Ed. 2. tit. Villainage 26. See, 19 Edw. 2.
Tit. 31.

If the Lord make to his Villain an obligation, or grant to him an anuity, or
let to him by Deed for years, or make to him a Feoffment and Livery and
seisin, he is infranchised, otherwise it ^s if he makes to him a Lease at will,
or a Feoffment and no Livery, Littleton fol. 45.

By Wilby, if the Lord infeoffs his Villain without Deed, he is not
infranchised, 24 Ed. 3. tit. 32.

Villain to two Coparceners, he marries one of them, yet he is not
infranchised against the other, coparcener, Fitzh. f. 197. N.

If a Copyhold escheat, or come to the Lord by forfeiture, and the Lord grants
that over by Copy to J. S. his Villain and to his heirs, to hold at the will
of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor, by the services due and
used to be paid, this is an infranchisement, but if a Copyholder surrender
into the hands of the Lord to the use of J.S. the Lords Villain and to his
heirs, and the Lord by his Steward grant to him Seisin by the rod accordingly,
this is no infranchisement.

How the Lord may take advantage of things which he has by his Villain, by
act of his Villain.
Manor to which a Villain is regardant, is let to one for life, and the
Villain purchase in fee, the Tenant for life enters, he shall have lands to
him and to his heirs for ever, Perk. f. 20.

If a Villain be granted to one for Life, and the Villain purchase in fee,
the Lessee enters, he shall have Fee, but if the Lord be Lessee for life, and
the Tenancy escheat, he shall not have that but for life, Doctor and Student
fol. 90.

If Lessee for years of a Manor, to which a Villain is regardant dies, and
the Villain purchase Lands, and the Executor of the Lessee enter, he shall
have the Land in fee but it shall be to the use of the Testator, Doctor and
Student f. 90

Where a Parson has a Villain, which purchases lands and the Parson enters,
he shall not have that to the use of himself, but in the right of his Church,
32 H. 8. tit. Villainage 46.

Where a Villain is infeoffed with warranty, the Lord may rebut by that, if it
were descended in possession of the Villain, but not vouch to have in value,
18 Ed. 3. f. 29. and 22 Book of Ass. 37.

If a Villain and his Wife purchase jointly in Fee, and the Lord enters in the
half, as he may, he shall have it, but if he do not enter, but the Husband
dies, the wife shall have all by the Survivor, and the Lord has lost his
advantage to have the moity. A bridge of ass. fol. 37.40. assis. 7.

If a Villain be bound in a statute, and before the day incurred, his Lord
enters, the Lord shall have such advantage that execution shall not be sued
against him, 18. Ed. 3. Tit. Execution Statham.

If my villain purchase Land, and I seize it, and the villain dies, yet the
wife of the villain shall be endowed, by Herl. 13. Ed. 3.74. Statham 19. Ed. 2.

Waste.
And in so much that you ought to inquire, if any Farmer which has part of the
Demesnes of your Lordship, has made wast, or any Copyholder, (unless by the
Custom of the Manor he may make wast) if any of them have made wast or not.
First let us see what is wast in Land, and to be punished, and what not.
IT is not wast to suffer the arable Land to lie fresh, so that it is full of
thorns, Fitz. fol. 59. N. 2. H. 6. fol. 11.

To suffer a Meadow to be drowned which is rushie or little worth, or arable
land to be drowned, that nothing remains but tough Clay; this is wast, 20. H.
6. fol. 1.

15. H. 3. Tit. 131. Wast was brought for making meadow arable, by Plowd. 2.
and it seems it lies.

If a Farmer plough meadow, it is wast, Fitzh. fol. 59. N. and 15. H. 3. tit.
131. the same, 12. H. 8.

If a Farmer do not repair banks of his Land in Lease, by which the Land is
drowned, or if he dig for Copper or Stone, or Coals, it is wast, Fitzh. fol.
59. N. 20. H. 6. fol. 1.

Wast lies against a Farmer, for fish in a Poole, 6. R. 2. Statham.

If there be a Mine in the Land, if the Farmer dig the Land, and take it, it is
wast, 9. Ed. 4. fol. 35. B.

Raising up a Furnace fixed, is wast, 42. Ed. 3. fol. 6.

What is wast in houses, to be punished, and what not.
IF a house be uncovered by sudden tempest, it is not wast; but if the Lessee
suffer that to be uncovered, that the timber rot, it is wast, and if the house
fall by sudden tempest it is no wast, 12. H. 4. fol. 4.33. H. 6. Tit. 155. B.
By Danby and Choke. If strangers, enemies of the King destroy a house, or that
it be blown down by sudden tempest, wast lies not; contrary where it was by
enemies, traitors, subjects, 12. H 8. fol. 1. See the time of Ed. 1. tit. 123.
where it was burnt by I. S. his Neighbor by mischance.

It seems that not covering of a house is no wast, till the great beam of that
is rotten, 10 H. 7. fol. 2. B.

It seems wast may be assigned, in breaking a stone-wall, and also in a
mud-wall, for that it is fixed to the freehold. But the Lessee may plead that
the lessor licensed him to break it down, and this is a good bar. And
adjudged that if a house be not. covered at the time of the Lease made, the
Less is not bound to cover that: and also if a house were curious at the time
of the Lease made, that is a good bar to plead in wast, 10 H. 7. fol. 2. B. 40
assis. 22. the same, and 10 H. 7. fol. 5. the same where a house falls by
tempest, though the lessee Covenant to repair it, he may plead in bar in a
writ of wast, that it fell by tempest, though he cannot plead it in a writ of
Covenant, 40. Ed. 3. fol. 6.

If a Farmer build a house, where there was none before the Lease, and suffers
that to decay, it is wast, 11 Ed. 2. Statham, 12 H. 4. fol. 6. the same, 42 Ed.
3. fol. 21. the same, and 17. Ed. 2. tit. 118. the same.

If wast in a house be repaired, hanging the writ of wast, it is not to
purpose; but if it were repaired before a writ purchased, it is otherwise, 38.
Book of Assis. 1. 21. H. 7. fol. 26. by Kingsmill, and not denied, that a
furnace fixed by a Farmer, and not to the walls, Posts, and such like, by him
fixed, and taken away within his term, is no wast, for the house is not
impaired. But where Tenant in Fee fixes a furnace in the midst of the house,
the Heir shall have it, and not the Executors: the same Law if a Fat fixed in a
Brew House.

34 Ed. 3. Tit. 3. where a house falls by great wind or tempest, it seems the
lessor shall have the great Timber, for that is not wast, and the lessee shall
not build that, 11 H. 4. fol. 21.

9 H. 6. fol. 52. Lease to a woman unmarried which takes a Husband, which
builds a house and dies, the woman shall be charged with that in wast, 47. book
of Ass. 22. If Posts of a house be and the rest is fallen, if the Guardian take
away the Posts it is no wast; for it is no house when it is not walled nor
covered, and if one take away a frame of a house which was newly built and
never covered, it is no wast.

What is wast punishable in woods, and what not.
IF a stable were ruinous, at the time of the Lease and falls, the lessee may
cut trees, and make a new house; but if no house were there before, he cannot
cut Trees to make a new house, as it seems 11 H. 4. fol. 32.

The farmer may cut trees to amend his house, and make reparations; but if the
house be decayed by the default of the farmer, then if he cut trees to repair
that, it is wast, Fitz. 59. K.

Cutting of dead wood by a Termor is no waste. And if a man cut wood to burn,
where he has dead wood sufficient, that is wast, and it is no wast to cut
seasonable wood, which is used to be cut every 20. years, or within that time,
Fitzh. fol. 59. M.

It was agreed that young Oaks of the age of 20. years, nor under 20. years,
could not be cut by a Farmer for years, nor for life, for they may be Timber,
and by this cutting they will never grow to be Timber: time of H. 8. tit. 334.
b. see 11. H. 6. fol. 1. cutting Willowes within the view and sight of a
Manor, is wast. 40. Ed. 3. fol. 15. B.

Cutting of Hazels which do not grow under great Trees, but in a quarter of a
wood is wast, 40. Ed. 3. fol. 25. b. 10. H. 7. fol. 2. the same, Fitz. fol. 6.
E. the same.

Cutting under wood is no wast, but barking them that they do not grow again is
wast. 42. Ed. 3. fol. 6.

A man cannot assign wast in cutting young Oaks, that is of the age of 7. or 8.
years, 13. H. 7. fol. 21. by Brian, contrary before the time of H. 1.

Cutting within the age of eight and ten years of young Oaks is wast, because
they can never come to be Timber Ed. 46. tit. 13

Young Oaks of the age of twenty years and under, Farmer may cut, and it is
not wast, but Martin says, that is in a Country where there is plenty of Wood,
if Oaks pass the age of twenty years they cannot be cut as seasonable for
house-boote, but by Martin, Wrang-lands of the age of twenty years, which can
never be Timber, cutting of them for firing is no wast, 11 H. 6. fol. 1 by the
Court.

Oaks of the age of sixteen years may be cut for fuel, for that they are but
falling Woods, 21 H. 6. fol. 53. by Newton.

4 Ed. 3. f. 22. Journey to Darby, fol. If a man make wast in a Mill, and cut
Trees to mend it, this cutting is waste,

12 Ed. 3. tit. 28. Wast, He cannot cut the Trees to cover the Houses, and sell
away the old Timber.

Cutting small Trees and selling them away is wast, but a Farmer may cut them
to make reparations upon the same Land let, but not to repair other Land,
cutting young Samples within the age of ten years seasonable, for house-boot
is no wast, but where they were of the age of twenty years, and able to make
great Timber is wast, 7 H. 6. f. 40.

Termor may take small Trees and such like, which are seasonable, which have
been used to be felled every 20, 16. 14, or 12. years, and is no wast: For it
is called falling wood, 4 Ed. 6. tit. 136.

Where Oaks are cut, and suffering the Springs to be eaten with Beasts that
they will not be Timber afterward but shrubs, it is wast, 11 H. 6. f. 1.

One may assign wast in a hundred Oaks cut, and also in the Stocks of the same
Oaks, that is in springs growing upon the same Oaks, for if so be they were
saved they would be Timber, and for that, that they are not, it is wast, 22 H.
6. f. 14.

Cutting green wood, where there is dead wood for firing, is wast, 23 Ed. 3.
tit. 32.

Cutting Sances is no wast, 8 Ed. 2. tit. 111.

Cutting Wood to burn where there is dead wood sufficient is wast, but not wast
to cut seasonable wood which is used to be cut every twenty years, or within
the time, Fitzh. f. 59. M.

Cutting white Thorn is wast, and not black Thorn, 46 Ed. 3. f. 17. But see, 9
H. 6. f. 10.

What wast in Gardens is punishable, and what not.
WHere Apple Trees fall with great wind, and after become dry, the Termor may
take them for Fuel, 7 H. 6. f. 40.

Cutting Apple Trees which have fallen upon Props, and bear Fruit, is wast, 44
Ed. 3. f. 44.

Cutting Apple Trees and Plum Trees is wast, 10 H. 7. fol. 2.

If a house and wood are let, he cannot cut Apple trees to amend the House if
he have Wood, for if he do it is wast, time Ed. 1. Title 122.

For what wast Termor shall be punished, and for what not.
IF a Termor for life make wast, and after surrender his estate, and the Lessor
accept it, the Termor shall not be punished for that wast, Natura brevium f. 36
B. 14 H. 8. fol. 111. By Pollard, but see 8 H. 5. fol. 8.

If a stranger make wast upon the Land which one holds for life or for years,
the Farmer shall be punished for this wast, 5 H. 4. f. 3. and 3 H. 6. fol. 17.
B.

If a Lessor himself make wast the Termor shall not be punished for that wast,
5 H. 4. f. 3.

If a stranger make waste upon the Land in ward, the Guardian in Socage shall
not be punished for this waste, Fitzh. f. 60. G.

Where waste is made by Enemies, or Tempest, the Termor is not punishable for
his waste, Fitzh. f. 59. L.

If a Termor make waste before that he attorn, he shall not be punished for
that waste, 48 Ed. 3. f. 15.

If a Lessor covenant to deliver great Timber of the said Land to repair the
House let, and will not, and for lack of that the Lessee will not repair that,
but suffers the House to fall, he is punishable for this waste: but if the
great Timber were to be taken from other Land, and is not delivered, this
excuses him, and he is not punishable for this waste, 44 Ed. 3. f. 21.

If Land be let to a lone Woman, and she takes a Husband which makes waste and
dies, she shall be punished for that waste; but if the Lease were made to the
Husband and his Wife, and he makes the waste and dies, for that waste she shall
not be punished, Not. brev. f. 36. B. 3 Ed. 3. Tit. 20.

Register, f. 72. against the Husband and the Wife, summoned B. and E. his
Wife, that they be, etc. to show why they made waste, etc. of Lands, etc. which
they held for the Dower of the said E.

Register, fol. 74. against a Woman, Summon B. which was the Wife of C. that
she be, etc. to show wherefore, etc. of the Houses, etc. which she holds for
her life, by a Lease, which D. thereof made to the said B. and the aforesaid C.
sometime her Husband, and to the Heirs of the said C.

14 H. 8. f. 12. When the term of years is ended, the Writ shall be which he
held, and where it is during the term, shall be which he holds:

40 Ed. 3. f. 23. Where the term passes, and where the Infant is of full age,
it shall be against the Guardian and Termor, which they held.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 23. Against Tenant for life the form is, which he holds for
term of his life, 40 Ed. 3. f. 33. 14 H. 6. f. 14. the same.

46 Ed. 3. f. 25. If a Lease be made to one for life, which grants over his
Estate, the Writ shall say, (which he holds) but where a Lease is made for
another life, and he for whose life dies, the Writ shall say, (he held) by
Finchden, and not denied. And if a Lease be made to a woman for years, which
takes a Husband, before the term ended, which makes waste, and the Wife dies,
waste lies against the Husband for the occupation. See Brook, Tit. 47. The same
Law where a Lease was to the Woman for life, which takes a Husband, etc.

Not. Brev. f. 36. If Land be let to a single Woman, and she take a Husband,
and the Husband makes waste, and dies, the Wife shall answer for this waste;
but otherwise it is where the Land is let to the Husband and his Wife, for
term of their two lives, and the Husband makes waste, and dies, the wife shall
not answer for that waste, for it was the folly of the Lessor to let that to
him, 15 H. 3. Tit. 133. Fitzh.

Time of Ed. 1. Tit. 128. Fitzh. If a woman Tenant for life take a husband
which makes waste and dies, it seems that the woman shall be charged of that,
for that, that the woman agreed to the Lease after the death of her husband, 10
E. 3. Tit. 17. and Tit. 21. and 133.

23 H. 8. Tit. 138. If a single woman Tenant for life takes a husband which
makes waste and dies, Action of waste lies against the wife; but if a Lease be
made to the husband and the wife, and the husband makes waste and dies, it is
otherwise, and held there for Law, that if the Termor make waste, and make his
Executors, and dies, the Action of waste is gone, for it is as a Trespass
which is a personal Action which dies with the person, but if the Executors
make the waste, it lies against them:

Fitzh. f. 56. A. If a Guardian in Knight Service grant over his Estate, and
the Grantee makes waste, the writ of waste shall be brought against the
Grantee, and not against the Guardian, but if the Guardian make waste, and
after grant over his Estate, waste lies against the Guardian, and not against
the Grantee: and so where Tenant for life, or for years, makes waste, and
grants over his Estate, the writ of waste lies against him that made the waste,
but waste shall be always brought against Tenant in Dower, or Tenant by the
Courtesy, notwithstanding their Grant over, Fitzh. 550. Register, fol. 72.

40 Ed. 3. Tit. 33. Waste against Tenant for life, it is no Plea to say, that
he had nothing in the Tenancy, Day of the writ purchased, nor ever after; for
if he has made waste, and granted his Estate over, yet he shall answer for
this waste, and though the writ be. (which he holds) it is good; and by
Finchden, waste is a writ of Trespass in his nature, and cannot be brought but
against him which is Tenant when the waste was made, unless he be Tenant by
the courtesy, or Tenant in Dower, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 23. and 44 Ed. 3. fol. 21.

Fitzh. 55. C. In waste against Tenant in Dower, the Statute need not be
rehearsed, nor in waste against Guardian, but against Tenant for life, or for
years, by Demise, shall be rehearsed.

Fitzh. 56. C. In waste against Tenant by the curtesic without rehearsing the
Statute, that is, without, when of the common Council of our Kingdom of
England, it is good, and so it seems it is, if it be rehearsed. Every writ of
waste is to the dis-inheriting of him which brought the writ, and for that it
shall be showed in the writ, though the Plaintiff has Reversion by the
Assignement of the Lessor.

Fitzh. 58. A.B.C.D.E. Register, 74. and 75. And the writ of waste is of me,
that is, the Plaintiff holds, and for that it is showed, by Assignement, as 46
Ed. 3. f. 25. Waste by the Assignement of the Defendant, Dd. that you have it
by Assignement, and the Plaintiff shows that he had a Feoffment and Livery,
saving the term, and good. Also it shall be showed in the writ of whose Demise
the Defendant has it, that is, as by the Demise of another. Fitzh. 57.
A.B.C.D.E. Register, 745. that is, for the Plaintiff is to recover the place
wasted, 34 H. 6. fol. 6. Tit. Waste Brook 121.

11 H. 6. f. 8. If waste or (Quare ejecit infra terminum) be brought, and the
term ends, hanging the writ, the writ shall not abate; for though he cannot
recover the place wasted, he shall recover Damages. Also if waste be brought
(Quas tenuit) after the term ended, he shall recover Damages, though he do not
recover the place wasted. So where one which holds for term of another life
makes waste, and after he for whose life dies, the Lessor shall recover
Damages, though he do not recover the place wasted, Fitzh. 60.

10 H. 6. fol. 8. Waste, supposed, by the writ that the Defendant has that by
Legacy of one such ancester of the Plaintiff, for that, that the custom was so
that he might devise, and good.

8 Ed. 2. tit. 112. Waste was found in a House, which was principal, and the
Plaintiff by Award recovered all the House.

15 H. 7. fol. 11. By Fineux, where a Farmer of a Wood makes waste in one
corner, this only is forfeited; but if it be in diverse places of the Wood, all
is forfeited, and the plots in this also, 15 Ed. 3. Tit. 108. See the time of
Ed. 1. Tit. 122: Waste against Guardian.

4 Ed. 6. Tit. 136. By Bromley, if a man make waste in hedge-rowes, which
enclose a Pasture, nothing shall be recovered but the place wasted, that is,
the circuit of the Root, and not the whole Pasture, 41 Ed. 3. Tit. 24. B.

Fitzh. 60. T. If a Guardian make waste, and the Heir being within age, bring a
writ of waste, by this the Guardian shall loose the Wardship, and over that
his Damages, to as much as the waste amounts unto. But if the Heir were of full
age, that he loses not the Wardship, then he ought to recover treble
Damages, for that that he cannot loose the Wardship, according to the Statute
of Gloucester.

43 Ed. 3. f. 6. Waste, it is a good Plea in Bar, that the House fell by
Tempest, and if he covenant to repair that, it is no plea in Covenant.

49 Ed. 3. fol. 1. Waste, it is a good Plea, that at the time of the Lease,
that the house was weak, and that the great Timbers were rotted, that it fell;
for if any the principal Timbers were rotten, it is no waste, though he
covenant to repair it.

8 H. 6. f. 57. Waste, it is a good Plea, that the Plaintiff has entered into
the Land, before which Entry, no waste made.

8 H. 5. f. 8. Waste, it is a good Plea, that he surrendered, to which the
Plaintiff agreed, before that no waste made.

9 H. 6. f. 11. Waste by the Heir is a good Plea, that the Plaintiff has an
elder Brother which survived the Plaintiff, and after died, after whose Death
no waste made, and a good Plea.

44 Ed. 3. f. 27. Waste against a Guardian in Knight Service, who says, that
after the Death of the Ancestor, J. F. (abated) against whom the Defendant
recovered in a Writ of Ward, after which Recovery no waste made, and it is a
good Plea.

12 H. 4. f. 6. Waste, it is a good Plea, that that fell before the Lease.

19 H. 6. fol. 66. Waste, that he suffered the House to be uncovered, by which
the great Timber rotted; it is no Plea to say, Day of the Writ purchased, the
House was sufficiently repaired; but to say, after the waste, and before the
Writ purchased, it was sufficiently repaired.

8 H. 6. fol. 61. Waste, held where Land is given to the Husband and the
Wife, and the Heirs of the Wife, and the Husband discontinues in Fee, and
takes an Estate for life, and the Wife dies, the Heir of the Wife shall not
have waste, before that he has purged the Discontinuance, 8 H. 6. f. 63.

Fitzh. 59. E: The heir within age shall have a writ of waste, against a
Guardian in Socage, 2 Ed. 2. Fitzh. the same, Not. bre. 58. If a Guardian in
Socage make waste, the Heir when he comes to full age, shall have an action of
account for that.

14 Ed. 3. tit. 107. It seems that waste lies against a Guardian in Socage,
tit. 100. Fitzh.

Fitzh. 58. H. There is a writ of waste in the Register, for him in reversion,
against tenant by Elegit, which has the Lands in execution, but it seems he
shall not have waste, for that, that he may have a venire facias to account,
and there the waste shall be recompensed in the debt, but by the action of
waste, he shall recover treble damages, which he shall not have in the account.

Not. Bre. fol. 37. waste does not lie against tenant by Elegit, nor against
tenant by Stat. Merchant; but if they make waste account lies, 42 Ed. 2. tit.
11. fol. If a Lease be made to one to use it in the best way that he can, now
he cannot make waste.

17 E. 3. tit. 101. If a Lease be made to one, so that he may make his profit
of that, etc. yet it shall not be intended, such as common right gives him; for
he cannot pull down abouse and make waste.

Action upon the Case.
Action upon the case in Court baron, and other Court, and first for slander.
IT lies for calling one traitor, felon, and robber of the Kings people, and
that is to be noted in Justice Seatons case, 30. Ass. 19.

22. Book of ass. 43. presentment, that one a is common Malefactor, or a common
thief, or a common Baretor, is not certain, and is not good; and so it is
thought by diverse, to say that one is a common malefactor, or a common baretor:
this action does not lie, for it is too general.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 5. For calling one villain, it seems that action upon the case
does not lie.

17 Ed. 4. fol. 3. Says there, that an action upon the case does not lie, for
calling the Plaintiff villain without more.

Not. Bre. fol. 55. There are two desamations or slanders, the one spiritual,
the other temporal: temporal where he cannot be punished by the spiritual Law,
as to say that the Plaintiff is outlawed of murder, conspiracy, forging of
deeds, etc.

30 H. 8. tit. 104. Lies for calling the Plaintiff perjured man; for now
perjury is punishable in our Law by the Statute of 5. Eliz. yet inquire, for
that it is not in what Court or cause he was perjured.

Register fol. 54. For calling the Plaintiff Adulterer or Usurer, Defendant
shall be punished in the spiritual Court, and there does not lie an action upon
the case.

4. Ed. 6. tit. 112. Lies for calling the Plaintiff a false Justice of Peace.

27 H. 8. fol. 13. It lies for calling the Plaintiff theif, and inditing him of
felony, and note the words of the writ are, that he is hurt in his goods, his
name, fame, and condition.

26. H. 8. fol. 11. For calling the Plaintiff Thief, and saying that he has
stolen sheep of one I. S. It lies.

17 Ed. 4. fol. 3. Lies for writing slander in a paper, by which he durst not
go about his business.

27. H. 8. fol. 17. For calling the Plaintiff Heretic, and one of a new
learning, it does not lie.

Book of entries fol. ^2. A president there, in an action of the case, for
calling the Plaintiff false man; but inquire if it lies, for there was not
there exception taken: and there is there another president for calling the
Plaintiff theif, and saying he has received 20 l. value of his goods.

In the Book of Entries, fol. 13. there is another president of an action upon
the case, that a certain Letter or Bill, with diverse slandering words, and
defaming, in the said Bill or Letter he caused to be writ.

It was the opinion in the Kings Bench, that for calling the Plaintiff Rogue,
Cozener, or villain, action upon the case does not he; for you shall not have
action upon the case, for every word of anger reproachful; for it is said, that
(Scandulum) is a Greek word, which goes to the overthrowe of one, and for that
it has been thought, that if the words intend to the destruction of the
Plaintiff, that he shall have an action upon the case, and for that where the
Defendant says, that the Plaintiff was infected with the robbery of Jerome, H.
and smells of it, the opinion was, that action upon the case for those words
does not lie.

Adjudged in London, that an action upon the case lies brought by Huson,
Inholder, for that the Defendant said falsely, that he had buried diverse which
died of the Plague, in his house, in his Garden, when the plague was not in his
house, by which his guests refused to come to his house.

Also it was the opinion of the Kings Bench, that an action upon the case does
not lie, for calling the Plaintiff false knave.

Essex in the Kings Bench Roll. 149. Hill. Term, 26. Eliz. Rich. Kerby
Gentlemen, brought his action upon the case against John Waller, for saying
these words, that is, thou Kirby art a false cozening knave, and has falsely
cozened my two Kinsmen, William Walker, and Thomas Walker, Brothers of the said
William, of Lands worth 6000 l. the manner of Py^on in Rameshold, and I will
bring thee to stand upon the Pillory for that. And adjudgad that the action
does not lie, and the Jury taxed damages to a 100 l. and upon that adjudged
that the action did not lie.

London, Thomas Gittens Carpenter, Anno 26. brought his action upon the case
against James Redforne in the Exchequer, for saying these words, Thomas Gittens
is a cozening knave, and I have proved him a cozening knave before my Lord
Mayor of London, for selling a Saphir for a Diamond, and adjudged that it does
not lie.

Action upon the case upon a warrant ^f a thing sold, and upon knowledge
without wairant.
ACtion upon the case lies for selling corrupt wine, and the writ is, knowing
it to be corrupt, and warrant is not to purpose, for it is ordained that none
shall sell corrupt victual, if he know it, and so the Issue was, whether it
were good and not corrupt. An action upon the case lies for selling corrupt
victual, if he know it, and so the issue was, whether it were good and not
corrupt, an action upon the case lies for selling so much Cloth and not well
fulled, where he warrants it, 11. H. 6. fol. 22.

Note the use, where Measel Porks are fold at Rumford, to have restitution of
his money if they prove Measel, 9 H. 6. fol. 53.

7 H. 4. fol. 16. Action upon the case lies for selling corrupt wine, knowing,
etc. the Defendant says, that he tasted it, and accepted it for good: the
Plaintiff says, he accepted it for good upon condition, if he liked it, after
it came to his house, etc.

19 H. 6. fol. 49. If one sell wine without warranty, if that be corrupt,
action upon the case lies, for it is prohibited by law, 7. H. 4. fol. 76.

13 H. 4. fol. 2. If one sell to me a Horse apparent blind, and warrant him
sound of all his Members, and I see him, I shall have no deceit, for that I
might see it, otherwise it is of a disease within his body, there upon the
warrant I shall have deceit. But if one sell a blind horse, and warrant him to
one that does not see him, deceit lies: If one sells to me wine, and I bid my
Servant to taste it, deceit does not lie if it be corrupt, for that he has
tasted it.

Fitzh. 94. C. If a man sell a horse to another, and warrant him to be sound
and good, etc. If the horse be lame or diseased, that he cannot work, action
upon the case lies, And so if one bargain and sell to one certain Pipes of wine,
and warrant them to be good, and they are corrupt, action upon the case lies
against him, and by Fitzh. it behooves that he warrant the horse, and also the
wine, otherwise action upon the case does not lie, inquire of the wine.

Fitzh. 98. K. If a man sell Clothes and warrant them to be of a certain
length, if they be not of such a length, he he which buys them shall have a
Writ of Deceit against him, but if the warranty be made after the bargain, is
otherwise.

11 Ed. 4. fol. 7. Where one sells Clothes and warrants them to be of such a
length, and they are not, deceit lies, for he could not know but by measure,
and he believed him, but it is said, if he warrant Seeds to grow that is in
Cod, or that a Horse shall carry one ten miles in two hours which is to come,
or warrant Cloth to be murrey where it is blue and see it, deceit does not lie,
but if he warrant Cloth to be of such a Country when it is not, deceit lies.

11 R. 2. Statham, If one sell a Horse, knowing him to be lame, and warrant him
to be sound, the Defendant says that he sold him sound, without that, that he
warranted him.

31 H. 6. fol. 11. Statham, If one sell a Horse, knowing him to be lame and do
not warrant him, action upon the case does not lie.

20 H. 6. fol. 37. By Paston, and not denied, if a man sell a horse which has
a disease, the Buyer may have action upon the case, that the Defendant knowing
his Horse to be diseased; sold him, though he do not warrant him to be sound;
notwithstanding it seems otherwise, where the Buyer may see the disease, by
looking upon him as a splint, a spavin, or an eye.

9 H. 7. f. 22. If one sell a thing, and warrant that at the same time, he may
have deceit, notwithstanding that he has not paid the Money, for that, that he
might have debt at his pleasure for the Money.

Action upon the case for cosenage and deceiving of one.
ACtion upon the case was brought against W. C. for that the Defendant took
eight Oxen of J.S. and offered to sell them to the Plaintiff as his proper
Goods, and by this salsity the Plaintiff trusting to the honesty of the
Defendant bought them, and paid seven pound, and after the owner took the
Oxen, by which the Plaintiff lost the Oxen by this falsity to his wrong and
damages, etc. Book of Ass. 8.

20 H. 6 fol. 25. Deceit was brought, for that the Defendant was his Attorney,
and ought to have taken an Obligation of J.S. for a hundred pound to the
Plaintiff, and he took it to himself; and it is said, he ought to declare that
he took a Fee of him: And so lies an Action upon the Case for such Cosenage
and Deceits: Which note.

9 E. 4. fol. 12. By Littleton, Debt against two, as Executors, and one is no
Executor, nor never administered, etc. Yet he acknowledged the Action, and the
other made default, the Plaintiff recovers, the other has no remedy but an
Action of Deceit; that is, Upon the Case, for he is party to the Judgment.

42 Ed. 3. f. 14. Conspiracy in the nature of an Action upon the case was
brought against three, which conspired to make one of them Attorney for the
Plaintiff, and to plead as they pleased, and so to cause the Plaintiff to be
found a Villain to one of the Defendants, and it lies, 26. Book of Assizes 62.

47 Ed. 3. f. 15. Action upon the case lies in nature of a Conspiracy, for that
the Defendant procured and caused a false Office to be found, by which the
Manor of the Plaintiff was seized into the Kings hands, Tit. Conspiracy, 8.
B. See 27. Book of Assizes 73. Fitzh. 114. D.

43 Ed. 3. f. 20. Deceit, for that the Defendant procure J. S. to bring a
Formedon against the Plaintiff by Collusion, by which he was travel by the
Suit, and brought a Writ of Warrantia Chartae in defense of that, and it lies.

Where an Action upon the Case lies for a thing pawned, and for a thing
borrowed, and where not.
ACtion upon the Case does not lie, for riding his Horse which he had hired of
the Plaintiff, which was weary, so that he had no service of him by six Days,
for weariness is natural after labor, and for that he ought to show some Fault
in the Defendant, if he will have that Action.

Fitzh. 86. C. If one borrow certain Money, and deliver certain of his Goods in
pawn for it, and he offers the Money to the party again, and prays Delivery of
his Pawn, and the other refuse it, he shall have an Action upon the Case for
the Pawn.

40 Ed. 3. f. 6. If I borrow a Horse, and he dies suddenly, and not by my
default, I shall not be charged to restore a dead Horse.

Doct. and Student. f. 29. If one use the thing borrowed, in other manner then
to what it was borrowed, he shall be charged, if they perish in any manner: but
if he use them as they were lent, if they perish not through his default which
borrowed them, the Owner shall bear the loss.

Doct. and Student. fol. 128. If a man borrow a Horse, and puts him in a house
which falls upon him, if it were strong and not feeble to fall, he shall be
discharged, otherwise it is, if it were weak.

21 Ed. 4. Tit. 42. Detinue of Goods, Br. Detinue of a Horse, it is a good
Plea, that at the time of the Delivery, the Horse was sick of diverse Diseases,
as Botts, Glanders, and such like, by which he died at D. such a day and year,
before request made by the Plaintiff to re-deliver him, and it is a good Plea,
contrary if he do not say, it was before request, for if it were after request,
that had been the folly of the Defendant.

Where Action upon the Case lies, or Detinue, and where Trespass, and where not.
IF the Lessor will not discharge his Farmer of a Tenth, or of a Fifteenth, or
of Quit-rent, which are due by the Lessor, and the Farmer pay it, yet he cannot
keep that back in the payment of his Rent, but shall have an Action upon the
Case, 21 H. 7. f. 12.

7 H. 4. fol. 3. If the Testator has my Goods amongst his Goods, and dies,
Trespass by force and Arms does not lie against his Executors for these Goods,
but Detinue in an Action upon the Case: and if one find my Goods, Trespass
does not lie against him, but Detinue, or an Action upon the Case.

12 Ed. 4. f. 10. If one take my Beasts, and another take them from him, I
shall not have Trespass against the second, but Action upon the Case, 21 Ed.
4. fol. 89. the same.

13 Ed. 4. fol. 9. If Goods be delivered to one, he cannot be a Trespassor of
them, but a Detinue lies of them.

18 Ed. 4. f. 28. Where one has Goods by my Delivery, I shall not have
Trespass, but Action upon the Case, and Count of mis-using of them.

46 Ed. 3. fol. 15 Trespass, if the Defendant says, that the Goods were
thrown into the Sea by a Tempest, for safeguard of the Ship, and he took them,
and Trespass does not lie against him, for that they were not taken out of the
possession of the Plaintiff.

21 H. 7. f. 39. By Fineux and Tremail, if I deliver Goods to a man, and he
gives them, or sels them to a stranger, if the stranger takes them without
Delivery, I shall have a Writ of Trespass; but if he makes Delivery to the
stranger of them, I shall have no Trespass.

Littleton, fol. 14. If I deliver to one my Sheep to dung his Land, or my Oxen
to plow his Land, and he kills my Beasts, I shall have Trespass, that is to be
intended Trespass upon the Case, and not Trespass by force of Arms. See 2
Ed. 4. f. 5. in Parco fracto.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 23. In Action upon the Case, where he counts of mis-using of a
thing delivered to the Defendant, or converting it to his own use, is to
recover Damages for the thing, and where one will recover the thing it self, he
shall have Detinue.

7 Ed. 4. f. 4. Where one comes to Goods lawfully, as by Delivery, Trespass
does not lie against him, but Detinue.

12 E. 4. f. 8. A man shall not have trespass general, that is, by force of
Arms, against him that mis-uses a License in Deed, as to ride a Horse twenty
Miles, where he borrowed the Horse but for ten Mile; but he shall have an
Action upon the case; contrary, if one mis-use a License in Law, as to enter
into a Tavern, there he shall have Trespass, by force of Arms, 21 Ed. 4. f.
76. the same.

18 Ed. 4. f. 2. If my Bailiff kill my Kine, Trespass by force of Arms does
not lie, but an Action upon the Case.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 22. Action upon the Case lies against J. S. Officer of the
Kings Bench, for that that the Plaintiff affirmed a Plaint of Debt against J.
D. in London, the said J. S. purchased a Supersedeas of Privilege for J. D.
supposing that he was his Servant.

2 H. 4. f. 19. Action upon the Case by the Neighbor of a fire, lies, that
according to the Law and custom of the Realm of England, etc. that every one
shall keep his fire, least by his fire any loss should come to his Neighbors.

42 Ed. 3. fol. 11. Action upon the case lies, where throughout the whole Realm
of England it was a custom, that the Host should keep the Goods that their
Guests brought into their House, if it be a common Inn, and should be charged,
though they were not delivered, and though that the key of his Chamber were
delivered to the Guest, 22 H. 6. f. 24. 2 H. 4. f. 8. 14 H. 4. f. 43. Fitzh. f.
94. B. 11 H. 4. f. 43.

28 H. 6. f. 7. Action upon the case lies, for that, that the Dog of the
Defendant worried the Sheep of the Plaintiff, he knowing his Dog to be
accustomed to worry Sheep, and it is no Plea for the Defendant that he did not
know, By Moyl, but he ought to answer, that he did not worry the Sheep.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 24. If a man ought to grind his Corn at the Mill of the
Defendant without paying Tole, and the Miller take Tole, trespass by force of
Arms lies, and so it is said where he takes more Tole then he ought, but if
one hinder people to come to my Market, Action upon the case lies.

13 H. 4. f. 12. Action upon the case lies, for that, that he has a Leet in
the Manor, Eyer and Court, from three weeks, etc. There has the Defendant
held Court within the same Manor, and has distrained his Tenants by great and
often distress, and has impoverisht them, that they cannot pay their Rent,
Fitzh. 94. E. the same.

33 H. 6. f. 16. Action upon the case lies, where his Steward comes to hold a
Leet, and the Defendant disturbs him.

11 H. 4. fol. 45. Schoolmasters shall not have an action of the case against
another, for setting up another School, that he cannot have so many Scholars
as he had before, for the profession is free, and is for the Commonwealth: the
same law of erecting a Mill upon his own land, though the Plaintiffs Tole be
diminished, he shall not have an action upon the case, 22 H. 6. f. 14. Mill
levied.

48 Ed 3. f. 25. Action upon the case lies against Tenant at will which makes
wast, or burning a House willingly, and not an action of waste, Lit. 14. 21 H.
6. fol. 43.

7 H. 4. f. 8. Action upon the case lies, for that, that the Defendant ought to
repair a certain wall upon the Thames, and does it not, by which the land of
the Plaintiff is drowned, Fitzh. 93. E. the same.

7. H. 4. fol. 16. Account does not lie against a Bailiff, or Servant for
driving his Plow, in which default the Beasts perished, but an action upon the
case lies for his negligence, for default of good keeping.

2 H. 7. f. 11. Action upon the case lies for negligent keeping my Sheep, and
the same Law for negligent carrying my Pots, or glass; and where one keeps my
Horse, and starves him for Meat.

7 H. 4. f. 45. Action upon the case lies by the Lord of B. against him which
bought and sold in the Market of B. without paying Tole, and though the Writ
was (Tollenam asportavit) yet it was also, and he denied to pay it, and for
that it was awarded good, for the first words are void and the last sufficient.

11 H. 4. f. 25. If a way belonging, etc. be stopped, Assise of Nuisance lies,
but for stopping of a way ingrosse he shall not have an Assise of Nuisance, but
action upon the case.

14 H. 8. f. the last, Where part of a River, or way is stopped which is narrow,
action upon the case lies, and where the whole, an Assise of Nuisance, an action
upon the case lies where he has no other remedy.

11. Ed. 4. f. 23. It seems there that a good Pleader, may frame actions upon
the case for many matters which are in the Chancery.

26 Book of Ass. 79. Action of the case lies against the Sheriff which quashed
an Essoyne erroniously, for false Judgment does not lie unless it were
Judgment of the Suitors.

Fitzh. 114. D. If one Person of his malice, and by his false imagination,
labor and cause another to be iudicted falsely, the party which is so indicted
shall not have a Writ of conspiracy, but an action upon the case against him
which caused him to be so indicted.

Fitzh. 95. D. If one play with others at Dice, and he has false Dice, and
wins Money of others with false Dice, Action upon the Case lies for this deceit.

13 H. 7. fol. 26. Action upon the Case lies, where one has a Watercourse by
Prescription, to Brew, and water Beasts, there has the Defendant made
Lime-pits, etc. 4 Book of Ass. 3. See Nuisance for Lever Tozaile to the
annoyance of the Freehold.

Action upon the Case for mis-using an Officer in his Office.
ACtion upon the Case lies against a Sheriff, where the Plaintiff has
Charter of exception, that he shall be impannelled upon no Jury, and shows that
to the Sheriff, and yet he impannels him, 18 H. 8. fol. 5.

21 H. 7. fol. 22. by King, Where the Sheriff serves a (Fieri facias) and
levies the sum, and does not return the Writ, the party may have trespass
against him for levying that; the same Law, if by a (Capias) the Sheriff
arrest one, and does not return the Writ, false Imprisonment lies, 20 H. 7.
fol. 13. 21 H. 6. tit. 6. B.

6 H. 6. Tit. 9. Trespass upon the Case was brought against an Escheator,
because he found an Office, that the party held of J. S. and he returned an
Office, That the party held the moity of the King in Chief, and by the Court
it lies, for he and the Sheriff are Officers of Record, but not Justices of
Record; for there it was agreed that an Action does not lie against a Justice
of Record, 9 H. 6. fol. 60. the same, 12 H. 6. fol. 3.

47 Ed. 3. fol. 15. Conspiracy, in the nature of an Action upon the Case, was
brought for that, that the Defendant procured, and caused a false Office to be
found, by which the Manor was seized into the Kings hands, and he sued that
out to the Loss.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 43. If the Sheriff upon a Writ of second deliverance, makes
deliverance to the Plaintiff of the distress, and will not return the Writ, so
that the Defendant may constrain the Plaintiff to come and count, so that he
may avow; the Defendant shall have remedy against the Sherif, and this seems,
by an Action upon the Case.

8 H. 6. fol. 1. Where in Precipe, the Sherif returns a Summons, where he was
not summoned, by which he looses his Land, Action upon the Case lies against
the Sherif: See that deceit lies.

19 H. 6. fol. 29. Action upon the Case lies against the Sherifs Deputy, for
imbezzeling a Writ of (Habeas corpora) and it lies as well against him that
stirrs up another to do it, as against a doer.

16 H. 6. tit. 38. by Paston, If the Sherif return a man sufficient, upon a
Venire facias, by which the next Sherif i^ charged of the Issues, he shall have
an Action upon the Case against the Predecessor, for he cannot return nihil
against the return of his Predecessor.

1 H. 6. fol. 1. Precipe, Where the Tenant loses his Land, by default upon a
false return of the Sherif, as he returns the Tenant summoned, where he was
not, deceit lies, but if the Summoners were dead, Action upon the Case lies.

38 Book of Ass. 13. Action upon the Case lies against the Sherif, where he
made a Precept to one, which was no Bailif of the Franchise, which returns a
Jury, by which this was quasht to the damages, etc.

41 Book of Ass. 12. Deceit in the nature of an Action upon the Case, lies
against the Sherif, for that, that one was outlawed at his Suit, and that the
Defendant then Sheriff, would not return the Writ to the loss, etc.

30 Book of Ass. 5. Where the Bailiff of a Franchise returns a Pannell to the
Sheriff, and returns another Pannell of himself, this shall not be outed at
the request of the Bailif, but they shall have their action of the case against
the Sherif.

11 H. 6. f. 18. If a Lawyer be retained to look over evidence, and after he
discovers that to another person, by which, etc. Action upon the case lies
against him; contrary if he show him his evidence, and do not retain him.

15 H. 7. f. 14. By Fro: Where an Attorney appears for a man without
authority, and Imparles, where he might have pleaded misnaming, and by this
has lost the advantage of this Plea; Action upon the Case lies against him,
for that, that he appears without authority.

9 Ed. 4. tit. 118. B. Where a Guardian pleads falsely for an Infant, or vouches
one which is not sufficient to render in value to the Infant, the Infant shall
have a^ Action of Deceit.

Action upon the Case against Executors.
ACtion upon the Case was brought against the Executors of J. D. and Count that
J. S. bought things of the Plaintiff, and J. D. undertook, if he paid not at the
day, he would, and counts that he had Assets sufficient to pay all his Debts
and Legacies, and sufficient to content him, and it lies: Note, J. D. did not
make the bargain and contract, but undertook for J. S. and upon Assumpsit he
could not wage his Law, 12 H. 8. fol. 12.

27 H. 8. f. 29. Where Tatam was in execution, the Defendant says, if he would
discharge him out of execution, that such a Day he would pay him, if Tatam
could not: the same Law, if he says to a Baker, Deliver Tatam so much Bread,
and if he do not pay you such a Day, I will pay you; Debt does not lie against
me upon this Promise, but an Action upon the Case.

27 H. 8. f. 27. It seems if a man be indebted upon a simple Contract, leaves
Assets, and dies, the Action upon the Case does not lie against the Executors,
for the Testator might have waged his Law, but he shall have a Quo minus in the
Exchequer.

15 Ed. 4. f. 15. Where the Testator may wage his Law, as in Debt of Contract
made by him, and borrowed, Debt does not lie against his Executor.

Plowd. Com. f. 181. Action upon the Case was brought by Richard Norwood,
against the Executor of Tho: Gray, and counts that the Testator in
consideration of forty shillings to him paid, undertook to deliver to the
Plaintiff certain Corn at a Certain Day, and did not; and counts that the Goods
and Chattels of the said Tho: Gray the Testator, at the time of his Death were
sufficient to satisfy, as well all the Debts which the said Tho: Gray did owe
to any person, or to any persons, at the time of his Death, as to satisfy the
Plaintiff for the said forty shillings; and adjudge that this Action lies
against the Executors. And if an Action upon the Case be brought against
Executors upon a simple Contract, if the have no Assets but to pay Specialties,
they may plead that, and shall not be charged.

4 Ed. 3. chap. 7. is, That an Executor shall have Trespass of Goods carried
away in the life of the Testator, or before: an Action personal dies with the
person.

7 H. 4. fol. 8. Executors shall have Eiectione firm by the equity of the
Statute.

23 H. 8. Tit. 138. Waste, if a Termor make waste, and makes Executors, and
dies, the Action of waste is gone, for it does not lie against Executors, but
for waste made by them.

Action upon the Case, for not performing his Promise, and Assumpsit, and the
place, and how, where it shall be traversed.
WHere a man makes a promise, or an Assumption to do a thing, and does it not,
and there is no specialty of that promise, he shall have an Action upon the
Case, and not a Covenant, for that it was not by specialty; as for a hundred
pound paid, the Defendant bargained, and sold his Land to the Plaintiff, and
promised to infeoff him, and infeoffs another person, he shall have Deceit, or
Action upon the Case, 20 H. 6. f. 36.

3 H. 7. f. 14. Action upon the Case, and counts that the Defendant for 10. l.
took upon him to labor for the Plaintiff to J.S. that J. S. should let the
Manor of D. to him, and counts that the Defendant has taken that to himself,
the Action lies: so if he undertake for 10. l. paid, to infeoff him, and
infeoffs another, for this mis-doing, an Action of the case lies, 2 H. 7. f.
12. the same.

48 Ed. 3. f. 6. Action of the Case lies against him which took upon him to
cure the Plaintiff of a Wound, and did not, and by his negligence the Plaintiff
was worse.

3 H. 6. f. 37. Action upon the Case, and counts that the Defendant took upon
him to make a Mill before such a Day, and did not, but held that he ought to
have counted what he should have, for it shall be Quid pro quo, and otherwise
the Action does not lie.

2 H. 4. f. 4. Action upon the Case, and counts that the Defendant took upon
him to make him a House, and it seems it does not lie, I conceive that was, for
that he does not count what he should have for doing it, 11 H. 4. fol. 31.

14 H. 6. fol. 19. Action upon the Case, where one had bargained to him certain
Land for a certain sum, and undertook that a stranger released unto him. Where
a Carpenter covenants to make to me a House, or a Chyrurgeon takes upon him to
cure me of my Hurts, and they do not, for this not doing, it seems, an Action
upon the Case lies.

21 H. 6. f. 63. If one for ten Marks bargain with the Plaintiff for two Pipes
of Wine, and undertake to deliver them at D. and did not, an Action upon the
case lies, though that sounds in Covenant, for that there is no specialty, and
the same Law is of all other bargains; and by Paston, bargained, sold, or
bought: It is no diversity to one or the other.

19 H. 6. f. 49. Action upon the case that the Defendant assumed upon him to
cure his Horse of a certain Disease, and that be negligently, and carelessly
applied Medicines, that the Horse dyed, and it lies.

26 H. 8. Tit. 133. Action upon the Case, that the Plaintiff delivered Goods to
the Defendant, and the Defendant for ten shillings undertook to keep them safe,
and did not, to the loss, etc. The Defendant says, that he had them not by
the Delivery of the Plaintiff, good by Fitzh. and Shelley.

34 H. 8. Tit. 107. Action upon the Case in London, and counts that he was
Possessor of Wine and Stuff, and showed that certain in such a Ship. The
Defendant at London assumed for ten pounds, that if the Ship and Goods did not
come safe to London, and are there landed, that then he would satisfy a
hundred pounds to the Plaintiff; and that afterward the Ship was robbed upon
Trade, on the Sea; and for not satisfaction, he brought his Action; the
Plaintiff does not show where he was possessed, and yet good, and the truth
was, that the Bargain was beyond Sea, and not in London. But where the place is
not local, it is not material, and though he were robbed upon the main Sea, the
Action lies in London upon the Assumpsit. See after fol. 1.

19 H. 6. f. 49. Action upon the Case, that the Defendant at London took upon
him to cure his Horse, and that carelessly he gave him a Medicine that the Horse
died: the Defendant says, that at Oxford in the County of Oxford, he took to
cure his Horse, which says, without that, that he undertook at London, and
held a good Plea.

3 H. 4. f. 4. Deceit in Land of that, that the Defendant there did undertake,
that the Lord should cause him, to have certain Copyhold of the Manor of D.
in the County of Middlesex, and he assured that to others, and says, that he
might be sued where the Assumpsit was, or where the Land is. Inquire.

11 H. 4. fol. 4. Trespass by Executors in Middlesex, of Money taken in the
life of the Testator: the Defendant says, that the Testator was indebted unto
him, and delivered that to him in London, in the name of Payment, etc. and it
is no Answer to the Trespass in Middlesex, but he should say, without that,
that you took it in Middlesex, as the Plaintiff suppose, and is good, 7 H. 6.
f. 37. and 22 Ed. 4. f. 38. the same.

4 H. 6. fol. 12. Trespass of a Close broken in D. Defendant justifies in S.
for Common appendant, and ought to traverse, without that, that he is culpable
in D. 22 H. 6. fol. 40.

9 H. 6. f. 62. Trespass of digging a Turbary in D. in the County of
Middlesex, he cannot justify in the County of Essex, without that; that he is
guilty in the County of Middlesex, for he may plead not guilty, if it be in
another County, but in Trespass local in D. the Defendant may justify in S.
in the same County, without that, that he is guilty in D. but in Trespass
transitory in D. Defendant cannot justify in S. in the same County, without
that, that he is culpable in D. yet in Trespass of Battery, or Trespass of
Goods taken in D. in the County of Middlesex, and Defendant justifies in S. in
the County of Essex, without that, that he is culpable in D. in the County of
Middlesex, 5 H. 4. f. 2. 10 H. 7. f. 27. 11 H. 6. f. 20.

5 H. 4. f. 3. Trespass of Sheep taken at D. in the County of Hartford: the
Defendant justifies the taking in Smithfield in London, doing Damage, he ought
to say, without that, that he took them at D. in the County of Hartford.

6 R. 2. chap. 2. That Writs of Debt and Account, and all such whatsoever
hereafter shall be taken in their Counties: and it is ordained, that if
hereafter it be declared, the Contract thereof to be made in another County,
that then incontinently that Writ shall be quasht.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 48. By Needham, a man cannot plead in Abatement of a Writ, and
say, the Contract was made in another County, for the Statute is not intended,
but where it appears by the Writ, that the Contract was made in another County;
but before this time they have used to make Examination where the Contract was
made, and upon that abate the Writ, if it were in another County, but this not
used now. See 3 H. 6. Tit. 30. Examination, and fol. 36.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 1. Nuisance, that a Mill was erected in D. in the County of
Kent: the Defendant says, that he and all his Ancestors have been seized of a
Mill in the County of Essex, and the Mill fell by? Tempest, and he built it,
without that, that he is guilty of any Annoyance in D. in the County of Kent,
and does not traverse all the County, and yet good by the whole Court, for
that, that the thing is local, and annexed to Freehold; and contrary of
beating, or Goods carried away, which may be continued, and is transitory, 21
H. 6. f. 11.

2 M. Tit. 283. Traverse by, without that, of Trespass of Battery, or Goods
carried out, it is transitory, and is not local, as of Trees cut, and Grass
mowed; and therefore in Trespass transitory, the place shall not make Issue,
and is not traversable, no more then in Trespass upon the Case upon an
Assumption, and these may be continued; contrary of Trespass local. See after
Title Vill.

34 M. Tit. 268. Traverse by, (without that) Action for making false Cloth in
Bartholomew Fair, London, against the Statute: Defendant says, that he made
them well and truly in D. in the County of E. without that, that he made them
in Bartholomew Fair, London, as, etc. and it is good, 22 Ed. 4. f. 38. the same
verbatim.

Bargains and Contracts.
For that your Actions of Debt are in Court Barons of Bargains and Contracts,
it is convenient to speak something of Bargains and Contracts, and where the
Cause or Duty is traversable, and where otherwise adjudged, what is a good
Plea, and what Pleas he shall not have, for that he may wage his Law.
DEbt of that, that he let one Chamber, and Board for his Wife and Son, for
every Week six shillings, it is a good Plea, to say, that he did not let the
Chamber, for he destroys the Contract in part, and it is entire, 9 Ed. 4. fol.
1.

21 Ed. 4. f. 26. If the Plaintiff sell two Horses for forty shillings, and
counts in Debt, that the Defendant bought a Horse for forty shillings, the
Defendant may say, that he owes him nothing, in manner and form, or vary from
the Contract, and the Jury upon pain of Attaint ought to find for the
Defendant; the same Law is, if he sell one Horse, and counts that he bought two
Horses for forty shillings; or if he sell a Horfe for forty shillings, and
count that he bought an Ox for forty shillings, upon pleading that he owes
him nothing in manner and form, this is material to aid the Defendant.

3 H. 6. fol. 51. Debt and counts for Tallow bought for forty shillings: the
Defendant says, that he bought the Tallow for three shillings and four pence,
which he is ready to pay, and to the remnant wages his Law, and had it.

14 H. 8. fol. 17. If I sell Goods for so much as J. S. shall say, it is no
Bargain forthwith, and yet if he sell them to another, before J.S. says, what
he shall pay, Action upon the Case it seems lies.

14 H. 8. fol. 20. If Lessee for years grant his Interest to one upon
Condition, that he obtain the good will of the first Lessor, and pay so much as
he shall arbitrate, and he obtain his favor, this is a good Contract: but
there agreed, that is but a Communication without (Quid pro quo) forthwith, or
at the Day agreed, as here. If you say, that you will give to me ten pounds for
my Horse, and you do not pay forthwith, it is no Bargain; but if you be telling
out your Money, he cannot sell that to another in the mean time, for there was
no fault in you: but if Agreement be, that you shall give ten pounds for my
Horse, and I give a Penny in earnest, that seems a perfect Bargain, and you
shall have the Horse, and I shall have the Money by Action of Debt, 15 H. 7. f.
6.

10 Ed. 4. f. 21. If a Priest be hired to sing for ten pounds per annum, he is
not compellable to serve, as a common Laborer is, but if he depart within the
term, his Wages is entire, and shall have nothing, and there it seems if one
sels his Horse to me for twenty shillings, he may keep him till I have paid him.

17 Ed. 4. f. 1. Trespass of Corn taken: Defendant says, the Bargain was,
that the Defendant should go to J. S. and see the Corn, and if they liked upon
the view, and gave forty pence for every Acre that he should have it: and
says, that he liked them upon the view, and took them, and it is no good Plea;
for notwithstanding the Bargain was, that he should have upon his good liking
upon view, yet it is upon giving sorty pence for every Acre also, and he cannot
take them before he pay, for that is parcel of the Contract. And so if one
agree upon the price for Wares, he cannot take them before he pay, unless he
have Day of Payment given unto him.

18 Ed. 4. f. 6. The Husband sels Trees growing upon the Land of his Wife for
twenty pound, and the Buyer takes part of the Trees, and paid ten pound, and
after the Wife died without Issue, so that the Husband shall not be Tenant by
the Courtesy: The Husband shall have Debt for the ten pound, for that, that the
contract was entire, and yet the Buyer shall not have the residue of the Trees.
And where one sells another man's Horse, which he has by wrong for ten pound,
out of an open Market, and the owner take the Horse, as he may; yet debt lies
for the ten pound, for that, that the Contract was once executed, and by Brian,
if one sells a Horse for ten pound he may keep him if he will till he be paid.

20 H. 6. f. 22. A man seized in fee of land, sels the trees, and after makes a
Feoffment in fee to another before the cutting, the buyer shall have the Trees.

21 H. 7. f. 6. by Fineux, If one ask the price of a Cloth of a Merchant in
London, and he says, twenty shillings, and the party says he will give it,
and he takes the Cloth the Merchant may have action of Debt for the twenty
shillings, or keep it till he be paid, and if the other take it against his
will, he shall have trespass at his choice

14 H. 8. f. 17. If I sell my Horse for so much as J.S. shall say, it is said
it is no bargain forthwith, but if he sell that to another before J.S. have
said what he shall have, I shall have an action upon the case.

23 H. 6. f. 50. Debt, the Plaintiff counts that he sold twenty Acres of land to
the Defendant for twenty pound, which he demanded, and by Newton though the
Plaintiff do not infeof the Defendant, yet he shall have Debt, and the Defendant
shall have an action upon the case against the Plaintiff: See, 3 H. 7. f. 14.

2 H. 7. f. 12. Action upon the case lies for that, that the Defendant has
bargained and sold to him lands, and that he has infeoffed another of them and
the Defendant traverses the Feoffment to another, and that proves that this is
the cause of his action and not the bargain.

18 Ed. 4. f. 16. If the bargain were that the Plaintiff should give ten pound
for so much wood, if he liked it, or it pleased him upon the sight thereof,
this is a bargain at the buyers pleasure: Now if first upon the sight they
disagree, then it is a void bargain, though he after agree to it, and if he
agree upon the sight it is a perfect bargain, though after he disagree.

5. H. 7. f. 41. One sells Goods or Wares, and after the Sale he warrants them,
this warranty made at another time then at the Sale is void.

9 H. 7. f. 22. If the Seller warrant the thing sold, the Buyer may have
deceit; though he has not paid the Money, for the Seller may have Debt.

10 H. 7. f. 7. Agreed by the Court, If I sell certain Goods to another for a
certain sum, although he do not pay the Money, if a day of payment be
appointed, that is a good bargain, and the property altered by this sale. And
by Hussy and Bria^: A Victualler shall be compelled to sell his victual, if
the Buyer tender him ready payment, and otherwise not, 39 H. 6. f. 18. contrary
by Prisot.

21 H. 7. f. 6. By Fineux, If one demand the price of a Cloth of a Merchant in
London and he says twenty shillings, and the party says he will give it, and
takes the cloth it is in election to make that a bargain, and to have an
action of debt, or to keep it, till he be paid, and if the other take the Cloth
by reason of this bargain, against his will, he may have action of trespass.

Plow. Com. f. 309. Where one undertakes by word to make a House without
consideration, that he shall have no action.

Plow. Com. fol. 11. There says, That bargains, or agreements conditional,
shall be said good; after that the condition is performed, but before they are
but words.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 21. Where one becomes suerty for J. S. and in consideration,
will give him longer day of payment, if J. S. do not pay he will, action upon
the case lies

27 H. 8. f. 33. If I sell to you twelve barrells of Ale, you shall not have
the barrells but the ale, but if it were twelve barrells of Wine it is
otherwise, for this is the usage and intent.

1 H. 7. f. 13. Debt upon buying Oil, for a hundred Marks paid, and so,
though of simple contract, it seems the Defendant may say, that he bought with
condition that he should pay when he had uttered them, without that that the
Plaintiff sold in manner and form, though he might have waged his Law.

21 Ed. 4. f. 49. Debt of buying a Horse at I. in the County of Middlesex:
Defendant may say that he bought him in London, upon condition, without that,
that he bought him in I. in the County of Middlesex, but he cannot say that he
bought him in another County, then the Plaintiff counts, unless it were that
he pleads, that it was upon condition.

33 H. 6. fol. 49. Debt, The Defendant cannot traverie the Contract, where he
may wage his Law, but the Defendant may say, that the bargain was upon
condition, and so traverse that, 21 Ed. 4. fol. 28.

34 H. 6. f. 46. Debt upon a bargain at D. the Defendant cannot say that it
was upon condition at S. in the same County, but in another County he may.

8 H. 6. fol. 53. Debt upon award upon arbitrament, it is no Plea for the
Defendant to say, that he never submitted to their award, for that he may wage
his Law, he cannot traverse the cause of the duty.

9 Ed. 4. f. 39. Where a bargain is to pay to the Plaintiff sive shillings, or
a gown such a day, it is at the choice of the Plaintiff after the day, to
demand one or the other which he will.

8 H. 6 fol. 53. Debt upon Contract, he cannot say no such Contract, or that he
did not buy, for he cannot traverse the cause of the duty, where he may wage
his Law, 38 H. 6. fol. 22.

11 H. 7. fol. 4. Where a man may wage his Law, he cannot plead-payment in a
foreign County. But in Debt upon a Lease for years by Indenture, the
Defendant may plead payment in a foreign County, and that is good, but in the
same County he ought to conclude, and so he owes him nothing, 10 H. 7. f. 4.

20 H. 6. f. 17. Debt upon arrerages of account, payment in another County
without concluding, and so he owes him nothing, is good, but where he may wage
his, Law his Plea is not good.

22 Book of Assizes 41. Where one undertakes to carry his carriage in a Boat
and over-chargeth it, by which his loading perish, action upon the case lies.

42 Book of Ass. 8. Action upon the case lies against J.S. for that, that the
Plaintiff had credit in J.S. and bought of J. S. an Ox, as his Goods where it
was the Ox of J.D.

27 H. 8. fol. 34. It seems if you pay to me twenty pound that then you shall
have my Lease, and term of years, this is but a Communication, if you do not
pay, and it is a Bargain conditional, that is, at your choice.

Doctor and Student, 104. Promise and assumpsit, for a thing past is not good.
Inquire: as I promise to give to you forty pounds, for that you have built me a
House, it is no good Contract, for it should be perfect at the time of the
Contract.

27 Ed. 3. Tit. 6. Apportionment, Br. A man retained to serve for a year, for
ten pounds at two Feasts, and the Master dies after the first Feast, he shall
have Wages but for one Feast; but where he was retained for ten pounds, whole
by the year, and he departs within the year, he shall have no Wages, for
Contract shall not be apportioned.

21 Ed. 3. Tit. 83. Debt, where a man pays ten pounds for teaching his Son
three years, the Son shall not have the ten pounds again which is paid, but if
the Money were not paid it is otherwise, for the Cause ceasing the Effect
cease.

1 H. 6. fol. 8. By Bab. If I be your Debtor in twenty pounds by a simple
Contract, and I give you a Bond for the same, if you bring Debt upon the
Bargain, I shall plead this well in the Dischage thereof.

3 H. 4. fol. 20. Debt of twenty pounds upon a Contract: the Defendant says,
that the Plaintiff after took a Bond of ten pounds, parcel of it, and held a
good Plea to the whole Bargain; for a Bargain determined in parcel, is
determined in all, for it is entire.

19 H. 8. Tit 29. If a man be indebted to me by Bargain, and after gives me a
Bond for the same Debt, the Bargain by that is determined, for in Debt upon the
Bargain, it it a good Plea, that he has a Bond for the same Debt; but if a
stranger make to me a Bond for the same Debt, yet the Contract remains, for
that, that it is by another person, and both are now Debtors, 21 H. 7. f. 5.

11 H. 4. f. 23. If one takes my Beasts by wrong from my Bailiff, and after I
give them to him; by Hank. Bailiff shall have no Trespass.

2 Ed. 4. f. 15. By Danby, Needham, and Moyl, If I deliver Goods to J.S. and a
stranger takes them, and after I give the Goods to another stranger, this is a
good Gift: but Littleton says, that the first stranger has property as
Trespassor, and for that he does not allow the Gift good.

6 H. 7. f. 9. By Brian, A man cannot give or release his Right by word, though
it be a personal thing. Inquire.

10 H. 7. fol. 27. By Brian, if a man take my Goods by wrong, and I give them
to him, that the Gift is void, as well as if they were given to a stranger: but
Keeble would that to be good, and inure as a Release, and said, that Release by
word of a Chattell, is good as well as with a Condition.

21 H. 6. fol. 43. It seems one may contract, and sell all his Tithes of his
Parish for seven years to come, or the profits of his Court for seven years,
and it is good.

42 Ed. 3. fol. 24. One may contract and grant, that he shall not be impeached
of Waste, and dispense with a thing that is not in being, for that, that Grant
is a Covenant, but he cannot release the Waste to come.

9 H. 6. fol. 12. Where the Queen grants twenty pounds out of the great Custom
of London, the Custom is not a thing in being, but is paid by chance, and for
that the person of the Queen is charged by a Writ of Annuity.

6 H. 7. fol. 5. It seems that the King may grant a thing not in (being) if
that sound in Covenant, as to be discharged of Tithes, or of collecting of
Tenths to be granteb by Convocation.

4 H. 7. f. 10. If on the first Day of May, lets to begin at Saint Michael
next, the Lessee may grant or sell that term before the Feast of Saint
Michael, but not release or surrender that, 22 Ed. 4. Tit. Grants, 110.

24 Ed. 3. Tit. 47. Grants, Br. If a common person grants award, and so from
Heir to Heir, till one of them come to full age: it is not good for award which
shall fall afterward, contrary of such a grant made by the King.

12 Ed. 4. f. 3. Where a common person has but right of Reversion, he cannot
grant it; and so it seems he cannot grant an Escheat of his Tenant, before that
fall.

Fitzh. 120. K. If one promise another ten pounds to marry his Daughter, and he
marry her, this is Contract in our Law, upon which he shall have Debt. See 14
Ed. 4. f. 6. and 15 Ed. 4.31.

Fitzh. 44. If one promise another ten pounds to marry his Daughter, if he
marry his Daughter it is a good Contract in our Law, and if he sue for that ten
pounds in Court Christian, Prohibition lies; but if he promise one with his
Daughter in Marriage ten pounds, he shall sue for that in Court Christian.

17 Ed. 4. fol. 4. If a man promise a certain sum of Money to another to marry
his Daughter or Servant, which he marries accordingly, Debt does not lie, for
it is Spiritual, contrary, Rogers and Sulyard; for it is (one for another)
though it were said, contrary, and the reason was, it shall be sued in the
Spiritual Court for this Cause.

22. Book of Assizes, 70. If one promise, that if he will marry his Daughter,
he shall have ten pounds, this is a Contract, this is a Promise in our Law, and
he shall have Debt: but if he say, he will give with his Daughter ten pounds,
he ought to demand that before the Ordinary.

45 Ed. 3. f. 24. Where Covenant was by Deed between the Plaintiff and
Defendant, that if the Plaintiff took to Wife the Daughter of the Defendant,
that then he shall be bound to him in a hundred pounds; and if he takes her to
Wife, Action of Debt lies, and the Court shall not be out of Jurisdiction
though that touch Matrimony, for that, that this was by Deed, but otherwise it
is, if it were without Deed.

37 H. 6. f. 9. By Prisot, if an Agreement be made, that A. shall take the
Daughter of B. in Marriage, and if he marries her there it is said, that he
shall not have Debt; for it seems it is not (Quid pro quo) Inquire: for if one
sels a Horse for ten pounds, and has no Horse, yet he shall have Debt for
that, and yet it is not (one for another) and where I sell my Land in D. for
ten pounds, Debt lies, and yet he has not the Land before Livery.

27 Book of Assizes, 29. Where a man sels all the Trees in his VVood, and
agrees that the same Buyer shall not cut them before Michaelmas next, if Hauks
in the mean time are in the Trees, it seems that the Seller shall have them.

14 H. 8. fol. 1. If a man let Land, except the VVood and under-wood, and
Hernes and Shovelers make their Nests in the Trees, the Lessor shall have them,
for the Trees are excepted, and the Nests in the Trees; and the same Law of
Akorns, which come by reason of the Trees.

7 H. 7. fol. 5. If a man sell a Lease of Land, and certain Cloth for ten
pounds, the Contract is entire, and cannot be severed: and if one of them were
by defeasible Title, and divested from the Vendee, yet the Seller shall have
the whole sum, for the Contract is entire, and cannot be severed. See 12 H. 8.
f. 13. and 9 Ed. 4. fol. 1.

9 H. 7. f. 22. If a man sell stuff for forty pounds, and deliver the stuff,
and no Money paid, nor Day appointed, yet it is a good Bargain, and he shall
have Debt for the forty pounds: but 11 H. 4. f. 33. If one assume to make the
Plaintiff a House before such a Day, and does not, unless it be for such a
sum of Money, Action upon the Case does not lie, for it is a naked Bargain.

9 Ed. 4. f. 54. By Littleton, if a man recovers in Debt upon a Contract, and
does not take Execution, yet he cannot have new Action of Debt upon the
Contract, for the Contract is determined by the Judgment, and the nature of
the Duty changed to a Record. And by Danby and Moyle, in Account, Debt,
Trespass, and such like, it is no Plea, that the Plaintiff at another time
recovered in them, unless he said, that he had Execution also; contrary
Littleton and Choke. See there in Debt upon an Obligation seems contrary.

2 R. 3. f. 14. Where one brings Detinue, and is barrd by Law waging, he shall
not have an Account afterward; for Detinue affirms property in him, and
Account disaffirmes that.

12 Ed. 4. fol. 13. Where is a Bar by waging of Law in Detinue, one shall not
have after an Action upon the Case, for negligent keeping the thing, as it
seems.

40 E. 3. fol 27. Where in Trespass one recovers in London, and be brought in
(the thing judged) he cannot refuse this Judgment, and sue for the Trespass
in a higher Court.

20 H. 6. fol. 12. Trespass of Goods taken, it is a good Plea that you at
another time brought Trespass against me, and J. S. and that J. S. appeared,
and pleaded not guilty, and it was found against him, and that the Plaintiff
had Judgment, for it is carried in Damages, and reduced into the thing judged,
and may have Execution at his pleasure: but otherwise it is in Debt, for there
it is not a good Bar, unless he pleads, that he had Judgment, and Execution
against one.

23 H. 8. Tit. 105. Action upon the Case, Debt of twenty pounds, if the
Defendant has waged his Law in this Action, and the Plaintiff brings an Action
upon the Case, it is a good Plea for the Defendant to say, that at another time
he was barred in Debt for the same, by waging of Law, 2 R. f.

Trespass, if in Debt, or other Action in the common Bench, the Defendant
pleads Recovery of that in a Court of Franchise, or that the Plaintiff is
barred in a Court of Franchise, though it be not of Record here, yet it seems
that the Defendant shall have advantage of Record, and otherwise shall be a
mischief. 46 Ed. 3. f. 17.

17 Ed. 3. Tit. Bar, 246. Debt upon an Obligation, it is no Plea, that at
another time before the Mayor of London, the Plaintiff recovered upon the same
Obligation against the Defendant, and had Execution, it is no Plea, for that,
that the Obligation was not Damnum, nor the Defendant does not show
Acquittance, and the Plaintiff by Award of the Court recovered.

4 H. 7. f. 8. Three bound in an Obligation, jointly, and severally; it is no
Bar for one to say, that he recovered against another; but that he recovered,
and had Execution, is good; and he ought to show Acquittance of the Payment, or
otherwise, he shall be charged.

5 Ed. 4. fol. 5. Debt by several Precipes against two by Choke, where he has
Execution against one, he shall not have against the other afterward.

22 Ed. 4. fol. 7. Two are bound in an Obligation joynty, and severally; if I
have Execution against one, this is a Bar against the other, but not Judgment
only.

Husband and Wife.
What Contract and Act of a married Wife, Bailiff, and Servant, shall bind the
Husband, or Master, and what not.
A Married Wife has no Will, but the Will of her Husband, and for that, if a
married Wife sell or give Goods, and the Husband agree before or after it is
good; and it is his Will, and his Sale; and if the Bargain be advantage or
disadvantage to the Husband, Agreement of the Husband makes it good: the same
Law of an Assumpsit, made to a married Wife, to deliver one out of Execution.

21 H. 7. fol. 40. The Husband shall not be charged by a Bargain of the Wife,
but if it come to the use of the Husband, and he agree, it is good: but if it
come to the use of the House, if he has not notice of it, or that it was not
bought by his commandment, he shall not be charged, by Fineux, for a married
Woman cannot do any thing, which may turn her Husband into prejudice, and
contrary of that which is for his advantage: but if I command my Wife to buy a
thing necessary, and she buys it, and comes to my use, this general
commandment (it is said) shall bind me, though I do not expresie what things:
but if my Wife without my commandment buy a thing for my Household, as Bread,
etc. and I have no knowledge of it, though that be spent in my House, I shall
not be thereof charged, by Fineux.

11 H. 6. fol. 38. By Martin, it seems the Husband shall be charged for
necessary Apparel of his Wife, but not for superfluous Apparel; for Martin
says, if my Wife buy of a man, and she arrayes her self better then belongs
to her Estate, I shall not be charged to pay this stuff taken up, though it
come to the use and profit of the Husband, for that, that the Wife of
necessity ought to be apparrelled, but for that that passes her Estate, her
Husband shall not be charged.

20 H. 6. fol. 23. By Newton, buying by the Wife or Servant, though it come to
the use of the Husband, or Master, it shall not charge the Husband or Master,
Not. Brev. fol. 61. the same. Note, there ought to be Assent and Agreement of
the Husband and Master, if they shall be charged, is to be intended upon that.

Doct. and Stud. f. 137. N. If a man send his Servant to sell a thing, which he
knows to be defective, and commands him to sell it to such a man, Deceit hes;
but if it be generally, to whom he could, it lies not against the Master, 9 H.
6. f. 254.

Fitzh. 120. F. A man shall be charged in debt for a bargain of his Bailiffe,
or his Servant, where he gives authority to his Bailiff or his Servant to buy
and sell for him, and so for a bargain made by his Wife, if he give authority
to his Wife, and otherwise not.

34 Ed. 1. tit. 163. Debt F. held there, That where a Woman receives ten
Quarters of Corn to the profit of the Husband, he shall be charged; but where
he counts, that the Wife borrowed ten Quarters of Corn, which came to the
profit of the Husband, he shall not be charged in Debt.

13 R. 2. tit. 50. Account, Where Tonels of Wine are delivered to a married
Wife, if the Husband agree to it, he shall be charged, and otherwise not.

27 Book of Ass. 5. If a man has a Bailiff known, and who has used to fell
the Beasts of his Master at the Market, this is a good sale, though he has no
special VVarrant to fell his Beasts: And if such a Bailiff pledge the Goods of
his Master; that is, Ox or Horse, for Corn, which comes to the use of his
Master, the Master shall not have trespass of the sale or pledging.

8 Ed. 4. fol. 13. If I make a man my Bailiffe of my Manor, he cannot make a
Lease of the Manor, nor of parcel, without special commandment of his
Master to do it, for that shall not bind the Master.

8 Ed. 4. tit. 14. Contract, Brook, If a man send his servant to buy certain
Goods, or his Factor or Attorney, to buy for him Merchandise, and he buy, etc.
The Master shall be charged, though that the Goods never came to his hands, and
though that the Master have no notice of that; and the Master cannot
countermand without notice given to the Servant, Attorney, or Factor, by Pigot
and Fairfax,

2 Ed. 4. f. 5. If my Servant in Cheapside which has power to sell, give my
Wares, it is said I shall have trespass against the Receiver; but if I deliver
Goods to keep to my use, and he gives them, I shall not have trespass, for he
has no notice whose Goods they are, as in the case of a Servant.

Doctor and Student, fol. 137. If the servant borrow Money in the name of his
Master, his Master shall not be charged, unless they come to the use of his
Master, and by his commandment: The same Law of a bargain made by the
servant; but if the Master send his servant to buy things, and he buys them,
the Master shall be charged; And if he buy a thing, and do not speak of the
Master, and it comes to the use of the Master, the Master shall be charged.

2 R. 2. Slatham, fol. 65. Debt is maintainable against the Master of a thing
bought by his man, if the Goods come to the use of his Master, notwithstanding
that his servant have no warrant of his Master to do it, if it be so that he
be known to be his servant.

11 Ed. 4. fol. 7. If a servant which has authority to sell and warrant the
thing, deceit does not lie against the Master if it be corrupt.

21. H. 7. fol. 27. by Read, If I command my servant to distraine, and he rides
upon the distress, he shall be punished and not I.

How shall the Husband have by his Wife, Goods and Chattells, whereof he takes
charge, and how he shall be charged for the Wife.
IF a man take a Wife which has Goods, now the Goods are in the Husband, 26 H.
8. fol. 4.

Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 418. A woman which has a Lease for years, or
Goods, takes a Husband, they are in him.

7 H. 6. fol. 1. If a woman have a Lease for years, and takes a Husband, this
is in him, but if he grant a rent charge out of that and dies, the Wife shall
have the term discharged: And by Strange, If an Obligation be made to a woman
sole, and she take a Husband, he may release that; but if the Husband suffer
the Obligation to remain and dies, the Wife shall have that, and not the
Executors of the Husband, 9 H. 6. fol. 52. the same.

21 H. 7. fol. 29. Where a woman is Executrix, and takes a Husband, the Goods
of the Testator vests in the Husband, and if the Husband give or release them,
he may, but if the Husband dye, and do not release them, they remain to the
woman again.

Fitzh. fol. 69. If Beasts of a lone woman be taken, and she take a Husband,
he alone shall have a Replevin, for that that the property is in him only.

Fitzh. 142. I. If a man have the Wardship of one in the right of his Wife,
and after his Wife dies, yet he shall hold that, for it was a thing vested in
him.

Perhins 107. Where the Husband has ret^ne in right of his Wife, and he
aliens that and dies, his Wife shall not have that, but if he do not alien
that and dies, she shall have it.

Perkins 165. A man has twenty years term in right of his Wife, and lets
for ten years, rendering rent and dies, his Wife shall have the Rent, and the
residue of the term.

Fitzh. 119 O. If a man takes a Wife, which was indebted to other persons, the
Husband and the Wife shall be ^ued for this debt, living the Wife; but if the
Wife dye, the Husband shall not be charged, unless it were recoverd during
the Coverture.

Fitzh. 121. If a man lets Land to a Woman for life, rendering Rent, and she
takes a Husband, and after the Rent is behind, and the Wife dies, the Husband
shall be charged, for that that he took the profit; otherwise it is of an
Obligation made by his Wife before marriage, the Husband shall not be charged,
unless recovery were of that during the marriage.

Fitzh. 121. D. A woman has Rent for Dower, and takes a Husband, and the Rent
is behind, and the Wife after dies, the Husband shall have Debt for this Rent:
But if a man be bound to a woman, and she takes a Husband, and the day of
payment comes during the marriage, and after the Wife dies, the Husband shall
not have debt upon this Obligation, for that that it was a duty to the Wife,
and a thing in action before the marriage.

Essoyne.
AFter that any has put himself into any Inquest, who has appeared or might
have appeared in these Writs, shall have but one Essoyne, or one default, etc.
West. 2. chap. 27. Marlcbridge chap. 13.

Marlb. chap. 19. Of Essoynes it is provided, that in Counry, Hundred, or in
Court Baron, or other Courts, none shall have need to swear to warrant his
Essoyne.

Westminster. 1. chap. 42. For that, that Demandants which bring actions against many
Coparceners and Joynt-Tenants, they often avoid by Essoyne.

It is provided, that those Tenants shall not have Essoyne but for one day, no
more then one sole-Tenant should have, so that now he cannot avoid, but only
have an Essoyne, see Marleb. chap. 9.

Westminster. 1. chap. 43. If one be essoyned as beyond the Seas, where he is in
England day of the Summons, it is provided that this Essoyne be not allowed, if
the Demandant will averr that he was in England, the day that the Summons was
made, and three weeks after: But let it be adjourned.

And if the Tenant be attaint which was in England, day of the Summons, and
three weeks after, the Essoyne shall turn to him for a default.

Westminster. 1. chap. 41. In a Writ of Assise, of Attaints, and Juris utrum,
provided it is for travail of Jurors, that if the Tenant once appear in the
Court, never after no Tenant can essoyne him.

Gloucester 1. chap. 18. Provided that in other Pleas then Trespass or
Attachments and Distress lying, if the Defendant make himself to be essoyned
of the Kings Service, and does not bring his Warrant at the day which is given
unto him by his Essoyne, he shall render to the Plaintiff Damages of the torn
of twenty shillings, or of more; according to the discretion of the Justices,
and be in the Kings mercy.

Westminster. 2. chap. 12. There lies not for one that brings an appeal of the death
of a man, an Essoyne.

West. 2. chap. 17. In the Circuit of the Justices, there is no Essoine
admitted of being sick in bed, of a Tenement, unless he which makes himself to
be Essoyned, truly be sick, for if it be excepted against by the Demandant,
that the Tenant is not sick, nor in that state that he cannot come before the
Justices, they will receive a reproach, and if this be disproved by an Inquest,
let that Essoyne be turned to a default, neither lies that Essoyne in a Writ of
right between two claimings by the same descent.

West. 2. chapter 27. After that any has put himself upon any Inquest, at the next
day let there be an Essoyne allowed to him, but at other days following by
Essoyn, let there be no deferring of taking the Inquisition whether he first
had an Essoyne or not, neither let any Essoyne be admitted, after the day
given, by the request of the parties, in case that the parties consent to come
without an Essoyne.

Westminster. 2. chap. 28. When by the Statute of, Westminster. 1. chap. 41. It is
appointed, that after the Tenants have once appeared in the Court, there shall
be no Essoyns allowed them in Writs of Assise, in the same manner from hence
let it be observed of Petitioners.

The Statute of Essoynes questioned, 12 Ed. 2.

That Essoynes do not lie in these following Cases, that is,

There lies no Essoyn:

Because, the Land is taken into the Kings hand.

Because, he is restrained by Land.

Because, there is granted to him from hence Judgment, if the Jurors come.

Because, he was seen in the Court.

Because, at another time he essoyned himself, as being not able to come.

He shall not be essoyned, as being beyond Sea.

Because, such a one essoyned him such a Day.

Because, it was commanded the Sheriff, that he should make the party to come,
41 Ed. 3 f. 29.

Because, a Woman is not in the Kings Service, but because a Nurse, Midwife,
or sent for by a Writ, to inspect the Belly.

Because, she seems to be deceived in her Dower, and deferring of Right.

Because, such a Complaint has not found Sureties to prosecute.

Because, the Attorney was essoyned.

Because, he has an Attorney in his Complaint.

Because, he is essoyned, witnessed, etc. that he is not in the Kings Service.

Because, the Summons is not testified, or part of the Return not attached.

Because, at another time he was essoyned of the Kings Service, and now did not
send his VVarrant.

Because, re-summons was in the last Presentment, or Death of his Ancestor, 30.
Book of Assizes 51.

Because, such a one is not named in the Writ.

Because, it was commanded the Sheriff, that he should distrain him to come by
his Land and Chattels.

Because, it was commanded the Bishop, that he should make him come.

Because, the time was past.

But it is to be known, that an Essoyn of the Kings Service is allowed after
the great Cape, and the small Cape.

1 H. 6. f. 4. Trespass, Issue was if the Land were the Freehold of the
Plaintiff, or of the Lessor of the Defendant, and after Issue the Defendant
prayed aid of his Le or, and at the Summons returned, the Prayee was essoyned,
and at the Day which he had by the Essoyn he joined, and at the (Venire facias)
returned, the Prayee cast Essoyn, and it lies, for that that the Statute is,
Por^quam, etc.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 38. Precipe, the Tenant tenders his Law, and this is at Issue,
for that after he shall have but one Essoyn, 37 H. 6. f. 2. The Plaintiff was
essoyned at the Day of the Law, 9 H. 5. f. 5 the same.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 21. One is essoyned after Issue in London, and at the Day in
Bench upon a foreign matter, is there essoyned again, for it is the first Day
in Bench.

21 Ed. 4. f. 19. Debt, Issue was upon the custom of London, and upon Writ to
certify that, Defendant essoyned, and lies after Issue by the common Law, for
after every mean Appearance, it lies by the common Law, though the Statute be
(after Inquest) which is not here, and for that the Essoyn is allowed.

21 Ed. 4. f. 19. Debt, Issue was upon the custom of London, and upon a Writ
to certify that, Defendant is essoyned, and it lies after Issue by the common
Law, for after every mean Appearance, it lies by the common Law, and though the
Statute be after Inquest, this is not here.

34 H. 6. f. 18. Precipe, the Tenant prays aid of him in Reversion, and had
it, and at the Summons to aid him returned, the Prayee was essoyned, and had a
Day of that Essoyn, and at the Day of that Essoyn the Tenant was essoyned, and
had it.

22 Ed. 3. fol. 4. Quare impedit, the Plaintiff was essoyned at the (Distringas
Juratores) and the Inquest came and adjourned, but it seems that the Defendant
shall not be essoyned at this Day.

25 Ed. 3. f 38. Scire facias, the Tenant pleads to the Issue, and at the next
Day would have been essoyned, and could not, for it is delay, which shall not
be in a (Scire facias) by the Statute of Westminster. 2. chap. 45.2 H. 7. fol. 10.39
H. 6. f. 53.

1 H. 7. fol. 8. There was an Essoyn cast upon an (alias venire facias) where
the first was not served.

1 Ed. 3. f. 38. Waste, Venire facias was abated first, and at the second
Venire facias, Defendant was essoyned, and that allowed, for the first was as
nothing.

9 H. 5. fol. 12. Dum non fuit compos^mentis, Venire facias awarded, and not
returned, and Sicut alias returned, the Tenant was essoyned, and it does not
lie, for it is not the first Day after the Issue.

3 H. 6. fol. 57. Debt, the parties were at Issue, and a Distringas Juratores
returned, at which Day the Defendant cast an Essoyn of the Kings Service, and
that Essoyn was not allowed.

14 H. 6. f. 20. The Plaintiff cast an Essoyn, at the Habeas corpora Juratorum,
and this turned upon him in Default, for the Essoyn does not lie at the second
Day, neither for the Plaintiff, nor for the Defendant, but is outed by the
Statute, Westminster. 2. chap. 27. which is Postquam aliquis, etc. And this Statute
is intended as well for the Plaintiff as the Defendant.

12 H. 4. fol. 24. Where an Essoyn de malo veniendi, was before the Statute of
Marlebridge, chap. 19. The Essoyner swears, that he was sick.

2 Ed. 4. f. 16. Where Essoyn of Service of the King is cast in, it seems that
the Essoyner shall be sworn, for that, 19 H. 6. f. 51. the same.

20 H. 6. f. 22. Where one is essoyned of the Kings Service, the Essoyner
shall be examined, and sworn upon a Book, if he be in the Kings Service or not,
and not as he is informed, otherwise the Essoyn shall not be allowed.

27 H. 6. fol. 2. Debt, the Defendant offers to wage his Law, and had Day, etc.
and at the Day the Plaintiff was essoyned, and after at that Day the Defendant
was essoyned, and after at that Day the Plaintiff cast in another Essoyn, and
it lies well by the Court, for so long as the Plaintiff and Defendant agree,
they may fourch by Essoyn.

9 H. 6. fol. 21. Quem redditum reddit, against two, held that they cannot
fourch by Distress or Essoyn: Note, that by 33. H. 6. f. 6. Essoyn does not
lie in this Action, for that that this is Judicial.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 20. Dower, against A.B.C. and at the Day A. makes Default, and
B. was essoyned, and C. appears, and the same Day given to C. and at the Day A.
made another Default, and B. appeared, and C. cast the Essoyn, Well, for every
one shall have an Essoyn, notwithstanding the Statute of Marlebridge, chap. 19.
but after they shall not have more Essoynes.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 20. Precipe, against the Husband and his Wife, before
Appearance, each one may be essoyned after other, but not after again, 4 H. 6.
f. 6.9 H. 6. f. 44.

3. H. 7. f. 13. Precipe: the Tenant was essoyned, and after vouched, and the
Vouchee was essoyned, at the Day the Tenant was essoyned, and it does not lie,
22 Ed. 4. f. 14.

22 Ed. 3. fol. 5. Precipe, against three at the Summons, one was essoyned, and
others have the same Days, at which Day another was essoyned, and the same
Day, etc. and the Essoyn adjourned, but after they have all appeared, they
cannot fourch or avoid.

29 Ed. 3. fol. 25. Formed on, against a Husband and his Wife, and at the
first Day the Husband appeared, and the Wife was essoyned, and at the second
Day the Wife appeared, and the Husband is essoyned and allowed, but after that
they have appeared they cannot fourch by Essoyn, for the Statute is, that
Coparceners and Joint-tenants cannot at any time fourch or avoid, and so of the
Husband and the Wife, 30 Ed. 3. f. 25. See 38 Ed. 3. f. 1. for fourching by
Distress, 4 H. 6. f. 6.

3 H. 6. fol. 36. Debt against a Parson of the Arrerages of an Annuity, the
Defendant prayed aid of the Patron and Ordinary, and there were four Patrons,
and at the Summons to aid, one was essoyned, and the three have the same Day,
and at the Day he essoyned appeared, and another essoyned, etc. and now, after
every other was essoyned one after another, the first cast the Essoyn, and
could not fourch, 33 H. 6. f. 28.

Over the Sea, and the Kings Service.
FOrtescue says, where the party has an Attorney in Court, he shall not be
essoyned of being beyond Sea; therefore not of the Kings Service: 19 H. 6. f.
57.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 18. At the small Cape against the Husband and Wife, the Husband
was essoyned of the Kings Service, notwithstanding that he had an Attorney not
essoyned, for the Attorney shall not be essoyned of this Essoyn.

Britton, fol. 281. Our Service as being in Our power, and the defense of Us,
and of Our People, and of Our Realm.

35 H. 6. f. 1. Where one essoyned of the Kings Service, and has a Day to
bring that in, he ought to bring that in, under the great Seal of the King, and
not the privy Seal.

19 H. 6. f. 50. If one be the Kings Carver, he shall not be essoyned of the
Kings Service; and yet the Woman which is Landerer, or Nurse, shall be essoyned
of the Kings Service.

4 H. 6. f. 8. One effoyned of the Kings Service, which is under Bail, and
cannot, for by the Bail he is intended in Prison, and by the Essoyn at large.

10 H. 4. f. 6. Quareimpedit, Essoyn of the Kings Service is not allowable for
the mischief of Lapps, 27. H. 6. fol. 1. the same.

12 H. 4. fol. 24. Where one is essoyned of the Kings Service, the name of the
Essoyner shall be put in, for if his Master do not bring in his Warrant, Deceit
lies against him and his Master.

Fitzh. 17. H. If one be essoyned of the Kings Service, and at the Day he does
not bring in his Warrant, he shall loose twenty shillings, etc. by Gloucester,
chap. 8. and further shall be in the Mercy, and it shall be allowed. See 45 Ed.
3. f. 24.

44 Ed. 3. f. 5. Essoyn of the Kings Service, does not lie in a Writ of Dower.

22 Ed. 3. f. 10. At the Venire facias returned, the Defendant puts the word
without Day by Protection, and at the re-summons he was essoyned of the Kings
Service, and had it.

27 Ed. 3. f. 81. In Replevin, the Avowant was essoyned of the Kings Service,
and for that, that he does not bring in his Warrant of that, he shall lose
twenty shillings for the Journey, and not Damages, nor any other thing.

29 Ed. 3. f. 17. At the Distringas, one was essoyned of the Kings Service, and
at the Day did not bring in his VVarrant and came not, by which by Award he
lost his Issues returned upon him, that is, five and twenty shil^ings, and the
Plaintiff has for the delay forty shillings.

29 Ed. 3. f. 46. After Issue in Trespass, the defendant is essoyned of the
Kings Service, and at the day fails of his VVarrant, and by Award he shall
recover damages by the Statute to twenty shillings, and further 20. shillings,
by discretion of the Court, and the Inquest taken by default, 2 Ed. 4. f. 16.

19 H. 6. f. 51. In Replevin, at the Habeas corpora Juratorum, the Plaintiff
was essoyned of the Kings Service, the Essoyner was sworn, and had it.

Fitzh. 29. C. If a man be essoyned of the Kings Service, the Plaintiff may
have a special Writ; if he be not in the Kings Service, to disallow the Essoyn.

4. Book of Ass. 3. Attaint is laid, at the next day, after the first day, and
qua^ht, and in Juris utrum it does not lie after Appearance.

4. Book of Assise 2. Attaint after Appearance, the Desendant is essoyned of
the Kings Service.

29. Book of Ass. 25. Attaint after Appearance, the Plaintiff casts the Essoyn,
and was quasht, that is a common Essoyn.

19. Ass. 15. Essoyn is out after Issue in Attaint by the Statute.

18 Ed. 4. f. 8. Attaint, the Tenant at the Summons was essoyned, and at the
Day of Adjournement made Default, and the Attaint was awarded by his Default;
and if at the Summons one be essoyned, and at the Day make Default, there shall
go a grand Cape, and not a small Cape, for he does not appear.

30 H. 6. fol. 1. Assise in common Bench, returnable the Monday after Octabis,
and the Plaintiff was essoyned in Octav. and the Court allowed that, and it
shall be before parties are demanded; and it seems that Essoyn in Assise shall
be entered in the Roll of Assise, and the Roll of Essoyn, this is for Essoyn of
Common Pleas.

1 H. 7. fol. 21. Essoyn is good, though it be not in the Roll of the Plea, but
in the Roll of the Essoyn.

10 H. 6. fol. 23. Assise by two, and one makes Default, and so Summons to
prosecute together at the next Assizes, at which day he that made default is
Essoined, and it does not lie, but is severed by award.

14 H. 6. fol. 23. Entry in nature of Assise, the Tenant was Essoined, and it
was Adjourned, and it is not like to an Assise, for after appearance, there
lies no Essoin.

Common Essoin.
Quem redditum reddit, and Scire facias, they are Judicialls, and no Essoin
lies in them, 33 H. 6. f. 6.

34 H. 6. f. 31. Trespass, Return, Attach, and Precpe, Return summoned, the
Defendant shall be Essoined, but when he comes by the great Distress, he shall
not be Essoined.

34 H. 6. fol. 50. Debt. The Plaintiff at the first day may be essoined,
unless the Defendant appear upon a Capias, Cepi, or upon an Exigent.

9. H. 6. fol. 58. Where one is let to Bail, no Essoin of the King, or other
Essoin lies, for that he is in manner as in Prison.

11. H. 6. fol. 39. Replegeare at the day of Imparlance, Essoin does not ly for
the Defendant.

2 H. 4. fol. 17. Deceit, the Defendant casts an Essoin after the day given,
and it was adjudged and adjourned.

Natura Brevium f. 13. If any man be essoined of being sick in his bed in a
Writ of Right, if the Demandant will aver, that he is not so ill, but that he
may well come, and this be found by Inquest, his essoin shall turn him in
default.

21. H. 7. fol. 40. Essoin does not lie in Quare uon admisit, for that it is as
a judicial Writ.

Britton, fol. 281. He is Essoined of sickness, and force of sickness, he
appeals, as it is of those which move themselves against the Court, and are in
riding taken with sickness, and Essoin of force is, as it is of those which
are hindered by Imprisonment, or by Theives, or of other Enemies by the way, or
by broken Bridges, or of other passages, or hindered by Tempest, or for want of
Boats or Ships.

12 H. 4. f. 24. Formedon by Thirn. if no Essoin be cast, and Record the first
day, it lies not afterward.

2 R. 3 f. 15. In a Writ of Right and Formedon, which is in his nature, Essoin
shall be cast the first day of Essoynes and proffers, and not afterward.

2 H. 7. f. 4. The Demandant or tenant in a Precipe may be essoined the fourth
day, and every day before the fourth day, and likewise the fourth day,
notwithstanding any challenge taken by his Adversary, but in a Writ Judicial
out of the Common Bench, the Party ought to be essoined the first day, and
otherwise not, if that be challenged.

18. Ed. 4. fol. 4. Precipe, Essoin of the Kings Service was laid, and it seems
there, that every Essoin shall be laid the first day, or any day before the
fourth day, if there be not an exception entered, and the fourth day shall be
adjourned, 1 Ed. 5. fol. 2.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 12. Before the Original be Returned, the Tenant shall be
essoined, and this is a common course.

30. H. 6. fol. 1. Essoin is Michiel where it should be Michael, and shall not
be amended, for it is laid before the Writ be Returned, and has not the Writ
to see it.

Every Return has four days, and the first day of them, is called the day of
Essoins and proffers, and the next day after that, is the day of the Return of
the Writs, the third day is the day, the fourth day is the day of appearance.
And it is an use if one cause the Clark of Essoins to enter (ne recipiatur) as
he may the fourth day, Essoin cannot be laid, after that is entered, but he may
cast an Essoin the fourth day, if that be not entered, if one do not lay the
Essoin the fourth day, then the next day ensuing, the Party may enter
exception, that is, (ne recipiatur) and after shall be no Essoin laid.

4 H. 6. fol. 6. Visus in Curia.
If one cast an Essoin and appear in the Court before it be adjudged, the
Essoin shall be defeated, and this by the Statute of questioning Essoins, 12.
H. 4. fol 24. the same.

7. H. 4. fol. 40. Quare impedit by the King against R. Felbridge, the Attorney
of the Defendant was Essoined at the day of the (Venire facias) Returned, and
after that the Essoin was adjudged, and before the adjournment, the Attorney
which was Essoined comes into the Court, and was seen of the Court: and it
seems after the Essoin adjudged, that he may be seen in the Court very well,
though that it be not adjourned, and the Essoin very good, 11 H. 4. fol. 80.
Precipe. 11. H. 6. fol. 53. Essoin was cast for the husband and wife, and the
Essoin was outed for the Husband, because he was seen in the Court, and allowed
for the Wife.

45. Ed. 3. fol. 24. Mortdancester against I. which voucheth B. which was
Enoined at the Summons to warrant, and at the day by Enoin he was Essoined of
the Kings Service, and at the day that he has to bring in his VVarrant, the
Tenant was Essoined, and the Essoin was adjudged and adjourned.

12. H. 4. fol. 14. by Hull, Essoin does not lie after Essoin, nor Essoin of
the Kings Service, after Essoin of the Kings Service, but contrary by mean
Process.

9. H. 5. fol. 5. By Strange, common Essoin does not lie after common Essoin,
without mean degree, but after common Essoin, Essoin of the Kings Service
lies, 21. Ed. 3. fol. 13. the same.

21. Book of Assizes, 11 Assise. The Sheriff Returns that the Plaintiff has
not found Pledges to prosecute, and the Plaintiff was Essoined, and the Essoin
adjudged, for otherwise the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 16. At the great Cape returned against the Husband and the Wife,
the Husband casts the Essoin of the Kings Service, where he had an Attorney in
Court, and held that the Essoin lies well, notwithstanding that he has an
Attorney in Court, contrary of a common Essoin, for that cannot be, where he
has an Attorney in Court.

4. H. 6. fol. 10. Dower. At the grand Cape the Tenant wages his Law of
non-Summons, and at the day Essoin is cast for him, and says that he has an
Attorney in Court, and notwithstanding this, the Essoin lies, for here the
Attorney is out of the Court.

7. H. 4. fol. 6. Precipe, at the great Cape Returned, one renders his Law by
Attorney, and at the day of the Law the Attorney laid an Essoin, and had no
day, for it was said to him, to let his Master come.

19 H. 6. fol. 30. Debt, at the day that he has to make his Law, his Attorney
was Essoined, and he ought not to be Essoined, for he is out of the Court.

18 H. 6. fol. 20. Precipe, The Tenant has two Attorneys, and the one is
Essoined, and not the other, and good, for their Warrant is joint and several,
and excuses the master, 11 H. 4. fol. 53. the same.

19 H. 6. fol. 57. The Attorney of one Party cannot be Essoined of the Kings
Service.

21 Book of Assizes 7. Where the Defendant appears, and answers by Attorney, he
shall not be after Essoined, unless his Attorney be also Essoined.

14 H. 4. fol. 13. Quare impedit, The Plaintiff was Essoined, and the
Defendant says, that the Plaintiff has an Attorney that is not Essoined, and
by Hank, that Challenge was entered, and at the day that the Plaintiff had by
Essoin that shall be showed, and if it be found, then the Defendant shall have
a Writ to the Bishop, and in the mean time the Essoin was adiourned.

45. Ed. 3. fol. 10. Debt, at the Exigent, the Defendant came by Supersedeas
upon Bail, and at the day of the Exigent returned, the Plaintiff was Essoined,
and therefore the defendant shall have the same day without Bail; and there
agreed if the Party be Essoined, and not his Attorney, that this is a
discontinuance of Process, for the Attorney only shall be Essoined, and every
Challenge of Essoin shall be entered, but it shall not be tried before the day
of Adiournment of the Essoin, unless it be challenged, for that he was seen in
the Court, which shall be tried forthwith.

11 H. 8. Tit. 41. Formedon, Conusance of Plea was granted, and the Demandant
sues a Resummons for failing of Right in the Franchise, and the Attorney of the
Tenant cast Essoin, where another Attorney was Essoined upon the Original, and
by the Court, this matter of Challenge cannot be now tried: the Essoin was
adiourned, but not adjudged, and it shall be tried at the Adiournment, and if
it be found, shall turn him in default.

12 H. 4. fol. 25. A man has two Attorneys, and after the view the one was
Essoined, and the other not, and by Hull, By this Challenge, the Essoin shall
be adiourned, but not adjudged, and by Hank, in some Case Essoin shall be
adjudged, and not adiourned, as the Demandant in Precipe is Essoined, and at
the same day Protection is showed out for the Tenant in this Case, the Essoin
shall be adjudged, so that the Demandant shall not be nonsuited, but it shall
not be adiourned.

12 H. 7. fol. 8. Formedon, The Tenant makes two Attorneys, and at the day upon
the view granted, the Tenant and one Attorney makes default, and the other
Attorney was Essoined, and it was held clearly that the Essoin of one Attorney
excuses the default of the Tenant, and the other Attorney, for they were
Attorneys Joint, and several.

2 H. 5. fol. 2. Formedon, After the view the Tenant was Essoined, and
notwithstanding that he had an Attorney not Essoined, the Essoin was allowed,
sub Calumnia, for the Attorney peradventure is removed, and agreed, if he have
no Attorney in Court, he himself may be essoined.

11 H. 7. fol. 42. Essoin was amended in Precipe of Rent where the Essoin was
entered in a Plea of a yearly Rent, where it should have been in a Plea of Land.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 4. The Writ was J.S. and the Essoin was J.S. of Dale in the
County of Kent, and for this variance it was quasht, and shall not be amended,
for the Clerk had no fight of the Writ, for the Essoyne was before the Writ
returned.

30 H. 6. f. 1. At the Pone in a Quare impedit, the Incumbent was Essoined, and
was varying from the name in the Writ, for the Essoin is Mich. and the Writ
Michaell, and adiudge that it should not be amended, for that the Essoin was
put in, before the Writ came in.

10. H. 7. f. 6. Precipe, The Tenant has view where it was not grantable, and
at the day of the Habere facias visum, The Tenant would have been Essoined, and
could not, in so much as the view was not grantable.

19 H. 6. fol. 80. Debt, The Defendant came by Cepi Corpus, and the Plaintiff
is Essoined, by this the Defendant shall have the same day without Bail; but if
the Plaintiff had appeared, the Defendant should answer in custody, and after
shall be by Bail till the end of the Plea.

12 Ed. 3. tit. 58: B. VVast, the Venire facias was abated, and a new one went
out and was returned, the Defendant cast Essoyne and it was adjudged and
adiourned, though there were the second Venire facias, for the first was as
none.

19 Book of Assizes 12 Ass. The Plaintiff was essoyned, and the Writ indorced
Tarde, and notwithstanding that the Justices adiuged, and adiourned the Essoin.

21 Ed. 4. f. 79. It seems that Essoin does not lie for a Corporation, for the
Essoin de malo veniendi, nor the Essoin de malo lecti, does not lie, for it is
to excuse the Defendant, and a Corporation cannot appear in person, but by
Attorney, nor an Essoin of the Kings service, nor of beyond the Seas, for all
cannot be together by common Intendment, and Protection does not lie for a
Corporation.

10 H. 6. f. 1. Scire facias by three and two were Essoined, the Essoin quasht
by the Court, for that delays are outed by Westminster. 2 Chap. 45. 2 H. 7. f. 10.
the same.

11 H. 6. f. 31 At the day of Imparlance the Plaintiff shall not be Essoined,
also he shall be nonsuited, if he do not appear.

45 Ed. 3. f. 19. Precipe, the Tenant vouches, and Process continue until the
Sequatur, at which day the Tenant is essoyned, and it lies well.

10 Ed. 4. fol. 15. Formedon, the parties were at Issue, and after
discontinuance by Demise upon re-summons, said, that the Tenant shall not be
essoyned: See the Statute is, that Essoyn does not lie, because re-summons was
in the last Presentment, 1 H. 6. f. 6. the same, 1 R. 3. f. 4.

34 H. 6. f. 34. Trespass upon re-attachment, the Tenant was essoyned, and
said, that it lies.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 4. Ass. Discontinued for not coming of the Justices, and upon
re-attachment the Plaintiff is essoyned, and it lies, and yet the Statute of
Westminster. chap. 41. is, who has once appeared in Assise shall not be afterward
essoyned, 44. Book of Assise, 24. the same.

22 Ed. 3. fol. 10. At the Venire facias returned, the Defendant put the Paroll
without Day by Protection, and at the re-summons he was essoyned of the Kings
Service, and had it.

21 Ed. 3. Tit. 35. B. Paroll was put without Day in a Precipe against a Prior,
for that that the King had sent a Supersedeas, that he had seized the Land for
War, for that the Tenant was a Prior stranger, and after Demand at the
Procedendo, and re-summons where the Paroll was put without Day before, after
Venire facias returned, and the Jury appeared, and at the Day of the re-summons
returned, the Prior was essoyned, and was challenged, for that, that the Prior
was another time essoyned upon the Venire facias in the first Action, and it
was not allowed, but the Essoyn admitted.

30. Book of Ass. 51. Mortdancester, at the re-summons the Tenant cast an
Essoyn, and it was quasht by the Statute De Calumniandis.

Wardens of Churches.
Though the Statutes for highways, not repaired, give all Forfeitures of
those Statutes to Churchwardens, yet they are no Corporation, and it is fit to
see what things they may take, and what not, and what Interest they have in
things of the Church, and where they may be removed, and where not, and what
Interest the Parson has.
PArishoners shall have no Action of Account against Wardens, but they may
choose other Wardens, which may have Account against the first Wardens, 8 Ed.
4. f. 6.

37 H. 6. fol. 32. If a Book be given to the Parishoners of such a Church, to
the use of the Church, the Wardens shall have Trespass against him which takes
this out of the Church.

10 H. 4. fol. 9. Churchwardens shall have Trespass of Bells taken, though the
Defendant hangs them in the Steeple, and though they are annexed to the Church,
they are no parcel: Parson shall have Trespass of Windows, and Trees in the
Churchyard cut, and the Wardens shall have Trespass of the Ornaments taken.

8 H. 6. f. 9. Parson brings Trespass of entering in a Close and House, which
was the Churchyard, and the Church; and it so feems that he has interest in
that.

38 H. 6. fol. 19. Parson shall have Assise of Churchyard, or Glebe.

8 H. 7. f. 12. The Freehold of the Church is to the Parson, and the Pewes are
Chattels, unless they be fixed, but some have Pewes there by Prescription, but
the Pewes fixed there are Freehold to the Parson.

21 H. 7. f. 21. Churchyard and Church are to the Parson, and he shall have
Trespass of Trees cut in the Churchyard. Abridgement of Assizes, fol. 112.
Assizes. It is a good Plea for the Defendant at the Jurisdiction of the Court
to say, that he is Parson, and that it is parcel of his Churchyard.

15 H. 7. f. 8. Church and Churchyard are to the Parson, that is, the
Freehold of them.

30 Ed. 3. Tit. Account, Statham. See there that the Church is to the
Parishoners.

Brit. fol. 84. Churchyards, burying-places, Church or Chancels are to none.
Seek.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 15. Indictment by the Churchwardens, why by force of Arms, the
Goods of the Chapel, etc. being, it seems good, and it seems, if it were the
Goods of the Parishoners it were better.

8 Ed. 4. f. 6. Trespass by the Churchwardens, and it is to the loss of the
Parishoners, and it seems they are a Corporation for personal things.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 15. Trespass was brought by Dame wiche against the Parson, for
taking a Coat-armor, certain Pendants with the Arms of Sir Hugh Wiche her
Husband. And it seems that a Parson shall not have that, nor the
Churchwardens, for they are hung there for the honor of the Body of him that
was buried there.

37 H. 6. f. 32. Churchwardens shall have Trespass of the Goods of the Parish
taken, and an Appeal of Robbery.

12 H. 7. fol. 32. Wardens of the Church cannot let Lands, nor take Lands, but
they may have Goods.

Abridg. of Ass. fol. 76. Churchwardens may have an Appeal of Robbery of the
Church Goods.

13 H. 7. f. 9. Churchwardens cannot let Lands, for the Law gives them
Authority to receive Goods, but not to depart with any thing, and may have
Trespass of Goods of the Church taken.

8 H. 5. fol. 4. To the Wardens of the Church are the Books, and Bells, and
Goods of the Church.

Doct. and Student, f. 118. For not enclosing the Churchyard, and for not
sufficient repairing the Church, shall be a Complaint to the Ordinary.

Waging of Law.
Then for that, that the ancient Trial in Court Baron is by waging of Law, and
also in Plaints for Copy-hold-Lands of non-summons, it is needful to say
something of waging of Law, and what will save his Default, and where, without
waging the Law of non-summons.
Trial, that in Court Baron the Trial is by waging Law, but it may be by a
Jury by consent of the parties, 33 H. 8. f. 143.

18 H. 8. fol. 3. Of Detinue, and counts of delivering of Goods by another
hand, the Defendant may wage his Law, for the Detinue is the cause of Action,
and not the Delivery: but in Account and Counts of a Receipt by another hand, he
cannot wage his Law, for the Receipt is traversable, 34 Ed. 3. f. 61.

26. H. 8. f. 26. Detinue, It seems though the delivery were by deed, it may be
discharged by matter in the evidence by redelivery, and in account of receipt,
by the Plaintiffs own hands, and he shows a deed testifiing that, yet the
Defendant in these cases may wage his Law, 16 Ed. 3. tit. 57. F. See, 27 H. 8.
f. 26.

Account, the Defendant shows a deed witnessing the receipt, Defendant shall not
have his Law.

Debt upon Arbitrament, for Money awarded, Defendant may wage his Law for he
has notice of the award, and ought to take notice of it, and so it seems in
debt against a Husband and his Wife, for debt of the Wife, for the Wife is
party always, 1 H. 7. f. 25.

10 H. 7. f. 18, In debt upon a Statute of Cappers, Defendant cannot wage his
Law, for it is a matter of Record, 50 Ed. 3. f. Where the King is party
Defendant cannot wage his Law.

13 H. 7. f. 3. Debt against Successor of an Abbot, where Predecessor makes a
bargain, that is buying Fishes which comes to the use of the House, and the
Successor, has his Law, and yet it was of another Contract

1 H. 7. f. 25. Contrary, for he has notice of the bargain, and said, if my
Servant buy a Horse for me, in debt against me of that contract, I may wage my
Law, 13 H. 7. fol. 3.

2 H. 4. f. 16. Where the Testator may wage his Law, no Action lies against the
Executors, 15 Ed. 4. f.

3 H. 4. fol. 3. Where the Defendant is ready to wage his Law, and the
Plaintiff is Demandant, and makes default, he cannot be non-suted, where
before he appeared in Court. But if he had imparled to this day he might be
non-suted.

6 H. 4. fol. 2. In debt for damages recovered in a Base Court, the Defendant
tenders his Law, but shall not have it. 34 H. 6. fol. 64.

11 H. 4. fol. 54. In debt for money awarded upon arbitrament, the Defendant
may have his Law. 22 H. 6. fol. 46. the same. 2 H. 5. fol. 6. the same.

8 Ed: 4. fol. 4. Detinue of Charters, held by all the Justices, that the
Defendant may traverse the delivery generally, for that, that he could not wage
his Law but in Detinue of Charters. If the Plaintiff do not entitle himself to
Land, the Defendant he may wage his Law: For if one give to me a Deed of
feoffment it is but a chattel in me, if I have not the Land.

9 Ed: 4. fol. 1. Debt, where a man lets a Chamber to the Defendant, and takes
his wife and son to table, rendering for the Chamber and Table 6 s. a week,
defendant cannot for his debt wage his Law.

9 Ed: 4. fol. 25. Debt against the Husband and his wife for debt of the wife
before the marriage, both shall wage their Law, for by the marriage the debt is
the Husbands. 15 Ed. 4. fol. 2. the same.

16 Ed. 4. fol: 15. Debt of the sale of clothes, the Defendant may wage his
Law. The same Law is in debt for wages, unless the reteiner be according to
the Statute of Laborers.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 26. Debt for an Horse sold for 10 l. where there were two, or
the contrary; or if he count of a Cow where it was a garment, it seems he may
wage his Law by conscience, for it is another contract.

22. Ed: 3. fol: 2. Detinue, if a man deliver to me goods in satisfaction of
debt due to me, and after having brought Detinue, Defendant may wage his Law,
for the property is changed, and in Detinue of a thing of 4 ounces which is but
two, The Defendant may wage his Law, the same law in Detinue of a white horse,
which indeed is bay. The same in Detinue of cloth of 20 yards, where it is but
13. the Defendant in these cases, by conscience may wage his Law.

34 H. 8. tit: 97. Detinue of a Deed Indent of a Lease for years, the Defendant
cannot wage his Law, for this concerns Land, and a Chattell real.

21 Ed: 4. tit: 79. Detinue of a chest with Writings, enealed, or of a Box
ensealed with Writings, the Defendant may wage his Law. And where he counts of
a chest ensealed with Writings, and of a special Deed, the Defendant may say
to this deed he detains not, and to the rest wage his Law. 19 H. 6. fol. 9. the
same. And 38 H. 6. fol: 25. the same. 44 Ed: 3.1. and 10 H. 6. fol: 20.

12 R: 2. tit. 43. Debt for amerciament in Leet, Defendant shall not have his
Law.

39 H: 6. fol: 36. Debt upon a Bargain, the Plaintiff shows a Deed witnessing
the receipt of it, yer defendant shall have his Law.

32 H: 6. fol: 19. Debt for a Sallary in Husbandry retained, Defendant shall
not have his Law.

8 H: 5. tit. 5. Quo minus. B. A man shall not wage his Law in a (Quo minus)
where one sues that for debt, and pays the King: 32 H. 6. fol: 28. the same.

32 H: 8. tit. 112. It was spoken for Law, that a man shall not wage his Law in
(Quo minus) But see Tit. 102. B.

2 H: 5. fol: 6. Debt for money awarded by Arbitrators, defendant shall have
his Law, for they are not Judges of Record. 5 H. 5. fol: the last, the same.

9 H. 5. fol. 5. Debt upon Arrearages of account before Auditors, defendant
shall not have his Law for that, because they be as Judges of Record: otherwise
it is of Arrearages before the Plaintiff himself. 5 H. 6. fo: 17. 43 Ed: 3.
fol. 1. 49 Ed: 3. fol. 3.

38 H. 6. fol. 6. The Lord in debt against him of surplusage of Account, he may
wage his Law by Prisot.

38 H. 6. fol: 14. Debt for wages, he counts that he was retained to serve in
Husbandry, defendant could not wage his Law; and if he count of another
reteiner, he may have his Law.

38 H: 6. fol: 24. If a Gentleman be retained in Husbandry in debt for their
sallarie, defendant cannot wage his Law: But if a Gentleman, or a Carpenter be
retained in other Art then Husbandry, in debt for their wages, the defendants
shall have their Law: 39 H. 6. fol: 19. 3 H: 6. fol: 43. the same.

1 H: 6. fol: 1. Debt, and counts that he left to the defendant certain sheep,
paying for every sheep by the year 4 d. and 15 d. for every sheep dead;
Defendant tenders his Law forthwith, and had it. The same Law is in debt upon
Arbitrament: but otherwise it is in debt upon a Lease of land rendering Rent.

3 H: 6. fol: 14. Debt, Defendant Imparles till the next day, and then comes
and tenders his law forthwith; And for that, that all was in one self same
Term, the Plaintiff should not be demanded to be nonsuited. But for that,
that he said nothing, it shall be intended acknowledged by him. But if he had
Imparled till another Term, Plaintiff shall be demanded, and may be
nonsuited.

3 H: 6. fol: 34. Debt by Counselor, and how he was retained by 20 li. yearly,
and the Plaintiff ought to count that he has given him Counsel; And the
defendant tenders his Law, and had it. But in debt for wages of a Common
Labourer, Defendant cannot wage his law, for it is certain by the Statute.

3 H: 6. fol: 43. Debt of 40 s: for Tallow, the defendant says that he bought
the Tallow for 3 s: 6 d: which he is ready to pay, etc. And to the remnant
tenders his Law, and had it: and for that it was the same Term, Plaintiff
shall not be demanded; But if it were in another Term he shall be demanded.

4 H. 6. fol: 25. Debt upon Arrearages of account, before an Auditor, Defendant
tenders his Law, and had it: 20 H. 6. fo: 17. the same.

^ H. 6. fol: 58. Debt upon Arbitrament, Defendant shall have his Law, and in
Detinue of delivery by another hand, but not in account of receipt by another
hand.

10 H. 6. fol. 20. Detinue of Writings ensealed, and counts of one, especial
of the Land, the Defendant may plead bar to that, and to the remnant tender
his Law, and had it.

11 H. 6. fol: 11. If debt be upon a lease and Bargain, or upon an Obligation,
and Bargain, Defendant may plead to the Obligation, and to the Bargain wage his
Law: 14 H. 6. fol: 1. the same. 19 H. 6. fol: 10. the same: 33 H. 6. fol: 26.

44 Ed: 3. fol: 41. Detinue, where the Plaintiff count of a chest for
Writings, the Defendant may wage his Laws but if he counts of a special
Writing concerning land, he cannot wage his law of that, but of the Chest and
the residue.

46 Ed: 3. fol: 6. Debt upon Contract for 40 s. the Defendant says that he
does not know the Contract to be made for so much: but only for 4 s. which he
has been always ready to pay, and yet is: And to the 40 s. he owes him
nothing, ready to wage his law, 3 H. 6. fol: 43.

49 Ed: 3. fol: 3. Debt upon arrearages of Account, found before Auditors
assigned by the Party out of the Court, and the Defendant tenders his law and
had it.

21 H. 6. fol: 48. Detinue of two Writings obligatory, the Defendant may wage
his law.

7 R. 2. tit: 42. Fitzh. Debt upon a Lease of land, the Defendant shall not
have his Law.

12 R. 2. tit: 43: F. Debt for Amerciament in Leet, the Defendant shall not
have his law.

14 Ed. 3. tit: 48. F. Account of Receipt by his own hand, the Defendant shall
have his law, 25 Ed: 3. fol: 46. the same.

5 Ed: 3. tit: 54. F. Account of receipt by the hands of his Wife, the Defendant
shall have his law.

14 Ed: 2. tit: 69. F. Account of receipt by other hands, the Defendant shall
not have his law, 17 Ed: 2. tit: 72 the same case.

27 H. 8. fol: 26. Account of Receipt by his hands, and shows a deed witnessing
that, yet the Defendant may wage his Law.

39 H. 6. fol: 36. Debt upon a Bargain, the Plaintiff shows a deed witnessing
that, yet the Defendant shall have his Law, see before. 26 H. 8. fol: 26.

18 Ed. 3. fol: 53. One which was dumb waged his Law by signs, and the words
were read to him, and he put his hand upon the book, and kissed it, and so waged
his Law without words.

21 H. 6. fol: 47. Where a Lumbard waged his Law.

22 H: 6. fol: 14. Debt for Commons of one, Defendant shall have his Law. 1 Ed:
4. fol: 5. 9 Ed: 4. fol: 1. the same.

28 H. 6. fol: 5. Debt against a Prisoner of the Tower for his meat, he shall
not have his Law, for the Plaintiff is compellable to give that to him.

27 H. 6. fol: 16. If the Tenant at the day of the great Cape appear, and
tenders his Law of non-summons, and the Sheriff do not return the Writ, yet he
may wage his Law, for he has day by Roll.

33 H: 6. fol: 8. Precipe, At the day of the great Cape returned, the Tenant
says that he was not summoned, ready to prove by the Country, and shall be
tried by waging law, and not by the Country, unles upon special matter
showed, as if the party were sick, or it be a Mayor and Commonalty, or be a
Recluse: And waging of Law shall be by 12 hands, that is 12, and he himself
shall be sworn: But the use is in Court Baron by 6.

40 Ed: 3. fol: 40. Cessavit against 3. which 3 at the day of the great Cape
returned, waged their Law of not summoned, and at the day 2 made default, and
the third appeared, and tendered the Arrearages, and could not, unles for the
third part, for that, that they are joined in Tender.

41 Ed: 3. fol: 2. Precipe against 2 which wage their Law of not summoned, and
at the day one comes and the other not: And he which comes wages his Law, and
awarded, that the demandant should recover the half against him which made
default, and took nothing by his Writ against the other, 40 Ed: 3. fol: 35.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 13. Cessavit against three, they wage their Law of not summoned
at the day, the great Cape returned, and at the day gives them to make their
Law, two appears and wage their Law, and the third makes default, and the Writ
abates for two parts, and one was received for the third part in desault of the
three, and so the Writ shall be for the third part.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 35. Debt against two which tender their Law, and at the day one
makes default, and the other was ready to wage his Law, and waged his Law: And
for that, that the Plaintiff suffered that, he was barred. And yet where the
two tendered their Law, and at the day one made default, this was the default
of both, If the Plaintiff had prayed it, and not suffered the Law of one.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 38. Precipe, the Tenant wages his Law of not summoned, the Writ
shall abate.

7 H. 4. fol. 3. Precipe the Tenant makes default after appearance, by which
issues Petty Cape, at which day he appears by Attorney, and the Attorney wages
his Law, and day given for his Master against another day to make his Law.

7 H. 4. fol. 7. The waging Law shall be in person by the Tenant, and not by
Attorney.

24 Ed: 3 tit. 57. If Sommons in Precipe be not served fifteen days before the
first day of the return of the Writ the Tenant may wage his Law of not sommoned.

42 Ed. 3. fol. 7. Precipe, at the great Cape returned, the Tenant tenders his
Law of not sommoned, and at the day comes to wage his Law; And the Demandant
offers to waive the default, and prays that the Tenant may plead in chief. But
cannot if the Tenant will not assent, by which he made his Law, and the
Demandant takes nothing by his Writ. But at the first day that the Tenant
offered his Law, the Demandant might have released the default: 27 H. 8. fol.
17. the same.

2 H. 5. fol: 1. Formedon, at the great Cape returned, the Demandant is
essoined, and for that the Tenant need not wage his Law, for the default is
saved. 18 H. 6. fol: 6.3 H. 6. fol. 50. the same.

8 Ed: 4. fol: 2 Precipe, If the Demandant be essoined the day that the Tenant
tenders his Law, the default is saved, and he need not wage his Law of not
summoned. But if it be at the day that he has waged his Law it is otherwise;
for he cannot release the default. 33 H. 6. fol. 49. the same.

7 Ed. 3. tit. 51. Saving default. Fitzh: at the Petty Cape returned the
Demandant was essoined, and had day over, at which day he took him to the
default, and the Tenant was put to answer at the default, notwithstanding the
said Essoine. 5 Book of Ass. 11. the same.

4 Ed. 3. tit. 62. F. At the great Cape returned the Demandant was essoined,
and day given over, at which day the Demandant took him at default by which it
was awarded, that he take nothing by his Writ.

3 H. 6. fol. 48. Precipe at the great Cape returned, the Defendant says that
he was imprisoned by J. S. upon a Statute Merchant, by virtue of a Statute
acknowledged to him that he could not come; and notwithstanding that this was
his own act; that is to say, the acknowledging the Statute, and not paying it,
yet the Imprisonment was by the act of the Law, and his default, and by that
Plea his default was saved. The same Law of increase of water: 12 Ed. 4. fol.
44. Saving default. F.

42 Ed: 3. fol: 7. Precipe, at the Petty Cape ret^^^ed, the Tenant says that
he was in Prison at the time of the default made, ready, etc. And the Demandant
to the contrary, that he was at large; and the Enquest taken, and sound that he
was in prison, by which the Demandant took nothing by his Writ: 13 Ed. 3. Tit.
49. F.

18 Ed. 3. tit. 35. F. At the great Cape returned, the Tenant says that he was
in prison, etc. The demandant says that he was in prison by his own consent,
and by fraud to save his default. And the Tenant was driven to aver, that he
was in prison against his will, and upon this Issue taken: 14 Ed: 3 tit. 39. F.

13 Ed: 3. tit. 49. At the petty Cape returned, the Tenant says that he was in
prison upon a Statute, etc. and the demandant says, that that was by covin,
and so Issue taken that he was in prison against his will, taken, and others to
the contrary.

39 H. 6. fol: 17. The Attorney may save the default where his Master came, and
for that both may save the default, by increase of water, and by Imprisonment,
and not by weakness, neither of the one nor of the other; for that cannot be
tried if he may come without unavoidable peril of death, or not.

38 H: 6. fol: 12. Weakness of an Attorney is not sufficient to save a
default, but increase of water, and Imprisonment is a cause. See 50 Ed. 3. fol.
9. And the Tenant plead in abatement matter for mischief of war, and death,
which proves the Writ abated without saving his default.

40 Ed: 3. fol. 2. Precipe against H. son of W. Osmond, the Tenant at the great
Cape comes without saving his default, and says, that his Father is named
Edmond, and not Osmond, and for mischief of the war he shall have that plea,
before default saved by waging of Law.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 42. Formedon, at the day of the Petty Cape, the Tenant comes
and says, that the Demandant has entered hanging the Writ, and cannot have
that Plea in abatement before the default saved.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 18. Precipe against the Husband and Isabel his wife, they come
before the default saved, that the wife is named Elizabeth, and had for the
mischief of the war.

14 H: 4. tit. 15. Precipe, the Tenant says, that the Demandant is outlawed,
and shall not have this before default saved.

38 Ed. 3. tit. 17. At the great Cape against three, they allege several
Te^ancie, and the Writ abate, if he do not maintain. And they shall not wage
the Law of not summoned, for then they admit the Writ, and that they are
Tenants as the Writ supposes. 12 Ed. 4. fol. 1.

14 H. 6. f. 4. Precipe, at the great Cape the Tenant would plead Joyntenancy,
and could not before his default saved, for this comes upon the view. 42 Ed. 3.
fol. 11. the same.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 19. Precipe against two at the great Cape, one Tenant pleads
that the other is dead after the day of the default, and for that, this Plea
proves the Writ abated, he shall have this Plea before his default saved: 20 H.
6. fol. 2. the same.

42 Ed: 3. fol: 3. Precipe against two, one Tenant may plead that in the
conclusion of the Writ, the one is left out, and the Writ for that is abated
before the default saved.

Pleas after Continuance, and Imparlance, and what not.
ASsise, where they are adjourned upon Plea in Bar, it seems that he shall not
have but one Plea, after the last continuance, for otherwise he may delay the
party, Infinitely: 28 H. 6. fol: 1.9. H. 7. fol: 9.9 H. 6. fol: 22. Quare
impedit, clearly agreed, that a man shall have but one Plea after the last
continuance, upon matter in Deed: And by some, the same Law is where it is by
matter of Record.

1 Ed: 4. fol: 3. Ass: It seems that one cannot have diverse Pleas after the
last Continuance.

2 H. 6. fol: 13. Entry in the Post, If the Demandant enter, and after there
is a Continuance, yet he may plead that, for that, that it is abated: And it is
folly of the Demandant to abate his own Writ. 7 H. 6. fol: 15. The same.

7 H. 6. f: 16. Quare Impedit, It was pleaded in abatement, Plaintiff was made
knight after the last continuance. Judgment of the Writ, and he had it.

20 H. 6. fol: 17. Trespass after Imparlance, the Defendant says, that the
Plaintiff was made knight day of the Writ not named knight, Judgment of the
Writ, and had that Plea.

35 H. 6. fol: 5. Where a man is sued by the name of J. Prior of the Church of
St. Peter of D. and imparles by an Attorney, he shall not plead in person
afterward, that he is Prior of the Church of St. Peter, and Paul, for that is
parcel of the name, which cannot be pleaded after Imparlance, for that does
notstand with, etc.

35 H. 6. fol: 37. Trespass against J.S. of D. after Imparlance he demands
Judgment of the Writ, for day of the Writ purchased he was dwelling at S. and
not at D. and shall not have it, for it is contrary to the name which the has
affirmed by the Imparlance.

32 H. 6. fol: 35. After Imparlance, the Defendant cannot plead, that he is
dwelling in another place, then is in the Count: 19 H. 6. fol: 1.

35 H. 6. fol: 43. Debt against J. S. as Executor of J. D. and he imparles, he
shall not say after, that he is Administrator, and nor Executor: 32 H. 6. fol:
32. The same, 36 H. 6. fol: 17.

37 H. 6. fol: 32. If the Defendant in personal action imparle, and at the day
makes default, Judgment shall be given, and in a real action shall be awarded
a Petty Cape: 7 H: 6. fol: 30. The same, 11 H 7 fol: 5.38 H. 6. fol: 36.39 H.
6. fol: 17.

4 H. 7. fol: 12. If a man in debt upon an Obligation, imparle before he
demands hearing of the Obligation and Condition, and has that entered, he
cannot plead the Condition afterward, for he shall not have hearing of that, if
he do not allege variance.

13 H. 7. fol: 17. Precipe of Lands in D. the Tenant imparles, and at the day
he may say no such Town: 9 Ed: 4. fol: 33. the same, 7 Ed: 4. fol: 1. Trespass.

16 H. 7. fol: 17. Debt by Prior, the Defendant imparles, and at the day says,
that the Plaintiff is deposed, for that goes in Bar.

7 Ed. 4. fol: 1. Trespass against J.S. de D. in the County of Middlesex, after
Imparlance the Defendant cannot say, no such Town D. within the said County:
but he may say there is over D. and nether D and none without addition: 22 Ed:
4. fol: 1. the same.

9 Ed. 4. fol: 38. Precipe, after Imparlance one may plead Non-tenure, and
Joyntenancie: But in Precipe of Lands in D. and S. the Tenant Imparles, and at
the day says, That D. is an Hamlet of S. without that, that there is any Town
or place known out of the Town named D. in the same County, Judgment of the
Writ, and has the Plea by the whole Court.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 42. Debt against Executors, after Imparlance he cannot say that
the Testator dies intestate, and that the Administration was committed to him,
Judgment of the Writ, for he is estopped by the Imparlance, but he may plead
never Executor, nor ever administered as an Executor, for that is with the, etc.
32 H. 6. fol. 32. the same.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 19. Writ is abated by death, and abateable by Joyntenancie, and
several tenancie, and where a man is made knight, or a woman takes an husband,
and such like, and says, where a Writ is abateable if he Imparle, or take
continuance, he cannot plead in abatement: But otherwise it is if it were
abated. See 7 H. 6. fol. 16. and 20 H. 6. fo. 17. And note that it pleaded
there that the Plaintiff is a knight.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 4. After Imparlance the Defendant may plead to the Action, as
to say, that the Plaintiff is a Channon professed, etc. But he cannot plead to
the Writ, unless he come after the Continuance, unless it were for that, that
the Writ is abated, as death, etc.

20 Ed. 4. fol. 9. Debt upon a Lease of a Corodie, the Defendant imparles, and
after that shall not have hearing of the Deed. See 4 H. 7. fol: 12.

4 H: 7. fol. 17. Replegeare against three which imparle jointly, and one makes
default, the other cannot plead no such in being, as one is, which makes
default.

11 H. 7. fol. 5. Debt for Corn, the Defendant imparles, and at the day makes
default, there shall go a Writ to inquire of the value. See 37 H. 6. fol. 32.

15 H. 7. fol. 14. Attorney for Corporation after Imparlance, he cannot plead
that they are corporate by another name.

32 H. 6. fol: 12. Where a Writ is abated, he may plead that though there be a
Continuance, as to say that the Plaintiff is dead, or has an Husband day of
the Writ, but if it be abateable, it is otherwise, he may say that after the
last continuance, is made knight, Judgment of the Writ, etc. where it is
abateable.

34 H. 6. fol: 49. Debt upon Obligation by three, the Defendant pleads not his
Deed; yet he may plead that after the last continuance one Plaintiff is dead.

22 Ed: 4. fol: 36. Trespass. The Defendant after Imparlance, may say that the
Plaintiff is his wife, Judgment if Action; or that the Plaintiff is a Monk
professed. And in Mordancester that the Demandant is a Bastard. And in Debt
against Executors, after Imparlance he may say he was never Executor, nor ever
administered as Executor; for these are disabilities which go in Bar.

32 H. 6. fol: 32. It seems a man may plead after a Continuance, that the
Plaintiff is a stranger born, or Monk professed, Judgment if Action, and not
to the person. 36 H. 6. fol: 7.

7 H. 6. fol. 39. It seems that after Imparlance, one cannot plead to the
Jurisdiction, unless it be after special Imparlance, saving all advantages,
as well to the Jurisdiction of the Courts as to the Writ, and Declaration.

19 H. 6. fol. 7. Debt by Executor, which shows the Will (as it behooves) and
after the Defendant imparles, there he shall not have reading of the Will
again. 38 H. 6. fol. 2. But if he plead variance, he shall have (Reading) and
so in Debt upon Obligation.

16 Ed. 4. fol. 4. Debt upon specialtie, the Defendant may plead Out-lawrie in
the Plaintiff, though he has parled; for that is a Bar, and intitles the King.

4 Ed. 4. fol. 15. Debt, after Imparlance, one space in the Count cannot be
amended in another term.

39 H. 6. fol. 22. Debt upon arrerages of annuitie, after Imparlance; the
Defendant cannot have hearing of the Deed: But if the Defendant plead that it
was made in another County, then where the Writ was brought, and then he shall
show. 39 H. 6. fol. 17. the same.

Pleas after day given.
IF the Defendant imparle, and make default, he shall be condemned, and upon
day given shall issue Process. 7 H. 6. fol. 42.

19 H. 8. fol. 6. Note by all the Prothonotaries that (day given) is ever
before the Count, and Imparlance is after the Count, and therefore where three
Capias and Exigent is awarded, and the Defendant appear upon the Exigent, and
has (day given) and after makes default, Distringas shall go, and upon that
returned, (Nihil) other 3 Capias and Exigent, and upon default in pers^r all
action, he shall be condemned. See 7 H. 6. fol: 42.

20 H. 6. fol: 17. Trespass, the Defendant at the day which he has by
Imparlance says, that the Plaintiff was knight day of the Writ purchased, not
named knight, Judgment of the Writ, and had plea by Judgment. Otherwise it is
said after continuance by (day given.)

42 Ed: 3. fol: 1. Debt, the Defendant came at the Exigent, by (Reddidit se)
and was bayled, and the Plaintiff came and prayed day by (Prece partium) and
had it, notwithstanding that the Defendant was by Bayl, for that is by
agreement of the parties.

8 H. 5. fol: 8. After day given, and after special Imparlance, the Defendant
may plead in abatement, and not after general Imparlance.

14 H. 4. fol: 14. If the parties be at Issue, and the Demandant releases to
the Tenant, and he takes continuance by request of the parties, he shall not
plead the release.

22 Ed: 3. fol: 8. The Tenant after the (request of the parties) was received
to plead Joyntenancie by Fine.

Pleas after Issue, and at the Nisi prius day in Bench, and after Verdict.
DOwer, by Thorpe, the day of the Nisi prius, and the day in Bench is not all
one to all respects; for a Writ purchased mean between the Nisi prius and day
in Bench, shall abate, for the first Writ is hanging till Judgment be given,
notwithstanding the Plaintiff was nonsuited at the Nisi prius. But when to
plead any Pleas, which come mean between them, there shall be one same day. 40
Ed: 3. fol: 38.

28 H. 6. fol: 1. A man may plead a Plea after last continuance at the Nisi
prius. Inquire what Pleas.

34 H. 6. fol: 45. At the day of the Nisi prius, the Defennant pleads to the
Writ, that one of the Plaintiffes was dead after the last continuance at D. in
the County of Darby. Judgment of the Writ, and had it.

47 Ed: 3. fol: 2. If it be found against the Plaintiff at the Nisi prius, and
the Plaintiff makes default at the day in Bench, yet Judgment shall be upon
the Verdict, for that is all one day, and the day of the Nisi prius.

10 H. 7. fol: 21. Debt upon a Lease for years, and the Issue was levied by
distress or not; And now at the Nisi prius, he could not plead a Release made
after the last continuance.

19 H. 6. fol: 36. Forging of false Deeds against many, they were at Issue,
Process continued against the Enquest till the Jury appeared, at which day the
Defendant pleads arbitrament after the last continuance, and upon this the Jury
was discharged.

21 H. 6. fol. 10. Nisi prius was returned Octa: Mich: that is, the day in
Bench: and one Plaintiff dyed after Octa: Mich: and before Judgment given upon
the Verdict; And the Defendant may plead that, for Judgment shall have relation
to Octa: Mich: and then the Defendant cannot have remedy by Writ of Error,
Audita querela, nor otherwise; therefore he shall have the Plea again. But it
seems that the Defendant cannot plead Release made to him, by the Plaintiff
after Verdict, for he shall have an Audita querela, contrary of his death, the
day of Nisi prius, and the day in Bench were all one self same day, and no mean
time; and therefore Release made mean between these two cannot be pleaded at
the day in Bench, notwithstanding it seems at the day of Nisi prius before the
Jury taken. The Release which is made mean between the Award of the Writ of
Nisi prius, and the day of the Nisi prius, may be pleaded at the Nisi prius.
See 10 H. 6. tit: 53 and tit: 55. Br.

22 H. 6. fol: 1. Dower, It seems if the Plaintiff release to the Defendant
mean between the award of the Nisi prius and the day of the Nisi prius, there
if the Jury remain for default of Jurors, the Defendant may plead this Release
at the day in Bench after the last continuance, though he did not offer it at
the day of Nisi prius, and contrary it seems, if the Jury had been ready at the
Nisi prius.

36 H. 6. fol: 24. At the Nisi prius the Enquest past for the Plaintiff, and
he released before the day in Bench, the Defendant shall have an Audita
querela, and of this it follows, that the Defendant cannot plead that at the
day in Bench after the last Continuance. 34 H. 6. fol: 3.

21 H. 7. fol: 33. After the Enquest taken by default, the Defendant comes
before Judgment, and pleads that he and the Plaintiff have put themselves to
Arbitrament after the last Continuance, etc. And by the opinion of the Court,
he has no day in Court to plead that Plea. And it was said that he shall plead
no plea in such case, but as a friend to the Court. But of matter apparent he
shall be received, but in the Kings case, he shall have that by plea; for he
has no other remedy. But in the case between common persons, he shall have
Audita querela, contrary against the King. 11 H. 7. fol: 10. tit. B. 61.

38 H. 6. fol: 33. Debt by Moyle, the Defendant after that he was at Issue
might once plead plea, after the last Continuance, as release or such like,
notwithstanding no oftener then once.

41 Book of Ass: 19. If Verdict pass for the Plaintiff, and the Defendant get
a release before Judgment, yet he cannot plead that.

21 Ed: 4. fol: 52. Adjudge that the Defendant cannot plead Release, made mean
between the Nisi prius and the day in Bench.

16 Ed: 4. fol: 5. A man may plead a Plea after the last Continuance, after
Issue joined, and in another Term. And therefore it seems, that the parties
have day in Court, as well after Issue joined till Verdict, as before. 50 Ed:
3. fol: 4.

Imparlance at a day in the same Term, and at a day and Term between, and
Imparlance of the Plaintiff.
COntinuance by Capias, ought to be made from Term to Term, and cannot have
other Term between; for that, that the party shall not stay so long in prison,
but continuance by distress may be made by a Term between, as from
Michaelmasse Term to Easter. 8 Ed: 4. fol. 13.

12 H. 7. fol: Common recoveries for assurance, the Tenant tenders Issue, the
Demandant may Imparle to a day in the same Term.

44 Ed: 3. fol: 16. If a man Imparle to another day in the same Term, or till
the next day, yet that is a new day, at which the parties are demandable.

37 H. 6. fol: 27. Debt, Defendant pleads misnaming of himself, and the
Plaintiff Imparles, and had it.

22 Ed. 4. fol. 19. Where the Defendant in appeal of Robbery, by which he put
his life in jeopardie, the Plaintiff shall not Imparle to that, and therefore
ruled that he should answer the Court sitting.

What Pleas he shall have after the last Continuance.
WHere the parties and Jury appear at the fourth day in the Common Bench, and
are adjourned, at another day a man may plead a Plea after the last
Continuance. 28 H. 6. fol. 1.

8 Ed. 4. fol. 9. Where a man pleads death of the Defenfendant, hanging the
Writ, he shall not plead that after the last Continuance, for that by this the
Writ is abated in deed, contrary of a Plea which proves the Writ abateable.

34. H. 6. fol: 49. At the day of Nisi prius, the Defendant pleads to the Writ,
that one of the Plaintiffes was dead after the last continuance, at D. in the
County of Darby, Judgment of the Writ and the Plea recorded, and the matter
adjourned, and had that Plea. 14 H. 6. fol: 9.

38. Ed: 3. fol: 5. Precipe by a Woman, the Tenant tenders his Law of not
summoned, and at the day was essoyned, and at the day says that the Demandant
took a Husband after the Law tendered, and for that, that he did not say after
the last continuance, that is after the essoyn, it was held no Plea.

4. H. 7. fol: 8. A man shall have but one Plea after the last continuance, 38.
H: 6. fol: 33. the same.

16 Ed: 4. fol: 5. A man may plead a Plea after the last continuance after
Issue joined, and in another Term, till Verdict, but not mean between Nisi
prius and the day in Bench.

^. H. 7. fol: 8. A man shall not have a Plea after the last continuance,
unless such Pleas which were not in being, at the time of the first Plea, for
otherwise it is not after the last continuance.

Maintenance.
In so much that Maintenance may be the better avoided, let us see what
maintenance is forbidden by the Law
THat no Clark of a Justice or Sheriff shall not maintain parties in quarrels,
nor in businesses which are in the Kings Court, West: 2. chap: 28.

That none of the Kings Counselors, nor none of his house, nor none of his
other servants, nor no great ones of the Land by sending of their Letters, nor
in other manner, nor no other of the Realm, shall not undertake to maintain
quarrels, nor parties in the Country in disturbance of the Common Law, 1 Ed: 3.
chap: 14. See 20 Ed: 3. chap: 3.

That no Counselor, Officer, or Servant, nor any other persons, shall not
uphold or maintain any quarrels by maintenance, in the Country nor elsewhere,
first of R. 2. chap: 4.

That henceforth none buy or sell, or take promise, grant or Covenant, to have
Manors, Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments. But if such person which sells,
their Heirs, or they by whom they claim have been in possession of the same, or
of the reversion or remainder of that, or has taken Rents or profits of that,
by the space of one whole year, next before that bargain, Covenant, Grant, or
promise, made upon pain of him that bargains, to forfeit the value of the
Lands, And the Buyer also knowing that to forfeit also the value of the Land,
the one half to the King, the other to him which will sue for the same, within
one year after the same offense.

And it is also Enacted, that none from henceforth unlawfully maintain; or
cause, or procure any unlawful maintenance in any action or complaint, in any
of the Courts of the King of the Chancery: Starr-Chamber, White Hall, or
otherwhere within the Kings Dominions, where they have power to hold Plea of
Land by Commission, Patent, or Writ. And also that none shall instruct Jurors
or subborn Witnesses, by Letters, Promises, or by any other sinister labor or
means, to maintain any matter or cause, or to hinder Justice, or to procure or
occasion any manner of perjury, upon pain of forfeiture, for every such offense
10 l. one half to the King, and the other to him that will sue for the same,
within one year after the same offense, 32. H. 8. chap: 9.

If one will say he will maintain, and does it not, he shall not be punished
for maintenance, And Champerty lies, where one purchases, hanging the Suit, 9.
H. 7. fol: 18.

See 3 H. 6. fol: 53. It seems it is no maintenance to give money before a Suit
begins, but hanging the Suit, Maintenance, the Writ was in Plea, which was
hanging, he maintains, and it is good, and it seems it is better to say in
Plea, which was hanging, 10. H. 7. f. 27.

It seems one may covenant to have part of an Obligation when it is recovered,
for traveling with an Alien which cannot speak English, nor Latin to his
Counsel, so one may covenant with one indebted to him, and deliver him the
Obligation of another, in satisfaction of his Debt, to sue in his name, and
notwithstanding that he paid Counsel, it is no Champerty. Every Champerty
implies in it Maintenance, but not of the contrary, and he to whose use, and
every one that has lawful Interest in the Land may maintain, 15 H. 7. f.
2.34. H. 6. fol. 33. the same.

By Fineux, If a Servant be arrested for Debt, or other thing in London, or
other Franchise, the Master may maintain him, and spend of his proper money for
loss of his Service, Inquire. But otherwise it is in Precipe, 21 H. 7. fol.
40. B. See 21 H. 6. fol. 19. by Newton.

By Newton, and Paston, Servant may pray one skilled in the Law, to be of
Counsel with his Master, but a stranger cannot pray one to be of Counsel with
my Adversary, for he has nothing to do, 21 H. 6. fol. 19.

If a man be at the Bar, and another informs the Court, that this man can
declare the truth, and pray that he be sworn; and by the commandment of the
Court he swears, this is Maintenance justifiable, but if he had said for one,
or the other, of his own head, this is Maintenance punishable: the same Law, if
he inform a Jury sworn, of his own head, it is Maintenance punishable, 28 H.
6. f. 6.

The Master may pray one skilled in the Law, to be Counsel with his Servant,
and this is Maintenance justifiable, but he cannot give of his own proper goods
to distribute to men of the Country, for maintaining his quarrel; for then he
meddles with a thing forbidden by the Law; and by Prisot he may justify giving
money to Lawyers to be of Counsel with his Servant, but not to give money to
others, not learned in the Law, 28. H. 6. fol. 12.

By Fortescue, Master may pray one learned in Law, to be of Counsel with his
Servant, but not to give to them money, unless it be of his Wages, and he says
one skilled in the Law, may be of Counsel without a Fee, Inquire 31. H. 6. f.
2.36 H. 6. fol. 29.3 H. 6. f. 55. Maintenance one may justify, for that he is
his Servant, but he cannot give money.

Maintenance, Defendant iustifies that he is a Bail, and that he came to the
Defendants Attorney, and prayed him to be careful, the which is the same
Maintetenance, by Prison, it is not good to say it is the same maintenance, for
this is no Maintenance, for every stranger may pray the Attorney, for it is the
part of an Attorney to attend to that, and for that it is no Maintenance, 32 H.
6. f. 29.

It is justifiable to speak to a Lawyer for him, that he cannot speak English,
and by Laken, Master may pay money of his Servants Wages to the Counsel, by
the consent of his Servant, but a Bail cannot pray a man learned in the Law, to
be of Counsel, but may come and see if his appearance be recorded, and it
seems that the Father may give of his own money for his Son and Heir, for he
is bound to find him, contrary of another Cozine, 34 H. 6. fol. 27. B.

If one be retained to ride to London, and when he comes there to maintain him,
this is not instifiable, but it seems otherwise, if he were hired for the
journey, that is justifiable, and the same of a Servant, 39 H. 6. fol. 6.19 H.
6. fol. 31.

Where one has property in the thing demanded, he may maintain by Moyle, as
goods or writings are delivered to J.S. and Detinue is brought against him by a
stranger, the Deliverer may maintain, and in Precipe quod reddat, or Ass.
against a Farmer the Lessor may maintain, 39 H. 6. f. 21. See 9 H. 6. f. 64 the
same.

Where one has Rent out of Land in Fee, and has the Writings granted unto him
by R. the Grantee may maintain R. in Detinue of writings of the same Rent, and
it seems that a Master may maintain his Servant, and a man may maintain his
blood, and his kindred, and give money to the poor, and that Maintenance is
justifiable, and he in Reversion may maintain his Tenant for life, after
Attournment, and not before, and this is seen in giving his own proper money, 9
H. 6. f. 64. See 14 H. 7. f. 2. by Read.

In attaint, it seems that one may aid and maintain his Cozen in aiding and
councelling him at the bar, 12 H. 6. f. 2. R.

Maintenance in Assise of Fresh force, Defendant Justifies for that he was of
his aliance, and shows how cozen, and it seemed good, by which the Plaintiff
says that he promised ten shillings piece to two of the Jury to pass for him,
20 H. 6. f. 1.21 H. 6. f. 19. By Paston a man may maintain his Kinn and his
Allies.

Maintenance, Defendant justify, that the party was his Chapleine ^etained
with him, and he gave him notice who he should have of his Council, which is
the same maintenance, and it seems that is no maintenance: And for that the
Defendant says, that he was at the Bar to aid him, and that is a good
Justification to say that is the same maintenance, 19 H. 6, f, 30.

In maintenance, Defendant cannot plead not-guilty, but he ought to answer to
the point of the Writ, that is to say, he did not maintain, ready to
Justify, and others to the contrary, 8 H. 6. fol. 36. But by 2 Ed. 4, fol. 16,
In maintenance not guilty, is pleaded and allowed.

By Choke, if my Brother or Cozen has a Suit in the Law and prays me to aid
him to learned council, and I pray a man to be of his Council, this is a good
Plea in maintenance, contrary if a stranger do it, but if he gives his own
Money for his Brother or Cozen, this is special maintenance, 9 Ed. 4. fall. 34.
In action upon the Statute of Laborers.

Where Tenant in tail or for life is impleaded, he in remainder or Reversion
may maintain, and give of his proper Money for safeguard of his Interest, for
he which has Interest in the land may maintain to save that, 1 Ed. 6. tit.
53. Maintenance.

It is held a difference between action real, where land may come to him, and
an action personal, for he to whom lands may come as by Remainder, Reversion,
Descent, and such like, may maintain in action real. And by Brian, a man may
show to another, who is a man learned in the law for the party to retain, but
he may not give Money to the Counselor, and one Neighbor may go with another
to seek Council, and a man may maintain his Servan^ and give of his wages
behind, and otherwise not to give Money, but he may lend to him or another
Money, and and that is no maintenance, but he in Reversion or Remainder, may
give money where the land is in question. And the Servant may maintain his
Master, as to go and labor for him, but he cannot give of his proper money for
him: And so it seems that he who has married the Daughter of one party, may
maintain him in an action Real, but not in an Action personal, 19 Ed. 4. fol.
3. Br.

Upon the Statute of, 32 H. 8. chap. 9. That a man shall not buy land, unless
the Seller has been in possession by a year before, it was agreed in Sergeants
Inn, that if a man Mortgage his Land, and redeem it, and he sells it within a
year after the redemption, that he may do it without danger of the Statute;
for the Statute is to be intended of pretenced title, and not of a clear
title. And the ancient Statutes are that none shall maintain, yet one may
maintain his Cozen, as above, for they are to be intended of unlawful
maintenance, that is, that unlawfully one cannot maintain, 6 Ed. 6. tit. 38.
maintenance.

One skilled in the Law may give evidence for his Fee to the Jury, and it is no
Imbracery: But is Imbracery in another, unless he be sworn, 6 Ed. 4. f. 5.

If Precipe be brought against me, and hanging that I infeoff J.S. and the
Demandant recovers by default after default, and I bring Writ of deceit, it
seems J.S. cannot maintain, for that, that the possession which he has is
Champerty and against the Law, 8 Ed. 4. fol. 13.

Maintenance, the Defendant justifies that he is his Neighbor, and knew no man
skild in the Law, and he informed him of one, and a good Justification, by
which the Plaintiff showed special maintenance that is giving Money to the
Jurors, 12 Edw. 4. fol. 14. See 19 Edw. 4. fol. 3

Maintenance, the Defendant may plead that he was a Juror, and that is good,
without saying that he gave Verdict, but if after Verdict given, the Juror
prays Judgment, this is maintenance, 18 Ed. 4. fol. 2.

If a Juror give Money to his Companion to pass, this is maintenance
notwithstanding that it be for truth: But to persuade him to pass, is no
maintenance, 17 Edw. 4. fol. 5.

One may be bail, and that is no maintenance, so that he do not meddle more in
the matter, 18 Ed 4. fol. 13.

Trespass of digging land, the Defendant justifies, for that that the place
where, is their Churchyard, and that the Inhabitants have used there to be
buried, and for making grave there justifies, and field, that all the
Inhabitants may maintain in this action, though they were not parties, 18 Ed.
4. fol. 2. See before, 15 H. 7. fol. 2. That every one that has lawful
interest may maintain.

Maintenance, supposing that the Defendant maintained A. in Assise: The
Defendant says that A. held of him by which he came with him to the Assise,
and staid with him, prayed the Sheriff to make an indifferent pannell, which is
the same maintenance, and it is a good Plea, 11 H. 6. f. 39.

General Attorney which sues, and is not skilled in the Law, may well meddle,
but he cannot proffer Money to a Jury, but may pray them to appear, 34 H. 6.
fol. 27. By Choke.

Maintenance, he cannot justify for that, that he was an Attorney retained
with him, and that by commandment of his Master he retained Council, and gave
to them forty pence of his Masters Money, and good

Inquire if an Attorney cannot retain Council without the commandment of his
Clyent, and if he may not disburse of his proper Moneys for the time: But
Attorney cannot give of his proper Money, nor of his Masters money to Jurors.
36 H. 6. fol. 29.11 H. 6. fol. 13. the same.

Maintenance, the Defendant says that he was an Attorney in the action
Judgment if action, and good. But he cannot give any thing to the Jury but as
an Attorney, and give Evidence to the Jury for his Clyent he may, 13 H. 4. f.
19.

If a man maintain a quarrel by his Attorney, action of maintenance lies
against the Master, 22 H. 6. f. 24. And by Newton, If a man of great power in
the Country, will say in the presence of the people, that he will spend twenty
pound for one party, or will give twenty pound to labor for the party, though
he give nothing, is maintenance, see before, 9 H. 7. fol. 18.

Maintenance against a Servant of one by Fortescue, if he meance Jurors to out
them of their Tenures, if they do not pa^e with his Master, this is special
Maintenance in the Servant, 19 H. 6. f. 30.

A man skilled in Law may do his endeavor for his Client, and it is no
maintenance, if the Plaintiff cannot allege other special matter forbidden by
the Law, 8 H. 4. f. 6. B.

Embraceor, is he which comes to the Bar with the party, and speaks in the
matter, or is there to overlook the Jury, or to put them in fear: but men
skilled in Law may speak in the Cause, for their Money, but they cannot labor
the Jury; and if they take money to do that, they are Embraceors. Fitzh. f. 71.
A.

Tenures and Services.
It is expedient to know the Services and Tenures which your Tenants shall do:
and first, of the Tenure in chief, and other Tenures of the King, and then of
other Lords.
FIrst, Tenure in chief is called, where one holds of the King merely as of his
Crown, which is a Signiory ingrosse, for that it is held of him which is
always King, and not of the King as of his Manor of D. etc.

Fuzh. 3. D. If any Land be held of the King, as of the Honor, Castle, or
Manor, such Lands are not held of the King in chief, and this is proved by
the Writ of Right, which shall be directed in such a Case to the Bailiffs of
the Honor, Castle, or Manor.

Also the Statute of Magna Charta, chap. 31. is, if any hold of any Escheat, as
of his Honor of Wallingford, Nottingham, Bullo gne, Lanca^^er, and of other
Escheats which are in Our hand, and are of Baronies, and dies, his Heir shall
not give other releif, nor make to us other Service, then the Barons should
make, if that Barony were in the hands of the Baron, and we in the same manner
will hold it as the Baron held it.

1 Ed. 6. chap. 4. also is, that where a King has, or after shall have any
Dukedomes, Baronies, Castles, Mannours, Land, Tenements, Fees, or Signiories,
by Attainder, Conviction, Outlary, or by Dissolution of Monasteries, which
Lands held of them by Knights Service, Socage, or otherwise, shall not be
construed to hold in chief, nor as Tenure in chief. See in Br. Tit. Tenures,
100.

Littleton, fol. 31. Tenure of the King in Burgage is, where an ancient Town
is, of which the King is Lord, and those which have Tenements within the
Borough, hold of the King their Tenements, that every Tenant by his Tenure
ought to pay to the King a certain Rent by the year, and such Tenure is but
Tenure in Socage.

Fitzh. 6. D. Lands and Tenements within Cities and Towns are held of the King
in Burgage Tenure, and it behooves that a Writ of Right Patent of them shall be
directed to Mayors, Sheriffs, and Bailiffs, as Bailiffs, and Officers of the
King, as if Lands were held of the King, as of any Honor, Castle, or Manor,
by which it appears, Tenure in Burgage is Socage Tenure, and not Socage in
chief: Fitzh. fol. 1. J. the same.

Stamford, 13. If one hold of the King in Burgage, the King shall not have
(first Seisin) but otherwise it is where he holds of the King by Knights
Service in chief, or by Socage in chief, for the Statute of the Kings
Prerogative, chap. 3. is, the King shall have the first Seisin after the Death
of them, which of him held in chief, of all Lands, and Tenements of which they
were seized in their Demesne, as of Fee, whatsoever age their Heirs were of, and
that is taken as well of Socage in chief, as otherwise in chief.

7 H. 6. fol. 3. The King shall have first Seisin, where his Tenant dies seized
in his Demesne as of Reversion.

47 Ed. 3. fol. 21. If the King purchase Lands which is held of others, by this
all the Services are extinguished, and if he infcoff others to hold of him, he
shall hold of his Crown in chief, by Finchden: and also when an Honor is
seized into the Kings hands, and a Manor is held of that Honor, which
escheats unto him, as of common Escheat, if he alien to hold of him, he shall
hold as he held before of the Honor, and by the same Services; but if he come
in as by Forfeiture, by War, or Escheat, which is because of his own person,
and he seize, and infeoff others, they shall hold in chief, if the King do not
express other Tenure.

33 H. 6 fol 7. By Prisot, if the King seize Land by Forfeiture of Treason, and
grant that over, to hold of the chief Lord, by the Service due, etc. that in
this case he shall hold of the chief Lord, as it has been adjudged.

44 Ed. 3. f. 45. The King gives Lands to one, to hold to him and his Heirs, by
the Services due, etc. and by all the Justices, that is Tenure by Knights
Service.

11 H. 4. fol. 71. It was recorded in the Exchequer, that such a one holds so
much Land of our Lord the King by Serjeanty, to find one Man for the War
wheresoever within the four Seas: and by Hank, it is great Serieanty, to be
made by the Body of a Man.

13 H. 7. fol. 16. If one hold of the Duchy of Cornwall, it is in chief, for
it was ancient Lands of the Crown.

Fitzh. 165. A. To hold Land to pay certain Rent to the Keeper of the Castle of
Dover, is a Tenure in chief. See Littleton, 23. See 5 Ed. 4. f. 127.

19 R. 2. Tit. 185. Guard. F. Keeper of a Castle in England is Knights Service,
for it countervailes Escuage, and is of the same nature.

8 H. 7. fol. 12. If I hold of the King, and he grants the same Service to me,
yet I shall hold of the King, for all is held of the King mediately or
immediately.

Magna Charta, chap. 20. See there for keeping of a Castle.

38 H. 8. Tit. 60. B. Livery, where the Heir was in Ward to the King, and come
to full age, there he shall sue Livery out of the Kings hands: and the first
Seisin is, where the Heir is of full age, at time of the Death of his Ancestor,
and where his Tenant holds in Socage in chief, and dies.

10 H. 7. f. 23. If one hold of the King to enclose a Park, he may by his Grant
after reserve for that six Marks; and the King is not bound by the Statute of
Westminster the third.

It is held 21 Ed. 3. fol. 41. The King gives the honor of Barkhamsted to the
Prince, and his Heirs Kings of England; and so it seems, that Lands held of
that Honor, seems to be held in chief, yet Magna Charta is, that Honor is not
properly in chief.

26 H. 8. fol. 10. By Fitzh. Lands in the County Palatine of Lancaster held of
the Duchy, the King there has kingly Rights, and there Livery shall be sued.

17 H. 8. fol. 31. Tenant of the King in chief, makes a Gift in Tail without
license, the King may choose the Donee or Donor for his Tenant. And if Tenant
of the King before the Statute of We m. 3. make a Feoffment, the King may
choose the Feoffee or Feoffor for his Tenant, 4 H. 6. f. 19.

33 H. 8 Tit. 94. B. in the Exchequer, 3 Ed. 3. Rot. 2. It was found that a man
held of the King in chief, as of his Honor of Raleigh, and it was taken no
Tenure in chief, but a Tenure of an Honor, otherwise it is if the Honor be
annexed to the Crown, for then the Honor is in chief. And in the year 11 H. 7.
The Honor of Raleigh was annexed to the Crown, and so it is in chief. But
where the King gives Lands to be held of him by Fealty, and two pence for all
Services, that is Socage in chief, for it is of the Kings person, and contrary
if it were to be held of the Manor of B.

24 Ed. 3. Tit. 19. He which holds of the King by Service to find a Man to
serve in the War, by forty Days at his own Charge, this is great Serjeanty
Tit. 69. Br. That a Tenure to find one Horse, and such like, is but small
Serjeanty, for it is not corporal Service.

44 Ed. 3. f. 45. The King gives the Fee-farm of a Town, that is, such a Rent,
to be held for term of life, and after confirms to him, and to his Heirs, to
be held by the Services due, and this is held Knights Service of the King, for
the most high, and better shall be taken for the King: and by Fitzh. 263. B. it
appears, that Rent may be held of the King by Knights Service in chief as well
as Land, etc.

10 H. 6. f. 12. Rent lies in Tenure of the King.

14 H. 6. f. 12. If the King grant Land to me in Fee, to be held as freely as
the King is in his Crown, yet I shall hold of the King, and if I alien without
license, I shall make Fine, for this is vested in the King by his Prerogative,
and shall not pass out of his Person by general words; by Paston in the end of
the Case.

45 Ed. 3. fol. 6. By Finchden, if my Tenant infeoff the King, and takes back
of the King, to hold of the King, yet he is my Tenant in right, and shall hold
of the King also. But inquire of the Tenure of me, for the Tenure was once
extinct, by the Kings Possession.

29 H. 8. Tit. 61. B. If the King purchase a Manor which J. S. holds, the
Tenant shall hold as he held before, and he shall not render Livery, nor first
Seisin, and he shall not hold in chief: and it is said, if the King grant the
Manor to W. N. in Fee, except the Services of J.S. Now J.S. holds of the King
as of the Person of the King, and yet he does not hold in chief, but as he held
before; for the act of the King shall not prejudice the Tenant.

31 H. 8. Tit. 70. B. Lord and Tenant, the Tenant is attaint of Treason by Act
of Parliament, and so forfeits all his Lands, and after is pardoned, and
restored by another Act of Parliament, to have to him and his Heirs, as if no
such Attainder or former Act had been; now he shall hold of a common person as
before, and yet once the Tenure was extinct.

3 H. 3. Tit. 94. B. Where the King gives Lands to be held of him by Fealty,
and twelve pence for all Services, this is Socage in chief, for it is of the
Kings person.

23 H. 3. Tit. 148. Guard. F. If a man holds of the King to go with him in the
Army against Scotland, in the Vanguard, and in his Return in the Rereward: and
so if he hold to give to the King Hornegild, which is said Cornage, it is great
Serjeanty.

38 H. 8. Tit. Livery 60. The Heir of him which holds of the King in chief in
Socage, shall not pay first Seisin to the King, for all his Lands, but only
for those Lands held in Socage in chief, contrary of him which holds in Knights
Service in chief, and where he holds in Socage in chief, the other Lord shall
have, (Ouster le main) with Issues.

2 Ed. 4. fol. 6. Land is given in Tail, to be held of the chief Lords, these
words to be held, etc. are void, and he shall hold of the Giver.

Where there is Lord and Tenant, if the Tenant be disseised, and the Disseisor
dies seized, and his Heir is in by Descent, the Lord ought to advow upon him:
but if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant infcoffs another, which does
not give notice to the Lord, now the Lord during the life of the Feoffor, may
take him for his Tenant, or the Feoffee at his pleasure, 4 H. 6. f. 19.

3. Book of Assise, 8. Lands is given in Tail, without saying of whom to hold,
the Donee shall hold of the Giver; and if a man before the Statute of Quia
Emptores, give in Fee, without saying of whom to hold, the Feoffee shall hold
of the Feoffor; Littleton, f. 5.

16 Ed. 3. Statham, fol. 23. If Lands be given in Tail, to be held of the Lord,
this (to be held) is void, and the Lord ought to avow upon the Feoffor.

5 H. 7. fol. 35. Mesnalty lies in Tenure by a Mesne, contrary of an Advowson
appendant, 1 H. 4. f. 1. the same.

33 H. 6. f. 34. Was the opinion, that Advowson may lie in Tenure, as where a
Manor and Advowson are held, the Advowson is made in gross, and the Advowson
is held for it self.

21 Ed. 3. f. 3. It seems that an Advowson lies in Tenure, 24 Ed. 3. Tit. 18.
14 H. 7. fol. 26. and 15 H. 7. fol. 8. the same.

32 Ed. 3. Tit. 75. Br. A fishing does not lie in Tenure, for the Soil may be
to one, and the fishing to another.

11 H. 4. fol. 80. It seems by Hill, that Rent cannot be held of a common
person, 10 H. 6. f. 12. Rent lies in Tenure of the King, 10. Book of Assise,
24. 1 H. 6. f. 21. Fitzh. 263. B. 13 H. 6. f. 12.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 44. Fishing lies in Tenure, and yet it is a profit in another
Soil, 8. Book of Assise, 7. Office may be held in chief.

42 Ed. 3. fol. 7. Advowson, may hold, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 15. the same.

14 H. 4. fol. 3. Where a Deed is to hold by Homage, Fealty, Escuage, and Rent,
for all Services, the Lord shall not have Suit of Court.

20 H. 7. fol. 10. He might before the Statute infeoff one to hold of him, and
after the Statute if he infeoff him of part, he shall hold for that part, 10 H.
7. fol. 10. the same.

5 H. 7. f. 11. By Fairefax, Termor for years shall make Fealty to his Lessor,
Littleton, 25. 9 H. 6. f. 43. the same.

10. Book of Ass. 29. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds of the Mesne by
three pence, and the Mesne over of the Lord by four pence, the Mesne dies
without Heir, the Lord shall have the three pence, for the Signiory is extinct
in the Mesnalty, so that he shall only have the Services which the Mesne
should have had, and also the Services which the Mesne paid to the Lord; but it
is said otherwise upon forejudging, for there the ancient Signiory remains,
for this wills the Statute.

Littleton, 41. Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Tenant holds of the Mesne by
the Service of five shillings, and the Mesne holds over by the Service of
twelve pence; the Lord Paramount purchases the Tenancy in Fee, then the
Services of the Mesnalty are extinct; but for that that when the Lord Paramount
has the tenancy, he holds of his Lord next Paramount, and for that the
Signiory of the Mesnalty is extinct, but for that that the tenant holds by 5.
shillings of the Mesne, and the Mesne holds but by twelve pence, the Lord shall
have the four shillings of the Mesne as Rent ^e^k, 2 E. 2. fol. tit. Exting.
6. F.

26 Book of Assizes 66. A man may hold by homage, and yet not Knights Service
but in Socage.

Littleton 22. Where a man holds by homage and fealfor all manner of Services
it is Socage, for homage by it self does not make Knights Service.

26 Book of Assizes 66. The King, Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the Tenant holds of
the Mesne by Socage, and the mesne over by Knights Service, the Tenant gives in
Frank-marriage, rendering 12 d. by year, for all services, saving Service
abroad, and it seems, that by this word, (saving the Service abroad) the giver
shall have only such Services, by which he himself is charged over.

31 Book of Assizes 30. When a man gives Lands in fee before the Statute to be
held by two pence, saving the service abroad, yet he shall hold by Knight
service, by Thorpe. See, 31 Book of Assizes 15.

Fitzh. 8. A. If the Husband infeoff J. S. and dye, and after the Wife is
endowed, she shall hold this Dower of the Feoffee by Fealty, 33 Ed. 3. Statham
fol. 75. Where the woman is endowed by the Guardian, she shall be Attendant to
the Guardian, and at full age to the heir.

3 E. 3. tit. 84. B. A woman tenant in Dower shall hold of the Heir for parcel,
and he shall make Avowry for that portion.

34 Book of Ass. 15. Where Tenant in tail dies without Issue, and his wife is
endowed, and the Donor enters, she shall hold by the third part of the
services, for this is the act of God, and the Law: The same Law is where there
is Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant dies without Heir; and the Lord enters for
Escheat, and the wife of the Tenant recovers Dower, and has Execution, she
shall hold by the 3d part of the services, contrary where the Lord purchases
the tenancy in fee, and she is endowed she shall render nothing to the Lord,
for this is his own act.

24 H. 8. tit. 53. If a man before the Statute of, Quia emptores terraru^, had
made a gift of land to one in fee, for repairing a Bridge, or for keeping sucha
Castle, or for marrying yearly a poor Virgin of S. this is a Tenure, and the
Donor may distraine and make avowrie and not condition: but if a woman give
lands to a man to marry her, this is a condition in effect and no Tenure.

9 H. 3. fol. 72. Lands in Gavelkinde are held in Socage, and not in Knights
Service, Fitzh. 13. D. Lands which are held in ancient Demesne are Socage.

13 R. 2. tit. 76. A man gives land to hold by ten shillings for all Services;
Exactions, Customs, and Demands. And yet the Tenant was constrained to pay
releife, for that is incident, as well to Socage, as to Knights Service.

29 H. 8. tit. 64. A man makes a Feostment of the half of his Land, the
Feoffee shall hold of his Lord by the whole Services, that the whole land was
held before, for the Statute to hold for that particular, does not hold place
here, for moiety is not a particular, as of one Acre or two Acres in certain,
but count of the third part, which goes throughout, and every where.

And if a man holds two Acres by a hauk, and makes a Feoffment in Fee, of one
Acre the Feoffee shall hold that by a hawk and the Feoffor shall hold the
other Acre by another hawk, Westminster. 3. fol. 85. It is lawful for any man to
sell, so that the Feoffee hold of the chief Lord for that part according to
the quantity of the land; that is, the value of the land so sold, etc.

Littleton 41. If one holds his land of the Lord by the Service, to render to
his Lord yearly at such a feast a Horse, or a Ring of Gold, or a clove, if in
such case the Lord purchase parcel of the land, such service is gone, for such
service cannot be severed nor aportioned, but if the tenant hold by homage,
Fealty and Rent, and the Lord purchase parcel of the land, the Rent shall be
apportioned, but the Homage and Fealty shall continue entire to the Lord.

8 H. 7. fol. 14. It is impossible that any Land should be and not held of the
King, either mediately or immediately and for that the King cannot release to
his Tenant all his Services.

10 H. 7. fol. 10. If the Tenant which holds two Acres by twenty pence, makes a
Feoffment of parcel, the Lord may distraine in this parcel so aliened, and
also in this part which remains in the possession of the Tenant

11 H. 7. fol. 12. Feosment before the Statute, or a gift in tail to make a
thing to himself, or to another for common wealth, is good, as to make a Beacon
or a Bridge, but to ride with a stranger is not good.

Fitzh. 1. L. To hold of us by free service, to find for us together with his
partners, Five ships for our passage at our command for all Services, it seems
to be Socage tenure.

Fitzherb. 83. C. E. A Writ de. Scutgio habendo, lies when one holds by
Knights Service, and the King goes in avoyage into the War in his proper
person, or his Leife-Tenant against the Scots, and none shall pay Escuage, but
those which hold to go into the War, and not he that holds by Cornage, nor by
keeping a Castle, Littleton 18. and Littleton the 19. One may distrain for
Escuage, or have a Writ, De scutagio habendo.

Fitzh. 135. a. If one hold twenty Acres by twenty shillings of the King, and
aliens a parcel, yet the King or his Officer, may distraine one of the Tenants
for all, and is not bound by the Statute to distraine for that parcel, but
otherwise it is of a common person, for if he distraine one for all, he shall
have a Writ to be discharged for a ratable proportion: But in case the king or
his Tenant aliens part, the Alienee makes Fine to the king for this Alienation:
It seems reasonable, if he be distrained for all the Rent, he shall have a
Writ to be disburdened, for a rateable proportion, against the kings Officer
which distrains, Westminster. 3. That the Feoffee of part, shall hold for that
particular part, according to the quantity of the Land so sold, etc.

Where by 27 H. 8. chap. 27. It was Enacted, That the king shall have to him
and his heirs, all Monasteries of Monks, Channons, and Nunns, which had not
Lands, Tenements, Rents, etc, above the value of two hundred pounds: And also
all Monasteries which have been granted to the king within a year next before
this Statute, by the Abbots or Priors under their Seal, or which have been
otherwise suppressed or dissolved; yet in this Act is a saving to the Lords
Rents, profits, services, and commodities, as they before have had them: So
that of these Monasteries, the Rents and Services of the Lords are not gone by
this Act; where such Abbeys hold Land of any Lord, but are saved to them.

But By 31 H. 8. chap. 13. The King is vested, deemed, and adjudged, in actual
and real Seisin, and possession, as well of the Monasteries dissolved by 27 H.
8. as of all others, and in this statute is a saving to every person, all their
Right, Title, Claim, Interest, Possession, Rents, Charge, Annuities, Leases,
Offices, Commons, Synods, etc. and other Profits in the Premises, or any part
of that, as if this Act had not been made, (Rents services, Rents seck, and all
other service, and suits only except) so by this statute, the Rents and
services of the Lords are gone.

1 Ed. 6. chap. 14. which gives Chanteries, etc. to the King, in this is a
Proviso that every one, which before that Act, lawfully without Covin or fraud,
has any manner of Rent, or any yearly profit to be taken of Chantries,
Colleges, free Chappells, and other the Premises in like manner and form as
they ought to have, if the Chantries, etc. had been in being, so that the Lords
of those shall not loose their Rents.

2 and 3 Ed. 6. Chap. 8. It is enacted, that where by office found, the King is
entitled to Lands or Tenements, in which others have Copihold, Rent, common
Office, Fee, or other Profit to take, for life, or for years, not found in the
same, that they shall enjoy the same Interest by Copy, Rent, common Office,
Fee, or other Profits to be taken, as if the same had been found by Office, and
provides that if one be found within age, or of less age then he is, that at
his full age, or after, he may have (Aetate probanda) or sue Livery, or (Ou^ter
le main) as his Case lies, and provides that where it is falsely found by
Office, that any Attaint of Treason, or Felony, is seized of any Lands, or
Tenements, whereof another has just Title, or Interest of an Estate of
Freehold, that he shall have Traverse, or Monstrans of Right to the same,
without being put to his Petition.

And provides where it is found, of what man or of whom the Tenements are held,
the Jury is altogether ignorant, it shall not be taken for a Tenure in Chief,
but there shall be a better Inquiry awarded.

37. H. 8. Chap. 20. It is enacted, that where by 35 H. 8. chap. 14. Houses,
not being Princely houses of the King, having Lands not above forty shillings,
that is, were granted by the King, and Tenure by Fealty to the King, and not in
Chief, is Socage, and that extends to all Letters Patents, made within five
years after the Statute.

Littleton, fol. 23. If a man hold his Land, by paying certain Rent to his Lord
for keeping a Castle, such Tenure is Tenure in Socage; but where the Tenant
ought by himself, or by other make the keeping of a Castle, such Tenure is
Tenure by Knights Service, so by Littleton, Escuage to go of a voyage Royal,
etc. and to keep a Castle, or the door thereof, etc. and to hold by Cornage,
that is, to hold, to make Service by the body of a man, these are Knights
Service, and to hold to pay Rent is Socage, for payment by him is Socage.

View.
Where one shall have View of Land in a Writ, or Plaint in nature of a Writ of
Land, and where not.
THe View is not to be granted, but where it is necessary, and if any Writ
abate, by a dilatory exception after the View, as by non-tenure, ill naming the
Town, or such like, he shall not have the View in the second Writ which
issues, also in a Writ of Dower where her Husband has aliened to the Tenant,
or his Ancestors, although the Husband died not seized, the Tenant shall not
have the View, and also in a (dum suit infra aetatem) (not of a right mind) and
such like, the View shall not be granted, West. 2. Chap. 48.

1 H. 5. fol. 11. upon the Resummons of Dower, the Tenant demanded the View,
the Demandant says, her Husband died seized, by which Judgment, and prayed
that he be outed, and he was outed by a Ward, 5 H. 5. f. 4.9 H. 5. fol. 4. f. 9.

9. Ed. 4. fol. 6. Dower, the Tenant demands the View, and held where the
Husband aliens, the View is outed by the Statute.

2 H. 4. fol. 2. Dower, the Tenant has the View, notwithstanding that he
disseised the Husband, See 7 Ed. 4. fol. 19.

11 H. 4. fol. 38. Dower, the Husband did not die seized, and this was the
Counterplea to out him of the View, 5 H. 5. fol. 4.9 H. 4. f. 9.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 31. Dower of Rent, for that, that the Husband was seized of
Land, he was outed of the View by statute.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 26. Dower, where the Husband dies seized, and in Assise where
Jurors have the View, and where the Tenant takes knowledge of the Land in
Demand, as in action against two: One says, that he is Tenant of all, in these
Cases he shall have no View.

33 H. 6. f. 57. Dower of Lands in diverse Towns, and to parcel the Tenant
pleads Bar, and demands the View in one Town, and shall not have it, for
that, that he has notice of parcel.

9 H. 6. f. 65. Wast, if six of the Jurors have not the View, the Inquest shall
not be taken, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 1. In Waste and Assise, the Jury shall have the
View. 21 Ed. 4. f. 26.

3 H. 4. f. 16. In Attaint upon verdict of Assise, the Jurors shall not have
View, for in this Writ it is not, (let them see the Land) and yet in Assise,
and Certificate in Assise, the Jurors shall have the View, 7 Ed. 4 f. 1.

22 H. 6. fol. 27. Entry in two Acres, and the Tenant pleads in Bar to one,
and demands the View of the other, and shall not have it, for he has taken
notice of parcel, and intended of all, 2 H. 4. f. 26.

7 H. 4. f. 9. Defendant shall not have View in an Action upon the Case, for
that, that it is personal, 7 H. 4. f. 32. the same, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 27.29 Ed.
3. fol. 43. the same.

3 H. 6. fol. 34. The statute is, for ill naming the Town, by non-tenure, and
such like, if the Writ abate after the View, he shall not have the View, in the
second Writ, and yet said, that if the first Writ abate for false Latin, that
he shall not have View in the second Writ, but where the first Writ abates for
form, as where the name of the Wife was put in the Writ, before the name of the
Husband, he shall have View in the second Writ, for that vests the fault in the
Party.

10 H. 4. fol. 6. Precipe, The Tenant has View in the second Writ, where the
first was discontinued after the View.

12 H. 4. fol. 4. Precepe against two, where one dies after the View, and the
Writ abates, yet in the second Writ against him which is alive, he shall have
View.

12 H. 4. fol. 11. Where the first Writ abates for false Latin, and by Thirne
has the View in the second Writ, Seek.

13 H. 4. fol. 8. He has the View in the second Writ: where the first was
abated by excepion of the Tenant.

13 H. 4. f. 14 The Tenant has the View in the second of Writ of 6 Acres,
where he had the View in the first Writ of 6 Acres, abate, 42 Ed. 3. fol. 23.
Precipe, where after the View, the first Writ abates by death, and in the new
by miscounts, he shall not have View, 43 Ed. 3. fol. 35.

42 Ed. 3. f. 33. Precipe abates by false Latin, and in a new by miscounts, he
shall not have the View, 7 H. 6. f. 36. the same, 46 Ed. 3. fol. 16. In a Writ
of Besayle, he shall not have the View, where he had View before in a Writ of
Cozenage, which was misconceived before of the same Land, and for that abates.

46 Ed. 3. fol. 34. In a dum fuit infra Aetatem, the Tenant shall not have the
View where a dismission was made to the Tenant by his Ancestor.

48 Ed. 3. fol. 31. In a dum fuit infra Aetatem, the Tenant shall not have the
View, for he is out by the statute.

29 Ed. 3. fol. 39. In dum fuit infra Aetatem, in the per and cui, the Tenant
shall have the View, otherwise, where it is in the per only, for he is there
outed by the statute.

22. Ed. 3. fol. 9. Precipe, The tenant has the View, and after the Demandant
was nonsuited, and after brought another Writ, and the tenant demands another
time the View, and had it.

24 Ed. 3. fol. 48 Precipe, the tenant abated that by waging of Law, of not
summoned, and yet in another brought freshly, he shall have the View, but he
had not that in the first.

38 Ed. 3. fol. 1. Precipe, Against Husband and Wife, they have the View, and
the Husband dies, and in a new Writ freshly brought, the Wife demanded the
View, and was outed, for it is not necessary, 29 Ed. 3. fol. 22.

38 Ed. 3. fol. 41. Where the first Writ abates by no such Town where he had
the View, and yet in the second Writ, he shall have the View.

30 H. 7. f. 8. (Cui in vita) the first Writ abates after the View, for that
he did not show of whose Demise he claimed in the second Writ, he was outed by
Fineux, and Davers, and by Vavisor, said, he shall have the View in the second,
if the first were not abated for any cause which comes upon the View, unless
it were by death abated.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 8. Quod ei deforceat, The Defendant shall not have View, for he
is outed by the statute, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 30. the same, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 42. the
same.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 8. Quod ei deforceat, The Defendant shall not have the View,
for he is outed by the statute, 41 Ed. 3. fol. 30. the same, 44 Ed. 3. fol. 42.
the same.

41 Ed. 3. f. 22. Assise of Nuisance, the Defendant shall have the View.

46 Ed. 3. f. 27. Curia claudenda, the Tenant shall have the View.

48 Ed. 3. f. 4. Gessavit, the Tenant shall have the View, where it is of his
own ceasing, where he is Tenant of the Land, and not Tenant to the Lord, for he
is as a stranger.

2 H. 4. fol. 6. Cessavit, of the Seisin of his Father, and of his own ceasing,
he shall not have View, for that it is of his own wrong, 7 H. 4. f. 16. the
same, 2 H. 4. f. 14.

37 H. 6. fol. 28. Cessavit, where it is of his own ceasing, he shall not have
the View, 4 H. 6. fol. 29. the same.

7 H. 6. fol. 47. Entry upon disseisin of Rent, the Tenant has View of the
Land, out of which the Rent is issuing. 8 H. 6. fol. 66. the same.

35 H. 6. fol. 70. Entry in the quibus of a Manor, said, that the Tenant
shall not have the View, for he is in by wrong, 28 H. 6. fol 1. the same.

3 H. 4. fol. 16. Assise, Jurors have the View, but the Tenant shall not have
the View.

6 Ed. 4. fol. 1. Quod permittat, the Tenant shall have the View, though it be
in Debet and solet, which is of possession, and not of Right, 30 Ed. 3. fol. 4.

2 H. 4. fol. 14. Quod permittat, of turning water, View was demanded in this
Writ, and he had it.

8 H. 6. f. 75 Admeasurement of Pasture, he shall have the View of the Land out
of which, etc. but not in personal Action, not in Waste, where Jurors have the
View; 9 H. 6. f. 41 the same.

3 H. 4. f. 10 Dower of Rent, the Tenant has the View of the Land out of which
it is issuing, and said, that he shall have it, though the Husband died seized
of the Rent: but see 44 E. 3. f. 31 if the Husband die seized of the Land, she
shall not have the View.

22 H. 6. fol. 12 Assise of Profits of an Office, the place where he holds his
Office shall be put in View.

13 H. 7. f. 10 Cui in vita, the Tenant shall have View, and yet the Statute
is, if a Dismission be made to the Tenant, and not to his Ancestor, the View is
not to be granted, but she claims from her Husband, and not by the Demandant
or his Ancestor.

Pleas after the View in Abatement.
FOrmedon, one cannot plead in Abatement after the View, unless it be a thing
which comes upon the View, but where it appears to the Court that it wants
form, or is false Latin, the Court, Ex officio, will abate it, 41 Ed. 3. f.
29.40 Ed. 3. f. 35.

44 Ed. 3. f. 14. Formedon of a House, and in the perclose of the Writ there is
a House and Meadow, and after View the Tenant cannot show that in Abatement,
for that it is but a Surplusage.

49 Ed. 3. f. 20. Formedon, after View the Tenant cannot plead in Abatement,
that any of the Degrees were omitted, for it is not apparent to the Court.

50 Ed. 3. f. 9. Formedon, the Tenant may plead ancient Demesne, after the
View, for it may be that parcel in the Town is ancient Demesne, and parcel
frank fee, and that comes upon the View to know that.

11 H. 4. fol. 70. Formedon, where is matter apparent in a Writ to abate that,
he may plead that after the View.

7 H. 6. fol. 39. After the View one cannot plead no such Town, but he may say,
that the Tenements are in another County, for that comes upon the View, but
after the View he cannot plead to the Jurisdiction, yet he may plead that they
are in C. and that they are impleadable there, and demand Judgment of the
Writ, and not Judgment if the Court will acknowledge.

19 H. 6. fol. 10. Dower, of a Freehold in D. and S. after View one cannot
plead no such Town of D. for he is estopped of that, for that he has knowledge
of the Town before the View, but he may plead Joint-tenancy, and non-tenure,
which comes upon the View.

5 H. 7. f. 8. If the View be denied where it is grantable, it is Error,
otherwise it is if it be granted, where it is not grantable, 8 H. 7. f. 11. the
same.

36 H. 6. fol. 17. Right of Advowson, the Defendant demands the View, for that
there are two Churches in the same Town, and to out him of the View, Plaintiff
says, that there is but one Church there, Ready, etc.

3 H. 6. fol. 57. Dower by Husband and Wife, the Tenant pleads that the Wife is
an Alien, born in Portugal out of the Allegiance of the king: Judgment if he
shall be answered: the Plaintiff says, that by Parliament she was made
personable: and now the Tenant demands the View, and had it, for though his
Plea before was as a Bar, he pleaded that as to the Person, and not to the
Action; and for that shall have the View, otherwise it is if he had pleaded a
Bar.

14 H. 6. fol. 8. Precipe against two, where one acknowledges the Action, the
other shall not have view.

26 H. 8. f. 2. Precipe, against two, one imparles, and the other has the
View, by Fitzh.

The third Part of this Book, chiefly for Pleading.
Abatement.
Something of Pleadings, for the Instruction of the Steward, shall be said here
following.
Trespass upon the Statute of Richard, the Defendant says, that J. F. let to
him, and the Plaintiff made Title, and that J. F. abated, and let to the
Defendant, the Defendant maintains his Bar, and traverses the Abatement, and
that is not good, for Issue shall not be upon the Abatement, 3 H. 7. f. 7. and
18 Ed. 4. f. 1.

Entry upon Disseisin, Issue cannot be taken upon Abatement: the same Law is of
Intrusion, 14 H. 6. f. 6.

Issue shall be upon the Affirmative and Negative, and not upon Plea by
Argument, but upon traverse the Affirmative.
COnspiracy, he is alive, without that, that he is dead, 7 H. 7. f. 6.14 H. 6.
f. 9.19 H. 6. f. 4. and 35 H. 6. f. 60.

Trespass, the Defendant iustifies for Fealty not made; the Plaintiff says,
it was not unmade, and good, 9 H. 7. fol. 12.

Debt against J. S. of D. the Defendant says, that he is dwelling at S. and
shall say, and not at D. in the Negative, 4 H. 6. fol. 4. 2 Ed. 4. fol. 1.4 Ed.
4. fol. 44. and 10 Ed. 4. fol. 12.

Trespass, the Defendant says, that the Freehold was to J.S. which let to
him at will, the Plaintiff says, that the Freehold was to him, and not to J.
S. in the Negative, 11 H. 4. f. 90.

Where the Defendant says, that the Plaintiff is a Bastard; and the Plaintiff
says, he is Legitimate; he shall say, and not a Bastard, 19 H. 6. f. 17 and 11
H. 6. f. 53

Trespass against J. S. of Fenton, the Defendant says, that he was dwelling
at E. and shall say negatively, and not at Fenton, 19 H. 6. f. 1.

Action upon the Statute of Laborers, the Defendant says, that he was in the
Service of J. S. and shall say, and not Vagrant in the Negative, 11 H. 6. f. 1.
and 52.

Action upon the Case, for that he has a Leet, and Fines and Amerciaments of
the same; the Defendant says, that well and true it is, that the Plaintiff
has a Leet; but he says, that he has not the Fines and Amerciaments, and
ought to say, without that, that the Plaintiff has the Fines and Amerci
aments, 38 H. 6. f. 16

False Judgment, Issue was, that one says, that he was dead, and the other
says, that he is alive, 14 H. 6. fol. 9.19 H. 6. f. 4. the same.

Where one pleads out of his Fee, the other says within, without that, that it
was out in manner and form, 11 H. 4. fol. 10

Formedon in reverter, and counts of a Gift in Tail, etc. the Defendant says,
that the Donor gave in Fee, and it is not good, for it is but an Answer by
Argument, and for that he ought to traverse the Gift in Tail, which is supposed
by the Plaintiff, 2 H. 6. f. 15.

Scire facias against the Parson of D. of Arrerages of Annuity; the Defendant
says, that before the Writ he resigned to the Bishop of L. and so that
remained in his hands: Judgment of the Writ, and it is but a Plea by Argument,
that is, that he is not Parson, and for that it is not good without concluding,
and so not Parson; 7 E. 4. fol. 16.

Assise and Trespass.
Diversity between pleadings in Assise and Trespass, for in Trespass need not
make Title under Possession, otherwise in Assise.
Trespass, the Defendant ought to convey to him an Estate immediate, and for
that, to say, that J. S. was seized, till by J. D. disseised, which infeoffed
the Plaintiff, upon whom J. S. entered, whose Estate he has, it is not good,
but if the Defendant says, that he was seized till by the Plaintiff disseised,
upon whom he entered, it is good, but not in Assise; 5 H. 7. f. 11.

Trespass, the Defendant says, that he was seized till by the Plaintiff
disseised, and he entered, and it is good; and he need not to convey to him a
Title; and the Plaintiff says, that he was seized, till by the Defendant
disseised, without that, that he disseised the Defendant, for if the Defendant
had first Possession, it is good in Trespass; 26 H. 8. f. 6.

Trepasse, the Defendant may plead Fine with Proclamation, Judgment if Action,
but not rely upon Estoppell; 17 H. 8. f. 27.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads his Freehold; the Plaintiff says, that he
was seized in Fee, till disseised by the Defendant, and he re-entered, and the
Trespass in the mean time, the Defendant maintains his Bar, without that,
that he disseised the Plaintiff, 1 Ed. 4. f. 3.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, Gift in Tail to his Ancestor, and conveys to
him by diverse Discents, the Plaintiff says, that he was seized in Fee, and
traversed the Gift, and it is good, and need not make Title beyond his
Possession, otherwise of Assise; 3 Ed. 4. f. 19.

Trespass, to plead a Feoffment of the Plaintiff, it seems to be good; or he
may say, that he himself was seized; but in Assise, Feoffment of the Plaintiff
is no Plea, for that amounts to no wrong, no Disseisin; 15 Ed. 4. f. 31. and
29. Book of Ass. 24.

Trespass, if the Defendant plead that he was infeoffed, the Plaintiff may
traverse the Feoffment without making to him Title, otherwise it is in an
Assise; 18 Ed. 4. f. 10.10 Ed. 4. f. 3.27 H. 6. f. 1. and 40 Ed. 3. f. 5.

Trespass, the Defendant says, that H. his Tenant at will infeoffed the
Plaintiff, and he entered; the Plaintiff says, that J. S. infeoffed H. and he
died seized, and his Issue infeoffed me; the Defendant cannot traverse the
Feoffment but the Descent, otherwise it is in Assise, 10 H. 4. f. 1.

Assise, by Littleton, the Tenant may plead, let to him for years, or for life,
the Reversion to the Plaintiff, and it is good; and so is it of a Feoffment
with Warranty, of the Plaintiff, and rely upon Warranty; 18 Ed. 4. fol. 10. 8
Ed. 2. Tit. Ass. 391. and 18 Ed. 3 f. 13. the same.

Assise, the Tenant pleads that the Plaintiff let to him for life, and is good,
but a Feoffment of the Plaintiff is not good in Assise, but in Trespass it is
good, 6 H. 7. f. 14.27. Book of Ass. 31. the same. and 29. Book of Ass. 24.

Trespass at Compton over C. and neither C. it is no Plea in Trespass, but it
is good in Assise; 8 H. 6. f. 18.

Trespass at D. there are two Dd. within the County, and none without
addition, it is no Plea, for the Visne shall be of the Body of the County; 3
Ed. 4. f. 26. and 9 H. 6. Tit. 5. the same.

Assise of Lands in Osgodby, the Tenant says, there are two Osgodbyes within
the County, none without addition, and it is no Plea, for the Plaintiff shall
recover by view of the Jurors, 5 Book of Assizes 9 and 27 Ed. 3. f. 2

Trespass in Otterton and H. which H. is a Hamlet of Otterton, it is a good
Plea in Precipe, and not in Trespass, where Damages only are recovered; 7 E.
4. f. 18 and 4 E. 4 Tit: Brief 155 and 179.

Trespass may be in a Hamlet, but not in a place only known; 11 H. 7 fol. 24
2 R. 3. fol. 1 and 43 E. 3. fol. 30 the same.

Precipe, in D. is a good Plea in Abatement, that D. is a Hamlet and not a
Town, but otherwise it is in Assise; 8 E. 4. f. 6

Pleas in Bar.
Bar is good at the first show, or by common reason and intent, such intent is
a Plea, which has not more vehement presumption then to intend contrary; but
if the intent be indifferent, it is not good at the first show by Intendment.
FOrmedon in Discender, that he gave not, is good, and yet it may be that he
did recover in value, but the most pressing Intendment is to the contrary: but
if in Debt, I plead Release bearing Date after the Obligation, it is not good,
at the first face, unless he says, that it was delivered after the
Obligation: Plowd: Com. f: 32

Forging of Deeds, the Defendant says, that he himself was seized at the time
of the Forgery, and it might be by Disseisin, but it shall not be intended, and
for that it is good, at the first show; 8 H. 6. f. 34

Trespass, that he entered into a Warren, the Defendant pleads his Freehold,
and it is good, and yet one may have the Warren, and another the Freehold; 44
E. 3. f. 12 17 E. 4. f. 6 10 H. 7. f. 24 and 34 H. 6. f. 28

Trespass in a several fishing, the Defendant pleads that the place is his
Freehold, and is good, as above at the first face; 18 H. 6. f. 29 10 H. 7. f.
24 20 H. 6. f. 4 17 E. 4. f. 6 and 18 E. 4. f. 4

Assise of Mortdancester, because his Mother took the habit of Religion, the
Defendant says, that your Mother had a Husband alive when she entered into
Religion, and it is not good; for it is indifferent whether he be alive or not,
and for that he ought to aver, that the Husband is yet alive; 5 E. 4. f. 3

Trespass of Goods, etc. the Defendant justifies that the property was to J.
S. which gave them to him at D. and though he do not say, where the property
was in him, it shall be intended at D. and good; 1 E. 5. f. 3

It is said there, though the Bar be good to common intent, yet it shall not
be good where parcel of the substance is left out, but where such things are
left out, which by special intendment, and not by general intendment, are
omitted, the Law shall keep such a bar. Plowd. Com fol 27.

Accounts, the Defendant says that he has accounted before the Plaintiff
himself, and it is good, yet he does not say, that he was before Auditors
before him, etc. 4 Ed. 4. fol. 6.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that he to whose use enfeoffed him, and does
not say, if he were out of Prison, and of full age, according to the Statute,
and yet being in Bar, it was said, that it shall be so intended, 6. H. 7.
fol. 6.

Where Count is upon matter of Reords, or of Specialty the Bar shall be so
high, and not upon bare matter.
DEbt upon arrearages of Annuity, the Defendant says, that he let the Manor
of D. to him in recompense, and it is no Plea, for it is not so high, 19 H. 8.
fol. 9.

Trespass upon the Statute of Rich. The Defendant pleads in Bar, warranty of
the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, and demands Judgment, if against the warranty,
etc. and it is no Plea, for Damages is only to berecovered, 10 H. 7. fol. 12.

Trespass, the Defendant may plead Fine with Proclamation, Judgment, if
Action, but not to rely upon the estoppell, 27 H. 8. fol. 27.

14 H. 4. fol. 27. Debt upon a Lease by Indenture, the Defendant says that he
has bestowed the Rent upon reparations by commandment of the Plaintiff, and
it is not good, for it is not so high.

10 H. 7. fol 4 Debt upon arrearages of a Lease for years, the Defendant pleads
agreement, and it is not so high.

1 H. 7. fol. 14. The Defendant cannot avoid specialty by bare matter, as to
say the specialty was delivered to him in place of an acquittance, for it is
not so high.

10 Ed. 4. fol. 18 Debt upon an Obligation, endorsed with condition, that if
the Defendant serve him in all his lawful commands, etc. the Defendant may
plead, that he discharged him, and it is good without specialty, for the
condition is matter in deed.

18 Ed. 4. fol. 9 If one covenant by Indenture to make me a house before such a
day, and he plead, that I discharged him before the day, it is good without
specialty, for I cannot come upon his Land after discharge, 19. Ed. 4. fol. 2
the same.

21 H. 6. fol. 36. Trespass of taking his Apprentice, the Defendant says that
the Plaintiff discharged him before the Trespass of taking, and it seems no
Plea, for that he is an Apprentice by Indenture, and the discharge without
specialty, and to another person.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 57. Annuity, the Defendant pleads levied by distress in another
County, and so that he owes him nothing, and it is good, but that he owes him
nothing only, is no Plea against specialty.

3 H. 6. fol. 41. Scire facias, upon recovery of arrerages of annuity,
Defendant pleads that the Deed of annuity was delivered to him in lieu of an
Acquittance, and it is no Plea against a recovery.

11 H. 4. fol. Debt upon arrerages before Auditors, the Defendant pleads that
he has an obligation for the same, and it is no Plea, for it is not so high.

11 H. 7. fol. 13. Waste, Defendant pleads an agreement between him and the
Plaintiff, and it is no Plea, for the Inheritance is to be recovered in this
writ, and for that it is no Plea.

Scire facias, upon a Recognisance to have one here at a certain day to
appear, it is no Plea to say, I have been there without showing his appearance
of Record, for it is not so high, 7 H. 6. fol. 26. B.

Debt upon arrerages of account before Auditors, the the Defendant pleads
Abitrement, and it is no Plea against matter of Record before Auditors, 3 H. 6.
f. 55. 8 H. 5. f. 3. the same, 10 H. 6. tit. 44. 4 H. 6. fol. 17. and 3 H. 4.
f. 7. H. 4. f. 6. adjudged.

Debt upon an obligation, the Defendant cannot plead payment, for it is not so
high, 1 H. 7. fol. 14.

Debt upon an obligation, endorced upon condition; the Defendant may plead that
the Plaintiff has retained parcel of the smaller sum, hanging the Writ, and
it is good in abatement without specialty, 5 H. 7. f. 4.

Action upon the Statute of Rich. If the Defendant plead Act of Parliament, by
force of which he was seized, till the Plaintiff entered upon him, upon which
he re-entered, the which is the same Trespass, etc. and concludes Judgment if
action, it is good, 3 Ed. 4. fol. 6.

Annnity by grant, the Defendant says in abatement that after the action
brought, that the Plaintiff has retained part of the arrerages, and it is no
Plea without specialty, for it is not so high, 22 Ed. 4. fol. 51.

Debt upon an obligation, the Defendant pleads receipt of parcel, hanging the
Writ, Judgment of the writ, and it is not good without specialty, 7 Ed. 4.
fol. 15.

15 H. 7. fol. 10. Debt upon a single obligation of twenty pound, the Defendant
pleads that the Plaintiff has received parcel, hanging the Writ, and demands
Judgment of the Writ, and it is no Plea without showing Acquittance, for it is
not so high.

Waste, the Defendant pleads agreement to make fludgates only, and agreement
is no Plea in this action, for it is not so high, for Land is to be recovered,
13 H. 7. f. 20. 11 H. 7. f. 13.

Covenant upon specialty, the Defendant pleads arbitrament, and it is not good,
for it is not so high, 3 H. 4. fol. 2.

Debt upon obligation, the Defendant cannot plead that the Plaintiff delivered
this obligation again to him in place of an Acquittance, and took it again from
him, for it is not so high, 5 H. 4. fol 2.

Debt for Rent upon a Lease by Indenture, the Defendant cannot plead payment
for it is not so high, but payment, and so he owes him nothing, is good, but
where a Lease is by word, payment in Debt upon that is good, 1 H. 5 fol. 6 See,
46 E. 3. f. 1. See, 10 H. 7.24. b. 11 H 7.4 b. 20 H. 6.20. b. and 9 Ed. 4.27.

Debt upon obligation upon condition, the Defendant may plead payment according
to the condition, without specialty, 5 H 7 fol. 41. 5 Edw. 4 fol 5. the same

Debt for Rent upon a Lease, payment is no Plea without saying, and so he owes
him nothing, but payment in another County is good without concluding, and so
he owes him nothing, 33 H 6 fol 4. 10 H 7 fol 4.3 H 7 fol 3.

Debt upon a bargain, where the Defendant may wage his Law he cannot plead
payment in another County, 18. H 6 fol 13. 10 H 7 f 4. 11 H 74 b.

Count.
Count shall be more certain then a Bar, and yet sometimes it is good by
intendment, that is if Common reason do not imply contrary to the Count, it is
good by intendment.
DEbt upon obligation without date, yet the Plaintiff ought to count when it
was made: But otherwise it is if the Defendant plead an Acquittance without
date, 3 H. 4. f. 5. 6 Ed. 4. f. 11. Debt or annuity without date, the same, 5
H. 7.24 B. of annuity.

Quare impedit, If the Plaintiff counts that four persons were seized of a
Manor, to which the Advowson is appendant, whose Estate he has, it is not
good without counting how he has it, otherwise it is in Bar, 2 H 6. fol. 10.

Action upon the case, of borrowing a Horse to ride to York, and counts that he
rode him further, he ought to count in what County York is, 21 Ed 4. fol 79 b

Debt, and counts that if the Defendant make voluntary wast, he should pay
twenty shillings, and counts that he made wast in sale, and for that, that he
does not count how, it is not certain, and not good, 9 H. 6. fol. 11.

Decies tantum, for embracing, and counts that at D. he has taken Money to
embrace, but for that, that he does not count that he has embraced, nor how or
where he embraced, it is not good, 37 H. 6. f. 31

Deceit against an Attorney, for acknowledging satisfaction, and ought to count
where he was not satisfied, for otherwise it is uncertain, and shall not be
employed, and intended, 11 H. 6. f. 2. B.

Rescous, and counts that he distrained for Rent, etc. and for that, that he
does not count, which were the days of payment, it is not certain, and is not
good, 8 H. 4. fol. 1.

Where one Avowes for that, that he held of him, by the third part of the fee
of Knights Service, and for that, that he does not show, by what manner of
Knights Service, it is not good, 12 H. 8. f. 13.

Debt by Stradling, and counts of taking excessive fees in paying Pensions,
where the Defendant was receiver of the Manors of D. and S. in the hands of H.
8. and for that, that he does not count, that they continued in the hands of
Ed. 6. it is not good, for the Statute was made in the time of Ed. 6. that if
any Receiver of the King took etc. he should pay for every penny six shillings
eight pence, and that might have two meanings, one with the Plaintiff, the
other against him, and for that it is not good, P.C. fol. 202.

Forging of Deeds, the Writ is, diverse false Deeds, and counts of a Deed of
Feoffment, and of a Writing and assurance of a Letter of Attorney, and for that
the Count is not good, 35 H. 6. fol. 37. b.

Debt, The Plaintiff counts upon a Lease made by him, and E. late his Wife, by
Deed indent, and counts for the Rent behind, and though he do not count that
his Wife was dead, yet it is good, for it cannot be by reason but she is dead,
9 H. 6. fol. 11. b. and 8 H. 5. fol. 4.

Account, the Plaintiff counts that the Defendant was his Receiver such a day,
till the Feast of Saint Michael, and there are two Feasts of Saint Michael,
that is, Michael in Tumba, and Michael the Archangell, and though it be not at
which Saint Michael, it is good, and shall be intended Michael the Archangell,
which is more known, and the more observed Feast. 20 H. 6 fol. 23.

Trespass, and counts that the Defendant entered into a Warren at D. and drove
away the Conies, and not say drove them away there, and yet it is good, and
shall be intended there, 44 Ed. 3 fol. 12

Where he confesses and avoids, he need not Traverse.
DEtinue of finding a Box, sealed with Writings, the defendant says, that they
were delivered in pawn to him for a hundred Shillings, and if he pay that he
would redeliver him it, and it is good without Traverse, for he confesses, and
avoids the Plaintiff, 21 Ed. 4. f. 19.

Detinue of a Chest ensealed with VVritings, The Defendant says, that the
VVritings which he had were in a Box ensealed, and the Plaintiff lent him a
hundred Shillings, and delivered this Box to him in Pawn, without that, that he
detains a Chest, and it is good; and it is good with Traverse, otherwise not,
22 Ed. 4. f 7.

Trespass of breaking his House, and taking his Goods there, the Defendant
says, that his Wife was Executrix, and that they were the Goods of the
Testator, and the Door was open, and he entered, and took them, and this is
good without Traverse, for he has confessed and avoided, 2 H. 6. f. 15 B

Trespass of his Goods taken, the Defendant says, they were delivered to him
by a Replegeare, and it is good without Traverse; 7 H. 4. f. 15. and 44 E. 3.
f. 20

Trespass of his Goods taken, the Defendant says, they were delivered to him
upon an Execution upon a Recovery, and this is good; 40 E. 3. f. 21. and 44 E.
3. f. 20

Trespass of Close broken, the Defendant says, that he had a way there by
Prescription to his Manor, which he used, and ought there to traverse without
that he bro^^^ down, for the other is not breaking down; 8 H. 5. f. 2

13 H. 8. f. 14 Quare impedit against J. Hecker, of an Advowson appendant, the
Defendant says, that it is an Advowson in gross, and that W. S. his Master
presented W. S. and that he died, and J. Hecker was chosen Master, and
presented J. Hecker, the Defendant, and for that he has confessed and avoided
the Plaintiff for gaining of Possession, and for that he need not any Traverse.

10 H. 7. f. 27 Quare impedit, and counts of an Advowson in gross, the
Defendant says, that it is appendant to a Manor which descended unto him,
and he ought to traverse.

5 H. 7. fol. 12 Trespass, Defendant says that Nicholas his Grandfather was
seized in Fee, and died seized, and that descended to his Father, and he
entered, and by Protestation died seized, and that descended to him: Plaintiff
says, that J. S. gave to Nicholas in Tail, and that descended unto him as Son,
and it is not good without traversing the Dying seized in Fee of Nicholas, or
confess and avoid it.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads a Grant made to him by E. and the Plaintiff
pleads that H. 6 by Authority of Parliament, granted that to him, and is good;
for that confess and a voyds the Grant; 7 H. 7. f. 15

Quare impedit against a Prior, the Plaintiff counts that he was seized of an
Advowson in gross and presented; the Defendant says, that he was seized in
right of his Monastery in gross and presented J. and after his Predecessor
granted the next Avoidance to the Plaintiff, and to the Presentee A. and good,
for he has confessed and avoided; 26 H. 8. f. 5

Trespass, the Defendant conveyes the Land to her as Sister B. the Plaintiff
says, that B. had Issue a Daughter, and that he as Guardian in Socage entered,
and it is good without traverse, for he has confessed and avoided; 19 H. 8. f.
11 B.

Assise, the Tenant pleads that J. S. infeoffed him: the Plaintiff says, that
well and true it is, that J. S. infeoffed you, but it was upon condition, and
that J. S. entered for the condition, and infeoffed the Plaintiff, and this is
good, for he confesses and avoides the Defendant, 6 H. 7. f. 8

Forging of Deeds, and counts that the Defendant has forged a Deed, by which
J. Beak infeoffed W. T. the Defendant says, that long time before the Plaintiff
had any thing, that J. Beak infeoffed W. and Alice his Wife which died, and the
Defendant as Heir of W. read and proclaimed the Deed, and ought to traverse
forging; for where the Defendant justifies a thing, prohibited by the Law in a
special manner, he ought to traverse, as in Maintenance; if he justify, he
shall say, he shall say without that, that he maintained in other manner; 32 H.
6. f. 1

Trespass of Assault and threatening, the Defendant says, that the Plaintiff
called him Traitor, and he said, thou lie in thy throat, it is no Plea, for
he does not confess any threatening 37 H. 6. f. 3

Conclude.
Order and form, how one ought to conclude in his Plea.
WHere to a Bar there ought to be a Reply, the Conclusion of his Plea shall be
(and this he is ready to prove) etc. (and where but ready that so) there it is
otherwise; 33 H. 6. f. 21 and 12 Ed. 4. f. 13 the same.

As in Dower, the Tenant pleaded (not ever seized that Dower, he ought to
conclude, (and of this he puts himself upon the Country) for no Reply shall be,
(but ready that so.)

Where the Defendant pleads to the Issue, the conclusion shall be (and of this
he puts himself upon the Country) and where the Plaintiff pleads to the
Issue, he shall say, (and he desires that this may be inquired by the Country,
26 H. 8. f. 4.

If one plead a Plea, which is not traversable, as no wrong, or general Issue,
or Record as Outlawry, he need not in his conclusion averr his Plea, that is,
(and this he is ready to prove, etc. 36. H. 6. fol. 17.

When the Defendant justifies, he ought to conclude, (and this he is ready to
prove, etc.) and when he pleads the general Issue, he need not, 6 H. 4. fol.
18. and the Book of Entries, fol. 152. the same.

Quare impedit, If the Defendant plead that it is incorporated by another name,
Judgment if Action, this conclusion is not good, but he ought, to conclude
Judgment of the Writ, 26 H. 8. fol. 1. and 4 H. 6. fol. 27.

Where the Defendant says, that the Parties to the Fine have nothing, but one
such a one, whose estate he has, he ought to conclude, (and this he desires
may be inquired by the Country) and the aforesaid Plaintiff likewise, it
shall be entered, for here needs no Reply, but ready, that so as above, 12 Ed.
4. fol. 13.

Debt upon Obligation, the Defendant says, that it was endorsed upon Condition
to perform Covenants of an Indenture, and that part was read, and part not, and
that he was a man unlearned, there he ought to conclude Judgment, if Action;
the same Law is, where he says it was made by constraint, or that he was under
age, or that it was delivered as an Eserow, 7 Ed. 4.3 B. he ought to say
Judgment, if Action, 14 H. 8. fol. 30.

Debt upon obligation, to plead payment, and delivery of that in place of an
Acquittance, he ought to conclude judgment if action, but if he avoid that,
for that it is raced or interlined, there it shall be concluded not his deed,
for where a Deed is void, he ought to conclude not his Deed, and where
voidable, or matter in Law, judgment if action, 1 H. 7 f. 14.

Debt upon Obligation, to say he is a man unlearned, and this was read to him
to be with Condition, and so this Obligation being single, is not his Deed, 7
Ed. 4. fol. 5. 15 Ed. 4. fol. 17. 16 Ed. 4. f. 1. the same, 9 H. 5. f. 15. and
3 H. 6. fol. 52.

Debt upon a Lease, to plead payment in another County, or levied by Distress,
without concluding, (and so he ows him nothing) is good, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 57.3 H.
7. fol. 3. and 33 H. 6. f. 4. the same; but levied by Distress or payment in
the same County, is not good without concluding, (and so he owes him nothing.)

Debt for Wages upon a Bargain, to plead payment in the same County, and
conclude, and so he owes him nothing, is good, 40 Ed. 3. fol. 24.

Debt upon a Lease by Indenture, for the defendant to plead payment in the same
County, it is no Plea without concluding, and so he owes him nothing to the
point of the Writ, 1 H. 5. fol. 6.

Where he ought to conclude, and so not his Deed.
DEbt upon a single Obligation, the Defendant says, that he is a man
unlearned, and this was read to him, with a Condition, and so not his deed, 1
H. 6. fol.

3 H. 6. fol. 38. Debt by a Husband and his Wife, of an Obligation made to
them, the defendant being Executor, J.S. pleads Release of the Husband made to
him, and the Release was of all actions, and demands, as Executor, and all
actions personalls, and other demands, and the Plaintiff says, that he is a
man not learned, and it was read for Actions, as Executor, and so not his deed,
and good, See 3 H. 7. fol. 5. and 19 H. 8.

1 H. 7. fol. 14. If the defendant confess, that once by his own Plea his
deed, he cannot afterward conclude, and so not his deed: As if an Infant makes
a deed, or a man by constraint, if he plead these matters to avoid that, he
cannot conclude (and so not his deed) but where an Obligation is void, he ought
to conclude, and so not his deed: as where an Obligation is made by a married
Wife, or a deed raced or interlined, 1 Ed. 3. fol. 5. the same.

Where he ought to conclude according to his matter pleaded.
LIttleton, f. 39 Six manner of men are, against which if they sue Actions,
Judgment may be demanded, if they shall be answered in the Conclusion of his
Plea; and first, if he say, that the Plaintiff is his Villain, he shall say
Judgment if he shall be answered; second, is outlawed; third, is a stranger
born; fourth, is one attaint in a Praemunire; fifth, is professed in Religion;
sixth, is excommunicated: the Defendant may plead these, and demand Judgment,
if the Plaintiff shall be answered.

34 H. 6. fol. 9 If the Tenant plead Joint-tenancy, or other Plea in Abatement,
he ought to conclude, Judgment of the Writ; and where one pleads in Bar, he
ought there to conclude Judgment if Action.

49 Ed. 3. f. 24 Account of Receipt in C. the Defendant says, that C. is within
the five Ports; Judgment if the Court will acknowledge it, and so always to
the Jurisdiction, that is Conclusion as Parson sue for Tithes, etc.

In diverse Cases they ought to conclude in the Negative, where so to the
Affirmative pleads that his Plea is but as an Argument, and not full Answer,
and also to make the matter in Law plain.
SCire facias against a Parson of Ar^erages of an Annuity; the Defendant
pleads, that before the Writ purchased he resigned, and so not Parson, and it
is good, 7 Ed. 4. fol. 16

10 H. 7. f. 4 Said in Debt upon a Lease for the Rent behind, if the Defendant
pleads Payment in another County, this is good without concluding, (and so he
owes him nothing, etc.) But if he plead Payment in the same County, it is no
Plea without concluding, and so he owes him nothing; 9 Ed. 4. f. the last.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 15 Debt against Executor which pleads that J. S. recovered
against them an hundred pounds, and had Execution, and they have nothing come
to their hands besides that: the Plaintiff says, the Testator did owe nothing
to J. S. and so the Recovery false and feigned.

21 Ed. 4. f. 71 Dower, the Tenant says, that the Husband was not seized, that
she could have Dower, etc. The Plaintiff says, that T. the Father of her
Husband died seized, and that descended to her Husband which died before Entry,
and so he died seized, and in Formedon of Lands recovered in value, he ought to
conclude, and so gave.

19 H. 8. fol. 6 Right of Ward, and counts that the Ancestor of the Infant died
in his Homage; the Defendant says, that he held of him in Socage, without
that, that he died in his Homage: the Plaintiff says, that J. S. and D. were
seized to the use of the Ancestor of the Infant, and so the Ancestor died in
his Homage.

12 H. 7. f. 7 Where the matter before the (So) is sufficient Bar, there the
(So) shall not be entered, as in Trespass or Assise, the Tenant justifies, and
so not guilty.

32 H. 6. fol. 16 Where the matter before the (So) is matter of Bar, and
sufficient, there the matter after the (So) is not traversable, and contrary if
not sufficient.

5 Ed. 4. fol. 5 Debt upon an Obligation for Bail, and is named Sheriff, the
Defendant ought to plead that, and conclude, and so not his Deed, but not
generally, it is not his Deed.

19 H. 8. fol. 7 Juris utrum, the Tenant says, that his Father was seized, and
died seized, and the aforesaid Plaintiff abated, and he recovered, and so his
Lay Fee, and not the frank Gift of the Plaintiff.

38 H. 8. fol. 26 Debt upon an Obligation, Defendant pleads diverse matters, and
concludes, and so not his Deed, and this Conclusion has made this single: 3 H.
6. f. 3

Of his own Wrong.
Where of his own Wrong is good, and where not.
REplegeare, the Defendant avowes as Bailiff, for that a Prior held of his
Manor by Fealty and Rent, the Plaintiff says of his own wrong, without such
cause, it is no Plea, for here he ought to answer the substance, which is
material, that is to say, the Lordship: 2 H. 5. f. 1

Where one iustifies by a Lease made to him by the Plaintiff, of his own wrong,
is no Plea, otherwise it is, where heiustifies a Servant of a Lessee: 10 H. 4.
f. 3.

If the Defendant justify by license, or commandment of the Plaintiff, the
Plaintiff shall not say of his own wrong, without such cause, not if parcel be
of Record, for these ought to be answered specially: 12 Ed. 4. fol. 10

Trespass of Imprisonment, the Defendant justifies, for that he is Constable,
and was assaulted by him, and broke the Peace, the Plaintiff may here say, of
his own wrong, without such cause, for that, that no Record was alleged: 5 H.
7. f. 6

Trespass of Battery, the Defendant says, of his own Assault: the Plaintiff
says, of his own wrong, without such cause, and this is good: 5 H. 7. f. 1

Trespass, where one justifies as Servant by command, that he arrested the
Plaintiff, or that he came at the request of the Sergeant, etc. of his own wrong
without such cause, is no Plea: 2 Ed. 4. f. 6 See 9 Ed. 4. f. 31

If the Defendant plead license, or a Lease of the Plaintiff, of his own wrong,
is no plea: 20 Ed. 4. f. 4 21 E. 4. f. 76 10 H. 6. f. 3 and f 9 the same.

Where a Sheriff justifies to make Execution, of his own wrong, is no plea,
otherwise it is where he justifies as Bailiff by command of the Sheriff: 19 H.
6.

Trespass of Battery, Defendant says, that the plaintiff beat one W. to
death, and the Constable came to arrest him, and he stood at defiance, by which
the Defendant came in aid, and the hurt which he had was of his own Assault,
the plaintiff says of his own wrong, without any such cause, and good: 38 E.
3. f. 9

Trespass of Grass out, the Defendant justifies as Parson of the Parish, and
that he took them as Tithes separated from the ninth part, the Plaintiff says,
of his own wrong, without such cause, and it seems it is no Plea, and then the
Plaintiff replied as above, without that, that they were severed from the ninth
part, and good: 16 E. 4. fol. 4

9 E. 4. f. 27 Trespass, the Defendant justifies the Imprisonment, for that,
that the Plaintiff assaulted J. N. to have robbed him, for which he put him in
the Stocks, of his own wrong, etc. is good.

41 E. 3. f. 29 Trespass, the Defendant justifies, for that Attachment was
awarded out of the Court Baron, to the Bailiff, to attach a Horse upon a Plaint
entered there by him, and that he came in aid of the Bailiff: the Plaintiff
says, of his own wrong, without such cause, and this is good.

38 E. 3. f. 3 Replegeare of Beasts taken, the defendant justifies for
Execution of a Recovery in Court Baron of twenty shillings, the Plaintiff says
of his own wrong, without such cause, and held that he shall not have this
general Averment, against a special matter, by which he said, that the Beasts
were not delivered in Execution.

14 H. 8. f. 18 False Imprisonment, the Defendant iustifies the Arrest of the
Plaintiff by a Warrant of a Justice of the Peace, where the truth was, that
when he was arrested he had no Warrant, but after had a Warrant directed to
him, the Plaintiff may say of his own wrong, without that, that he has any
such Warrant, and gives the matter in Evidence.

2 E. 4. f. 9 False Imprisonment, the Defendant iustifies, that he took the
Plaintiff wandering in the night for suspicion, etc. The Plaintiff may say, of
his own wrong, without such cause, but he cannot say of his own wrong, without
that that he was wandering, for he cannot traverse the special matter, but
where it is a matter of Record, or of writing, and not where it is a matter in
deed.

13 R. 2. Tit. 28. Rescous, the Defendant iustifies to make Replevin by Warrant
of the Sheriff, the Plaintiff says, of his own wrong, without such cause, and
it is not allowed, against this special matter, but of his own wrong, without
that, that he had a Warrant of the Sheriff at the time of the delivering of the
Distress, etc.

33 H 6. f. 47 Trespass of Goods taken in the County of Darby, the Defendant
says, that the Plaintiff fold them to J. S. in the County of Middlesex, and he
by his commandment took them, the Plaintiff says of his own wrong, without
that, that J. S. commanded him in manner and form, and is good.

22 Book of Ass. 57 The Defendant iustifies as under the Eschea^or, for that
Tenant of the King aliened without license, and shows a Commission, and the
Plaintiff says of his own wrong, without such cause, and is good.

8 H. 6 fol. 34 Trespass of Grass cut, the Defendant says, that the place
where, etc. was the Freehold of his Master, by which, by his commandment he
entered, and made the Trespass, the Plaintiff says, of his own wrong, without
such cause, and is good: but if the Master himself had been party, and had
pleaded his Freehold, of his own wrong, etc. had been no Plea.

28 Ed. 3. fol. 58. Trespass of goods taken, the defendant justifies by the
commandment of his Master, for that, that the Plaintiff is his Villain, the
Plaintiff says of his own wrong, and is no Plea without answering to the
Villainage.

10 H. 6. f. 3. Trespass of two Horses taken, the defendant says, that he let
to the Plaintiff Land, rendering the Rent of twenty Shillings, and for this Rent
behind, he entered, and took the horses, and the Plaintiff says of his own
wrong, without such cause, and by Cotesmore it is no Plea, but he ought to
answer to the special matter, as to say of his own wrong, without that, that
any Rent was behind, 21 Ed. 4. f. 64.

42 Ed. 3. f. 2. Trespass, for chasing in his free Chase, the defendant pleads
license of the Plaintiff to hunt there, the Plaintiff says, of his own wrong,
without such cause, Inquire of this Issue.

16 H. 7. fol. 3. Trespass of goods taken, where the defendant conveys his
title from the Plaintiff, there the Plaintiff by replication may say, of his own
wrong, without such cause, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 41. the same.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 43. Trespass of a bag with money, the defendant says, that the
Plaintiff was indebted to him in a certain sum, and delivered that unto him to
content him, the Plaintiff says, of his own wrong, without such cause, and it
is no Plea, for that, that he conveys from the Plaintiff himself.

10 H. 6. fol. 9. Trespass, for entering into his Pigeonhouse, and taking of
Pigeons, the defendant pleads that the Plaintiff gave him leave to take them,
the plaintiff may say of his own wrong, without that he gave him leave, 20 Ed.
4. fol. 4.

21 Ed. 4. fol. 76. Where the defendant conveys from the Plaintiff, or his
Ancestor, or that it is his Freehold, these shall be answered, and there of his
own wrong, without such cause general, is no good replication.

44 Ed. 3. f. 13. Trespass, the defendant justifies for Harriot, the
Plaintiff says of his own wrong, without such cause, the Issue was taken upon
that 38 Ed. 3. fol. 7. the same.

44 Ed. 3. fol. 18. Trespass, the defendant justifies, for that, that the
Plaintiff was in Ward to the Prince, and he seized him, and granted the Ward
to him, by which he entered and occupied, the Plaintiff says, of his own
wrong, without such cause, and it is no Plea by the Court, but he ought to
answer to the special matter, by which the Issue was taken that he held in
Socage, and not in Knights Service, See 22 Book of Assizes, 56. 41. Book of
Assizes, 21. and 12 Ed. 4. fol. 10.

14 H. 4. fol. 32. Trespass of his Servant taken, the defendant justifies, for
that the father of him, which is said to be Servant, held of J.S. in Knights
Service, and that he died, and the Land descended to the Infant called Servant,
being within age, and that the defendant by the commandment of the said J.S.
seized him, the plaintiff says, of his own wrong, without such cause, and by
Cheney, and Hull, for that, that the defendant has alleged special matter,
that is, Tenure, in Knights Service, the plaintiff ought to answer to the
special matter, and this is no plea, See 22 Book of Assizes 85.

33 H. 6. fol. 29 Trespass, where the defendant justifies by the Kings patent
of of his own wrong, etc. is no plea.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 22. Trespass, where the defendant justifies by wreck by
prescription, the plaintiff says, of his own wrong, without that, that it was a
wreck, and good.

5 H. 7. fol. 9. Trespass, the defendant justifies by custom of foldage by
prescription, of all Sheep which pasture in such a Common, the plaintiff there
says, of his own wrong, without such cause.

Where a double Plea shall not be suffered, and where it shall.
PRior brought a Quare impedit, and counts that his predecessor was seized and
presented, and the King seized his temporalties because of War, and
presented, and now it is void, and it belongs to him to present, and it is
not double, 40 Ed. 3. f. 10.

But in Quare impedit, and counts of diverse presentiments in his Ancestors, this
is double, 1 H. 5. fol. 1.

Quare Impedit, by Tenant in Tail, and alleges a Presentment in the Donor,
and another in the Donee, this is not double, for the Gift is traversable; but
if he allege Presentment in the Feoffor, and another in the Feoffee, this is
double: 4 Ed. 4. f. 3

Debt against Executors, to plead fully administered, and so nothing in their
hands, is not double, for one Answer makes an end of all, that is, that they
have Assets, 3 H. 6. f. 3

Debt upon Obligation, and pleads Payment, and Delivery of the Obligation in
place of an Acquittance, it is not double, for one Answer shall be for all: 1
H. 7. fol. 15 and also it is no Plea.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads Gift in Tail, and diverse Discents, and it is
not double, for the Gift is only traversable: 19 Ed. 4. f. 4

Bastardy is pleaded to ten Acres, and Release of all Actions, and that is
double: 10 H. 6. f. 20

Non-tenure is pleaded to part, and Bastardy to the rest; and this is double:
43 E. 3. fol. 29 B. Inquire 33 H. 6. f. 20 and 40 E. 3. f. 21

Dower, the Tenant may plead Joint-tenancy of part, and that she detains
Writings for the rest, which goes to all, and it is not double: 33 H. 6. f. 57
and 40 E. 3. f. 31

Assise of a Manor, the Defendant pleads a Fine of one half to J. S. whose
Estate he has, and to the other half, pleads a Release of the Father of the
Demandant, with Warranty, and demands Judgment, if against Warranty, Assise
ought to have been of that Moity, and it is not double, for this goes but to
the Moity, and is not, etc. 37 H. 6. f. 24

Debt upon an Obligation, that he was a Lay man unlearned, and the Day of
Payment was read to be at another Day, and that it was delivered as an Escrow
upon condition, that if others sealed, etc. and the others did not seal, and so
not his Deed, this Conclusion has made that single: 38 H. 6. f. 26

Intendments.
Pleas good by Intendment, and how.
INformation for Liveries, it is showed that Cloth was given at D. but not how
it was used, and it shall be intended there, and good: and Trespass, he broke
his Close at D. and made an Entry, and shall be intended to be there: 5 H. 7.
f. 18

Appeal of Rape, (is Rapuit) and though it be not, fellonioussy rapuit, it
shall be intended: 1 H. 6. f. 1

Waste against Beatrix, which was the Wife of the Earl of Arundell, though
that she were not named Countess, it is good, and shall be intended Countess:
2 H. 6. f. 11

Debt and Counts upon Indenture, that the eldest Son ought to marry K. and if
he died before carnal knowledge, then that the youngest should marry her, if
the Ecclesiastical Law would permit it, and Counts that he purchased a
Dispensation, and required him to marry her, and he refused, and though he do
not show if the Request to marry K. was before noon or not, nor if K. were
alive at the time of the Request, it is good, and shall be intended: 12 H. 8.
f. 6

Trespass, one iustifies as Servant of J. S. and though he do not say, and by
his commandment, it is good, and shall be intended: 13 H. 7. f. 13

If one plead a Deed dated at D. it shall be intended delivered there: 1 H. 6.
f. 3

Waste by the Prioresse of the House and Church of C. the Writ was to the
dis-inheriting of the Prioresse of the House and Church of C. (leaving out
praedict.) but it shall be intended: 10 H. 7. f. 5

Annuity is Grant, provided that he be of honest conversation, and the Grantee
pleads in Action, that he was of honest conversation, and that he does not say
always after the Grant, it shall be intended to be of honest conversation, for
every one shall be intended to be of honest conversation, till the contrary be
showed: 22 Ed. 4. fol. 28

Diverse pleadings shall be good by intendment, as in action against the Sherif
for imbezzilling a Writ, and does not say that he was Sherif at the time of the
imbezzilling, but it shall be intended, 22 Ed. 4. b. Tit. Pleading, 109.

If one plead that one John Pur^bote, Master of the College, and his fellow
brethren were seized in Fee, that shall be intended in Right of their College,
for it has but one intendment, Plowd. Com. fol. 102. Fulmerstone.

Entry upon the Statute of Rich. the Defendant says, that the third part was
to J.S. and that he entered by his commandment, and does not say, whether the
third part were severed or not, but it shall be intended severed, and good, 37
H. 6.38. and 38 H. 6. fol. 8. the same.

Trespass of two Coffers taken in D. the Defendant says, that the property
was to J.S. and gave them at D. to him, and though he do not show how the
property was to him, it is good, and shall be intended when the gift was made,
1 Ed. 5. fol. 3.

Scire sacias, by Sir T. Chaworth, Cozen and Heir of one Hawes, of a gift by
Hawes in Tail, and the remainder in Tail, and counts that the Donee, and he in
remainder are dead, without heir of their bodies, and that to him ought to
revert as Cozen and Heir of Hawes, and though he do not say, that Hawes is
dead, it shall be intended, for otherwise it cannot revert to him, as Cousen,
etc. 33 H. 6. fol. 54.

Where one avoweth, and says he was seized by the hands of one J.S. his
Tenant, and though he do not say, then his Tenant, it shall be intended, 34 H.
6. fol. 8.

14 H. 8. fol. 12. Wast against P. which he held for Term of years, and Counts,
that in the tenth year of H. 7. the Plaintiff let to P. for Term of one year,
and from and so from year to year, so long as both parties were pleased, (by
virtue of which) he was possessed and occupied by 24 years, and now it is
thirty years, from the 10. of H. 7. and where the Count is (by virtue of which)
he occupied by 24 years, by implication it shall be intended, and no more, and
it shall be (which he held) and not which he does hold.

Plowd. Com. fol. 409. Where H.C. devised, etc. that none of his Sons should
alien, and it is pleaded that H.C. has Issue J. and F. that shall not be
intended that he has more, till the contrary be showed of the other party.

12 H. 8. fol. 3. Trespass, why he beat his Servant, and took away a dog
called a Blood Hound, and though he do not count that he might spend forty
Shillings, it shall be intended, that he might, till the contrary be showed.

9 H. 6. fol. 10. Debt, and Counts of a Lease, by the Plaintiff, and E. late
his Wife, and though he do not count that she is dead, it shall be intended.

20 H. 6. fol. 24. Account, and Counts, that the Defendant was his Receiver, at
such a day, until the Feast of Saint Michael, and it is not Michael the
Archangell, nor Michvel in Tumba, and it shall be intended Michael the
Archangell, and good.

8 H. 5. f. 4. Quare impedit, by the Husband and his Wife, and counts that they
were seized of a Manor, in Right of his Wife, to which an Advowson was
appendant, and though he does not show what Estate, it shall be intended the
best Estate, Fee Simple.

36 H. 7. fol. 3. Trespass and Counts of assault at D. and gave so many
threatenings, that about his business, etc. and does not show where, and shall
be intended at D. and good.

Plea good by Intendment till contrary be showed.
PLowd. Com. fol. 74. Assise. Wimbishe, Venire facias, directed to the
Coroners, which surmise in the end, that the Sheriff is Cozen, and the Assise
to the Coroners is also (except Curson his Cozen) and it is good, and shall be
intended Cozen of the whole blood, till the contrary be showed by the Defendant.

19 H. 8. f. 11. Trespass, Defendant says that B. was seized in Fee, and died
seized, and that descended to him as Cozen and next Heir, that is, Son of N.
Sister of B. Plaintiff says, that B. had Issue a Daughter, and that he as
Guardian in Socage of his Daughter, took her, and good, and though it might be
that the Daughter were of the half blood, it shall not be intended, till it be
showed of the other part.

Plowd. Com. f. 103. Fulmer^^one, Trespass, Defendant says, that in the
thirtieth year of H: 8. that W. Master of Rushworth, and his fellow brethren,
let to him an an hundred Acres, parcel of the Manor of E. for fifty years:
Plaintiff says, That before that is in the year, etc. J. P. Master, and his
fellow brethren, let to the Defendant the Manor of E. except a Tenement late
Largentine, for sixty years, and that by the Statute of 31 H. 8. for that,
that the first Lease was in being, the second was void, and though that by
Replication he does not show that J. P. the Master was seized in right of the
College, it shall be intended till contrary be showed.

Plowdens Commentaries, fol. 26. Colthirst, Bar is good to common intent,
though it be not good to every special intent, yet where parcel of the
substance is left out, it is not good: It is good to common intent, where such
intent is not indifferent; but is such intent which has more stronger
presumption, then any other intent has.

3 Edw. 2. tit. Escheat 8. And counts that his Tenant committed Felony, by
which he was attaint, and the Count was challenged, for that, that he does not
say, for what Felony, and yet good; for it is not material for what Felony it
was.

General Issue.
Trespass upon the Statute of Richard, the Defendant pleads his freehold, and
it is not general Issue in this, but it is good in Trespass, Ravishment, not
guilty is the general Issue, and in maintenance, not culpable, 2 Ed. 4. fol. 6.

Action upon the Statute of Liveries, said that not guilty is no plea, but that
he gave not the Liveries, is good; and in Maintenance says, that not guilty is
no Plea, but that he did not maintain; yet inquire, 8 H. 6. f. 36. b.

Debt upon a matter of Record, he owes him nothing, is no Plea, but in
Maintenance not guilty, or he did not maintain, is good, and in forging of
Deeds not guilty is good, 12 H. 7. fol. 14.

Debt for Scavage, held where the action is grounded upon a Statute, and upon a
matter in Deed, he owes him nothing, is a good Plea, 21 H. 7.14.

Forcible entry, not guilty is good, 14 H. 6. fol. 16. Eitzh. 249. D.

Trespass of Goods taken, the Defendant says, that the property of these was
to J. S. which gave them to him, without that, that he took Goods of the
Plaintiff, and this amounts to not guilty, and by the Court adjudged that
nothing shall be entered, but not guilty, and shall give that matter in
evidence, 9 H. 6. fol. 11.

Assise, the Tenant cannot plead Feoffment of the Plaintiff made to him, for
that amounts to a general Issue, and the general Issue no wrong shall be
entered: 2 H. 4. f. 20 and 43 Book of Ass. 41

Praemunire, of that, that the Defendant draws him out of the Realm in Plea,
whereof Conusance to the King belongs, the Defendant says, that he was
Executor to J. S. and sued in Court of Audience to prove the Will, and for that
he could not have Right there, he appealed to Rome, and nothing shall be
entered but the general Issue: 2 R. 3. f. 18

Trespass of Goods, for the Defendant to say, that the place is his Freehold,
and he took them doing Damage, it is no Plea, but he ought to tell the
certainty of the Land, but of Trespass in Land his Freehold is good: 5 H. 7.
f. 28 B.

See Brook Title General Issue.

Pleas uncertain.
Where it is uncertain in place, and where not.
Trespass, for that that the Defendant holds Land of him in Reseleigh, by
reason of which he ought to scowre Ditches, and for that he does not show where
those Ditches are, it is not good: 46 Ed. 3. f. 8

Trespass, it is a good Plea to plead, that there was an Arbitrament that he
should pay ten pounds, which he has paid, without saying, where he has paid
it: 8 H. 6. fol. 74

If Surrender or Attornement be pleaded, which is matter in deed traversable,
it ought to be showed where it was made: 18 Ed. 4. f. 16. B.

Where one avowes upon a Grant of a Rentcharge made to him, and that one
attorned, he ought to show in what place: 2 R. 3. f. 13

Annuity, the Defendant says, that he tendered that to him, and for that he
does not show where, it is not good, for it is matter in deed issuable, which
ought to be showed certain: 9 H. 6. f. 16

Held, if one plead Arbitrament in Bar, he ought to show where the Submission
was made: 9 H 6. f. 50

Decies tantum, for embracing, and for that he does not show where it is not
good: 37 H. 6 f 31

1 R. 3. f. 1 Presentment in the Sheriffs Turn, that A. Abbot of D. had a
Tann-house, and had tanned Leather insufficiently, and that he had sold and
uttered the same Leather, contrary to the Statute; and for that he does not
show in what place it was sold and uttered, it is not good; for there is no
place upon which the View shall be, and that is material.

3 Ed. 4. fol. 30 Trespass, Defendant pleads Lease for years, and ought to
show where it was made, for it is traversable.

5 H. 7. f. 3 Presentment, that an Abbot and his Successors use to cleanse a
Gutter by the highway, by reason of the Tenure of some of their Land, and this
is issuable, for that it ought to be alleged where the Land is.

Where one avowes for Rentcharge granted to him by Deed, he ought to show in
what County, and where it was granted: 5 E. 4. f. 11

If one plead a Lease made to him for years, he ought to show where it was
made: 5 H. 7. f. 24 and 3 E. 4. fo. 27. B. 18 E. 4. f. the same.

False Imprisonment, if the Defendant justify the Arrest by Precept, he ought
to show where the Precept was made: 14 H. 8. f. 18 and 21 H. 7. f. 73 the same.

Where the Defendant pleads that J. S. has Goods in diverse Dioces, and the
Administration belong to the Metropolitan, if he do not show in what Town the
Goods are, it is not good: 10 H. 7. f. 16.

Debt upon Arrerages of Annuity granted to him, till he were promoted to a
Benefice, to plead that he took a Wife is not good, if he do not show where,
for it is traversable: 35 H. 6. f. 50

Where the thing is issuable, it ought to be showed in what place it was.
INformation of Liveries, the Plaintiff ought to count where the Cloth was
given, that is, at D. 5 H. 7. f. 18

12 E. 4. f. 11 Trespass, Defendant says, that the place where, etc. is the
Freehold of J. S. and that he by his commandment entered, he ought to show
where the commandment was given, but if he justify as a Servant, and by his
commandment, he need not show where the commandment was.

35 H. 6. fol. 59 Debt upon Arrerages of Annuity, Defendant says, it was
granted to the Plaintiff, till he was promoted to a Benefice, and says, that
he was promoted to a Benefice, and ought to show where, for it is issuable.

Uncertain for Year or Day.
Trespass, the Defendant iustifies, that be entered as Lord, for that, that
the Tenant aliened in Mortmain, and for that he does not show what Day and
Year, it is not good: 7 H. 7. f. 5

Qnare impedit, the Defendant says, that the next Avoidance was granted to
J.S. which died intestate, and the Ordinary sequestered, and for that that it is
not what year he granted, it is not good: 9 H. 7. f. 23.

Trespass of Goods, to plead that in London is a Market every day but Sunday,
and that he bought them on Friday, this is good without showing what year, for
the year is not material, by Choke, 12 Ed. 4. f. 1.

Assise, if the Tenant plead that one Plaintiff died after the last
continuance, he ought to show what day, which may appear: 18 Ed. 4. f. 13. B.

Escheat, it is good without counting what day he committed the Felony, for the
day is not material, if it be one day or other: 40 Ed. 3. f. 45.

Debt, and counts that the eldest Son married K. and if he died before carnal
knowledge, that the youngest should marry her, if the Ecclesiastical Law would
permit, and counts that the eldest married her, and died before carnal
knowledge, and that he purchased a Dispensation, and required the youngest to
marry her, and he refused, and though he do not show what day, it is good: 12
H. 8. f. 6.

Assise brought the same Day that the Disseisin was made, it shall be intended
that the Disseisin was first, and that the Writ was brought after the same day:
4 H. 6. f. 7.

Rescous, and counts that he distrained for Rent, and does not show the days
of Payment, and for that not good: 8 H. 4. f. 1.

Obligation of two hundred Marks, and the Condition is to pay one hundred
Marks at a day certain, and in Debt the Defendant pleads that he has paid the
hundred Marks, and for that, that there is but a day, which may be according
to the Condition, it is not good: 47 Ed. 3. fol. 13.

Where a day is issuable, it shall be pleaded certain, as one pleads a Lease
made to him for years, he ought to show when it was made: Plowd. Com. f. 24.

Debt upon an Obligation, which is endorsed with a Condition, that if the
Defendant renounce all the Administration, etc. and no day is in the Condition,
when it shall be, and the Defendant pleads that he has renounced the
Administration, and for that, that he does not show what day, it is not good,
for it may be after the Writ purchased, and then it is not good: 15 Ed. 4. fol.
29.

Trespass of Swannes taken, the Defendant says, that long time before the
Trespass supposed, the property was to J. S. which gave them to him, the
Plaintiff says, that long time before J. S. had property, the property was in
him, and for that, that he does not show what day; it is not good; 31 H. 6. f.
12.

Entry by the Lord Cromwell of the Manor of Amphill, the Defendant pleads a
Lease for years, and a Release, and it is not good, without showing when the
Lease was made, notwithstanding that it be showed when that began, for that,
that he ought to show that the Lease was made such a day, and the Release
after: 32 H. 6. f. 8.

Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant says it is endorsed upon Condition,
that if he infeoff him, and he then pay to him twenty pounds, that the
Obligation shall be vold, and it is not expressed what day the Payment ought to
be made, and yet he ought to show what day, for that is said to be forthwith
after the Feoffment, for the words are, that then he shall pay: 33 H. 6. f. 48.
B.

Matter uncertain.
See where it is uncertain in Matter, and where not.
Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiff was indebted to him in a
hundred Marks, and that he pawned the Goods till he were paid, and for that,
he does not show for what the Debt was due, nor whether he paid it or no, it is
uncertain, and is not good: 5 H. 7. f. 1.

Trespass, if the Defendant says that A. was seized of the Manor of D.
whereof the place is parcel, he shall say at what time the Trespass is
parcel, otherwise it is not good: 32 H. 6. f. 24. and 10 H. 7. f. 28. the same.

One pleads a Fine levied to B. of the Manor of D. and that the Tenant
attorned to B. and for that he does not say, that the Conisee was seized of the
Manor at the time of the Attornement, and also for that, that he does not
show what Term the Fine was levied, it is not good: 10 H. 7. f. 28.

Found by Office that the Lord Greystock Tenant of the King died seized, and
one came to traverse that, and said, that the Dean of York recovered in a Writ
of Right against the Lord Greystock, and entered, long before the Inquisition,
etc. and gave to him in Tail, and it is not good; 3 H. 7. f. 2. for that it is
not showed if the Entry was in the life of the Lord, or after his death.

Forcible Entry, where the Defendant says, that J. H. and H. Wood infeoffed
Fines and Sackvile, and iustiffies as Servant to them; the Plaintiff says, one
J. S. J. Hook, and H, Wood infeoffed him, and for that he does not say, the
aforesaid J. Hook and H. Wood, it is not good: 1 H. 7. fol. 19.

Where one pleads Bar, which comprehends but one matter, this shall be
certain, as Arbitrament, he ought to show where the Submission was made, and if
that comprehend two matters, he need not to show both so certain, as it is
said, Freehold of a stranger, and he as Servant, and by his command entered,
it is good without showing where the commandment was, 3 H. 7. fol. 11. B.

Quare impedit, The Defendant says, that J.S. granted the next avoidance to A.
which presented, and the Church is void, and the next avoidance was granted to
B. which died intestate, and the Ordinary sequestered, and for that, that he
does not show the name of the Ordinary, it is not good, 9 H. 7. fol. 23.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads that it is the Freehold of John Sherewood, and
that he by his commandment entered, and for that, that he does not show where
the command was, it is not good, otherwise it is, if he had justified as
Servant, and by his commandment, 12 Ed. 4. fol. 10.

Trespass, upon the Statute of Rich. the Defendant says, that his
Predecessor, Master of the Hospital of Saint John's of Jerusalem, was seized,
and died, and that he was Master, and entered after his death, and might be
Master by Election, Collation, or Presentment, and for that it is not good, 34
H. 6. fol. 27.

Debt upon Obligation, the Defendant says, that it is indorsed upon condition
to be at the award of J.S. who awarded that he should discontinue his Action,
which he had made, which he has done, and for that it is not showed what
Action, nor ^ow it is hanging, it is not good, 36 H. 6. fol. 9.

Maintenance, The Defendant iustifies for that, that he was his Servant, and
the Plaintiff says that he gave four Marks to maintain, and for that, that he
does not say, hanging the Plea, it is not good, for it may be before, and then
it is no Maintenance, 3 H. 6. fol 54.

Trespass, The Defendant pleads that J.S. enfeoffed the Plaintiff to the use
of Alice, by force whereof the said Alice gave to him the Trees, and it is no
Plea, for he does not show if the Plaintiff were seized at the time of the
gift to the use of Alice, 7 H. 7 f. 3.

Trespass, if the Defendant justify by command of him to whose use he ought
to say, that at the time of the commandment they were seized to the use, etc.
the same Law, if one plead a Lease, and Release, he ought to say, that he was
possessed at the time of the Release made, 10 H. 7. f. 26. and 7 H. 7 f. 3. the
same.

That which is Issuable ought to be pleaded certainly.
ONe avows for that, that the Plaintiff held of him by a Knights Fee, and this
is not good, for that he does not show by what Knights Fee, 12 H. 8. fol. 13.

3 H. 7. f. 2. One traverses the Office found after the death of the Lord
Greystock, the Kings Tenant, which was found that he died seized, and he said
that the Dean of York recovered against the Lord G. in a Writ of Right, long
before the finding of the Office, and it may be he recovered against him long
before the finding the office, and it might be, after the death of the Lord
Greystock, and for that it is not good, for it is uncertain. So if one plead
that he entered for that, that his Tenant aliened in Mortmain, he ought to show
that he entered within the year, otherwise it is not good.

26 H. 8. fol. 2. Debt upon Obligation, indorsed with condition, if he make an
Estate, as it shall be devised by the Plaintiff, Defendant says, that he has
made an Estate, and it is not good, without showing what Estate.

1 H. 7. fol. 13. One comes to reverse an Outlawry of Felony, and pleads that
he was in the Castle of Oxford, at the time of the Outlawry published, and for
that he does not show, in what County the Castle is, nor under whose custody,
it is uncertain, and not good, for these are Issuable.

2 H. 7. f. 6. Dower against the Heir, he says, that he was ready to render
Dower, if she would deliver to him the Writings concerning his Land, and for
that he does not show what Writings, uncertain, it is nor good, for it is
Issuable.

Affirmative and Negative.
Issue shall be upon the Affirmative, and Negative, and it shall not be
answered by Argument.
DEbt against the Administrators of J.S. Defendant says that J. S. made him
Executor, Judgment of the Writ, he shall say without that, that he died
intestate, for this is alleged by the Plaintiff, 9 H. 6. fol. 7.

11 H. 4. fol. 88 Trespass of taking six beasts, the Defendant iustifies the
taking of them by agreement, the Plaintiff says, they were other six, and
ought to traverse without that, that he took those six in the Negative.

11 H. 6. f. 1. Writ upon the Statute of Laborers, and counts, that the
Defendant was a Vagrant, and he required him to serve, and he refused,
Defendant says, that he was in the Service of J. S. and shall say without
that, that he was a Vagrant.

1 H. 6. f. 15. Formedon in Reverter, and counts of a gift in Tail, the
Defendant says, that the Donor gave in Fee, and it is not good, but he shall
say without that, that he gave in Tail.

10 H. 6. f. 7. Account for the Heir, against a Woman Guardian in Socage,
Defendant says, that the father of the Insant held of her in Knights Service,
and died, and Defendant seized him, and he ought to say without that, that he
held by Knights Service.

14 H. 8. fol. 4. The Avowant says, that W. the tenth day of February, year
twenty five granted, his Interest to him, and avowed doing damage, Plaintiff
says, that W. the first day of Feb. year twenty five granted, his Interest to
him, and he put in his beasts without that, that he granted that to the
Avowant, before he granted that to him, and good.

38 H. 6. f. 17. Action upon the Case, of that, that he has Leet and Fines,
and Amerciaments of the same, Defendant says, true it is, that the Plaintiff
has Leet, but that he the Defendant has Fines, and Amerciaments, he ought to
say without that, that the Plaintiff, has the F^nes and Amerciaments.

18 H. 6. f. 8. Debt upon an Obligation dated the twentieth of April, and
first delivered the second of May, the Defendant pleads Release the last day of
April, and that the Obligation was delivered when it bore date, and for that,
that he has not traversed in the Negative, that is to say, without that, that
it was first delivered, the second day of May, it is not good.

32 H. 6. f. 4. Debt, and Counts of a Lease of a House, rendering twenty
shillings; Defendant says, that he let the House and four Acres rendering
twenty shillings, and ought to traverse, otherwise it is but an Answer by
Argument.

32 H. 8. f. 8. Debt against Executors, Defendant says, that the Testator died
intestate, that the Administration was granted to him, he ought to say, without
that, that he is Executor, or administered as Executor.

1 H. 7. f. 13. Debt upon a simple Contract, Defendant says, it was upon
Condition, and shall say, without that, that he sold in manner and form.

4 H. 7. f. 9. Partition, Defendant says, that he was only seized, and shall
say, without that, that he held as undivided; 6 H. 7. f. 5.

4 H. 6. fol. 4. Debt against J. S. of D. Defendant says, that he is dwelling
at S. and shall say, and not at D. 19 H. 6. f. 1. the same.

7 Ed. 4. f. 16. Scire facias against a Parson for Arrerages of an Annuity,
Defendant says, that before the Writ purchased, he resigned to the Bishop of
L. and so that remains in his hands, Judgment of the Writ, and it is no Plea,
for it is but an Answer by Argument; and for that he shall say, without that,
that he was Parson; day of the Writ purchased, or afterward.

11 Ed. 4. fol. 4. Action upon the Statute of Rich. by J. Freestone, Defendant
says, that the Master of the College of Maidstone, and his fellow-brethren
let, etc. Plaintiff says, at the time of the making of the Lease, there were
not any fellow-brethren of the said College, and this is but an Argument, and
for that he shall say, without that, that the Master and his fellow-brethren
let.

14 H. 8. f. 29. Issue shall be upon Affirmative and Negative.

9 H. 7. fol. 13. Trespass, Defendant justifies for Fealty not made; the
Plaintiff says, it was not unmade, and good in the Negative.

Material.
Let us see what things are material in pleading, Evidence and Verdict, and
otherwise, and what not.
ACtion upon the Case in London, and counts that he was possessed of Wine and
Stuff, and shows that certain in such a Ship, and the Defendant at London
assumed for ten pounds, that if the Ship and Goods did not come safe to London,
and are put upon the Land there, that then he shall satisfy one hundred pounds
to the Plaintiff, and counts that aftewards the Ship was ^obbed upon the Trade
in the Sea, and for not satisfying, Action did accrue, and though that the
Plaintiff does not show where he was possessed, it is good, and though it
appear upon the Evidence, that the Bargain was made beyond Sea, and not in
London, yet for that the place is not local, it is not material, and though
they were robbed upon the Sea, the Action lies in London upon the Assumpsit, 34
H. 8. Tit. 107.

40 Ed. 3. fol. 2. Precipe, against H. Son of W. Osmond, the Tenant at the
great Cape came before he saved his default, and says, that his Father is
named Edmond, and not Osmond, and shall have that Plea before he save his
default, and that is material, for mischief of the Warrant: 40 Ed. 3. f. 48.

41 Ed. 3. fol. 15. Ravishment of J. Heir to his Father, where he was Heir to
his Father and Mother, for the Lands were given to the Father and Mother, and
to the Heirs of their two Bodies, and the Mother survived, and yet it is good,
for the Action is personal, and it is not material if he be named Heir to one
or other; 43 Ed. 3. fol. 4. the same.

3 H. 7. f. 14. Where a Jury appears, and notwithstanding the Distress, for
the Jurors were not w^ll returned, it is not material, and for that it shall
not be assigned for Error.

21 H. 7. fol. 36. It seems in the Case of a Lease of Common, except profits,
that where a Lease is pleaded to be made one day, and it is found by Verdict to
be made another day, the day is not material, and the party shall recover; and
where Trespass is alleged to be made one day, and it is found to be made
another, it is not material, but the party shall recover.

33. H. 7. f. 11. In an Obligation one is named of D. he is not estopped to
say, that he is dwelling at S. and not at D. for it is a recital not
material. 34 H. 6. f. 21. Debt against J. wikes at Bristoll.

38 H. 6. f. 9. The Array was challenged, for that it was made at the
denomination of the party by one J. S. the Sheriffs Clerk, and given in
Evidence, that it was made at the denomination, by the Baillff of the
Franchise, and that is good Evidence, for the substance and effect is, if it
were made favorably or not, and the other is not material.

32 H. 6. fol. 3. The Original in Debt is two and forty pounds, and there is a
Supersedeas sued upon that, for that the Defendant is Clerk of the Chancery,
and the Supersedeas does mention four and forty pounds, and yet for that he is
a Clerk of the Chancery has the privilege allowed, and the other is not
material.

36 H. 6. f. 2. Debt upon a Recognisance, the Defendant pleads no such Record,
and it is certified Recognisance upon Condition not expressed, and the
Plaintiff shall recover, otherwise it is, if it were certified upon Condition
therein.

42 E. 3. f. 3. Covenant by one as Heir, where a Covenant was made to his
Father and his Heirs, to sing Divine Service within his Manor, he need not to
be named Heir, whether he be named Heir or not, it is not material, for if he
be Tenant of the Land, it shall not abate for that, for he that has the
Manor shall have this Covenant, for the thing is to be done upon the Land; 44
Ed. 3. f. 38.

44. Ed. 3. fol. 45. Assise of Tenements in Belham, Defendant pleads Recovery
of the same Lands put in View in Eston, and for that, that the Town is not
material in Assise (for he shall recover by View of the Jurors) is good.

6 H. 7. fol. 6. Appeal against J. Hasset, Cannon of the Monastery of W. the
Defendant says, no such J. Hasset Cannon of the Monastery of W. it is not
good, for if he be Cannon or not, it is not material, but no such J. Hasset as
is supposed by the Writ; 10 H. 7. f. 27.

3 E. 2. tit. Eschea^ 8. In Escheat, the Plaintiff counts that his Tenant
committed Felony, for which he was attaint, and the count was challenged, for
that he does not say for what Felony, and yet it is good, for it is not
material for what Felony it was.

7 H. 4. f. 1. Debt by a woman, Defendant pleads that she is outlawed at the
Suit of J.S. and the Plaintiff pleads no such Record, and she was Outlawed at
the Suit of N.S. and she shall not be answered, for it is not material at
whose Suit she was Outlawed.

4 Ed. 4. fol. 29. Obligation is W.N. to be bound to J.S. and is to be paid to
W. N. where it should be J. S. and this to be paid is not material, for the
Obligation is good without, to be paid, and may count solvendum J. S. and it is
good.

7. Ed. 4.5. Hominereplegiando, by an Abbess, they were at Issue, and it is a
principle challenge, that one of the Jury was cozen to a Nun of the Abbess,
and it shall be tried if he were Cozen or not, and it is not material how he
is Cozen.

9 Ed. 4. fol. 4. A man is bound in an obligation, the condition of that is, if
he go to the Church and marry his Daughter, etc. and he rides and marryes her,
that suffices, and the other not material, for the Marriage is the substance,
and not going, or riding to do it.

10 Ed. 4. fol. 13. Detinue, against J. Curson and the writ was, command J.
Curson, Son and Heir of J. Curson, where in truth he was Son of William
Curson, and the Plaintiff counts of delivery of Goods, and for that it is not
material.

12 Ed. 4. fol. 1. Trespass of Goods taken, the Defendant says that in London
there is a Market every day but Sunday, and that J.S. sold them to him upon a
Friday, and though he do not show what year, it is good, for it is not
material.

22 Ed. 4. tit. 128. Showing of Deeds, trespass by Admistrator, and counts of
Goods taken out of his own possession, he need not show Letters of
administration, for that it is of his own possession, and is not material.

38 Ed. 3. tit. 14 Detinue of writings, by J. Son of T.W. it is no Plea that
the Plaintiff is a Bastard, for he demands but Chattells, whereof he was in
possession, and it is not material.

15 H. 7. f. 11. Trespass, where the Defendant conveyes to him title by
diverse scoffments of strangers the Plaintiff may traverse any which he will,
but if he convey any title from the Plaintiff himself, that is more material
and traversable.

3 Ed. 4 fol. 19. Trespass, the Defendant says that J.S. gave in tail to his
Ancestor, which dyed seized, and this descended to him, the Plaintiff says
that he was seized in Fee, in right of his Church, till the Defendant outed
him, and ought to traverse without that, that J.S. gave in tail, etc. For this
is most material, 15 Ed. 4. fol. 2. the same.

26 H. 8. f. 1. The King recites that for the good service that he had done in
the Wars, he grants, where he was never in the Wars, it is a good grant, for
the recital is matter in deed, not material.

9 H. 7. fol. 7. If the King make a Denizen, and recite that where he was borne
in France, where indeed he was borne in Spain, this grant and making him
Denizen, is a good grant, and the recital is not material.

3 H. 6. fol. 9. Where process is miscontinued, and Judgment given by default,
this Judgment upon miscontinuance is error, and may be assigned for error,
but where it is miscontinuance of process, and the party appear and pleads,
and Judgment upon Verdict is given, this cannot be assigned for error. See, 3
H. 7. f. 8.

1 H. 7. f. 12. Error was assigned, for that it was contained in the Record,
that in base Court the Entry was, that the Court was held upon Tuesday, that is
the third day of March, where Monday was the third day of March, and this was
adjudged error, and the (Videlicet, etc.) material.

4 H. 7. f. 6. Where one is named Executor, where that name Executor is not
material, the Writ shall not abate.

17 Ed. 4. f. 2. Where the Defendant in trespass pleads, that the plaintiff
bargained and sold to him ten acres of Corn, though he do not say ten Acres
sown with corn, it is not material, for it is usually so called, and a good
Plea.

1 H. 7. f. 21. A certain Memorandum was entered, that is to say, Memorandum
that Simon Wiseman came this 31 day of November, this Term of S. Michaell.

2 H. 7. f. 11. If process be miscontinued, and the party appear and pleads to
the Issue, and Judgment is given, there the miscontinuance is not material,
and is no Error.

9 Ed. 4. f. 42. Trespass of a Bagg taken with Money, the Defendant says,
that the Plaintiff was indebted to him in a certain sum, and delivered that
unto him for discharge, and is good, though he do not show for what cause he
was indebted, for this is not traversable, and for that is not material.

Manner and Form.
Manner and Form, where it is material, and where not.
MAaintenance, The Defendant iustifies, for that, that he is his Neighbor, and
informed him of a man learned in the Law, The Plaintiff says, that he gave
money, the Defendant says, that he did not maintain in manner and Form, and it
is no Plea without answering to the special matter, 13 Ed. 4.14.

Trespass, The Defendant says, that the Plaintiff is Villain regardant to
the Manor of D. the Plaintiff says he is free, and not Villain in Manner
and Form, and Manner and Form is not material, but if he be a Villain, or not,
13 Ed. 4. f. 4.

Debt of the sale of a Horse for sorry Shillings, (where the Bargain was for
two Horses) the Defendant pleads, that he owes him nothing in Manner, and
Form: the Jury ought to find for the Defendant, for that, that the Bargain was
for two Horses 40. s. and Manner and Form there is material, and parcel of
their Charge, and so it is in every Case, where the Action varies from the
Bargain, 21. Ed. 4. f. 22.

Debt upon sale simply, the Defendant says, that the Sale was upon condition,
without that, that the Plaintiff sold that in Manner and Form, and is good, 1
H. 7. f. 13.

Trespass, the Defendant justifies, for that the Plaintiff held of him by
Homage, Fealty, Suit of Court, and ten Shillings four pence, the Plaintiff
says, that he held by Fealty, and ten shillings, without that, that he held in
Manner and Form, and found by Verdict that he held by ten Shillings four pence,
and not by Homage, and the Plaintiff had Judgment for that, that part is
found against the Defendant, and Manner and Form is not material, 31 H. 6. f.
12. 9 H. 7. fol. 12.

Entry in Casupro viso, and Counts of alienation in Fee, the Defendant says,
that he did not alien in Manner and Form, as the Plaintiff has counted, and
found that he aliened in Tail, the Demandant shall recover for (Manner and
Form) are but words of Form here, but whether he aliened or not, is the
substance, Littleton, fol. 113.

Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant brings Trespass against his Lord, and
Justifies for that, that he held of him by Fealty and Rent, and for the Rent
behind, that he took his beasts, and demands Judgment of the Wri^, (by force
of Arms) against him, the Plaintiff says that he does not hold of him in
Manner and Form, and though it be found, that he holds by Fealty only, yet the
Writ shall abate, for (Manner and Form) is not material, Littleton f. 113.

Trespass of Battery; or of goods taken, the Defendant pleads not guilty (in
Manner and Form) as the Plaintiff supposes, and is found guilty in another
^own, or at another day, yet the Plaintiff shall recover, Littleton fol. 114.

Action upon the Case, by a Husband alone, upon an Ass^^^^t to him by Tatam,
the Defendant says, he did not allume in Manner and Form, and the Plaintiff
gives in evidence of an Assampsit made to his Wife, and his agreement
afterward, and it is good, and (Manner and Form) is not material, 27 H. 8. f.
29.

Cessavit, That the Defendant held diverse Lands by entire Service, he may
plead, that he held not in (Manner and Form) and give in evidence, that he held
by several Service, and it is good, 10 H. 7. f. 24.

An Array of a Pannell, was challenged, for that it was made by the Sheriff,
Cozen to the Plaintiff, and shows how he is Cozen, the other says, he is not
Cozen in (Manner and Form, as, etc.) and he is found Cozen, but this is found
to be in another Manner, and yet good, for (Manner and Form) is not material,
19 H. 8. fol. 7.

Assise, the Tenant pleads a Feofment of J.S. by Deed, the Plaintiff intitles
him, without that, that J.S. enfeofed him in Manner and Form, and could not
give in evidence a Feofment without Deed, and traverse that with (Manner and
Form) is good to avoid a Negative pregnant, and in Sine assensu Cantuli, the
Defendant shall not say, that he did not alien without the consent of the
Chapter, but that he did not alien in Manner and Form to avoid a pregnant
Negative, 22 Ed. 4. f. 4.

Negative Pregnant.
Where a Negative pregnant may be, and where not.
WAste, The Defendant says, that he did not let to him for years, it is no
Plea, for it is a pregnant Negative, but he shall say that he did not let at
all, 43 Ed. 3. f. 13.

Action upon the Statute of Rich. he did not enter against the Form of the
Statute, is good, though it be a pregnant Negative, for that, that it
traverseth the point of the Writ, 31 H. 6. f. 12.

Consimili Casu, Issue was, if he aliened in Fee, or not aliened in Fee, which
is a pregnant Negative, and allowed, the reason is plain, 38 H. 6 f. 3.

Lord and Tenant, the Tenant pleads a Feoffement made before the Statute of
(quia em tores terrarum) after the time of memory, and the Lord said, that he
did not give after the time of memory, and is good, notwithstanding it be a
pregnant Negative, 39 H. 6. f. 8.

Debt upon Obligation, the Condition to repair a House, and says, that A.
disturbed him by the Plaintiffes command, the Plaintiff says, that he did not
disturb him by his commandment, and it is a pregnant Negative, and double, and
for that says, that he did not command him, and took the other by
Protestation, 9 H. 6. f. 44.

Debt upon Obligation, the Defendant says, it is indorsed upon condition, to
be at the arbitrament of B. so that it be delivered to the parties, before such
a day, the Defendant says, that the Arbitrators made no such Award, and
delivered to the parties, and it is good notwithstanding, that it be a pregnant
Negative, for that it is Condition, and is the whole Condition: 10 Ed. 4. fol.
6.

Debt upon the statute against a Vicar for taking Farms, he had not, nor held
not, against the form of the statute, is good, though it be a pregnant
Negative, for that it is to the point of the statute, 27 H. 8. f. 25.

Action upon the Case against a common Inholder of his Goods taken, where they
were laid; the Defendant says, that they were not taken in default of him, nor
of his Servants, and it is not good, for it is a pregnant Negative; the same
Law is, where the Defendant says, that he delivered to the Plaintiff the Key
of his Chamber, and he carried A. and B. with him, which carried out the Goods,
the Plaintiff says, that A. and B. which he brought in with him did not carry
out his Goods, and it is not good, for it is a pregnant Negative; 22 H. 6. fol.
22.

Waste of ten Oaks, the Defendant says, that the Plaintriff gave them to J.
S. and commanded the Defendant to cut them, and to give them to J. S. which he
did (...) the Plaintiff says, he did not cut them by his dommandement, and it
is not good, for it is a pregnant. Negative; and for that he says, that he did
not command; 21 H. 6. fol. 49.

Action upon the Case of his House burnt in dosa^^^ of good keeping the Fine of
the Defendant; the Defendant says, that the House was not burnt in default of
his good keeping of his fire, in manner and form, and it is a p^egnant
Negative, and was pleaded in Ariest of Judgment, for that, that in this are
comprised two Sentences, one that the House was not burnt, the other that it
was not in default of the Defendant; 28 H. 6. f. 8.

Obligation.
Here I intend to show to you how the Condition of Obligations ought to be
pleaded, performed.
WHere one pleads Conditions performed, and his Plea is in the Affirmative, he
ought to plead in certain, as where the Condition is to discharge the Obligee,
it is no plea to say, that he has discharged him, but he ought to plead now he
has discharged certainly; 5 H. 7. f. 8. and 6 H. 7. f. 5.

But if the Condition be to save him without damage, to plead in the Negative,
(he was not ^amnified) is good; 7 H. 4. f. 13.38 H. 6. f. 14. and 10 H. 7. f.
13.

By Hussy, if Condition be to save the Plaintiff harmless, to plead (he was
not damnified) is good: but it the Condition be to discharge or acqui^ him, he
ought to plead how specially he has acquitted and discharged him; 22 Ed. 4. f.
43.35 H. 6. f. 13. and 40 Ed. 3. f. 20.

If the Condition be, that if the Defendant acquit the Plaintiff against J. S.
and he pleads that J. S. released to the Plaintiff at his request, and this is
a good Acquittall, 1. H. 7. f. 30.

Condition was to discharge a Sheriff, it was held clear, that the Defendant
shall say generally, that he has discharged him, without showing how, for he
cannot show special discharge, where there was no Charge, I suppose this was,
for that it was infinito^* (...) Ed. (...) f. 10. and 21 H. 7. fol. 30.

Condition that if he keep J.S. discharged of all Escapes of all Felone in such
a Prison, the Defendant says, there were but two Prisoners, that is, J.S. and
R.K. and that he was not damnified, and a good Plea.

If the Condition be to gather all the green Wax of the County, the Defendant
may plead generally that he gathered all, without showing specially what that
is, for that, that it is infinite, 2 H. 7. fol. 15.

If Condition be that if the Defendant serve the Plaintiff, without absence
for seven years (special license excepted) the Defendant may plead that he
has served the Plaintiff this seven years; and not absented himself
(special license excepted) and it is good, for it may be he has licensed him
diverse times, and he need not show all, 6 Ed. 4. fol. 2.

If the condition be, that if the Defendant find sufficient Meat, Drink, and
Apparel to one, till he be of the age of twenty four years, it is a good
Plea to say, that he has found him, Meat, Drink, and Apparel sushcient at D.
for all the time aforesaid, without showing in special what Meat, and what
apparel, and the Plaintiff takes Issue, that he did not find to him
sufficient Apparel: And took not Issue upon all for doubleness, 12 H. 7. f.
14.

If condition be, that if the Defendant shall not prove that J.S. was not
presented and instituted to the Church of D. that then, etc. The Defendant may
say that J.S. was not instituted, and it seems good, for the condition is
negative, and therefore it suffices to say as above in the negative. The same
Law is if the condition were, that if the Defendant prove that he owes nothing
to the Plaintiff, it suffices to say he owes nothing: The same Law is, if the
condition be, that if I prove my Wife not guilty of such a Trespass, it
suffices to say that she is not guilty, 15 Ed. 4. fol. 25.

If the condition were, that if he prove within one year, that it was the will
of J.S. to say that J.S. made this Will, which he brought to the Plaintiff
within one year written, is not good: But by 3. Justices, proof of that by two
Witnesses to plead that, is good, though it be not by Jury, 10 Ed. 4. fol. 11.

If the condition be, that if he do not enter and claim the House, the
Defendant may plead that he did not enter nor claim that, and the Plaintiff
shall say that he claimed and show the manner of that, 4 H. 7. f. 13.

Condition, if the Defendant make an estate to the Plaintiff before P. as it
shall be demised by the Council of the Plaintiff: The Defendant may plead that,
the Council gave no advise, or no advise was given by Council, and good in
the negative, and the Plaintiff then in the affirmative cannot say that the
Council did give advise, but he ought to show certainly who was of his
Council, and say certainly what advise was given, 6 H. 7.3. and 11 H. 7.23.
accordingly.

Condition to pay all the ar^erages, of all the Lands which he holds of the
Plaintiff in D. it is no Plea that he has paid all generally, but he ought to
show specially to what sum, for that, that it is in the affirmative, 20 H. 6.
fol. 33.

Condition to pay a Lesser sum at the Feast of P. If the Defendant plead that
he has paid it, he ought to plead what day he paid it, 46 Ed. 3.29. and 47 Ed.
f. 13.

Condition, that if the Defendant carry all the Thorns out of the Land let to
him by the Plaintiff, the Defendant may plead generally, that he has carried
all, for that, that it lies in notice of the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff says,
that so many were, which were not carried. But if the condition were to infeoff
the Plaintiff of all the Land, of which the Father of the Defendant died seized,
or to give to him all the Money in his purse, there he ought to plead how much
that was, for that, that it is in the affirmative, and it lies more in the
knowledge of the Defendant then in the Plaintiff, 12 H. 8. fol. 7.

Debt by the Sherif upon an obligation, the Defendant says it was indorced
upon condition, and says, he has, performed all the condition, and it is a
good Plea: And the Plaintiff, that he has not accounted, and that is no Plea,
but that, such a thing came to his hands for which he has not accounted, that
the Issue may be upon certainty, 2 R. 3. f. 17.

If the condition be to perform all the Covenants in an Indenture, the
Defendant cannot plead that he has performed all generally, but he ought to
plead how specially he has performed every Covenant, 26 H. 8.6.11 Ed. 4.12.
13. H. 7.18. and, 6 Ed. 4. fol. 1. But at this day it is used in the same case,
in debt upon an Obligation endorced to perform the Covenants in Indentures,
that the Defendant recits the Indenture, and in the end he pleads, that he has
generally performed all the Covenants. And then the Plaintiff ought to show
breach in one, and upon that Issue is taken.

If condition be, to stand to the award and abitrement of certain Persons: it
is no Plea for the Defendant to say, that he had no notice of any Award, but if
it were (so that it be delivered to the parties in writing) the Defendant may
plead that no Award was delivered to him in writing, 1. H. 7. f. 5.

If condition be, that if the Defendant shall stand to the Arbitrament of J.S.
the Defendant may plead that he has not made any Award, and the Plaintiff
shall say, that he has made one, and show what it is, 2 R. 3. f. 13.

Pleading by Name.
REversion is devised, by the name of all Lands and Tenements in D. and good,
34 H. 6. f. 6.

Lease is made of his Lands in Bodehill, and by ancient evidences, parcel of
that is in D. he may plead his lease and give in evidence, that all was let by
the name of Bodehill, 20 Ed. 4. f. 9.

Where Margery and her Husband levied a Fine by the name of Margaret, and the
Tenant may plead that Margaret by the name of Margery acknowledged the Land by
Fine. And also it is that Agnes by the name of Ann levied a fine, Fitzh. f. 97.
A

One cannot give Land by the name of the Oshee of the Forest, 10 H. 7. f. 17.

That J.S. by the name of J.D. in grant is good, and by the name Hastings,
Hasting, 9 Ed. 4. fol. 43.

Obligation was J. Boson and an Acquirtance J. of Bozon with a (z) and this was
pleaded to be made by name, 14 H. 4. fol. 30.

Presidents.
For that, that Presidents are to be followed, something shall be said touching
them.
SAunders chief Baron says, the best Interpreter of the Law is Custom, and
for that, that the Presidents, and the Accounts of the Exchequer, prove that
from time to time, custom and usage has been, that the Kings of this Realm
have had the profits of such Mines of base metal containing Gold and Silver,
without disjunction, that the value of the Gold and Silver shall be greater or
less* and upon the Presidents it was adjudged, for the King against the Earl
of Northumberland, in the information of Mines of Copper, mixed with Gold or
Silver, Plowden fol. 336.

It is said in Assise, for that, that it is (has showed to us) where it should
be (has complained to us) because of the form and president, it shall abate,
and so it is where it is (he has disseised him of four Acres) where it should
be by the Presidents (of his Freehold) it shall abate, 11 H. 6. f. 25.

Venire sacias, The Sheriff returns (that he has made to come) 12. and yet to
return 12. is not good for the Presidents are twenty four, and so ought he to
return twenty four, 2 H. 7. f. 8.

27 H. 8. fol. 16. One challenged the Array, and does not verefie his
challenge, and he need not, for Presidents are so, and the Justices would not
change the Presidents.

7 H. 6. fol. 30. In the Kings Bench you shall not have a Habeas Corpora
juratorum, but a Ven^re facis and distringas.

39 H. 6. fol. 32. M^sne, and counts that he held of the Mesne, and that he
ought to acquit him, and does not count that the Defendant held over, yet for
that, that there were Presidents of that showed: It was held good.

6 H. 7. fol. 15. Assise 1. The Tenant plea^s no wrong by Bailiff, and yet
continuance was not between Plaintiff and Bailiff but between Plaintiff and
Tenant, and so were presidents, and for that said to be good.

11 H. 7. f. 11. Where the Tenant pleads by Bailiff in Ass. he may after plead
in proper person, matters in writing, or of Certificate, for Presidents are so.

16 H. 7. f. 8. Cui in vita, The Writ was which he claims to hold to him and
the Heirs of his Body, without showing of whose gift. And the opinion of the
Court that it is good, but when the Register was showed to be contrary, the
Court changed their opinion.

33 H. 6. fol. 22. Precipe, at the great Cape returned, the Tenant says that
he was not summoned, ready by the Country, but say that he shall be tried by
wager of Law, for so are ancient Presidents, which shall not be changed without
special matter, as against Mayor and Commonalty, which cannot wage their Law.

Forcible Entry of 8 H. 6. and counts of Entry with force, and keeping with
force, where the Statute is in the disjunctive, but for that, that there are
Presidents in this Manner, it was allowed, 3 Ed. 4. f. 21.

Debt against Executor, for that, that the Writ was Debet, and detinet, where
the President is Detinet only, it shall abate the same Law, where it is Precipe
quod solvat, where it should be Reddat, it shall abate, 22 Ed. 4. f. 21.

Debt upon the Statute of Farms, against a Priest, the Writ shall not be quod
reddat to the Plaintiff, the sum so much, but it shall be quod reddat as well
to us, as to the Plaintiff, otherwise the Writ shall abate, for it is not
according to the Presidents, 27 H. 8. f. 23.

Two Infants alien in Fee, and one dies, the other shall have dum fuit infra
Atatem, of the who^e, supposing that he himself aliened the whole, for that
there is no other Ferm of the Writ, 21 Ed. 3. f. 50.

If Tenements be let to one man for Term of half a year, or for a quarter of a
year: In such Case, if the Leffee make Waste, the Lessor shall have a Writ of
Waste, and the Writ shall be (which he holds for Term of years) for that there
is no other Form of the Writ, but he shall have a special Count, Litileton f.
14. So the Writ of Waste is, that he made Waste, and yet may count of many
VVastes, for that, that there is no other Form and President of a Writ, 4. H.
6. f. 11.

Trespass, why with force and arms, his goods and chattells to the value, etc.
where it is of dead things, and if he counts of Horses, or Kine, where the
Writ is, (goods and chattells) it shall abate, for that, that the Form is
otherwise, and if the Writ be of things living, he shall make metion of that
in his Writ, that is to say, by force, and arm^, four Tenches, or four Pikes,
he took, or shall say, he took his beasts, and where it is a Horse, it shall
be, (he took his Horse) or he took his Cow, 2^. H. 6. f. 39.

Trespass, if the Writ be, that he took his goods, and Chattells, and counts
of ten pounds in money, the Writ shall aba^e; for of money the Writ is, that
he took so many penc^, and that is the Form 39 Ed. 3. f. 23.

Trespass, by the Husband and Wife, The Writ was, he broke the Close of the
Wife, and the graffe thereof the said Wife's, did ^atdown, and the Declaration
was, whilst she was unmarried, and the Writ was awarded good, for the
Register is accordingly, 21 H. 6. f. 30.

Trespass by the Husband and Wife, why by force and arms he took his Goods
and Chattels, and counts that the Trespass was when she was unmarried, the
Writ shall abate, because he may have a Writ of Form, that is, the Goods and
Chattels of the said Wife, and not his Goods and Chattels, 7. H. 7. f. 2.

Where Battery is made to a Woman unmarried, which takes a Husband, they shall
have an Action, that he struck D. his Wife whilst she was unmarried, 22 Book
of Ass. 87. But where an unmarried Woman bea^s another, and after she takes a
Husband, the Writ shall be that they both made the Battery, and this is the
Form.

A Woman diffeises one, and after takes a Husband, the Writ against them shall
be, that they disseised the Plaintiff, and not that the Wife whilst she was
unmarried disseised him; but if the Woman unmarried be disseised, and after
takes a Husband, and they bring an Assise, in shall be, disseised her, whilst
she was unmarried, 4 Ed. 4. Br. Tit. Falfe Latin 1.

What is the same.
Where in a Trespass or Action of that nature, one justifie^^^ Wrong, where he
ought to conclude, that it is the same, and where not.
ACtion upon the Case for threatening his Tenants at will, by which they left
the it holdings; the Defendant says, that the Plaintiff disseised him, and
that he shid to him, of he would not depart, he would sue him a^ the Law would,
which is the same threatening, and it is good, 9. H. 7. f. 7. and 16 Ed. 4. f. 7.

28 H. 6. fol. 4. Defendant in Trespass justifies, for that, that he and his
Ancestors Tenant of such a House and Land, have had a way in the place where,
etc. to the Market and Church of D. time out of mind, by which they used the
way, which is the said Prospasse, etc.

21 H. 6. fol 5. False Imprisonment, Defendant justifies; for that the
Plaintiff was arrested by a Justice of Peace his Warrant, and carried to him
being Jailer, which is the same Imprisonment.

False Imprisonment against an Abbot, which justifies that he gave counsel to
J. S. being in fear of his life, to go to a justice of Peace for a Warrant of
the Peace against the Plaintiff, and that by virtue of a Warrant of the Peace
so had, the Plaintiff was arrested, which is the same Imprisonment, and this he
cannot say, for this is not Imp^^sonment by the Defendant, and for that the
general Issue was entered: 12 H. 7. f. 14.

False Imprisonment by a Woman, the Defendant says, that she is car^ied to
Southwark by her consent, which is the same Imprisonment, upon which the
Plaintiff counts, and it is no Plea; for Imprisonment is against the will of
one, and that is not so; 14 H. 6. f. 2.

Trespass of Assault, Battery, and wounding, the Defendant says, that he laid
his hands upon the Plaintiff peaceably, and arrest the Plaintiff the same day
and place by a Warrant, which is the same Assault, Battery, and wounding, and
held it is no Plea for the reason aforesaid; 21 H. 7. f. 49.

Trespass of a Close broken such a day, the Defendant justifies that the
Plaintiff licensed him the same day to enter, and need not say, that it is the
same Trespass, for that it is the same day; but if he justify at another day,
^^at another place, then he must say, that it is the same Trespass; 21 H. 7.
f. 39. The same Law is of Goods carried out, if the Defendant justify at the
same day and place; and so in ^^^p^sse of Battery, if the Defendant ^^stifie,
for th^^ the (...) day and place the Plaintiff made Assault on him, (...) he
had; was of his own Assault; he need not in these Cases to say, it was the sam^
Trespass.

But in Trespass of Goods taken the first year, etc. the Defendant pleads all
the Record, and says, that one J. S. recovered, and that year the ninth, by
virtue of a Precept to make Execution he took them, which is the feign taking,
upon which the Plaintiff, etc. and this is not good, for it cannot be the same;
12 H. 6. f. 3. by Co^esmore.

False Imprisonment, the Defendant iustifies as Sherif, that he arrested the
Plaintiff by a Capias, and it is good, if he shy that is the same Trespass, and
otherwise it is not good^; 22 Ed. 4. Br. False Imprisonment, 29.

False Imprisonment, the Defendant says, that he took the Plaintiff from Jack
Cade and other Rebels, and delivered him to the Mayor for his safeguard, which
is the same Imprisonment, and that is good, for that was the Imprisonment, but
justifiable; 35 H. 6. f. 53.

Conspiracy, the Defendant iustifies, for that, that he is Steward, and that in
a Leet was presented, that the Plaintiff is a Felon, and that he showed his
Rolls to the Justices at the Session, which commanded him to show that to the
Jurors, which inquired for the King, which he did, and says, that that is the
same; for by Englefield, when the Defendant pleads a Conspiracy, which is
justifiable, he ought to show that it is the same Conspiracy; 27 H. 8. fol. 2.

Annuity is brought of six and twenty shillings and eight pence, the Defendant
says, that he held of the Plaintiff by six and twenty and eight pence of Rent,
which is the same Rent, and is not good, for it cannot be the same; 33 H. 6. f.
38.

Debt upon Obligation, the Defendant says, it was made by threats, the
Plaintiff says, that he let the Land to the Defendant, rendering Rent, and
says, if he would not seal the Obligation to him for the Rent behind, he
would sue him at the Common Law, which is the same threatening, and it is no
good Plea, for this is lawful, and not a threatening; 16 Ed. 4. f. 7. Br. Tit.
Duresse 23.

Maintenance, the Defendant says, that he carried the Money of him, which the
Plaintiff supposed he maintained, to his Counsel, which is the same Maintenance,
and this is no plea, for this is no Maintenance, 34 H. (...). fol. 19.

Replication.
Where a faulty Bar is made good by Replication, and where not.
Trespass, the Defendant pleads an Agreement to pay Money, and to make
Windows, and said, that he paid the Moneys, and nothing of the Windows, and the
Plaintiff replied and said, no such Agreement, and yet the Plaintiff in Bar
pleaded an Agreement, and that not executed, is not made good by the
Replication, for the Bar is not good, to no intent, and the Replication cannot
make that good, 6 H. 7. f. 10.

But count where a Bar may be made good by a Plea of the other party, where
the Count or the Bar is uncertain, as where the Plaintiff counts of an
Obligation in Debt, and does not count where it was made; and the Defendant
pleads Release, and acknowledge it, and the Conisee, where the place should be
in is now outed, and need not to have that; the same Law in Trespass, where a
man pleads Arbitrament, and does not show the place where the Submission was
that is not good: but if the Plaintiff reply, and says, that he discharged the
Arbitrators before the Award, now it is good, for that which was ill is now
confessed, 10 H. 7. f. 24. and 20 H. 7. f. 12.

By Hussy, if one plead Joint-tenancy, day of the Writ purchased, it is not
good, for that he might be sole Tenant after, if the Demandant says, sole
Tenant, and does not demurr, it is made good by Replication, 5 H. 7. f. 14. The
same Law if in Debt against Executors, they plead nothing in their hands, day
of the Writ purchased, and do not say, nor ever after, the plea is not good:
but if the Plaintiff reply, and say, that they have Assets, and that is found,
he shall have Judgment, 3 H. 7. fol. 8. accordingly.

False Imprisonment the tenth day of May, the Defendant says, that the
Plaintiff made an affault in the Court before the Steward, and for his
disturbance of the Peace in the Court, he was committed to ward, the Plaintiff
says of his own wrong, without such cause, and now though the Defendant has
not showed what day the Court was, yet by the replication it is made good, for
now the day is not material, 21 H. 7. f. 32.

If double Plea be pleaded, and the Plaintiff replies, and rakes Issue of one
matter, and that is found, he cannot after plead in arrest of Judgment, for by
the Replication it is made good, 18 Ed. 4. fol. 17.

Debt upon in Obligation, the Defendant pleads a defeasance, which is, that if
the Defendant deliver to the Plaintiff in London certain Clothes of Kersey of
as good Stuff, and of as good making, as before these times have been made in
the Town of D. in the County of Darby, that then the Obligation should be void,
and says that he has delivered to the Plaintiff in London the Clothes of as
good, etc. According to the condition, and this Plea is not good, for that,
that it cannot be tried, for those of London cannot try if they were as good,
etc. But the Plaintiff replied, and said, that the Plaintiff did not deliver to
us any manner of Cloth in London ready, etc. and now by the Replication it is
good, 22 Ed. 4. fol. 2.

Debt, the Plaintiff counts upon a Lease for term of years, and does not show
where it was made, and the Defendant traverses the Lease, and the Plaintiff
replies, and joins Issue, and after acknowledges the action, and after pleads
in arrest of Judgment, for that the Plaintiff has not declared in what place
the Lease was made, and yet he had Judgment; for when the Defendant has in
Bar gainsaid the Lease, he has admitted the count good, 18 Ed. 4. fol. 17.
And in Debt, if I Plead the Release of the Plaintiff, and do not show where it
was made, and the Plaintiff replies, and pleads not his Deed, the Plea of the
Defendant, is made good by his Replication, Br. title Repleader 38.

Annuity for Counsel given, and to be given, and counts that he has given to
him Council, in doing his businesses, and though he do not show in what
businesses it is good, for if the Defendant says, that he does not give to him
Council against the Plaintiff in his replication, he may show in what things he
gave Council, and so the replication has made all good, and the Count was
good generally, 39 H. 6. fol. 33.

By Vanisor, Replication may make an ill Bar good; as I plead in Bar grant of
Reversion, and omit attornement, if the Plaintiff reply, and confess and avoid
the grant by special matter, then is the Bar good, 11 H. 7.24.

By Read, in Debt against one as Executor, which pleads nothing in their hands
day of the Writ purchased, which is no Plea, for that, that he may have assets
afterward: But if the Plaintiff reply that he has assets and that found by
Verdict, is good, 6 H. 7. fol. 6. The same Law, if the Tenant in Precipe plead
non-Tenure, day of the Writ, and the Plaintiff replies, that he was Tenant.

And now though by the statute of, 32 H. 8. chap. 30. It was enacted, that if
any Issue be tried by the Oath of 12. in any of the Kings Courts of Record,
that Judgment shall he given, any mispleading not having color, insufficient
pleading, or Jeofaile, not worrant of Attorney put in any mis-construction, or
discontinuance, misjoyning of Issue, or other default, or negligence of
parties, their Councillors or Attorneys had or made to the contrary
notwithstanding, and that the Judgment shall be in force, and shall not be
reversed by Writ of Error. And yet at this day, one may plead in arrest of a
Jury, and say that you ought not to take this Inquest, notwithstanding this
Statute.

Conspiracy against two, one in the year, 42 Edw. 3. has pleaded to the Jury,
and the other, 43 Edw. 3. pleads in Abatement, and now in, 48 Ed. 3. the first
takes Nisiprius, and cannot have it before the Court be advised, if the Writ be
good, for though that the other has accepted the Writ good, yet if the Writ
does not lie in the case, the Writ shall abate against one and the other, by,
43 Ed. 3. f. 10. The same Law notwithstanding the Statute of 32 H. 8. aforesaid.

Debt against two Fxecutors, one comes at the Pluries and pleads fully
administered, and after comes the other by Exigent, and pleads to the Writ that
3. others are Executors, which have administered not named, Judgment of the
Writ, and for that, that the Plaintiff has replied, that the two alone are
Executors, the Defendant for that may plead this matter, in arrest of taking of
the first inquest upon the first Issue, for by the replication to the second
Plea, he has waived the advantage of the first plea, where it was sufficient
for all, by reason of the Statute, which will, that he that first shall come by
distress, shall answer, 7 H. 4. f. 12. Brook Executors 46. and this is good at
this day, notwithstanding the Statute aforesaid of Jeofailes.

Several Tenancy.
SCire facias, of a Fine of Rent Service against many Tenants, one says that
The came to a House, parcel of the Tenements, whereout the Rent in Demand is
supposed to be Issuing, by it self, without that, that the other have any
thing, Judgment of the Writ, and that another holds four Acres parcel of the
Land, whereout the Rent in demand is supposed to be issuing by it self, and it
is good, 5 H. 5. f. 4. otherwise it is of a Rentcharge.

Scire facias against J. S. J. D. and three others, J. S. says, that he and
one of the three held parcel jointly, and that the Ancestor was dead, day of
the writ purchased, Judgment of the Writ, and J. D. says, he held another
parcel in Fealty; Judgment of the Writ, and the Writ brought against them
in common was abated, 38 Ed. 3. f. 20. And note also, several Tenancy of
parcel, shall abate all the Writ, 19 Ed. 3. tit. 18. 27 H. 8. f. the last,
and 20 Ed. 4. f. 8.

Precipe against two of sixteen Acres of Land, one takes the Tenancy of twelve
Acres, without that, that the other has, etc. and vouches, and the other takes
the Tenancy of the residue, without that, that the Plaintiff ought to maintain
his Writ, 41 Ed. 3. f. 20 the other several Tenancy shall abate the Writ, 28
Book of Ass. 25. That he which pleads several Tenancy may vouch or plead over
in Bar, and not conclude to the Writ. See, Br. title Breife 141 and 13 H 6. f.
26.

Assise, several Tenancy is no plea, and the same Law in other actions where
no land is demanded in cercaine, 24 H. 8. tit. 18. But see, 21 H. 6. f. 57. and
30 B. of Ass. 24.

Dower, several Tenancy shall abate the Writ, ^9 Ed. 3. Brook 30. otherwise it
is in Assise, 15 Ed. 2. tit. 1. and 14 Ed. 3. tit, Brief. 276.

It seems that non-Tenure, and several Tenancy in Nuper obiit, against, 3, is
no Plea, 7 H. 6.8. See, 13 Ed. 1. tit. 3. Fitzh: fol. 197. D. F.

Quid Juris clamat, against three, which plead several Tenancy, and it was
said that it behooveth that the Plaintiff should maintain his writ, so he he
did, 12 Ed. 3. tit. 9.

Mortdancester, against 3. which say that they are Tenants in severalty,
Judgment of the Writ. And for that, that the Assise found that one of them was
Tenant in severalty the Writ abated, 8 Ed. 2. tit. 2.

In, Per quae servitia, Several Tenancy is no plea, 12 Ed. 3. tit. 15. and 32
Ed. 3. tit. 7.

Scire facias against two, one makes default, and the other pleads several
Tenancy in abatement, and cannot, for that Seisin is to be awarded of half, 42
Ed. 3. fol. 8. See ^. Book of Assizes the 16.

Precipe against two, one takes the Tenancy upon him, without that, that the
other has anything, and the other says nothing, the Plaintiff need not to
maintain his Writ, 37 H. 6. f. 16. and 18.

Entry in the quibus against two, one pleads several Tenancy, and also over in
Bar, and the other pleads in the same manner, and the Plaintiff need not to
answer to the Bar, be it good or not, but he ought to maintain his Writ, for
one ought not to recover upon an ill Writ, 12 H. 6. f. 4.

He which pleads several Tenancy, without that, that the other named with him
has any thing, he need not conclude to the Writ, but vouch or plead in Bar,
but the Demandant shall not answer to the Bar, nor to the Voucher, but ought
to maintain his Writ, that they are Tenants, as the Writ supposes, 19 H. 6.
f. 14.

Traverse.
Where he ought not to traverse, and where he ought, then what thing in the
Plea shall be traversed.
BY Hussy, in Precipe, if the Tenant plead that the Land is ancient Demesne,
and pleadable by a small Writ of Right close, and he need not take Traverse
that it is not frank fee, for that, that the Writ is but a Supposall, 5 H. 7.
fol. 13. And in Mortdancester, Tenant pleads Joynt-tenancy with the Father of
the Demandant, and it is good without Traverse, that he is sole Tenant, for
that, that this is but a Supposall; and by Tremail, fol. 14. of his Horse
taken, the Defendant says, that J. S. sold the Horse to him in an open Market,
or that the Horse was waived, or VVreck, or such like, there he need not
traverse, for that, that this is matter in Law; and if he takes Traverse he
waives that matter in Law, 5 H 7. f. 6. accordingly, 2 Ed. 4. f. 9. and Plowd.
23. A. By Hussy and Fairfax, where a matter indeed is alleged, by way of
Bar, or in Covenant, then this ought to be traversed in every Case, unless it
be for the mischief of Trial, as special Bastardy is alleged without
Traverse, it is goood for mischief of Trial, 6 H. 7. f. 5. otherwise it is of
matter of Supposall, and in Assise the Tenant pleads a Feoffment of J. S. the
Plaintiff says, that this was upon Condition, and that J. S. entered for the
Condition broken, and infeoffed him, and so he confesses and avoids, and for
that he ought not to traverse; and in Precipe quod reddat, against J. S. he
shall say, that he held jointly with J. D. not named in the Writ, and take no
Traverse, for that, that it is but a Supposall; and in Trespass of Goods
taken, the Defendant says, they were the Goods of J. S. which made him and the
Plaintiff his Executors; the Plaintiff says, that the Testator devised, that
after his Debts and Legacies paid, that he should have all the remainder, and
says, that such and such are paid, which are all; the Defendant says, that
such a Legacy was not paid, without that that the Plaintiff alleges were all,
and he ought to traverse, for that, that it is a matter in deed.

Trespass of Trees cut, the Defendant pleads, that J. S. was seized of an Acre
whereof the Trespass is parcel in Fee, and let to him at will, and that he by
his commandment cut the said Trees, and demands Judgment if Action, and this
is no Plea without Traverse, that is, without that, that it is the Soil of the
Plaintiff, 5 H. 5. fol. 8.

Trespass, the Defendant conveys that his Father was seized in Fee, and that
descended to him; the Plaintiff pleads that J. D. infeoffed him, and ought to
traverse, without that, that the Father of the Defendant was seized in Fee, 27
H. 8. f. 9.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads, that the place where, etc. was his Freehold;
the Plaintiff says, that J. S. was seized in Fee, and let to him at will, and
that the Defendant outed him, and disseised J. S. and that the Plaintiff at the
command of J. S. re-entered, and the Trespass mean between the re-entry and
the disseisin, and the Defendant maintains his Bar, and he ought to traverse
the Lease, for that is most material, 11 Ed. 4. f. 3.

Trespass, the most material matter shall be traversed; and for that if a Gift
in Tail, and dying seized be pleaded in Bar in Trespass, the Gift is
traversable, and not the dying seized; so in Trespass, if the Defendant says,
that a stranger was seized, and infeoffed the Father of the Defendant, and that
his father died seized, and that the Defendant entered as Son, and Heir,
nothing is traversable, but the last dying seized, for that is the effect of
his Bar, by Neale, 15 Ed. 4. f. 2.

Trespass, The Defendant says, that I was seized, and protesting died seized,
and conveyed the descent to the Defendant; the Plaintiff says, that M.
enfeoffed him, by force of which he was seized, till the Defendant made a
Trespass, and the Defendant says, as above, without that, that the Plaintiff
was seized at the time of the Trespass, but it is not good, for he ought to
traverse, and to say without that, that M. enfeoffed him, for that is the
effect of the Replication, 19 H. 8. f. 7.

Trespass, the Defendant pleads his Freehold, the Plaintiff says, that the
Defendant let to A. for years, which granted his estate to B. which granted to
him, the Defendant maintained his Bar, without that, that B. granted to the
Plaintiff, and is not good, for he conveys from the Defendant himself, and
that is traversable, and says, without that, that the Defendant let to A. But
where an estate is conveyed all by strangers, he may traverse one conveyance or
other, 10 H. 7. f. 8.

Assise, the Defendant pleads Bar, and the Plaintiff makes Title by a gift in
Tail to his father, and dying seized of his father, the gift is traversable:
but if it be by Feoffement of J. S. to his father, and dying seized of his
Father, the dying seized is traversable, 9 H. 6.22. and 10 H. 4.1. accordingly.

Mesne, and counts that he held a hundred Acres by Fealty, of the Defendant and
he over, etc. the Defendant says, that the Plaintiff held of him by Homage
and Fealty, and ought to traverse the acquittal, and not the Tenure, 2 H. 5. f.
2.

Trespass of close broken, the Defendant faith, that J. S. and J. D. were
seized in Fee, that J. S. enfeoffed the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, and J. D.
enfeoffed the Defendant, and so they hold as undivided, and the Plaintiff
says, that his Ancestor died sole seized of all, and this descended to him,
without that he held as undivided, and it is no Plea, but he ought to traverse
the Feoffement made by J.D. to the Defendant, for the Plea is as good without
(So) and for that in this Case, that which comes after the (So) is not
material, but whre it is material, it is traversable, and for that by Choke;
Debt upon an Obligation, the Defendant says, that he was a lay man, and not
learned, and this Writing was read to him in place of an Acquittance, and so
this Obligation is not his Deed, now this which comes after the (So) is
material, 32 H. 6. f. 16. Tit. Issue 9.

Debt upon a Lease of four Acres, for four pounds of Rent, the Defendant
demands Judgment of the Count, for that that the Plaintiff let the four
Acres, and a Rectorie for the four pounds, and ought to traverse without that,
that he let the four Acres only, etc. 35 H. 6. f. 38. and 18 Ed. 4. fol. 17.

One avowes for that, that the Plaintiff held an Acre of him by twelve pence,
the Plaintiff says, that he held the same Acre, and another by six pence,
without that, that he held of him by the same Services only, and it is not
good, but he shall say, without that, that he held the said Acres in Manner and
Form, 13 H. 7.25.

One avows, for that, that he held two acres by twenty shillings of him, the
Plaintiff says, that he held the two Acres and two others in the same Town, by
the Services of twelve shillings, without that, that he held the two Acres
only by the Services of twenty shillings in Manner and Form, as, etc. this
seems good, 8 H. 7. f. 5.

Where one justifies at another day then the Plaintiff alleges, and ought to
traverse only, before the day of his justification, and where, before and
after, where only after.
Trespass against the Sherif, of a Cow taken, the Desendant justifies, at the
day after by a Precept he attached the Cow, and took her with him, without
that, that he is guilty, before that Precept to him directed, and this seems
good, 9 H. 7. f. 6.

Trespass of imprisonment second day of May, the fourth year, the Defendant
iustifies the fourth day of August, Anno fourth aforesaid, by force of a
Warrant of the Peace, etc. which is the same Imprisonment, without that, that
he is guilty before that day, and it is doubted if he ought to traverse before
and after, and there it seems if one plead his Freehold such a day, after
without that, that he was guilty before, it seems good. 5 Ed. 4. fol 12.

Trespass in Wood, 1. day of August, the Defendant justifies by prescription to
have yearly, twenty cart load there betwixt Michaelmasse and Christmas, and
that such a day in November he took them, without that, that he is guilty
before Michaelmasse, and after Christmasse, and good, And the Plaintiff says,
that he knowledgeth the day that he counted, and traverseth the prescription,
and good, notwithstanding he does not maintain the day that he traverseth; for
it is in the election of the Plaintiff to maintain the traverse of the time,
or to traverse the special matter, as in trespass, Anno 7. The Defendant pleads
Release, Anno 6. without that he was guilty after the Release, the Plaintiff
may say it is not his Deed, without maintaining the day. 10 Ed: 4. fol. 2. and
21 Ed: 4. fol: 79. the same of Release pleaded, without that he was guilty
afterward.

Trespass, where one pleads a Release, or Arbitrament atano there day, he ought
to traverse all the time after the Release, or after the Arbitrament; for all
time before is extinct. But if he plead such a day, it is Freehold, there he
ought to traverse all time before. And in Trespass of Corn taken the 6th day of
July, the Defendant justifies as Parson the 10th of August, for that they were
severed from the 9th, without that, that he is guilty at another time: but
after the Tithes severed, and till they were dry, and it is good without
traversing before and after, for it is yearly, and not certain what day of the
year. The same Law where one justifies for Common after corn sowed, till cut:
But otherwise it is for having Common from Lammas till Candlemas, there he
ought to traverse all the time before Lammas, and after Candlemas. 12 Ed: 4.
fol: 6.

Trespass of a Close broken first day of May, Anno 8. the Defendant pleads that
the Plaintiff enfeoffed him, the 4th of May the year aforesaid, without that
that he was guilty before the said 4th. day. And the Plaintiff says that he
did not enfeoffe him: and it is good, without maintaining the day which was
traversed before. 15 Ed: 4. f: 23.

If the Defendant justify by License at another day, he ought to say without
that, that he is guilty before or after. 31 E: 4. fol: 9.

Trespass of Battery, the Defendant justifies at another day before, yet he
ought to traverse without that, that he is guilty before or after. 30 H: 6.
fol: 4.

Trespass of beating 1. day of July, the Defendant justifies in defending
himself the 2. day of July, he ought to say without that that he is guilty
before or after. 2 R: 3. fol: 16.34 H: 6. fol: 14. the same. and 19 H: 6. fol:
47.

Where one shall traverse the Town, and where the County, and where not.
Trespass, why he broke his Close, and took his Reeds in B. it is no plea that
the place is in D. in the same County, and not in B. but he ought to justify
in D. the taking, as by prescription for repairing his house, or any matter of
justification, without that, that he took in B. 9 H: 5. fol: 9. and 4 H: 7.
fol: 5 by Hussy.

Trespass of goods in D. in the County of Middlesex, Defendant justifies at S.
in the County of D. by commandment of J. S. in whom the property is, without
that, that he is guilty in the County of Middlesex: 22 Ed: 4.38.

Trespass of goods in one County, the Defendant may justify in another, and
traverse the County. 7 H. 6. f: 37.

Trespass of a Close broken in D. the Defendant justifies for common appendant
in S. in the same County, he ought to traverse without that, that he is guilty
in D. 4 H: 6. fol: 13.

Trespass, why he broke his Close in D. in the County of Darby, the Defendant
cannot justify in S. in the County of N. in manner and form, and traverse the
County, but plead not guilty; for upon not guilty, the Jury cannot find him
guilty in another Town in another County: but in another Town in the same
County they may, and for that he ought to traverse. But in trespass of goods
taken, or of Battery in D. the Defendant may justify in S. in the same County
without travers. 9 H: 6. fol: 62.

Trespass of Fish taken in a Close in little Henberry, the Defendant justifies
in great Henberry in the same County, without that, that he was guilty in
little Henberry, and it is good. 19 H: 6.8. and 20 H: 6.29.

Trespass of Assault, Battery, and Imprisonment in D. the defendant ^ustifies
in S. in the same County for helping a woman, which the Plaintiff would have
robbed at S. and it is good, without traverse, that is, without saying, without
that, that he is guilty in D. for it is a justification in every place of the
said County. 9 Ed: 4 fol: 26.

Trespass upon the Statute of Rich: the fifth year, for entering in 20. Acres of
land in D. the defendant says, that J. S. was seized of 20 Acres in S. in the
same County, and of them enfeoffed him, and justifies, without that, that he
entered into the Lands in D. and it is good. If he give color in S. to have the
Town par^ell of the Issue, for inveigling the Jury. 11 Ed: 4.9.

Trespass in D. of Beasts taken, the Defendant justifies in S. in the same
County doing damage, without traverse. The same Law of Battery. Yet see the
Book. 18 Ed: 4.11.

Detinue of a delivery to the Defendant in D. in the County of D. to re-deliver
to the Plaintiff, the Defendant says that the same day and year at S. in the
County of N. the Plaintiff bought the goods of the Defendant for 10 li. upon
condition, that if he paid the 10 li. such a day, that the Sale should be
void; and that he did not pay at the day, without that that the Plaintiff
delivered them in the County of D. for to re-deliver, and admitted a good Plea.
8 H. 6. fol: 10.

Detinue of a delivery in one County, where it was delivered in another: the
Defendant may say, that the delivery was in another County, without that it was
delivered where the Plaintiff counts; otherwise he shall be twice charged. 33
H. 6. fol: 28.

By Nedham, in Debt upon a bargain, the Defendant says it was made upon
condition at another place in the same County. The Plaintiff may say that it
was made simply, without any condition, ready without traversing of the place,
for that, that it is in the same County. But if the Condition were made in
another County, there he ought to traverse that it was made simply where the
Plaintiff counted. 34 H: 6. fol: 32. And the same Law in detinue of chattels,
and see a bargain traversable, which is in effect the same conveyance, where he
might have waged his Law 33 H. 6. fol: 25.

Account of Receipt in London, by the hands of R. the Defendant says that he
received them by the hands of R. in C. to deliver to the Plaintiff himself,
which he has done without that, that he ever received them in London, and
good. 9 Ed: 4.48. and 22 H. 6.55.

Account of Recest of 10 Marks in London, the Defendant says he received them
in Cornwall, to deliver them to J.S. which he has done, without that, that he
was his Receiver in London, and it seems a good plea. 9 Ed. 4. f. 48.

Trespass in the Parish of W. in D. in the County of E. the Defendant says that
the place is called W. in D. in the County of K. and justifies, without that,
that W. is in the County of E. and not guilty shall be entered. 34 H. 6. fol. 5.

Trespass of a bag with money taken at C. the Defendant says, that the
Plaintiff delivered that to him at L. and it is not good, but that he delivered
that to him at L. to deliver to J.S. which he did, without that, that he is
guilty at C is good. 34 H. 6.9. and 19 H. 6. fol. 43.

Trespass of an Horse taken at D. in the County of M. the Defendant justifies
the taking for a Waife at S. in another County, without that, that he is guilty
at D. and it seems nothing shall be entered but not guilty. Inquier 19 H. 7.27.
and 22 Ed. 4.38. this was entered, and not the general Issue.

Action upon the Case for that, that the Defendant sold Woad to him at J. and
there showed to him a piece, which is march^ntable, and warranted the rest to
be as good as the example, where it is defective. The Defendant says, that he
sold to him Woad at B. and warranted that, etc. without that, that he sold at
I. and is good. 14 H. 6. fol: 24.

Action upon the Case upon Assumpsit at London to cure his Horse; the Defendant
says at Oxford he assumed to cure, etc. without that, that he assumed at
London, and it is good. 19 H. 6. fol: 49.

Trespass of beating at D. in the County of D. If the Defendant justifies at S.
in the County of N. he ought to traverse the County. 9 H. 6.62. and 11 H. 6.20.
the same.

Trespass of goods taken at E. the Defendant pleads that they were delivered to
him at S. in the County of M. to deliver to the Plaintiff, which he did,
without that, that he was guilty at E. 19 H. 6.48.

In Trespass transitory, where the Defendant justifies in another County he
onght to take traverse. 29 H. 6.72. and 5 H. 4. fol: 3. the same. 22 Ed. 4.
fol: 38.7 H. 6. fol. 37.10 H. 7. fol: 27.

Yet ready.
Where he shall say Yet ready, and where not.
DEtinue of a Chest with Writings against Executors, it is no plea for them to
say, that the Writings came to them sealed, and that they were ready to
deliver them, and yet are ready, unless that they offer them to the Court; or
to say that the thing is of so great weight that they cannot bring them hither.
9 H. 6.65. and 22 Ed. 3. B^ook. Always ready. 6 Ed. 4. fol. 11.

44 Ed. 3. tit. 40. Dower, the Tenant says that he has been always ready to
render Dower, and yet is. The Demandant avers the contrary; upon which the
Demandant shall recover her Dower. But she shall not have a Writ to inquire of
her damages now, for that is the Issue, which shall be tried.

14 H. 8. fol: 28. Dower, if the Tenant come in at the first day, and will aver
that he was always ready, and yet is, if the Demandant will not aver the
contrary, that the Demandant shall not recover damages. 5 Ed. 4. Dower 2.
Where the Tenant imparles to another Term, he shall not say, yet ready to
render Dower.

21 Ed. 3. tit. 24. Dower, the Tenant alleges, that the Demandant deteins a
Hamper of Evidences of that Land, and it, etc. the Demandant says, That she
is, and always has been ready to deliver the Hamper, etc. and for that she
shall have judgment for thwith.

8 H. 6. fol. 15. Trespass, the Defendant pleads an Arbitrament, which was to
pay 10 li. if the day be past, he shall say that he has been always ready,
and yet is, and bring the money into the Court.

22 H. 6. fol: 45. Debt upon an Obligation endorsed upon Condition, to perform
an award to pay 20 s. before Christmas last past, if he tendered before the
day, and the other refused, he shall not say yet ready afterward. Injuire.

Dower, where the Tenant casts an Essoyn, he is not estopped to say, yet ready
to render Dower. 14 H. 6. 4. See in Debt by Hank. 11 H. 4.60. and 7 H. 4. fol:
16.

Debt, where the Defendant comes inupon the distress, he may say yet ready. 7
H. 4.11. and 8 Ed. 4. fol: 11. the same.

Debt after Imparlance, the Defendant cannot plead yet ready. 36 H. 6. 14.

Annuitie where the Defendant comes in at the distress, he cannot say yet
ready. 2 H. 4. fol: 4.

Debt, Process continued till the distress, return Nihil and proceeds to the
Capias, pluries, and the Defendant comes in, and says that he was always
ready, and yet is. 11 H. 4. fol: 6.

Debt upon an Obligation, to stand to the award, and the award was to pay at
such a place; the Defendant may say that he was always ready at the place,
without saying yet ready, and without tendering the money in Court. 11 H. 6.27.
See 22 H. 6. fol: 39. the reason in this case.

Debt upon an Obligation to pay a lesser sum at such a day, for the Defendant
to say that he was ready at the place, and offered, and the Plaintiff refused,
it is no plea; but shall say, that he has been always ready, and yet is, and
tender the money in Court, for otherwise the Plaintiff shall not have remedy.
7 Ed: 4.3. But see 7 H. 4.19. and 2 Ed: 4.3. by Choke.

Detinue of Deeds against Executors, they ought to say, that they were ready,
and yet are; for otherwise they shall pay damages, 22 Ed: 3. tit. 37. Always
ready.

Debt upon an Obligation, condition to pay 10 li. such a day, and place; and
the Defendant tenders that at the day and place, and the Plaintiff receives
there part, and respits the rest until an agreement be made between them, and
after the Plaintiff requires it, and the Defendant refuses to pay it; yet he
shall not forfeit the penalty; for this is saved by the first tender. But now
by the Court, he ought to tender it in Court.

And where one is bound in 10 l. upon condition to pay five pound, at such a
day and place, and though that he were ready at the day and place, and none
comes to receive it, yet by the Court he shall have the money in Court ready, 7
Ed: 4. fol: 3. See 5. H. 4.

Debt upon an obligation, the condition to pay so much money as B. shall
appoint for the taking of the beasts of the Plaintiff, and the Defendant
says, that B. appointed 10 l. which he tendered, and the Plaintiff refused it
judgment if action, and it is a good plea without saying yet ready, for the
condition is to do a collatterall act, and this 10 l. is collatteral, and for
that he shall not say yet ready. But if one be bound in 20 l. and the condition
to pay 10 l. there if he say that he offered the 10 l. at the day, and the
Plaintiff refused it, yet he shall say yet ready, for the 10 l. are parcel of
20 l. and for the 10 l. he cannot have action, 19 H. 8. fol: 12. and 22 H 6.
fol: 45.

Debt upon an obligation, the condition that J. S. should perform the covenants
of an Indenture, the Defendant alleges them performed specially, and one
Covenant was, that J: S: should pay to the Plaintiff 10 l. and he said that he
offered it to him, and the Plaintiff refused by Fitzh: and Shelley, he need
not say yet ready, 27 H. 8. fol. 1.

Debt upon an obligation, The Defendant says that it is endorced upon
condition that if the Prior of W. made an obligation to the Plaintiff before
such a day, that then etc. And says that the Prior tendered that to the
Plaintiff, and he refused it, and shall nor say yet ready, for it is a thing
out of his power, and to be made by a stranger, 10 H 6. fol: 17.

If a man be bound in 20 l. and the condition is to pay 10 l. if the Defendant
plead in debt upon the obligation, that he tendered the 10 l. at the day, and
the Plaintiff refused it, yet he shall say yet ready. But if the condition
were, that J. S: should pay at the day to the Plaintiff, and the Plaintiff
refuse, he shall not say yet ready, 14 H. 6. fol: 24.

Debt upon an obligation, of 10 l. the Defendant pleads that after by Indenture
of defesance, the Plaintiff granted that if the Defendant paid unto him 20 s.
such a day, that then the obligation should be void, and says that he tendered
to him the 20 s. at the day, and he refused it, and by Prisot, he shall not say
yet ready, 33 H. 6. fol: 2.

Debt upon an obligation, the condition to pay a less sum, this less sum is
parcel of the sum in the obligation, and for that the Defendant shall say yet
ready, but otherwise it is, where the condition is to stand to the award or
other collatteral matter, there the Defendant shall not say yet ready, 20 Ed:
4. fol: 2.

The Court Roll.
THe Court Baron of W. T. Prebend of Islington.
Gentleman Farmer of R. F. Clark, Prebend of the preben dary aforesaid, there
to be held the Tuesday, that is the 6 day of May: the year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lady Elizabeth by the grace of God. Queen of England, France, and
Ireland, defender of the faith, the ^oth.

L. H. by W. I. essoyned of Common. Essoyne. Homagers.


Jury J. H, J. P, T. G, R. M, R. H, R. E, T. L, R. W, R. B, W. R, T. W.

First they say upon their Oath, Default of the Freeholders.


W. A, 4d. J. H, 4d. and R. B, 4d. are Freeholders of this Manor, and owe
suit to the Court, and at this day have made default. Therefore every of them
in the mercy, as it appears upon their heads.

Also they say upon this Oath, Des: Tenants by Copy of the Rol^.
that W. J. 2d. and J. R. 2d. are Tenants by the Copy of the Rolls of this
Court, and owe Suit to the Court, and at this day made default, therefore
either of them in the mercy, as it appears above upon their heads.

Also they present that W. J. which held of the Lord freely one house, Death.
and 30 acres of Meddow, and Pasture with the appurtenances, within this
Lordship by fealty, suite of Court, and by the yearly Rent of 6 d. dyed of such
an estate so seized, and that R. J. is son and next heir of the aforesaid W. J.
and is of the Age of 10 years, and came to Court, the aforesaid W. J. and
pays to the Lord for releif ^^d and made his fealty.

Also they say upon their Oath, Alienation.
that G. B. which of the Lord held freely one Cottage, one Orchard, and 6 acres
of m^ddow with the appurtenances, by his deed indented bearing date the 6th.
day of January, the year of the reign, of the said Queen, gave, granted,
bargained, and sold, all and sing ^lar the premises aforesaid with their
appurtenances to R. K. of etc. to have and to hold all and singular the
premises aforesaid, with their appurtenances aforesaid, to the said R. K. his
heirs and Assigns, of the chief Lords of the fee, by the Rents, Services, and
customs there first due, and of right accustomed, and the premises does hold
of the Lord of this Manor, by fealty, Suite of Court, and by the yearly Rent
of 12 d. And at this Conrt the said R. K. made to the Lord his fealty.

Also they say upon their Oath, Legacy.
that W. A. which held of the Lord freely one house or tenement ^ and 20 Acres
of Land called H. by fealty, suite of Court, and by the yearly rent of 6 d.
dyed thereof seized, And by his last Will made in Writing, bearing date the
28th. of September, the year of the Reign of the aforesaid Queen the 19th.
bequeathed the house or Tenement, and the aforesaid 20 Acres of land to certain
R. A. and T. A. his sons, by the name of all his Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, Situate, Lying and being in J. aforesaid, to have and to hold
the aforesaid message or tenement, etc. And the aforesaid 20 Acres of Land, to
the said R. A. and T. A. their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the poper use
and behoof of R. and T. and their Heirs and Assigns for ever. Therefore it is
commanded to the Bayliffe, that he should distrain the aforesaid R. A. and T.
A. according to the form of the Statute in that case provided, to pay his
Releif, and likewise let them be distrained to make their fealty. Surrender.


Also they say upon their Oath, that R. R. customary tenant of this Manor, out
of the Court, surrendered into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of W. T. and
R. M. two customary tenants of this Manor, according to the custom of this
Manor. All that message, and 30 acres of meddow, feeding and Pasture, with
the appurtenances, late in the tenure, or occupation of R. B. to the use and
behoof of R. R. for term of his natural life, and after the decease of the
said R. R. then to the use and behoof of T. B. and the heirs of the body of the
said T. lawfully begotten, and for defect of such issue, of the body of the
said T. B. lawfully begotten, the remainder thereof to J. J. the son of R. J.
of J aforesaid Gentleman, his heirs and assigns for ever, and they say that
the aforesaid R. dyed, and now at this Court aforesaid T. B. came and requested
to be admitted to all and singular the premises aforesaid, and at this Court
the Lord by J. K. his steward granted him seisin thereof by the rod, to have
and to hold to the said T. B. and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and
for defect of such issue, the remainder to the use and behoof of the said J. J.
and his heirs for ever, and the aforesaid T. B. gave to the Lord a fine 4
pound, and made to the Lord his fealty, and is admitted tenant thereof.

To this Court it is witnessed by W. T. steward, Surrender taken by the Steward.
that W. N. lying very sick 10 day of A. the year of the Reign of the aforesaid
Lady the Queen 19. surrendered into the hands of the Lord, by the hands of the
said steward, (the Court being absent) in the presence of R. C. R. P. and C. H.
one tenement called Miles in which lately dwelt W. G. with all his lands and
tenements within the prebend of J: to the use and behoof of M. his wife for
term of her life, and aster the desease of the said M. the remainder to W. T.
son of the foresaid W. the father, and E: daughter of the said W: the father,
and sister of the aforesaid W. their sons and heirs upon this condition,
notwithstanding following, that if it happen any of the aforesaid W. the son,
and E: the daughter, to dye without heirs of their body issuing, that then he
or she, which did survive, shall have and enjoy the tenement aforesaid to them
and their heirs for ever. And upon this came into this Court the aforesaid M.
and did desire to be admitted into the Tenement aforesaid with the
appurtenances, to whom the Lord by J. K. his steward granted thereof seism by
the rod, to have to him in form aforesaid at the will of the Lord, according to
the custom of the Manor, and gave to the Lord for his fine for his entrance
there had, as it appears, etc. and made his fealty, and is admitted thereof
Tenant.

Item, The death of a Coheir.
at this Court it was found by the Homagers, that one W. W. one of the sons and
Coheirs of R. W. dead, which surely W.W. held of the Lord to him and his heirs,
according to the custom of this Manor, the half of two messuages or tenements,
and one garden with the appurtenances, in J: and long before this Court dyed
thereof seized within the age of 10 years, and in the keeping of one R. M.
according to the custom of the Manor, and that S. W: is brother and sole heir
of the aforesaid W. W. and of full age, who being here present in the Court,
desired to be admitted Tenant, to all the lands and tenements customary, of
which the said W: W: dyed thereof seized, that is to the half of two messuages
or tenements, a Toft and garden with the appurtenances within the Manor, to
which the Lord by his steward J. K. granted to him seisin thereof, to have and
to hold to him and his heirs of the Lord by the rod, at the will of the Lord,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, by the rent, custom, and
services there first due and accustomed, and gives to the Lord for his fine,
for his entrance as it appearsin the head, and made to his Lord fealty, and is
admitted tenant thereof.

Also to this Court came J: T: Surrender in Court.
and surrendered into the hands of the Lord, 10 acres of land, either more or
less, with the appurtenances called S. 4 acres of pasture, either more or
less, called B. and 4 acres of meddow, be it more or less, called K.
customary, to the use and behoof of R. B. Gentleman his heirs and assigns for
ever by the rod, at the will of the Lord according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, to which R.B. the Lord by his Steward granted to him thereof seisin,
to have to him and his heirs of the Lord by the rent of 10 s. yearly, and other
services then first due, and he gives the Lord for a Fine, for having this
entry therein 4 l. and made to the Lord fealty, and is hereof admitted Tenant.

Also the Homagers say upon their Oath, that on R: S: Death.
which held of the Lord as a Parcener by the custom of the Manor, nine Acres
of customary Land, with a grange, together with T: S: his brother to him and to
his Heirs, dyed since the last Court so seized, and that one J: S: his son and
next heir of the said R. to the half aforesaid, of the Land and Grange
aforesaid, and is of the Age of 8 years. And upon this as well the custody of
the aforesaid F: as the Land and grange aforesaid, were committed to one S: I:
as his. next friend, etc. And found surety to the Court E: N to restore to the
aforesaid J. of the profits thereof, when he should come to the age of 14 years.

Also they say upon their Oath, that R: W: Encre^ meant.
encroached upon the wast of the Lord, at C: in length 20 rods, and in breadth
one rod, therefore he in mercy, etc. And it is ordained, that he shall lay out
the same before the feast of St. John Baptist next, under the pain of
forfeiting to the Lord for every Rod, etc.

Also they say upon their Oath, that G: B: Re^^ous.
Bayliffe of the Lord, such a day and year, etc. within the Lordship
distrained, H: S: for the Lords rent, then by that foresaid H: behind and not
paid, and that the aforesaid H: then and there made Rescous upon the said G: B:
therefore he in the mercy etc.

Pleas in Court Baron.
R. H. complains against C: E: and A: his wife, Formedon in Remainder.
of a Plea of Land, that is to say, of one house, two Cottages, 20 Acres of
Meddow, and 20 Acres of Pastor with the appurtenances in J: within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, and made protestation to prosecute the Suit, in
form and nature, (...) a Writ of the Queens, of the form of a gift in
remainder at the Common Law, and found sureties to prosecute that Suit, in
form and nature aforesaid, that is J.H. and R: M: and desires forthwith
process to be made for him, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid,
against the aforesaid C: and A: his wife, etc. Therefore according to the
custom of this Manor, used time out of mind. It is commanded to the under
Ba^liffe of thi^ Manor aforesaid, and the Officer of the foresaid Court, that
he should summon by good summoners, the aforesaid C: and A: that they should be
before the suitors of the Court aforesaid, the next Court of the Manor
aforesaid, the Tuesday such a day, held at the Manor aforesaid, to answer to
the aforesaid R: H: of the aforesaid Plea, etc. The same day is given to the
aforesaid R: here, etc. To which truly next Court, came as well the aforesaid R:
H: as the aforesaid C: and A: by J: R: their Attorney, And the aforesaid
Officer of the Court aforesaid, returned here in the Court, that that he by
virtue of the command aforesaid to him directed, had sunimoned the aforesaid C:
and A: by good summoners, that is by J: D: and R: R: to be here at this Court
to answer the aforesaid R: H of the aforesaid Plea, of the aforesaid one house:
^ Cottages 20 Acres of Land, 20 Acre: of Meddow, and 20 Acres of Pasture with
the appurtenances, as it was commanded him, etc.

And upon this the said R: H: demands against the said C: Count.
and A* the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, as his right and
Inheritance, saying, that one W: H: was seized of the tenements aforesaid, with
the appurtenances, in his demesne as of Fee, at the will of the Lord, according
to the custom of the manner aforesaid, And so being seized, according to the
custom of this Manor, time out of mind, used and allowed at the Court of the
Manor, held at J: within the precinct of the Manor, the aforesaid Tuesday,
next after the feast of P: the year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Queen
Eliz: 22. by J.A. and T: P: deputy Bayliffes of the Manor aforesaid, in the
presence of T: C: T: S: R: L: J: M: Y: R. and J: B: are tenants of the Lord of
the Manor aforesaid, surrendered into the hands of the Lord, the tenements
aforesaid, with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of one M: then the
wife of the aforesaid W: H: to be held for term of her life, and after the
decease of the said M: the aforesaid Tenements with their appurtenances, should
wholly remain to one J: H. son of N: H: brother of the aforesaid W: H: and to
the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for defect of such Issue of the
said J: the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to
one E: H: daughter of the aforesaid W: to be held to her and her heirs of her
Body lawfully begotten, and for defect of such Issue of the said E. the
aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances, should wholly remain to the right
heirs of the aforesaid W: H: and his heirs for ever.

By virtue of which surrender, the aforesaid M: was seized of the tenements
with the appurtenances, in his deinesne as of freehold, at the will of the
Lord, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid: in the time of peace,
time of the aforesaid Queen Elisabeth, taken then the profits to the value etc.
And from the said M. remained right by the form of the surrender aforesaid,
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, J: H: by which the said J:
was seized of the tenements aforesaid, with the appurtenances in his demesne as
of fee tail, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, by form of the surrender aforesaid, in the time of peace, in time
of our Lord Edward late King of England the second, taking then the profits to
the value etc. and from the said J: after the death of the aforesaid Elizab:
(for that both of them, the aforesaid J. and E: dyed without heirs of their
body lawfully begotten) the right remainder by the form of the surrender
aforesaid, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, to the said R: H:
which now demands, that is to say, as the son and heir of W: F: brother and
heir of the aforesaid W: H: and therefore produces this Suite.

Plaints of Mortdancester.
R. C: Complains against W: L: and E: his Wife of a Plea of Land, that is to
say, of one house, 30 Acres of Meddow, and a 100 Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in J: within the Jurisdiction of this Court, and made
protestation to prosecute his complaint in form and nature of a Writ of the
Queens, Assise of the death of his Ancestor at the Common Law etc. And desired
process for that, to be made according to the custom of this Manor, in form
and nature of this Writ aforesaid, to be directed to the Bayliffes and Officers
of this Court. And that the said Bayliffe and Officers by the command and
precept of the Lord of this Manor, Where all are Copiholders.
and according to the custom of the said Manor, should summon by good
summons, twelve honest and lawful men of the homage of this Manor, at the
next Court to be kept within the Manor, ready to know by their Oath, if R: C:
Father of the aforesaid R: was seized in his demesne as of fee, at the will of
the Lord according to the custom of the Manor, the day that he dyed, of and
in one house, 30 Acres of Meadow, and a 100 Acres of Pasture, of customary Lands
of this Manor, with the appurtenances called C. within the jurisdiction of
this Court; the day that he dyed, And if the said R. the father dyed within 50
years now last past, and if the aforesaid R: the son be the next heir of the
aforesaid R: the father, and in the mean time they should view the Lands and
Tenements aforesaid. And that they should summon by good summoners, the
aforesaid W: and E: which hold the said lands and tenements, that they should
be here to hear the Recognitors, and should find sureties to prosecute their
Suite aforesaid, J.D: R: R.

And late here at this Court came the aforesaid W: J: in his own person, Bar.
and says that the aforesaid R: father of the said complainant was not seized
in his demesne as of fee, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of
this Manor, day that he dyed, of the aforesaid house, and 30 Acres of Meddow,
and a 100 Acres of Pasture with the appurtenances in manner and form, as by
the aforesaid complainant is first supposed, and this he desires might be
inquired by the Assise, and the said Complainant likewise.

Entry in the by, and to whom.
TO this Court came J: N: in his proper person, and complains against T: M:
of a Plea of Land, that is to say, of one house, one garden, and one Orchard
with the appurtenances, and found sureties to prosecute his suit aforesaid that
is J: D. and R: R. and does protest to prosecute his suite aforesaid, of the
aforesaid house, garden, and orchard, with the appurtenances in J: in nature
and form of a writ of entrance, of our Lady the Queen in the (by) and (to
which.) Saying that the said house and garden with the appurtenances are his
right and Inheritance, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and
into which the aforesaid T: M: has no entry but by El: late the wife of W: M:
and the daughter of R: P: to which aforesaid R:P. and M: his wife, they
demised, which since unjustly and without judgment, disseised R: N: by rem: of
the said J: N: within 50 years last expired, etc. And desires process thereof
to be made to him against the aforesaid T: M: according to the custom of the
Manor, therefore according to the custom of the Manor it was commanded, J:
B: under Bayliffe of the said Manor, and Officer of the Court aforesaid, that
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, he should summon by good
summoners, the aforesaid T: M: that he should be here at the next Court, that
is the fourth day of M. next coming, here to be held to answer to the
aforesaid J: N: of the Plea aforesaid, etc. The same day is given to J. N:
here, etc.

To this Court came A: B: Citizen and Mercer of L. Common Recovery in a Right
Patent.
in proper person, and complained against W: W: of a Plea of land, that is of
one house, one garden, and one Acre of land with the appurtenances in J: held
of this Manor, by copy of Court Roll, of this Manor, and made protestation to
prosecute his complaint aforesaid, in the Court aforesaid, in form and nature
of a Writ of one Lady the Queen of right Patent at the Common Law, according to
the custom of the Manor aforesaid, And found pledges to prosecute his
complaint aforesaid, here in the said Court, that is J: D: and R: F: and
desired process thereof to be made to him, against the aforesaid W: W:
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, therefore according to the
custom of the Manor aforesaid, it was commanded J: S: Bayliffe of the Manor
aforesaid, and Officer of this Court, that he should summon the aforesaid W: W:
so that he should be here at the next Court of this Manor aforesaid, here,
that is the Saturday the fourth day of J: to be held, to answer the aforesaid
A: B: of the Plea aforesaid, and that he then have there the names of the
summoners, and this precept. And the same day is given to the demandant here,
etc. And late, that is to say, to this Court came the aforesaid W: W: in his
proper person, and in the full Court here gratis offered to answer to the
aforesaid A: B: of the plea aforesaid by good summonitors, that is J: D: and R.
R: according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and upon this lately to
this Court the aforesaid A: B: that is in proper person, came and demanded
against the said W: W: the house aforesaid, the garden and acre of land,
aforesaid with appurtenances in J: aforesaid, held of this Manor by Copy of
Court Roll, as his right and inheritance, and whereof he says, that he himself
was seized of the tenement aforesaid with the appurtenances in his demesne as
of see and right, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid in time of
peace, in the time of our Lady the now Queen, taking the profits to the value,
etc. And that so is his right, he offers, etc. And the foresaid W: W: came
and defends his right, when etc. and this seisin, of which seisin etc. As of
fee and right etc. and especially of the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances and all etc. And puts himself upon the homagers aforesaid of our
Queen of this Court aforesaid, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, and desires an acknowledgment to be made, whether he has more right
to hold the tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances, as he holds, or the
aforesaid A. B. to have the aforesaid tenements with the appurtenances as he
above demands, etc. And the aforesaid A: B: demands license to consider
thereof till the 11th. hour before noon of the same day, and had it, etc. And
the same hour was given to the aforesaid W: here, etc.

And after the said A: B: returned here into the Court, the self same day at
the aforesaid hour in proper person, and the aforesaid W: W: though he were
solemnly warned, came not, but in contempt of the Court departed, and made
default, therefore according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, It is
considered by the Court that the aforesaid A: B: should recover his seisin
against the said W: W: of the tenements aforesaid with their appurtenances
according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, to hold to the said A: B: and
his heirs according to the custom of the said Manor, quiet from the said W:
W: and his heirs for ever, and the said W:W: in the mercy etc. And now to this
Court the Lord, in execution of judgment, and recovering aforesaid by his
Steward, granted to the aforesaid A: B: of the Tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances, seisin to hold to him and his heirs and assigns by the Rod, at
the will of the Lord according to the custom of the manor, and made to the
Lord then fine and fealty, and then was admitted Tenant.

And after, that is to say, at the same Court, the aforesaid A: B: then present
came, and the aforesaid W: W: surrendered into the hands of the Lord, the
tenement aforesaid with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the
foresaid A: B: his heirs and assigns for ever, and further, the aforesaid W:
W, remised and released, and altogether for him and his heirs for ever quite,
claimed to A: B: his heirs and assigns in their full and peceable possession,
and seisin, day at the making of these presents, according to the custom of
the said Manor, of and in the tenements aforesaid, with their appurtenances,
the whole right, title, state, claim, interest, or demands whatsoever, which he
ever had, has, or any way hereafter may have, of or in the tenements aforesaid
with their appurtenances, or in any parcel thereof; so that neither the
aforesaid W.W. nor his heirs, or any other of them any right, title, state,
claim, interest, or demand of, or in the Tenements aforesaid, with their
appurtenances, nor in any parcel of them from hence may challenge, claim or
pretend unto, nor shall do hereafter but from all action of the Law, title,
claim, use, interest and demand thereof, be for ever excluded, and every of
them excluded for ever by these presents, And further the said W:W. grants
for him and his heirs, that he will warrant the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances to the aforesaid A: B: and his heirs, against all men for ever.

To this Court etc. came W.T: son and heir of W: T: Common recovery in entry in
the Post.
dead and is admitted tenant by the rod of one Field called C: containing by
estimation 8 Acres of meadow with the appurtenances in J: aforesaid whether more
or less, with the appurtenances to have to him and his heirs at the will of
the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, and paid to the
Lord for his entrance so had, etc. and made his fealty, etc.

And after to the same Court came the said W: T: and surrendered into the hands
of the Lord, in the same Court aforesaid, the field called C: containing by
estimation 8 acres of meddow, either more or less, lying in J: aforesaid with
the appurtenances, whose western part abouts upon a certain way called K: and
the northern head thence abutting upon a close late S:W: to the use and behoof
of M:M: and his heirs for ever, and upon this came the aforesaid M: M: and
desired of the Lord in the same Court to be admitted tenant to the aforesaid 8
acre; of meddow with their appurtenances, to have and to hold to him and his
heirs for ever, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, making and rendering thereof rent, services, and customs, before due
and accustomed, to whom the Lord by his Steward, granted seisin thereof, by the
Rod, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor aforesaid,
and paid to the Lord for a fine for such an entrance, for him to have 53s. 4d.
and made to the Lord fealty, and then was admitted tenant.

And after, that is to say, to the same Court came R. M. and W. M. and
complained against the aforesaid M. M. of a plea of land, that is of the
aforesaid 8 acres of meddow, and made protestatiou to follow the complaint, in
form and nature of a Writ of the Queens, of entering upon disseisin in the
post, and upon this the aforesaid R. and W.M. in their proper persons, demand
against the aforesaid Michall M. the aforesaid 8 acres of meddow with the
appurtenances in J. within the jurisdiction of this Court, as their right and
inheritance, and into which the said M. M. had no entrance, but after
disseisin, which H. H. thereof, and without judgment made to the aforesaid R.
and W. within 30 years last past etc. And whereof they say that they were
seized of the aforesaid 8 acres of meddow with the appurtenances in their
demesne as of fee, and right, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom
of the Manor aforesaid, taking the profits thereof to the value, etc. and in
which etc. and so bring their suit, etc.

And the aforesaid M.M. in his proper person comes and defends his right, when,
etc. and called into warranty the aforesaid W.T. which is present here in Court
in his proper person, and willingly, the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with
the appurrenances, did warrant unto him, etc. and upon this, the aforesaid R.
and W.M. do desire against the said W.T. Tenant by his warranty, the aforesaid
eight Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances in his Demesne, as of Fee and
Right, at the Will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor
aforesaid, in the time of Peace, in the time of the Queen that now is, taking
the profits thereof, to the value, etc. and in which and, etc. and thereof
bring their Suit, etc.

And the aforesaid W.T. Tenant, by the warranty, defends his Right, when,
etc. and further then calls to warranty C.D. which likewise is present in
Court, in proper person, and gratis the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with
the appurtenances to him, does warrant, etc. and upon this, the said R. and
W.M. do desire against the said Christopher, Tenant to the warranty, the
aforesaid eight Acres with the appurtenances, whereof they say, that he himself
was seized of the said eight Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances in his
Demesne as of Fee, and Right, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom
of the said Manor, at the said time, in the time of Peace, in the time of our
Lady the Queen, now, taking the profits thereof, to the value, etc. and in
which, etc. and therefore bring their Suit, etc

And the said R. and W.M. desire License of talking the other, and had it, etc.
and after the said R. and W.M. returned here into the Court, to the same Court
in their proper persons, and the aforesaid T. though he were solemnly summoned
returned not, but in contempt of the Court departed and made default, therefore
it is granted that the aforesaid R. and W.M. should recover their Seisin
against the said M. M. of the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances, etc. and that the said M.M. should have of the Land of the
aforesaid W.T. to the value, etc. and that the said W.T. further should have of
the Land of the aforesaid C.D. to the value, etc. and the same C. in the mercy,
etc. and upon this, the aforesaid R. and W.M. do desire a Precept to give to
them full Seisin of the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances
to be directed to an Officer of the aforesaid Court, and it was granted to them
retrunable here immediately, etc. and afterward, tha is to say, the first of
April, came here into the Court, the aforesaid R. and W. M. in their proper
persons, and the Office of the Court, that is to say, R.W. and certified the
Court aforesaid, that by virtue of the Precept aforesaid, to him so directed,
the said first day of April, he made to have to the aforesaid R. and W.M. full
seisin of the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with the appurtenances, as by
the Precept aforesaid, he was commanded, etc.

And after, that is to say, at the very same Court, the aforesaid R. and W. M.
and the aforesaid W. T. then being present, came and surrendered into the hands
of the Lord, in the same Court, the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow, with the
appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the aforesaid M. M. his Heirs, and
Assigns, to whom the Lord by his Steward aforesaid, granted then Seisin by the
Rod, to have and hold to him and his Heirs, at the will of the Lord, according
to the custom of the Manor aforesaid, etc. and further the aforesaid R. and
W. M. and W.T. remiswed, released, and altogether for them and their Heirs, for
ever quite claimed to the aforesaid M:M. his Heirs, and Assigns in his full and
peaceable possession, and Seisin, appearing in the full Court, all the Right,
Title, State, Claim, Interest, or demands whatsoever, which they ever had,
have, or any way hereafter may have, of, or in the aforesaid eight Acres with
the appurtenances, or in any parcel thereof, so that, that neither the
aforesaid R. and W.M. and W.T. nor their Heirs, or any of them, any Right,
Title, State, Claim, Interest, or demand, of or in the aforesaid eight Acres of
Meadow, with the Appurtenances, or in any parcel thereof, etc. nor ought
hereafter, but from all Action of the Law, Title, claims, Uses, Interest, and
demands, from thence to be demandded, are excluded, and every of them is
excluded for ever by these presents, and further the aforesaid W.T. grants for
him an his Heirs, that they will warrant the aforesaid eight Acres of Meadow,
with the appurtenances, to the aforesaid M.M. and his Heirs, against all men
for ever, etc.

4. H. 8. Tit. Recovery in value, 27 in Fine, and 23 H. 8. Tit. Recovery in
value, 27. Recovery against the Husband and wife, where the wife is Tenant in
Tail, and they vouch over, and the Demandant recovers against the Husband and
wife, and they over in value, this seems shall bind the Tail, and the Heir of
the wife.

23 H. 8. Title, Tail, 32. Double voucher, in Entry in the Post, bars the
Tail, because of the recompense, but single voucher shall not bar, but the
Estate Tail which he had time of the Recovery in possession; but if he were in
of another Estate, time of that Recovery it is no Bar.

23 H. 8. Tit. Recovery in value 27. Entry in the Post against Tenant for
life, to bind the Fee in Reversion, Tenant ought to pray aid of him in
remainder, and they ought to vouch.

25 H. 8. Tit. Recoverie in value, 33. where Tenant for life vouches a
stranger, and the Demandant recovers, and he over in value, this shall not go
to him in Reversion, and shall not bind him.

27 H. 8. Tit. Recovery in value 28. Tenant in Tailremainder over Entry in the
Post, against Tenant in Tail and he vouches over, this is a recompense, and
shall bar the remainder.

Pleas in Court Baron. Count upon Lending.
J. S. complains against T.D. in a Plea of Debt, of thirty Shillings four
pence, for that, that is to say, etc. and thereof the same J.S. by W. T. his
Attorney says, that when the aforesaid T.D. tenth day of February, the year of
the Reign of Elizabeth now Queen of England twentieth, at Islington, within
the Jurisdiction of this Court, borrowed of the aforesaid J.S. the aforesaid
thirty shillings four pence, to be paid to the sald J.S. when he was required,
notwithstanding the aforesaid T.D. though he has been often required, the
aforesaid thirty shillings and four pence, has not restored it to the said
J.S. but to him to pay them as yet has denied, and yet does deny, upon which
he says that he is damnified, and has loss to the value of ten shillings,
and thereof brings his Suit.

Form of a Plaint in a Court Aaron upon buying of Oyland Madder, etc.
G.B. complains agrinst R.C. in a Plea of Debt thirty Shillings four pence,
for that, that is to say, that when the aforesaid R.C. eleventh day of April,
the year of of the Lord, 1540. at J. within the Jurisdiction of this Court,
bought of the said G. B. fourteen gallons of oil, called Meat oil, for fifteen
Shillings and three pence, one Hundred of Madder for fifteen shillings and a
penny, to be paid to the said G.B. when he should be required, which truly in
all does amount to the sum of the aforesaid thirty Shillings four pence;
notwithstanding the aforesaid R.C. although he has been often requested the
said thirty Shillings four pence, to the said G.B. has not restored, but that
to him as yet to restore, has denied, and yet does deny, by reason whereof,
he is the worse, and has loss to the value of ten Shillings, and therefore
brings his suit, etc. and the foresaid R.G. by J.A. his Attorney comes and
defends the force and injury, when, etc. and says, that he does not owe to the
aforesaid G.B. the aforesaid thirty Shillings and four pence, nor any penny
thereof, in Form, in which the said G.B. complains against him, therefore it is
considered, that the said R.C. should wage his Law, and put in two Sureties for
the Law, J.M. and R.J. and should come with his Law here, at the next Court, in
proper person, and it is said to the aforesaid Attorney, of the aforesaid R. T.
that then he should have here the said R.C. his Master, in his proper person,
to finish his Law aforesaid, etc.

Plaint for accusing a man of Pelony, and imprisoning him.
T.H. complains against S. D. for that, that is to say, that when the said
Complaint a true and faithful Liege-man and Subject of our Lady the Queen now,
and of her Progenitors of the Kingdom of England, from the time of his Birth
did appear, always, and as a true Liegeman of our said Lady the Queen, and all
her Progenitors aforesaid, from all the time aforesaid, without any Crime of
Theft, stealing, Felony, or any other notorious Crime whatsoever, from the time
of his Birth hitherto, has carried, had, and kept himself, and so with all
honest men was reputed and accounted, by reason of which name of Honor, Fame,
and Coversation, the same Complainant much and great gain and profit to the
maintenance of his Living did get and had: the foresaid Defendant
notwithstanding not ignorant of the Premises, the eighteenth Day of July, the
year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, the sixth at J. within the
Jurisdiction of this Court, out of his mere malice, and ill mind, threatening
and envying the good Report, Living, Degree, state, and condition of the said
Plaintiff, and to blot it, and to bring the Complainant into an ill name, and
Danger of his Life, as much as in him lay, spoke certain false, malicious, and
scandalous words of the aforesaid Complainant, and did publish and openly say,
that T. H. (meaning the said Complainant) has robbed me of forty pounds of
money, by reason of which scandalous and false words, proclaiming and
publishing, the said Plaintiff not only in his good name and same, for which
aforetime he was know and reputed, with many honest men, and chiefly with J.A.
Inholder, greatly hurt and wronged he did appear, and did incurr and fall into
great Infamy and Discredit with the said J. H. and many other of the said
Queens now, faithful Subjects. Likewise W. G. and W. C. the Constables of L.
aforesaid, by reason of an ill opinion by them conceived, by reason of the said
Scandal against the foresaid Complainant, published then by reason of the open
speaking of those words, that the foresaid Complainant was guilty of the Felony
aforesaid, afterward, that is to say, the eighteenth Day of July, they took
the Complainant, and imprisoned him in a Prison of the said Queens, called,
etc. Situate, etc. In which Prison the said Plaintiff from the said eighteenth
Day of July, till the twentieth Day of the same Month of July for the cause
aforesaid was detained, which twentieth Day of July the Plaintiff from the said
Prison to the Prison, etc. of the said Queens in, etc. Situate, etc. was
removed, and then, and there imprisoned, and in prison from the said twentieth
Day of July, till the eight and twenty Day of the said Month of July, for the
said cause was detained so that the same Plaintiff, not only suffered and
sustained great Cost and Charges by the occasion of his Restraint and
Imprisonment, but also lost wholly many great profits and gains, which of the
said Subjects he might have gained for his maintenance and living, if the said
scandalous and malicious words so openly proclaimed had not occasioned it, to
the loss of the said Plaintiff, etc. three and thirty shillings and four
pence, and thereof brings his Suit, etc.

Trespass, Plaint for walking with his Feet.
J.R. complains against T. B. that is to say, in a Plea why by force and
arms, the Close of the said J. R. at D. he broke, and his Grass to the value
of five and thirty shillings and eight pence, there late growing, walking with
his Feet trod down and spoiled, and other Injuries offered to him, to the great
loss of the said J. R. and against the peace of our Lady the Queen now, etc.
and whereof the said J. R. says, that when the aforesaid T.B. the seven and
twentieth Day of January, in the year of the Reign of the said Queen now the
fourth, by force and arms the Close of the said J. R. at D. broke, and his
Grass to the value, etc. there late growing, walking with his Feet, there trod
down and consumed, and other Injuries, etc. to the great loss, etc. and
against the Peace, etc. whereof he says, he is made worse, and damnified to
the value, etc.

And the said T. in his proper person came, and defended the force and Injury,
when, etc. and says, that he in nothing is guilty of the Trespass aforesaid,
as the aforesaid J. above complains against him; and of this puts himself upon
the Country, the aforesaid Plaintiff likewise, etc.

Entry of the great Cape.
A. Which was the Wise of C. J. by A B. her Attorney, offered her self to
this Court against T. J. of a Plea of the third part of a House, and twenty
Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in J. which the same A. in this Court
claims as her Dowry, of the Gift of the aforesaid I. C. in times past her
Husband, for that the Tenements aforesaid are within this Lordship, and the
Women, which after the Death of their Husbands of Tenements in J. aforesaid,
being dowable, according to the Custom of the said Manor time out of mind
used, of the third part thereof, ought to be endowed, etc. and they came not,
and summoned, etc. therefore by the Judgment the third part of the aforesaid,
with the Appurtenances, should be taken into the Lords hands, etc. and day,
etc. they should be summoned, that they be here at the next Court, etc.

Precept of the great Cape.
J.K. Steward to the Bailiff thereof, health, take into the Lords hands, by the
view of good and lawful men of this Manor, the third part of one House, and
twenty Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in I. which A. I. this Court, etc.
does claim against T. I. late of I. as the Dower of the said A. of the Gift of
the aforesaid C. I. in time past her Husband, by a Writ of Dower, whereof she
has nothing, by the default of (...) said T. and the same taking certify me
of, and summon by good Summoners the aforesaid T. that he be here at the next
Court, there to answer, and to show why he was not here at the last Court, as
he was summoned, and have here the names of those by whom, etc. you made the
Summons, witness, etc:

Entry of a small Cape.
T.Q. Esquire, and I. his Wife, by their Attorney offered themselves the
fourth day against A. B. of I. and A. his Wife of a plea of the third part of
eight Messuages, and eighty Virges of Land, with the Appurtenances in I. which
the aforesaid T. and I. in this Court, claim as the Dower of the said I. of the
Gift of G. S. in time past her Husband, against them, and they did not come,
and had from thence day until this day, that is to say, the tenth day, etc.
after other they appeared here in Court, therefore by the Judgment the third
part with the Appurtenances should be taken into the hands of the Lord, and
they summoned, etc. that they be here in the day, etc. to hear their Judgment,
etc.

Precipe of Summons upon a right Patent, etc.
J.K. Steward, to the Bailiff of the Manor aforesaid, health, etc. I. S.
complains against I. D. in a plea of Land, and makes Protestation to follow
the Suit, in the nature of a Writ of our Lord the Kings, of a right Patent;
and therefore I command you, that according to the Custom of this Manor, you
shall summon by good Summonitors the aforesaid I. D. to be here at the next
Court, here to be held such a day, to answer in the Plea aforesaid, and have
there this Precept, and how, etc. dated, etc.

Precept upon Assise of Mortdancester.
J.K. Steward to the Bailiff of the Manor aforesaid, health; because I. S.
complains as above, therefore I command you that y^^ summon by good Summons,
12. free and lawful men Tenants of the foresaid Manor, that they before me
the aforesaid Steward at the next Court there to be held, that is to say, the
Tuesday 19. day of September, next coming, at the hour of eight before noon of
the same day, ready by their Oath to know, if T. S. Father of the said J.S. was
seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of two Houses, and with the Appurtenances in
D. within the Jurisdiction of this Court, the Day that he died, and if he died
within forty years now last past, and if the said J.S. be his next Heir, and in
the mean time let them view the said two Houses, and make their names to be
entered, and summon by good Summoners the aforesaid J. and D. which now hold
the aforesaid Houses and Lands, that then they be there to hear that Return,
and have here the Summons, and this Precept, Dated, etc. under my Seal, etc.

To make to have Possession.
J.K. Steward, to the Bailiff thereof health, know that A. B. in the Court held
such a Day, by the consideration of the said Court recovered his Seisin against
B. of eight Acres of Land with the Appurtenances in J. by Default of the
aforesaid B. and therefore I command you, that to the said A.B. you shall give
a full Seisin of the Tenements aforesaid, with the Appurtenances, without
delay, and have there this Precept, and how, etc. Dated, etc. the Day, etc.

Small Cape.
J.K. Steward to the Bailiff thereof health, we command you that you take into
the hands of the Lord, by the view of good and lawful men of this Manor, one
House with the Appurtenances, which A.B. in this Court claims as his right
against B. R. by Complaint of a Formedon in Remainder, for Default of the said
B. and make known the Day of the taking to me, at the next Court, and summon
the said B. R. that he be before, etc. such a Day, there to answer, and to show
why he was not in this Court, before, etc. such a Day last past, as he was
summoned, and have there this Precept, and how, etc. Dated, etc.

The Return of Writs newly corrected.
With diverse other good Returns, and many Cases of the Common Law to that
added, very necessary and profitable, as well to young Students of the Law, as
to Sheriffs, Coroners, and others, which are to make Returns of Writs, for the
better understanding of the Law in the said Returns.

Process in the Court Hundred, Court Baron, etc. Pleg. de prosequendo J.D.R.F.
THe within named H. E. is attached by Sureties, N. F. R. D.

J.D. Knight, Sheriff.

The within named J. H. has nothing in my Bailiwick, by which he may be
attached.

Note that every Pone is but a Summons.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Pone upon a Repleg.
I have put before the Justices of the Queens Bench at Westminster, the
Complaint which is in my County, by a Writ of the said Queens, between T. W.
and H. B. of the Beasts of the said T. W. taken, and uniustly detained, as it
is said, as it appears in a certain Schedule to this Writ annexed, etc.

Some. T.P.I.D

At my County Court held at N. the twelfth day of N. in the year of the Reign
of the Queen, now, etc. Scedule.
twenty-third, T.W. complains against H. B. of a Plea of taking, and unjustly
detaining of beasts, and there are Sureties to prosecute, and Return to be had,
if Return there be adjudged, that is to say, J.M.W.F. In Witness whereof
I.K.K.B.C.D.G. and R.S. four lawful men of them which were present at the
Record, were present in the full Court there, and have underneath set their
Seals to the said Record, severally the day and year abovesaid.

By virtue of this Writ directed to me in my full County Court held at W. in
the County of W. within such a day and year, I have made the Plaint to be
recorded, You shall make the Plaint to be Reccorded in the County.
which is in the same County, between the parties underwritten, whereof within
is made mention, which truly complaint does appear in a certain Scedule annexed
to this Writ, and I have that Record before the Justices within written, at the
day and place within contained under my Seal, and the Seals of W.H.T.R. etc.
four of the honest and lawful Knights of the said County, of those which were
present at the Record, and to the parties within written, I prefixed that day,
that they which are in that complaint should prosecute, as is just, as within
is to me commanded. Scedule.


At my County, W. held at W. in the County aforesaid, such a day and year
before W.W.H.SS.T.V. and A.B. four suitors of the Court aforesaid, amongst
other things, it is so contained. R.S. complains against J.M. of a Plea of
taking, and unjust detaining his beasts, against Sureties, Complaint.
and Pledges, etc. and they are Pledges to prosecute, as also to have Return,
if Return thereof be adjudged. Pledges to prosecute J.D R.F. in witness of which
thing, etc.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Otherwise.
I have made the Plaint to be recorded, which was in my County between the
parties within written and I have prefixed a day to the said parties to be
before the Justices, within written, at the day and place therein contained, as
the said Writ in that requires and challenges, which truly complaint appears
in a certain Scedule sowed to this Writ.

A. B. complains against C.D. of a Plea of taking, and unjustly detaining his
beasts, Pledges. etc. as before.

By virtue of this Writ, I made the complaint to be recorded which is in my
County, without the Queens Writ, between W.H. and A.D. of the beasts of the
said W.H. taken and unjustly detained, as it is said, and I have that Record
before the Justices within written, at the day and place therein contained,
under my Seal, and the Seals of T.W. and four lawful Knights of my County, of
those which were present at the Record, as it appears in a certain Scedule,
annexed to this Writ, according to the exigent of this Writ, etc.

At my County held, Plaint shall come to the Court.
etc. as above.

By virtue of this Writ, In Form within written, I came to the Court within
written, and in that full Court, I made the Plaint within written, to be
recorded, and the Record, as it appears in the Scedule annexed to this Writ, I
have it before the Justices within written, at the day and place within
contained, and to the parties within written, I have prefixed that day, that
then they are there to suffer, as what is just, in that Complaint, as in the
mean time, I am commanded.

A. B. complains of G.D. of a plea of taking, Scedule.
and unjust detaining the beasts of the said A.B. In witness whereof
J.K.T.S.W.H. and R.I. four lawful men of those which were present at that
Record in full Court, there held at D. tenth day of J. the year of the Reign
of the Queen now twenty three, and to the same Record they have severally put
their Seals, the day and year above written, etc.

No Court of within written J.D. whereof below mention is made, Oherwise.
was held after the Receipt of this Writ, and before the day of the Return of
the same, by which Execution of this Writ for present, by me could be made.

By virtue of the Queens Writ, Other wise In Court Baron or Hundred.
to this Scedule annexed, taking with me B.C.D.E.F.G.H.I. four lawful Knights
of my said County, In my own person, I came to such a Hundred, or to such a
Court, and in the full Court there, or in the full Hundred, the complaint
before the Justices within writtten, at the day and place therein contained,
under my Seal, and the Seals of four lawful men of this Court, which were
present at the Record, I have ready annexed to this Record, according to the
Tenure of this Writ, and have prefixed the same day to the parties in the same
Writ named, that then they be there in that complaint to proceed as it shall
be just, according as the said Writ it self challenges, and requires, etc.

By virtue of the Writ of our Lady the Queen to this Scedule annexed, (taken
with me four discreet and lawful Knights of the County of W.) I came to the
Hundred, whereof in the said Writ mention is made, held at B. such a day, and
year, and in the full Hundred there, the Complaint whereof in the said
Writmention is made, I would Record, and J.S. Bailiste there, and then in full
Court sitting, the said Writ being seen and heard, they immediately shut their
books touching the said complaint, rose, and hastening from that Hundred with
all those books, and all Suits of that Hundred, then, and there appearing, took
them away with him, and abruptly departed, and the said Precept of our said
Lady Queen, specified in the said Writ then and there flatly denied to
execute, and the books aforesaid, a bruptly, then and there, from my sight, by
force and Arms, with violence took and threw by, by which means I could not for
present make execution of the said Writ.

Pledges to prosecute I.D.R.R.

The residue truly of the executing of this Writ appears in a certain Scedule
to this writ annexed. Come to the Court.


Summons I.D.R.F.

By virtue of this writ to this Scedule annexed, Scedule.
such a day and year, etc. taking with me R.T.I.B.R.C. and W.B. four discreet
and lawful Knights of my Bayliwick, I came to the Court of E. Duke of
Buckingham, of K. in the aforesaid writ nominated, and in the full Court there,
I requested the Bailiff, and Suitors of the said Court, to record the
complaint, which was in the said Court, by a small writ of our Lady the Queens,
of Right between R.T. the Plaintiff, and T.B. the Tenant of a Message, etc.
Milt.


The Hundred of E.B. Esquire, held there by W.B. his Steward there, before J.T.
and R.C. etc. Suitors of the Court of the hundred aforesaid, the tenth day of
M. the year, etc. amongst others, it is so contained. Complaint.


J.S. Gent. complains against R.G in a Plea of unjust taking, and detaining his
beasts or Chattells.

Pledges to prosecute, and to have Return of the beasts, if etc. A.B.C.D.

The names of four lawful men of the hundred, of those which were present at
the Record, A.B. C.D. E.F. G.H.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed in the form within written, Of a Record
to be delivered in Court.
I came to the Court within written, and in full Court there, I made to be
recorded the complaint within written, and the same Record, (as it appears in
the scedule to this annexed) I have before the Justices within written at the
day and place within contained, under my Seal and the Seals of I.B. etc.
twenty four good and lawful men of my Bayliwick, of those which were present
at the Record, and parties etc. as before.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Otherwise if the Record be not
delivered.
in my proper person, (taken with me J.S. etc. Good and lawful Knights of my
County) I came to the Court of J. D. Esquire to record the complaint within
written, at the day and place within contained, as within I am commanded, upon
which the Suitors of the Court aforesaid, at the Town of C. in full Court to me
the Sherif within written, to execute the said Writ there, or to meddle at all
with the said complaint, they altogether denied, by reason whereof I could not
make execution of the said Writ.

By virtue of this Writ, False judgment.
(taking with me P.M. etc. four lawful Knights of my County) in my proper
person, I came to the Court E. held at N. such a day and year, and in parts of
the said Court of A.B, etc. Suitors of the same Court, and R.H. Steward there,
I desired the Record of the complaint which is in the said Court, by a small
Writ of the Queens of Right, between I.P. plaintiff and N.S. Tenant, to be made
and delivered unto me, which truly, Steward, and Suitors there would not
deliver unto me, By reason whereof I could make no execution of the said Writ.

Process in common Bench. Pledges to prosecute J.S.R.M. Original in debt.
Summonitors within written J.S. P.M. R.S. J.D. Knight Sheriff. Pledges to
prosecute J.D. R.R.
The within named A.B. has nothing in my Bailiwick by which he may be summoned.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Clark
I do certify the Justices within written, that T. H. within named is a Clark
beneficed in the Bishopric of London, having no lay fee in my Bayliwick by
which he may be summoned.

Note that the Defendant always ought to be summoned fifteen days before the
day of the return of the Writ.

Pledges to prosecute J.R.R.D.

J.E. Original in Trespass. Attachment.
within named has nothing in my Bayliwick by which he may be attached.

Pledges within named, J.D. J.W. R.R.

J.D. within named is attached by one price ten pence, or by a Cow price ten
shillings.

J.F. which was the wife of D.C. Attachment upon appeal Eiectment of a Farm.
within named has not found me suerties to prosecute: Therefore to the
executing of this Writ, nothing is by me done.

The within named A.B. is attached by a hundred sheep, price 20. l.

The within named C.D. and E.F. have nothing in my Bailiwick by which they may
be attached.

The within named J.S. Capias in Debt.
is not to be found in my Bailiwick.

The within named J.S. and J.H. nor either of them, is to be found in my
Bayliwick.

I.S. Otherwise.
and the rest of the Defendants within named are not to be found in my
Bayliwick.

In this Writ may be returned diverse returns, and in diverse manners, that is,
if the Sherif will not serve the writ, or if he will not execute the Writ, then
so.

A.S. within written is not to be found in my Bailiwick, Otherwise.
after the Receipt of this writ, or after the coming of this Writ, but if he be
present, then so.

By virtue of this Writ, I have taken J.W. within written, whose body before
the Justices within written, at the day and place within contained, I have
ready, as the writ commands and requires, etc.

The within written J.W. is taken by his body, Otherwise.
whose Body at the day, etc. I have ready, as within I am commanded, according
to the Exigent of this writ.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, Otherwise.
I have taken the Body of the within named J.S. whose, truly Body, before the
Justices within, at the day and place therein contained, I have ready, as
within I am commanded, or as this writ in it does command and require.

The within written J.S. Otherwise. Otherwise. Bailiffe of the Liberty
is taken by his Body, whose body at the day and place therein contained I have
ready; as, etc.

R.S. within named is not to be found in my Bayliwick, and that to take R.S.
within named I commanded I.F Bailif of the Liberty of S. that has the full
return of al Writs and Executions thereof, to whom the Executing of this Writ
altogether belongs to be done, in which liberty no execution of this Writ,
there by me can be made, which truly Bailif so answers me, That he has taken
the Body of the aforesaid R.S. Whose Body aforesaid before the Justices of our
Lady the Queen within written, at the day and place therein contained, he shall
have ready, or so, which truly Bailiff has given me no answer.

J.D. Liberty.
within named was in the Liberty of J.E. Esquire, and continually dwelt there:
Therefore I cannot take him.

Before the coming of this Writ to me directed J.S. Sanctuary.
within named entered the Sanctuary of Saint Peter's in Westminster, in the
County of Middlesex, and in the same County yet continues, by which the Body of
the aforesaid J. S. before the Justices within written, at the day and place
within specified, I cannot have, as, etc.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I have taken the Body of A.B. within named, and him to the Jail of our
Lady Queen at her Castle of D. have committed, there to be safely kept, etc.
Who after, by reason of another Writ of our said Lady Queen to me directed, and
to this Writ annexed, I made to be delivered from that Prison.

Afterward, Otherwise.
that is to say, such a day and year by reason of a certain other Writ of our
said Lady the Queens, to me directed, which transcript I send you annexed to
this Writ: And therefore the Body of the aforesaid A.B. before the Justices
within written at the day and place therein contained, I cannot have, as within
I am commanded.

By virtue, Latitat.
etc. I have taken the Body of J.C. within named, whose Body before our Lady
Queen, wheresoever she shall be in England, at the day and place therein
contained, I have ready, as within I am commanded.

And if the Defendant which is so taken, be sick in Prison, or if the Sheriff
will be at no cost, to remove him to Westminster before the Justice, saccording
to the contents of the Writ, then so.

By virtue of this Writ A.B. Sick.
within written is taken by his body, and in such a prison or Goal so sick and
weak, that his body at the day and place within named, I cannot have, wiihout
danger of death.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Otherwise.
I have taken the body of within named J.S. which truly J. is in Prison of our
Lady the Queens at F. so sick, that without danger of death, I cannot have him
before the Justices within written, at the day and place therein contained, as
I am commanded.

Which truly J. is so vexed with diverse infirmities, Otherwise.
that him without great peril of Death, and for the weakness of his Body,
before the Justices within written, at the Day and Place therein contained, I
cannot have, as within, etc.

R.D. within named was taken by J. C. Constable of the Town of D. at T. in the
County of D. Otherwise, for Felony.
for suspicion of Felony, and for that cause in the Gaol aforesaid, under my
Custody was detained, and in the same Gaol is so sick, that by no means he can
labor, or can be carried, or so.

Whose Body I have ready before you at the Day and Place within contained,
Otherwise. Supersedeas upon Capias.
to do what that Writ in it commands and requires.

By virtue of this Writ I certify you, that after this Writ was delivered to
me to take R.T. and other Defendants in this Writ specified, the same K. and
others within named, brought to me a Writ of our Lady the Queens, of
Supersedeas, which is fastened to this Writ, by virtue of which Supersedeas,
not at all, etc.

By verrue of this Writ to me directed, Supersedeas after Cepi Corpus.
I have taken the Body of the within named B.D. which afterward brought to me a
Writ of our Lady the Queens, of Supersedeas, to me directed, and fastened to
this Writ, therefore his Body before the Justices, within written, at the Day
and Place aforesaid, I could not have, as within I am commanded.

And if upon this Writ there be sent another Writ which is called a Habeas
Corpus, then thus.

To have his Body, and the Body with the Cause.

By virtue of this Writ I certify you, that before the coming of this Writ,
Sick.
by virtue of a certain other Writ to me first directed A. B. within written in
the Prison of the Castle of our Lady the Queen of E. is imprisoned, and there
so sick and weak does lie, and in the same Prison yet sick and weak lies, so
that him for fear of Death I cannot remove, therefore the Body of the said A.
B. at the Day within named I cannot have, etc.

And in these Writs there are diverse manners of Returns, and diverse of them are
so.

By virtue of this Writ I certify you, that before the coming of this Writ,
W. B. within named was taken in another place, and committed to the Queens
Prison of W. By virtue of which other Writ to me first directed, the Transcipt
whereof is sent to you, fastened to this Writ, notwithstanding the Body of the
said W. I have ready to come before you, at the day and place within named, as
within it is commanded me, etc.

We Sheriffs aforesaid signify unto you, Trespass.
that before the coming of this Writ of our Lady the Queens to us directed,
and fastened to this Writ, J. F. of T. in the said Writ nominated, was taken
in such a place, and committed to our Lady the Queens Prison of W. for twenty
pounds of Damages T. C. of N. in a Plea of Trespass in the Queens Court, in
the said City of E. before us, the said Sheriffs held, and adjudged, and
likewise the said J. is detained in Prison aforesaid, at the the Suit of W.S.
in a Plea of Trespass before us the said Sheriffs in the Court aforesaid, had
and prosecuted, yet his Body, etc. as in the next Return before, etc.

By virtue of this Writ I signify to you, that before the coming of this
Writ of our Lady the Queens, Felony.
R.A. in the said Writ named was taken in L. and committed to the Prison of
our Lady the Queens of W. for suspicion of a common Theif, and further the said
R. was detained in the said Prison, for that, that he for diverse Felonies by
him done and committed at D. in the Hundred of A. is indicted as I am informed,
and another time taken armed at I. in such a County, was carried to the Prison
of our Lady the Queen: and the said A. the same Prison of our Lady the Queen
felloniously broke, and from thence escaped, as it is said, notwithstanding the
Body of the said R. as above, etc.

By virtue, Excom.
etc. I certify you, that before the coming of this Writ, A. W. within named,
by the Ecclesiastical Censure in the Church of N. such a day and year, etc. for
his Contempt, and such like is excommunicated; and the said A. by the
Ordinaries of the Church of Saint Martins, Justices in the Premises, as yet
stands in the same Church excommunicated, and this is the cause of the taking
and imprisoning the aforesaid A. notwithstanding the Body of the said A. W.
before our Lady the Queen, at the day and place within contained, wheresoever
she is, I have him ready, as, etc.

Before the coming of this Writ, C.D. Counterfeit Money.
within written was in such a place and Prison of our Lady the Queen of R.
committed for suspicion of counterfeiting Money of the Queens, and for that
cause and no other is detained in the said Prison, notwithstanding the said C.
D. before you at the day and place within contained, I have ready, as within is
commanded.

B. W. was taken at D. in the County of E. by H.S. Murder.
Steward of T. F. and before the said Steward at a Hundred held, etc. was
indicted for the death of J. T. by the aforesaid B. slain, and by the aforesaid
Steward was sent the Queens Prisoner to R. which truly Indictment remains, with
the aforesaid Steward, notwithanding the Body of the said B. before our Lady
the Queen in her Chancery, at the day in that contained, wheresoever he be,
etc. I have ready, as that Writ in that commands and requires, etc.

Here follow diverse Causes, upon Returns of this Writ of Corpus cum causa, to
be brought in, etc.

If it were necessary, the cause of keeping and detaining A. of B. within
written here follows.

A. of B. is taken for suspicion of Theivery, Felony.
and because he cannot find sufficient Sureties, to expect the Law of our Lady
the Queen, he was committed to our Lady the Queens Prison of R. and for the
cause aforesaid detained, notwithstanding the Body of the said A. before, etc.

W. D. within written was taken before the coming of this Writ in such a place,
Account.
and in a Prison of our Lady the Queens, there under my Custody was detained,
by reason of which Complaint in the Queens Court, there before me the said
Sheriff, upon him by the name of W. etc. at the Suit of such a one in a plea of
Account affirmed, whereof in the same Court before me the said Sheriff, the
parties aforesaid pleaded, and put themselves upon the Jury of the Country in
the same Court, and afterward the said W. of D. by sufficient Sureties to
answer the aforesaid, such a one of his Plea aforesaid, he was set at Liberty
from the Prison aforesaid; and because the said W. after the said Bailment,
came not to Judgment in Custody, his Body at the day and place aforesaid I
cannot have.

The within named J. C. Treason.
was called at W. before such a Justice, by W. his Probator, such a day and
year, for diverse Treasons by him committed, and for that cause was taken at C.
and committed to the Prison of our Lady the Queen of N. notwithstanding his
Body, etc. at the day and place within contained, I have ready, as is within
commanded me, etc.

A. Outlary.
the Daughter of A. of B. by the name of A. of B. before the coming of this
Writ, was outlawed of Felony before P.S. R.T. and their Fellows, Justices of
the Queens, of the Peace in such a Liberty, or in the County to be kept, and
after by the command of the said Justices to me late directed, the same A. was
taken at D. and for the cause aforesaid, was committed to the Queens Prison of
W. notwithstanding, etc.

By virtue of this Writ, Supplicavit.
I certify you that A.W. within written was taken by virtue of a certain other
Writ of our Lady the Queens, called a Supplicavit, at the Suit of D. P. long
before the coming of this Writ, and committed to the Prison of our Lady the
queen, of B. because he could not find sufficient Sureties to keep the Peace
toward the said D. and for this cause, and no other, is kept in the said
Prison, notwithstanding, etc.

Otherwise it may be said, A Rule.
that he was condemned in such a Court, of his own Confession, or by his taxing
thereof, by the counsel of the Court:

Before the coming of this Writ by virtue of a certain other Writ called a
Capias utlagatum, A Capias utlagatum.
to me directed, whose Transcript I send you annexed, I took C. D. within
named, and committed him to our Lady the Queens Prison of C. and there in the
same Prison he is kept for the cause aforesaid, notwithstanding his Body, etc.

Before the coming of this Writ, Account.
A. H. S. Auditors of the Accounts of W. of B. to me by Indenture delivered, to
keep the Body of R. S. within written, safely and securely, till he should
satisfy W. B. of two hundred pounds behind, upon the end of the Account of
R.S. found before the said Auditors, etc. and this is the cause of the taking
and detaining the said R. S. notwithstanding the Body, etc.

Many ways one may be said to be taken and detained for ten pounds against him
recovered in such a Court, Debt.
or is taken by the command of our Lady the Queen, or upon a Recognizance
acknowledged in the Chancery, and Appeal for the Death of a man, or of Robbery,
etc.

The within named R. V. was taken at D. Rescous.
tenth Day of May, the year within written by T.B. the Bailiff of our Lady the
Queen and mine, by virtue of a certain Warrant by the pretext of this Writ by
me made, and to him directed; and upon this the aforesaid R.V. with others
unknown, by force and arms, that is, staves, etc. made an Assault upon the
said Bailiff, and took him out of the Custody of the said Bailiff, and never
after the said R. V. in my Bailiwick I could find.

The execution of this Writ does appear in a certain Schedule to this Writ
annexed. Otherwise. Schedule.


By virtue of our Lady the Queens Writ to me directed, and to this Schedule
annexed, I have made a certain VVarrant of mine to one J.M. my traveling
Bailiff, to take and arrest E.G. in the said Writ nominated, according to the
exigent of the said Writ, which said Bailiff of mine, by virtue of my VVarrant
aforesaid, the 9. day of J. the year of the Reign of our Lady Elizabeth Queen,
within written, the twentieth at D. in the County aforesaid, took and arrested
the Body of the said E.G. and then and there the said E. G. was in his Custody,
upon which F. G. of D. aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, Gentleman, and T. M.
of the said Town and County, Gentleman, then and there by force and arms, etc.
made an Assault upon my aforesaid Bailiff, and my said Bailiff, then and there,
against the Law and Custom of the Realm of the said Lady Queen of England, and
against the will of the said Bailiff of mine, imprisoned him, and the same
Bailiff of mine in Prison there, by the space of an hour then detained, and
twenty pence in told Money, of the Goods, Chattels and Moneys of my said
Bailiffs, then and there the aforesaid T. M. took, and the aforesaid E. by
force and arms aforesaid, then and there out of the Custody of my said
Bailiff, took and rescued, and also the same E. her self, then and there out of
the Custody of my said Bailiff rescued, against the will of my said Bailiff,
and against the Peace of our Lady the Queen now, etc. and after the said E. is
not found in my Bailiwick.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Otherwise.
I have made a certain Warrant to one R. P. my Bailiff, this torn riding, to
take and arrest the within named T. L. according to the exigent of this Writ,
which truly R. P. by virtue of the Warrant aforesaid, after, that is to say,
second Day of May, the year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen within written,
twentieth at B. in the County aforesaid, took the Body of the within named T.
L. of B. aforesaid, in the aforesaid County of F. which truly T. the Day, Year,
and Place aforesaid, by force and arms made an Assault upon R. P. my aforesaid
Bailiff, and bear him, wounded him, and abused him, so that they dispared of
his life, the same T. then and there out of the Custody of my aforesaid
Bailiff, and against his will departed, escaped, and rescued himself, against
the Peace of our Lady the Queen now, etc. and after the said T. L. is not found
in my Bailiwick.

By virtue of this Writ. Otherwise.
I have made my certain Warrant, to W. A. the Bailiff of the Hundred of H.
which answers me so, that where he by virtue of the Warrant aforesaid, tenth
Day of S. the year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen within written, the
twentieth at C. took one J. S. and her to the Castle of our Lady the Queen, of
W. would have lead, there to be safely kept, thither came certain J. T. R. S.
with many others unknown, with force and arms, arrayed in warlike manner, and
out of the Custody of my said Bailiff at the said W. the aforesaid J. took and
carried away, and so for fear of his Death, suffered the said J. S. to escape,
and for that cause the Body of J. S. aforesaid, before our Lady the Queen, at
the Day and Place within contained, wheresoever, etc. I cannot have him, as
within is commanded me, and further I certify you, that after the said tenth
Day, etc. J. S. was not found in my Bailiwick.

By virtue of this Writ, Otherwise. Rescous and Riot.
I have commanded J. S. my Bailiff of the Liberty of D, in the County
aforesaid, which has full Return of all Writs, Precepts, and Warrants to him
there directed, which truly J. S. such a Day and Year at P. in the County
aforesaid T. S. in the Writ to this Schedule annexed, nominated, and by virtue
of a Warrant to him directed, took and arrested, and the same T. S. in his
Custody, by the occasion aforesaid, then and there had and held, and so being
held, etc. one J. G. late of S. in the County aforesaid, Laborer (gathering
many other Malefactors unknown, and Disturbers of the Peace of our Lady the
Queen) to the number of twenty persons, arrayed in a warlike manner, by force
and arms, that is to say, Swords, Daggers, Skeines, and Staves, upon the same
Bailiff of mine, then and there riotously made an Assault, and beat him,
wounded him, and abused him, so that he dispaired of his life, and the
aforesaid J. C. and others, etc. and the said T. S. out of the Custody of my
said Bailiff, then and there took and rescued, and where he would, at large,
suffered him to go, and the said T. S. himself out of the Custody of my said
Bailiff, then and there took and rescued, and where he would at large suffered
him to go, and the said T. S. himself out of the Custody of the said Bailiff,
then and there likewise rescued, against the Peace of our Lady the Queen, etc.
and after the said T. is not to be found in my Bailiwick.

I J. H. Knight, Sherif, Otherwise.
by virtue of this Writ have made a certain VVarrant to J. B. and P. D. my
Bailifs, for traveling this Torn, to arrest and take R. F. to make
satisfaction to the within named W. P. of Debt and Damages within specified, as
within I am commanded, by virtue of which VVarrant, the said J. B. and P. D.
Bailiffs, such a Day and Year at H. in the County aforesaid, arrested the
foresaid R. F. as by that VVarrant they were commanded; and the said R. F. and
one G. F. of G. in the County aforesaid, with others unknown, by force and
arms, that is, with Swords, Staves, etc. upon the said J. B. and P. D. the
same Day and Year at H. in the County aforesaid, made an Assault, and them
abused, and then and there made a Rescous, by reason of which Rescous, the same
R. F. from that Custody then and there contrary to the Arrest aforesaid,
himself rescued, departed, and escaped; therefore the said R. F. at the Day and
Place within contained I could not have; and further I certify you, that after
that Day the aforesaid R. F. was not found in my Bailiwick.

By virtue of this Writ, Otherwise.
I made and directed a certain warrant of mine to one T.C. my Bailiffe, to
attach the within named J.C. by force whereof the said T.C. the ninth day of J.
the year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen within written, the twentieth at
B. in the County within written, took and arrested the aforesaid J.C. being
willing to bring him before me, and so intending, to make and receive, as in
the Writ I was commanded, and afterward, that is to say, the said ninth Day of
J. the twentieth year aforesaid.

The aforesaid J. C. late of B. aforesaid, in the County of H. at B. aforesaid,
in the County aforesaid, upon T.C. my Bailiffe made an Assault, and from the
same Bailiffe, then, and there, flew, escaped, and rescued himself, and after
the same J. in my Bailiwick, I could not find.

By virtue of this Writ, Return to be had.
I certify the Justices within written, that I have made Return to the within
named J.S. all those beasts of the within named W.S. which to the said J.S.
were adjudged, for default of the said W. to be safe, and carefully kept, so
that they to the aforesaid W. at the complaint of the said W. by no means
should be delivered, without a Writ of our Lady the Queens, which of the said
Judgment makes express mention, accordding to the form of this Writ.

Pledges to prosecute, and to have a Return thereof, if Return thereof be
adjudged, E.D.R.F.

By wertue, etc. I have made a Replevin to R. of the beasts within named,
Repleg.
as in that Writ I am commanded, and further I certify the within named, our
Lady Queen, that no other Writ of replevying the within written beasts, ever
besides this Writ was delivered to me, etc.

Before the coming of this Writ, the beasts, and chattells, Repleg. where the
beasts are carried far off. Otherwise.
of the within written K. which W.C. took and uniustly detained, as it is said,
were driven far often, by the said W.C. therefore I cannot replevie the
aforesaid K. his beasts, and Chattells, etc.

No Writ of replevin of the beasts within written besides this, was ever
delivered to my hands, and further I certify our Lady the Queen, that before
the coming of this Writ, the aforesaid beasts were driven far off, and
conveyed to places unknown to me by the said J.T. that I can by no means
replevie them for the said W. as within I am commanded.

Before the coming of the beasts within written were driven far off, Otherwise.
by the within named T.C. to places to me unknown, so that sight of them, to
make return to the within named A.H. and T.C. I could not have, as within I am
commanded.

By virtue, etc. (such a Day, Otherwise.
and year) I have made Replevie to R.B. within named, his beasts within
mentioned, which the within named T.M. and R.S. took and uniustly detained,
according to the form of this Writ, as within I am commanded.

And the within named T. and R. are attached, by a hundred sheep, price, 6
pounds, by T. F. Bailifte, by the Plea of J.T. R.M. and the within named R. B.
is attached by my said Bailiffe, by three Kine, price, three pounds, by the
Plea of the aforesaid J. T. and R.M. and no other command of our Lady Queen,
besides this Writ of the beasts aforesaid, to be replevied, before the coming
of this writ, was ever delivered to me.

By virtue etc. I certify our Lady the Queen, Otherwise in Chancery.
in her Chancery, that the beasts and Chattels by the within named A.B. first
taken, are driven far out of the County within written, to places unknown to
me, by the within named T.R. by which means the beasts and Chattells aforesaid,
cannot be returned by me, as within, further I am commanded.

Before the coming of this writ, Beasts driven far upon the second deliverance.
the beasts within written were driven far off, by the within named J. M. to
places unknown to me, so that the Beasts within written of J.M. I cannot
return, according to the Form of this writ.

Pledges to prosecute, and having Return, etc. J. D. R.R.

By virtue, etc. I W. A. Precept upon the second deliverance in the County.
one of the Bailiffes within named, requested of J.T. and R.N. within written,
the delivery of the beasts of T.B. within written, that is to say, of three
Oxen, price each Ox twenty Shillings, and of two Horses, price each Horse
twenty Shillings, and they refused thereof to make Delivery, and the aforesaid
beasts are driven far off, to places to me unknown, by which thereof, I can
make no Delivery, as within I am commanded, and the aforesaid J.T. is attached
by one of Silver, to the value of twenty Shillings.

By virtue of this, Otherwise of replevying a man
etc. I certify our Lady the Queen within named that no other Writ or command
of our said Lady the Queens, of Replevin, the within written J.C. whom W.S.
within named took, and taken keeps, as within is specified, till that Writ of
Pluris Repleg. the aforesaid J. came to my hand, neither was it delivered to
me, nevertheless, I do further certify the Justices of our said Lady the
Queen, that forthwith after the receipt of the said Writ, I came to the
aforesaid W.S. to make replevin of the aforesaid J. which the said W. would not
show me, but the aforesaid J. before the coming of this Writ, had conveyed to
places unknown to me: And after the receipt of the said Writ, the said I. was
not to be found in my Bailiwick, so that I could make no Replevin of the said
I. by any means according to the command of this Writ, as within I am
commanded.

No other Writ besides that of Repleving the within named D.G. to my hands as
yet came. Otherwise.
And further I certify the Justices within written, that the aforesaid D. is
conveied away to places to me unknown, by the within named, J.T.E.B. and T.R.
By which means I cannot replevy the said D. as within I am commanded.

By virtue, Pluries Repleg.
etc. I certify our Lady the Queen, that after the receipt of this Writ, I
diligently inquired, throughout all my Baliwick, and I can by no means
understand that any of the beasts of the within named W.P. were taken, and
unjustly detained, by the within named J.N. as in the Writ is supposed: So
that the execution of this Writ according to the Tenor and Effect of the same
could not be done by me, as within I am commanded; and further I certify our
Lady the Queen that no other Writ of Pluries Replegeare, besides this Writ,
was ever delivered to me.

Condition, Cond. Repleg.
etc. That if the above bounden A.B. and C.D. shall redeliver to the above
named Sheriff, all those goods and chattells, and every parcel thereof by H.
P. taken, and by reason of a certain Replevin, by the aforesaid Sheriff, made
to the aforesaid A.B. and C.D. Repleg. if Return thereof should be adjudged,
and the said Sheriff and his Executors, saved harmless, that then, etc.

The within written J.H. Withernam.
has no beasts in my Bailiwick, that I can take in Withernam, according to the
exigent of this Writ.

By virtue, etc. I have taken two brazen Pots, Otherwise.
etc. of the Goods and Chattells of T. H. in the writ nominated, in Withernam,
and I have caused them to be delivered to W.F. to hold to the said VV.F. till
the said I.H. the Chattells of the aforesaid W.F. he do deliver, as this Writ,
etc.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I have taken in Withernam at D. in the County within written, two cowes,
etc. of the Beasts of the aforesaid I.D. and two cowes of R.T. within named,
which truly Beasts aforesaid, fled from hence, and I caused them to be put in a
certain place at S. in the foresaid County, safe and securely there to be kept,
according to the Exigent of this Writ

Where the beasts aforesaid lie, Otherwise.
and the aforesaid I.H. and R.T. have no more or any other beasts at this time
in my Bailiwick, that by any means I can take in VVithernam as within I am
commanded.

By virtue of this writ I have taken two cowes, and two Steeres of the beasts
of the within named R.D. and two cowes and two Steeres of the beasts of T.L.
which I caused to be delivered to I.C. within named to be safe and secuerly
kept, until the other Beasts of the within named I.C. First taken and conveyed
to places unknown to me, I can deliver, as within I am commanded.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Exigent.
at my County Court kept at W. in the County of W. the within written Tuesday,
that is to say, the twentieth day of January, the year of the Reign of our
Lady the Queen within written, the twentieth, I.C. and other Defendants within
named, First were called, and did not appear, and at my County Court, etc. as
before the second time called and did not appear, and at my County Court held
and so forth. The third time called, and did not appear; and at my County
Court held, etc. The fourth time called, and did not appear, and at my County
Court held, etc. The fifth time called and did not appear: Therefore the
aforesaid, I.C. and the rest of the Defendants within named, by the judgment of
the Coroners of the said Lady the Queen, of the County aforesaid, according to
the Law and custom of the Realm of England, are Outlawed, and every one of
them is Outlawed.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Between two Sheriffs.
at my County Court held at W. in the County of W within written, on Teusday,
that is to say, the tenth day of January, the year of the Reign of our Lady
the Queen within written, the 20. R.L. within named, first was called, and
appeared not, that Writ so above indorced, was delivered to me by I. E. Esquire
late Sheriff of the County within written, my next Predecessor in his going out
of his Office, as before in the back of this Writ. And at my county Court, etc.
as before.

That Writ so above indorsed, Otherwise.
together with the Writ of our said Lady Queen, of Smpersedeas, to that
annexed, was delivered to me by M. D. Knight, late Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, my next Predecessor.

By virtue, For defect of Coroners.
etc. at my County Court held there the third Day of November, the said
twentieth Year of our Lady Queen Elizabeth within written, the aforesaid T. C.
was the fifth time called, and did not appear, and for want of W. B. and R. C.
Coroners of the foresaid County, I could not further prosecute.

By virtue, etc. and at my County Court, etc. and because there were not more
County Courts held in the County aforesaid, from the Day of the Receipt of this
Writ aforesaid, till the Day of the Return of the same, by which nothing is
done for present, or so; and therefore in the executing of this Writ, what is
further to be done, nothing is done.

There are joined to them four County Courts, Allocat. Com.
at which J. B. within named was called, and appeared not; and further, by
virtue of this Writ, at my County Court, held at W. in the County of W. within
written, the eight Day of September, the Year, etc. the within written
twentieth, the said J. B. was the fifth time called, and appeared not,
therefore by the Judgment of the Coroners, etc. and if it be a Woman it shall
be so.

Therefore according to the Law and Custom aforesaid, Otherwise of a Woman.
Supersedeas.
A. R. Waiviata est.

By virtue, etc. and at my County Court aforesaid, held there the Tuesday, that
is to say, the twentieth Day of A. the said Year the twentieth of our Lady the
Queen within written, the aforesaid A. R. the fourth time was called and
appeared, and brought to me a Writ of our Lady the Queen, of Supersedeas,
which is fastened to this Writ, by which, to the executing of this Writ you
shall altogether seize, or so.

As in the foresaid Writ of our Lady the Queens, of Supersedeas, I am
commanded.

By virtue, etc. and at my County Court, Delivered himself.
etc. the aforesaid J.W. and A. 4. are called, and the aforesaid J. appeared,
and delivered himself to our Lady the queens Prison of E. whose Body before the
Justices within written, at the Day and Place therein contained, I have ready,
as that Writ in that commands and requires, and the foresaid W. and A.
appeared not.

And further at my County Court held, Supersedeas.
etc. the foresaid W. and A. were called the fifth time, and the said W.
brought to me a Writ of our Lady the queen of Supersedeas, which is fastened
to this Writ, by which of executing this Writ further, doing any thing for
the foresaid W. I have altogether desisted, and the aforesaid A. appeared not,
therefore according to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom of England, he is
outlawed.

By virtue, Outlaries otherwise.
etc. and at my County Court held at W. in the County aforesaid, twelfth Day of
April, etc. J. H. R.S. I.C and all other Defendants following in this Writ
nominated, besides J. H. which brought me a Writ of our Lady the queens, of
Supersedeas, therefore to him, to make further prosecution I altogether desist,
as in the said Writ of Supersedeas I am commanded.

And besides R.S. which yielded himself to the Prison of our Lady the queen of
F. within the County of W. whose Body before the Justices, Reddidit se.
etc. and so besides J.C. which is dead, did not appear, therefore by the
Judgment, Dead.
etc. and the foresaid I. C. is waived in presence of F. W. and I. C. Coroners
of the said queen, Waived.
in the County aforesaid.

As to the Exigent, taking, out-Lawing, Otherwise.
or in any way molesting the within named P.T. by virtue of this Writ to the
Justices of our Lady the Queen within written, at the day and place therein
contained: I certify, that by virtue of another Writ of our said Lady the
Queen, to me directed and to this annexed, I supersede altogether, as by that
Writ I am commanded.

By virtue, etc. I. B. and the other Defendants within named were the second
time called, Sick.
and the aforesaid I.B. appeared, and yielded himself to the Prison of the
said Lady Queen of F. within the County of W. aforesaid, and in the same
Prison remains sick, troubled with many Infirmites, so that for the weakness
of his Body, and Danger of Death, he cannot travel, or be carried, by which
the Body of the said J. B. before the Justices within written, for the present,
I cannot have, according to the form of this Writ, and the within named J. P.
and R. R. being the fifth time called did not appear, and because at none of
the County. Courts they appeared, the foresaid I. P. and J. R. according to the
Law and Custom of the Kingdom of England are outlawed, and either of them is
outlawed, as this Writ in it self challenges and requires.

At the County Court, etc. first, second, third, fourth, he was called, and
appeared, and yielded himself to the Prison of our Lady the queen of C. where
he is so sick, that for Danger of Death, him before the Justices within
written, at the Day and Place therein contained, I cannot have.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed at my County Court of W. held at W. in
the the County of W. within written, the Tuesday the twentieth day of M. the
year of the Reign of our Lady the queen within written, the one and
twentieth, I made to be proclaimed, and at my County Court of W. held at W.
aforesaid, in the said County of W. the twentieth day of M. aforesaid, the
twentieth year of our Lady the Queen, within written, the second time I made it
be proclaimed, and also at the General Sessions of the Peace held at W. in the
said County of W. in the parts of M. within written, upon Thursday, that is,
the twelfth of September aforesaid, the twentieth year of our Lady the Queen,
within written, publicly I made to be proclaimed, that J. C. and all the rest
of the Defendants within named, should yield themselves to the within named
Sheriffs in L. so that the same Sheriffs may have their bodies before the
Justices within written, at the day and place within contained, as this Writ in
it self, commands and requires.

W.H. Defendant within named was not found in my Bailiwick, after the receipt of
this writ, and for that, Otherwise for the Queen
that the said W. in my said Bailiwick could not be found, at my County Court
held, etc. I made to be proclaimed that the said W. be before our Lady the
Queen at the Term within wrirten, wheresoever then it shall be, to answer to
the said Lady Queen, and further to do, as this writ commands and requires,
etc. and also at my County Court held, etc. I caused to be proclaimed that the
said W. be before our Lady the Queen at the Term aforesaid, wheresoever, etc.
to answer to the said Lady the Queen, in form aforesaid, as within I am
commanded. Venire facias.


The within nominated J. B. has nothing in my bailiwick by which he may be
attached.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, I caused to come before our Lady the
Queen at Westminster at the day within contained I.B. as within I am commanded.
Out of the Exchequer.


I. F. within named, has nothing in my bailiwick, by which I can make him
come, neither is he to be found in the same.

Note that in the Venire facias, no Issues shall be returned, but in Habeas
corpora and distrings. Issues.


The Issues of every one of them five shillings, and that is by the Statute of,
35. of M. 8. chap. 6

And also in every writ where the clause (if A. shall secure you of prosecuting
his claim, it shall be expressed, the Sheriff may delay the Plaint by this
Return to say.

The within named I.B. has not found me Pledges to prosecute this Writ;
therefore to the executing of the same, nothing by me is done.

The Execution of this Writ does appear in a certain Pannell fastened to this
Writ, and sometimes in the Pannell thus. Venire facias, or Distringas Jurat.


The Jurors between R.T. the Plaintiff, and VV.F. Defendant in a Plea of
Trespass, and then write the names of the Jury, twenty four, A B. C. etc. and
under write this.

Every one of the Jurors aforesaid by himself severally is attached by Pledges,
I.D.R.R. but in Distress.

The Issues of every one of them five Shillings.

And note that in the first Venire facias of the Jurors, it is not very
material to put in Manucaptors, for that you will make (by this mainprise) the
Jurors to loose Issues in the Kings Court, which is not required at the first
time.

The execution of this Writ does appear in a certain Pannell fastened to this
writ. Habeas corpora in Debt.


The Jurors between A.B. the Plaintiff, and C.D. the Defendant of a Plea of
Debt, A. B. etc.

Every one of the Jurors aforesaid by himself severally is secured by T.D.R R.

And in this writ you need not return Issues, nor in december or octo tales, nor
you ought to return (Manucaptors) which note, notwithstanding, it is used in
diverse parts of England, though void.

Also the Sherif may return (Tarde) upon a distringas, and upon the (December
tales) as it appears in these following, and then the Jurors shall not lose
Issues, which note.

For the distraining of John M. and other Jurors within named, Tarde.
to be before the Justices, etc. the day and place within written, I signify
to you, that this writ was so late delivered unto me, that for the shortness
of the time, I could not execute it for the present, but of new, I have put to
that December tales, or Octo tales (as it apppears in these following, as in this
writ I am commanded, etc. A. B. C. D. E. F etc.

But as to ten, as well Knighs, as other honest and lawful men, of the view
within contained, to be put among the Jurors within contained, the execution of
this writ does appear in a certain Scedule fastened to this writ.

Pledges to prosecute J.D.R.R. Habeas corpora in Attaint.

Summoners within named, R.F.J.D.R.F.
Manucaptors of the Summoners aforesaid, and of every of them, N P. I.C.I.D.R.R.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ does appear in a certain Pannell to
this Writ annexed.

The names of twenty four Knights, Pannell.
between R.S. Plaintiff, and R.F. Defendant, A B.C.D.E.F. to the number of
twenty four.

Summonitors of the aforesaid Jury, and of either of them, I.D.E.C.

Manucaptors of the Summonitors aforesaid, and of either of them,
I.P.R.C.F.D.E.G.

The names of the Jury of the first Inquisition (whereof in the writ to this
Sceduled annexed) makes mention of I.D.B.C. to the number of twelve. Names.


Summoners of the Jnry of the first inquisition, and of each of them, I. D.R.R.

Manucaptors of the Summoners aforesaid; Otherwise. upon a Writ Seignill in the
Chancery.
and of every of them, I.L.H.P.R.S.T.V.

Pledges to prosecute I.E.R.R.

The within named W.B. is summoned by A.H.R.P.

Manucaptors of the Summoners aforesaid, and of each of them, I.H.R.D.

The residue of the execution of this writ does appear in certain Pannells
fastened to this writ.

The names of twenty four Knights between R.F. Plaintiff, and T.S. Defendant,
Pannell.
A.B. etc. to the number of forry eight.

Every one of the Knights aforesaid, severally by himself is summoned by I
D.R.R.

Of which every one severally by himself is manucapted by I.B.C.D.E.F.G.H.

The names of of the Jurors of the first inquisition, A.B. C.D. to the number
of twelve.

Every one of the Jury aforesaid, of the first inquisition, severally by
himself is attached, and manucapted by Plaintiff I.D.R.F.

The names of the Jurors of standers by, of new put in, Return of the Panel of
standers by. Otherwise.
between I.S. Plaintiff, and W. D. Defendant, according to the Form of the
statute in this Case published and provided, A.B.C.D. etc.

The names of the Jurors, of standers by, of new impannelled, and returned by
the command of the Justices, at the request of the Plaintiff, for defect of
the Jurors above nominated, not appearing according to the Form of the Statute,
late for that provided, A.B. etc.

The Manucaptors bolow named, J.F.J.D.R.R.

Issues three Shillings four pence. Distress. where the Tenant has no Lands.
Against many.


J.F. within named has nothing in my Bailiwick, by which, nor where he may be
distrained.

T.D. 40 d. A.R. 40 d. etc. are distrained, and each of them is distrained by
Land, and his Chattells, according to the Form of this writ, whereof the
Issues, as appear above upon their heads and they are manucapted, and each of
them, i^ manucapted by himself, that is by, I.D.I.S. and P.H. that they be and
each of them be, at the day and place within written, according to the Tenor of
this Writ, etc.

A. 40 d: which was the Wife of B. within written, Against executors
executrix of the will of the foresaid B. 40 d.

R. R. 40 d. another Executor of the will aforefaid T.S. 40 d. the third
Executor of the will of the foresaid B. are distrained, and each of them by
himself is distrained, according to the form of this Writ, from whence the
Issues, as it appears upon their heads, and each of them is manucapted by
himself, that is by four Manucaptors, by name A.B. etc. And there are no more
Executors of the will of the said B. nor heirs of him, or of Lands or
Tenements which were his in the County of W. as by any means for the present
can appear unto me.

Pledges to prosecute J.D.R.R.

A.B. within named has nothing in my bailiwick but the Issue first by me
forfeited, Favor of the Sheref upon the 2. or 3. Distring. Against a Clark.
by which nor where he may be distrained, as to me by any means can appear for
this present.

W.D. Arch Deacon of R. has nothing in my bailiwick of lay fee, by which nor
where he can be Distrained, Warned, or Attached, by any means at present, as to
me can appear.

That I should distrain the within written A.B. to be before the Justices
within named, Upon a Tarde.
at the Day and place therein contained. This writ so late was delivered unto
me that for the shortness of the time I could make no Execution thereof.

To the Distraining of R.L. and all other the Jurors within written to be
before the Justices within named at the day and place therein contained:
Other-Wise upon a Jur.
This writ came unto me so late, that for the shortness of the time, could
make no execution thereof, but to ad, December tales, the execution thereof, does
appear in a certain Pannell fastened to this writ. Otherwise for Homage.


The Manucaptors within named, J.S.W.P.I.D.

His Issue half a Mark.

The summoners of the within named R. and E. his wife W.F.R.P.

And so of all other actions real, if the Defendants be sufficient.

The Execution of this writ does appear in a certain inquisition to this writ
annexed.

By virtue of a writ of our Lady the queen to me directed, Partition.
and to this partition indented, annexed, I J.D. Knight, Sheriff of the County
aforesaid twentieth day of A. year 20. etc. taking with me J.S. etc. twelve
free and lawful men of my County, and of the view within written in the
presence of H.F. in the writ aforesaid nominated, in my proper person, I came
to the Tenements in the said writ nominated, and there by their Oath (respect
being had to the true value of the said Tenements with the appurtenances) the
said Tenements in partition into three parts equally to be parted, and one part
of the said three parts, that is twelve foot in length, and eight foot in
breadth, of the House in the foresaid writ specified, extending to the Land of
F.G. called G. toward the west, and thirty four foot in breadth, and twelve
rods in length, and one Garden in the aforesaid writ specified, lying to the
said house, abutting toward the west to the Land of the aforesaid F.G. called
B. and the Glebe Land of the Rectory of S. and also, etc. And I the aforesaid
Sheriff twentieth day of A. the year, etc. have made them to be assigned and
delivered to H.F. nominated in the said writ, to hold to him severally
according to the form, and effect, of the writ aforesaid. And as the said writ,
in that commands and requires

Which truly whole third part of the aforesaid Tenements in the aforesaid Writ
specified, Otherwise.
to the aforesaid H. in form aforesaid is delivered and assigned, and for the
other two parts remaining of the aforesaid Tenements, in the aforesaid Writ
specified, J.F. likewise in the same Writ nominated, to the partition
aforesaid, to be assigned and Delivered, to the Justices of our Lady the Queen
in the Writ aforesaid specified, I certify, that none of the part of the said
J. came to receive of me, the aforesaid Sheriff, those two parts, so that those
two parts I could not deliver an Assign, as the writ aforesaid, in that does
command and require: In witness whereof, as well the Seal of me the aforesaid
Sherif, as the Seals of the other twelve Jurors to this partition Indented,
are put: Dated the year and Day abovesayd.

Pledges to prosecute I. D. R. R.

The within I. S. and R. B. are attached, and each of them is attached by
Pledges, I. D. R. R.

The residue of the execution of this Writ does appear in a Pannell fastened to
this writ. Assise of Novel disseisin.


Assise of novell disseisin between such a one Plaintiff, or Demandant, and such
a one Defendant, or tenent in the Plea, etc.

A. B. C. D. etc. to the number of twenty four. Pannell.


The names of the Recognitors, I. P. and T. W.

Summonitors, J. D. T. B.

Manucaptors, summoners aforesaid, and every of them, J. S. J. D.

Pledges to prosecute. Otherwise.
G. C. R. R.

R. H. within named, is attached by one (...) of Latin, price eight pence, by
Pl. W.D. and T. D.

The residue of the execution of this writ does appear in a certain Pannell
annexed to this writ.

A Recognition of an Assise of Novell disseisin, Pannell.
between J. D. Plaintiff, and R. T. Deforceant, of his Freehold in B.

J.D. etc. to the number of twenty four.

Summoners of the Jurors aforesaid, and of every one of them, J.S.J.D.

Manucaptors, summoners aforesaid, and of every one of them, J.B.T.C.A.B. and
W.H.

The execution of this writ appears in a certain Pannell to this writ
annexed. Otherwise.


The names of the Recognitors in an Assise of novell Disseisin between A.B.
Plaintiff and J.M. Defendant A. B. etc. to the number of twenty four.

Every one of the Recognitors aforesaid, by himself is severally attached by
pledges, J.D.RR.

The Issues of every one of them, five shillings.

The names of the Recognitors of new added, according to the form of the
Statute, A. B. etc. to the number of ten.

Every one of the Recognitors aforesaid of new added is attached several by
Plaintiff, J.D.R.F.

By virtue of this Writ, Great Cape.
tenth day of M. the year aforesaid, by the view of R.H. and T.H. good and
lawful men of my County, I have taken into the hands of our Lady the Queen,
the Lands within written, as within I am commanded, summoners, J.D. R.F

And if the Writ be sent to the Sheriff, and the place where he ought to
execute it, be within Franchises, which has full return of all VVri, tsthen so.

The Execution of this Writ, etc. as before.

I J.S. Sheriff of E. have commanded J.W. Bailiff of the Liberty of B. in the
County aforesaid, which has full return of all Writs, and execution of them,
within the Liberty aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, and to whom the
executing of this writ does wholly belong to be don, for that that the said
execution thereof, otherwhere in my Bailiwick cannot be done, out of that
Liberty, which answers me so, etc.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I have taken into the hands of our Lady the Queen, by view, etc. as
before, of the Lands and Tenements of J.M. within named, to the value of one
house, etc. as in the Writ is contained, such a day and year, according to the
form of this writ, or as it is within commanded me, or as the writ in that
commands and requires, or. Otherwise.


The third part of the Houses, Gardens, and rest of the Premises, as within I
am commanded.

The execution of this writ does appear in a certain scedule to this writ
annexed.

By virtue, etc. and to this scedule annexed, Scedule.
such a day and year, I have made E. B. widow to have (nominated in the said
writ) full seisin of the third part of the Manor of B. with the appurtenances
in the same writ specified, that is to say, etc. (and rehearse the particulers,
as in the writ to hold to the said J. B. in severalty by Metes and Bounds, in
the name of the whole Dowry of the said J. to the said J. belonging, of all the
Manor in the aforesaid writ specified, as by the said writ I am commanded.

By virtue, etc, Reseisin.
such a day and year I caused the Messuages or Tenements within written to be
reseised, and G.C. within nominated, into full possession of the said houses or
Tenements with the apurtenances I caused to be put according to the force,
form, and effect of the Statute before specified, as within I am commanded.

By virtue, Summons of a Knight.
etc. I have caused to be summoned A. B. Knight, one of the Knights of my
County, girt with a Sword by B T. and C.B. that he should be before the
Justices within named, at the day and place within named, as this Writ in that
commands and requires.

Manucaptors of the within named, A.B. B.T. and C. B. J.D. R.R.

Issues of every one of them twenty shillings.

By virtue etc. Scire facias upon appearance.
Scire feci, the within named A. B. and C. D. that they should be before the
Justices of our Lady the Queen within written, at the Day and place therein
contained, to answer R.H. within named, by J.H. and R.S. good and lawful men
of my bailiwick.

By virtue, To hear a Record.
etc. Scire feci, T.A. and E. his wife within written by J.J. and R.T. that
they be before our Lady the Queen at the day within written whersoever, etc. to
hear the record and process, whereof this writ makes mention, and further to
do, and receive all and singular, as this writ commands. Nihil.


A.B. within named have no Lands or Tenements, Goods or Chattells in my
bailiwick, (that I can make him know) as that writ, etc. Neither is he found in
the same.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, W.B. Administrator of the Goods and Chattells
which were T. P. within named by W. G. and G. K. good and lawful men of my
bailiwick, Against Executor or Administrator.
to be before our Lady the Queen or the Justices at the day within named,
neither were there any more Administrators of Goods and Chattells, which were
of the said T.P. in my Bailiwick, to whom or to which for present I could,
Scire facere.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, T.V. within named, that he should be, before the
Justices within written at the day and place within contained, Upon trespass,
utlagat. the Chancery.
by J.S. and R.G. to do that which this writ in that commands and requires.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, W.C. Knight, within named, that he be before our
Lady the Queen in her Chancery, at the day therein contained, wheresoever he be
in England, to show and propound as that writ in that requires, by J. M. and
W.D good and lawful men of my bailiwick, according to the form of this writ.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, J. C. within named, Before the Queen.
that he should be before our Lady the Queen the 13. Day of N. to show, and
further to do and receive, and as that Writ in that commands and requires, by
A.B. and C.D. good and lawful men of my Bailiwick, according, etc.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, J.C. within named, Before the Justices of the
Bench.
that he should be before the Justices within written, at the day and place
within contained, to show if he have any thing for himself, or knows to speak,
why the within named W.H. and R.E. Execution for the Debt and Damage (as within
mention is made) against the said J. C. should not have, as this Writ in it
commands and requires, by J.W. and R.C. good and lawful men, etc.

By virtue, etc. such a Day and year, etc. By what right.
I took into the hands of our Lady the Queen, the Tenements within written with
the Appurtenances, and further the same Day and year, Scire feci, as well A.B.
chief Lord of the immediate Fee of the Tenement within written, with the
Appurtenances, as the within written, H.D. by good and law full men of my
bailiwick, that they should be before the Justices within written, at the Day
and place therein contained, to hear the recognition within written, as within
it is commanded me, and further I certify the same Justices, that there is not
any other chief Lord of the Fee aforesaid, mediately or immediately, between
the Queen and thewithin written. A.B. to whom Scire facere potui.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Fieri facias.
I have taken in Execution the within named ten pounds of the Land and Chattels
of the aforesaid R.W. which truly ten pounds before the Justices within written
at the Place and Day within contained I have ready, as this Writ ^n that
commands and requires, etc. Execut. upon Devastavit.


By virtue, etc. Fieri feci, a hundred shillings of the Goods and Chattels of
the within named W.H. which truly hundred shillings before the Justices within
written, at the Day and place there in contained, I have ready, as, etc. and
further I certify the same Justices, that the Executors within written, have
utterly wasted the Goods and Chattels of the within named W. H. the Testator,
so that the said sum of ten Marks, within written, nor any parcel thereof for
present can I levy by Fieri facias.

The within named R. B. has no Goods, Nothing.
or Chartels, Lands, or Tenements in my Bailiwick, so that I can levy the Money
within specified, by Fieri facias, as within I am commanded, neither is the
said R. to be found, nor is there any such person in my Bailiwick.

A. M. within written, Otherwise.
has no Goods, or Chattels within my Baliwick of which I can make Execution of
that Writ, as, etc. neither is he found in the same, nor has any Lands or
Tenements at the fourth Day of January, nor ever after, as it appears in a
certain Schedule annexed to this Writ.

By virtue, Where Good, remain unsold.
etc. I have taken the Goods and Chattels of the within written A. W. to the
value of four pounds, of the within written eight pounds, which Goods and
Chattels remain with me unsold, for lack of Buyers, and that the aforesaid A.
W. no other, nor more Goods and Chattels, nor any Lands or Tenements has in my
Bailiwick, whereby the residue of the aforesaid eight pounds, so that I can lay
no Execution for the residue of the eight pounds, or take any other parcel for
present, in Execution, neither is he found in the same.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I certify the Barons within written, that the tenth Day of A. etc. I
took of the Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, of the within named W. to
the value, etc. and of the Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, of J. D.
etc. to the value, etc. and those I have set to sale, to which I have not yet
found Buyers, and therefore the Money, etc.

As yet the Goods and Chattels, Otherwise.
which late of the Goods and Chattels of the Farmer, occupying and holding the
Manor of W. to the value, etc. I took into the hands of our Lady the queen,
for defect of Buyers remain unsold, but from Day to Day I expose them to sale,
and of the Money arising thereof, as soon as I can, I will answer you.

The Goods and Chattels, Otherwise.
of which within in that Writ, there is mention to sell, and ten shillings
thereof coming to the Exchequer of our Lady the Queen at Westminster, at the
Day in the Writ limited, I have made ready, according to the tenor of this
Writ.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I have sold the Goods and Chattels within written, by me first taken, and
also I have laid Execution of the Goods and Chattels of R. S. within named, for
the residue of the Debt therein contained, so that I have all those Moneys
ready, before our Lady the Queen, at the Day and Place within contained, to pay
to the within named H. VV. as within I am commanded.

To levy the Money by Fieri facias within written, Supersedeas.
by virtue of a certain Writ of the Queens of Supersedeas, to me directed, I
do altogether desist, which truly Writ of Supersedeas I send you annexed to
this Writ; and further I certify, that the said J. C. has not any other, or
more Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements in the same, my Bailiwick, from
whence any Money can be levied for present, etc.

Restitution upon Fieri facias. Nihil.


J. G. and others within named have nothing, nor any of them have any thing in
my Bailiwick, whereby Restitution of the Goods and Chattels within written,
(for the foresaid VV. M. to have) I can make, nor the four and twenty pounds
within written, to the said M. could I make to be levied, as within, etc.

T. F. within written, Levari facias otherwise.
has no Goods or Chattels in my Bailiwick, of which the Money within written,
nor any parcel thereof I can levy, as within I am commanded, etc.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. I have taken into the hands of our Lady the Queen, a certain Inn, with
three Shops in such a place, of the said J. T. within written, which are worth
by the year over reprises, ten pounds; and that the said Inn and Shops
aforesaid, I safely keep, till I have other from you in command.

The Execution of this Writ appears in a certain Inquisition, etc. An
Inquiry indented, Inquiry of Damages.
taken at VV. in the County of VV. such a Day and Year, before R. VV. Esquire
Sheriff of the said County, by virtue of a certain Writ of our Lady the
queens, to the same Sheriff directed, and to this Writ annexed; and this
Inquiry was finished, by the Oath of R. S. etc. to the number of twelve Jurors,
which say upon their Oath, that A. P. in the Writ to this Inquisition annexed,
nominated, sustained loss by the occasion of the Trespass by J. H. in the
foresaid Writ nominated, as in the same writ, mention is made, to forty
shillings, and for Expenses and Charges of the said A. P. spent by him upon the
Suit in this part to forty shillings, in which thing, etc.

By virtue of this Writ J. VV. S. Esquire Sheriff of the County within written,
^^egit.
such a Day and Year, did deliver to J. B. the half of the Mannours in this
Inquisition, to this writ annexed, specified, with the Appurtenances, by an
Extent made in the said Inquisition, to hold to him and his Assigns, as his
Freehold, until the said J. B. has levied his Debt and Damages within
written, as within I am commanded.

By virtue of this writ, Otherwise.
such a Day and Year, I have caused to be delivered to the within named A. B.
the half of the Manor of S. with the Appurtenances, extended to the yearly
value of forty pounds sterling in all issues, ultra reprises, by twelve Jurors
in the Inquisition annexed to the writ, nominated, of which truly Manor with
the Appurtenances, B. G. and E. his wife were thereof seized as in right of E.
his wife, in Fee, as of Freehold, Day of the taking this Inquisition
aforesaid, as in the said is found, to have and to hold the same half of the
Manor aforesaid, with the Appurtenances so extended to the aforesaid A. B.
and his Assigns, as his Freehold, till the within named forty pounds from
thence he shall levy, according to the form of this writ.

The Residue truly of Executions of this writ do appear in a certain
Inquisition to this writ annexed, etc.

Of a Liberate after an Extent made upon an Obligation, of a Statute Staple. By
virtue, Deliberation.
etc. I have delivered to the within named B.S. the Mannours, Lands, and
Tenements within written, to have to him and his Assigns as their Freehold,
until to him of the Debt within written, together with his Damages, Charges,
and Expenses be fully satisfied, etc.

By virtue, Extent.
etc. I certify our Lady the queen in her Chancery at the Day and Place
therein contained, wheresoever they be, that such a Day and Year I delivered
the Seisin and Possession of, and in the Mannours, Lands, and Tenements within
specified, to the within named W. C. according to the exigent of this writ, and
the within named H. M. is not found in my Bailiwick.

J. M. within named is not found in my Bailiwick, Otherwise.
therefore I cannot take him at present, but as to the extending, and valuing
all the Lands and Tenements of the said J. M. according to the form of this
Writ; the Execution thereof does appear in a certain Inquisition to this writ
annexed, which truly Lands and Chattels in the said Inquisition contained, I
have caused to be seized into the hands of our Lady the Queen.

A. B. within named is not found in my Bailiwick, Otherwise, within Liberties.
and therefore by virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have extended and
apprized all the Lands, and Tenements, Goods, and Chattels of the aforesaid A.
in my said Bailiwick, which truly Extent is to this Writ annexed; and also all
the Lands and Tenements aforesaid, in the same Extent specified, together with
his reasonable Damages and Costs I have levied according to the form of the
Statute, thereof inacted and provided, and according to the form of this Writ.

By virtue, etc. To give Seisin.
I have taken the Goods and Chattels of J. M. within mentioned to the value of
all the Money within written, and have set them to sale, and because I have not
yet found Buyers, therefore the Money within, etc. I cannot have at the Day and
Place within contained, as, etc.

By virtue, etc I certify the Justices within written, To deliver Seisin.
that such a Day and Year within written, I have caused A. B. to have full
Possession of one House with the Appurtenances in S. within written, in all, as
this Writ, etc.

By virtue, etc. such a Day and Year within specified, Otherwise.
I caused the within named A. B. to have and to be assigned, full Seisin of a
Manor and Tenement within specified, in a convenient place, that is to say,
of the Manor of F. twenty Acres of Land, a hundred Acres of Meadow, etc. with
the Appurtenances in F. etc. in the County within written, according to the
form and effect, etc.

By virtue, View.
etc. I have made R. G. to have the view of one House with the Appurtenances in
C. and I have told R. S. and J. D. T. M. and H. R. four Knights of those, which
were present at the view, that they should be before the Justices within
written, at the Day and Place therein contained, to testify that view, as that
Writ in it commands and requires.

By virtue, etc. I certify the Justices within written, that none, of the part
of R. S. came to show me the view of a House, and Meadows, with their
Appurtenances within written, therefore touching the Execution of that Writ,
nothing is done by me, for this present.

By virtue, To have the view.
etc. I certify the justices within written, at the Day and place within
contained, that such a Day and year, I caused the within written J.F. and M.
his Wife to have the view of the House, etc. within specified, with the
appurtenances, and I told A.B.C.D.E.F.G.H. four Knights of my County, which
were present at the view, that they should be before the Justices aforesaid, at
the Day and Place therein contained, to testify that view, as within I am
commanded.

By virtue, Otherwise.
etc. of our Lady the Queens, to this scedule annexed, I have caused I.G. in
the said Writ nominated, to have the view of sixty Acres of Pasture, with the
appurtenances in G. which H.F. in the Courrt of our Lady the Queen, before her
Justices at Westminster claims as his Right and inheritance, against the
aforesaid I G. by a writ of the Queens, in Form of Gift in Discender, and I
said to four Knights, which were present at the view, that they should be
before the Justices of oursaid Lady, the Queen at Westminster, at the Day in
the said Writ specified, to testify that view, as in the said Writ I am
commanded.

None came to me of the part of the within named R. F. Otherwise.
to show me the view of a Pasture within specified, for which cause I could not
make the view of that Pasture within written to R.F. to have. The execution of
this writ does appear in a certain inquisition to this writ annexed.

Inquisition indented, Inquisition.
taken at G. (which is a place wasted) in the County of D. such a day and year,
before W. L. the Sheriff aforesaid, by virtue of a Writ of our Lady the
Queens, to the same Sheriff thence directed by the Oath of twelve men sworn,
which say upon their Oath, that R.M. in the said Writ nominated, made Wast, and
destruction in a Wood, in which, in the Writ aforesaid there is mention, and in
the Wood aforesaid, cut twenty Oaks, price every one twenty pence, part whereof
he sold, and part carried away, to the disinheriting of VV.F. within written,
and against the Form of provision in the said Writ specified, and say upon
their Oath, that the aforesaid R. has made no more VVast in the VVood
aforesaid, as to them any way can appear, in witness of which thing, etc.

By virtue, etc. I came to a place wasted, Otherwise.
in the Writ contained, as within I am commanded, and the residue of the
execution of this Writ does appear in a certain inquisition to this Writ
annexed.

An inquisition indented, Inquisition.
taken at F. in the County of VV. such a day and year, before VV. K. Esquire,
Sheriff of the aforesaid, by virtue of a certain Writ of our Lady the Queens
to him directed, and to this inqusition annexed, by the Oath of A.B etc. to the
number of twelve, which say upon their Oath, that I.B. in the aforesaid Writ
nominated, made waste, sale, and destruction, in Tenements, Lands, and woods,
in the aforesaid Writ specified, that is to say, in suffering a Hall, etc. in
the writ specified, to be uncovered, by which the great timber of the same
House, by tempests of Rain falling upon them, became rotten, etc.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, I have made to come before the Justices
within written, at the day and place therein contained, all writs, Ass. of
Jurors, and Certificates in the County of VV. within written, together with the
Pannells, Attachments, Re-attachments, Re-summons, and all other Adminicles,
Ass. of Jurors, and certify those whom they concern, I have made also, made
come before the said Justices at the Goal Delivery of our Lady the Queen of F.
of the Prisoners therein, being to be delivered, assigned at F. aforesaid, at
the aforesaid Day, all the Prisoners in the Goal aforesaid, being them any way
concerned, and to the view of every Town and place, where the Felonies (of
which the said person indicted apppealed, or arrested were) were committed, as
well within the Liberties, as without; twenty four good and lawful men, to
whom the truth of the thing, may be best known and inquired, and who are not
any way of kindred to the said Prisoners, together with four men, and Governors
of their Town or place, to do that which then and there, to them on the behalf
of the said Lady our Queen, they are now enjoined: and also I have made it to
be publicly proclaimed throughout my whole Bailiwick, that all they which
would follow against those Prisoners, that then they should be there against
them (as it was just) to prosecute; and I did give understanding also, to all
the Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Stewards, Bailiffes of Liberties, and
Hundreds, of the County aforesaid, that then hey should be there with their
Rolls, Records, indictments, and other their remembrances, to do that which to
their Office belonged; as within I am commanded.

The residue of the execution of this Precept, does appear in a certain scedule
to this Precept annexed.

By virtue, Session.
etc, I have made to come before the Justices within written at M. within
specified, the day and year within contained, all Constables, and Bailiffes of
Hundreds, and Burgers within specified, and also of all aforesaid Hundreds,
twenty four Jurors, to do those things, which to them on the behalf of our Lady
the Queen, then and there, they are enjoined: I have also given notice to all
Constables, and Bailiffes of Hundreds, within written, that they should be
there, having the names of all the Artificers, Laborers, and servants of
Husbandry, within the Hundred aforesaid, against the form of the statute, to
that end enacted, and provided.

And likewise, I caused very sufficiently to be proclaimed within my Bailiwick,
that all they, which as well for the said Lady the Queen, as for themselves,
against any of the Artificers, Laborers, and servants, any complaint according
to the Form of the statute, provided to complain off, or would prosecute, that
then they should bring in their Bill before the Justices, if they thought fit,
as within I am commanded.

A Calender.
A Calender of the names of the Justices of peace, Derby.
of our Lady the Queen, Coroners, Stewards, Bailiffes of Liberties, and
Hundreds, in the County aforesaid, Summoniters, at the Assizes held at C. in
the County aforesaid, the Thursday, in the fourth week of Lent, the year of the
Reign of our Lady Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. twentieth, of the names of the
Prisoners in Goal of D. aforesaid, being A.B.C.D.

The names of the Justices of the Peace. A.B.C.D.etc. The names of the
Coroners. A.B.C.D.etc. The names of the Steward, and Bailiffes of the Liberty.
E.F.G.H. The names of the Bailiffes of the Hundred. I. K.L.M. The names of the
Prisoners in the Goal of D. being J.S. repreived. J.N. taken at S. for
suspicion of Felony.
Process in the Chancery.

I have made to be chosen two Knights, For the Knights of the Parliament to be
chosen.
girded with Swords, the most fit and discreet of my County aforesaid, that is
to say, VV.F. and J.S. which truly Knights have a full, and sufficient power
for the County aforesaid, to do and consent to those, which at the day and
place within named, of the Common Council of the Realm of the Queen of
England, ordinarily are handled, and the aforesaid W.F. and J.S. are
Manucapted, by J.P.W. B.J.D. and R.N. to be at the Parliament of the Lady the
Queen at Westminster, at the day within contained, to do, as that Writ in it
commands, and requires: I have also made a Precept, tby virtue of this Writ
to J.P. and W.S. Bailiffes of the Liberty of the Town of G: that of the Town of
G. they should cause to be chosen two Burgesses of the discreetest, and most
sufficient, that they be at the Parliament of the said Lady the Queen, at the
day within contained, to do and consent as aforesaid, which truly Bailiffes so
answer me, that they have caused to be chosen of the aforesaid Borough of G.
two Burgesses discreet, and most sufficient, to be of the Parliament aforesaid,
that is to say, S. W. and R.VV.

By virtue, etc. at my next County Court, For choosing Burgesses of the
Parliament,
after the receipt of the same, held at W. such a day and year, in my full
Court, I caused to be proclaimed all things in that writ contained, acccording
to the Form and effect of this Writ, as, etc. the residue truly of the
execution of this Writ, does appear in certain Indenture to this Writ annexed.

This Indenture made such a day and year, Indenture.
between M. P. Sheriff of the County of C. of the one part, and J.D. and A.B.
etc. of the other part, witnesses, that according to the Form of the writ to
this Indenture annexed (Proclamation being made in the full County Court, held
at C. such a day, and year) the aforesaid J.D. and S.B. etc. which were in the
County Court aforesaid, at the making the Proclamation, according to the Form
of the Statutes in the writ aforesaid specified, and the command of the said
writ, chose A.D. and J. A. to be Burgesses of the City aforesaid, at the
Parliament in the said writ specified, which have a full and sufficient power
for them, and the County of the City aforesaid, to do and consent, as the writ
in it self commands and requires, in witness whereof, the parties aforesaid
to these Indentures have severally set their Seals, etc.

By virtue of this writ, as well within the Liberties as without, Upon the Writ
of receiving the order of Knighthood.
throughout my whole Bailiwick, I have made to be proclaimed, that all and
singular persons, that have Lands, Tenements and Rents, as is within written
(whose names in a certain scedule to this writ annexed are written) at the
presence of our Lady Queen, about the Feast within written, personally shall
appear, and come to take the aforesaid order, as within I am commanded.

By virtue, Adjournment.
etc. all writs to me delivered, or to be delivered, before the Justices within
written at Westminster, in Octabis of Saint Hillary, returnable, or returned, I
have before the Justices within written at Westminster, the day, etc. together
with all executions of the same, and further army County Court held at N. such
a day and year, publicly I made to be proclaimed, that the parties in the same
writs named, should keep their days before the Justices at Westminster, the
next Term, as this writ, etc.

By virtue of this writ, Certior are upon protection.
of our Lady the Queens within written, in her Chancery, under my Seal,
distinctly and openly, that I certify VV.T. within named, under the safe
custody defense and tuition of the Town, Castle, of the Marches of the Queen at
Callice, in obedience to the said Lady Queen in S. aforesaid, the said kinsman
of hers holding place as General of the Town, Castle, and Marches aforesaid,
according to the Form of the Queens Letters Patents, by which the said Lady
Queen took the foresaid W. T. into her protection and defense, does not stay,
but draws his stay in the City of London, intending his own proper business,
etc.

I J.D. Knight, Sheriff of the County within named, Supplica^ vit.
do certify our Sovereign Lady the Queen in her Chancery, that before the
coming of this Writ, A.B. the within named was taken in my Bailiwick, and in
the Queens Prison, there under my custody detained, by virtue of a certain
other writ to this Writ annexed, for which truly, the aforesaid A.B. before the
coming of this Writ was delivered in the Bailiwick to A.B.C.D.E.F. and H.P.
which undertook, and each of them undertook by himself, for the aforesaid A. B.
upon the pain of ten pounds, that he should do no damage or ill to H. P. in
the said Writ of Supplicavit specified, within the space of such a day next
coming, nor by any Means should procure it, which 10. l. the Manucaptors
aforesaid granted, and each of them for himself granted of their Lands and
Tenements, and of each of them to the use of our said Lady the Queen, should be
levied, if any damage or ill came to the said A.B. or by his procurement in
the mean time, any should come by any means, etc. and this is the Surety of the
Peace, which the aforesaid A.B. before me has found.

Under which truly Bail, Or so.
the aforesaid C. was suffered to go at large out of the Prison aforesaid, and
afterward returned not to my custody; therefore the body of the said C. before
our Lady the Queen, at the day and place within contained, I cannot have.

I. etc. certify our Lady the Queen in her Chancery, Or so.
that R.P. within named, has found to me no security of the Peace, of which
within there is mention, but remains in prison of our Lady the Queens, under my
custody at present.

For certain, Or so.
truly complains of the threats the aforesaid J. B. before the coming of this
Writ was delivered in Bail to A.B.C.D.E.F. and G.H. which undertook, and each
of them did undertake upon the pain of twenty pounds for the aforesaid J.B that
he should do no damage, or any ill to the aforesaid H.P. and T. D. or either
of them, until the Day after the Feast of Saints next coming, nor should
procure to be done, which truly twenty pounds, the aforesaid Manucaptors
granted, and each of them to be levied to the use of our Lady the Queen, if any
Damage or ill to the said R. P. and T. D. or either of them by the aforesaid
J.B. or by his procurement, to any of them, should come in the mean time, under
which bail truly, etc. at large, etc.

Before the coming of this Writ, Ne exeat Regnum
and before any execution thereof, A.B. C.D.E.F.etc. Came before J.D. Sherif of
W. and undertook before me the aforesaid Sheriff, for L. M. that is to say,
Every one of the Manucaptors aforesaid, under the pain of ten pounds that the
said L. before the day after All Souls next coming, should not convey himself
to any parts beyond Seas; to prosecute or attempt any thing there to the
prejudice of the said Lady the Queen, or any of the People of the said Queen,
or the loss of our State of England, should prevail, nor from hence to send
any body for that cause, which truly sum of ten pounds the said Manucaptors
granted, and each of them for himself, granted of their Lands and Chattells, to
the use of the said Lady Queen to be levied; if the said L. any thing against
the form of this Mauncaption aforesaid, shall do, or cause to be done, or by
any means attempt: And here is the Tenor of the security, whereof within there
is mention made, which to the said Lady Queen into her Chancery, etc. at the
day and place, etc. I send.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Proclamation out of the Chancery.
I have made a public Proclamation within my bailiwick, that the within named
H.B. upon the pain of his allegiance, before our Lady the Queen in her Chancery
aforesaid, at the day within written shall appear, as within I am commanded,
and likewise I certify the said Lady Queen, that the within named H.B. is not
to be found in my Bailiwick.

By virtue of this Writ, Praemunire.
such a day and year by J.S.T. W.R.T. and E.F. good and lawful men of my
bailiwick, Praemunire feci, W.R. Clarke within nominated, that he should be
before our Lady the Queen, at the day within contained whersoever, etc. to do
and to receive as that Writ in it commands and requires, and J. B. and the
rest of the Defendants within named, have nothing within my bailiwick, by which
I can Praemunire facere, for present, neither are they to be found in the same.

I certify our Lady the Queen that the within named I. H. before the coming of
this Writ to me directed, was dead. Of choosing a Verdecer in the Forest.
And that I after the receipt of this Writ to me directed, in my full County
Court held at Wilton in my County the 29th. day of May the year within written,
by assent of the said County, in the place aforesaid, I made to be elected one
N.S. Esquire a Verdecer of the Forest of B. within written, to do as the said Writ
in that commands and requires.

At my County Court, held such a day and year, Election of a Coroner.
in the full County aforesaid, by virtue of this Writ, and by the consent of
the said County in the place of P.H. within named, (which died) I chose a
Coroner, that is to say, I.W. who (as the manner is) took his corporal Oath,
that he should do those things, and observe what to the Office of a Coroner in
the County aforesaid appertained to be done, as within, etc.

By virtue of this Writ I summon, Archbishops, Justices of Forest Summon.
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and all other free Tenants which have Lands
and Tenements within the bounds of the Forest of the said our Lady the Queen
within written, in my County, and four men, and the chief of every town within
the bounds of this Forest, and also twelve good and lawful men of every town
within the bounds of the said Forest dwelling, which ought to come and were
wont, that they be before our Instices within written, at the day and place
within contained, as within I am commanded. Publicly also I have made to be
proclaimed through all my Bailiwick, as well in Buroughs as in other Towns,
and in Faires, Markets, and other public places, that all those which by
Charters of our Lady the Queen, now, or of her Predecessors, or her
Progenitors, or any way, any liberties or Franchises claim to hold, and by what
warrant, that they be before our said Justices, at the day and place aforesaid,
I also made to be proclaimed that all attached for Vert or Venison, or hunting
in the Forest aforesaid, after the last Plea of the Forest aforesaid held,
and their Pledges, and Manucaptors aforesaid to be, and before the aforesaid
Justices to stand to their right, and to do those things which according to the
Law of the Forest they ought to do.

The residue of the Execution of this Writ does appear in certain Pannells to
this Writ annexed.

By virtue, Capias ut legatum.
etc. I have taken the body of H.S. within named, whose body before the
Justices within written, I have ready at the day and place therein contained,
as within I am commanded, the residue truly of this execution of this Writ,
does appear in a certain Inquisition to this annxed.

Before the coming of this Writ, Other wise between 2 Sheriffs.
J.M. Esquire late Sheriff of the County of W. the within named T.D. took, and in
the Prison of our Lady the Queens Prison with him detained, by virtue of a
certain Writ of our Lady the queens to the late Sheriff directed, which said
T.D. late Sheriff, together with the Writ to him directed, to me J. D. Knight,
now Sheriff of the County aforesaid, in the end of his Office, has delivered,
whose truly body and the Writ to the said late Sheriff directed, J. the
aforesaid now Sheriff before the Justices within written, at the day and place
aforesaid, have ready, to do and receive what the said Writ in that commands
and requires.

This Writ as it is above indorced, Testificate returned of the late Sheriff.
together with the inquisition to this Writ annexed twentieth day of June, in
the year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen within written, ninth, was
delivered to me J.D. Knight, Sheriff of W. within written by J. E. Esquire late
Sheriff of the County aforesaid, my Predecessor, in the going out of his Office.

This last return ought to be written in Roman Letters.

By virtue, Certiorare.
etc. All and singular indictments, R.B. within named before our Lady the
Queen, wheresoever she were in England, at the day within contained, I send in
a certain Scedule to this Writ annexed.

We A.B. and C.D. Coroners of our Lady the Queen of the County within written;
Otherwise by the Coroners.
Do certify the Justices within written, at the day and place within
contained, that we have searched the Rolls, and other our remembrances, and
also all and singular writings of all and singular Courts held in our pesence,
as well at the Suit of our Lady the Queen, as at the Suit of G.H. or any other
pubished, and we can find nothing thereof nor can certify any such Record,
before the Justices, according to the form of this Writ.

By virtue, etc. I certify the Justices within written, that such a day and
year, I took into the Queens bands 3. Cessation by two weeks.
Houses etc. within written, by the view of A.B.C.D.E.F. and. G.H. good and
lawful men of my bailiwick, as within I am commanded.

By virtue, etc. Dedimus potestt atem.
I certify our Lady the Queen into her Chancery, that A.B. within named,
before us has taken his Corporal Oath, that the Letters Patents (whereof
within there is mention made) came to the hands of the within named C.D. his
Testator. But by his Oath, he says, that nothing of the Articles and other
circumstances in the same Letters Patents specified, before him was found.

The Answer of H.L. and J.D. Commissioners.

By virtue of this Commission to us directed, The return of Commissions.
we have taken the Answer of T. D. within named, upon the holy Evangelist, that
all things in the said Answer are true, which Answer so taken is to this
Commission annexed, together with the Bill, together in the same directed, and
all other things which in the said Commission are contained, or belong to it,
we have made to be done, according to the effect and tenor of the same, as
within we are commanded.

Return for the Chancery, or the Master of the Rolls.

By virtue, etc. there was a Search made amongst the Records of the Chancery of
our Lady the Queen within written, and in them, or any of them, I find as yet
no Record for the Queens title, by which it can appear, of any Lands or
Tenements, with the appurtenances in S. in C. which were of late the within
named J. S. which ever came to the hands of our said Lady the Queen, as in this
Writ is supposed.

I certify the Justices aforesaid, Decies tantum.
that the within named S.A. at the day and place therein contained, before you
I have ready, to do and receive, what the Court of our Lady the Queen within
written shall consider of that, according to the form of this Writ.

I J.D. Suerty o^ the Pe^
assigned one of the Justices of our Lady the Queen in the County of D. of the
Peace to be kept. Send before our Lady the Queen in her Chancery, the Tenor of
the security of the Peace, of which in the said Writ there is mention, under
my Seal, as the said Writ in that commands and requires, etc. Which truly
security is annexed to this Writ

Security of the Peace as it is taken.

The answer of T.F. Mayor of the City of D. and one of the Justices of our Lady
the Queen, assigned in the same City to preserve the Peace.

By virtue, Certificate scedule.
etc. All and singular the Recognizances, which A.D. and the rest within named
before the justices within written, late made, with all things touching them,
before our Lady the Queen, at the day and place therein contained, I send under
my Seal to these presents annexed as within, etc.T.F. Mayor of the City
aforesaid.

Process out of the Exchequer.

The within named Lady J.S. has nothing in Manors, Nihil.
Lands, and Tenements within written, but with J.S. Esquire whom she took to
Husband.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, I have taken the body of the within
named J.S. whose body, Ce^i Corpus.
before the Barons within written I have ready, as within I am commanded.

By virtue of this writ to me directed, I certify the Barons within written, I
have taken, as well the body as the Lands Distress.
that I have taken the body of the within named J.R. whose body before the said
Barons, I have ready, at the day within contained.

And also twentieth day of January the eighth year within, written I took into
the hands our said Lady the queen, by name of Distress, certain Lands and
Tenements of the within named J.R. lying and being in B. of the yearly value of
a hundred shillings, as the said Writ in it commanded and required.

The within named J.E. is not to be found in my bailiwick, I have taken as well
body as goods.
nor has any Goods or Chattells in my Bailiwick: But by virtue of this Writ
to me directed I certify the Barons within written, that the fifteenth day of
June in the twentieth year of the Queen within written, I took into the hands
of the said Lady the Q. in name of Distress, seven Houses or Tenements with
their appurtenances in M. which are of the clear yearly value of fifty
shillings, and one chief House or Farm, with the Appurtenances in W. of the
yearly value of five Marks.

The within named A B. is not to be found in my bailiwick, (...).
and further I certify the Barons within written, that by virtue of this Writ
to me directed. Such a day and year within written, I took into the hands of
our Lady the Queen, one House or Tenement, with the Appurtenances in B. in the
County of W. within written, of the yearly value of ten pounds, as the Lands
and Tenements of the within named A.B. And also six cowes, one Bull, and one
Gelding, price in all eight pounds of the Goods and Chattells of the said A.B.
in name of Distress, as I am commanded.

All which truly goods and chattells with me remain unsold for defect of
Buyers, and the said A.B. no other or more goods and chattells, Lands or
Tenements, has within my bailiwick, which into the hands of our Lady the Queen
for present, by any means I can take or seize

I certify the Barons aforesaid, Otherwise.
that by virtue of this Writ to me directed, the eighth day of J. etc. within
written, I have taken into the hands of our Lady the Queen, the Manor of S.
with the Appurtenances within written, as, etc.

The residue of the execution of this Writ does appear in a certain scedule
to this Writ annexed. Scedule.


An Inquisition indented, taken at S. in the County aforesaid the eighth day of
January the year, etc. Before me, J.H. Knight, Sheriff of the County
aforesaid, by Writ of a Right close, of the said Lady Queens to me directed,
which is annexed to this Inquisition, by the Oath of J.D.R.R. etc. good and
lawful men of the County aforesaid, which do say upon their Oath, that the
Manor of S. with the appurtenances, is of the yearly value of five pounds,
besides all charges, and reprisalls, in witness whereof, etc.

The Manor of S. within named lies in the County of G. and not in the County
of W. Therefore I cannot distrain the Tenants there, as within I am commanded.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed I. certify the Barons within written,
that the twentieth day of March, Take into the hands
the 8th. year of our Lady the Q. within written, I took into the the hands of
the said Lady Queen, the Manor within written with the Appurtenances, as
within I am commanded.

If it be with inquiry for the yearly value.

The residue of the execution of this Writ appears in a certain inquisition
taken, to this writ annexed.

The within named VV.B. and M. his Wife, Who is Tenant.
are Tenants of the third part of the Manor aforesaid, in three parts divided,
and C.A.M.E. and J. B. the Daughters of C.D. dead, are the Tenants of the
second part of the Manor within written, in three parts divided, and the other
third part of the Manor within written, remains in the hand of our Lady the
queen, by reason of the nonage of T. B. Son and Heir of the aforesaid C.D.

The Manucaptors of the forenamed W. B. and M. his Wife. J.D.R.R.

The within named A.B. has nothing in my Bailiwick, Venire facias. Crown
office or Exchequer.
by which he may be attached, or where I may take him.

The within named A. B. is attached by Pledges, that is, J.D.R.R.

If he be an Earl or a Countess.

The Issue of them half a Mark.

And further, if these words are repeated in the Writ (and also to show)
twenty shillings.

The within named R. A. has nothing in the Land, Distr.
of the Tenement and Hereditament within written, by which I can distrain him.

No such Manor, Otherwise.
nor any Lands or Tenements known by the name of E. lying in the County of VV.
whereof I can distrain the Tenants, as within I am commanded.

The within named J.K. and R.K. have nothing, nor either of them has any
thing, within my Bailiwick, and further I certify the Barons within written,
that none are Executors, or Administrators of the goods and chattells which
were the within nameds M. K. whereby them, or any of them I can distrain.

The Manucaptors of I S. Gent. Tenant of the Lands, and Tenements within
specified, which were the within named M.K.I.D.RR.

The Issues thirteen shillings four pence.

By virtue, etc. I have taken Execution of the Goods and Chattels of J.H.
within named, a certain Demise and Grant to the said J. H. by one to T. G. of
one part, and the aforesaid J. H. of the other part, for term of one and
thirty years, to begin from the first day of January, the year of the Reign of
our Lady Elizabeth, within written, as by that Indenture bearing date the same
day and year fully appears, of and in a House or Farm with the Appurtenances,
situate, and lying, and being in L. in the Parish of f. within my Bailiwick,
called or known by the name of B. together with all and singular Lands,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Under-woods, Waters, and Pastures, with
all their Appurtenances, situate, lying, and being within the Town, Parish,
and Feilds of F. aforesaid, and likewise in my Bailiwick; and the aforesaid
Lease, and all the whole Right, state, Title, term of years, Possession and
Demand, which the aforesaid J. H. now has, of and in the foresaid Premises, by
virtue or force of the said Demise and Grant, or otherwise I have set to sale,
and sold to one R.G. Gentleman, for the sum of threescore and sixteen pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence, and also I have taken in Execution other
Goods and Chattels of the aforesaid J. H to the value of threescore and five
pounds six shillings eight pence, which truly sums of Money so in form
aforesaid by me levied, in the whole do amount unto 132. pounds and twelve
pence, and the same sums before our Lady the Queen, at the day and place
aforesaid I have ready, and to be given to the within written E.P. and J. his
Wife, in part of satissaction of the Damages within written, as by that Writ
I am within commanded. And that I. H. has no other Goods or Chattels in my
Bailiwick, that the residue of the aforesaid one hundred threescore and five
pounds six shillings two pence can be had or levied, according to the command
of this Writ.

By virtue, I have taken into the Qu. hand.
etc. tenth Day of S. the year of the Reign of our Lady the Queen within
written, twentieth, I J.S. Knight, Sherif of W. within written, have taken,
resumed, and seized into the hands of our Lady the Queen, all those Tenements,
Shops, Gardens, and all the other the Appurtenances, by virtue of the Writ
aforesaid to be resumed, which do appear in the Inquisition to this Writ
annexed.

By virtue of this Writ to me directed, Of setting to sale.
from day to day I have set to sale those Goods and Chattels to the value of a
hundred shillings, residue of the eight pounds, which were of the Goods and
Chattels, Lands and Tenements, T. F. within named, and there I sold to the
value of forty shillings, which truly forty shillings I have ready at the day
and place within contained, as within I am commanded, then there to be paid;
and the residue of the Goods and Chattels aforesaid, then with me remaining
unsold for want of Buyers, but I will set them to sale from day to day, and
when they happen to be sold, the money thereof coming before the Barons within
written, I will bring, according to the form and effect of this Writ.

Those Goods to the value of twenty Marks within written, Otherwise.
which by virtue of the Writ of our Lady the Queen, lately now to me directed,
I have taken of the Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, which were lately
T. F. within named, and have set them to sale, and sold them, and the Money
thereof I have ready to bring to the Barons within named, at the day and place
therein contained, as therein I am commanded.

A. B. and C. D. within nominated, Are dead.
were dead long before the sending out this Writ, neither have they any Goods
or Chattels, Lands or Tenements within my Bailiwick, which I can extend and
value, as by this Writ I am commanded.

The within named A. B. and C. D. are dead, For the shortness of time. Scire
feci.
and to the rest of the Execution nothing is done by me, for the shortness of
the time.

By virtue, etc. Scire feci, J.C. within named, that he be before the Barons
within written, at the day and place within contained, by J. C. and R. S. good
and lawful men of my Bailiwick, as within I am commanded.

There are no Executors of E. within written, Against Executors.
nor Administrators of the Goods and Chattels which were his, nor Heirs, nor
Tenants of Lands and Tenements, which were his in my Bailiwick, to whom by any
means I can give the Scire facias.

I.D. and the rest of the Defendants within named, Otherwise.
have nothing in my Bailiwick, by which I can them Scire facere.

By virtue, Non omittas.
etc. I have taken of the Lands and Tenements of W.R. to the value of forty
shillings, which I have ready for the Barons within written, at the day and
place therein contained, as within I am commanded: and further, I certify the
Barons within written, that the aforesaid VV. has no other, or more Lands
nor Tenements, Goods nor Chattels in my Bailiwick, whereof the residue of the
Debt within written I can levy by Execution, as the said Writ in it commands
and requires.

Here follow certain Cases of the Common Law, upon the Returns aforesaid, and
others.
BEcause Justices (to whose Duty it belongs, West. 2. cap. 35.
to administer Justice to every one before them complaining) are oftentimes
hindered, so that they cannot in due manner execute their Office; by this that
Sheriffs do not return their Original and judicial Writs, and likewise return
false Answers.

The Lord the King provideth, False Return.
that those which fear the malice of the Sheriff, should deliver their Writs in
the full County Court, or in the other County Court, where there is a gathering
of the Kings Money, and let there be a Billet taken of the Sheriff present, or
of the Undersheriff, in which Billet there shall be contained the names of the
Plaintiff and Defendant, and adjoined to the Billet sealed by the Sheriff, or
Undersheriff, in witness thereof, and let there be mention of the Delivery of
this Writ.

And it gives remedy, Tarde.
if the Sheriff will not seal the Billet: by this Statute remedy is given if
the Sheriff return Tarde, Mandavi Balivo.
where he has sufficient time to serve the Writ, and where he returns (I have
commanded the Bailiff of the Liberty) where it is no Liberty; and this Statute
gives (you shall not omit for any Liberty) and gives Averment against the
Return of the Sheriff, Averment,
if he return to little Issues, and gives (that he should deliver Corn in the
Grange, and all Movables (besides, Equituram, Indumenta and utensilia domus)
contained under the name of Issues; and the Statute gives (Posse Comitatus) See
the Statute of 1 Ed. 3. chap. 6.

The Sheriff by the common Law is the Preserver of the Peace, Authority of the
Sheriff.
and has the Custody of the County for the time that he is Sheriff, and may
cause the party to find Surety, if any require that, and every Obligation
which he takes to keep the Peace, shall be taken a Recognizance in Law, and
specially when this is certified by Certio^are in the Chancery. But Pleas
before him in the County or Hundred are not of Record, for these are by reason
of course, and this taking for Peace, is by reason of his Office; Fitzh. 81. D.

If the Sheriff return upon a Distringas Juratores, Appearance.
no manner of Issues, and a full Jury appears and pleads, this is no Error, for
the King has no loss, and the Issues are for the King, which he shall not
have if the full Jury appear, 5 H. 7. f. 8.

Also if the Sheriff return Scire feci, upon Fine, or Judgment, and no mention
is made of the Summoners and Viewers, and the party appear and pleads, it is no
Error, and if upon the Grand Cape there be not returned the Summoners and
Viewers, yet if the party appear, and pleads, it is no Error, 3 H. 7. f. 14.
this Return was amended, and the Plaintiff recovers. See 8 H. 5. f. 2. B.

Scire facias is returned Scire feci, by J.S. and J.D. and though the Return be
not (by good and lawful men) as it ought, if the party appear it is a good
Return, and may be amended, 33 H. 6. f. 35. 44 Ed. 3. f. 16. and 8 H. 6. f. 27.

If the Sheriff attach a Cow, Attachment.
the property is not out of the party till the Day of Return, that he make
Default, and if at the Day of the Return he make Default, the Sheriff may take
that as forfeited to the King, though he have left that before with the party,
9 H. 7. B. Table Dormant, and such things which are fixed to the Freehold
cannot be attached, 21 H. 7. f. 26.

Annuity, the Sheriff returns (I have nothing in my Bailiwick by which he can
be attached) where it should be (by which he can be summoned) and though it
were in the time of another Sheriff, Amendment.
it was amended, for the Cout may amend a mistake of the Clerks, and also of
the Return of the Sheriff, 33 H. 6. f. 47.

Upon a Distringas Juratores, the Sheriff in his Return leaves out four Names
which were in the Venire facias, and the Sheriff was examined, and says, that
they were distrained, and for that the Return was amended, 37 H. 6. f. 12. 22
H. 6. f. 45.

Appeal upon Distringas Juratores, where there were Knights and Esquires which
were in the Writ, there was returned but eight pence upon every Juror, and the
Sheriff had been amerced, unless he be there present, and amend that, and sets
upon every Juror two shillings, 2 R. 3. fol. 13.

Attaint at the Distringas Juratores, the Sheriff returns Issues upon J.
Burton, where there is no such of the Jury, but J. Bormstone, and it was
amended, 2 H. 5. f. 8.

The Sheriff upon a Capias returns Non inveni, where he ought to return Non est
inventus, and the party was outlawed, and this was assigned for Error, and
awarded Error, and shall not be amended, 9 H. 5. f. 10.

One was outlawed, and Proclamari feci of that was returned, that I made be
proclaimed, that he should deliver himself to the Sheriffs of London, where the
Writ was the Sherif of Kent, and this Outlary was reversed by Error, and shall
not be amended, 27 H. 8. f. 34.

One was outlawed, and the Exigent was returned, at my County Court, held at
the Castle of Oxford, he was first called, and because it was not in what
County, it was Error, and shall not be amended, 21 H. 7. f. 34.

One was returned outlawed, and for that, that it did not appear that it was by
the Judgment of the Coroners, it was reversed without Writ of Error, and shall
not be amended, 21 H. 7. f. 33.

The Sherif returns Scire feci J. A. Clio, where it should be Clico, and was
amended, 7 H. 6. f. 1.

Where the Sherif upon a Distringas returns to small Issues, he shall amend
the Return, 27 H. 8. f. 3.

Process against a Voucher, Averment.
the Sherif returns the Vouchee dead, the Demandant may aver, that he is alive
by the Statute of 14 Ed. 3. chap. 10. Vouch. 8. And there held, that a man
shall not have a direct Averment against the Return of the Sheriff, unless
that his person is to be charged, or his Inheritance for ever to be lost, and
that by the same Law he cannot have remedy to save the same Inheritance, 40 Ed.
3. f. 6.

Debt against two, the Sheriff returns upon the Capias, I have taken their
Bodies, and have them before you; and now one comes and says, that his
Companion is dead and had it, for that the other cannot gainsay it, 50 Ed. 3.
f. 7.

By the statute of Westminster. 2. before said upon a Distringas, one may aver that
the Sherif has returned to small Issues; and by this Book the Sherif ought to
return in Issues so much of Rent as the Defendant receives the Day of the Writ
purchased, until the Day of the Return of it, 27 H. 8. f. 3.

Where the Sherif returns to small Issues upon a Distringas, one may aver that
they are to small, but some seem, that if he return to small upon a distringas
Juratores, it is ont of the Statute, 10 H. 7. f. 11. Debt, the Sheriff returns
upon the Distringas twenty pence upon the Defendant, and averment was, that the
Shetiff might have returned, mean, between the writ delivered, and the return
of that 100 s. and the writ was awarded to the Justices of Assise to inquire of
that, 20 H. 6. fol. 26.

Where the Sheriff returns one outlawed, he cannot aver that he was called but
three or four times. But in appeal he may have the averment, 10 H. 7. f. 22.

In Re-disseifin, he cannot aver that the Sheriff did not go to the place, for
he is Judge, and also one outlawed cannot aver that he was not the fifth time
called, 10 H. 7.28.

Trespass upon (Pone) goods were returned attached, and when the Defendant
appeared, he had a Writ to the Sheriff to deliver to him again the Goods: And
the Sheriff returns that he has redelivered, the Defendant cannot averr the
contrary, the same Law of a return of a seisin in Dower, one cannot have an
averment to the contrary, for the Sheriff is Officer, to whom credit shall be
given, which cannot have averment to the contrary. But where one is without
remedy, and to be dis-inherited, it is otherwise, as if the Sheriff in a
Precipe against one, return that he is dead, the Demandant may aver that he is
alive, and may say not attached, by fifteen days, which is no direct averment:
But upon an Habere facias sesinam.

Where the Sherif returns, I have delivered seisin, he cannot aver the
contrary, 3 Ed. 4. fol. 20.

One cannot have direct averrment against return of the Sherif in the same
action, but in another he may. As in Debt against a Bailif of a Franchise, for
an escape of one, return by the Sherif that he has taken him by a Warrant to
him directed, upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, he may now in this action of
Debt aver, that no such Warrant was to him directed. And in Assise not attached
by fifteen days he may averr. And in a Precipe that he was not summoned
according to the Law, is a good averment in the same Action, but not, not
attached, or not summoned, 5 Ed. 4. f. 1.

A Writ of Deceit is returned by the Sherif, and the Defendant averrs that the
summoners now returned were not the summoners in Precipe, and he cannot aver
that Averment against the Return of the sherif, 5 Ed. 4. f 7. and 33 H. 6. f.
11. Markham, accordingly.

The sherif returns, I have commanded the Bailif of the Liberty of N. which so
answers, that at another time the Defendant was committed to the next Gaol by
Auditors upon an Account for Arrerages, and that he being Bailif of that Goal,
carried him to Prison, and he came in upon a Cepi Corpus, and says, that no
such Account, and shall have that Averment, notwithstanding the Return of the
sheriff, 18 Ed. 4. f. 5.

One sues a Liberate probanda, to recover Nativo habendo, and the sherif
returns, that no Nativo habendo was delivered unto him, and the other averrs
contrary, and may, 18 Ed. 4. f. 7.

Upon a Venire facias, the sherif returned four and twenty Jurors, and upon the
Habeas Corpora, he returned that 12. of them were dead, the Plaintiff shall have
Averment, that they are alive against the Return, 20 Ed. 4. f. 11.

The Plaintiff prays, that the Defendant in Replegiare, wage Deliverance, the
Defendant says, that they died in an open Pound, in default of the Plaintiff,
and prayed a writ to the sherif, Si constare poterit, and if the Sherif return
upon that writ, that they are dead, yet he may aver the contrary, and have a
sicut alias, 30 H. 6.2.

Where the Sherif returns (I have commanded the Bailif of the Liberty of the
Archbishop of York) which returns summons, the Defendant cannot aver, that the
Land is within the Franchise of Richmond, 34 H. 6. f. 3.

The sherif returns upon an Exigent, that four times called, and not
withstanding Averment was taken, that he was outlawed, and this was certified
by the Coroners, and for that the sherif was amerced to fifty Marks, 36 H. 6.
f. 24.

Where the sherif upon a Capias returns (He is not found) one cannot have an
Averment against this Return, 2 H. 4 f. 15.

One may have an Averment in another Action, against the Return of the Sheriff,
as in Covenant, the Sheriff returns him warned, yet in Detinue he may aver the
contrary, 11 H. 4. f. 47.

Where upon a Corpus cum causa, out of the common Bench, it is returned, that
he is bound to the Peace, which is for the King, and notwithstanding that it be
false, he cannot have an Averment in this Writ to the contrary, 9 H. 6. f. 44.

One outlawed reverses it by Error, and he has a Writ to restore his Goods,
which he took, time of the Outlary, directed to John Bailif of Westminster, and
could not return that he is not Bailiff, but he ought to answer to the Goods,
whether he had them or not, and how they are wasted in his Possession, 6 H. 7.
f. 9.

The Sherif or Bailif errant, sworn and known, may arrest one without showing
to him a Warrant, contrary, of a Servant of the Sherif, or other Bailif which
is not sworn and known, 8 Ed. 4. f. 14.

Where the Sherif returns upon a Fieri facias, Clerk.
that he is a Clerk beneficed, not having any Lay Fee, there shall go a Writ to
the Bishop to sequester his Benefice, 13 H. 4. f. the last. See 32 H. 6. f.
13.2 Ed. 4. f. 1. and 21 H. 6. f. 20.

The Ordinary sues a Writ of Annuity against one, and the Ordinary himself
returns, that he is a Clerk beneficed, having no Lay Fee; and held that a
Venire facies Clericum shall go to the Metropolitan, for that the Plaintiff is
Ordinary, 34 H. 6. f. 32.

Return, Duchy.
that I commanded the Bailif of the Liberty of the Duchy of Lancaster, though
that the Duchy has no capacity, it is good, for that, that there were ancient
Presidents of it. 33 H. 6. f. 22.

Upon a Capias, Church.
the Sherif returns, that the party is a Verger in the Church at Salisbury,
and dwells within the precinct of the Church, and being a Sanctuary, he returns
for that, Non est inventus, and for that the Return is not good, for he may
serve that Process in the Church, 6 H. 4. f. 3.

2 R. 3. C. the last. Prohibited upon pain of Imprisonment and Fine, that none
arrest any person of holy Church, when he is d^ing Divine Service.

Dower, the Demandant recovers by default, after default, Inquest.
and the Demandant says, that her Husband died seized, and prays her Damages,
and a Writ went out to the Sheriff to inquire of Damages, and the Sheriff
returns that the Jury found no Damages, and by Thorp, the Sheriff shall not be
amerced; but where he returns a writ ill of himself, in this case he has
returned by the Oath of Twelve, by which he was not amerced, 44 E. 3. f. 8.

Debt against Executors, which plead fully administered, and found that they
have Assets, and the Sheriff returns the Fieri facias, I have commanded the
Bailiff of the Liberty of Kingstone, which gave me answer, that the Executors
aforesaid have not any Goods, the which is contrary to the Verdict, and
adjudged that the return was not good, for he cannot return a thing which is
contrary to that which is found, 3 H. 7. f. 11. and 5 H. 7. f. 27. accordingly.

Where the parties admit one such a Visne, though there be no such the Sherif
cannot return that there is no such but shall make the Pannell of the Body of
the County, 37 H. 6. f. 12.

Appeal, the Sherif returns the Jury of the Visne of D. and yet the new Sherif
returns the Distress, that there is no such Visne, and may, 3 H. 6. f. 58.

Where the Father is condemned, False Returns.
and upon the Exigent upon a Capias to satisfy, the Sherif returns, that he
delivered up himself, and it is his Son that came, and this was so averred, and
found the Son, and the Sherif was amerced, 7 H. 4. f. 13.

Where the Sherif makes false Return, as if he return, I have taken the Body,
upon a Capias to satisfy, and has him not, he shall have his remedy by a
Writ out of the Chancery, or upon his Account in the Exchequer, and not here,
7 H. 4. f 32.

If a Felon (^n going to Execution) be rescued from the Sherif, if that be
presented before Justices of Peace, Felony.
it is Felony; otherwise it is, if that come in by return of the Sherif, 6 H.
7. f. 12. and 1 H. 7. f. 6. the same.

Upon a Fieri facias, the Sherif returns, Fieri facias.
I have done Execution at the Day within contained, and at the Day has not the
Money, and for that goes a Scire facias to the new Sherif against him, to know
why he shall not have Execution, 9 Ed. 4. f. 3.

The sherif which broke the Door of the House to make Execution upon Fieri fac.
shall be punished, as Trespass lies against him, but not for taking the Goods,
18 Ed. 4. f. 4.

The sherif returns upon a Fieri facias, against Executors, that the Executors
have sold all the Goods of the Dead, before the Writ purchased, and have taken
Money, and other Goods for the same Goods; and for that he was amerced, for he
ought to have made Execution of Goods amounting to the value, notwithstanding
the Sale, 14 H. 4. f. 13.

The sherif returns upon a Fieri facias against Executors, that they have
nothing after the coming of the Writ, as to him any way does appear, and was
amerced, for he ought to return directly, that he has nothing; but he may
return, that they are conveyed away, and upon that Execution shall be of their
proper Goods, and he cannot return, He is not to be found, as he can
understand, 9 H. 6. f. 57.

By Hank, if a Fieri facias go out, and the sherif levy the Money, and return
no Writ, the party may sue Sicut alias, if he will, or he may have a writ
against the the sherif, to have the Money here; inquire what Writ that is, but
by Thirn, it is duty to receive by party, and the Fieri facias is, that those
Moneys you shall have here, and they shall be brought into the Court in
discharge of the Defendant, and the sherif is not Debtor by simply saying, for
that is not upon Record that he has levied them, and so the Defendant is
Debtor, and not the sherif, yet some say, if the sherif levy the Money by Fieri
fac. and pays them not to the party Plaintiff, he shall have an Account against
the sherif, 11 H. 4. f. 57. See 2 H. 7. f. 22. by King. Trespass lies against
the sherif for levying the sum, and not returning the writ.

Till the Fieri facias be executed, the Money shall not be intended paid, and
this is not executed, till it be returned by the sheriff, 20 H. 6. f. 25.

Scire fac. to have Execution of a Judgment, the Def. says, that before this
time the sherif by Fieri facias did levy the sum, and though the Def. did not
say, that the sherif delivered the money to the Plaintiff, nor that the Writ
was returned, this is adjudged a good Bar, and for that the Plaintiff says,
that the sherif has not levied it ready, etc. 21 H. 6.5.

Upon a Fieri facias, the sherif returns, that he took Goods to the value of
ten pounds, for which he found no Buyer, by which issued to the new Sherif, a
Venditione exponend. which returned, that his Predecessor took no Goods,
therefore, etc. By which issued a Distress to the late Sherif, that the Goods
that were set to sale he should bring in, 34 H. 6. f. 39.

It is Error where he is outlawed, and the Exigent returned, at my County held
at Ilchester, Uncertain, and where not.
in the County of Some. for it ought to be at my County Court of Somerset, held
at Ilchester, and to recover at the Hustings, London, where there are two, and
is not at which Hustings, it is not good, 6 H. 7. f. 15. See 11 H. 7. f. 10.

Where an Outlary was returned, it shall not be amended, where it was returned
at my County Court held at the Castle of Oxford, and says not in what County,
it is not good, 21 H. 7. f. 37.

Upon a Capias, the Sherif returns, I have taken J.S. and J.D. and does not
say, (within named) and it seems good, and shall be intended, 12 H. 7. f. 18.

A Writ upon a statute staple issued, to take the Body, and to extend the
Lands and Goods of him that was bound, and the Sherif returned that, that he
had extended the Land, and returned nothing of the Goods, and yet it is good
for the Land, which is part of the thing which he ought to do, and not all, 16
H. 7. f. 6.

The Sherif returns, that by virtue of a Command, I have taken the Body, and
that is good, without saying, by virtue of a Writ, for the Sherif may take one
in the Hall at Westminster, by commandment of the Justices without a Writ, 16
H. 7. f. 16.

Scire facias, the Sherif returns, I W.S. do certify you, and it is not good,
but it ought to be, I certify you Justices: but where the Return is Scire
feci, J. S. and does not say, the within named, yet for that that, it is
further, (as this Writ in it commands and requires, according to the form of
the Writ) that is a good Return, 1 H. 6. f. 7.

Praemunire, tht Sherif returns, that the Defendant was warned, and for that,
that it is not what day, it is not good, for he ought to be warned by two
Months before the day of the return by the Statute, and that does not appear,
and for that it is not good, 42 Ed. 3.7. and 39 Edw. 3.7.

Assise where the writ was ill returned, and that uncertain, there shall Issue
a Sicut alias, 46 Ed. 3. f. 18.

One Outlawed, and Proclami feci was returned, that he had rendered himself
Prisoner to the Sherif of London, where it should have been Rent. And the
Out-lawry was for that reversed by Error, 27 H. 8.34.

Where the Sherif returns Nihil, or is not to be found, as it can appear to
him, he shall be amerced, for he ought to take notice, 9 H. 6.57.

Where the Sherif returns (I have commanded the Bailif of the Liberty) of D.
and for that, that he has not returned to what Person it is not good, 9 Ed.
4.20. and 1 H. 6.7, the same.

Upon a Capias, the Sherif returns (I have taken the body) and that A. and B.
rescued him, and for that, that it is not where, it is not good, 10 Ed. 4.17

Scire facias to have Execution of an annuity against a Parson, the Sherif
returns (that he has no Goods) notwithstanding that it was not (nor had at the
time of the receipt of this writ) yet it seems it shall be intended, and for
that it is good, 2 Ed. 4.1.

Scire facias against two several Tenants, the Sherif returns ( Scire feci in
manner and form, as this Writ in it commands and requires) and it is good,
though it be not returned severally, Scire feci, 2 H. 4.14. See, 37 H. 6.31.

In a Writ to inquire of Wast, the Sherifreturns that I, took the Inquisition,
Die Sabbati proximo, and for that it is not what Sabbati, it is no good return,
40 Ed. 3.20

Scire facias, to have execution of arrerages of an annuity against Lawrence
Booth, keeper of our blessed Mary Hallers in the University of Cambridge and
Scholars, and the Sherif returns that Scire feci Lawrance Booth, and nothing
of the Scholars, and for that the return was not good, and so Sicut alias, 34
H. 6 54.

Where a Writ goes to the Coroners, and one returns that he made a Precept to
his Servant to arrest the Defendant, and that he at D. such a day made a
Rescue, this return is not good, for it shall be made by both the Coroners, 39
H. 6.42.

Upon Exigent, the Sherif returns, I have caused to be proclaimed at such a
County Court held such a day, and for that, that it is not what year, it is not
good, 27 H. 8.34.

The Sherif returns, he has nothing, and it is not good, but he ought to
return also, that he has not Bailifs, nor a Bailiwick, nor he is not to be
found, 26 Book of Assizes 33.

Attaint, The writ you shall diligently inquire, who were the Jurors of the
first inquisition, and whether M.B. Knight was one of the petty Jury, and he
returned their names, and M.B. was dead, and though he do not return M.B.
Knight. It shall be extended the same, and a good return, 24 book of Assizes 6.

The Sherif upon a Venire facias, returns twelve names only upon the back of
the Writ, and not in the Scedule, and it is not good, but shall return twenty
four according to the usage, 2 H. 7. f. 8.

The Sheriff returns upon a Cap^as, that a Rescue was made at D. by the command
of J.S. and for that, that he does not return where the command was, it was not
good, for the return shall be as certain as known, 3 H. 7.11.

Upon Pluries, to have a Corody, the Sherif returns that the Bishop of K. is
founder and does not return the name of that Bishop that founded it, and for
that it is uncertain, 3 H. 7.6.

Admeasurement of Dower, the Sherif returns that the woman has more by forty
shillings per annum, this is no good return, for he ought to return two parts
by it self and their values, and the third part by it self and the value
thereof, 44 Ed. 3.11.

The Sherif of London upon a Nativo habendo, returns, London.
that if a Villain remain in London by a year and a day, that he shall not be
drawn out, and that is a good return, and it is said, that return, that Attaint
does not lie in London, is a good return. Inquire, 7 H. 6.34.

In London every of the Sherifs may arrest a man, and yet the Return shall be
made in the name of both the Sherifs, 39 H. 6. f. 43.

Where the Sherif returns (I have commanded the Bailif of the liberty) and
does not return, for that, that he has nothing, within my bailiwick and was
amerced, 47 Ed. 3.2.

Where the Sherif returns (I have commanded the bailif of the liberty) where
that liberty is not enrolled in the Exchequer, it is taken as a dis-inheriting
of the King, 2 H. Mandav. Balivo.
4.5. and 11 Ed. 4.6. the same.

The Sheriff returns, I have commanded the Bailif of the liberty, which answers
me that he has taken the body, and has not the body there, it is doubted
whether the Bailiff shall be amerced or the Sherif, 2 H. 4.16 Inquire, see, 11
H. 4. fol. 41. that the Bailiff shall be amerced and not the Sheriff, 5 Ed.
4.6. The same.

Where the Sheriff returns, I have commanded the Bailiff of the Liberty, which
answers me, that he has taken the body and notwithstanding has not the Body,
the Sherif was amerced, and a Distringas awarded, to distrain the Bailiff to
bring in the body, etc. 47 Ed. 3.25. But, 14 Ed. 4.1. There shall go out a
Distringas Ballivum to bring in the Body, and, 36 H. 6.1. the same

The sherif returns I have commanded the Bailif of the Liberty, which answers
me, and returns but nine of the Pannell, the sherif shall be amerced, and not
the Bailif, for the return in Law is not good, 8 H. 6.56.

The sherif upon a Grand Cape returns (I have commanded the Bailif of the
Liberty,) which answers me, that he has taken the Land into the Kings hands,
and does not return that he has summoned the Tenant, and held that the return
in Law is not good, and for that the Sherift shall be amerced, 4. H. 6.25.

If the Sherif upon a Capias makes a command to the Bailif to arrest one, and
he takes him, and the sherif does not return the Writ, by Frowick and Brian,
the Bailif shall not be punished but the sherif, 10 H. 7.17.

False Imprisonment against a Bailif, which says that a Capias came to the
sherif and the sherif commanded him being a travailing Bailif, that he should
take the body of the plaintiff, which he did so, the Plaintiff says that the
Writ was not returned. And by Kingsmill, though the Bailif were Fined, it shall
be accounted all wrong in him, for that, that the Writ is not returned, 20 H.
7.13.

Contrary by Read, and Littleton, says, that Trespass does not lie against a
servant in this case, 18 Ed. 4.10.

If the sherif himself justify in Trespass the arrest of one by Capias to him
directed, he ought to show that he has returned the writ, for it is
conditional (so that you have his body here, etc. 3 H. 7.3.

Where the Sherif serves a Fieri facias, and levies the sum, and does not
return the Writ, the party may have an action of trespass against him for that
levy, 21 H. 7.22. by Kingsmill.

The same Law is, if a Bailiff by the command of the Sheriff arrest a man, and
do not bring him to the Sheriff, false imprisonment lies against him.

Capias issued to the Sherif where there is no Orignall, and he arrests the
party and returns the Writ, trespass does not lie against him.

If the Servant of the Sheriff arrest one by a Precept made out of a Capias,
and return his Precept to the Sherif, and the Sheriff do not return his
Capias, it seems, that false imprisonment lies against the Servant.

But where the Bailiff of a Liberty arrests one by a Precept out of a Capias,
made to him by the Sheriff, and the Sheriff do no not return the Capias, it
seems that fall imprisonment lies against the Sheriff, and not against the
Bailiffe.

If the Sheriff make a Precept to his Servant, or to another to be a Bailiffe
(if he be not a Bailiffe of the Franchise, which is not his Servant) and they
take party, and the Sheriff does not return the Writ, the Bailiffe is a
Trespasser, unless he be Bailiffe of the Franchise, though the Bailiffe return
his Precept to the Sheriff served, 8 Ed. 4.18. and 13 H. 7.2. the same, See 18
Ed. 4.9. and 28 Book of Assise 47.

Debt against an Executor, which pleads nothing in his hands, and found Assets,
and the sheriff returns upon a Fieri facias, I have commanded the Bailiffe of
the Liberty, etc. which answers me that he has no goods of the Testators,
and this Return is not good, for it is contrary to the Verdict and trial, and
yet the Sheriff shall be amerced, and not the Bailiffe, for that, that the
Return in Law is not good, and the Sheriff ought to have knowledge of the Law,
5 H. 7.27.

But for false Return, the Bailiffe shall be amerced. 3 H. 7 11. the same.

Where the sheriff returns I have commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty,
which has given me no answer, there shall go out a Non omittas.

The sheriff Returns, I have commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty, and for
that, he does not return (for that) be has nothing within the Liberty, he was
amerced, 47 Ed. 3.2.

The sheriff returns, I have commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty, and it is
not to what person the Liberty is, and for that by Pigot it is not good, 9 Ed
4.20. contrary by Dauby, see 1 H. 6.7.

The Sheriff returns, I have commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty of the
Franchise of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and for that, that it is not, (for that)
the Lands were within the Liberty, it was challenged, and the return is not
good, for that, that it is not of what Liberty, if he have more, and for that
he ought to return, I have commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty, of the
Franchise, of the Earl of Shrewsbury of Scarsdale, or his Liberty of high Peak,
etc. which has full return, and execution of all the Writs in the said
Liberty, to whom it belongs totally to make execution of this writ, which
truly Bailiffe so answers me, etc. 1 H. 6.7. 9 H. 6.33.

Upon a Writ to inquire of VVast, the Sheriff returns, I have commanded the
Bailiffe of the Liberty, which has given me no answer, and the sheriff was
amerced, for he ought to enter, and go to the place wasted, for that is the
statute, and for that the Franchise shall not hold place, 11 H. 4.80.

If the sheriff enter into any Liberty, and execute Process there, without a
(non omittas) the Lord of the Liberty shall have a Writ of Trespass upon the
Case against him, Fitzh. 95 B.

The sheriff returns upon the Exigent, that the Defendant is dead, and cannot,
by Prisot, and also upon a Capias he cannot return that, 32 H. 6.33.

The sherif returns upon a Scire facias against an Abbot, that he is deposed, by
which he cannot warn him, and it is good, for that is a death, 1 H. 6.2. and 2
H. 6.5. the same.

The sherif returns upon an Exigent that the defendant is dead, and it is no
good Return, for he ought but to demand him, and if he appear to take him, 10 H
4.5.

Upon Pluries Repleg. The sherif returns that the beasts are dead, and this is
a good Return, and he need not return that the beasts are driven away, 32 H.
6.32.

In Attaint, the sherif cannot return that the Defendant is dead, for there are
not any words in the Writ to warn the Defendant, 18 H. 8.5.

Upon a Habeas corpus Jurat. the sherif returns that four are dead, and may,
and upon a Distringas thereof, he returns that other two are dead, and may, 10
Ed. 4.11.

Upon an Habere facias Seisinam, and upon the Grand Cape, and upon Habere
facias visum, a return that none, came of the part of the complainant, etc. is
a good return, 13 H. 4.9. None comes for the Plaintiff.


Upon a Writ of View, it is a good return, that none came of the part of the
complainant, to show him the Land, for the sherif is not bound to know the
Land, 14 H. 6.20.

The statute of York, chap. 5. says, Names of the Sherif
that the sherif ought to put his proper name to every Return, 8 H. 6. fol.
76.36 H. 6 f. 1. and 9 Ed. 4. f. 19.

Where one is outlawed, he may reverse that by Error, for that in Return of
the Alias Capias, the name of the sherif was omitted, 26 H. 8.4.

Trespass against an Abbot and his Monks, Pledges.
the sherif returns Pledges for the Abbot, and that his Monks have nothing, and
that is a good Return, and yet of a Husband and a Wife, Pledges shall serve
both, and he need not return the Wife, Nihil, 48 Ed 3. fol. 26.

Assise, the sherif returns he has found me no Pledges, and the writ was
delivered to the sherif again, and the Plaintiff forthwith found Pledges, 2 H.
4.22.

Assise against a Husband and his wife, the wife shall be attached by goods of
the Husband, for that she is to be brought in by her Husband, 7 H. 6.10.

Upon a Habeas corpora, against a Juror, the sherif cannot return that he has
served part, and the Bailif of the Liberty the other part, but upon a Capias
against diverse, the sherif may return Cepi corpus of one, and I have commanded
the Bailif of the Liberty of another, Part served by the Sheriff.
and it is a good Return, 31. H. 6.13.

The sherif upon a Habeas corpus with December tales, returns that he has served
the Habeas corpus, and to the December tales, I have commanded the Bailif of the
Liberty, which has served the residue, it is not good Return, 8 H. 4.16.

Distringas Juratores, the Sheriff cannot return that he has distrained some,
and the Bailiff of the Liberty has served the rest, 19 H. 6. f. 48.

Upon a Distringas with Proclamation upon an Ejectment of Ward, the Sheriff
returns, I have commanded the Bailiff of the Liberty, which answers, etc.
Issues forty pence, and that he himself has made Proclamation, and for that it
seems that the Sheriff ought to make the Proclamation in the County, and ought
to serve the residue, 2 H. 4. f. 1.

In a Precipe, the Sherif returns, I have commanded the Bailif of the Liberty,
who answers me so, etc. a good Return; and also that the Bailif takes the
Pledges, and for that that he took the Pledges, where the Sherif ought, the
Sherif was amerced, and Sicat alias was awarded, 14 H. 6. f. 3.

Assise, the Sherif returns, that he has taken Pledges, and that the Bailif
of the Liberty has served the residue, and though part be served by the
Sherif, and part by the Bailif, it is good; for if the Plaintiff do not find to
the Sherif Pledges, he shall make no Precept to the Bailif, 21 H. 7. f. 14.

The Sherif by the statute of Westminster, Posse Comitatus.
the 2. chap. 39. may take, Posse Comitatus, to execute Process, and also
agreed by this Book, that the Bailif may so do, for he is in the place of the
Sherif, 3 H. 7. f. 1.

Upon a Scire facias against a Chaplain upon a Recovery in a Quare impedit,
Quare impedit.
the Sherif ought not to return, That he is a beneficed Clerk, having no Lay
Fee, for that shall not be returned, but upon a Distringas or Capias in Debt or
Trespass, that is a good Return, and there shall go Venire facias Clericum,
but here he may be warned by his person, 32 H. 6. f. 13.

If the Sherif return that one at D. Rescous.
made a Rescue, it is good without addition of the party in the Return, and yet
Process of Outlary lies upon that; and where the Sherif returns the Rescue to
be made at D. he is estopt to plead to that Return, over D. and neither D. and
none without addition, for he is estopt by the Return.

Where the Sheriff upon a Capias returns, I have taken the Body, and that J.
S. and J. D. made a Rescue, and for that, that in the Return there is not of
what place, it is not good, 10 Edw. 4. fol. 17. and 3 H. 7. f. 11. the same.

Where Tenant for Life, Scire fac.
prays in aid of him in Reversion, and in Scire facias against him, the Sherif
may return, that he is warned in the Land in Reversion, which is in the Land
demanded, 45 Ed. 3. f. 26.

One may be warned in Scire facias by his person, his Land, or Goods, as it
seems by 32 H. 6. f. 13.

Scire facias to warn two upon a Writ of Detinue, the Sherif returns one
warned, and that the other (has nothing) and held that the Sherif shall be
amerced, for though that he has nothing, he ought to have warned him by words,
that is his Person; but for that that the Return was read, and was (He has
nothing in my County) nor is found in the same, it was good, for he cannot warn
his Person, 1 H. 5. f. 13.

The Sherif returns upon a Scire facias, against a Parson to have Execution of
Arrearages of Annuity, that the Parson has resigned, and that he has no
Goods, and it is good, and may take notice of the Resignation, 2 Ed. 4. f. 1.

Upon a Writ of Error issued Scire facias, to the Heir and Ter-tenant
severally, to come together if they thought fitting, and it was against Husband
and his Wife, and another person, and the Sherif returned, that Scire feci L.
de B. and Alice his wife Tenants of so much, and R. de H. tenant of so much
severally, and the Return good, though the Husband and the wife cannot be
severed, 3 H. 7. f. the last.

The Sherif returns upon a Scire facias, against an Abbot that he is deposed,
that he cannot warn him, and this is good, for he is dead, 1 H. 6 f. 2.

The Sherif returns Scire feci, by A. and B. without saying, Good and lawful
men, and the party appears, and good, 8 H. 6. f. 76.

Attaint was returned by the Sherif Nihil, Summons in the Land demanded.
and the Return is not good, and so Sicut alias, and shall be summoned in the
Land demanded, 42 Ed. 3. f. 19.

Mortdancester by two, and one makes default, by which issues a Summons to
prosecute together, the Sherif upon this returns Nihil, and award, that they
shall be summoned in the Land demanded, 44 Ed. 3. f. 27.

Scire facias out of a Fine to execute that, and two make default, and in a
Summons to prosecute together, the sherif upon that returns Nihil, and shall
be amerced, for they shall be summoned in the Land in Demand, 10 H. 6. f. 12.

The same Law is, where one has aid of him in Reversion and in a summons to
aid, he shall be summoned in the Land demanded.

A Writ of Covenant to levy a Fine, the Sheriff returns Nihil, and for that
shall be amerced, for he ought to have Summoned him in the Lands Demanded, 10
H. 6.13

Where aid was granted, and the Sherif returns that the Prayee has nothing
whereby he may be summoned, by which Sicut alias, was awarded in the Land in
demand, 23 Ed. 3.37.

Debt against John Burton Parson of D. The Sherif returns at the Pluries
distringas, that he has resigned, and it is a good return, 2 H. 7.10.

Scire facias, against an Abbot, and the Sherif returns he is deposed, and good
return: But in Scire facias, against a Husband and his Wife, Spiritual
the Sherif cannot return that they are divorced, for that is spiritual,
whereof he has no notice, 1 H. 6.2. and 2 H. 6.5. the same

Scire facias, against the Parson of D. to have Execution of arrerages of
annuity, though the Sherif return that he has resigned, and take notice of
that, it is a good return, 2 Ed. 4.1.

The Sherif returns upon a Capias, Tarde, and was amerced, 2 H. 4.8.

Right of ward at the Distringas with proclamation, the Sherif returns Exitus,
and that he cannot proclaim that, for that it came too late, and there shall go
an Alias, to proclaim that only, and shall not return Issues, 3 H. 4.6.

In Capias of appeal of Death, Tarde.
the Sherif returns, that, that writ came so late that, etc. and the return
awarded good, 8 H. 4.22.

In Assise, when the Writ is returned, Tarde, the Clarks do not make Sicut
alias, but enter the Writ, and send that again to the Sherif to be served, 9
Ed. 4.20.

Forging of Deeds, Distringas, with December tales, of that was awarded against
the Jury, and the principle Jury was returned Tarde upon the distringas, and
the Tales served, and the return was awarded good, for where the Issues are to
be returned, the Sherif ought to have time to know their Land, but upon a
Capias returned Tarde, it is said to be ill, But inquire, because it is used,
21 H. 6.51.

The Sherif returns Writ delivered by Bill according to the Statute of Westminster.
2. chap. 39. Tarde, and for that, that the Sherif refuses to put his seal,
others put their seals according to the statute, and the Plaintiff has a writ
to the Justices of assise to inquire of Damages, 29 Ass. 58.

Capias, to have Execution against an Abbot, or against a Bishop if it be
returned, that they have nothing in that County, there shall go out Elegit upon
the Testatum in another County, 26 H. 8 8. and 26 H. 8.17.

Where one has recovered in a Quare impedit, and has a Writ to the Bishop,
which refuses his Clark. So that he has a Quare non admisit, Testatum,
and process continue to the distress against the Bishop, and the sherif
returns that he has nothing, there goes Distringas to the sherif of London
upon the Testatum, that he has no Land there, 3 H. 4.6.

Trespass against a Prior, the sherif returns that he has nothing, and how he
has no Land there, he shall have process into another County upon a Testatum,
for a Prior was a name of Dignity, and for that shall have process in another
County upon Testatum, 7. H. 4.1.

Where the sherif returns Nihil, Capias does not lie against a Lady, Peer of
the Realm, Earl or Baron. But there shall go a Testatum in another County, but
where they do wrong, as if they essoigne, Distress, and returns that by the
Sherif, the Capias lies for the wrong, 11 H. 415.

If the Sheriff arrest any, and Rescue is made, by Baron, Earl, or Duke, if
the Sheriff return the Rescue, Capias lies, 1 H. 5 fol. the last.

Wast was made in Reddale, and upon a Writ to inquire of Waste, the Sheriff
returns, that I have taken an Inqusition at Reddale, and for that it is not at
the place wasted, it is no good return, 40 Ed. 3.20. and 27 H. 8.16 the same.

Waste in A.B.C. and D. it is said that a Writ to inquire of Waste shall be
returned (that I have come to the Tenements aforesaid, and the Inquisition
taken at one Town shall serve for all, 34 H. 6.49.

A. returns upon a Redisseisin or upon a Writ to inquire of Waste, (that I came
to the Town) is not good, but to the place, 11 H. 4.6.

Upon a Writ to inquire of waste, for that that the Sheriff returns, (I have
commanded the Bailiffe of the Liberty, which has given me no answer) he was
amerced, for he ought to go to the place wasted, 11 H. 4.80.

Appeal, Visne.
the Sheriff returns a Jury of the Visne of D^ and the new Sheriff returns no
such Visne, and may, 3 H. 6. fol. last.

Venire facias, Venire facias.
was returned by the Sherif, and afterward the Sherif was discharged, and a
new Sherif made and at the Distringas he returned (Nihil) upon a Juror, and
adjudged that he shall be amerced, but he may return that the Lands are
recovered against the Juror, or that the Juror was Tenant for life of J. S.
which is dead, or other special matter, and so (Nihil) 19. H. 6.38.

Where the Parties admit one such (Visne) where there is no such, the Sherif
cannot return, that there is no such (Visne) but shall make the Pannell of the
body of the County, 37 H. 6.12.

A (Venire facias) with the Pannell was returned, and none found upon the Roll,
but (sicut alias) awarded and returned, and upon that (Habeas corpora) and
Distringas, and the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and it is showed in arrest
of Judgment, that there was another (Venire facias) with a Pannell, and
adjudged that it shall not be intended to be there lawfully, but shall be taken
off the File, for that, that in the Roll the Entry was, ad quem diem Vicecomes
non misit breve, and upon that it was awarded the sicut alias, 20 H. 6.17.

Though the Venire facias, is Venire facias, twelve free and lawful men, yet
if the Sherif return twelve only, if he do not amend that, he shall be
amerced, for the Justices will not alter the ancient Form, for the mischief
which may come, for if twelve only be returned he shall not have a Jury
without a Tales, 2 H. 7.8.

The sherif returns a Pannell upon Venire facias, and comes a Bailif of the
Fee, and shows an Indenture by which he has returned certain names to the
sherif, and that the sherif has returned other names in blemishing his return,
and prays that the Jury be not taken, and it was not allowed, 30 Book of
Assizes 5.

Assise, (Venire facias) was directed to the Coroners, and the Pannell was
returned by two Coroners, where there are four, and therefore the (Venire
facias) was sent back again, and after was returned by all four, 31 Assise 20.

Venire facias Issued to the Sheriff, which returns, Mandavi in Ballivo
libertatis, that to me he should send a Panel, and this is returned, and after
goes Tales to the Sheriff, and he return the Tales, aledging that there were
more sufficient within the Franchise, and good return upon this special
matter, 38 Ed. 3.29.

Debt against the sherif, Sheriff.
and he reurneth that hhimself is sherif, and that he cannot summon himself, 18
H. 3. and H. 6.77. see 9. H. 6 f. 10.

Precipe, (Venire facias) issued to the sherif, and he was outed of his office
one month before the return of it, and he sent the (Venire facias) which was
served to the new sherif, and he returned another Venire facias, and returned
that Writ late, and it seems that the Writ which is served shall be 28 Ed.
3.99.

One was out lawed, and Procla mari feci was returned, that he should render
himself to the sherif of London, where it should be Kent, and the outlawry was
reversed by error, and for that, that it is in another Term, it seems that
the sherif shall not amerced, 27 H. 8.34.

Debt was brought by I.S. being sherif, and serves the Writ, and it is good,
and may serve that til a Venire facias 14 H. 6.1.

The sherif may bring a Writ of debt in the County where he is sherif, and may
serve it, and return it, and may find pledges to prosecute in the Chancery, 14.
H. 6.19.

Trespass against the sherif and two others, and process was awarded to the
Coroners, and the sherif was found not guilty, and the Plaintiff prayed a (Fiere
facias) to the sherif and could not have it, for that the process before was to
the Coroners, 2 H. 6 12.

Debt upon a Capias, the sheriff returns that he is sick in Prison, and yet
the Defendant was received to appear, for he has day by Roll, and the Plaintiff
was demanded, and did not come, and was non suited, 3 H. 6.3.

If the the sherif return in one Panel, Johannis D. where it should be
Johannes D. yet that is good, for false Latin is not material in a return, 2 H
4.8.

If the sherif return upon a Capias, cepi corpus, and has not the body, he
shall be amerced, 7 H. 4.11.

The Defendant cannot say that the sherif is cozen to the Plaintiff and pray
(Venire facias) to to the Coroners, for if it be so, he may have his challenge
and quash the Jury, but the Plaintiff may pray that 3 H. 7.2. and 5.

Exigent which was delivered of Record was imbezilled, and the Copy of that
returned by the sheriff, and he was amerced for returning of the copy to 30 l.
and for imbezilling that 20 l. 3 E. 4.5 Debt upon an Obligation made to the
sheriff, by one let to mainprise, and the name of the sherif is not in the
Obligation as ought to be by that statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10. and the
Defendant may show that, and conclude, and so not his deed, 7. Ed. 4.5. Every
original writ shall be to the sherif as assise of an office in the Common
place, but process may be to the keeper of the Palace, 3 Ed. 4.17. The
sheriff nor his servant cannot break a close to make a Replevin where is a
gate, unless it be stopped, 20 H. 6.30. The sherif, and the Bailif errant,
sworn and known, may arrest one without showing him a Warrant, contrary of the
servant of the sherif, which is not an office sworn and known, 8 Ed. 4.14. If
the sherif come to arrest one, and he fly, he may pursue him, and take him in
another County, but not assault nor beat him, for that he was not arrested, but
if he were arrested, and fly into another County with his sword naked in his
hand, he may follow him, and assault him, and beat him, and take him, 2 Ed.
4.7. If the sherif come to arrest one, and he sly into another County, there
he may freshty pursue and arrest him, 11 Ed. 4.9. The sherif or officer may
break a house to take a Felon, but he cannot break a house to arrest one upon a
Capias in Debt or Trespass, 13 Ed. 4.8.

The sherif upn a Fieri facias cannot break a door or chest to take goods in
Execution, for if he does, Trespass lies for the breaking only, 18. Ed. 4.4.

Trespass against the sherif for taking of goods, he may justify for that the
Exigent of Felony was awarded to him, and that he took them, and he might
justify for that, though that he does not say, that he accounted to the King,
but a Capias ad satisfaciendum is conditional, 3 H. 7.3.

If the Sheriff attach a Cow, by the attachment, the property of the Cow is
not out of the party, till the day that he makes default: and if at the day he
makes default, he may take that as a forfeit, although he leave it with the
party, 9 H. 7.6. and 34. H. 6.53.

Capias for Felony, the Sheriff returns Cepi corpus, and has not the body at
the day, by which he was amerced a hundred shillings for the escape, 40 Assise.
43.

See the sherif may serve a Writ as it seems with three hundred men if need
be, 3 H. 7.1.

THE MOST USUAL WRITS which have been used in the Kings Bench, and are most
like to continue in that Court, now called the Upper Bench, never before
Printed in English.
Latitat.
THe Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament,
to the Sheriff of E. Greeting.
Whereas We have lately commanded the Sheriff of the County of Middlesex, that
he should take A.B. if he might be found in his Bayliwick, and him safely keep,
so that he might have his body before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, the
Thursday next after the fifteen days of Easter, to answer to C. D. in a Plea
of Trespass. And the said Sheriff of Middlesex at that day returned to us that
the said A. B. is not found in his Bayliwick. Whereupon on the behalf of the
said C. D. in the Court before us, it is sufficiently testified, that the said
A. B. does lurk, and sculk in your County; therefore We command you that you
take him if he shall be found in your Bayliwick, and him safely keep; so that
you may have his body before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, the
Wednesday next after the three weeks of Easter, to answer the said C.D. in the
Plea aforesaid. And then you have here this writ,

Witness H. Roll at Westminster the 17th day of April, in the year of our Lord
1651. Wightwicke.

Alias Capias.
THe Keepers of the Liberty of England by Authority of Parliament,
to the Sheriff of E. Greeting.
We command you, as formerly We have you commanded, that you take A. B. if he
shall be found in your Bayliwick, and him safely keep, so that you have his
body before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster on Saturday next after the
morrow of the Ascension of our Lord, to answer C.D. in a Plea of Trespass. And
then you have there this Writ. Witness H. Roll at Westminster the 17th day of
April, in the year of our Lord 1651. Wightwicke.

Plures Capias.
THe Keepers of the Liberty of England by the Authority of Parliament,
to the Sheriff of E. Greeting.
We command you, as many times we have commanded that you take A. B. etc. as
above in the Writ next before.

Bill Middl.
Middl: ss:
It is commanded to the Sheriff, that he take A. B. if, etc. and him safely,
etc. so that he have his body before the Keepers of the Liberty of England, by
the Authority of Parliament, in the Upper Bench at Westminster on Wednesday
next after the month of Easter, to answer C. D. in a Plea of Trespass. And then
he have here this precept, etc.

By Bill: Wightwicke.

Alias Bill.
MIddl: ss.
It is commanded the Sheriff, as it was formerly commanded, that he take A. B.
etc. as above in the Bill of Middlesex.

Attachment of privilege.
THe Keepers of the Liberty of England, by the Authority of Parliament,
to the Sheriff of H. Greeting.
We command you that you attach A. B. if he shall be found in your Bayliwick,
and him safely to keep; so that you have his body before Us in the Upper Bench
at Westminster. on Wednesday, etc. (reciting the return) to answer C. D. Gent. one of
the Clerks of Samuel Wightwicke Esquire chief Clerk assigned to inroll Pleas in the
Upper Bench at Westminster. etc. in a Plea of Trespass. And then you have there this
Writ.

Witness H. Roll at Westminster, etc.
Habeas Corpus ad ^ac and rec'
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
Greeting.
We command you, that you have the body of A. B. (in our Prison under your
custody (as it is said detained) under safe and secure conduct, together with
the day, and cause of his caption, and detaining by that name soever the said A
B. be censured in the same) before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster on
Saturday next after the morrow of All Souls, to do, and receive al., and every
those things which the Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster. shall
consider of in that behalf. And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Habeas Corpus retornable before a Judge immediately.
THe Keepers, etc.
(as above in the Habeas Corpus until)
by what name soever the said A. B. be censured in the same) before Henry Roll
chief justice, assigned to hold Pleas in the Upper Bench at Westminster. at his
Chamber in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, London, immediately after the
receiving of this Writ, to do, and receive all and every those things which the
said Chief Justice, then, and there shall consider of in that behalf. And then
you have here this Writ, etc.

Witness, etc.
Habeas Corpus upon a cepi Corpus.
THe Keepers, etc.
to the Sheriff of O. Greeting.
We command you that you have the body of A B. (by you taken, and in our prison
under your custody detained, as you your self to us in the Court before us in
the Upper Bench at Westminster. formerly by you sent, have thereby charged your self)
before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster. etc. (reciting the Return) to answer
C.D. in a Plea of Trespass. And then you have there this writ.

Witness, etc.
Habeas Corpus ad satisfaciendum.
THe Keepers, etc.
(as above until the Return)
next after, etc. to satisfy C. D. as well of one hundred li. of debt, as 40
s. for his damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining of that
Debt, as for his Costs and charges by him, about his Suit, in that behalf
disbursed. And further to do, and receive all, and every those things, etc. (as
above in the Habeas Corpus ad fac' and rec'.

Procedendo
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
Greeting.
Although we have lately commanded you by our Writ, that you should have the
body of A. B. (in Our prison under your custody, as it was said, detained
under safe and secure conduct, together with the day and cause of his caption,
and detention, by what name soever the said A. B. should be censured in the
same) before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster. on, etc. (as the Return was in the
Habeas Corpus) last past, to do, and receive all, and every those things which
the Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster shall then, and there,
consider or in that behalf. Yet we being now moved with certain causes in the
same Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, We command you, and
every of you, that in whatsoever Plaints or Suits against him, the said A. B.
at the Suit of C. D. in the Court before you, or any of you leavied, or
affirmed; and before you, or any of you now depending undetermined, in such
manner you proceed with what celeritie you can, as according to the Law, and
custom of this Nation you think to be expedient; Our Writ aforesaid to you
formerly directed to the contrary notwithstanding.

Witness, etc.
Supersedeas when the Defendant appears, and files common Bail.
THe Keepers, etc.
Greeting.
Whereas by our Writ, we have lately commanded you, that you should take A. B.
if, etc. (recite as is in the Alias Capias till these words) to answer C. D. in
a Plea of trespass. And because the said A. B. in the Court before us, in the
Upper Bench at Westminster. has appeared at the day, and place in the said Writ
contained, to answer the said C. D. according to the form and effect of the
said Writ; Therefore we command you, that you for ever supersede from further
attaching, Imprisoning, or him the said A. B. for that cause any way molesting;
And if you have taken him for that cause and no other, then upon your peril
without delay you cause him to be freed, delivered from the Prison, where he is
so detained.

Witness, etc.
Supersedeas upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum, when the Plaintiff has
acknowledged satisfaction
THe Keepers of, etc.
Greeting.
Although by our Writ we have lately commanded you, that you should take A. B.
if, etc. (Reciting the execution until these words) as it does appear to us
upon record, yet because the said C. D. in the same Court before us in the
Upper Bench at Westminster, did acknowledge that he is satisfied for the debt
and damages aforesaid, therefore we command you that you for ever supersede
from taking, attaching, Imprisoning, or him the said A. B. for that cause any
ways molesting. And if you have taken him, the said A. B. for that cause (and
no other) then without delay upon your peril, you cause him to be delivered
from the Prison where he is so detained, if for that cause and no other, he is
detained.

Witness, etc.
Subpena.
THe Keeper, etc.
to J. B. and C. D. Greeting,
we command you, and both of you, notwithstanding, all and every business and
excuses whatsoever, that you be in your proper persons, before Henry Roll Chief
Justice assigned, to hold Pleas in the Upper Bench at Westminster on Friday the
29th. day of November, at Guild-Hald London there to testify all and every
those things, according to your, and both of your knowledge and notice, which
you, or either of you have known, in a certain action, now depending in the
Upper Bench at Westminster undetermined* between E. F. Plaintiff, and H. J.
Defendant, in a Plea of trespass, and ejectment to be tried between the said
Parties by a Jurat of the Country. And this in no wise you omit, neither either
of you omit, upon the penalty of either of you, of a hundred pound.

Witness, etc.
Subpena to testify before the Sheriffs of London.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above until these words) proper persons before the Sheriffs of London,
the 15th. day of May, about one a clock in the afternoon of the same day, at
Guild Hall London, to testify, etc. (as above until) the day and place
aforesaid, to be inquired of before the said Sheriffs, by the Oath of twelve
honest and lawful men of the City of London aforesaid.

Witness, etc.
Venire facias.
THe Keeper, etc.
to the Sheriff of London, Greeting.
We command you that you cause to come before Us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster on Wednesday, etc. twelve free, and lawful men of the visne of the
Parish of Blessed Mary of Bow, in the Ward of Cheap, London, every one of
which has four pounds of Lands, Tenements, or Rents by the year at the least,
by whom the truth of the matter may better be known. And which neither the said
A. B. Plaintiff, nor C. D. to happen into any affinity, to make a certain
Jurat between the parties aforesaid of a Plea of Debt, because as well the said
C. D. as the said A. B. between whom thereof there is contention, have put
themselves into that Jurat. And then you have there the names of the Jurors.
And this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Venire facias with a Proviso.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above until these words) have put themselves in that Jurat. Always
provided, that if two Writs shall thereby come to you, you only execute and
return one of them. And then you have there the names of the Jurors. And this
Writ. Witness, etc. Also the Distringas Jur. may be made with a proviso.

Distringas Jur.
THe Keepers of, etc.
to the Sheriffs of London. Greeting.
We command you that you distrain A. B. etc. (naming the 24. Jurors) Jurors
summoned before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, between A. B. Plaintiff,
and C. D. by all their Lands and Chattels in your Bayliwick, so that neither
they, nor any by them put hands to those thing, until you have thereof another
Precept from us. And that of the issues thereof you answer to us. so that you
have their Bodies before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster on Wednesday next
after five weeks of Easter; or before our faithful and well beloved Henry
Roll, Chief Justice, assigned to hold Pleas in the Court before Us in the Upper
Bench at Westminster, if first he come on Tue^day the ^1. day of May at
Guild Hall London, by the form of the Statute in such case lately made, and
provided, to make a certain Jurat between the said parties in a Plea of Debt.
And to hear their Judgment of many defaults. And then you have here the names
of the Jurors. And this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Distring. (...) the Issue at the Bar.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above until these words) so that you have their Bodies before Us in the
Upper Bench at Westminster, on, etc. next after, etc. to make a certain Jurat
between the said parties in a Plea of Trespass, and E^ectment. And thereby to
hear their Judgment, etc. And you have, etc. (as above.)

Distring, (...).
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting.
We command you, that you distrain A. B. Esquire, lately Sheriff of your
County, by all his Lands, and Chattels; so that neither he, nor any by him, put
hands to those things, until you have thereof another Precept from us. And
that of the Issues thereof you answer to us, so that you have the Body of C. D.
(by him taken, and in our prison under his custody detained, as he himself by
his Return to us in the Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster,
formerly thereunto by him sent, has charged himself) before us in the Upper
Bench at Westminster. on, etc. next after, etc. to answer E. F. in a Plea of Trespass.
And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Writ of Inquiry.
THe Keepers, etc.
Greeting.
Whereas A: B. lately in the Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster
by a Bili without our Writ, and by judgment of the said Court had impleaded C.
D. of E. in the County of F. Yeoman for that, (that is to say) that wherea^ one
J. H. the 19th day of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred
and fifty, at L. in the County aforesaid, had demised, granted, and to farm,
let, etc. (And so recite the Declarat') And thereupon, then produced the Suit,
etc. Such like process thereupon, is taken before us in the same Court, that
the said A. B. ought to recover his damages against the said C. D. by reason of
the premises, but because now it is unknown what damage the said A. B. in that
behalf sustained; Therefore we command you, that by the Oath of honest and
lawful men of your Bayliwick, you diligently enquire what damages, the said A.
B. as well by reason of the premises, as for his costs and charges by him about
that Suit, in that behalf disbursed And the inquisition which you shall thereby
take, you make manifest before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, on, etc.
under your Seal, and the Seals of them by the Oath, of whom you take tha^
inquisition, together with this Writ:

Witness, etc.
Exigent.
THe Keeper, etc.
To the Sheriffs of London Greeting,
we command you, that you make A. B. lately of C. in the County of C. Gent. to
be required from husting to husting, until according to the Law, and custom
of England, he be outlawed if he shall not appear; And if he shall appear
then, you take and cause him safely to be kept, so that you may have his Body
before us in the Upper Bench, in the fifth week after Easter, wheresoever we
shall then be in England to answer C. D. in a Plea, that whereas the said C. D.
and A. B. at London, had accounted together of diverse sums of money, being
before that time due to the said C. D. from the said A. B. and being then
behind and unpaid; And upon that account the said A. B. was then and there
found in arrerages to the said C. D. in a hundred pounds of lawful English
money, the said A. B. (in consideration thereof) did assume and to the said C
D. there faithfully promised, that he the said A. B. would pay, that men (...)
the said C. D. yet t^^ said A. B. has not yet paid the said money to the said
C. D. although he has been thereunto required to pay the same, to the damage of
the said C. D. one hundred and twenty pounds as he says, and whereupon you
your selves have sent to us, that the said A. B. is not found in your
Bayliwick, and you have here this Writ:

Witness, etc.
Proclamation sur' Exigent.
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
To the Sheriff of Cornwell Greeting.
Whereas by our Writ, we have lately commanded the Sheriff of London, that he
should cause A.B. of C. in your County Gent. to be required from husting to
husting, until he be outlawed, according to the Law and custom of England,
if he should not appear, and if he should appear, then they should cause him
safely to be kept, so that they should have his body before us in the fifth
week after Easter, wheresoever we should then be in England, to answer C. D. in
a Plea, that whereas the said C. D. etc. (And so recite as is in the exegent
till you are past these words) as he says, (then write on) we command you
according to the statute made and provided in the one and thirtieth year of the
Lady E^izabeth lately Queen, you cause to be proclaimed the said A. B. at three
several days, according to the form of that statute, whereof one Proclamation
thereof shall be made, at or near the most usual door of the Church of C. in
your County, so that he may render himself to the Sheriffs of London, to
answer the said C. D. of the said Plea. And you have here this Writ:

Witness, etc.
C^^ias utlegat'.
THe Keeper, etc.
To the Sheriffs of C. Greeting.
We command you that you do not omit from any liberty within your County, but
take A. B. of, etc. And him safely keep, so that you have his body before u^ in
the Upper Bench in etc. (Reciting the return) wheresoever we shall then be in
England, to stand right in Court before us in the Upper Bench, upon a certain
Outlawry against him the said A. B. at the suit of C. D. in a Plea of debt, at
the hustings of the Common Pleas, holden in London, on Monday, etc. In the year
of our Lord one thousand six hundred and fifty, in the Court of London
pronounced. And you have there this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Capias ad satisfaciendum in a Plea of Debt.
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
Greeting.
We command you, that you take A. B. if he be found in your Bayliwick; And him
safely to keep, so that you have his body before us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster. on Wednesday next after the five weeks of Easter, to satisfy C. D. of
100 li. of Debt; and also 21 s. for his damages, which he sustained as well by
occasion of detaining of that Debt, as for his Costs and charges by him about
his Suit in that behalf disbursed, whereof he is convicted, as it does appear
to Us upon Record. And then you have here this Writ. Witness H. Roll at Westminster.
the 17th day of April in the year of our Lord, 1651.

Wightwicke.

Testat. Inde.
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
to the Sheriff of H. Greeting.
Whereas we have lately commanded the Sheriffs of London, that they should take
A. B. if he might be found in their Bayliwick; And him safely keep, so that
they should have his body before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, at a
certain day now past, to satisfy C. D. of a hundred pounds of Debt; and also
one and twenty shillings for his damages which he sustained, as well by
occasion of detaining of that Debt, as for his Costs and charges by him about
his Suit in that behalf disbursed: whereof he is convicted, as it does appear
to us upon Record. And the said Sheriffs of London at that day returned to Us,
that the said A B. is not found in their Bayliwick. Whereupon on the behalf of
the said C. D. in the Court before Us is sufficiently testified, that the said
A. B. does lurk, and sculk in your County; therefore we command you, that you
take him if he be found in your Bayliwick, and him safely keep, so that you may
have his body before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, on Wednesday next
after the three weeks of Easter, to satisfy the said C. D. of the Debt and
damages aforesaid. And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Capias ad satisfaciendum after judgment affirmed in a Writ of Error, and for
damages for the Plaintiff, being the Defendant did thereby delay Execution.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above in the Capias ad satisfaciend: till these words) to satisfy C. D.
of a hundred pounds of Debt, and also 40 s. which were adjudged to the said
C.D. in the Court of the Common Pleas at Westminster, before Oliver St. John,
and the other Justices his Associates, for his damages which he had by reason
of detaining of that Debt, whereof he is convicted, as by the inspection of the
Record, and Process thereupon, which we lately for certain causes have caused
to come in the Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster; And which in
the same Court now remaining, does appear to us upon Record; And also five
pounds which in the same Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster,
according to the form of the Statute, in such case thereupon lately made, and
provided, were adjudged to the said C. D for his damages, costs, and expenses,
which he had by reason of the delay of execution of the Judgment aforesaid, by
reason of prosecut^^^ of a certain Writ of Error, by him the said A. B. in the
same Court, before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, prosecuted in, and
upon the Premises, as it does also appear to us upon Record; And you have there
this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Capias ad satisfaciendum against Manucaptors in a Plea of Debt.
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting.
We command you that you take A. B. and C. D. (writing the addition as it is in
the Bail piece) Manucaptors of E: F: of, etc. (as above in the first Capias ad
satisfaciendum, until these words) to satisfy G: H: of 30 li. of Debt, and 20
s. for his damages, etc. (as above in the first Capias, etc. until these
words) disbursed, whereof the said G: H: is convicted, as it does appear to us
upon Record; And whereof in the same Court before Us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster. it is considered, that the said G: H: shall have his Execution against
the said A: B: and C: D: of the Debt, and damages aforesaid, according to the
force, form, and effect of the Recognisance by them the said A: B: and C: D: to
the said G: H: for the said E: F: in the Court before Us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster. acknowledged. And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
The same against the Plaintiff for not prosecuting his Action.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above in the first Capias ad satisfaciendum, until these words) to
satisfy C: D: of six pounds, which in the Court before Us in the Upper Bench
at Westminster. were adjudged to the said C: D: according to the form of a Statute in
such case lately made, and provided, for his costs and charges by him about his
defense in a certain Action of Trespass, at the Suit of the said A: B: in the
same Court before Us in the Upper Bench at Westminster. sustained; whereof the said
A: B: is convicted, as it does appear to us upon Record. And then you have here
this Writ.

Witness, etc.
The same for damages in breaking Covenant
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting, etc.
(as above in the former directions) to satisfy C: D: of 7 li. for his damages
which he sustained by reason of certain Covenants made to the said C: D: by the
said A: B: lately broken, as also for his Costs and charges, etc. (as the first
Capias ad satisfac' to the end.)

If for trespass, thus.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as before until these words) to satisfy C: D: 7 li. for his damages which
he sustained as well by reason of a certain Trespass done to the said C. D: by
the said A: B: as for his Costs, etc. (according to the directions in the
former.)

If for trespass upon the Case, thus.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above until these words) to satisfy C: D: of 10 li. for his damages
which he sustained, as well by reason of a certain Trespass upon the Case lately
done to the said C: D: by the said A: B: as for his Costs, etc. (as in the
former directions next before.)

If for performance o^ promise. thus.
THe Keeper, etc.

to satisfy C: D: of 10 li. for his damages which he sustained as well by
reason of not performing of certain promises and assumptions lately made to the
said C: D: by the said A: B. as for his costs, etc. (as above.)

The same for costs for the Defendant upon a Verdict at the Assizes against the
Plaintiff.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as above until these words) to satisfy C: D: of 40 s. for his costs and
charges by him disbursed, about his defense in a certain Plea of Trespass upon
the Case, at the Suit of the said A: B: prosecuted in the Court before us in
the Upper Bench at Westminster. And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Fieri facias in a Plea of Debt.
THe Keepers of the Liberty, etc.
To the Sheriff of Leicestershire, Greeting.
We command you, that you cause to be made of the goods and Chattels of the
said A. B. in your Bayliwick, as well a certain debt of forty pounds, which C.
D. lately in the Court before us at the Upper Bench at Westminster, recovered
against the said A. B. as also one and twenty Shillings, which to the said C:
D. in the same Court, were adjudged for his damages which he sustained, as well
by occasion of detaining of that debt, as for his costs and charges by him
about his Suit, in that behalf disbursed, whereof the said A. B. is convicted,
as it does appear to us upon Record. (when the Judgment is renewed by a Scir'
fac'; then this sentence is to be in the execution) whereof in the same Court
before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster it is considered, that the said C.
D. may have his execution against the said A: B: according to the force, form,
and effect of the recovery aforesaid) And you have that moneys before us in the
Upper Bench at Westminster, on Friday next after the morrow of the holy
Trinity, to restore to the said C. D. for his debt and damages aforesaid, and
then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
A Testatum thereupon.
THe Keeper, etc.
To the Sheriff of Middl: Greeting.
Whereas we have lately commanded the Sheriff of London, that they should
cause to be made of the goods and Chattels of A. B. in their Bayliwick, as well
a certain debt of one hundred pounds, (which C. D. in the Court before us in
the Upper Bench at Westminster, lately recovered against the said A. B. as also
one and twenty shillings, which to the said C. D. in the same Court, were
adjudged for his damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining of
that debt, as for his costs and charges by him, about his Suit in that behalf
disbursed, whereof the said A. B. is convicted, as it does appear to us of
Record. And that they should have those moneys, before us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster, at a certain day now past, to restore to the said C. D. for the
debt and damages aforesaid. And the said Sheriffs of London at the day, have
returned to us, that the said A: B. has nothing in their Bayliwick whereby
they might cause to be made the debt and damages, or any parcel thereof,
whereupon, on the behalf of the said C. D. in the Court before us it is
sufficiently testified, that the said A: B. has goods and Chattels sufficient
in your Bayliwick, whereof you may make or cause to be made, the debt and
damages aforesaid; Therefore we command you, that you cause to be made of the
goods and Chattels of the said A. B. in your Bayliwick, the said hundred pounds
of debt, and the said one and 20 s. for damages aforesaid. And you have there
those moneys before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster on Thursday, next
after the eight days of the holy Trinity, to render to the said C. D. for the
debt and damages aforesaid, and you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
A Devastavit returned, and thereupon a Fier' Fac' of the proper goods of the
Executor.
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting.
Whereas by our Writ we have lately commanded you, that you cause to be leavied
of the goods and Chattels which were of A. B. otherwise called etc. (naming the
addition) in your Bayliwick, in the hands and custody of C. D. Executrix, of
the last will and Testament of the said A. B. one hundred pound of debt, and
also 5 l. which were adjudged to E. F. in the Court before us in the Upper
Bench at Westminster. for his damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of
detaining of that Debt, as for his costs and charges by him about his Suit in
that behalf disbursed, if so much she should have them in her hands. And if so
much she should not have them in her hands, then you should cause to be leavied
the said five pounds for the damage aforesaid, of the proper goods and chattels
of her the said C:D: And you should have those moneys before us in the Upper
Bench at Westminster at a certain day now past, to render to the said E: F: for
his Debt, and Damages aforesaid; whereof the said C: D: is convicted, as it
does appear to us upon Record. And you at that day returned to us, that the
said C: D: had no goods or chattels which were of the said A: B: whereby you
might cause to be made the Debt, and Damages aforesaid, or any parcel thereof.
And moreover, that by virtue of the said Writ, you caused to be made of the
proper goods and chattels of the said C: D: the said five pounds for damages
aforesaid. And that you had the moneys prepared before us in the Upper Bench at
Westminster, as it was commanded to you by our Writ. And that the said C: D:
has wasted the goods and chattels which were of the said A:B: to the value of
thirty pounds, parcel of the said Debt of one hundred pounds. Therefore we
command you that you cause to be made in your Bayliwick the said 30 li. parcel
of the Debt of 100 li. of the proper goods and chattels of the said C:D: And
then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Elegit.
THe Keepers, etc.
to the Sheriff of L: Greeting.
Whereas A: B: in the Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster. lately
recovered against C:D: an hundred pounds of Debt, and also one and twenty
shillings for his damages, which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining
of that Debt, as also for his costs and charges by him about his Suit in that
behalf di^bursed; whereof the said C: D: is convicted, as it does appear to us
upon Record. And because the said A. B. does come in the Court before us in the
Upper Bench at Westminster. and electeth to be delivered to him all the goods and
chattels of the said C: D: in your Bayliwick, besides his Oxen and beasts of
his Plow, and also the half of all the Lands, and Tenements which were of the
said C: D: the 14th day of June, in the year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred and fifty; which day the Judgment aforesaid was given against the said
C: D: in the form aforesaid, to have the goods and chattels aforesaid, as the
proper goods and chattels of him the said A: B: and to have, and hold the half
of the Lands, and Tenement aforesaid to him, and his Assigns as his Freehold,
until he has thereby fully leavied the Debt, and damages aforesaid. Therefore
we command you, that without delay you cause to be delivered all the goods, and
chattels of the said C: D: in your Bayliwick; except the Oxen, and beasts of
his Plow and also the half of all the Lands and Tenements which were of the
said C: D: the said 14th day of June, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six
hundred and fifty aforesaid, to the said A: B: by a reasonable price, and
extent, to have the goods, and chattels aforesaid, as his proper goods, and
chattels; and to have, and hold the half of the Lands, and Tenements aforesaid
to him, and his Assigns as his Freehold, until he has thereby fully levied
the Debt, and Damages aforesaid. And in like manner this Precept shall be
executed, you make it appear before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, on
Thursday next after the fifteen days of Easter under your Seal, and the Seals
of them by the Oath of whom you took that Extent, and Apprisement, together
with this Writ.

Witness, etc.
Habere fac' poss.
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting.
Whereas A. B: lately (that is to say) in the Term of Saint Hillary, in the
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and fifty, before us in the Upper
Bench at Westminster, has recovered against C. D. (...) s^arm then, and yet to
come, of, and in one message with the appurtenances in E. in your County,
which F:G. d^^admse to him to a ^^arm, which is not yet past (that (...)) from
the Feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, in the year of our
Lord, one thousand six hundred and fifty, until the end and term of three
years from thence next following to be fully complete and ended, by virtue of
which demise, the said A. B. entered into the tenements aforesaid with the
appurtenances. And was thereof possessed, until the said C. D. did afterward
eject him the said A. B. from his Farm; Therefore we command you, that without
delay, you cause the said A. B. to have his possession of his Term aforesaid,
yet to come of, and in the Tenements aforesaid with the appurtenances. And in
like manner this precept shall be executed, you make it appear before us in the
Upper Bench at Westminster, on Saturday next after the morrow of the Assention
of our Lord, together with this Writ.

Witness, etc.
A Scire Facias in debt.
THe Keeper, etc.
to the Sheriff of N. Greeting.
Whereas A. B. in the Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster,
recovered against C: D: two hundred pounds of debt, and also thirty shillings
for his damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining of that
debt, as for his costs and charges by him about his Suit, in that behalf
disbursed, whereof he is convicted, as it does appear to us upon Record; And
now on the behalf of the said A. B. in the Court before us in the Upper Bench
at Westminster, we conceive that although the Judgment be thereby given, yet
the Execution of the said Debt and damages does yet remain to be made,
whereupon the said A. B. has made supplication to us, accordingly in that
behalf, to provide remedy for him. And we being willing in that behalf, to do
that which is just, we command you, that by honest and lawful men of your
Bayliwick, you make known to the said C. D. that he may be before us, in the
Upper Bench at Westminster on Wednesday next, after the fifteen days of the
holy Trinity, to show if he has, or knows any thing to say for himself,
wherefore the said A. B. ought not to have his Execution against him, of the
debt and damages aforesaid, according to the force, form, and effect of the
recovery aforesaid, if he think expedient. And further, to do and receive that
which the Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, shall consider of
in that behalf; And then you have here this Writ.

Witness, etc.
The same against Manucaptors.
THe Keeper, etc.
To the Sheriff of Middlesex Greeting.
Whereas A: B: lately in the Court before us, in the Upper Bench at
Westminster, recovered against C: H: one hundred pound of debt, etc. (as above
until these words) does yet remain to be made of the goods and Chattels
aforesaid. And whereas E. F: lately of, etc. And G. G. (naming the addition)
formerly (that is to say, in Michalmas Term last past, in the same Court,
before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, personally came, and did become
Pledges and Manucaptors, and both of them, by themselves became Plegde and
Manucaptor, for the said C:D: that if it should happen the said C.D. to be
convinced in the Plea aforesaid, that then the said E: F: and G: H: granted,
and either of them for himself, did grant the debt aforesaid, and also all such
damage, cost, and charges which should be adjudged to the said A. B. in that
behalf, of their, and either of their Lands and Chattels to be made, and to the
use of the said A. B. to be leavied, if it should happen the said C D. not to
pay the said debt, damages, costs, and charges to the said A. B. or not to
render himself to the Prison of the Marshall of our Marshalsey, of the Upper
Bench at Westminster upon that occasion, yet the said C. D. has not hitherto
paid the said debt and damages to the said A. B. neither has upon that
occasion rendered himself to the Prison of the Marshall of our Marshalsey of
the Upper Bench, before that time, as by the insinuation of the said A. B. in
the Court before us in the Upper Bench at Westminster, we have accepted,
whereupon the said A. B. has supplicated us accordingly, to provide remedy for
him in that behalf, (as above till after the return of the former Writ to these
words) to show if he has or knows any thing to say for himself, wherefore
the said A. B. ought not to have his execution against him, of the debt and
damages aforesaid, according to the force, form, and effect of the recognizance
aforesaid, if he think good so to do, etc. (as above until the end.)

A Scire Facias against an Executor in Debt.
THE Keepers, etc.

(as above in the first Scire facias until these words) does yet remain to be
made of the Goods and Chattels aforesaid, and that the said C.D. after
Judgment aforesaid, in form aforesaid rendered, is dead, and that one E.F. is
Executor of the last Will and Testament of the said C.D. whereupon the said
A.B. has supplicated us accordingly, to provide remedy in that behalf, (as
above till after the Return of the first Writ) to show if he has or knows
any thing to say for himself, wherefore the Debt and damages aforesaid, of the
Goods and Chattels which were of the said C. D. at the time of his death, being
in the hands and custody of the said E.F. to be administered, ought not to be
made, and to the use of the said A.B. levied, according to the force, form, and
effect as above in the first, etc.

The same for an Administratrix in Debt.
THe Keeper, etc.

(as in the first Scire facias, until these words) as it does appear to us
upon Record, and now in the Court before us, in the upper Bench at Westminster
comes E.F. Widow, the relict of the said A. B. and says, that after
Judgment aforesaid, in form aforesaid rendered (that is to say) on, etc. in
the year, etc. (naming the time) the said A. B. at A. in your County died
intestate, after whose death, (that is to say) on, etc. in the year, etc.
(naming the time at A. aforesaid, the. Administration of all the Goods and
Chattells, Rights, and Credits, which were of the said A.B. at the time of his
death, by, etc. (to whom the Commission of the Administration of Right did
pertain) was committed to the said E.F. and now on the behalf of the said E. F.
in the same Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, we have
accepted, that although, etc. (as above in the first Writ of this sort.)

Rotam. habend.
THe Keeper, etc.
to the Sheriff of Middlesex, greeting,
whereas A.B. was lately summoned to be before us in the upper Bench at
Westminster, to answer C.D. in a Plea of taking and uniustly detaining of the
Goods and Chattells of the said C.D. and the said A.B. appearing in the Court
before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, the said C. D. made default, for
which it was considered of in the said Court, that the said A. B. should have
Return of his goods, and chattells aforesaid, therefore we command you that
without delay, you cause to be returned to the said A. B. the goods and
chattells aforesaid, and not deliver them at the complaint of the said C.D.
without our Writ aforesaid, making express mention of the said Judgment, and
as this Precept shall be executed, you certify to us in the upper Bench, in
eight days of the Purification of the blessed Virgin Mary, wheresoever we
shall then be in England, together with this Writ,

witness, etc.
Capias in Withernam.
THe Keepers, etc.
to the Sherif of M. greeting,
whereas A.B. in the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, was
summoned to be before us in the uper Bench at Westminster, to answer C. D. in a
Plea, wherefore he took the goods and chattells of him the said C.D. and
detained them uniustly against Sureties and Pledges, as it is said, and the
said A. B. appearing in the same Court before us in the upper Bench at
Westminster, the said C. D. there made default, for which in the same Court it
was considered by the same Court, that the said A.B. should have return of the
goods and chattels aforesaid, whereupon we commanded you by our Writ, that
without delay you cause to be returned the goods and chattells aforesaid, to
the said A.B. and not deliver them at the complaint of the said C.D. without
our Writ that shall make express mention of the said Judgment, and in such
manner, as that Precept should be executed, you should certify to us in the
upper Bench at Westminster, in the eight days of the Purification of the
blessed Virgin Mary last past, and you at that day did return to us, that
before the coming to you of that Writ, the goods and chattels aforesaid, were
convayed away to places to you altogether unknown, so that you would not cause
those goods and chattels to be returned to the said A. B. therefore we command
you, that you take of the goods and chattells of the said C.D. to the value of
the goods and chattels aforesaid formerly taken, and you cause them to be
delivered to the said A. B. to be detained until you may cause the goods and
chattells formerly taken to be restored to the said A.B. and you put the said
C.D. by Sureties and safe pledges, that he be before us in the month of
Easter, whersoever we then shall be in England, to answer as well as of the
contempt, and as also the said A.B. of his damages, and injuries in that
behalf illated, and that you have there this Writ,

witness, etc.
A Scire facias for an Executor to renew a Judgment after a year and a day
THe Keepers, etc.
greeting,
whereas A.B. Executor of the last Will and Testament of C. D. lately deceased,
lately in the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster by Bill without
our Writ, and by the judgment of the same Court, recovered against E.F.
thirteen pounds of Debt, and also one and twenty shillings for his damages
which he sustained, as well by occasion of detention of that Debt, as for his
costs and charges by him about his suit in that behalf disbursed, whereof he is
convicted, as it does appear to us of Record, and that the said C. D. after
Judgment aforesaid, in Form aforesaid, rendered at London, made his last Will
and Testament, and thereby did appoint and ordain the said A.B. his Executor,
and afterward there died, and now on the behalf of the said A. B. in the
Court, before us in the upper Bench at Westminster have accepted, that although
the Judgment be thereof rendered, yet the Execution of the Debt and damages
aforesaid, does yet remain to be made, whereupon the said A.B. has supplicated
us accordingly to provide remedy for him in that behalf and we being willing in
that behalf, to do that which is just, we command you, that by honest and
lawful men of your Bailywick, you make known to the said E.F. that he be
before us in the upper Bench at Westminster on Friday next, after, etc. to show
if he has or knows any thing to say for himself, wherefore the said A. B.
ought not to have the Execution of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, according
to the force, form, and effect of the recovery aforesaid, if he think good to
try, and further to do and receive that which the same Court before us, in the
upper Bench at Westminster shall consider of in that behalf, and then you have
here the names of them by whom you made known to him, and this Writ;

witness, etc.
The same in an Action of Eiectment the Plaintiff (a woman) after Judgment
being married.
THe Keeper, etc.
Greeting,
whereas A.B. lately before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, recovered
against C.D. her Term, then and yet to come, of and in one Message, with the
Appurtenances in E. in the Parish of F. in your County, (that is to say) from
the last day of March, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred and
fifty, until the end and Term of five years, to be fully complete and ended,
and afterward the said A.B. at E. aforesaid, took to her Husband one C.G. and
now on the behalf of the said G. H. and A. B. in the Court before us, in the
upper Bench at Westminster, as we have accepted, that although the Judgment
aforesaid be rendered, yet the Execution of that Judgment does yet remain to be
made, whereupon the said G. H. and A.B. have supplicated us accordingly to
provide remedy for them, in that behalf, and we being willing in that behalf,
to do that which is lust, we command you, that by honest and lawful men of
your Bailiwick, you make known to the said C.D. that he be before us in the
upper Bench at Westminster, on etc. (reciting the Return) to show if that he
has or knows any thing to say for himself, wherefore the said G.H. and A.B.
his Wife ought not to have Execution of the Judgment aforesaid, if he think
good to try, and further to do and receive that which the Court shall consider
of in that behalf, and then you have here the names of them by whom you made
known to him, and this Writ,

witness, etc.
The same for an Administrator in Debt.
The Keepers, etc.
Greeting,
whereas A. B. lately in the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster,
recovered against C.D. twenty pounds Debt, and also one and twenty shillings
for his damages, which he sustained, as well by occasion of detention of that
Debt, as also for his costs and charges by him about his suit in that behalf
disbursed, whereof he is convicted, as it does aprear to us upon Record, and
afterward the said A.B. at London aforesaid, died intestate, as it is said,
and the Admistration of all and every the Goods and Chattels, Rights and
credits, which were of the said A.B. at the time of his death, at London, were
committed to one E.F. as by the insinuation of the said E.F. in the Court
before us in the upper Bench at Westminster we have accepted, yet the Execution
of the Debt and damages aforesaid, does yet remain to be made, whereupon the
said E. F. has supplicated us accordingly to provide remedy for him in that
behalf, and we being willing to do that which is just in that behalf, we
command you, that by honest and lawful men of your Bailiwick, you make known
to the said C.D. that he be before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, on,
etc. (reciting the Return) to show, if he, etc. (as above in the former Writ,
until the end.)

The same against an Executor of a Sheriff, where the Sheriff returned that he
had caused the Goods of the Defendant to be levied, but has not paid the Money
coming thereof.
THe Keepers etc.
to the Sheriff of Middlesex greeting,
whereas A.B. lately in the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster,
recovered against C.D. one hundred pounds of Debt, and also five pounds for his
damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining of that Debt, as
for his Costs and Charges by him about his Suit in that behalf expended,
whereof the said C.D. is convicted, as it does appear to us of Record. And
whereas also E.F. Esquire Sheriff of the County of E. has returned to us upon a
certain Writ issuing forth of the same Court before us, upon the judgment
aforesaid, that he had caused to be taken the Goods and Chattells of the said
C.D. to the value of the Debt and damages aforesaid (that is to say) the one
hundred and five pounds, and the Money coming thereof (that is to say) the said
one hundred and five pounds before us at the day and place in the said Writ
mentioned. He had prepared to deliver to the said A. B. according to the
Exigent of the Writ aforesaid, as by the return of that Writ in the same Court
before us remaining of Record does manifestly appear: And because the said
E.F. the Moneys aforesaid in form aforesaid, taken into the Court before us in
the upper Bench at Westminster, has not yet paid or delivered, nor to the said
A.B. (as by his insinuation in the same Court before us we have accepted) has
yet paid or delivered, and that the said E. F. after the return aforesaid in
form aforesaid so returned, is dead, and that one G.H. is Executor of the last
will and Testament of the said E. F. whereupon the said A.B. has supplicated
us accordingly to provide remedy for him in that behalf. And we being willing
to do in that behalf that which is just we command you that by honest and
lawful men of your Bailiwick, you make known to the said G.H. that he be
before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, on, etc. next after, etc. to show
if he has or knows any thing to say for himself, wherefore the said one
hundred and five pounds ought not to be made, and to the use of the said A.B.
levied of the Goods and Chattells which were of the said C.D. at the time of
his death, according to the force, form, and effect of the recovery and return
of the Writ aforesaid if it shall seem to him expedient, and further to do and
receive that which the same Court before us shall consider of in that behalf,
and then you have here the names of them by whom you made known unto him and
this Writ;

witness, etc.
A Testatum ca. sa. against Manucaptors.
THE Keepers, etc.
to the Sheriffs of London greeting,
whereas we have lately commanded the Sheriff of Middlesex that he should take
A.B. and C.D. (naming the addition) Manucaptors of E.F. of etc. If they had
been found in his Bailiwick; and them safely keep, so that he should have their
Bodies before us in the upper Bench at Westminster at a certain day now past,
to satisfy G.H. of thirteen pounds of Debt, and also of one and twenty
shillings for his Damages, which he sustained, as well by occasion of detaining
of that Debt, as for his Costs and Charges by him about his suit in that behalf
expended, whereof the said E.F. counted, as it does appear to us of record,
and whereof in the same Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster it is
considered, that the said G.H. should have his Execution against the said A. B.
and C.D. of the Debt and Damages aforesaid, according to the force, form, an
effect of the Recognizance by them the said A.B and C.D. for the said E.F. in
the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, to the said G.H.
acknowledged, whereof the said A.B. and C.D. are convicted, as it does likewise
as to us upon Record. And the said Sheriff of Middlesex, at that day returned
to us, that the said A.B. and C.D. are not found in his Bailiwick; whereupon on
the behalf of the said G.H. in the same Court before us in the upper Bench at
Westminster, it is sufficiently testified that the said A.B. and C.D. do lurk
and sculk in the City of London, therefore we command you that you take them,
if they shall be found in your Bailiwick, and them safely keep, so that you have
their Bodies before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, on Thursday next
after, etc. To satisfy the said G.H. of the Debt and Damages aforesaid. And
then you have here this Writ;

witness H. Roll at Westminster, etc.
A Supersedeas upon a ca. sa. for Manucaptors.
THe Keepers, etc.
to the Sheriff of London greeting,
whereas by our Writ we have lately commanded you that you should take A.B. and
C.D. if they had bin found in your Bailiwick: And them safely keep, so that you
should have their Bodies before us in the upper Bench at West. on Thursday next
after, etc. to satisfy G.H. of thirteen pounds of Debt, and also of one and
twenty shillings for his Damages which he sustained, as well by occasion of
detaining of that Debt, as for his Costs and Charges by him about his Suit in
that behalf expended, whereof the said E.F. is convicted, as it does appear to
us of Record: And whereupon in the same Court before us, it is considered, that
the said G. H. should have his execution against the said A.B. and C.D. of the
Debt and Damages aforesaid, according to the force, form, and effect of the
recognisance, by them the said A.B. and C.D. for the said E.F. in the Court
before us in the upper Bench at Westminster, to the said G.H. acknowledged, and
because the said G.H. in the Court before us in the upper Bench at Westminster
comes and acknowledges himself to be satisfied of the Debt and Damages
aforesaid, therefore we command you that you for ever supersede from further
taking, imprisoning, detaining, attaching, or them the said A. B. and C.D. or
either of them in any thing molesting; and if you take them or either of them
for that cause (and no other) then without delay at your peril you cause to be
delivered, them and either of them from your Prison and Custody (if they or
either of them is, or are detained for that cause and no other) and suffer them
to go at liberty;

witness H. Roll at Westminster, etc.
THE TABLE.
Acceptance.
WHere a Lease is voydable, acceptance of rent makes that good, otherwise where
it is void, fol. 320.
Action upon the Case.
For what slanderous words it lies, and for what not fol. 339. It lies for
selling corrupt Wine, without warranting that. fol. 342. Has tasted the Wine
and accepts that for good, is a Bar. fol. 342. Where warranty for that, see
where it lies, and where not. fol. 342. For making deceit it lies. fol. 343.
It lies where one will not deliver the Pawn upon the Money tendered. fol. 344.
The tenant shall have that against the Landlord, for not paying Quit rent. fol.
345, It lies where there is delivery, and not Trespass, Vi and armis, and where
one or the other lies. fol. 345. It lies for misusing license in Deed, and
Trespass for misusing license in Law. fol. 346. It lies for not carefully
keeping a fire, and against an Host, and where ones Dog worryeth a Sheep. fol.
346 It lies for holding a Court in another Manor, and for disturbing one to
hold a Leet, fol. 347. It does not ly against a Schoolmaster, nor for erecting
a Mil, but for wast by tenant at will it lies, fol. 347 It lies against a
servant for ill looking to Beasts, and negligent keeping them, fol. 347 Or for
stopping a way, and for false Dice, and Lime-pits dug, fol. 348. It lies
against a Sheriff for serving a writ, and not returning it, fol. 348. Where it
lies against executors, and where not, fol. 250 Where it lies for promise not
performed, fol. 351 Where the place is traversable, and where the Common, and
where not, fol. 353 Archers, fol. 27. Artificers. fol. 27
Assise.
Where it lies, and where a Mortdancester, fol. 119 What is sufficient seisin
to have Assise, and what not, fol. 120 Pleas in Assise by Bailiff, fol. 120
Pleas of the Disseisor, fol. 123 Pleas, that the tenant shall have for the
Assise to adjourne, 125. Diverse Pleas in Abatement, where they are not
contrary, and contrary to the Assise, fol. 127 Where it shall be awarded at
large, and where in right of damages, 128. Where the Plaintiff may choose his
tenant at his peril, and where not, fol. 131 What is a good title in Assise,
and what not, fol. 135 Plea in Bar and abatement, 136. Where he may abridge
his plaint, and where not, fol. 138 Where after verdict he cannot abridge, fol.
139
Attornement.
Where it ought to be, and where not, fol. 139 Where is good Attornement, and
where not, fol. 141 Who is compellable to attorn, and who not, fol. 142 Where
he which is not compellable to attorne, attornes, 143. What thing granted by
Fine, he shall have without Attornement, fol. 144
Attorney.
May make suit in Court Baron, fol. 145
Amerciament.
Amerciament in Court Baron and affire, fol. 145. For trespass made to the
Lord himself, and affire, fol. 145
Attachment.
Who shall be attached, and what shall be forfeited upon that, and what not,
155. The form of making the Precept upon that, fol. 155
Ancient Demesne.
In what Actirn this is a good Plea, and in what not, 188. Ancient Demesne is
Court Baron, and and see the Fine there, fol. 190 Where it is made Frank fee
for a time, and where for ever, 190. It is Socage, and how that shall be tried,
152. The form of pleading of that, and Copyhold of Ancient Demesne, 192. How
execution shall be by Writ in Ancient Demesne, and how free they are, fol. 194
Avowry.
Upon whrm it shall be made, and upon whom not, fol. 105
Bargain and Contracts.
IF the Plaintiff vary from his Contract, where he owes him nothing is
pleaded, in manner and form shall be tried, 355. Where it is for so much as
J.S. shall say, or upon condition, or misliking, fol. 356 If the Buyer takes
without paying, Debt or trespass lies, 358. Where one may wage his Law, he
cannot traverse the Contract, nor cause, fol. 359 Defondant says, it was upon
condition on another County, and ought to traverse the Count, fol. 360
Defendant may plead that the Plaintiff has obligation for the same, 361.
Where a Lease by Paroll of Right, goods, or contract is good, and where not,
361. The King may give a thing not in being, and not a common person give a
right, fol. 361 To marry my Daughter, debt lies, with my Daughter not, fol.
362
Bar.
If he recover in debt upon a contract, he cannot have new debt, 363. The same
Law in Trespass. If the Plaintiff were barred in Detinue, he shall not have
account, nor Action upon the Case for the same, 363. Bar by a Recovery in
another Court, pleaded here, 363. Bar good to common intent, fol. 427 Bar
shall be as high as the matter Count. fol. 427
Baron and Feme.
What Contracts of the wife and servant shall bind the husband, and what not,
364. The husband shall not be charged, though they come to the use of the
house, if he has not notice and agreed, fol. 365 The husband shall be charged
for necessary apparel of his wife, and not for supersluous, fol. 365 Servant
which has used to sell pawnes, goods, of his Master for Corn, which comes to
the use of his Master, good, 366. A servant sent to buy, and the thing bought
does not come to the use of the Master, yet he shall be charged, 366. Servant
gives goods of his Master, the Master shall have trespass, fol. 366 Servant
borrows Money in the name of his Master without his commandment, there the
Master shall not be charged, 366. He shall have goods and Lease, and if he dye,
the Lease not altered, it shall remain to the wife, 367. If he marry a woman
executrix and dies, the wife shall! have the goods which remain. fol. 367 He
shall have an obligation made to the wife before marriage, and if be dye, that
shall remain to the wife, 367. He shall be charged with a debt of his wife,
and if she dye not afterward, fol. 368 He shall not have an Obligation made to
his wife, before marriage, after her death, fol. 366
Bylaws,
What shall bind all, and what not, fol. 89 In Court Baron, and in Town, fol.
89
Chattels.
ALL goods and Chattels whatsoever granted, fol. 62 What shall pass by the
grant of Chattels, fol. 63
Challenge Jurors.
What is principal, and what not, fol. 178 What is good for favor, and what
not, fol. 180 Charter of exemption of Juries, fol. 114
Chimnies. Ways.
Trees in them, ditch, and bridge making, fol. 66 Making highways by
Statutes, fol. 67
Condition.
Lease for years upon condition, if he be disturbed he shall have fee: See
Obligation, fol. 164
Confirmation.
What liberty ought to be confirmed at the change of the King fol. 65
Commons.
Where the Lord may improve that, and where not, 180. Appendant and
Appurtenant, and admeasurement, 184. With what Beasts it shall be used, fol.
185
Conisance.
In what cases that shall not be, fol. 222
Constable.
His office and authority, and what he ought te do, fol. 94
Continuance.
See in Imparlance afterward, fol. 392
Conclude in Action.
See Pleading afterward, the order and form how one ought to conclude, fol.
422
Copyhold.
It seems he shall not have an Assise before admittance, but he shall have
trespass, 157. His estate and interest, what it is, 157. Of base tenure and
free is ancient Demesne, 159 Where he enters and dies before admittance, 160
Diverse Cases of that, and countermands of surrender, 160 What surrender is
good, 161. Lease by license, and recovery against Lessee, and form of license,
The statute of limitation extends to that, 169. See title Copyhold, 160,
Diverse Cases there added, 161. As surrender into the hands of two tenants and
dies, Gavellkinde to the next of the blood, and Borough English, 161. Lord has
more Rent then he ought, fol. 162 Surrender to use, without more, 163.
Forfeiture by attaint of copyhold, 161. Admittance in other manner, then was
the surrender, 161. Copyhold in tail, time out of mind, and not otherwise,
fol. 173. It is in the Saxons time, Folkland, and it is good by continuance,
174. Trespass against the Lord, what forfeiture shall be presented, and what
not, fol. 175. Shall have house-boot, plough-boot, and hedg-boot, 176. Fine
upon every alteration and admittance, Forfeiture of that by denying Rent, and
by Feoffment and livery, 176. May lop trees, Feoffment, and Fine, and other
forfeitures, fol. 177. Cordiners, fol. 29.
Costs.
Where the Plaintiff shall have costs, and where not, fol. 209.
Covin.
And fraudulent gifts to defeat Executors, fol. 232.
Count.
Shall be certain, 430. Upon lending and upon buying, 430, 501. Count in an
Action upon the Case for slander, fol. 502. Count in Trespass, with walking
with his feet, fol. 504
Court Baron,
And Leet, how they are first ordained, fol. 6. And where Suitors hold of the
Manor, 7. Is incident to a Manor, 7. The order here begins to keep that, 105.
The charge in this here begins, fol. 107. What actions shall be there sued,
and what not, 145. Capias shall not be awarded in that, and which is a great
Court, 98. In what place it shall be held, 186. What is Court Baron, and what
of Record, 187. The trial in Court Baron, 187. Foreign matter pleaded there,
187. The entries in Roll of Court Baron here begin, 186. Entries of surrender
and admittances. Form of process of execution.
Court of Ancient Demesne,
Here that begins, 188. See before Ancient Demesne.
Court of Pipowders.
Is of Acts and Contracts only within the Fair, fol. 195.
Court of the Marshalsey, fol. 196. And the authority of that to hold Pleas,
fol. 127 Crosse-bows, and Hand-guns, fol. 28. Crow-Netts, fol. 30.
Customs.
Customs of diverse Manors, 200. It shall be reasonable according to common
right, and upon good consideration, 201. What is good, and what not, 204. And
who may prescribe, fol. 105. It shall be taken strictly, fol. 209.
Damages.
FOR taking only, and not for retaining, shall be recovered, 211. In what
Actions shall be recovery, and in what not, 211. Damages recovered in Dower,
fol. 314,
Distress.
For amerciament, the Lord may distraine, and for Fine or By-Law broken, shall
have debt, or Distre (...) What thing may be distrained, and what not, fol.
87.
Descent.
Where one shall be said in by descent, and where by purchase, 212. A woman
being young with child, enters, and see great with child, and who is Bastard,
213. What is a possession in fee to be an impediment to the half blood, 214.
Descent, and where it shall escheat. fol. 214
De son tort Demesne.
Where one may plead that, and where not, etc. fol. 216.
Divorce.
If they have in Frank Marriage, and are divorced, the wife shall have all, and
if tail, they have a freehold by Divorce, fol. 310
Double Plea.
See there what is a double Plea, and what not, fol. 441
Droit.
Who has more right, and how it shall be directed, 151. where after the Mise
joined, judgment final shall be given, 151. Recovery in right, etc. fol. 496
Dower.
By attainder of tenant in tail, where it shall be forfeited, and where not,
303. Third part shall be assigned to Eloppement, 314. It shall not be of a
reversion for life, though his fee is joined to the freehold, 317. Nor it shall
not be during the time of the husband being in Religion, nor where be is
jointly seized, 316. Where a villain takes a wife it shall be, under nine
years it shall not be, fol. 315 Where a Lord enters for Mortmaine, or
recovers in Cessavit, the wife shall be, 317. where the husband has an estate
in fee upon condition, she shall be, 317. where the heir is remitted, she
shall not be, 317. where the husband looses by default, or reddition, she shall
be, fol. 318 Assignement by Guardian in Knights service by Disseisor, Abator,
or Intruder, good, 317. Assignement by Guardian in Socage, shall not be Rent
assign to the wife, Rec. and yet assign, 317. Where the husband dies seized,
and she demands, and he was not ready, the wife shall recover damages, fol.
318.
Entendment.
What is good by Entendment, and what not, fol. 443
Enquest.
In Leet if twelve agree, it is good, and a stranger may be sworn, 13. In
Court Baron by less then twelve for the Lord, 13. In Leet it shall be by
twelve at the least, and see issue tried in Court bar^^ fol. (...) Misdemeanor
in drink, or taking a writing, fol. 225
Estray.
After the year and day, and Proclamation made in the Church and Markets, fol.
79
Escheat.
Where it ought, and where it shall descend, fol. 216 Where land ought. fol.
217
Essoine.
After Issue but one Essoine, 368. Where at two Venire fac. Habeas corpora,
and distress, it shall be, and where not, 372. Action against three, every one
shall make Essoine severally and not after, but, etc. 373. Of the Kings service
cast in at the Distringas Jurat. 374. After appearance the T^nant shall not be
in Assise, 375. Of the service of the King the Essoine, Sworn and he ought to
bring in his warrant and shall loose 20 s. fol. 380 Exception of that entered,
and day of Essoyne, fol. 280 It does not lie for acorporation in the Scire fac.
fol. 381 Where it lies upon a re-summons, and re-attachment, and where not,
fol. 361.
Evidence.
Upon general Issue, that he had no such canse of action or no cause of
action, good. 234. That he has interest, and an Estate good. 235. Upon general
Issue, he shall not have Evidence of another thing, or contrary. 236. Where
the Evidence proves the substance of the Issue, it is good. 239.
Exhortation to the Inquest.
Exhortation, and the cause that they are sworn. 13.
Execution.
What shall be, and what in Court Baron, and Capias is not there. 227. Upon a
Recognizance and Statutes. 231. Of Goods, that he shall have Day of the
Execution awarded, of Land, that has Day of the Judgment. 230. Four manner of
Executions, and Debt after the year. 232
Fealty.
SHall be at the first Court and Attornement. 140 Form of making Fealty. 92 Who
shall make that, and who not. 259
Felonies.
If Indictors of a Felon utter the Counsel of their Companions, See diverse
manners of Felonies there. 48
Forfeitures.
The King has Year, Day, and Waste, and the Lord and Escheats. 54. Of Goods
only, and where not by Attainder. 55. Of Lands, Day of the Felony, and Goods,
Day of the Judgment. 57. And when Officer may seize. 58
Formedon.
To a Gift first made it is not extended, and Assise by Tenant in Tail, where
it lies, and where not. 247 Shall make a Descent by all which tender Estate,
and the heir to every one is to sue. 248. In Reverter and Discender, Esplees is
of the Donor and Donee, in the Remainder in the Donee only. 249
Gage Law.
Trial in Court Baron is by waging Law, and by Assent, by the Country. 384.
Where he shall have that in Account, and where not. 384, 385, 386. Detinue of
VVritings, and Obligation where he shall have his Law, and where not. 385. Upon
Arbitrament, and Money awarded, shall have his Law, and not upon Statute. 385.
Debt for Salary, for what he shall have it, and for what not. 385. He may,
where the Plaintiff fails in the Contract. 185. He shall have it, not showing a
Deed, witnessing the Contract or Receipt. 388. Debt for Counsel he may have, but
not for Amercement in Leet. 387. Where he shall save his defaule upon the
Grandd Cape, by waging of Law, and where by Imprisonment and certain Water.
390
Guard.
Who shall be in Ward, and who not. 250. Where part is in chief, the King
shall have all, and where part Socage not all. 254. Guardian cannot at this day
out the Termor. 256
Guardians of Churches.
Shall have Account against the old Wardens, and Trespass of Goods taken. 382.
Shall have Indictment, Appeal of Robbery, and are a Corporation for Chattels.
383. Churchyard and Church, Freehold of them seems are in the Parson. 383.
Churchyard and Church not enclosed shall be for that Complaint to the
Ordinary. 383
Grant of the King.
See mis-recitall, false consideration, and false svrmise. 60. What is good,
and what not, where the King is deceived. 61
General Issue.
In what Actions he shall have it, and what it is. 446
Hares.
TRacing of hares. 309
Hawkers and Hunters.
What is lawful, and what not. 115
Hariot.
Custom is of every Estate aliened, and Death. 262. Service is properly by
reason of Tenure and of every Descent. 262. Custom esloigned, the Lord shall
have Detinue, and distrain for hariot service. 263. Lord, where he may seize,
and where not, and always for hariot custom seize. 263. Of Copyholder
Surrender in extremes, or aver. 265. Hats and Caps. 35. Highways 34. Hemp.
35. Homage. 259. It shall be made to him that has Inheritance, and who shall
make it. 259. Horses. 37 Hue and cry. 33
Inmates.
WHo are, and who not, and who shall not have Common. 90
Incidents.
What they are, and what Incidents may be severed, and what not. 70
Justice.
Justice should be made to every one. 5. Justice should be ministered. 5. And
Letters to Justices, 5.
Judge.
Steward in Leet, and Justices of Peace, are Judges of Record. 81. Judge in
Leet and Court Baron, and how there. 82
Imparlance.
Imparlance, and day given, 394. Imparlance general and special, 394. Pleas
after Imparlance and last continuance, 395. He shall have Plea, which proves a
writ abated, or Bar, 398. Pleas after the last continuance, and day in Bench,
399 After Issue, matter for last continuance, 399
Leet.
THE precept to warn that, and the order to hold that, 11. and 12. It is
ordained to be held twice in the year, Scilicet, within, etc. 14 The anthority
of that enlarged, by 18 Ed. 2. etc. 13. The charge here begins in that, 15. The
Breviate of the Change begins; 40. Cases argued and agreed to be inquirable
there, 42. Presentment there which touches freehold, traversable, and
otherwise not, 24. Things there not presented, shall be presented in Torn, and
if not in Air, and if not in the Kings bench, 84. It shall be held within a
month, unless by prescription and place, 88. Form of entering the presentment
there, 88. The Steward there is Judge of Record, 83. Record and his authority
there.
Liberties.
What the Lord shall have by Charter, and what he shall have by prescription,
59. Not using and misusing of that is a cause of seizure, 58
Livery and Seisin, 267
Delivering the Deed within the view in name of Seisin, 268. Where give and
grant is confirmed, and good without Livery, 269. Two infeoffed and Livery to
one, 270.
Lex. Law.
Law is ordained to the King for Government, 4 The necessity of that, and of
charity, 4
Manor.
How that began, 7
Material.
What in pleading, and what not, 456
Maintenance.
Not by Letters nor otherwise, 460 To embrace Jurors, and suborn VVitnesses is.
400. To say, he will maeintain and does not, is no maintenance, but to say,
that he will spend 20. l. etc. is. 400. To give money before Suit, and covenant
to have part of an Obligation, for traveling with a stranger born, is not.
401. Where he has an Obligation delivered for his Debt or Interest, as
Reversion or Remainder, may. 401. Servant arrested, Master may give of his
wages, and lend him money. 402. It is said, that one learned, may be of Counsel
without Fee, and give Evidence for his Fee, but not labor the Jury. 404, 406.
Who may pray a learned man to be of Counsel with one, and who not. 404. The
Father may, his Son, Cozen and Kindred, in action real and poor, but not
promise to a Iuror. 402. For Burials in Churchyard all Inhabitants may. 405
Manucaptor cannot retain Counsel, and do nothing but see him appear. 402 What
an Attorney may do, and maintain. 404
Modo and forma.
Where it is material, and where not. 460
Mortmain.
What is Mortmain, and what not. 36, 75, 273
Mortdancester.
Issue upon one point shall not inquire of more. 271 Resummons and Process upon
that. 272. Where that lies, and where not, and where it is devisable. 273.
Musters.
Non-tenure.
IN what action it shall be pleaded, and non-tenure of parcel is not abatement
for all. 276
Nuper obiit.
Where it lies between Sisters of half blood. 277
Negativa preignans.
Where Issue shall be of that, and where ntt. 462
Obligations.
How the Conditions of them shall be pleaded. 464
Office.
Grant to one which does not know to execute, void, and where to two, 282.
Assignee and Deputy, and where mis-using is Forfeiture, 282
Officer.
How he ought to demean himself in executing Process, 278. Executing erroneous
Process, he excuses, and where it is out of their Jurisdiction, and where not,
279. Arrest in a Church, and Bailiff errant without warrant, 279
Plaints.
IN Assise, 137 Of Mortdancester and Bar, Of entry in the per and cui, and
Precipe of Summons. In Formedon, Precipe of Summons and the Count. 8
Pleadings.
Issue shall not be, if he abated, or not, 422 Issue shall not be upon
Affirmative and Negative, 423 Diversity between pleading in Trespass and
Assise, 424 Bar good to common intent and (First Face) good, 426 Bar shall be
as high as the matter which is counted, 427 Where the Defendants confess and
avoids, he need not traverse, and where he ought, 431 Detinue or Trespass, the
Defendant says, that they were delivered in pawn, or by Replegiare, and good
without Traverse, 431 Where the Defendant justifies in special manner, he
ought to traverse, 432 Count and Bar good by intendment, 445 Where the place
shall be showed certain, and where not, 447 Plea uncertain for the year and
day, and what not, 449 A thing issuable ought to be showed certain, 449 What is
material pleading, and what not, 456 Pleading by name and grant, and Evidence
by name, 457 In pleadings where he shall say, that is the same, 418 Where the
Defendant shall say, that it is the same Trespass, or the same Imprisonment, or
the same maintenance, 471
Conclude in pleading.
Where the Defendant shall say, Judgment if the Plaintiff shall be answered,
and where Judgment of the Writ, and where to the Jurisdiction, and were which
so, etc, 433 Order and form, how one ought to conclude, 433. Where to the Bar
there shall be Replication, the Defendant ought to conclude, and this he is
ready, etc. 433 Where the Defendant pleads to the Issue, he ought to conclude,
and of this he puts himself, etc. 444 Where the Defendant pleads to the Issue,
and of this he desires that, etc. 434 Where the Defendant pleads general
Issue, he ought not to conclude, and this he is ready, etc. 434
Pleadings of his own wrong without such cause.
Where of his own wrong the Plaintiff shall say, and where not, 436 Where the
Defendant conveys from the Plaintiff, or pleads special matter, this shall be
answered, and of his own wrong, etc. it is no plea, 437 Where the Defendant
justifies as Constable, Sheriff, or by warrant of the Sheriff, or by the Kings
Patent, of his own Wrong, is no plea. 430 Where as Servant or Bailiff of the
Sheriff by his commandment, in aiding a Constable or Bailiff, of his own
wrong, is good. 439
Pleas after View.
See what Pleas he shall have. 426 He may plead ancient Demesne, matter
apparent, Joint-tenancy, and non-tenure, 420 Farmedon, that be does not omit
any degrees, nor no such Town, nor to the Jurisdiction. 421 Of what Precipe,
and Plaint in this nature. 149 Presidents, etc. 467
Prescription.
Who may prescribe and who not, 204. Town Inhabitants and Officers, 205. Of
Rena and of another thing without Deed, 207
Presentment.
What traversable and what not, 84.
Prerogative of the King.
What the King shall have without Office found, and what not, 221. Where part
in chief of the King the Seigniory of another suspended but to the distress,
261. Pound open, Pounds and for dead Chattels 71 What is open and what other,
and where cattle dye in pound, 71 Distress taken unlawfully and pound
unlocked, 284. Who shall have Parco fracto and poundage for entire distress 4
d. 285.
Proclamation.
Where there shall be three, and where but one. 11.
Process.
In Court Baron. 152 Grand Cape in Dower and Precipe of that, 505. Between
Petty Cape and the Petty Cape, 505 Precept of summons in a Plea of Land, 506.
Precept of Summons in Assise of Mordancester, 506 Habere facias sesinam upon a
recovery by default, 506. Attachment and form of that, 155. Process of
Execution, 283
Recoveries.
IN Court Baron in ature of a Right Patent. Common recovery in Entry in the
Post, 497.
Replication.
Where the Bar is vicious, is made good by replication, and where not and
Jeofailes, 474.
Rescous.
It cannot be brought if the Lord distrain within his Fee, and not out, but if
one distrain doing Damages or not, where out of his Fee he may, 72
Releif.
Shall be paid at full age, if he were not in ward, and for Socage forthwith if
he pass fourteen years, 286. Part of the King yet the other Lord shall not
loose Releife, and two releifs by one, and Tenant dies before notice, 286 Where
he is in by descent he shall pay, and where by purchase, and Fee farm not, 287.
where Devise, and where a hundred shillings and a hundred Marks, and grand
serieanty, 288. Corporation shall not pay that, unless by prescription, 290.
Resiants
And Suitors to a Leet Who are, 65.
Ryots.
Routs, unlawful assemblies and forcible entries, 36. and 37.
Roy.
Ordained of God for Government. The King is always of full age, 2. To disobey
the King or Law is iniquity, 5. and 6. He is the Lord of narrow Seas, 45. He
ought to scowre the Sea of Pirates, 45. He ought to defend Banks and Sewers of
the Sea, 46.
Roigne.
The wife of the King differs from another married wife, 2. Assurance of her
power 39.
Steward.
ANd his Authority in Leet, and that he is a Judge of Record. 81 and 82 He may
amerce any of his own head without cause. 154
Seisin.
Of what thing it suffices to have Ward, Ass. Advow, and what not. 287
Serement or Oath of Officers.
Of the Reve, Bailiff, and Heyward, etc. 91 Desiners, Affirors, Aletasters, and
Constables. 92
Several Tenancy.
In what Action it may be pleaded, and where he ought to maintain his Writ,
without that, etc. 476
Servant.
See before Husband and Wife. 364
Statutes.
How it shall be expounded and taken by intendment.
Suit of Court.
Suit by Charter or Prescription. 291 Coparceners, and Joint-tenants. 291 Suit
by Coparceners of the King. 292 By Attorney, and not by Tenant in Dower. 293
Tenant in Fee.
Lease for years upon condition, if he disturb he shall have Fee. 296 Where
the Fee in expectancy, and where executed. 298 See 149. b. and by devise 298
Where the Remainder is upon limitation and upon condition. 298
Tenant in Tail.
What is an Estate Tail and what not. 301 Lease by tenant in tail, 302. Tail
and forfeiture by attainder, 303. Tenant in tail, reversion in the King, and
rec. Fine with Proclamation, 355. He charged where he is bound in a Statute or
Recognisance, and dies, 355. What is discontinuance of it, and what not, 355.
What recovery, the Issue in tail may falsify, and what not, 307. Where a
double Voucher, and where a single is to bar, 308 What debt due to the King
shall bind the Issue in tail, 308. Recovery against tenant in tail, where
the reversion is in the King, the Issue is not bound, by 34 H. 8. 308
Tenant in Frank-marriage.
After marriage as before, 310. With a woman that is not cozen, it is no
Frank-marriage, 310 After they are divorced, the woman shall have all, and
where in Tail, a Freehold, 310
Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct.
Shall not have aid, nor waste, and waste does not lie against him. 312 Is not
compellable to attorn, and if he alien, he in Reversion may enter. 312
Tenant by the courtesy.
Where he has Issue a Daughter that shall not inherit, yet he shall be, and
where a woman has possession in Deed and where not, 312. 313. A woman attaint,
the Husband shall be where he is born alive, and does not cry he shall be, 313
Tenant in Dower.
See before Dower. 314.
Tenant for life
What is an Estate for life and what not, 320.
Tenant for years.
Where the Husband lets dies, and where a Parson, Prebendary, or Tenant in
Dower and dies, 320. 321. Where Tenant is and dies without Issue, and where
Bar, 321. Lease for life, and forthwith another for years, Bishop only and
where he and the Chapter, 323. He grants so much as shall be behind the time
of his death not good. 303
Tenant at will.
He lets for years this is a Disseisin. 324 Release to him is good, he need not
attorn Lessor dies, 324 Makes waste it seems action upon the case lies. 324 He
shall House-boot, and debt lies for his Rent, 325
Tenant at sufferance.
Who is and what Acts he may do and what not, 325.
Tenures.
In chief is merely of the King as of his Crown, 406. Of the King as of an
Honor, Castle, Manor are not in chief 406. To be held of the Duchy of Corn
wail, Castle of Dover, of the Honor of Barkhamstead are Tenures in chief,
409. Of the King in Burgage is Socage, 407, To hold of us by Fealty and two
pence is Socage in chief, 409. But where it is of us of the Manor of E. by
Fealty and 2d. it is not Socage in chief, 409. Grand serianty and petty
serianty, 409. Rent held of the King, 409. Of what Tenure the King shall have
the first Seisin, 409 Advowson, Fishing, Mesnalty, lies in Tenure, 411, Where
he shall hold for that part, 413. The whole thing, etc. 412. Rents of
Monasteries gone and not of Chantryes, 414 Office found for the King and omit
Rent, Coppi-holder, Common, etc. and of what ignrvant, 415.
Trespass.
It does not lie where he has Goods by delivery, if it be not a Servant
without Master, 324. Assaults and Affraies 74.
Traverse.
Which is but a supposall, and what matter in deed traversable, 477. where the
Defendant justifies at another day, and ought to traverse before and after and
where one only, 480. Of the County and Town where it is local, and in another
Town in the same County. 482 where the Defendant justifies in trespass
transitory in another County he ought to traverse the County, 484. Trespass
transitory Defendant may justify in the same County in another Town without
traverse 484.
Treasons.
Small Treasons what they are, 47.
Treasure trove.
In the Land and in the Sea,. 78.
Trial.
See Court Baron, 225.
Waste.
BY Guardian in Socage, Tenant by Elegit and the remedy 339. A woman Termor
takes a husband which makes waste and dies, the wife shall be charged,
otherwise it is of a Lease to them, 336. Against whom it shall be brought, and
against whom not, and where the Statnte shall he rehearsed, 336. 337. Where
the Plaintiff shall say, by demise or by gift by will 337. where he shall
recover all or but the place wasted, and what a Guardian shall loose 337. 338.
what is good Bar in wast, 338. It seems it does not lie against Tenant by
Elegit, but Account, but against a Guardian in Socage. See, 339. Suffer Land to
over-grow with thorns is not, but to drowned, which is clay, or Meadow made
Arable, it seems is 330. Falling by tempest, where it was uncovered, at the
time of the Lease, by Enemies ali^n is not, 331. To suffer a house to be
uncovered, that the great timber rots. 331 Where a Furnace ^ixed, and where
not, 331 Repair before writ, is no ^^ste, 331 He may cut Trees to repair, where
it is ^^^ayed, and Keynes cut down, and dead wood, 332 ^utting those which have
used to be cut within these twenty or sixteen years, is not, 333 Cutting
VVillows within view, Hasels under great Trees, barking under-woods, is, 332
Cutting wrong-lands, See cutting Keines, 333 To eat the Springs, cutting green
wood where there is dead, and white-thorn is. 333 For what one shall be
punished, and for what not. 332 Where it shall be, (which he holds) and
where which he did hold. 335
Waters.
Fishing in the Sea, and the Sea flows, and reflowes. 46 Common fishing. 45
Frank fishing. 46 Several fishing, and frank fishing. 46
Waive.
If the Owner make fresh Suit, and brings Appeal, and now upon Indictment. 80
Watch.
Of time, and what persons. 97 wines. 39.
Wreck of the Sea.
He may have that by prescription. 24 See fresh victuals. 24 what is wreck and
what not. 24
Villainage.
How that begun, and villain Executor, and where sale before seizure, 326.
Where he is infranchised for a time, and where for ever, 327. Lord or villain
is Plaintiff makes Attorney, or sues Recordare, is not enfranchised, 328.
Perquesite, how the Less. and how the person shall have, 328. Lord and Villain
vouch or Imparle, or is made Knight, it is an infranchisement, and to be of a
Jury is infranchisement, 328. Enfeoff his Villain, makes obligation, Lease is,
328. See Surrender.
View.
Where the first writ abates, he shall have in the second, and where not, 417.
Where she is outed in Dower, and where not, 417. See Dum fuit infra aetatem,
and Non compos mentis, 518. In Assise Attaint, Quod ei deforceat, Entry in the
Quibus, he shall not have, 418. In Assise of Nuisance, Curia claudenda, Cum in
vita, Quod permittat, Admeasurement he shall have, 419. In Assise of an Office
he shall have, 420.
Unques prist
If he says yet ready, he ought to tender to the Court; or to say that it is
so heavy, that he cannot bring it with him, 485 Dower, where the Tenant is
essoyned, he is not estopped to say yet ready, 486 Debt, at the Distringas if
he comes, he is not estopped, otherwise it is in Annuity, 485, 486 After
Imparlance he shall not say, yet ready, 486 Where he shall say, Ready at the
place, 486 Where it is collateral, he shall not say, yet ready, but that he
tendered at the place, 48, 76, 487 Where it is of a thing within, he shall
say, yet ready, and without not. 487
THE TABLE TO THE RETURN of Writs.
A.
ACcedas ad Curiam, fol. 510. Account, 517. Adigas ad curiam, 511. Adjournment,
546. Allocat. Com. 526. Amendment, 558. Appearance, 558. Appeal, 513. Assise
nonet disseisin, 534. Pro some. Ass. 643. Attachment, 513. 558. Attaint, 530.
Authority of the Sheriff, 557. Averment, 559. 557. Averra elongata, 523.
Averra elongata, sur 2 deliverance 523.
C.
Capias in Debt or Trespass, 513. 519. Capias utlagatnm, 518. Capias in manus,
etc. 553. Ca^as tam Corpus quam terram, 552. Cepi corpus, 515. Cepi corpus out
of the Exchequer, 552. Certiorare, 550. Certiorare sur protection, 546
Certiorare by the Coroners, 550. Certificate of the Mayor of the Cities, 552.
Certificate of the security of the peace, 551. Cessavit perbiennium, 551.
Clericus non habens Laicnm feodum, 562. Commission, 551. Condition upon
Replevin, 524. Counterfeit money, 517 Corpus cum causa, and habeas corpora, and
many returns upon that, 517. For defect com. 526. For defect of Coroners, 5.26.
for election of Coroners, 549. Panel de circumstantibus. 531.
D.
Decies tantum, 551. Dedimus potestatem, 551. Deliberatis Sesines 541. 540.
Deliverance in County, 523. Det ubi pars nibil habet, 521. Distress, 531.
Distringas Juratores, 532. Distringas verse. Clericum, 532. Distringas verse.
Executores, 532. Distringas post pone, 531. Exitus in Scaccario sur Distringas
554. Dower, 535.
E.
Ejectione firma, 513. Elegit. 540. Electio Coronatorum, 549 Electio militum
Parl. Electio Burgensium Parl. 545. Electio Viridarii, 563. Inquest, 563.
Inquire of damages, 563. Scire facias verse. Executores, 556. Distring as verse.
Executores, 536. Excommengement, 516. Exigen, and diverse returns upon that,
525. Exitus, 529. Exitus, sur Distringas, 529. Extent 540.
F.
Falso judicio, 512. Favor of the Sheriff, 532. False return, 557. Felonies,
517. Feme waviata, 527. Fieri facias, diverse times, 537. Some. in Foresta, 549.
Viridarius in Foresta, 549.
G.
Grand Cape, 535.
H.
Habeas corpus, diverse returns of that, 515, 516. Habeas corpus Juratorum in
Debt, 530. Habeas corpus in attaint, 530. Aliter in the Chancery, 541. Habere
facias Sesinam, 542 Habere facias visum, 524. Homine replegiando, 524. Plaint
in Court Hundred, 511.
I.
Uncertain, and where not, 595.
K.
Kalendarum pro Sess. 544.
L.
Languidus, sur Capias, 515. Languidus sur redd. se sur exigent. 528. Languidus
sur Felony, 515. Latitat. 514. Levare facias, 539. Liberty, 514. London, 567.
M.
Mandavi Bailivo Libertatis, 514. Pro ordine militis recipiend. 546. Pro summum
militum Parliamenti, 545. pro electione militum Parliamenti, 545. Mortui sunt,
527. 568. S. Mort. sur Exigent, 514. Murder, 517.
N.
Ne exeat Regnum, 548. Nihil, 539. 540. 552, Non omittas 556 Nomme del Vicount,
556. Nullus vemt pro querente, 571.
O.
Ordinum militum recipiend., 546. Original in Debt or Trespass, 512. 513.
P.
Panel, 530. 531. Partitione facienda, Pa^l. 543. Part serve pe^le Viscount,
571. Pledges, 571. Pluries Repleg. 524. Pone sue Repleg. 598. Pone in Debt o^
Trespass, 509. Posse comitatus, 572. Precipe second deliverance, 523.
Praemunire, 548. Proclamation sur exigent, 525. Proclamation pro Regina, 546.
Certiorare sur protection.
Q.
Quare impedit, 572. Quis est tenens, 554. Quo warrant. 551. Quo jure 537.
R.
Re, fa, lo. 509. Recordo deliberando, 572. Reddidit se sur exigent, 527.
Regula, 518. Replegiare, 522. Rescous, 520. Re-seisure, 523. 575. Restitutio
sur Fieri facias, 539. Returno habendo. 522.
S.
Sanctuary, 514. Scire facias, Mults, Returns de cer. 336 556. 573. Second
deliverance, 523. Certificate securitatis pacis 533. Seisin, 541. Special
Return, 575. Supersedeas sur capias, 515. Supersedeas post cepi corpus, 515.
Supersedeas sur Exigent, 527. Supersedeas sur Fieri facias, 539. Supplicavit
558. 547. Sum Militis, 536. Sum. Ass. 43. Sum. sessions, 544. Sum in Foresta,
549. Sum. in terra petita, 73 Tales de circumstantibus, 531. Tarde sur
Distringas, 53^ Tarde sur Distringas Juratores, 532. Tarde sur capias, 53^
Test. nuper Vicecom. 550. Testatum, 525. Treason, 518. Tre^ pass 516. 536
V.
Venditioni exponend. 555. Venire facias. 529. 554. Venin facias, hor. de
Exchequer in office of the Coroner, 554. Viscount, 577. View, 541. Viridario
eligendo 549. Visnet. 576. Utlag. su exigent, 518. 529
W.
West, 542. 575. Withernam, 525
FINIS.

