depiction of King Charles I and his son

THE Kingly Myrrour, OR King Charles His last Legacy to the Prince His Son.

Written a little before His Death.

Containing Many excellent instructions and Directions, how to carry Himself
in all Estates and Conditions.

AND May serve as a good Monitor for all the Princes in Christendom.

April 11th London Printed for C. V. 1649.

The Kingly Myrrour:
SOn,
If these Papers, with some others, wherein I have set down the private
reflections of my conscience, and my most impartial thoughts touching the
chief passages, which have bin most remarkable, or disputed in my late
troubles, come to your hands, to whom they are chiefly designed; they may be so
far useful to you, as to state your judgment aright in what has passed;
whereof a pious is the best use can be made; and they may also give you some
directions, how to remedy the present distempers, and prevent (if God will) the
like for time to come.

It is some kind of deceiving and lessening the injury of my long restraint,
when I find my leisure and solitude have produced something worthy of my self;
and useful to you, That neither You nor any other may hereafter measure My
Cause by the success, nor my judgment of things by my misfortunes, which I
count the greater by far, because they have so far lighted upon you, and some
others whom I have cause to love as well as my self, and of whose unmerited
sufferings I have a greater sense then of mine own.

But this advantage of wisdom You have above most Princes, that You have
begun, and now spent some years of discretion, in the experience of troubles,
and exercise of patience, wherein Piety, and all Virtues, both Moral and
Political, are commonly better planted to a thriving (as trees set in winter)
then in the warmth, and serenity of times, or amidst those delights, which
usually attend Princes Courts in times of peace and plenty which are prone,
either to root up all plants of true virtue and honor, or to be contented only
with some leaves, and withering formalities of them, without any real fruits,
such as tend to the public good, for which Princes should always remember
they are born, and by providence designed.

The evidence of which different education the holy Writ affords us in the
contemplation of David and Rehoboham: The one prepared, by many aflictions for
a flourishing kingdom the other softened by the unparaleld prosperity of
Solomon's Court, and so corrupted to the great diminution, both for peace,
honor, and Kingdom, by those flatteries, which are as unseparable from
prosperous Princes, as Flies, are from fruit in summer, whom adversity, like
cold weather, drives away.

I had rather you should be Charles le Bon, then le Grand, good then great, I
hope God has designed you to be both, having so early put you into that
exercise of his graces and, gifts bestowed upon you, which may best weed out al
vicious inclinations, and dispose you to those Princely endowments, and
employments, which will most gain the love, and intend the welfare of those,
over whom God shall place you.

With God I would have you begin and end, who is King of Kings; the Sovereign
disposer of the Kingdoms of the world, who pulls down one, and sets up
another.

The best Government, and highest Sovereignty you can attain to, is, to be
subject to him, that the Scepter of his Word and Spirit may rule in your heart.

The true glory of Princes consists in advancing Gods glory in the maintenance
of true Religion, and the Churches good; Also in the dispensation of civil
Power, with Justice and Honor to the public peace.

Piety will make you prosperous, at least it will keep you from being
miserable; nor is he much a loser, that loses all, yet saves his own soul at
last.

To which Center of true happiness, God, I trust, has and will graciously direct
all these black lines of affliction, which he has been pleased to draw on me,
and by which he has [I hope] drawn me nearer to himself. You have already
tasted of that Cup whereof I have liberally drank, which I look upon as Gods
Physic, having that in healthfullnesse which it wants in pleasure.

Above all, I would have you, as I hope you are already; wel-grounded and
settled in your Religion: the best profession of which, I have ever esteemed
that of the church of England, in which you have bin educated yet I would have
your own Judgment and Reason now seal to that sacred bond which education
has written, that it may be judiciously your own Religion, and not other men's
custom or tradition, which you profess.

In this I charge you to preserve, as coming nearest to Gods Word for
Doctrine, and to the primitive examples for Government, with some little
amendment, which I have otherwhere expressed and often offered, though in vain.
Your fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary for your soul
then your Kingdoms peace, when God shall bring you to them.

For I have observed that the Devil of Rebellion, does commonly turn himself
into an Angel of Reformation; and the old Serpent can pretend new Lights; when
some men's consciences accuse them for sedition and faction, they stop its mouth
with the name and noise of Religion; when Piety pleads for peace and patience,
they cry out Zeal.

So that, unless in this point, You be well settled, you shall never want
temptations to destroy you and yours, under pretensions of reforming matters of
Religion, for that seems even to worst men, as the best and most auspicious
beginning of their worst designs.

Where, besides the Novilty which is taking enough with the Vulgar, every one
has an affection, by seeming forward to an outward Reformation of Religion, to
be thought zealous, hoping to cover those irreligious deformities, whereto they
are conscious by a severity of censuring other men's opinions or actions.

Take heed of abetting any Factions, or applying to any public
Discriminations in matters of Religion, contrary to what is in your judgment,
and the Church well settled your partial adhering as head, to any oneside gains
you not so great advantages in some men's hearts (who are prone to be of their
Kings Religion) as it loses you in others, who think themselves, and their
profession first despised, then persecuted (...) you: take such a course as may
either with calmnes and charity quite remove the seeming differences and
offenses, by impartiality, or so order affairs in point of power that you shall
not need to fear or flatter any faction; for if ever you stand in need of them,
or must stand to their courtesy you are undon: the Serpent will devour the
Dove: you may never expect less of loyalty, justice, or humanity, then from
those who engage into religious rebellion: Their interest is always made Gods,
under the colors of Piety, ambitions policies march, not only with greatest
security, but applause, as to the populacy; you may hear from them Jacobs voice
but you shall feel they have Esau's hands.

Nothing seemed less considerable then the Presbyterian faction in England, for
many years; so compliant they were to public order: nor indeed was their party
great, either in Church, or State, as to men's judgments: But as soon, as
discontents drove men into Sidings (as ill humors fall to the disaffected part,
which cause inflammations) so did all, at first who affected any novelties
adhere to that fide, as the most remarkable and specious note of difference
(then) in point of Religion.

All the lesser Factions at first were officious servants to Presbytery their
great Master: till time and military success discovering to each their
particular advantages, invited them to part staks, and leaving the joint stock
of uniform Religion, pretended each to drive for their party, the trade of
profits or preferments, to the breaking and undoing not only of the Church and
State, but even of Presbytery it self, which seemed and hoped at first to have
engrossed all.

Let nothing seem little or despicable to you, in matters which concern
Religion, and the Churches peace, so as to neglect a speedy reforming and
effectual suppressing errors, and schisms, which seem at first but as a
handbredth, by seditious Spirits, as by strong winds are soon made to cover
and darken the whole Heaven.

When you have done justice to God, your own soul, and his Church, in the
profession, and preservation both of truth and unity of Religion. The next main
hing on which your prosperity will depend, and move, is, that of civil justice,
wherein the settled Laws of these kingdoms, to which you are rightly heir, are
the most excellent rules you can govern by; which by an admirable temperament
give very much to Subjects industery, liberty, and happiness and yet reserve
enough to the Majesty and Prerogative of any King who own his people as
Subjects not as slaves; whose subjection as it preserves their propriety,
peace, and safety; so it will never diminish your. Rights, nor their ingenuous
liberties; which consists in the injoiment of the fruits of their industry, and
the benefit of those Laws to which themselves have consented.

Never charge your Head with such a Crown, as shall by its heaviness oppress
the whole body, the weakness of whose parts cannot return any thing of
strength, honor, or safety, to the Head, but a necessary debilitation and ruin.

Your Prerogative is best showed, and exercised in remitting, rather an
exacting the rigor of the Laws, there being nothing worse, then legal tyranny.

In these two points, the preservation of established Religion and Laws, I may
(without vanity) turn the reproach of my sufferings, as to the worlds censure,
into the honor of a kind of Martyrdom, as to the testimony of my own
Conscience. The troubles of my Kingdoms have nothing else to object against me
but this, That I prefer Religion and Laws established, before those alterations
they propounded.

And so indeed I do, and ever shall, till I am convinced by better Arguments,
then what hitherto have been chiefly used toward me, Tumults, Armies, and
Prisons.

I cannot yet learn that lesson, nor I hope ever will you, That it is safe for
a King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the public Interest, and the good of the community.

How God will deal with me, as to the removeall of these presures, and
indignities, which his justice by the very unjust hands of some of my Subjects,
has been pleased to lay upon Me, I cannot tell: nor am I much solicitous what
wrong I suffer from men, while I retain in my soul, what I believe is right
before God.

I have offered all for Reformation and Safety, that in Reason, Honor and
Conscience I can; reserving only what I cannot consent unto, without an
irreparable injury to my own soul, the Church, and my people, and to you also;
as the next and undoubted Heir of my Kingdoms.

To which if the divine Providence to whom no difficulties are insuperable,
shall in his due time after my discease bring you, as I hope he will: My
Counsel and Charge to you, is, That you seriously consider the former real or
objected miscarriages, which might occasion my troubles, that you may avoid
them.

Never repose so much upon any man's single council, fidelity, and discretion,
in managing affairs of the first magnitude, (that is, matters of Religion and
Justice) as to crease in your self, or others, a diffidence of your own
judgment, which is likely to be always more constant and impartial to the
interest of your Crown and Kingdom then any man's.

Next beware of exasperating any Factions by the crossenesse, and asperity of
some men's passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by you, grounded only
upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the skirts and suburbs of
Religion.

Wherein a charitable connivence and Christian toleration often dissipates
their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies: and puts the despised and
oppressed party, into such Combinations, as may most enable them to get a full
revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly assisted by
that vulgar commiseration, which attends all, that are said to suffer under the
notion of Religion.

Provided the differences amount not to an insolent opposition of Laws, and
Government, or Religion established, as to the essentialls of them, such
motions and minings are intolerable.

Always keep up solid piety, and those fundamental Truths (which mend both
hearts and lives of men) with impartial favor and Justice.

Take heed that outward circumstances and formalities of Religion devour not
all, or the best encouragements of learning, industry, and piety, but with an
equal eye and impart^all hand, destribute favors, and reward to all men, as
you find them for their real goodness both in abilities and fidelities worthy
and capable of them.

This will be sure to gain you the hearts of the best and the most too: who
though they be not good themselves, yet are glad to see the severer ways of
virtue at any time sweetened by temporal rewards.

I have, You see, conflicted with different and opposite Factions (for so I
must needs call and count all those, that act not in any conformity to the
Laws, established in Church and State) to sooner have they by force subdued
what they counted their common Enemy, (that is, all those that adhered to the
Laws, and to Me) and are secured from that fear, but they are divided to so
high a rivalty, as sets them more at defiance against each other, then against
their first Antagonists.

Time will dissipate all Factions, when once the rough horns of private men's
covetous and ambitious designs, shall discover themselves; which were at first
wrapped up and hidden under the soft and smooth pretensions of Religion,
Reformation and Liberty: As the Wolf is not less cruel, so he will he more
justly hated, when he shall appear no better than a Wolf under Sheeps
clothing.

But as for the seduced Train of the Vulgar, who in their simplicity follow
those disguises; My Charge and Council to you, is, That as ye need no
palliations for any designs, (as other men) so that you study really to exceed
[in true and constant demonstrations of goodness, piety, and virtue, toward
the People) even all those men, that make the greatest noise and ostentations
of Religion, so you shall neither fear any detection, (as they say, who have
but the face and mask of goodness) nor shall you frustrate the just expectations
of your people, who cannot in Reason promise themselves so much good from any
Subjects novelties, as from the virtuous constancy of their King.

When these mountains of congealed factions shall by the Sunshine of Gods
mercy, and the splendour of your virtues be thawed and dissipated; and the
abused Vulgar shall have learned, that none are greater Oppressors of their
Estates, Liberties, and Consciences, than those men that entitle themselves,
the Patrons and Vindicators of them, only to usurp power over them: Let then no
passion betray you, to any study of revenge upon those, whose own sin and folly
will sufficiently punish them in due time.

But as soon as the forked arrow of factious emulations is drawn out, use all
princely arts and clemency to heal the wounds that the smart of the cure may
not equal the anguish of the hurt.

I have offered Acts of indemnity, and Oblivion, to so great a latitude, as
may include all, that can but suspect themselves to be any way obnoxious to the
Laws; and which might serve to exclude all future jealousies and insecurities.

I would have you always propense to the same way, when ever it shall be
desired and accepted, let it be granted, not only as an Act of State policy and
necessity, but of christian charity and choice.

It is all I have now left me, a power to forgive those that have deprived me
of all; and I thank God, I have a heart to do it, and joy as much in this
grace, which God has given me, as in all my former enjoyments; for this is a
greater argument of Gods love to me, then any prosperity can be.

Be confident (as I am) that the most of all sides who have done amiss, have
done so, not out of malice but misinformation or misapprehension of things.

None will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, then those Subjects who
are sensible of their Errors, and our Injuries, will feel in their own Souls
most vehement motives to repentance, and earnest desires to make some
reparation for their former defects.

As your quality sets you beyond any Duel with any Subject, so the nobleness
of your mind must raise you above the meditating any revenge, or executing your
anger upon the many.

The more conscious you shall be to your own merits, upon your people, the more
prone you will be to expect all love and loyalty from them, and to inflict no
punishment upon them for former miscarriages: You will have more inward
complacency in pardoing one than in punishing a thousand.

This I write to you, not desparing of Gods mercy, and my Subjects affections
toward you, both which, I hope you will study to deserve, yet we cannot merit
of God, but by his own mercy.

If God shall see fit to restore me, and you after me, to those enjoyments,
which the Laws have assigned to us, and no Subjects without an high degree of
guilt and sin can divest us of, then may I have better opportunity, when I
shall be so happy to see you in peace, to let you more fully understand the
things that belong to Gods glory, your own honor and the Kingdoms peace.

But if you never see my face again, and God will have me buried in such a
barbarous imprisonment and obscurity, (which the perfecting some men's designs
require) wherein few hearts that love me are Permitted to exchange a word or a
look with me, I do require and entreat you as your Father, and your King, that
you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or
dis-affection from the true Religion established in the Church of England.

I tell you I have tried it, and after much search, and many disputes, have
concluded it to be the best in the world, not only in the Community as
Christian, but also in the special notion as reformed, keeping the middle way
between the pomp of superstitions Tyranny, and the meannesse of fantastique
Anarchy.

Not but that the draught being excellent as to the main, both for Doctrine and
Government in the Church of England) some lines, as in very good figures, may
happily need some sweetning or polishing, which might here have easily been
done by a safe and gentle hand: if some men's precipitancie had not violently
demanded such rude alterations, as would have quite destroyed all the beauty
and proportions of the whole.

The scandal of the late Troubles, which some may object, and urge to you
against the Protestant Religion established in England, is easily answered to
them, or your own thoughts in this, That scarce any one who has been a
Beginner, or an active prosecutor of this late War against the Church, the
Laws, and me, either was, or is a true Lover, Embracer, or Practiser of the
Protestant Religion, established in England, which neither gives such rule, nor
ever before set such examples.

It Is true, some heretofore had the boldness to present threatening Petitions to
their Princes and Parliaments, which others of the same Faction (but of worse
Spirits) have now put in execution: but let not counterfeit and disorderly zeal
abate your value and esteem of true piety, both of them are to be known by
their fruits, the sweetness of the Wine and fig tree is not to be despised,
though the Brambles and thorns should pretend to bear figs and grapes, thereby
to rule over the Trees.

Nor would I have you to entertain any aversation, or dislike of Parliaments,
which in their right constitution with freedom and honor will never injure or
diminish your greatness, but will rather be as interchangeings of love and
lovaltie and confidence between a Prince and his People.

Nor would the events of this black Parliament have been other than such
(however much by assed by Factions in the Elections) if it had been preserved
from the insolences of popular dictates, and tumultuary impressions: The sad
effects of which will no doubt make all Parliaments after this more cautions to
preserve that Freedom, and Honor, which belongs to such assemblies when once
they have fully shaken off this yoke of Vulgar encroachment, since the public
interest consists in the mutual and common good both of Prince and people.

Nothing can be more happy for all, than in fair, grave, and Honorable ways
to contribute their Councels in common, enacting all things by public consent;
without Tyranny or Tumults. We must not starve our selves, because some men
have surfeited of wholesome food.

And if neither I, nor you, be ever restored to our rights, but God in his
severest justice, will punish my Subjects with continuance in their sin, and
suffer them to be deluded with the prosperity of their wickedness; I hope God
will give me and you that grace, which will teach and enable us, to want, as
well as to wear a Crown, which is not worth taking up, or enjoying upon sordid,
dishonorable, and irreligious terms.

Keep you to true principles of piety, virtue and honor, you shall never want
a kingdom.

A principle point of your honor will consist in your deferring all respect,
love, and protection to your mother, my Wife; who has many ways deserved well
of me, and chiefly in this, that having been a means to bless me with so many
hopeful children (...) (all which, with their mother; I recommend to your love
and care) she has been content with incomparable magnanimity and patience to
suffer both for, and with me, and you.

My prayer to God almighty is, (what even becomes of me, who am, I thank God,
wrapped up and fortified in my own innocence and his Grace) that he would be
pleased to make you an Anchor or Harbor rather, to these tossed and
weather-beaten Kingdoms a Repairer by your wisdom, justice, piety, and love,
of what the folly and wickedness of some men have so far ruined, as to leave
nothing entire in Church or state, to the crown the Nobility, the Clergy, or
the Commons; either as to Laws, liberties, estates, order, honor, conscience
or lives.

When they have destroyed me (for I know not how far God may permit the malice
and cruelty of my enemies to proceed, and such apprehensions some men's words
and actions have already given me) as I doubt not but my blood will cry aloud
for vengeance to Heaven; so I beseech God not to pour out his wrathupon the
generality of the people, who have either deserted me, or engaged against me,
through the artifice and hypocrisy of their Leaders, whose inward horror will
be their first Tormenter, nor will they escape exemplary judgments.

For those that loved me, I pray God, they may have no miss of Me, when I am
gone; so much I wish and hope, that all good Subjects may be satisfied with the
blessings of your presence and virtues.

For those that repent of any defects in their duty toward me, as I freely
forgive them in the word of a Christian King, so I believe you will find them
truly Zealous, to repay with interest that loyalty and love to you, which was
due to me.

In sum, what good I intended, do you perform; when God shall give you
power: much good I have offered, more I purposed to Church and State, if times
had been capable of it.

The disception will soon vanish, and the Vizard will fall off a pace, This
mask of Religion on the face of Rebellion (for so it now plainly appears,
since my Restraint and cruel usage, that they sought not for me, as was
pretended) will not long serve to hide some men's deformities.

Happy times I hope, attend you, wherein your Subjects [by their miseries] will
have learned, That Religion to their God, and Loyalty to their King, cannot be
parted without both their sin and their infelicity.

I pray God bless you and establish you^ Kingdoms in righteousness, your
Soul in true Religion, and your honor in the love o^ God and your people.

And if God will have disloyalty perfected by my destruction; let my memory
ever, with my name, live in you; as of your Father, that loves you, and once a
King of three flourishing Kingdoms; whom God thought fit to honor, not only
with the Scepter and government of them, but also with the suffering many
indignities, and an untimely death for them; while I studied to preserve the
rights of the Church, the power of the Laws, the honor of my Crown, the
privileges of Parliaments, the liberties of my people, and my own Conscience,
which I thank God is dearer to me then a thousand Kingdoms.

I know God can, I hope he yet will restore me to my Rights. I cannot despair
either of his mercy, or of my peoples love and pity.

At worst, I trust I shall but go before you to a better Kingdom, which God has
prepared for me, and me for it, through my Savior Jesus Christ, to whose
mercies I commend you and all mine.

Farewell, till We meet if not on Earth, yet in Heaven.
FINIS.

