A DISCOVERY of the Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and illegal Actions of some of the
Committee of the County of Lincoln, Occasioned by a charge given to the grand
Jury at the Quarter Sessions of the peace held at FOLKINGHAM in the County
aforesaid, upon the 5 of October. 1646.

BY EDWARD KING, of Marton in the County aforesaid Esquire, Justice of the
Peace for that part of the County:

Wherein is set forth the exorbitancy of the said Committee men, who
transgressed the Laws, changed the Ordinances, and broak the Solemn Vow,
League, and Covenant; with several Warrants under their hands for the clear
and evident proof of the same.

ISAIAH 3. 14, 15. The Lord will enter into Judgment with the Ancients of his
people and the Princes thereof, for ye have eaten up the Vineyard, the spoil of
the poor is in your houses.

What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces and grind the faces of the poor,
says the Lord God of Hosts.

London, Printed. 1647.

To the Honorable the House of COMMONS, the humble Petition of EDWARD KING of
Grays Inn in the County of Middlesex Esquire.
Shows,
THat having according to his Oath and Duty (being a Justice of the Peace)
given a charge to the Jury at Folkingham Sessions in the County of Lincoln; the
Sectaries and some of the Committees of that County have unjustly and unduly
prosecuted your Petitioner for the same, pretending that the Excise was
obstructed, Whereupon Master Corbet a Member of this Honorable House, sent a
Warrant for Your Petitioner to attend the Committee of Lords and Commons for
regulating the Excise, where Your Petitioner was examined upon intergatories
without the knowledge or Order of this Honorable House, and grievously vexed
and troubled by the indicted Delinquents, being Ordered by that very Committee,
to prove and make good by testimony the indictment taken before him and other
Justices of the Peace at the quarter Sessions, and found by the Grand Jury upon
Oath, a ready way as he humbly conceives, to subvert all Legal proceedings of
Justice and discourage all Justices of the peace for doing their duty; Your
petitioner having done nothing but his Duty, giving in charge to the Jury that
Your Ordinances ought to be obeyed; and that such as by color of them
oppressed and poled the people to Your dishonor (as the Excise men had done)
ought to be presented; That not long after Mr Scawen a Member of Your
Honorable House, upon the false and malicious complaint of some of the
Committee of Lincolnshire who endeavored to bring a double evil upon him at
once without the hearing of Your petitioners just defense, or any notice
thereof given unto him, presented a Letter to Your Honorable House, and two
papers signed under Your petitioners hand, representing great obstructions in
the Assessments for Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, occasioned by Your petitioner,
together with false and unperfect notes, styled the notes of a charge delivered
by Col. Edward King at the last quarter Sessions; since which time according to
Order of Your House dated the fourth of December, Your petitioner has tendered
his humble Answer (hereunto annexed) for his just defense, the which the
Committee of the Army to whom it was referred to examine the whole business
have rejected, and examine such persons (who prosecute the complaint against
Your petioner) as witnesses against him, the which as Your petitioner humbly
conceives is against the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and distructive to
the liberty of the Subject, all which he refers to the Justice, wisdom, and
piety, of this honorable house, And prays that he may be protected by
authority of Parliament according to the Law, and that his accusers may receive
condign punishment for their Offenses, and likewise that Your Petitioner may
be dismissed from further attendance, with honorable satisfaction, and
reparations against his false accusers, who have wrongfully and maliciously
prosecuted complaints against him, almost this three years last past, before
several Committees, against whose faithfulness they have not been, neither are
they able to prove any thing material.

And Your Petitioner, etc.

To the honorable the Committee of LORDS and COMMONS for Regulating the Army.
The humble Answer of EDWARD KING of Grays Inn in the County of Middlesex
Esquire, to the false scandalous and malicious information of William Bury,
Norrice Cave, Thomas Lister, John Archer, and William Savill, Committee Men for
the County of Lincoln; occasioned by a charge given to the Jury at the quarter
Sessions of the peace held at Folkingham in the parts of Kestiven in the County
of Lincoln upon the fifth of October, 1646. By the said EDWARD KING.

THis Defendant says, That he has been always active, diligent, and forward
to put in execution all the Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament; and to
possess the Subjects of this Realm with a right understanding of the
Declarations, Protestations, Oaths, and Covenants, set forth by both Houses of
Parliament; and of their loyalty and fidelity to his Majesty; and their justice
and zeal to maintain the Rights and Liberties of the Subject against al
Arbitrary proceedings, and unjust oppressions, by any instruments whatsoever:
And has ever been much agrieved, and does think it strange, that after so many
Declarations, and solemn Protestations made to God, and the people, by both
Houses of Parliament of their said resolutions: That some of the Committee for
Lincolnshire should hope to receive encouragement to issue out the Warrants
hereafter expressed; so contrary to the Laws of the Land; the Ordinances,
Orders, Declarations, and Votes of Parliament; and so full of danger, and
inconveniences to all the Subjects of that County, (which if admitted) will be
a heavier yoke of bondage upon the people then that of Ship money, the high
Commission, or any other illegal charge which has been taken away this
Parliament as intolerable grievances. And for that it is pretended, that the
said Warrants and arbitrary proceedings of the Committee, are warranted by the
Ordinances of Parliament, by which they act; This defendant says, that for the
clear manifestation of the untruth thereof, he humbly prays the Judgment of
this honorable Committee, the said Warrants being in these words; Many of them
concerning personal differences between party and party, the which by several
Votes of the House of Commons they are prohibited to intermedle with.

To Thomas Boxolme of Fulletby.
1. WHereas John Gell of Houghton in the Moore, was ordered by us to pay unto
you a debt upon a Bond of twelve pounds, which he paid accordingly; and you
refuse to deliver unto him the said Bond which is in your custody. This is
therefore to will and require you upon notice hereof to deliver unto the said
John Gell the said Bill or Bond, Ma. Whichcott John Barnard. Tho. Nethercotts.
or otherwise to appear before us upon December 6. next, to show cause to the
contrary; And hereof fail you not in any wise.

Given at Lincoln, November the 16. 1644.
To the Mayor, Bailiffs, Constables; and the Inhabitants of Great-Grimesby.
2. BY virtue of an Order to me given by the Right Honorable the Lord
Willoughby, Lord Lieutenant for this County of Lincoln; These are to charge
and command you, and every of you; that immediately you do bring into Arbye one
fat Ox, or two Bease, price 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. ten fat Sheep, threescore pound of
Cheese, thirty pound of Butter, two dozen of Chickens, twelve hens for
provision of the Army for the King and Parliament, and likewise twenty dozen of
Bread, and four barrels of Bear, hereof fail you not upon pain of present
plundering.

Dated 20. September, 1649. Nehemiah Rawson, Scout-Master-Generall.
You are likewise to bring in this day one chaldron of Oats and a quarter of
Beans.



3. Ham. whichcot. John Archer. Cha. Hall. Alex. Emerson.
FOrasmuch as it appears unto us upon hearing and examination of the
differences between Bridget Martindale Widow, and Thomas Gill concerning
certain Lands in Morton; That the said Bridget was, and is lawfully seized for
term of her life, of certain Houses and Lands in Marton by deed of Jointure
made before her intermarriage with Robert Ives, late of Marton, her former
Husband, And of all other the Lands of the said Robert in Marton aforesaid by
his Will, who dyed about twelve years since; And that the said Bridget has
peaceably and quietly enjoyed the same, till within these two years; Thomas
Ives son of the said Robert, taking advantage of these troublesome and
distracted times, violently entered into the possession thereof, and outed the
said Bridget; the said Thomas dying soon after, Thomas Gill married his widow,
and relict, and so without any color of title does still keep the possession
thereof, contrary to the peace of the County; The peace whereof we are enabled
to keep by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf made; These are
therefore to require, and command the said Thomas Gill and his Wife, to avoid
the possession of the premises by monday next, and to suffer the said Bridget
quietly to enjoy the same as before these troublesome times she did, until by
due course of law the title may be further tried, and she evicted, Fail you not
herein at your perils.

Given at Lincoln this 11. day of July, 1644.
To the Constables of Kirksteade and either of them.
4. Tho. Trollope. Tho. Lister. Vill. Savill. John Archer. Cha. Hall. Edward
Northrope.
THese are to require you, and either of you, to bring before us at Lincoln on
Tuesday next, the body of John Williamson of your Parish, and with him one
black-brown Nag in his possession, the proper goods of Robert Goldinge of
Dunston; to the end that justice may be then done by restoring the said Horse
to such person as upon proof we shall see him justly to belong, therein you
may not fail.

Given at Lincoln this 18 day of March, 1645.
To the Constables and all other the Inhabitants of Great-Steepeinge.
5. Richard Earl. Jo. Brownlow. Jo. Archer. Sam. Leigh.
WHereas by Order of the 30 of July last, we settled the possession of a House
and forty Acres of land in great-Steepeinge which Henry Neave Clerk, whose
ancestors and himself had continued the possession thereof above thirty years,
until by force Richard Forman and Philip Danks entered the possession thereof
since these troublesome times, and held the same notwithstanding our Orders,
until upon further Warrant they were brought before us for their contempt, and
one of them engaged himself to deliver up the possession thereof: but the other
has absented himself, and put others into the possession of the premises, who
riotously have entered thereinto, and by maintenance hold the same. These are
therefore to require and charge you, and every of you, that you bring or send
in safe custody unto us at Lincoln on wednesday next, the bodies of Nicholas
Rawson and his Wife, and all other persons who do withhold the possession of
the premises, or any part thereof from the said Master Neave, there to be
proceeded against for the contempt of our Orders: herein you may not fail at
your utmost perils.

Given at Lincoln this 30 day of August, 1644.
To Mr Broxholme of Fulletby and John Marshall of Reasby.
6. WHereas William Hodgeson of Ashby prerorum, is assessed several sums of
money toward the weekly assessements, which he is willing to pay, but is
disabled for that his just debts are by you withheld from him, which debts by
Ordinance of Parliament we are enabled to leavy. Ham. Whichcott. Franc. Fines.
These are therefore to require and command you, and either of you, that you
forthwith pay and satisfy the said William Hodgeson all such monys as are by
you, or either of you, to him due and owing, or show cause to the contrary
before us at Lincoln, on thursday next the 27 of June instant; if you fail
herein you will fall into contempt of the High Court of Parliament, and be
proceeded against accordingly.

Given at Lincoln the 21 day of June, 1644.
To the honorable Committee at Lincoln, The humble Petition of Henry Pepper.
Showing, That whereas the Petitioner having put into the hands of one Richard
White, upon some consideration, the sum of one hundred pound; the manifold
debts, charges, Assesments, and other necessary duties continually pressing
your suppliant for discharge: forced him to demand his said 100 l. of the said
Richard White, who neglects and delays the payment thereof, to the great hurt
and prejudice of the Petitioner, who not receiving the said money, is altogether
unable to pay his Assesments and other duties, etc.

May it therefore please the honorable Committee to order, that the said
Richard White give satisfaction to the Petitioner concerning the said 100 l. or
be caused to appear, to show cause to the contrary; and your Petitioner (as he
ought to do) shall still pray for your prosperity and happiness.

To Richard White of Markeby.
WHereas Henry Pepper of Billisby Gentleman, is assessed several sums of money
for his fifth, and twentieth part, and toward the weekly Assesments, which he
is willing to pay, but is disabled, for that the sum of 100 l. from you to him
due, Ham. Whichcott. Tho. Cornwallis. Alex. Emerson. John Archer.
and owing is by you with held from him, which debts we are enabled to leavy
for payment of moneys assessed. These are therefore to require and command you
forthwith, to pay and satisfy the said Henry Pepper the said sum of 100 l.
that he may be thereby enabled to pay his said Assesments, or to show cause to
the contrary before us at Lincoln on Friday the 19 day of this instant July;
If you fail herein, you will fall into the contempt of the high Court of
Parliament, and be proceeded against accordingly.

Given under our hands at Lincoln this 12 day of July, 1644.
Upon this Warrant, White appeared, and having given instructions to Mr. Archer
to be of counsel with him, Mr. Archer at this sitting refused the Chair, where
he constantly prosided, takes another fear, and professes himself of counsel
with the said Richard White, and pleads against the Petitioner, and his own
Warrant, and procured a reference to Mr. Mussendine, and Mr. Woolley two of the
Committee; and not long after Mr. Archer being in the Chair, dismissed the cause.

To Henry Winge, Gregory Wraw, Thomas Palmer, and Thomas Kyme, Assessors and
Collectors of the third four Months assesment, charged on the towns of
Temberland and Martyn, and every of them.
7. Whereas upon hearing of several the Inhabitants of both your said Towns
on the 15 of May last past; Ham. Whichcott. Tho. Cornwallis Cha. Hall.
It was ordered, that to prevent all further differences that might arise
between the said Towns, touching the unequal assessing of them; That the Town
of Timberland with the tithes thereof, and the Town of Martyn with the tithes
thereto belonging, should be equally assessed, until cause should be showed to
the contrary: Now there being no cause offered to the contrary; We do charge
you to divide the sum of 29 l. -- 5 s. equally upon the several Towns, that is
to say, the sum of 14 l. -- 12 s. -- 6 d. upon each Town; of which you are to
give account according to our former Warrant, and observe such directions in
leavying the same as therein is directed: Fail not at your perils.

Given at Lincoln this 8. day of June, 1645.
And this defendant does further declare, that Mr. Archer, Mr. Lister, and some
others of the said Committee, have imprisoned, beaten, and evilly entreated
their fellow subjects, disinheriting them of their lands, spoiling them in
their goods, and restraining them of their liberties, contrary to the great
Charter, the law of the land, and the Ordinances of Parliament, as by these
particulars following may appear,

Thomas Lister Esquire, having lands in Rowston, (where this defendants tenant
Thomas Cook lives, (who was an Assessor) refused to pay his taxes, whereupon
the said Cook complained to Mr. Archer, and some of the Committee then at
Grantham, and delivered to them a Letter from the said Mr. Lister, in these
words, Gentlemen,
THat my grounds in Rowston might not lie unserviceable to the Commonwealth, I
have given order for the disposing of them, undertaking to discharge whatsoever
shall be laid upon them by taxes for the Parliament. I therefore desire that
you will take my engagement for them, and that no other may be questioned for
them, which shall be faithfully performed by

Your humble servant, Tho. Lister.
Lincoln, April 19. 1645.



But this letter notwithstanding, Mr Archer and some other of the Committee
imprisoned this Defendants Tennant at Grantham for five weeks, for not paying
the said Master Listers taxes, which was maliciously done to force this
Defendents Tenant from his habitation, and he was so unjustly terrified by some
of the Committee, that this Defendent was constrained to take 25 l. rent per
annum of him, that he might abide in his house, though formerly the Defendent
leased the same to him for 58. l. per an. and upwards, and the said agreement
yet in force.

1. Master Archer and Mr Hall two Committee men sent a Warrant to Thomas Gill
to appear at Lincoln and Answer such things as Bridget Martindale should
object: upon his appearance Master Archer asked him by what Title he held the
Land, etc. Gill replied he held it for his Wifes child being heir at the Common
Law, Master Archer said here is a Jointure in writing, unless you can disprove
it, she shall have the Land, to which Gill replied, he could prove, it was not
sealed or delivered in her husbands life time; Archer replied if you bring
twenty witnesses, he not hear them against the deed, whereupon Gill desired he
might have a trial at Law; Archer answered unless you will yield the possession
you shall not, and none shall have the hearing of it but our selves: Gill told
Mr Archer that his predecessor was troubled in the Sessions at Sleaford
formerly about it, and that the Bench had referred it to a trial at the
Common Law, to which Archer replied. They may do what they will; But we will do
what we list; and when Gill refused to yield up the possession according to an
Order of the Committee, he was sent for by Warrant to Lincoln, where Mr Archer
committed him to prison, where he lay fifteen weeks, fell very sick, was at 13.
s. 4. d. charge by the week, his wife frighted with soldiers fell sick
likewise, and they lost the greatest part of their crop by this unjust usage.

2. The Assessors and Collectors in Kestiven for the three months tax ended,
Jan. 1643. were after the expiration of the said Ordinance in the year 1644. by
beatings, imprisonments, and distresses compelled by Mr Archer and some of the
Committee to pay the same to their treasurer, to the dishonor of the truly
honorable the Earl of Manchester, who had by special directions formerly
freed that part of the County from those payments in regard Colonel Crumwell
had been quartered amongst them.

3. October 1644. A gentleman being in the Committee chamber at Lincoln, was
present when two Collectors of a Town which was within six miles of the Enemies
garrison of Newark, having Collected the greatest part of their money, and
entreated much that they might have time from Wednesday morning until Friday,
either to Collect or borrow the remainder, could not obtain it, but to prison
with them; take them provost Marshall; who violently haled them with some five
or six others to prison for the same cause; The Gentleman knowing (the first
two) past his word for them to see the money paid at the day; at which some of
the Committee were very angry with him, for breaking the Order of that board;
the other Collectors went to prison.

4. Mark Barnes, servant to the Lady Carr, being at Grantham the 12 of November.
1644. was sent for before some of the Committee there, and 9. l. demanded of
him for taxes due for Sir Robert Carrs Land in old Sleaford; the said Mark told
Mr Archer that Colonel Rossiters horses eat the grounds; that his Masters Wood
was felled by the Parliaments Forces; and the house burnt upon their leaving
it; but Mr Archer not having patience to hear him speak, committed him to the
Goal where he lay until he borrowed 9. l. and paid it.

5. May 1645. Some of the Deputy Lieutenants of Lincolnshire by virtue of the
Ordinance of the 3 of July 1644. for putting the Associated Counties of
Lincoln, Suffolk, etc. into a posture of defense for the preservation and
safety of the Counties, summoned the Inhabitants of the hundred of Elloe
together where the major part of them did propound and nominate Edward King
Esquire for their Colonel according to the Ordinance, and delivered a writing
to Thomas Lister and some other of the Deputy-Lievtenants then present to
declare as much; at which M. Lister was offended, and said, if he could do any
thing in the County, Colonel King should have no command there, and at such
time as the Persons aforesaid propounded and nominated Colonel King for their
Officer; Thomas Lister replied, that if any cried (a King again) he would clap
them by the heels, notwithstanding all which, Colonel King was freely
propounded, and nominated, and so acknowledged under the hands of some of the
Deputy-Lievtenants; but in regard the said Deputy-Lievtenants refused to
approve and allow the choice, the Country was not put into a posture of
defense, but wasted, destroyed and plundered by the Enemy, contrary to the just
and honorable intentions of the Parliament.

6. Lands in Boothby were taxed, the party named in the Assessement was neither
Tenant, nor Occupier of the Lands, who thereupon repaired to Lincoln to M.
Archer, and some of the Committee to acquaint them with the truth of his case;
after he had made it known to M. Archer, he presently trebled the sum upon him
for not payment, and the Marshall being present, he said, take him Marshall;
whereupon he was constrained to pay the treble, and complaining of this abuse
to M. Disney one of the Committee, he went and searched the book, and told
him, that the single Assessement was only entered.

7. Diverse Assessors complaining to M. Archer and some of the Committee, that
M. Wincop the Sub-Commissioner for Excize refused to pay the Parliaments
Assessements, and had not goods whereby to be distrained, were committed to
prison by M. Archer until they paid them.

8. One of Heckington being much oppressed by free quarter, and having forty
quarters of corn taken from him, complained to the Committee at Lincoln,
where M. Archer reviled him, called him knave, and in angry manner bad him give
two sh^^^^^ to his man to draw up a petition to the board, if he had (...)
^^^^ng to complain of.

And this Defendant further says, that so great were the miscarriages of the
said Committee in Lincolnshire, that Colonel Cromwell (now
Lievtenant-Generall) informed the House of Commons of the same, whereupon Die
Luna, 22. Janu. 1643. a Committee was nominated to take into consideration the
miscarriages informed, etc. Die Lunae, 29. Janu. 1643. It was resolved upon the
question by the Commons House of Parliament, that the Committee for
Lincolnshire Informations shall have power to examine Sir Anthony Irby, M.
Ellis, and Sir Edward Ayscough, Members of this House; but the troubles of the
Kingdom increasing, and Colonel Cromwell being commanded to his charge, no
proceedings were made in the same; whereupon diverse of the Committee Men, as M.
Archer, M. Lister, etc. returned into the Country, and being sharpened and in
raged by the complaint against them, imprisoned, spoiled and destroyed the
poor Inhabitants of the County, under a fair and specious show of executing
the Ordinances of Parliament, and procured by false and untrue informations
notorious Delinquents to be nominated of the Committee, and act with them, such
as Sir Richard Earl, and William Godfrey who had voluntarily contributed
money, horse, aid, and assistance toward the maintenance of the Forces raised
against the Parliament, and are puliquely known to be notorious Delinquents;
and caused this Defendant and diverse others, who had served the Parliament
faithfully, to be disgracefully put out of all commands or employments for the
public, by which means our estates became subject to, and were unduly taxed
by Delinquents, who by the said Committees were nominated Assessors; the which
burdens being intolerable, a humble Remonstrance subscribed with above 3000.
hands of the Commons of the said County, was presented to the House of Commons,
and Die Mercurii, 6. Novem. 1644. it was Ordered, that the Remonstrance be
referred to the Members of the House that are of the Earl of Manche^^ers
Association; where the Petitioners attended many weeks, and after the expense
of much money, and time, some of the aforesaid Warrants and Informations being
proved against M. Archer, upon a suggestion to the House of Commons, M. Archer
was orderd to have thanks given him, and to return into the Country, the which
was very unexpected, and put the Petitioners and the whole County of Lincoln
into an amazement; since which time the said M. Archer, Lister, and some other
of the Committee, have continued in Lincolneshire, and being Committee Men, to
the dishonor and scandal of the Parliament, have not restrained men of
unsound doctrine to preach, though not ordained Ministers, nor allowed for the
trial of their gifts, as by both Houses of Parliament was ordained; have
oppressed, and tyrannized over the people, wasted the treasure of the County,
and consumed the estates of Delinquents, by their mis-government, letting them
to the Owners, and Malignants, abusing the Honor and Justice of Parliament; the
which being apparent to this Defendant by view of the Warrants, and by
complaint of the people who groaned, and cried out under their oppressions, and
were ready to despair in the Justice of the Parliament, this Defendant,
according to the duty of his place, did openly deliver for the Honor of the
Parliament, and for the quiet and satisfaction of the people, a Charge to the
Jury at Folkingham-Sessions in Lincolnshire to this effect:

MY Masters of this Jury, The Charge.
being called to this public service, I am resolved this day to set before
your eyes the wisdom, piety, prudence, and justice of the Parliament, and to
let you know in all their Protestations, Covenants, Oaths, and Declarations,
how tenderly they have expressed themselves for the preservation of our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and that done, your selves and the world be
Judges how suitable the actions of those have been, who contrary to their pious
and just intentions have suffered heresies to be openly taught amongst us, and
laid unsufferable burdens upon us, by misusing, altering and subverting the
Ordinances of Parliament. When we first took up arms in our own just defense
against the will of our Sovereign, seduced by wicked councellers, it was, as
the Parliament solemnly protested, and vowed, and by Covenant engaged us to
believe, for the defense of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, such was their
zeal to the Covenant, as who is there here before me this day that was not by
command ordained to take it? nay, who is there in the Nation, if justice be
executed, that escapes punishment if they obstinately refuse it? The Parliament
in the time of greatest danger, declared themselves tender of our Laws, and
Liberties, they laid no tax or assessement upon us, until we refused to help
our selves by voluntary contributions, and when they did it, they assured us,
and did protest in the presence of the all-seeing Diety, that their only end
was to provide for the public peace, and prosperity of His Majesty, and all
his Realms, to preserve the Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom, for being
seized, and devoured by a wicked party; and they doubted not but to deliver us
at the last, if the people suffered not themselves to be deluded by false and
specious shows. When they were in danger to be baffled, and injured by a
malignant party, who had no respect to the Laws of the Land, they excited the
well-affected persons to contribute their best assistance according to the
solemn Vow and Covenant, and did declare, that whosoever should bring in
money, plate, horse, etc. should do according to their duty, and that the same
should not be employed upon any other occasions, then the maintaining the
Protestant Religion, the Kings Authority, and his Person, our Laws and
Liberties; all which the Parliament in several Declarations, pressed upon us, as
being answerable before God, for the neglect of them; they wrastled earnestly
for our Laws and Liberties, being assured that men's minds being made poor, and
base, and their Liberties lost and gone, they would be ready to let go their
Religion also: Why then should any man entertain a dishonorable thought of the
Parliament, who have so solemnly lifted up their hands to the high God, as to
fear they will not maintain the Laws of the Land, but suffer an Arbitrary
Government, a thing every honest moral man abhors, to be introduced upon us,
and in truth such an act, as no rational man can believe the Houses of
Parliament will be guilty of? who can imagine (as themselves have declared)
that six hundred men of equal power should agree in acts of will and tyranny,
or that the Nobility and chief Gentry should conspire to take away the Law, by
which they enjoy their estates, are protected from acts of violence and power,
and differenced from the meaner sort of people? For my part, though my own and
others sufferings be great, in regard that hitherto the current of justice
has been obstructed by the malice of enemies, and the late distractions, yet I
am confident, the Parliament will approve themselves faithful to the Covenant;
and that you and I might now obtain justice, if we would contend for it. What
though some of our Egyptian taskmasters compel us to make brick without
straw, and beat and imprison us without fault; what though they govern us by
an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Power, and tread the Covenant, Ordinances, and
Declarations of Parliament under foot, insomuch that they are become like
juglers knots, fast and loose at the will of some men; shall we therefore deal
falsely and treacherously with our God and the Parliament, and our selves in
the Covenant; and Esau-like sell our birth rights for a Mess of pottage? God
forbid; I am assured, if at this time I should ask you whether you would part
with your God, and Liberties or not, you would answer me, no: but you have in a
great measure parted with your God; and others with a high hand have invaded
your Liberties, by means of your own divisions; for durst any blaspheme God, or
profane the Sabbath, or suffer damnable Doctrines to be taught; or durst the
proudest subject in this Realm beat, imprison, and exercise a tyrannical
power over you; if you would according to the Covenant adhere together, that
such who thus dishonor, and injure the Parliament and oppress you, might be
brought to condign punishment; if you will take example of a dying man, I Will
tell you the story; The Father lying sick upon his deathbed caused his quiver
of arrows to be brought unto him, and that done, sent for his Sons, who
standing about his bed, he delivered the quiver of arrows into the hands of
his eldest son, and commanded him to break them, he took them, and replied,
Father I cannot; he then delivered them to each son severally, with a like
command, and they answered as the eldest had done; he then took the quiver into
his own hand, and drew out an arrow, and commanded his eldest son to break it,
who obeyed and did so; he then delivered another to his second son, and so to
each, who did as the elder Brother had done; and so all the arrows became
broken. I Will leave the application to your selves, be you wise as Serpents, and
innocent as Doves; which if you were, durst some Committee Men contrary to Law,
and the Ordinances by which they act, put you out of your possessions by force,
lay arbitrary taxes upon you, by their own power, without any Ordinance, and so
destroy the property you have in your goods; by taking your beefes, muttons,
bacon, corn, hay, etc. from you, and ordering soldiers to have free quarter
amongst you, though they collect from the County moneys sufficient to satisfy
their pay; if you would enquire after justice, Nota.
and not cease to prosecute your complaints, and grievances in a just, and
legal way, until they were heard, and redressed, Tho: Lister left his
Colors, Arms, etc. at Spalding, upon a rumor that the Earl of Newcastle was
coming into those parts; The which the Defendent marched under, etc.
durst some have betrayed your lives, and estates into the enemies hand, by
unworthily deserting you in the time of your greatest danger; and that after
they had levied vast sums upon you, for your defense; if you were active, and
stout in pursuing the Covenant, and in prosecuting them for their cowardice,
and treachery? Would any have dared to put obsolete Ordinances in execution
upon you, and imprisoned you for moneys, which should have been taxed, when the
Earl of Newcastles Army frightened them? ruined you, and possessed the Country,
contrary to the mind of the Parliament, and intent of the Ordinances? durst the
Committee Men for the fifth, and twentieth part view and review you; and review
you again, the Excise-men poll you, contrary to their Ordinance, and the Oath
therein prescribed, taking excise for the sucking children that hangs upon the
Breast, and for the Bullock that casually dies under the yoke? durst some of
the Committee Men, and Deputy-Lievtenants have denied to put you into a posture
of defense, according to the Ordinance of Parliament, thereby to have preserved
you from ruin, and plunder of the Enemies? or durst at this present some of
the Committee leavy a ten months tax upon you by color of the Ordinances for
Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army, which imposes only twenty months tax upon you;
when they have already leavyed two and twenty months, being two months more
then that Ordinance imposed on you; besides other undue taxes of money, corn,
and free quarter, to boot, during the self same month? durst any keep the
Ordinance for sequestration, as a rod over their backs, who are well-affected
to the Parliament, to compel them to bear the iron yoke of their arbitrary
and exorbitant proceedings; if you had not (like unworthy Englishmen) sold
your selves to their bondage, and slavery? have you read the story how Hanun
used David's servants; the text tells you he shaved off the one half of their
beards, and cut their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent
them away; the which when they told it to David, he took revenge of Hanun for
entreating them so vilanously; All I say to you is this, look about you, and
see whose beard is not shaven, or whose garment is not cut off in the middle,
even by their Buttocks by these Hanuns, and that done, say if you have told our
David's the Worthies of Parliament, who are ignorant of it, or if you have
sought a legal remedy against them. This day you have taken an Oath to present
all things given you in charge, and that without respect of Persons; the Law
certainly will conquer the greater, as well as the lesser offenders; Justice is
painted blind, that she may not distinguish of persons, the sword is put into
the Rulers hand to execute wrath upon him that does evil, and our God is a
righteous Judge, I may say with David, the Lord never fails nor forsakes those
that put their trust in him; why then should that curse which God denounced
against Meroz fall upon our heads? I know you neither will, nor desire to sell
your selves, your wives, your sonns, and your daughters into the hands of
oppressors; it is for those only who love such Masters, and will not go out
free to go to the door-post, and to let their Masters boar their ears thorough
with an aul, and to serve them for ever; for my part, being now called to this
place of Justice, and unexpectedly put upon this service to give the Charge,
I Will never pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cumin, and when I have done
contrary to my oath and duty, omit the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment,
mercy and faith, if I perish, I perish; I will not hold my peace, whilst the
Hamans of the times are working our destruction; what if few, or none that
opposes their arbitrary, and illegal practices, and complieth not with them
in their crooked ways escapes unsequestred, or ruined, shall I therefore
fear, and fly? I Will not dissemble and deal falsely with God, the Parliament and
you, to save my life, my estate, etc. neither will I be terrified by menaces,
or the injustice of malefactors, I know what became of Haman who had a wicked
plot to destroy the Jews, and offered ten thousand talents of silver, and
pretended that the people kept not the Kings Laws; our case is almost the
same: was not this Country reported by some to the Parliament, to be generally
Malignants? and are not many who are well-affected, dealt with as Malignants?
Nay, have not some Malignants more favor then many of us? It was you the
Commons of this Country under God, that upheld this Parliaments Authority
here, and it is for your good that they sit in Council: fear not then to
maintain your Laws and Liberties, we have a just God, and an honorable
Parliament, in whose eyes there will be no respect of Persons; According to my
duty, I shall this day put you in mind of two things, your duty toward God,
and your duty toward your Neighbor: If you have regard to the first, present
all Papists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Separatist, Antinomians and Heretics, who
take upon them boldness to creep into houses, and lead captive silly women
laden with sins; Prophaners of the Sabbath, Swearers, Drunkards, Fornicators,
Idolators, Adulterers, abusers of themselves with mankind, or with beast; If
you regard the second, and desire that common right be done to all, as well
poor as rich, without respect of Persons, present such as speak irreverently
of the Person of the King, our undoubted Sovereign, and if any man go about
to compass or imagine his death it is Treason: to counterfeit the great Seal,
the Privy Seal, or money current in this Realm, is Treason: to kill or
murder the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of the one Bench or other,
Justices in Air, of Assize, Oyer and Terminer in their places doing their
offices, is treason; to levy war against the King is treason; which is to be
understood against his authority in the maintenance of Laws, and Religion; not
his illegal will and that Malignant party who now adhere unto him; to adhere
unto the Kings Enemies within the Realm, or without, and declaring the same by
some open act is treason, which you ought to present; All manner of Felonies
you ought to present; such is Sodomy, Sorcery, Rape, Burglary, Robbery, Murder,
Manslaughter, and stealth; offenses with force you are to present, as Maimes,
Batteries, false imprisonment, assaults, and menaces; False imprisonment is
when one is committed against Law without lawful power, Mittimus, commandment,
Order or Warrant; Offenses without force you ought to present; such are
nusances, deceipts, etc. Offenses against the Statutes you are to present as,
Alehouses unlicensed, or disorderly alehouses not observing their license;
Ryots, Routs, and unlawful assemblies you ought to present, such as have a
plague sore and wilfully and contemptuously go abroad, and converse in company
contrary to commandment, you ought to present: Bribery and Extortion you ought
to present, Bribery is when any person for doing his office, or by color of
his office, takes any fee, gift, reward, or brocage, being workers of iniquity;
without knowledge, eating up the people, as they eat bread. Extortion is
unlawful exacting of any fee, or reward; an offense the officers of some
Committees are highly guilty of, if the common voice be not a liar; my Lord
Cook tells us that the Collectors of fifteens were committed to prison for that
they took of every Town one shilling six pence for in acquittance, your selves
best know what you have paid; and in what manner it has been exacted from you;
I have heard strange stories both of Excise-men, Committee Men, their Clarks,
and Sequestrators in this nature, if they be true; I should be glad to see them
presented; you are likewise to present perjury which is a wilful, and corrupt
forswearing of a man's self. And it is twosold; assert: ut de praeterito, sicut
testes, etc. seu permissorium, de futuro, sicut Judices, Justiciarii,
Officiarii, etc. if an Officer commit Extortion he is perjured because it is
against his general oath; but if a Sheriff receive a Writ unsealed (as some
have done) this is perjury, being against his express oath; if any person
indite such offenses, and the Jury wilfully refuse to find them, the sin is
theirs, and the party that indicted, or informed shall receive no damage,
whatever some ignoramusses have out of malice divulged to the contrary. You now
know what are offenses, and I presume some of you that are of this Jury
remember the offenders; Imprisonments and unkind blows are not easily
forgotten: Let it not then be said that you encourage wicked men; let not those
whose houses are full of deceit who are become great, and waxen rich thorough
bribery, and oppression, refusing to judge the cause of the fatherless, and
the right of the needy, escape your presentiments; If false teachers be among
you, who privily bring in damnable heresies, and your governors have exacted
corn, hay and money from you, shall it be said in a time of Reformation that my
people delight to have it so? No, remember your Covenant, and the Oath you have
now taken, provoke not the Lord to anger by sparing or concealing any
malefactor; but be bold, and of a good spirit, turn not to the right hand, nor
to the left in your presentiments, that so God may prosper you wheresoever you
go.

Finis.
Edw. King.

Now this Defendant further says, that Thomas Lister Esquire, during the time
that he was High Sheriff of Lincolnshire, received a Writ for the Election of
a Burgess to serve in Parliament for the Town of Grimsby, the which Writ
being unsealed when it was delivered unto him, he refused to grant a precept
under his Seal to the Mayor of Grimsby, taking notice it was against his oath
so to do, as by this Letter may appear; SIR,
I Received a Letter from you, but when the same was written I know not, and in
the Letter some thing like a Writ, directed I cannot tell to whom; by what
appears legible in the Labell, by my Oath as I take it, I am to receive no
Writs but sealed, and though you write you broke it up; yet it might come to
you unsealed, and whether it be safe for me to grant a warrant upon it I must
advise, and take council in it, I desire to be informed, how it came to your
hands, and whether a Letter, or person came with it; to give you assurance it
was rightfully obtained, I desire to walk warrantably so near as I can,
especially in a matter of so great concernment, wherein I hope you will excuse
him, who will be ready to serve you, and express himself

Your affectionate friend, Thomas Lister.
Lincoln 14. Octobris, 1645. Subscribed, To the Right Worshipful John Moore,
Mayor of Grimsby, these deliver.



But this Defendant who stood for the place, being summoned up to London to
answer a complaint subtly devised against him, the said Sheriff to injure
this Defendant in his absence delivered a precept under his seal to the Mayor
of Grimsby, upon that thing like a Writ, commanding him to proceed to the
Election of a Burgess, and afterward unduly returned Mr. William Wray; who at
that time was an Infant, and beyond the Seas; the Mayor not sealing an
Indenture according to the Statute, the which this Defender conceives was
against his oath, the Law of the Land, and Statutes of the Realm, and for so
doing the said Sheriff ought to be punished.

This Defendent likewise says, that by virtue of several Ordinances of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, there was monthly to be charged
upon the County of Lincoln from the first day of February 1644. until the
tenth of October 1646. 2070. l. to be taxed, levied and paid for the
maintenance and payment of the Army under the immediate command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, etc. and charges incident, to which Army the Regiment of horse under
the command of Col. Rossiter, was and is belonging; And this Defendent says
that the Committee of Lincolnshire neither had nor have any power to assesse or
levy any other sum or sums of money whatsoever for the maintenance of any other
forces in that County, The 2800. l per mensem ought not to be levied, being the
County was not into a posture of defense.
other then as aforesaid: The which several sums ought to have been divided
and apportioned by the Committee of the County to be levied upon the several
and respective Wards, Divisions, Hundreds, Layths and Wapentakes according to
the usual proportions, and divisions of Rates in the said places; and that done
two of the Committee ought to have directed their warrants to several persons
within the Respective divisions, to be assessors of the said rates, which
persons were required to assesse every person within their division, according
to the Rate, and proportion in the Ordinances mentioned; and to the end the
said Rates might be equally and indifferently assessed, and the money duly
collected, and a true account thereof made, the Assessors were by the
Ordinances required within six days after the Assessement made to deliver one
Copy of their Assessements fairly written, and subscribed by them, unto the
said Committee, and the said Committee were required to sign and seal three
duplicates of the Assessements, whereof one duplicate the Committees were to
deliver to the Collectors with warrants to them to collect the said
Assessements, and an other duplicate to such person or persons as the Houses of
Parliament should appoint for receiving the same, and the third duplicate to
the Committee of accounts of the Kingdom as has been accustomed in the Court
of Exchequer in the case of Estreats of Subsidies, and now used in this
assessement in all other Counties liable to it but ours, and two of the said
Committee were to nominate one or more sufficient and honest persons in every
division to be Collectors of the said moneys so assessed or rated; which
Collectors were required to collect the said money so assessed, and if any
person refused or neglected to pay the same, then the said collectors might
levy the same by distress and sail of his goods. But this Defendant says that
some of the Committee of Lincoln having a greedy and covetous disposition to
enrich themselves, dishonor the Parliament and abuse the people in contempt of
the Ordinances of Parliament, never intending to give a true and perfect
account of their doings, and proceedings, wholly neglected, and omitted to sign
and seal any duplicates, or in any due, or orderly manner to assess the same;
but by an Arbitrary, illegal and tyrannical power, some of the said Committee
issued out a Warrant dated the sixth of September 1645. under the hand of Sir
Richard Earl, Sir Thomas Trallope, Sir Hammond Whichcot, Francis Clinton,
alias Fines, Edmund Ellis, and Cha. Hall, Committee Men for the County of
Lincoln, and without any duplicate of an assessment signed and sealed; there
was unjustly levied upon this Defendants estate and the Inhabitants of the said
County in a confused and disorderly manner, the sum of 2800. l. per mensem for
six months, and by another Warrant as aforesaid under the hands of Sir Hammond
Whichcot Knight, William Disme, Edmund Ellis, Will. Godfrey, Cha: Hall, and
Richard Filkin, Committee Men for the County aforesaid, bearing date the sixth
of Feb. 1645. there was levied as aforesaid, the sum of 2070. l. per mensem,
for ten months, and by another Warrant under the hands of Sir Richard Earl,
Edmund Ellis, John Hobson, Richard Brian, John Archer, and John Disney,
Committee Men as aforesaid, bearing date the 4. of May, 1646. there was levied
as aforesaid 2800. l. per-mensem for six months, which sums amount to 54300.
l. whereas if regards be had to the Ordinances of Parliament, the said Committee
ought not, neither can they justify the levying of any more or other, by
color of any Forces whatsoever, then the sum of 41400. l. which this Defendant
being well assured of and knowing they have no power derived from Parliament in
this arbitrary manner to impose or require any the aforesaid payments, or to
enforce the Inhabitants by imprisonments, fines and distresses, to pay, the
same to William Bury their Treasurer: this Defendant did command his Tenants
not to pay the last six months tax after that manner rated, and imposed upon
them, being it was unjustly and unduly laid upon them, and amounted to 12900.
l. more then the said Ordinances do Warrant; whereupon one Robert Dawson, and
Thomas Cook, two of this Defendants Tenants, for refusing to pay the same, were
by soldiers imprisoned at Lincoln, and their goods taken from them, and this
Defendants Estate sequestered, by order of some of the aforesaid Committees. Now
this Defendant well knowing that the House of Commons had declared, that they
would not, nor any by color of Authority derived from them, should interrupt
the ordinary course of Justice in the several Courts and Judicatories of the
Kingdom, did sue out of the Kings Bench several habeas corpus's, for the
relieving of this said Defendants Tenants, and intends with the favor of this
honorable Committee, to seek repair and satisfaction by Law. And this
Defendant further says, that a Warrant being sent unto Marton and other Towns
in Lincolnshire, for the levying 2070. l. per mensem more for ten months dated
the 7. of Sept. 1646. subscribed with the names of Richard Earl Knight,
William Savill, and some other of the Committees, commanding the Collectors to
pay the said money to William Bury Gentleman, their receiver at Lincoln the one
half upon the 25. day of Sept. last; the other half upon the 13. of November.
he this Defendant did write and subscribe the two notes showed unto him, the
one dated the 21. of Sept. and the other the 24. of the same, which notes were
read in the honorable House of Commons, and did command the Inhabitants of
Marton being his Tenants, not to assess the same, or pay any more money to
William Bury their Treasurer, unless the Committee could show them an
Ordinance to raise and pay the said money according to that Warrant, whereupon
an Order was made and delivered to this Defendants tenant in these words.

At the standing Committee for the County of Lincoln.
Exam. per. Tho. Dowse.
IT is ordered that the Lands of Col. Edward King in Rowston be sequestered,
until he shall pay his assessments due for the same upon several Ordinances:
And upon the 6. of October, the Ordinances for raising and maintaining of the
Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax being expired, and the power of
that Committee determined, William Disnie, Moses Disnie, and William Godfrey,
sent out a Warrant in these words:

To Edward Burnet.
The Warrant illegal.
COmplaint being made unto us, and also testimony given, that Thomas Cook of
Rowston being appointed, an Assessor, Collector of the Assessement imposed on
that Town for six months, and four months for maintenance of the Forces
under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, William Disney. M. Disney. William
Godfrey.
and having received a Warrant to that purpose, does notwithstanding
contemptuously refuse to make the said Assessement, to the great retarding of
the service, not only in that Town, but in all the Towns adjoining, by his
ill example, for which he is fined forty shillings: These are therefore
according to the said Ordinance to injoyne you to leavy the said forty
shillings upon the goods and chattells of the said Thomas Cook by distress,
sale of goods, and in case of resistance, the soldiers quartering in the
Town, or thereabouts, are desired to assist you herein, for which this shall
be sufficient Warrant.

Lincoln, October. 6. 1646.
By color of this Warrant Thomas Cook was distrained by soldiers, whereupon
this Defendant advised his Tenant to bring an action at the Common Law, who
declaring as much, the distress was waived, and about two days after a party
of soldiers sent to Rowston, and the said Cook by force taken out of his house
and carried to Lincoln, where M. Archer, and some others of the Committee
imprisoned him until he had paid forty shillings fine, (as they called it)
and after that they appointed him an Assessor and Collector for the second ten
months tax, and some of the Committees have since by force, imprisonments, and
threats, as this Defendant is informed, and hopes to prove, unjustly compelled
the said Cook to assesse and collect the same, and taking upon them an
arbitrary and tyrannical power, have since their authority was determined,
oppressively and corruptly levied the sum of 20700. l. or a very great part
thereof upon the County of Lincoln; whereas in all cases of difficulty and
doubt, this defendent conceives, it is their duty, to address themselves to
the honorable Houses of Parliament, and not by force and imprisonment, (in
this manner) to destroy the Subjects of that County, whose sufferings have been
intolerable, and whose poverty is very great; by which unlimitted power the
said Committee have levied 33600 l. upon the County of Lincoln, very
unwarrantably and unjustly, against the form and effect of the Ordinances of
Parliament, to the undoing of infinite numbers of people; and the great damage
and wrongful vexation of the Inhabitants of the same. At which unconscionable
and unjust levies, this defendant is the rather agrieved, when he considers
that the sum raised by way of Tax from the 1. of February 1644. in
Lincolnshire, does amount unto the sum of 75000 l. besides the goods and rates
of Delinquents which came to the hands of some of the Committee, and were at
their disposing, are of an exceeding great value: that vast sums have been
levied by tickets without any name subscribed to the same; called the fifth,
and twentieth part: and that 1400. quarters of Oats has been monthly assessed
upon the County; Great sums of money raised upon the Earl of Manchesters
Ordinances after they were expired, which is not mentioned.
And several other devices set on foot to levy money by color of the Ordinance
for Sequestrations. And yet the Soldiers have lived upon Free Quarter, contrary
to the Ordinances and Orders of Parliament, it being ordered, die veneris 26.
December, 1645. That the Committee of the Army do according to former
directions take care to see the Inhabitants in all places duly satisfied for
such Free-quartering, or quarters as have been taken by the Army under the
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax; or any part of the said Army: the Horses, hey,
corn, and goods of the poor Husbandmen taken from them without price, the
charges and expenses of levying, Impressing, and conducting Soldiers, contrary
to the Ordinance of Parliament, made very grievous and burdensome to the County
by some of the Committee, when as the 800. Horse, sent out of the Eastern
Association, was paid by order of Parliament, and 20000 l. paid to the three
Regiments of Horse under the command of Major Lehunt, Major Gibb, and Major
Haines; and the Company of Dragoons under Captain Walletts command, as by
Ordinance of Parliament appears: all which this defendant well knowing to be
true, he cannot but admire what is become of the moneys, thus unjustly extorted
from the poor people by the foresaid Committee Men.

And lastly, this defendant faith, that William Bury, John Archer, William
Lister, and John Disney, by color of being Committee Men shaking the ancient
and fundamental laws of this Kingdom, there being no Articles depending
before the Committee against this defendant, being both his accusers and
prosecuters here: and prosecuters and Judges in the country, have taken upon
them by their discretion, to examine several persons against this defendent,
and by force thereof have preferred these sinister, crafty, feigned, and forged
informations against him; and unjustly and wickedly pursue the fame, to his
great damage and wrongful vexation; which if not timely punished by the
justice and wisdom of the Parliament, its not credible what horrible
oppressions and exactions, to the undoing of infinite numbers of the people,
will be committed by this unjust and injurious power. For if this undue
proceeding should be countenanced against this defendant he has neither safety
in his life, right, nor property in his estate or goods, nor liberty in his
person, there being at this present, Warrants sent to several persent in
Lincolnshire under the hands of some Committee Men to gather informations
against him in these words,

To John Hutchinson of Scawpwick, George Sturdivile of Marton, James Norman of
Thrope Tillney, William Smedly of North Kime, etc.
Will. Lister. Will. Bury. John Disney.
THese are to require and charge you, and every of you, all excuses set apart
and delay, to make your several appearance before us at Lincoln on Wednesday
next, by ten of the clock in the fore-noone, to answer such matters as shall be
demanded of you, on the behalf of the Commonwealth: hereof fail not, as you
will answer the contrary at your perils. Given at Lincoln December 5. 1646.

Sturdivile appearing upon this Warrant, was examined as follows. Did Colonel
King hinder the assesments for the ten Months or not? did you demand it of
him? how many children has Colonel King? whether be they boys, or wenches?
what age are the children? what are their names? do any of them live with his
Father, or his Wifes Mother.

The examination of Robert Prugeon taken at Lincoln December 9. 1646. before
Will: Bury, etc.
THat I Robert Prugeon of Walcott do think in my conscience that the charge of
Col: This Prugeon is a known Delinquent.
Edward King given at Folkingham at the last quarter Sessions; wherein he
spoke of the second ten months Tax, for Sir Thomas Fairfax, of the
illegalnesse of it, to be an hinderance to the said parts of Kestiven; not
paying it to the Committees at Lincoln, hereunto I set my hand.

Robert Prugeon.

One Gustards, and diverse others were compelled to do the like, and such as did
speak in the justification of this defendant, their testimonies were rejected,
which bare informations taken contrary to the law, in the absence of this
defendant; who by order of this Committee is commanded to attend here touching
the same business, and cannot cross examine them for his just defense, ought
not, as this defendent humbly conceives, to be admitted as an accusation
against him before this honorable Committee, nor he thereupon be taken,
imprisoned, or put out of his freehold; neither ought he by the great Charter
of this Kingdom, be put to answer the same; all which he refers to the
judgment, wisdom, and piety of this honorable Committee, and prays that
the same may be reported to the honorable House of Commons, that justice may
be executed upon offenders, and this defendent dismissed with a just and
honorable reparation.

EDWARD KING.
December. 21. 1646.
FINIS.

