THE Presbyterian Lash. OR, NOCTROFF'S MAID WHIPPED. A Tragy-Comedy. AS It was
lately Acted in the Great Room at the Pie Tavern at Algate. By Noctroffe the
Priest, and several his Parishoners at the eating of a chine of Beef.

The first Part.

LONDON: Printed for the use of Mr. Noctroffs friends, and are to be sold at
the Pie at Algate, 1661.

To Master ZACH. NOCTROFFE.
SIR,
KNowing that it is your great ambition (for the carrying on of your designs)
to be popular, as your many pamphlets against Divine Service and Episcopacy, do
sufficiently demonstrate: and Sir, knowing that your own time is so extremely
taken up in preparing and fitting your self to cant forth sedition at St.
Antholins, where I out of curiosity was lately to hear you, and believing that
it is your intent to raise your self as high as your late Patron Hugh Peter's;
and rather than a week should pass, and somewhat of your name not appear in
print, I have made bold to publish this piece, hoping, though it may have as
little sense in it as some of your own, you will patronize it: and Sir, I Will
assure you, that so soon as I can receive perfecter intelligence of your late
transactions in your parish, and be better informed of your designs, I shall
publish them to the world, that your fame may never dye. Thus, Sir, hoping,
though I present not one of these myself to you, yet you will protect this from
this Censorious Age; I rest

SIR, Yours to do you service K. F.

The Names of the Actors.
NOctroffe a hotheaded Presbyterian Priest. Carp a Brewer Denwall a Joyner
Churchwardens and honest Cavaliers, Goose a Carpenter Lellie a Chandler
two blind Independents,
All Enemies to Noctroffe. Light a Tailor, Forger an Usurer
two hotheaded Presbyters, and Friends to Noctroffe. Jone, Noctroffs Maid,
Gammar Trounce her Mother.
THE Presbyterian Lash, A Tragy-Comedy.
Scaena Prima.
Enter Carp the Brewer, and Denwall the Joyner. Den. IF ever I heard the like,
would I might be hanged.


Carp. I protest 't will be an eternal shame to our Parish, that such a fellow
as this should be permitted to live amongst us, it is a fine age In Faith when
such Belswaggers must be taking up Wenches Petticoats, We shall in time have
neither our Wives nor Daughters live quietly by them, at least we shall hardly
get them to Church, for fear of their Bumfiddles, if once they hear how Mr.
Parson begins with wenches of eighteen.


Den. Pox take him, he is cunninger at a Girl than we took him for -- I
warrant he thought that the tickling the Wenches buttocks with the Rod, would
provoke her to Lechery, O they are a company of dry whoremasters, still Sows
in faith; or else it may be the poor Whores breech was so cold that she could
not bear it out stoutly against a bench or bed side, and therefore he was
resolved to warm it.


Carp. Come neighbor, you will never leave off this waggish talk, but Prithee
what do people report it was for?


Den. Why truly brother, there are so many reports why and wherefore, that a
man does not know what to make on it: Some say that coming home one night, after
he had been exercizing, or laboring, which you please, at St. Antholins,
sweating like a Bull, he calls for his little Satin Cap, to shift that on his
head, (for though he debominates a what de'e call it, three cornered Bishops
cap, yet he can as well be hanged as preach without one) but O misery, by the
carfulness of his Maid Joan, the cap was fallen into the Embers in the
chimney-corner, which had so heated it, that what with his afternoons exercize,
and power of the Seacol ashes, his brains were so set on fire by next morning,
that away into Kent-street he posts, buys me a bundle of birch, comes home,
calls his maid Joan into his closet, takes up her coats, and to firking he
goes by wholesale.


Carp. Pox take her for an ignorant Whore, could not she cry out a Rape? O
that I had been one of the Jury, if he had come to have been arraigned.


Den. I, or I either, I would have taught him how to play at slats in faith, or
to take up linen upon trust, without paying for it.


Carp. Paying for it? Nay faith they say the poor Wench was paid soundly: she
had little reason to say she was not paid, he flaw'd her sweetly; but come
neighbor, we must be serious, such scandals as these must not be past by
without taking notice of, while we are Churchwardens; I Am sure we shall have
Neighbor Goose the Carpenter, and Lelly the Chaundler to join with us in
petitioning for his rejection; and though they be Rogues of a worse sect then
he, yet they will do more toward it than we can, as times go.


Den. I cannot endure the sight of those Independent Rascals, but it is no
matter, if they will but serve our business, I Will try how I can bear looking
upon them.


Carp. Hang them, I care for them for no other end: but 'whist, here they come.


Scaena Secunda.
Enter Goose and Lelly. Carp. Good morrow neighbors, have you heard what a
firker our Parson Noctroffe is grown?


Goose. Yes truly neighbors, we have heard it, and are very much grieved that
a man who professes himself a teacher of the Gospel is become a scandal to his
profession, and the Church, contrary to the rule of the Apostle Paul in the --


Den. Nay, Good neighbor Goose, no canting; We are very unsensible how it is
not only contrary to Gospel, but good Manners to take up a Wenches Petticoats,
Smock and all; but what shall we do to get him out? that he may not in time
serve our wives so.


Lell. Truly neighbors we shall be very free to join with you in so good a
work, for I can prove by many Texts of Scripture, that scandalous teachers are
to be rejected: as first, --


Carp. Enter Light and listens. Nay good Neighbor we have no need now of your
proofs, but let us loose no time, but advise what course we shall take.


Lelly. Truly I can say no more to this, till we have heard the maid her self
relate what, and how this was brought to pass: but my brother and I here have
some other Articles to draw up against him, and then we will meet again, and
speak with the chastized and afflicted Damsel.


Carp. Agreed, we will meet you here about half an hour hence.

Exeunt. Manet Light.
Scaena Tertia.
Light, Forger. Light. Ha! a fine discovery!

A flat downright conspiracy against Honest Mr. Noctroffe to turn him out of
his living; but who could expect better from such a crew as there was met
together? a couple of as Arch-Profane-Episcopal-Antichristian-Cavaliers, as any
are in England, and another of cunning-subtle-sly-devilish-hypocrytical, and
Antichristian Independents too; match me two such couple in all the territories
of the Whore of Babylon, and I Am mistaken. The first he sticks to Popish
ceremonies, whether the Pope will or no, so he is sure of him; but the last is
merely drawn in by a Jesuitical party: Well, let people talk what they will of
one Antichrist, I do verily protest and believe, that there are two in this
very Parish; here is such heaving, and setting one against another: Ephraim
against Many-asses, and Many-asses against Ephraim, and both against our Judah,
or rather our David, honest Mr. Noctroffe: Well, but I Will e'ne go and provide
him against their assault. O but here comes my Neighbor Forger the Usurer,
we will e'ne go together.

Enter Forger.
For. Good morrow Neighbor Light.


Light. Thank you kind Mr. Forger: Oh! I have made the bravest discovery to
day; here is Carp the Brewer, and his fellow-Church-Warden, with Goose and
Lelly, have been conspiring together to draw up Articles to turn out hodest Mr.
Noctroff.


For. Is It possible?


Light. Possible! Why I protest I overheard them discourse of it; but if they
turn him out of the Parish, they shall turn me too; and before they shall do
that, I Will spend a brace of hundred pounds, or two brace if need be.


For. And truly neighbor I think you will do very well in it.


Light. Truly Neighbor I Will assure you I will not see that honest man wronged;
I have bettered by his Teaching many years before he came into our Parish; and
now he is in, he shall not go out in have if I can help it.


For. No truly Neighbor should he not.


Light. Nor shall not Neighbor; I hope one day to be an Elder of his
Congregation, for all this; Sure those in Power will have more wit then to turn
him out of his Living for chastizing his Servant. But come neighbor, let us
tell him what snares they have prepared against him, that he may avoid them.


For. With all my heart.

Exeunt.
Scoena Quarta.
Enter Noctroffe and Light. Noct. WHy truly Brother Light you do a
Christianlike Work thus to inform me how, and where the Wicked have pitched
their snare against me; but I trust the Lord will deliver me out of their pits;
however I would win them rather by fair means to desist from their wicked
courses, then let them persist therein to their own destruction. Good Brother
let me persuade you to go to them, and desire to know the reasons of their
distaste against me.


Light. Sir, it is principally about your Maid.


Noc. Alas Brother! I hope you think that a man may lawfully chastize his
Servants for their souls good; but pray tell them I shall be ready to satisfy
them in that or any other point that troubles them.


Light. I shall use my utmost endeavor to restrain them.

Exit.
Noct. Do good Brother.

He Is gone, it is well; and now I am alone
I may with Freedom vent my thoughts. Have I
Not many years since lived by Deceit,
Making the Pulpit and the Word a Cloak
To my Designs, whilst not the advance of that,
But of my self, have been my chiefest aims?
And shall I now be bafled by a crew,
Half Cavalier, half Independent? Hold,
They are but boys in cunning, and too young
To drive me from so rich, so fair a Living,
Unless't be to a better: Yet I must
To circumvent them, now abuse the Faith
Of this hotheaded Fellow that adores me,
And takes what ere I speak for Oracles --
I have sent him now to talk with my Antagonists:
Not that I think his words can ere restrain
Them from their folly; but his Works may do it.
For I have thus designed it: Carp I know
Is chollerick and fiery, and by railing
Will heat Lights brains; so that without all doubt
Some words will fall to take advantage by,
Will make him leave off me, to follow Law:
The tother's but a Bladder full of Wind,
Can hurt but little, though thrown never so hard.
Thus are the Cavaliers disposed; next couple
I must endeavor both to se^ odds
Betwixt themselves, and with the Cavaliers;
For I gave Light instructions to that purpose.
Then spite of Fate and them I Will keep my Living,
Laughing when some of them may chance to weep,
Who to their costs will pay for their attempting
To thrust out me; so I Will deceive the world*
Since without cheats no Wealth is to be had,
But when they thrive, it is comfort to be bad.
Exit.
Scoena Quinta.
Enter Carp, Denwall, Goose, Lilly. Carp. WElcome Neighbors, I Am ene very
glad to see you so well men according to your words: What Mr. Goose, have you
brought any thing against Mr. Noctroffe, pray let us see.


Goose. Never fear Sir, we shall have that to show against him, he will hardly
claw off in have; but will the Maid come hither, that we may hear more fully
what she can say against him.


Den. I, I, she will be bear presently; but pray when she comes, let me have
the examination of her, I love such baudy stories with all my heart.


Car. It will better become Mr. Lelly, as the most elderly man.


Den. Faith you say right; and I have often heard too, that the brothers and
sisters when they are alone, are very expert in baudy discourses. But see, she
and her Mother Gamar Trounce are come; Well say what you will, I will shoot my
bolt now and then, though it be but a foolish one, yet out it must.

Enter Gam. Trounce and Joane.
Lelly. You're very welcome good Woman; is this your Daughter, she that was so
unseemly chastisied by profane Noctroffe.


Gam. Trounce. I do not know what you mean by seemly nor Chastized neither; but
this is my Daughter that Mr. Noctroffe like a base sneaking man as he was,
took and whipped as though she had been a Dog; Ah, and I had been by, I Would have
clawd out his eyes, that I would, like an uncivil fellow as he was, to go to
take up my Girls Petticoats, and at that age too, when she was as able to bear
Children as his Mother --


Lelly. Peace good Woman, and let your Daughter answer for her self. Maid, For
what Causes or Reasons did he use thee so.


Jone. Truly sir he said very little to that purpose your Worship speaks of,
but told me he must chastize me for the good of my soul.


Den. Alas poor man --

And the fit was come on him now, now now,
And the fit was come on him now --

Lelly. Hold good Neighbor; but pray Maid, where was it that he performed this
unseemly act in the sight of God and Man.


Jone. Oh no Sir, he was too close to do it so publicly. Indeed Sir he called
me into his private Closet, and there by main force used me so seemly as your
Worship says.


Car. But did he attempt no farther? Had he not some design to have ravished
thee, and when he could not compass that, did the other in revenge?


Jone. Truly your Worship speaks very likely, for while he was struggling to get
up my Coats, he would often thrust up his hand -- I am ashamed to tell you
where.


Car. And were thou such a fool as not to cry out a Rape.


Jone. O Lord, he said he would whip me to death if I did but cry out, or
squeak --


Den. A perfect intended Rape I dare protest.


Goose. Truly Neighbor I am of your mind clearly; for first, Why should he
call a Virgin of that age and parts into a privy-house?


Jone. No sir, no, it was not in the House of Office, and'^ had, I could have
got away from him, for there is never a Lock, nor never a Key to that door, but
his Closet-door has a great Lock to it; besides therts a Bench stands so
conveniently. --


Den. Alas poor Wench, all things conspired against thy Buttocks that day; but
prithee did he whip thee with a rod, or clap thee with his hand.


Jone. Sir, he had a great Birchen Rod as big as a broom almost; and yet he
gave me two or three claps with his hand; but if he had done no more, I would
never have spoke on it, that I would not; I Will warrant I had learnt to play at
clap -- from a child.


Den. A Pox take him for a Letcherons thief, I warrant thou have a good pair of
Buttocks, and he could as well as be hanged as see, and not be a feeling too;
but did he see no farther then thy backside.


Joan. O yes, I tumbled and rould over and over, quite the length of the form,
but durst not cry out any other then, O good Master, for goodness sake --


Gam. Trounce. Alas poor Girl; no, I Will dare say it, I warrant thou had not
been whipped a great while before; I dare say Gentlemen, that I have not whipped
her my self this ten years, and then poor thing, she would cry out the
prettilest would do your heart good to hear her; but if I thought Mr. Denwall,
as you say, that he pretended to ravish her, I Would trounce him I Will warrant you,
for all he is the Parson of our parish --


Den. How do you know but he might have done it?


Gam. Trounce. By my Fackins-law, and I don't know neither, What say you Joan?
Did he --? Speak Wench, if he did, never be afraid to tell it --


Den. Speak Wench; if he did, thou art not the first that such a Belswagger has
ravished.


Joan. No truly Sir, I don't know, I cannot tell; yet sometimes when he put his
hand between my Thighs to keep me on upon the Form, he tickled me so, that I
think I was almost ravished with it.


Car. A fine piece of Baudery to be acted by a Parson, think ye Gentlemen. But
who comes here? Enter Light. Oh! his Friend Light. Well, good Woman and your
Daughter, you may go, but I hope you will not fail to assist us in a Course at Law
with him.


Gam. Trounce. No I warrant you Sir, he shant whip my Daughter for nothing.

Exit. Gam. Trounce and Joan.
Scoena Sexta.
Light, Carp, Denwall, Lelly and Goose. Light. WEll, truly Neighbors I am very
sorry to see you so busy about a thing of nothing, to go and endeavor to turn
out an honest, pious, religious, and pains taking man out of your Parish; but
he whose Cause it is, will not let you prosper:


Car. You Are a pretty fellow to make this a good Cause, or call him an honest
or pious man that casts such scandals upon us and the whole Parish; I grant you
he may be a pains taking man; for it seems he took extraordinary pains with his
Maid.


Lelly. Truly it was a very filthy, base, I will not say baudy action; (for I
would not have such a profane word in mouth): And truly I think not to be
permitted or tolerated in a Parish besides, there are many other things too, we
have against him, that it is a very shame --


Light. Why good neighbor we know how much you are his enemy, but for all your
scandalls and inventions and pretenses, he will be found an honest good man in
the end.


Car. An honest man yes a very honest man, a divil rather or worse then a
divil; a mere wolf clad like a little like a sheep, though a man may easiely
discern him through his gown? one that thinks it sanctity to damn all but his
own followers, whom under a show and pretense of Preciseness he seduces, Oh a
sermon of an hour and a half long, with a mouth drawn aside and one eye winkt
withal (as if he would spy among his Parishioners which is most like to be
cheated) is a fine Cloak to cover a disembler and to cousen the world in --


Light. Your a base scandelous fellow thus to abuse a Person of his Coat
learning and honesty,


Deu. His coat! what do ye mean neighbor his maids Peticoates he has not put
them on since he took them up, has he?


Light. I your e'ne of the same Gang a couple of base Profane cheating rogues
and villains as you are.


Car. bear witness Neighbor.


Light I witness what you will I say again and again you are a profane Cheating
rogue and I Will prove you so now carp and catch at what you will or can


Carp. I believe I shall have some Catch-poles for you friend, ere it be long:
What satisfaction can you give me for the defaming my Credit, as you have done?
But what do I talk to you of satisfaction? You have just such a Conscience as
your Ring leader Noctroffe; and his is as hard as his Pulpit.


Light. I, I, go on and talk what you will, you shail find either him or me
hard enough for you, and both he and his Pulpit shall stand in spite of your
teeths --


Den. Well said Wasp; but now you talk of his Pulpits standing, we will make him
make that he has pulled down, stand again, or we will make him hold up his hand
at the Bar for stealing from the Parish; They are not such fools yet as to let
the Pulpit be taken away where they may one day see an honest man stand again.


Light. Talk on, talk on; Come neighbors Goose and Lelly, you are not so
profane as these two, Churchwardens do you call them, they are not fit to bear
any office either in Church or State; they have a trick to bring in the Popish
Bishops, with their Tippets and Surplices, and other Fopperies, and now they
would turn out honest Mr. Noctroffe to bring in a Popish Prelatical Parson, as
profane as themselves.


Lelly. Indeed Neighbor, if we thought they had any such intention, we would
have nothing to do with them, for we would do all for the best, and we have
hopes to bring in one that is an honest godly man indeed.


Car. Come, come Neighbor, take no heed to what he says now; he sees he cannot
prevail with us to persist from seeking Justice by his Railing and Brawling, he
fiddles I know not what into your ears to make you fall off from us, but I hope
you will have more wit.


Lelly. I, but indeed Neighbor if you intend any such thing as he says, we
cannot in conscience stick to you to turn out a bad to take in a worse.


Den. Come come lets first turn him out and then we will think of discommodating
the bufiness as well as we can afterward.


Goose I, I, neighbor Lelly they speak but reason, we shall not fall out, let
him but be out first.


Lelly Go, go you are fool, but I Will not be fooled by none of them I wont assist
in the turning him out except we may be assured that Mr. Simp may come in.


Light. I Am glad to see this however that though my purse is like to pay for
my tongue; yet they are so fallen out amongst themselves that they will very
heardly do Mr. Noctroffe any hurt I Will go and acquaint him.

Exit
Car. Well all that I can say to it then, is that if you wonnot do it, We Will do
it our selves; come Neighbor Denwall come.

Exeunt several ways.
Scaena Septima.
Enter Noctroffe solus. ALthough I am so well acquainted with
The humors of my present enemies,
That I cannot doubt that all has prospered just
As I determined yet I long to Leave it
But sure I am unless my Proselyte, Light
Or my Light proselyte which you please to term him
Has lost his common temper, he and Carp
As passionate a fool almost as the other
Are Deeply fallen out nor do I fear but something
Has happened in discourse to make a breach
Of the grand union which conspired against me
My parrish is divided to my wish
We all know it is a certain rule
Though blemished for the devils invention
Devide and reign the truth on it it is I care not
Much Whose the inventions was but if it suite
With my designs as now it does make use often
For howsoere it seem abroad to bear
A tender conscience, and to be precise
In what I do to blind the eyes of people
It Is but a cloak to varnish ore my Policy
And do gain credit and esteem 'ith world
Of being pious, holy; thus I have
By seeming Sanctity gained the greatest part
Of my parishioners, who are so dull-sighted,
They cannot see these tricks serve but my end:
Now it must be my care for to maintain
A fence 'twixt the other Factions and them,
And then 'twixt the other two, betwixt themselves.
The Independents most I fear, for they
Are many of them cunning too, and know
How to dissemble with the world; but though
Their Parson Simp be subtle, and a great
Huge Mastive fellow, able to contain
Thrice as much cunning as he has; he will find
A little David will be strong enough
To cope a great Goliath: The Other party
Has little danger in them, as the world
Goes now; for they will be sure to find
An opposition hoth from him and me.
Enter Light. But here comes Light:

Neighbor, what news?


Light. I have been Sir with your Enemies, and there Mr. Carp that profane
Fellow uttered so many scandals against you, that I could not refrain my
tongue: But I am afraid I have spoke somewhat will cost my purse.


Noct. O brother, you should learn to bridle your passions.


Light. Indeed Sir I could not, they were so high, and had got there your Maid
and her Mother in Examination, and did so rail at you, that it was impossible
for flesh and blood to hold: So I expect an action every minute.


Noct. I am sorry for it, that you should suffer for your love to me -- but who
are these?

Enter a Sergeant and Yeoman.
Light. It Is as I told you Sir, they are Sergeants.


Serj. Mr: Light, I have an action against you.


Light. At whose suit Sir?


Serj. At Mr. Carps.


Noct. What is it Sir?


Serj. An Action Sir, I told you.


Noct. But for how much, or for what?


Serj. An Action of Defamation in a thousand pounds.


Noct. Well Gentlemen, if you will take my word, I Will engage he shall put in Bail
to your action within this two hours.


Serj. I am content, so he pay my fees.

Gives him money.
Light. Here they be.

Exit Sergeant and Yeoman
Serj. Farewell Sir, thank you.


Light. I told you so sir, that this cross fellow would be upon my back ere he
slept.


Noct. Well, it cannot be helped; do you make haste and put in bail, that I
forfeit not my word; there is friends enough will be ready to do you service
upon my desire; Forger will be sure to be one.


Light. I doubt not but he will sir; farewell.

Exit.
Noct. Adieu --

How are my plots now prosperous beyond hope
Or thought! but I must now contrive a way,
That they may end as they have well begun;
I have it: Blessed brains! it shall be thus.
Now I have set these two at enmity;
The way to make me friends with Carp, will be
To make him friends with Light; and so will both
Be friends to me, and the designs against me --
Vanish like smoke; and their devices set
To turn me from my living, make me more
Secure and firm in it, then ere before.
But slay, did not Light say that they had got
My Maid and her old doting Mother Trounce
Under examination? there may come
At least disgrace, if not worse ill by that:
I must prevent them here, lest they should take
Her Oath before a Justice, else'tis vain:
The old man ows me money; him I Will threat
To send to Prison, if they do not force
Their Daughter to deny whatere she has said:
This, with some present money added, does't.
But will my Conscience then permit me give
A bribe against the truth? it must not be.
Tush! Conscience! there is a fair and a rich Living
That lies in competition; com't must be
Never more dispute it; I Will send for the Maid
To come here to me with her Mother; and
I know how easily to work upon them.
What wonder will it seem, I pray, if I
That can dissemble so, teach others lie.
Exit.
Scoena Octava.
Enter Carp and Denwall in a Tavern. Carp. I WILL teach the Rogue another time how
to use his tongue -- a Schismatical, Puritanical Whelp, to tell me to my face
that I was a cheating Rogue and he would prove me so! I Will prove what strength his
purse has now, before I leave him; he has put in bail to my Action.

Here Drawer, some Wine.

Enttr Drawer.
Draw. You shall have the best sir.


Den. Who are his bail, can you tell.


Carp. Why, his crop-car'd brother Forger is one, that old usuring Cur, that
has the Conscience to take ten in the hundred, and a gift besides for the loan
of his money; a fellow that is as slow and dull of his tongue, as the other is
quick.


Den. I, I know him well enough; but a pox, nothing vexes me, but that those
two non-sensical Papples should fall off so, when we had almost brought our
business to an end: Oh I would fain have had the little David been served as he
served his Maid.


Car. How?


Den. Why whipped a little, whipped soundly about the pigmarket or at a horses
tail; O that I had had the jerking of him I Would have clawed his Buttocks for him;
and then I would have had him branded with a W. in his forehead that all the
world might take Notice of the Whiper


Car. Enter drawer with wine Faith Neighbor I have often heard of the
Presbyterian Lash, but never knew the meaning of it till now, come Neighbor to
you. Drinks


Den. To you again Drinks

Lash do you call it; had the poor Wench found out another swash to couple with
her she might have deserved the lash; but the poor wench --


Carp. Come Neighbor now we are merry lets hear that Song, thou sing'st well
I Am sure, and for a baudy Song there is none ith City like thee.


Den. Why then have at it; but first lets drink, as the Thresher said to his
man. Drinks.


SONG.
ALl Christians and Lay Elders too
for shame amend your lives,
I Will tell you of a Dog-trick now,
which much concerns your wives.
An Elders Maid near Temple Bar,
(ah what a Queen was she!)
Did take an ugly Mastive Curre
where Christians use to be.
Help House of Commons, House of Peers,
oh now or never help!
The Assembly having sat four years
have now brought forth a whelp.
2 One Evening late she stepped aside,
pretending to fetch Eggs,
And there she made her self a Bride
to one that had four legs.
Her Master heard a rumblement,
and wandered she did tarry,
Not dreaming (without his consent)
his Dog would ever marry.
Hole House of Commons, and.c
3: He went to peep, but was afraid,
and hastily did run
To fetch a staff to help his Maid,
not knowing what was dove;
He took his Ruling-Elders Cane,
and cried out help, help here!
For Swash our Mastive, and poor Jane
are now Fight Dog, fight Bear.
Oh house of Commons, etc.
4. But when he came, he was full sorry,
for he perceived their strife,
That according to the Directory,
they two were Dog and Wife:
Ah (then said he) thou cruel queen,
why have thou me beguiled
I wondered Swash was grown so lean
poor Dog he is almost spoiled.
Oh house of Commons, etc.
5. I thought thou had no carnal sense
but what is in other Dasses,
And could have quenched by cupiscence
according to the Classes;
But all the Parish see it plain,
since thou art in this pickle,
Thou art an Independent queen,
and love a Conventicle.
Oh house of Commons, etc.
6. Alas now each Malignant Rogue
will all the world persuade,
Tha she that is Spouse unto a Dog,
may be an Elders Maid;
They Will jeer us if abroad we stir,
Good Master Elder stay,
Sir, of what Class is is your Cur?
and then what can we say?
Oh house of Commons, etc.
7. They Will many graceless Ballads sing
of a Presbyterian,
That a Lay Elder is a thing
made up half-Dog half-Man:
Out, out, (said he and smote her down)
was mankind grown so scant?
There Is scarce another Dog in town
had took the Covenant,
Oh house of Commons, etc.
8 Then Swalh began to look sull grim,
and ^ane did thus reply,
Sir, you thought naught too good for him,
you sed your Dog so high:
It Is true, he took me in the lurch,
and leapt into my arm,
But (as I hope to come to Church)
I did your Dog no harm.
Oh house of Commons, etc:
9 Then she was brought to Newgate-Gaol,
and there was naked stripped,
They whipped her till the Cord did fail,
as dog use to be whipt^
Poor City Maids shed many a tear
when she was lashed and banged,
And had she been a Cavalier,
surely she had been hanged.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
10. Hers was but Fornication sound,
for which she felt the lash,
But his was Buggery presumed,
therefore they hauged Swash.
What will become of Bishops then,
or Independency,
For now we find both Dogs and Men,
stand for Presbytery.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
11. She might have took a Sow-gelder,
with Synod men good store,
Ent she would have a Lay-Elder
with two legs, and two more.
Go tell the Assembly of Divines,
tell Adoniram Blew,
Tell Burgess, Marshal, Case and Vines,
tell Now-and-Anon too.
Oh House of Commons, etc.
12 Some said she was a Scottish Girl,
or else (at least) a witch,
But she was born in Colchester,
was ever such a Bitch!
Take heed all Christian Virgins now,
the Dog Star now prevails;
Ladies beware your Monkeys too,
for Monkeys have long tails.
Oh House of Commons etc.
13. Eless King and Queen, and send us peace,
as we had seven years since,
For we remember no Dog Days Girls,
while we enjoyed our Prince
Bless sweet Prince Char. 2 Dukes, 3. Earls,
O save his Majesty!
Grant that his Commons, Lords and
may lead suchlives as He.
Oh house of Commons, etc.

Carp. Excellently well performed in faith; O how I love to hear these Precise,
Puritanical rogues jear'd, but faith all this, while we never think of drawing
in our brace of independants again.


Den. Hang them, it is but Colloguing again and making them believe that when
he is out there logger headed Simpleton shall come in, and they will be as ready
to join with as -- I don't know what


Cap. Let us then go about it, or at least go you to Goose, he seems the most
yiedling, whilst I go fee my attour ney to declare next court day against my
peevish pricklouse adversary Light.

Exeunt
Scena Nona.
Gamer Trounce Solus -- VEry well, very well, now he has abused my Daughter and
turned up her Petticoates and paid her buttockes for her, I must be sent for to
make her hold her tongue, by my fackens law I had as full a dissolution to have
made him have smok't fort as ever I had since my live-long day. Nay and't had
not been for the fear of my poor Gaffers going into jayle, I should ha made him
remember how he meddles with wenches Bums as long as he had a day to live, but
he hears that I and my Daughter had been in Cora nobus, with Mr. Churchwarden
his worshipe; and some other grave tradesmen of the parish, and whip says he
and imediately sends for me and my daughter, but by my nickins my poor Girl
was afraid to go, and I cannot forewarne her for it; she had so lately been
Clapperd-clawd by him, that and I were as She, i would never come there more, by
these ten bones, and that is a great oath, he had so flawg'd her, that for two
days she was hardly able to sit on her britch, I was fain to send to my
neighbor Gamer Spindles to borrow her down pillar for to sit her upon, but by
my truth law he should never have diswaded me, to put it up, if he had not
given me this money too, shows a bag of money my Gaffer should ene have gone
to prison though I had work't day and night upon my bare knees for him, rather
then my girl should have been so used; but I must go home and destruct her as
Mr. Parson says what she must say if they should come again, but twill be a
hard case if she should be Put to her Oath -- to have her forswear her self;
but if he does Mr. Parson -- has promised heel give her -- I don't know, what
do you call it -- Hem -- it is a very hard word -- hem -- oh! consolation,
consolation -- I hope he means more money by it.


Enter Carp Carp. Gamar Trounce Gamer Trounce she offers to go out --


Gam. Trounce. Whose that calls? oh Offers to go out again


Carp: Why Gamer Trounce come heither I say


Gamer. Tro. Well now must I deny all -- Oh Mr: Carp how do you do? truly I
heard some body call, but I could not tell where it was --


Carp. Well what do you intend to do about your daughters business -- when
shall we take her oath before a justice


Gamer Tro. Her oath, pray Mr. Churchwarden for what?


Carp For what why about Mr Nocttroffs whiping her


Gamer Tro. Indeed Sir. I do not know what you mean by my faith law, nor I
believe my daughter neither


Carp. Why was not thou before me and my brother and some others Churchwardens
obout it this morning.


Gamer. Tro. I don't know indeed Sir. I can tell nothing of it -- fare you well
to your worship --

Exit
Carp I think in my soul the Woman's mad; what a devil ails she? o here has
been fine Juggling, I find it now --


Serje. Your servant Mr. Carp --

Enter Sergeant and Yeo.
Carp. O how do do friend? thou did Mr Lights business to day.


Serje. I Sir, and now I have an Action against you.


Carp. An action against me at whose suit.


Serje. At Mr. Noctroffe the Parsons suit, Sir.


Carp. Ha! say thou so; well? here thy fees I Will put thee in bail before
night.


Serje. I Sir I dare trust you, farewell Sir


Carp. Godbye

So now we shall have fine work indeed, the truth on it is I spoke as much
against the Parson, as Light did against me well its no matter: I see scores will
be quit one time or other, well I must be content, I Will go put in my bail --
but these are such envious fellows that I could in my heart wish all things
were undone again.

Exit --
Scena Decima.
Enter Noctroffe, Solus. HA, ha, ha, ha, ha, --
how could I split my lungs with laughing now
To see how things strive to content me!
Fortune I could adore thee for a Goddess --
With all my heart; I could turn heathen now
Is It were but for an hour to Worship thee,
What fools are these that say thou favourest fools
It is the bold Audacious fortune helps;
Or in plain text a knave, That's such as I --
Some fool perhaps now might have been amazed,
Befoted, stupied, to hear of such plots;
Contrivances against him would have frighted
His soul to nothing, and have made him yield
Himself to the mercy of his Enemies
But I was never such an ass, my heatr
Rich in Deciets; hung round about with cuning
Was made to fool but never to be fooled.
How neatly have I guld my adversaries
Carp's now arrested at my Suit for slander
And had been so before, had I before
but heard what words he spoke; now I that thought
To have sent to him to reconcile all griefs,
Will make him come to me -- and make him pay too;
Yet when that is done, to make the world believe
I Am still a pure and undefiled Saint,
I Will out of seeming charity return
Part of the money, that I gain by law,
Unto his wife, so J gain her; and it is
A general Rule, when once the wife is got,
That ten to one the Husband follows too.
O blessed Genius! how do thou induce me
To undo them who late strove to undo me!
Exit.
Scoena undecima.
Enter a Lawyers Clark with Papers. Here in a short Epitomy, Epitomy do J call
it! rather a Volume of the Quarrels, Dissentions, Distractions, Confusions,
betwixt a Parish Priest and his Parishioners; what fool, or ass, or idiot, or
non-sensical Coxcomb must he needs be, that cannot plainly perceive, discern
and see, that the Shepherd has set his Flock together by the ears. Imprimis,
here is one Light, a lightheaded fellow without doubt, set on by the Parson,
is sued for abusing one of his parishioners, named Carp; and yet the Carping
Coxcomb must needs call the Parson, Jesuitical Priest; so he is sued by him,
whilst the Priest laughs in his sleeve at both, and my Master laughs at all;
for whoever is a looser, he is sure to be a gainer. Well, it is a fine story; yet
methinks the Jury were but non-sensical fools, for they have fined Mr. Light
too light a sum in my mind, when poor Carp is forced to pay one hundred pound
for speaking the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; for my
young Reason can easily guess, That there is nothing that savours more of
Jesuitical tenants, then to set men together by the ears; but J think the Devil
reigns in this age; these black-coats without their Gowns or Tippets, look so
like imps, that J know not what to make of them otherwise -- but J think my
Master calls me -- Well, J must ene go draw up a Judgment against honest Carp,
for being a plain, downright dealing fellow: It Is a sad age methinks my
masters; but how to help it, faith, is beyond my skll to tell you.

Exit.
Scoena Quodecima.
Enter Carp and Denwall. Carp. WAs ever man so abused, Neighbor, as I am? I
protest I care not so much for the Money, but that the Law should be so
retorted as it is now-a-dayes; That Light for defaming me, and utterly taking
away my credit in the World, should be fined but twenty pound, and that they
should set me at one hundred pound only for calling that base, seditious,
scandalous fellow as he is -- Well it is a hard case --


Den. It Is so indeed Neighbor, but we cannot tell how to help it: Now a man had
as good be hanged as meddle with these black Cloaks, they have such tricks and
such quiliets, such strange Quonundrums to cheat a man of his money, as it
passes --


Carp. A pox of their Quillets and their Quonund rum s I Am sure I Am like to
pay for it; but what shall I do now? can advise me to be even with him.


Den. Why faith, if you have a mind to be even with him, you must even pay him
the money that is adjudged him, and have a care how you meddle with him any
more, till times mend; and then if you can whip and trounce him soundly, you will
do very good service.


Carp. But what way shall I take to send him his money:


Den. Why e'ne send it him, and make no more word on it; that is, send him
fourscore pounds, and consign over the twenty pounds that is adjudged you from
Light; that is, send him fourscore pound ready told, and put it to account for
searching too far into the whipping of a Wench.


Carp. A pox of him and his Wench, would he would clawd her buttocks to the bone,
so I had never meddled with her: I Am sure I must pay sweetly for the cure of
her breech: Yet nothing more vexes me, then that the damnd Whore her Mother
should afterward deny whatever both she and her daughter said to us: O there
went some of the money that I must now pay efaith.


Den. But was the Devil so impudent as to deny it?


Car. Was she! she told me flat and plain as I met her just coming out of the
Parsons -- that neither she nor her Daughter knew any thing of it?


Den. O impudent Jade?


Car. Well, but come Neighbor, it is in vain now to dispute; I must e'ne now
think of sending the dogged Rogue his money; but what would say if the
scoundrel should turn pretty honest, and send it back again.


Den. What would I say! why I would e'ne have it registered for a Miracle, and
him canonized for the only Saint that ever was, or I believe ever will be of
his Faction; but I think you need never fear that such a good act will proceed
from one of that crooked and perverse Generation.


Car. Nay, faith I Am of thy mind; but if he does not send back some, I Will e'ne
swear he is as very a Devil as he would be a Saint should he send back all. But
come, I Will entreat thee to carry him his money which lies ready in the Bag
dormant, before an Execution be served, which is the next thing I must expect.


Den. You may be sure of it; therefore make what haste you can with it.


Car. I Am ready, though it be but with an ill will, God knows; come let us go.

Exeunt.
Scoena decima tertia.
Enter Goose and Lelly. Goose. TRuly Neighbor here has been strange doings,
fine going to Law, and quarrelling among our selves; I thought what it would
come too, when we first began to fall out with the Churchwardens; I thought I
say, then, that we should do nothing against Noctroff, but for him.


Lelly. Indeed brother Goose, if I had thought things would have been carried
as they have been, I would never have stood out; but since it is so, we must ene
be content, and seemingly give our hands to the Reconciliation till another
opportunity serve: Enter Carp and Denwall. But here comes the two
Churchwardens. Neighbors, what news?


Carp. Why I suppose you know the News; now Noctroff, has broke our heads,
he will give us plasters; now he has set us all together by the ears, he will make
us friends again; but the best for him is, 'twill be at my cost; and I Will assure
you Gentlemen, I think I have some reason to bid you welcome to this feast, for
my money will pay for it.


Goose. Truly Neighbor I Am sorry it should be so; but it is your own fault.


Carp. My fault! A pox take you and your fellow-schismatick there; 'twas your
faults marry was it; and if --


Den. Nay Brother, now we are come to be friends, let us ene be friends; there
has been cavilling enough already -- methinks we need no more.


Carp. I, but when they go about to justify --


Den. You will be talking till there come some mischief on it; come prithee be
mild, and direct your passions, else what a condition will you be in to make
friends!


Enter Noctroff, Light, Forger. Noct. Good morrow neighbors all:

How fares it with you neighbor Carp? come let you and I shake hands, and
forget all former passages between us; come neighbor Light, be you friends too
All shake hands Gentlemen. They shake hands interchangeaably.

Why so; is it not better for Parishioners like Brethren to live in Christian
charity, then To be in continual debate and strife one amongst another?


Carp. Whose fault was it?


Noct. Nay neighbor, that ripping up of old sores, will make us still have a
spleen one against another; let us forget all that is past, and be as good
friends as ever we were.


Den. That Is rank Enemies I dare be sworn; for Carp and I were always so to
thee. Aside.


Carp. Well Sir, I will be so, and now thank you for the twenty pounds you
returned my Wife.


Noct. Never mention it; but neighbor Forger, you stand in a corner as if you
were at enmity with every body still.


Forg. Who, I! no indeed Sir, I never fell out with any of them, and therefore
I cannot be indemnity to them.


Noct. Well neighbors, it rejoices my heart to see thi^ our reconciliation. I
have provided a Chine of Beef, or so, here at the Pie at Aldgate, that now we
are friends, we may eat together like friends, and I hope we shall continue
friends. Pray neighbors walk in, and I Will wait upon you instantly.

Exeunt all but Noctroff.
Noct. And was not here a pretty crew of Coxcombs?
Dull sottish fellows, that scarce yet perceive
That my sole wit has brought these things about,
And contrived every minutes circumstance.
How do I glory in my self, and shrug,
To think how close, how cunning my deceits are?
How under the pure vail of Sanctity,
I cozen men, yet they believe me holy.
But what are these designs? pish, weak and small,
Fooling these fellows does but firm me here,
And not at all advance me; he that once
Has raised himself up in the world from nothing,
To appear something, if he does stay there,
Js but a blockish Coxcomb; my ambition
Soars higher yet; and one deceit that thrives
Prompts me to work another; nor shall any,
Though never so wicked, escape me, so it may
But either fill my purse, or raise me up
In popular esteem; for that is the thing:
Such whose lay-plots to mount as high as J,
Must chiefly aim, and in this J have
So well improved my time, that J may hope,
Jf things succeed, to prove an English Pope.
Exit.
FINIS.
An EPILOGVE.
We Will follow not the common course, to say,
Courteous Spectarors, how do you like this Play?
We Will beg no Plaudites, nor desire you
To clap your hands: Then what do you think we will do?
We Will tell ye news, Our Play is spoiled, we fear,
For our prime Subjects is In the Tower.
confined; howere,
In hopes he soon may visit Holborn air,
And as in his Devices, have a share
In false Peter's
Hughs Punishment; we have thus much said,
To tell ye how he deserves to advance Dun's Trade.

FINIS.

