THE KINGDOMS CASE: OR, The Question resolved, Whether the Kings Subjects of
this Realm of England may or ought to aid and assist each other, in repressing
the persons now assembled together, under the name of the KINGS Army.

Pro Lege ad illam propugnandum.

Pro Rege ad illam informandum.

Pro Grege ad illam conservandum.

By him that prays the peace of the King.

April 24. 1643.
IT is this day ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament,
concerning printing, that this book, entitled (The Kingdoms Case) be printed
by John Wright.

John White.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, May 1. 1643.

The Case.
FIve or ten thousand, or more Persons, aggregate and assemble themselves
together, in a warlike manner, with Officers, and and all provisions of War,
and go from Nottingham toward London, kill diverse of the Kings Subjects, rob,
steal, and take away the Goods of others, break into Towns and Houses by
force, and imprison diverse.

Upon this Case there are diverse Questions put.

Quaere 1. WHether others of the Kings Subjects may not by the Laws of this
Kingdom of England, by all means whatsoever, whether by raising of Arms or
otherwise, endeavor to their uttermost, to apprehend, oppose, quell, and
vanquish, the aforesaid persons.

Answer. IT is not only lawful but commanded by the Laws of this Kingdom,
that all persons able, should by all or any means whatsoever, endeavor to
apprehend, oppose, quell, and vanquish the said persons; and if any present at
the aforesaid outrages, do not without command, or absent do not upon command
endeavor to apprehend, oppose, quell, and vanquish the said persons; they are
punishable by the Laws of this Kingdom.

The Proof. 3 Edw. 3. Item. Northampton, Corone 293. But by M. Lambert, he is
to be fined, and imprisoned, Lam. Justice of P. page 133, 134, 135, etc. much
more, and a Fortiori, where the peace is broken, with a high hand, and in such
transcendent manner, as the present Case is put; and every public Officer, as
Sheriffs, Constable, etc. may and ought to raise and leavy the power of the
County, Hundred, or Town, to repress the breaking of the peace, if other wise
it cannot be repressed; or for the apprehending of Traitors, Felons, etc. 3
Hen. 7.10. Dalton Office of Sheriffs, 136, and if they fasle in perfor, mance
of their duties therein, they are to be fined and imprisoned; and if any refuse
to aid them therein, they are in like manner to be punished.

in terrorem populi Domini Regis, in amazement of the Kings Liege-people, and
so a riot, rout, and unlawful assembly. Now if the number of there or more
persons, assemble themselves together, to do an unlawful act, all persons in
the County where the same assembly is, being able to travel, are to aid and
assist the Justices of the Peace, and Sheriffs to resist, repel, and take such
offenders, and that under pain of imprisonment, fine, and ransom by the
Statute 2 Hen. 5. cap. 8. a fortiori, where unlawful acts are done, as in the
cafe put.

England, pasch. 39 of Eliz. of that multitude then assembled in warlike manner
to pull down Enclosures, in those places, where they had no color to claim
Common, and so was adjudged by the whole Parliament, 29 Hen. 6. cap. 2. in
Cades rebellion, that he was a Traitor, and the leavying of Arms within this
Kingdom in warlike manner, without lawful cause, is Rebellion, and so
Treason; and so it is resolved, Abridgment of Dier 13 Eliz. 298.

Now by the Laws of this Land, all are bound to apprehend and take all Felons
and Traitors, under the penalties before mentioned; yea, I conceive, under
greater. For if A commit Treason, and B know it, and conceal it, it is
misprision of Treason, and he shall forfeit therefore all his goods, and the
profit of his Lands during his life; and much more where be does refuse to
assist in apprehending, and punishing the offenders. If the assemblers to pull
down Enclosures before mentioned, were Adjudged Traitors, much more these
Rebels assembled to pull down the Enclosures namely, the fence of our
Religion, Laws and Liberties, viz. the Parliament, which is the only Fence and
Guard we have in this Kingdom, against ruin of Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, the general medicine, to cure all our grievances, the life of our
lives and livelyhoods.

And that this is the maine intention of this Rebellion, appears, not only
by their own speeches, but also for that:


The principal Case, and all the other Cases in answer thereunto are put, as
supposing the King not commanding, and then the Conclusions thereupon are so
apparent, that all men that have their right senses will agree the same to be
the Common Laws of this Kingdom; therefore the Case is further put: Admit that
this Assembly is by the Kings command, and that others are prohibited by the
King to oppose them.

Quare 2. WHat alterations are thereby made of the Conclusions aforesaid.

Answer. NOne at all.



And therefore his Majesty's command by word is not sufficient, but it must be
in all Cases to Justify the party, by or from some of his Courts of Justice,
or under some of his Majesty's Seals thereunto Appointed, Co. Ma. Cha. 186. b.
187. forevery His Masesties Seals are appropriated to eath Court, as the Laws
of this Kingdom have disposed, and every Seal will not serve in every case;
and therefore until the foresaid persons produce such warrant as is according
to law, it is not only lawful, but commanded by the Laws of this Kingdom,
that all perssons able, should by all, or any means whatsoever, endeavor to
apprehend, oppose, quell the aforesaid persons assembled as aforesaid, under
the name of the Kings Army; which is proved by a familiar Case, viz. a Capias
issues to the Sheriff of S to take A ad respondendum, etc. and before the
taking, A procures a protection or a Supersedeas, the Sheriff of S may
Justify the taking of him, until the showing of the Protection or Supersedeas
by A unto him, and that the Protection or Supersedeas do appear legal, both
for the matter, manner, Court and Seal; And if the Sheriff do not take him,
having fit opportunity, an Action of the case lies against him, he has broken
his Oath, and is to be amerced, notwithstanding these countermands concealed or
kept in the pocket, and so in the present case.



Because it is already proved, that this Assembly, and demeanor in it self
considered, is against Law in case the King command it not; now it a thing be
in it self against Law, the Kings command does not, nor cannot make it
lawful: for the Kings commands or prohibitions, against the known Laws of
the Kingdom, are ipso facto void, and so says Bracton, Nihil aliud potest
Rex, quam quod de Iure potest, and the rule is general as well in the King
case, as in the case of a common person, Quod contra legem fit pro infecto
habetur, and the Actors and Executioners of these: comm^ are to be punished, as
if no such command or prohibition were.

For instance, The King commands A to arrest B without cause, (which is an
unlawful act) and A accordingly does arrest hun; B may have an Action of false
imprisonment against A notwithstanding the Kings command, 16 Hen. 6. numende
faits 182. So in like manner, if the King should command A to kill B, and he
accordingly should kill him, T. H. 8. Coron. 229.19 H. 6 63, etc. A may be
indicted at the Kings suit therefore, notwithstanding the Kings command, and
executed for the same, as if no such command had beeen.

In like manner, if the King should command A to ^ill a Judge of Assize, while
he is doing his Office, and he accordingly kill him, this is high Treason,
notwithstanding the Kings command, and the Indictment shall be contra
Legeanciae suae debitum, against the duty of his Allegiance; for his duty of
Allegiance is only to obey the King in his commands according to Law, and not
contrary to Law: and if this be Treason, as it is by the Common Law, to kill a
Judge as before, then much more hamous Treason is it, to kill the Judges of that
Judge, which are the Lords and Commons in Partliament.

The same Law is, if the king command A to take away the Gods of B without Just
cause, and A do accordingly, A shall therefore be punished, as if no such
command had been, as appears by the present experience of the late Sheriffs,
for taking away men's Goods for the Shipmoney; and by the Officers of
Monopolies, who have not in any manner been excused for that they had the
kings Command: and so is the ancient Experience of former times. 42 ass 5.

If the Rebels in Ireland had, (as they pretend they have) the kings Commission
for what they do, it would not in any manner abate or mitigate their offense,
but that it should be high Treason, and they to be apprehended and proceeded
against as if they had no such Commission: and the same Law is in the case put,
of the persons assembled here in England, in like Rebellious manner aforesaid.



As if the King grant a protection under the grant Seal to I. N. directed to
the Sheriffs, and other Officers, commanding them that they shall not arrest
the said I. N. during one whole proze next answeing at any man's suite, and this
per praerogativam nostram quam nolumes esse arguendam; yet if the Sheriff do
not arrest the laid I. N. upon process against him, he shall be amerced, and
this command or prohivitions of the Kings shall he no excuse to him; and so is
Co. Mag. Chars. 56. Where particular cases are put to that purpose.

Quere 3. But suppose the aforesaid persons, calling themselves the Kings Army,
were no Peace-breakers, Traitors, nor Felons, (as before we have proved them to
be) yet being so declared de facto, by the Judges of the suppreame Court, viz
the Parliament: Whether are the Subjects of this Kingdom bound, by the Laws
of the same, to give credit to their Judgment, and so far to believe them,
as to endeavor to apprehend such persons so declared, and proceed against them
accordingly?

Answer. THey are.

1. Because the Judgment of a Court of Record is quasi Iuris dictum, that is,
the sentence or dictate of the law, for the Court is, as it were, the mouth of
the Law, by which it speaks to all that are Within the Jurisdiction of it; now
we are bound to believe the sentence, or dictates of the Law, when they are
thus uttered unto us, without dispution or er amination; for that these Courts
are entrusted by the Laws, to utter and express their sense in the cases,
that are within their cognizance and Jurisdiction.

Therefore if the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled make an Ordinance
or Declaration, that is their Judgment, and binds all persons with in the
Jurisdiction of the Court, until it be reversed, which must only be done in
Parliament, and so is the express book of 8 hen. 4.14.



If I. S. a man free from all Felony, be outlawed for Felony, which is but a
Declaration by and before the Coroners, which are of the most interior sort of
Judges of Record, in this Kingdom; every Subject is bound, so far to
believe, and credit the said Judgment to be true, that he is not to receive,
relieve, or comfort the said I. S. it be do, knowing the said Outlawry, or
living in the County where the said Outlawry was proclaimed, whereby he is
bound to take notice thereof, at his peril; he is accessory to the said
Felony, 12 E. 2. Coron. 377. which is cited 19 Eliz. die. 355. And the very case
of Attainder by Parliament is put, 1 Hen. 7.4. v. where diverse then elected as
Knights and Burgesses of the then intended Parliament, had been attainted by a
former Parliament, held 10 Rich. 3. in which book it is resolved by the Judges
there, that the persons so attainted, could not by the King, or otherwise be
discharged thereof, but by reversing it in Parliament, though it were none in
the time of an Usurper, and without any Just cause: And no doubt, if any bad
apprehended any of those persons, so declared Traitors, before the reversall of
the Attainder, or the said I. S. Outlawed as aforesaid, he might well lustilie
it, and was not any way for to be punished: Nay, had a^ny refused to apprehend
any of those persons attainted, or I. S. outlawed as aforesaid, he should
therefore be justly liable to the punishment aforesaid.

England gives so much credit to every Court of Record, that no averment can
be taken against it, none shall be admitted to contradict it, or to say, it is
not true; no not the King himself, but it must remain valid and of force,
until it be reversed.

And therefore it was lately held, by the Judges of the Kings Bench, in the
Lord Says Case for the Shipmoney; that it being resolved by the mayor part of
the Judges of England in the Exchequor Chamber, for the king; That that
Judgment standing in force, the same matter was not to be brought in question
again, nor to be disputed, though betwixt other parties; and therefore refused
to hear the Lord Says counsel, except they had new matter not resolved
before: and some of the Judges then affirmed, that that, and every such
Judgment by all the Judges, is as it were and Act of Parliament to bind the
Subject, and is in as much force until the same be reversed, which must be in
Parliament, and no where else, as accordingly since, the said Judgment in the
case of Shipmoney has been; so that as all men were bound up, by the said
Judgment, now by the reversall thereof all men are at large, and the King
thereby as much bound as the Subject was before; Whereupon we may see how
deeply it concerns the Subjects of this kingdom, to have frequent
Parliaments, to review the Judgments of interior Courts, And also to have
bonest and able Judges, chosen into the places of Judicature; and that such of
them as offend may be punished according to their demerit, and that, that
punishment may not be dispensed with.

Henry 4. to Gasco^gne, his then C^i^fe Justice and remembered 7 H. 4.14. which
was, That one kills another in the presence of the said Chief Justice, and a
third man which is not guilty, is by the verdict of twelve men found guilty;
what the law in that case wire? to which the Chief Justice made answer, That
be ought to respite the Judgment therein, and petition His Majesty for his
pardon: so that the Verdict does and must stand in force against both King and
Subject, and the Kings command by word, or affitmation, to the contrary is of
no effect. And if the said Judge had not had particular knowledge, who it was
that killed that man, then he ought to have given Judgment without any delay;
or if he had given Judgment and the party against whom such Judgment was
given, was apprehended or executed by any Officer; that Officer, and all
assissing him therein, had bien freed from all blame, and were not any way to
be punished: Nay, if the Officer had not done his Office, or others had not
assisted him therein, both he and they had been Subject to punishment, in
manner aforesaid.

Co. 10.76. in the Case of the Marshall-sea, viz. that where a Court has
Jurisdiction of the cause, but proceeds erroneously, or against Law, to a
Judgment that all Officers and others employed in execution of that Judgment,
are to be excused; and whatsoever they do therein is lawful, and justifiable,
and may not be admitted to dispute or question the illegality thereof; so that
upon the whole matter it appears, That the supreme and highest Court of
Record in the Kingdom, which has Jurisdiction over all Courts and Causes,
namely, the Parliament, Declaring the aforesaid Assembly to be disturbers of
the Peace, Traitors, Felons, etc.

And hereupon it appears that, Quacumque via data, the first conclusion
stands firm, viz. that it is not only lawful, but commanded by the Laws
of this Kingdom, that all persons able, should by all or any means
whatsoever, endeavor to apprehend, oppose, quell, and vanquish, the said
persons assembled in manner as aforesaid, notwithstanding the Kings Command or
Prohibition, Commune periculum, commune auxilium petit.

FINIS.

