The Lifeguard OF A Loyal Christian, described in A SERMON, PREACHED At St
Peter's Cornhill, upon Sunday in the afternoon, May 7. 1648.

BY PAUL KNELL, Master in Arts of Clare-Hall in Cambridge: Sometimes Chaplain
to a Regiment of Curiasiers in his Majesty's Army.

ROMANS 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against us?

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

A Prayer for the King.
O Lord, preserve the Kings most excellent Majesty, our Sovereign Lord Charles,
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and
Supreme Governor in these his Realms, and in all other his Dominions and
Countries, over all persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal. Behold, O God our Defender, and look upon the face of thine
Anointed; Lord remember King Charles, and all his troubles, remember him
according to the favor that thou bear unto thy people; O visit him with thy
salvation, plead thou his Cause, O Lord, with them that strive with him, and
fight thou against them that have so long fought against thee and him; thou
that bring man out of prison, be pleased to bring him thence, deliver him
not always over unto the will of his Enemies, but set his feet once more in a
large room; send down thine hand from above, deliver him, and take him out of
the great waters, from the hand of strange children, keep him as the apple of
thine eye, hide him under the shadow of thy wings, from the men of thy hand, O
Lord, from the men and from the evil world, let his honor yet be great in thy
salvation; glory and great worship do thou lay upon him, set his Dominion also
in the Sea, and his right hand in the Floods; as for those his Traiterous
Enemies, which would not that he should reign over them, though they have
imagined such a device, let them never be able to perform it, but let them all
be subdued unto him even in the midst among the Kings Enemies; Let us no longer
see servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth; but
they that now trample upon him, let them kneel before him, let his Enemies lick
the dust; comfort him again now after the time that thou have afflicted him,
and for the years wherein he has seen so much evil, restore him to his Crown
on earth, and when thou take away this, give him a Crown in heaven.

And let every Loyal Christian say, Amen.
The Lifeguard OF A Loyal Christian.
ISAIAH 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.


QVem miserum video, hominem scio; trouble is the very badge and cognizance of
humanity; we are born to it, holy Job says, as the sparks fly upward; to this
end were we borne, and for this cause came we into the world. Or if this be not
finit intentionis, yet it is finit executionis, I am sure, if we came not
hither a purpose to be troubled, yet without great trouble we cannot get from
hence, from the Cradle to the Coffin, being like Ezekiels roll, full of
Lamentatition, and mourning, and woe. There are some indeed (I mean the
Traiterous Reformers of our Age) that live wholly at ease in their usurped
Possessions, they come in no misfortune like other Folk, neither are they
plagued like other men: But these look like the Devils Darlings, or rather like
the Worlds Bastards; though we may be men therefore without trouble, yet
without it we cannot be Loyal Subjects, we cannot be good Christians; in the
world ye shall have tribulation, were the words of our departing Savior to
his Church. But he told them just before, that in him they should have peace,
and he tells them in effect the selfsame in our Text, That he will deliver
them in six troubles; yea, that in seven there shall no evil touch them; that
in Famine he will redeem them from death, and in War from the power of the
Sword; Let their troubles be external, corporal corrections, let their
troubles be internal, spiritual desertions, yet their Joshua, and their
Jehovah will deliver them out of all; When thou passest thorough the waters, I
will be with thee; and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

In which words, ye may please to observe with me four parts, the Passenger,
the Passage, the Concomitant, and the Consequent. The Passenger is the Church,
cum transieris, when thou passest. The Passage is twofold, per aquas and per
ignes, thorough waters, and thorough fire. The Concomitant or the Convoy, is
Almighty God, tibi ad sum, I am or I will be with thee. The Consequent, is the
Churches safety, flumina non operient, flamma non incendet, the rivers shall
not overflow thee, the flame shall not kindle on thee. And of these parts in
order. I begin with the Passenger, which is the Church, cum transieris, when
thou passest.

Had we retained our first integrity, we might easily have stepped to heaven with
as great facility as from one room to another, from the parlour of an earthly,
to the presence chamber of an heavenly Paradise. But sin has placed a (...),
a great gulf between us and heaven; we that were sometimes near, are now afar
off; whosoever will hereafter enter into Canaan, he must undergo a tedious
passage thorough the wilderness.

There are four titles that pertain to the best of Adams sons, Advenae,
Inquilini, Hospites, Peregrini, we are strangers, we are sojourners, we are
guests, we are pilgrims; but of all four, the last, me thinks, fitteth our
condition best, Peregrini, we are pilgrims, Viatores, we are travelers,
Transeuntes, we are passengers, here we have no continuing city, but we seek
for one to come. Look upon the Patriarch Abraham, the great grandfather of the
Church, and ye shall find him like St. Paul, in journeying often; from Caldea
to Charran, from Charran to Canaan, where he journeyed, the Apostle tells us,
as in a strange country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob; he had
there none inheritance, (...), says St. Stephen, no not so much as to set his
foot on, to teach him and us all, that we must not set up our staff here, plus
ultra, we must go further, we being but Pilgrims on the earth.

This we know likewise to have been the condition of the Israelites, who
wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way, and found no city to dwell in;
their own houses were tents, Gods house was but a Tabernacle, all portable, to
be carried up and down from one place to another; they had neither tenement nor
Temple, till they were settled in the land of Canaan, nor have we any certain
dwelling place, till we come thither where the Lamb's the Temple. For while we
are at home in the body, we are not properly at home, we are but in via, in the
way that leads us to it; we are born from above, and therefore there is our
native country; all the while we are on earth, we are, as it were going, a
pilgrimage to heaven. And the application of this now may be twofold.

First, seeing we are but passengers here and pilgrims, this may serve to set
spurs to us, and hasten us toward our country. For no passenger would
willingly tarry long upon the way, but makes all the haste he can to get him
home. So let us think it our greatest punishment (next to this Rebellious
Reformation) that we are constrained to dwell with Mesech, to have our
habitation among the tents of Kedar, and therefore wish, with holy David, To
have the wings of a Dove, that so we might fly home to heaven, and be at rest.

Secondly, though here we are but passengers, yet seeing heaven is our home,
this may comfort us amidst all our plunderings and persecutions, all our
necessities and distresses. For let a passenger meet with never so bad
entertainment by the way, yet he will not greatly murmr at it; I have better
at home, he will say, and it will not be long, I hope, ere I get thither. So,
brethren, as long as there are quarters taken up for us in heaven, if we have
any Christian courage, let us not faint by the way, be our usage never so
course, be our passage never so perilous;

Which leads me from the first part of the Text, the Passenger, the Church;
to the second, which is her Passage, and this I find to be twofold, per
aquas, and per ignes, through waters, and through fire. Her first passage is per
aquas, when thou passest through the waters. Which waters have sundry acceptions
in holy Scripture: the literal is first in nature, and must be so in order.
And Hugo Cardinalis will have an Alleotheta here, one tense put for another,
transieris, for transibas, when thou passest, or shall pass, instead of when
thou passedst, or did pass, alluding to the passage of Noah in the deluge,
or rather to that of Israel through the Red Sea. But whether this, or no, be the
meaning, these examples suite well with the Text; and of the same nature we
have some other in holy writ, the example of Moses, of Elijah and Elisha, of
the Disciples, of Saint Paul; I shall anon touch upon these in their proper
place, I shall here only show you the several acceptions of these waters, the
literal I have briefly pointed at already.

Secondly, by waters we may understand the enemies of the Church. So they are
expressed by holy David, Psalm. 88.17. They came round about me daily like
water, and compassed me together on every side. And Psalm. 144.7. he prays
after this manner, Send down thine hand from above, deliver me, and take me out
of the great waters, from the hand of strange Children. And Revel. 17.15. the
Angel expounding the vision of the great whore, which sat upon many waters,
tells Saint John in express words; The waters which thou saw, where the
whore sits, they are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

Thirdly, by waters we may understand heresies, and doctrine of devils, (which
are too common, since we had neither King nor Bishop.) So Aretius and others
expound that, Revel. 12.15. where we read that the Serpent cast out of his
mouth, water as a flood, after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away of the flood.

Fourthly, and lastly, by waters we may understand the abyss of desperation.
So we may construe that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69. The waters are come in even
unto my soul, verse 1. I am come into deep waters, verse 2. Let not the
water-flood drown me, ver. 16.

The Churches second passage is per ignes, when thou walk through the fire.
Which is first literally to be taken, and we have examples of some in Scripture
that found a safe passage through this fire, as Lot, and Isaac, and the
Israelites, and the three Children.

Secondly, by fire we are to understand persecution and affliction, according
to that of the Psalmist, Psalm 66. Thou laydest trouble upon our loins,
ingressi sumus per ignem, we went through the sire. And St. Peter uses the same
Metaphor, Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try
you. 1 Pet. 4.12.

The result then of all, is briefly this, That it is the portion of the Church
to pass through fire and water, it is her destiny to suffer persecution and
affliction.

Noah's Ark was a notable representation of the Church, that was tossed upon the
waves in the general inundation, so is this in the worlds troubled sea which
cannot rest. The disciples ship, in the Gospel, was another figure of the
Church, that was covered with waves, almost overwhelmed with a raging tempest;
so this is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, the deep waters of
the proud are ready to run even over her soul. The Church is a Ship, the
World is the Sea; a sea of glass mingled with fire, Revel. 15.2. Of glass,
there is the brittle and inconstant condition of the world; mingled with fire,
here are the troubles of the Church, St. Peter's fiery trial. Troubled, alas!
she is, and so has ever been. Look upon Jacob, look upon Joseph, upon David,
upon the Son of David. The time would fail me to tell you of Prophets and
Apostles, of the Martyrs, Confessors, and other holy men of God, how they
passed through the waters, how they walked through the fire; how they had trial
of cruel mockings and scourgings; yea, moreover also of bonds and
imprisonment; how they were stoned, as S. Stephen, how they were sawne asunder,
as the Prophet Isaiah; how they were slain with the sword, as the Apostle St.
Paul; how they were beheaded, as St. John Baptist; Strafford and Canterbury;
how they were hanged, as Tomkins, Chaloner, Yeomans, Bourchiar, Burleigh, and
others; how they wandered about in deserts and mountains, and in dens, and
caves of the earth, in sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted,
tormented. Thus we see, that all which will be Loyal to God and the King, all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Till our Savior
came into the Ship, the Sea was calm and quiet, but when he was once aboard,
there straightway arose a mighty tempest. So long then as thou art without
Christ, or without God in this world, the devil will make fair weather round
about thee, but when once Christ Jesus is, as it were, come aboard thy soul,
then will Satan raise a storm to try if he can make shipwreck of thy faith;
when thou have listed thy self a Soldier to fight under thy Saviors and thy
Sovereigns Banner, then look for a whole shower of fiery arrows from the
wicked one, for the messenger of Satan to buffet thee, with St. Paul, both by
inward temptations, and outward tribulations, by private suggestions, and
public persecutions, the Devil will strive to split thee against the rock of
desperation. But take this for thy comfort, that although thou art dangerously
tossed, yet thou shall not be cast away, for even he that upholdeth the heaven
is thine upholder. Which leads me from the second part of the Text, the
Churches passage through fire and water, to the third, which is the concomitant,
or the convoy, Almighty God, Tibi adsum, I am, or I will be with thee.

I that am the great Creator of Heaven and Earth; I that fill all places, and
am contained in none; I that am about thy path, and about thy bed, and spy out
all thy ways, tibi adsum, I am, I will be with thee.

But what need then is there of this promise? For we may say it without
blasphemy, that God must still be with us; it being as impossible for him to
deny his omnipresence, as to deny himself, he can sooner separate heat from
fire, he did that in Nebuchadnezzars Furnace; he can sooner separate light from
the Sun, he did this at our Saviors expiration; the Creator can better do any
thing, then divorce or divide his presence from his Creatures, for herein not
only our been esse, but our very esse does consist, should he subtract his
presence from us, we must return into our first nothing. He is not far
therefore from every one of us, as St. Paul told the Athenians; nay, he is
nearer to us, then we are unto our selves, tibi adsum, I am, I will be with
thee.

But ye know there is a twofold presence of Almighty God. First, his general
presence, which is his universal power and providence, whereby he governs
and disposes all things, both in heaven and earth, and under the earth,
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. If I climb up into heaven, thou
art there, if I go down to hell, thou art there also. If I take the wings of
the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there also
shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.

Secondly, there is Gods special presence, whereby he is present with his
elect only, either to prevent their troubles, or else to comfort and support
them; and chiefly is he with his servants in his Temple, at his public
worship, which may easily be explained by an example. The King is, or ought to
be, and I trust, shortly will be, by his power in all parts of his Dominion;
yet he is said to be there, especially where his Courtiers, where his retinue
is. In like manner is the King of Kings by his unbounded power and providence
at all times in all places; yet we may know him to be with us, after an
especial manner in the Temple, from his retinue of heavenly Courtiers that are
there attending on him. For it was not for ornament only, that the walls of
Solomon's Temple were carved round about with Cherubims, but also to signify
that the holy Angels are ever about us at our public services. And if Angels
be there, much more is the King of Saints, tibi adsum, I am, I will be with
thee.

There are three things especially that will continually be with us, the Air,
our Conscience, and Almighty God. We may as well be without our being, as
without our breath; take but away this from us, and take away us too. The Air
leaves us not till death, our Conscience, this goes further with us, it
remains with us after death to all eternity. Do not therefore the least sin,
though none be with thee, but thine own Conscience, for this will accompany
thee to thy deathbed, nay, this worm will live to eternity. And thy
conscience is not more inseparable from thee then Creator, whisper never so
softly, he will hear thee, hide thy self never so closely, he will see thee,
run away never so swiftly, he will still be at thine elbow, tibi adsum, I am,
I will be with thee.

But I should not speak so much of Gods general presence, his special presence
is that which I must here insist upon; that presence which he promised the
Patriarchs and Prophets, that presence which our Savior promised his Apostles,
Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Mat. 28. ult. Always,
there is no intermission. To the end of the world, that is, world without end;
here is no termination. We may have men for our companions, that will forsake
us in distress; or if they stick to us all our life, they must leave us at our
death. But if God be our companion, if God be present with us, it is not
distress, it is not death shall ever part us; nay, death shall unite us more
nearly then ever we were before, we shall always be with God, he will always be
with us, tibi adsum, I am, I will be with thee.

But if God be always thus present with his Church, we may then expostulate
here, as Gideon once did with the Angel Judge. 6.13. Oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befallen us? Why is the blood of his dear
servants shed like water on every side? Why suffers he the Turk and Pope to
drink themselves drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus?

I Answer; though seemingly God absent himself from his Church for a season,
yet never will he finally forsake her; seemingly, I say, for indeed he
absenteth not himself at all, it is but in our apprehension that he is ever
from us, if we can but believe it, he is present with us always, tibi adsum, I
am, I will be with thee.

And the application of this now, may be twofold.

First, here is comfort for all that mourn in Sion, and with good Hezekiah,
turn their face to the wall. Let them be cast into prison with Joseph and my
Sovereign Lord the King, let them be cast into a dungeon, as Jeremy was, let
them be cast into a den, as Daniel was, let them be cast into the water, as
Moses was, let them be cast into the fire, as the three Children were, let them
go through fire and water, famine and sword, never so many dangers, never so
great disasters; yet so long as they have God with them, this will sweeten all
their pills, in the multitude of the sorrows which they have in their hearts,
his comfortable presence will refresh their souls.

Secondly, seeing God is still with us, this should teach us likewise to be
still with him, seeing he vouchsafes to keep company with us on earth,
therefore our conversation should be with him in Heaven. When we are lying down
to sleep, to him we should commit our Spirits; when we wake up, like David, we
should be present with him. It was Jacobs vow, Genesis 28: that if God would be
with him, then the Lord should be his God. We need not speak so doubtfully, for
God is certainly with those that fear him, not only by his general, but also
by his special presence, to direct and protect them, to deliver and to defend
them. Which leads me from the third part of the Text, the concomitant,
Almighty God, to the fourth and last, which is the Churches safety, Flumina non
operient, flamma non incendet, the Rivers shall not overflow thee, the flame
shall not kindle on thee; when thou passest through the waters I will be with
thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk
through thee fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee. Flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

I propounded four acceptions of these waters, ye shall see that the Church
passes safely through them all.

First, through waters, taken in the literal sense. Sin had once so soiled the
earth, that God was feign to lay it asoak, it was so foul, that nothing would
cleanse it but a flood. There were Giants in sin, as well as in stature, the
wickedness of man was great in the earth. And abyssus abyssum, this depth of
sin called for as deep a deluge, the floodgates therefore were plucked up,
the windows from on high were opened. And what distress of nations was there
then with perplexity, the sea and the waves roaring, and men's hearts failing
them for fear? Me thinks I see how abruptly their marriage-feasts are
dissolved, what haste they make out adoores, that they may get up into trees,
how some climb the tops of mountains, tamen ultra pergere tendunt. But the
waters continually following them at heels, when all hope that they should
escape drowning was taken away; me thinks I hear them curse the day that ever
they were borne, and wish, if it were possible, that they might be
metamorphosed into fishes. But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord, when
the flood was brought in upon the world of the ungodly; for though it rained as
if heaven and earth would have come together; though the waters were so grown,
as to overtop the highest mountain, yet heavens great Palinurus preserved
Noah in this ocean; flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

The Children of Israel may be a second example, whose preservation was indeed
far stranger then Noah's, for Noah had a Ship, the Israelites had none, which
made them think that there was no way in the world with them but drowning, Mars
in the rear, and Neptune facing of them, they thought that one of these must
needs devour Israel with open mouth. But he that brought light out of
darkness, brought safety out of their greatest danger; what they feared would
be their destruction, this God made their preservation, for rather then Israel
shall miscarry, Jordan shall forget his fluid nature, the floods shall stand
upright as an heap, and the depth shall be congealed in the heart of the Sea.
Gods People need not fear the waters, the waters saw them and were afraid; and
therefore run away with might and maine, to make way for them. The waters fared
as if they had known the Israelites from the Egyptians, drowning the host of
Pharaoh, but immuring the host of Israel, flumina non operient, the rivers
shall not overflow thee.

Moses may be a third example to this purpose. There were never two greater
Tyrants then Pharaoh and Herod, one drowneth the male Children, the other
cutteth their throats. But as Christ escaped from Herod, so from Pharaoh,
Moses. His Parents durst not long entertain him in their house, when he was
but a quarter old, they shipped him in an Ark of rushes. But how properly may
that of the Psalmist be applied to him, Ps. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother
forsake me, then the Lord takes me up. Or rather, indeed the Lady did this,
even the King of Egypts daughter, who named him therefore Moses, Extractus, one
drawn out, flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

And to these examples I may add Elijahs and Elishaes passage over Jordan, the
Disciples with our Savior in the Ship, and Saint Paul's most dangerous voyage
toward Rome; all corroborating and confirming this assertion in our Text,
flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

The Lord sits above the water-flood, Psalm. 29.9. ye have heard the story of
him that wondered why any man would go to Sea, seeing so many die at Sea; and
that one replied, he might wonder as well why any man will go to Bed, seeing
so many die in their Beds. Dii maris and terrae, may be put into Gods Royal
title, his way is in the sea, and his paths in the great waters, he that was
able without a ship, to walk safely on the Sea, must needs be able to save
those that go down to the Sea in Ships, while they are following their
vocation, they may be assured of his protection, he will give his Angels charge
over them, to keep them in all their ways; the Angel of the water mentioned
Revel. 16.5. this Angel shall be their Pilot, and conduct them to their wished
haven, flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow them.

Secondly, by waters we understood the enemies of the Church, neither shall
these waters overflow her. The Serpents seed will still be warring with the
woman's, the Dragon and his, against Michael and his Angels, the Church of
Christ will ever be maligned by the Synagogue of Satan, but though these waters
swell, yet they shall not prevail against her. David's enemies were daily in
hand to swallow him up; but these waters of the proud had bounds, which they
could never pass. Hezekiah was both invaded and besieged by the Assyrians, but
how strangely was he preserved from him that had drunk strange waters, and who
with the sole of his feet had dried up all the rivers of besieged places! I
have not time to show you all the particular preservations of Gods people, how
he has saved them still from the reproof of those that would have eaten them
up.

And from this experience of Gods former, together with the promises of his
future favor, we may draw this application; we may here put on the resolution
of holy David, not to fear, though the earth be moved, and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Let the heathen
never so furiously rage together, and let the people imagine a vain thing (let
them think to overthrow the government both of Church and State) let the
rulers stand up, and take counsel together against the Lord, and against his
Anointed, and against his Church, let Gebal, and Amon, and Amaleck, the
Philistines with them that dwell at Tire, let Gog and Magog, Antichrist and
Mahomet, Pope and Turk, nay, let all the Devils in hell be confederate against
the Church, yet still she shall be safe, the sons of wickedness shall not hurt
her, the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, flumina non operient,
the rivers shall not overflow thee.

Let me apply this to the head of our Church, my Sovereign Lord the King. The
floods are risen, as David speaks, the floods have lift up their voice, the
floods lift up their waves. But these floods of ungodly Rebels shall not
overflow Him, though the waves of the Sea are mighty, and rage horribly, yet
the Lord (that is one good turn) which dwells on high is mightier, and he will
send down from the high to fetch him, he will take him out of many waters, he
will make these Traitors, according to our common phrase, as weak as water, as
water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered up, he will still the
raging of the Sea, and the noise of his waves, and the madness of the people,
he will deliver the Kings soul in peace from the battle that has been so long
against him, he will deliver him from the strivings of the people, and he will
make him the Head of the Heathen; from the waters of strife, he will bring him
to the still waters, the fierceness of these men shall turn to his praise, and
the fierceness of them he will speedily refrain, flumina non operient, the
rivers shall not overflow him.

I have seen, Solomon said, and so have we, Servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking as servants upon the earth: but I hope we shall not much longer see
this sight.

Water is a good servant, but a bad master: God therefore, I trust, will
shortly deliver us from the tyranny of an arbitrary Anarchy, from the
sovereignty of our fellow subjects, flumina non operient, the rivers shall not
overflow us.

Thirdly, by Waters we understood heresies and doctrines of Devils; neither
shall these waters overflow the Church. The Devil is ever changing Gods truth
into a lie; if God have said, ye shall; Satan will say, ye shall not die. And
God sends some such strong delusions, that, as Eve did, they believe a lie,
the Dragons flood of errors quite drowneth them in perdition: but the Church
shall not miscarry for all this Dragon-water, the earth (as it is Revel. 12.)
shall swallow up the flood: the Earth, that is, the earthly minded, the ungodly
of the world, shall swallow up the flood, that is, shall approve of, and
entertain these wicked errors. Not a little of this water has been emptied
into the river Tyber, the Church of Rome has swallowed down a great part of
this Dragons flood. The residue has been swallowed by Pelagians and
Antinomians, Donatists and Novatians, Marcionites and Manichees, Socinians and
Arminians, Preshyterians and Independents, Brownists and Burtonists,
Schismatics and Separatists, Familists and Anabaptists; while we that are
right Protestants take in none but living water, drawing the water of truth out
of the well of salvation, the flood of error shall never surround or
overwhelme us, flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow us.

Fourthly and lastly, by Waters we understood the abyss of desperation;
neither shall these waters overflow the Church. One while the Devil tells
men that God is made up of all mercy, another while that his mercy is not so
great as their sins: first, he would flatter them into presumption, then he
would fright them into desperation: and when he has brought them to this
latter state, then they are apt to drown themselves, like that Lunatic which
ofttimes fell into the water, Mat. 17.15. But the Lord (says S. Peter) knows
how to deliver the godly out of temptation. He will not suffer them (says
Saint Paul) to be tempted above that they are able, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it.

Art thou come therefore into deep waters, so that the floods are running over
thee? has Satan brought thee to the very brink of desperation? why! yet he
shall never be able to bring thee any further, if thou belong to Christ; he
could not drown the silly Swine without Christ's leave, (and thy Savior will
never license him to do thee such a mischief) he is but like a Dog in a
string, like a Dragon in a chain, so that thou may assure thy self he can
do thee no hurt without Gods special warrant and commission. Though thou
walk therefore through the valley of despair, yet fear no evil, for there
is a way to Heaven just by the gates of Hell. It is the nature of clay to dam
up the eyes, yet our Savior put clay upon the blind to make him see. It is the
nature of water to put out fire, yet Elijah poured water upon his sacrifice to
make it burn. God many times brings about his ends by means, which, to our
thinking, are quite contrary. As he lets some therefore (I mean the daring
Rebels of our age) soar, with Icarus, upon the wings of presumption, ut lapsu
graviore ruant, that their downfall may be the greater, the heat of Gods wrath
melting them, as wax melts at the fire, and they precipitating headlong into
the sea of desperation: So God suffers others sometimes to fall into
despair, that the depth of misery may invoke the depth of mercy, he throws
them, as it were balls against the ground, to make them bound the higher. When
thou think therefore he has quite left thee, then he is nearest to thee,
when thou walk through the brook of despair, then he will lift up thy
head, his rod and his staff shall conduct thee through these Stygian waters,
Flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

And so ye have the safety of the Church in her former passage, which was per
aquas, through the waters. Ye shall see her safety likewise in her latter
passage, which is, per ignes, through the fire; when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Non combureris, thou shall not be burnt. The Apostle says, that faith comes
by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. It has therefore been the practice
of persecutours in all ages to burn up all the Bibles that they could lay
hands on, knowing this to be the ready way for them to destroy the faith of
Christ. But how strangely has the Bible escaped even in the most fiery
persecutions, though some part of it may be lost, as the Prophecy of Enoch,
and the Book of Iasher, yet there is so much left still, as contains in it
all things necessary to salvation; God would never suffer all of it to be made
fuel for the fire, non combureris, thou shall not be burnt.

Neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. The damned in Hell are ever burning,
never burnt. But who can dwell with those everlasting burnings? They could with
a good will put up that petition, hic ure, hic seca, that God would cut them
all in pieces, and then burn them up to very nothing: But should they make many
such prayers, there would none of them be heard, they shall not be burnt, the
flame shall not kindle on them.

But to come nearer to the Text. We propounded some examples out of Scripture,
of men that passed safely through fire, literally taken.

The first may be Lot. God usually proportioneth the punishment to the sin.
Sodom burned in lust, and was therefore burnt with fire: but though brimstone
and fire were rained upon the Sodomites, yet God delivered Lot out of the midst
of the overthrow, non combureris, thou shall not be burnt.

The second example may be Isaac, who came very near the fire: Behold the fire
and wood; nay, behold he is laid on the Altar upon the wood; yet for all this,
God suffered not Abraham to do him any hurt; he made an offer to offer up
Isaac, and the will went for the deed, non combureris, thou shall no be burnt.

The third example may be the Israelites, in whose company the fire was
kindled, there went out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and
fifty men that offered incense, Number. 16.35. But though the flame burnt up the
ungodly mutiniers, yet every obedient Israelite escaped, non combureris, thou
shall not be burnt.

The fourth example may be the three Salamanders in the furnace, Dan. 3. who
though they walked through the fire, yet their coats were not changed, nor so
much as the smell of fire had passed on them. And this last example is without
example, I never heard of any fire-proof before, for fire is of a most
devouring and consuming nature, turning all into its own substance that comes
near it; yet the children of the fire, the sparks, hurt not these three
children, with the shields of their faith they quenched the violence of fire,
when they walked through the fire, they were not burnt, neither did the flame
kindle upon them.

And to these I might add, though somewhat out of order, the example of Abram,
whom God brought out of Vr of the Caldees, Genesis 15.7. Now Vr, as Hugo
observes, signifies fire, the Greek word, from which our English word seems
to come has but one letter more: and therefore the Hebrews had a tradition,
that because Abram would not worship the fire as the Caldeans did, he should
have been cast into the fire, had not God given him notice of it. But though Vr
signify fire, yet the ordinary gloss takes it, not for a common, but for a
proper name, for the name of the Town or Village where Abram dwelt: This
example therefore cannot claim kindred of the Text. I might more properly
bring in our preservation from the Powder Treason; but this is so beaten a
path, that I will not tread it at this time. I will rather here answer a
question that may rise from our Text, for is this promise always performed, Thou
shall not be burnt, the flame shall not kindle on thee? what shall we say then
to that fiery persecution in Queen Marys days, when there were so many Bethels
in this Kingdom, so many Cities wherein men's bones were burnt?

I answer, it is true, that the Church of Christ, this Church in particular
has endured the fiery trial, but as Rex non moritur, so Regina. Psalm. 45.
Ecclesia non comburitur, as the King is never buried, so the Church is never
burnt; James may die, and so may Charles, (yet God maintain his life) but the
King (let Levellers do what they can) never dies: So Latimer may be burnt, and
Cranmer may be burnt, but the Church ^s never burnt; If Pagans should prevail
so far (which God forbid) as to burn up all the Christians; or if Puritans
should prevail so far (which heavens hinder) as to burn up all the
Protestants, yet I verily believe that out of their very ashes God would raise
up a new Phoenix, cinis martyru^ should be femen Ecclesiae, the ashes of an old
should be the seed of a new Church, she shall not be so burnt as to be quite
extinct, neither shall the flame so kindle upon her.

And the application here of now may be briefly this. Seeing God will not suffer
his Church to be finally burnt up by others, this may teach us (as it were) to
set on fire our selves, not with the fire of lust, it is better to marry, then
so to burn, nor with the fire of wrath, rather heap coals of fire upon the
head of enemies; but let it be with the vestall fire of devotion and affection,
let our hearts burn within us with love to God and men; So shall neither the
Sun burn us by day, nor the Moon by night, the Lord will preserve us from all
evil, it is even he that will keep both our bodies and our souls, when the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, when the Earth and the works therein
shall be burnt up, he will preserve and keep us from everlasting fire, and
exalt us to his coelum empyreum, his fiery heaven, there forever to behold him
whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as if
they burned in a furnace.

And so ye have the safety of the Church in her passage through fire literally
taken. A word or two of her safety as she passes through the fire of
affliction and persecution, when thou walk through this fire, thou shall not
be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. The nature of fire is
congregare homogenea, and segregare heterogenea, a Refiner therefore is wont to
bring his mine to the fire, and by this means he severeth the silver from the
drsse; which is likewise the very practice of Almighty God, it is the Prophet
Malachy's similitude word for word, Malac. 3.3. He shall sit as a Refiner and
purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as
gold and silver. And the sweet Singer of Israel harpeth upon the same string,
Psalm. 66.10. Thou, O God, have proved us, thou also have tried us, like as
silver is tried. Non sicut foenum, sed sicut argentum, non in cineres
convertisti, sed sordes abluisti, says Saint Austin, God tries us not with a
consuming, but with a clensing fire, turns us not into ashes, only takes
away our sullage and our ashes from us, purely purges away our dross, and
takes away all our tin. God purges men by affliction, as the Israelites were
to purge the spoil of the Midianites, Number. 31.23. Every thing that may abide
the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be clean. God
tries men by affliction what mettle they are made of; they that endure this
fiery trial, they are good gold, they are Gods children; they that endure it
not, they are but dross, they are but cast-awaies. Good men are like Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, though they walk through the fiery furnace of
affliction, yet they are not burnt up, no not so much as singed: but wicked men
are like the Soldiers that bound and cast them in, when they are yet but at
the mouth of the fiery furnace, when the fire of affliction but begins to
seize upon them, it prevails against them, and consumes them in a moment.
Good men are, in this, like clay, the fire of affliction strengthens and
confirms them; but wicked men are like wax, as wax melts at the fire, so
do the ungodly perish in the fiery trial; affliction to them, is like the
fire that burns up the wood, and like the flame that consumes the
mountains; God makes them like a fiery oven in time of his wrath, the Lord
destroys them in his displeasure, and the fire consumes them. Affliction
makes wicked men a great deal worse, as water becomes much colder after
heating, then ever it would have been, if it had never been heated. As for the
righteous, it is not so with them, God burns them indeed thoroughly, as the
bricks of Babel were; but this is only as a Potter frames his vessels in the
fire, that so they may be vessels unto honor, and for the masters use, though
they walk through the fire, yet they are not burnt, neither does the flame
kindle upon them. When Job's Wife heard of all the evil that God had brought
upon her Husband, she grew so mad, so outrageous and impatient, that she would
feign have persuaded him to make away with himself: What, says she, all that
ever thou had taken away from thee? is this the reward thou have for thine
integrity? well, serve God who will, I would serve him no longer, make good the
Devils words if thou will be ruled by me, do, as he said thou would in such
a case, Curse God, and die, Job 2.9. But ye have heard of the patience of Job,
says Saint James, let his Wife therefore say what what she will, he will have
none of her counsel, thou talkest like an ass, (says he) thou speak like
one of the foolish women. And indeed (as he goes on, and as our Sovereign by
his most exemplary patience seems to say) shall we receive good at the hand
of God, and not receive evil also? shall we receive health, and not sickness;
wealth, and not poverty; peace, and not war; honor, and not dishonor;
liberty, and not restraint? yes, my brethren, if we be Christians we must
endure all. And if we do this, then we may assure our selves that although we
sow in tears, yet we shall reap in joy, though God have suffered Rebels to ride
over our heads, though we have gone through fire and water; yet, ere it be
long, he will bring us and our Sovereign out into a wealthy place; our light
affliction which is but for a moment shall work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, Which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to grant
us, for the merits of his Christ, our Jesus. To whom, with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, Three Persons, one Immortal, Invisible, Indivisible, only wise
God, be rendered and ascribed, as most due is, All Honor, Glory, Power, Praise,
Might, Majesty, Wisdom, and Dominion, the residue of this blessed day present,
and for evermore world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

