A LOOKING-GLASS FOR LEVELLERS: Held out in a SERMON, Preached at St. Peter's
Pauls-Wharfe, upon Sunday in the Afternoon, Sept. 24. 1648.

BY PAUL KNELL, Master in Arts, of Clare-Hall in Cambridge. Sometime Chaplain
to a Regiment of Curasiers in His Majesty's Army.

LUKE 20.19. And the chief Priests and Scribes the same hour sought to lay
hands on him (but they feared the people) for they perceived that he had spoken
this parable against them.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

A LOOKING-GLASS For LEVELLERS, etc.
St. LUKE 20. ver. 14. But when the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among
themselves, saying, This is the Heir, come let us kill him, that the
Inheritance may be ours.


THe first particle is discretive, and severeth the Text from the foregoing
Verses, wherein our Savior holds forth, as it were, a Dark-Lanthorne to the
chief Priests, That seeing they might see, and not perceive, and that hearing
they might hear, and yet not understand. Or rather he shows them their faces
in a Glass, wherein they might see plainly what manner of men they were. The
Looking-glass is this present Parable of the Vineyard, wherein he insisteth
chiefly on three things.

First, he shows the descent and pedigree of the Priesthood, A certain man
planted a Vineyard, and let it forth to Husbandmen.

Secondly, he upbraideth the ingratitude of these Husbandmen in abusing their
Landlords servants, they beat them, they entreated them shamefully, they
wounded them, they killed them.

Thirdly, he threatens a punishment for their ingratitude, which is no less
then a re-enter, the Lord shall destroy these Husbandmen, and shall give the
Vineyard to others.

But more punctually to survey and view this parable. By this certain man, the
Planter of this Vineyard, we are to understand the worlds Creator, God himself.
By the Vineyard, we are to understand his Church, confined for a long time to
Judea, Isa. 5.7. By the Husbandmen, to whom the Vineyard was let out, we are
to understand the chief Priests, who by their doctrine and example were, as it
were, to prune and dress Gods Vineyard, that so it might be fruitful in good
works. By the Servants sent to demand some of the fruit of this Vineyard, we
are to understand the inspired Prophets, who were sent by God to call the chief
Priests to repentance, to bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life. Trium
autem mentio fit, etc. says Aretius, God is said to have sent severally three
Servants to the Husbandmen, because three is a perfect number, and is therefore
used to show Gods uncessant desire of their Conversion. Uncessant, I say, it
was, for though it knew a little intermission, yet it knew no termination,
though the word of the Lord were precious in the days of Eli, yet even then
God raised up Samuel to reprove the lewdness of the Priests, there was no
time, there was no place but the Jewish Priests had Prophets sent among them.
Before their Captivity in Babylon, they had Isaiah; Jeremy, Amos, Micah,
Zephany, and others. In time of their Captivity, they had Ezekiel and Daniel.
After their Captivity, they had Haggai, Zechary, Malachy. And the last was not
the least, for among those that were borne of Women, there was not a greater
Prophet then John the Baptist. But what entertainment found these Servants
amongst their Masters Tenants? why just such as we that will not Preach treason
meet with in these days, just such as the Messengers of truth have always found,
convitia, verba, vulnera, as Stella speaks, revilings, blows, wounds; nay,
very death it self. Isaiah was sawn asunder, Jeremy and Zechary were stoned,
Amos had his brains beaten out with a Club, Micah was thrown down headlong
from a rock; and all the rest did the Jews either kill, or at least hunt after
them, (...), as S. Steven asked them, which of the Prophets did not their
Fathers persecute? Act. 7. yet see the never-wearied goodness of Almighty God,
though the chief Priests had killed his Prophets, and had stoned those that
were sent unto them, yet he did so long to do them good, that nullum non
movebit lapidem, he will leave no stone unrolled, no not the cornerstone, he
had but one bosome-Son, and he sends him to them for his rent, presuming that
for shame they would not send him away empty, They will reverence (says he)
their young Landlord when they see him, But when the Husbandmen saw him, they
reasoned among themselves, saying, this is the Heir, come let us kill him,
that the inheritance may be ours.

The Text, ye see, is a conspiracy against Christ, wherein we meet together the
four causes of it.

First, here is the Efficient cause, or the Conspiratours, the Husbandmen.

Secondly, the Material cause, or person conspired against, the Heir, when
they saw him.

Thirdly, the Formal cause, or manner of their conspiracy, they reasoned among
themselves, saying, come let us kill him.

Fourthly, and lastly, the Final cause, or end of their conspiracy, which was,
that they might be Lords of the Manor, that the inheritance may be ours.

These are the parts, of which in order briefly, and very plainly. I begin with
the first part, the Conspiratours, which are Coloni, the Husbandmen.

If the first man had been a good Husband, there had been no Husbandman, the
Earth need have had no Midwife, she would have brought forth of her self. But
Haec maledictio Adae, etc. says Saint Bernard, this was a curse entailed on
Adams sin, that for his sake the ground it self was cursed, his barrenness in
obedience made the very Earth grow barren. Which may therefore serve to mind us
sinners of repentance, the husbandry of the hand may teach us the husbandry of
the heart, even to break up our fallow ground, and sow in tears. But I must
not insist upon these Georgicks, I must lead you from corporal to spiritual
husbandmen. And these are the painful Preachers of Gods word. For as the
Earth must be plowed and harrowed by the Countryman, before she will ever
bring forth her increase: So the men of the earth must be directed and
corrected by the Churchman, before they will bring forth the fruits of
righteousness. The Clergy, like the Prophet Elisha, are a kind of Plow-men.
They that do, as it were, drive the Plow, are ordinary Ministers; they that
hold the Plow, are the reverend Bishops; the Plow would not go so well, should
Episcopacy be abolished. Let these Laborers therefore have their due, they are
worthy of their hire. And let them likewise have a respectfull estimation set
upon them.

For the Courtier cannot live without the Countryman, the King himself is
served by the Field. Neither does man live by Bread only, but by every word of
God. As then where no Hushandmen are the people sterve: So likewise where no
Ministers, where no vision is, the people perish. Which admonishes Gods
husbandmen, the Clergy, to be industrious.

There is no profession more laborious then that of Husbandmen, who in the
sweat of their face most commonly eat their bread. And herein they are a
pattern and ensample unto us, who indeed should labor more abundantly then
they all, because they labor but to sustain men's bodies, we to feed their
souls. We must therefore: abound always in the work of the Lord, we must
Preach the word, as Saint Paul charged Timothy, not slothfully, but painfully,
we must labor in the Gospel, we must be instant, and eager, and earnest in our
preaching, in season, out of season, in time of peace, in time of war, we
must reprove, we must rebuke, we we must exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine, as the Apostle speaks.

And as we must be fervent, so we must be perseverant in our office, having put
our hand to Gods plow, we must resolve not to look back. We must not, with
Demas, forsake our function, and embrace the world; nor must we cease to
exercise it, till we just put off this tabernacle though there be never so
great danger in the exercising of it, though there be never so many wicked
warrants out against us, Husbandmen will not give over plowing for a shower of
rain, nor must we give over Preaching because of persecution, though we are
never so superannuated, though we are such as Paul the aged, or though so
feeble, that, with St. John, we must be carried to the Pulpit. Neither must we
lord it over Gods heritage, like Presbyterian Pastors, or like these chief
Priests, who that they may be Lords of the Lords Vineyard, conspire to murder
the right Lord of it, the Conspirators, our Text tells us, were Coloni, the
Husbandmen. And so likewise Pontius Pilate told our Savior, Thine own
Nation, and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me, Joh. 18.35. What
prodigious unthankful miscreants were these! there can be no Epithet bad
enough for such Traitors. For they that taught the people, taught they not
themselves? They that were dressers of the Vineyard, durst they conspire
against the owner of it? durst men of the Temple venture upon the worst of
treasons? well, we see by this the truth of that old axiom, Corruption optimi
est pessima, the best wine makes the sharpest vinegar; if Clergymen once turn
Traitors, they are incarnate Devils. So our Savior styled the traitor Judas,
and thus likewise all Synod-traytours may be styled. And so I pass from the
first part of the Text, the Conspirators, the Husbandmen, to the second, the
person against whom they conspired, which was the Heir, when the Husbandmen
saw him.

The Heir. The wise God of peace and order, will not have every man be his
own carver, for the best weapon would then be the best evidence, as Levellers
would fain have it; the strongest arm would be the surest title. But as he has
ordained a succession of men, so of Estates, their Children must be their
Heirs, they must leave their substance to their Babes, Dominio non fundatur in
gratia, they that call themselves babes of grace, all things are not theirs,
had not Jacob supplanted Esau, this graceless one had been Isaac's Heir. For
the inheritance was always challenged by the eldest Son; and therefore this
title of Heir, must needs be due to Christ, who was the first begotten of his
Heavenly Father, the firstborn of his Earthly Mother, the firstborn of
every Creature, the firstborn among many Brethren, by right of primogeniture
he was the Heir, (...), says the Apostle, Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. The
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1. And he that is owner of all things, makes
his eldest Son a promise of them, he promises to give him the heathen for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8.

The Devil, I know, made his brags once, that he was Heir of the world, when
he showed our Savior all the Kingdoms of it, and told him, they were his. But
as he was a murderer, so he was a liar from the beginning. It is true that
Abraham had a promise, that he should be Heir of the World, as the Apostle
testifyeth, Romans 4.13. But though to Abraham and his seed there were such a
promise made, yet Christ, for all this, was still to be the Heir, it is the
same Apostles observation, Gal. 3.16. He says not to seeds, as of many, but to
thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.

But here we must not be mistaken, for though our Savior be styled the Heir,
yet we must know that his inheritance is no temporal, but a spiritual
inheritance, his Kingdom, his Church, his heritage is not of this world. And
as we Christians are not of it, so our inheritance properly is not in it, we
are Heirs to a better Country, that is an Heavenly, though not by nature, yet
by grace, though not by birth, yet by faith we are made partabers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, we are heirs of God, co heirs with
Christ, we have an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for us, where we shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of God, where we shall see our pierced-Saviour, not to our
terror, but our triumph, where we shall see him not with other, but with these
same eyes, the same numericall, though not the same mortal eyes, where we
shall see that which Saint Austin so much wished to see, Christum in carne,
Christ in the flesh, and that which many Prophets and Kings desired to see, and
could not see it. They saw this sight indeed a far off, which did not a little
cheer their hearts, Abraham rejoiced, says our Savior, to see my day, and he
saw it, and was glad, John 8.56. But when Simeon saw him in the Temple, his
eyes were satisfied with seeing, close them now, Lord, says he, let me die in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And we may observe here by the
way, that if ever we will see Christ in Heaven, we must first see him upon
earth, for though we cannot see him yet, as Simeon (and these chief Priests)
did, with the eyes of our body, yet we may see him, as Abraham did, with the
perspective of our faith, we may, and we must see him through this glass
darkly, before ever we can see him face to face. A Christian must not be like a
Cyclop, with one eye; the spouse of Christ, as Peraldus observes, must have
two, oculum fidei, and oculum gloriae, the eye of faith, and the eye of
fruition. We must walk by faith, before we can walk by sight. We must, like
Jacob, be first married to blear eyed Leak, before we can obtain beautiful
Rachel; we must first see our Savior with the tender eye of faith, before ever
we can behold him with the brighter eye of glory.

Now though our Savior pronounce them blessed that have not seen, and yet have
believed, and though Faith be defined by the Apostle, the evidence of things
not seen; yet Segnius irritant animos, etc. as the Poet speaks, a man will
give more credit to his eyes, then to his ears, Saint Thomas would not go by
hearsay, except he might see, he resolved not to believe. But the chief
Priests were so perverse, that they would not believe their own eyes, for they
conspired against our Savior, though they saw him, though they knew him,
though they knew him to be the Messiah, and could say, (...), This is the Heir.

From whence we may observe, that as there is a zeal without knowledge, so
there is a knowledge without faith. The very Devils knew our Savior, they knew
him to be the Son of God, Mat. 3.29. Jesus I know, said the evil Spirit to
those Exorcists, Act. 19.15. But their knowledge was merely historical, like
their faith. And just after this manner did the chief Priests know Christ.
There are indeed some places of Scripture that seem to contradict our Text, and
to say, that the chief Priests knew not Jesus to be Christ, knew not that he
was the Heir. For Saint John says plainly, that the world knew him not, Joh.
1.10. And Saint Peter upbraiding the Jews for killing the Prince of life,
uses these very words, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also
your Rulers, Act. 3.17.

And Saint Paul speaking of the wisdom of God, which I take to be his Son,
tells us in express words, that none of the Princes of this world knew it,
for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor.
2.8.

But I answer, First, to that of Saint John, the world knew not Christ, that
is, the greatest part of it, to that of Saint Paul, none of the Princes of this
world knew him, that is, few of them; to that of Saint Peter, the Jews and
their Rulers slew him ignorantly, that is, some of them did so: thus the
ordinary gloss would have those places construed.

Secondly, I answer, that the ignorance of the chief Priests was not purae
negationis, but pravae dispositionis, if they were ignorant of Christ, it was
because they would be ignorant, as the people used to say to their Seers, see
not, so these Seers seem to have stopped their ears, and shut their eyes, for
otherwise they could not choose but acknowledge Jesus to be the Messiah, because
all the Prophecies of his coming were fulfilled.

First, that Prophecy, Genesis 49.10. pointing at the time of his Birth, the
Scepter was then departed from Judah, the Jews paid contribution, they were
tributaries to the Romans.

Secondly, that Prophecy, Micah 5.2. pointing out the place of his Nativity, he
was borne in Bethleem of Judea, which was the place assigned for Christ's Birth,
as these very chief Priests or their Predecessors told King Herod. But if
neither the time nor place of his Birth, yet his Miracles might perfectly
assure them that he was the Messiah. And therefore when Saint John Baptist sent
two of his Disciples to ask him, if he were Christ? all the answer he would
return by them was this, Go, and show John again those things ye do hear and
see, the blind receive their sight, the deaf hear, the lame walk, the lepers
are cleansed, the dead are raised up, etc. Mat. 11.4, 5. And when Christ
comes, some asked the question, Shall he do more Miracles then these which
this man does? Joh. 7.31. Though the chief Priests then would not believe his
words, yet they might have believed him for his works sake. But neither of
these would prevail with them, they had ears, yet would not hear, they had
eyes, yet would not see. Which was a most notorious aggravation of their
treason, for had they been stark blind, their sin happily might have been
remitted, but because seeing they would not see, therefore their sin remains.
And this sin of theirs seems to be no better then the very sin against the
Holy Ghost, for against conscience, out of mere malice they conspired to put
this Heir to death. And I pray God the Ringleaders of our rebellious
Reformation be not guilty of the self-same sin; for it seems to be out of a
desperate, inveterate malice, that notwithstanding the present Treaty, some of
them persist in their conspiracy against the best of Kings. But these Levellers
shall bring up the rear of my discourse.

I pass therefore from the second part of the Text, the Person that the chief
Priests conspired against, which was the Heir, to the third, which is the
manner of their conspiracy, They reasoned among themselves, saying, come, let
us kill him. (...), they reasoned, they argued the case. Treason is a sin of
deliberation, a studied sin. All sins are not cognita, known sins, there are
sins of ignorance, as well as sins of knowledge. But there is neither
ignorantia facti, nor ignorantia juris in treason, it is wilfully contrived and
complotted, it is a premeditated sin. And herein appears the heinousness of
it above other sins. To sin out of infirmity or ignorance, to be overtaken in a
fault, this is but (as it were) chance medley, pardonable by the law of God and
men. But to sin with a full career, of set purpose, to consult about it, this
is no less then wilful murder, a sin that never must go unpardoned; and yet
this was the sin of these chief Priests in our Text, they reasoned among
themselves, saying, come, let us kill him.

(...), Come. Wicked men use to call and invite one another to commit sin, they
are a sociable sort of people, that are unwilling to go to Hell alone, they
entise and engage as many as they can to be partakers with them, they are in
league and covenant, there is a combination among them, especially among
Traitors, such as these chief Priests were, who conspired against Christ, just
as Joseph's Brethren against him, (...), come, let us kill him. Joseph indeed
escaped with life, thanks to his eldest Brother; but Jesus had not one Reuben to
speak for him, none but a Woman, and she could not prevail, the Kings of the
earth standing up, and the Rulers taking counsel together against the Lord,
and against his Christ, for against the holy Child Jesus both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of the Jews were gathered together,
they gathered them together against the soul of the righteous, that they might
condemn the innocent blood, they reasoned among themselves, saying, come, let
us kill him.

Kill him. As the Devil is a murderer, so all those that are of his party
thirst after blood. Shimei did a great deal of wrong to David in calling him
so, but otherwise Bloody man, and man of Belial may well go together, for there
is no man desperately wicked, but he is a bloodthirsty man. It has been thus
from the beginning of the world, and will be so to the end. Caine was of that
wicked one, (...), and slew his Brother, 1 John 3.12. This was likewise the
resolution of wicked Esau, the days of mourning for my Father are at hand,
then (says he) will I slay my Brother Jacob, Genesis 27.41. Thus Pharaoh
commanded the Egyptian Midwives to murder every Male child of the Hebrews, if
it be a Son, then ye shall kill him, Exodus 1.16. And thus Herod slew all the
Children in Bethleem, from two years old and under, Mat. 2.16. This we read of
Herodias, that nothing would satiate her malice but Saint John Baptists blood,
Mat. 14.8. Thus the Jews cried out against Saint Paul, Away with such a fellow
from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live, Act. 22.22. And Act.
23.12. we find some that bound themselves under a curse (they took the
Covenant) saying, that they would neither eat nor drink, till they had killed
Paul. And the Whore of Babylon is said to be drunk with the blood of Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.6. I might be infinite in
examples, but this in our Text shall be instar omnium, we may fee the bloody
mindedness of wicked men by these chief Priests, who conspired not to banish
or imprison, but even to murder Gods own Son, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, come, let us kill him. And the voices of the multitude, and of these
chief Priests prevailed, this treason stood not always in consultation, but went
on to action, what the common counsel determined wickedly, the common people
executed greedily, they cast the Heir out of the Vineyard, and slew him with
this dreadful imprecation, his blood be on us, and on our children.

And seeing our Master was thus used, we must expect no better measure, but
even to be killed all the day long, as the Psalmist speaks, and to be counted
as Sheep appointed to be slain. The Alpha, and the Omega of the Church is writ
in blood, Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crevit,
Sanguine firmatur, sanguine finis erit.
And we need not wonder at this, if we believe our Savior, for it is but that
which he told us long ago, that we should be hated and hunted after for his
sake, yea the time will come (says he) that whosoever kills you will think
he does God service. A Prophecy that seems to point directly at our very
days, when the bloudiest of Soldiers think themselves the best of Saints,
when murdering of loyal Christians goes for pure Religion. But though our
blood be shed like water on every side, yet our God that is true and holy, will
(in his good time) judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth,
there will one day be a strict inquisition made for blood, for the blood of
Strafford and Canterbury, for the blood of Lucas and Lisle, for the blood of
Tomkins and Chaloner, for the blood of Yeomans, Bourchier, and Burleigh, for
the blood of Dunkin, and others in Kent, there will be a day, I say, if not in
this, yet in the next world, when all the righteous blood that has of late
years been shed in this Kingdom, shall be required at the hands of this
tyrannical satanicall generation.

And so I pass from the third part of the Text, which was the manner of the
chief Priests conspiracy, they reasoned among themselves, saying, come, let us
kill him, to the fourth and last, the end of their conspiracy, which was, that
they might be Lords of the Manor, that the inheritance may be ours, But when
the Husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, this is the
Heir, come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.

In every action, there is both Opus, and Intentio operantis, the doing of the
work, and the end for which we do it, and by an Hysteron proteron the last of
these is first, what is last in execution, the same is first in our intention,
the end being always the beginning of the action. Now it is an axiom in
Philosophy, Finis and Bonum convertuntur, let the action be what it will, Good
is always propounded for the end, either Honestum, or Jucundum, or Vtile, either
an honest, or a pleasant, or a profitable end, they that do evil will say
they do this, that good may come of it, good to themselves at least, though
hurt to others; or if it be not good indeed, yet it shall seemingly be good;
and the last of those three ends the chief Priests here propound unto
themselves, Bonum utile, they set up profit for their end, Come, let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours. They propound the same end with those
sinners that Solomon cautioneth us to take heed of, Prove. 1.11, 13. where hope
of gain is used as a motive to invite others to join with them, Come, let us
lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the innocent without cause, we
shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses with spoil. And at
the 19 Verse there is just such another passage, So are the ways of every one
that is greedy of gain, which takes away the life of the owners thereof. --
quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames?
There is no villainy but will go down with men, if it have a golden bait. The
love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.10. Balaam will endeavor to
curse Israel, if he may gain but the rewards of Divination. Achan will take of
the accursed thing, if he may gain a Babylonish garment, two hundred shekels of
silver, and a wedge of gold; Saul will spare the spoil of Amaleck, if he may
gain good store of rich plunder; Gehazi will tell an arrant lie to Naaman, if
he may gain two talents, and new clothes; Judas will betray his own Master, if
he may gain thirty pieces of silver; the Soldiers will say that Christ was
stolen out of the grave, if the chief Priests will give them large money;
Jezebel will plot Naboth's death, if she may gain his Vineyard; she proclaimed
a fast, yet knew no other godliness but gain: and this, this likewise set the
chief Priests a work to conspire the death of Christ, Come (say they) let us
kill him, that the inheritance may be ours. That we may be no longer dressers,
but possessers of the Vineyard, that there may be no Superior, no Lord over
us, but that the Church may be ruled and governed as we list, that the doctrine
and discipline of it may be what we see good; nay, that we may have dominion as
well over men's freehold, as their faith, that their consciences and coffers
may both be at our command. This was the end that the chief Priests aimed at,
when they conspired against the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the
inheritance may be ours.

And herein the Bishop of Rome looks very like them, who styles himself
Christ's Vicar, S. Peter's Successor, he says, that he is the right heir, the
head of Christ's whole Church, he arrogateth the title of Universal Bishop, he
challenges (as it were) the Wardship, nay, the Lordship of the Church,
whatsoever he says must go for Gospel, merely because he says it, he takes
upon him more then Apostolical authority, even that which is Gods peculiar, To
forgive sins, for which cause fall the silly people unto him, and thereout he
sucketh no small advantage, it is a mass of money that his Pardons annually
bring in to him. And other stratagems he has, but all to enrich himself. He
will release men out of Purgatory, if they will give him money enough, he will
warrant they shall be heirs of Heaven though herein he contradict himself, for
sometimes he tells them, that they can never be sure of Heaven till they come
thither, yet thus he befooleth the people, he will warrant them an inheritance
in Heaven, if they will make him their Heir on earth. His whole Religion
indeed is nothing else but a politic project to get money, he feeds not the
flock of Christ, but feeds upon it, he keeps the people in ignorance,
seeking not them, but theirs, He, and all his Cardinals, Monks, and Abbots,
they seek their own profit and preferment, their own gain and greatness, like
these chief Priests in our Text, whose aim was to get the inheritance, Come,
(say they) let us kill him that the inheritance may be ours.

And so I have gone through the several parts of the Text. A few words of
application, and I have done.

Our Text is a plain conspiracy against our Savior, and the conspiracy of
Levellers against our Sovereign will match it right. Our Savior let out his
Vineyard to Husbandmen, so our Sovereign did (as it were) let out His Kingdom
to Statesmen, he gave them power to prune and dress it, to take off
superfluities, to rectify enormities, he gave them their hearts desire, and
denied them not the request of their lips, he granted that which none but a
most indulgent Landlord would ere have granted, they asked a lease of him, and
he gave them a long lease, longer then any of their Predecessors ever had, he
made them no Tenants for years, much less at will, but reserving his
fee-simple, I mean his Negative voice, he gave it under his hand, that he would
not re-enter, till they themselves consented to it.

O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint, Agricolas! What men were ever so
happy, as these might have been? How might the glory of their God, of their
King, of their Country, and even of themselves have been advanced by them? But
neglecting the three first, they aimed chiefly at the last, at their own
glory. For as soon as their unlucky lease was sealed, they straight way thought
themselves freeholders, taking Regal power upon them, as if the Militia, the
King's inheritance had been theirs, they divested their Sovereign of it, and
invested themselves with it, making the Heir of three Kingdoms (though no
Child in any thing, but malice) to differ nothing from a servant, when he was
Lord of all, for, without him, they took upon them to un-make, and to make
Laws, saying, we have the legislative power, who is Lord over us? And that
they might the better enjoy the Crown, they entered into Covenant against the
Miter, resolved to abolish the excellent government of Bishops, root and
branch. And because the King, both against his oath and conscience would not
yield to this, Come, said they, let us compel him to it by force of Arms;
they set the people awork first to mutiny, then to fight against him, as who
should say, we have no part in Charles, neither have we inheritance in the Son
of James, every man to his tents, o England, they proclaimed open War against
Him and His Adherents, giving out Commissions to kill and slay all persons that
should oppose them, their Sovereign Lord the King was not excepted, for
bullets cannot distinguish between a Scepter and a shovel, the sword (as David
said) devoureth one as well as another. But seeing they could not kill Him in
the field, they have since attempted it in the prison, it is too apparent that
the Ringleaders of this Rebellion had an hand in that late Conspiracy against
Him. Nor is it only Carolus, but even Rex that they strike at, going about not
only to kill the Person, but the very office of King, I speak of the levelling
Faction, all this while, Come, say they, let us break his bonds asunder, and
cast away his cords from us; come, let us make no more addresses to him, but
let us make our selves a Free State, that the name of Monarch may be no more in
remembrance. And to effect this, they have made the Kingdom not only a field,
but even a sea of blood, breathing out nothing but slaughter against all loyal
Subjects, killing and slaying, butchering and murdering their Brethren, whose
blood they have shed like Water on every side, like that Woman in the
Revelation, drinking themselves drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, in which noble Army those matchless Knights
murdered at Colchester may well be listed.

It is no mervaile if these bloud-hounds will not have Gods Commandments read
in Churches, for one of these tells them expressly, they must do no murder,
and as almost all the rest, so most especially that sixth Commandment they
count Apocryphal, for murdering of men is their profession, and a great part
of their Religion, as if Mars were their God, and Mahomet their Messiah. Let
them usurp the name of Christians while they will, I am sure their bloody
practices proclaim them arrant Turks. Christianity, is for the saving of men's
lives; Turcisme, for the destroying of them, and such is the Religion of these
Levellers, destruction is in their way, they are still opposing of Treaties,
the way of peace have they not known, like horse-leaches, they never think they
have blood enough, they would have it even unto the horsebridles, as if they
had a mind to swim in blood.

And all this under pretense of Religion and Reformation, a pretense so pitiful
and so thread bare, that I wonder men are not ashamed to be seduced by it, for
Religion was ever made the stalking-horse to Rebellion, and indeed this must be
the pretense, or else the design will soon be dashed, for should they proclaim
themselves open Atheists, and profess the subverting of Religion, I think the
world is not so bad, but that it would tear them all in pieces. They are bound
therefore to pretend piety, like Absalom and Jezebel, but their actions tell
the world that they aim at other ends, even at Libertinisme, that they may be
lawless, that they may do what they list, that they may roar and whore, yet
never be questioned or controuled; for there are no men living more given to
the flesh, then they that pretend so extremely to the spirit; but chiefly, the
Inheritance, the Kingdoms wealth is that they aim at, they seek not the
kingdom of God, but the riches of this Kingdom, that the revenue of the
Crown, and the patrimony of the Miter, and the Estate of every loyal Subject
may be theirs. Most truly may that of the Prophet be applied to them, Jer.
22.17. their eyes, and their hearts are not but for their covetousness, and
for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it;
witness their Sequestrations, their Contributions, their Excise, their Fifth,
and Twentieth part; besides their greedines in getting all the gainful Offices
of the Kingdom. Their love of money has been the root of all our evils, we may
see this by their dividing of the spoil, their sharing of the Kingdoms wealth
among themselves, especially, by their sacrilegious selling and usurping of
Church Lands; they had long ago ended the War, or rather had never begun it,
but to get these Lands: they kill, as Saint James speaks, because they desire
to have, to have other men's possessions, the whole world, and even their own
consciences bear witness to this truth. And their Chaplains of the Assembly
are just like them, those Journey-men-Rebels, that love the wages of
unrighteousness, that have so much by the day to make Rebellion good by
Scripture; an heart they have exercised with covetous practices, through
covetousness, with fained words, making merchandise of men. Their aim is to
get the greatest Livings, even Pluralities, which once they so much railed at,
and under the name, forsooth, of Lecturers, they creep into Deanes and
Prebendaries houses, some get Masterships of Colleges, some of Hospitals, all
their aim is that the inheritance, the profitable preferments may be theirs.

I shall not need to rake this dunghill, nor stir this Camerina any further. It
is most evident how bloody and covetous all these levelling Vine-dressers are.
What therefore shall the Lord of the Vineyard do unto them? Sure in justice he
might destroy them (though he delights more in mercy) and might let out his
Vineyard to others, he might discard these unjust Judges, he might displace
these unfaithful Stewards, these Zimries deserve no peace, no pardon, that
would have slain their Master, these Shebaes deserve to have their heads thrown
over the Wall, these Hamans to be executed upon their own gallows, those mine
enemies, (might the King say) which would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before me. -- neque est lex justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
They might justly be served, as the Scythian Queen served Cyrus, have their
heads thrown into a bloud-boule, with this exprobration of their tyranny,
Satiate vos sanguine, sanguisugae, quem sitistis, their heads should down to
the grave with blood, theirs especially that have shed the blood of war in
peace, that for mere envy, have murdered their Captives in cold blood. And
methinks indeed these men of blood should have such an hell within themselves,
that like Cain, they should be afraid that every one which meets them, will
slay them. For bloodthirsty men, as David speaks, shall not live out half
their days, if they do, they seldom die peaceably in their beds, Ad generum
Ceteris sine caede and vulnere paci
Descendunt -- and sicca morte tiranni.
If any ask why I rip up these men's actions, in a time of Treaty, I Answer,
that I have, in a manner, their own order for it, they returned thanks to
those men that petitioned lately against the Treaty, whereby it is evident that
they approved of their Petition, and one passage in that Petition was to this
purpose, that no base Act of Oblivion might obliterate their doings, but that
there might be an Act rather for the propagating of their memorial to
posterity. But to speak no more of them being absent, let me now apply my self
to you here present, and let me entreat you to be no longer partakers in their
sins, walk not ye in the way with them, refrain your feet from their path,
for their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood, and bloodshed,
Brethren, how light soever now esteemed, is a most crying sin, the cries of it
enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Wash therefore not your hands
only, but your hearts too from this sin, let no bloody thoughts any longer
lodge in you. As the death of men is dear in the sight of God, so let it be in
your sight. Remember what Almighty God says, Genesis 9.5, 6. Surely your blood of
your lives will I require, at the hand of every man's Brother will I require the
life of man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Take
heed then of shaking hands with those men that delight in blood, this sin will
not suffer God to be quiet, till he avenge it. To the slain, his ears are
open, but fast shut to those that slay them, all your days of Fasting and
Humiliation will be ineffectuall if ye be against the Treaty, if ye be still
for War, though ye make never so many Prayers, God will not hear you, so long
as your hands are full of blood. Wash your selves therefore I beseech you, make
you clean from the blood of all men, be no longer accessory to murder, by
raising Money to maintain War, ye know that no murderer (no not a second-hand
murderer) has eternal life abiding in him. Let then your prayer be, that God
would deliver you from this kind of bloud-guiltinesse, and hereafter make
better use of your money, make it not the price of blood. Cursed be he, says
God by Jeremy, that keeps back his sword from blood, Jer. 48.10. A place that
Assembly-men have strangely wrested of late years, pressing it upon men's
consciences as a warrant for them to cut throats, urging it as a Commission and
command for them to kill and slay; and many thousands have followed their
pernicious doctrine, even LONDON, the sometime faithful City is become an
Harlot, righteousness did once lodge in it, but now murderers. But let not
these bloody wolvish Prophets seduce you any more. Woe to the bloody City, this
is the voice of the Lords Prophets, and if any man teach you otherwise, let him
be accursed.

O that ye would know therefore in this your day the things that belong unto
your peace, lest otherwise they be hid for ever from your eyes. Consider what
God says to the Jews, Isa. 1.19, 20. for the very same he says now to you,
If ye be willing and obedient, willing to have your King restored, and will
henceforth be obedient to him, ye shall eat the good of the land, but if ye
refuse his gracious pardon, and resolve still to rebel against him, ye shall be
devoured with the sword; for the mouth of the Lord bath spoken it. If ye still
keep up the sword, ye will, in the end, perish by it, your sword will certainly
penetrate your own heart. Obey not them therefore that think they can kill the
body, and that would have you make a trade of killing, but obey him that can
kill body and soul, whose express command is, that ye shall not kill. If ye
will not follow peace, ye shall never see the Lord. If here ye banish that from
you. He will hereafter banish you from him he will renounce you with those
words of David, Psalm. 139.19. Depart from me, ye bloody, ye bloodthirsty men.
And as God abhors the bloody, Psalm. 5. so does he the covetous man, Psalm.
10. He that said, Do not kill, said also, Do not covet, as therefore ye must
abstain from blood, so must ye from covetousness, let not this be on^e named
amongst you, as becomes Saints, but learn of the Apostle in whatsoever state
ye are, therewith to be content; see that ye covet no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel, but having food and raiment, be therewith content. Ye know whose law
it is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house; take heed then, Brethren, of
coveting Bishops houses, or any thing else that is another, and not yours. All
covet, all lose, ye may have good Scripture for it, Jer. 8.10. I will give
their Wives unto others, and their fields to them that shall inherit them: for
every one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness, from
the Prophet, even unto the Priest. They that greedly get away other men's, beget
a gangrene in their own estates. De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius hares.
Take heed therefore, as our Savior exhorts, and beware of covetousness.
Consider what S. Paul says, Ephesians. 5.5. no covetous man, who is an idolater,
has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; and consider what
the same Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.9. They that will be rich (as it were, whether
God will or no) fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Covetousness
tempts men to murder, this is that makes Levellers so bloody as they are:
from whence come wars and fightings among you? Surely covetousness has been
the original of them all, the lower sort of people strive to be in an higher
room, the poor would feign turn tables with the rich, they would thus have
every valley to be filled, and every mountain and hill to be laid low, as if,
in this sense, every man were bound to seek another wealth, they that were
borne to nothing, strive to get others birth rights, calling themselves, for
sooth, the Saints, who, they say, must inherit the earth; they would make
themselves rich, that have nothing, and others poor, that have great riches.

But to conclude this, Brethren, is not the office of Saints, it is Gods
office, it is the Lord that makes poor, and makes rich. Presume not then to
take Gods office out of his hand, strive not to make your selves rich, if God
have made you poor, but be content with that portion of outward things that he
has given you; the silver is mine, and the Gold is mine, says the Lord of
Hosts, Hag. 2.8. Deny him not therefore that privilege, which your own selves
challenge, give him leave to do what he pleases with his own; let not the
least root of covetousness remain in you, remember that godliness with
contentment is great gain, if the riches of others increase, set not your
hearts upon them, seek not these things below, but those above, strive not for
an inheritance on earth, but to have one in heaven; that ye may banish cruelty,
let covetousness be banished first, that ye may not thirst after other men's
bloods, covet not their goods, bast thou killed, says God to Ahab, and also
taken possession? well, ye know what became of him and Jezebel for this; stifle
therefore not only you murtherous, but also your covetous thoughts, if ye must
needs be killing, mortify your earthly members, if ye must needs be coveting,
covet earnestly the best gifts; God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in
faith, to be heirs of his kingdom; labor therefore to get the gold of faith,
whereby ye may be rich toward God, and then although here ye have no temporal
inheritance, yet hereafter ye shall have one far better, ye shall be heirs
apparent unto Heaven, ye shall inherit gloty, God will give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified, though now ye are in your nonage, yet at
the last day ye shall be perfect men, ye shall be of full age, ye shall attain
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, who shall then invite
you to enter upon your inheritance in these words, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
Which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to grant unto us all, for the merits
of his beloved Son, our blessed Savior. To whom, with the Father, and the Holy
Ghost, Three Persons, one Immortal, Invisible, Indivisible, only wise God, be
rendered and ascribed, as most due is, All Honor, Glory, Power, Praise, Might,
Majesty, Wisdom, and Dominion, the residue of this blessed day present, and
for evermore world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

