Americans no Jews, OR Improbabilities that the Americans are of that race.

They shall be scattered abroad, and their remembrance shall cease. Deuteronomy. 32.
v. 26. Until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall
be saved. Rom 11. 25. For through their fall Salvation comes to the Gentiles,
to provoke them to follow them. Romans 11. 11. By HAMON l'ESTRANGE, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in
Fleetstreet. 1652.

To the Reader.
NOt long since a Book (entitled Jews in America, or, Probabilities that the
Americans are of that race) was sent unto me by the Author thereof, a Divine,
whom I do much esteem and reverence for his gravity and learning: I read the
same with more diligence and delight for the Authors sake, but as I sailed
through the discourse, I fell upon many Sands and Rocks of reluctance to my
sense, and thereupon soon after I committed mine observations to writing and
being free and Independent, Nullius addictus jurare in verba -- not to conjured
by any obligation of amity or respect contrary to mine own reading, reason, and
apprehension, wherein I am confident of the Authors candid leave and
permission, as

Me penes arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi I conceive my self at
liberty to subscribe unto the Author, or refuse; the first is a good, dull,
safe, quiet way, but I am loath to betray mine understanding so far, as vote
and involve consent to such errors as occurred either per incuriam (which are
most venial) or as quod volumus facile credimus, we are carried on to believe
by the torrent of our own liking; so the force of Inclination has formed some
twinkling Constellations in the Authors fancy, as sometime*

Maxima pars vatum --
Decipitur specie recti --
learned men are deceived in the optics of reason, and fallacies of
affectionate beams.

I have presumed at last to publish mine Observations and Antitheses: If I have
any ways erred in judgment (as I am the meanest of men, and the best build
sometimes (but with dirt) like Swallows) or if in style, language, dicacity, or
urbanity, I refer my self to the Readers ferula, and offer, and pray to be
pruned of riot, and rankness, to an innocent, candid, geniality, and meaning,
and no other dedicatory Umbrello do I seek or desire to defend this work from
the scorch of censure. So I take leave, as I am taught by Gregory, Sicut
incauta locutio in errorem pertrahit ita indiscretum silentium in errore
relinquit. And now, (...).

Mar. 30. 1651. Hamon l'Estrange.

Americans no Jews.
THE Author first laye^ down six Conjectures, upon which he superstructs the
main Fabrique of his Work and Arguments.

1. The Acknowledgment of the Americans. 2. From Rites and Customs. 3. From
Words and Speech. 4. From Man devouring. 5. From the Conversion promised to the
Jews. 6. From the Calamities threatened to the Jews.
I shall not premere vestigia, tread in the very steps of his Method, but shall
begin first to enquire when America may be proved or collected to have been
first planted and Inhabited, and how the Jews should come thither (all which
the Author handles in his second Part) and I shall after observe upon the
Conjectures, and comparatively weigh them and the Rites and Ceremonies for
confutation, or confirmation of what the Author has alleged.

It is said Genesis 6. v. 1. Men began to be multiplied upon the Earth; and this
was long before the Flood, which was Anno mundi 1656. And it being certain,
that all the World had sinned, which is evinced from the certainty that all the
World was drowned, as Chap. 7. v. 19, 21, 22, 23. And Sin the Cause, as Chap.
6. v. 5, 6, 7. What hinders but that (without presumption) It may be said the
now America was also in some measure peopled, and those drowned with the Flood;
for if in the space of less than three hundred years after the Flood, and from
eight persons, Noah, and his Sons, and their Wives, there sprang up (as I shall
hereafter show) so great an increase of Mankind, as we read were in the two
prodigious Armies for numbers, betwixt Ninus King of Assyria, and Zoroaster
King of the Bactrians, Wh^t should* hinder but that in the revolution of 1656
years for so long it was from the Creation to the Flood, when men lived at
least twice as long as after the Flood, and the affections of man boiled, and
aspired to a full possession of the whole Earth which (as David says) God gave
to the children of men to possess^ America might be then also peopled, together
with the other three parts of the World.

After the Flood (which continued 1^0 days) the Ark rested upon mount Ararat,
which, upon conference with Raleigh's History; a most subtle and elaborate
disquisition that question, and rejection of the Gordaei, or Curdaei mountains,
which I may presume to place and seat upon the Caucasi Hill^ betwixt Imaus and
Paraponisus, upon the very Hill Siciclegh, in the Province of Jeselbas, in the
Eastern part of Persia near Tartary, in North. lat. 38. and long it* about 109
gr. where one of the springs rises of the River Almorgab that runs into the
great River of Abiamu, now Abin, sometime Oxus, which empties into the Caspian
Sea at the South-East corner thereof, which Province of Jeselbas is the ancient
Margiara, a most rich, fruitful, and delightful soil, as Boterus the Italian
says in his Relat. part 1. lib. 2. and celebrated by the ancient and faithful
Geographer Strabo for the excellency of the Vines (which I say) Noah there
first planted; and Luis de Vrreta the Spanish Friar, lib. 1. E^iop. says, Noe
salio de area con sus ^ijos en la ^ierra de Armenia, que es en la provincia de
Scythia. Noah went out of the Ark with his children in the land of Armenia
which is in the Province of Scythia; and ab Armenia ubi Area constitit non
^d^^dum longumiter est ad Cathaiam, from Armenia where the Ark rested, is no
very long way to Cathay, ^aie^ Jo. de Lae^ de orig. gent. part. 14.

Now for the introducing of what I shall labor to prove, I will lay down some
necessary principles from whence to deduce the conclusion, and probably to
attain the scope and end of mine aim.

The Flood being ceased, and Noah, and his Sons, and Daughters, safe landed
upon dry ground out of the Ark, Genesis 9. v. 1. 7. God blessed them, and
commanded them to incre^se and multiply; and there is no doubt, but there was
an earnest natural instinct, thirst, and appetition in all creatures for
restoration, and to replenish the World, which now discovered it self ready
again for use, and to furnish all manner of food and sustenance; and chap. 10.
We read of the numerous increase of Mankind by Noah and his Sons, which
increase was reinforced from two other special reasons and arguments, the one
the strength of nature, and exquisite temperament of humors, and constitution
of body to vivacity, whereby their lamps of life lasted so long even to many
hundred of years; the other the permission, if not lawfulness of P^lygamie,
and many Wives.

And now the pride and arrogance of this multitude and millions of men begun to
show it self, when all the Sons, and Offspring of Noah, saving Heber and
Phaleg (who were Gods more peculiar reserves both for language and people)
journing from the East, where it is probable they made a long abode in the
mountainous country, before they came down into the plain, for the fearful
memory of the late Flood: Finding themselves over-numerous to be contained in a
small compass of ground, and cohabitation, and Nimrod a prime stickler in all
ambitious designs, they conferred together how to perform some mighty and
magnificent work, which were easily done while they were now together, and
before they parted, which might eternize their name and memory, whereas if they
were once severed (as they peceived they begun to over-swell the banks, bounds,
and capacity of those parts where they made abode) they should want heads to
devise and contrive, hearts for courage, and hands to act and execute so great
and glorious a design, and the fresh memory of the Flood minding them of
preservation, maugre (as man's simplicity was apt to imagine) the power and
force of another Flood if it should happen, the country furnishing them with
earth for brick, and slime for mortar, they fell to work, and when they were in
the heat and hardest travailes thereof, and made all the haste they could to
get up to Heaven, God came down to them, as he took off the Chariot wheels
from Pharaoh's host in the Red Sea, so as they drove them heavily, so now he
brake in sunder the Stern and Rudder of all their actions (as Tully says,
vinculum humane societatis est ratio and oration) by confounding their language,
so as alter alterius labium non perciperet, they could not understand one
another, nor guess by the motion of their lips at what was spoken, but they
all stood amazed, and at last they resolved, or dissolved into 72 Languages,
unusquisque secundum linguam suam in tribubus suis, and in gentibus suis,
Japhet 15, Cham 31, Sem 27, as Aust. de Civit. Dei cap. 3. lib. 16. And from
thence the Lord did scatter them abroad upon all the earth.

Now for the manuduction of some necessary consequences, it shall be requisite
to enquire at what time and year after the Flood, the Confusion of Tongues at
the building of Babel happened, which by all Writers is agreed and stated to be
in Phalegs time, as Genesis 10. ver. 25. from the Etymology of the word Phaleg,
which is Division, as the skillful in the Hebrew inform us, the Flood was in
An. Mun. 1656.

Sem was 98 years old at the Flood, and begat Arphaxad two years after, as Genesis
11. 10.

Now the Division of Tongues granted to be in Phalegs time, it rests to
enquire in what parts of his age, which to discover, or most probably to
evince, will be of special use to some part of our subsequent discourse.

Some will have that name given him at his birth, conceiving that the Confusion
of Tongues then happened; but to that I cannot subscribe, because I read Genesis 10.
v. 25. In his days was the earth divided, which word days must import the
time of his Manhood, not of his Birth, Infancy, or Childhood; for when we speak
of such a thing done in such a man's days, it implies when he was a man of
action.

Again, an indefinite concession that his name was called Phaleg, because the
Division of Tongues happened in his days, or lifetime, demonstrates no
certainty.

Phaleg lived 239 years, and dyed An. mund. 1996, and These lived with Phaleg.
Noah 8 Sem 239 Arphaxad 239 Sala 239 Heber 239 Reu 209 Serug 176 Thure 118
Abraham 48.
340 years after the Flood, and all these (as on the Margent) were
contemporaries with Phaleg; and why should Phaleg have a name importing
Division, rather than any of the rest which then lived with him, unless the
name should be given him from some notable and confiderable circumstance, or
accident of his life, and so from thence to be changed, as Abram to Abraham,
Jacob to Israel, etc. and to make that the Epoche or Root from whence to
supputate so great an action? but that is but conjecturall, and no firm
foundation for a good Argument. And now not to dull or dazzle my self with too
curious prying and piercing into this obscurity of question, I offer my
qualified opinion as follows.

Phaleg was born An. Mun. 1757, and post Diluvium 101* he lived in all 239
years, till An Mun. 1996 and then died. I will grant that the name Phaleg was
given him at his birth, not because the Division then happened, or was
accomplished, but given him prophetically at his birth, when I suppose the
building began, and the prophecy to be after fulfilled according to the secret
and determinate counsel of God, when the conspiracy and practice should be
ripe for his Judgment of Confusion and Dissipation, and to which purpose I
suppose God (for his greater glory) did not at the inception and inchoation of
the work instantly break them off, but permitted and suffered them to make some
fair and far progress in the work, to the end that having built, and bestowed
the more time and cost therein, and then to be scattered, frustrated, and
deluded of their hopes, it would be a far greater anxiety and vexation to them
to have naufragium almost in portu, especially also when they were furnished of
all materials, and all both Architects, Contrivers, and Engineers, as also of
Laborers and Workmen in abundance, and they all strong, sound, and of perfect
constitutions (proportional to the length of the lives of the men of those
days, which I presume to think to have been then even of common and ordinary
persons omitted as of those which are mentioned in Scripture) and yet to be
dashed and defeated by so weak a seeming means, as though they had every one of
them all their fives senses in complete measure and perfection, yet they could
not understand what one said to another, but chattred like Jayes and Pyes, and
were thereby disabled from action without any diminution or debilities of the
faculties of the body or mind, and wanting nothing of the perfection of men,
yet could not consult to do any thing; therefore as they vauntingly said, Genesis
11. 4. Let us build us a Tower whose top may reach up to Heaven: So undoubtedly
God suffered them to raise it very high, whereby to flatter their ambition
while it was working, and to let them see the sin of their Pride in their
Confusion, and that their Tongues should cease to be any more any messenger of
the mind to action.

I will not here reprove the modesty of some men's judgment, who allow forty
years expended in the building of this Tower; for truly my fancy may incline
to allow them as long time to build that Tower, as God allowed Noah to make the
Ark, which was 100 years, as Aust. de Civ. Dei, lib. 15. cap. ult. and Contra
Faust. lib. 12. cap. 18. and some give it 120 years, from Genesis 6. v. 3. that as
Noah made the Ark sufficient (in that space of time) to endure that great long
siege and battery of the seas, so God might give the Nimrodites or
Babel-builders leave to try their art and ingene (which they thought was able
in a like space of time) to contrive a fabrique and structure of such vast
dimensions for height and breadth (as some have made it a mile and a quarter
high) as might dare and wade through all future deluges, storms, tempests,
rages of wind and weather whatsoever, and preserve them safe and alive; for
the judgment and punishment of the Flood still stuck in their stomachs, and
they would not take Gods word, Chap. 9. v. 11. never to drown the World again,
and they wanted the warrant of Noah's Faith, which Horace calls no other than
Illi robur and aes triplex
Circa pectus erat qui fragilem^truci
Commisit pelago ratem,
Primus --
to venture upon such another voyage as Noah's. Thus if we state the Division of
Tongues to be but forty years after the beginning to build the Tower, it will
be 140 years after the Flood, and in about the fortieth year of Phaleg's age,
and an. Mun. 1797. or about 1800.

Nimrod (who was the ancient Belus) was King of Babylon, and the first King
that ever was, and by the computation of the best Chronologers, he reigned 66
years, and although it is said of him Genesis 10. v. 9. Nimrod the mighty hunter,
yet I suppose that does but only intimate his open, imperious domineering, and
ambitious spirit, and I believe he was the great and chief author and
ringleader of the building of Babel Tower, but I think also that he reigned not
as King until after the Confusion; but when he saw his hopes and purposes
dashed, and a solstice of the work, and that he was now arrived at the Hercules
Pillars, and nil ultra of his great action and adventure, and could not reach
home to say with Nebuchadnezar, Is not this great Babel that I have built? yet
he was unwilling to remove from the place where he had erected such a monument
of his aspiring mind, but there he meant to stay and abide, expecting the
dawning of another day, and how so great a wonder and miracle should conclude.

In the mean time the people being scattered and removed into sundry parts of
the World, Nimrod being of most note and renown (with a great party that
adhered to him, as bad is ever most numerous) still kept together, and within
some reasonable space of time (as we may conjecture about forty or fifty years)
had now contracted and made a proper and peculiar language; and soon after
Nimrod, having now many followers, set now his ambitious spirit on work to feed
their eyes, mouth, and ears, with the sight, report, and noise of his
undertakings; and at last obtained to be the first of Kings, and Monarch of
Babylon, while Sem with his children, and grandchildren Phaleg and Heber, are
thought (by some of the Fathers, and the best Chronologers) never to have
engaged in the action of Babylon, but to have removed Eastward to India.

Now the Division of Tongues being (as before) about 140 years after the Flood,
and there being a motus trepidationis at, and for about forty or fifty years
after the Confusion of Languages, by the panique amazement that possessed the
builders of Babel, the sum is about 180 years; then add 66 years, the time
of Nimrods reign, the sum is about 240, or 250 years.

Thus have I prepared and made way for the credit of the story of Diodorus
Siculus lib. 2. out of C^esias (who lived in the Persian Court) the sum of
which story is, that Ninus (who was the Son of Nimrod, and succeeded him, and
reigned 52 years) in an expedition of War against Zoroaster King of the
Bactrians, about the thirty third of Ninus reign (as sundry Chronologers have
it) carried into the field 17 hundred thousand Footmen, and two hundred
thousand Horsemen, against Zoroaster whose Army consisted of four hundred
thousand men.

If I add this sum of 33 of Ninus reign, to 250, the sum of years is, 283
after the Flood, and if this space and extension of time will not satisfy for
so great a breed of men and people, I may yet add more help to admit this
expedition of Ninus to have been three hundred years after the Flood; for by
how much less of time that increase of people spent (as some will not allow it
two hundred, others a little above two hundred years) by so much the greater
plenty and overflow of people might the sooner extend, and move Eastward to
the populating of America.

And we must not imagine that all the men in the world were in those two
armies, But if so great a swarm of men were then sprung up out of Iaphe^ and
Cham within that time, who were yet like to be infested with continual broils
and wars, by the pride, cruelty, insolence, and usurpation of Idolatrous
Nimrod, what hinders to believe but that Sem and his children who were the true
believers and children of God, and lived quietly and peaceably, and Genesis 9. 16.
were blessed with great increase and multiplication, and kept their Hebrew
language, and were not engaged in the action of Babel Tower, and suffered no
interruption by that confusion, but traveling to the East, ampliated and grew
very numerous? And as the progeny of Iaphes or Cham approached nearer toward
them, so they removed still more East, and soon after planted and peopled the
nearest, and more parts of America, and so verified that in Genesis 9. 19. The
three Sonns of Noah overspread all the Earth.

It is not my meaning to infer out of my quotation of Diodorus a like general
planting and populacy all the world over, but I suppose that mankind having
then (as we use to say) all the world before them, and room enough, spread,
dilated, and extended into that same moderate and temperate clymate, Eastward,
declining the hotter regions to the South, and colder to the North, nam primi
gentium mediam regionem inter^nimium calorem and frigus, etc. as I^. de Laet de
orig. gent. pa. 91.

Now touching the Dispersion of the Jews by the carriing away of the Ten
tribes by Salmanasser King of Assyria, which is supposed by some to be the
Fountain and origin of the people of America, although learned Brerewood (in
his 13. Chap. of Enquiries, etc.) makes a solid confutation of the vain and
capriccious fancy (as he calls it) of the Tartars to be descended of the ten
Tribes, as also the quotation out of Esdras touching Arsareth, yet if we
should admit the wandering of the Jews into Tartarie after the Captivity,
nevertheless since that Captivity was about 1500 years after the Flood, we
cannot but suppose that those East parts of Asia were peopled long before that
Captivity, and consequently America also.

And to induce it and confirm what I have before declared, I further offer,
that Jerome quaest. Heb: g. lib. 6, and he happily out of Joseph: lib. 1.
Antiq. cap. 7 both say that the Sonns of Sem (who was Noah's second Son, and
came out of the Arc) travailed from Senaar, and possessed and Inhabited the
part of Asia from That is in the same parallel with Babylon.
Euphrates to the Indian Sea or Ocean, and the East part then of Asia remaining
entire with the Globe of the Earth; for the straight of Anian (pernavigated
only in words) is yet to me but a fable, and so thinks Brerewood, and Purchase
Amer. cap. 8. and magis inclino ad eam sententiam quae cohaerere credit, says
Jo. de Laet de orig. gent. page 12. and illud non minus famosum quam incertum
fretum Ani^n, Page 72. and credo omnes parts continentis concatenatis, page
116. And Grotius there Anion utrum fretum sive sinus nondum constat, page 9.
and though the Cosmographers seem to own it, yet.

Dic mihi d^cte virum, aut quis sit da Tytire nobis.

Name or prove me the men that ever sailed it through. And Arias Montanus is
also clearly with me in his book de primis gentium sedibus, where speaking of
the Americans, he holds them cum Asia continuatas, and doubts not further to
say, that Sems* Sonns travailed to the parts of the new world which we call
America, and magis persuadeor etc. I am more persuaded that soon after the
dispersion of Nations at the Confusion of tongues, Noah's Sonns and Offspring
came and inhabited that part of the world, and Jo. de Laet orig. gent. page 7.
ego autem Iudice, I am of opinion that we are not to think America to have bin
peopled not above 500 or 1000 years since, but forthwith after the Confusion
of tongues; now the Flood was Anno mundi 1656. and the confusion of tongues
about 140 years after, as I have laid down before.

In Genesis the 9. v. 28. It is said, that Noah lived 350 years after the Flood.
So Noah had so many years of his own life to bestow in repeopling and
replanting the Earth. It is held that Noah came not to Babylon, nor was party
to the arrogant attempt of the building of Babel, and if I er^e, libenter ^r^o,
I am willing to err, to think that as God pleased to make Noah the maine stock
and restorer of mankind, so also he allowed him convenient measure of time to
see the work of the repeopling of the world in a good forwardness, for he
lived till Abraham was 57 years old, and died as Functius says, postquam
totus fere orbis babitari caepisset.

And if there were a Fret or Straight betwixt the two Continents, though
certainly very narrow, and yet a necessity of passing over by boat, ship, or
other vessel, we may assure our selves that at the time of the said Captivity
of the ten Tribes, and long before, ships* and shipping were well known and in
use; for Jason about Anno mundi 2740 (which was above 500 years before that
Captivity of the Ten tribes) sailed out of Greece, and performed his expedicion
for the Golden Fleece unto Colchis in Mengrelia at the bottom of the Euxine,
and about 20 years after Ulysses performed his travailes all about the Thuscan
Sea, the Adriatique or Gulf of Venice, and the Grecian Islands in the
Archipelago; And Solomon to Ophir (An. Mun. 2970) hundreds of years before the
Captivity aforesaid.

And besides what I find argued by that learned and Judicious Brerewood* that
the Americans are the race of the Tartars, wherein (should I recede from my
former argument and opinion, I should concur with his) he much presses one
reason from the known discovery, that the West parts of America next to Asia
are (by a fit implication from the more general, ancient, and constant
confluence of the Tartars out of Asia) the most plentifully peopled of any part
of America, where they have the best records of the series and succession of
their Kings, and where are to be seen goodly buildings, and magnificent
monuments of Antiquity, far exceeding and excelling all other parts of the West
Indies, all which also rather proves and confirms than confutes my former
arguments.

There was another Dispersion of the Jews from the passion of our Savior, but
that was only of the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin who were harassed and
canvassed by the Romans after the expugnation of Jerusalem, and we gather from
history that those Jews were most scattered West, North, and South into Europe
and Afrique, but from thence we cannot ground any plantation of America.

If the Jews had gone over into America, by themselves, or with the
Tartarians, then the commixture of Nations would have produced a diffusion of
promiscuous and medly manners and customs, and the more Jews the deeper die
and influence of their rights and customs had also pierced and possessed those
parts, and with it an inundation of the peoples rights, customs had also
followed and overflowed, but we see they differ toto caelo, as appears by
Acosta, Maffeius, Pe. Mart. Jo. de Laet and others.

Thus far have I offered my weak conceptions, first how America may be
collected to have bin first planted, not denying the Jews leave to go into
America, but not admitting them to be the chief or prime planters thereof: for
I am of opinion, that the Americans originalls were before the Captivity of the
Ten tribes, even from Sems near progeny (of which I have spoken enough already)
besides that from the Confusion of languages, to that Captivity, there is a
distance of about 13 or 1400 years, which is time sufficient for the
plantation of America out of Asia before the Captivity.

Now I come to enquire into the harmony and agreement together of the Jews and
Americans, in manners, customs, language and religion.

The First instance of the first Conjecture which the Author Conject. 1.
notes, is the Americans acknowledgment; but to this Acosta (who lived 17
years in the West Indies, and travailed all the Country over as he says
himself) tells us lib. 5. cap. 25. that what the Americans talk of their
beginning is nothing worth, and rather a dream than any likelihood of a true
story, nor will the weight of his experience, learning, and integrity, be
overpeised by any.

The Second Conjecture is raised from rights and Conject. 2.
customs, whereof the Author has made a distinction of Common and Sacred, and
given a select list of both, which are his chief lifeguard.

And First of Common rights. The First is from their garment or Mantle which
the Cust. 1.
Americans use, as the Author, so also Acosta confesses to be a square coat or
cloak as most single, simple, and less charge, and no more peculiar to the
Jews or Americans than to any other Nation, and is the same with Elias Mantle,
and such as we read of in Diodorus, used by the Chaldeans, and in Herodotus,
by the Egyptians, and such as the very Irish wear, though of a thicker
substance, because a colder Country; and reason shows it is the most proper
and ready garment for any Nation in an ho^ clymate, and where the people have
any modest sense and shame of their own nakedness.

They constantly anointed their head, as the Jews did, Cust. 2.
Luke 7. and 46. This Pharagraph must be thus conceived and apprehended to be
the Authors meaning, that they constantly, that is daily, usually, and very
often, as the Jews daily, usually, and very often did; Or that in such manner
as the Jews did sometimes, So the Indians did daily, usually, and very often,
anoint their head.

In the old Testament we read of two manner of Annointings, the one Sacred or
Holy, the other Common or Profane.

The Sacred or holy oil or Anointing is that we read of Exodus 22. being a
very sweet perfume, the confection or composition whereof was directed by God
himself, and he appointed that the Tabernacle, and all the instruments and
vessels thereof should be anointed therewith, and Aaron the Priest and his
Sons, as v. 30. And what Hannah spoke 1* Sam. 2. 10. He will give strength to
his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed, and what else the man of God
said to old Ely, v. 35. of the same Chap. insinuates either a declaration of
the manner of Inauguration of Kings among the Gentiles, whereof they had heard,
or they spoke it prophetically by application of what they heard Moses had told
from the mouth of God, Deuteronomy. 17. touching the election and institution of a
King among the Israelites, which was after verified in the Kings of Juda, etc.
who were anointed with the same holy oil, as we may read at large of Saul,
David, Solomon etc. and as the prophet Elisha was anointed, 1. K. 19. 16. all
which was with oil powered upon the head, and therefore Luke 6. v. 46. Christ
says to Peter, Mine head with ^yle thou did not anoint, but this woman has
anointed my feet with ointment; as if he had said, I that am the truly
anointed of the Lord, King, Priest, and Prophet, and should have had oil
powered upon mine head, as was upon Aarons, David's, and Elishahs, such cost you
were loath to bestow upon mine head, and you see how freely and joyfully she
has bestowed it upon my feet.

The first place in Scripture where we read of Anointing with oil, is Genesis
28. 18. where it is said that Jacob (when his Father sent him on wooing) in his
travail, having slept all night upon a stone for a pillow, and dreamed of the
ladder to heaven, and of the wonderful promises of Gods blessings to him
revealed in a vision, he was so ravished therewith, that he brake forth into
these expressions of Admiration; Surely the Lord is in this place; How
dreadful is this place? This is none other than the house of God, this is the
gate of Heaven, and he builded an Altar there, and called it Bethel, and vowed
a vow, and took the Stone (implying the same stone whereupon he slept, and
that rather than any other, because in his rest upon that Stone he had that
glorious apparition) and powered oil upon it, which doubtless was no other
than such as he carried with him in his travail for his own refreshment, and
which though he used as partly for food (as the widow of Zarephath 1. K. 17.
12. and as we eat it with fish, Salades and Herbs,) so also to supple his
joints and tired Limbs (as 2 Chr. 28. v. 15.) yet he thought it not too
precious so to be bestowed, whereby to make the Stone look smooth, cheerful
and shining, as also to preserve it from frost, rain, and the injury of
weather, as we do metalls, wood, stones, (of more than ordinary use or
esteem) that stand abroad, and in open air; and although this was before the
giving of the Law, yet I take this to be an anointing dedicated to Gods
worship.

The other which I call Common or Profane anointing may be subdivided, and
severally branched, and to begin with the best and highest, I surpose some were
of most sweet and odoriserous sent and perfume by the confection and
ingredients, as when they buried Asa it is said, Chro. 2. 16. 14. that they
dressed him unguentis meretriciis as Jerome renders i^, with wanton,
Harlot-like, and delicate oils and ointments, as the Harlot Prove. 7. v. 15.
invites to her bed perfumed with Myrrh, Aloes, and Cynamon (two of the
incredients of the Holy oil) and such was the oil in Ruth 3. 3. and such were
the odours to which allusion is made 1. Cant 3. 12 4. 10. 14. and Amos 6. v. 6.
and which Judith used when she dressed her self for the surprise of
Holophernes, and I hope I shall not err to suppose and say that such oil it
was that Jesus feet were anointed with, for she that bestowed it was Mary
Magdalen, mulier peccatrix, a ^inner, an old wanton, that was provided happily,
or else knew soon how to provide costly and curious perfumed oils and
ointments to invite delight, but now a Convert, and as she first anointed his
feet with what she was wont to anoint her self withal, so her hair (which
she was wont to embroider, dress and curl with all curiosity, wherewith to
catch, ensnare, and entangle beholders eyes) she now makes a towell or napkin
wherewith to wipe and dry up the tears that she first washed his feet withal,
and after anointed his feet with that oil which I take to be such as is
mentioned Mark 14. 3. a box of oil of Nard very precious, which unguenta
spicata Galen reckons inter Rom^norum delicias, among the delicacies of the
Romans, as Apronius caput et os suum unguento per fricabat. Cicero in ver. 5.

There was another anointing with oil, to cheer, comfort, and exhilarate, and
to look smooth, fair, and fresh, as David Ps. 104* 15. oil to make him a
cheerful countenance, and as he anointed himself after his grief for the
death of his first Son by Bathshe^a. And as Pro. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume
rejoice the heart, and Athaeneus lib. 1. says that Democritus the Philosopher
of A^derites (being demanded how a man might live long) answered, si exteriora
oleo, interiora melle irriget, to anoint outwardly with oil, and inwardly
with honey, as one says, unguenta non voluptatis tantummodo, sed and
valetudinis causa usurpantur, and such anointing is mentioned Mat* 6. 17. When
thou fastest anoint thy head, etc.

There was another use of Anointing, which was to supple and refresh the
sinews, joints, and muscles, as Psalm. 109. Let it come like oil into his
bones, and Mich. 6. 15. Homer both in his Ilyads and Odysses speaks often of a
Custom among the Grecians of bathing or washing in the morning, and after
anointing with oil; And Athenaens lib. 1. Deipnos gives a reason, for bathing
is wholesome, but makes the skin harsh and rugged, and oil makes it soft and
smooth again; And Thucydides says, In gymnasio Lacedaemonii corpora nudarunt,
and oleo perfuderunt, the Lacedaemonians at their feats of exercise bared their
bodies, and then anointed them with oil.

Exercent patrias oleo labente paaaestras.
Nundati socii -- virg.
Aenead: and Oleum quo superunguntur Athletae ad adjiciendum Robur Ceroma
dicitur, says Seneca, the oil wherewith wrestlers anoint themselves to get
strength is called Ceroma, and Plutarch in this Alexander says, that the Gods
bestowed oil upon men for refreshment after weariness and labors.

There was another Anointing with oil mentioned in Scripture, which was of
such as were sick, as Mark 6. 13. Ia. 5. 14. that was a Power given by Christ
to his Disciples, which was not from any express receipt, or cure, but only
for a sign and earnest of Spiritual health, and cure of the Soul, as were
many other miracles done by them; this manner of anointing lasted as long as
the gift to work miracles lasted Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Math. and Aust. de vera
religione cap. 15. both confess that they were vanished before their times,
and from that primitive use the Papists have extremely translated it into a
Sacrament.

Other Anointing than what I have here mentioned, I find not in use among the
jews, save that in festis solebant Iudaei caput oleo ungere, upon their
festival days the Jews used to anoint their head with oil, which was no
other than that, because upon those high and great days they were more
public in their meetings, and assemblies, therefore they anointed themselves
both to smooth and cheer the countenance, and to please by sent and perfume;
And their head rather than any other part, both because the hair would better
lodge and retain the sent* especially also being preserved warm with an hat or
covering, and because when men are together in ordinary conference and
discourse, the outward seat of the seat of smelling (which is in the nose a
member of the head) is nearer the object of delight, as they talk nearer, and
their heads are nearer together by the salutations of kissing or embraceing,
and so they contribute pleasing odours and perfumes to the delight of one
another.

Of all this that is said which is of odoriferous and sweet oils, nothing
makes for the scope of the Author to the use of the Indians, who never anoint
to the purposes aforesaid; but as they prefer the dark and tawny complexion, so
they love to adulterate the color of their hair. So in Florida, and some parts
of Brasile, they anoint themselves, their skin with oil, ut nudam cutem, etc.
to crust, harden, and defend it against the scorching of the Sun, but of the
anointing of the head, I read no custom among them.

They pride themselves with Earings, and have their noses Cust. 3.
bored through, with Jewels hanging at them, as we read in Esaias 3. v. 20. 21.
I confess the Earings in use among the Americans, as was in Esaias, and is with
us, and all Europe over by perforation.

Auribus extensis ma^nos commisit elenchos -- Iuvenal. li. 2. sa^. 6. but the
Nose-rings in Esaias were only naso impendentia, hanging down upon the forehead,
as was most in use among us in late memory, but the Americans bore the sides of
their nostrills through to hang their Jewels at; And so their lower lips also
for lip rings; but I forbear to quote authority thereof, being confident of the
readers consent and satisfaction in so clear a matter; In the (...) let us
observe and an^^i^ (...) ^^ane time Iewe^ (...)e negative command to the (...),
^evit. ca. 19. v. 27.

In ^ll India they wash themselves often, and the Jews were Cust. 4.
frequent in this, Mark 7. 3, 4. Io. 2. 6. To say they wash themselves often,
must implie, they wash their bodies often, and such washing the heat of
Brasile, and other hot Clymates require, and such washing may also easily and
often be done by a people going almost naked, and so with small and little
labor to dress, and undresse; but the washing of the hands before meat
(quoted out of Mar.) was with the Jews, as with us, a common practice before
meals, but otherwise of the washing of the body; and that quotation out of
Mark, etc. is only a note of the seeming outward purity, and cleanenesse of
the Pharisees, and their ceremonious strictness, putting and placing religion
in opere operato, and the form of Godliness, for they washed before meat, at
meat, upon drinking, pledging, changing of Pots, Glasses, etc. and therefore
(for their several often and frequent uses) they had in their diningroomes
great pitchers, or vessels of water, ever in readiness, as at the marriage in
Cana. Io. 2. But the Americans wash their bodies often to cool themselves, and
to wont and accustom to the waters, they practicing very much swimming, in
fishing and diving, but Io. de. Laet. Ind. occid. lib. 15. cap. 2. says, the
Brasilians (one of the largest provinces of all the West-Indians) eat their
meat illotis manibus, with unwashed hands; And Purchase America cap. 5. says,
the Brasilians wash not before meals, and in his treatise of Nova francia cap.
8. he says, they wash not at meals, except they be e^ceeding foul, and then
they wipe upon their own, or their dogs hai^es; and whereas Lerius has a
nonnulli that wash before and after meals, this denotes but a few, and admits
the generality not to wash; as for the Levitical law of washing, that respected
only clensing after supposed pollution by touching of unclean creatures, and
other defilings and contamination, and contrary to Gods express command,
whereas the question with us rests only in a voluntary, and national use
and custom; yet for washing before meals, it is a common use among us, and
other countries, who are any whit civilized by commerce, and so Linschot says
of the Cambians, Goans, Peguans, and Bengalans. I could here relate of the
sundry superstitious particulars of the Pharisaicall washings, as the Jesuis
Serrarius quotes them out of the Rabbis, enough to pose all America.

They exceedingly delight in Dancing, etc. Cust. 5.
This is so cheap and prostitute a custom all the World over (and must needs
be most among naked people) as inopem me copia fecit, if I should begin to
exemplify, I knew not when to end. It is a ravishment of the Intellectuals,
with an high content of fruition or near hopes, which the soul breathes forth
by her ministers the faculties of the body in all light volatile and aerie
motions and activities.

The Jews were wont to call them Fathers and Mothers that Cust. 6.
were not their natural Parents; so the Indians, etc. This assertion is not
exemplified by any quotation of Scripture, how, and in what manner, and measure
it is intended, or extended; for the words Pater, Matter, have sundry other than
natural significations, and in many of them the same words are in use among us.

In America they eat no Swines flesh; it is hateful to Cust. 7.
them as it was among the Jews. Lev. 10. 7. Perhaps the Americans might have
that custom from the Tartars, as Sigism. Baro cap. de Tartaris says, Ab equis
and aliis animalibus quoquo modo interemptis suaviter vescuntur demptis porcis;
they feed deliciously upon dead horses, or any other carrion whatsoever
(howsoever killed) except Swines flesh. So did also the Egyptians, Arabians,
Scythians, Samoedes, who never descended from the Jews or Israelites, yet the
Egyptians tempore plenilunio suilla carre vescuntur, says Herod. lib. 2. The
Egyptians eat Swines flesh in the new Moon: And Jo. de La^t descrip. Ind.
occid. lib. 15. cap. 2. says of the Brasilians, carnibus and piscibus
indiscriminatim vescuntur, neque ab immundis animantibus abhorrent, the
Brasilians feed upon all manner of Fish and Flesh, and make no difference; nay
they abstain not from unclean creatures; by which he may be thought (without
any over-strained presumption) to mean Swine; for lib. 10. cap. 19. he says of
some parts of Virginia, aluntque multos porcos, they bring up many Swine (which
we must understand for food, if he assign no other cause) And so page 413. he
speaks of the people of the Sichi in Peru, Aluntque multos porcos, qui omnium
Peruvianorum optimi judicantur, they breed many Swine, which are counted the
best of all Peru (which must intend the best for food and meat.) And the
Epistles of the Jesuit Ni. Duran. printed 1636. says of the people of
Paraquaire (right West of Brasile) Sues habent quibus vescuntur, they breed up
Swine, and feed upon them; and Pet. Mart. Dec. 2. cap. 9. and 3. cap. 7. sales
they have Swineherds, and herds of Swine, and the Swines flesh is commended by
the natives to be wholsomer, and of a better taste than their Mutton: And of the
Chinese in Asia over against America, Maffeius lib. 6. says, caro suilla
maxim expetitur mensis, no greater dainties at their table than Swines flesh:
And Hierome adver. Vigilant. To. 2. says of Jovinian, Inter Phasides and
carnes suillas non tam amisit spiritum quam eructavit; and Lucian in his
Saturnals, and Pliny, both say, that Swines flesh was a choice dish at Feasts.
And though by the Leviticall Law Swines flesh was forbidden, being one of the
creatures that divided the hoof, but chewed not the cud; yet we read that the
Gadarens (in the Tribe of Manasseh) had an heard of 2000 Swine drowned with the
devils in the Lake; and we may presume to suppose that the Jews in the other
Tribes had swine also, and may conclude, that they bred and brought them up for
their own food and spending, or for the markets of other people near unto them.

They wash strangers feet, and are very hospitable, and Cust. 8.
this was the known commendation of old Israel. Most of all the Americans (as
our authors report, and must be true in nature) are fearful, jealous, and
inhospitable people toward all strangers, whom they suspect to come to invade,
or annoy, or expel them; and if in any place where they are subdued and
civilized, they washed others feet, it was not an occult quality inherent from
the Jewish race and derivation, but a trite use, and custom of their own
barefoote experience, and afterward (as bonum signum a mala causa) became a
practice in seeming courtesy toward others where they were subdued.

In the ^8 of Genesis 4. Abraham says to the three Angels that came in humane
shape unto him, Let a little water, I pray you, be brought, and wash your feet:
Here Abraham offers them water, and wills them to wash their own feet, as best
knowing, not where the shoe, but the want of a shoe pinched them most; of
this we may read Genesis 19. 2. and 24. 32. and 43. 24. Judges 19. v. 21. and
sundry other places; and in hot countries people went barefoot, and used to
wash their feet for refreshment after surbaiting, or solebaiting, and weariness
of travail; and this washing of feet was a special remedy to unweary them,
as Calvin calls it in the French, Delasser.

Homer in his Odysses does often mention the hospitality of washing of feet, as
Polycaste Nestor's daughter washed Telemachus feet, and Ulysses when he
returned home after his long travailes, and was not yet discovered, he refused
to let any woman wash his feet, (...), nisi aliqua vetula, unless there were
some old woman; and Plavus in his Persa, ferte aquam pedibus, bring water for
the feet.

But the quotation as of the known custom and commendation of old Israel,
cannot suite much with any practice of the Americans.

In the 13 of John we read of the greatest Master that ever was, that he washed
his servants feet; but this was no custom in Israel or Judah, nor was ever
done by any of the Sachims or Casiques in America; and here the proffer of
Christ to Peter was of so unspeakable condescension, as Peter (in an angry
modesty, and bashful indignation, ver. 8.) told him he should never wash his
feet, that is, as the Centurion said to Christ, I am not worthy thou should
come under my roof, can I have that brazen-faced boldness and impudence to
permit thee (so far exceeding and excellent above all mortal men) to perform
so mean an office to me, the meanest of men? but Christ soon cooled and
converted him in the same verse: If I wash thee no^, etc. Here our Savior
teaches his Disciples humility, and brotherly love, as ver. 14, 15, 16, 17. and
(as he draws nearer to his passion and parting) dictates and inculcates those
things to them, that should be their practice to his glory, and their eternal
comfort.

The Indians compute their times by nights, and which Jo. Cust. 9.
de Laet confesses they had from the Hebrews. Grotius alleging Hunting,
Computation by nights, Washing of new born children, and Dicing to be in use
among the Americans, and to have been used also by the Germans; Joh. de Laet de
orig. gent. answers, or observes upon it, and says, that Hunting was as common
to other people, especially the Scythians; so also Computation by nights
familiar to many Eastern people, which they had from the Hebrews, and therefore
the author does a little impose upon the reader herein; for de Laet does not
say that the Indians had them from the Hebrews, but that many* Eastern people
learned that computation from the Hebrews, and the Indians might have it from
those Eastern people.

The Athenians began their day at Sunset, so did the Jews, and so did the
Gauls in Caesar's time, who Coment. lib. 6. says, Galli^se omnes a Di^e
prognatos dicunt, ob eam causam spatia temporis non numero dierum sed noctium
faciuntur; the Gauls say they descend from Pluto, and therefore compute their
time by nights: And as the Americans fear Pluto, Dis, the Devil, the God of
darkness most, so their stupidity and ignorance may justly give the Night
precedence in their computation of time; and although we will not forget our
own usual reckoning by nights, as Sevenight, Fortnight, yet we offer not to
strive with the Gauls for the petigre, though Seeing, we will not see, and are
blind, though we have had a long Sunshine; We reckon also by months, as the
Jews did, though in neither are we the more Jewish; In Cuba they reckon by
the Sun, and say so many Suns, as Pet. Martyr Dec. lib. 4. cap. 8. I could
perplex this question yet more, but non est tanti, It is not worth the labor.

Virginity is not a state praiseworthy among the Americans, Cust. 10.
and was a bewailable condition among the Jews, Judge. 11. 37. The prophecy and
promise of our Saviors coming in the flesh, was an encouragement to marriage
among the Jews, which made the condition of Iephtes Daughter bewaileable,
because her hope was quite cut off, her Father having dedicated her to God in a
single life, not sacrifised her by death (as some would have it) but unforced I
thrust my self any further into that disquisition; But when Christ came into
the world, he conferred the greatest honor that ever was upon Virginity, by
being himself born of a Virgin, himself living and dying a Virgin, and the
great commendations we otherwise have of Virginity, are most plentifully set
forth both in the old and new Testament; So as the very Elect are called the
Virgins that follow the Lamb, Revel. 14. 4. and the Fathers call it the
Angelical State, and condition; And if Saint Paul be Canonical, he does
satisfy us to the full; And Acosta lib. 6. cap. 20. says, Virginitas quae
apud omnes mortales in precio and honor est, apud hos Barbaros (speaking of
the Americans) vilis and indecora, and a little after, Virginitas quae ubique
gentium maximo and prope divino honor ^fficitur, inter belluas dedecori and
infamiae est, Virginity which is honored all the world over (among those
barbarous people, and no better than beasts) is a shame and disgrace, and
basely esteemed. And it cannot be expected (upon a near inspection into that
Nation) but that it may the sooner kindle lust, and the more easily and
speedily inflame to execution; and principally from their heathenisme, want of
Civility and Religion, having (as the Psalm. says) no fear of God before their
eyes; as the Malabars in East India, who think if they die maids they shall
never come into Pardise; but I am sorry to read the Parallele, and that the
allusion of the lamentation for Jephtes Daughter should be quoted to
countenance the bawdinesse of these beastly and barbarous people, so contrary
to the Law of God, by Moses, Levit. 19. v. 29.

The Natives marry with their own kindred and Family, Cust. 11.
this was Gods Command to his people, Numbers 36. 7. While it was Gods command
it was to be obeyed, and though Ipse dixit, that God said it, had bin enough,
yet God may be thought to have commanded it for increase of people among his
own children the Jews, and that increase not to be seduced or endangered to
Idolatry by entermarriage with Idolaters; Chrysostom. upon Matthew frames another
reason, which is, that because death was among the Jews a punishment that went
nearest the heart, and then especially the loss of a husband to a wife must be
most grievous and insupportable, therefore there could be no such mitigatory or
lenitive of sorrow to the widow, as to marry the husbands brother or near
kinsman, whereby the first husband seems in a manner still to live, and the
estate to continue in the same stock, but that law after vanished, and as
Austin says, Commistio sororum and fratrum quanto fuit antiquior compellente
necessitate, tanto postea facta est detestabili^r religione prohibente, and I
hope those marriages were ceased and laid down long before the Captivity under
Salmanasser.

We must consider the curse upon Cham gazing upon his Fathers nakedness, and
Valor. Maximus says that apud antiquos non erat fas filium simul cum patre
balneari, in old time the Son was not suffered to be seen bathing with the
Father; and Aristotle in his Hist. Animalium, tells of an Horse that having
covered a Mare that was his own damm, after he perceived it, he brake his own
neck down a precipice, with horror or shame of the fact; be it true or false,
the story is a divine beam in the Philosopher; but these Marriages among the
Americans, derive partly from their own brutishness, partly from their
heathenish policy for safety and assurance in the confidence of their own
safety and kindred, and being in many parts a Nomades, a wandering, fleeting,
and removing people up and down in hords from place to place, and studious of
numbers and faithfulness for strength and preservation from enemies and
danger; yet Pet. Mart. lib. 7. cap. 10. of the Islanders, They have as many
Wives as they please, saving of their own kindred: And Hierome in his second
book against Iovinian says, Persae, Medi, Indi, and Ethiopes, cum matribus,
aviis, filiabus, and neptibus, copulantur; lie with their Mothers,
Grandmothers, Daughters, Neeces.

The Indian women are easily delivered of their children Cust. 12.
without Midwives, as those in Exodus 1. 19. This place of Exodus Hierome
translates, obstretricandi haben^ facultatem, that is, the Hebrew women are
skillful in Midwifry; but because the office of a Midwife is of a another
person distinct from the woman travailing, who cannot minister to her self as a
stander by, therefore the translation seems to me improper, not that mine
ignorance in the Hebrew can judge it, but because I find it otherwise rendered
in sense by sundry other learned men; Vatablus says the Hebrew women were
vegetae, Tremellius, vividae, Pagnine, valde roboratae, the Italian, gagliarde,
the French, vigonrenses, the Spanish, robustas, our English, lively; which word
carries enough of skill, slight, devise, art, ingeniosity; but to come more
close to the question.

The danger and difficulty of women in Childbirth, is a curse entailed upon
Eve, and all women kind ever since, for tasting and giving Adam the forbidden
fruit, In sorrow shall thou bring forth: Rachel had an hard travail of
Benjamin, and dyed of him, and Phinehas wife of Ichabod; Moses does not of
himself say, that the Hebrew women were easily delivered, as if it were a
national and natural promptness and facility; but he says, the Hebrew
Midwives (being charged of Pharaoh to destroy all the Male children when they
saw them upon their stools (which insinuates they had the usual travail and
help of other women) the Midwives who feared God, and for that reason spared
the children) excused themselves by saying, the Hebrew women are lively, and
easily delivered before we come at them; so as nothing is proved of the Hebrews
facility of childbirth above other women.

And we may further (without presumption) suppose, that when God intended so
miraculous a preservation and increase of the Israelites, he might (by his
power) facilitate the travail of the women, and give them more easy
deliverance for accomplishment of his own great design and purpose in that
particular.

Now it is a vain and empty cogitation and argument, to say that the Hebrew
women (having understood of Pharaoh's command) raised themselves to the highest
pitch of spirit, and uttermost strength of nature, and sphere of activity to
their own deliverance in that great combat, and for preservation of their issue.

Besides, although we must grant that in nature (yet not to give a law alike to
all constitutions and frames of body, which severally may recipere majus aut
minus, and differ one from another) the danger, and danger is great in the
travail of women, and childbearing; there being but unus introitus, and mill
exitus, but one way into the world, though a thousand out; yet Nature may be
helped by Custom (a second nature) and I do admit, that all barbarous and
savage people, who by their hardships of body, and nakedness, or loosnesse
(with little garment or covering, which render them always more nimble,
active, and maniable, especially in warm countries and clymates, which is apt
to dilatation, as cold is to constriction) are more able to endure, and more
ready and facile to the discharge of their burden.

I could here amplyfie and enlarge (by credible relations) of the manner and
practice of the Irish, and the help and Midwifery of their Mantles, but I spare
it; and in Strabo we read that the women in Spain go about their ordinary
works as soon as they are delivered, and the husband lies in while the woman
works; so the Tibareni in Asia Minor, and the Brasilians about the river Plate,
as Purchase cap. 4. of America.

They wash their Infants newly born, and this we find also Cust. 13.
Ezekiel. 16. ver. 19. The quotation out of Ezekiel. might have been spared in so
ancient and necessary a custom; Arist. Pol. 7. says, apud barbaras gentes,
etc. among the barbarous people there grew a strong custom to wash infants in
cold water, as the Gauls also did. and Virg. Aenead. 9. says,

-- natos ad flumina primum
Deferimus saevoque gelu duramus and undis,
Our new born babes we wash in water cold,
Naked at river side,
And use to frost and snow, to make them bold,
All hardship to abide.
And follows in the same place,

Venatu invigilant pueri silvasque fatigant. The boys do plie the chase,
And tire the beasts apace.
Which serves also exactly for the Americans, and Avicen says, festinandum ut
infantum corpuscula perluantur ^qua, and Strabo relates such a custom in
Spain, and Grotius quotes the like of the Germans out of Tacitus; yet
Mexicanis usitatum non invenio, says Io. de Laet* de orig. gent. page 37. I
do not find it used among the Americans; so some particulars as the great
Province of Mexico will not be comprised within the general word they.

In foeminine seasons they put their women into a Wigwam Cust. 14.
by themselves, for which they plead Nature and Tradition. The confession and
concession of the Author saves me the labor of any further inquiry in this.

The Widow marries the brother of the deceased husband, Cust. 15.
which was Moses Law, Mat 22. v. 24. Of this has been spoken already in part
to the 11th, I now add, Moses words are these, If a man dye, having no
children, his brother shall marry his wife by the right of alliance; the word
is, (...) of (...) a Son in Law, as in Deuteronomy. 25. 5. Moses said, his Kinsman
shall marry his wife, and (...) among the Greeks is usually taken for a
Kinsman, as in Homer and others, so (...) is, shall Kinsman it, as Beza
judiciously renders it affinitatis jure, and our english translation by the
right of Alliance, and the note upon the margent in the Geneva bibles, says
the Hebrew word does not signify the natural brother should marry the
brothers wife, but other Kinsman in a degree which might marry, as the Cosen
(as is plentifully explaned in Ruth) and so it is rendered in Valablus,
Tremellius, the Italian, French, and Spanish Bibles, though Pagnine have it
Levir, the Husbands Brother, yet the note upon the side corrects it into
Cognatus; and as Calvin in his Epistles, page 495. Phrasis est linguae
Hebraicae, etc. It is the phrase of the Hebrew tongue, to call all Kinsmen
Brothers; and hereof we may read largly and learnedly (among others) in
Zanchius de sponsal. lib. 1.

These most obscure, uncomely, and unnatural matches, let the Americans still
own, and be not once named among, or of those that were called the Children of
God, but forbidden by him to the Israelites, though in practice among the
incestuous Idolaters, as the note is upon the 18. of Levit. v. 16. as the
Persians and other Nations had a law from those Idolaters to marry sisters,
daughters, brothers, as Eusebius. de Pr. Evang. lib. 6. cap. 8. and if the Popes
dispensation be a law, the Papists have an easy remedy for incestuous
marriages, and though some of them do grant there was a fieri non debuit, yet
by the Popes omnipotency factum valet; for Princes the better to assure their
Estates, as also to enlarge and augment their power and dominion, do enter
marry with their own near kindred, and in degrees clearly forbidden and
incestuous before God, though allowed and confirmed by dispensation from the
vice-God the Pope, wherewith themselves, and their issue, and progeny (if they
have any) are all ever after deeply obliged as homagers to the Pope who gave
them their Crown and greatness, and thus they serve their own turns of the
Pope, and he his own upon them, as to omit others, may be thoroughly instanced
in the marriage of late years of Albert Archduke of Austria with the Insanoa
Isabella Clara Eugenia.

Philip the 1. of Spain had
Charles the 5. Ferdinand 1.
Charles 5. had
Ph. 2. Marie
Ferdinand had
Maxim. 2. Ferdinand, Charles, John.
Ph. 2. married Anna Maria daughter of Max. 2 and had
Ph. 3. Isabella Clara Eug.
Marie sister of Ph. 2. married Maxim. 2. by disp. from P. Paul the third.

Phil. 3. married Mary daughter of Cha. Son of Ferdinand.

Maxim. 2. had by Mary Daughter of Cha. 5.
1 Rodulph, 2 Ernest, 3 Matthias, 4 Maximili. 5 Albert, 6 Wencelaus, 7 Anna, 8
Elizabeth.
Isabella Clara Eugenia married Albert 5. Son of Maxim. 2. So Ph. 2. might
truly call Albert Brother, Cosen, Nephew, Son; and by such (political and
damnable) matches the Americans may with the Psalmist, as before, join house
to house, and land to land.

Dowries are given by the Indians, as Saul enjoined David, Cust. 16.
1. Sam. 18. The meaning of the Author is, that the Parents among the Indians,
sell or set what price they list upon their daughters, as from this quotation
the Author would insinuate to have bin a custom among the Israelites.

The word Dowry, comes from the latin Dos, and that from the Greek (...) or
(...), or the Indeclinable (...), all meaning a gift or donation, and all from
(...) to Give.

In the first ages some men took wives where they list, as Genesis 6. 2. and
Judges 21. v. 21. others had them of the gift of the Parents, as Genesis 24. v. 5.
and as Hamor said to Jacob of Dinah, The soul of my Son longs for your
Daughter, I pray you give him to wife, Genesis 34. v. 8. others bought their
wives, as Jacob did Rachel, Genesis 29. 18. and Hos. 3. v. 2. and so it was also
among the heathens.

In the first ages also, Riches and substance consisted most in flocks, and
stock of Cattle, as we may read at large in Genesis of the Patriarchs, and after
of Job, and such was the practice of the ancient heathen, as Pausanias in
Mesieri, and those cattle first for use in sacrifices, after for food and
meat for men.

We read in Herodotus, Thucidides and others, that it was a common practice in
ancient time, for rovers at Sea, to land upon Maritime parts, and to steal,
take, and carry away Virgins, and young maids, when they were playing in the
fields (as Pluto did Proserpina) and to sell them for cattle, and to steal
cattle also, and with them to buy maids to sell again, as Laertes (Ulysses
Father) bought Euryclea for (...) the price of 20 oxen, Homer, Odyss. lib. 1.
And in Homers Hymn of Venus, she tells Anchises how she was taken and carried
away.

(...)
(...) --
Which is thus translated into the latin, Virgins been d^tatae ludebamus, a
company of us maidens of good portions were playing, that is which would sell
for good store of cattle, of which name of Alphesiboeus oxen finding, we may
read more in Servius upon Virg. his 5. and 7. Aeglogues. and Strabo lib. 15.
speaks of Virgins among the Indians (...) bought with a pair of oxen, a common
practice among them*

Again Aristotle and Thucidides both tell us, that in ancient times husbands
bought their wives, which shows that in their times, It was not so, but that
then parents gave portions with their daughters, yet we read of Lycurgus (the
great lawgiver of Lacedemon) that he would have wives bring no portions, lest
the greatness of the portion should make them insolent, and so I suppose it
wittily meant by Seneca, where he says, Insolens malum est beata uxor, which
is clearly adapted to that of Syracides cap. 25. a woman that nourishes her
husband is full of reproach; and Iuvenal Sat. 6. lib 2. Intolerabilius nihil
est quam faemina dives.

Tacitus of the Customs of the Germans, says, Dotem non uxor marito sed
maritus uxori dat, by which he means the purchase of a wife, and notes it for
a difference from the use among the Romans, Antiquitus, in old time (says one)
the women ( munera quasi dotem a maritis acceperunt) had gifts from their
husbands, as (or in manner of) a Dowry, which is but a fain: expression and
resemblance; for I suppose those were but love tokens, complements and earnests
of affection, dona nuptialia, as Cicero pro Cluentio, I dare not adventure to
call them (...) with Pausanius in his Laconicks, which I translate revelatoria
as bestowed for putting off the veil, or when the veil was first put off,
which was a yellow veil ( Flammeum, as Pliny calls it, lib. 21. ca. 8.) ca^^
over the face, whereupon some Critiques bring nuptiae from nubo, (because then
the Covering is cast off) but I dare adventure to say they are such as Homer
Odyss. 8. speaks of, when Vulcan had taken Mars in bed with Venus, he chained
them together, with a curious chain which he made on purpose, and would not
loosen nor set them at liberty, till -- (...)

He were promised that her Father should restore him all his love tokens and
gifts that he bestowed on her when he was a Suter to her, and so the Father
having those gifts in his power, may not be improperly said to have sold his
daughter.

But now to press the argument nearer, from the Grounds of Reason and
Religion, None will deny that as a daughter is a charge and burden to her
parent for her diet, apparel, and maintenance while unmarried (as Paul sais,
he is worse than an infidel that provides not for his Family) so being
married, she becomes a charge to her husband, which the parent has removed
from himself, besides also the probable consequent and concomitant charge of
children, and for these reasons Vlpian (one of the Fathers of the Civil Law)
says, Dos est proprium filiae patrimonium, and Paternum est officium dotare
filiam, and this Dowry or Portion, is the just motion for a set Iointure to be
made to the wife, and this the Civil Law calls donatio propter nuptias, and as
the Greeks call a Dowry, or Portion, (...), because the woman brings it, So
they call the Ioincture (...) which is a bringing to meet it, a quid pro quo,
or a retaliation; for as the Civilian says, Dos and Donatio propter nuptias
must paribus passibus ambulare, go and march evenly and together, thus Dos or
Dowry purely and heartily taken is ( quod a parente propter vinculum and onera
matrimonii datur) that which the parent gives to knit the knot, and bear a
part of the charge in marriage, and of this we have plentiful confirmation,
both in sacred and profane story.

When Leah brought Jacob a sixth Son, she said, Now ^ath God endowed me with a
good Dowry, Genesis 30. v. 20. That is, although my Father Laban gave Jacob
nothing in portion with me, yet this my fruitfulness is enough to content
Jacob, who shall not (as David said afterward) be ashamed when he speaks
with his enemies in the gate: And that the use and practice was such, for
parents to give portions to their daughters, may be evinced cap. 31. v. 14, 15.
Where Rachel expostulates thus against her Father; Is there any more portions?
has he not sold us? That is, our Father, who according to common use and
custom of other pareuts, should have given us portions, has sold us, that is,
has paid, or given us to Jacob for his wages; though it pleased God to provide
that Jacob should have a portion with his wives, by the profit of his subtle,
natural, and philosophical experiment and conclusion, v. 37, 38, 39.

Again, Exodus 22. v. 17. If a man entice a maid to lie with her, and her father
will not let him marry her, he shall pay according to the Dowry of Virgins:
That is, she shall have a Dowry or Portion suitable to his quality whose
daughter she is, as the ability of the young man's parents may bear it. So Deuteronomy.
22. v. 28, 29.

We read that Pharaoh King of Egypt gave Gezer to his daughter Salomon's wife
in dotem, or in nomine dotis, as Hierom and Vatablus (pro muneribus says
Paguinus) and so might be still Dos profectitia (in the Civillians terms) from
a parent; this place to my sense is unfitly with us translated a Present; for
though the word might be excused toward the glory and majesty of Solomon
(though Son in Law to Pharaoh) yet it is too stooping, low, and unseemly from
a Father to his own Daughter, since the word Present, imports always on
offering from an Inferior to a Superior.

And to return again to the name and signification of the word Dowry. In the 2
Match. 1. 14. mention is made of Antiochus, that went to receive money in the
name of a Dowry; which History though it be, as Iunius says, Fabulous, and is
Apocrypha, yet the receiving of Dowry, or Portion by a man with his wife, is
Canonical enough to our purpose.

Homer Il. 6. show, that Hector called his wife Andromeda, Polydra, because she
brought him a great portion; and in his first of his Odysses, he uses the word
(...) for a portion with a daughter; and Plato lib. 6. And Laws give rules for
portions and so lemnizations of Marriages; and Themistocles (who is also very
ancient) said, Malo sponsam piam carente dote optima, quam dotem optimam
carente sponsa pia: And among the Romans, Dos magna parentum virtus. Probamque
pauperiem sine dote quaero, and -- decies centena dedisset -- huic puero, all
Horace. Vxor sine dote veniet, Terent. Nihil est quod them, Euclio to Megadorus
in Plaut. Aulularia, and there a little after, Convenisse dotis mea afferret
filia, at last we agreed he should take my daughter with any portion; and ipse
filiae nubili dotem conficere non potest, Tully ad Atticum, and Caesar Com. 6.
says of the Gauls, Viri quantum pecuniae ab uxore dotis nomine accipiunt,
tantum, etc.

Now whether Dowry be meant in the Authors quotation under the first or second
sense, I cannot find what either Saul gave for Portion, or David for
Joincture; but to attain the meaning of the place as near as I can, I offer
thus,

It is certain, that ever after the women of Israel sang David's victory over
Goliath, with an higher note and pitch of honor ten to one than Saul's, Saul
sought his life, and so Saul's proposition, as it was but a trap for David
(thinking David could never have paid the price of so dangerous a purchase) so
Saul knew also that if David quit himself, and escaped, he should have his
daughter in marriage, and ma^^ying the Kings Daughter he should want no portion
to himself, nor means of Joincture for his wife, for by his office of command
in the Army, as Chap. 18. v. 5. 13. 17. and the profits of his spoils and
victories; and this exposition, I think fits well, both to get David a portion
with his wife, and to enable him to make her a Joincture.

I hope I have sufficiently proved the antiquity of the giving of portions by
Parents to their children in the time of the Patriarchs, and under, and from
the time of giving the Law. So as I suppose the Author cannot maintain his
pretended custom of the Israelites to sell their daughters, after giving and
knowledge of the Laws for Dowries, and long before the carrying away of the
Ten Tribes, and contrary to all Laws of religion and nature.

I have also sufficiently maintained mine assertions by some of the most
ancient profane writers of best Test, and credit, and what Saul did in the
height of his malice. If the Author be desirous the bloody and Idolatrous
Americans may have leave to derive it ex traduce (for it is but a Crumme of the
maine impure mass of man's nature) I hinder not, I shall only conclude, that
as I may not deny but that in some parts of America (as in the Island of Mocha,
in the province of Chile) Proci (as one says) sponsas suas a patentibus
mercari solent, and bovem and oves, etc. pro filiabus reddere; Suitors buy
other men's daughters for wives: So I may further admit it a custom like to be
much in use among such barbarons, wandering, flitting, running, roming, and
removing people, and quit the Author from proof of usuality and custom. I
demand but to find one Parallele among all the Americans, agreeing to the
quotation, that a West Indian Potentate, Sachim, Weroance, or Casique, should,
or uses to bestow a daughter in marriage under the terms of such a promise,
with condition of Price, as Saul did (though the Americans have a number of
strange fowls) is rara avis, such a black Swan as I believe all America cannot
show or afford.

The husband has power over the adulterous wife, and to Cust. 17.
turn her away, and they have other causes of divorce, as was in Israel, Math.
8. 19. I could here mention the Athenian, Arabian, Persian, and Egyptian Law,
and the Laws of other Nations, for punishment of Adultery with death, and
other shameful separations, and I believe none of them were derived from the
Jews. In the mean time I note the Quotation is misprinted, and should be
Math. 5. 32. and 19. 9. where our Savior says, Whosoever puts away his
wife, except it be for fornication, etc. and declares no other cause of
divorce, and so no other cause was allowed among the Israelites, and de facto
ad jus non valet, etc. from fact to right is no good argument; the lewd
practice of the Barbarous Americans, is a Lawless Law, and no just cause of
divorce.

They nurse their own children, even the Queens in Peru, Cust. 18.
So did the Mothers in Israel. I believe it of the ordinary sort of people in
America but from a particular instance, avouched or mentioned by this or that
Author, of this or that several and particular province or people, we must not
fasten a belief or argument of a general national practice; In Genesis 24. 29.
Rebecca went and her nurse, and in Sam. 2. 4. and 4. M^phibosheths nurse fled
away with him. It may be objected, these were dry nurses, (as we call them) or
some women or maids that took care of them, but it is clear that of the 2. K.
11. 2. where Iehoshebah stole away Ioash and his nurse, Joash being than but
infantulus lactans, as some of the Fathers call him, a sucking child.

And although the Author quotes the Queens of Peru, yet I agree with him, that
he did not like to quote, Esaias 49. v. 23. Queens shall be thy nurses, yet
according to Nature (simply considered) I dare believe as far as any; Tacitus
says, sua quemque matter uberibus alit, every mother suckles her own child, and
what is common in nature to all, cannot be termed a particular custom to any.

Again it is the usual practice with us (except only for persons of
delicate, tender, and easy lives, and education, and curiosity of dress and
attire) to commit their children to be nursed by others, so the barbarous
people being empty of much of that cumber, acquainted and bred up in hardship
and nakedness, are evermore prepared, and ready to perform that office with
the least trouble and perplex.

The Husbands come not at their wives, until their Cust. 19.
children be weaned, such an use is read Hos. 1. 8. Though this be no true
History, but an allegorical vision (according to the best divines) yet It may
well be admitted, that for a woman that suckles her own child, to company with
her husband, and so prooving, or becoming with child again before the former
be weaned, it must needs vitiate and corrupt the milk, besides the spoiling
and exhausting the spring thereof, and thereby deprave and deteriorate the
humors, health, and constitution of the child, and for that reason, abstinence
or continence of the husband from the wife (until the child be weaned) renders
it more sound, strong, and firm; In new Spain (as some write) the children
suck 12 years. I believe the Author is not willing I should believe this of
the Israelites, yet in other places of America, the husband lies not with his
wife for two years after her delivery; so also they write of the Floridans,
but in the tenth Custom the Author has discovered a remedium amoris, a speedy
and sufficient means to quench the husbands heat when maids and Virgins
desire the honor to be deflowred, and are moreover prostitute for many years
after, even until they be married, as is the common report of sundry Authors,
touching the Americans; but the weaning of the child generally follows the
quality of the mother, the condition of her health and affairs.

Among the Indians they punish by beating and whiping, Cust. 20. Their Princes.
etc. So do all people in the world. And the * Sachims put offenders to death
with their own hands, and sometimes secretly send an executioner. Mark 6. 27.
and Cor. 2, 11. 25. The instance of the Tyrannous and cruel act of an heathen
Prince in Mar. 6. for a foul end, I may not admit to derive from the line of a
Jewish custom or Law, and so to make the Jews patrons of all the parallele
actions and customs of the Americans; Besides the putting of John Baptist to
death, was the act of a Roman Governor in Judea, and but a Deputy though a
King, and one that commanded that execution, not by custom or Law, but of will
and lust, and so Herod the Great dealt with his dearest Mariamne, and also took
off his Sons head in prison, because he did but a little overhastily seem
to think of a lawful succession when his father lay a dying. And so also
afterward was James the Apostle killed by the command of Agrippa Major, Acts
12. 1. 2.

But the Author does not illustrate out of the Scripture, of any executed by
the Princes own hands.

Nor do we read in the Histories of the West Indians, any such formalities of
question, and Imprisonment; but as we say, a word and a blow, present death to
the supposed enemy or offender.

The Quotation out of the Corinthians is very good evidence against the Author;
for mention is there made of Stoning, and forty stripes save one, both whith
Paul underwent, and were customary punishments among the Jews; but the Author
quotes no such custom among the Jews.

As for the Lex talionis cited by the Author out of Lerius, Cust. 21.
with eye for eye, wound for wound, death for death. First, it is confined to
Brasile by the Author out of Lerius.

Again, it is well known how the Divines expound that of Deuteronomy. 21. v. 19. That
talio not to be understood Identitatis, as Goodwyn, or aequalitatis, as Weembs,
but similitudinis, as both of them and others; and five considerations are to
be had of the wrong, maine, or injury (which diversity and distinctions, I hope
the Americans never trouble themselves withal) and accordingly to set and
estimate the mulct.

When the Master of the family dies, he is buried in the ^ust. 22.
middle of the house, with his Jewels and other things he delighted in, and
Josephus tells us of much treasure laid up in David's grave. Ant. l. 7. c. 12. I
deny not the custom of many parts of America therein, but for the Jews to be
buried in the midst of the house, I find no mention in Scripture; ^and for the
instance in David, I may suppose Josephus mislead in his History, and
Intelligence, therefore let us consider,

First, who may be thought to have buried that treasure.

Secondly, to what purpose.

If any treasure were hidden or laid up close, It will be conceived, that
either David commanded it, or Solomon, and we may rather think David than
Solomon could spare it in overplus, or redundance, above the treasures, which
by the Scriptures record he left to Solomon for accomplishment of the great
designs, according to the vast dimensions of the knowledge and wisdom of
Solomon's heart, as Syracides says of him, chapter 27. Thou were filled with
understanding as with a flood, and thy mind covered the whole Earth. And if any
ask how David could be so gathered and stored of wealth, It is answered, that
the fountains of his treasure were the good husbandry of his Cattle, Corn,
Vines and Olives, 1. Chr. 27. and tributes from conquered Nations, and the
spoils of his many victories, and presents from confederate Princes and
States, by all which he heaped what he could, having no divining spirit of
Solomon's future supplies from Ophir.

But I cannot imagine what either president, example, dictate, or reason,
should move David to bury any treasure in his own sepulcher, or monument, as if
he meant to count his Gold with Jobs complement, Thou art my Confidence, or
should dedicate it to Pluto, the God of Darkness, there to rest and rust
useless, and without employment, as it is recorded of Ioram, that he lived
without being desired, when Gold animates all the world to Action, and (as the
wise man says) Money answers to all.

Again, If David had designed it to serve future purposes of Solomon, yet to
bury, or command it to be buried in his Sepulcher, and thereby to seem to be
willing to carry it with him as far as he could, must have fallen under some
sinister interpretation, to the blemish of the honor of his piety.

Nor can we Imagine that though the Poets feign Pluto, the Devil, to be the
God of riches, and that Spirits, Fairyes and Hobgoblins do haunt graves and
Sepulchers, therefore as Gryphons are feigned to keep the mountains of Gold;
So David hoped that the simplicity of men would be afraid to deal with (much
more to offer violence to) the monument of his treasure, for fear of fiends or
Spirits that might haunt and keep it, though he knew Solomon's wisdom, (when
he should have occasion to use it, and he must of all men be most privy and
knowing thereof) could easily conjure those Ignes fatui, and take and enjoy
those treasures to himself.

Again, If David caused any treasure to be buried for Selomons private
supplies, and which he would have kept very close and secret, then we may not
imagine it to be buried in the midst of his house, but rather in some spare
outroome, or place, or part, and whither it might be carried and conveyed, and
where buried, with the least noise, notice, discovery or suspicion; and they
that do make a description of the City of Jerusalem, as Adrichoimimus and
others, do place the Sepulcher of David, and the Kings of Judah, in the
South-West angle, and Corner of the City, near unto the wall, and far from the
Kings palace, as may be gathered out of Nehem. 3. and Niceph Eccl. Histor.
lib. 8.

Nor can I imagine that the treasure was buried by Solomon (though Josephus
says it) in David's Sepulcher, for Solomon knew as much in Religion, and could
as well distinguish of godly and ungodly, and superstitious acts, as David
(though he cannot be excused from the great errors of his life, by the
seducement of Idolatrous wives and concubines, whom his affections Idolized*)
yet the best divines, both ancient and modern, make little doubt of his
Salvation, only the Papists (who me thinks should be the better persuaded of
him, for his complements, and courting both of his Idols wives, and of his
wives Idols) are of another mind, and yet (which is very strange) though they
know so many ways to be saved, yet they cannot find the way to be sure of it.

Now after this short wry step out of the way, I return, and say, that besides
the great uses which Sodomon had of treasure, for the glut of himself in all
worldly pleasures and delights (as he confesses of himself in the Second
Chapter of his retractations) in the flower and strength of his age, and
years, and when his stirring blood boiled toward action, and that he heard
his Glory and Wisdom cried up for the Nonesuch and wonder of the world, which
invited continual concourse to his Court; And less can I imagine that any
treasure was left by Solomon in David's Monument, for if Solomon were really
necessitated to lay great taxes upon his people, which yet I do not read in
scripture clearly expressed and charged upon him, otherwise than by Ieroboams
expostulation to Rehoboam the Son of Solomon, in the beginning of his reign;
For I pass over the tributes laid upon the Hittites, Amorites, Perizzites,
Hivites, and Iebusites, which were not of Israel, 2. Chr. 7. 8. and if Solomon
had bin in such want, he might lawfully have relieved himself, and justified
his supply, out of the great magazine of the Monument, which if amassed by
David, it was not to bar or banish his Son from the use of it, if by Solomon
himself, sure he might be bold with his own.

Besides also the considerations of Engagements toward the wars, and
insurrections of sundry Princes against him, some in envy to his glory, others
weary of the yoke of homage, service, awe, ta^es and tributes to him (when his
Sun was now grown low and in his west) all which found him work enough for the
vent of his treasure; And because also the Scripture is silent and speaks
nothing of David's monument, but often after him of the Sepulchers of the Kings
of Judah, for these reasons I cannot subscribe to Josephus, that Hyrcanus or
Herod took any treasure out of David's monument, no more than I do believe
Josephus for Solomon's magical tricks of enchantments, and conjuration, and
casting out of Decills at the Nose, by the smell of a root; Besides also that I
find confessed by Josephus, lib. 12. Ant. ca. 13. that what he writes of the
Judgment and death of Antiochus Epiphanes, others held and maintained the
reasons of Polybius therein to be of greater truth and consequence than those
of Josephus, against whom Josephus confesses that he would not argue, and
indeed he was like to get little by the argument with a man who lived and
flourished before Josephus, about two hundred years, and within twenty years
of the action, and is otherwise generally held, a man of grave and faithful
relation; and Beroaldus (a late protestant writer, and Chronologer, whom
Zanchius especially approves) does often check at Josephus, and finds faults
with his frequent errors, De. mundo ca. 3. pa. 33.
and sometimes Falsities, and lib. 3. cap. 8. he says, Iosepho plus aequo
nostri deferunt, we give too much credit to Josephus, and instances in a
particular, wherein he says, Josephus was parum cautus, immo egregie mend^x
and impudens; and Calvisius a late Learned Chronologer, says of Josephus, that
he does sometimes vacillare; and Capellus a later, says of him, that he is
sometimes fabulosae and sublestae fidei, a fabulous Author, and worthy but of a
mean belief; and our Sandys in his travailes, lib. 3. says of Josephus, a
man not allwaies to be believed.

Again, if David or Solomon had buried up treasure in a monument or Sepulcher
(of which mass we must needs suppose Gold the chief Ingredient, and that this
lay entombed in a dead sleep until Rehoboams time, when Shishag King of Egypt
came up against Jerusalem, and carried away all the Golden shields) what
inforcement lay upon Rehoboam to recrute them with shields of brass? who might
(and that lawfully) have repaired the loss in the same metal without the
least sacrilege or violation to the Manes or memory of David or Solomon,
neither of which may be intended to disherit the right heirs thereof, and to
sacrifise that to oblivion which they had gathered with so great care, and
undoubtedly meant should be kept and used for the sinews and supportation of
the State and Kingdom.

I read in the 1. Match. 1. v. 24. that about A. M. 3782. when Antiochus entered
Jerusalem, besides the spoil of the Temple, he took also the secret treasures
that he found, Thesauros absconditos', reconditos, occultos, as they are
severally rendered by several learned men, and in the next verse, It is said,
And when he carried all away; by the words secret treasures found out, It
shows there was a narrow search, which surely could not be in the middle of
the Kings palace, nor be meant of his grave or monument, both which were known,
open, and unconcealed, but rather some more occult and obscure place; and from
this expression in the Macch. of a thing done about 170 years before Christ,
and about 230 years before Josephus flourished (who was borne 40 or 50 years
after Christ, and may be thought to have written when he was about 40 or 50
years old) and which story was (at it ought to be) compiled by some of the
prime Rabbines before Josephus, he might either ( per incuriam, or from other
reason) fall a rifling of David's monument, when he was to set down Hyrcanus his
composition with Antiochus Eupator when he hired him (with a present out of the
Temple) to raise his siege before Jerusalem, and depart.

It is also considerable, that neither Josephus, nor any other Historian, says
that Antiochus pillaged the Monument of David, and I can hardly afford
Antiochus so charitable a censure, as that he (who knew not whether he should
ever play another game for that Rest) would ever spare any of that which came
to his view, discovery or knowledge, especially riches and treasure which I may
call private, and profane, and not of the Temple, whereof we may hope he had
more than ordinary reverence and veneration, for the glory, magnificence, and
Majesty of the house of God, to whose power it was dedicated, and of whose
power, mercies, and Judgments, he had h^ard so great fame and report, which
he either believed or feared, and therefore I believe he left little of secret
treasures, or those in David's Monument (to speak the Language of Josephus, if
any were) for Hyrcanus to glean^ out afterward, for it is said Antiochus
carried all away.

In Strabo I read of a golden bed, and a golden bathing tub, and other
household stuff of Gold found in Cyrus Monument in Pasargada, when Alexander
rifled it, but Curtius tells of nothing but a rotten target, and two Scythyan
bows, and a sword, found in it.

In Albania they used to bury a man's wealth with him, says Purchase, Asia. cap.
1. So also ca. 19. So also in Tartary ca. 13. And I suppose that among the
heathen people, what with the opinion of the Elysian fiels with some of them,
what of the transmigration of souls after death, with others, what with the
staggering opinions of the immortality of the soul, with others, and with most
an opinion of some work for the soul with the body after death (as in the East
Indies they use to bury a new pair of shoes in the grave, for the deceased to
travail his long journey withal) for these fancies and phenomenes in their
brain, they use to bury some of their choicest riches and delights with them,
as the Grecians do at this day their richest apparel, lib. 1. Sandys trav.
When I had begun to dig into David's Sepulcher, so many plentiful springs of
matter opened and brake out upon me, as made mine invention thus to overflow in
this discourse, which yet I hope shall not nauseate, as unpleasant or
unprofitable to read.

The Indians are much given to weeping, especially their Cust. 23.
women, at burialls, this was in fashion among the Jews, Ier. 19. 17. I may
answer, what Nation is there in the World, to whom this is not familiar? Is not
the loss of a friend grievous? Is not the last leave of him much more? Is not
the expression of sorrow, the last tribute which nature can pay in affection to
the memory of the deceased? Is not that affection the more inflamed at burialls
by a common sympathy in sorrows of the assembly? Are not women the most usual
ministers and attendants in sickness? And they that dress the body to the
grave? And are thereby most frequent at burialls? Are tears any thing else
than a natural exhalation, and ebullition (of affection grieved) from
compression of the heart, and that chiefly in the tender constitution of women,
who receive a quicker impression of passion, and retain it longer through
debility of repercussion? So that of that Paralelle, I may say with our
Savior, What went you out to see, a reed shaken with the wind?

Balsamum was peculiar to the Jewish Country, and Cust. 24.
thought to be lost long ago says Pliny, and is now found again in America.
It is true that Balsamum was a peculiar native of Jud^a, and especially
Jericho, and Josephus says the plants thereof were first sent to Solomon by
the Queen of Saba, which is in Arabia Faelix, on the East side of the Red Sea
(as Ethiopia is on the West): and extends to the South Sea all along by the
entrance into the Red Sea. It was after transplanted out of Judaea to Memphis,
now Caire in Egypt, by Cleopatra, to whom Herod the great sent it when he sided
with Mark Anthony against Augustus.

It is now found in New- Spain, and at Tolu in Cartagen^, both in America, and
of more Southerly, and several latitudes differing from Judaea.

Trogus lib. 36* says of Balsamum (in Judaea) in eis tantum regionitus
gignitur. Pliny says, lib. 12. ca. 25. Balsamum uni Iudaeae concessum, and
lib. 16. cap. 32. fastidit alibi nasci, Balsam grows only in Iudaea, and
likes no place else; but we see that confuted, though Pliny knew not what
became of it, and thought it could not be found out of Iudaea, but sure the
Balsam trees of America come of no Jewish parents, and if they did, it were but
a wooden help to the argument.

Their^ Princes, or Governors, called Sachims or Sagamos, Cust. 25.
are no other than Heads of Families, as Numbers 7. 2. The Sachims or Sagamos
here mentioned, are the same with the Paraquousii in Florida, the We^oances in
Virginia, the Casiqui in Brasile. Peru, Cuba, Spaniola (other parts of America)
and are all their Kings, and Rulers, and the same in native signification with
reges, principes or duces, Kings, Princes or Governors, and not chief of
families, as Valois, Burbon, Plantagenet, Ormond, Towmond, Oneale, etc. not
that I deny they may have right of Inheritance and succession in the
governments, from the family of which they are.

The Indians have ^osts and Messengers that were swift of Cust. 26
foot, so were among the Jews, 2. Sam. 18. 24. 26. 27. So have the French,
English, Irish, and all others, and so had the ancients their foot-Posts, and
their veredarii, or Pegasarii, their horse-Posts; In America they must have
foot-Posts, for they had no horses, and the people there must needs be of
great speed, being always almost naked, and so void of the cumber and load
of clothes, and continually practiced in the exercises of hunting, fishing,
and fighting.

Now I have passed over the first part or branch of the Second Conjecture, from
the list of Common and profane Customs, and am come to the Second branch or
part of the Second Conjecture, concerning

Sacred Rights and Customs. Circumcision primas tenet, is the leader of that
list, which S^. Cust. 1.
Acosta lib. 1. cap. 23. de nov^ orb, expressly denies to be in use among the
Americans, who have, as he says, ^raeputia Integra, the foreskin on, and
whole, and Emmanel de Moreas (who labors all he can to apparel the Americans
in the Jewish cut and customs) yet he says they would never be drawn to wear
Circumcision.

I deny not but P. Martyr and others, make mention of Circumcision used in some
places, but not generally, and so not national (as the Authors words cap. 4.
page 9. and which I chiefly oppose) Nay Io. d^ Laet. Ind. occ. lib. 4. cap. 15.
page 218. says of the Americans in Florida, nullus morbus eis familiarior quam
lues venerea* no disease so common among them as the French Pox, and lib. de
^r. gent* page 145. says of the Americans, Hae gentes proclives, etc. are all
very leacherous, and almost all troubled with the French Pox, which frets and
eats off the foreskin (a secret the Author touched tenderly) and Benzo lib. 1.
ca. 18 says, In parteolis and viridibus caenobiorum, etc. they plant great
store of Guya^um all about their Cloisters and religious houses, because of men
and women, because they are so much infected with the Pox, which is vernacula
and endemialis to the Americans, as Renodaeus in his Sassafras. And Sandys
trav. lib. 4. reports that certain Merchants having contracted to serve the
French army at the siege of Naples, with a quantity of Tunny sish, and not able
to perform it, but hearing of a late* Battle in Barbary went thither and
supplied the quantity with man's flesh so dressed, which proved so over high
afeeding, that their bodies brake out into foul ulces, and thence is called the
Neopolitan disease, and Sandys conceives that Man-flesh eating breeds it the
more among the Americans.

As for the Authors great Huge Grotius whom Samuel Maresius always Magnus ille
vir, and might be called Huge, Great, both for his name and learning, and whom
Io. de Laet calls always Clarissimus vir, yet aliquando -- magnus d^rmitat
Homerus, both Maresius and Io. de Laet do prove he may be sometime foild and
found desective both in judgment and integrity.

I know that Circumcision might be derived from Abraham to the Arabians, and
from them to the Ethiopians and Egyptians, and Herod. lib. 2. says, the
Phenicians learned of the Egyptians to Circumcise, but some write that the
Egyptian priests only were circumcised, and that none were admitted to the
learning of the Egyptians unless they were circumcised, and some report that
Pythagorus circumcised himself that he might be their scholar, and at this day
Circumcision is used among the Turks, Mengrelians, F^z, Guiney, the
Philipinaes, Benin, Zocotora, and the want of this absolute general and
constant character of propriety to the Americans, whom the Author labors to
deduce from the Jews to whom Circumcision was singularly fixed Ne^ recutitorum
^ugis inguina I^deorum. Mart. weighs down 1000 other petit, and inconsiderable
cocurrent testimonies; and where they are circumcised, says Linschot they were
taught by their priests from the Devils mouth.

The Indians worship that God who they say created the Sa. Cust* 2.
Sun, and the Moon, and all invisible things, who gives* also all that is Good.
In nova Francia they neither know God, nor acknowledge any Divine power under
the name of Religion, but tell some slight fables of the Creator of all. Io.
de Laet Ind. occid. lib. 2. cap. 12. page 47.

The Souriquois in New France have no worship of God, or form of religion,
page 53.

The Attigonantes in new France have no Law, Government, or Religion, and
worship the Devil. page 50.

They of Terra nova have no Religion or Government, and are rather beasts than
men. pa. 34.

Richerius (who went out of France with one Nich. Duran^ius a Knight of Malta
surnamed Villagognon, in his epistle page 264. of Calvin's Epistles) speaks of
the Americans, where he conversed, and says, bonum a mal^ non secernunt, etc.
they know no difference betwixt Good and evil, and such things as other
heathen by the light of nature call vicious, or not fit to be done, they
account lawful; they little differ from beasts, nor do they know there is a
God.

In nova Belgia no sense of Religion, nor worship of God, page 75.

In Virginia their only Religion is to worship every thing they are afraid of.
page 82. They superstitiously worship many Gods. page 72. They have little
knowledge of one God. pa. 92.

In Caiana (which is in Guiana) they have no religion, but worship the Sun and
the Moon. page 621. So also in Florida. 218. So in the Cannares in Peru. page
414. So also the Persians and Massagetes*

In Peru every one worshipped what he list, plants, woods, rivers, wild beasts,
what he loved or feared most, afeerward they worshipped the Sun, and built
temples, and had priests and sacrifices. page 398. 399. So also Benzo.

In Mexico they had 2000 Gods, as Gomara says, and Purchase Amer. 2.

The Brasilians acknowledge no God* true nor false. Iar. page 302. So also P.
Maffeius lib. 2. cap. 46. and so also Io. de Laet Ind. occid. page 543.

And now although the Author says the Indians, And as he would carry all
America before him with a word, yet I hope I have gotten the greatest part of
America on my side, as Mexico, Peru, and Brasile. I plead not to circumscribe
the pleasure of God who sheds the rays of his light where he list.

They knew of that Flood which drowned all the world, and Sa. Cust. 3.
that it was sent for the Sin of man, especially for unlawful lust, and that
there shall never be such a deluge again. In Peru, says Aco^la, lib. 1. Nov.
orb. cap. 25. they talk much of the Flood, but whether Noab's or some other is
not clear, Nonnulla de Noe and diluvio a patribus, etc. says Iarricus of the
Bra^ilians, page 302. and P. Maffeius lib. 2. cap. 46. So also Benzo, but all
their discourse of the Flood is so full of fables, as it is liker a dream than
any thing else, says De Laet de orig. g. page: 115. yet I am willing enough to
listen to their traditions ( ex traduce from their fathers) and will gain by
the bargain, insinuating that they were originalls from the Plantation by some
of Sems posterity out of the Ark, as I have before showed; and so they derive
the fame of the Flood.

It is affirmed by them, that fire shall come down and burn Sa. Cust. 4.
all. Josephus lib. 1. cap. 3. of Antiq. says that Adam understanding by a
prophetical spirit that the world should be drowned, and after burnt, caused
two great and high pillars to be erected, the one of Stone, the other of Brick,
and upon each of them caused to be engraven the arts and sciences then found
out, and discovered, to the end that the stone Pillar might preserve from
water, and the brick pillar from fire.

Again it is agreed by all the ancient fathers, that Pythagoras and Plato
travailed into Egypt, there to learn Antiquities, and Plato (in his Timaeus)
brings in an Egyptian Priest (who in his discourse with Solon of the world,
mentioning what novices in knowledge and learning the Grecians were) tells them
that all the world shall be dissolved by fire (which is the opinion of all the
Platonicks) So* Numenius the Pythagorean, So Ovid Metam. 1.

Esse quoque id fa^is reminisciur affore tempus
Que mare, quo coelum, correptaque regio coeli
Ardeat, and mundi moles operosa laboret.
And he remembers that the day must come,
That shall Seas, Earth, and Air to cinders doom,
And all the world shall burn, and sorely be
In travail of its great Catastrophe.
And Lucan says, Communis mundo superest rogus -- and Seneca ad Martiam, Fa^um
ignibus vastis torrebit, incende^que mortalia, and omnis materia uno igne
conflagrabit, all the world shall make but one pile, in which all mortality
shall burn, and one fire consume all; And the Sybills speak as much, as they
are cited by Lactantius, and Augustine. So we see the general conflagration
of all by fire might easily be conveyed by Sems offspring, and traduction from
Adam

They believe the immortality of the soul, and joy or torment Sa. Cust. 5.
after death, they which do no harm shall into the first, they which kill,
lie, or steal, into the last. So Champlaine says of the people of New-
France, Jo. de Laet Ind. occid. page 48. and of Virginia page 93. So those of
Caiana in Guiana pa. 642. and in Peru pa. 398. 399. So in Brasile 543. But Nic.
Duran. An. 1636* page 149. says, of the people of ^oioba, De altera vita nulla
apud eos mentis, and obstupes^unt quum de mo^tuorum resurrectione dicentem
audiunt, they never talk of another life, and stand amazed to hear any
discourse of the resurrection of the dead, and believe nothing of joy or
torment after death; and so says P. Maffeius lib. 2. cap. 46. of the
Brasilians, and so Iarricus, and of all matters of Religion, and the knowledge
of God, all the Americans both South and North of Panama, have only a slight
touch and ^as^, being all Idolaters, as I^. de La. de orig. g. pa. 159. living
rather like beasts than men, as Acosta in sundry places, and as Richerius in
Calvin's epistles page 264. as aforesaid.

The Americans have in some parts an exact form of King, Sa. Cust. 6.
Priest and Prophet, as was in Canaan. For this William Key is only cited, as
at other times often, as the Clavis or key to unlock the mysteries of the
Americans, and to regulate the inequalities of the Parallele.

What is used in some parts of America, must not be said to be the use of
America, no more than the custom of Gavelkind in Kent may be said to be the
custom of all England. I do believe some parts have Kings, and some or most
of them Priests, but I do not believe that their Kings were Priests, no more
than that the Bra^enes or Priests in the East- Indies were their Kings.

We read in Plutarch that Numa the second King of the Romans was also at the
same time the first Pontifex Maximus, and wrote twelve books of the office of
Priests, and after it became a fashion of the Roman Emperors (by Imitation
from Augustus) to have the chief authority over all the service of the Gods,
and to be called Pontifices Maximi, high Priests, as the Royality in
Lacedemonia had predominancy both in War and Sacrifices, as Aristot. Pol. 5
cap. 10.

Rex Anius, rex idem hominum Phaebique Sacerdos. Virg. Aen. 3.

Anius was both a King and Phoebus Priest.

(...), Plato in Pol. none was permitted among the Egyptians to reign, that
was not Priest; the Greeks also had their Kings, who were also their Priests,
the office of the King was primum ut sacrorum and sacrificiorum principa^um
haberet, Dion. Halicar. lib. 2. (...)* Plut. de ^^. and Osyr. and as we may
read more at large in Cic. de Divinat. lib. 1. and the Caliphs of the Saracens
were both Kings and Priests, as Paul. Aemil. Histor. Gall. lib. 4. 5. But in
America their Priests are their wizzards or witches, as Whitea^re tells in
Purchase cap. 6. of Amer. as in Virginia, Florida, Nova Francia, and among the
Souriquosians, and Attigonantes, in Mexico, Peru, Brasile, as P. Maffeius,
Iarricus, de Laet, Purchase, etc. and their prophets are no other than witches
consulting with the Devil for weather or war, or things lost or stolen, as
Musorum, and Collymarum incolae colloquiis daemoniorum familiari^er utebantur,
those Inhabitants do familiarly converse with evil Spirits. Ind. oc^i. pa.
381. and of this we may read plentifully in Purchase his America.

Pr^ests are in some things among them (as with the Hebrews) Sa. Cust. 7.
Physicians, and not habited as other men, etc. In Florida their Physicians (as
among other savage people) are Magitians and Priests, as Purch. Amer. ca. 7.
and Benzo lib. 1. ca. 26. Iidem sunt and medici and sacerdotes, their
Physicians and Priests are all one, and their Priests being wizzards, and
having conference with the Devil, are their best doctors.

And for Habit or apparel of Priests, as there is a natural awe and
reverence of a deity, or supreme power that guides and governes all: So those
persons that profess and instruct in the knowledge, fear, and mysteries of
that power, and are thought to converse more familiarly with God or that divine
power, in thoughts, studies, and integrity of life, they are had in
extraordinary esteem and veneration, and from thence are by a like natural
policy, reason* and reverence, distinguished in habit and apparel from other
sorts* ranks and professions of men, and is every where a received custom.

Their Temples are built four square, and jumptuous, as were Sa. Cust. 8.
those of the Jews, Ez. 40. 47. There is no doubt but their temples were built
of a figure and form easiest for apprehension and workmanship, and strongest
for duration and continuance, and such is the square figure; as the Cube
denotes firmness and stability; And for sumptuousness, we know that honor,
fear* and reverence, invite cost, and there is usually more of the hand where
there is less of the heart, and a belief in opere operato is an easy
religion; But God is a spirit, etc.

These Priests have their chambers in the Temple, as the Sa. Cust. 9.
manner was in Israel. 1. K. 6. 7. It may be conceived that at the laying of
the foundation of a Temple the places for the lodgings of the Priests and daily
ministers thereunto were also contrived, and set out, and the whole fabrique of
the Temple, and lodgings and chambers for Priests and officers were erected
together; for the services to be performed in the Temple, required necessarily
the cohabitation of all the ministers that officiated thereunto, as in our
Cathedralls the Bishops, Deanes, and Prebends, and other functions and offices
have their lodgings near the Church, which being considered from the grounds of
best reason and discretion, needs no illustration.

They had places therein which none might enter but their Sa. Cust. 10.
Priests. Heb. 9. 6, 7. This is a necessary consequent of the last, especially
among Idolaters and barbarous people, where the Devil has taught the Priests
how to cheat and abuse the people with variety of I^gling tricks and
inpostures, by answers and seeming miracles, secretly, closely, and cunningly
contrived, as the false door to the vault under the table in the Temple of
Bell, and a painted tongue of Iron in the mouth of an Image among the Papists,
and upon a demand to the Image, a Priest spoke through the head by the mouth of
it, while a lodestone applied cunningly behind, gave the tongue a motion as if
it had spoken, and many more such impostures of the Papists might be set forth
and declared.

In their worship of Viracocchie, etc. they open their hands and make a kissing
sound, as Job. 31. v. 27. Sa. Cust. 11.
This Viracocchie is the Great God of Peru, of whom we may read at large in
Acosta and others.

In the text quoted we find no mention of any sound made of the kissing of
the hand, no more than in kissing of it we use to do, which would be
accounted a rudeness and ill manners to ^se in England any such popysmata, or
(as Zen^phon de re equestri says, excitare closmo equos) any such popping or
smacking. Besides we see all that chapter of Job is ^ull of Rhetorical and
Allegorical divinity, per manum opera, per os locutio, so manum ad ^s
porrigere, est voci suae in opere c^ncordare, says Gregory, action is meant by
the hand, speech by the mouth: So to reach the hand to the mouth is to do as a
man speaks.

They had almost continual fire before their Idols, and took Sa. Cust. 12,
13, 14.
care lest the fire should die, they call that the divine Earth, as in Levit.
6. 9. The Heathen had their Vestall fire preserved by Virgins* at the
destruction of Troy they brought the use of it to Rome, and there also Numa
instituted it, and had Priests belonging to it, Vestales virgins ignem foci
publici sempiternum custodiunto. Tully de leg. 3. and there was a necessity of
the continuance of that fire, because of the continual sacrifices.

But I demand whether the Americans kindle, preserve* and rekindle their fire
as the Grecians and Romans did* who (if it happened to go out) they kindled it
again by the Sunbeams, reverberated from a concave vessel, upon some dry
and conbustible matter, in imitation of the first fire that came down from
Heaven upon the Altar, Levit. 9. 24. and continued thereabout 1000 years, of
which fire the report might come from the Jews to the Egyptians, from them to
the Grecians.

In their necessities they always sacrifised and burned incense, S^. Cust. 15,
16.
and then grew hopeful and confident, etc. they burnt incense, had their
cens^rs, and Cake-oblations. Ier. 7. 18. If necessity were the only cause of
their sacrifices, this seems to quench their former fire, and if those
sacrifices where the cause of their confidence, that were but brutish* so
beasts and birds crave meat when they are hungry, and so man prays when he is
in trouble, ^s David says* when he flew them they sought him, and having
sacrifised, as the Papists when their beads are over, then (like boys that
have said their lesson) they go and play, as one says truly of the Roman
sacrifices, Vbi quod diis t^ibutum erat confl^grassent ad ^pulas ipsi and
^onvivia converteban^ur, when they have burnt up their oblations, and the
Americans ^umed up their most excellent incense of fragrant Gummes* as Anime,
(opal, etc.) then they fall to frolique and feasting among themselves.

The first fruits of their Corn, etc. they offered, and what they Sa. Cust. 17.
got by hunting and fishing. The Tartars and Cathaians offer to their Idols
the first fruits of their milk, and the first morcell^ of their meat, and the
first draught of their drink at meals. So Purchase. The ancient Romans non
gustabant vina aut novas fruges priusquam sacerdotes primitias libassent, says
Plin. lib. 18. cap. 2. the ancient Romans tasted no wine or new fruits before
the Priest had sacrifised of the first in oblation; but the Author does not
prove any custom* or command to the Israelites to offer the first fruits of
Hunting or fishing.

In Mexico and other places they immolate the bodies of men, Sa. Cust. 18.
and (as the Jews of old did eat of their beasts sacrifised) they feed on
mans-flesh so offered. I expected that the Author would have attempted to prove
that the Jews sacrifised the bodies of men, but failing he makes but a crooked
parallele,

It is confessed that in the Islands of the Gulphe of Hondutas, in Co^umel and
Jucatan, and in some parts of the province of Mexico, they offer their Sons
and Daughters in sacrifice to Devils, and I hope the Author, (if happily
(after the common reading) he supposes that the King of Moab sacrifised his
eldest Son upon the wall, which the marginall note* and some learned Authors
think to have bin the King of Edoms Son, taken by a salley or ambush, but David
seems to cross that again, saying, they (that is the own parents) offered
their (that is their own Sonns and Daughters unto Devils) in the recesse of
thoughts and bottom of best reason, It cannot be otherwise, for no sacrifice
can be so pleasing to the Devil (who was their God) as that wherewith the true
God is most displeased, and as the killing of a man (who is the image of God,
and made for Gods glory, and the benefit of society) is an offense which even
nature abhorres, and of high provocation to God, much more for a parent to kill
the own child, which God has given him for a blessing, and not only by that
unnatural act to destroy that which should be dear to it, but in scorn and
defiance to God, to bestow his favor upon the Devil his greatest enemy, in a
most transcendent obedience of Impiety, must needs be most welcome and
acceptable to the Devil) and I hope I say the Author believes no such custom
among the Jews or Israelites.

Homer in the 22th of his Ilyads, represents Achilles kiling twelve young men
of the Trojans, and sacrificing them at the funeral of his friend Patroclus.
So after Polyxena was offered to paci^ie Achilles Ghost; So there were men
slain offered to Diana Taurica* as Lucan. 1.

Et Taur^ Scythic^ non mi^rior ara Dian^. We read that the Carthaginians
sacrifised their Sons and Daughters to Saturn, and Diodor. lib. 20. Antiq.
says, that when Carthage was distressed with a siege, the Priest told them
that unhappiness was fallen upon them because they offered up children which
they bought for the sacrifice, and not their own, whereupon they forthwith
slew, and sacrifised to Saturn 200 of the principal youths of the City; and
Polyb* says, that afterward Gelon (King of Syracuse) upon Articles of Peace
which he made with the Carthaginians, one was that they should never after
offer their children to Saturn. And Plau^us in his Amphitru^ calls Mercury
(his counterfeit servant) Saturnes sacrifice, saying to him Tun'me mactes
carnifex nisi formam body dii meam perdent faxo ut bubulis copiis onu^^us sis
Saturno hostia; and Plutar* de superst. says, the Galati and Scythians spare
their own, and buy other children, and fat them up (as we do chickins) for
sacrifice. So Aug. lib. 7. cap. 19. de Civ. Dei. out of Caesar's Comment. lib.
6. says, that the Gauls sacrifised their young men to Saturn; and there is
no doubt but the Barbarous and Idolatrous Americans, (without the attractive of
president, and imitation) have matter enough in the corrupt mass of their own
nature to be seduced by the grand Impostor to perpetrate so horrid impieties.

In all Peru they had but one Temple, and that was most Sa. Cust. 19.
sumptuous, besides four other places for Devotion, as the Jews had their
Synagogues besides their glorious temple. The old land of Canaan had but one
Temple, and that was at Jerusalem, almost in the midst of the Land, and a
Temple in Peru, the midst of America, seems to resemble America to Canaan; but
the Author does not say that the Temple of Peru served for all America; Again,
as the old Land of Canaan had the two Golden Idols of the Calves, the one at
Dan, the other at Beersheba (the two extremities and outmost bounds of Canaan)
for the whole Land to come to worship; So in America from Davis straight on the
North, to that of Magellane on the South, there was nothing but Idolatry
through the whole length of that great continent and part of the world; but
from Dan to Beersheba was under one power and Jurisdiction, and from Davis
straight to that of Magellane under many.

For sumptuousness, besides natural arguments of honor and reverence to
supposed deities, we may add, that they are not like to spare for any cost to
please the Devil, who will not spare to murder their own children to content
him*

The Idols of America were mi^red in a manner as Aarons Sa. Cust* 20.
was. Aarons miter was only an Hat or Cap of linen somewhat full like a Turks
Turband or Tulliband, and sat close to the head like a Cap of State or
Maintenance, with a bordure a little above the brow, wrought with crown work in
points or diamonds, some of the bordure left so long behind as might be there
tied on a knot at the nape of the neck, as the Tassell or ends of a Cypress
ha^band, to keep the Miter fast on.

E^^unic^ manicas and habent redimicula mitrae. virg. Aen. 9.

Their coats have sleeves, and their miters laces, fillets, or strings, so
also had the high* Priest among the Israelites, long and wide sleeves to his
stole, or long coat, which came down to his ancles; but to say they had it in
a manner as Aarons was, is such an Individu^m vagum, as the Reader can make
small matter of it; and I do not see but a minister (with a linen cap and a
lace turned up (may come as near Aarons miter, only the Author is ready to
collect every the least shadow of Inducement that may flatter him toward his
own opinion; but I demand where are the rest of Aarons ornaments in use among
the American Priests? though I must allow that all the world over, every
several function and trade have their several habit and accoutrements proper
and peculiar to them, and common reason may instruct several people and
nations the invention and use of the same things proper to the same offices and
occasions.

A year of Iubile they did observe, as Israel did. Sa. Cust. 21.
I demand how the Americans observed it, what enlargement and liberty of
servants? what ceasing from plowing and sowing? what profit of self-sowne
crops? what redemption and return to possessions, etc. and the like according
to the Leviticall Law? The Jews had it every 50th year; Purchase out of Gomara
speaks of some parts of America, that though they seem to have some such
pingue otium (as scholars call a full playing day) yet it is with them but
every fourth year; and this hoc aliquid nihil est, It cannot derive from the
Jews Iubile, and to fall from 50 to every fourth.

Lerius tells a story much like that of Bell and the Dragon. Sa. Cust. 22.
I believe he tells it, and may tell many more such Apocryphalls, which yet may
be true of such ignorant and blind Idolaters; but shall every fable of the
Americans, holding analogy with some tales of the Talmud, be an evidence to
convince the Americans to be of the race of the Jews? so shall we all at last
be of one Petigre; besides, to tell a tale like another, i^ out of the rank and
c^assis of Rites and Customs.

In their Idol-services they dance and sing, almost as Miriam, Sa. Cust* 23.
Exodus 15. 20. These are gestures and behaviors only to express how they
desire to make their Gods believe they rejoice in their service, and further
joy in their hopes of a blessing upon themselves, and their affairs.

In the place quoted it is said, Miriam the Prophetess, which shows that what
she did in acclamation and joy of that miraculous victory, and deliverance of
the Israelites from Pharaoh, she did it by a prophetical motion, as David
danced before the Ark, not ad petulantiam carnis, but jucunditatem Calvin.
spiritus, not to tickle the flesh, but to ravish the spirit with pleasure and
delights to Godward.

They have hopes of their bodies resurrection, and for that Sa. Cust. 24.
cause are careful to bury their dead. Of this I have partly spoken in Sac.
Cust. 5. And do add, that it had bin better they could have bin proved to live
well and civilly, otherwise I may say that some of them believe no
Resurrection, others know nothing of a resurrection, and none of them truly and
rightly, and as they ought to believe; and without such belief, I believe
little of their hopes from their burial of the dead, which I value at little
more rate than a mere common care of preservation from infection by a
putrifyed and corrupt air arising from the stench of dead and diseased bodies.

The Indians make account the world shall end, but not before Sa. Cust. 25.
a great drought, etc. and therefore they yell and cry at the sad and bideous
sight of Eclypses. In some part the Americans talk of an end of the world, in
others nothing at all, And that it shall not end till after a great drought, I
have only once read a far glimering and obscure words, and rather taught them
by the Spaniards since their conquest.

The yelling and crying shows they rather fear than hope for a Resurrection,
and truly I think so of them, for -- Deus est animus -- as the heathen Poet
said, every one has a God within himself (the Conscience) which Tertullian
calls Praejudicium Iudicii, another Paedagogium animae, another natural
Iudicatorium, another the Natures Consistory, another Gods deputy, another
Antidated day of Judgment, another a Domestique doomesday which with Juvenall
-- Surd^ verb^r^ L^dit and makes that -- ta^ita sudant praecordia cu^pa every
one is able to read the hand writing upon the wall against himself, which makes
his knees (as ^elshazzar) smite one against another.

The third Conjecture is from languages, words and speech. Acosta in his proeme
to his book de procuranda Iudaeorum salute, says of the Americans,
Innumer^b^les sunt barbarorum gentes ut caelo, loco, stitu, ^abitu, ita
ingenio, moribus, institutis la^issime dissidentes, the barbarous people of
America are innumerable, and as in air, situation and habit, so in
disposition, manners, and customs they differ exceedingly, and lib. 5. cap. 2.
ferunt, etc. they say that at the Confusion of tongues there were 72 languages,
but the Americans have 700 and more, so as scarce any champion or plain
country a little broader than ordinary, but has a several language, and of
the Tap^ians (in the province of Brasile) there are 76 Nations, and almost
every one of them has a several Language. Io. D^ Laet* Ind. occid. page 548.
Again, quot populi, ^ot linguae. Io* de Laet de orig. pa. 55. and suum cuiq,
praefecturae Idioma. page 92. and Rich^^ius in Calvin's epistles says, maxim
impedit Idiomatum divers^^as, the diversity of their language is a maine
hindrance to us, and because I perceive the Author a litttle willing to nible
at words, and to put them upon the rack (to confess to his desire) I say with
de Laet de orig. Gent. page 24. Si cui place at otio suo ^buti, If a man have a
mind* to trifle away time, he may now and then hit upon some words among them
that may agree in sound and sense with some of ours in Europe; as the Priest,
chief or leader of every company among the Samoeds was called Papa. Purchase*
Asia ca. 17. and in the Brasilian tongue betwixt the River of Amazons and
Orenoque Papa is a father. de orig. gent. page 182. and in New- Spain the
chief Priest was called Papa, as Purchase de* America cap. 2.

In the province of Cusco they call their Sisters Nanna, which among the
English is the most common name for women, and so we are like to be of kindred
to the Americans, but as Io. de Laet. de orig. gent. page 35. Si literas
mutare, If we fall a changing of letters, transposing of Syllables, adding and
subtracting, we may easily wrest some of them to our fancy as we list.

And Io. de Laet his observations out of Sagardus prove them all to be various,
diverse, and differing from one another in the several parts of America, and
in none of them any affinity at all with the, nay they have not so much as any
trace or glimpse of Letters or writing (as the Hebrews had in perfect method)
and all their languages being no other then medleys and confusions from their
original after the Flood.

The fourth Conjecture is the Anthro^o^hagie or man-devouring of the Americans.
I suppose it improper to make that an attribute or custom of the jews, which
was only an act of Exigence, and necessity of famine for want of food, as at
the siege of Samaria, 2. K. v. 25. 29. and when Titus ^lay before Jerusalem;
but the barbarous custom of the Americans is a national helluonisme innatured
by a fierce malice and fewde, whetted and edged on with (the sweetest sauce to
an angry stomach) Revenge, and so becomes an habitual practice and delight in
eating of man's flesh as Acosta says, h^manis carnibus pro sumnis deliciis
vescuntur, and Iarricus says* opta^issimae Brasiliis epulae sunt carnes
humanae, Man's flesh is their daintiest dish, for they fat up young captives as
we do capons for the palate, and in Scythia and other northern parts both of
Asia and Europe, as also in the Islands Sumatra, Bornea, and most of the East
Indian Islands, and in the Southern part of Afrique, the people are Man-eaters.
Hierome in his second book against Jovinian says, that when he was a young man
and in France, he saw Scots (a people of Britany, without indigitation, I
should have thought he meant the Scyths or Scythians) eat mans-flesh, and that
the Massagetes and Derbices, when their parents and kindred grow old, they cut
their throats and eat, as better than suffer the worms to eat them And

Carnibus ^umanis vesci licet -- says Juveal. The people that have not yet
recieved the Gospel, are Jews. Conject. 5.
It is a received opinion, and truth taught and evidenced by the scriptures,
and confirmed or subscribed unto by the Fathers, that before the day of
Judgment the Gospel of Jesus Christ shall be preached and published all the
world over, and that the Jews shall be called and converted.

This word Calling or Conversion, must not carry the sense of a positive saving
faith to all, that is, that generally all the Jews shall be converted and
saved, but only a clear convincing manifestation of the error of their
expected Messiah, and other superstitious and detestable opinions, and an
enlightening and instruction in the mystery of Christ his Incarnation, life,
passion, death, resurrection, ascen^ion and coming to Judgment, and that the
use and application thereof by faith to salvation is not (in the secret
counsel of Gods Decree) bestowed generally upon all, but only upon the elect
Arminians or Jews, otherwise the Jews who (considered in their Nation)
deserved the worse, should have a privilege of favor above all the world
beside; for the knowledge of Christ in the Gospel is sufficient, but not
efficient to the salvation of all.

Again, to have it granted, that the people who have not yet received the
Gospel, are Jews, were a cunning petitio principii, making the medium of the
Syllogism. But they Americans are the people which have not yet received the
Gospel; Ergo the Americans are the Jews.

But let Brerewoods enquiries cap. 12. be well read, consulted, and weighed,
where he makes a computation of Idolaters all the known world over, and we
shall find vast parts thereof, and many whole Nations entirely and pure
Idolaters, and such as never yet received the Gospel.

Besides those of the great and unknown region of Beach, and the South
Continent beyond the Cape of Good Hope, and streights of Magellane, which he
(most learnedly and Philosophically in his 14 Chapter) collects to be as large
as all Europe, Asia and Afrique, and all which is probably (if peopled)
Inhabited with Idolaters, yet of such peopling I should much doubt and
haesitate, if I thought any of the Jews were there, because the discoveries,
plantations, and gospelling of those people, is a work of longer requisite time
(not that I offer* to circumscribe the power of God) than may be effected
before the end of the world, wherein (If I adhere to Napiers modest, grave,
solid, and deep propositions and considerations upon the Revelations) I hope my
sober embracement shall be no just reproach unto me.

Again, the manner how the Jews shall be enlightened, instructed, called, and
converted, is further to be considered, for we are not to conceive that at the
near approach of the end of the world, all the Jews collecttive from their
several dispersions and separations, all the world over, shall be amassed
together into one body of people, or place, and so united semel and simul, but
that (though they be like ^ain for killing their elder brother, made vagabonds
all the world over) sparsim and disjunctive they shall be enlightened and
converted as aforesaid, in every one of those parts and corners of the earth
where they dwell and inhabit, in distinct degrees, series, and succession of
time, and some centuries of years before the end of the world; for as Acosta de
Proc. Ind. Sal. lib. 1. cap. 2. Familiare est propheticis oraculi^ ut tempora
etiam sejunctissima uno velut aspectu subjiciuntur oculis, deque ijs universis
pronuntient quae per parts implenda sunt. It is familiar in prophetical
speeches to set before us at once the occurrences of things far distant from
one another; and to speak of things generally and in gross, which are to be
accomplished in parts, and by retaile.

The sixth Conjecture is foom the Calamities of the West-Indians, Conject. 6.
and the analogy and proportion thereof menaced to the Jews. It cannot be
denied (to pass by all other arguments or quotations) but that the guilt of
the crucifying of our Savior, has entayled upon the Jews an ocean of miseries
and infelicities ever since* and rendered them despicable to all men, and made
them drink the dregs of the bitterest cup of all manner of cruelties, and that
in sundry parts of the world, yet all this is no evidence that because the
Americans have suffered so much, by and under the Spaniards, therefore they are
the race of the Jews, we know the Spaniard is his craftsmaster in Cruelty, he
cut off by the hand of the D. of Alva in 6 years 18000 by the hangman, besides
other murders and massacres, and the Netherlands cost him 100 millions of
money, and the lives of 400000 Christians, Raleighs Preface. But the Spaniard
having discoverd and tasted of the wealth of America, and finding that without
a total subjugation of them, and utter destruction of the Natives (who were as
impatient to be overmastred and enslaved to foreign usurpation) they could not
assure themselves of those Riches, and Wealth of America, which to hold and
enjoy,

Per fas atque nefas, infernum Acheronta movebunt,
They Will venture souls and bodies, all they have,
What they have got that they may keep and save,
And being still whetted and sharpened on with Goldhunger, their sword devoured
many Myriades of the Americans, by sundry unheard of and unparelled murders and
massacres, as we may read at large in Barth. de Las. Casas and others, It may
be the Spaniard perceiving some few apish imitations of the Jewish customs
among the Americans taught them by the Devil, the Spaniard, by the same Satan's
suggestions taught them also to derive themselves from the Jews, that the
Spaniard might have the better warrant to execute all cruelties in
accomplishment of the curse upon them.

But (to speak yet more close and home) If the Americans come of the 10 Tribes
carried away by Salmanasser (which answers to the aim of the Author) and we
grant them once settled in America, the Author shall be much posed by any
History to ship them back again to be engaged in the crucifying of Christ, and
after to retransport them into America; and if the crucifying of our Savior
entailed the great curse, It must be intended most probably toward them, and
their posterity that were actors and engaged therein; and now there is work for
the Author to prove that the Jews often passed and repassed betwixt Iudaea and
America, otherwise the Americans though derived from Salmanassers Israelites,
yet are not so nearly concerned in the cause and Curse.

I come now to observe upon the Conjectures, and from all the Customs both
Common and Sacred divisim and junctim as follows.

Whosoever reads the stories of the West Indians or (our abbreviator Observe. 1
of them) industrious Purchase, shall find most of all the commonly called
rights or customs (peculiarly assigned by this treatise to the Americans) to
be in use among other Nations, wherein besides what I have quoted out of
Purchase, I have also further illustrated from other Authors and reading.

And for the Americans to be derived from the Jews, and to Observe. 2
retain nothing of Iudaisme, or of their certain Rights and Customs, or the
knowledge of Christ (having once had it) and if they were transplanted since
his death, caret exemplo, says Acosta lib. 1. cap. 13. and further thus, how
comes it to pass (says he) that the Hebrews boast so much of their race and
antiquity, and are so sedulous and strict conservers thereof in other parts of
the world, and yet in the West Indies their race, ceremonies, Messiah, and
Iudaisme, are all clean and quite lost? and after, quid opus est, etc. what
need we say more of what they say more, all which are Inania veritatis, and
vanitatis plenissima, empty of all truth, and full of all vanity, and many
learned men say the Americans cannot make out the mention or memory of their
Nation for above 400 years.

I insist always the more upon Acosta, because I find none equal to him in
esteem and reputation, for experience, learning, Judgment, and sincerity.

Brerewood Enquiries cap. 14. says that Europe, Afrique, Asia, Observe. 3
and America are in Proportion as 1. 3. 4. 7. that is dividing the world into
fifteen parts, Europe is 1. Afrique 3. Asia 4. America 7. and notwithstanding
the greatness of America, and extent thereof, and all that is said of the
multitude of people, diversity of Nations, variety of manners and language, yet
whatsoever the Author can gather to be an use or Custom in this or that
peculiar part and place, he too loosely and largely a^^ignes, attributes, and
ascribes to the whole Nation by the great gr^^pe, latitude and extent of the
words the Americans, the Indians, They, etc.

Again, he often makes that a Custom among the Americans, Observe. 4
which is drawn from the reason of nature, and necessity, and is common to all,
as to dance, laugh and sing in matters of joy, to cry, howl and weep in
accidents and objects of heaviness and sorrow, and many such like, which
granted (as is gathered and applied) will make all the world Jews, or that
those are no distinct characters of the Jews which are used by all the world
besides.

Again, the 12th of the common Customs was indeed no Custom Observe. 5
of the Hebrews, for every Custom imports an act resulting not from the Law
of Nature and necessity, but from a liberty at first to will or nill to do it,
and if the Hebrew women had a natural facility of child bearing, that was no
Custom which was out of the power of the will; and Balsamum (which is a
natural product of the temperament and constitution of the soil and clymate)
is as improperly listed among the Customs of Iudaea or America; and the 25th
and 26th are no Customs, but common results of reason to all the world.

So also the 3, 4, 5, 22, 24, 25, of the Sacred, have very little taste or
relish of the propriety of Custom.

Again, the Author picks up some properties of the Americans, Observe. 6*
and puts them upon the rack to confess themselves Customs, which for brevity
I omit; but what was hateful and abhorred of the Jews, and forbidden of God
to be used, and yet in use among the Americans, he passes over, as Incest,
Sodomy, Witches, Wizardes, for all which they are branded of all Authors, as P.
Maffeius says, augurijs and ariolis ^d insaniam, they are starck mad in love
with their wiches and wizards, besides their Idolatries which are national,
and epidemicall.

Again, we read of the unclean and forbidden creatures, Observe. 7
Levit. 11. and the Israelites were not to eat of any creeping foure-footed
creature, yet the Americans eat Crocodiles, Lagartos, Iguanaes all America
over; In New- France snayles, dogs, their coats of beasts skins, all Carrion*
Descr* Ind. occid. page 46.

The Attig onantes eat Dogs for dainties, and fatted bears, pa. 50. In
Florida immundissimis rebus utuntur, they eat the most unclean things that are*

The Israelites might not eat any thing that died alone, or Observe. 8
was torn with beasts, as Levit. 17. 15. Nor of an ox that had killed a man,
as Exodus 21. v. 28. The Brasilians are neither troubled with curiosity nor
conscience, but eat all manner of beasts howsoever slain, and all manner of
Carrion, snakes, toades, glowwormes, and all insects, lib. 15. ca. 2. 3.

The Israelites might eat no blood; the Americans besmeare Observe. 9
and beslaver their Idols mouths with the blood of their sacrifises, and suck
the blood of their enemies.

The Israelites might not take an whore in marriage, Levit. 21. Observe. 10
v. 7. In America they take no other, for virginity is a thing not
praiseworthy (as the Authors words are) and the young women are common
prostitutes for many years until they marry. Observe. 11


The Israelites had the punishments of stoning, strangling, fighting with
beasts, whipping with forty stripes save one, etc. and many other such, which I
forbear, and of which not one word is collected and proved by the Author to be
in use among the Americans.

I might also instance in the Sabbath of the Jews, of the which Observe. 12
not one word all America over, nor of their feast of Passover, Pentecost,
Tabernacles, etc. And Acosta says, lib. 5. ca. 9. that the best governed
Provinces of America had most store of devilish superstitions; yet lib. 6. ca.
12. he says that the Devil (to the end to draw the more worship to himself)
played the ape, and imitated God in teaching them a number of Ceremonies
agreeable to those used in the true worship and service of the true God.

By what I have said, I conclude, that to much of what the Author has said, I
might safely answer with the three children in Daniel, We are not careful to
answer thee O King.

But to all I declare, that the collections of the alleged probabilities are in
themselves ^aint and lanquid, and confronted (as I conceive and hope) with so
just and clear oppositions, as they vanish and dissolve, especially being
halting and lame in the principal and mainepillars and properties that should
have supported them; for as de Laet* de orig. gent. page 35. nisi mores in
omnibus ^ut saltem in plerisque and praecipuis, etc. unless the manners and
customs agree in all, at least in most, and most material, I think but
slightly of the instances and paralleles; for had the Author had more for him
than against him, and especially of the chiefest, I should charitably have
greeted him with Horace -- ubi plura nitent -- non ego paucis Offender maculis
-- --

Of the second part of the treatise, namely the origin and plantacion of the
Americans, I chose rather to speak before in the first part, and first to
derive and give then a being, when and from whence, and after to examine them
by their Customs, whereby to show the way, and after to stear and conduct the
opinion and judgment.

In the third part of the treatise beginning thus, The humble desires, etc. five
reasons or motives are premised for Plantation out of Bodine his Method of
History, as follows. 1 Expulsion 2 Supernumerarinesse of Inhabitants 3 Want
of means and livelihood 4 Desire of enlargement 5. Favor to Prisoners.
I conceive the Author wishes that ampliation of the Gospel had led the Van,
and to that end he seems to cite the sense of the Novangles. Now to speak
freely and cheerfully, I like not the word Novangles; for though the
contraction of the word in the Latin by Honor Regius be harmless, yet the word
Novangles in English is too prostitute and subject (by unhappy cadence and
partition) to the abuse of the Authors meaning, and to be exchanged, and spoken
Newfangles, the letter v lawfully borrowing the pronunciation of a consonant;
but I proceed.

By Expulsion, I suppose an actual banishment, or proscription coercive from
the supreme power, or voluntary in fear of it.

But to speak my sense shortly (and I hope surely) I suppose the 3d and 4th
motives in especial to have been, are, and ever shall be, the perfect Pole,
and Loadstar of direction in all Plantations.

-- namque i^e per omnes
Et terras tractusque maris --
Nor Seas, nor Earth can hold
Where there is desire of Gold.
Want and Wealth perrumpere ama^ saxa -- will break through stone walls. And I
think I may answer for Bodine, that he willingly omitted ampliation, or
propagation of the Gospel, as a mere fucus and complement, and no reality of
motive from the mind of the Planters; and we know God loves Adverbs better than
Adjectives; but when, and wheresoever a Plantation is made, I am prone enough
to believe, that all Opinionists, and Inconformists to Church Government in
Adiaphorals and indifferencies, do naturally drain, and descend into places so
planted by their own gravity of self-opinion, which is nothing else but nolumus
hunc regnare super nos, we will be masters of our own consciences, and hope to
raise a Government to our selves, which to our aerie, sublime, and sanctified
spirits is no great difficulty, every one of us being able to make a better
Pope, or Archpraesul, than any other (that is not of us) a common Deacon: But
they gather none of this counsel or encouragement out of Calvin (most justly
for learning, candor, judgment, incomparable) his, or B^zaes, or Zanchius
modest Epistles, and the Rule of the Canon Law is grave, and to be approved,
which says, Things of themselves indifferent, do i^ some sort alter their
nature when they are either commanded or forbidden by a lawful Magistrate or
Authority, and may not be omitted at every man's pleasure, contrary to the Law
when commanded, nor committed when prohibited. And as Calvin says in his
Epistle, Edicta principum and magistratuum jus suum habent, and quamvis acerba
sunt, contemni illa f^s non est, nec esse privatorum abusus corrigere,
Proclamations of Princes and Magistrates have their right, and are not to be
contemned, though they be sharp and severe, and private men have no power of
reformation of public abuses.

And to acquit my self from the suspected infirmity of a causeless
prejudicatory jealousy herein, and to be truly esteemed to behold things as I
do in reality and existence (and not in fancy) I do but fairly demand the
name of any one Orthodox Protestant, conformable, and moderate Minister (for of
them I intend my speech only) either removed or removing into a foreign
Plantation, unless it be some unbeneficed or underbeneficed man, who (not
animated with a spirit of separation) goes for novelty or advantage in
attendance, and as Chaplain to some Person or Party of quality and power.

And when I consider what I have read, that one Mr* Winslow has abundantly
written, to answer and avoid this matter of accusation; it does evidence to me
that abundance of like opinions novanglice such assertions as mine have been
offered.

And I am confident, that not 4. of 40* unbiassed men will differ from me
herein.

Leriu^ tells ut that Villagagnon traveled upon a discontent with his estate,
and though he pretended to go for Gods worship and glory, it plainly after
appeared what Proselyte he proved.

Not but that I may also aver and avow, that many Lay men depart also from us,
whereof I knew some (that refused to kneel at prayers, or stand at the Creed)
that went into New England, where what monstrous births of opinions (figured
forth with a finger from heaven, by that monstrous birth of children whereof
Mrs. Hutchinson was delivered, and Mrs. Dyers monstrous child also) the
spiritual fornication of these times has produced, are to be read at large in
the Rise, Reign, and Ruin of the Antinomians in New England.

And the observations of Honor Regius (upon occurrences there) relate of Mr.
Cotton (a man and Minister of prime note, and smooth and venerable carriage and
esteem, but since, as he says, a great father, fautor, and fosterer of strange
opinions) that in Horrendos errores lapsus est, he fell into horrible errors of
opinion and judgment, and more in pertinacity of defense.

I am no Champion for superrogatory and unnecessary rules, redundancies, forms,
dresses, and impositions in Church* Government; but I heartily wish, that the
Luminaria magna, the great Lights and leading stars of the first magnitude, the
Bishops, had not been over-severe in introducing antiquated, or imposing new
Ceremonies, but had rather unstitched, let fall, and discontinued some of use,
but superfluous, and not only unprofitably redundant, but scandalous, and
offensive to weak capacities, whose judgments could not concoct some so hard,
other so fulsome matter, though perhaps palliated under the amiable and lovely
names of order and decency.

Again, for them that will tear authority in pieces, I will mind them of what
I read of Luther (a man of as much animosity as ever was) who though he
confessed that he hated Images with his heart, yet he abhorred and dehorted
from insurrection, and putting them down without authority; and as Aug. says,
Aras eorum destruetis cum acceperitis potestatem, ubi non data potestas non
facimus, ubi data non praetermittimus, prius agimus ut Idola in cordibus
confringamus; speaking of Altars in his Tract de verb. Dom. in 2 Math. To. 10.
Sermon. 6. You may destroy their Altars when you have leave or authority, while
we have no leave, we do it not; when we have, we presently do it; in the mean
time we first labor to break down the Idols in their hearts. I could cite here
much other pertinent matter out of Hieron. Socrates, Eusebius, and Aug. Ep.
118. ad Ian. He that will execute Phinehas zeal upon Cozby, etc. must be sure
to have Phinehas warrant, Privata authoritate publicum negotium gessisse
capitale esto. Platon de Leg.

In page 55. the Author gives a little touch upon the jus and right of entering
into, and settling in another land or dominion, wherein Acosta has learnedly
and elaborately handled that question, and Barthol. de las Casas, and sundry
Civilians have travailed excellently herein; but I fear there is ever more of
an inordinate desire of enlargement of wealth and dominion, than any warrant of
Law or Religion to attain, and consequently of force to maintain a possession,
and to that end- qui minor est armis- is the ratio ultima, the ever final
result and resolution, and the ergo of the Syllogism.

I know there are many Meanders and windings in this question of Plantation,
and settling in another land; and if the Commandment Exodus 22. v. 21. Thou
shall not oppress a stranger, much less shall thou (being a stranger) presume
to oppress another at his own home; and the counsel of not removing a
Landmark be well considered, we may find argument to help us; I do but now
peep into this question, and may happily hereafter adventure to tread the maze
of it; in the mean time we are not to forget what we have sometimes suffered by
the natives in the West Indies, for our invasion and usurpation upon them, and
we are now become staffeholders of a first precurious interest, and begin to
prescribe in intrusion, and an unprovoked conquest.

In the purchase from the King of Paspebay (mentioned by the Author) the best
warrant arises from the circumstances of his, and his peoples treacheries,
which subdued him to compliance for fear of our revenge, though we were first
over-bold, and busy with him without a right.

The cautions and directions which the Author gives for settling and securing
Plantations, are especially worthy of embracement and approbation; to which I
add, breviter per exemplum, example is the shortest and surest master.

-- non sic inflectere sensus
Humanos edicta valent quam vita regentis.
Laws and Edicts we do find do not bind,
Nor do bow the hearts of man,
As the great ones lives we see powerful be,
And their good example can.
I wish an increase of all happiness to the successesses mentioned in the tenth
Chapter, if the foundation be laid upon pious principles, I may promise more in
the building and progress; but I fear too much of Bol^ons white devil of
spiritual pride, and the sacred hunger of Gold (which the Americans call the
Christians God) and too much meum and tuum have over-leavened the whole lump,
and been the prime authors and actors in our plantations.

About 40 years since I adventured for the discovery of the North-west passage,
to contract our travailes and returns to, and from the East Indies; and I
confess that I embrace the innocence of such action to the fair advantage of
trading, or to a plantation in an unhabited land, with better thoughts than to
invade or exterminate natives, and by means (too commonly coarse and cruel) to
get and to keep dominion.

I confess again, that what the Author seems to commend in the Americans page
125. Desire of public meetings, and to blame the divisions and separations
that are in England, Cy^^^ius aurem vellit, is to my sense an evidence of
condemnation to the Plantation in New England, which is separated in Civil and
Ecclesiastical government from us, whereas b^i^g of us, and going out of us,
and warranting themselves sub au piciis, under the grace and favor of the
Kings of England (as the Author mentions page 78.) I suppose it more Christian
and comely, that the Judge 9. 14, 15.
plantation there should have paralleled with our Church and Government, and
not rend and tear from us by every bramblebrained noveli^t in superficial
ceremonies and indifferencies when I hope (though I confess mixed with some
fear as Phoebus said to Phaeton for the warrant of his affection, -- do pignora
certa timendo) we all hold, and retain the sheat Ancour of our Salvation in
the right use of the word and Sacraments, and faith in Christ, and such
departure I dare call an Irreligio^ity, I do not a rebellion, and dare say
with the Prophet to Naaman, Go in peace; and I read with fear and reverence
that of Calvin, Quicunque sese separant and abscindunt a caetu fidelium iidem
sese a regno caelorum abjiciunt

In the 125th page, the Author most justly reprehends the depainted, bedawbed,
(well might debawded) and debauched immodesty of women; then he proceeds to
commend the Indians to wear their hair comely as the English do, I am loath to
understand the Author that those of New- England wear their hair like those of
Old- England, who drown themselves in their dangling dresses and tresses, as
ashamed to own their own faces, -- and erectos ad sidera tollere ^ultus, their
hair all powdered, whether to confute our Savior when he said, no man can make
one hair white or black, or to give a sent that may predominate to bad and
offensive exhalations; and now that I have got hold of their locks, I shall not
let go till I have viewed and surveyed them a little more.

Their breeches with two wastes, the one reversed at the knees as big as the
other, and in all points now better furnished, and decending into the top of a
boot, dignum patella operculum, a full and fowl cover for such a dish; the spurs
jingling as the women's feet, Esaias 3. long necked, roweled not for necessity and
use in riding, but (by the impediment of those, and distention of the boot
tops) to traverse the men into a pace and posture of gentle and deliberate
going and walking, and thereby to help to dissemble some infirmities, which by
Venery, and misriding, and miswalking they have contracted, and which easily
discovered, but for their counterfit pace which these stradling spurs and boot
tops have taught them; if I err in my calculation I submit mine ignorance to
be corrected by those of more, but worse knowledge and experience.

And for their eare-wigle toes I confess the fashion and the reason thereof
such as my narrowness could never yet fadome or comprehend; I read the fashion
of piqued or pointed toedshooes in ancient use among us in England, and a law
made therein to limit them, and because the point or pike end was subject to
sink and fall, therefore they were reined up from the to^ to the Leg above the
Calfe, which from leather grew to silk, and from silk ribond to silver chains,
etc. till at last the ridiculous excess thereof was restrained, and soon after
the folly of the devise resolved it self into its dissolution.

I am not a little amassed to consider the story of Monterinos, and what he
relates of the report and discourse of the West Indians, as he travailed to
Quito, but does not mention the express place; Io. de Laet* Ind. occid. lib.
10. cap. 6. says the people of the Province of Quito are mendaces, vani, nec
ad civilia instituta se traduci patiuntur, Sacra Christiana aegre and pene
coacti amplectuntur, they are liars, vain, and will not be brought under any
civil discipline, and very hardly drawn to embrace any sacred or holy duties.

If the Author scruple what I have said, or offer any thing omitted by me to be
spoken unto, I am ready to give a modest answer and reason, in the mean time as
I conceive he expected to prevail most by the power of his paralleles, and
coherence of Customs. So when upon examination I found so great diversity,
disparity, contrariety and discord betwixt the ancient Jewish rights, and the
Customs of America, I resolved little to touch the historical part of the
treatise, but chiefly to bend my self to confute the wrong Petigree of the
Americans, and to oppose and withstand a blind obedience and consent to weak,
uncertain, and fallacious conjectures, for as Scaliger says, de rebus Sinarum
Plenum aleae est de iis aliquid statuere quae nobis per caliginem duntaxat nota
sunt, It is but hap-hazard to assert any thing positively in matters that we
can behold but through a mist and darkness; and although in matters of Sacred
knowledge we may not offer to plumbe or sound the Abyss thereof, for as the
Christian Prudentius says,

-- nescire velle
quae magister maximus docere non vult
est erudita inscitia.
It Is a learned ignorance to nill to know
What our great master does not will to show.
Yet in these obscure and sublunary questions that reach not to the Caelum
empyreum, we may not be denied by any law of discourse, conference,
argumentation, or reason, to thresh upon the Subject in question, and to winnow
and fan out the purest, clearest and the best grain of our private sense and
opinion, and to offer and expose it to the view and test of others, and that
liberty according to the law of reason (as a reasonable creature) I have
assumed and practiced.

Iam nos ecce manum ferula subduximus -- When I had taken mine hand from the
loome, and was ready to fold up this frolique and ^urtivity, of minutes, there
came unto mine hands a small book entitled, the Hope of Israel, written by one
Manasseh Ben Israel a Jew, showing the place of the ten Tribes, etc. which he
makes to be behind the Mountains Cordillerae on the South side of the ridge of
the hills Andes in Peru, in So. lat. about 4 gr. and long. about 320 gr. and
though I have often travailed over those parts on dry foot, yet I could never
find the least track or trace of any matter that might invite my sense and
opinion to concur with him.

I find Manasseh Ben Israel a perfect Talmudist, and Rabbinicall doctor; In
page 11. he confesses from Montecinus mouth that Francis the Indian was a kind
of Talmudist also, for if Montecinus pressed him too much, he would make him
tell him lies, which is a good staggering introduction to invite a man's belief
of the consequent story.

Then he goes on and tells us some ravelled discourse till he come to Sect. 2.
page 17. and there he reports of the plantation of the West Indies, and page
20. he says the Spaniards are not altogether mistaken to make the Indians to
come of the ten Tribes, which words not altogether insinuates some mistaking,
or a mistaking in part though not altogether.

As for his discourse of Arsareth I remit both the Author and the Jew to
Brerewoods 13. chap. of Enquiries, and I say with Iunius, whether Eretz in the
original be the same with Ararat in America, viderin^ docti, let learned men
that undertake it look to it, for he determines not.

As for Manassehs argument a Simili (as he calls it) Sect 6. Comparison of
Americans with Jewish Customs, besi^ds that all people in the world may agree
in many Customs (which I may rather call dictates of Nature) I have already
given a full answer to them, only I would know his authority, to prove a
jubilee of fifty years among the Americans, and when began, the ceremonies of
the performance and observation, for to my sense the incivilities and
incultnesse of the Americans seems not capable of the rites and properties
thereof.

Manasseh goes on with sundry other imperfect relations, to induce an opinion
of the Americans derivation from the Israelites, but all to little purpose, and
confesses that Grotius and de Lae^ differ from him in judgment, but he
modestly confesses he will not stand to confute them, which is bonum signum a
mala causa, for he knows it must be done by lying down and not otherwise.

In Sect. 17. he speaks of the Jew Solomon Molho, who was burnt alive at
Mantua, by the command of the Emperor Cha. 5. because he practiced to draw the
Pope, C^a. 5. and Fra. the first of France to Iudaiize, but Iunius says he
feigned himself Solomon the Son of David, and was executed for a notorious
counterfeit.

Then he proceeds to tell a number of strange stories, till he comes to the
greatest wonder of all, which is the Sabbaticall river, Sec. 20. where he
drowns himself in diving for it, which river is says Iunius (ut inquiunt
Judae^rum fabulae) trans montes Caspios, etc. (as the Jewish tales tell us)
beyond the Caspian Mountains, where there is a large Kingdom divided from
other people by the Sabbaticall river, and there Iunius further taxes the
falsehood of that chapter of the History of Esdras, to the fourth verse, and
Friar Luis de Vrreta in his History of E^hiopia, says of that Sabbathicall
river, that ^s Chimera sin fundamento, Imagines de Rabbinos, a groundless
Chimera, and fancy of the Rabbis. And there he tells a strange fiction and
fabulous report of a Jew that filled his budget with the sand of that river,
and Sandys tra. lib. ^. says that the Jews say that the ten Tribes are in
Jndia about the Sabbaticall River.

I could here cite many others who de^ide that waterish fiction, and some think
it is as likely to be the via lactea in the air, yet Manasseh believes it, as
he believes that which his Father told him of the hour-glasse of the
Sabbaticall river sands which ran all the week, and stood still all the
Sabbath, which I am willing to believe for company, if he never turned it; and
as simply and plainly page 54. whatsoever it be, says he, it is some where,
and page 56. he says these things he gathered concerning the ten Tribes who
we believe still keep the Jewish rites.

I confess I find him a man of so sharp an appetite, and strong and easy
and Ostrich concoction; as I cannot sit at table any longer with him, and
therefore I now rise and offer others every one to seed according to his own
phancie.

Having thus travailed into the West Indies, I am brought into remembrance of
some time spent formerly in the canvasse and discuss of a question in the East
Indies, which I now offer.

Arguments to prove the Island which we call Seylam to have been Prolomes
Taprobane, and our Sumatra to have been his aurea Chersonesus, contrary to the
opiniou of most modern Geographers. P^ol. lib. 7. cap. 4. Tab. 12. of Asia,
says that the Island Taprobane 1. From the Name.
was anciently called Simonds Isle* after Salice, and the Inhabitants Salae,
which in sound alludes to our Seylam.

The first Island of any notable bigness which Ptol. placed 2. Si^e and
Latitude.
South of India, and intra Gangem, within Ganges, was his Taprobane, and his
Aurea Chersonesus extra Gangem, without Ganges, as is the now Sumatra.

2 Ptolomey gave the North promontory of Taprobane 12. gr. 30 min. of North
lat. the North cape of Seylam agrees truly therewith, the North cape of Ptol.
his aurea Chersonesus had 5 gr. of North lat. agreeable to the North cape of
Sumatra.

3 Ptolomey placed South upon the East Sea, betwixt the mouths of Indus and
Ganges, So stands Seylam.

4 Ab Eoo mari incipit prae^enta Indiae, says Soli^us of Taprobane, it begins
in the East Sea, and streches in a direct South and North line upon or toward
India.

5 Pro certo credimus Taprobanam in alto verse. meridiem ante Indiam jacere.
Strabo* lib. 2. we are certainly persuaded that Taprobane lies* just before
India to the South (that is length-wise) so does Seylam.

6 Taprobana ins^^a mul^o longius vers^s merid. quam sit Jndia sita, opposita
Egyptiorum insulis cum quibus habet temperiem, and Cinnamomiferae regioni, the
Island Taprobane extends South toward Jndia, opposite (that is right Eastward)
to some of the Egyptian Islands, and of the same temper with them, and the
Cinamome region, S^ra. lib. 2.

Ptol. his promontorium Aromata is now Cap^ Guarda^uy by S^cotora at the mouth
of the Red Sea, and is due East of Ptolomeys Cynamome region, which is the
North part of the now Kingdom of Magadoxon Afrique.

Pliny says lib. 6. cap 22. Taprobane lies medio in cursu solis occurente,
that is, as the Sun meets us in the 12 a clock line. So stands Seylam North and
South.

8 Ante Taprobonam multitudo Insularum jacet, says Pliny, so the Maldiners and
a flock of 7 or 8000 Islands before Seilam.

9 Again the words of Ptol. in his Geograph. cap. 14. are considerable,
Meridianus qui est per Indi fluminis principia paulo occident^i^r est boreali
Taprobanes promontorio, which shows that this Taprobane cannot be our Sumatra,
for the head of Jndus arising out of the hills betwixt Imaus and Causasus (now
Nungraco^ and Delanguer) cannot be said to be paul^ but Permultum, very much
more West than Sumatra, near about 20 gr. and Seylam very little, if not in the
same longit.

10 Again the Equinoct. cuts through the midst of Ptol. his Aurea Cherson^sus,
and so it does Sumatra. Solinus.

11 Again there is a small Island near Sumatra called Andramania, which is as
much as aurea Insula, participating of the name and nature of Ptol. his aurea
Chersonesus, or Chryse, which contributes also with me.

Solinus and Pliny, make Taprobane 7000 furlongs long, which 3. Bigness.
is about 800 english miles, but by the face of the shore, short and shallow
(as Lins^hot lib. 1. cap. 13. among others has observed) it seems the rage of
the Sea has devoured a great part thereof: So as now it is not above 250
English miles long, and about 140 broad.

Ptol. his Taprobane abounded with Gold, precious stones, etc. 4. Commodities.
Linschot says so of Seylam the best in all the East, and fishing for pearls,
and mines of rich mettalls, and store of Elephants the best of all India, as
S^rabo, Solinus, Pliny.

Wars, Conquests, and time (which is the greatest Conqueror) 5. Names.
devours all men* Towns, Cities, Countries. So also it defaces, blots out, and
corrupt names; I shall essay to scour, refresh and renew some places long
disguised and obscured, that may be be called in to support mine assertion, and
I shall exemplify a little among our selves to usher in some after instances
in Seylam and Sumatra.

Ptol. his Eblana is our Dublin in Ireland, his Itaena aestuarium our Eden in
Cumberland, his Garienis Fluvius our river Yare, his Garieni^ ostium our
Yarnemouth, his Camalodunum our Maldon in Essex, his Sabrina our Severne* I
might be infinite herein near and far off, but I premise but these few.

In India near to Taprobane Ptol. had the great emporium or trade Town of
Colchi our Cochin, he had there near, the South Promontory Comaria, our now
Cape Como^y, and more East, Promontorium Colligicum our now Cape C^el, he had
the great emporium Malanga upon the Indian shore, and we Malacca though
otherwise placed beyond Ganges Gulf, or bay, near Sumatra, or the Aurea
Chersonesus, which error was crowded in by first making Sumatra to be
Taprobane, and then Malacca to be near it as Malanga was to Seylam the true
Taprobane; And to enter into Tabrobane Ptol. had there Nagadiba our Negubo in
Seylam, he had Galiba our Chilaban, if nimbly and swiftly spoken.

Again Ptol. his Aurea Chersonesus had the Town Palandra, which alludes to
Palimban now in Sumatra, and agrees in site, he had the Town Samarada in the
North-east corner of his Aurea Chersonesus which I presume may be that which
first denominated that Island to be Sumatra

It may be objected that Ptol. his Aurea Chersonesus was a pe^insula, but
almost an Island, it is answered that it is evident enough that the store of
slands which lie betwixt Sumatra and the Continent, and which the Sea has not
yet devoured and swallowed, though rent and torn from terra firma, do clearly
satisfy that the Sea has cut off the neck of the land where Sumatra or the
Aurea Chersonesus, and the continent were once joined together.

Now for a conclusion, I will animadvert upon the story which Solinus and Pliny
report after ehis manner.

A servant of Annius Plocomus who was Customer ^or the red Sea, in the reign of
Claudius, was carried with North-west winds from the Coast of Arabia besides
Carmania, in 15 days to Taprobane, which could not possibly be performed if
Sumatra were Taprobane, for from Babelmandel (the mouth of the red Sea) and so
over to Carmania (now Narsingua in a right line to the next and most Western
cape of Sumatra (esteemed the then Taprobane) is about 2400 miles (as miles
answer to a degree in that latitude) so as he must have sailed every of those
fifteen days above 160 miles, and this I calculate in right lines, whereas it
is without dispute that he was driven to and fro in a crooked, winding, and
unsteady course, and sometimes by* side, cross, contrary winds.

This short discourse of Taprobane I wrote many years since, as also a far
longer o^ Solomon's Ophir, which I now intended to offer to view, but after much
fruitless search for those papers, I conclude them lent or lost, but to whom,
or where I know not, I well remember the Springs head of that discourse rose
from Ophir and Havilah the Sonns of Ioctan, Genesis 10. 29. and Genesis 2. 11, 12.
and the stream after continued and ran until it branched into two, whereof the
one emptyed it self into the Aurea Chersonesus before mentioned, the other at
Sofala in Mozambique in Afrique (for the compass of my resolution had
variation) and mine opinion and judgment fluctuated betwixt those two, but in
that Sea of matter I shall now sail no further, and therefore here

Ancora de prora jacitur -- FINIS.

