A COPY OF A LETTER SENT By Mr. SPEAKER, To all the Corporations in England.
And the like also to all the Justices of Peace, in the several Counties of
England: Drawn out by Order of the House of COMMONS.

ALSO, A Worthy, Learned, and Religious Speech; Delivered by the Earl of Cork,
to the Protestant Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of Ireland, at a General
Assembly holden at Cork, Ian. 20. 1641.

WHEREIN Is expressed, the general Calamity of that Kingdom, with his
Encouragement and desire unto the said Assembly, to provide present Relief and
Succor for the distressed and afflicted Protestants.

LONDON. Printed for Robert Hodgekinsonne. 1642.

A Copy of a Letter sent by Mr. Speaker to all the Corporations in England, etc.
The Endorcement was thus; TO A.B. Major of C. and to D.E. Recorder, and to all
His Majesty's Justices of Peace of the said town: and so the like to the
Justices of the several Counties.

GENTLEMEN,
It is now some months since, that the Protestation taken by the Lords and
House of Commons was sent down into the Country, with an expectation that it
should be generally taken throughout the Kingdom for a testimony of their good
conourrence with the Parliament, but through the remissness of some of those
who had the care of recommending it to others, very many there be that have not
hitherto taken it.

Now the House of Commons having discovered many dangerous designs plotted
against the Parliament, especially of the 4th of this instant Ianuar* which had
it taken effect, would have stricken not only at the Privileges, but the very
Being of Parliaments, as will appear more by the Declaration herevvith sent
unto you, which the House desires you to publish in your Corporation, and the
Liberties and Parts thereof (as the same is also to be published by the
Justices of the several Shites) have thought fit once again to recommend the
taking of this Protestation.

And have therefore commanded me in their names, to desire you the Major, and
Justices of the Peace of the said Corporation, to meet together in one place,
as soon as possibly you may, and there to take the Protestation your selves;
and there also calling the Ministers of the several Parishes within your said
Corporations, and the Constables, Church-vvardens, and Overseers of the Poor,
and all other the Inhabitants of the same Corporation, both House-holders, and
others being of 18, years of age, or upvvards, to tender unto them the said
Protestation, to be taken in your presence, and to take the names both of them
that do take, and do refuse to take the same Protestation, and to make return
thereof to the Burgesses, serving for the said Corporation, before the 12th of
March next, wherein the House desires your great care and diligence, as a
matter very much importing the good both of the King, and Kingdom, which being
all I have in Command, I rest,

Your very loving friend, William Lenthall.
Dat. 29. Jan. 1641.
A WORTHY LEARNED, AND RELJGIOVS Speech, delivered by the right Honorable the
Earl of Cork, etc.
My Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen:
THe occasion of this present Assembly, (but I could heartily desire, that some
more happy cause had called us together) is the general calamity, which like a
Leopard has overspread, and overrun almost the body of this Kingdom. We have
bin a very long time under a most heavy persecution of a most bloody and
barbarous enemy, whose, as yet uncontrolled malice, has so far proceeded,
that it has brought to ruin whole amilies, nay destroyed, and quite
overthrown the fairest of our buildings, and whole towns and Cities. I intend
not now to paint over our sorrows, or to renew our griefs by the sad
recapitulation of them; for I am fully persuaded that none here present, but
like mine, their hearts do bleed at the heavy remembrance and consideration of
the now present miseries of this Kingdom.

The enemies have so much insulted over our names and persons, that they have
endeavored to please and satisfy themselves with choice and variety in our
afflictions, and has made it part of their triumphs to invent and afflict upon
us new and unparalleled torments. You have heard the cries of distressed
mothers, who hourly expected that the same which made them widows and
childlesse, should prove merciful unto them, and make them breathless. You
have here seen the stout-hearted husband forced and constrained to behold a
spectacle as full of sorrow, as inhumanity, while the barbarous enemy took his
dearest and bosom friend, and ravished her, he was made a beholder, and was
much more grieved at his own impotency to relieve, then the cruelty of that
most unnatural spectacle, whose heart being now filled with the horn of so due
a sight, and yet not yielding to its own wait of misery, entreated and found
the merciful hand of the enemy to dispatch from all his sorrow. My Lords, and
the rest of this worthy Assembly, these are but a few of the thousands of
cruelty, which our brethren have suffered, and since as yet groan under, every
day affords unto us new matter of grief, and should I be as voluminous in my
relations, as they in their practices, I should tire out the day, and your
patience, and yet not reach the head of their bloody actions.

This day and m^^ting was designed for some other purpose, ^^^n to rub over our
old sores, that were but to aggravate, and not redress them.

The intended action for this present time, is to procure a remedy for our
eminent evils, which if not speedily administered, an universal sub^^^sion is
like to succeed. We have bin a long while flattered with hopes of relief from
England, and other Countries, but we find them so slow in their succor, that
if we feed our selves any longer, with such or the like expectation, it is to
be justly feared that ruin will overtake and overwhelme us, and our whole
estates, before the remedy be applied, We have the too many and great
encouragements to warrant our undertakings, which are not merely supposall, but
real and substantial.

It has been held, and is at this day lawful, and necessary dimicate pro aris
and socis, to fight for our God, Religion, and our possessions, for the liberty
of our Consciences, and the liberty of our persons. In both these we have much
suffered under the inso^ent persecution of our barbarous enemy.

Let us not, my Lords, stand like men amazed, or distracted with such malicious
proceedings, but let us quit our selves like men, and having the advantage of
the cause, although not of power proceed valiantly. The battle we shall fight
is the Lord of hosts, who is able to save and give victory as well by few, as by
a numerous army, and strength. Remember and consider, that God is not so
confined to multitudes, neither can the number of multitudes prevail in the
day of battle, without the assistance and protection of the Almighty. Let us
therefore, my Lords and Gentlemen, with one body, and with one affection,
prepare and make ready, to oppose and countermand the contumacy and
stubbornness of the bloody persecutor, who in all his passages breaths nothing
but ruin and destruction. My person and assistance shall not be deficient to
so good a cause, but I shall endeavor to serve my God, my King, and Country,
with my utmost endeavor both of person and fortune, and shall count my self
happy, if it be my lot to make my ruin and overthrow in the defense of so
honorable a cause. For praestat per virtutem emori, quam per dedecus vivere, I
had rather dye in a noble and religious cause, then live fortunate under so
base an enemy both to God, the King, and his Country. And if there be any here,
as I hope, and believe there are none, of so degenerate and base condition,
that shall endeavor to shift themselves from off this undertaking, because
their habitation is remote, and the danger has not as yet took progress so
far to them. I thus reply, and answer them in the Popes language and phrase.
Paries cum proximus ardes, tunc tua res agitur. When thy neighbors house is on
fire, thou art not secure, but the same danger may reach thee also. There is no
true, religious, and loyal breast, but has a share in a public calamity:
neither is any Member so secure, but the same misfortune which made the head to
ache, may also make the rest of the Members grieve. Mischief which is uncontrold
goes apace, and overtakes the careless mind in his depth of security. J am
afraid I have been too tedious in my discourse, but I will now end in a word;
let not the insolency of the enemy, or consideration of the hazard, prevail
over the goodness and justice of the cause, and your noble and undanted
courages, but be as valiant as your cause is just, and I doubt not, the
success will crown your actions with honor, procure peace and quiet both to
your Consciences and possessions, and so shall you inherit the everlasting
names of men, religious and pious to your God, loyal to your Sovereign, and
faithful to your Country.

FINIS.

