A Discourse of PRAYING WITH THE SPIRIT, And with the UNDERSTANDING. WHERE Of
Extemporary Prayer. Of Premeditate Prayer. Of Set Forms of Prayer.


Preached in two Sermons at HILLSBOROUGH Anno 1659.

By Henry Leslie (maugre all Antichristian opposition) Bishop of Down and
Conner.

And now published for the Redress of the great abuse of Prayer in that
Diocese, whereof he had, and ought to have a Charge.

Whereunto is annexed A Letter of JER. TAILOR, D.D. Concerning the same Subject.

ECCLES. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth,
therefore let thy words be few.

LONDON, Printed for John Crook, and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

My LORD,
I Am well pleased your Lordship has consented to publish Your excellent
Sermons concerning extempore prayer. You preached them in a family, in which
the public Liturgy of the Church is greatly valued, and diligently used: but
in a Country, where most of the Inhabitants are strangers to the thing, and
enemies to the name; for so they are taught to be; having no other reason for
that enmity, then because their preachers have blastedit with the breath of
their displeasure. But instead of this, they are fed with indeliberate,
unstudied, sudden conceptions, begotten and born in the same minuit, and
therefore not likely to be better than all those other productions of the
world, which, by being sudden and hasty, have an inevitable fate to be useless
and good for nothing.

My Lord, I have often considered concerning the pretensions of those persons,
who think no prayer is good if it be studied; and none spiritual, unless it be
extempore, and that only such are made by the Spirit; and perceiving them to
rely upon the expression of St. Paul, [I will pray with the Spirit;] I have
thought that they as little study, what they teach to men; as what they say to
God: for if they did not understand with the Spirit in the same sense as they
pray with the Spirit, that is, without all study and consideration, I am verily
persuaded they would not have fallen upon this new and unheard of practice. I
say, unheard of: for it is a new thing; both to Heathens, to Jews, and to
Christians: and indeed must be so; since in the very Nature of the thing it
self, it appears to be infinitely unreasonable.

For what greater disparagement in the World can there be to him that speaks,
or the thing spoken; than to say, it was spoken rashly and inconsiderately. And
therefore it was an excellent saying of one; Oration viri Philosophisicut vita
debet esse composita: every wise man's words should be composed and orderly as
his life? (...), with labor and consideration: And certain it is, if any man
intends to speak well and wisely, he does not vomit out his answers, as a fool
does secrets; he is sick till they are out; and when they are, they are
loathsome. Of this I need say no more: but it is evident all such extempore
prayers are likely to be less wise; and to use such ways of prayer is against
Reason,

2. To do so is against the virtue of Religion. It is a doing the work of the
Lord negligently, and therefore unpleasantly; and to this is to be imputed all
those unhandsome issues of a sudden tongue, which so ill become Religion, that
they very often minister offense to wise and godly persons of all persuasions.

3. Hasty and unstudied prayers are against Scripture; expressly I say against
the word of God: whose spirit has commanded thus: Eccl. 5.2.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and be not hasty to utter any thing before God.
Now this commandment is plain and easy* and therefore not to be evacuated by
any obscure and difficult pretenses, from which no certain argument can arise.
To which if we add that S. Paul, amongst the characters of these of whom he
prophecies evil things, 2 Timothy 3.
reckons (...) the hasty and headie people, I humbly conceive that these are
the persons, in the new Testament who break the commandment in the old; and
that they must have something else to defend them, then what has yet appeared.

But therefore these our brethren pretend that the spirit of God supplies all
this; and what is wanting in nature, is supplied by grace. To this I need to
make no new replies, but only consider, that where there is an unavoidable
necessity we have reason to suppose we shall be helped; but we have no such
need, we are taught, in scripture by the H. Spirit, what to pray, and how to
pray, and beyond this assistance we need nothing, save only that he be pleased
to stir us up to pray, and for that also we have arguments and invitations
sufficient in the divine scripture; and I humbly conceive it is one sort of
tempting God to call for extraordinary aides, when we are sufficiently provided
for in ordinary: and I appeal to the piety and consciences of all christian
Ministers, whether the Spirit of God has not sufficiently enabled us, in all
the parts and necessities of prayer, by the treasures of holy scripture? And 2.
whether by reading, and meditating in the scriptures, we cannot obtain all the
aids we need? And 3. Whether or no, do not those Ministers that are supposed to
pray best amongst them, most of all use the phrases and expressions of
scripture? And 4. Whether or no, are not such prayers undeniably the best which
are taken thence.

4. But, that I need no farther argument in this question, I appeal to the
experience of this last age, in which extempore prayer have been born and bred;
whether it can be reasonable to allow such sudden prayers to be productions of
the spirit, when we have heard many spiritual crimes expressed and promoted by
such prayers, and by those that pretended to such gifts: the consequent of
which is certainly this: that to prove a man to pray with the spirit, something
else is required besides speaking extempore; and that this is not therefore it:
because many do this, who do like Ananias and Saphira (...), belly, or falsely
pretend the spirit, who cannot dictate false, haeretical, rebellious,
blasphemous, or ignorant propositions: and yet it is certain, if these men who
pray ex tempore did pray with the spirit; that is, if the spirit of God did
dictate those words; those prayers would be as good canonical scripture, when
they are written by the short hand writers, as any of the plalms of David, or
the words of the Apostles. Which because it is intolerable to affirm; it
follows; that praying with the spirit, means not extempore prayers.

5. I add but one thing more, and that is, that Dideclavius the great patron of
our dissenting brethren said, in his Altar Damascena, that the master of a
family could not without undecency pray with such sudden conceptions before a
family; Sine indecore non potest Seneca.
and as wise a man as he said; nihil ordinatum est quod praecipitatur and
properat. There can be no order in sudden conceptions. Since therefore it is
undecent and unorderly; let it be considered how such persons can observe the
precept of the Apostle; let all things [in the church] be done decently and in
order.

If it be asked by any man, whether it be unfit to use in private, forms of our
own composing? I answer, it may be very fit; but this is because this rule of
the Apostle, which wholly relates to the public, is not a provision for the
private, for decency is a relative term, and so is order; and in private we may
deliberate upon our knees; but in public we cannot; and although we must
neither in public, nor in private speak hastily, rashly, or without sufficient
deliberation; yet we may do that in private which in public we may not: and
there we are only to avoid rashness and hastiness; but in public we must take
care of order also, and of decency, and of edification of others, all which by
extempore prayers cannot be well provided for: but my Lord; I forget the
purpose of my letter, which is to pay to your Lordship, that just
acknowledgment of your care of the Churches good and the instruction of souls;
which you have expressed in this material, plain, easy and religious discourse;
which I pray God may prove as profitable as it is rational; as useful as it is
pious. My Lord I am

Your Lordships most affectionate Brother and Servant J. T.

I COR. XIV.XV. What is it then? I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray
with the understanding also.


THis Text is much abused, in this age, to justify praying ex tempore, whereby
they have destroyed the right use of Prayer, and, indeed, have left us nothing
which can truly and properly be called the public worship of God. And it is
the highest pitch of sacriledg to make the Scripture it self patronize impiety,
which we are all bound, to oppose, and to contend for our most holy faith
against them who now, under pretense of the Spirit, do but cheat you out of
your Religion. Therefore, knowing that I must shortly lay down this my earthly
Tabernacle, and that I am not like to speak again in public; I desire now to
discharge my Conscience, as touching that practice, and to undeceive the World,
if it be possible, or, at least, to vindicate this text, from being guilty of
such profanation of prayer; by showing the true sense and meaning of it,
which, by the help of God, I shall make appear clearly out of the context it
self, which is the surest way of expounding Scripture.

And first, I desire you to look into the scope, and drift of the Apostle, who,
throughout this whole Chapter, speaks of spiritual gifts, showing that all
of them are to be referred unto edification, as to the right and proper end,
and, therefore, he prefers prophesying, or the gift of expounding Scripture,
before the gift of speaking with tongues, because it tends more to the
edification of the Church, ver. 3, 4, 5. And upon the same ground, he
prefers prayer, in a language that is understood, before prayer in an
unknown tongue, for (says he in the words going before my text) If I pray in
an unknown tongue, my Spirit prays, that is, my mind inspired with that
gift, does its part, but my understanding is unfruitful, because I do not
profit others: and, so, in the words which I have read, he resolves what is to
be done, What is it then? that is, what is then to be done, and he makes
answer, I will pray with the Spirit, and will pray with understanding also.
Where he expresses what is to be done by his own resolution, which he
propounds as a direction for others: For, when he says, I will pray with the
Spirit, it is as much as if he had said, and I would have you to pray with the
Spirit, but to pray with understanding also. In the words we have two things to
consider, 1. the duty to be performed, is to pray, I will pray. 2. The manner
how it is to be performed, expressed in two things, first, with the Spirit, I
will pray with the Spirit, and then, With the understanding also.

The duty is to pray, whereby we are to understand the whole worship of God by
invocation. I cannot better define what prayer is, then the Schoolmen have
done in few words, calling it, desiderium piae mentis ad Deum, the unfolding of
the desires of an holy mind unto God. The Apostle, 1. Tim. 2.1. brancheth it
into four parts, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks.
1. Supplication or deprecation, for the averting of evil, all evil, both of
sin, and of punishment, and so it relates to the confession of sin, and
presupposes an humble acknowledgment of our offenses, and of that miserable
estate wherein we stand by reason of sin. 2. Prayers, are the petitions which
we make for the good which we want, even for all things necessary, as well for
the body, as for the soul; for this life, as for that better life which is to
come. 3. Intercessions are the prayers which we put up in behalf of others. 4.
Giving of thanks, when we praise God for his mercies and benefits conceived.
these four make up a complete Office of prayer. And the Apostle in that place,
will have Timothy, and the rest of the Bishops within his Province, to keep a
constant public Office of devotion, consisting of these four and so they did,
for St. Chrysostom tells us, that all these were used in the Church in his
time, and long before. And so it appears by the Ancient Greek Liturgies yet
extant. Thus you see what it is to pray.

This is the first and chiefest of all duties. The Apostle does challenge a
priority unto it, saying, I exhort that, first of all, Supplications and
prayers be made, he will have that done first of all, because it is the first,
and chiefest, for dignity, for we honor God by prayer more then we can any
other way, acknowledging him to be the knower of our hearts, the giver of all
good, and so the stay of our faith and hope, in whom only we do trust, and we
are highly honored: for, by prayer, we have commerce and conference with God,
we enter into acquaintance and familiarity with him, and, even walk with God,
as Enoch did, prayer is the first thing wherewith a godly life begins, and
the last thing wherewith it does end: The Saints and Angels in Heaven,
continually pray and praise God, singing Hallelujahs unto God, and to the lamb
that sits on the throne, and therefore, seeing it is a work common to the
Church, triumphant, as well as militant; common to Men with Angels: we may well
reckon so much of our time as is spent in this holy exercise, to be Celestial
and Divine. And, as prayer is the chiefest of all duties for dignity; so it is
of great force and efficacy: St. James says, the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous Man avails much. Cap. 5.16. it avails to the turning away of all
evil from us, and to the procuring of all good unto us, it is the key that
opens the Cabinet of Heaven, and draws down Gods blessings upon us: it is
the bucket wherewith we draw grace out of the well of Salvation: it is our
strong tower, whether we betake our selves in the time of trouble: it is the
weapon wherewith we put to flight all our Enemies, spiritual, and corporal.
Prayer conquereth Heaven, and, even, overcomes God himself; for Exodus 33.10.
when Moses came to interceed for the People, after their great transgression,
the Lord said unto him, Let me alone that I may consume them, as if he had
found himself mastered by Moses his prayer, and could not destroy them, unless
Moses did forbear to pray for them, And, if prayer be of such force, you may be
sure that it is most necessary. It is necessary, both necessitate finis, and
necessitate praecepti: both in respect of the end, that our own wants may be
supplied; and in respect of Gods commandment, it being a duty which he
requires from us. But I cannot now stand to speak of these things

This holy religious duty of service, concerns us one way, as we are Men,
another way, as we are parts of a community, members of the Church, and so
prayer is either private, or public. For private prayer, we are at our own
choice, for time, place, and form, according to the exigence of our occasions
in private: But public prayer, requires a certain time, a public place, a
consecrated person, and known form wherein all may join; this public prayer is
of far more worth, then the private prayer of any one; for it is more
forcible, and likely to prevail with God, by reason of the multitude of
suppliants, who, being assembled together, do besiege God with their prayers,
(says Tertullian) and these forces are unto him acceptable. Now it is of
public prayer, that the Apostle speaks here; for he speaks of prayer in the
Church, when they are assembled together, which he will have so done, that the
Church may understand, and be edified by it. In our private devotions, we may
use any language which we our selves understand; but the Minister of public
prayer, must use only that language which is commonly understood by the People,
and so pray, not only with the Spirit, but with the understanding also.

And, so I am come to the manner, how this duty is to be performed, expressed in
two things, with the Spirit, First, I will pray with the Spirit; What Spirit?
we need not travail far to find out what is meant by the Spirit, albeit it has
many diverse acceptions in Scripture. For what the Apostle calls the spirit, in
this Text, he calls his Spirit in the former verse, If I pray in an unknown
tongue, my Spirit prays. And it is not likely that he would call any thing
his Spirt, but his own natural Spirit, called the Spirit of a Man, Cap. 2.11.
Who knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man? That is, his mind.
But then you may say unto me, how comes the Spirit here to be opposed unto the
understanding? I answer, that, albeit the Spirit and understanding be here
distinguished, yet they are not distinct faculties; but one and the same
faculty, even the mind of Man, which, in one respect, is called the Spirit, in
another, the understanding. It is called the Spirit, either as it is ravished
beyond it self by Divine inspiration, or as it is elevated above it self by
illumination, or as it is inflamed with earnest and ardent affection. And the
same faculty, when it is employed to teach others, and, to make them understand
what it has conceived, is called the understanding so that to pray with the
Spirit signifies three things, 1. To pray by immediate inspiration, which was
peculiar to the Prophets, Apostles, and those who had extraordinary indowments,
2. To pray by the direction and assistance of the holy Spirit, which is common
to all believers, 3. To pray fervently with earnest and ardent affection. Here
are three senses of praying with the Spirit also found in Scripture, and a
fourth sense no man can imagine, nor any thing in this phrase which favors
our praying ex tempore.

First, to pray with the Spirit, is to pray by immediate inspiration, when he
that prays is the mere organ of the Spirit, uttering only that which the
Spirit of God does dictate, he maks no use of his own Judgment and reason,
either in divising of the matter, or choosing of the words; but speaks only
that which the Spirit does suggest. Thus the Apostles, Prophets, and penmen of
holy writ were inspired; for St. Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.21.
they speak as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And after this manner were
they inspired, who had the gift of tongues, after that miraculous effusion of
the Spirit on the day of Pentecost; for, (says the Evangelist) they speak with
other tongues, Act. 2.4.
as the Spirit gave them utterance. Of these the Apostle speaks here, and
throughout this whole Chapter, for there were at that time diverse such in the
Church of Corinth, who sopke, prayed, and sung in an unknown tongue, whereby
the People were, not edified, but amazed, and the Apostle here corrects the
abuse of that gift, and will have all gifts used to edification, so that, if
any man make use of the gift of tongues in the Church, he will either have him
to interpret what he says. ver. 5. Greater is he that prophesies, then he
that speaks with tongues, except he interpret, that the Church may receive
edifying. And ver. 13. Let him that speaks in an unknown tongue, pray that he
may interpret. Or he will have some other to interpret for him. Ver. 27. If any
Man speak in an unknown tongue, let one interpret. Or, if there be no
interpreter, then he will have him to hold his peace, and make no use of that
gift in the Church, ver. 28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep
silence in the Church, for, that miraculous gift of tongues was given for the
conversion of the Nations, as he says, verse 22. Tongues are for a sign, that
is, a miracle, not to them that believe, but to them that believe not: As, if
he should say, there is no Use of that Gift among believers, who had no need so
to be convinced by miracles, but to be edifyed by wholesome Doctrine. Now, our
Apostle, as he had the gift of tongues, and spoke with tongues more then they
all, as he says ver. 18. so he had the gift of interpretation, and therefore
resolves, that if he made any use of that gift in the Church, he would so
interpret what he said, that the Congreation should understand him. And this is
the true meaning of the words of my Text, as they are well glost by Piscator, I
will pray with the Spirit, that is, I will use any language which the spirit
does dictate unto me, but then I will pray with the understanding also, that
is, if I have prayed in an unknown tongue, I will so interpret my prayer, that
the Congregation shall understand me. So that to, pray with the spirit, and to
sing with the Spirit, here, does not only express an immediate inspiration;
but particularly that kind of inspiration, whereby they prayed and sung in an
unknown tongue, as is evident by that which follows: Else, when thou shall
bless with the Spirit, how shall be that occupies the room of the unlearned,
say, Amen, seeing he understands not what thou say? And the only reason why
he cannot say Amen, nor understand, is, because the blessing, or thansgiving,
is in an unknown tongue, called here a blessing with the Spirit. And again ver.
17. thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified. And, the only
reason, why he is not edifyed, is, because the thanksgiving is in an unknown
tongue. So, ver. 2. speaking in an unknown tongue, is called speaking in the
Spirit; and, ver. 12. They who are desirous of the gift of tongues, are said to
be Zealous of Spirits. This is so clear, that all interpreters, ancient and
modern, (except some popish writers, who seek to cast a mist upon this text
which speaks so plainly against them) by the spirit here do understand the gift
of tongues. Yet, I think it more proper, by the spirit, to understand the mind
inspired with that gift, which is in effect the very same thing. By this which
I have said it is manifest, that what the Apostle speaks here of praying with
the Spirit, and singing with the spirit, does not concern us, but was an
extraordinary and miraculous gift given at first for the conversion of the
Nations, and laying the foundation of the Church, which, when the Church was
once gathered, ceased, as did also the gift of Miracles. So that they, who now
pretend, that their extemporary effusions are the dictates of the Spirit,
should do well to show us some of their Miracles; and they should, sing with
the Spirit also, compose the ditty in meeter, sing it in a new tune, according
to the rules of Music, and all this ex tempore; and they should pray in Greek,
or Hebrew, or some language which they never well learned; and then they might
challenge our belief: but if they cannot do these things, they must give me
leave to say, that they are not the Organs; but the apes of the spirit, and,
that it is not the good spirit of God, that guides them in such undertakings;
but their own spirit, a spirit of pride, arrogance, and presumption; of whom we
may truly say, as was said of the foolish prophets, Ezekiel. 13.3. They follow
their own spirit, and have seen nothing.

And yet we must pray with the Spirit, that is by the direction and assistance
of the holy Spirit; St. Jude requires this of all Christians, verse. 20. Build
up your selves in your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, for all
believers have the Spirit, that is, the gifts and graces of the Spirit, they
are led by the Spirit of God. Romans 8.14. And if any Man have not the Spirit of
Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9. The Spirit of God dwells in them, 1 Cor.
3.16. And, where he dwells he is not idle; but is still working: he becomes
unto them; First, a Spirit of sanctification, then a Spirit of Consolation, and
lastly, a Spirit of intercession: for, says the Apostle. Romans 8.26. The Spirit
helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought:
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot
be uttered. The Spirit cannot groan; but makes us to groan: so he is said to
make intercession for us, because he stirs us up to make intercession. This is
that which was promised. Zach. 12.10. I will power upon the house of David, the
Spirit of grace and of supplications. But there is great difference between
that Spirit which we now receive, and the Spirit which they had of whom the
Apostle speaks in this Chapter, even as there is great difference between the
Spirit whereby the Scriptures were given, and the Spirit whereby they were
afterward discerned to be the true word of God. You shall therefore
understand, that the Spirit of God is present with men two manner of ways,
either by inspiration, or by illumination only. First by inspiration, which is
immediate, and excludes the use of their own judgment and reason, as also their
pains and industry: such a presence of the Spirit, the Apostles, Prophets, and
penmen of holy writ had. They speak as they were moved by the holy Ghost, says
St. 2 Pet. 1.21.
Peter. They did not meditate, nor devise any thing; but were the mere organs
of the Spirit, which spoke by their mouth, and wrote by their pen, as Zachary
says in his song, He spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets. And the Apostle.
Heb. 1.1. Cod spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets. Yea, he spoke not only by
them, but in them, as Christ says unto his disciples. Math. 10.20. It is not
you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which is in you, And after this
manner were they moved with the Spirit, who had the gift of tongues, of whom
the Apostle speaks in this Chapter, they did not study for what they spoke,
nor take pains to learn it: but (as the Evangelist says) they were filled with
the holy ghost, and spoke with other tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.
Act. 2.4.

Again the Spirit is present with Men by illumination only, which is not
immediate; but requires the use of means, it does not exclude, but require the
use of our own judgment and reason, as also our industry and deligence. And
thus did the Spirit enable the Church to discern the holy books, to receive
those which were genuine and truly divine, and to reject others which pretended
the like authority. It was not by any Enthusiasme, that they knew the
Scriptures to be Gods word: but they made use of the natural dexterity and
sagacity of their own ingine: they took much pains in examining these writings,
and comparing one thing with another, and when they used the means, the Spirit
of God did improve their natural faculties; help their art and Industry, and so
aid and assist them, that their eyes were opened to discern those interna
eriteria, marks inhaerent in the word, as the divinity of the matter, the
Majesty of the style, the truth of the predictions, and agreement, of latter
books, with those written many hundred years before; whereby they were
convinced of the verity of these books, and that they had God himself for their
author. And so the Spirit now persuades us of the truth of Gods holy word:
Christ promised unto us his Spirt, to lead us into all truth. Joh. 16.13. And
yet you know that we must use the means, we must seek and labor to find out
the truth, for we must search the Scriptures. John 5.39. we must seek wisdom
as silver, and search for her as for bidden treasurs: Prove. 2.4. we must
separate our selves and seek wisdom, as it is Proverbs. 18.1. Through desire a
Man, having separated himself, seeks, and intermedleth with all wisdom. First
the holy Spirit stirs up in us a desire of heavenly wisdom, then this desire
makes us to separate our selves from the World and worldly thoughts, to retire
into the closet of our own hearts by holy meditation, and to seek God
diligently in the use of the means; and then the wisdom of God, which before
seemed foolishness, is by the illumination of the Spirit, made so known unto
us, that we cannot, but discern and admire it. So much the Apostle has taught
us Chap. 2.13. saying, we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches,
but which the holy ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual
things. Where we see that the Holy Ghost does teach us words, which man's
wisdom cannot teach, but it is upon our cooperation, our study, and endeavor,
while we compare spiritual things with spiritual things. And so the holy Spirit
works faith in us, faith is the gift of God, of God only; he not only gives
the power to believe; but also brings forth the art, as the Apostle tells us,
Philip. 1.29. It is given unto you for to believe. Faith is reckoned amongst
the gifts of the Spirit. Gal 5.22. And the Apostle mentions the Spirit of
faith. 2 Cor. 4.13. And yet the Spirit does not work faith in us without means;
but requires our own endeavonrs, for (says St. Augustine) He who made thee
without thine own help, will not justify thee without thine own help, we must
use the means, diligently, hear, read, and meditate, in Gods word, for, faith
comes by hearing. Romans 10. 17. And they who neglect to use the means, must
never think, that the holy spirit will inspire them immediately with the grace
of faith.

Thus you see how the holy spirit now works in directing the Church: to
discern the canonical books, in persuading us of the truth of Gods word; in
leading us into all truth, and in begetting the grace of faith in us; that in
all these he requires our own endeavors, and consequently, he requires the
same in all his other gifts, and productions. Therefore I may safely conclude,
that so, and no other ways, the spirit inableth us to pray, namely, in the use
of means both natural and artificial. That prayer is the gift of the spirit,
no man can deny; for (says the Apostle) we know not what to pray as we ought,
but the Spirit helps our infirmities, Rom, 8.26. where I desire you to
observe the word which the Apostle uses (...), it is a double compound, an
ingeminate expression, and signifies that he joins in relieving, he bears or
lifts with us, helping us in our labors together with him. So that if we would
have the holy Spirit help us to pray, we must labor, we must make use of our
own judgment and reason, and not only make use of our natural faculties; but
also of our learning, and industry: we must diligently read and meditate in
Gods word, that we may be acquainted with the style of the holy ghost, and
there learn to frame our prayer aright both for the matter, and for the form.
And, when we thus study the addresses which we make unto God, we may be sure of
the direction and assistance of the spirit: for God helps industry, and his
spirit now works by means, and then most assists us, when we most endeavor.
So that, albeit we cannot now pray by immediate inspiration, and in a strange
tongue; yet we may and must pray, by the direction and assistance of the
spirit, in the use of the means. The spirit directs us to pray in the Word, and
assists us inwardly with his motions.

He directs us to pray in the word; for there we have many Godly prayers,
psalms and hymns, recorded for our use. And we may use them either as prayers
or patterns to frame our prayers by. First, we may use them as prayers; for no
prayer that we can make can be compared with them for piety and devotion,
neither can any man, now, presume to have such a measure of the spirit, as
those holy penmen had, whose prayers and hymns are by the spirit of God
consigned unto the use of the Church for ever. And so some of them have been
always used: for that wild conceit that now possesses men, was not known in
former ages, namely, that our prayers should wast themselves away in the
making, and like smoke vanish in the ascending; that they should never be
reiterated; but still conceived new, and that as often as we make our adresses
unto God, we should vary both our matter and words. This is the divinity of
many men in this age, who measure God by their own bellies, thinking that he
does loath to have the same sacrifices offered daily, as they do to be fed
still with the same meat without change of diet. But such devotion was never
known unto the people of God: for they always practiced the contrary. The
Priests under the law, by Gods own direction, used the same words, in blessing
the people every day, which are set down. Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. David at. the
removing of the Ark used the same prayer, Psalm. 68.1. which was at first
composed by Moses, for that use. Numb. 10.35. Let God arise, and let his
enemies be scattered. The same David composed many prayers and psalms for the
use of the Tabernacle, the Ninety second Psalm is entitled a song for the
sabbath day, the same being composed to be sung every sabbath, when there was a
holy convocation unto the Lord. It is said 2. Cron. 29.30. That Ezekiah the
King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites, to sing praises unto the Lord,
with the words of David and of Asapth the Seer. The Prophet Hosea prescribes
unto the repenting Isralites a set form of prayer, which he will have them to
use, Chap. 14.2. take with you words, and turn to the Lord, say unto him, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of
our lips, etc. John the Baptist taught his disciples a form of prayer, as
appears Luke 11.1. And Christ has taught us a most exquisite form, and has
commanded us to use it, saying, when you pray, say, our Father, etc. But now
that prayer is rejected, and a countermand given, when you pray, say, not our
Father, and certainly such a direct opposition against Christ, must needs
proceed from the spirit of Antichrist. St. John. Rev. 15.3. saw in a vision,
those who had gotten the victory over the beast, praising God, and they sung
the song of Moses, the Jews in their daily liturgy used the song of Moses
albeit they never had the same occasion again which brought it forth at the
first. Also the prayer which was ordinarily used in the synagogue, was that
prayer which is entitled the prayer of Moses. Ps. 90. And besides that song
and prayer of Moses, they used daily some of David's Psalms. And in their feast
of Passover, they sung no less then six Psalms, even from the 112. to the 119.
which they called their great Hallelujah. St. Paul concludes all his Epistles
with the same prayer, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, the
Christian Church, from the very beginning, has used in her Liturgy, the
Psalms of David, the song of the blessed Virgin, the song of Zachary, and the
song of Simeon And when we use these with true devotion, we are sure that we
pray with the spirit; for all these prayers were in indicted by the Spirit of
God.

Or, we may use those prayers we find in scripture, as patterns and samplers to
frame our prayers by: For I would have men, especially in their private
devotions, to exercise their own gift, provided that they follow the expresses,
rules, and direction which they find in scripture. And if they follow that,
they do pray with the spirit, because they pray for such things, and in such
form, as the spirit has taught us in the word, Dr. Tailor does illustrate this
by a very apt similitude, which is this, as he who prescribes the moddell of a
house, provides the materials, and sets men on work to set it up, is said to
build the house, though the same be built by other men's hands, so the holy
Spirit having prescribed us forms of prayer, and supplied us with materials in
the word, and incited us to pray by promise of reward, may well be said to be
the Author of our prayers, albeit they be composed by our own art and industry.
The A postle. Chap. 12.3. says, No Man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the holy ghost, Because no Man could truly say it, unless the holy ghost had
revealed it in the word. And if speaking a truth revealed in the word, be a
speaking by the holy ghost; why shall not praying in, and according to the
word, be a praying by the holy ghost? The Christans in the Apostles days,
framed diverse Psalms and hymns, to praise God with, and the Apostle calls
them spiritual songs. Ephesians. 5.19. Because the matter of them was taken out of
Gods word, which was given by inspiration: so, if our prayers be composed
according to Gods word, they must be accounted spiritual also, the same
Apostle describing our spiritual armor. Ephesians. 6. bids us take the sword
of the spirit, which is the word of God, verse. 17. And in the very next words,
he shows us how we should use that sword, saying, praying alvvayes with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, so that if we do use the sword of the
spirit in our prayer, praying in, and according to, the expresses, rules, and
directions which we sind in the word; we do pray with the spirit.

Besides those prayers recorded in Scripture, which we may use either as
prayers, or as patterns to frame our prayers by, there be many rules and
directions given in the word, concerning prayer, and every thing thereunto
belonging, I will reduce all into five heads, which I can only mention; for to
examine the particulars, would require no less then a volumne. 1. We are taught
in the word, what should be the contents of our prayers: namely confession of
sin, or deprecation, Petitions for things necessary, intercession for others,
and giving of thanks; and how every one of these should be performed. 2. We are
taught in the word, how we should be disposed when we pray that we should
sequester our selves from the World and Worldly thoughts, set our selves as in
the presence of God, duly considering our own unworthiness, and the great
Majesty of God, as also the great need we have of these we pray for, and the
inability of all other means under Heaven to help us, unless God be pleased to
hear our prayers. 3. We are taught in the word, to whom we should pray: to God
only, and to God rightly conceived, one in essence, three in person, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and to this one God, in the name of Christ the mediator.
4. We are taught, what things we should pray for: 1 John 5.14.
for such things as God has promised to grant, or, (as St. John says) for
such things as are according to his will; and for all such things as be
necessary, either for the soul, or for the body, but with this caveat, that we
pray first and chiefly, for things spiritual, and in the last pace for things
temporal, and for things temporal, only conditionally, if it be Gods will, and
with an exception and reservation of the Cross. Lastly, we are taught in the
word, how we should pray with reverence and humility, with love and charity,
with faith and confidence to be heard with zeal and fervency, with patience,
constancy and perseverance. If we follow these directions, and take Gods word
for our guide we are sure, that we pray with the spirit.

As the spirit directs us to pray, in the word, so he assists us inwardly, with
his motions, for which, he is called the spirit of prayer, or supplication: he
is so called because he stirs up, helps, and inables, us to pray. First, he
stirs us up, and moves us, to pray, for of our selves we have no spiritual
disposition to prayer; but are averse from it, and rather employ our selves any
other way: It is the good Spirit of God that inclines our hearts to pray; for
the Holy Ghost sheddeth abroad the love of God in our hearts: as says the
Apostle. Romans 5.5. And this love of God begets in us, an earnest desire to seek
God. and that good which is to be found in him. They who are the Children of
God, and led by his Spirit, know this by experience, that even, when their
affections are dull and heavy, they feel, sometimes on a sudden, such a fire
kindled within them, that they can not long be silent; but must vent their
desire by prayer, David found it so Psalm. 39.3. My heart was hot within me,
while I was musing, the fire burned: then I spoke with my tongue, Lord make me
to know my end, etc. It was the good Spirit of God who kindled this fire in
David's heart, which burst out into the flames of fervent devotion; his desire
was so great, that it made him to cry out. O God my heart is prepared, I will
sing and give praise. As the spirit stirs us up and moves us to pray; so he
helps and inableth us to pray: the Apostle says, we know not what we should
pray for, as we ought, nor yet how to pray, that is, we are not able, of our
selves, to pray with, that fervency of spirit; that heat of heart, such motion
of mind, such power, and such affection, as is convenient for the Majesty of
God. But the spirit helps our infirmities, and makes request for us with
groanings which cannot be uttered. It can not be truly said of the Spirit of
God, which is God, that he either prays, or groaneth: but the meaning is, he
has that operation in our hearts, that he makes us to pray and groan: so Gal.
4.6. it is said, that the spirit cries, Abba Father, because by him we cry
Abba Father, as it is expressed, Romans 8.15. If the holy spirit dwell in our
hearts, he will fill us with holy thoughts and desires. He opens our eyes to
see the miserable Estate wherein we stand, and what great need we have of Gods
grace, and help for all things. Then he opens our hearts to pray, and opens
our lips also. He strikes our hearts with a deep sense of our own misery and
wretchedness, and with a true consideration of Gods Majesty and greatness, and
so makes us to pray with reverence and humility: he inflames our hearts with
love to God and to our Brethren, and so makes us to pray in charity: he begets
in us a confidence to be heard, and so makes us to pray in faith: he gives us
patience, and so makes us wait upon God, and persevere in prayer. And from the
power of the Spirit, we have those motions kindled in us, whereby our prayers
are made fervent, for it falls out often, that when we settle our selves to
pray, our own hearts do leave us, and our minds are wandering abroad, not
regarding what the tongue speaks. Bernard complains much of this, saying,
Nihil in mundo fugatius est cord meo, nothing in the World is swifter then my
heart, it flies away and fastneth upon other objects. And therefore he used to
begin his devotions, with exurgat Deus, Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered. For indeed those wandering thoughts are great Enemies to devotion;
they arise so thick that they suffer not our prayers to come up unto God. As
when Abraham offered sacrifice, he was no sooner gone from it, but the fowls
of the air light upon it. Genesis 15.6. So when we offer unto God the Calves of
our lips, it comes to pass through our carelessness and wantonness, that many
foul thoughts gee upon our sacrifice, and defile it. But our care must be to
drive them away, as Abraham did the fowls of the air. And for this, the spirit
of God does assist us: for he calls us home, and puts us in mind that we
are kneeling before the Majesty of God, and therefore ought to take good heed
what we speak in his presence, and to himself. The holy Spirit also inflames
our affections with zeal, so that we pray with fervency of Spirit, and utter
our desires unto God with sighs, which cannot be expressed; without this special
assistance of Gods spirit, the best of our prayers are but luke warm, as says
St. Austin, Tepida est omnis oration, quam non praevenit inspiratio. And this
leads me to a third consideration of praying with the Spirit?

As to pray with the spirit, signifies to pray by immediate inspiration, and
in an unknown tongue, here in this text; and also to pray by the direction, and
assistance of the holy Spirit. Jude 20. So, it signifies to pray zealously and
fervently, with earnest and ardent affection: and so it is to be taken. Ephesians.
6.18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication, in the Spirit, that is,
heartily and fervently. So St. Paul worshipped God, as he protests Romans 1.9.
God is my wittness, whom I serve in my spirit, as if he should say, I do not
serve God for by-ends, or in outward appearance and sight of men: but I serve
him in my spirit, heartily, fervently, sincerely. So he would have all who
worship God, to be fervent in spirit; for he joins them together, Romans 12.11.
Fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. This is the only worship that pleases
God, as our Savior has taught us, John 4.23. The true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit, that is, they must join their heart and spirit, with the outward
performance. That worship pleases God, for the Father seeks such to worship
him: But if the heart be wanting and the spirit dull, the outward art, though
never so formally done, will not please God, as appears, by what the Lord
himself says, Esa. 29.13. This people draw near me with their mouth, and with
their lips do honor me; but have removed their heart far from me. The like
complaint we have, Jer. 12.2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their
reins. And Hos. 7.14. They cried not unto me with their heart, when they howled
upon their beds. Where we find that Hypocrites did pray, and cry, and howl
to; but the Lord did not regard it, because it was not with their heart. For
God is a spirit, and looks especially to the inward disposition of the
spirits of men: he first of all requires the heart, Prove. 23.26. My Son give
me thine heart. Look whatsoever duty he requires of us, he will have it done
with the heart, and with all the heart, we must seek the Lord with all our
heart, cleave unto the Lord with all our heart, serve him with all all our
heart, turn unto him with all our heart, love him with all our heart, obey him
with all our heart, follow him with all our heart, praise him with all our
heart. And, so, also, pray unto him with all our heart, and not with our lips
only: for prayer is not a pouring out of the lungs; but of the heart and soul,
before God, as Hanna says, 1 Samuel 1.15. I have powned out my Soul before the
Lord. And so David exhorts us, Psalm. 62.8. Yea People pour out your hearts
before him.

And, as we are to pray with all our heart; so with all our might, that is,
with the whole strength, and endeavor, of our soul, and all the faculties of
it. It is said of David 2. Sam. 6.14. That he danced before the Lord with all
his might: That was a worship of God, a spiritual worship, wherein David, by
his outward act of dancing, did express his exultation and rejoicing in the
Lord, and the text says, the did it with all his might, borrowing a Metaphor
from bodily exercise: For as a man is said to Wrestle with all his might, when
he uses all his force, and puts all his strength to it; even, so we worship
God with all our might, when all the faculties and powers of our souls are
concentrated and united together in the performance of that work, then do we
wrestle with God as Jacob did, or strive in prayer, as the Apostle exhorts us,
Romans 15.30. I beseech you brethren, that ye strive together with me in your
prayers to God for me. So did David worship God; for he danced before the Lord
with all his might, to express his joy for bringing home of the Arc. And, as
he danced with all his might, so he praised God with all his might: for,
resolving to praise God, Psalm. 103.1. He summons all the faculties of his Soul
together, for the performance of that work, Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
all that is within me, bless his holy name. So, Psalm. 35.10. he promises that
all his bones, that is, all his strength, shall be exercised in prayer, All my
bones shall say, Lord who is like unto thee, etc. And so should we worship God;
if we would pray with the Spirit, we must pray with all our might, even with
the whole strength and endeavor of our soul, so that there be a concurrence of
all the faculties and powers of it, of the understanding, the will, the heart
and affections.

First, our understanding must concur. David exhorts us to sing praises with
understanding, Psalm. 47.7. So we must pray with understanding, and know well
what we ask, that it is good for us and agreeable to Gods will: otherwise God,
who would not accept of a blind sacrifice under the Law, Mal. 1.8.
will far less accept of a blind devotion under the Gospel; for all our
spiritual sacrifices should be a reasonable service; as St. Paul says, Romans
12.1. therefore our understanding and reason must be occupied in it, else it is
not reasonable. Peter made a motion for making of three Tabernacles, one for
Christ, one for Moses, and one for Elias: but our Savior took no notice of it,
because he knew not what he said, Luke 9.33. The sons of Zebedee preferred a
suit unto Christ, but did not obtain it, because they knew not what they asked,
Math. 20.22. So we may say of all ignorant Papists, who say their prayers in
Latin, that they ask they know not what, their devotion is blind, their
sacrifice is no reasonable service; for they make a sound, and utter words, but
with out understanding, like Plinie's Raven which could say, Ave Caesar
imperator; or like Cardinal Ascanius his Parrat, Lib. 3. cap. 32. In Ps. 18.
which (as Caelius Rodiginus reports) was taught to pronounce all the articles
of the Creed. It is St. Austines comparison, and the argument which he uses,
to diswade men from praying, or singing in a language they understand not. God
has endued us with reason and understanding, and we should use it when we
worship God, and therefore understand what we pray.

Again as the understanding, so also the will must concur; for nothing is done
well, but that which is done with the will. The Apostle will have all our
spiritual sacrifices to be living or quick. Romans 12.1. Now that is said to be
living, which moves of it self, and that to be dead, which does not move but
by outward forcer our prayers must be a living sacrifice, and therefore not
drawn from us by sickness and pain, or by fear, or apprehension of danger: nor
should we pray for ostentation, to get applause of men, as did the Pharisees;
nor pray only formally, and customarily, as performing a task imposed upon us:
but we should pray so willingly, freely, cheerfully, that it be our delight to
power out our souls before God. Finally the heart must concur, and we pray
with vehement affection, and with an earnest desire of those things which we
pray for. Look how earnestly a condemned Malefactor begs for his life, or a
hunger starved beggar for an alms, as earnestly must we beg Gods mercy. If
we pray but coldly and faintly, without any great desire of those things which
we ask, we do ask like Swine, who esteem not of pearls, but trample them under
their feet: And so we give God occasion to deny us, for qui timide rogat,
docet negare. Christ will have us not only to ask, but also to seek and knock.
He will have us earnest, Math. 7.17. Luke 11.5. Math. 15.22. Luke 18.1. Psalm.
103.
as was the man that came to borrow bread at midnight: Instant as was the
Cananitish Woman: Importunate, as was the Widdovv with the Judge: crying unto
God out of the depths, as David did, that is, from the depth of our hearts. For
its only the fervent prayer of a righteous man, that avails much, as S. Jam.
says this fervent prayer draws sighs and groans from the heart, which cry
loud in the ears of God. The Lord said unto Moses, Exodus 14.15. Wherefore
cryest thou unto me: and yet Moses spoke not one word: but his Spirit prayed
within him, and so fervent was his prayer that it was as a shrill shreek in
the ears of God. Hannah uttered not her voice; 1 Samuel 1.
but she prayed so fervently, that her lips shook vvithal, and she obtained her
suit. And as in fervent prayer there must be great intentention of affection,
so also great attention of mind: we must labor to have our minds well
composed and settled when we pray, free from cares and vvandring thoughts,
and intent only upon that which we are about: for how can we think that God
should hearken unto us, when we do not hearken unto our selves; or he be
mindful of us, when we do not mind what we say unto him? Christ giving
direction for private prayer, Bids us Enter into our closet and shut the doors
behind us, to avoid ostentation: so we had need to enter into the closet of
our heart, and shut the door behind us, barring out all vvorldly thoughts, to
avoid destruction. We should at least give unto God that respect, which
civility teaches us to give unto men, especially our superiors, not to turn
away our mind, till our tale be done. Christ prayed often in a Mountain, John
17.1.
apart from the World, and he lift up his eyes to Heaven, when he prayed; so
should we turn away our hearts from all the creatures, and have them wholy
fixed, bent, and set, upon God. Thus, if we pray by the direction of the
word, and with the assistance of the Spirit, zealously and fervently, we are
sure that we pray with the Spirit. And this is the only praying with the
spirit, that can be expected from us now, who have not the gift of tongue*
nor any immediate inspiration.

Our next care must be, to pray with Understanding, as it follovveth in the
text, I will pray with understanding also. That is, I will pray so as the
congregation may understand me: that this is the meaning of the words, is
evident by that which follows, else, if thou shall bless with the Spirit,
that is, (as St. Ambrose well expounds it) If thou utter the praise of God, In
1 Cor. 14.
in a tongue unknown to the hearers; how shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned, say Amen, seeing he understands not what thou say? Thou
verily give thanks well, but the other is not Edifyed. So that to pray or
bless with understanding, is to pray so, as the unlearned may be able to say
Amen, understand what we say, and be edifyed by it. And again, ver. 19. In the
Church, I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I
might teach others, then ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. Where he
expounds speaking with understanding, to be a teaching of others by our voice,
and he opposes it to speaking in an unknown tongue. So that there can be no
doubt of, the meaning of these words, but that to pray with understanding is,
to pray so, as to be understood. Therefore Beza renders it well, Precabor
intelligentia, I will pray with intelligence, that is, to the understanding of
others, this is indeed the scope and purpose of the Apostle, throughout this
whole Chapter, to show, that all spiritual gifts should be used to
edification, for there were at that time diverse in the Church of Corinth, who
having the gift of tongues, prayed, and sung, in an unknown tongue whereby the
People were not edified, but amazed, and the Apostle here corrects the abuse of
that gift, and will have nothing spoken in the Church, but that, whereby the
Church may receive edifying. And, if he would not suffer them to pray in an
unknown tongue, which they had by miracle, and special gift of the holy Spirit;
far less would he suffer men, now, to pray in an unknown tongue, which they
have not by, miracle, or any gift of the Spirit; but by their own study and
labor. They of Corinth did pray with the Spirit, though they did not pray with
understanding: but they of Rome pray neither with the Spirit, nor with
understanding. The Apostle, in this Chapter, sets himself so much against that
practice, as if he had seen that which happened, afterward, in the Western
Church, to have all their prayers in latin, after that the Latin tongue
ceased to be the known vulgar tongue, understood by the People. He uses at
least eight or nine arguments against it, which I cannot now stay to repeat,
but the sum of them all is this, that all things in the Church should be done
to edification, and so also prayer; but no man is edified by hearing that which
he understands not. This he amplifieth in many words, ver. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11,
14, 16, 17, 19, 26. And indeed disputes so strongly against that practice, that
the Papists may do well to turn this whole Chapter out of their Bibles, as they
have done the second commandment out of their primmers, for it speaks
clearly against prayer in an unknown tongue. And so it was understood by all
the ancient Fathers, and the Church, for above six hundred years after Christ,
did religiously observe the Apostles direction, so that all Nations converted
to the faith, had their prayers in their Common vulgar tongue, as have been
fully proved by the learned Jewel, Artic. 3.
of England. And the same is confessed by many learned Papists, Aquinas, Aenaeas
Sylvius, Durand, Lyra, Eckius, and Mr. Harding, albeit he strugle hard to
instance the contrary, yet being overcome by evidence of truth, he makes this
confession, this was necessary in the primitive Church, when the faith was a
learning, and therefore they had their prayers in a common known tongue.
Against Jewel Artic. 3.
And is it not as necessary now? for the faith is still a learning, and albeit
there be not such need of miracles, now, as then, yet there is as great need of
edification, therefore, let us, have a care still to pray with understanding.

APPLICATION.
I Have now done with my text, and will only labor to bring it home by
application, that you may perceive what is my drift in this discourse, and what
is the use that I would have you make of it. It is agreed by all Christians,
that there should be public prayers in the Church, and by all Protestants,
that these prayers should be in a known vulgar tongue: the question that now
troubles us, is, whether these prayers should be extemporary, or premeditate;
and if premeditate, whether the private meditation of the Minister alone, or a
common known form wherein all may join. And if we will admit the Apostle to be
Umpire, he will afford us a clear determination of that controversy, out of
this text. For certainly, that prayer should be used in the Church, which is
most likely to be both with the spirit, and with the understanding; but so is
not extemporary prayer: It is neither with the spirit, nor yet with
understanding. Not with the spirit; for I told you before, that we cannot now
pray by immediate inspiration, and in an unknown tongue; but by the direction
and assistance of the spirit, and, that the spirit directs us to pray in the
Word, and assists us inwardly with his motions. But they who pray without
advice and consideration, cannot follow the direction of the word, nor yet
promise unto themselves the assistance of the Spirit, They cannot follow the
directions of the word, for to follow that, will require some study and
deliberation. No man can make a thing after a pattern, or make one thing like
unto another, but it will require some study and advise to compare them
together, and to fit the copy to the samplar: so we cannot make a complete
prayer, consisting of confession, petitions for things necessary,
intercessions, and giving of thanks, and square all these according to the rule
of the word; but we must take some time to study, and advise with, the Word,
for it is not every confession that will please God, nor every petition that he
will accept of: we may err in our prayers, and err so dangerously, that our
prayer be turned into sin, as David says, St. James tells us of many that
ask amiss, Psalm. 109. James 4 3.
the Disciples themselves did it when they desired fire to come down from
heaven and consume the Samaritans; which was not good. The Sons of Zebedee
desired to fit, one on Christ's right hand, the other, on his left; and, though
that was good, yet it was not a thing fit for God to grant. If they were not
privileged from error, far less are We: and therefore we had need to advise
well our prayers, taking Gods Word for our guide, we should think before we
speak, and even after that we have thought, we must not presume to lay our
thoughts upon Gods Altar, till first we have weighed them in the ballanes of
the sanctuary.

As they who pray without study and deliberation cannot follovv the
directions of the word; so neither can they promise unto themselves the
assistance of the spirit: for Gods spirit works by means, and then most
assists us, when we most endeavor. I shevved unto you before, that the
spirit, in all his other gifts and productions; requires our endeavors, and
consequently he requires the same in our prayers: and that the Apostle in that
place, Romans 8.26.
where he speaks of the spirits helping us to pray, uses a word which does
import our own study and labor; for it signifies that he helps us in our
labors together with him: so that, if we would have the spirit help us to
pray, we must labor and use the means. Yea, whatsoever God has promised
unto us, we must use the means, if we would obtain it, When Paul was in
danger of shipwreck, Act. 27. The Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a
vision by night, and assured him, that he should be safe, and all that were
with him in the Ship, and so much he told the Centurion. ver. 24. yet a little
after, when the Mariners were about to fly out of the Ship, Paul said to the
Centurion, except these Men abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. ver. 31. God
had promised that they should be all safe, yet they must use the means, else
they cannot be saved. So God has promised that the spirit shall assist us to
pray, but we must use the means, and we will find that study, and
premeditation, does soonest purchase the gift of prayer, and that the spirit of
prayer is most vigorous in him who deliberates most prudentially. But
extemporary prayers ponied out with out any deliberation, are so full of
indigested crudities, that they do not savor of the Spirit. For the Spirit of
God, is a Spirit of wisdom, he gave unto Isaiah the tongue of the learned, not
a tongue without learning, Christ promised unto his disciples, a mouth and
wisdom; not a mouth without wisdom, for a tongue without learning, and a mouth
without wisdom, are no gifts of the spirit, albeit they be in great request in
this age, with many, who reckon nothing spoken with the Spirit, unless there be
never a wise word in it. The speech which St. Paul requires in a Bishop, is
(...) speech according to learning. Tit. 1.9.
And so St. Peter will have us speak as beseems the Oracles of God. And
therefore not lightly, or inconsiderately. It is said Act. 2.4. That the Spirit
gave them utterance, where the word in the Original is far more pregnant, 1
Pet. 4.11.
for (...) signifies as much as to spoke Apothegmes, or wise sentences, and so
it is said ver. 11. that they spoke Magnalia Dei, great and high points, not
Trivialia base course stuff not worth the time it vvasteth. So that they are
far injurious unto the Spirit of God, who father their nonsense upon him.
Unto this Counsel of Solomon's, I will add the like advico from the Son of
Syrach; who, was well acquainted with Solomon's instructions, and speaks his
sense, he says Eccles. 18.23. Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be
not as one that tempts the Lord. If we must prepare our selves before we
pray, then we must advise well what to say in our prayers: they who neglect
this, and pray without deliberation, do not prepare themselves before they
pray; but tempt the Lord, because they neglect the means, and depend upon an
extraordinary assistance, and immediate inspiration, as if God should still
work miracles, only to justify their fancy.

And as extemporary prayer is not with the Spirit, so neither is it with
understanding, at least, not so much to the understanding of others, as
premeditate and well digested prayer. For a Man may pray in the vulgar tongue,
and yet not be well understood, for want of matter, want of method, want of sit
expressions; as also by reason of many Tautologies, tedious repetitions, and
empty words, signifying nothing, all which are found in extemporary prayers, so
that we may say of them truly, as it is Job. 35.16. They multiply words
without knowledge. The Apostle, here, will have the prayers of the Church to be
such, that the unlearned may say, A men, but neither learned, nor unlearned,
can say A men, to those extemporary prayers which are now in use, nor he
himself who has prayed, when he has done, he cannot truly say A men, for he
has spoken a long time, like a Man in a trance: But can hardly tell what he
has said. This is not to pray with understanding. And this draws after it
another great inconvenience, which is this, that they who have no other
prayers in their Congregations, but such as are poured out ex-tempore, can
never persuade a Papist to come into their communion; for, albeit they should
convince him of the truth of their doctrine, that it is Orthodox; yet they can
never persuade him, of the goodness of their worship, that it is free from
exception, because they cannot tell him what it is, or that it is any thing,
but what every ministers fancy does suggest unto him, in the very instant when
he is praying. And this must needs stagger him, who otherwise might prove a
convert, and make him resolve, rather to continue in the communion of his own
Church, where, albeit all their prayers be in latin; yet he is sure that they
have the public approbation of the Church, then to join with a Congregation,
where, either there is no worship at all, or that which is pretended to be
worship, has no public approbation, and is but little better understood, then
is their Latin service: Indeed neither of them, is to edification.

Thus you see that this Text does no ways justify praying ex tempore, but
condemn it. And I have diverse other exceptions against it, and will only
briefly point at the chiefest of them, and so conclude. And first, I desire you
to consider Solomon's advice, Ecclesiastes 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and
let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God; now when we pray
unto God, we utter our mind unto him, and I know not who are hasty, and rash,
too, if they be not, who utter their mind as fast as it comes, and never think
what they are to say unto God, but when they are saying it, and then speak
quicquid in buccam venerit, what ever comes uppermost? certainly this is not
according to Solomon's advice. And he backs his precept with a strong reason,
taken from the infinite distance between God and us. For God is in Heaven, and
thou upon Earth. God is in Heaven, full of glory, Majesty, and power: and we
upon the Earth, dust and ashes, unclean worms: this consideration should breed
in us a reverential awe of the Majesty of God, make us wary what we offer unto
him, and careful that we offend not with our tongue, and therefore, to advise
well our prayers, least, through inadvertence, and want of consideration, we
offer strange fire upon Gods altar, and he cast back on our faces the dung of
our sacrifice. They belie the Spirit of God, and greatly dishonor him, when
they pretend him to be the Author, and inditer, of their wild, impertinent,
discourse, which no wise Man would willingly own. And sometime, in their
prayers, they vent both Heresy and Blasphemy, and so entitle the holy-spirit,
not only to their folly, but also to their impiety, which is a blaspheming of
the holy ghost.

Again consider that God commanded, in the Law, Dcut. 16.16.
that they should not appear before him empty; but bring their offerings with
them. And, albeit those outward sacrifices did belong unto the ceremonial
worship, and are now abrogated by the sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross; yet
there is a morality in that precept, which still binds us, to offer something
unto God, in acknowledgment of that homage which we owe unto our Creator: and
what that is, the Psalmist tells us Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving
and pay thy vows unto the most high, and call upon me, etc. But they who pray
ex tempore, bring nothing with them to offer; but take it upon a sudden, even
after they have presented themselves before the Lord. Which must needs be a
dough-baked sacrifice, unworthy to be offered unto God: for he requires a
sacrifice without blemish; the very choice of the Flock. And when they did
offer him the refuse, the blind and the the lame; Exodus 29.1. Levit. 22.19,
20, 21.
he bid them offer it unto their Governor, Mal. 1.8. And verse. 14. he calls
them deceivers which did so, and cursed them, cursed be the deceiver, which
has in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt
thing, for I am a great King says the Lord of hosts. This reason is full of
moral equity; God is a great King, and therefore look what respect you give
unto your prince, you must give no less unto him, you will not offer unto your
prince a naughty thing; but the very best in its kind of any thing that you
have; so that which you offer unto God, must be the best, even in humane
estimate. When you are to appear before your Prince, you will present your
selves with great reverence, bowing your selves unto the ground: even so we
must bow our selves before the most high God, says the Prophet Micah: Mic. 6.6.
We must worship, bow down, and kneel before the Lord our maker. Psalm. 95.6,
When you are to speak unto your Prince you will, deliberate and advise what to
say, weigh your thoughts, and choose your words: so you should advise and
deliberate what to say, when you are to speak unto God; and not offer unto him
your rude and imperfect conception, which you would not offer unto your
Governor, in a serious matter: they who do so, have a mean esteem of God; for
they think any thing good enough for him: The very Heathen had more care of
their devotions, and greater respect to their Paynim Gods, for the prayers
which they offered unto them, were composed with great art and skill.

And they have too high an esteem of themselves, and too great a confidence in
their own abilities, who dare trust to their own fancy and invention, before
the Majesty of Heaven. 2 Samuel 24.24.
He who knows God and Himself, will know his distance, and keep it, and
neither appear before his God, empty, nor yet with that which cost him nothing.

Finally, to pray ex tempore, especially in public, is against the rule of
prudence: for he is esteemed a wiser man, who considers and deliberates
before he speak; then he who speaks without any deliberation: Solomon says,
The heart of the Wise teaches his mouth, Prove. 16.23. His heart teaches his
mouth, because he considers, and deliberates, what to say. So that they who
pray without any deliberation, are none of Solomon's wise men. From all this
which I have said, it evidently follows, that we should studdy and deliberate
our prayers, especially those which we utter in public. We should fit and
prepare our selves to seek the Lord; like the bride who makes her self ready,
Rev. 19.7. and as the wise Virgins, who trimmed their lamps, before they went
out to meet the bridegroom. Math. 25.7. our hearts should first be inditing a
good matter, before our tongue be the pen of a ready writer.

And of all premeditated prayers, none are so sit for the Church, Psalm. 45.1.
as set forms, composed by the governors of the Church, wherein all may join?
These prayers are most according to the rule of this Text, that is, with the
Spirit, and with understanding also: with the Spirit; for it were strange If
the Church should not have the Spirit of prayer in her compositions, as well as
any of her Children. Yea, in all reason, the public Spirit is to be trusted
before the private; for the promise of the Spirit, is made unto the Church, and
especially when her pastors are assembled together. And these prayers are most
with understanding, because most to the understanding of the People. In this,
set forms have the advantage of all other prayers, that they are best
understood. And the Apostle here prefers praying with understanding, before
praying with the Spirit, so that albeit praying ex tempore, were a praying with
the Spirit, as is pretended, but falsely; yet were they nothing so convenient
for the Church, as set forms, which are better understood, because the People,
are acquainted with them, bear some part in them by their suffrages and
answers, and so heartily join in prayers, for which cause it is called Common
prayer. So it was always in the ancient Church: Se Just. Mart. Apol. 2. Aug.
op. 118.
then the prayers of the Church were not, dispatched between the Priest and his
Clark, as now in the Church of Rome, nor performed by the Minister alone, but
all the People answered the Priest, and so they all prayed and sung together.
This is the Juge Sacrificium, the perpetual Public Sacrifice, which never
Church wanted. The Church of the Jews had their Liturgy, which they used
Daily, and the Jews, even at this day, do observe it. And the Christian Church,
from the very beginning, had Liturgies and common forms of worship. Jame. the
first Bishop of Jerusalem, (of whom you read in the Acts of the Apostles)
employed himself so much in composing of Liturgies for the use of the Church,
that he was called Jacobus Liturgicus. So did St. Basil, St. Chrisostom, St.
Ambrose, and others.

Or if you like better the exemple of reformed Churches, Mr. Calvin advised all
Churches to use such set forms of prayer from which the Ministers might not
vary, Calv. Ep. 87. ad prot. Aug quod al fo^mam precum and vituum Eccl siae,
valde probo, ut certa illa excet, a qua past nibus in functione sua descedere,
non liceat, tam ut consulatur quorundam Simplicitati and imperitis, quam ut
certius ita conster omnium inter ses Ecclesiarum consensus postremo, ut obviam
eatur desultoriae quorundam levitati qui novationes quasdam affectant.
and he gives good reasons for it, therefore I will repeat his own words,
concerning a form of prayer, and Ecclesiastical rites, I very well like, that
it be a certain and constant one, from which the pastors of the Church may in
no ways depart, or vary, as well to provide for the simplicity and
unskilfulness of some, as also, that the consent of all churches may more
certainly be known, and lastly, to meet with the unconstant levity of some Men
who affect innovation. And so all the reformed Churches, as they had their
confessions of faith, so they had books of Common prayer, and administration of
Sacraments. Even the Church of Scotland, albeit their reformation, was in times
of rebellion, brought in by popular fury, and so with too much heat, and
opposition against Popery: yet they were not then so full of the spirit of
Munster, but that they used set forms of prayer daily, and never Minister went
into a Putpit, but before he uttered any words of his own, he first read a
prayer out of the book, containing a general confession of fin. T. C. reply.
And they who at first opposed the liturgy of the Church of England, did then
protest, that they did not not dislike set forms of prayer, but approve well
of them; only they would not approve of that book which came so near to the
Romish missals. But now we see that the Divil is of an encroaching nature, that
if we yield him an inch, he will take a span: For, having prevailed, to have
that book laid aside; now they will have no set forms at all, not so much as
the Lords prayer: nor any premeditate prayer, but will have ministers pour out
all their prayers ex tempore. And I dare say, that the Devil will allow them
such prayers; for they will never batter his Kingdom, but enlarge it. For such
a form, or rather no form of worship, does occasion multitude of Schisms in
the Church: when every one prays after his own fashion, and in his prayer
vents his opinions, which are not always according to faith and Godliness;
there must be (as St. Jerome says) Tot Schismata, quot Sacerdotes. The
Milevitan Council, above twelve hundred years ago, saw this evil, and provided
against it. And the Protestants in France, at this day, are aware of it: For
albeit they make little use of a liturgy, in their daily ministration, save
only for Psalms and Lessons; yet in the administration of the Sacraments, they
bind all Ministers precizely to the words of the book, so that if any Minister
in France, in the administration of either Sacrament, should neglect the
prayers of the book, and conceive prayers of his own, he would be deprived. For
they know well, that there can be no unity in religion, without some uniformity
in worship. When all particular congregations communicate in a common form of
worship, then is the Church like Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.3.
that is, built compact together. But when every one prays after a several
fashion, there is as great diversity of tongues, as was at the building of
Babel. That division of tongues was a curse: so it is as great blessing of God,
when the whole Church is unins labii, has, as it were, but one lip: when all
do praise God, and magnify him, togegether, as David required Psalm. 34.3. God
of his infinite mercy grant us this blessing, that we may with one mind, and
one mouth, glorify God, as the Apostle exhorts us, Romans 15.6. This shall be
my prayer while I have any being: and let all who love, the worship of God, and
the peace of the Church, say, Amen.


