DOUBLE Your Guards; IN ANSWER To a Bloody and Seditious Pamphlet, ENTITLED An
Alarm TO THE ARMIES OF England, Scotland, and Ireland.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR, 1660.

Double your Guards, etc.
THis last Week, has brought to light two Pamphlets; so exquisitely impious,
as if they had been framed in Hell, by Oliver, and Bradshaw. They speak the
Language of the damned; Horror, Despayres, and Desolation. These goodly Pieces
are christened; Plain English, -- and An Alarm. I suppose they are Twinns; the
issue of the same Brain, as they are related to the same maine end. I had nigh
finished a Reply upon the Former, when the Latter came to my Hand: comparing
which with the other; I find they correspond, so aptly, and so universally, to
the same seditious Purpose, that there is not any Interest escapes their malice,
and attempt. They advance their Dispute, and march together; that what they
cannot gain by force of Argument, they may be ready to Essay by dint of sword.
Their Plain English; is a Reasoning of the case. First with the General;
Claiming, from his Engaging for the public Liberty; a Title to his aid in
favor of a private, and enslaving Faction. It labors then, to puzle the
Presbyterian into a jelousie of the Kings faith, and honor; and consequently,
into a doubt of his own safety; should his Majesty be restored. Nay, not
content to blaspheme the Kings integrity, by a bold censure of his secret
thoughts: The shameless Beast, (the Author of it) sticks not to charge the
Secluded Members, with the Guilt of the Kings blood, upon a senseless
Inference drawn from the Declaration of both Houses in 1647. Touching the
Reasons of the Votes for non-Addresse. His aim is here to persuade them, to
accuse themselves.

How those Votes were obtained, I have showed at large: (in a Print entitled
Treason Arraigned) and it suffices; the whole Nation knows, that though the
Plague was in both Houses then; yet all were not Infected. The Rumpers only had
the Tokens: (nor all these neither) so that at last, the Seclusion of so many
as opposed the Capital Prosecution of the King, amounts to a clear act of
discrimination; a separation of the clean from the unclean.

Having there set the Presbyterians at work, upon the Question of Interest, and
safety; (and after many a lame complement to his Excellency) he cuts out worse
employment for the Phanatique Soldiery: and at the same time, breathing Hot,
and Cold: -- Reason, and Mutiny; he sollicites the General into a Compliance,
and the Army into a Tumult.

To disabuse the multitude; (if any should be mad enough to be deluded by so
gross a cheat) I Will lay the juggle open, in as few, and familiar words as
possible.

The Title speaks the business of the Pamphlet:^ ('It Is An Alarm,) and the
Application, -- (To the Officers, and Soldiery, etc.) the malice; there is
treason in the very Face on it: if the first two words cost not the Nation a
hundred thousound lives, it is not the Authors fault.

His second Page, places the Legislative Power in the Army, challenging their
promise; that before they would suffer themselves to be disbanded, or divided,
they would see the Government of these Nations established upon the just and
secure Fundamentals, and constitutions of freedom and safety to the people, in
relation, as Men and Christians, and that in the way of a Commonwealth, or
Free-state-Government, without a King, single Person, or House of Lords.

These Gentlemen (I see) resolve to be their own Carvers; not suffer themselves
to be disbanded? This Rump, would be a perpetual Army, as well as a perpetual
Parliament. Let the Nation observe now the Quality of this suggestion.

First, By the Law of Arms, it is Death; that, which these Fellows would
engage the Army in: that mutiny against their General. (for they give Him for
Lost.)

Next, It Is Treason, by the Law of the Land; the Usurpation.

Thirdly, It Is Murder. Murder, intentionall, in the bare conception of it;
and actual, sure enough, so soon as that intention is but known. Now let us
weigh the benefits it brings, against the Crimes, and dangers that attend it.
Freedom, and Safety, to the People, both as Men, and Christians. There Is the
proposition.

Freedom, there can be none, to the People; where a particular, and little
party pretends to impose upon a number 40 times greater, and enslave them.

Nor Safety: where in that Disproportion the Nation is engaged against a
Faction: and every sword that is raised against it, carries damnation upon the
Point on it.

Neither do they act as Men. Man, is a reasonable and sociable Creature. Here
's a Design, that breaks the Bond of Order: and betrays a manifest folly, by
a contrivance so impracticable, and mischievous at once; Idly to labor the
saving of a few, guilty Persons, at the Price of an universal, dissolution.

For Christianity; either my Bible's false, or their Opinion, that shall
pretend to raise a Christian Government, upon a Basis of Rebellion, and
bloodshed.

From hence, the terrible trifle proceeds to the distribution of his design
into three heads.

First, what the Cavalier says. Secondly, What the Presbyterian thinks.
Thirdly, What the Armies best Friends, (scornfully called Commonwealth-men, and
Phanatiques) do foresee, concerning the present transactions in the three
Nations. And lastly, his own observations, and seasonable advice.

He tells us, The Cavaliers opinion, that the Generall's intention is to bring
in the King, and grounded upon these Reasons.

First, That upon the 11th. of February last, he sent an imposing Letter to the
Parliament, (in scorn called the Rump) and thereupon, (without any Order from
them marched with their Army into London, then esteemed and made by him, (in
destroying their gates, etc.) their implacable enemies; and at night suffered
so many Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells, and publicly drinking healths to the
King, and a Free-Parliament; Rosting, and burning of Rumps; Hearing, and seeing
his Masters in open Street declared Murderers, and Traitors, etc. -- Feasted,
and associated with the Kings Friends, etc.

This is a grievous charge, assuredly: but not Unanswerable; and (by the
license of our Observator.) This I reply.

The Generall's Commission expired upon the tenth of February, so He was free,
the eleventh. Again, It was the design of the Rump, to make the General
odious, and therefore they imposed upon him such barbarous Orders as probably
might leave him no retreat. While he professed to Act by any Derivation from
Them; malice it self cannot but say his Excellency stood firm to every point
of Military obedience: at last, when they proceeded so severely against the
City; he interposed; but his Mediation was rejected; and more imperious
commands sent to him, this is enough to prove, 'twas not the General that made
London the Rumps implacable Enemies: But 'twas the Sordid insolences of the
Members, that made the Conventicle hateful, to the whole Kingdom, and this
appeared, by the Universal Joy that followed upon their disappointment. If the
Rump at Westminster, did by a Simpathy, fellow-feele the suffering Rumps in the
City; the Case indeed was hard; but for the rest the murderers, and Rebels
they were called, -- methinks it should not trouble folks to be called by
their Names: (that is only Liberty of Conscience, and I dare say, the people
spoke as they thought.) Are these Gentlemen's Ears so tender, and their Hearts
so hard? Is the sound of Treason and Murder so dreadful and the exercise of
it so Trivial? -- I must confess, to stay away Ten days together; (from the
11th of Feb. till the 21 as that his Masters charge him with) was something a
long Errand. But seriouslly, Gentlemen, considering 'twas his first fault,
forgive him. (true, if he kept Lewd Company, (Cavaliers,) as you say he did) I
have no more to say.

The second motive to the Cavaliers discourse, ( that his excellency will
restore the King;) is that notwithstanding his engagement, by Letter, and
Verbal promise to his Masters (that had ventured their All to secure him from
being ruined by Lamberts Army, he yet admits the Secluded-Members to sit. --
(most of whom, he absolutely knew to be for the Restoration of Charles
Stuart,) etc.

To this; it is notorious; that designs were laid to murder the General;
That the Rump received, and kept in Members impeached: that they promoted, and
gave thanks for Barebones Petition: containing matters of direct contradiction
to their Professions. In the next place; instead of the Rumpers saving the
General from being ruined by Lambert, that General saved them and touching
their Opinions, of ( Charles Stuart; as this Villain prates) the King. The
Noble General regard their Trust, not their Opinions nor did he enquire what
they were.

Thirdly; (say they) the General will bring the King in, for he;has suffered
the secluded-Members to release Sir George Booth, and his party, etc. -- Again;
they have ( de novo) voted the Covenant to be Printed, Read, and set up-and --
acknowledging the late King's Posterity: -- as likewise suffering to be
maintained in the House, that none but Jesuits and Priests are for
Free-State-Government. -- observe yet further, (says the Cavalier) that he
imprisons Common-wealth-men, and releases Royalists, etc.

These Rumpers have gotten such a trick of breaking Parliaments that it is their
public Profession now become to enforce them to the bent of the Army. Suffer,
still is the word. The General suffered the secluded Members to Release Sir
George Booth* -- The next point, is yet more remarkable: These very Covenanters
abjure the Covenant. -- As for the suffering (there it is again) to be
maintained, that only Jesuits and -- the General is not properly to take
cognizance of what passes in the House. (the King was chidden for it (exact
Collections; see the Petition of both Houses De. 14. 1641.) -- now for
imprisoning, and releasing. If it so happen, that some Common-wealth-men
deserve to be laid up; and some Royalists to be enlarged (not as such) it is
but justice to do the one, and the other; for at the rate of this subtle
Argument; Free-state-men shall be Protected against the Law, and Royalists so
persecuted likewise.

Lastly, the Cavaliers conclude as much from the Generals countenancing the
Militia; being raised and formed to murder, and destroy the Army -- and that
the same thing was done long since in Scotland: -- besides, the Irish Army have
proceeded answerable to himself. -- And diverse Officers that served the late
King have had fair promises from him, -- and several of the Kings friends are
peaceably returned from exile, etc. -- and again there is a Proviso in the Act of
dissolution,concerning the Lords being a part of the Parliament, etc

To be short, -- the General encourages the Militia to save the Countries, not
to ruin the Army, -- next; if long since done in Scotland, the better done,
the sooner: for England has been only Rump-ridden, for want of it. To this the
conform motion of Ireland, proceeds from their Commune Commens with England in
delivering themselves from the Tirunny of the Rump, for the Generals promises;
I am glad to hear it, but truly I know nothing of it. In truth it is a sad
business, Alderman Bunce his return, and the Proviso in the Act of
dissolution, (for certainly by the known Law, the Lords are no part of the
Parliament.) To speak my thoughts freely; I am very glad to hear that the
Cavaliers are of Opinion, that the King will come in but I believe it never the
more for your saying it.

Now to the sober Presbiterians: they (says our Phanatique) begin to suspect
the General: for the Cavaliers are at this instant Arming themselves in all
the three Nations, etc. -- and if Charles Stuart comes he will bring with him
Archbishops Bishops, etc. -- and then in comes his Mother -- with her
Jesuits, Priests, etc. -- and this will make little difference betwixt us, and
the Sectaries.

Now do I dote upon the sincerity of this Bubble, had he pretended to Religion
himself; had been rediculous, but putting that scruple upon the sober
Presbyterian, it is well enough. The story of the Cavaliers Arming themselves,
is a Phanatique not a Presbyterian conceit, as to the Queens bringing in
Jesuits, etc. It needs not, the Independents have enough for her Majesty and
themselves too. (how the changeable Butterfly flutters from Party to Party, and
wherever he seizes, he stains.) as to his concluding opinion, that the King
will put no difference, he may live yet to change that opinion.

He comes next to the Armies BEST FRIENDS, (as he terms them) and they preach
nothing but Fire, and Sword, if ever the King come. Oh this pestilent MILITIA!
Alas poor Phan. does it bite. Away with your Improbable Lies: The Secluded
Members threaten the Army. Yes it is a likely matter. Come Gentlemen you are
safe, if you continue honest, and lost without it. Do not you know that these
very persons that now flatter you, are the people that have taken your meat out
of your mouths; that have received sufficient for six Armies from the Nation,
and yet have left you monilesse, and ready tu perish for want of Bread? nay
Suppose their Arguments were more rational then they are, and that the King
were a Person, as famous for Cruelty as he is for Clemency, you were still
safe. You are below the stroke of Revenge. They are fearful for their own
heads, and pretend to concern themselves for you. They talk of Treachery, in
case you should recede from their Designs: They tell you of Engagements,
promises, etc -- and so do I. Remember but your Oaths and Covenants, and if you
do, you will not mix with them; they promise you the glory of after-ages: yes
you shall be Renowned with Flame and Hell too, if you engage with th^se
Desperadoes

Look back into old Stories; enquire into the different reputation of the Brave
Mayor that Killed the Rebell-Patriot, and of the Libertine himself that fell;
(a MARTYR, your Hot headed Counselor would call him) Are you Ambitious to be
chronicled with JACK OF LEYDEN, KNIPPER* DOLLING, CADE, TYLER, RAVILLAG,
BALTAZAR GERARD, etc. Desire your Brainsick Illuminates to tell you Muncer's
story, go to, beware of separating. Remember them that cried You take too much
upon you ye sons of Levi: the Congregation is Holy every one of them, and the
Lord is among them. To come a little nearer home. Reflect upon the Ashes
decas'd Patrons of their Franteck Zeal. Their very flesh is not more putrid
then their memories. Come nearer yet, and look impartially among your living
Partisans (I speak of such, as our Pamphleter styles Patriots) do not you find
them clothed with the Spoils of Widows, and of Orphans? nay look into their
Morals, even toward those, that with the loss of Blood, and Peace have raised
them: how Thanklesse, and how Avaritious are they? Examine now their Principles
of Courage, and their Military virtues: do they not Sneak into Committees, and
there, dispose of all the advantages of your Unchristian Hazzards? YOU kill the
HEIR, but THEY possess the INHERITANCE.

Having abundantly perplexed the minds of his weak Brethren, he is as Intent,
now, how to entangle the Interests of the Nation. The man is willing to do any
thing, that may help on the work of undoing All; and here, he is ballancing
Accounts: -- casting up, how many Millions will pay the Court-Debts; and repair
the Losses of his Majesty's Friends. For that, I think the next Parliament may
as well compose the Difference, as either He, or I. This only I may say, it is
not the care of the Public which imploys him so much: His Sins are greater
than he can bear.

AIl this is nothing, compared with what he has yet to tell you. Observe him
well, and ask him, how he looks when he Lies? Upon his Knowledge, the Militiaes
are resolved to cut the Souldjours Throats in their Beds. Why does he not
discover who they are? Still the bloody 11th. and 12th. of February runs in his
Head; The Villainies of that Night, how hardly does he digest them! and then,
the Catalogue of Saints, (the Holy-ones of the Rump) that nettles the Bumme
terribly. That, marquis them out for a Massacre, he says. The Worthyes have
behaved themselves well the mean while, that call themselves the People. Why,
at the worst, if the People have a mind to destroy themselves, they cannot
begin better than at the Rump; that is a good way from the Heart.

Now have a care, for I Will hang you, in a Rope of your own twisting. The story
of your Governor is every bodies tale. I Will only take the Applicable Part; we
love the TREASON but we hate the TRAITOR. 'Twas you Btray'd your Countries
trust to the Army. They love the Treason, but they hate the Traitor. ( It Is as
Fit, as if it had been made for you)

Now your Advice; which is scarce worth a Fee; for -- you propose things
Impossible; Rendezvoz first, you say: why you Phansy (sure) that the General is
of the Plot; and that his Officers are all mad; and then you propose a
Confederacy, as 'twas at New Market: your little Agitators, etc. -- Phy, Phy!
Gentlemen, here is the difference of the Case, the Nation then, was with the
Revolted Party against the Great ones: Now; they are Unanimously against you; in
any such Design. Your General is a Gentleman, and a Souldjer: and every Man
that is either, (in the Kingdom) will dye at's Feet: His Officers are Persons
that understand Honor, and the Discipline of War. There Is not ^ man among
them, but when he comes to pass a Sober Thought, upon so base an Action as a
Munity, would rather Perish, than Promote it.

Beside; you are discovered with the first breath that utters the least
Syllable, tending to a Conspiracy. Could I believe, the Conscience of that
Traitor that advises you to this, would let him Sleep, I should believe his
Counsel but a Dream, it is so remote from any due Coherence of right Reason.
Come; shall I Counsel you a little? Be Obedient to your Superiors;
Compassionate to your Country; Just to your Equals; In sine; serve God, and
Honor those whom he has set over you for your Good.

It Is not the Fool's ^eviling of his Betters, that mends your Cause, or makes
ours worse. There are (as he says) Ropes twisting, I believed, (and there the
man's a Conjurer) but they are preparing for such Imps as himself. He tells
you; Gallows are setting up for the executions of your friends; (and he
accounts himself one of your friends) who knows what may come ou't? He
concludes with a Proverb. Men Armed, are seldom Harmed. take mine too; and so
shall I conclude. Save a Thief from the Gallows, and he will Cut your Throat.

April 4 1660. Libido Dominandi, Causa Belli.


