A DECADE OF GRIEVANCES, Presented and approved to the Right Honorable and
High Court of Parliament, against the Hierarchy or government of the Lord
Bishops, and their dependant offices, by a multitude of people, Who are
sensible of the ruin of Religion, the sinking of the State, and of the plots
and insultations of enemies against both.

clergymen with high church accoutrements fall in disorder from a tree by a
church in disrepair

The tottering Prelates, with their trumpery all,
Shall moulder down, like Elder from the wall.
Printed in the year, 1641.

SIONS PLEA Against The Prelacy.
RIght Honorable and high Senators, you are not unacquainted how the
affrighting and turmoyling troubles of the heart speak in the faces of all
true hearted subjects, expressing often by their sighs and groans, and also
vented by their patheticall complaints, the moving cause whereof is our
calamity, partly already seized, and partly making haste (as it is further
threatened) to seize upon us. But to our shame and confusion of faces, we must
confess, that of the provoking cause of this calamity, (namely sin) we are
nothing so sensible as we should be; or if we complaint of sin, yet we find
not out that Ashteroth or maine national sin which is the conjunct or
immediate working cause of all the evil that is upon us. When a body politic
is run all into one festered sore of sin, and one benumming bruise of
judgment, then the universal and painful distemper takes away the
discerning faculty of the master sore that has bred and fed all the rest,
which indeed must either be sought out and removed (as the principal cause) or
it will never prove a cure. Though the wrath of God be revealed against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness, yet for some one capital sin especially,
the Lord departs from a State, and turns it upside down. This might be
instanced in Israel, joining himself unto his idols, which made the Lord unto
him as a moath, and unto the house of Judah as rottenness. This principle
Israel understood, when they sought again and again, and sought out the cause
why he fell before Benjamin. The same course took Joshua in humbling himself to
find out Achan, and the excommunicate thing. He might have found out, and also
removed many other sins, yet if he had not found out the thing of the curse,
he might have mourned his heart out, before he had prevailed with the Lord
against the enemy.

How to find out Achan, or golden wedge and Babilonian garment, hoc opus, etc.
for it is not obvious to every man: Yea this spirit is neither found out, nor
cast out, but by fasting, and prayer. Yet woeful experience, the common
schoolmaster, has formerly discovered to the Chariots and horsemen of Israel,
and now does discover this very same to be the very chief cause of our
calamity that we pitch upon; we do not exclude our own sins, nor others
sins, for many sins and many enditemens are against us; but this is the master
sin, as we conceive, and that upon this ground, that the capital sin of a
nation is not the higest sin abounding in the highest measure (against which
there is any laws established;) but that is the maine and master sin, which
is established by a law. And this is that framing of mischife by a law, that
the prophet speaks of, called in another place, the commandment of man
establishing sin.

Now give us leave (Right Honorable) to demand, what sin is established by law
in this commonwealth, but the hierarchy and their acoutrements? and therefore
we verily believing by the grievances following, offer to demonstate that the
hierarchy and their housholdstuffe, is the capital sin and maine cause why
all this evil is come upon us.

I.
First, may it please your honors to take notice, that the calling of the
Hierarchy, their dependants, offices and ceremonies, whereby they subsist, are
all unlawful and Antichristian.

II.
The hierarchicall government cannot consist in a nation with foundnesse of
doctrine, sincerity of Gods worship, holiness of life, the glorious power of
Christ's government, nor with the prosperity and safety of the commonwealth.

III.
The present Hierarchy are not ashamed, to bear the multitu^e (...), that
their calling is Iure divino. Bu^ they dare not but confess, when they are put
to it, that their ca^ling is a part of the Kings prerogative. So that they put
upon God what he abhors, and will hold of the King when they can do no
other.

IV.
They abuse many w^^es that power from the King, by changing, ^dding, and
taking away at their pleasure, to the greevous vexation of the subject, the
dishonouring of his Majesty, and the making of the laws of none effect.

V.
The privileges of the laws and the hierarchiall government cannot consist
together.

VI.
The loialty of obedience to the Kings Majesty and his laws, cannot possibly
stand with the obedience to the hierarchy.

VII.
All the unparalleled changes, bloody troubles, devastations, desolations,
persecutions of the truth, from forraines or domestics, since the year of our
Lord 600. arising in this Kingdom; and all the good interrupted or hindered,
has had one or more of the hierarchy, as principal causes of them.

VIII.
All the fearful evils of sin and judgment, for the present reigning amongst
us, and threatening against us (to omit the black desolation of our sister
Churches) we conceive to be the birth of the womb^, and the nu^slings of the
breast of the hierarchy.

IX.
If the herarchy be not removed, the scepter of Christ's government, namely
disciplin^, advanced to its place, there can be no healing of our sore, no
taking up of our controversi^ with God; yea our desolations, by his rarest
Judgments, are like to be the astonishment of all Nations.

X.
Lastly, right Honourab^^; I^ you strike at the hierarchy, removing that
Ashteroth or grand I^oll, and erect the purity of Christ's ordinances, we are
confident that there shall be a ceasing from exorbitant sins, a removal of
judgment, a recovery of Gods favor, a repairing of the breaches of the Church
and Commonwealth, a redeeming of the state, a dashing Babells brats against the
stones. Yea this shall remove the wi^ked from the throne, strike a terror, and
astonishment to the hearts of all foreign and domesticke foes. In a word, God
will go forth with us, and smite our enemies. Yea a glorious prosperity shall
rest upon Zion, King, State, and Commonwealth.

Thus having laid a Dec^de of evils arising as so many corroding ulcers out of
the body of the hierarchy, we wish your Honors might prevail with them by
fair means; to take Hierax for a president without exception: who forsook the
Prelacy (as Isidore witnesses in his epistle 223.) meeerly for the
unlawfulness of the calling; which calling was not then come to that height of
unlawfulness by many degrees that now it is. A certain Monk being chosen
Bishop, refused the burden, who after his death (as they say, Caesar. Histerb.
Illustr. miracl. lib. 2. cap. 29.) appeared to his friend, speaking to him
thus, Si Episcopus fuissem peritssem, If I had been a Bishop, says he, I had
been damned. To conclude, we desire to say no more to your Honors, but up and
do what the Lord has bidden you.

Magnum iter ascendis, sed dat tibi gloria vires,
Non est e terris mollis ad astra via.
FINIS.

