SEVEN QVESTIONS ABOUT THE CONTROVERSY between the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, AND THE
Separatists and Anabaptists, breifely discussed.

1. Whether is the Church of England as it now stands a true Church? 2. Whether
the Church of England be a right National Church? 3. Whether are the Ministers
in the Church of England sent of God, and so are true Ministers or not? 4.
Whether is the Baptism of Infants a true and lawful Baptism or no? 5.
Whether it be lawful to be Rebaptized or not? 6. Whether is it lawful to
separate from all the public Ordinances and Christian Assemblies in our
English Church, because there are some defects in Discipline, and in other
things amongst us? 7. Whether is it necessary to demolish our Churches
(Steeple Houses as the Separatists call them,) and to build them in other
places, because they were built by Idolaters for Idolatrous worship, were
abused with Images, and dedicated to Saints?
By IMMANVEL KNVTTON, Preacher of Gods Word at Beeston in Nottingham-shire.

Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, there is
one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling;
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all,
and through all, and in you all. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. London, Printed by Tho:
Pain, and are to be sold by Andrew Kembe at Margrets Hill in Southworke. Anno
Dom. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE COMMITTEE of Parliament in Nottingham, Immanuel Knutton,
Wishes all present happiness and future blessedness.
IT is well known to your Honors, that I endured a long and tedious bondage
at Newarke, together with my godly Concaptive and fellow labourer in the work
of the Ministry, M. William Hewit, for the space of almost thirty weeks; and
how God wrought our enlargement, by the worthy instrument of his glory,
Captain John Needham Governor of Killingworth Castle in Warwickshire. But at
my return to Nottingham from Newarke, I found this Garrison much distracted by
some Separatists in it, who desert our public Assemblies and the Divine
Ordinances, and have seduced too many to their way; In my conference with them,
I found their Tenets unchristian, and themselves pertinacious in them; Their
tenets were these, 1. The Church of England is no true Church of Christ. 2. The
Ministers of this Church are not true Ministers, not called of God. 3. Baptism
of Infants is no true Baptism, therefore not lawful. 4. It is not lawful to
hear us Ministers Preach, least they should by their presence approve of our
Popish calling by the Bishops, and because we preach in popish steeplehouses,
also because we were Baptized in our Infancy, but if we will renounce our
calling by the Bishops; Preach at the Market-crosse, not in the Steeplehouse;
and be rebaptized, they well hear us, otherwise not. 5. Our steeplehouses
ought to be demolished, neither is it lawful to worship God in them. These
their opinions too many in this Garrison approve of, and follow, therefore I
have breifely answered their arguments and published them* that I might hereby
excite others more able then my self, to handle these points of controversy
more fully; and in the mean time I beseech your Honors to suppress these
errors offencive both to God and the godly, least these Schisms turn to
heresies, endeavor to extirpate all Popery, Scisme, and Prophainnesse, as the
Covenant enjoynes you; which you heard worthily explicated and urged home to
your consciences in St. Mary's Church on Thursday August 8* by that faithful
Minister of Christ M. Richard Whit-Church in his Lecture Sermon upon that Text,
Jer. 50.5. Almighty God establish you in his truth, direct you ever by his
spirit, secure you and this Garrison by his presence, or own your designs
with comfortable success, to the glory of his name, and to the perpetual
happiness of this Nation, Amen.

So prays your Honors humble Servant Jmmanuel Knutton.
From my Study at Beeston, August 16. 1644.
SEVEN QVESTIONS about the Controversy between the Church of England and the
Separatists and Anabaptists, breifely discussed.
QVEST. I. Whether is the Church of England as it now stands a true Church?


Next I affirm it is a true Church, yea the spouse of Christ.

England has the matter and form of a true Church; the matter of a Church,
are men and women in a right Logical sense, matter which is one of the causes
has this property, it is passive; for action is from the form which is called
the beginning of doing, as matter is of suffering, so are men by nature (in the
internal and real work of grace in conversion) passive, Phil. 2.13. such
matter our Church has; it has also the form of a Church, the form of a
thing in strict logical sense, is a chief cause which actuates the matter and
perfects it, it is a constituting cause; now the form or constituting cause of
a Church is faith, which brings it into relation to Christ, and therefore in
Scripture the Church is called the Lords Spouse, Vineyard, House, etc. because
of its relation to him: this form our Church has, it has many true
believers: Now Discipline, though it conduce to the well being of a Church to
keep it in a sweet order, yet it is not the cause of a Church, it does not give
being to a Church, as the cause gives being to a thing; in nature a man is
begotten and borne, but the order he is tied to observe in his life, makes him
not a man, but conduces to his well being in his life, so is Discipline to the
Church; so then our Church has many true believers, who by faith are united to
Christ, and are thereby made members of his body (as the Separatists
acknowledge) and if they help to make up his body, they must needs be Christ's
Church, for his body is his Church, Col. 1.18.24. Ecclsia est caetus hominum
vocatorum, Dr. Ames. 1 Cor. 1.24 1 Cor. 10 32.

England has the essential notes and marks of a true Church of Christ.

1. One is the word of God purely and powerfully preached, professed, and
maintained, which always gathers a people to the Lord, being so taught, 2
Cron. 13.10, 11, 12.

2. The lawful administration of the two Sacraments according to Christ's
institution, Mat. 28.19, 20.

3 The true obedience to the word of God, a right following Christ's voice, and
conforming to his will, John 10.27.

4. The union with God by his spirit and faith, and with his Saints by love,
Col. 1.4. 2 Cor. 6.16. Romans 8.14.

But this Church wants the Discipline of Christ, therefore no true Church.

Corinth was, in which was wanting the execution of spiritual Discipline, and
more horrible abuses of the ordinances then in England, yet Paul writes to it
as to a true Church, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 30. So the Churches of
Galatia maintained justification by works, which we account a damnable heresy
in the Romish Church at this day, yet Paul called them Churches, though this
heresy be worse then the want of complete Discipline and other Ceremonies in
our Churches. Also there wanted true Discipline amongst the Israelites, and was
more profane abuses of Gods worship then is amongst us, yet we account them
to have been a true Church, 1 Samuel 2.16, 17, 22, 29.

England was rightly called and constituted at the first by the preaching of
the word and gracious Laws of the Magistrate.

But it should have been gathered only by the word taught, not by constraint
from the Magistrate:

Chron. 33.16. 2 Chronicles. 34.32, 33. 2 Chronicles. 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Magistrates may compel Infidells to here the word, 2 Chronicles. 30. They are
keepers of both tables, they must abolish Idolatry and prophainnesse, by
command from the word, and they have as good ground to cause people to attend
the public Ordinances.

But to believe, is a voluntary act, and must not be enforced. Psalm. 110.3,

Luke 14.23. The guests must be compelled to come in, though not to eat when
they are come. Compelled, not by persuasions; for these were the first
invitations; therefore by further means. So then both Word and Sword was
effectual through Gods blessing to gather a Church in this Island, the Gospel
was worthily taught in King Edwards days, which brought 300. Martires in Queen
Mary's days to the Stake, and many godly professors to the succeeding times in
Queen Elizabeth's days, there was great confluence of zealous Professors who
spread the Gospel over the land, and drew flocks of hearers to them: then came
a Christian Edict from the State, that every man should yield obedience to this
truth wherein they had been thus instructed: it was performed by the most,
whose submission was an actual profession of their faith and repentance.



But the Church is a company of men and women called, as Doctor Ames describes
it, now in England the most people are uncalled, prophaine, etc.

Mat. 22.14. Many are outwardly called to be Members of the Church visible,
entered thereinto by Baptism, made partakers outwardly of the word and
Sacraments, but few of these belong either to Gods eternal Election; or are
effectually called and chosen to be Members of the Church invisible. So John
15, 2. We are in Christ two ways, 1. By external profession, frequenting the
Ordinances, having a form of godliness but, etc. these are Members of the
Church visible: 2. By real implantation, and these are the true spiritual
Members of Christ, both these our Church has; the common sort are outwardly
called by the word, initiated by baptism, and have a form of Religion, and
are outward Members of the Church visible, as truly as such were in the Jewish
Church, and as Judas was in Christ's family, and as Hypocrites are Members of
any reformed Church, for Hypocrites are worse then the openly prophaine.

Cor. 3.9. Yet in that Church were horrible crimes, incest maintained. 1 Cor.
5.1.2. Some of them denied the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.12. Though we have many
dumb dogs and wicked people, yet the Church receives its denomination from the
better part, not from the major part, as an heap of wheat having much chafe
in it.

QVEST. II. Whether the Church of England be a right National Church?






2. But I add further, that no National Church is mentioned in the New
Testament, Because there was no such, during the abode of Christ and his
Apostles upon Earth, but only particular Churches gathered by the Apostles
preaching amongst the Heathen, there was no King nor Potentate that embraced
the Christian Faith, for 300. years, till Constantine the great Emperor of
Rome, who did most zealously receive, countenance, and promote the progress of
the Gospel, and encouraged the Ministers of it exceedingly.

3. If the judgment of Mr. Brightman, and some other learned Divines upon the
Revelation, be Orthodox and sound, (which I question not) then National
Churches are spoken of, and prefigured by those seven Asian Churches, whom that
Eagle-eyed Expositour looked upon as Types of succeeding Churches, and those
Churches whom they set out to be the Counterpaine, as Sardis set out the Church
of Germany, Laodicea our English Church, Philadelphia set out the Churches of
France, Helvetia, Suevia, Geneva, Holland, Scotland, because they live by one
and the same form of Ecclesiastical Government, and so of the rest.

4. Lastly, In the Old Testament are diverse illustrious prophecies of National
Church of the Jews, when God shall convert them and bring them back to, and
settle them in their own Kingdom, for the Prophets frequently speak of it.
Isa. 60. Isa. 61. Isa. 62. and 63. and 64. etc. Jer. 30. Jer. 31. Jer. 33.12,
13. Ezekiel. 34.25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Ezekiel. 36.24. Ezekiel. 37.25. Likewise we find
these Prophets speaking of National Churches amongst the Gentiles, which
should come and join with the Church of the Jews. Isa. 49 23. Isa. 60.16.
Isa. 19, 24.25. Doubtless there shall be many famous National Churches after
the conversion of the Jews, which I hope draws on fast. And when those days
are come, there will be more famous National Churches then ever the old Jewish
Church was. Zach. 14.20.21

But the Church of England wants those Church Officers mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11.
which Christ left to his Church.

Jerusalem, from the time of Christ's ascension, till the Election of the 7
Deacons? those hundred and twenty Disciples, Acts 1.15. And 3000. Converts,
Acts 2.41. those continual troops that flocked to the Apostles, were they no
true Church? Let the Apostles and Evangelists be Pastors and Doctors: where
were their Elders, Deacons, Releevers? Afterward when Deacons were ordained,
yet what news is their of Elders till Acts 11.30. Yet that of Jerusalem was
more forward then the rest: we will not (as the Separatists are wont) argue
from Scriptures negatively: no proof, yet much probability is in St. Paul's
silence: He writes to Rome, Corinth, and other Churches: Those his divine
letters, in a sweet Christian civillity, salute even ordinary Christians: and
would he have utterly passed by all, mention of these Church Officers, amongst
his so precise acknowledgement of lesser titles in others, if they had been
ere this ordained? Romans 1.8. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 1.7. Gal. 4.15. All these,
notwithstanding all this, were true Churches, famous, forward and exemplary.
Only the Phillippian Church is styled with Bishops and Deacons, but no Elders
besides them. Phil. 1.2.

But through Gods great mercy, we have many who conscionably teach and feed, by
teaching call them what you please, Lecturers, Parsons, Vicars, etc. If they
preach Christ truly, upon true inward abilities, upon a sufficient (if not
perfect) outward vocation, such are Pastors and Doctors allowed by Christ: we
stand not upon circumstances and appendancies of the fashions of ordination,
manner of choice, attire, titles, maintenance, but if for substance these be no
true Pastors and Doctors, Christ never had any in his Church since the Apostles
left the Earth.

QVEST. III. Whether are the Ministers in the Church of England sent of God,
and so are true Ministers or not?


Romans 10.15. Jer. 23.21, 22. As if he had said, I gave no commission to these
Prophets, yet they ran, as of their own heads, etc. If they had received
directions and creands from me, and had delivered them accordingly to my
people, they should have labored to have turned them from their lewd courses.
Where the Lord shows that the conscionable, and able preaching of his word,
proves that he sends such about that work.

Jer. 23.32. 1 Cor. 9.2. Yea. the Separatists themselves received their first
Illumination, Faith, and other graces from the word preached by us, before they
made a divorcement from us.

But the Ministers of the Church of England were called by the Prelates, whose
calling is Antichristian, from the Pope, therefore they are not the Ministers
of Jesus Christ.



Separates, every Vlebeian Artificer has power to elect and ordain by virtue
of his Christian profession (the act of the worthiest standing for all) how can
they deny this right to persons in some measure qualified for this work?

Mat. 20.25, 26.

is worthy to be followed from whomsoever it comes, though from an enemy. I
see not how the latter is unlawful, if one be qualified with fidelity and
ability, he ought to preach the word; (though the Prelates licenced and
commanded him) because as yet here was no other outward way of calling
Ministers to preach in this Church of England, appointed and established by
authority.

I heard of an Usurer in this Kingdom, who had gotten very much money by usury
and unjust gain, he made it his only calling, (which doubtless is unlawful)
it pleased God to convince him of the unlawfullnesse of his usury, he made
restitution largely to his debtors, and sent his servant with restitution money
to diverse of them, though his course of usury was unlawful, yet it was
lawful, yea, needful for him to command his servant to carry home
restitution money to such as borrowed of him; and it was lawful for his
servant to obey him in this, of the like nature is the business I speak of.

But the Ministers of the Gospel should be called in a Church way, by the
Church, and not be obtruded upon them, as many Ministers in this Church be
against the consent of the people, in this land people being prophaine as
Heathens, and being no Church, cannot choose Ministers, neither are such true
Ministers, as are called by them:



2. I conceive, that sometimes a Minister may be sent of God to preach the
word, when the people desire him not. As after Christ's ascension the Apostles
dispersed the Gospel in diverse heathenish Nations, so may it now fall out, if a
Minister should go and preach among the Pagans, and convert diverse of them to
the truth, for ought I see, he may be truly said to be a Minister sent of God.

3. Though our land has many prophaine in it, (yet its a National Church as I
proved) I should propose this quaere to the conscience of any reasonable man:
Suppose a prophaine parish where no means of grace ever was, nor any Godly
Christian ever dwelt, should from the conviction of the necessity of preaching,
make earnest suite to some Godly and able Minister (not tied to any other
charge) to be their pastor, and teach them the way to life, I demand whether
this man have a true divine call from God to them or not? I conceive he has,
though they be not a true Church, yet they may be; God by his spirit may excite
in them a true desire after the word, and that Minister may have much work to
do there. Acts 16.30. Paul and Silas had a true call, to go into the Jaylours
house at his questioning of them about salvation, though he was not fully
converted.

4. I think a Minister may be truly sent of God, by a Synod of Godly and
Learned Divines to a Pastoral charge, though the people sometimes call him
not, as if he be to preach the word in a prophain parish, that desires not
powerful preaching, but hates it, and would oppose the coming in of such a
Minister, the Synod may send him to such a place, and God may bless his
labors to the conversion of many there; a learned Synod is better able to
judge of a Ministers ability and fidility, for that sacred function, then a
vulgar congregation, and there are too many ignorant parishes in this land, who
will hardly ever call zealous and godly Ministers to them, if our blessed
Parliament, and reverend Synod have not a care to send such to them.

But the Ministers of this Church are maintained by Tithes, a Jewish Ceremony,
and abolished long since by Christ.

^eb. 9. Now, to say that tithes were instituted to signify something only for
a time, as all ceremonies were, is not truth: If any say, they signified the
maintenance of Ministers under the Gospel, then it will follow, that they
signified a far larger maintenance for the Ministers of the Gospel, then the
Leviticall Priesthood had, because the office of Ministers of the Gospel is of
greater worth and excellency, then the office of Priests and Levites under the
law. Also because the Antitype or thing signified, is larger then the type or
ceremony signifying. Neither could tithes signify an Arbitrary maintenance, to
be left to the will of the Magistrate, (as some say) for this were to make a
certainty tipyfie an uncertainty. That tithes are morrall and so perpetual, I
thus prove it, 1 Cor. 9.13.14. That is by tiths, else the Apostles apodosis
answers not to his protasis, then the similitude were lame.

dictated tithes to be perpetual, then much more does the word of God.
Herodotus says, that Cyrus King of Persia, having conquered the Lydians,
offered the tithes of all to Jupiter. Plutarch says, the Romans used to offer
tithes to their gods, Camillus vowed tithes to the goddess matter Matuta, in
case he should overcome the Vejans. He says, Lucullus grew rich because he
observed the use of paving tithes to Hercules. Xenophon says, that others used
to pay tithes to Apollo. Pliny writing of the Sabaeans, and Aethiopians (more
barberous then the Romans) says, that Merchants may not meddle with the Spices
which those countries yield abundantly, before the Priests have laid out the
tenth to their gods. Festus says, the people of old did offer all the tenths
to their gods. Which use amongst all Nations shows that it was dispersed from
Noah amongst them: yea, it argues that it came from the incorrupt light of
nature before the law was given.

Levit. 27.30. Here is neither institution nor assignation of tithes, but a
declaration of the Lords right, here he says not they shall be, or let them
be, as was said of other Ceremonial laws, as of the Passover: Exodus 12.24.
But as its said of the seventh day, it is the Lords Sabbath, so of tithes, they
are the Lords. All that which concerning tithes was, instituted in the law, was
that tithes should be assigned to the Levites so long as they served the
Tabernacle. Numb. 18.21. Though God gave the tithes to the Levites, yet did he
not first found them in that Incorporation, but only transferred his own right
to that order of Priesthood so long as it should endure, and after the ceasing
of that Priesthood, the same right descended to the Ministers of the Gospel: so
tithes were due to the Leviticall, Ministers as Ministers, not as Leviticall
and so are successively due to Evangelicall Pastors, as Pastors not formally,
as Evangelicall.

Abraham paid the tith of all. Genesis 14.20.

That which Abraham paid was of the spoils, Heb. 7.4. (...)

Abraham gave tithes of the spoils, yet it more confirms the right of tithes,
for if he gave tithes of the spoils, much more did he use to do the same of
his own goods, for here the Apostle says. Heb. 7.2. He gave a tenth part of
all, why is this compared with Leviticall tithes which were paid yearly, if
this were not also usual and continual? the Apostle would not use this manner
of speech of one only action, unless it showed the common use and practice how
tithes were then paid to the Priest, as by common use and practice they were
afterward paid to the Levites.

Besides, I think with judicious Calvin, that Abraham paid tithes not of the
spoils, but of his own goods: because it is said Genesis 14.22.23. That Abraham
had lift up his hand to God, that he would not take so much as a thread or
shoe latchet of that which was taken, which he yielded to the King of Sodom,
etc. It Is more then probable that he paid no tithes of the spoils, seeing he
would not account any part thereof his own. The next testimony before the law
is, Genesis 28.20.21. etc. From hence it appears that it was the general opinion
of the godly before the law was given, that tithes ought to be given to God.
For otherwise Jacob did offend unless he knew that this thing pleased God, as
being appointed by him.

But Jacob vowed a vow to give the tenth, now no morrall thing may be vowed,
because we are bound without a vow to perform such things?

Chron. 15.12, 13, 14 Psalm. 119.106. Psalm. 50.14. Psalm. 56.12. and though
ceremonial things might be vowed under the law, yet no otherwise, but as they
drew to some moral duty. Besides, the other parts of Jacobs vow was not
ceremonial, but moral* Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. That God should be his God: this
was vowed by him on like condition, with tithes, and for ought I know Jacob
might as well vow tithes to God for ever, as that God should be his God: Jacob
in this vow I think vowed not for himself alone, but for his seed that should
succeed; because the vision which Jacob saw, concerned all his posterity so did
his vow, God promised many blessings to him and his seed: he vows holy service
and obedience to God, for him and his posterity, those that would ascend into
Heaven by Jacobs Ladder, (which is Christ John 1.51.) must be tied to Jacobs
vow, for Jacobs vow answering the vision, whilst any part of the vision is to
be performed, which will be till Christ's second coming; so long shall tithes
be Gods inheritance. Because as I said his vow concerned his seed, as much (if
not more) then himself. And those are his seed who are more of his faith then
his flesh: for all the families of the earth, which here are blessed in Jacobs
seed, were not all of Jacobs flesh, but even Iaphets seed coming to the tents
of Sem; the Gentiles called: Therefore all subject by Jacobs vow to tithing.
Romans 9 6.7.8.

But we read not of the constant paying of tithes, nor of any law for tithing,
till the time of Moses. Numb. 18.

Exodus 16. Yet doubtless the people of God observed it, but as concerning
tithes, we have here two examples, Abraham and Jacob.

Melchizedeke by Abraham, and so ought to be paid to Christ, or else Christ
should fail in some thing to be as Melchizedeke was, which may not be granted,
seeing he is after his order, as the Priests of the law after Aarons order, and
so were in every thing as Aaron: Now tithes being due to Christ, must be paid
to his servants the Ministers of the Gospel, Heb. 7.1. to 11. From this place
consider these things, 1. The scope of this place is, to set forth the
greatness and the honorable condition of Melchizedek, and consequently, of
Jesus Christ. 2. Melchisedecks receiving of tithes, the Apostle makes a
special argument of his greatness, viz. his receiving tithes of Abraham,
whose Offspring the Tribe of Levi took tithes. 3. Melchizedek is as great as
ever he was, and so in all things as he was in the time of Abraham, for he is
the Priest of God for ever that never dies, and so his Priesthood and the
rights of it never cease 4. how can his admirable greatness in his Antitipe
Christ, be said still to be the same, if Christ takes no tithes, neither has
right to take them? seeing the Apostle urges this as a maine argument of his
greatness: his scope is to prove Melchizedek more excellent then Aaron or
Abraham himself, or then any of the Jewish Nation, and consequently Christ
more excellent, that the Hebrews might not be hindered by an over weening
opinion, touching the Aaronicall Priesthood so long settled amongst them from
coming unto Christ. The super excellency of Melchizedek is proved by this,
that he took tithes of the Patriarch Abraham and blessed him, the title
Patriarch being added for Abraham's greater honor, to magnify Melchizedek the
more.

Next, the super excellency of Melchizedek is in this amplified by comparing
this tithing, with that under the law used amongst Abraham's children, for if
some of them had a greater honor done to them in this that they took tithes
of their brethren, Melchizedek was far more honored in taking tithes of
Abraham; and if they were honored to bless others their brethren, being
hereby proved greater; then Melchizedek in blessing Abraham, was much more
honored and proved greater then he, and by consequence then Levi, and the high
Priest springing of him, for so much as Levi himself being then in Abraham's
loins paid tithes unto him, and was blessed of him: from all this it follows
plainly, that tithes are due to the Ministers of the Gospel, in regard they
are Christ's Ambassadors to reconcile people to God, and to bless them with
conversion by preaching the word; because tithes are Christ's and Melchizedeks
as they were a means of blessing, for in this respect also Abraham is noted to
have paid tithes to Melchizedek when he met him and blessed him.

But we read not that Christ or his Apostles received tithes or demanded them?



Secondly, the argument follows not from no practice to infer no right, for
the Apostles traveled from place to place to preach the Gospel, that then this
could not be well done, but the right was not infrienged hereby, no more then
the right of Circumcising by the intermission thereof forty years in the
Wilderness.

Thirdly, we read soon after Christ's ascension, the Apostles took the price
of whole fields and possessions of such as joined themselves to them for their
own maintenance, and of their poor brethren, Acts 2.45. Acts. 4 34, 35, 36,
37. this course continued about 200. years, during which time no marvel
though they required not tithes, that which was given them being a far
greater proportion: such as oppose the morality of tithes now, would not be
willing to deal so with us Ministers of the Gospel.

QVEST. IIII. Whether is the Baptism of Infants a true and lawful Baptism or
not?


viz. remission of sins, and mortification of the flesh, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Jer.
4.4.6. Act. 2.38. Act. 22.16. Romans 6.4. both of them are Symballs of our
Adoption into Gods family, and so our imitation into the Divine Covenant, Genesis
17.7.10. 1 Cor. 12, 13. Gal. 3.26, 27. besides Baptism succeedes Circumcision,
Col. 2.11.12. or else the conditon of Christian infants under the Gospel, were
worse then the condition of Jewish Infants under the Law, in regard of their
age; if Baptism might not be conferred upon them now, as Circumcision upon
the Jewish children, if Baptism belong not to Infants, then the grace and
favor of God by Christ's coming, is more obscure and straight and less
testified, then it was to the Jews, which to affirm, is an horrible indignity
offered to Christ.

But there was an express commandment for circumcising of Infants, Genesis 17.
but no such for Baptizing of Infants now?

Mat. 28.19, 20. all that believe of any condition whatsoever, should be
Baptized; under which Infants borne of Christian parents are comprehended, for
in Laws and Precepts that be general, an enumeration of singulars and
perticulars is not required, because laws do command concerning the whole
Kind.

Secondly, the Baptism of Christian Infants has descended and continued from
the Apostles days to us, Origin who lived in the year 213. said, that the
Church received the tradition from the Apostles, to give Baptism to Infants.
Augustine who lived in the year 420. said, that Baptism of Infants, the
Church univerfall held it not instituted by Counsels, but always retained it,
and most rightly believed it to be delivered by Apostolic Authority. Now such
examples are aequivalent to express commands.

Thirdly, The New Testament does not literally command, remember to keep holy
the Sabbath, not to say grace before and after meals, not to pray with our
families morning and evening, not women to receive the Lords Supper, and many
other such like things I might instance, yet we hold this to be moral duties,
and ought of necssiety to be performed, and may be proved sufficiently by
consequence out of the New Testament.

Genesis 17.7. Act. 2.39. for this blessed Covenant is exceedingly extended and
enlarged by Christ, good reason then, the seal of this Covenant should not be
straightned* nor made narrower then Circumcision was; now Christian Infants
being within the Covenant of Grace, Baptism the Seal of it is their right,
for as much as they are Christians belonging to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 7.14.
here he says your children are holy; if but one of the persons married be a
believer, some by (holy) understand, legetimate, as if he had said, your
children are not bastards but lawfully begotten and borne; But the Apostle
speaks not of civil legitimation, for the children of Infidells may be and
are legitimate, others construe the words thus, that your children are holy,
viz. by education in Christianity: others interpret them thus, your Children
are holy, viz. by the secret operation and illumination of the spirit, which
begets in them new inclinations toward God, as in John Baptist, and the
Prophet Jeremy. Others say thus, your children are holy. viz. They are
Christians, belonging to the Covenant and to the Church, this I choose: holy,
here is not understood civil but legally; the Law called things unclean,
profane, as vessels, and living creatures, and men without the Church, and so
the Law called things dedicated to God, holy; therefore as the children of the
Jews in the old Testament were not unclean but holy, that is, they were not
Gentiles, but Jews, in Covenant with God from the womb, by the vigor and
virtue of that promise, Genesis 17.7. though by nature they were children of
wrath; so here, Christians with their children who are adopted into the place
of the Jews, now in the new Testament the Apostle calls holy; that is, they
are not Heathens but Christians, though by reason of original sin they are
borne children of wrath; so according to faederall grace, we are borne
Christians, though according to national generation we are borne sinners, by
virtue of which faederall sanctity Christian Infants have as clear a right to
Baptism as Jewish Infants had to Circumcision: such then who oppose faederall
sanctity and teach that the custom or Baptizing Infants has continued in the
Church not from example or command in Scripture, but from the degrees of the
Church, take part with the Papists who stiffly seek to maintain theirs against
us.

Jeremy and John Baptist, many such belong to heaven, Mat. 19.14. as if he had
said, of such little ones and of others affected like them does the Kingdom of
God consist, Mark 10.14. Christ blessed them, then we may bestow the Sacrament
and seal of blessing on them.

If we could certainly know which Infants had grace wrought in them, and did
belong to Heaven, then we might baptize them, but this we know not, therefore
its the best not to baptize them, til they come to riper years to make a
profession and a confession of the Christian faith?

Phillip Baptized Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. We must never Baptize any, if we stay
for infallible knowledge of any particular man's Election and particular
Sanctification.

Secondly, the faith of Parents may warrant their infants Baptism, yea though
they have a bare historical faith, (not a justifying faith,) if they can
credere ad baptismum, though not ad salutem, this faith makes their children
fit for Baptism, there were many in the Apostles times who were Baptized
having only an historical faith, as Magus and others.

But the new Testament runs much upon these speeches; believe and be
baptized, repent and be baptized, teach and baptize, now Infants are not
capeable of the exercise of any of these graces, nor capeable of teaching; and
what good can the Parents faith do to the Infaint in Baptism, seeing every
one must live and be saved by his own faith?



In like manner, if we were to preach the Word amongst the Pagans and Infidells
who knew not Christ, believe not in him, heard not of him, we ought not to
Baptize them nor their children till they profess faith in Christ, and come to
know him. But now in this Church of England, all our people profess themselves
Christians, and say, they believe in Christ and hope to be saved by him, though
in their works many profane Protestants and licentious Christians deny
Christ, opposing the power of godliness, yet having a temporary faith, they
are entitled and called Christians, and have right to Baptism as well as the
Children of many profane Jews had to Circumcision.

Secondly, I say, the Parents faith may benefit the Infant so much, as to bring
it under the compass of the Covenant, and to make it a partaker of the sign
and seal of the Covenant, Romans 4.11. He says Circumcision was a Seal of the
righteousness of the faith, children we know were circumcised, what faith
could they express? therefore the faith of their parents, applying the
righteousness of Christ to themselves, by their Circumcision, it made their
children to be borne Jews by nature, Gal. 2.15. Next this their faith assured
them, that God would be a God to their seed, according to that promise, Genesis
17.7. In as good stead does faith stand Christian Parents in, now, about the
Baptism of their children, for Baptism is a clearer seal of righteousness
then Circumcision was.

Thirdly, We read the Apostles Baptized whole families, Acts 16.15.33. Acts
18.8. 1 Cor. 1.16. and it is probable there were children amongst them.

Moses in the cloud and sea, now there were six hundred thousand footmen,
Exodus 12.37. besides very many young infants and small children, and they were
all baptized tipically; very well, yea, much more may Infants of Christian
Parents now under the Gospel, have Baptism conferred upon them, in the Truth
and Antitipe, for the Truth or Antitipe is larger and of greater consequence
then the Type; The Israelites, their passing into the bottom of the sea,
signified our burial with Christ in Baptime, their coming out of the sea, our
rising up to newness of life, Romans 6.4. So the Apostle, 1 Pet. 3.21. Makes
Noah's Arc a type of our Baptism; for says he, the like figure whereunto even
baptism, etc. as if he had said: Answerable unto which preservation of the
eight persons in Noah's family, by water, is the benefit which we receive by
baptism, which does also now save us by, and in applying unto us, the power of
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, and become effectual unto us, not in respect
of the outward element, which only washes off the filth of the flesh, but in
respect of the inward efficasie of the grace, thereby represented, and
exhibited; whereby the conscience is both quieted, and assured of pardon and
favor, and is there upon enabled to treat for, and expect mercy from God, and
reconciliation with him.

But Christ was not Baptized until he was thirty years of age, Luke 3.21, 22,
23.

Mat. 3.15. that is, to accomplish in all due obedience, all that part of Gods
will which concern him. 2 To confirm John's baptism, doctrine, and ministry,
and to commend and confirm to us the use of baptism by his example. 3. That
he might sanctify our baptism to us, and seal up this fellowship with us. 4
To signify that he was sent to be baptized, namely to die, and to wash away
our sins with his blood, Luke 12.50. 5 That the truth might answer the type or
figure; for as the high Priest, at his inauguration had his whole body washed
with water, the sacerdotall garment was put upon him, he was set in the sight
of all the people, and oil was powered upon his head; Exodus 29.4, 5, 6* so
Christ being to enter upon the public function of the Ministry to preach the
Gospel, he would be baptized, that he might be ordained, and confirmed by the
public testimony of the whole Deity. But this example binds not us in respect
of the time of his baptism, for if it did then Ministers must be baptized at
their entrance into the Ministry; then none might enter into the Ministry till
they be thirty years old, nor be baptized till they come to that age; so
then, Christ entering upon his public function at that age, did answer the
legal type of the Priests and Levites, who ordinarily were chosen to the
public service of the tabernacle at thirty years of age, Numb. 4.3.23.30.
etc. He did not by his example bind us to receive baptism at that age.



QVEST. V. Whether is it lawful to be rebaptized or not?
I Answer, that if one were Baptized in the name of God in general, without
particular explication and recitation of the three persons be not mentioned but
omitted in Baptism, its not right and lawful baptism; or if one was baptized
of those heretics who delivered not the right doctrine of the Trinity, such
as were the Marcianites, Arrians, and Pneumatomachi, its not right and lawful
Baptism, because the essential form of Baptism is not observed, which
(according to Christ's institution) must be in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: but if Baptism be rightly administered according to the institution
of Christ and the form prescribed of him, then rebaptization is unlawful, for
these reasons.

Cor. 11.26. and the Apostle says, there is but one Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5.





But many who were baptized in their infancy, were never truly borne again?

Simon Magus, and others.



Now some of the separatists hold that our baptism in the Church of England is
no baptism, because its conferred upon Infants; and therefore they are
rebaptized: but they grossly err; not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of
God in that Sacrament to us; I hold these their tenets and practice unlawful
for these reasons.

1 Because they seek to nullify and frustrate the Sacred ordinance of Christ,
viz. Baptizing in Infants, and so by consequence speaks blasphemy, horribly
taking Gods name in vain, in that they vilify and reject one of his
Ordinances, as a matter of no worth, efficacy, and consequences if any of them
shall say, that they never felt or discerned any benefit by their baptism in
their infancy? I answer, that they do discover carnality and pride, and are in
the bond of iniquity with Simon Magus, if they were regenerate, they might
feel as much benefit and comfort of their baptism in their infancy, as the
godly L^^^n might from their circumcision in their infancy: also they discover
hypocrisy in that they made profession formerly of their Covenant made with
God in Baptism, but now since their Separation, they disclaim this Sacrament,
and acknowledge themselves nothing better for it.

2. Because many of them are baptized by such as are no true Ministers of
Christ, not sent by him to preach the Gospel, for I am certain they are not
able to preach the word, therefore not sent by the Lord; now, none should
baptize but they who are able teachers, sent of Christ, Mat. 28.19.

3. Because this opinion revives the ancient heresy of Marcion the Heretic,
who lived in the year 143. he was the inventer of a strange and new custom,
for he taught, that after a man had been once baptized, he may be baptized
again the second time, and third time also. This he did to wash away his
whoredom; his father was a Preacher of Gods word in Pontus, and he himself
had vowed chastety, and afterward polluted himself with whoredom, and was
cast out of the Church by his own father; who when he came to Rome, not being
admitted to the fellowship of the Church, there he joined himself to the
fellowship of Cerdon and augmented his error, who held that there were two
Gods or two beginnings, the one they called the Author of all good things, the
other the Author of all evil things; to which Marcion added this heresy: he
said, first, there was one supreme and universal God, and him he called the
good God, who created nothing that is in this world: secondly, there was a
visible God, who was creator and maker of all things, and thirdly, there was
the Devil, as a mid thing between the visible and invisible God; no heresy
sprang up at that time that was so universally over spread in many nations and
countries as Marcions heresy was.

But we read Acts 19.3, 4, 5. that Twelve Disciples of Ephesus were Baptized
by Paul, who had been baptized by John; therefore its lawful to be rebaptized?

John (there called baptism) and not baptized of him with water, but were now
baptized in the name of Jesus.

Some hold they were baptized of John with water, and not of Paul, as the text
seems to import, but that they were baptized in the name of Jesus, that is,
they were furnished with admirable gifts of the Spirit, after Paul had laid his
hands upon them, which effusion of the spirit is called baptizing, Acts 1.5.

Some hold they were baptized amiss by some of John's followers in a corrupt
form, but now were rightly baptized, yet here was no rebaptization.

Some hold they were baptized of John and Paul both for the diverse manner of
signification, John baptized in the name of Jesus that was to come, and to be
exhibited, Paul in the name of Jesus already come and exhibited.

But let us consult the text a little better; first, the text says not, that
Paul baptized those who before were baptized of John, as the Anabaptists urge,
but we must rightly distinguish the words of Paul from the words of the
Evangelist, Luke relating that history, Paul's words were these; John verily
baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they
should believe on him which should come after him, that is* on Christ Jesus.
Lukes words were these, When they heard this they were baptized in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and when Paul had laid his hands upon them, etc. So Luke says,
when they heard this, that is the Preaching and Doctrine of John, then they
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus; that is of John, not of Paul: So
that Luke here sets down how truly, worthily, and rightly these 12. Disciples
were baptized of John and that John baptized in the name of the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, for else his baptism had not been right and sound, but John
baptized thus, I say, as appears, Mat. 3.11.16.17. Secondly, in that those
twelve said, they heard not whether there be an Holy Ghost or not? its not
meant of the existence of the holy Ghost, for John taught clearly concerning
the holy Ghost. Mat. 3.11. but its to be understood metonymically, of the
effusion of the visible gifts of the holy Ghost, which flourished excellently
in the beginning of the Church, as John 7.39. so that when Paul had laid his
hands on them, the holy Ghost came upon them; that is after a visible manner,
he means not here the gift of regeneration offered to all in baptism, but
those peculiar and extraordinary gifts; as the gift of tongues, and gifts of
working miracles and such like. Give me leave to set down a short Paraphrase
upon five verses in the beginning of this Chapter, for the further illustration
of this point.

Acts 19.2. Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye believe? and they said
unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost.

we have not so much as heard, that there are those miraculous gifts of the
holy Ghost, bestowed on men that believe.

And he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized? and they said unto
John's Baptism.

John's Baptism, to the remission of sins by Jesus Christ, that lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world.

Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying
unto the people, that they should believe on him which should come after him,
that is on Christ Jesus.

Paul, John verily as the outward Minister of Baptism, baptized you with
water, to the remission of sins, together with his baptism teaching the
people, that they should believe in that Jesus Christ, which should come after
him; so as his baptism was true and perfect; yet such as was not accompanied,
and attended with these miraculous gifts, which now since the full
glorification of Christ, are bestowed upon men.

When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.

John taught them thus, and made this holy comentary upon his said baptism,
they that heard it (in receiving his baptism) were baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus.

And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the holy Ghost came on them, and
they spoke with tongues and prophesied.

Paul had laid his hands upon them (as having before been fully and duly
baptized) the Holy Ghost came down upon them, in miraculous gifts, and they
spoke with tongues and prophesied.

So that here is no ground for rebaptization in this place, these twelve
doubtless had received the Holy Ghost, (though not in that miraculous and
extraordinary manner as they did after) for Paul in his question says they
believed, now to believe, is a fruit of the Spirit; Therefore the Separatists
do very ill oposing our Baptizing of Infants, for in Scripture we find no
examples, wherein Infants of Christian Parents were denied baptism but
examples we find, wherein they had it conferred upon them, 1 Cor. 10.2. as I
proved before, and Lydia with all her household was baptized, likewise we
find no negative precept inhibiting paedobaptisme, neither can it be proved
truly that Christ's command. Teach and Baptize, etc. does exclude infants from
baptism; now if their be neither example* nor precept, against paedobaptisme,
then such as oppose it do ill; for they follow those pestilent heretics
called Annabaptists in Germany, who sprung up there (when the light of the
Gospel first began to shine) not very long since, about Luthers time, this
their opinion being but new and upstart, there is good reason they should
disclaim it, and be humbled for it.

QVEST. VI. Whether is it lawful to separate from all the public Ordinances
and Christian assemblies in our English Church, because there are some defects
in Discipline, and in other things amongst us.
England, because of our mixed congregations, and because of some defects in our
Discipline.

Mat. 28.20. Also he has planted his Sacraments in our Church, he has
converted many souls in our land to himself by the faithful dispensation of
his Ordinances, but where all this is, there Christ is resident, Exodus 20.24.
such a Church is the spouse of Christ, and whilst she holds the foundation of
Religion, retaining the substantial grounds of it, agreeable to the analogy of
faith, she is spoused to Christ, but if she reject the foundation of religion,
she is an harlot, as the Church of Rome is, Revelat. 2. there Christ walks
amongst the seven golden candlestickes, viz. Those seven Churches of Asia, yet
some of them had great defects; Now till Christ leaves us, it is unlawful for
them to leave us, and account our Church an harlot; such as do thus, do through
the sides of our Church wound Christ, strike at him, and dishonor him, Luke
10.16.

Heb. 10. And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and good
works, but some might ask how must we perform this duty? he answers verse
25. not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, etc. here the Apostles
impugneth the supercidiousnesse of the self conceited Jews, who out of
contempt of the Gentiles deserted the Christian Assemblies, as if he had said,
notwithdrawing and utterly separating our selves from the assemblies of Gods
people, upon conceit of the peculiar rights and prerogatives which God has
given the Jews above the Gentiles; and standing upon the high terms of
difference, as the manner of some is, etc.

Heb. 10.25.26. for such as despise and desert our Christian Assemblies and
Gods holy ordinances amongst us, for some defects and imperfections; (which do
not alienate Christ his presence and love from us) are in the ready way to fall
to blaspheme the truth, and to sin unpardonable. Mr. Paget of Amsterdam in
his preface to his book called An arrow against the Separation of the
Brownists, complains of them thus; It is apparent that three or four hundred
of the Brownists have brought forth more Apostate Anabaptists and Arrians,
sometimes in one year, then 10000 members of the reformed Dutch Church in this
City have done in ten years or more, though tempted and compassed about with
seducers as much as any other. Now the Arrian heresy, is fearful and odious,
in the year 324 sprang up Arrins a Presbyter in Alexandria, who denied that
the Son of God was begotten of the substance of the Father, but said, that he
was a creature, and that there was a time wherein the Son was not: The
Anabaptists taught, that infants should not be baptized until they came to
perfect age, and can give a confession of their own faith. Next, that Christ
took not flesh and blood of the Virgin, but brought it from heaven. Next, that
God not only reveals his will by the written word, but also by visions and
dreams. Next, that that Church is not a true Church; wherein there is any Spot
or wrinckle. Next, that the Office of Magistrates under the New Testament is
not a calling approved of God. Thomas Muntzerus one of the first Fathers of
this Sect, made a great insurrection (though the Anabaptists teach that wars
are unlawful for Christians) but was overcome and beheaded in the year 1533.
Johannes Leidensis troubled the City of Munster, but was taken and condemned to
death, he called himself King of new Jerusalem. David Georgius an Anabaptist
in Holland, said that he was Christ the Messiah and Savior of the world. Thus
we see when men disdain the Assemblies of Saints for some defects, God leaves
them to fall into fearful errors and heresies through the pride of their
hearts.

Isa. 65.5. such would make themselves seem holier then Christ and his
Apostles, who went and preached amongst the profane Jews and Heathens, and
though some of these seem humble, yet their seeming depth of humility, may be
a real height of pride; they may not lawfully separate from us except Christ
also did, whilst he stays with us, they should do the like.

Donatists, 400. years after Christ, Donatus Bishop in Numidia drew many after
him, and had many favorers called by diverse names, Parmeniani, Rogatistae,
Cirtenses, Maximianistae; Circumciliones, the worst branch of this root, for
these would burn, or drown themselves, and account this kind of death
Martyrdom: the maine heresy of the Donatists was, 1 that the true Catholic
Church was no where else to be found, but only in that corner of Afric,
wherein they themselves dwelt: 2 that baptism was not effectual, except it
had been ministered by one of their society, against these heretics did
Augustine, Bishop of Hippo contend with mighty grace, the Separatists of these
times are in some measure like them, but in some points they exceed the
Donatists, Mr. Robinson and Mr. Johnson in one part confess this their
Separation to be late and new; but in the nature and causes thereof, to be as
ancient as the Gospel, the former I grant, the latter I deny, for we never read
that the Saints in Scripture separated from those assemblies where God was
truly worshipped, in the old Testament Elkanah frequented the public
Assemblies at Shiloh, 1 Samuel 1.3. though there were more vile abuses of the
Lords ordinances, then amongst us in England, 1 Samuel 2.22. and in that time
between the Prophet Malachy and Christ's Nativity, we read that Zachary
executed his Office, Luke 1.8.9. and did not Separate from the Lords
ordinances, though there were fearful abuses amongst them, as far as I
remember in the Old Testament, Caine was the first that separated from Gods
holy servants and service, Genesis 4.16. and Judas in the new, 1 Cor. 11.33.34. he
wished them not to separate but to reform their horrible abuses of the Lords
Supper.



Cor. 4.14, 15. this their separation is an ill requital to their spiritual
fathers.

Though we leave your Godly Saints and Ordinances, yet we have the society of
other holy Saints and the Ordinances in purity?

Cor. 12.4.10.11.) which the ministry of this English Church enjoys, yea,
some who followed the Separation a while, but afterward returned from it, to
our public assemblies again, said, that the Ministry amongst the Separatists
is a very fruitless, dead, and heartlesse Ministry, that they will often
disagree about the interpretation of some places of Scripture, and sometimes
none of them hit upon the right sense, whereas if they had a man of learning,
and judgment amongst them, he would soon resolve their doubts, and prevent
that unedifying confusion that is too much amongst them. I desire you of the
Separation to consider that place well, Heb. 13.7. whose faith follow: now
those godly teachers who instrumentally converted you were not of your faith,
but did believe this English Church to be a true Church, wherein the Lord
dwells, and they joined with us in Gods service. I desire you likewise, to tell
me ingenuously, whether you have heard the voice of Christ, and sensibly felt
his spirit working upon your hearts, more by the Ministry of this English
Church, than, or by the Ministry of the Separation; time was when you would
have melted in prayer amongst us, you would have trembled at Gods word in our
Congregations, ye would have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine we
delivered, your hearts would have burned with zeal in holy performances
amongst us, you seemed to be inflamed with precious love to Christ, to his
ordinances, and to his servants, do you find the ministry of the Separation
working these effects in you? I hardly believe you do.

But (your Ministers being called by the Prelates, their calling is
Antichristian,) we dare not come to your public Assemblies to Gods worship,
because in so doing we shall approve of their unlawful calling.

against the Prelates and their Ceremonies, and confute our outward calling
from the Prelates by argument as much as you please, so that you will but keep
the unity of the spirit with us in the bond of peace; but this renting from us
does exceeding much hurt, it brings many an able Minister into contempt, and
the word he preaches to much disgrace; it makes many weaker Christians to
stagger, and is commonly an inlet to diverse errors and heresies, for inveterate
schisms often times turn to heresies; the Donatists because they could not
effect their cruel design against Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, fell from
the unity of the Church, and in the end were defenders of heretical opinions:
we read 1 Samuel 2.22. what horrible abuses of the Lords service was then, yea
worse then is amongst us, yet Elkanah and his wives did frequent the public
Assemblies, 1 Samuel 1.3. which he would not have done, if his presence there had
been any approbation of those abuses, 1 Cor. 11.33, 34. there were more
horrible abuse of the Lords Supper, then are amongst us, yet Paul bids them not
separate upon this, but come together again, yet better prepared. I suppose it
is lawful for you to read a Papists Book (whose religion is heresy) or to
dispute with a Jesuit, and yet by your presence give no approbation of his
Religion and condition, Mat. 23.3. Christ bids them hear the Pharisees (a
vain sect sprang up amongst the Jews 144. years before Christ says
Josephus,) yet Christ approves not of them, farther then they taught the law
truly, but in the same chapter denounced many woes against them, Phil. 1.18.
Paul rejoiced that Christ was preached of envy and strife by the false
Apostles (whose calling was not from Christ,) then I believe that Paul
accounted it lawful for people to here such Preach, and yet be in no danger of
approving their false Apostleship. Besides if your bare presence at our
Assemblies does give an approbation of our calling (which seems Antichristian
to you) then your presence in our markets where be many profane people, may as
truly approove of their sins and wickedness, Christ knew Judas to be a
notorious hypocrite, a covetous wordling, yea, a traitor, yet he admitted him
into his family, permits him to sit with him at the table; yet Christ was far
from approving of Judas his sin and wickedness.

But I dare not join with your mixed Assemblies, least I contract the guilt of
their sins upon mine own head?

Hooker, (now in New England) in a famous Sermon he Preached upon 2 Timothy 3.5.
answers this objectio^ thus; suppose says he, those in authority will not cast
out profane persons, yet the Saints of God should not abstain from the
Congregation, it is pitiful indeed, and the thing is troublesome and tedious
to a gracious heart, and we must mourn for it, but being it is not in my
power, I must not abstain: Then he answering the objections of the Anabaptists
says; They (says he) cast this as a reproach upon our Church, common
drunkards say they, and swearers, if they pay but two pence for their offering
at Easter, may receive the Lords Supper; he answers thus, we confess this
fault, let it lie where it is, we cannot reform it, we only can mourn for
it, and that God will accept. Obj. 1 Cor. 5.11. if there be an adulterer, etc.
with such do not eat, that is communicate not? he answers; to eat, there is
not referred to the communion in eating the body of Christ, but eat not with
him, that is, be not familiar with such a person, and it includes the word
familiarity, not communion at the Lords table, Psalm. 41.9. their eating
implies a common inward familiarity, mine own familiar friend, etc. But
(says he) they reply from the greater to the less; if we may not eat with
them privately, then much less publicly may we communicate with them? he
answers, Its no good reason, because I have more authority to refuse the
company of a man in mine own house, then I have to refuse in the open
congregation, I can keep a man out of my house, but I cannot fling him out of
the open congregation, that belongs only to those that are in authority. Thus
far Mr. Hooker.

Next, I say you may not lawfully relinquish our public Assemblies and
ordinances, because of profane persons that be amongst them, whilst we have
the Ordinances purely dispensed for the substance.

Elkanah would never have sacrificed to the Lord in Shiloh yearly with Hophni
and Phinehas such profane persons: if there were such danger of contracting
the guilt of others sins this way, then Paul would not have wished the
Corinthians to come together again, though there were amongst the^ most vile
abuses of the Lords Supper, worse then amongst us. Upon the same ground the
Jews might have refused to hear the Pharisees, (as wicked a generation of
Hypocrites as ever was, both for life and Doctrine,) yet Christ bids the Jews
and his own Disciples hear them, Mat. 23.3. on the same ground, its unlawful
for you to frequent our markets, to have civil commerce with us, for there,
even there do the profane people amongst us act, and practice their
wickedness more openly, bouldly, and frequently, then in our meeting houses,
in the Markets they use swearing, drunkenness, lying, couzening, etc. I should
think it more dangerous being there, (though a true Christian may lawfully be
there, through the necessity of his particular calling,) then in our public
Assemblies at Gods worship; for in Gods public worship amongst us, the
prophanest persons put on a form of piety, carry themselves demurely with
outward reverence, they do not act their leudenes and folly there, but
conform to the outward worship; I conceive then, there is less danger for you
to be there.

Isa. 55.1, 2, 3. Prove. 8.1. to 11. verse. Prove. 9.1. to 7. verse. and in many
other places, now this I must obey, or else I sin fearfully against God and
mine own soul, if the wicked intrude amongst the Saints in their sinful
estate, there sins shall lie upon their own head; indeed, if I commit their
sins with them, or approve of their wickedness, and encourage them in it, or
if I connive at their sin and reprove them not for it, if I have a lawful
calling to do it, or if I mourn not for their sins, nor endeavor to
reform them, then I make my self guilty of their sins; but if I come in
obedience to Gods command, to meet him in his ordinances, for the enlargement
of my communion with him, this makes me not guilty of their wickedness; if it
did, then doubtless Christ who knew Judas to be an Hypocrite, would not have
suffered the other Apostles to eat the Passover with him, but he would have
excluded Judas and expelled him, or else he would have diswaded the other
Apostles from coming into Judas his company; neither of which he did.
Therefore it favors strongly of Pharisaisme, to relinquish our public
Assemblies; because they are mixed, the Pha^^^ees thought it sin to converse
with the base vulgar, their Phylacteries did say, touch me not, for I am
cleaner then thou; though we have some profane, yet not all, there be
amongst us many godly Christians keeping the mystery of faith in a pure
conscience, now, we should love these as much as hate the other; if all maine
truths be taught amongst some godly, some profane, why should I more shun
those profane, then cleave to those truths, and those godly? If I have daily
admonished him, and detest and bewail his sin, what is another man's
prophannesse to me? If prophannesse be not punished, it is their sin whom it
concerns to redress them: if the Officers sin, must we run from the
Church? its a famous and pregnant protestation by God, Ezekiel. 18.20. and if the
Fathers sower grapes cannot hurt the childrens teeth, how much less shall the
neighbors? if any unbidden guess come with a ragged garment, and unwashen
hands, shall I forbear Gods heavenly dainties? the Master of the feast may
say, friend how came thou in hither? not friends why came you hither with
such a guest? God bids me come, he has imposed this necessity, never allowed
this excuse: my teeth shall not be set on edge with the sower grapes of others:
if the Church cast not out the known unworthy, the sin is hers: if a man will
come unworthy, the sin is his, but if I come not because he comes, the sin
is mine: I shall not answer for that others sin: I shall answer for mine own
neglect: another man's fault cannot dispense with my duty.



Therefore its needful for you to adhere to us, to help forward the
conversion of many, who belong to Gods decree of Election, but are for the
present in the state of nature.

Cor. 10.32. there is the offense of grief, and the offense of error, both
these your separation gives to many Christians; it grieves their hearts, and
the spirit of God in them exceedingly, to see you relinquish the public
ordinances, as if Christ was not to be found there; Cor. 6.17. Come out from
amongst them and be ye separate, etc.

Corinth, had too much fellowship with the idolatrous heathens, in going to
their feasts, and in marrying with them, therefore the Apostle verse 14.
dehorted them from this, and in this 17. verse: As if he had said; be not so
familiar with the Idolatrous heathen, as to eat and drink with them at their
feasts, because thus ye should draw in one yoke of wickedness with them,
having communion in their abomination, and if any near familiarity with them
be condemned, much it more o marry with such. To come out from amongst them
is, to reprove their sins; to touch no unclean thing is, to refrain from
doing those sins which they do. Here is no ground to separate from Gods
Church, because there be wicked persons, we should rather bear with some
things for the preservation of the peace and unity of the Church, then through
offense at these, to loose the benefit of communion in the word and Sacraments.

England, as now there be. God increase their number a thousand fold Amen.

In the next place, I shall show you that it is more unlawful and unfit for you
to separate from our English Church, now, then it was formerly.

London can prove this by witness sufficient, this separation turns many to
the Cavaleeres, and exasperates the Cavaleeres extremely against the work of
reformation, they think that both the Parliament, and all that side with them
would turn Separatists, be rebaptized; and depose all humane learning, so that
any mecanicke and artificer may turn preacher, all this and much more the
Cavaleeres objected bitterly against the Parliament side to my face, in my long
and tedious durance at Newarke where I was prisoner almost thirty weeks,

can but wait with patience, we may comfortably hope to see it effected, now
this Separation does rather disparage the Parliament by outrunning the
authority of it, as if it was not wise enough to accomplish a reformation, and
as if it was lawful and fit to set up a reformation in England without
Parliamentary authority: The best Israelites in the times of Abijah, Asia,
Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, never took upon them to reform without, or
before, or against their Princes 2 Chronicles. 13. 2 Chronicles. 14. and 15. 2 Chronicles. 29.
and 30. 2 Chronicles. 34. Nehemiah without Artaxerxes (an heathen King,) did not set
up the walls of Jerusalem, Ezra. 4 23.24. Zerubabell and Joshua built not
without leave and command from Cyrus, and when contrary letters came from
above, they laid by both trowells and swords, private profession is one thing,
public reformation is another; every man must do that in the maine, none may
do this but they of whom God sais, I have said, ye are Gods.





QVEST. VII. Whether is it necessary to demolish our Churches (Steeplehouses as
the Separatists call them) and to build them in other places, because they were
built by Idolaters for Idolatrous worship, were abused with images, and
dedicated to Saints?


Golias his sword though an instrument of cruelty and murder, serving for the
maintenance of heathenish Idolaty in the hand of the Giant, was yet lawfully
used by David as an instrument of justice to the glory of God, 1 Samuel 17.51.
1 Samuel 21.9. the authority of the Magistrate has cast Superstition out of
these houses, and converted them to the true worship of God.

Biscaie in Spain admitts of no Bishop amongst them, for when Fernand the
Catholic came in progress hither, accompanied by the Bishop of Pampelune, the
people arose in arms, drove back the Bishop, and gathering all the dust on
which they thought he had trodden and flung it into the Sea; If Popish
superstition have defiled our Churches, and Church yards with an indelible
stain, why serve you not them so likewise?

Ainsworth in on part of his works says, that persons unlawfully circumcised
and baptized in Idolatrous and false Churches, might yet through faith and
repentance, come to a lawful and comfortable use of their former circumsition
and baptism, why then cannot our repentance and faith, as well sanctify unto
us, the places superstitiously consecrated, while we do in like manner
disclaim and renounce their superstitions?



Achans tent be burnt, and not Achan himself? Josh. 7.24, 25. this is the
rather to be marked, because Revel. 18.13. the souls of men are expressly
mentioned and reckoned amongst the wares and merchandise of Antichrist, so as
the Temples are not; therefore such as stand for the demolishing of our
Temples, I suppose they would not have such persons destroyed as are converted
from popery, because they have been Papists; nither would they destroy a
Papists house, if the Parliament should bestow one upon them.

But the retaining of these steeple houses for the service of God is a breath
of the second Commandment, Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. with Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3.

Deuteronomy. 12. is a temporary ordinance, part of Moses his policy that is
abrogated, and therefore not binding us in these times, for how ever the equity
thereof continue, teaching us to detest Idolatry, yet it binds us not in such
manner, and by such means, to signify our detestation thereof, as it did them
in Moses time: for example; as God here commands to abolish Idolatrous places,
so in the next chapter, Deuteronomy. 13.12.15, 16, 17. God commands them, not only to
demolish their places of worship, but also their goods and cattle to burn it
with fire; the equity of this commandment, leads us to a great detestation of
Idolatry; but who will say, that it is to be declared by the very same means
and manner of judgment, in destroying such things as are of necessary use?

Secondly, As God commands to destroy Idolatrous places, so he commands to
abolish their names, and not to retain them, Deuteronomy. 12.3. this commandment
appears herby to be temporary and ceremonial, because now in the New
Testament, we see that the names of diverse Idols, have been retained in
diverse persons thereupon denominated, as the names of Mercury, Venus, Phebe,
Jupiter, Apollo, Fortuna, that were heathenish Idols worshipped for gods and
goddesses, and yet their names not abolished in the Saints mentioned by the
Apostles, Romans 16.14. Phil. 2.25. Romans 16.1. Titus 3.13. 1 Cor. 16.17.

Thirdly, this command for destroying Idolatrous places, as its not perpetual
for time, so also not universal for the place, but expressly restrained to the
land of Canaan, to the Idols of those Nations which Israel should possess;
from that place they were to be cut off, ^s is thrice noted in three verses
together, Deuteronomy. 12* 1.2, 3. even as God would have greater severity and
detestation to be manifested toward the Idolaters in Canaan, then to those of
other Countries a far off, Deuteronomy. 20.10.15, 16, 17. Josh. 9.6, 7.

Fourthly, Seeing meats sacrificed to Idols were as much polluted, as the
places of their worship, and yet notwithstanding may now lawfully be retained
for our necessary use, Psalm. 24.1. with 1 Cor. 10.15, 26, 27. why not the
Temples also?

Fifthly, There is not the like reason, to abolish the buildings abused unto
Idolatry now, as the high places of old, because God having appointed one only
place for sacrifice, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6 etc. Levit. 17.3.4. those high places being
for sacrifice were to be destroyed, though no Idolatry had been committed in
them, but being polluted with the service of Idols, there was then double
cause of their destruction, which is not now in these, while differance of
place is taken away. John 4 21.

Sixthly, The high places, the Groves, Altars, Images destroyed by Josias, 2 Chronicles. 34. whereof no necessary use, as our Temples now are; the high places
were Altars in heigh Mountains and Hills. Acts 19.9, 10. There we find an
Idolatrous place converted, by the Apostle unto the service of God, the school
of Tyrannus, being as the rest of the heathenish schools, the nurseries of
superstition, idolatry, false worship, and pernicious opinions, was yet after
this used by Paul, for a place of Gods worship, for a school of religion, to
preach the Gospel of Christ in the same. Levit. 6.28. Levit. 11.32, 33. God
there ordained that things polluted, being of less price should be broken, but
being of more worth, were to be purged and so retained, as the merciful care
of God for his people appeared herein, even under the Law: so much more under
the Gospel, this type is fullfilled unto us, and God in his large bounty does
grant us the necessary use, both of things polluted with Idolatry, as also of
such thing as were otherwise ceremonially unclean. I hope these reasons will
satisfy any reasonable man, who truly loves the peace of Sion; they satisfy
me, and convince me of the truth of these points, which I have endeavored to
defend; but howsoever, some may like these reasons, and others may dislike
them, I shall say to my self in the words of the Poet Theogins; (...)
(...).


FINIS.

