Kollourion,

OR EYE SALVE to anoint the Eyes of the Ministers of the PROVINCE OF LONDON;
THAT THEY MAY SEE Their Error (at least) in opposing the present Proceedings of
the PARLIAMENT and ARMY, in the due execution of JUSTICE.

By a Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by G. Dawson for Henry Cripps and are to be sold in Pope's Head
Alley. 1649.

An Eye Salve to anoint the Eyes of the Ministers of the Province of London,
that they may see their Error (at least) in opposing the present proceedings
of the Parliament and Army, in the due execution of Justice.
Quaere I. Kings that have the Government of Civil States and Kingdoms are not
(under the New Testament, and times of the Gospel) In these our times we are to
distinguish between the state of Kings in their first original, and between
the State of settled Kings and Monarchs, that do at this time govern in
civil Kingdoms. King James Speeching Parliament, cited by Mr. Burton, in his
Epistle Dedicatorie to King Charles in his seven Vials. So again a little
after, Speaking of the Bishop that Preached before him, says he, If I had been
in his place, etc. I would have concluded as an Englishman, etc. putting a
difference between the general power of a King in Divinity, and the settled
and established State of this Crown and Kingdom. id ibid.
rather of a humane then Divine Constitution and Creation, according to 1 Pet.
2.13. Submit your selves (...), to every ordinance of man: or, to every humane
Creation, for the Lord sake, Whether it be to the King as supreme etc, and
therefore are not properly to be called and styled (as is the practice of
Ministers in their prayers usually to do) the Anointed of the Lord.

II. Whether those Kings that are so constituted, when they degenerate from
their Kingly authority, with which they are invested by their people, and turn
down right And therefore a King governing in a settled Kingdom leaves to be a
King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to rule according
to his Laws Therefore all Kings that are not Tyrants or Perjured, will be glad to
bound themselves within the limits of their laws and they that persuade them
the contrary are Vipers and Pests both against them and the Commonwealth id.
ut sup.
Tyrants, Murderers and destroyers of their Kingdoms, may not safely and upon
just grounds be called to an account, and have the law executed upon them for
so doing, they being as subject to the laws, by which they are to govern, as
their people over whom they are set? and Vid. Fox martyrolog. edit. ult. vol. 2
p. 879 880. as Mr. Prinne cites it in his 1 part of the Papists disloyalty to
their Sovereign.
whether in this case civil governors in a State, are more exempt from
Deposition, then Ecclesiastical in a Church?

III. Whether the King of England did not (in an almost unparalled way,
excelling his Predecessors) make himself guilty before God and good men, and
of those (never enough to be abhorred) abominations of Tyranny, Murder, and
Oppression in his three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland: and
whether, if the Commons of England (whom it principally concerns) should wink
and connive at those aforesaid unparalelled abominations, and neglect to
execute righteous judgment, according to the laws of God, Nature and Nations,
they should not bring the guilt of all these abominations, committed by the
said King, upon their own heads, and so become accessory to their own and the
Kingdoms ruin; yea, King Vortiger anno D. 454. King Sigebert, 756. K. Ofred
789 K. Ethelred 794. All before the Conquest with many others after quoted by
Mr. Prinne, ut sup.
the ruin and misery of their Posterity after them.

IV. Whether there be not infinite examples in Histories of the Peoples
proceedings in ways of bringing their Tyrannical Princes to condign
punishment, and setting up others in their steads.

V. Whether the Army under the Command of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, has
not been in a special manner isntrumental from heaven to bring down, that
proud Genesis 10.9.
Nimerod, the KING that hunted after, not only the Estates, but Liberties and
precious lives of the best of his Subjects; and brake through all the hedges
and boundaryes of just laws both of God and Man, that should have kept him
within compass; and were acknowledged the friends of God and good men for so
doing, and many prayers and praises put up to heaven in the behalf of them.

VI. Whether the foresaid Army are not still to be look upon in the present
Transactions they are upon, as instruments in the hands of God (though in an
extraordinary way) for the saving of the Kingdom, so long as they proceed by
the lawful Authority of the Kingdom, viz. the Parliament; in bringing the
grand Incendiaries of the Kingdom to condign punishment.

VII. Whether the God of Heaven, who is Revel. 15.3.
just and holy in all his ways, does not according to his wounderfull
workings, beyond the shallow reach of humane capacities, many times stir up
(in an extraordinary manner) private persons, to execute his Number. 25.7.
just and righteous judgments on those that are his and his Peoples proud and
implacable adversaryes, especially when ordinary ways and means fail: and
whether we are not rather to reverence and adore the glorious and wonderful
actings of God this way, in order to the vindication of his own great Name, and
his peoples salvations, as at this day in England, then to quarrel and fall
foul, with the Instruments, that he is pleased to make use of.

VIII. Whether God has not in his word commanded a speedy execution of
Justice, without respect of Persons? 2 Chr. 19.7.
and been greatly displeased for the neglect of it: and whether the Lords
beholding such a neglect, has not provoked him to make bare his own arm, and
to act in a more extraordinary way and manner to the effecting and bringing to
pass of such a great work, as the execution of Justice and Judgment is.

IX. Whether the Lord General and Council of war in the Army, have acted in
this present business of bringing the King to justice (and those have been in
confederacy with him in the Parliament and Kingdom) by themselves alone,
without the knowledge and approbation of the Kingdom; and whether they have
not been continually instigated by the honest and godly party, as well
Presbyterians as Independents, by their petitions and supplications to
enterprise this business, looking on it as the next and speediest means
through the blood of Christ, to turn away the Number. 25.12.
wrath of God from this Nation, and to preserve it in a sound and better peace
for the future: And whether the godly party so petitioning the Lord General
and Army hereunto, and slighted in your letter are not (without offense be it
spoken) men of as great integrity, judgment and conscience, and as well
insighted in the nature of the present transactions, as those few Ministers of
the province of London (as they are pleased to style themselves though without
any warrant in Scripture) who are known by experience (at least diverse of
them) to come exceeding short both of learning and the power of godliness, and
have more need to hearken to the Counsel of the Lord Jesus, in Matthew. 7.3.
First to take out the Beam that is in their own eye, then to attempt to pluck
out the Moat that is in their brothers eye.

X. Whether the Parliament and Army in waging a just war against the King and
his malignant party, had not been free from the blood of the King, if his life
had been taken away in these wars; and whether it be not every way as lawful
when they have overcome him (through the blessing of God upon their endeavors)
to proceed against him in a legal way, to try him for his abominable
murdering his innocent subjects, as it was formerly to wage war against him.

XI. Whether (the premises duly weighed) ye the Ministers of the province of
London) have not ill requited he Lord and his faithful servants in this
Nation, for their great work and labor Heb. 6.10.
of love in saving hitherto this miserable kingdom though your opposing so
bitterly (contrary to the nature and commission of true Gospel and Evangelicall
Ministers) their just and righteous proceedings in a legal way to have the
known and undoubted enemies of the Lord and his people, brought to condign
punishment: and whether this may not in an hour when you little think of it,
be found just matter of shame and sorrow to your poor souls.

XII. Whether ye have not heretofore in your consciences believed, and
accordingly in a public manner professed, that the King (whom you now so much
plead for) has been a notorious enemy to the Lord Jesus Christ, and sought
(quantum in se fuit) to lay violent hands on his Throne, and to make his
heritage desolate, and to introduce an arbitrary and tyrannical power into the
civil State, and to confirm (as to this day, that Antichristian Government in
your Church which you have covenanted against; and whether you have not
preached prayed, and written, if not some of you fought against him in your
proper persons, or at least encouraged the Soldiers thereunto, when you have
been formerly in the relation of Chaplains or Preachers to them, though now
your judgments and practices (without any just grounds) are clean altered and
turned about.

XIII. Whether now in this present juncture of time for such as ye are, that
pretend to be Ministers of Christ, and friends to the kingdoms peace) to plead
for the King and his malignant party, that were happily secluded from sitting
at the Helm of the Kingdom any longer (they steering so directly contrary to
the safety of the Kingdom) and to preach and pray, and write for them, and
against the present Parliament and Army, that cannot justly be taxed of
carrying on any other design then the glory of God, and salvation of this
miserable Kingdom, and have deserved far better at your hands, be not with
Iehosophat that godly Prince, to 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
help the ungodly, and love those that hate the Lord; and whether this be any
other then to fall from your Rev. 2.4,
first love, and betray your trust you pretend to be committed to you by
Christ, and whether wrath be not for this gone out against you from the Lord.

XIV. Whether if you narrowly ransack your bosoms, and deal impartially with
your own hearts many of you, (if not all of you that have subscribed the Letter
lately sent to the Lord General and his Council of War) have not appeared
against their present preceedings with the Parliament in the secluding the
malignant members, and trial of the King, out of mere prejudice against them,
because you understand they are about to pull down that Dagon of the
presbytery, viz. Tyths and offerings, etc. the which you so much strive to keep
up, (though altogether inconsistent with the Ark of God) and can no more endure
to have taken from you, then old Micah could his carved and moulten Image, his
Ephod and Teraphim, Judge. 18.18. who cried out, Ye have taken away my Gods,
and what have I more.

XV. Whether in this late setting your selves against the proceeding of the
Parliament and Army, in trying of the King, and bringing him to justice, ye do
not directly break the Covenant you so much idolize and plead for, by
endeavoring (what in you lies) to keep from condign punishment such as are
convicted of delinquency, and are without controversy known enemies to the
State and Kingdom in the highest degree; and whether your exempting the person
of the King from justice, be not to make the righteous God a (...). i. a
respecter of persons.

XVI. Whether this course you have lately taken, by your public preaching,
praying, and writing, to oppose the present weighty proceedings of the Army, be
not in a very great measure, a making sad the hearts of the godly party, and
rejoicing the hearts of the wicked, yea a strengthening their hearts and hands
to be more active and desperate then ever (if the Lord from heaven did not put
a hook Isa. 37.29.
in their jaws to restrain them) in their old ways of bloody Cavalerisme: and
whether you do not hereby give just occasion as to the enemy to justify the
King and themselves in their former cursed ways of disobedience to the laws
of God and this Kingdom, so to the Lords people to do your errand to Heaven,
and fill the ears of Jehovah with loud cries and sad complaints against you,
and to beseech him either to open your eyes, or stop your mouths.

XVII. Whether you have not just cause to fear, that you are in the number of
those the Prophet Malachi speaks of, chap. 3.2. who shall not abide the day
of Christ's coming into his Temple, nor stand when he appears, as a Refiners
fire, and like Fullers soap; and whether you are not some of those Priests and
Levits there spoken of, that stand in need of Christ's putting you into his
Refining pot, that he may purge out that dross and take away that scum of
ambition, covetousness, and bitterness, that so apparently remains upon you,
so that you may be able to offer to the Lord a pure offering, and an offering
in righteousness indeed, and not mingle the clean and unclean any longer
together, when you draw nigh to God in the ways of his sacred worship and
service.

FINIS.

