A SERMON PREACHED AT THE PVBLIQVE FAST the ninth of Feb. in St MARY'S OXFORD,
BEFORE The Great Assembly of the Members OF THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS
There Assembled: And published by their special Command.

Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it.

Saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong unto thy peace.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

Die Sabbati decimo Februarii. 1643.

ORdered that Mr Mostyn, and Mr Tompkins, give the Bishop of Down thanks for
his Sermon, and, desire him it may be printed by a Printer at his own
appointment, (unless for Expedition he please to employ the Printer to the
University.)

Noah Bridges.
IEREM. 5.9. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, and shall not
my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
AT the first hearing of these words read, you will conceive that I am come with
an angry message in my mouth; yet are you bound to hear it, because it is from
the Lord, Dictum Iehovae: even a fearful threatening from God himself against
his people Israel, which is repeated no less then thrice in this book, here in
the ninth verse of this Chap. again v. 29. and after Chap. 9.9. Now (says S.
Jerome) verba toties inculcata, vera sunt, viva sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt:
Words so often inculcated are true and lively, sound and plain. The Truth of
this threatening appears by the fearful execution of the judgment threatened
upon the Jews, who became a spectacle of Gods vengeance unto all Generations.
This does something concern us; for the Apostle says, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning. And again, he
tells us, 1. Corin. 10.6. that the punishments of the Jews are our examples,
to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
If therefore it appear that we have sinned in like manner as they did, that our
case is like unto theirs, I shall have a good warrant to take up this Dictum
Jehovae, to come with this threatening in my mouth, shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this?

In which words two things are expressed; First, the Prophets commission, or
the authority by which he spoke, in these words, Dicit Dominus, says the Lord.
Secondly, The message which he brings, which is a fearful threatening against
his people Israel, shall I not visit for these things, and shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this?

The Prophets commission is not from man, nor by man, but from the Lord, for
dicit Dominus, the Lord says it. It is ordinary with all the Prophets, to
allege the authority by which they speak, and to bring forth their commission,
thereby to draw the attention of their hearers, and to procure faith and
obedience to their words, as being the words of God himself. And this they
have done in many and diverse phrases, such as are these especially, the word
of the Lord came unto me, the Lord said unto me; the Lord spoke by me; I saw
the visions of God; the spirit of God came upon me; and this here in my text,
dicit Dominus, wherewith every particular Prophecy is sealed, to show the
dignity of the Prophecy, and the truth of the Prophet, that he speaks not the
vision of his own heart, (as it is said of the false Prophets, Ier. 23.16.) but
that he does prophesy from the mouth of God himself. Our Prophet in the
beginning of this book brought forth his commission, showing that the word of
the Lord came unto him in the days of Josiah, and yet afterward as often as he
begins a new matter, and particularly here where he threatens Judgment, to
show that there is nothing his own; he does it in the style of the Court of
heaven, with a Dicit Dominus, says the Lord.

Now if it be the Lord that says it, if this message be from God, then it is
our duty to hear it; for when God speaks, all men are bound to hear: He that
made the care, shall he not be heard? Ye, it is our duty not only to hear it,
but also to hear it aright, not as it is the word of man, but as it is indeed
the word of God: we must receive it as Gods message, that is, with reverence,
and attention, with fear and trembling, with wisdom and discretion, and
especially with faith and obedience, else all our labor is in vain: for this
is the Propter quod, the end of hearing: therefore God sends his word unto us,
that we may obey, and obey we cannot, unless we believe the word which we
hear; for faith is the mother of obedience, as Saint Paul has taught us in
that excellent gradation, How shall they call on him in whom they have not
believed. Romans 10 14. Calling on God is the first act of obedience, and this
cannot be done without faith. And so we see the true reason why men do not
profit by the word that comes unto them from the Lord, even because they do
not believe it. The Gospel was preached to the Jews who perished, as well as
unto others, but, says the Apostle, It did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2. Turn over all the volumes of the
Prophets, and you shall find that this was the immediate cause of the
destruction of the Jews, even their not believing and obeying the words of the
Prophets. They made a mock at Gods threatenings; for as it follows a little
after my Text, verse. 12. They said, It is not he, neither shall evil come upon
us, neither shall we see sword nor famine. And the Prophets shall become wind,
and the word is not in them. And this their incredulity brought forth
disobedience: for how often does the Lord complain, When I called none did
answer, Esa. 65.12. and 66.4. and as it is in Chap. 35. verse. 15. of this
Prophecy, I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising up early,
and saying, return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings:
-- But ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto me. And therefore if
we would profit by the word that comes from the Lord, we must give credit to
the message, believe all Gods threatenings, that so we may apprehend the danger,
and labor to prevent it by repentance, as did the repenting Israelites, Hos.
6.1. when they heard Gods judgments threatened, they called one another,
saying, Come let us return unto the Lord, for he has wounded, and he will
heal us. As yet the judgment was only threatened, it was not inflicted, and
yet they cry out, He has wounded, he has torn us, as though they had even
then felt the strokes which after came upon the wicked: for why, they knew that
God is true, and that none of his threatings could fall unto the ground;
therefore they were sensible of their danger, and did sue unto God for
deliverance. So did Noah, for the Apostle says, Heb. 11.7. By faith Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an arc to
the saving of his house. Where observe three degrees of Noah's obedience. 1. His
faith, he believed Gods threatening, though it was of things as yet not seen,
for he received Gods warning by Faith. 2. His fear, he was moved with fear.
3. His wise dome and care, he prepared an Arc to the saving of his house.
In like manner should we receive Gods warning by faith, believing his
threatenings, that so we may fear and tremble at his judgments, and being
moved with fear, we may provide for our own safety as he did. This is the part
of every wise man; for says Solomon, Prove. 22.3. A prudent man foreseeth the
evil, and hides himself. That is, he knows that the judgment threatened
will come upon the land, and he provideth by all Lawful means for his safety,
especially he makes his Peace with God, and hides himself under the wings of
his protection, that so he may be able to stand in the evil day.

And thus having briefly prepared you to receive the message, I come to show
you what it is. It is a very angry one, like Samuels message: for unless we
have caroused the cup of slumber unto the very dreggs, this will make both our
ears to tingle, 1. Sam. 3.11. and our heart strings to tremble. It is a
fearful threatening against his people, expressed by way of interrogation, yea
of a double interrogation, and this interrogation has the force of a most
powerful affirmation. Shall I not visit for these things, and shall not my
soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? That is, I shall visit for these
things, my soul shall be avenged on such a Nation as this. Wherein he
appeals, as it were, unto themselves, to declare whether he can do any less,
then punish these sins. As the Judge calls unto the guilty Prisoner at the
Bar, to speak, and to show cause, if he can, why the sentence of death
should not be pronounced: so God is brought in here dealing with his people. He
has in the words going before, by this Prophet, accused them of many grievous
sins, of Rebellion, hypocrisy, security, contempt of his judgments, neglect of
his word, abuse of his servants, disobedience to his call, impudency in sin,
idolatry, adultery; and having found them guilty of all these, he calls them to
show cause why the law should not be executed upon them. Shall I not visit for
these things, says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? As if he should say, Now since there are such abominations in
Jerusalem, since there is such obstinacy in this people, let all the world
judge, and even your selves speak, if it be not meet and just, that I who am
the most just judge of the world, should call you to an account, and Judge you
for these things. I punish the sins of the Nations who know not my name, how
much more shall I punish the sins of this unthankful Nation, to whom I gave
the knowledge of my will, whom I chose to be mine own people, and whom I have
blessed without measure with innumerable benefits; yet have they followed the
sins, for which other Nations were destroyed, and estranged themselves from me:
they have provoked my Majesty by their Idolatry, wronged their Neighbor by
fraud, oppression, and all manner of unrighteousness; and by a perpetual
Rebellion they have resisted my will: therefore is my will wholly bent to
revenge, I will visit for these things, my soul shall be avenged.

From the words thus explained, I will draw seven conclusions. 1. That
punishments are a visitation, so called in my Text. 2. That all punishments are
from God, Shall not I visit. 3. Sin is the cause of all punishment, Shall not
I visit for these things. 4. That great sins procure not only a visitation,
but a vengeance, he will be Avenged. 5. Such sins procure a speedy vengeance,
such as God in his will does earnestly affect, and in his work does seriously
effect; for his Soul is set upon revenge, that is, he has a bent mind, a
ready will, and an earnest desire to be avenged: Shall not my soul be avenged?
6. That these grievous sins bring Gods vengeance, not only upon particular
persons, but also upon the whole Nation: Shall not my soul be avenged on such
a Nation? 7. That no Privileges nor Prerogatives can secure a Nation from
punishment; but if sin do abound, God will be avenged on any Nation, even on
this Nation of the Jews, who were his own peculiar people, Shall not my soul
be avenged on such a Nation as this? By these seven steps shall we climb up
unto the understanding of this Text.


1. Punishments are a visitation, so called in my Text, Shall I not visit? that
is, shall I not punish? Indeed in many other places we find the word used in a
better sense, to express Gods kindness and favors to his people. And if you
would know how this word comes to have two such contrary significations, as
to express sometimes his benefits, and sometimes his judgments: we must look
into the proper signification of the word. To visit properly is to enquire, or
make a search, to take a view of a thing, and exact an account, which may be
both of good and bad. Therefore sometimes the Hebrew word Pakad that signifies
to visit, is by the latin interpreter rendered quaerere, to enquire, as Job.
31.14. Cum quaesierit, (...) jiph kod.
quid respondebo? When he shall visit, what shall I answer? To this end do
Kings institute visitations by themselves or by their Ministers, even to
enquire into the State of their Kingdom, for the punishment of evil doers, 1.
Pet. 2.14.
and for the praise of them that do well. So the Apostles visited Churches,
that is, they did view thoroughly the State of the flock. Now because when God
comes to visit the Sons of men, he takes notice both of the good and the
bad, rewards the good, and punishes the bad: hence it is, that his
visitation expresses sometimes his mercies, and sometimes his judgments. So
that there is a twofold visitation from God, a visitation in mercy, and a
visitation in justice. This threatened in my Text is a visitation in justice,
like that mentioned in the second precept of the Law, He visits the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children. And Isa. 26.14. Thou have visited
and destroyed them, and made all their memory to perish. And in many other
places Gods visitation does express his judgments. I conceive that the phrase
is borrowed from the proceedings of a Judge against guilty persons; in which
proceedings there are two maine acts. 1. An inquiry and diligent examination,
whether the party be guilty or not: this is properly to visit. 2. after he is
found guilty, punishment is inflicted upon him. Such is the proceeding of every
just Judge, and after this manner does God himself proceed, and the second act
which is punishment, is called by the name of the first act, a visitation or an
enquiry, and that for two reasons. 1. To show that God does never punish but
after an enquiry made, and examination of the fact: he is that Lord who in the
Parable, Luke 16.12. calls his Steward to an account: He called him and said
unto him, how is it that I hear this of thee; give an account of thy
Stewardship. There is the visitation or inquiry: and then follows the
punishment, for thou may be no longer Steward. That this is the order of
Gods proceedings he shows clearly, Genesis 18.2. Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous: I will go down
now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it,
which is come unto me: and if not, I will know. 2. To show that if God come to
visit, that is to make a search for sin, we cannot possibly escape
punishment; for we are all guilty in his sight, not able (as Job says) To
answer him one of a thousand: so that the best of us had need to pray with the
holy Prophet, enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy sight shall
no man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.



Now to make some use of this in a word, if punishments be a visitation, then
whenever we are under the cross, let us remember, it is God that visits
us, and then in like manner let us visit God, visit him by prayer; for to pray
unto God is to visit him, according unto that, Isa. 26.16. Lord in trouble have
they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastning was upon them.
Visit him by repentance; for as by sin we turn our backs upon God and depart
from our heavenly Father; so by repentance we come home again, and set our
faces toward God, walking in the ways of his Commandments. Finally, visit
him by faith, faith is the eye of the soul, by faith we look upon him whom we
by our sins have pierced, by faith we who were far off are made near, by
faith we have boldness and access unto him.

The second conclusion is, that all punishments are from God, Shall not I
visit? he says not shall not the Assyrians visit? but shall not I? for
punishment is an act of Justice, and so most proper to God, who is the Judge of
the world, as is expressed, Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? Certainly whatsoever calamities do befall us, they come
not by chance or any blind fortune, or the malice of men or Devils; but by the
determined Council and foreknowledge of God. If the pestilence come amongst us
and consume us, it is the Lord that sends it; or if famine come and pine us
away, it is from the Lord; or if the sword be unsheathed to kill and destroy,
it is the sword of the Lord. I will send (says the Lord, Chap. 25.9.) and take
all the families of the North, and Nebuchadnezzar the King of Babylon my
servant, and will bring them against this land -- and make them an
astonishment, and an hissing, and perpetual desolation. It was God that
delivered Iehojakim King of Judah, into the hands of the King of Babel, Dan.
1.2. It was not Nebuchadnezzars doing, but the Lords. It is plain in the
History of Job, that the Devil for all his malice could not touch Job, nor any
thing that was his, until first the Lord had said unto Satan, Behold all that
he has is in thy power, Job 1.12. Insomuch that Job being spoiled of all his
goods, cried out, The Lord has given, the Lord has taken. He says not, the
Sabaeans have taken away, but the Lord has. So the repenting Israelites in all
their extremities, cried out, He has wounded us, he has torn us, Hos. 6.1.
all the wounds which they felt, they acknowledge to come from God, and
therefore they have recourse unto him for remedy, knowing that Gods hand is
like unto Achilles his spear, which only can heal the wound that it has
made.

The consideration hereof, should teach us patience under the cross, even with
all meekness and humility to submit our selves unto the hand of God. So did
David, I was dumb (says he) and opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
When Shimei did curse and revile him, he did not so much as look upon the
instrument, but upon God whom he had offended, saying, Let him curse, because
the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. 2. Sam. 16.10. So should we in all
our sufferings, not so much look unto the instruments, as unto God, from whom
our afflictions do come. Verily, there is not a greater let that hinders men
from profiting by their afflictions, then their blindness, whereby they
ascribe all their calamities, to secondary causes and inferior means, to
fortune or chance, and never look up unto the hand of God that strikes them;
like a Dog that snatcheth the stone, and observes not the hand that flung it.
Such was the blindness of the Israelites, Hos. 5.13. when Ephraim saw his
sickness, and Judah saw his wound: then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent
to King Jareb; yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wonnd. And
there be many such, and some worse, who in their troubles will not only go
unto Ashur, but even to a Witch at Endor, as though there was not a God in
Israel. Oh wretched people! do they think it is the Devil that hurts them,
or that he can heal them? No, it is only God that wounds us, and he only can
heal us: He kills and makes alive, 1 Samuel 2.6.
brings down to the grave and raises up. Therefore let us in all our
extremities have recourse unto him, saying with Iehosaphat, O Lord, we know not
what to do, but our eyes are unto thee. 2 Chronicles. 20.12.

As all punishments are from God, so the cause that procures them is always
in our selves: for sin is the cause of all punishment, as it follows in the
third place, shall I not visit for these things? that is, for these sins.
Almighty God who is goodness it self, and hates nothing of that which he
has made, does never strike without a cause, nor for every light cause either,
as he has expressed, Lam. 3.39. wherefore is the living man sorrowful, man
suffers for his sin: And a little before, verse. 33. He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men. It is not willingly, but with much
reluctation, as he expresses, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim?
how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I
set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. Therefore is the execution of justice called Opus alienum, Isa.
28.21. For the Lord shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be wroth as in
the valley of Gibeon, that he might do his work, his strange work, and bring
to pass his act, his strange act. It is called a strange work, because he has
no delight in it, as he professes, Ezech. 18.32. I have no pleasure in the
death of him that dies. God has no pleasure in death and in destruction, but
is in a manner constrained by our finnes to inflict them: for sin cries unto
the heaven for vengeance, and suffers not God to rest till he have poured it
out: sin is so contrary to Gods nature, that he cannot but punish it, according
to that, Psalm. 5. 5. The foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate
all workers of iniquity. He reasons from the nature of God, after this manner;
God hates sin, and therefore he will punish it. It is not without cause that
the same word in the Hebrew does signify both sin and punishment; for these two
are inseparable, if impiety, there can be no impunity. It was Gods threatening
unto Adam, in the day that thou eatest of the forbidden fruit thou shall dye
the death, Genesis 2.17. This is the sentence of the Law, Cursed is every one that
abides not in all things that are written in this book, Deuteronomy. 27.26. This is
repeated by the Prophet, Ezech. 18.4. The soul that sins, it shall dye: the
same is confirmed by the Apostle in many places, Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men,
Romans 5.12. By sin death entered into the world: So that if it had not been for
sin, death could not have found a door to enter in at. But when by one man sin
entered into the world, death entered by sin, and passed upon all men, Romans
6.23. The wages of sin is death, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh, ye
shall dye. And S. James says, chap. 1.15. Sin when it is finished, brings
forth death. He says not of every sin, that it brings forth death; but only
of sin when it is finished, or come to a full height: for God in his mercy
forgiveth sins not finished, or at least he tolerateth them till they come to
perfection, that the sinner may be without all excuse; but in his justice he
judges and condemns sins consummate by frequent iteration, hardness of
heart, and impenitencie: as he she weth, Amos 1.3. For three transgressions of
Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof etc. as
if he had said, if Damascus had sinned only once, in persecuting of my Church,
I might have turned away my judgments: but they have sinned often, to three
transgressions, they have added four, they have threshed Gilead with threshing
instruments of iron. And for so many transgressions I will not turn away their
punishment. Such a continued course in sin, does not only deserve death,
which is common to all sins; but it assuredly brings it forth, and moves
God to inflict it upon the sinner. The word (...) there used by the Apostle
signifies to be delivered of that which has been conceived: so that the
Apostle will give us to understand so much, that sin, when once it comes to
perfection, is with child of death, and must needs be delivered.

If it be so that sin brings punishment, and that there is no suffering but
only for sin: then whenever any evil is upon us, let us look back into our
former courses, examine our by past lives, and see what we have done, to
provoke Gods wrath and indignation against us: for certain it is, that all
afflictions are from God, and as certain it is that all afflictions are from
God, and as certain it is, that God never strikes, but where he finds a cause
in the party. Oh happy were we, if the sense of our sufferings might thus lead
us into the sight and sense of our sins, that so we might have recourse unto
the Physician of our souls. But alas! we all perish for want of consideration:
for we go on, walking rashly, and mind not what we do, or in what case we
stand to Godward. No man repented (says our Prophet, cap. 8.6.) but why? No
man said, what have I done? Every one turned to his course, as a horse rusheth
unto the battle. There can be no repentance, till first there be a looking
back, I. am. 3.40.
to see what we have done amiss; therefore let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the Lord. First we must search and try our ways, to find out
our own wanderings, before we can return unto the Lord.

The fourth point follows, that great sins, such as were among the Jews,
and doubtless are amongst us, do procure, not only a visitation, but a
Vengeance: which is an act of Gods wrath, and so a terrible punishment, in some
sort proportionable to the offense committed, which God inflicts upon men, not
so much for their correction, as for the satisfying of his own justice. First
I say, it is an act of Gods wrath, according to that, Micah. 5.15. I will
execute vengeance in anger, and fury upon the Heathen. Again, I say that God
inflicteth vengeance upon men, not so much for their correction, as for the
satisfying of his own justice. For this difference Aristotle puts between
punishment and revenge, Lib. 1. Rhetori. c. 10.
that punishment is for their sakes that suffer it; and revenge for his sake
that takes it. So long as our sins are any way tolerable, God does only
punish, intending our amendment; but if our sins become great and grievous,
such as cry unto the heaven, God will proceed to revenge; then he will not
look so much unto us, as unto himself; for his honor is engaged, and must be
relieved, by executing vengeance upon the wicked. Gods Justice calls for
revenge; for by sin God is wronged, and he must be righted, and get himself
honor upon those sinners who have dishonored him. Thus being to execute
judgment upon Pharaoh, he says, I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, Exodus
14.17. God got himself honor, by magnifying his Justice in the destruction of
that Rebellious Tyrant. This is a thing so agreeable to the Divine nature, that
thereby God is known to be God, according to that of the Psalmist, God is known
by executing of judgment. Hereby was he made known unto the Egyptians, as he
says, Exodus 7.5. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord, when I
stretch forth mine hand upon Egypt. Yea vengeance is so proper unto God, that
he does challenge it as his own peculiar, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Vengeance is mine, I
will repay. Which place is twice quoted by the Apostle, once Romans 12, 19. to
diswade us from private revenge: and again, Heb. 10 30. to deter us from
wilful sinning. Besides he is styled the Lord God of Vengeance twice, Ps.
94.1. and the Lord God of Recompenses, by our Prophet. cap. 51.56. and Nahum.
1.2. he is called a jealous, furious, and revenging God.

If God be an avenger; then let us remember what the Apostle says, It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10 31. His wrath
is a consuming fire, before which when it is kindled, the wicked shall be
consumed, as stubble before the fire: when God comes to revenge, they shall
cry unto the Mountains to fall upon them, and cover them from the face of him
that sits on the Throne. We shall therefore do well to advise with Our
selves now, how we shall do to bear that wrath; we should now pose our selves
with that question of the Prophet, who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? If Gods wrath be
in supportable, then should we labor in time to prevent it. And the only way
to prevent it is, now to revenge upon our selves for the sins we have
committed; for revenge is a part of Repentance, as is excellently expressed by
the Apostle, 2 Corin 7.11. Behold, the self same thing that ye sorrowed after
a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your
selves; yea, what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea,
what zeal; yea, what revenge? But how shall we revenge upon our selves? even
by mortifying our sinful lusts and corruptions, beating down this body of
sin, afflicting our souls by fasting and abstinence: we must not only take
from our flesh all sinful pleasures and delights; but also restrain our
selves of the use of lawful pleasures, of meat and drink: Et abstine at a
licitis, quia illicita concupivit. This is that work where unto we are now
called, and whereof this day we make a profession. If we do truly humble our
selves and afflict our souls, we shall not be judged of the Lord: otherwise
Gods vengeance is near at hand.

So it follows in the fifth place, That grievous sins procure a speedy
vengeance, such as God in his will does earnestly affect, and in his work does
readily effect: for his soul is set upon revenge, shall not my soul be
avenged? God is not as man consisting of soul and body; yet the Scripture
speaking of God after the manner of man, ascribes unto him not only bodily
members, as eyes, ears, hands; but even a soul also. Gods Soul is here
mentioned to express the earnestness of his desire. As in other places when
God is brought in, saying, My soul hates this, my soul abhors that, it is
to express a great and a vehement detestation: so here when God says, my
soul shall be avenged, he will express a vehement desire. He will have his
people to conceive that by their sins they had grieved him (as we say) at the
very heart, that is, offended him exceedingly, and that he will ease his heart
by executing vengeance upon them, as he threatens, Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease
me of mine adversaries, I will avenge me of mine enemies.

Therefore let us take heed of grieving Gods soul: if his soul be grieved,
his soul will be avenged. It is a dangerous thing to grieve men, especially if
they be powerful; how much more dangerous is it; to grieve the great God of
heaven and earth, as is expressed, Isa. 7.13. It is: small thing for you to
weary men, but will you weary my God also? Remember therefore the Apostles
admonition, Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby you are
sealed. Or if we have grieved him by our sins, the next best is, that we be
grieved with our selves for all our abominations. That is the only way to keep
back Gods vengeance both from our selves and from the Nation.

For that is the sixth conclusion arising from this Text, Grievous sins bring a
vengeance, not only upon particular persons, but also upon the whole Nation:
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation? As God in Scripture accuses
particular persons for sin, so he charge whole Nations, Kingdoms, and
Cities. Judah is a sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity: Isa. 1.4.
Gilead is a City of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with blood. Hos.
6.8. and in the fourth Chapter of that Prophecy at the first verse. the Lord
takes up a complaint against the whole Land: The Lord has a controversy with
the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth nor mercy, nor knowledge
of God in the Land. etc. The Apostle Peter taxes the age with corruption, Acts
2.40. Save your selves from this untoward generation. And Saint John says, The
whole World lies in wickedness. 1. Joh. 5.19. And as the Nation is defiled
with sin, so we find that Gods judgments are general upon the whole
Nation: when the Earth was filled with cruelty, and all flesh corrupted his
way, then God sent the flood upon the old World: the whole Cities of Sodom
were overthrowen: God ten plagues were upon the Land of Egypt, so that from
Pharaoh that sat upon the Throne, unto the She pheards that followed the Ewes,
there were none free from the annoyance of those plagues: the seven Nations of
the Canaanites were cast out, when their iniquities were full: Gods wrath was
upon all the Camp of Israel in the wilderness. In the Prophets you will often
find Judgments threatened against the whole Nation. Jsa, 1.7. Your Country is
desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire, your Land strangers devour in your
presence. Isai. 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall
perish. Hos. 4.3. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwells
therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of
Heaven, yea the fishes of the Sea also shall be taken away. Hos. 13.16. Samaria
shall become desolate, for she has Rebelled against her God: they shall fall
by the sword: their Infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with
child shall be ripped up. And as he threatened, so he executed his judgments upon
the Nation: First, the Kingdom of Samaria was so utterly destroyed, that it
ceased to be a Nation any more: a little after the Kingdom of Judah was
carried away captive unto Babel, and albeit God was pleased to bring back
again their captivity, yet it was a very small remnant, as says the Prophet
Isai. 1.9. Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we
should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. So
God dealt with other Nations, Zeph. 3.6. J have cut off the Nations: their
Towns are desolate, I made their Streets waste, that none passes by: their
Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant.
Even Babylon the hammer of the Earth became heaps. Jerem. 51.37. An habitation
of Owls, Satyrs dancing, and Dragons crying within her palaces. Isa. 13.21.
So we know God will do unto mystical Babylon: when her sins have reached unto
Heaven, then will the Lord remember her iniquities: she shall be burnt with
fire: yea, her destruction is so irrecoverable, that it is compared to a
millstone cast into the midst of the Sea, which is not to be taken up again.
But to leave judgments to come, consider what is become of the famous Kingdom
in the East, where the Apostles themselves planted Churches, and you will find
that God has removed their Candlestick, or covered it under a bushel; for
they now groan under the slavery of the Turk. So true is that which Saint
James says, Sin when it is finished, brings forth death.

Here it will be expedient that I show you briefly, what sins these are that
bring judgments upon the Nation, and what is the vengeance which God executes
upon a Nation. As to the first, it is not every sin that draws judgments
upon the Nation; but sin when it is finished, or come to a full height: for
there is a growth and perfection in sins both Personal and National.
Personal sins are finished, when men add sin to sin, acquire a habit of
sin, draw upon themselves a necessity of sining, harden their hearts, and
continue in impenitency. There is a perfection also in National sins, and
four things concur to the finishing of sin in a Nation. 1. Their number
and quality, if they be many and grievous. 2. Their extent, if they be
general. 3. Their freedom, if they go unpunished. 4. Their continuance, if
they be persevered in without repentance.
If the sins of a Nation come once to this full height, then are they ripe for
Gods sickle there will follow the death and destruction of that Nation. The
vengeance which God executes upon a Nation has three degrees: the first I may
call affliction, the 2d captivitiy, and the 3d utter destruction. For
affliction, when 0198 God visits a Kingdom with diverse plagues, such as are
mentioned in the fourth of Amos, where he reckons up the several plagues
which he had inflicted upon his people, as famine, or cleannes of teeth, ver.
6. drought or want of rain; ver. 7. blasting and mildew, ver. 9. Pestilence
and the Sword, ver. 10. And when for all these they did not return unto the
Lord, he threatens yet a greater judgment, ver. 12. Therefore thus will I
do unto thee, O Israel. For this is Gods method in punishing: he begins
with milder corrections, and when these cannot prevail, he proceeds to sharper
judgments. In the fifth of Hos. first he threatens a gentle correction, ver.
12. J will be unto Ephraim as a Moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.
But when they were not affected with the slow gnawing of a small Moth, he
threatens a heavier judgment, ver. 14. I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, and
as a young Lion to the house of Judah; I, even I, will tear and go away: I
will take away, and none shall rescue him. And Levitic. 26. he threatens
several plagues against the transgressors of his Law: first, sickness ver.
16. then famine, ver. 9. after this destruction of their cattle, ver. 22.
after that the sword and Pestilence, ver. 25. And after all these he adds,
And if you will not for all this hearken unto me, then will I bring seven times
more plagues upon you; as if he should say, since ordinary afflictions cannot
work upon you, ye shall even go into captivity. This is the second degree of
vengeance which God brought upon his people, their abused soil upon a surfeit
of wickedness, did spue out her perfidious owners; they were carried captive
unto Babel, and there were servants to a people, whose gods they knew not,
whose language they did not understand: and as it was foretold, Their country
was desolate, their Cities burnt with fire, strangers did devour their Land in
their presence, and the Daughter of Sion was left as a Cottage in a Vineyard,
as a lodge in a garden of Cucumbers, as a besieged City. Isa. 1.7.8. The third
degree of vengeance which God brings upon a Nation, is utter destruction,
such as God brought upon the old World, upon Sodom and Gomorrah, upon the
Kingdom of Israel. It pleased God to bring back again the captivity of Judah,
and they were as a firebrand plucked out of the fire: but the flourishing
Kingdom of the ten Tribes came to a final end, and so vanished in that her
dissipation, that no man since could ever say, this was Israel. Here was
vengeance upon the whole Nation.

Such vengeance will God execute upon any Nation, if their sins be come to a
full height: and therefore howsoever thou be desperately careless of thy
self, yet pity the Nation that bred thee, and wherein thou breathest. If
Paris be famous to this day, for occasioning the destruction of Troy: how shall
your names be branded with ignominy, if you bring destruction upon your Nation?
but if you regard not the shame, yet fear the torment will follow your own
Souls: God will require the blood of them that perish by your means, at your
hands. If they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the stars,
brighter then the firmament; then they who turn many unto wickenesse, shall
burn in Hell as brimstone it self, hotter then other wicked men, which yet
shall be Faggots in Hell fire. The rich glutton in Hell had a great care for
his brethren, that they should not come into those torments; and the reason is,
he knew that then his own torments should be increased, because by his
example, he had been the author of their destruction. Have, I beseech you, at
least as much charity, as damned Dives had; pity your Nation, and be careful
that others fare not the worse for your sakes.

The last point is, That no privileges and prerogatives can secure a Nation
from judgment; but if iniquity do abound, God will be avenged on any Nation,
even upon this Nation of the Jews which was his own people. Indeed never a
Nation under the Cope of Heaven could compare with the Jews for prerogatives:
they were Gods people by peculiar adoption: the Lord did choose them above all
the people of the earth to set his love upon them: he gave his laws unto
Jacob, and his testimonies to Israel: he dealt not so with every Nation, as he
dealt with them. To them partaineth (says the Apostle) the adoption and the
glory, and the covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and
the promises: whose are the Fathers, and of whom as concerning the flesh,
Christ came, Romans 9.4. They had the Temple of God amongst them, of which the
Lord himself speaks thus: This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell. Ps.
132.14. They had amongst them the Arc of the Covenant, the Mercy-seat, the
true worship of God, and what not? and yet they falling from God by a
perpetual Rebellion, must be destroyed, defaced, extinguished, and made a
fearful spectacle of Gods wrath to all posterities. Those prerogatives which
they had, and the worship of God in which they trusted, could not free them
from vengeance, as the Lord himself forewarned them in the seventh chap. of
this Prophecy: Behold ye trust in lying words, which cannot profit, saying,
the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord; will ye steal, murder,
commit adultery, swear falsely, burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other
Gods whom ye know not; and come and stand before me in my house, which is
called by my name, and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations? Is
this house, which is called by my ^ame, become a den of robbers? Therefore will
I do unto this house, which is called by my name, and wherein ye trust, as I
have done to to Shiloh: and I will cast you out of my sight, as I cast out all
your brethren, even the whole s^ed of Ephraim. Yea those prerogatives and
benefits which they had received, were so far from saving them in the day of
vengeance, that they did aggravate their guiltiness, and double their
condemnation, as is expressed Amos 3.2. you only have I known of all the
families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities: as
if he should say, because I blessed you more then others, seeing now that you
prove unthankful, I will punish you more then others. God uses his former
benefits, as arguments to prove that judgments were due unto them: for these
three follow of course, Ingentia beneficia, ingentia peccata, ingentes poenae:
where God vouchsafes to confer great benefits upon a Nation, and they answer
him with great sins, certain it is, that great judgments will en^ue. How does
our Savior take on against these Cities, where he had preached, and wrought
many miracles, and they were not converted? Woe be to thee Corazin, Woe be to
thee Bethsaida, woe be to thee Capernaum: for if that the great works that
have been do^e in thee, had been done in Tyrus and Sydon, in Sedome and
Gomorrah, they would have repented: but it shall be easier for them of Tyrus,
for them of Sodom at the day of judgment, then it shall be for you, Matthew.
11.20. etc. So may I say unto many who now enjoy the means of Salvation, and
have drunk deep of the cup of Gods blessings, and yet continue in their sins:
the time shall come when they shall cry out, oh that I were of Sodom, oh that
I were of Gomorrah, oh that I had been borne a Turk, a Pagan, and never
known the good Word of God, rather then having known it, to have turned away
from the holy Commandment.

Let us not therefore flatter our selves, in respect of an outward profession
of the true Religion, and because of the manifold blessings wherewith Almighty
God has blessed our Nations: for when God once comes out of his place to
punish the Inhabitants of the earth for their iniquities, then the plea of
Templum Domini will not serve the turn, if reformation of the heart and life
be wanting: The Jews, because they had Abraham to their Father, thought
themselves free, and could not endure to hear of bondange: and indeed they
were the seed of Jacob, the only visible Church that God had; yet when the
faithful City became an Harlot, God gave her a bill of divorce, his soul was
avenged upon that Nation. Good God, if thy justice spared not Jerusalem, what
Nation can look to escape? The Apostle directs us, what use we should make of
all the punishments of the Jews, 1. Corin. 10.6. etc. Now these things were
our examples, to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they
also lusted. And that Scripture brings me to my general application.

You have heard Gods threatening against his people, in handling whereof I have
proved, that great sins procure not only a visitation, but a vengeance, yea, a
speedy vengeance, not only upon particular persons, but even upon the whole
Nation, yea, upon any Nation, though never so near and dear unto God, as upon
the Nation of the Jews. Now if we will reflect upon our selves, we will find
that we may vie blessings with the Jews, blessings spiritual, and blessings
temporal, the blessing of Peace the blessing of plenty, the blessing of many
great and extraordinary deliverances from out enemies, and above all, the
inestimable blessing of the word of God. And it fears me, that we shall find,
we may tell sins with them also, and overmatcht them by farte.

I pray you what were the sins for which God was pleased to execute vengeance
upon his own people? Was it Epicurisme and fleshly lusts; for these stand^ne
^rest to the threatening in my Text, when I had fed them to the full, they then
committed adultery, they assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses:
they were as fed Horses in the morning: every one neighed after his Neighbors
wife: Whereupon follows this threatening, shall I not visit for these things?
Or was their sin Blood and Oppression, Bribery and Injustice, Fraud and
Deceit, Robbery and Extortion, Lying, Avarice and Ambition, Pride and
Prodigality, Oaths and Blasphemy? Or was their sin Ingratitude and
Hypocrisy, neglect of Gods word, disobedience to his call, abuse of his
servants, and profanation of his Sabboths? carnal security, hardness of
heart, and contempt of Gods judgments? Or was it corruption in worship and
gross idolatry? Of all these crimes they stand indicted by the Prophets, and
in all these we have gone beyond them: as Jerusalem justified Samaria, so have
we more then justified Jerusalem in all her abominations. I will instance only
in one, or two. Our Prophet says, Chap. 23.10. Because of swearing the Land
mourns. And yet the least child in our streets could teach them all to
swear: that sin could not be so very common amongst them; for they had a
custom to tear their clothes, when they heard one to blaspheme: if we should
do so in this age, I am sure we should not leave a ragge upon our backs. As we
go beyond them in swearing, so also in lying: never was there any Iow, nor
Friar either, that had a face so impudent, to devise such lies, as now are
published, allowed, rewarded, as being the best means they have to advance
their holy Cause, Besides, there are many sins common amongst us, which were
either rare, or altogether unknown unto the Jews; as Usury, which was not
practiced by them, except in their dealing with strangers: neither do we read
of their Sacrilege, till after their return from the captivity. Here, if time
would permit me to speak of your gaming, dicing, of your Masks, and
Stageplayes, etc. I could make it appear, that there are many great sins
allowed amongst us, which were not known unto the Jews, not so much as heard
of in Sodom or Gomorrah. We have new devices to cozen with, new inventions to
pamper our bodies. and sacrifice to our panch, new fashions to be proud with,
new oaths to blaspheme with, new dressings and tires of women to provoke lust:
we have a new Rebellion, such as was not known unto Gods people, and cannot be
paralleled amongst the heathen: we have got a new Covenant to strengthen that
Rebellion; two new Idols set up, like Ieroboams Calves to draw away the people
from the house of David, but that the one is inconsistent with the other; the
Presbytery of Geneva, and the independencie of New England; and we have almost
as many new Religions as there were gods amongst the heathen. Now shall not God
visit for these things? and shall not his soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this?

But besides the number and quality of sins, other things concur to the
finishing of sin in a Nation; as their extent, if they be general; their
freedom, if they be not punished; their continuance, if they be persevered in
without repentance; and if we take a true view of our Nation, we shall find
that none of these are wanting. Sin is so general, that Almighty God now might
call for a search as he does in the first verse of this Chap. Run ye to and
fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the
broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that executes
judgment, and seeks the truth. If God should call for such a search to be
made in our Land, I believe that but few such should be found. And for further
trial hereof, following the example of our Prophet, in the fifth verse, First,
I will get we unto the great men of the Land, to see if they have known the
way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether
broken the yoke, and burst the bonds. Their houses are full of bribes, their
hands are full of violence, they build unto themselves houses with the blood of
the poor: if they do not turn justice into wormwood, by a wrongful sentence;
yet I dare say, that they turn justice into vinegar, by their delays. From
the Rulers of the Land, I will pass unto the house of Levi, to see yet if the
Priests lips do preserve knowledge, and their hearts holiness. Alas nothing
less; but as the Princes of Jerusalem are as roaring Lions, and their Judges
as Wolves; so her Prophets are light and treacherous persons: her Priests have
polluted the Sanctuary, they have wrested the Law. Zeph. 3.3.4. The Lord may
complain now, as he does by our Prophet, Chap. 23.11. both Priest and Prophet
are profane, yea in my house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord.
But I shall not need to accuse the Clergy; for every man's mouth is open against
them, and your sacrilegious abuse of them, is not the least of these sins,
which God now calls to remembrance; yet it cannot be denied, but, as it is said,
Mal. 2.8. We have broken the Covenant of Levi, and therefore has God made us
contemptible and base before all the people. It were easy to go through all
Estates and conditions of men, and show that sin like an Epidemicall disease
possesses the whole body of the Land, so that from the soale of the Foot, even
unto the head, there is no foundnesse in it, but wounds and bruises, and
putrefying sores, as is said of Judah, Isa. 1.6. And as our sins are
general, so are they committed with great freedom: men are not restrained
either with shame, or fear of punishment, which makes our case yet more
desperate. When Phinces drew the sword, and smote the adulterous persons, he
turned away Gods wrath, and caused the plague to cease: but where there is not
a Phinces to draw the sword for the punishment of vice, there the guilt of
these finnes lies upon the Land, and draws down the judgments of God upon the
Nation, And it is not so with us now? for judgment is not executed, all sins
are either venial, or venall: even the blood of many thousand Innocents shed
by Rebels, cries unto the heavens for a vengeance, because there is none in
earth to revenge it. And finally, do we not continue in our sins without
repentance, hardening our hearts against all Gods admonitions? So that it may
be said of us, as was said of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
That in the time of our distress we trespass yet more against the Lord. Now
shall I not visit for these thing, (says the Lord) shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this?

Yes, Almighty God has already begun to visit; he is come down to execute
vengeance upon our sinful Nation. In Ireland there is nothing but ruin,
desolation, and woe, dii multa neglecti dederunt besperiae male luctuosae: we
of that sinful Land did provoke God; and he has stretched over us the line
of Sodom, the Plummet of Samariae. And as he has done to Ireland, so is he
like to do to England: for he has kindled a fire in your bosoms; he has
sent such an evil spirit between the King and His People, Judge. 9.25.
as he did between Abimelech and the men of Sechem. This Kingdom, which is
secured by Seas from Foreign Invasion, is now like to destroy it self: for
there is such a bloody, cruel, and unnatural Rebellion in it, as may minister
matter and occasion to a new book of Lamentations, This Kingdom was once like
Israel, Lam. ^.^. c. 2.15.
great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces; the perfection of
beauty, the joy of the whole earth; a refuge and shelter to strangers in
distress. But now the Lord has cast down her beauty from heaven unto the
earth: v. 1.2.
he has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied: he
has slain all that were pleasant to the eye, v. 41.
he has powered out his fury like sire, the Lord has cast off his Altar: v. 7.
he has abborred his Sanctuary; he has taken away his Taberracle, he has
destroyed his places of the assembly: 2.6.
the Lord has ca^sed the solemn feasts to be forgotten, and has despised in
the indignation of his anger the King and the Priest. In a word, God has
brought so many calamities upon this Land, that I could say with our Prophet,
Chap. 9.1. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people.
God has sent amongst us his three great plagues, famine, pestilence, the
sword: The greatest of these is the sword, as may appear by David's choice: and
now the Lord has put the sword in Commission: he has sent it to ride Circuit
from one County to another, as is expressed, Cha. 47.6. O thou Sword of the
Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into thy
scabberd, rest, and be still. Whereunto answer is made in the next words, how
can it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against As^kelon, and
against the Sea shore: there has he appointed it. Such a charge has he given
unto his sword at this time. It is a sword like that which is described, Ezekiel.
21. A sword, a sword sharpened, and also fou^bished ver. 9. It is the sword of
the great men that were slain, entering into the privy Chambers, ver. 14. It
contemns the rod of my son, ver. 10, that is, it regards not the Kings
Scepter, where even the Geneva note in the Margin tells us, that the King is
called the Son of God, because that all men should reverence Him as being in
Gods place. But this is a desperate sword, as is expressed, verse 13. And what
shall this be, if the sword contemn even the rod? Such is the sword which God
has sent against our Land: It contemns the rod, despises the Scepter, and
spares not the person of the King himself; so that the breath of our
nostrills, the anointed of the Lord was almost taken in their pits. Lam. 4.20.
This sword is so desperate, that it devoureth without respect of sex, age, or
conditions of men: and there is no end of destroying. We may now with sad
hearts, and wet eyes behold the whole Kingdom, like a sorrowful Widow; not
only as Rebecca, pained with the struggling of her children in her womb; but
as Rachel, weeping for her children, who will not be comforted because they are
not.

It is repotted of Judas Macchabaeus, 2. Mac. 12. that after a shaughter of the
People, he caused to offer up Sacrifice for the dead. Now howsoever that author
has related this story, yet I cannot believe that Judas offered any Sacrifice
for the benefit of the dead; for certainly that error is not so ancient: but it
may well be, that he caused to offer up Sacrifice because of the dead; that is
to say, by the slaughter of those men that fell, he perceived that Gods wrath
was kindled against all the People, and so he offered Sacrifice to make an
atonement for themselves. So we shall do well now, to offer up sacrifice
because of the Slain, to turn away Gods wrath from us, lest we all likewise
perish. I know there is a sacrifice intended; but it is such as will make no
atonement. Many divelish politicians would now make a sacrifice of the Church:
they call it a Reformation of Religion; but it would prove the destruction of
it. This has bin often attempted before, and it was observed by M. Cartwright,
and the author of the Ecclesiastical discipline, that it was covetousnesses
which set on worktheir Lay-followers, to bring in their discipline. Whilst
they hear us speak against Bishops and Cathedral Churches (says the author
of the Ecclesiastical discipline) it tickleth their ears, looking for the
like prey they had before of Monasteries; Yea, they have in their hearts
devoured already the Churches inheritance. They care not for Religion, so they
may get the spoil. They could be content to crucify Christ, so they might
have his garments. Our age is full of spoiling soldiers, and of wicked
Dionysians, who will rob Christ of his golden Coat, as neither fit for him
in Winter nor in Summer. And says M. Cartwright, They are Cormorants, and
seek to fill the bottomless sacks of their greedy appetites. They do yawne
after a prey, and would thereby, to their perpetual shame, purchase to
themselves a field of blood. So that even in the judgment of these men who
were the founders of this Rebellious Sect, it is no acceptablesacrifice to God,
for men to appropriate to themselves the maintenance of the Church, and such
things as have been dedicated to Gods service. This is not to offer up a
Sacrifice to God, but to sacrifice the things that are Gods unto wicked and
Sacrilegious men. Such a Sacrifice will be so far from pacifying Gods wrath,
that it will incense it the more against us, and against the whole Land: such a
Sacrifice will be as abominable unto God, as was under the Law, the cutting off
a Dogs neck, and the offering of Swines blood. Isa. 68.3.

It is another Sacrifice wherewith we must make an atonement, even that
Sacrifice which David, repenting of his sin, vowed unto God, Ps. 51.17. The
sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart, which God will not despise. We must
humble our selves in the sense of our sins, and cry mightily unto God, that the
fierceness of his wrath may be turned away. By this humiliation Gods wrath
has been often pacifyed: Ahab by an outward humiliation, procured the
adjourning of a temporal judgment. So did the Ninevites, when their
destruction was within forty days, they humbled themselves and fasted;
whereupon the Lord repealed his sentence, and they were not destroyed. In the
second of Joel I find, that even when the day of the Lord was nigh at hand,
ver. 1. that is, destruction ready to fall upon them presently, yet God was
willing to stay his hand, and that his people should make his threatenings void:
for in the 12. verse he exhorts them unto repentance, saying, Therefore also
now, says the Lord, turn you unto me: also now, that is, even now when the
sentence is gone forth, when the judgment is at hand, now when I have whet my
Sword, bent my Bow, and prepared the instruments of death; yet Turn ye unto me
with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning:
rent your hearts, -- and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious and
merciful, -- who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him? -- Therefore blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, c^ll a
solemn Assembly. -- Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between
the Porch and the Altar, and say, Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thine
heritage to reproach. When Shishak King of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem, in
the days of Rehoboam, and took in the fenced Cities of Judah; the Princes of
Israel and the King humbled themselves: And when the Lord saw they humbled
themselves, the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some
deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of
Sh^shak. 2 Chronicles. 12.7. So powerful is true humiliation to assuage the flames
of Gods wrath. But for want of this humiliation, many times Gods people,
maintaining a good Cause by lawful authority, yet are foiled, as were the
Israelites before Ai, who could not prevail, until such time as Joshua fell
on his face, and mourned and cried unto the Lord. Jos. 7.6. The Israelites
going against the Tribe of Benjamin, were Gods. people, they had a good Cause,
and a special Commission from God; yet were they twice foiled, because they
did neglect to seek God by repentance and humiliation, as does appear by the
event: for being beaten unto it, they went up to the Lord, and wept and fasted,
and offered burnt offerings and Peace Offerings before the Lord. Judge. 20.26.
Whereupon they overcame the Benjamites. In the first of Sam. 7.6. it is said,
that the people drew water and powered it out before the Lord, and fasted; that
is, as the Chaldee observes, they poured out their hearts before God, and shed
tears in such abundance, as if they had drawn water and powered in upon the
ground: whereupon God took their Cause in hand against the Philistims. So
Iehosophat proclaimed a Fast when the Moabites came against him. 2 Chronicles. 20.3.
And it is reported of O tho the great, that being to join battle with the
Hungarians, he proclaimed a Fast in his Camp, and called upon God. If we would
thus humble our selves, God would soon humble our enemies: it is his own
Covenant, Ps. 81.13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had
walked in my ways: I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my
hand against their adversaries. This Covenant is expressly set down by our
Prophet, Chap. 18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down, and destroy it: if that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them. The like is promised, 2. Chron.
7.14. If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear
from Heaven, and will forgive their sin, and heal their Land. Where observe,
that we must not only humble our selves, pray, and seek Gods face: but also we
must turn from our wicked ways; otherwise we cannot expect that God should
heal our Land.

Therefore in the next place I say, that with our humiliation, we must join
the reformation of our lives. It is not enough that we bow down our heads like
a bul-rush, and afflict our souls for a day by fasting: if afterward we
return to our sins as a dog to his vomit: we have often fasted, or made a
show to fast, since this bloody Rebellion begun: but it seems God has not
regarded our Fastings, for his anger is not turned away but his hand is
stretched out still. And the reason is, we do not fast from sin: but pour out
our selves into all manner of wickedness and so long as we by our sins fight
against God, we may be sure that God will fight against us. When Trajan,
General to Valens the persecuting Emperor, was defeated by the Goths; the
Emperor upbraiding him with cowardice and sloth, as the causes of the
overthrow, he told the Emperor, that himself was the cause of the loss, for
you do so war against God, Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 4.
(says he) that you abandon the victory, and send it to your Enemies. When
Phocas had built a mighty well about his Palace for his security in the night
he heard a voice, saying, O King, though thou build as high as the clouds,
Cedren. Hist. page 5 42.
yet the City may easily be taken; the sin within will mar all. Except sin
be cast over the walls, a wall of brass is but a vain thing. To this purpose
speaks the Comic, Si incolae been sint morati pulchre munitam arbritror; at
nisi invidia, avaritia, ambitio exulent, centuplex murus parum est. Therefore
the Romans at first in their wars (as Vlpian and Flavius Vopiscus do
testify) made choice of no criminous parties, no adulterers, no condemned
persons; yea, no bondslaves, nor contentious brawlers. But afterward (as Li.
vie says) the Commonwealth being brought to the very pinch of despair, they
employed such wicked persons, whereof Scipio complained, Live. l. 10. Dec. 3.
saying, Non est mihi tantum ab hostibus armatis periculi, etc. We need not so
much to fear the forces of our enemies, as our own ill conditions: for indeed,
as Ambrose says, Graviores sunt inimici mores pravi, quam hosies infesti. Our
sins areenemies more to be feared, then armed men. It is out sins that have
laid Christian Kindomes open to the tyranny of the Turk, and now our sins have
betrayed us into the hands of more cruel and harbarous enemies, then the
Turks: our sins are the only cause of their prevailing: they have not
prevailed so far, for that their cause is good, or their carriage better then
their cause, for both are stark naught) but God cannot endure that in his own
people, which for a time he will in his enemies: the Midianites who caused the
Jsraelites to sin, were worse then the Jsraelites; yet God first corrected his
own people, and then vexed the Midianites. Therefore how carefully should we
take heed unto our ways, now when the sword is upon the l^nd? many think that
in the time of war, there is a liberty of sin, and they may do what they list,
and such is now, for the most part, the carriage of our Soludiers: they do not
Sanctify a war, as God requires, Joel, 3.9. but by their godless behavior
they discredit the good cause for which they fight. As we should keep our
selves from sin at all times, so especially in the time of war: sin has no
time allowed for it, but it is never more untimely, nor out of season, then in
the time of War; for War is the punishment of sin; War is the
sickness, sin is the surfeit: now when we are sick of a surfeit, will we not
be careful to order our selves well, to keep a strict diet, and not then to
drink in iniquity like water, distemper our selves, as though we were in
perfect state of health, and so make our disease desperate? War is the rod of
Gods wrath for our sins: now when Gods fearful rod is over us, when his hand
is upon us for our sins, then to sin and provoke God more, is a high
contempt against him, a putting him to open defiance. War is an act of
Justice, of justice corrective, whose office is to punish sin: and is it not
absurd, that we should then pour out our selves into sin, when we go about
to correct sin in others? Or with what face can we punish Rebels, when we
our selves stand out in rebellion against God? Besides, God is the Lord of
hosts, the battle is his, and he gives the victory: now how can we expect
that God should give us any victory, or go out and in with our Armies, if we
continue still in our sins, whereby Gods wrath is provoked against us?
Remember therefore, I beseech you, that caveat which God has given us, Deuteronomy.
23.9. it is the great Canon of Martiall-discipline: When thou go out with
the hgst against thine enemies, keep thee then from all wickedness. The
reason follows, ver 14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy
Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee: therefore
shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away
from thee. For by experience we find that speech to be true, which Azariah the
Prophet spoke to King Asa, 2. Chron. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye are
with him; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

As with our humiliation we must join reformation of our lives; so we must
test^fie this our repentance by works of mercy and charity toward the poor:
Daniel joins these two together, in that counsel which he gave unto
Nebuchadnezzar, Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities
by showing mercy to the poor. Dan. 4.27. Surely if ever there were a time to
extend the bowels of mercy, now it is, when there are so many objects of
mercy, even men full of misery. But that whereunto I am now to exhort you, is
not only a work of charity and mercy; but an act of thankfulness whereunto
you are bound by the Law of Nature, namely to contribute for the relief of the
poor, maimed, and sick Soldiers, who have ventured their lives, and spent
their blood for the defense of their Country. I will add only one thing more,
that this our repentance must be general, as our sin is general and
National: a particular man, by turning from his wicked ways, may avert a
particular judgment hanging over his own head; but where the Rebellion
against God has been general, and the judgment prepared is some general
calamity upon the Land, there nothing can turn away Gods wrath, but a general
conversion unto God; as the Lord himself has taught us, Ezech. 14.13. Son
of man, when the Land sins against me by trespassing grievously, then will I
stretch out my hand upon it: and though these three men, Noah, Daniell, and
Job, were in it, they should deliver but their own souls by their
righteousness; they shall deliver neither Sons nor Daughters: they only
shall be delivered, but the Land shall be desolate. If the Sea roar and swell,
and be ready to break the banks; it is not the care of one or two in
repairing their banks, that will prevent the inundation; but there must be a
general concurrence of all that are near the place: So now, when God has
begun to roar from above against our Nation, and is ready to swallow us up;
there must be a general endeavor to stop the breach; otherwise the particular
care of some few will not prevent the deluge of his wrath. Would we therefore
remove this general judgment which is upon our Land, our repentance must be
general, as the sin was general that brought the judgment? let us
therefore call one another, as did the repenting Israelites, Hos. 6.1. saying,
Come, and let us return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and he will heal
us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up. And as it is, Chap. 50.4. of this
book, let the Children of Israel and the Children of Judah, come together, and
weeping seek the Lord. Thus if we seek him, he will be found of us; he will
yet heal our Land, and restore unto us the years which the Caterpiller has
devoured; he will give us beauty for ashes, and the oil of gladness, for the
spirit of heaviness; he will make the bones which he has broken to rejoice:
which God of his infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

