LENT.
LENT.
allegorical depiction of Lent You that love flesh, or to the flesh are given
By Lent; unto your shifts you shall be driven
In warlike manner he is to Combat come
And unto (many) welkome like Jack. Drum

HEre Lent and Shrovetyde, claim their proper right,
Are both resolved, and prepared to fight.
Lent armed at all points, from the foot to head
A fishing Nett has for his Banner spread.
An Angling rod, he in his hand does bear
To show that Lakes and Ponds and Rivers clear
Are at his great command, Eele, Carpe, Pike, Tench,
Or Lobster which the brinish Sea does drench.
Are his by hook or crook, his power will get
And make all fish that comes into his Nett:
A boiling Kettle is his helmet fit
(For Lent has small use for a roasting Spit)
Thus mounted on a horse that never eat hay
Lent meets with Shrovetyde and begins to say:
I now am come to mundifie and clear
The base abuses of this last past year:
Thou puff paunch'd Monster (Shrovetyde) thou art he
That were ordained the latter end to be
Of forty five weeks gluttony, now past
Which I in seven weeks come to cleanse at last:
Your feasting I will turn to fasting diet
Your Cooks shall have some leisure to be quiet,
Your Masks, Pomps, Plays, and all your vain expense
I Will change to sorrow, and to penitence,
I will reform you, and I hither came
To keep flesh from you, your proud flesh to tame:
Let Butchers clear their cleavers and their knives
Hang up their Axes, let their men or wives
Make pricks for future uses, if they please
I come to give them all a writ of ease:
To Calves, Lambs, Piggs, Hens, Capons, all I give
Free leave to multiply, increase and live,
There shall no Ven'son be (with swearing) slain
And fishermen shall search the Ocean maine:
And sirrah (Shrovetyde) I do further mean
Before I go to make your fat chapps lean:
For though like Rebels madd, you roave and stray
And feast each friday, and each fasting day,
Though you regard no Ember Week, nor Law
Nor rule or order keeps you under awe,
Yet be assured that whosoever wrongs Lent
Shall not escape deserved punishment.
FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange 166(...)


