A modest PLEA FOR PRIVATE MEN'S PREACHING.

OR AN ANSWER TO A BOOK entitled, Private men no pulpit men; composed by
Master GILES WORKMAN.

Wherein The thing in controversy is briefly debated; The examination of
private men's preaching examined; also certain accusations wiped away and
removed.

By JOHN KNOWLES A Preacher of the Gospel, formerly in and near Gloucester, now
belonging to the Lifeguard of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

LONDON. Printed in the Year 1648.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THere are two evils, too common amongst Professors, one is, the taking up of
much for truth, which is indeed not so; whence they accept darkness for light,
and embrace nubem pro Junone, a cloud for Juno: The other is, the embracing of
many truths, which they see not with their own eyes to be so; whereby their
faith proves fruthlesse, whilst this popish doctrine, to believe as the Church
[the Clergie] believes, is a practical tenent amongst them. Wherefore I cannot
but see a breaking forth of mercies toward us, by the breaking out of
controversies amongst us, that being a way to remove us from our false
apprehensions, and to settle us on true, upon good foundations.

Therefore expect (Reader) sound reformation from our gross apprehensions, and
a sweet union from our great divisions. I cannot but acquaint thee (courteous
Reader) with two lessons, which God some-while since has taught me.

The first is, To bring all things to the touchstone and under examination;
wherefore those things, which men call received truths, I have called into
question, and am resolved neither to believe nor practice any thing, till I
enjoy a satisfactory reason, why I should so either believe or practice. By
which course I have been graciously led out of many embraced errors, and (I
hope) graciously led into many yet unresolved scruples, for satisfastion
wherein I wait on the God of discoveries,

Secondly, I have learned to receive truth by parcel-meale, in that God is wont
by degrees not by whole sale to impart it.

As for the following discourse, it was occasioned from a desire in me, to
vindicate both the truth and my self from a false accusation, and it was
long-since prepared for and sent up toward the Press; but providence by
sickness hindering the Messenger, it returned back again to me, where it has
ever since remained in, the prison of silence, and should bave been for ever
hindered from walking abroad, had not importunity obtained it liberty to behold
the Sun and look the world in the face. That it is entertainment will be
diverse I am not doubtful. How I may be censured I am not careful If God may
have glory and his Church good, I have my desire.

I shall not farther trouble thee in way of Preface, but only to entreat thee
seriously to consider of the ensuing discourse. What in it thou find to be
good, that is Gods. Give him the glory. What falls thou meet'st with, some may
be mine; impute them to me: some may be the Printers; do him that favor, when
thou find'st them to amend them; by which thou may oblige him unto thy
service, who is willing to be commanded by thee,

John Knowles.

A Modest PLEA for private Men's PREACHING.
The First Part. Wherein the thing in controversy is briefly stated and
clearly explained, whereunto also positive arguments are annexed, and certain
Interogatories answered.
WHen controversies are rightly stated, they are in away to be ended. Acts 19.
He that strives about things not wisely stated, beats the Air and sights with
his shadow, and so brings forth opas mane, a fruitless labor. Too many of our
zealous contenders are too like Demetrius his followers, making outcries and
uproares without reason and with not a little ignorance. Wherefore that I may
not shoot my darts as at random, and that there may for the building be laid a
good foundation, I shall in the first place yield a brief proposal of mine
Assertion; thus.

That men gifted for Preaching, though out of Office, may lawfully in any
company preach the Gospel.

Words may admit of diverse constructions, and some are apt to mistake plainest
expressions. Wherefore I shall to the Assertion add a clear explaination of
it: that my meaning in it being clear discervered, and mistakes about it
wholly removed, the Christian Reader may be put in a posture rightly to judge
of the thing, which is [nunce sub judice] now in controversy amongst us. For
the effecting whereof three questions shall be proposed and answered, which may
plainly inform the Reader of my mind in the foregoing conclusion: As the
three errowes, which Jonathan shot, gave notice to David of Saul's intention.

What is it to preach the Gospel?

Gospel is: which will open a way to the Reader, whereby he may the more easily
enter into the knowledge of the thing demanded. The Gospel is a divine
New Testament doctrine, making a glorious discovery to man of the Almighties
will concerning man. Now to Preach the Gospel is nothing else, but to publish,
make known, or declare the truths and mysteries contained in it.

That this is true may be as clearly perceived: as the Sun at noonday, by the
two following particulars.

First, By considering the proper significations of the principal words, which
are commonly used to express the work of Gospel-preaching. These three
following I have specially observed, whose significations will give light to
the truth of the foregoing difinition. The first is (...) which from the
Septuagint and Greek Original is translated in the Latin as Uer^ion
proclamare, praedicare, and signifies as much as aper^e seu public dicere vel
docere, to divulge, report, publish or noise abroad. And so it is ended. Mark
5.20. Chap: 7.36. The Gospel is a divine doctrine, or Proclamation from Heaven,
containing in it house-top-discoveries, which concern all, and are to be
published to and apprehended by all. The second is (...) Latin euangelizare,
which is often translated to preach the Gospel, and does properly signify lata
annunciare, to show or bring glad tidings, and so it is turned in Luke 1.19.
chap. 2.10. He that preaches the Gospel brings heart-rejoycing tidings to the
creature; for the Gospel discovers a sufficient remedy for man's misery and
holds out the way to everlasting glory. The third, which speaks the same
language with the former is (...), to Prophecy; signifying properly to
foretell or say any thing, Mat. 15.7. some time to reveal a secret, Matthew.
26.68. sometime to teach, 1 Cor. 13.9. Revel. 11.3.

This word fitly sets out the work of Gospel-preaching, for the World to come
is the subject or matter of the Gospel: Unto the Angels (says the Apostle) God
ha^h not put into subjection the world to come, whereof of we speak, Heb. 2.5.
that is, God has not made eternal life or everlasting death, to be the matter
of the Law, or that doctrine, which was ordained by Angels, of which world to
come we that are Ministers of the Gospel speak. All do Prophecy who preach
the Gospel, for they foretell what shall be the everlasting estate and
condition of every man; that they shall enjoy life, that believe, that they
shall meet with death, who have not faith to lay hold on eternal life.

Secondly, By comparing Scriptures where diverse words and such that condescend
to the weakest capacity, are used to express the same work of
Gospel-preaching. Amongst twenty and ten take one or two, which will be
sufficient. Compare the first verse of Acts 14. with the second of the same
chapter, where you shall find, that to preach the Gospel is, To speak or teach
it to the People. Ephesians. 3. ver. 8. with the 9. will be alike useful. Thus
being come to the period of the Answer to the first question, I hasten to the
second, for throughout I intend to be brief.

Who are gifted for Gospel-preaching?

Romans 10.
They are gifted for it, who have necessary and sufficient abilities to
discharge it; For no man can preach except he be sent, i. e. except he has
abilities to perform it. Knowledge and utterance are as needful for this
work, as counsel and strength for the war. And when God puts his words into
men, and gives words to them to make discoveries of Gospel mysteries, he then
sufficiently fits them to preach the Gospel. He that has knowledge and wants
utterance cannot preach, but he that has both is put in a posture fit to
preach; preaching being nothing else but a promulgation or speaking of our
apprehensions unto others.

Who are men out of Office?



Having thus commented, take a more large and plain expression of mine
assertion, thus. That men who know the Gospel and are able to declare it, may
[qua tales] as such (being neither Pastors nor Teachers in visible Churches)
make known in any company the mysteries of the Gospel revealed to them.

Having thus done with the explication, I shall advance next to the proof of
the Assertion: mine Antagonist requiring the performance of it by his
affirmantis est probare; and method challenging this place as due unto it.

I shall bring forth testimonies of two sorts, viz. divine and humane. The
first as infallible, the second only as probable ways to prove it.

The divine testimonies which I shall allege are reasons drawn from
Scripture, that just desider of all controversies, and discoverer of all
doctrins.

Before the proposal of the reasons let this one thing (as needful) be
premised; That men gifted for preaching are no where in Scripture restrained in
using their gifts, either in respect of place or company.



Divine commands are to the creature of a binding nature, from the force
whereof men cannot, and Saints would not be free. And as nature, so the God of
nature gives nothing in vain. Where he bestows gifts there he requires the
use of them. The truth of this doctrine Christ teaches us in the Parable (
Luke 19.23) where he tells us; That a certain noble man, when he went into a far
Country East, called his ten servants and delivered unto them ten pounds, and
said* Occupy till I come. Peter is a teacher of the same doctrine, 1 Pet. 4.10,
11.
where he says: As every man has received a gift, so minister one to another;
as ^ood Stewards of the manifold grace of God. To. 14.19. 1 These. 5.10. Heb.
10.25.
If any man speak; let him speak as the oracles of God. Paul also immitates
Christ, and joins hands with Peter, in requiring from Saints the same duty:
for he exhorts them to study after peace, and things wherewith they may edify
one another. In another place; To comfort and edify one another. Else-wher; To
exhort one another. Which duties may be performed by the use of gifts, and so
the use of gifts required. Now to the Second Reason.



Acquired gifts, whether common or special, are not complete at first
entrance, but do by degrees grow to perfection. Now men that enjoy gifts ought
by increasing them to press to the mark (i.) the perfection of them. They
that received Talents, and increased them were commended, and as therein doing
their duty, Matthew. 25.
were called Good and faithful servants. But he who added not to his Talent,
was condemned, and as a neglector of his duty, termed an evil and slothful
servant. And will any, who has made Scripture, reason and experience of his
Counsel, doubt, whether the use of gifts be a direct way to increase them? If
any should, the Parable above mentioned will resolve him; reason also and
experience will contribute to his satisfaction. Vsus perficit artem, is a
received maxim. Now I hasten to the third Reason, which joins hands with the
former in the same testimony.

Because Gods end in bestowing gifts, cannot be answered without

Every manifestation of the Spirit (says the Apostle) is given for profit; 1
Cor. 12.7.
not only of him who does enjoy it, but of him also who is interested in it.
All the enjoyments of Saints as Saints, are common amongst Saints: for they all
make up but one body in Christ Jesus, and are members one of another in
particular; and so what every one enjoyes as a part of the body, it is enjoyed
for the good of the whole. A Believer, that has received gifts, 1 Pet. 4.10
that are useful for the edification of his Brethren, is but Gods Steward for
them; and cannot appear faithful (a dispensation being commiteed unto him) if
he imparts not (when need requires) his gifts to those, for whose good he
enjoyes them. Now he that has knowledge and utterance can no more profit
others by them without the use of them, Matthew. 5.
than a Candle can give light to those in the house, when it is under a Bushel.
As James once said in respect of outward things: so may I say of inward gifts;
if thou do not communicate, What do they profit? If the Saints want
instruction, exhortation, or comfort, and we have wherewith to supply them; How
may we advantage them with out a communication of our abilities to them?

Thus the third Reason having spoken its mind, hear what evidence the fourth
brings with it.

Because the practice of men out of office, in preaching the Gospel Cor. 10.11.
but we have in Scripture a mention not condemnation of the practice of men out
of office in using their gifts in Gospel-preaching The Jews allowed men, who
were not their Church Officers, publicly to teach and preach amongst them.
Luke 4.16, 17, 18. Acts 13. ver. 14, 15. chap. 28.22, 23. Whence it was, that
the Rulers of Israel did never (as I remember) condemn the Messengers of
Christ Jesus (being none of their Church Officers) for the work of preaching,
but for the matter or doctrine they taught. The Primative Christians made no
scruple to hear those preach, who were none of their Church Officers, Acts
18.24, 25, 26. And it was the practice of the Saints to publish or preach both
to the world and their Brethren the mysteries of the Gospel made out to them.
Acts 8.4. 1 Cor. 14. 1 These. 5.10. Paul tells us (Phil. 1.) That he rejoiced
that Christ was preached, though by men out of Office (for so they were in all
probability) and that through envy. This fourth Reason leaves the Reader to
make the conclusion, giving way by its silence to the next witness, which is
the fifth Reason.

Acts 11.21. 1 Cor. 14.3, 24, 25. Now shall experience, which teaches much
truth, be heard in giving out her sentence? Thus she utters her voice.

I have found by much observation, that as heretofore, so now men gifted for
preaching using their gifts though out of office, are very advantageous
instruments both to the Church and World. Notwithstanding I must (says
experience) freely confess, that some have by this practice been instruments
of mischief, but heerin they differ not from many of our licensed Preachers.
Thus far experience. The common opinion has another byas, and speaks in
opposition to the foregoing affirmations. But it is no wonder to see error and
the common opinion companions together. Thus the fifth Reason takes leave to be
silent. And the last (for present intended) appears to confirm what its
fellows have endeavored to prove, and being enforced to be somewhat large in
opening it self, the rest through courtisie to it have spent the less time in
uttering their speech.

Because the denial of the use of private men's gifts in preaching

Its is a truth without controversy; that the thing is not nicknam'd, when
called evil, that naturally draws after it ill and bad consequences: for as
we Gather not Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles; so we enjoy not salt
streams from a fresh Fountain. But that the denial of private men's preaching,
does engender such a generation is a truth to which many (and almost all the
Clergy) will not put to their seals. Wherefore I shall a little for the
satisfaction of such, open the Book of its generation.

The first born of the denial of private men's preaching, is the shuting Tim.
3.10. But they cannot know men's sufficiency for the work of preaching, without
hearing them preach. Now if they must preach before they are made
Church Officers; then some private persons may preach. But if it be affirmed
that none may lawfully preach being out of office, then Gods way is denied of
bringing men into office.

The second ill consequence, which calls the former brother is, the shutting up
or making narrow the way to hear the Gospel. For if none may lawfully preach
but Church Officers; then none may be heard by us but those, who are, or who
are known to us to be lawful Church Officers; and so the way of hearing the
Gospel will be exceeding strait and narrow; for,

First, They that preach must first convince the people, that they are lawful
Church Officers, before they lawfully can preach amongst them. For the people
wanting conviction of their being lawful church officers; cannot be lawfully
employed in hearing. But how must they prove themselves to be lawful
church officers? Not from abilities, for that is the thing denied; not from
habits or garments, which we may not allow to carry with them sufficient power
of conviction; although many look on black and canonical Coats as marks of
Ministers. By what then most they prove their calling? Without doubt it must be
by their election and ordination. But what if any doubt of the lawfulness of
their electi^n and ordination? They may not th^n lawfully hear them, although
they be lawful Church Officers; For what is not of faith is sin. And how the
World then may be brought lawfully to hear the Word, I wot not: seeing they
usually are ignorant of, and enemies to the ways and orders of Ch^ist's
visible Churches.

Secondly, If none may be heard but Church Officers (as none may, if none but
they may preach) then none may be heard that are strangers, till they are known
by those that hear, to be lawful Church Officers. But how difficult a thing
it would prove, to prove al strangers to be lawful Church Officers, all, that
know any thing may easily judge. Many of the greatest maintainers of the
doctrine I oppose, are found to be frequent transgressors of it. For not a few
Ministers have admitted such to preach in their pulpits, whom they know not,
and who indeed are no Church Officers or none of theirs. Also many of the
people of the same opinion, do with their Ministers take hands in the same
transgression: in that they hear many preach, of whom they are wholly ignorant.

Thirdly, None may be heard who are suspected (as before) or are known to be
false Church Officers; be they never so eminent in parts or godly in life: of
which paradventure not a few may be found. For mine own part, were I persuaded,
that none are lawful Preachers but lawful Church Officers, many who have me
now (being of another opinion) some times in their auditory, should altogether
miss of my company. Some embracing with them the same opinion, have made from
their public meetings a total separation; being persuaded that
Parish-preaching Ministers were false Church Officers. For (say they) if their
ordination (from which they prove their calling) be sufficient to make lawful
preachers, then there are at Rome lawful Church Officers: in that both ours
and theirs arise from the same fountain, but at a further distance; in that our
first ordainers received from Rome their holy orders, from whom by way of
succession ordination, has descended even to this generation.

Thus you may easily see how obnoxious the doctrine I oppose is to the hearing
of the Gospel.



As if in case there may be, first sometimes in some places (where Saints are)
a cessation of visible Churches. Or secondly, If where visible Churches are,
some Saints are not convinced of their order. Or thirdly, If they are in order
and want Church Officers. Or fourthly, If their Officers be (through sickness,
persecution, etc.) absent from them, in all which cases (though they have
amongst them persons of great abilities for Gospel-preaching: yet) they must be
exposed (at least) to scarcity of the Word; because none but Church Officers
may lawfully preach I shall not farther increase the number of the children of
the forementioned Father, but shall leave it to the diligent searcher.

Thus I have done with the first sort of testimonies which are divine, and
shall now come to the second, which are probable, being humane testimonies;
which are either the speeches or practices of men that are godly.

Of the speeches of men, that professedly speak with me (that I may not
overburthen this Book) I shall instance but in a few. An Apol. of the exiles.
p. 45.


1. The english Christians, who were Exiles in the low Countries, witness to
the truth of the doctrine hear pleaded for, their fourth position being this.

That discreet, faithful and able men (though not yet in office of ministry)
may preach the Gospel and whole truth of God, etc.

2. I shall bring in the Elders of the several Churches of New England,
speaking fully to my mind in this particular, in their answer to the twenty
seventh question sent over to them from certain Ministers of Old England:
which I have not hear inserted for brevities sake; but it may be found at
large, in a Book entitled Church Government and Church Covenant discussed, (p.
77.) published by Master Peter's. De conscientia et ejus jure vel casibus p. 229.


3. You shall have the testimony of that learned man, Doctor Ames, whose works
praise him in the Gate. Thus he speaks.

That for the preaching and teaching of the Gospel a singular calling is not
required. For proof whereof he brings these Scriptures, Acts 8.4. c. 11.19.
and 21. c. 18.24. and adds to them these Reasons.

1. Because, this is the duty of all Christians, that they Promote as much as
they can, the Kingdom of God: and therefore that they teach others the
doctrine of God.

2. Because it is some time necessary, that men be convinced of errors and
instructed in truth before a calling can be rightly instituted.

3. Because the People being sometimes destitute of a Minister, cannot without
the loss of edification be helped, unless they allow those to instruct them,
who as yet are not rightly called to the ministry. Further he affirms, That
not only private but also public preaching may be exercised without a singular
calling, first, in a Church to be constituted. Secondly in a Church already
constituted, with the approbation of that Church, if confusion be avoided and
order observed. 1 Cor. 14.23. Acts 13.15. For it belongs (says he) to the
Churches edification, that they who excel others in gifts, exercise those
gifts before others to help and stir them up.

Also ( P. 245.) he speaks to the same effect, affirming. 1. That there was in
the primative Church a certain prophetical exercise distinct from sermons 1
Cor. 14.31.32. etc. 2. That not only Ministers were permitted to use this
exercise, but also among the brethren, the ch^efe and most expert, for those
gifts which they had conferred to them, ibid. 3. That it was also lawful for
other men of the Church for the sake of learning to propose their doubts, that
they might be taught of those who were more skillful* ibid. v. 35.

4. That where this exercise may conveniently be brought into Churches, it
ought not to be contemned. 1 These. 5.20. 1. Because it is most agreeing to the
order of the primative Church approved by the Apostles. Secondly. Because it
singularly healpeth to stir up, cherish and increase spiritual gifts in
several Believers. Thirdly, Because it takes away negligence and envy, and
nourishes charity. Thus far Amesius.

4. Hear the judgment of M. Thomas Goodwin, and M. Nigh, men of no small
eminency, their very enemies being Judges. They in their Epistle to M. Cottons
Book, of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, thus speak.

We humbly conceive Prophesying (as the Scripture terms) or speaking to
edification of the whole Church may (sometime) be performed by brethren gifted,
though not in office as the Elders.

5. I might add to the number dear M. Burrowes, M. Peter's, M. John Ellis junior
with many others, who affirm; That men out of Office may preach the Gospel;
but I forbear to cite their expressions having spoken enough of this
particular. Wherefore I come to the next sort of humane testimonies, to wit,
godly men's practices, carrying a kind of testimony with them, what did the
Martyrs (of whom our Cronicles make a glorious relation) who were not
Church Officers, less then preach publicly, when they did before multitudes
of people open and apply the Scriptures, which men now call preaching? If it
may be said, that the congregationall Churches both in Old and New England do
consist of believers, men that are Godly, then it may be affirmed, that Godly
men, out of Office do preach the Gospel; for private men's Preaching is not a
rare practice amongst them. Who is there acquainted with Godliness, that dares
call those ungodly who in the Army, City and Country do Preach the Gospel
though out of Office? What if I should call writing in Divinity Preaching? And
so put the style of Preachers upon those of the Layety, who are writers in
matters of Divinity; I might then bring in Mr. Prynne and Doctor Bastwicke (the
one a Lawyer, the other a Physician, both busy writers in matters of Divinity)
to justify the practice of Private men's Preaching. But if that liberty may be
denied me, yet I may boldly affirm, that there is such a neernesse between the
writing and Preaching of men out of Office, that the Arguments which justify
the one, will plead for the other.

Thus having dispatch the confirmation of the thing in controversy, I shall
return brief answers to some common Queries, for somes satisfaction.

Whether men out of Office may be fitted for Gospel Preaching?

Richard Baker) have Sacrae dotes, though they are not, Sacerdotes. Abilities
and holy Orders are not always joined and linked together. What hinders? But
that men being not Church Officers, may be fit and able Preachers? Gods Spirit
(from whom gifts for Gospel-Preaching flow) breathes where it will, and is not
cloistered up amongst the Clergy. Are Tongues and Arts necessary to fit men
for Preaching? If this were granted, some private men might then be found not
unfit for Pulpits: for in Learning many of the layety will not come a step
behind the Clergy.

Does not experience teach us? That many out of Office do (at least) equalize
the best, and far surmount the greatest part of our Church Officers. Who
thinks not but that Doctor Bastwicke esteems himself of this number, since in
contending about Church Government he is not contented to trayle a Pike after
the Clergy, but styles himself Captain of the Presbyterian Army.

Whether Preaching Officers will not be useless, if all gifted for Preaching
may be Preachers?

now, who judge themselves to be visible Churches, esteem
Preaching-Church-Officers to be needful, notwithstanding their private
Preachers.

Why are so many Preachers and others so opposite to private men's Preaching?



Many do so behave themselves toward private men's Preaching through
ignorance, or want of light only. Which men oppugn truth (Non qua veritatem,
sed qua errorem) not as truth but as error, for so it is in their judgments
they mis-judging by mis-apprehending of it. They mistaking it (as Mary did
Christ, when she saw him in the garden supposing him to be the gardener) will
not own it. And mis-apprehending it (as Peter did Christ, when he saw him
walk on the water) are afraid of it. If they know it to be truth, they would
(as Lydia did ( Acts 16.15.) in respect of the Saints) earnestly desire to
entertain it, and out of love to it would contend for it, and that unto blood.
But many there be, who in their oppositions against private men's Preaching are
guided by an evil spirit, and self-love that corrupt affection has
predominancy in them. They are so much endeared to their credit, case and
profit, that they cannot with delight look on that practice, because it
crosses (as they apprehend) each of their darlings. The Spirit of Deotrophes
and of Demetrius appears to be in too many amongst us.

Whether private men's Preaching would be inoffensive, if they would not Preach
in Ministerial places, and take up in Preaching Ministerial Forms?



And as for Forms and methods in Preaching, I would be informed. First whether
Gods Directory does direct Ministers to this or that Form or method, as
always necessary and peculiar to them.

Secondly if it does so; what is that Form (or those Forms) which is always
necessary and peculiar to them. Could I be persuaded, that there are Forms in
Preaching peculiar to Ministers, I should willingly vote, that no lay man in
Preaching should lay hands on them. But being persuaded to the contrary, I wish
that all private Preachers would stand fast in their liberty, and not be
entangled in a yoke of bondage. Thus I have done with the Queries, and so with
the First part of the Treatise.

The Second Part. Wherein the Author addresseth himself to his Antagonist in
particular, in answering certain extravigances observed and picked out both of
the Epistle and Treatise.
SIR, before I present to the Reader mine answers to your exceptions against
mine allegations for private men's Preaching, (least he should be troubled and
puzzled by many digressions,) I shall impart to him (in speaking to you) some of
mine observations, occasioned by your writing, and fit to be noted.

First, Sir I shall make to you this ingenious confession; that your writing
has deceived much mine expectation. I looked for a Justification (at least in
show) of Mr. Beales Reasons, which you undertook and promised to do. But
behold nothing less: for having singled out three Scriptures, which in the
discourse I alleged, you against them (for the end I quoted them) have bent
your forces; leaving the Gentleman's engaged Reasons to shift for themselves. So
that this your birth was as far from my thoughts: as that which the
Mountains (in the Fable) brought forth was to those, who long waited for their
delivery.

Jacob expected Rachel, but behold Leah was unexpectedly brought to him. But
Sir, what were your reasons, that the Gentleman's reasons should indeed (though
not in show) be forsaken by you? Shall I guess? I will shoot my bolt, if I hit
not the white: yet (I suppose) I shall not be ^ar^^ from the mark.

Peradventure you having a better view of the Ministers reasons than himself,
and seeing them to weak for the condemnation of private men's Preaching, have
brought forth against it a new accusation; being unwilling that the thing in
controversy should receive the sentence of absolution: leaving the former
reasons to stand by as ciphers amongst the witnesses in this present
controversy, not consenting to their election out of the company. Or it may be
you (...) that some of his reasons would be the condemnation of some of your
actions: for of this I am sure, that some of his doctrine and your practice
will not in amity shake hands together.

Secondly, I shall present to you some objects of mine admiration.

First, I something wonder at the sublimity and highness (not of your
conceptions or expressions, but) of your stomach (Sit venia verbo) discovered
in and by your expressions. I take not John Knowles (say you) as a meet
Antagonist in this controversy. I know you would, that some of eminency
should give you a meeting to contend with you, that you may if you loose the
field, lie under the less disgrace. But Sir [Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse
jovi] they want leisure (having in their hands weighty employments) to attend
such small matters. And do think, that your unmeete Antagonists are meet
enough to grapple with you. And Sir, why do you contemn me? As I perceive you
do, not only by your Paper, but by a speech also, which I heard from you in
General Massies Chamber. But wherefore? Is it because of my minority? Why
should that make me unfit to deal in the controversy? Shall not the Spirit of
God be suffered Spirare ubi vult, to breath where it will? Or must his
breathings be contemned, if they are found in Babes and Suckling? Surely if the
Doctors in the Temple had been of that judgment, Christ Jesus (whilst a
Child) had not been suffered to dispute amongst them. Saul thought David unfit
and unable for meeting with, and conquering of that great Goliath, because Puer
erat, he was but a Child. Thou art (says he) not able to fight with this
Philistin; for thou art but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth. Or
is it because I am not of the Clergy? Truly (Sir) though I am not of the Lord
Bishops, yet I am of the Lord Jesus his Clergy, to wit, his heritage. But why
do I act so much folly, as to wipe away disgraceful speeches of this nature?
Esteem of me how you will: By the Grace of God I am what I am.

Secondly, I a little marvel at your liberality and freeness, in granting
that Tongues are not necessary [Ad esse, sed ad been esse] to the being but to
the well being of a Pastor or Preacher. Sir, by this affirmation, you have
neither answered mine expectation, nor gratified the Minister in supporting his
Reasons: whereof one has received a deaths wound from it. For his third Reason
is this.

Private men (says he) may not Preach because they are not fit for the work,
so ^^^ugh Lay-persons have a good measure of the knowledge of Divinity: yet
they are not presently fit to Preach the Word; for a Preacher there is required
the knowledge of the Arts and Tongues, of which lay men are most commonly
ignorant. Thus have you befriended your friend; (though paradventure
unwittingly;) and fairly vindicated his third Reason. For hereby you (although
mine Antagonist) have helped me against him, who you call mine adversary, and
have joined hands with me to pull down his building. For Te ipso judice his
third Reason will prove useless, to harm the opinion of those, who hold it
lawful for men out of Office to Preach the Gospel.

Thirdly, another object of mine admiration is your great partiality; in that
you deny that liberty to others, which you so frequently make use of, and that
in a lavishing manner. Your wholl Book is little else than an heap of
inconsequentiall consequences, Notwithstanding (in p. 23.) the weapon of
consequences must not by me and some others be handled, if you might have the
ordering of us. But why must we not enjoy this liberty with you? Seeing (as you
say) arguing by consequences is good and to be allowed. What must we have no
liberty to use that, which may harm you? But you would inform us, what the
reason why you deny us consequenciall reasoning is, because it is denied (say
you) to us by many amongst us in point of Paedobaptisme and some higher matters.

Sir (by your favor) I cannot believe, that any amongst us either have or will
deny in Paedobaptisme, etc. consequentiall Arguments, because consequentiall:
though they cannot allow (and that peradventure on ground sufficient) your
consequentiall Arguments; because they (at least) conceive that they are
inconsequentiall. But if there be any, who with their wits keep so little
company; as to deny arguing from consequences: may it by consequence be
gathered in reason, that I am of the same opinion: And If I am not guilty (as
indeed I am not) of the same transgression; what equity is there, that I should
suffer with them the punishment of it? As for other things you have in the page
forementioned, I rather smile at, than answer to them.

Fourthly, But the greatest object of my wonder, and that which mainly moved me
to put pen to Paper, is your fained charity and uncharitable courtesy. You tell
your Reader (in the end of your Epistle) that you have (as if you were made up
of Charrity) left out of your Book the slander (whereof I was (as you suppose)
guilty) being of more private concernment. Sir, it is true the accusation has
not entered within the Treatise, 'twas your pleasure to leave it at the
portall; that the very passers by might behold me guilty. For in the Epistle by
Capital and bloody Letters you give notice to your Read^r, that I was guilty of
laying a foul aspertion and unchristian slander upon a Minister near in
relation to you. Your own words are these, (showing one end of your writing)
and for the Vindication of a painful Minister, near in relation to me, from a
foul aspersion and unchristian slander laid upon him in that writing. Sir, if
I here Apologize for my self, I hope I shall not be blamed for it; since there
is no man so careless but has some care of his credit; and nothing more
lawful, than for a man, when his good name is unjustly taken from him, to
endeavor by just means to regaine it to him. The wise man tells us, That a
good name is more desirable than ample riches, and better than the best
ointment. The expression in my writing on which the accusation lays it is
foundation is this, What shall we then say to our English Priests, who at a
Prelates pro^ibition, will cease to be Preachers and turn Physicians? Sir by
your own confession, this is the only speech, whence you gather, that I am
guilty of a foul aspersion and unchristian slander. Where you have learned
this art of Deduction, to draw that out of mine interrogation which was not in
it, I could inform you. But that the Reader and you (if you please) may
understand, how unjustly you have drawn such an accusation from that
expression, I shall ^^^ate the occasion of it; by setting down the Ministers
first Reason, and part of mine answer to it: wherein the expression so
offensive and sinful (in your conceit) is contained.

The Ministers First Reason against private men's preaching is word for word
this.

The reason (says he) is the saying of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 7.20. Let
every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was called. Now when a lay man
does take upon him the preaching of the Word, he does not abide in the same
calling, wherein he was called; he does not keep himself within the compass
of his own calling, but he does pass the bounds and limits of it. And does
not the same Apostle will the Thessalonians (1 These. 4.11.) To studdy to be
quiet and to do their own business, to work with their own hands, as he
commanded them? Now when a Lay-person does undertake the preaching of the Word,
he does not do his own business, his proper work, but does meddle with a
business that concerns him not.

Thus far the Ministers Reason; mine answers follows.

The Answer.

That we may the better give an answer to this reason, we will draw it up into
two Sillogismes.

The First whereof is this.

Every one ought to continue in that calling wherein he was called. 1 Cor. 7.2^.

But a Lay-person, that takes upon him the Preaching of the Word does not
continue in the same calling wherein he was called. Therefore a Lay person
ought not to preach the Word.

To the First we Answer, That the Authors bare literal expression of those
words, though not his intention in the expressing of them is good and Lawful.
His expression's good; because it is the Apostles: his intention evil; because
not consonant but repugnant to the meaning of the Holy Ghost in that place.
Wherein it seems that he laid it down either from gross ignorance, or with
purpose to deceive and beguile unstable Souls. His drift in the allegation of
that Text was to prove; that Lay men (as they call them) having trades etc.
ought to continue in them, and not to depart from them. But how contrary this
is to the meaning of the Apostle these considerations will plainly show.

First, consider to whom the Apostle directs the words, to wit, to believing
Husbands, Wives and Servants.

Secondly, consider the end for which they were spoken, which was the
satisfaction of the Corinthians in this scruple, whether (to instance in an
Husband) the believing Husband should continue with his unbelieving Wife, and
not leave her he being called to the Faith. The Apostle denies it, and commands
him to continue in that calling (to wit of an Husband) in which he was, when
called to the Faith.

Thirdly, If that be the meaning, then the Apostle (as I suppose) must needs be
contrary to himself. For in verse. the 21. he exhorts Servants (the persons to
whom the exortation in verse the 20. was directed*) that if they be called
being Servants, that they should not care: but if they might be free, that they
should use it rather. Now according to the Authors exposition, I cannot see how
these two places can agree together.

Fourthly, consider the ill consequence of that exposition. Then Christ's
Disciples did sin in departing from their first callings and in setting upon
another. And if they did sin in it, then Christ was the causer of it, for he
commanded them so to do: which to affirm is no less then blasphemy.

Now you may see, that the proposition for the end which he uses it is vain
and idle. But suppose it were granted, that it is unlawful to leave one
calling for another. What should we then say to those English Priests, who at
a Prelates prohibition, will c^ase to be preachers and will become Physicians?
And what will it make against private men's preaching? Nothing surely, as we
shall presently by our Answer to the Minor proposition clearly prove.

Now for the Assumption, where the Author t^lls us; that a Lay man, that takes
upon him the preaching of the Word departs from that calling, wherein he was
called.

To which I Answer. First, That if his words be rightly understood (as being
the words of the Apostle) he speaks nonsense. For this is the meaning of the
Apostles words. That every one ought to continue in his calling (as that of an
Husband, etc.) wherein he was when called to the Faith; although as being an
Husband he has an unbelieving Wife. This being the Apostles mind, the
Assumption will thus run.

Every Lay person that preaches the Word, being called to be an Husband or
Servant departs from being an Husband or Servant.

Secondly, Although we should take his meaning and leave his words: yet here is
nothing but bare affirmations, without any probation, and therefore of
Christians it deserves no better then rejection. The man had said something to
purpose, if he had proved, that every lay man departs from his calling by
taking on him the preaching of the Word: as here he has affirmed.

Thirdly, I Answer, That his assumption is most false and untrue.

1. Because, they do not depart from their callings, who use them. But those
who preach as lay persons use their callings: therefore, etc.

Secondly, Because they depart not from their callings, who live by them. But
they who preach as Lay persons, live not by their preaching, but by their
callings.

Fourthly, I Answer, That dangerous consequences do follow from it. As,

First, That all those Christians in the Primative time who were scattered
abroad, by reason of the persecution, that arose about Steven, departed from
their callings, for it is written, that they went about preaching. Acts 8.4.

Secondly, That Paul departed from his preaching, because he used the
occupation of Tent-making, Acts 18.3.

Thirdly, That God commands all, who have the gift of prophecy to depart from
their lawful callings. For he has commanded all that have the gift to use it,
according to the proportion of Faith. Romans 12.6. Thus far the Answer.

Sir, if you would judge with impartiality, you would (notwithstanding your
high accusation) be enforced to pronounce me non-guilty. If you will not; yet
I hope the reader will, who is ingenious and impartial. Wherefore I might in
equity draw my self as innocent out of the accusation, and bring you in, as
being guilty of (to use your own words) a foul aspertion and unchristian
slander against me.

Before I pass over the accusation have patience to hear a few of mine
observations from it.

First, I observe (but this by the bye) your great oversight in your very
Grammaticals. 1. In misunderstanding common plain English, which a man below
the degree of a Master of Arts might have easily perceived*. 2. In taking
Priests, Preachers and Physicians to be words of the singular number.

Fourthly, I cannot but note (I wish you may seriously take notice of it) your
willingness to expose me to public disgrace. My name has heretofore amongst
some been somewhat infamous in the City by your occasion. But as therewith
being unsatisfied, you have raised a rumor throughout the Country by your
printed papers; that I am guilty of a foul aspersion and unchristian slander.
And all this notwithstanding I was publicly cleared before the Magistrate.
For I was (being at the Tolsy) accused by one of your party, and cleared by a
Minister of your own, after I had made for my self a brief Apology in the
audience of the whole Assembly, he professing that I was only faulty in
calling them Priests, a disgraceful title. To whom I replied after this manner.
That the name in it self is not disgraceful. And although it belongs not now
to men as Church Officers: yet 'twas a wonder that men retaining Episcopal
Ordination should be offended with it; ^^th by that name they were Ordained
Ministers, and frequently so called by their Book of Common Prayers.

What Sir, is this a carriage fit for a Christian to a Christian? Or am I not a
Christian, because not a dependant but Independent Presby^erian? Were I a Turk,
you might not wrong me: for the Gospel does not allow a Saint to hate, of
un^ustly to disgrace his enemy: Well Sir, take heed, least the same bread by
some other be broken to you; and the same measure rendered, which you have meted
out to me in fall measure, pressed down and running over.

Thirdly, I have observed your straying from the rules of common equity; in
that you have accused me in the worlds eye as a person fowly criminous, without
showing wherein, or proving, that I was guilty. Philosophy (wherewith that you
are acquainted, you would by your title master of Arts inform your readers) it
would have taught you a better lesson, had you but consulted with its Oracles,
although you had in the doctrine of Theology been wholly ignorant. Thus much
of that accusation.

Now further you have discovered your Charity toward me to be but fained, by
accusing me (in your Epistle to the Reader) of a crime as great, if not greater
then the former: to wit, that I took the boldness publicly before the
Magistrate to defend the practice of private men's Preaching, with such
contemptuous language against the godly and faithful Ministers of this
Kingdom, as the five Reverend Apologists abhor the thoughts of. It Is true, I
took the boldness to defend that practice, but with no contemptuous language
against the godly, my Soul abhorred it. But ^ir, what were the contemptuous
speeches I then used? Or how came you to know them, being not then present, if
my memory proves faithful to me? You were peradventure so informed. But they
(if any) who did so inform you, will not dare (I am confident) before my face
to affirm it; for I shall disprove them. Sir, shall I take the boldness to
inform you, being ignorant of the truth in that particular, if not worse. The
truth is, I was so far from being guilty of contemptuous language against any
(much less the godly) that so much as an accusation was not carried on against
me. Yea further I was (at my second appearing) by an Alderman publicly freed
from being guilty of any such language. And I appeal to all of that Assembly,
but especially to the Right Worshipful Major * (that then was) and Aldermen
(whose courteous carriage at that time toward me I remember with all
gratefulness) to sentence for or against me. What Sir, Mr. Luke Nurse.
do you think your bare accusation sufficient to condemn me? At that rate who
shall be guiltless? Ecquis insons erit, si accusatori crimine non probato,
fides habeatur? Said Julian the Emperor. Or do you think it not an evil to
take up and divulge false reports of others? Or is it from your charitable
credulity that you have followed Mr. Edwards in telling Stories? Thus much for
your feigned charity, now for your uncharitable courtesy.

You have ( page 1.) informed your Reader, that in answering my writing you
have gratified me with the omission of things scattered in it. Surely Sir I
hold not my self bound in duty to give you thanks for this your courtesy, it
being but a crafty way of disgracing, or at the best but Court-like, merely
Complementall. For I suppose had it been real, much of your pains in page 21.
had been spared, and such an answer to my Querie had not been rendered. But I
must (say you) return an answer to his demand. Peradventure 'twas because you
could (within the compass of that writing) find nothing else, from which
colourably you might disgrace me. But what is the demand you must needs answer?
The Minister having affirmed, that the knowledge of the Arts and Tongues is
required to make a Preacher, I therefore demanded; Whither by Arts he did
understand the art of Geometry, Astronomy, or the like? And for Tongues,
Whither it be the Welsh, Irish, Latin, Greek, or Hebrew? Or whither all
Tongues be required to make a man fit for Prophesying? For this Querie I am to
be blamed, if your observations on it be observable. What is it? Say you. A
scoff. That Is your conceit. But what do you gather from it as implied in it?
First that I am ignorant, Secondly impudent. But by what Logic? Not by that,
which Aristotle but Mrs Invid^a taught you. But let us see how in your
judgment mine ignorance and impudence shines forth by that Querie. Mine
ignorance of the Arts appears by my scoffing at them; for thus you say. Our
writer scoffing at them is only a proclaming his ignorance of them. Sir you
have there gathered up, what I never strewn, and have builded on a foundation
never laid by me. If you could prove, that I scoffed at the Arts, your
inference would be good, that I was ignorant of them. But I was so far from
scoffing at them, that I always have highly esteemed them, since I enjoyed the
least insight in the least of them. Now for mine impudency in regard of the
Tongues, which you observe and wonder at also. For thus you say. For the
Tongues; First I wonder at this youths impudency, etc. What, no less than
impudency? But let us see, whether you have without impudency accused me for
it. How have you made good your charge against me? By two Reasons, alike
weighty. First in that I jumble the Greek and Hebrew Tongues in a scoff
amongst the Welsh and Irish. Sir, it seems that I am (in your judgment)
impudent, not because I made a mention of those Tongues together, but because I
did it in a scoffing manner. But how do you prove it? so you suppose. But
suppositions are insufficient to justify accusations. Now what is your Second
Reason? This, because I paralleled in a jeering manner the original Languages
with the Welsh and Irish, Tongues of least use and repute. If this were true,
then might you argue impudency truly from it. But how may it in equity be
gathered from my Querie, that I did parallel or equal the Welsh and Irish
Tongues to the Greek and Hebrew, because I did there name them together? If I
were guilty of impudency and did see it, I should not be so impudent as not to
be ashamed of it. Notwithstanding what here you have said I see no cause why I
should blush. Thus ends the Second Part of the Treatise.

The Third Part. Wherein the examination of Private men's Preaching is examined.
ALl is not (says the Proverb) Gold, that glisters. Therefore let us (according
to the old Motto) first try before we trust: or rather (as the Apostle
speaks) Try all things and hold fast that which is good. Wherefore I shall
here bring the Examination of private men's preaching unto the touchstone of
Examination, affording a lust and Legal trial to it; that we may know how
justly to pass sentence on it. In page 1. mine Antagonist has expressed my
grant to the Minister, mine Adversary, as he calls him. I am still in the same
mind. What I then granted, I shall not now deny. If private men, gifted for
preaching, have no more authority to preach; than Vzzah had to put his hand to
the Arc, which was contrary to command; they shall be (as Vzzah was) guilty of
sin, if they do it.

Next having laid down the Doctrine, I maintained against the Minister, he
draws forth three Scriptures, which I alleged to justify private men's
Exercise of the gift of prophecy; and endeavors to make them to speak to his
own heart, and not so much, as to cast a favorable countenance on mine
opinion.

The first place mentioned is Romans 12.6. Having therefore gifts, etc. whether
Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of Faith.

In replying to mine Antagonist, I shall present you first with a brief
Exposition of that Scripture, then with a short (yet full) confutation of his
Answer. For the first of these thus. From the beginning of the third to the
ninth verse of this Chapter, the Apostle gives exhortations concerning those,
who have gifts for, or Offices in the Church. In which we may in general take
notice of those particulars, as, the manner, ground and matter of them. How he
exhorts them you have laid down in these words; I say to [or charge] every
man, that is amongst you; Wherein you may observe the extent and authority,
that his exhortations carry with them. Now the ground on which he builds his
charge is expressed in these words, By the Grace given to me, i. e. By that
ability and authority, which God through his Grace toward me has bestowed on
me, to instruct and exhort you. Now the matter of the exhortation is laid
down, more generally in the 3, 4, and 5. verses, and more particularly in the
ensuing verses.

In the general he discovers their duty with the reason of it. The duty is
both negatively and affirmatively laid before them, thus; Not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according
as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith. Which with the words
foregoing is as much as if he had said. I charge every one that amongst you, by
reason of that ability and authority bestowed on me for exhortation, not to
desire in regard of gifts, to seem to have more gifts, or more of any gift
than he has: and in regard of Offices, not to desire to do more in his Office
or Ministry than what belongs to it; nor to go beyond his own calling into
another. Wherein the Apostle specially condemns two evils, first pride,
whereby men desire to seem to have what they have not, and to be what they are
not, lifting up themselves and despising others as useless in their gifts or
Ministry: Secondly, discontentednesse, whereby men are not contented with Gods
distribution toward them and disposition of them in the body. In like manner
he commends to them the contrary virtues.

Now I come to the reason of the exhortation, set down in the 4. and 5.
verses, and drawn from the relation that is amongst Saints. They (though many)
being but one body in Christ Jesus and so members one of another, have diverse
actions, and therefore ought not to desire to do the action of every member,
but to be contented doing that, for which God has placed them in the body:
And also ought to look upon others gifts and places as appointed by God for,
and tending to their profit and commodity. This Reason is also illustrated by a
similitude verse. the 4. Now the Apostle goes on, and makes application in
particular of the exhortation, he had in general proposed to them. First, he
lays a ground to the thing intended, in these words; Having then gifts
differing according to the Grace given to us; that is, seeing we have (being
one body) diverse actions, and so diverse gifts for the performance of them,
according to Gods gracious dispensation to us. Next he sets the Exhortation on
particular persons, by dividing the praxin or action of the several members of
the body, into Prophecy and Ministry. I shall speak only of the first, to
wit, Prophecy. Whether Prophecy [let us prophesie] according to the
proportion of Faith. Instead of the words, let us prophecy, we are to
understand the whole 3. verse. and so the Apostles mind seems to be this. I
charge every one, that is amongst you having the gift of Prophecy, (whereby
he is able to speak to others edification, exhortation and comfort) to behave
himself humbly and contentedly in the exercise of that gift, in the discovery
of that measure of knowledge enjoyed by him. So much by way of Exposition.

Now I shall (according to promise) fall upon the second thing, the
consultation of mine Antagonist's Answer. He endeavors to make Romans 12.6. to
be an unfit foundation, to bear up the opinion of the lawfulness of private
men's preaching; and not only so, but also to speak against it: And so it does,
if he mistake not; for thus he says, The truth is, this Scripture concludes
against him. But what course does he take to bring his purpose to pass? Truly
thus he thought to effect it, by putting on that Scripture an Exposition of
his own, and by crossing that, which I gave to it.

In replying to both, I shall not spend time to gather up or Answer all, that
he there scatters; knowing how to employ my time better: but shall only strike
at the body, which being down, will be sufficient. His Exposition you have
page the second, the sum whereof is this. The Apostle (says he) requires;
that they who have these gifts (...) and (...) (ibid.) Prophecy and Ministry,
or (as he translates it) Deaconship, exercise then in humility and fidelity.
Where by Prophecy he would understand the gifted callings both of the Pastor
and Teacher: and by Ministry, the Office of the Deacon only.

Antagonist by his Exposition does (as I suppose) not a little strain that
Scripture. That you may perceive my supposall not to be groundless, I shall
put that Exposition in the balance of the Sanctuary, placing Truth in the
scale opposite to it, whereby you may easily discern the lightness of it.
Although I cannot deny, but that the Apostle does in this Chapter require those
to preach (as mine Antagonist says) who are by Office Pastors and Teachers;
and those who have lying on them the Deacons Office, to behave themselves in
simplicity: yet I cannot believe, that we are by the word Prophecy to
understand both the Pastors and Teachers Office; or that by the word Ministry
is signified the Office of those only, who are entrusted with the Churches
money, for the supply of the poor's necessity, whom we commonly call Deacons.

First I cannot be persuaded, that the word Prophecy does in Romans 12.6.
signify the Offices or gifted callings of Pastors and Teachers. 1. Because a
contrary interpretation of that word Prophecy would agree with the Scripture.
If I should affirm, that Prophecy does there signify gifts or abilities,
whereby men are fitted to be instruments for the World's and Churches
commodity; I should not stray from it is common acceptance in the Scripture,
neither should I cross Paul's intention in that Scripture. 2. Because that
interpretation, which makes the word Prophecy to denote the Offices of Pastors
and Teachers is contrary to the Scripture. 1. Because it is contrary to common
speaking (from which Scripture is not wont to vary) by gifts to express
Offices. 2. In that, Prophecy (in Scripture phrase) is a gift, and commonly
does signify abilities; 1 Cor. 14. But where the Offices of Pastors and
Teachers are expressed by it I yet find not. It is so far from signifying the
Offices of both, that I find it to denote the Office of neither Pastor nor
Teacher. And it is so far from denoting the Office of either, that it
signifies the gift of neither. 1 Cor. 12.8. compared with the 12. of the same
Chapter.

Secondly, Because that Exposition does (if I mistake not) represent Paul as
one guilty of using tautology and battology in his speaking, which to affirm
is not agreeing to Scripture.

Secondly, I cannot be induced to believe, that the word [(...)] Ministry does
in Romans 12.7. hold forth the Office of Deacons only, whose work is to make
distribution to the poor of the Churches contribution for them. 1. Because
there is no necessity that it should here be so expounded. If the word
Ministry were in Scripture no where used but to express the Office of Deacons
only, peradventure it would necessarily follow, that it ought in Romans 12. to be
so expounded. But it does in general signify any Ministry; and in particular
that of Teaching Elders: as in Acts 6.4. and Ephesians. 4.12. Wherefore the
Dispensers of the Word are called [(...)] Ministers or Deacons. 1 Cor. 3.5.
Therefore there is no necessity, that it must in Romans 12. be taken for the
Office of the Deacon only. 2. Because there is a probability at least, that it
ought not here to be so interpreted. 1. Because we have immediately a recital
of the several Officers or Ministers of the Church, as an amplification or
explication of the Apostles mind in that expression, verse. 7. 2. Because in
verse the 8. (where the Deacon is spoken of) he is not called (...) a Minister,
but (...) (Qui distribuit) he that distributeth. Whereby Paul seems (at least)
to give us notice, that by Ministry he did not intend the Office of the Deacon
only. 3. Because from that interpretation (if not many, yet) some absurdities
will be produced. As, 1. Thereby Paul appears as using needless repetitions in
speaking; which may (as I conceive) be easily perceived, by comparing verse 7.
with the 8. 2. Thereby Ruling Elders (mentioned verse 8.) are excluded as none
of those gifts (verse 6.) given for the Churches good. The gifts are (says
mine Antagonist) Prophecy and Ministry, i. e. the Offices (as he would have
it) of Pastors, Teachers and Deacons; and so Ruling Elders are excluded. So
much in answer to his exposition. I shall now come to make a Reply to his
Exceptions against mine Exposition. He endeavors (page 3.) to make invalid
mine Interpretation of that Scripture; and so to shoulder out my deduction from
it. But how does he endeavor it? Surely by laboring to prove that the word
Gifts is not to be taken for abilities only; but for Offices or gifted
callings. But how does he prove it? By two Reasons, too weak to bolster up his
opinion. The first whereof is this. 1. Because the word Gift (says he) is used
in Scripture (as I expound it) for the Office it self or gifted calling, Mr. W.
etc.



1. That he has not showed, where in Scripture the word translalated Gifts, in
Romans 12.6. is used for Offices themselves, or gifted callings. What means then
those Scriptures, Ephesians. 4.8. and chap. 3.8. which he has quoted? Surely they
mean not, what he meant in quoting of them; the first being in sound not in
substance for him, the other neither in sound nor substance helping of him.
Wherefore I shall only reply to the first of them, to wit, that in Ephesians. 4.8.
where the word Gift is used, but notwithstanding it makes nothing for his
purpose. 1. Because the word Gift is there not to be taken for Offices or
gifted callings, but for those new Covenant-mercies, which God, by the hand of
Christ, gives to al those, to whom he gives himself to be a God by way of
Covenant. Which Mercies are mentioned, Hebr. 8.10. For this is the Covenant,
that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: (or
according to the Greek) giving my Laws into their mind, I will write them on
their hearts, etc. i. e. I will, by giving a powerful light into their
understandings, cause them to be like me and to give up themselves to me, and
so I will appear to be their God, and they shall appear to be my people. That
the word Gifts there ought to be so expounded, and not as mine Antagonist would
have it, is very clear, both from the context, and also from the place, whence
it was drawn.

2. If it were granted, that the word Gifts in that place does signify Offices
or gifted callings: Yet it does not follow that in Romans 8.6. it ought so to be
taken: for although in our English Bibles the words do not differ: yet in the
Original they are not the same. The word translated Gifts in Romans 12. is
(...), (gratiae) graces; but in Ephesians. 4. (...), dona, gifts, many of the
Clergy cry out against some of the Layty, as unfit to open or apply the
Scriptures, because they are unacquainted with the original languages. I
suppose many of them talk of Originals more than use them: It seems mine
Antagonist had the English not Greek Testament in his hand, when he quoted this
Scripture.

Secondly, although it were quoted, that the word ((...),) Gifts is in
Scripture somewhere used for gifted callings: yet it does not follow, that in
Romans 12.6. it must be so understood, first, because one and the same word may
in diverse places be of different significations: yea, in one and the same place
it may signify diverse things.

2. Because that word in Romans 12. translated Gifts, is often in the Scripture
used for abilities only, as in Romans 1.11. 1 Cor. 12.4. and so his reason will
make rather against him, than for him. For thus one might argue from his
Reason. If the word Gifts be somewhere in Scripture used for abilities only;
then it may be so taken in Romans 12. But in Scripture the word so signifies:
Therefore in Romans 12. it may be so expounded.

So much for his first Reason. Now to the second, which is drawn from the
absurdities that will follow; if we take the word Gifts to signify their
abilities only. That I may the better try its strength, I shall draw it up into
this one Syllogism.

That exposition of Scripture is not to be followed, from which absurdities do
naturally flow. But if the word Gifts in Romans 12.6. be expounded abilities
only, thence absurdities will follow naturally: Therefore, etc.

The first I shall grant to be an orthodox truth; but let us see whither we may
lawfully pass the same sentence upon the Assumption. False accusing both of
opinions and persons is a crime too common. Many things, which are not absurd,
are branded for absurdities. Many opinions and practices are accused with the
bringing forth of monstrous births of absurdities, which are as free from them,
as Christ was from iniquities. But does not the expounding of the word Gifts,
in Romans 12. for abilities, produce and bring forth many absurdities? Surely
there had been no need to wander far for resolution in this particular; if
the Author of the Reason had been as good in proving as bold in affirming: For
absurdities (says he) will follow such an Exposition, which are in number two,
according to his reckoning. The first is this following.

We may then proceed from abilities to the Exercise of other callings, G. W.
Page 3.
for if ability to preach be sufficient to Authorize one to Preach without any
more ado, then also ability to Baptize, and to Rule, and Govern, is
sufficient to Authorize any to Baptize, and to take on them to Rule, Govern
and Judge, as Rulers, Magistrates and Judges do, etc.



First, He affirms, that it is unlawful to proceed from abilities to the
exercise of callings.

Secondly, That he that Preaches, does by Preaching enter into the calling of
him, who by Office is a preacher.

Thirdly, That if it be lawful, from abilities (without any more ado) to
proceed to the Ministers calling: then it is lawful, from abilities to proceed
to other callings, as that of the Magistrate to Rule, etc.

To the First of these I shall thus Answer.

First, I dare not allow that speech to be true without exception. For there
are some callings as the Husband-mans calling with some other, into which a
man, having ability, may lawfully enter, and in them exercise himself from
abilities only.

Secondly, That if it be spoken with limitation, it may be received for a truth
without contradiction. If it be restrained to callings in the Church, then I
affirm; that it is unlawful for any man to proceed into the exercise of
callings merely from abilities: because the Lord in his Word requires, that
unto qualifications for Offices, Election and Ordination be annexed, before the
exercise of them (in way of Office) be undertaken.

Now to the Second of his affirmations, which is this, That he that Preaches
does enter into the calling of him, who by Office is a Preacher.

This affirmation is false and absurd, which may appear by these two Reasons.

First, Because a man may do, in some way, some actions that belong to
another calling, and yet not entrench upon, or enter into his calling.
Praising of God (under the Law) upon Musical Instruments was the calling of
some of the Levites; Now did all (not being Levites) entrench upon their
calling, who did (in the presence of others) praise God upon Musical
Instruments? Prayer is a work that belongs to a Ministers calling, Acts 6.4.
Now do all those, that pray (when a company is met together) as their mouth
unto God, enter into the Ministers calling? Is it not a work of the Magistrate
to judge betwixt persons in matters of civil difference? Notwithstanding the
Apostle bids the Corinthians to set those to judge, who were not judges by
Office. 1 Cor. 6. But I hope the Apostle would not have them to entrench on the
Magistrates calling. Preaching of the Gospel is an Apostles work, Romans 1.1.
Do all then, that take upon them to be Preachers, enter into the Apostles
Office? etc. Every calling has not all it is works peculiar to it self.

Secondly, Because Preaching is not a work peculiar to a Minister; that is,
it is not a work, which none may lawfully do, save those who are in Office for
to do it. I shall here propose some questions only; The first part of this
Treatise being a proof of this Reason, to which I shall refer thee (Christian
Reader) for thy further satisfaction.



The peculiar works (said he) of the Ministry, were the administration of the
Sacraments and Discipline; but as for preaching it is a more common work, etc.
Mr. John Ellis junior. Epist. The sole path to a sound peace.

The Elders of the Churches of New- England tells us. That the Act of praying
and preaching is improperly called a Ministerial work, etc. Church Government
and Church Covenant discussed. page 78.76. I remember a saying, that another
has to this purpose. The Papists (says he) and some ignorant Protestants,
would have no word of God sounded out by any, but by their selected Clergy.

Whither they, who do affirm preaching to be a work peculiar to 2 Chronicles.
19.20.
do not sin against the Generation of the Righteous? Do they not condemn
Jehosaphat (and others) who taught and exhorted the People (publicly) to
believe God; he being neither Priest nor Prophet. If preaching be a work
peculiar to the Ministry; who will justify the Martyrs? Nay, who will not
blame them rather? May we not say to them, O Martyrs culpandi estis, ye are
blameworthy, for intrenching on the Ministers calling, in that you (being not
Church Officers) did preach the Word a Company being met together; for did you
not Expound and apply the Scriptures, inform and exhort the people? Why
suffered ye so many things in vain? Why was the enemy constrained to cut your
Tongues, to gagge and with balls of Iron to stop your mouths, to hinder you
from preaching; seeing God did not command you to it?

How may the Saints make use of their Gifts, knowledge and Utterance Hebr.
4.12. c. 10.25.
Or how may they be said to be Teachers of others; and to exhort one another,
when they meet together, and yet not preach? To this Question, mine Antagonist
has framed an answer, ( page 6.) but how far from the purpose, let us a little
consider. He answers to a saying of mine, which was this, It is the duty of a
Servant of God to use those gifts for the edifying of the Church, which God
has given him for that end. Which he grants to be true, but not to my purpose:
but let us see how men may without preaching, use their gifts of knowledge and
utterance. He will inform you ( page 7.) that there are otherways of using
gifts for the edifying of the Church besides preaching. He tells us, that Family
governors and Parents must edify their Children and Family, and God gives them
Gifts in Prayer and knowledge, and for that purpose. But I pray, what is this to
the purpose? The speech was not of Families, but of Churches. But what if there
be none in the Family sit to be edified, being not begotten; how then may he
use his gifts of edifying? He further tells us of another way, more likely to be
the way, thus. And Christians (says he) must exhort, and comfort, G. W. Answ.
4.
and ^^^difie one another in Christian conference and discourse, etc. This is
true, that the Saints may and ought to do so. But to me it is strange, and no
less than a riddle, to affirm it lawful for private persons to do so, and
yet unlawful for them to preach; as if there were such a vast difference
between it and preaching. It Is my desire to plow with the Authors heifer, that I
may understand that his a^nigmatical affirmation What may they exhort, comfort
and edify one another, when they are met together, and yet not preach? Oh
strange expression!

Now to the third thing affirmed by mine Antagonist, which is this.

Mr. W.
That if it be lawful from abilities to proceed to the Ministers calling, then
it is lawful from abilities to proceed to other men's callings; as the
Magistrate, etc.

Aristotle, Ramus, or any other in their Logic, to justify this kind of
arguing generals from particulars not of the same kind? What Reason may there
be found to plead for that Assertion? Let him, that can show.

Secondly, If it were granted, 'twere not for his purpose: for I have proved,
that he, that preaches does not by preaching enter into the Ministers calling.
Thus the Answer to the first absurdity; let us now cast our eyes on the second.

G. W.
If all that can may and must preach, the Ministers Office were needless. What
need of Authority by Office to do that, which every one may and must do
without, it, etc.

Sic Dominus dixit may be found in it. Wherefore if I should but barely deny,
what he barely affirms; why might it not be sufficient? Seeing that my Nay
has as much authority as his Yea, in matters of this Nature.

Ephesians. 4.11.
Secondly, It Is false, else Paul will be found a man making opposition against
Christ's Institutions. Has not Christ ordained Pastors and Teachers, 1 Cor. 14.
men in Office, for the Churches edification? And did not Paul allow those to
prophecy in the Church of Corinth, who had the Gift, but were not by Office
Pastors or Teachers? And so did not he approve of that, which made the Office
of Ministers useless? For they publicly preached in the Church for it is
edification. But if the preaching of men, who are neither Pastors nor Teachers
do now make useless the Ministers calling; then it could at that time have no
better effects; And so Paul must needs be an enemy to Christ's ordinary
Ministry.

Thirdly, Private men's preaching is so far from making useless the Ministers
calling; that it does not a little help it. Heb. 5.11.
For hereby their mouths are opened to speak wisdom (the deep things of
Christ Jesus) to the people. The truths of God taught by the Officers are the
more confirmed, when others also bear witness to them. Also the truths taught
by the Officers are the better preserved; for by the use of private men's gifts
they are often occasionally mentioned. The Officers are moreover comforted and
encouraged; by beholding Gods blessing upon their Ministry, in that some grow
so much, that they grow up to be Teachers of others. The truth of this those
know, who are Officers in Congregationall Churches, where there are such
private preachers. Thus much in answer to the Assumption, which has denied
liberty to the conclusion (therefore the Exposition of the word Gifts in Romans
12. for abilities only is not to be followed) to pass as an Orthodox Truth.

Now I shall lead you on to the Second Scripture, which as mine Antagonist
conceives, will not plead for private men's preaching.

The place before mentioned is Acts 8.1. and 4.

And at that time there was a great persecution against the Church, which was
at Jerusalem, Verse. 1.
and they were all scattered abroad throughout the Regions of Judea and
Samaria, except the Apostles.

Therefore they that were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the Word.
Verse. 4.


I shall here in speaking observe this method.

First, I shall discover my deduction from it.

Secondly, I shall answer to the reply of mine Antagonist.

For the First thus. The thing thence concluded was, that private persons
(having abilities) may lawfully when a company is met together) preach the
Word; in that those there mentioned did so preach, they being (for the
generality) private persons or no Church Officers: since their practice being
approved may be to us for a pattern. That they were (for the greatest part)
private persons is the thing in Question. That they were, so is mine opinion;
wherein I am neither alone, nor without reason.

I am not alone, for others think so with me. The Elders of the Churches of
New- England were of the same mind, this being their saying: They that were
scattered abroad by reason of the persecution, that arose about Steven, were
not Church Officers, at least all of them (for the Apostles who were their
^^^^e, if not their only preaching Officers, were not scattered abroad but
remained still at Jerusalem, c. 8. v. 1.) and yet th^se men did so preach the
word of the Lord Jesus, etc. so Dr. Ames, with diverse others.

Now the reasons, that make me so to believe (amongst other) may be these
following.

First, Because it plainly tells us, that the generality of the Church were
scattered, v. 1. Now the Scripture will not inform us, that there were (at
that time) any Teaching Officers, save the Apostles: and Reason will teach us,
that the greatest part could not be Officers. Which scattered Christians
(without any exception) are said Ans. 4. to preach the word. Secondly, Because
(...) in such an Exposition, no Scripture will be crossed; neither will any bad
consequence be thence produced, etc.

I shall draw you now forwards to consider mine Antagonists answer; wherein two
things especially are endeavored by him: First, that they who preached were
not private persons; Secondly, that if they were such, yet we might not gather
thence a Warrant for the preaching of private persons now. To his Reply I shall
Answer; First more generally; Secondly in a more particular manner. For the
general thus.

First, There is scarce a Scripture, which lies not under diverse
Interpretations. And there may appear a probability of Truth in cross
Expositions. Whence we gather the needfulnesse of the Spirit for our
direction. There is not a little difference betwixt my self and mine
Antagonist about this Scripture. That you may see who is in the truth, learn
to deny your selves, and seek the Spirit to be your teacher.

Secondly, Mine Antagonist has laid down in his Answer nothing as certain. By
which he endeavors, that this Scripture may be rather wholly useless, than
useful for us.

Thirdly, Those whom we commonly call Seekers may take up mine Antagonists
Answer, as useful for them, and against him and his brethren. Were I a
professed Seeker I should show my skill, in arguing against mine Antagonist (he
being now a Minister) with his own arguments. Now to a more particular Answer.

M^ne Antagonist has proposed three consideration to convince his Reader, that
those scattered (but preaching) Christians were not private persons.

Mine opposers first opposing consideration you have (page 10.) at large
expressed: The sum is this.

Mr. W.
It is probable if not certain, that the Apostles gave them Authority to
preach, and so they were not (as Lay men with u^ private persons.



First, It is (I do not say, must be) supposed; that the Apostles gave to the
scattered Christians such direction. Since the Scripture does not so much as
hint at it, we are not bound to believe it. From merely supposed suppositions,
we cannot draw for faith sound conclusions.

Secondly, If it were allowed, yet the preaching of private men now, might not
thence be denied. For the Apostle were in those days to believers, instead of
New Testament Scriptures. And therefore if it may be proved from their
writings (as I have in the First Part of this Treatise) that private men
enjoying ability have Authority to preach the Gospel, it is all one, as if they
had Authority from their persons immediately. The second consideration, which
mine Antagonist gives, you have page 10. and 11. The sum whereof is this.

That if those scattered Christians had not Authority from the Apostles: G. W.
yet they might be put out of the condition of private persons by immediate
Revelation.



The third consideration appears page 12. which is in brief this.

All that were scattered were not private persons. G. W.
Wherefore it is probable that none did preach, but those that were public: for
if those that are private may preach, then they may Baptize also.

Philip the Deacon was amongst them: but that (as they call them) Teaching
Church Officers were with them cannot be proved; for the Apostles remained at
Jerusalem. There is therefore no need to prove, that others besides public
persons did preach. When they did preach, they were (in a sense) public
enough, but in another sense not public. The Scripture tells us, that they, who
were scattered went about preaching, without making the least exception. But if
they may preach, they may Baptize also; says mine Antagonist. He has said it
indeed, and said it, and double said it; as if it were of no small force to
convince us of the unlawfulness of private men's preaching. Who may Baptize (as
well as who may be Baptized) is a thing in question. What my judgment therein
is I am not bound here to discover. But let me a little reason with mine
Antagonist. Sir, by what good consequence will it follow, that if private
persons may preach, they may Baptize also? What is there no work peculiar to
Church Officers, if preaching be not? If a private person may judge between
others in matters of civil difference, 1 Cor. 6.
which is a Magistrates Work, then a private person may lay fines and taxes on
the people, which is another Work belonging to the Magistrate. Is this not as
good consequence, as that of mine Antagonist? But we say, that Officers have
some work peculiar to them; other work common to them with others. And is not
this as good consequenciall arguing; If private persons may pray, then they may
Baptize also; seeing prayer is a work that belongs to the Ministers Office.
Wherefore (by mine Antagonists favor) his consequence (if 'twill follow) will
not be dangerous, unless he can prove, that Baptizing is peculiar to Church
Officers* nor consequentiall; unless he can prove, that preaching is peculiar
to them in Office, So much for the considerations. page 14. Mr. W.


Jerusalem; but amongst a people, who had never the sound of the Gospel amongst
them: but our lay preachers, teach where a true Ministry is, or may be had,
etc.

Mine Antagonist has here much mistaken the question, for the question to
which the Minister made an answer, to which (through entreaty) I made a reply,
was; Whither lay persons a company being met together may preach the Word?

2. He has also grossly mistaken in his expressions. First, In telling us; that
they exercised themselves in preaching, only where the sound of Christ was not
heard; for the Scripture tells us, That they were scattered abroad throughout
the regions of Judea and Samaria, which were places wherein they preached. Act.
8. But was not Christ preached in Judea? Read the Gospel and they will inform
you. 2. In that he makes such a difference betwixt Judea, Samaria, and some
places amongst us, in respect of Ministry. I am sure some places amongst us
have no Ministers, and some other have false Ministers. How Judea could be (for
Ministers) in a worse case I know not.

3. He reasons from what he laid down, but without reason. For their preaching
proves the lawfulness of private men's preaching, a company being met together.

So much for the second Scripture.

The fourth and last Scripture is the 1 Cor. 14. This Chapter is full of
difficulty, and exceeding hard to be understood. Men vary much in the
expositions, they give of it. I shall therefore (at this time) only lay down
one argument, to prove the lawfulness of private men's preaching, from that
Chapter.

They who have the gifts of prophecy, may prophecy.

But some private persons may now have the gifts of prophecy.

Therefore some private persons may now prophecy.

The First (I suppose) none will deny. The Second (that private persons may now
have the gift of prophecy) is to be proved, which being confirmed, the
conclusion (that therefore they may prophecy) will of necessity follow. That
some private persons may now have the gift of prophecy does appear, both from
the matter, promise and end of it. First it is manifest from the matter of it.
Knowledge and utterance, whereby men are enabled to speak to others
edification, exhortation and comfort, i.e. matter whereby others may be
edified, exhorted and comforted, is the matter of prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.3. Now
it is apparent by experience, that some private persons are able to speak to
others for their edification, etc. Therefore some private persons now have the
gift of prophecy. They who enjoyed the gift in the primitive times were called
Prophets or spiritual, that is, not carnal, not babes in Christ. There is
some difference between those, 1 Cor. 14.^7. 1 Cor. 3.1.
who now enjoy the gift; and some of those, who in the primitive times did
enjoy it; in regard of the manner of receiving it, their measure of enjoying
it, and in respect of the enjoyment of some extraordinary and temporary gifts
with it.

Secondly, It appears from the promise of it, Joel 2.28. Your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy. Which prophecy was in the Apostles times in part
fulfilled. Act. 2. The greatest part is yet behind, in respect of the number
of persons enjoying it, though not in respect of the measure enjoyed by
particular persons; which prophecy will be gloriously manifested when the
fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and the Jews called; now the spirit is
powered out, but (as it were) by drops: then, 'twill be powered out as a mighty
flood.

3. It shines forth also from the end of it, which is the Churches edification,
1 Cor. 1^.^.22. What was needful for the Churches edification in the primitive
times is now needful: Ephesians. 4. Apostles were then needful, so now, whom we
enjoy in their writings, but how do we enjoy Prophets even Evangelists, unless
in the use of the gifts of men fitted to speak to the Churches edification?
Thus in have I rest till I enjoy more light and leisure. Farewell.

FINIS.
Courtious Reader, in page 25. line 10. for consultation, Read consutation. in
p. 28. line 16. for quoted, read granted. and line 30. for their, read there.


