AN EPITOME OR BRIEF DISCOVERY, FROM THE BEGINNING TO THE Ending, of the many
and great Troubles that Dr. Leighton suffered in his Body, Estate, and Family,
for the space of twelve years and upwards.

Wherein is laid down the cause of those Sufferings; namely that Book called
Sions Plea against the Prelacie, together with the warrantable Call that he had
to the work: And also, the hard and heavy Passage of the Prelates proceedings
against him, in the high Commission, and Star Chamber.

And lastly, their invective speeches in the said Court of Star Chamber; from
the Impeachment whereof, and the Accusations charged upon him, he vindicates
himself by a just Defense.

To you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake,

Phil. 1.29. These are they which came out of great tribulation, etc.

Rev. 7.14. Tot mala sum passus, quae si comprendere. LONDON, Printed by I. D.
1646.

TO The Right Honorable, the Lords Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the
Court of PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable, and high Council of State,
AS I acknowledge it a rich mercy from God, that he has accounted me worthy,
(though unworthiest of my self) to suffer any thing for the Name of Christ;
Acts. ^.
so this adds to the setting off the sufferings, that by your Order, and
under your Authority (Right Honorable) this Epitomie thereof (and but an
Epitomie) is published to the view of all, many of whom, yet alive, were
Eyewitnesses to my nflictions. And as it was a part of Paul's happiness
(though a prisoner) to plead before Aggrippa, Acts 26.2.
so I account it a singular favor, that you (more expert then Aggrippa in the
Truths of Christ,) have heard pleaded, and adjudged me and my Cause, with so
full and satisfactory a Judgment, that nothing can be added, but Execution: And
therefore with humble and hearty thanks, give me leave further to entreat your
Honors, that with Christ, and for Christ, you would finish the Work that the
Father has given you to do, John 17.4.
And for my particular, as you have broke my bonds, and brought my
Weather-beaten Bark to Shore, so I am confident, you will not suffer me to
perish in the Haven, Nam turpe laborantem deseruisse in portu non fraginum
facere.

To the compassionate Reader.
AS thou had a Simpathy in my sufferings; so thou enjoyest a share of my
deliverance: The servants in the Parable, when they see how cruelly their
fellow servants were used, even by a Fellow Servants, as it is said, they were
very sorry, and came and told their Lord all that was done. Matthew. 8.31.
So according to the Application, when you did see and hear, Clem: Alex: lib.
hat unparalleld inflict^ons were done upon me in bitterness of soul, you
went to God, the Father of Spirits, and with many tears and supplications laid
out the Matter before him; neither was it in vain, for your prayers and tears
were stronger thou Jeremies Rags to pull me out of the Dungeon. Now this Book
is not only libri mentis, as one of the Ancients sicut frumentum gemin^ molarum
opere curatum, Hyer.
speaks of Books. Fut it is also libri afflictionem, and mentis and
corporis, the Off-^pring of Affliction, both of Body and Mind: Let the use of
it be threefold, for me, for you, and for the Afflictors, so many as live; For
my self, as I must labor in thankfulness to be (as a Father speaks) Heb.
12.10.
like the Wheat that comes from between the two Millstones, tried, and
purified. Or with Paul, Prove. 23.2^.
more and more partaker of his holiness. In you, it may stir up confidence,
and resolution, to buy the truth at the dearest rate, and not to sell it. The
Gold of Ophir cannot equal the gain of sufferings for Christ; As no man knows
the sweetness, joy, and honor, that are in fighting the Lords Battles, but he
that has been in the Field; so I way say (though it may seem a paradox, Here
are Grapes of Thorns and Figs of Thistles. Lastly, it may be of use to my
Tormentors, so many as live, or at least to some of them; of whom, I say from
my heart, O! that they might live. If these men have not cast off Man, in
regard of this Treatise all sprinkled with Blood; they cannot but relent: If
they would act Zacheus his part, humble confession, and due satisfaction; They
might dave ashare in Zacheus his Portion. But if against God and Man, they will
stand out without Bowels toward my necessities, and repairing of my wrongs;
then I desire them to take notice of that speech of the Apostle, 2 The s. 1.6.
that the righteous God will recompense Tribulation to those that trouble his.
For the Spirit calls it a righteous thing so to do, and that righteous God in
part has done it; And though the Laws of God and Man call for revenge of
Innocent Blood; yet I refer that to them, to whom God has committed the Sword.

An Epitome, or brief Description of Doctor Leightons troubles, for the space
of twelve years, and upward.
AS the Justin. ^is^. lib. 6. page 114
Ancients of Sparta opposed themselves strenuously in the gates of their City,
against the whole Theban Army, under the conduct of Epaminondas, intending to
surprise the City: so some of the better sort, both of City and Country, came
to my house at Blacke-friers, desiring my advise concerning the presentment of
their grievances to the high Court of Parliament then being, in Anno 1628. and
that by way of Petition. In the generality of the subject whereof all did
agree; namely, the Prelates, who looked like nothing more then the surprisers,
yea and sackers of the Church and State; and that in a more cruel and
unnatural manner, then the Thebans did against the Spartans, and under a more
impious and bloody leader, namely, the Man of Sin, then was that noble and
generous General Epaminondas: but in the particular extent or degree of
enlarging their defires they varied: Some would have the power of the High
Commission abated, some a mitigation of the pressing of the Ceremonies, some,
that the Ministers might not be so inslaved; some, that the tyranny of their
Courts, troubling of people, and exacting of Fees, might be taken course with;
but the queree coming to me, my simple opinion was right down, for Extirpation
of the Prelates, with all their Dependances, and Supporters: my reasons against
that course was, that the lopping of the branches had done no good, the
striking at the root, would make all fall together. Frustrafit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora: Many works in one saves labor. They desired me to
frame the Petition, which I desired rather should be done by some other, but at
their request I set upon it, and in two hours I drew up that Decade or ten
Positions, the subject of the Book. Which Positions contain the reasons of my
advice. That night we met according to appointment, where the Positions being
read, they told me, if I could, and would prove those, I should exceedingly
deserve of the Church and State. I replied, that I could not attend it by
reason of my Calling; some other might be found both more able and better
fitted with helps; I was almost split upon a former imploiment, and none to
hale me to shore. Lastly, I conceived I should have more fists about mine
ears then mine own, if that work came to light; but notwithstanding of all
these fears and doubts, their importunity and my willingness, (though in much
weakness) to bring any thing to the Public Cause, prevailed with me, and I
framed up the proofs, which being perused, gave full satisfaction: they
desired me to go beyond the Seas, and publish it; which I told them, I neither
could, nor would do, without the review, and approbation of the Godliest,
Learned, and most judicious of the Land, both Ministers, and others: by such
parties the thing being approved, some whereof were Parliament Men, I desired
their hands to it, which they freely granted, yea (as I confessed in my
Examination to the Attorney General) I had 500. hands to it. Away I went, and
published it beyond Seas, being both a chargeable and painful piece; and
because some might think that I might aim at gain, if any did so, they might
answer themselves, the fiery heat of the Work would burn up the gains; but
to answer more directly, I profess I had in all but 50 pound of some private
friends for the defraying of all charges, which was but a poor pittance of
that which it cost me; besides, mine own charges, the thing it self cost me
triple, to hasten it to the Parliament, besides the intermission of my calling.
And being done, the Parliament had two of them sent over by a friend; but the
Parliament being dissolved, I shut up shop till a better time; but fearing to
come over (for the Prelate had his Spies there) I gave order to my wife to put
away my house, and house-hold-stuffe, which was done to our great detriment:
but in July following I came over, we set up house again, which being scarce
fully furnished; and wherein I had not been above six weeks, when on the 17.
of February 1629. coming out of Blacke-friers Church, Cross and Tomlins two
High Commission Pursevants, with many others with them, by an High Commission
Warrant, attached me, and dragged me with great force and violence to
London-house, where I remained until 7. of the Clock. When the Prelate
returned from Fulham with Doctor Corbet in his Coach; Cross made a show to
bring me before the Prelate, but he meant it not, for they carried me through a
subterranean-way, opening up a door (as they said) not opened since Queen
Maryes days, and having brought bolts to put upon me, they carried me with an
huge multitude of Bills, and Staves, to Newgate; in the entry whereof they had
almost killed my Wife: and there they cast me into A nasty Dog-hole, full of
Rats, and Miee, no light almost but from the uncovered Roof, no place but the
ruins of an old chimney for fire, affoording me neither meat, drink, nor
bedding; so that I had been between the Tuesday at night, and the Thursday at
noone, without food. Two doors were shut upon me, and none suffered to come at
me. The sum of all this is in my Petition to the High Court of Parliament,
and also in my Answer to the Star Chamber Bill.

CHAP. I.
THe third day of my Imprisonment, the keepers called me out of the pit, where
I was humbling my soul before God, and brought me to an upper Chamber, where
seven or eight of the High Commission, with the Clerk of the Register, were
set at a Table. After an interview, and some pause taken; Sir Henry Martin
began to regrete my condition, speaking more of my parts, then I was capable
off; withal he told me, that they were come to examine me. I answered, that
it seemed unreasonable to me, to endanger a man's life by so close, and hard
Imprison^^^t, and then to examine: but I desiring to know their authority, and
whether they were not of the High Commission? they answered, yea; I replied,
that I could not, and therefore would not be examined by them; and that for
these reasons. First, because by an unlawful warrant, they had violently cast
me into a loathsome Prison. Secondly, both the Laws of God and the King, do
forbid them to meddle with the body or goods of the Subject; whereupon the
Commission under Seal being produced, and laid upon the Table, Sir Henry
Martin told me, that himself and Doctor Reeve had order from the King, to take
mine Examination. I replied, that it was more then I knew: but howsoever, if
they would lay aside their Commission, and by virtue of the Kings command
examine me: I would answer them. Not so, said Sir Henry Martin; then said I,
not so neither as you would, will I be examined. You will not, said he, be
examined by any, but by the King. That is your Assertion, say I, and not mine,
neither have you any ground for it: for if it please his Majesty to send his
meanest Footman with a lawful Warrant, I will obey without more ado. They
brought out two Books, demanding of me if they were of my doing; I replied,
that neither directly, nor indirectly I would answer one word, ut sub judice.
Sir Henry Martin asked me then, since I would not be examined, if I would spend
some time in discourse with them; I answered, with all my heart; so they would
not lie at advantage to ensnare me. Sir Henry Martin said, that they would not:
I told them that the world knew that the Looking-glass of the Holy War, was
mine; and I had suffered much from them, unjustly for it: and as for the other
Book, I would acquit my self in that, as a lawful examiner should occasion
me. The Clerk offered to write those passages; but I told him, he should not,
for it was contrary to covenant; so Sir Henry Martin caused him to forbear;
and laying by all their tools, we fell to other matter. Sir Henry asked me
what I thought of the Kings Supremacy. I replied, that if I should be put
Legally to it; my answer should give Caesar that which was Caesar's. I told him
further, that being a Scholar, and a great Civillian, he could not choose but
know; what both Divines and Lawyers, ( Popish and Orthodox) had delivered
concerning that: he replied, it was true: neither was he so gross, as to
think any King or other Man to be Head of the Church; only he did hold the
King to be Sovereign and Supreme Governor under Christ. Then (said I) Sir
Henry you have answered your self; but of this further in mine Examination by
Sir Robert Heath, then Attorney General. From that he fell to ask me, what
was the reason that I did oppose the Hierarchy so vehemently. I replied, true
it is, I have ever opposed them, since the Lord called me; but I protested, and
that truly, it was not out of hatred to their persons, though I and mine had
suffered by them: nor out of envy to their places, whence their wealth,
honor, and case might acrue: but first, because their Places and Authority
are not of God. Secondly, because in executing of their Places, they take more
upon them, then either the Law of God, or Man, allows them: to the prejudice
and abusing of the Kings graunts, the heavy detriment of the Subject, and the
highly indangering of themselves: and this I offered to make good: and as for
their persons, I told them, I wished them as well as my self. What? said Sir
Henry Martin, if it be so, we are all mistaken; do you not think that they
are of God; Nothing less (said I) neither think I that they think themselves
so, if they will impartially examine their own hearts: for they know those
thoughts to be contrary to the Word of God, the current of Humane Writers, and
to their own Peremptory Assertions in their own Works, written by them for
their defense. Yea, said Sir Henry Martin, but I will prove it thus, is there
not superiority in a Civil state; and was there not superiority in the State
Ecclesiastical, under the Jews: Witness Aaron^ superiority over the Priests,
so that he reasoned thus in effect, Aaron was over all the Leviticall Priests.

Ergo, Bishops by Divine Right should be over Ministers.

For all my pressures, I smiled to hear their Champion for the time; beat the
brains out of their cause, with a beam of their own making, or of the Popes;
withal I told Sir Henry, that his Anticedent and Consequent were of so deep
distance, that all the Learning in the World, could never make them meet. Yet
he set a face to prove it, by a connex Proposition;

If Aaron were over the Priests,
Then Bishops should be over Ministers, etc.
I denied the Connection, and told him that all the learning amongst them could
not advance that Argument one foot; nor no more they did; but being at a stand,
I told Sir Henry Martin that he could not of all the Quiver, have chosen a
deadlier shaft against themselves; as should appear by the retorting of the
Argument thus.

Aarons Priesthood was superior to the rest under the Law. Ergo, No
Superiority in Ministerial function should have place under the Gospel. The
sequel I prove thus. That which was in form of a Type of Christ under the
Law, must have no place under the Gospel, because it is done away. But not
only the Priesthood, but also the superiority of Priesthood, or
Ministerial Function, was in form of a Type under the Law. Ergo, Superiority
in the Ministerial Function, must have no place under the Gospel.
The Major I cleared both from proof and reason, as Collos. 2. verse. 17. Yea
the Author to the Hebrews speaks particularly to the point, as in Hebr. 7.11,
12. The Minor as it is undeniable, so he had granted it by way of quere: yea,
the Papists themselves grant both in express terms, in the fore-quoted place
to the Hebrews, That the Leviticall office in Aaron, and other things were
figures of Christ's death, and to be ended and accomplished in the same. I
showed how I could make good the Argument from the testimonies of the Fathers;
as Cyprian speaks punctually to it, citing the words of the Apostle, Let a man
so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries
of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Paulus Apostolus (says the Father) aequales habere voluit
Sacerdotes, cum dicit, sic nos existimet, etc. The Apostle Paul will have all
Ministers to be equal; when he says, Let a man esteem of us, etc. Doctor
Willet uses the like Argument, by way of retortion against the Papists,
bringing Aaron and his ornaments, for a warrant of their Mass, Church-Musique,
Vestments, and the like; because (says he) these were in Gods worship then,
therefore they should not be now. The premises being thus invincibly proved,
Sir Henry for a while was silent; but at last brake out to his
Fellow-Commissioners in this sort; Gentlemen, I can go no further, and I
assure you if it be thus, you may burn all your Books. The three Deanes, or
Parsons, or what they were with the Doctor, sat still mute as Fish, not
answering one word. By Gods mercy, truth thus prevailing; Sir Henry began to
touch on an old Callumnie, Doctor (says he)* you are a great
Conventicle-keeper (as they say.) To which I replied, Sir Henry, you know in
your conscience I am no Conventicle-keeper; and as I hate the thoughts, and
occasions of impious and illegal contrivements; so if the Law were granted me
upon any Subject that should thus charge me, he might smart for it.

Hereof it shall not be amiss (according to my simple knowledge) to say
something for the clearing of Gods people, and good duties.

First, against Gods people, for the performance of such duties there is no
Law, Statute, or Command; Sect.
and where there i^ Law, there is no transgression.

Secondly, it is both contumely, and injury, against God and the duties; and a
wresting of the Law against Conventicles, to urge it against the said
performances: since it is against the extent of the Law, and the intent of the
Lawgiver, witness both the Commission of Peace, giving power to inquire of
Conventicles, which are said to be against the Peace: and also diverse Statutes
made against Conventicles, containing the punishments of offenders therein; as
1o. Mar. cap. 12. 1o. Eliza. cap. 17. these are called Unlawful, and
Rebellious Assemblies; including all Ron^s, Riots, or other confederacies,
whether sine armis, or vi armata. The former Statutes, and many other speak
fully against them, under these names, and diverse 13. Hen. 4o cap. 2.2. Hen 5o.
cap 8.19. Hen. 7o. cap. 23.
other; where they are called, Rebellious Insurrections, and Rebellious
Assemblies; with these, I might cite diverse Authors, as Dallison, 2. H. 5o. cap
9.15. Ric. 2. cap. 2.
Marrow, etc. in all these, we shall not find the performance of any such
duties, called by the name of Unlawful Rebellious Assemblies, or
Insurrections: and if they had been so termed by Popish Princes, and Statutes
made again them; no doubt Professing Princes would have repealed them, as they
did other Statutes against Protestants.

Secondly, the Matter of Conventicles, does clear those duties from the Name;
Sect. Lambert.
for the subject matter of every Conventicle must (as the learned in the Law
observe) be, an unlawful act done, or intended; but no law with us says so of
Fasting, and praying; and more particularly, in every Conventicle, there is a
manifest disturbance of the peace, in a greater or lesser degree: as threatening
speech, turbulent gesture, show of Arms, or expression of Violence: but by the
contrary, Fasting and Praying are the maine preservers of Peace.

Thirdly, the end of a Conventicle is ever, or for the most part, evil; as to
disturb the Peace, or revenge some Quarrel, etc. and therefore it is said to
be in terrorem populi, which words, are always laid as mainely material, in
an Indictment of this nature: but the intent of such as humble their souls, is
to meet God by Repentance, that he may meet us in Mercy* and therefore no
Conventicle.

Fourthly, the Manner of a Conventicle, which gives the being to the thing is
naught, as Disorderly,, Tumultuously, or Extremely suspitiously, in regard of
the Places, Conversations, or Professions of the Persons; being dangerous to
true Religion, or the State. But they that humble themselves, are no Suspicious
persons, nor make they any disorder, or tumult in coming together; but
soberly, and holily, taking due circumstances with them; they do behave
themselves for the Truth and State; and say there were some Anomalie, in the
carriage of the business, yet it is far from such an inormitie, as makes up
a Conventicle.

Fifthly, they differ in the Effects; the effects of a Conventicle at the best,
are the disquieting and terrifying of the more peaceable sort by their Act; and
the imboldning of such busiebodies as live upon confusion by their evil
example; besides the bloodshed and other wrong that often falls out. But the
Mourners in Sion are not only means to keep the peace; and to prevent the
violence of fears, but also to pacify the unpeaceable; either bringing Lions
to be Lambs; or at least by power of Prayer restraining their rage; so that
there is nothing of a Conventicle in it.

Sixthly, and lastly, they are altogether different in their Causes; for the
Devil and man's corruption are the causes of a Conventicle; But of afflicting
the soul by humiliation, God is the Author and Mover. By all these large
differences, it appears what wrong they do unto God, to his People, to his
Ordinances, the Laws, and the State; Who call the gathering together of Gods
people, a Conventicle.

For further clearing; to these I may add some experimental trials in our
times. A certain Judge, cujus nomini parco, (but no Friend to Sion;) was
complained unto in the Circuit, by a Profane exorbitant Crew, that certain
godly people in the place where they lived did keep Conventicles; the ground of
which complaint, was their mischievous malice conceived against that people,
because some of them being in office, had laid the Law to their Prophenesse,
the judge gave order to these evil men, to indict the other for
Conventicle-keeping; his Brother Judge Itinerant being in the Room and over
hearing, asked him what those men were about, which he desiring to conceal, he
told him plainly that he knew the matter, and told also the people, that the
course they were about was very illegal and injurious, and if they could not
prove the people Conventicle-keepers (which they could not indeed) they would
have a good action against them, whereupon they desisted.

Another instance from a Gentleman's case in the North, who was accused by a
Purseivant for keeping of Conventicles, he took witness of such as were
present, and sued the Pursevant at York, where the case was cleared on the
Gentleman's side, besides sixteen pound given him for damnages: As this hitteth
home (as I have showed) the enemies of God; so it misseth not that Pannick
fear which is in some of Gods people, qui trepidatione mentis and brevificto
de minis; Who out of the trembling of the mind, and through a fained brief of
threatenings, would once call in question their divine tenor of humiliation, or
gathering themselves (as the Scripture phraseth) in more Families, against
which there is not one jot of Laws Statute or Common; and for Divine warrant
(which no humane Law can contradict) I will say no more at this time but this,
because I have largely handled it other where, it is strictly and frequently
commanded, and highly commended by God the Lawgiver; all blessings promised to
the performance of it, all judgments threatened against the neglect of it, yea
the heaviest in all the Book of God, Isaiah 22.14. and accordingly promises and
threatenings have been accomplished; thus having borrowed leave by way of
digression, to clear so good and excellent a duty, of so foul and undeserved a
name; I return unto the closure of our conference, where by the way I do not
approve of erroneous and phanatick withdrawing from the public Ordinance.

O said Sir Henry Martin, I do not mean a Conventicle, but I mean Fasting
and Praying; sure (said I) there is as great difference between these, as
between loyalty to God and man, and rank disobedience to both: But if Fasting
and Praying were Conventicles I was never out, upon good occasion given when I
could conveniently; nor never would be as God should enable me, for if it were
not for Fasting and Prayer, (said I) where had you and we been ere this? for
these are the preservers of the State. With that they* rose up from the Table,
and standing about me, I told them that their cruel usage of me against all
Law was a pregnant evidence that they were not of God, and that the rather
because Jesuits, dead men by the Law, enjoyed under them all ease, pleasure,
and prosperity, that their hearts could desire; and I, and such as I, had
nothing but Gall and Vinegar wrung out to us by them in a full cup* With that
Doctor Reeve let his bolt fly, affirming in his Conscience, that I did more
hurt then the Jesuits, though it was beside my intention. I replied, it was an
odious comparison, and found in the mouths of none, but such whose courses
sorted better with the Jesuits, then with the courses of such as were trusty
friends to the truth; no reply being made, Sir Henry Martin looked steadfastly
upon me; my countenance through long fasting, beastly lodging, and other
affliction, looking very pale; the tears rusht into his eyes, and he asked me
what I would have, if I would drink any wine, with thanks I answered no, and
so they departed; and thus much in effect past amongst us, and I was carried
again into my Pit, and two doors locked upon me, where with much cheerfulness
I gave humble and hearty thanks unto God, who had given me (though the weakest
and unworthiest of his Soldiers,) the better in this encounter, tanquam
primitias plenioris victoria as the first fruits of a fuller victory.

CHAP. II.
A While after came Sir Robert Heath Attorney General to examine me, who told
me that the King was informed that I would not be examined; I answered I had
the more wrong, and that the contrary might appear: I was willing to be
examined not only by him, but by the meanest of his Majesty's Subjects that
should come with lawful Authority. It was true, I refused to be examined by
the High Commissioners delivering my Reasons in effect, which formerly I have
set down: In which Reasons he seemed to acquiesce, proceeding to examine me
concerning a book especially; three several Examinations of me they have
verbatim, the more material things whereof I will but touch. To his first
Quere concerning the Book I told him salvo meliori judicio, that I had rather
cause to enquire why I had suffered so much, and so long, without any cause
known, then first to put such heavy things upon me, and then to examine the
cause; for I knew nothing by my self, neither had they, for any thing I knew,
any just matter of such usage against me. As for the Book I told him, if any
man could charge either with Book or any other thing; wherein I had
transgressed I was willing to satisfy the Law: In the mean time, I desired as
one yet clear in Law, to go upon sufficient Bail, and so to come to my
Answer: he confessed the Answer was reasonable, but in that he told me the King
was very desirous to know the Author, and that not for any evil to him; and if
I would discover what I knew, it would be acceptable to the King; (or in his
very words) the King would take it well: yea if it entrenched upon my self, I
should find as much favor as I could wish. To which I answered, if it were a
thing so pleasing unto his Majesty, and if he would be pleased to lay a
particular command upon me, I would discover what I knew by my self in that;
yea, if I knew guilt by my self, which indeed I did not. He being well content
with this, and in words regreeting my distress, he went away and withal
making offer, etc. And the next time returned with the Kings particular command
(as he said) for in my second Examination it was thus set down: Upon the Kings
Majesty's particular command, etc. I acknowledge my self to be the whole and
sole Author and composer of the Book, etc. For this in effect was the sum of
my second confession concerning my Book. As we were upon discourse, he told me
that it was given out that I should deny the Kings supremacy; I answered, that
it was an unjust aspersion, for I was never put to it juridice, so I told him
in effect some passages between Sir Henry Martin and my self by way of
discourse; and how his answer was in effect my tenet, and I desired in my heart
in regard of Loyalty, not to come short of any subject: Well said he, you shall
do well also to express your self by me in that particular, that if any such
aspersion be laid upon you, by giving the King satisfaction it may be
prevented: I told him I was very willing and desired him to write my
expressions, which I delivered in these words or to this effect: I acknowledge
(ex animo) as much dominion and sovereignty, to belong unto our King over all
his dominions, and therein over all his Subjects and causes, as any of the
Kings of Judah or Israel had over their dominions, and the premises therein;
save only in those things wherein they were Types of Christ, or had a
particular warrant. This he told me at his return, he had showed to the King,
and that it gave him not only good content, (for it is all he could desire) but
he said he had not heard that case so well cleared, but for all this I had no
release, neither favor afforded, for being, or well-being, only my Wife
permitted to come to me.

The third approach of Mr. Attorney was nerve transverso with a cross sinew,
namely, to examine me who were my partners and abettors in the work, for they
conceived I had not done it without the helping hand, of the most judicious
Divines and Lawyers in the Land. To this demand I replied, that it was besides
my Covenant, yet being willing to satisfy all demands so far as I could
without prejudice to others, I professed (as I have also answered to the
information) that no living soul had any hand in composing Page or Line of
that Book except my self: For I told him as I was not so ambitious, as to
derogate from other men if any thing in it were praiseworthy; so I was not so
Prodigal of my self as to suffer by taking other men's works upon my self:
Then he asked me whether I was moved to it by some other, or if it came of my
self, I told him I was moved by some well-affected people to frame a draught
of their desires to the Parliament then being, which all the Kings liege people
might do, but they differing for a time upon the Subject matter; at length it
was concluded to desire the removal of the Hierarchy and their Appendices, as
the maine root of all our bitterness; and the establishing of Christ's
Ordinances in their power and beauty; together with the grounds of these our
desires; for reason does convince, and experience teaches that toto sublato
non officiunt parts, take away the whole, and the parts will do no hurt. And
where diverse Petitions had been put up for Reformation of diverse parts, with
little or no success, it were as good without mincing, (by showing the extent
of their desires) to heave at all; as the Proverb is, cum pulvisculo; yea the
Scripture teaches us, the best way to sweeten waters is to begin at the
fountains 2 Kings ^.21.
head.

Whereupon I framed those Ten Positions* set down in the Book, the proofs
whereof being exceedingly desired, I drew a scantling of them; which being by
serious view perused, it had the approbation and hands of many excellent good
people; so that I may safely say, I ran not unsent about the business. The
Attorney urged me to give up the names of those Approvers, with many fair
promises of liberty, and what not: I answered, that in my judgment there was
neither Law nor Conscience for it. For what had the people done, but that which
good subjects might safely do. Secondly, though there was no danger in the
Act, yet the re-vailing of them might endanger them, which I would be loath to
do. Thirdly, as it was done in time of Parliament, when every subject might
without impeachment unfold a public grievance so if that high Court were in
being, and should call them to it, they should either avouch the act; or I
would deliver both their names and hands. He replied, that though I was
somewhat versed in the Law, yet it was not my faculty. I answered true, yet I
stood in need of so much as to square my ways by, and if he being a great
Lawyer, could give me any ground for that he required from the Law of God or
Man, I would satisfy him forthwith, and every man should bear his own
burden. To this I received no answer, but after a pause, he told me that the
King would take it ill; for the denial of such a thing, was an Argument that I
loved him not, I replied; that I would not for a Kingdom give him just cause
of offense, but obedience must be ruled; and for my love to his Majesty let my
actions and sufferings witness to the would; for if I had not loved my
Sovereign better then my life, I had not put my life in my hand, in the
discovery of truths so strongly opposed; which if they should not prevail; I
might partly conceive what it would cost me, witness the continuance of my
hard usage: In conclusion he began to be rough, and to threaten me with the
Rod: To which I answered, the rod was in Gods hand, and he should do well to
look to it; for the wrath of man did not accomplish the righteousness of God;
and for his threatenings, I hoped they should never bring me to be an accuser of
the Brethren. Thus much in effect passed between the Attorney General and me,
where though not totidem verbis, yet I have not wronged him one jot, but how
much in this matter he wronged both me and himself, Lord open his eyes to see
it.

CHAP. III.
AT length after fifteen weeks hard Imprisonment, and cruel usage in that
loathsome prison, I was served with a Sub-poena out of the Star Chamber,
whether I was appointed to go to take out the Information against me; having
for the most part one Thief or other out of Newgate to be my Keeper; so that I
durst hardly come in any house for fear of his lime-twig fingers,

Non fuit Antolycho tam piceata manus. The last Bout they had with me before
the day of hearing* was about the answering of Interrogatories in the
Star Chamber office, whereof I was more afraid then of all the rest; for
wanting the Copies of three several Examinations, having an information laid
against me, with the Answer to it, and to the Interrogatories; all in sum to
keep in memory, I might easily fall into a contradiction, which they would have
accounted Perjury, and it might be have made that the Matter of their
Proceeding against me: But that gracious God who keeps straight the steps of
his weaklings because of their enemies, stayed my foot from sliding, so that
way (blessed be his Name) they had no advantage against me. The last
Interrogatory was, Who were privy to the composing of the Book. I answered the
Examiner (as formerly the Attorney) that I was not tied to answer that
Interrogatory by any Law; yea the Law did exempt me, instance 25 Hen. 8. cap.
15. Whereas it is held against equity and order of justice, to call any man in
danger of Life, Name, or State, upon intrapping Interrogatories, or by any
other Means then Witness, Verdict, Confession, or Presentment; so it is
illegal to delate a brother accused of the same thing especially, not evil in
it self but taken to be evil. The Examiner answered, that he would not admit
that Answer. I replied he should have that or none, for I knew no exception
against it; then he said he would set it down, but withal that no other
Answer I would make, with which I was content.

Hence observe; First, that the waving of this Interrogatory was fundi nostri
calamitas, as appeared by many fair promises, if I would discover them.

Secondly, we should learn to desire the Lord, when we are under chains and
threatenings, that he would make us faithful unto the Saints in a lawful
concealment of their assistances, though it be with our own prejudice: as a
friend is another self, so he should be (...), faithful in the deepest
distress. It is a shame that Heathens should outstrip us in this

Manil. 8.
Vnus erat Pylades, unus qui mallet Orestes
Ipse mori, etc.
Did one Pylades and Orestes strive
For death, each other to preserve alive?
And shall not the Saints lay down their lives for 1 John 3.16.
the Brethren? which Text if it were better cleared by practice it would amaze
us; but blessed be God it has been so cleared far beyond the practice of all
Heathens. Witness Ionathans faithful love to David, which he preferred to the
preventing of his fathers wrath, the saving of a Kingdom, yea and to life it
self; so 1 Samuel 18.1, 3, 4, etc. 2 Samuel 17.
Cushi to David, and so of diverse Martyrs one to another, who have laid down
their lives with others and for others: So that the fidelity of Hercules and
Theseus, Socrates and Ceriphon, Achates and Aeneas, Pythias and Damon; and of
all the rest of those glorious Pictures, how bright soever it seemed, was but
as a piece of polished Crystal, in comparison of that true diamond fidelity of
the Saints. But a faithful one in danger for others may here object, in these
evil days, where is the mutuallity? I would be a Pomgranate, but where is the
Myrtle crown to set it in? For that with the Egyptians is the Hyerogliph of
faithful friendship. I would be a Pythias, but where is the Damon? A Jonathan,
but where is the David? Aliquorum amacitta arund^nea imo hirundinea.
Some in requital prove like Reeds and Swallows unprofitable, and
ungrateful? Number prohibet servare sidem de^eta Sagunthu^.
shall sacked Sagunthu^ sack thy precious faith? Thy reward is with the Lord:
let not other men's unfaithfulness make thy faith of none effect, but be
always abundant in the power of it, knowing that thy labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

As the whole proceedings was according to the use of the Adage (...), a
condemning of the absent; so the parts whereof it did consist, were in the
mouths of them and their Abettors invective revilings, and passing of
unparraleld censure. There is a Maxim unalterable in the Law of Nations;
Formidabilitas and minae in bello, comitas vero and aequitas in judiciis.
menacing threatenings are useful in War, but Gentleness and Equity should
bear sway in judgment. For the better clearing of my self from doing them any
wrong, and my self and the cause from reproaches put upon us, I have set down
some of their speeches that were sent me by a friend who was present there.

First, it is true, the Answer was read after the Information, but without my
knowledge or direction; for I abridged the Answer, because I expected a hearing
to explain and maintain the particulars, but God otherwise in his wisdom
disposed it: but I am not ashamed of the answer, for one told me from the mouth
of the greatest in that Court, that he affirmed it to be the sufficientest,
truest and justest Answer, that ever was put into that Court these many years;
for clearing whereof, I have published the sum of the Bill or Information,
with the Answer.

The Answer of Alexander Leighton still prisoner in Newgate, to a Bill in the
Star Chamber preferred by his Majesty's Attorney General against the said
Defendant.
ALL advantages, and exceptions to all and every the uncertainty and
insufficiency of the said Information, now and at all times reserved to him,
This Defendant says, That whereas your Majesty's Defendant by a warrant from
the High Commission was apprehended the 17. of February 1639. and carried with
much violence to the Bishop of Londons house, and there detained from eleven of
the clock till seven at night, whence he was carried to Newgate without
examination; and there shut up close prisoner in a strait smoakey room, where
he lay without meat or drink, from the Tuesday at night, till Thursday at
noone; and there still has he lain close Prisoner for the space of nine weeks,
being denied all the time the coppie of his Commitment, to the utter undoing of
his health, both of body and mind, and desolating of his Family: And further,
the Prelates Pursevants two days after entered your Majesty's Deputies house
(as he is informed) with a multitude of Staves and Bills, being suggested, that
your Majesty's Deputy was a Jesuit, and then, and there, the said Pursevants,
by their cruel and barbarous dealing affrighted exceedingly your Majesty's
Deputy, Wife, and Children, breaking up also Presses, and Chests; notwithding,
that all diligence was used for opening of them; yea, they tore up the doors
of the house, and brake the doors from the hinges, and that in presence of the
Sheriffs of London, who ore-looked them; yea, one of them threatened a young
Child, by holding a charged Pistol to his head, since which time, the Child
has never liked. After all this, your Majesty's Defendant was served with a
Suppena, and a Bill laid against him in His Majesty's Court of Star chamber,
where your Majesty's Defendant appeared with His Keeper, and de^^red according
to Law, to have liberty upon putting in of Sureties, to be at the day of
hearing: But he was, and is still denied it, as he conceives by the
overswaying Power of the Prelacie; And he being kept prisoner, he is not able
to answer as he should, or would, having neither time nor advise, as the case
requires; and by his imprisonment, is with his Family utterly undone, having
no means to maintain them: Further, your Majesty's Defendant acknowledges,
that under the favor of your Majesty's particular Command, he confessed the
compyling of that Book wherewith he is charged in the Bill, as appears by his
Examination, protesting withal, that it would not stand with the honor of
your Majesty, That such a confession made under your Graces Clemency should
accuse him, but if your Graces favor should protect him from accusation; And
this your Majesty's Defendant offers to prove by instances from divine Writ,
from our own and foreign Histories, Maxims of the Laws and Reasons; for a
taste whereof, that which Jeremy confessed to the King, the King would not
reveal, but had a great care that it should not come against him before the
Princes Priests and Prophets: For if it had (though it was the truth, yet he
might have suffered for it, Chap. 38. Verse. 27. etc.

It is also a Royal truth, Gratia Principis est accumulativa non privativa,
but by suffering this confession to accuse your Maj. Defendant, he is deprived
of a main benefit of his own defense: Amisso, clipeyo vulneratus est, having
lost his Buekler he is undone; Wherefore he humbly entreats, that Your
Majesty's Royal Favor might deliver him.

3 As for your Majesty's Predecessors, and the Gospel under them, especially
for your Royal Majesty, and the Gospel of Peace under You; We humbly and
heartily thank God as we are bound, professing always upon every occasion, the
Loyalty and Love of our poor hearts toward Your Majesty; and more
particularly, in sundry passages of this Book, as, page 175. etc. where we
seem to want words to express our affections, yea, we proclaim what we think
without flattery, that all Christendom has not such a King for Kingly
Endowments, and Royal Conquest over the faults of Princes, as our Sovereign
and Supreme Governor: But that the Discipline exercised by the Hierarchy is
Consonant to the Word of God the practice of the Primitive Church, and best
agreeable to the State of a Monarchy, Your Majesty's Defendant has punctually
demonstrated the contrary in all these particulars; witness the second
position, page 19, 20. page 110, 111, 112, 113. From which passages, your
Majesty's Defendant frames this one Argument.

The Discipline of Christ's Church warranted by the Word, is of Christ's own
appointment, and by consequent unchangeable, page 111, 112, 187, 188, 189, 242.

But the Discipline of the Hierarchy is not of Christ's appointment, nor
unchangeable, witness themselves, page 111.

Therefore it is not warranted by the Word or consonant to the Word; yea,
themselves confess, it was not so from the beginning, for then they needed not
to plead for changability of Discipline; yea, the Papists challenge, and the
Hierarchy cannot deny that their Discipline is the very Popish Discipline;
witness page 131, 181.

Lastly, That their Discip^ine is not most agreeable to the State of a
Monarchy, your Majesty's Defendant has proved largly and fully page 242, 243,
244. And has also answered the Objections that may be brought to the contrary.
A world of Proofs and Reasons your Majesty's Defendant could bring for further
confirmation, if your Majesty's High Court will permit: But he will say no
more, but this undeniable and experimented truth. The Sway of Christ's Scepter
in his House, is the very Power and Glory of a Kings Scepter in his Kingdom;
where Christ has his due, there Caesar shall have his due: And where your
Majesty's Defendant is charged in the said Bill, to vent the said things out of
a seditious and malicious humor with many such terms charged upon him in the
aforesaid Bill; He answers once for all, That he hates the very least
thought or appearance of malice or sedition: but what hatred and crue^ty he and
his endures from the Prelacy, he cannot express, praying that it may never be
laid to their charge; And as your Majesty's Defendant conceives that he goes
on good grounds; So his ends were the glory of God, the honor and happiness
of your Majesty's Person and State, the vindicating of the Nobility from wrong,
and the good of the whole Nation.

4 The Book it self was compiled beyond the Seas, save only the Draught and
the Lineaments of it, and there it was printed for the Parliament only.
Neither did your Majesty's Defendant bring or cause to be brought any of the
said Books into the Land; or can it be proved, that he published any of the
said Books abroad: but his intent was after the breaking up of the Parliament,
not to meddle any further: And how, or by whom, the Books were brought into
the Land, he knows not. And whereas your Maj. said Defendant is charged with
the hating of the Prelates Persons, and setting them at variance with the
Peers and People; In these he protests still his Innocence: It being rather
a main part of his intent, to have Them, the Peers, Ministry, and People, all
at unity in Christ Jesus, by virtue of due Reformation: And this your Majesty's
Defendant does manifest in sundry passages of the said Book, as page 150, 153,
265, 343, 344. So that it is their good, and not their hurt; yea, the good of
all that we desire, by removal of the Prelacie: Neither does your Majesty's
Defendant scandal these Prelates; but proves, what he affirms, either by
Gods Word, your Majesty's Laws, the Writs of the Learned* or by good relation:
Yea, what your Majesty's Defendant has said against the Prelacie, rather then
the Prelates, is commonly laid down and contained in his ten Positions; Which
Positions, your Majesty's Defendant, as he conceives, has sufficiently
proved, and is further ready to satisfy, as he shall be called. As for
bringing confusion to the Church, dishonor to your Majesty's most Sacred
Person, or Government, or to stir up any thereto, He had rather dye, then
entertain the least thought of any of these; yea, he pleads for nothing so
much, As the Order of Christ's Church, the honor of your Majesty's Person, and
happiness of your Government.

5 Where your Majesty's Defendant is charged in the Epistle to the Reader with
these words. VV^e do no^ rea^e of greater persecution, higher indignity and
indemputty done upon Gods People in any Nation professing the G^spel then in
this our Island, especially since the death of C^een Elizabeth, and that the
Prelates are men of Bl^ods. To all these your Majesty's Defendant answers,
That the thing it self is too too true as appears by the Prelacies taking
away life and livelihood from so many Ministers and private men and their poor
Families of who^ many were pined to death in prison: many wandered up and down
their Families being left desolate and helpless, whereof your Majesty's
Defendant could give many instances, and so can many more* But your Majesty's
Defendant does only give a touch in sundry passages of the Book, as page 122,
123. page 79, 80, page 126. Besides all this, the blood of souls has been
endangered, by the removal of the faithful Shepherds from their Flocks,
quite contrary to the mind and speeches of your Majesty's Royal Father, whom
your Majesty's Defendant has deservedly cleared, to his everlasting honor of
these courses of the Hierarchy; witness, the Epistle to the Reader: also, page
123, 74, 70122. Yea, if there were no more but that which your Majesty's
Defendant has seen and felt, it were enough to prove the assertion. Lastly,
the phrase is a Scripture phrase, not only importing violently actual
depriving of life, but also the afflicting or wronging of men by indirect
courses, which we conceive rather to proceed from the evil of the Calling than
from the dispositions of the men; for good men have proved evil Prelates.

6 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged with naming the Prelacy,
Satannicall and Antichristian persons; your Defendant (as he conceives) has
sufficiently proved it from Scripture reasons, and the Evidences of the
Learned; Witness, page 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and shall be ready
to prove more fully, if need be: neither be the words your Majesty's
Defendants, but the words of the Learned, speaking of the diverse kinds of
Bishops, page 88, 89. And for further evidence*

That Office or Calling which has the internal or essential parts of
Antichristian Prelacie, is Antichristian Prelacie it self.

But the present Hierarchy has the internal or essential parts of
Antichristian Prelacie:

Therefore it is Antichristian Prelacy it self.

And this may be the reason of the Major Proposition, that the change of an
external efficient or instituting cause cannot alter the nature of a thing, so
long as the internal or essential causes remain.

And for the reason of the Minor Proposition, the matter and form are all one
in both.

7 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant calls the Hierarchy, The main and Master
Sin of the Land established by a Law page 3. He answers, in haec verba, as
we conceive, And that it is a sin your Majesty's Defendant has proved, from
page the first* to the twentieth, And that it is established by a Land, the
Statutes speak expressly therefore a sin. Therefore a sin established by a
Law, and by consequently, As we conceive, the main and master sin of the Land.

8 Where your Majesty's Defendant should say. Tha^ Ministers should have voye^s
delibe^ative and decessive in Counsels, page 7; Your Majesty's Defendant
answers, That it is the determination of Counsels from the Word of Truth;
witness the before quoted page, and as for Paritie of Ministers, it is the
Institution of the Spirit, maintained by the Current of the Learned. Ancient*
and Modern, but Imparity is the spawn of the Mystery of Iniquity.

9 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged with tearming, the Prelates,
Ravens and Py-Maggots, he answers that the Learned term them so in effect,
as Mr. Bullinger calls them Harpies page 13. and Mr. Wick^iffe, Disciples of
Antichrist, page 12. And thus they are termed for that repacity that is
incident to their calling, and not to assperse any of their persons.

10 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged with suggesting of false fears
to the King, for reviving that spawn of the Beast kneeling at the Sacrament for
the greater teverence; thereto you^ Majesty's Defendant answers that he
speaks of the time of King Edward the sixth, of whom the Papists desired it
tumultuously, to whose contentment by much importunity with the King, it was
granted, which gives good evidence, as your Majesty's Defendant can
sufficiently prove, that it was the spawn and supporter of the Real Presence.

11 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is said to affirm that the Statute 1
Elizabeth, seems inconvenient, etc. page 42 43; your Majesty's Defendant
there only relates, what Positions were agitated, and brought to a fair
height of being in the Parliament, Anno 1610. If good Intentions had not
miscaryed* where your Majesty's said Defendant is so far from derogating from
your Majesty's Royal Power and Laws, that with all his best endeavor, he
pleads the establishment of them: In this particular namely, that neither by
the Law of God, nor by the Law of Man, The Prelacie has any power to fine or
imprison. And this is witnessed by the concourse and concord of all our famous
Jurists, witness page 31. p. 128. etc.

12 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged to rearm the Canous, nonsense
Canons; your Majesty's Defendant humbly entreats, that they may be perused:
and it shall appear, that it is against sense and reason, that for saying,
There is any thing in the Book of Common Prayer repugnant to the Scriptures, a
man should be excommunicated, ipso facto. Can. 4. since themselves confess,
that all things therein contained, are not warranted by the Word. Also, by the
8. Canon they are excommunicated, ipso facto, that try, or call in question,
the Calling of the Hierarchy. Also by the 19. Canon, there must be no
diminishing of any part of the Service, in regard of preaching, or any other
respect, and yet preaching may be omitted, It seems also, Nonsense, that
Ministers are forbidden, by fasting and prayer to exorcize or co^jure out the
Devil* without license obtained from the B. and that on pain of deposition: but
so it is ordained by the Canon 72. The passages of which Canon seem very
strange; other Instances may be given against them; neither were they consented
to, or approved by some of the best of the Synod: for, Dr. Rud, opposed them by
an oration. These Canons also cross your Majesty's Laws, depriving your
Majesty's Subjects of the benefit of Appeal in Cases before them depending,
peremptorily, decreeing, that no Judge ad quem shall admit or allow of any
Appeal, except the Appealant will do all that they require, in matter and
manner of conformity; witness Canon 98.

13 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged to affirm, that the* Prelates
corrupt the King, fore-stalling his judgment against the Good, and goodness,
page 118. your Majesty's Defendant answers, That considering the danger of
your Majesty through the corruption of the Calling rather then the Men (if God
preserved you not) your Majesty's Defendant cites only the judgment of the
Learned upon the Prophet Hose^, Quod peccata Praelatorum, etc. That the sins of
Prelates corrupting Princes, hinders all goodness: which flows rather from
their Calling, then their Dispositions, so that here is neither evil speech,
nor evil thought of your Majesty, as is informed; for if we should use any
such* it were pity we should live.

14 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant seems to regrate the Error of your
Royal Match, rather then the match it self, under these words, The Daughter of
Heth, page 172. Your Majesty's Defendant answers, that it is not out of
neglect of bounden duty to your Majesty's Royal Consort and our Queen; but
that she looking into the rock whence she is hewn, may rejoice to be the
Daughter of Abraham; for which, as we pray, so no doubt it will be the joy of
your Majesty's heart. Secondly, we regrate more in the place sore-quoted our
own unthankfulness and unwatchfulnesse over your Majesty, then any thing else.
Thirdly, the phrase is a Scripture phrase by allusion, and has been used by
diverse Divines, whose Sermons are extant, and is as little as could be said if
any thing were said in that particular; for the Hittites were ye kindest and
trustiest neighbors that Abraham had. Fourthly and lastly, though your
Majesty's Royal and beautiful Ra^hel have an Image-in the stuff, yet
Princely prevailing Jacob, to his everlasting honor, may reform it.

15 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant says, Consider what a pity it is to all,
and an indelible dishonor to the State Representative, that so ingenuous and
tractable a King should be so monstrously abused by the bane of Princes, to the
undoing of Himself and His Subects, page 175; Your Majesty's Defendant
answers, that whereas your most excellent Majesty is the very breath of our
nostrils, and more then we all, If we were Tongue-tide, we cannot but cry out,
since we see the Destroyer already gone out against us, and is mounted on the
wings of all our sins, which have their But and Rise, as we conceive, upon
that Calling of the Hierarchy, which your Majesty's Defendant has proved to be
the bane of Princes.

16 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged with sundry sinister thoughts,
concerning the untimely death of the late Duke of Buckingham, as though he
should seem to approve of Feltons Act, etc; Your Majesty's Defendant
answers. That in his Book he rather regrateth it, wishing that the Parliament
had restrained the Current of the late Dukes Courses, whereby his untimely
death and the others desperate Act, might have been prevented; witness p. 1^3.
as for the words alleged, page 176. In Gods offering to guide them to
Reformation, by giving of that blow; Your Majesty's Defendant answers, that
though the ^^omy or sin of the action, was from that desperate man; yet the
action it self, and as it was a Judgment, was from God: for there is no evil
in the City which the Lord has not done. And whereas from the Parliaments
following of God; hand, the Bill charge upon them, stirring up, or animaring
of others to the offering of the like violence against the Prelates; your
Majesty's Defendant answers, that the Consequent has in it a double
Sophisme, a simpliciter ad secundum quid: Namely, first in the Subject; because
the Parliament may follow Gods hand in Justice; It does not follow that others
may, or should follow Gods hand with desperate violence. The second
inconsequent is from the Object, matter thus: Though we do desire the
Parliament to follow, with the removal of the Hierarchy, and other
Reformations; yet will it not follow, that we desire, that their Persons should
suffer the least wrong or violence; witness, page 78. etc. And hereto your
Majesty's Defendant protests before God, that he wishes them as (...) in
body, soul, and state, as himself; though your Majesty's distressed Defendant
has suffered, and does suffer much in himself, and his, as he conceives, from
their indignation against him.

17 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged with these words, The. Church
has her Laws, with the res^ following; and by consequence, he should detract
from your Majesty's Royal Power, etc. page 191; Your Majesty's Defendant
answers, that they are the words of Reverent Divines; neither does your
Majesty's Defendant detract from your Majesty, to whose gracious Highness your
Defendant attributes, as much power as the Kings of Israel, and Judah, in
their places, as appears by his examination.

18 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged to slander your Majesty in
using these words, That we are spoiled of all that pass by, and all are
spoiled that rely on us; and for instance, he cites R^^^^ll^^^, page 264; your
Majesty's Defendant answers, that woeful experience proclaims our spoiling,
and being spoiled to the world: whereof your Majesty's loyal and loving
Subjects are exceeding sensible, and lay it much to heart; besides, it is the
subject of Strangers discourse, with whom indeed your Majesty's Subjects are
much out of that ancient esteem, that formerly attended them: yet
notwithstanding all this, what face so shameless, or heart so faithless, as
to tax your Majesty with the least spot of dissimulation, which we know your
Majesty does utterly detest and abhor: For what can your Majesty do more
then afford the means? But if the sins of us all, and the security in sin,
turn Gods hand against us: If the slight and sedulity of the Enemy, Foreign
and Domestic be a snare to entrap us: Lastly, if your Majesty's eyes and hand;
should deceive us, we can neither do good nor receive good; yea, we cannot
subsist: and therefore your Majesty's Defendant presumes to entreat that
Senate, being your right Hand, and your right Eye, to look to it.

19 Whereas your Majesty's Defendant is charged to have permitted a thousand
Copies, and to have published the said Copies; your Majesty's Defendant
answers, that there were little more then half of a thousand printed; and as
for the publishing of them, it cannot be proved.

20 Whereas in the closier of the Book, your Majesty's Defendant is charged
with these words:

High must Ye sore, but Glory gives the VVings,
No low attempt a Star-like Glory brings.
Your Majesty's Defendant answers, that he intimates nothing in these words,
but this; That high and inveterate evils, such as we labor of, require much
yains, wisdom, and skill, for the curing of them.

21 Lastly, for all the things asserted by your Majesty's Defendant in the said
Book, for the qualification of them from peremptory Assertion; your Majesty's
Defendant has recourse to that phrase, in the Preamble to the Parliament, page
3. As we conceive.

As for your Majesty's Defendants offers in the Epistle to the Reader, to make
good the things asserted; It is to be understood but quoad posse; whereunto
your Majesty's Defendant shall in all loyal humility, be ready to show his best
endeavor, and where it has been always the practice of the Reverend Fathers
of the Church to convince by reason, and not prison; your Majesty's Defendant
humbly desisireth, that some of the Prelates would be pleased to take away his
grounds, and show him better, where if he be convinced by falsehood or error by
sound reason; your Majesty's Defendant shall both heartily retract, and humbly
beg pardon: As for the evils charged upon your Majesty's Defendant, in the said
Information; this your Majesty's Defendants Answer, as he hops, shall clear
his innocence.

This Defendant humbly confesses the writing of the Book, mentioned in the
Information: But this Defendant says, he did it beyond Seas, out of his
Majesty's Dominions, and that not out of any such malicious or seditious humor
as is alleged in yt Information. But being persuaded in judgment, and fearing
in his apprehension, that some great inevitable evil was toward us, except by
reformation, it were prevented, as the Book at large specifieth; He was moved
in Conscience, with the poor man in Ecclesiastes, to set all his thoughts on
work, how, under correction, he might cast in a voice, for the safeguard of our
Sion, not being moved thereunto by any sinister respect, as hatred, or neglect
of any, or self-reflecting end; but he intended only the Glory of God, the
honor of his Sovereign, the good of the Nobility, and of all his People and
Dominions: For all which, he is not only ready to neglect himself and his (as
hitherto he has done) but also, if need be, to sacrifice himself upon their
service. Further, this Defendant says, that he intended the said Book only for
the Parliament; and therefore printed not so many Copies, as are laid down in
the Information, almost by half the number; Namely, between five and six
hundred; which number, as this Defendant conceives, was not sufficient to show
the several Members of both the Houses of that high Court of Parliament, being
a Body politic (as this Defendant conceived) to which the meanest Members of
the Commonwealth might intimate their cares and fears concerning the dangers,
or deliverances of the Commonwealth, being the Mother of us all; and these
pious Ends and Intentions, this the said Defendant expresses in his Preamble
to the Parliament, and sundry other Passages of the said Book, leaving the
success unto God, the Author and Moderator of all good Intents and Actions,
submitting also both himself and the Book unto the approbation and censure of
that Honorable and High Court: Neither did this the Defendant, bring or cause
to be brought any of the said Books or Copies into the Land, but it was the
Defendants special care rather to suppress, then to divulge them. And this
Defendant further says, he willingly and humbly confessed the composing of the
said Book sub sigillo Mandati Regis, under the favor of his Maj. special
Command, from whom as an Angel of God, he could conceal nothing;
notwithstanding that the said Defendant was confident at that time, that no
creature could accuse him of composing of the said Book; At which time this
Defendant also professed, that it could not stand with the honor of his
Majesty, that a humble and voluntary mind, under the favor of his gracious
Clemency should accuse or condemn though there were delinquency, but that it
should rather graciously protect or pardon: and this, this Defendant conceives
to be free from; from Principles of Divinity, Maxims of Theames, Rules of
Reason; and instances from our own and foreign Histories, especially from the
Kings of England and Scotland, his Majesty's Ancestors; A touch whereof, this
Defendant humbly entreats leave to deliver to this hon^rable Court: Neither
does this Defendant wave the said Confession any ways to reflect upon his
gracious Majesty; but since he is inferior to no Earthly Power, in all Royal
Graces; wherf he is the Ocean, p^y moderat^^ and inenipatum tutela^^, he has
recourse to the Sanctuary of His Majesty's Royal Favor. This Defendant
further says, that he neither delivers the things contained in the Book, nor
undertaketh the answer before the particulars laid down in the Information by
way of peremptory assertion: But this qualification still to be understood, as
is expressed in the Preface of the said Book to the Parliament page 3. As he
conceives. Further, this Defendant says, that he is unstained to this defense
or qualification of the things laid down in the Information, by reason of his
said Confession made under his Majesty's special Command, and taken by his
Majesty's Attorney-Generall: For as this Defendant conceives, that where there
is confessio fracti, there must be either defensio juris, or agnitio culpae, he
is in all humility and duty to the truth, put upon the best defense or
qualificatio^, in the said particulars, that he can possible make; but if this
the Defendant has erred in judgment (as who may not, etc.) upon the discovery
of it by clear and sound Reasons, he shall be ready both heartily to retract,
and humbly to beg pardon. For as the ingenuous and free Soul holds no Truth
so weakly, that any flax or affliction can fire it; so it holds nothing so
confidently, but sound Reason may overruled it: As for the integrity of this
Defendants affection to all, from the highest to the lowest, if his heart
deceives him not, he may take heaven and earth to witness of it. Further, this
Defendant says, that by reason of the distraction of his Council assigned, he
could not have them to meet or agree on putting in his Clause, according to an
Order from this Honorable Court, he adventured to present this weak and
informall Answer, and that by reason this Defendant is not versed in this
Element: All which things, this Defendant humbly offers to the favorable
consideration of this honorable Cout; And so under favor, he comes to the
particulars.

I had Counsel allotted, who acknowledged the Equity of my Cause, and freedom
from Guilt; but they durst not plead, and so I was ordered to put in mine own
Answer.

First began the A. G. Quam facile crat in absentem and prostratun accusatorem
acerbius agere, an easy thing for a man of his place and gifts, with nipping
Scoffs, to triumph over an absent and prostrated man, both under the immediate
hand of God, and the armed wrath of cruel Enemies. If a man be for God, it is
the height of unhappiness to play upon him; yea though with Tertullus he could
do it with Eloquence. Psalm. 1.1. Job. 16.20.
Therefore Cassiodor speaking of an Advocate, says, he should not be Ad
facetias ursus; adfalendum, vulpos; ad superbiendum, taurus; ad Consumendumm,
inotaurus
a Bear for tricks and quirks, a Fox for deceit, a Bull for haughtiness, or a
Labyrinth to devour, in Psalm. 73. especially, where the Intent^ons of the
accused, are the good of Religion and Policy. It is held a higher commendation
in an high Advocate, * that is, as Tully expounds it of Coelius, to defend,
better then to accuse. In such a Case, Potiorem sinistram quod dextram habere.
the same Orator, in his Oration for Roscius, makes a Goose the Hyerogliph of
an Accuser, Qui obstrepat tantum noceat tamen rihil.
a voice would be heard, but not to hurt the harmless. But not to insist, if
the pleading was no better then the Information laid, as Advers. Haeres.
Lyri^nsis said of a Father in another Case, it was but rev^latis nuditatis, a
further discovery of his nakedness; for neither of both will hold out at the
Tribunal of God, before which, we must all appear.

CHAP. IV.
THe next in order, was I. R. Strenu^^ Accusator, as may appear, by stating of
the Case, under the name of a Crime; and Est attributio alicujus Deo quod ei
non convenit, vel detractio ojus ab eo quod ei convenit.
then branching it out under the names of many Crimes: As first of Blasphemy
against God, etc. But as he says much and proves nothing; so, if to accuse be
enough, who shall be innocent! First, for Blasphemy, Scripture, Ethers and
Schoolmen, desi e Blasphemy against God, to attribute of God, or affirm of
him that, that is not agreeable unto him; or detracting from him, and denying
of him that which is proper unto him. Now, what do I, or my Book affirm of God
that is Blasphemous? If I were guilty of Blasphemy, especially of that kind, it
were unworthy I should live. A Blasphemer is the worst of all Creatures, A mad
Dog that flies in his Masters face, or like a viperous Child that will pience
the heart of his Father, as the Story has it; or as sacred Writ speaks of
the Blaspheming Egyptian, according to the Original. He smote or pierood
through Gods Name. Levit. 24.11.
* An accustomed Blasphemer (as a Worthy of out Nation says) is a Devil
incarnate. Blasphenia veniaus (...) maretur, says Hierome, Epist. 32 Chrysostom.
teaches us how to know a Blasphemer; besides, the comparison of a Woolse, and
a Sheep together. Si quis lupum cooperiat pelle, Ovina quomodo eognoscit illum,
etc.
* If a man cover a Woole, with a Sceepskin, how shall he know him, but by
voice or act, as the harmless Sheep with a demisse countenance bleateth, and
the Woolf sets his face against Heaven and howleth: So he that in humility
of soul confesses that truth believed in his heart, though with danger of his
life, is a Sheep; and as the Prophet says, led to the slaughter. qui voro
adversus veritatem turp^^or blasphemis ululat contra Deum lupus, etc.
But he who shamelesly with Blasphemi^^ howles against the Truth, howling
against God in reviling of his Servants, is a Wolse. Hence I appeal to any
man's judgment, who is the Blasphemer. As speaking truth from the heart is
required of all, * so especially in Magistrates and Judges; Lying lips becomes
not a great one, Matthew. 7.
A main property required by I^thr^ in a Judge, Homil. 9.
is, that he be a man of truth. Psalm. 15.2.
*

The second thing charged upon me is Schism, prove. 17.7.
A Schismatique, etc. says he, Exodus 18.21
the Word of God which best defines a Schismatique, I hope shall clear me of
that Imputation. Paul tells us Romans 16.17.18.
that a Schismatique is one that brings in or maintains corrupt Doctrine or
Discipline contrary to the Word, or besides the Word of GOD, as a Divine
observes from the word Fai^^.
(...) where not only (says he) that which is contrary to the Word is
forbidden; * but if any other thing, or in any other manner be brought in
belonging to Doctrine, which Paul calls Sed si quid aliud, vel al^ter
introducitur.
(...). Whereon Mr. B^z^ well observes, that not only false Doctrine
apparan^ly, contrary to the Truth, is forbidden but also the adulterating the
pure Doctrine, by Humane Inventions. 1 Timothy ^.3.
And Chrysos^^^^ on this place to the Romans thinks that the J^wes are (...)
especially, who together with the Christian Faith urged also the Ceremonies of
the Law. Of whom as Enemies of the Gospel, the Apostle often complains. Now
what Doctrine or Discipline contrary to the sacred Word, or besides it? have I
broached or maintained in my Book? they can show me none; therefore I am no
Schismatique. But such as do so, let them be Schismatiques. I pray God with the
Apostle, that All, but especially such as be in supreme places, may diligently
observe such, and avoid them. Indeed, all divisions cannot be avoided; and
therefore one observes well upon that place, that the Apostle forbids not
all divisions, but such as are caused by Innovation of Doctrine; For there are
some profitable divisions (says he) Gualter.
whereby consent in Superstition is hindered: such a division is said to be
among the People about Christ; Quibus conscusus in superstitione, etc. John 7.4.
some confessed him, some rejected him, and some went about to take him. For
the better discovery of Schismatiques, and avoiding of them, the Apostle
brandeth them with remarkable Marks: As first, with rotten Hypocrifie, they
serve not the Lord Jesus. What pretense soever they make. Secondly, from their
base Ends, they serve their Bellies: Or, as in another place, they make their
Bellies their God, Phil. 3.18. Omnia questus causa.
they do all for filthy lucre. It is a miserable thing, says Chrysostom, Pro
Doctoribus servos ventriis babere.
to have for Teachers, Servants of their Bellies. Thirdly* from the means they
use to fill their Bellies, by fair speeches, etc. that is, they sooth and
flatter men in their sin. They speak pl^c^nti^, all is well, so they have
enough: lkie murdering Physicians, they please the Humors, and kill the
Patients; they devour Princes alive. Let such an one then Qui natus ab domini
ventris.
as is born to his Belly, or (as Hierome) Habet inventre.
as minds nothing so much as his Belly, who for Giants Bowls, Esau his Red
Pottage, or the Red Earth of Gold, will sell Laws Divine and Humane, Soul,
Heaven, and Christ himself and yet will be taken to be Servers of Christ, by
coming to the Church, etc. though nothing less. Let such an one (I say) be
noted for a Schismatique, and avoided.

The third thing, S^ct.
he taxes me with, is, Treason against the King; For branding me unjustly with
the other two; Namely, Blasphemy and Schism: his ignorance in terms of that
nature, might seem in tanto, though not in toto to excuse him; For I take him,
as P^racess^^^ spoke, of Quacks, to be Iulia^^m Theologum. But to put Treason
upon m^e, must either evince, that he has never thoroughly perased my Book, nor
weighed my Cause in a true Skale, which a man of his place should do before he
judge; or otherwise, it must appear that ded^ta opera, he accused me of that,
for which he has not the least appearance of ground: First, Is it likely that
I standing out this thirty years against my world^^ preform^nt, the advancing
of my Childrens good, and that in tenderness of Conscience, should at last
wrap up all the rejoicing of my Sufferings, in the Black and ignominious Veil
of horrible and damnable Treason. I might answer him in the words of Secrates,
to a Persian Ambassador, folliciting him to Treason in the behalf of their
King. When he was eating Cabbage to his Dinner; Audite inquit an hoc prandium
proditorem facit Valor. Max. lib. 7.
observe, says he, if this kind of Diet can make a Traitor. Traitors are
fatte^ in the Rib, then I, and look for greater matters, then I do.

Secondly, my heart bears me witness, and God himself who is greater then my
heart, Sect.
that I have ever accounted, and do account the Kings Majesty, the Anointed of
the Lord the very Bre^th of our N^str^^s, and as I have often protested, I
esteem the least particular, conducing to his Being, or Well-being, better then
my life, and the life of all mine, and many thousands; and so I hope it shall
appear against all opposition, when Truth by Time, shall manifest it self.

Thirdly, Let the Book be tried by judicious men, Sect.
though partial to the Cause, if either vola or ves^^^gi^m of Treason be found
in it: I desire, besides, what I have suffered to die the most shameful and
bitter death, that could be thought on against any Traitor.

Fourthly, and lastly, If I be a Traitor against the King: Sect.
why did they not proceed against me as a Traitor, according to the Laws of
God and of the Nation? As Treason is a Sin of the highest name, 2 Timothy 3.4.
whether it be immediately against God, as Idolatry, or against the Kings
Person, and other Appendices. So there be condign Penalties, both by Divine
and Humane Laws, inflicted upon it. Witness, Amaziahs dealing, with those
that killed his Father, 2 Chr. 23.5.
and also the Peoples exact revenge taken upon the Murderers of Amon; Cap.
33.25.
witness also the Laws of all Nations; of ours in particular, against such
Imma^e and prodigious Persons, with their several Penalties; instance for all,
that exact and duly deserved Justice, that was done upon the bloody Regi-cides
and Pari-cides, upon that thrice learned, and Majestic King, King, James the
first, of Scotland: of which Aeneas Silvius, (afterward Pope Pius the second)
was an Eye witness (being there for the time) who much commended the Nations
Wit in devising such exquisite, and answerable torments, and their love, in
inflicting them to a hair. If any happily reply, that it was the Kings mercy
to alter the case, and that I should suffer in this sort, in stead of
punishment due to Treason. To which I answer, as I did in public presence,
that if I might have but a due Trial at Common Law, and if I perished that
way, I would think it in favor howsoever. So in this case, I may say with
Seneca, Beneficiam in vito non datur.
A forced Benefit is no Benefit, when a man may not choose, especially in two
Evils it is a poor Benefit.

Secondly, I am persuaded, that herein his Majesty is abused; For how can they
change the Guilt and Punishment, before the Guilt be known; and how can it be
known before the Law try it? And further, where the favors of Kings are free,
and Accumalative. But this kind of Commutation is into a Punishment more bitter
then death, and for shame and ignominy: what more can be? If it were not the
glory of the Lord that rests upon the Cause, and so turns the shame of the
suffering into glory.

Lastly, if I had dyed, I could have forfeited no more then I had: But to the
rest of my sufferings, they added that, wherein I could not ^uffer: Namely,
they fined me ten thousand pounds, though the Judge said, he thought in his
Conscience the Sneak was not worth so much. And was not this Proportia
asimetra, I am sure it was neither Gramatrica, nor Arith^^^tica, or to speak In
Law, was it Salvo Conten^m^^to; but to leave Suppositions and Probabilities,
Let his Lordship give me leave to deal with him obsigu^^is ^abulis; all the
Statutes against Treason clear me of that Crime. First, am I guilty of
attempting any thing against the King or Queens Person, or the Persons of their
Princely Issue, Levying of Forces, counterfeiting either of the Seals,
bringing in of counterfeit Coin, killing a Judge fitting in his place, as the
Butcher would have done, forging the sign Mann^ll, clipping of Coin: have I
prejudiced the Kings honor? Have I entered on any Castle or Ship; etc. Have I
concealed Treason, or any Bull from Rome? Have I set any at liberty, committed
for Treason, by the Kings Commandment? No verily, Heaven and Earth shall clear
me of all: Then not guilty of Treason, or misprision of Treason; for those are
all the several kinds in Effect, that are condemned by the Statutes here
quoted: 25 Edw. 3.2 1 Mar. 6.1 and 2. P. and M. 3.14. Eliz. 11.3. Edw. 6.11.
etc.
But to come close unto the Particulars, concerning words spoken against the
Sovereign for the time being. There be two Statutes especially remarkable; the
one of which, is that ^3. Eliz. c. 2. in hoc ver^a, If any man shall advisedly;
and with a ^^l^^ious intent devise Writs, etc. any manner of Book, Writing,
etc. containing false, seditious. and slanderous matter; to the defamation of
the Queens Majesty, or to the encouraging stirring, or moving of Rebellion, or
Insurrection within this Realm, he shall suffer, or forfeit as a Fellon. Before
this Statute enacted, words of this nature were not Fel^ony; as appears by
the Censure of Mr. Stubs of Lincolns-Inne; upon the oc^^sion of whose Fact,
this Statute was made, no terrify men from writing slanderously of their
Sovereign. Let my Book be laid to the Statute in the strictest kind of Trial
(so it be true) it shall evidently appear, that neither for matter; nor manner:
I do infringe the Statute, and so am no Fellon, much less a Traitor. The other
Statute, is conce^^ing words of an higher ^^^ure uttered against the Queen of
King, for the time being Namely, ^^^ing him, or Her Heretic, etc. 1^. Eliz. c.
1. It is enacted, that whosoever shall publish, that her High^esse is a^
Heretic, S^^^smatic, Tyrant, etc. shall be punished as a Traitor. This Stature
has relation to the former; which was made, as it seems, to protect the
Sovereign Majesty from petty, or lesser slanders, as Iu^^mperancie,
Uncleanness. etc. The latter was to prevent such grand and gross slanders, as
foul mouths might cast upon the Persons of Sovereignty; as Heresy, Schism,
Tyranny. The transgression of the former Felony, or the latter Treason. Now
as I am clear of all the aforesaid fore-quoted Statutes made against Treason,
against the least King. So it is clear as the Sun, that I come not within the
touch of the compass of this Statute: yea, I protest, not in thought; How then
came I to be made a Traitor, without the breach of any Law? Let the Judge show
me (...).
my transgression of the Law, and I shall willingly acknowledge the Law to be
the just Coertion or Castigation of mine Offense or Offenses. But I am so far
from Guilt by the Law, that I challenge all the Law he has to bring me within
the Compass of Treason, ex consequente, by Inferrence, or directly; although
he knows very well, that the Law is not so far to be stretched, against any
Subject Delinquent, or non-Delinquent, in Case of Life, or Blood For every
poenall Law, concerning those, is strictly and literally, according to the
Grammatical sense, to be expounded and delivered; Witness, the Papists
calling of Protestants, Heretics; by the Law of Universals, including
particulars, they call the King Heretic; and so by consequent, in so speaking,
are Traitors, by that foresaid Statute, 13. Eliz. c. 7. Yet the Law lays not
hold on them as Traitors for this speech. And so I might instance in other
things; which I note the rather for my just defense, that if he, or any other
there did plead any Law against me by way of Consequence, which must needs be
enforced, by the true intent of the Law it was null: Thus all men may see mine
integrity to be a quitted from Treason by the Laws. For where the St^tute-Law
cl^^^eth, no Principle of Common Law, nor Case, nor Comment d^^h condemns. But
it is (...) wonder, that I am thus traytored, it has been thus with by
Betters, as a Learned Divine has it: It is a s^ole Imputation of Ages to
Be-traytor Gods Servants, when they stand for their Master. H^m^n accused
Morde^ai, and the Jews of Treason, to King Ahashu^r^sh. Mr. Samuel ward, in
his coal, etc.
when any thing is amiss, Elijah must be the Traitor, Hest. 3.8.
and by Tertullus; the mouth of Gods Enemies, 1 King. 18.17, 18.
Paul is accused to be a plagy Fellow, and a tumultuous Traitor; Act. 24.5.
yea, Christ himself, the harmless and spotless one, escapes not this
branding Imputation, Luke 23.2.
where they falsely allege, that they found him over-turning the State (for so
is the word) and also hindering the Revenue of the Crown. The Disciples must
not look to be better used then their Master. It is an old dawbing trick of
corrupt times, to slurry and soy^e the fairest Excellencies, with the fowlest
Names, to make the things more odious, and to veil and varnish the fowlest
Exorbitances, under the fairest Names; as for example, Holiness must be called
H^pocrisie, or Puritanisme, Zeal, fury, truly strict and sincere obedience, no
better then Treason. But on the contrary, fowlest Exorbitancies must be masked
with the fairest Names, State-subverting principles, and practice, must be
called by the name of Policy, Rotten pollution of Gods Worship, by men's
Devises, Orders and Dece^^i^. Pleading impudently for a bad Cause, ability in
Law, giving away, or selling men's Estates at pleasure, and imprisoning their
persons, Equity, condemning the innocent, and absolving the Guilty, nothing but
Justice; and this the wronged Parties must acknowledge, or perish, Treacherous
cunning to make bare the King and State, for making their own Nests in the
Cedars, must be termed wise and frugall guiding, halting between God and
B^^^, ^^dera^e d^f^retion, harbo^^^g and mainraining openly Tray^ors against
God and the King, a point of State-mystery. But God weighs not things by
their Names, but by their Nature; Yet (as the Philosopher says) Nomi^^ (...)
cons^^tian^, Pl^^ (...) sap.
let Names, and the nature of things agree together, God in the Creation, and
Man in his Integrity, put fitting names upon all the Creatures, truly
expressing their Natures: But to invert this Institution, is to subvert the
order of nature, and to sin highly against the God of Nature. Cursed be they
therefore, th^^ call Good Evil and Evil Good, says the Spirit; But to hold to
the particular, and so to close it up, there be so many Traitors (the Apostle
shows us) in the last days, what perilous times shall be; and that through
the abundance of monstrously wicked men, of all sorts, amongst whom he
reckons Traitors. 2 Timothy 3.4.
All Idolators, or such as serve other Gods, are Traitors immediately against
God. As all offenses in a Commonwealth are against the King; because they are
against his Laws, and he is the head of the Politic Body: But those that are
immediately against his Person, are of an higher nature; especially, the seeking
of his life or to dethrone him, which are high Treason. So Idolatry intrencheth
upon the Throne of Gods Dominion, and strikes at the very Root of his Being;
and therefore is high Treason against him. Tantum est aliquod peccatum gravius
quanto longius peripsum ho mo a deo ec epit.
A sin is so much the more grievous, as it removes a man the further from
God. As Traitors are in greatest distance from the King, so Idolators, from
God; and therefore Moses calls it the great finne. Aquin. 22.3. ^^tic. 3.
Idolator are also Traitors against the State; because Idolatry brings
desolation upon it; Witness the same place of Exodus Where GOD puts many to
the sword, and had slain the rest, if Moses had not stood up in the Gap, and
turned away his wrath. Exodus 32.7.
As learned Calvin says, it brings utter destruction.

Accersit vltimam cladem.
These are held to be Traitors to the State, who being in place, as Eye* and
hands to the King and state, see and do only for themselves, to the undoing
of both the former; and not only so, but they also divert by corrupt
suggestions the Kings favor from his Subjects: and by deading of their
spirits, do weaken the love of the Subject to the King: That such Courses are
Treason, there is Express Testimony for it in a work of that judicious, and
Learned Erasinus De Institut. princip. si capito ple^titur, qui principi^
monetam viti^^it quanto dignior est eo supplicio qui principis ingenium
corruperit.
if Clipping or corrupting of the Kings Coy^^ be Treason and her worth to loose
his bea^e, that does it; how much more worthy is he of the same Punishment
that Corrupts the disposition of the King: They are Traitors who by any
^ea^^^, words writings or other practice, Endeavor to withdraw any with in the
King^ dominions, from their Natural Obedi^^ce, or from the Religion now
established here, to the Romish Religion: a^ to move them to Promise Obedience
to the Sea of Ro^e, the C^^^^^l^rs, and Ayders of such offenders are within
Misprision of Treason, 23 Eliz c. 1.
what Case then by the Laws are all the Plotting and Pragmatical Jesuits in
their accomplies, yea such as entertain the Archplotters in their houses and
at their Tables. Th^se devour the fa^ and at their tables these devour the
fat and sweet of the land, and walk where they will, do what they list,
and Pampered with dainties and flaggons of wine (as they say) strut it out
insultingly over the imprisoned and distressed Servants of God, sustering: much
hardship for witnessing the truth. I speak upon Experimental knowledge, what in
sufferable Treason is it; for a Subject to Suggest to the Queen to convert to
the Catholic faith, or rather subvert our King, and to profess their hopes
of it, which is flat Treason by the statute, and this is delivered in a Book
written by R. B. as he calls himself, and printed at Doway (as they say) anno:
1632: wherein (he says) he hops, that the Queen shall make the Land happy
by restitution of the Catholic Religion, and converting of the King to the
same Epist.] page 32.
and in a passage of the Book it self, he takes not only away the Kings
supreamacy or Regal power, but also subiecteth him and all other Kings, to the
Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, making his Honor inferior to that of the
Bishop; Ne^ magis vituper andu^ est prodit^r patria quam communis utilitati^
aut lalutis desert^r. Cic. de: sin:
finally to finish this point, that great statesman of Rome reckons those up
for Traitors, that withdraw their aid to their uttermost power, place, or
ability from the advancment of the Public good, and so they are indeed. Amos
6.9.
Or as another has it that teaches the Law, causing the wicked to compus^^
the righteous. Habac. 7.4.
Surely by the nature of the evil, and the verdict of the Word this man is the
Arch-Traytor, because he (...) loeth the King and subverteth the state; who are
b^^^ preserved by the Laws and the execution thereof p^pul^ s^^^ (...), yea
such an one lays all upon to the cons^^^ing and unquenchable Wrath of God;
witness Amos in the fore-quoted place, where the Lord laying out ^^^^pting of
judgment, and the violence of such as boast they have Ho^^^^ by the strong he
whereof they thrust down People Laws and all, He shows also the fe^rf^ll and
damnable fruits of this bitter Root, behold I will raise up against you a
Nation, faith the Lord God of Hoasts; and they shall afflict you from the
entering of Bemah; to the river of the Wil^^rnesse that is from one correr to
another. Where this conclusion arises demonstratively. That Subverters of the
Law, and Corrupters of judgment, and Violent Opressors of the People, are
Traitors which I demonstrate thus. That Person or Persons who brings in a
desolating Enemy, upon the whole state and Kingdom is a Traitor; But a
subverter of the Laws A corrupter of judgment, an oppressor of the People
brings in a desolating judgment upon a whole State and Kingdom (witness the
words of the Text.)

Ergo, Subverters of the Laws, Corrupters of Judgment, and Oppressors of the
People, are Traitors.

By all this, we see, that there be Traitors enough and too many in States and
Kingdoms; and it as c^eerly appears, that I am not one of those. Nor never a
faithful Counselor, nor incorrupt Judge, nor impartial Justice; nor in a
word no good Patriot in maintaining of the Kings honor, the life of the Law,
and the Subjects Right. I wish from my Soul, that a^l Traitors of what sort
soever had their Treasons branded in their due desert, with Phalarius Duke of
Venice, who after his Execution, instead of a Seat of Honor had a Chair
cove^ed with Black set in the Sena^e-house, as an Emblem of his everlasting
Infamy.

The fourth Article of the Charge is that I am a Libello^ against the
Parliament: Sect.
If he were a private man, I might well say sobrius haec nunquum diceret: For
who feeth not, that has read my Book, that no man of my Talent has more
perspicuously vindicated the honorable Privileges of a Parliament, from the
affronts of the Malignant, then I have done; and therein I have cleared diverse
ways and means, for the advancement of the Regalities and Profits of His
Majesty, the Weal of the Subject, with the pr^pogating of the Kingdom of
Christ, in the sme^rity of Religion, which is indeed the Scepter of his
Kingdom, and the Crown of his People, and that not upon supposed or feigned,
but upon infallible and impregnable grounds; both from Gods Laws and Man's. is
this then to Lybell? nothing less. what madness had it been in me, to
address suits, in the behalf and name of the subjects, to the highest, and
most honorable Court of the State; and withal to Libell against them? would
any friend to the State, and favor of my endeavors, present one of the Copies
unto the Lords another to the Commons, if it had been a Libel?

Lastly, Would I have in my Answer to the Information, employed an Appeal to the
Parliament for Trial, if I had Libelld against them? Let any man judge how
these sort together. But for my more evident clearing, let us see what a Lybell
is: The name L^bellus is taken in diverse senses, both by Humanists and Lawyers;
All of which, I will not mention, but such as are most pertinent. As, sometime
it is taken for a Supplication, which the Greeks call (...), Hend^ca^^l
supplic^bus vacat lybelli^.
so Martial, so Sueton in Caesar, such were preferred unto Princes and
Senates, by the People or Subject, Ad negotia explicanda*
to unfold their Grievances and Desires. And such a Libel I acknowledge mine to
be: But to clear other acceptions, let us pitch upon that, wherein I take he
uses it against me, libellus accusationis.
viz. An Accusatory, or Defamatory Libel. So it is used in Plautus, Ubi tues
qui me libello venereo citasti, etc. in C^r.
Where art thou, that accusest me of incontinency? This Desamatory Lybel thus
defined. Famosus lyb^llus est no^modo si dissi mulato, vel ficto author is
nomine reddit^r, v^rum etiam si express ad infamiam hoc est impingis delictum
aliquod notabile.
A Defamatory Libel is an Expression in writing, (whether with name of the
Author feigned suppressed, or expressed) of some Infamy against a Person or
State, taxing it unjustly with some notorious Crime.

Now let me be tried, by this true and essential definition, Nam c^i compe^it
de^^niti^, competit de^^^itum.
If this agree to me, I am the man: but if I have not charged that Senate with
any Defamatorie Crime (which far be it from me) then am I free from the Crime
of Libe^ing.

To shut up the point, If there were nothing but one thing to quit me of
Libelling, that would do it: Namely, if I had Libelled against the Parliament,
I might happily instead of tortures and torments, imprisonment, and pining to
death, I might have had some of the Worlds wealth and glory. Ye, from the
Center of Ignominy, why must not I ascend to move in the Orb of Erring
Planets, as well as others* who from their black mouths, and malapert affronts,
have lybelled, and done against the Parliament things not tolerable:
Notwithstanding all which, they are come to be pollished stones in the
Jewel-house of the Hierarchy; Witness, M. C. and M. qui torqueri deb^nt
ampliantur, beneficii. Senec.
They who deserve highest punishments, are laden with heaps of Benefices,
says Senco^. Which they may sear shall be enough Punishments in the End. In
the mean time, etsi hoc impune faciunt, yet let the Saddle for Lybelling, be
set upon the right horse.

The fist Article against me is innovotion of the Laws. Sect.
This is as true as the Papist charge against the protestants of innovation of
Religion He cannot show me what Law of God, or Man, what Statute Law or point
of Common Law. I have innovated: Omnium legum est manis censura nisi Divine
legis imagin^m geraba^. Aug. lib. 9. de Civit. Dei.
For as I plead for the Royal Right of the Ancient of Days; so I make the
Antiquity of Truth, the ground of my Plea desiring, and urging, that with the
Prerogative of Christ, the Kings just Prerogative may be preserved. And that
the ancient Laws of the Land, answerable to the Laws of God, may be like the
Laws of the Mede^ and Persians, which are unalterable, supremam popu^i
sal^^tem.
the tenure of every Law is void except it carry the Image of the Divine Law.
Since ever I knew any thing in the Law, I held it ever to be the highest Weal,
Lex est san^ti^ san^ti, ju^ence ^onesta, and pr^^ibens contraria. Fortescue in
comondation ^f the laws of England, fol. 8
of the Weal-publique, because it is nor the invention of man; but as the
Orator speaks of it, the Law is the Invention and Gift of God; the Common
Juncture of the Body Politic.

And therefore that learned* and zealous Chancellor, gives a good definition
of the Law; the Law is a holy Sanction, or Decree, commanding things honest,
and forbidding the contrary. Agreeable to that Definition of Tullies. Jubec ^a
qui saci^nda sunt prohibetque con^raria. lib. (...) lege.
Another reason, why I, nor others should not innovate Laws; because good
Laws, are not only Gods Institution, but in the Equity of them, they are
Eternal: And therefore inviolable ^^x non es^ s^itum abquod populorum, se^^
ternam quid^dam.
the Law is not the Devise of Man, but a thing Eternal (says the Orator.)

Thirdly, whereas the Learned say, the Excellency of the Law consists in two
things: In the goodness of the Laws, and the Effluence of things thence
proceeding. Which of these have I opposed, or innovated? Or, yea, rather have I
not pleaded, and suffered for the maintenance of both these. Fourthly, where
thete are six grounds of the Law; Namely, Reason, the Law of God Good,
Generall-custome, sound Maxims, Good Particular-Customes, and wholesome
Penall-Statutes. On which of these, have I entrenched?

Fifthly, and lastly, Cum lex obedientibus vir, tutem declarat injuriam paffi
vindicatix sit and scopus, sit legis de vita hom inum been mereri.
since it adornes the obedient with virtue, revenge the wronged, and deserves
well of every man's life; What good should I get by innovating the Laws? Indeed
there be too many Innovators, both of Gods Law and Man's. As first, such as
decree, wicked Decrees (as the Prophet speaks) Esr: 10.1.
where by wicked Decrees, he means either such as make Decrees against Piety,
Equity, or Honesty. And such the Prophet calls, Statutes that are not good.
Wherefore I gave them Statutes thet were not good, says God, Ezekiel. 20.25
that is, he gave them up to obey fancies of their own devising, id stead of
the good Laws that he had given them. Or by such Decrees is meant, the
wresting of the Law against the true meaning and intent of the Law, or
Lawgiver, either by corrupt Pleading or by giving of Sentence. For as no
corruption is so contagious and noxious, as corrupt Pleading according to the
Greek Commick. (...).
A wicked Pleader is the Pox to the Laws. Such Judges also as do pervert or
wrest Judgment, as the Spirit speaks, Deuteronomy. 27.19
or justifies the ungodly, or condemns the Innocent, Prove. 17.15.
Such, I say, are Innovators, yea and Falsificators. Against such the Lord
pronounces a heavy Curse and Woe; yea, Esa 5.23
they are an abomination unto the Lord, as in the places fore-quoted. So the
Lord prescribes Laws to all men, how they should walk before him, both in
their general and particular Callings; and this is called the Regal-Law, able
to make every man perfect to every good work. As for instance, the Law
concerning his Worship is called the Old Way. Jerem. 6.1^
Ask for the old Way, which is the good Way, and walk therein.

Now what is this Old Way? But that wherein the Prophets and Patriarchs walked,
directed by the Word of God. Intimating thereby, Mr. Per^. order of Causes, p.
25.
that there is no true way; but that which God prescribes. As it is a part of
Christ's Kingly Office to govern his Church: so it is a main part of his
government to make Laws; and another part to appoint Officers. Jam. 4.12.
There is one Lawgiver, which is able to save and destroy: and so for
Off^cers. Ephesians. 4.11
Hence it will follow, that all they who put ways upon men in Gods-worship,
which he prescribes not; ordain Laws not of Christ's making, and appoint
Officers and Ministers such as God never gave; do innovate, and so it may be
said of the Laws of Kingdoms agreeable to the Will of God and not of Man. In
the execution whereof, Men should be like to God; and in this respect they are
called Gods, 2 Chronicles. 19
But if they judge injurious Evil (as it is there phrased) and will not know
or understand whose judgment they execute, but make the Laws serve their
Lusts, or the unjust desires of other m^n; then they innovate the Laws indeed,
and thereby shake the Foundations of the Kingdom, as it is in the same Psalm,
moned shall be all the Foundations of the Earth Psalm. 82.
as if the Prophet would say where men of Place will not undestand but pervert
judgment and carue it against its own intent, and the intent of the Lawgiver.
Upon the violation of these Laws, such disorders and disturbance of State
shall follow, that all helps whatsoever shall come to ruin, the Earth (as the
Prophet speaks) shall Reele to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be removed
like a Cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be so heavy upon it; that
it shall fall and not rise again. Verse. 5.
there is an absolute necessity of judges to declare the Laws: and to give
sentence according to the Laws; as the Civilians, and our own Learned judges
have it. Esa 24.20.
it is little material that humane society enjoy Laws: except there be men of
place to declare these Laws, and to judge according. and because affairs be
many: Kings and States must have judges, as hands, and Eyes to discer^e and
determine of Right Parum est jus in societate buwana nifi, fint qui jura*
di^^^t and regere possunt.
and Wrong, according to that Council of Iethro to Moses Exodus 18.6.
where not only the necessity of such judges; but also the due qualification of
them is laid out, as also De^t. 1.13
they must be wise men, Nam ignora^^cia jud^cis est Calamitas innocentis. Aug.
de civit. D^i. lib. 19. c. 6.
the Ignorance of the judge is the undoing of the Innocent says that learned
father, where by Wisdom, they must not understand a bare speculative In-sight
in the Laws: but such a speculation as is joined with practice.

And therefore the Spirit of God uses two words to express the Knowledge of
Judges, Wisdom, and Understanding; where by the first, the Interllectuall part
must be well informed: and by the other, that Information must be well applied
to the Particulars in hand.

And this Knowledge and Practice (as I take it) is all one with that Courage
which is required in Judges. Exodus 18.21
It is the same word that Pharaoh uses to Ios^ph, concerning his Brethren,
where he asks, if they be Men of Activity.

Therefore Simlerus rendereth it well, Valentes ingenio.
Men of a dextrous Wit.

A great Civilian * speaks elegantly, and pertinently to this purpose; A
Judge must be seasoned with two sorts of Salt, the Salt of Science, without
which he unseasoneth all; and the Salt of Conscience, without which his
Knowledge is Diabolical.

Judges also, says the Word must be men of Truth, that is (as the Learned say
well) * they must be true in Word and Deed, both to speak the truth, and to
practice it.

There must first be a diligent seeking out of it, by all good evidences; and
then a judging accordingly, secundum allegata and probata, as they say, * yet
never with the neglect of Conscience.*

Let them determine as it becomes them, according to the evidence of things
proved, says that great Lawyer Vlp^anus; and that they may thus do, let them
love the Truth, as another Civilian says upon this place, or as Solomon, Let
them buy the Truth, and not sell it, as every Man should speak the truth from
the very bottom of his heart, So the hearts of the Judge should be the Cabinet
of Truth. And as Untruth should be odious in the mouth of every man; so it is
most abominable in the mouth of a Judge, because it is countenanced from the
place of Justice, whereby the Name of God is blasphemed the Righteous broken,
the Wicked strenthened, and the State ruined.

Auother Property; they must hate Covetousness, where the Phrase (as Cajetan
observes) is very emphaticall, ^Etfi sufficit alia non esse avarum.
though it be enough unto another, that he be not covetous: yet a Judge must be
so far from Covetousness, that he must hate it and abhor it. As the word
Batzah signifies Avaritia and cupidi tate evertituus Judicium.
by covetous Desires, judgment is over-turned, says a Civilian. Augustine
calls the Covetousness of Judges Noveram Jus^itiae and nu^^^tricam Gehennae.
the Stepmother of justice, and the Nurse of Hell. Iustiman draws the Picture
of a Covetous Judge to the life, A covetous Judge delights more to look upon
the Mass of Gold, th^n the Son of Righteousness. Plutarch tells us, that the
Judges of Thebe were pictured without hands: Implying, that they should be free
from Gnifts, which (as Moses says) Blind the eyes of the wise, and perverteth
the words of the just.

A worthy Judge of our own simming out the lineaments of a Judge, besides that
freedom from acception of Persons; he says, there must be in him Avarus
gratius intuetur auri molamquam Justiliae solemn. Novel. 3.
a diligent search, and inquiry of all things to be judged, and a just
execution of things decreed. Diligence exquisitio oportet en^m Judicem cun^^a
ruminari, etc.
And he gives Reasons for all these from Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 1. Job. 29. 2 Chronicles.
19. ^^amford, lib. 2 c. 4.


One thing more required, and that is the Bas^ of all the rest, they must be
men fearing God. The fear of God is the Foundation of all the other qualifying
Virtues, fine h^c no^^ sunt verae virtutes sed umbrae.
without this, the rest are not true Virtues, but shadows of Virtues.

Arm a man with Authority of Place, if he fear not God, cu^^ ex
p^tenciahomine^. Genesis 20.11.
since out of might he fears not wrong, what wrong may he not do? Or what
will he not do, if occasion serve. As Abraham looked for nothing in Gerar, but
some bloody death, because the fear of God was not there: So let no man look
for justice from the mouth of that Judge; in whose heart the fear of God
resideth not: For either he does no justice at all; but by wresting of justice,
turns it against those whom he should protect. Or if they do any justice at any
time not for Justice sake; It is by the fear of the Lord (says the Wiseman)
that men depart from evil Prove. 6.6
a vive Pattern of such a Judge, Our Savior relates in the Gospel, there was
in a City a Judge, that neither feared God norreverenced man: Luke 13.^
such a cruel and bloody Crew of unjust Judges not fearing God, were the
Chief-Priests, Scribes, and Elders, Matthew. 27
who came together betimes in the morning and arraigned Christ, and condemned
the Innocent to dye. Which Judges and judgment Hierome and Chrysostom
describes prettily. Erat illie solum figurae Judicii reverae autem impetus
suit latronum.
There was (say they) a shape or shadow of judgment, but in very deed, nothing
but a violent shock of Bloody Robbers.

Therefore, that Judges may bring their hearts to this fear, let them inform
themselves of two things.

First, as they can do a King and State no higher injury, then by wresting of
judgment to violate Laws. So Kings (thus provoked) have and will put the
highest Censures, and that deserved^y upon such Godless Judges, as neither
fear God, nor reverence them: and that the rather, because Kings shall answer
to God for all the violence (especially in case of Blood) and wrong that they
commit or maintain, under pretense of their Place.

And therefore as Kings had need of many Eyes, and also to use them, the
Egyptians drew the Hierogliph of their King, in a convolved Serpent always
awake; holding fast as it were biting the tail in the teeth: writing upon it
in stead of the Kings Name, Custos, a Keeper, giving Kings to understand that
if they will be Kings indeed, they must have an Eye to all things; as well the
lesser, as the greater, that co^^ern the good of the Weal-Publique, especially,
in matter of Justice, Valor lib. ^. page 140.
that Woman's speech to Casar, though somewhat bold; yet was not in-opportune in
it self, nor evil taken by him. If Casar will Reign, he must look that his
poorest Subjects have Justice. Erasmus lib. 6. Apoth.
For the hurt of the least Member, reflects upon the Head. And therefore, good
Theodosius the younger gave a sweet expression of a Princely disposition. Ad
privata oportet principem esse facilem ad ignoscendum: in iis quae laedunt rem
debent esse severi. Erasm. Apoth. 8.
In privacies Princes should be easy to pardon; but in things that prejudice
the Weal-Publique, they should be very severe.

But to the point of danger to unjust Judges; let that remarkable Example
suffice for all, Sesamines by an unjust Sentence perverting the right of a poor
Woman, she pitifully complained to Cambyses the King, who took the matter to
hearing, and finding her to be wronged in judgment, he caused the Judges skin
to be flead off, and to be set in the place of Judgment (or as some made a
Cushen of it) appointing his Son Ottanes in his place, with this Item; that
when he looked on his Fathers Skin, he should be taught to do righteous
judgment. Herod. lib. 4.


This were a dangerous Law in these evil days, Cum pones justes jus est, etc.
where Judges kill the Witnesses, surely if skins should be hazarded, for every
unjust Sentence, if some had more skins then the Serpent, that casts one
every year, they were sure to forfeit them all.

The second means to bind this fear upon their hearts, is that inevitable
Answer, without Appeal, that they must make before the high Judge of Heaven and
Earth to whom they must give an account of their great Steward-ship; which if
they cannot do, as they have broken the People in judgment so God will bray
them to powder. He who ascends the Seat of Justice, should so judge: as he
desires to be judged by that great and supreme Judge in the last judgment,
over whose judgment he was left on earth. Says one, where this holy in-awing
fear is not in Judges, in judging according to the Laws, they plague the
State, prejudice the King, and abuse his Royal Favor. They dishonor our God,
whose judgment they execute, and they provoke God to plague them in their
Posterity. ^^^tnesse, God himself in diverse places, Exodus 23.8.
where the reason why men should not wrest Judgment, in slaying the Innocent,
ver. 7. is this, He will not justify the Wicked, verse. 8. that is to say, God
will be avenged of the unrighteous Judge. So in the second Psalm, and other
places. The Prophet Micah in the 3. of his Prophe^ie from the 9.10 the 11.
s^^^th forth Emphatically the monst^^^s and cruel dealing of the Judge; of
Israel, they ab^^r j^dg^^^t, s^ith the Land and pervert Equity, they build up
Sion with Blood, and Hi^^^ J^l^^^ with Iniquity, the Heads thereof judge for
reward, th^^ Priests teach for Hire, and the Prophets Divine for (...) yet they
lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us? None evil can come
upon us. But observe what follows in the lest verse, therefore shall Sion for
your sakes be plowed, ^^^^sa^^^ shall become an heap and the Mountain of the
house, the high places of the Forest; where observe, how the Impieti^ and
Iniquity of the Judges and Ministers of a Nation covered with Hy^roc^isie, do
not only bring a fearful plague upon them and theirs; but also utter
des^l^^tion upon Church and State. As the greater Caelestiall Bodies out of
frame do distemper the inferior; so if Judges more not directly, they mar
all: as sinews or tendo^s out loses the motion of the Member, because they
cannot be consolidated; So want of integrity in Judges makes a la^^e
Commonwealth. As the Organicall parts are of the s^^e temper with the similar
parts of which they are compo^^ded; to Persons and Officers in Law follow the
temperature of the greater, as Councillors and others. God pronounces an
heavy Curse and a Woe against such, Deuteronomy. 27.1^ Esa 5.23.
all their supposed advantage of place shall inlargetheir Pu^ishment* their
Table (as the Psalmist speaks) shall be made a s^^^^ unto them, Psalm. 69.22
and every good thing that they possess shall increase their Woe. Potentes
tormenta patientur.
Mighty winked ones shall be mightily tor^^nted. God moves a fearful
Question unto s^^^ as turn alide judgment, what will ye do in the day of
Visit^^^^ (...) where b^ ^h^^^ con^r^ry they that establish judg^^^t in the
ga^e. ( (...) A^^^ speaks) has p^^^ises of ^^^^^y and Protection, Amos 5.^
a^ D^od^r^^ S^^^l^^ rep^^^eth the ma^^^r of the Th^^i^^^. quod capital^ crimen
habitum cavillationib^^ interpretam legum, severitatem and Majestatem
distrahere proinde ^utum ^rat non cicere nisi laqueo colio circumdato, etc.
It was holden a capi^^ll Crime, by ^^villing (...) ^o ^^stract or str^tch the
si^^^^ of the Lawe^ (...) ^^^^rity; and (...) i^^^ as (...) dai^^^ that in
(...) of great cons^^ (...) of (...) the (...) ^re and i^^^^ (...) La^es, of
(...) and Policy were to be scanned, being the very souland spirit of the
Weal-Publique. The Counselors come to the Bar and Plead with ^^alters about
their necks, that if they offered Violence to the Law, they should be hanged
up. Bernard speaking of such Ampullis and resonantibus, verbis.
as by swelling and frothy words pervert the Laws he calls them H^stes
Insticiae* ^^^mies to justice. Galen speaking of bad Physicians who deceive
themselves and others; shows the of strength erroneous Opinions, when they
once ceize upon the minds of men. How much more dangerous when they studdy
falsehood for love of Lucre? false opinions ceazing upon the souls of men make
them not only deaf but also blind: this affected blindness joined with
greediness of gain and some faculty* of expression Tully lays out from the
dangerous effects or Symptoms of it Postquam commodit as prona virt utis
imitatrix dicendi copiam consocuta, etc. in Prol. Rheto.
when desire of gain, with semblance of fair dealing, has once obtained a
flu^nt faculty of expression. Then (says he) it is odinary for mischeife
masked with wit; to overturne Houses Lands, and Lives. That deserved Encomie
that Galen and others gives of Medicines; may be aplied to the Laws; if they
be well used (...) they a^^ the Auxiliary bands of God: but if they fall into
the hands of Moun^ebankes, who rather abuse, then use the Laws * there is more
danger from the Physician then the sickness. As the Law is defined to be an
Holy Sanctio^: so the judges or deliverers of the Law, are by the Leg^sts
called S^^^dotes. That is sacra d^tentes ^t ministrantes, teachers and
administratros of the Holy things* therefore it is Sacrilege to abuse, or
innovate them. If the s^preame judge on earth cannot inno^ate the Laws, except
they crossed the Laws of God and the good of the State; then mue^ less ^a^
Mi^^st^rs ^r deliver^^s of the Law cru^^^ to the Right hand (...) to there^^,
from the ^^ve intent and m^^ning of the L^ws* Now that the former may not; it
is cleared in th^^ Tr^tise called the comendation of the Laws by that
n^^er-enough commended fallen of the Laws Gh^^^ ^s^er* F^^^as^^^, and that by
an^eleg^^ Sim^^e from the^^ (...) the body politic in these word^. As the Head
of a ^ody. Natu^all^annot change his fine^es, no^ cannot deny or withhold from
his inferior Members, their peculiar powers, and several nourishments of
Blood: No more can a King, which is the Head of the Body-politic, change the
Laws of the Body; nor withdraw from the same People, their proper Substance,
against their wills and consent in that behalf.

Then to shut up this particular, with that Axiom of the Civill-Law Judges
should not judge or sentence after the guidance of their own Will: but
according to the Lawe^, laudable Customs, and received Statutes of the place.
Like unto this, is that Order of the Imperial Chamber: It is given in charge
to the Judge and Assistants of the Imperia^ Chamber; that not out of their own
proper and bare pleasure they should give Sentence: but according to the Laws
and Statutes of the Empire.

A consc^onable ^^dge or Lawyer is such an one, as rules his Conscience by the
Law, and then his Sentence, or Plea, from Conscience. For such as pretend
Conscience without Law, are like unto Papists, or other Heretics; who still
proclaim Conscience, but without that word of Truth which is the ground of
Conscience.

To this purpose speaks Oruat Baldus, Consci^^^^^ l^gis vincere Consci^^^iam
^^^^^^is.
The Conscience of the Law should ever command the Conscience of Man. (...)
Hence (says he) is safety of Conscience. * The Conscience of the Judge is
never oftended, who in judging ob^erveth the inviolable precepts of the Law. By
all which, we see, the Conservation, or Innovation of the Laws, spring
especially from the integrity or curruption, Cu^^d^^ L^g^^^, of the Keepers or
Ministers of the Laws. Which corrupt Ministers are not unlike those Succed^^^an
Vi^^^ers, of whom this relation goes: The Lord Major of London gave order to a
Sergeant to call the Brewers before him; who instead of them, warned the
Vintners to appear, (...)
whom the Lord Major beholding in the Court, a ked what they did there: the
Se^jeant answered him, that upon his Lordships Com^^^^^^ent, he had warned them
to appear: the Lord Major rep^^ed that he gave order for the Brewers
appeara^ce: It is true my Lord, (said he) and these be the greatest Brewers, or
grand Imposters in corrupting of the Queen of Liquors, as I, and my Fellows
find by dangerous experience. Whereupon, the Lord Major and Aldermen approved
his wit, and took the matter to consideration.

Even so they that are the Masters of the Wine-Seller of Justice; if they mix
their wine with water, or turn judgment into wormwood, these are the corrupt
Brewers, or Masters of the Laws, the grand Impostures poisoning the whole
State, because they poison the Fountains head.

Therefore David describing the wicked man in opposition unto the godly; he
uses the word Rashangh, which fignisieth a restlesnesse in himself, and a
disturber of others; and therefore likened to the raging of the Sea, the
learned Paraphrast does call them ex leges. Nonita Divini gens ^e^cia foederis
exlex. Not only lawless^ but such (as if they be in place) trouble and bemire
the pure Fountaine^ of the Laws. And in this they become like the wicked and
devouring Shepherds, spoken of by Ezekiel, seems it a small thing to you, to
have eaten up the good Pasture: but ye must tread down with your feet the
residue of the Pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must
foul the rest with your feet? And as for my Flock they eat that which you have
trodden with your feet: and the drink, that which ye have fouled with your feet.
Ezekiel. 34.18, 19.
where by shepherds, are meant, both Pastors, and Magistrates; and by good
Pastures, and deep Waters are meant, The pure Word of God, and the incorrupt
Pountain of Practice. Out of the corrupting of both which, they first made up
their own mouths; and then distributed to the People nothing but what they had
corrupted.

Let Kings therefore (as the Psalmist speaks) be prudent, and let the Judges
of the earth be well nurtured; Psalm. 2.10
for if they kill not the Son, whilst he is angry, that is, both in Justice
and Religion, they shall perish in the midway; that is, even in the top and
the ruff of their wicked works; when they looked least for it, they shall
suddely perish. And this the Apostle assures them of, as if they had it in
their hand, the wrath of God (says he) is revealed against ungodinesse. Impiet
as est proc are in Deu^^ Iniquil^^ in Homi^es Orig and Chr.
Where Impiety is to sin against God, and Iniquity against Men: the reason
is, from that which aggravateth their sin: Namely, the withholding of the
Truth in Unrighteousness. Which Phrase, a the Learned do observe, does
intimate men to have a knowledge of the Truth, both in things concerning God
and Man. But they do the contrary, the very Emphasis of the Word laveth it home
to corrupt Judges, (...), a word borrowed from the Practice of such as tyran^^^
^^y (...) press the I^uo^ent and casts them into Prison. But by the
contrary, blessed are those Judges, and other Ministers of the Law, that do
and speak righteous judgment: for they may confidently wait for safety, when
trial comes upon the whole Earth. It is remarkable how Marcham chief Justice
in Ri^h, the third his time, denying to give sentence against Burdet the
Vintner, for saying, he would make his Son Heir to the Crown; Was contented
rather to lose his place, then to part with a good Conscience for which his
Posterity has prosperously flourished till this time. But on him who for his
place was content to condemn the Innocent, the Lord revealed his wrath indeed,
in plaguing of his Postestrity; and so much for the Innovation of the Laws.

The last particular of this long charg, is, Sect.
that I am a factious Person in the Commonwealth. Respondent ulti^a primis,
the last is like the first, When accusations come from men of place, from whom
nothing but sacred truth should proceed, they ceize deeply upon the Accused,
being brought low in the eyes of men, how soever they be guiltless both in
Gods eyes, and in the eyes of all that are impartial. It is an ordinary course
in such Accusations, to use words of courses which being many in number, and
wanting weight of proof sunt sol^is le^^^^a caduci^, of themselves they are
lighter then fallen leaves. How soever accidentally they damnisie the Accused.

Now to clear my self of this, as of the former, according to the course that I
have taken in the rest, Let us consider what Faction, or a Facti^us Person is,
for as my Accusor should have cleared the Crimes charged upon me, by giving a
definition or description of them; and so according to the nature of a
definition, Rem definitum prosequi dum proprium. efficiat^r lib. 2. de demonst.
c. 14. ^it. 17.
is to prosecute the thing desined, till it plainly appear to agree properly
to the Party spoken of.

But as I am not gvilty of the matter nor charge with it methodically: so I
follow a course by way of Definition to acquit my self of the matter charged upon
me, namely proving directly that the thing defined touches not me. N^m eni non
competit defintio non competit definitum. Faction with Lawyers and Polititions,
is either taken in the better, or in the worse sense. In the better sense, it
is either taken so simply, or accidentally, the former of these is defined thus
by Politicians * there is one kind of faction, which defends the Laws and
Right of a Weale-Publiqve against all unjust oposers of the same. And this is
the best or an approvable factions. Of this kind of faction I desire ever to
be, and all good Subjects should doc the like, so far as place, and power,
calls them. Nam nati sumus potius Reipub. and legibus quam nob is ipsis.
We are rather borne to the Republique, and the maintenance of its Rights; then
to our selves. The latter kind of good faction consists, in the devision of
families, or men of note in place, evil in it self, yet accidentally good,
because it poyseth the adverse faction. To this purpos speaks that great
Ropsodian in Rep: * diverse factions so they move not sedition, are to be
tolerated in a commonwealth: because by this means the State may be better
tempered, and kept as it were in an equal balance. Instance, in Rome, the
Tribunes of the people, kept the Consuls and the Senate in an Equilibrie. So in
England under Queen Elizabeth and other Princes, by diverse factions the State
was Poysed: howsoever the parties in their divisions had their own particular
ends. And this is that concerdia discors, that keeps the State in tune and
temper. The second sort of faction is evil continually and co-incident with
sedition, though in some particulars they differ, there is a faction (says a
Statist) that without just ground rusheth upon violent courses; and this
faction, is sedi^^on, if it be confirmed by Covenant, it is called Conspiracy,
if by oath Conjuration where upon imediatly follows his definition or
description; faction is, a gathering together of more or ^^wer by Conspiracy
the end or Issue where of (says Bodin) is either the destruction of both or
the advancement of the one party to the stern of Government. For this there be
a world of Instances, as of that Faction of the Gwelph^ and Gibellines, that of
the Samaritanes, and of the Jews, and of the M^n of Judah, and the Men of
Israel, Tacitus gives a description of Factious Persons, being base and poor
in their privacies, and having no hope to raise themselves; but by the ruining
dissentions of the Public State, they become deadly mischiefs to the Common
good, and therefore are to be taken off.

The Grounds of Faction, are Ambition, or Sedition. Avarice, Hatred, Discord,
and the like, or dependenc^ upon great ones, whose Humor, they serve, and
whose Discords they foment. Unde factiosi qui primates civitatis discordantes
ctantur.
Hence they are called faction (says the Orator) who follow the great ones of
State in their discords and heart-burnings. This ground of Faction was called
by the Ancients. Ius Client^^a the right of ^^^a^ing, or ad^er^^g to their
Patron or Defender, whose observancie they preferred before the League of
Kindred and Friend hip. Plu^arch in the life of Romulus. treating of this
Subject, calls such Clyentes (...) willingly to come nigh, or to adhere,
intimating the strict necessi^ude between such Clyents, and their Patrons or
Maintainers. Julius C^sar calls these Clientary Coitions, factiones, factions.

Another main ground of Faction, and the last that I will mention, is Reward.
In such States or Kingdoms wherein Factions are ^^^^pened and maintained by
Rewards there Faction or Sedition shall never be warting. For that thing to
which there is a gainful recompense proposed, must needs grow exceedingly, be
it good or bad. To this purpose speaks that universal Architector. The Rise
of Discord and Sedi^^^, is from converting a Public Right into a Private.

Now let me be put to trial upon these particulars, both from the Nature and
Grounds of Faction, as upon a competent Jury, and then it shall evidently
appear, whether I be guilty of factious Faction, or no.

First, was there any unjust cause undertaken, or maintained by me? or any that
moved me to the work? was there concursus ad vivum, any violent manning out of
the matter? was there any Conspiracy, any Conjutation? was the ruin of the
tottering State, or rather the recovery aimed at by us? Was a lawful and
necessary recourse, in time of danger to the whole State representative, a
point of Faction? Especially, they being the great Physicians, we being the
Patients. This recourse being the joint privilege of all good Subjects.

Lastly, in matter and manner of our recourse, nothing laid down but the very
open and public Diseases of the Church and State. Proved invincibly from the
Laws of God and Man; pleading for nothing more next unto Christ's right, then
the right of the King.

For the truth of all which and true intent in handling of it, I call my
Conscience to record and God himself, which is greater then Conscience; For
which truth I also suffer, and am ready by Gods assistance to suffer to the
last, if he think it good. Now if this be to be Factious, I know not what is to
be faithful.

As I am thus acquitted from the nature of Faction; Sect.
so all the Grounds of Faction or Sedition will clear me of the guilt of it.

Eirst, for Ambition, which according to the Etimon (...) is a Haughty desire
of Dignity, or Vainglory; which as a Father calls it, Barnard Ep. 126.
is causa furoris, the cause of madness, now a days especially: As I had no
ground for it, considering mine own unworthiness; so I thank God, since ever
he gave me a call, I desired never to be ambitiou^ of any thing, save to have a
share in Paul's Ambition, Namely, to know the Power of Christ's resurrection, the
Fellowship of his Sufferings, and to be made conformable unto his Death. Phil.
3.10.
In evidence whereof, the world knoweeth, that for keeping a good Conscience, I
have forsake-great Preferment. As for coveteousnesse the root of all evil, by
Gods mercy I had learned in some measue to be content, And where coveteousness
(as Augustine says) consists in two things in aliena rapi^nd^ et cupide sua
servando, in robbing others, and in two nighly kee^ing of a man's own; For the
former non can accuse me; and for the latter the world can wi^nesse with me
that at time and time; I have lost for Christ, and the State a competent state
for a private man. For hatered; howsoever I had many wrongs now and then; yet
blessed be God they turned ever to my good; why then should I hate the
Instruments? for this had been to have marred the Medicine, and to have weakened
Prayer, by which the Medicine is sanctified. Augustine speaks sweetly to that
purpose. sicut nullum in vulner evalet medicamentum, si sit infut farum ita
nihil proficit oration ubi manet odium. De rectitud. Catholic. converse.
As no Salve can cure the wound so long as the weapon remains in it; So
Prayer in affliction profits nothing, so long as hatred remains in the
heart.

As for Dus^ord (as the Prophet Jeremy says) I had not much mediing with the
World, and therefore the less ground for contention. As for Clientary
Dependency, in truth I neither had it nor did affect it; Neither had I relation
to any great Ones except my Calling occasioned me.

Lastly for Reward, It is true indeed, that Reward of the Good, and Punishment
of the Bad, be the Rod and Staff of Government: yet I can safely say, that I
was so far from any man's reward, that I rather spent of mine own in any
business of State I confess ingeniously, that the Seeds of all the former
Corruptions are in my corrupt nature; yet the grace of God in me did so curse
the springing of them, that I protest, they never grounded in me, the least
thought of my seditions Faction as is here charged upon me. But by these
grounds, it will appear, who be the seditiously Factious; namely, Ambiti us
Humans, and over-lording Dictrepheses; who! so they climb, they care not who,
or what fall. And by the golden steps of their ascent, it evidently appears,
and they may truly say with the chief Captain, (...) with a great sum we
have redeemed it. Act. 22.2^.
And when they are once mounted in Seats of Justice they verify that which
Innocentius said of his time; Non curant Prodesse sed gloriantur Praeesse. De
utilitat conditionis human^.
their care is not to profit the State: but all their glory is, that they are
set in high pl^ces. And then they make the suppression and consusion of Divine
and Humane Laws, Scabella ambitionis, the very Foot-stooles of their Ambition.
On these men and their Practices, Nero's Motto may well be set.

N^bis viventibus, terra misceatur Coelo. So we live, let all he swallowed up
in confusion. A second sort of seditious Persons, are such covetous Achans, as
shake the Foundations of Piety and Policy, for a wedge of Gold, gainsaying
Baalams, who when they cannot curse the People of God as they would, they lay
stumbling blocks before them, to cause them to eat things sacrificed to Idols,
and to commit Fornication. Which words are the very Comment of our Saviors
words, upon Baalams practice, Rev. 2.14.
and all this breaking of the people, and polluting of Gods Worship, plotted
and practiced by that factious Baalam, Numb. 22.7.
was for there ward of Divinations, as Moses calls it: 2 Pet. 2.15.
or ways of unrighteousness as the Apostle calls it, * of this Cut was
seditious, treacherous Judas, who betrayed the Innocent blood of his Lord and
Master, for a poor piece of Thirty-pence. Even so the eyes of such Baalamites
and Iudasses, whose hearts hunt after reward, may easily be put out: and what
will they not do, or undo! Philip never doubled the surprisall of that City,
where an Ass might enter laden with Gold. Yea the Spirit of God (as I have
formerly noted) tells us, that where the Heads judge for reward, the Priests
teach for hire, and the Prophets Divine for money; there shall be nothing but
overwhelming desolation. Mich. 3.11, 12.
These may well be called (...) inexpleble Hogs-head, whose practices only
challenge this Motto.

Oportet habere nil refert vnde. Have we must; but whence, and how, it matters
not.

A third Sort that become Seditious, are such Misanthropicall Athenian Tymon's,
whose Bowels will burst, if they cannot vent themselves in Bloody revenge. It
is true, there is a lawful and necessary hatred; and that is, both of Evil
and of Evill-men: ye lovers of the Lord have the evil: so the Prophet says of
evil men. Do not I hate them (O Lord) that hate thee? I have h^ted them that
observe vain Falsehoods. Psalm. 97.10:
Where by the word Hebel translated Lying-Vanities, or vain-falshoods. He
understands not only the vanity of world^y things spoken against by Solomon,
Psalm: 1: 73
but especially I dolatry, or men's vain Inventions in Gods Worship as some
Translations have it; and these are often so called in Scripture as, Eccles: 10
because they are light, vain, Deuteronomy: 32: 27 1 King: 16.26 Jerem. 8.9:
vile the word is simmed out by the same Prophet, in the fore-quoted 139.
Psalm. By the qualification and extent of it, I do hate them with a perfect
hatred, or with perfection of hatred; I esteem them as mine Enemies, verse. 22.
where by perfection of hatred is meant (as Austine well expounds it) Vitia non
homines edisse nec vitia propter homines dilexisse.
to hate the Sins, and not the Persons, nor to love the Sins for the Persons;
yea; the very Heathens could go thus far Naturam errantem dividere a vitiis.
to difference men from their Vices, and thus not to hate is to sin, and to
provoke the breaking out of the Lords wrath. Instance that saying of the Seer
to Ich^saphat, will thou love them that hate the Lord. Where by consequence, he
should have hate them: 2 Chro 19: 2.
But as this hatred is good, rightly determinated by the object. So there is
another hatred that is nor good; namely, the hating of the good; and this is
vatineanum odrum* that deadly and irreconcilable hatred which is the ground of
Faction and Sedition; as this is of the Devil, and all other works of the
Flesh; so hence arises in the wicked (...) an endless War with the Godly.
And of all the Factions, or Seditions* that ever we read of, where the Gospel
was preached. We shall ever find men of this mood, the raisers of them. Was not
hating Ish^^ael, the cause of the Faction in Abraham's house and Esa^ in Isaacks
house, and Joseph's Brethren in Jacob, house; and were not all these Factions
from Hellish hatred? and this hatred is without a cause (as our Savior says)
they have hated me without a cause. John. 15.
Yea, it is (as I have said) for the good they see in the godly. Mat. 10.22.
Yea, ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. And from this hatsed
arises factious persecutions, wherewith they follow the People of God. and
when they shall pers^ente you, etc. verse. 23. And in this they rise up and
conspire against God and his Christ, Psalm. 2.2 Sicut rex imagine honoratur sic.
Deus in suis diligitur aut oditur. Greg. mortal 10.
as a King is honored in his Image: so God is hated or loved in his own. He
cannot hate them, who loves God; nor can he love God that hates them. As the
I vie or Colewort through Antipathy, eatech the heart out of the Vine; and the
Oak planted by the Ollive, loses the growth; So that Serpentine hatred of
Souls possessed with it, against the good of Religion and State, will not
suffer them to rest till they have either secretly eaten our the heart of both:
or by open Faction burnt up the Vines, and hewed down the Oaks, yea, and
Cedars too, whereby the ruin of the State ensues; and this word will serve
their humors, aut pereo, aut perim^.

The 4 Seed of Sedition, is Discord or Contention one object seem two: Sect.
so the christallin humor of reason misplaced, make a work also of the flesh. As
hatred (by Austine) is said to be tras in ocul^, A beam in the Eye. As the
Christalline humor of the Eye, wavering toward any corner, makes the Eye
evil against the good that it hates. As Hammons hateful Eye was evil
against Mordecai, and the P^arisees against Christ. Out of this hatred arises
contention (as Solomon says) Hatred stirs up strifes, Prove: 10: 12
and strife or contention must be aided and maintained by Sedition: As the one
of these is the original of the other, so God disclaimeth them both, as the
Works of the Devil. The sower of Discord (says Solomon) is an Abomination to
God, Prove: 6: 19
and God is not a God of confusion, as the vulgar, or rather according to the
word (...) of (...) us stirs. As an Impostuma^ed Botch (says Plutarch) having
rooted it self deeply in the flesh; casts the Body in a Fever, whose Cr^ssis
proves often deadly: Even so Contention seated in auima exulcerata in a Soul,
festered with hatred, begets that Pestilantiall Fever, of Seditiou^
Faction, which causes the d^slocation of every State where it cei^eth.
Instance the ruin of all Commonwealths that ever we read of. Instance the
sour Monarchies, this Island; and all out Neighbor Kingdoms; the particulars
whereof I pass, because they are so well know: to my purpose lee Virgils
testimony fustice for all, Egl. 1.

Im^ius hac tum culta novalia miles habebit;
Barba^^s has segest^^^ ^n quo discordia ^ives
Perdu^it ^^iseres! Enqueis consevimas agres!
Shall Impious Soldiers share our fertile Soil?
Shall ba^oarous Brood reap that which we have sownd?
Lo Citinen^ what mischief Discord brings.
The Common wealth is like the Tythian Stone; of which Plynie speaks, lib. 2.
c. 106 lib.; 6: c: 17.
that notwitstanding the greatness and weight of it; if it be entire, will
swim above the water: but if it be diminished never so little, it sinketh. Even
so by Concord-Internall, the Common wealth is upholde^, though it be pressed
down with the weight of much opposition; But if factious Discord beset the
heart, like unto that Disease called (...) Palpitation of the heart, which
arises from foggy and fuliginous vapors, included in the Pericardium, or
tunicle of the heart; then by agitation, it fulleth into a deliquium, or
fainting fit, and sinkes right down: and as in this Disease, a Burning Feavor
is deadly, if it be not prevented by Phlebotomie; So, except the Liver-vein of
contentions Faction be opened, actum est de ^e^^b the S^^s is (...). As the
great winds that blows, cannot move the Earth, but the subterranean Vapors
in the Bowels thereof, make an Earthquake, till all reele again; So those
ro^^en vapors stuffed up in the Cavernes of Factions, under the color of much
deceit full calmnesse, break (...) ^^st in an o^^r tarning Earthquake. But in
the enucleation or uncovering of this corrupt Seed of Contention, it is (...)
that I re^isie, if I can, a wilful mistake of the worser sort, or at least,
resolve the doubt of the bea^^^, (...) by a clear discovery who be these
conce^^i^^ (...) and by consequence who be the factions: Both the peaceable and
contentious agree in the Thesi or general, that contentious Persons, are
pernicious weeds, and are either to be kept very low, or to be plucked up; But
in the Hypothesi or particular application, they dissent mainly, who are those
contentious ones. Men of contentious Spirits have nothing rifer in their mouth,
then crying out of contention. They have the Synteresis of the matter in their
minds; but not the Synedsis in their hearts. Like Jobs Friends, they make good
enough Majors, but very evil Minors.

With the men of the World, who are those contentious Persons? but even the men
of Peace, Peace-takers, Peacekeepers, yea, and Peacemakers with God and Man;
or what would become of the Worldlings, who striving against God, and the Good,
as their Nature and Practice is, to put the brand of Contention upon men that
love nothing less. If they would trouble the waters with the turbulent Jews,
who is the contentious man, But the Prophet Jeremy? Jer. 15.29.
a man as peaceable, as they were impiously contentious; there the Prophet
heavily complains, that he was reserved to such wicked times, wherein the
Offenders do charge the offencelesse. And so may Gods distressed people now
justly complain; for Contention is charged upon them even by the contentious,
who hate the very first motions of it. The Arminian brood and servers of their
own bellies, yea blasphemous Sectaries make the Pulpits and private houses
ring, and their Papers fly, with nothing so loud, as the proclaiming of the
People of God to he contentious; who sowes discord? (say they) who stirs up
strise* who be the Bouseus of Contention? who sets the Peace of the Church and
State upon the Rack? who rends and tears the seamlesse Seat of Christ, but the
contentious Puritans? such as will not obey the order cap and fora^^, at the
name of Jesus, crouch to Altars and the rest. And thus they do not only faisly
accuse Gods guiltless people; but some of them abuse the Kings Majesty to his
face, with these Suggestions. And herein they follow the Dyotrephean Spirit of
their Fathers, who are always lashing Gods Ministers and People, whether
present, or absent, with the Spirit of Contention: yea, it is to be lamented
that not only so, but that men of high places, as Judges, Justices, and other
great Ones; by the evil example of the Clergy (as they call it) are so
frequent in this Charge; for thereby all the Rabble of the Vile are emboldned
to revile the people of God with this aspersion.

This is even the old strain of Gods Enemies in former times; amongst many
instances, take that Sermon of Dr. Youngs, preached at Paul's Cross in Queen
Mary's days Anno. 1573: where he proclaimed with foul mouth fury-outly, the
Banished Ministers to be the stirrers up of strife in the church; because they
could not attain to Bishoprckes which others enjoyed Preface to the Franckford
troubles. page 2.
with this I might parallel Dr. Banekrofts Sermon at the Cross, but of that
hereafter.

Now for the better clearing of this Imputation, Sect.
and laying of the blame where it should lie; we are to understand there be two
kinds of Contention, as I have formerly discovered: two sorts of Factions, the
one good and necessary, the other evil and dangerous. The former is either
good absolutely of it self, or accidentally in regard of the Sequel. The former
of these is determined by the Object; namely, for that which is good, by the
Person, in regard of general or particular Call: Considering also Time and
Place; and this is not only permitted as lawful, but also enjoined, and
commanded. The Apostle St. Jude held it needful to write to all the Churches
with all diligence, and to exhort them to contend earnestly for the Faith, Jude
3
where every word has its own weight. First, for the object, Faith, is meant
fides qua, the grace of Faith, whereby we are justified, and the word of Faith,
whereby we are brought to believe, and made perfect unto every good work.

For this. and for all other pure Ordinances of Christ, Christians must
contend, which is the Action here enjoined. Where the compound (...) to contend
as it were for life, is, to renew this Fight to the very last gasp. And this
must be followed against Satan the World, the Flesh: Satan's Instruments; as
Tyrants, Heretics, Schismatikes, Hypocrites, in a word, against all the
Enemies of Christ, and of his Truth. In which bloody strife, the Saints of God
have been more then Conquerors, overcoming Kings and Kingdoms (...) says the
Apostle, Through Faith they subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.33.
by the same Agony or strife there, we must enter in at the strarght gate,
either removing, or leaping over all impediments. Luke 13.24
Much to this purpose the Apostle enjoynes the Galatians, and in them, all
Christians, to stand fast in the liberty, wherein Christ had set them free. Gal.
5.6.
In which words, the Apostle implies the assaults that the Saints shall
endure, if they stand by their co^ours, and will not either quit the colors of
Christ, or at least quar^er them with such colors, as Christians are not
allowed.

In the second place, he gives express charge to contend for the maintenance
of those Colors, by standing to it. Stand fast (says he) etc.

Another kind of Contention, though not good in it self, yet accidentally
proves often good to the Church and State, namely, by the contention of the
wieked amongst themselves; when God sets the Tsansgressor against the
Transgressor he thereby purifieth the Air, and gives his own a breathing
time. It may well be said (...) that all thrive the better whe^the wicked are
by the ears together. When Thieves reckon True-men come to their own. The
sting of the Scorpion is deadly poison; yet Woolfes-Bane is more deadly; But
some say, that this given in drink, is a good remedy against the other. Ad ^o
ut cum venenum cum veneno luctatur, servatur homo, itide^^ discord a
pestilentium civium.
As one poison overcomes another, whereby the life is often saved: even so the
Discord of Pestilentiall men, proves often the safety of the Church and State.

Abundance of Examples I could bring, both from Scripture and other Writ, as of
Abimelech, and the Seehemites, the Sadduces add the Phatisees. But because the
thing is so eleere and this is not so much to the purpose, I give it but upon
the by, and return to the other which is more pertinent, namely A Conten^ion
for that which is good, which is not the Seed of Sedition, but rather the
Fortress of the Truth, and Procurer of Peace. But of that contention which is
the Serpentine Mother of a Draconitish Faction; the people of God may say with
the Apostle, If any man list that way to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. 1 Cor. 11.16
In a word let the word determine who be the contentious, and by consequent,
the factious indeed. According to that saying of Origer, (speaking of the
peaceable condition of the godly, how it should be like the Concin Harmony of
Musequ^) he gives this note of the truth of it. sitales sierine n^ in nullo
dissentium a mandatus. Hom. 26. in Numb.
If they be such as dissent not from the Commandments, nor do not cross by
their courses the Evangelical Precepts, then are they far from contention.
But on the other side, they who walk contrary to God and obey not his Gospel,
and follow the councels of their own hearts, are by this Rule convinced to be
the men of contention, and therefore men of Faction.

For brevities-sake, Sect.
I omit the rest of the Particulars of Faction, and will come to the closure,
wherewith he varnisheth all the rest. He comes upon me with my shallowness
and deep ignorance of Law, how soever I seemed to be skillful. To which I
answer, Law is not my profession, and therefore it is not required in that
faculty that I should be a Master in Israel, yet I would not be a Stranger in
Israel; that is, I love not to be ignorant of so much Law as may lead my
actions and undertakings: and so should every man be according to his ability
and employments; from the King that sits upon the Throne, to the meanest of
his Subjects: the reasons may be taken from the very Etimon of the word, Lex
enim maligando, so called from brinding to obedience and how can they love, or
obey that which they have not. Nihilaema^ tum nisi cognitum.


A second Reason from the nature of the Law. Lex est regula^ and mensura actuum
agendorum vel ammittendorum. Thom. prima.
The Law (as the School-man says) is the rule or measure of things to be done,
or left undone. Now how can any man high or low, square his actions by that
which he knows not.

A third Reason is from that common Interest that all have in the Law, as the
greatest good that they can lay claim unto. Lex enim populi salus suprema.
The Law is the highest pitch of the Peoples safety. And how should they
esteem so highly of it, without some knowledge of it. Yet notwithstanding all
this; there is not a like knowledge required of every man, but according to his
Place and A stairs. And as for my self, if I were so ignorant: First, why did
he pass so cruel a censure upon me, Cum caecit as sit pars innocentiae.
since Ignorance is some part of Innocence, especially where there is no evil
intent. Secondly, why did he not demonstr^tively convince me, either of forging
Authority, or of misconstruing of the Law. Neither of which, I hope, he was
able to do, yea (be it spoken without Arrogance) I have not only read the
Statutes; but also I can give some account, that I have perused the best
Common-Lawyers, and Civilians, and some Canonists, that are extant, and to
abuse mine own knowledge, or a State, upon any by end, (which I have not) I
account it impious. But to be brief, if Vox populi be true, he was not guilty
of much Law. But for his Learning all must give him his due, Egregius homo
usque ad Dover. Further for his invective speeches as they were very violent,
and unbeseeming a Judge. So of them I will say no more, but this, according to
that experimental rule of Hypocrates, lib: 5. Ep.
(...), the man's tongue cast his water.

Now I come to the last passage of his speech, Sect.
containing the sad Castrophae, or shutting up with an heavy and bloody
Censure, which made the standers by to shudder (as my relator speaks of
himself.) Yet his hope was, it should never be put in execution, and indeed I
hoped no less, till the Hierarch^ made way for the Execution, and the Writ was
out. For I conceive that men could not so far ex ver^ homines, cast of
humanity, as to inflict harder things upon a man and his family, then death it
self. But as it was a shuddering Sentence, so it was as cruelly executed; of
which more hereafter. I insisted the longer in this tongue-assault, because it
took up a great part of the time. Diverse others said somewhat, being drawn to
it, rather by the Prelates grandeur, than out of any stomach they had to it.

CHAP. V.
SEcretary Cook fell upon the Point of Iure Divino. and citing Lane sius his
Agency for the Pope, in the Council of Trent against that Tenet; he was forced
by the truth (as the hearers said) to acquit the defense of Iure Divine. I will
pass the rest and come to the declamations, or rather exclamations of the two
Prelates, Dr. Laud and Dr. Neile, from whom, and by whom, the whole hu^^nesse
was driven along.

To begin with Dr. Laud; then B. of London, the (...) or great and angry B.
indeed with a dangerous sting. After the Judges and others had spoken, he fell
on with a discourse of almost two hours long; with which (as some said) all
the Hearers were wearied. But passing the Particulars of his Apologetick
Preface; and also the bitterest of his invective Charge against me, and my
Book, wherein he invented much choler and little truth. I will only point at
such particulars of his Charge, as at the very relation whereof, truth shall be
ready to acquit me, in the judgment of all ingenuity. In general he said, it
was the most false, seditious and inhumane Pamphlet that he had ever seen,
comparing it with others of that kind as he called them. Further, he accused me
of Blasphemy, of High Treason, and other Nominals; none of which he could
prove; of all which, I have quit my self sufficiently, I hope in my Answer to
I. R. his Accusation; and also in mine Answer to the Information.

He told the Court of another Book done by me, called the Looking-glass of the
Holy where, which he confessed, was somewhat milder; yet notwithstanding, his
late Majesty King James would have hanged him (said he) if he could have been
found. And that I went over the house top with a naked sword in mine hand, lib.
3. de. Rep.
Plate gives way to Physicians to lie for their Patients good. But for one
that will be a B. falsely to accuse, it is very soul. It is true, I wrote that
Book in the behalf of the late King and Queen of Bohemia: (and without
Ostentation be it spoken) it has found respect from many Nations. It cost me
indeed the on-setting, by-charge, pains, and sufferigns. For by the suggestion
of the Co^d^marian and Prelaticall Faction, the Stationers entered my house*
took away my goods, carried my wife, and diverse of my Family to prison; only my
wife fainted by the way, they left my young Children in the channell^ and all
this they did without Warrant or Officer appointed; which manifest wrong, I
hope the high Court of Parliament will redress.

But for his late Majesty's indignation against me, it was a mere suggestion:
for His Royal Majesty was my only refuge, in whose presence and sight, I was
frequently in the height of my Troubles. He was graciously pleased to peruse
the Book, and out of his gracious favor, to give order that neither Prelates,
nor others* should trouble me any further: And that the equity of my Cause, and
the grosnesse of my Wrongs put upon me may the better appear; the first high
Court of Parliament* called by our Sovereign Lord King Charles, did promise
that I should have a special hearing, and just redress. He taxed me with
Ignoran^e, and bare pretense of Learning; affirming the Book not to be of my
doing for all the rare wits (says he of the Land for Law and Divinity) have
been at the making of it.

If I made the Book (as indeed I did) then has not his Lord^hip Learning
enough to keep himself from a contradiction. It seems the commendation of the
Book was Reflexive upon himself, that he might seem at least to confute such an
universal piece. But it has stood ^^rme yet against him and all his Archers.
I thank my God, who with the little Learning given me^, has enabled me to make
good what I hold, which he cannot do; if with Moses he were versed in all the
Learning of the Egyptians.

The Learning and Place of a B. indeed should rather have used Arguments then
Torments, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal (says the Apostie) 2 Cor.
10, 4
But his Arms shows what house he is come of. The Attorney General made once
a motion, of sending some learned men to Neugate, to me, to dispute the matter;
whereof I was very glad. But all the Arguments that I see to this day (as I
said upon the Scaftold) were Prison, Fire, Brands, Knife, and Whip, which as
a^l know are unanswerable Arguments. From these Velitations, he came to the
main Shock of the Business; namely, the defense of his Place and Calling,
which he said I had wronged egregiously. And instanced first in that Assertion,
that it was the Grand and Master-sinne, for which God had a Cont-eversie with
Us, because established by a Law* Wherein he offered a Challenge to all men,
that when they could produce any Law made for the establishing of the BBs,
Places, he would undertake to prove, that there were BBs. before that Law. If
his heat had not transported him, he might have seen that both those might be
true; BBs. in his sense might be before that Law: yet being established in any
measure by a Law, they became more dangerous; as may be instanced from the
Popes Supremacy, acknowledged by such as did admire the Beast, that being
established by a Law, it became out of measure dangerous.

But by this Challenge (if I conceive not) he would wave, if not disclaim
this Tenure of Humane Right too weak a Foundation for the Hierarchy, nam
debile fundamentum fallit opus, for a weak Foundation deceives the Structure.
But this shift discovers (compared with the undeniable evidence of those of his
own house, the Laws of the Land and the Kings Prerogative) how good a Subject
he is; and going on, he saves me from mistake in affirming from Antiquity, that
James was B. of Jerusalem, and Peter B. of Anticch, a little more help would
have made him say of Rome, but both a like true; And this may serve also to
answer his alleging of the Fathers, as Athanasiu^, A^sti^^, Ambrose, etc. who
though they were men's BBs. as Re^^ calls them, yet they were not of his
Babilonish Cut. The disproofe of this Assertion is as needless, as it self is
groundless, yea the sencelesnesse of it will hence appear, that that
retrograde or Crab-like course from Apostle-ship to Episcopacy, could not suit
with that highest function Apostilicall. So that he brings them ab equis ad
asi^os as if he would bring the Lord Major to be Constable. But suppose it had
been so, it would have made as little for him, as the Popes plead for Peter's
being* B. of Rome, since their Hierarchy is no like Peter, then an unhappy
Monkey is like a Man. But the Prelate being in solio, not content with this,
he winds up the bottom of his Hierarchy, and its Government to an higher
Pin, debasing the Ministers and Government of Christ most opprobriously I set
down his own words, until the time (says he) of Luther, Calvin and Beza, the
world heard not of any other Government of the Church, but by BBs. and although
Caelvin and Beza did abjure BBs, and their Government, yet he found them to be
more proud and imperious in their Government, then any BBs. in England. For
witness of which particular, let the Prelates overtopping of Kings, and
States, and manifest Treasons against both: and the true and hearty submission
of the aforesaid Ministers, be speaking witnesses. And fol^owing the Charge, he
affirmed that I and my fellow-Schismaticks, would obtrude upon the Church a new
Government, affirming that only, to be lawful, and the other Antichristian. By
drawing up his forces in form of Argument, he offered to prove that the
Government by Elders and Deacons and the Discipline we call for, was more truly
Antichristian, then theirs. And for the enforcing whereof (though he had none
to hold his cloak) yet he makes shift to bring up this Argument.

That Government, which neither Christ, nor his Apostles taught, nor was ever
received in the Church for almost fifteen hundred years after, that must needs
be Antichristian:

But the Government and Discipline called for by Elders and Deacons, etc. was
neither taught by Christ, nor his Apostles, nor ever received into the Church
for so long time.

Ergo, It is Antichristian.

-- Quis talia tando? Who could but blush to hear; much more to assert such
palpable untruths. We desire no better Judge, or Arbiter, than the major
Propositian; and for the minor, when he, or any of his can prove it, for mine
own part, I will bring both my Book and my Sufferings, and lay them down at his
feet. But I may say to him, as the Welch-man said in fight, Cud her not seo her
Buckler. If height and heat would have let him see the truth of that Book,
which he was reviling, it would have showed him the mouth of the Minor turned
directly against him, by way of retorsion; proving pregnantly in diverse places,
the Hierarchy and their Government* to be Antichristian; and the Officers and
Government which he maligneth, to be the true Ordinance of God: For proof of
this, be pleased to peruse the * Book, especially, Syons Plea.
the proofs of the first and second Poition, and diverse other places; as from
Page 110 to 114. Page 87, 149, 194 to 201. and other places of the Book, any
that will may find enough for that which he speaks against, and also against
that which he pleads for. I will quote but one place for all concerning the
original of Prelacy; for I fear the bulk of this work shall of necessity be
bigger then I would have it. And if Syo ^s Plea were not mine own, I would
humbly entreat the honorable Senate, that where it has been thrice printed,
they would cause it once more to come forth under Public Authority, for the
satisfaction of many that has it not. To the place then that BBs. of his mould
are not of God: and then by his own proposition they are of An^ichrist, *
appears by the testimony of A. B. Page 25. Bal. script. Brit. centur. 1.37.
Cent. 6.7. col. 591.
of more Learning and equanimity than himself. Sed cujus testimony nullun^
gravius, But no man's evidence of better weight, from the year 507 (says he)
the Church began to be ruled by BBs. which Government was especially devised
and invented by the Monks which indeed is true; for until this Age (every
particular Church was governed by the BBs. Elders, and: Deacons of the same.
Witness the Authors of the Cent. Mag. and though some before this were titular
BBs. yet their superiority the Church would not bear. Witness, our English
Synod, Synod. Harf^rd.
Anno 674. For further proof, I could add a Jury of BBs. and other the
learnedest of the Land, but I cannot insist. Look the 8 page of the aforesaid
Book; many wondered that they answered not the Book, and therefore took it for
granted they could not.

Sed si non aliqua nocuisset mortus esse. As they have had diverse Treatises
which they never answered; so that thrice honorable Patron of Christ his
Cause, the Lord Brook, has published a Masterpiece, which has musled all
theit mouths. Dr. Hall objecteth against Petitions and Treatises, that still
they had the Matter out of Zions Plea, but what in Zions Plea have they refuted?

Another passage of the Prelate was, concerning their Intrusion upon Civil
Jurisdiction, and Lordly Dominion over the Ministry. Against both which, the
word of the Evangelists are cited, Mat. 20.25. Luke 22.25.
Be not ye called gracious Lords; the Prelate was pusled with the words; and
seeing that he was beaten out of that coined distinction of the Jesuits from
the simple and compound Verb (...) and (...), he betook himself to quarrelling
with the translation. It is true (said he) that it is so Englished, but it is
not truly translated. For trial whereof, if we consider the word, according to
the strictness of Etimology (...) signifies Benefactor. By which name few or
none have cause to call them. But the meaning of the Spirit there, is by the
word to set forth the outward Pomp, Splendour, and Bounty, that accompany the
Government and Deportment of Princes: And therefore the Latin translateth it
Benefici. The French indeed has in the Text, Bien facteurs, but the Marginall
Note explaines the meaning very fitly, by the word Mag^^fiquis, (...) (as
Lawyers and Humanists observe) is some External Art of glorious bounty, such
as comes from Princes, or Princely dispositions: The ground of this
acceptance, I conceive to be from a word in the first Language of the same
signification. The Prophet David defireth the Lord to give him a free Spirit,
Psalm. 51.1^*
but the Word in the Original signifies a Princely and Royal Spirit. A well
framed Spirit. (...) the French Bien fais in the Margin. By this it appears,
that the Prelate brings either his dissimulation upon the Stage in impeaching
that which he knows to be a true and fit translation. or otherwise, he
discovers his Ignorance in Scripture Phrase, and the Originals. All this
while this man of Tongue* spoke what he would without controlment, and made up
his conclusion with concurring to that heavy and bitter Censure, which was
hatched and brought out (as his Servants, and others could tell) before my
cause came to trial: But to his conclusion, he added an Apology for his
Presence and Assistance in this great Service, where he confessed, that by the
Canon Law no Ecclesiastical person ought to be present, or assist in such a
Judicature, where there is loss of life, or member: But (said he) to take away
the Ear is not loss of hearing, and so no member lost; neither is the slitting
of the Nose loss of smelling, and so no member lost. So for burning the Face,
or whipping no loss of Life or Member; And therefore he concluded, he might
assent to the Censure.

I have set down his own words, as they were related unto me; and by this
Paliatory distinction I appeal unto any Scholar, whether, or no he has
dismembered Logic, Law, Divinity, and Anatomy; knows he not, that the form
gives the being! Now mangle an Fare, or an Nose, and it wants the form; and
so it is not in propriety of speech an Ear, or a Nose; Again, an Organ may lose
the function, and yet remain an Organ: so an Organ may be mangled, and yet some
part of the function remain. Secondly, for Laws Divine, Humane, as Civil-Law,
Canon Law, the Laws of England, Statute, and Common: Counsels, the whole
Current of the Learned, Ancient, and Modern, concur with one voice, to the
secluding of them from all Civil Judicaure: what place then is there at all
for the Prelates dawbing and illogical distinction. For proof of all this
Cloud of Witnesses, I entreat the Reader, for brevities sake, to have recourse
unto Zions Plea, from page 129. to page 135. out of which I hope he shall have
abundant of satisfaction. By the Laws of England no Clergyman shall bear any
Rule, or exercise any Jurisdiction, nisi in spirit^^libus (faith Br^cton) lib.
1. fol. 5. numb. 2.
the second Lawyer that wrote in England, who lived in the time of Henry the 3.
when Popery was in its Ruff.

Another antienter then he, and first that ever wrote, bears witness to the
same truth; namely, Judge Glanvil in the time of Henry the second, lib. 4. fol.
32 ^.6.
That they should not meddle with any matter of Civil Right, though it seemed
collaterally to belong unto them. The State of Venice (though Popish) maintain
their Right in this particular against the Pope, and all his Clergy, whom they
would not suffer to meddle with any secular affairs: though the Pope
interdicted them shut up their Churches, and was preparing to come in Arms
against them; but they stood their ground. Whereby it appears that the
seducing the Prelates from all Civil Judicature, is no new thing; but a thing
as all the Laws that we can name, and practice has been answerable; yea* the
Pope himself by word and practice has approved of it and so does Bellarmine.
de Pontif. Romans lib. 5. c. 10.
(...) word or two of the Canon Law which the Doctor-mentioneth, which inhibits
(as the Learned observes) (...) secu^ar cares. And was not this a shrewd
see^^^r Business, and to give judgment on a d^ing man more bitter then death.
The Canon Law (with which all other Laws concur in that particular) forbids
that any Clergymen should sit on Blo^^, or be present where any such Censures
be given. If Be^armine in the place fore-quoted, will not have them to be
Arbitros facult atum, Judges in matters of Civil right; much less will he
allow them in case of Blood.

And lastly, he acted the very Quack in Anatomy; his dissertion indeed was very
deep, sed potius lanlena qua^^ anatomia, but rather Butcherie then Anatomy.
God made the Ear and not a mangled sti^mp of an Ear, for hearing; the table of
the Ear reverberates the Air, being the medium between the Mallet and the
Anvill, but my table was cut clear away, and so was it done to other^^, whereby
our hearing is much hurt: and thence it is, that in punishing rognes they touch
not the table. But something must have been said, though better nothing at all,
Nam mala causa null is medetur remediis.
An ill Cause can never be cured.

CHAP. VI.
I Go on now to another, and he shall be all that I will insist on; namely,
Dr. Neale, then Prelate of Winchester. To follow a wise man, is almost to be
wise, He laid about him extremely (as my Relator tells) with this Preface
protesting, that although he had lived sixty and odd years; and had observed
passages of State these fifty years.

-- Animus constantior annis. He might be a pretry Statesman of 12 or 14
years of Age: But to the point, he said, he had never heard, nor seen all that
time such a vile Book, preferring it to Baalams Ass, Martin Mar-Prelate, Vdals
Book, and all the rest; and wondered, that such a Traitor, as I, was suffered
to live And for his Calling, he protested he had it from the Holy Ghost, and if
he could not make it good, he would fling his Rochet and all the rest from his
back, yea that would he. With that he marshalled up against me, many Latin
Sentences which I take (under favor) Nam, de mortuis etc. he had learned since
he came to be Prelate of Duresme; for being there in the Common-School, and
checking the Schoolmaster for his severity, instancing the prejudice that came
to children thereby, from his own experience, when he was a Scholar of
Westminster School, he said (in the hearing of a reverend man yet alive,
besides others, there present) that the said Schoolmaster was never off his
breech, by which he became so very a Dunce, that until that hour he could
never make a right Latin Theme. After he had given me many blows and vented
his choler, he came into a better mood; namely; of praying for me, that if I
were not as Simon Magus, he prayed God to forgive me; with that a Lawyer not
able to forbear laughing asked another that stood by, if ever he heard before,
that it was a sin against the Holy Ghost to write against the B B^. Thus I
hope I have not wronged any of them in relating of their speeches, for a right
honest and judicious man took them; and as he sent me them, so have I delivered
them. As for the Lords and others, I have little or nothing to say; for surely
it may be thought, that the most of them were rather passive, than active, in
so black a doom. The Commemoration whereof by way of Petition, to the
honorable House of Parliament, one that was at the Censure, being now a Member
of the house watered his cheeks with tears. I heard that the L. VV^ntworth
(afterward Earl of Strafford) used many violent and virulent expressions
against me: but it was no wonder for he and his ghostly Father the Prelate,
were upon the way of a more dangerous conjunction; the ill effects whereof, the
three Kingdoms have felt, and when they shall have an end the Lord only
knows. A man of eminent quality told me, that the Book and my Sufferings did
occasion their combination: for the Prelate seeing, that the Book struck at
the root and branch of the Hierarchy, and Strafford perceived that the support
and defense of the Hierarchy would make him Great; they struck a League like
Sun and Moon, to govern Day and Night, Religion and State. And if others should
be terrified by my dreadfull^sufferings; then they might trample on their
Estates, their Necks, Bodies, and Souls, and make them the most Artificial
slaves, under the Sun (which are worse then natural slaves) but if any should
stand up for the truth, they meant so exquisitly to torture them (as they did
indeed) that all that feared the Lord) (though to their great woe and grief)
should quit the Land, and give all for lost: and this they had brought to an
high pitch; but blessed be the Lord of Hosts, who has cut their cords, and
delivered poor souls from the snare of the Hunter.

CHAP. VII.
NOw to come to that Radamanthean Censure (the terror whereof made my friend
that write (as he said) to shudder; but he hoped it should never be executed,
and so did many more. A Knight moving one of the Lords, with the fearfulness
of it; and how it opened a gappe to the Prelates, to inflict such disgraceful
Tortures upon men of quality; the Lord repsyed, that it was but in terrorem,
and that he would not have any think that the Censure should ever be executed.
But as the Prelate desired that Honorable Court to put the highest Censure
that could be put: So his thirst could not be quenched, until his hand was as
deep in shedding of Blood, as his tongue and heart were in censuring. I cannot
tell whether I may say of him as it was said of Tyberi^; who though he loved
wine, yet in respect of his thirst of Blood he was said to loath it, fastidit
vinum quia jam sitit ist^ ^ru^r^m.

My weak distressed wife was sent for, by James the Jailer of Newgate, and a
Tipstaste, to be at the Trial, who carried with her a Certificate under four
Physicians hands of my extreme weakness, and sickness unto death, in the Eye
of Man: to the same purpose an Attorney made affidavit into the Court, to whom
my wife delivered a Petition to supersede the hearing, but having no good
answer, she went away, and hastened homeward in regard of my weakness; but they
called her back by a Tipstaffe, that the dreadfulnesse of the Censure as it
seems) might overwhelm her spirit: but the God of our strength upheld her
marvellously, that she was not so much as danted, but spoke freely in the
Court, yet with modesty enough. The Censure was, to ^ut my ^ares, to s^it my
nose, to brand me in the face, to whip me at a p^st, to stand on the Pillory,
ten thousand pounds fin^, and perpetual imprisonment; and all these upon a
dying man, by appearance.

-- Instant morientibus ursa. The Censure thus past, the Prelate off with his
Cap, and holding up his hands, gave thanks to God, who had given him the
victory over his Enemies.

-- O curva interris anima!
Ambros. de Offic.
Non est gloriosa victoria, vbi non est gloriosum certamen.
There is no glory in that victory that wants the glorious fight of faith. But
this was a fight against the faith, for the said censure was against all Law,
Equity and Humanity, as I could make it appear from these grounds following
first from the matter of my Accusation. Secondly. from their manner of
proceeding. Thirdly, from the Nature of the censure. Fourthly from the Party
censured. For the first; namly the Book; Is any of the Positions false? have I
not punctually proved them; are any of them disproved; have I in any passage of
use or explanation broken any Law of God or man? have I Wronged any man; and
where there is noe law broken there is no trangression? for sin is the
transgression, of the Law. As I have said in Effect it is a received Maxim in
all Laws Judicium debet precedere deliberatio and causa cognitio idque
secundum legem.
that mature del^heration and trial of the Cause and that according to Law
should precede Indgment. As the great judge of Heaven and Earth unaccountable to
any, leads on his deputyes to this by his own practice and precept. The
second ground of di^proving of the proceedings is from the ^aner of it, which
was illegal as the matter it self; good things should be well done, or else
they lose the grace; an evil thing ill done is a double evil; God loves the
well doing of an action better then the good action it self, because the
former is from an internal Principle resembling God himself: The latter is
from an external Principle and is dead without the other. Justice unjustly
done, i^ injustice, and injustice with unjust Proceedings is Injusticia arm^ta,
Armed injustice, as Plato and others call Judgment and Justice, Virginem in
corruptant. De lege 120.


So in jupging any matter, there should be an incorrupt proceeding.

4 Things spoil the form of proceeding in judgment; Sect.
namely Prejudgment better speeches of the Party, Racking or torturing of the
Matter, and condemning without hearing. Of every of which, but a word: All
these did concur, though it may be not in all, to the choking of the Divine
Rod of Justice.

For the first; namely, Prejudgment which makes the Judgment rather wrath, then
judgment, the indignation wherewith the Prelates were filled, does prove it
ful^y.

The second thing that made the proceeding unformall. in mouthing of which, I.
R. first ran foul, whom the Prelates followed; so that the house did resound
(...), as Suydas has it, with many coatumelious and reviling Threatenings. To
these I have replied something in my Answer to the Judges particulars; and
though such a course damnifieth exceedingly the accused, and indignifieth the
Judge; yet pass.

The third Deformity in proceeding is to wrest words, beyond either the Letter,
or intent of the Speaker, or Writer. This (as the Apostle speaks) is to take
things in the worser part, and not to find a party guilty by the Law, and so to
censure him; but to put, or enforce guilt upon him that they may censure him.

The fourth and last point, but not the least, wherein the form of proceeding
failed, was the condemning and censuring of me without hearing; a course indeed
against Nature, against all Laws Divine, and Humane, Civil, Common and
Canon-Laws, against the Law of Nations, against the practice of God himself as
I have showed, against the practice of Christ, and the privilege of all men.

Our Savior Christ, the Judge of Quick and Dead, whose practice every Judge
should follow, keeps this order of judging, as he testifies of himself. I can
do nothing of my self (says he) as I hear, I judge, and my Judgment is just;
because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father, who has sent me.
John 5.30.
He that neglecte^h this, crosses that common truth of that (...). Do not give
judgment before thou hear both parties, Plato in Demon.
Alexander ever referred one ear to the party no^ heard. What should
demonstrate the light but against all those reasons and proofs; they dealt
with me worse then with a Traitor, condemning me without sight of Judge or
Accuser; and that not through my default for I desired as heartily to make my
appearance as to live; but the danger of my sickness could not admit the
removing of me from my bed. That current Maxim in all Laws was my sufficient
excuse, necessitas inducit privilegium necessity carries a privilege in it
self; especially it it be necessit as actus Dei, a necessity of the A^t of
God, such as mine was, and could not be avoided. Upon this; humble Petition was
made to the Court, that they would supersede either until God had made an end,
or that upon recovery, I might as well be heard* as judged. which could be no
prejudice to the State, no damage to the Cause no way: yea, I desired nothing,
but that to which they were tied both in Law and Conscience, according to that
of Magna Charta. nulli negabimus, rectum vel judicium, we shall deny Right, or
Justice to no man. If it be objected, that the Matter in Controversy was
confessed. I answer, it is true, but with cum confessione facts, I there was to
prove defensi^ non^ Iuris, a defense by Law, that the actions, fact, or words,
do not condemn, but the Anomie or Evil of Actions: otherwise, the Jews had a
good plea in condemning Christ for his good Actions: But, say the Act
confessed, had been evil; yet it excuses not condemning, without hearing, as I
have proved at large, except it be the delinquents fault. Yea, I may
confidently affirm, that Judges condemning a Delinquent without hearing, do
often become the greater Delinquents, both in regard of the Person and of the
Act: The more conspicuous the person is the greater is the blemish; and a
corrupt Act in Justice is far worse then an exemplary evil in the Judges
life. Because the former corrupts the Public Founrain; the other but a
Draw-well in a man's own ground. If it be further objected, that my answer was
read in the Court. To this I reply, that was besides my intention, because it
was but an abridgment of that which I could and would have said in defense of
my Cause. Secondly, though the Answer being presented to the then Lord Keeper,
was acknowledged by him to be as sufficient as ever any Answer that was put
into the Star Chamber. Yet all reason required, that I should have had
personal audience: First, that I might answer to that which might be further
objected: and further, since they gave me order for putting in my own Answer,
because Council durst not plead, and the Law did allot me twice as much time
for my Defense, as the At^orney should take to accuse, though he was to speak
last, the very Law of Nature and Reason did plead the necessity of my Personal
presence.

I will shut up this Point with that testimony of Nicodemus. Does our Law
condemn a man before he be heard.

The third ground of my Exception against their Proceeding is from the Nature
of the Censure, being the Highest (as I. R. said) the Court could Put. it was
high indeed and with great rigor; but as undeserued as ever any Censure was
put since it was a Court all circumstances considered. Fuit gravis et in audita
Censura, a heavy and unh^ard of Censure. Politicians, and Lawyers, in their
d^scoveries of C^nsures concur all in this, that Magistrates should be very
wary in Censuring, especially to Bodily punishment, to look to their grounds,
the matter, the manner, the preparation of the punishment, and how they should
be effected, when they are forced to punish.

The 4 and last ground whence their proceedings is disproved, is from the
person Censured, whose degrees (to let other things pass) did exempt him from
any such punishment, besides inbred genoorsity, a master in arts, I commenced
also Docter; for my capabillity in these degrees, I have the seals of two
Universities St. Andrews, and L^yden, with more then Ordinary aprobation as may
appear, Imitatu jan^ existimen omnes. Paenas impons ad hibita ratione
qualitatum earum, I hold it worthy the observing, that in the imposition of
punishment; there must be a consideration had of the Person(...) and qualities
thereof, * knighthood cannot suffer any ignominious punishment, lib. aut facta,
etc.
no more can a Docter Doctoratus privilegia, etc.
the priveledges of Doctor all degrees, are the very same by Assignment of Law,
that belong to Equestrall dignity. With prejudgment, rather then Judgment they
set on the highest censure that ever was given upon the greatest Malefactor:
not once making known what Law I had broken, or what crime I was guilty off.
Also thus Censured* I lay under the hand of God and under their Censure at mine
own own house. Whence the under Iaylor of Newgate would needs carry me in my
sickbed; but that my friends entered in ten thousand pound bond for me.
Notwithstanding the said Iaylor all the time of my sickness, played the
Lord-dane over my house challenging it to be his, and set theevish fellows
over me upon my charges, besides the moneys he had of me and of my friends; at
length before full recovery he carried me to the fleet, where upon promise of
liberty to retire unto my own house for my health, my friends entered ten
thousand pound bond for me; but failing of that liberty* I took in my bond: So,
thus in much weakness of body, I remained during the time of the Plague, by
which the Term was adjourned, and the Execution of the Censure deferred. But
the Plague ceasing they began to sit, I was carried before the Hi^rarchy at
Lambeth, where I spoke in defense of the Truth as it was given me of GOD, and
that to this effect as far as I can remember.

First, I disclaimed their ^udicature, giving them Reasons for it and that it
was not out of contempt of their Persons, is dis-esteeme of their Gifts; but
because (as I had clee^ed in my Book,) they were not of God, and so had no
power given: so they did intrude upon the Estate, Body and Blood of me* and
other Subjects, contrary to the Laws of God and the Kings Majesty, as the Book
shows at large. And if they could bring one title for their Calling and
aforesaid Practice, either from the Law of God, or Law of the Land, I should
lay down the Buckler, one replied that I was not brought before them, tanquau^
sub judice alieujus fac^i, but that they might degrade me; for ^^^^rwife the
censure could not be executed. I replied in effect, that it was a rotten
Antichristian course: for if a Minister transgress, shall he not be subject to
the power of the Law (...) imo qua, Minister as well as any other.

Secondly, they had no power to degrade, because they could give no d^gree of
Ministr^e.

Thirdly, and lastly, I told them I had no Degrees from them, and if I had, I
would disclaim them. But sure I am. that my Degrees, by the Law of Nations,
should have exempted me from such a cruel, and reproachful Censure: but since
it is so, with Moses I esteem the reproaches of Christ greater riches then the
treasures of Egypt. Further, I offered there (as formerly in other place) to
maintain my Book against all Gainsayers; but none opposed it. As I was thus
speaking, one told me, that the King had passed by Treason in me and had
changed the Penalty into this censure. To whom I replied (as I remember) that
no honest Subject had a face to charge me with Treason; for my heart (was
conscious to its own Loyalty; and that my Innocence in that might appear, I
offered before all the People, that if that man that sat before me meaning Dr.
Land) who had his hand in my blood, would move his Majesty to pass that
Censure and to give me my trial at the Common Law, if I should be found guilty
of the breach of his Majesty's Laws, I should desire no favor, but humbly
thank his Majesty for so fair and legal a Trial. Other things passed, which
I omit; only in the closure, when they bid take me away. I told them, I had one
message to them; namely, if my blood were shed, the Lord would require it of
them. And I did summon some of them, ere long, to appear before that great
Tribunal of God, to give an account for it, and so some have made their
appearance. From Lambeth I was brought back to the Fleet, where I remained some
sive days, expecting the execution of that dreadful Censure; yet to Gods
glory be it spoken (the Spirit bearing me record) without the least touch of
any dauting terror, but with m^^h comfort and courage the Lord ^a^ryed me on
in humiliation and prayer, the People of God assisting me, all this time
betwixt recourses to God. As formerly for my abode in the Fleet, as occasion
was given, I did traverse with so me learned and judicious, the lawfulness of
escape; yet ever with an upright indifferency to submit to the Will of God, and
motion of his Spirit: and I speak the truth, and lie not, that all the learned
and judicious that ever conversed with me, concluded absolutely the lawfulness
of my escape, being well qualified, only the expediencie, or inexpediencie in
me, they left to the particular instinct of the Spirit which was, it shall
appear, by the unanimous consent of the Learned, carries the main sway in this
Case ^f or my judgment not without sedulous scanning, and mature deliberation,
it was fully possessed of the lawfulness of the thing; only my Assertion stood
in relat^on to the thing, as God should offer or deny the means: at length God
did not only present the means, but also opened the mouth of one of the
Instruments, to tell me in plain terms, that if I answered not the
Opportunity, it was a tempting of God, and to my bloodshed I should be
accessory; which thing, as I had formerly pondered, so it presently gave me to
lay hold on the occasion; and as the good hand of God made the way clear for
me, and so I went out of Prison; the lawfunesse of which Act being a piece of
Christian liberty I have proved in a Treatise by it self, from good grounds,
good ends lawful means, and due Qualifications. I have satisfied all that
come to me and some with tears have beg^d pardon for censuring of me. The
Ancients have set forth whole Treatises for the lawfulness of flight, as
Athans Ambros Seneca, Aquinas. But I hope few or none will doubt of it, a main
motive to me, was the diverting Blood from the Land: but nothing could serve
the Prelate but Blood: and so with Vriah I was brought to the stake, he had his
desire. The aforesaid Censure was executed in every particular in a most cruel
manner, and measure: the Executioner was made drink in the Fleet the night
before, and also was hardened the very same day with strong water being
threatened to do it with all rigor: and so he did by Knife, Whip, Brand, and
Fire, insomuch, that never a lash he gave with a treble-cord, but he brought
away the flesh, which I shall feel to my dying day. I being put thereafter on
the Pillory an hour and a half in Frost and Snow, they inflicted the rest, and
would not let me have a Coach of my own charge, to carry me to the Fleet: but I
was forced to be carried by water, for I was not able to go. The Officers of
the Fleet sent me up into the common Jayle, by forty seven dark steps, to a
woeful dog-hole; in my assent I was diverse times like to fall backwards, and
break my neck; if Mr. Weal the Apothecary following me up with a Cordial had
not kept me, as he witnessed to the honorable Committee of Parliament. I fell
into a strong Feavor, my case was very dangerous, and my recovery very
doubtful; as my Chyrurgion and others did witness at large to the aforesaid
Committee: after that I was kept straight Prisoner within the Fleet Walls the
space of nine years and a quarter, having been prisoner three quarters of a
year before that. I was never suffered to breath abroad, nor all that time to
see my Family in my house, it being less then a Bows draught of the Fleet;
much hardship I endured and many rough affronts put upon me and mine, by the
Officers of the Fleet, notwithstanding of my inoftensive demeanours, even
themselves being Witnesses. But when all this would not serve to cut the thread
of my wearisome life, a masterpiece of cruelty was devised and followed by
four parties, whose names are known; namely, to cast me into the common Jayle,
for the effecting whereof, they set eight strong fellows upon me, who with
violence bruised my body, and did through me into a loathsome lousy place,
forty seven dark steps up, amongst some sixteen or more of wicked and debased
ones, for the most part* as the earth had not: the fall of the house endangered
my life. I lay ten weeks under the Canopy of Heaven, in the dirt and mire of
the rubbish, having nothing to shelter me from the Rain and Snow in a very cold
Season. I had many assaults made upon me to take away my life, yea even then,
when I lay very weak under the hand of God; All those passages, and many more,
concerning the company, place, and cruel usage, were proved sufficiently to
the honorable Committee: And for the further evidence, Warden Ingram told the
Counsel (as he said that it was not a place to put any man in, that was fit
to converse with an honest man. A Member of the honorable house laying my
deplorable case much to heart (as they all did) said that he had rather have
suffered all my former inflictions, and have lost his right hand too, (which he
would not for a Kingdom) than have undergone those Common-Iayle sufferings,
which were a sn^re unto my very soul, and I confess it was the very finger of
God that upheld me; there I was shut up close, twenty and two months,
notwithstanding the Kings command again, and again, to replace me in my former
Chamber. I have a Treatise by it self of this inhumane practice to be
published; the reading whereof, I am persuaded will make the Bowels to earne.
At length, in great weakness, with much ado, under Ten thousand pound Bay, I
recovered my Prison-pallace (I may say) having been there a while, and gotten
some recovery, it pleased the Lord, to move his Majesty, to call this present
Parliament, who was graciously pleased to call for my Petition, as the first
work; which when I came abroad to present, I could neither go, hear, nor see,
though my Petition was larger, then I thought the House would admit: yet out of
sense of my distress, it was twice read, and my cause much regrated with tears
of compassion: the Petition it self, I have here inserted.

TO THE HONORABLE, And High Court of PARLJAMENT. The humble Petition of
Alexander Leighton, Prisoner in the Fleet.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
HOw your much and long distressed Petitioner on the 17 of February gone ten
years, was apprehended in Blackfriars, coming from the Sermon, by a high
Commission Warrant (to which no Subjects body is liable) and thence with a
multitude of staffes and Bills, was dragged along (and all the way reproached
by the name of Jesuit and Traitor) till they brought him to London house, where
he was shut up, and by a strong guard kept (without food) till seven of the
clock at night, till Dr. Lawd then Prelate of London, and Dr. Corbet, then of
Oxford, returned in Coach from Pullam house, with a Troop attending. The Jailer
of Newgate was sent for, who came with Irous, and with a strong power of
Halberts and Staves they carried your Petitioner through a blind hollow way,
without pretense or examination, and opening up a Gate into the street (which
some say, had not been opened since Q. Mary's days) they thrust him into a
loathsome and ruinous dog-hole, full of Rats and Mice, which had no light, but
a little grate; and the Roof being uncovered, the Snow and Rain beat in upon
him, having no Bedding, nor place to make fire, but the ruins of an old smoaky
Chimney, where he had neither meat nor drink, from the Tuesday at night, till
the Thursday at Noon. In this woeful place and doleful plight, they kept him
close, with two doors shut upon him, for the space of fifteen weeks, suffering
none to come at him, till at length, his wife was only admitted.

The fourth day after his commitment, the high Commission Pursevants came
(under the conduct of the Sheriffs of London) to your Petitioners house, and a
mighty multitude with them, giving out, that they came to search for Jesuits
Books. There those violent Fellows of prey, laid violent hands upon your
Petitioners distressed wife, with such barbarous inhumanity, as he is ashamed
to express, and so rifled every soul in the house, holding a bent Pistol to
a child's breast of five years old, threatening to kill him, if he would not tell
where the books were, through which, the child was so affrighted that he never
cast it. They broke up Presses, Chests, Boxes, the Boards of the House, and
every thing they found in the way, though they were willing to open all. They
and some of the Sheriffs men spoiled, robbed, and carried away all the Books
and Manuscripts they found, with Household Stuff, your Petitioners Apparel,
Arms, and other things; so that they left nothing that liked them:
notwithstanding, your Petitioners wife told the Sheriffs, they might come to
reckon for it. They carried also a great number of diverse of your Petitioners
Books, and other things from one Mr Archers house as he will restifie.
Further, your Petitioner being denied the Copy of his Commitment by the Jailer
of Newgate, his wife with some friends, repaired to the Sheriff, offering him
Bail, according to the Statute in that behalf* which being showed by an
Attorney at Law* the Sheriff replied, That he wished the Laws of the Land,
and Privileges of the Subject had never been named in the Parliament, etc.
Your Petitioner (having thus suffered in Body, Liberty, Family, Estate, and
Name) at the end of fifteen weeks was served with a Subpaena, and an
Information laid against him by Sir Robert Heath, then his Majesty's
Attorney-Generall, whose dealing with your Petitioner was full of cruelty, and
deceit. In the mean time it did more then appear to four Physicians* that
poison had been given him in Newgate; for his hair and skin came off in a
sickness (deadly to the Eye) in the height whereof, as he did lie, Censure was
past against him in the Star Chamber, without hearing (which has not bin heard
of) notwithstanding of a Certificate from four Physicians, and Ast davit made
by an Attorney of the desperateness of the Disease. But nothing would serve D.
Lawd, but the highest Censure that ever was past in that Court to be put upon
him; and so it was to be inflicted with Knife, Fire, and Whip, at, and upon the
Pillory, with ter thousand pound Tine; which some of the Lords conceived (as he
expressed himself to a man of note) should never be inflicted: Only it was
imposed (as on a dying man) to terrify others. But the said Doctor and his
Combinants caused the said Censure to be executed the 26. day of November,
following (with a Witness) for the Hangman was armed with strong drink all
the night before in Prison, and with threatening words to do it cruelly. Your
Petitioners hands being tied to a stake (besides all other torments) he
received thirty six stripes with a terrible Cord. After which, he stood almost
two hours on the Pillory, in cold Frost and Snow and suffered the rest; as
cutting off the E^^e, firing the Face, and slitting of the Nose; so that he was
made a Theater of Misery, to Men and Angels. And being so broken with his
Sufferings* that he was not able to go, the Warden of the Fleet would not
suffer him to be carried in a Coach; but he was forced to go by water, to the
further indangering of his life. Returning to the Jail, after much harsh and
cruel usage for the space of eight years, paying more for a chamber than
thrice the worth of it (having not a bit of bread, nor drop of water al^owed.)
The Clerk of the Fleet to top up your Petitioners sufferings, sent for him to
his Office and without Warrant, or cause given by your Petitioner, set eight
strong Fellows upon him, who tore his clothes, buised his body; so that since,
he was never well, and carried him by head and heels to that loathsome common
Jail* where besides the filthiness of the place, and vildnesse of the
company, diverse contrivements were laid for taking away your Petitioners life,
as shall manifestly appear* if your Honors will be pleased to receive and
peruse a Schedule of that subject.

Now the cause of all this harsh cruel, and continued ill usage (unparalled
yet upon any one, since Britain was Christian) was nothing but a Book written
by your Petitioner, called Si^us Plea against the Pre^aeo^e, and that by the
call of diverse and many good Christians in the Parliament time^; after diverse
refusals given by your Petitioner who would not publish it, being done, till it
had the view, and approbation of the best in City, Country University, and of
some of the Parliament it self. In witness whereof he had about 500 hands:
for revealing of whose names he was promised more favors by Sir Robert Heath
then he will speak of; But denying to turn accuser of his brethren, he was
threatened within storm, which he felt to the full, wherein (through Gods
mercy) he has lived; though but lived* choosing rather to lay his neck to the
yoke for others then to release himself by others sufferings.

Further* the Petitioner was robbed of diverse goods by one Lightborn, H^es,
Grave^ and others, Officers and Servants of the Fleet, amounting toward the
value of 30. l. for which Lightborn offered composition (by a secondhand) upon
the hearing of the approach of a Parliament: but your Petitioner
(notwithstanding his necessity) refused to hearken to any such illegal and
dangerous way. To innumerate the rest of your Petitioners heavy pressures
would take up a Volumn, with which he will not burden your Honors, till
further opportunity.

And therefore he humbly and heartily entreats, that you would be graciously
pleased to take this his Petition into your serious thoughts, and to command
deliverance, that he may plead his own cause, or rather Christ's, and the
States; As also to afford such costs and damages, as he has suffered in Body,
Estate, and Family, having been prisoner (and that many times) in the most
nasty Prisons, eleven years not suffered to breath in the open Air. To which,
give him leave to add his great sufferings in all those particulars, some 16
years ago, for publishing a Book, called, The Looking-glass of Holy War.

Further, as the Cause is Christ's, and the States; So your Petitioner
conceives (under correction) that the subject of the Book, will be the prime
and main matter of your Agitation: to whose wisdom, he hops the Book shall
approve it self.

Also, your Petitioners wearing Age going now in the seventy two year,
together with his sickness, and weakness of his long distressed wife, require
a speedy deliverance.

Lastly, the Sons of death, the Jesui^^, and Jesuited have so long insulted in
their own licentious liberty, and over the miseries of your servant and
others; who forbearing more motives, craves pardon for his plolixity being
necessitated thereto from the depth and length of his miseries: In all which, he
cease not to pray, etc. and.

K^ssath your hands.

PROVE. 24.11. Will thou not deliver them that are drawn up to Death, and those
that are ready to be slain.


But notwithstanding of my inability, the House could not prevail by entreaty
with Warden I^grano, to let me take a Lodging at Westminster, though he had
ten thousand pound Bail for me, as good as London afforded: through which
denial, I was almost killed with a Coach, being on horseback, toward the
Fleet in the dark, I received a dangerous wound in the forepart of my Leg; by
the neglect whereof in following my Cause, my life was endangered, and so I lay
by it ten Weeks not able to stir abroad.

But before I took my Bed, my wrongs were recognized and adjudged, my Cause
cleared and justified, and that by as noble, judicious, just, and impartial a
Committee, as any State could afford. The Inquiry was exact the Examination
punctual, the Censure just, the Report entirely faithful, the Order of the
Honorable House answerable to the Premises, and the Transmission to the Lords
very just and equal.

Lastly they caused the Warden of the Fleet (with much ado) to deliver up my
Bail: So that after twelve years hard imprisonment, I was delivered out of
the Pit. wherein there was no water; for all which, I humbly thank the great
God of Heaven, and do acknowledge my dutiful obleigement to the Honorable, and
High Court of Parliament; expecting Execution, which is the Life of Judgment.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

JAMES CRANFORD.
May 22. 1646.

