A Moderate Answer UNTO Dr. BASTVVICKS BOOK; CALLED, Jndependency not Gods
Ordinance. WHEREIN, Is declared the manner how some CHVRCHES in this City were
gathered, and upon what terms their Members were admitted; That so both the
Dr. and the Reader may judge, how near some Believers who walk together in the
Fellowship of the Gospel, do come in their practice to these Apostolical
rules which are propounded by the Dr. as Gods method in gathering Churches and
admitting MEMBERS.

By HANSERD KNOLLYS.

Printed and published according to Order.

Imprimatur,

JA: CRANFORD.

LONDON, Printed by JANE COE. 1645.

A Moderate ANSWER UNTO Dr. BASTWICKS Book; CALLED, Jndependencie not Gods
Ordinance.
PAssing by many things less considerable, because I intend brevity; In the
7th. page of the Doctors book, There is a twofold Question between them
called PRESBYTERIANS and their Brethren who are termed INDEPENDENTS; The first
is, concerning the Government of the Church, viz. Whether it be
Presbyterian-Dependen, or Presbyterian-Independent? The second Question is,
concerning the Gathering of CHURCHES.

Touching the former Question concerning the Government of the Church, the
Doctor acknowledges in the same 7th. page, that the Brethren on both sides
agree, that the Government of the church is a Presbyterian-Government, both
acknowledging a Presbytery. But whether it be Dependent, or Independent is the
maine thing in the question, which the Doctor does determine, and says in the
Title page of his book he has evidently Proved. ' That the
Presbyterian-Government-Dependent is Gods Ordinance, and not the
byterian-Government-Independent.

I intend not to strive with the Doctor about words, and therefore touching
the two Terms, to wit, Dependent, and Independent; I shall only say this at
present: That if by Independent the the Doctor indeed mean (as it does appear
so to my understanding by many passages in his book, he does intend) a
Presbyterian-Government, which has not Dependencie upon any in matters merely
Ecclesiastical (but upon the Lord Jesus Christ, Who is the Head of the Church)
And if by Dependent he also indendeth (as in many other passages in his book
seems to me to be his meaning) Page 8.10. Page 14.15.17.18.
a Presbyterian-Government, which has a Dependencie upon a supreme Judicature
of a Common Council of Presbyters, and who must in matters Ecclesiastical be
subject unto the Decrees, Sentences, Constitutions, and Commandments of a
Common Council, College or Consistory of Classical, Provincial, or
Synodicall Presbyters; Then I do conceive the Doctor has not proved, (nor will
he ever be able to prove) That the Presbyterian-Government-Dependent is Gods
Ordinance; And I hope to make the contrary plainly appear both from clear
Texts of Scripture, and the Doctors own books. And seeing that the Doctor
has in the 6th. p. of his Book desired all his Christan Brethren in the
Deciding of this Question to take the Word of God into their Hands, and with
the Noble Bereans to sit down and examine, whatsoever shall be said on either
side according to the Scriptures: I willingly make the same request, as most
desirous, that this short Answer may abide the like trial, and be weighed in
the other balance of the Sanctuary against the Doctors Book.

Now that all things may be handled in good order, and in a Methodicall way,
the Doctor has reduced the whole disputation concerning this first Question
into four Propositions, page. 11. The first, that there were many Congregations
and several assemblies of Believers in the church of Jerusalem, in the which
they enjoyed all acts of Worship, and all the Ordinances amongst themselves,
and did partake of all acts of Church Fellowship, especially of preaching, and
in the Administration of the Sacraments, and prayer, and that before the
Persecution we read of, Act. 8.2. The second, That all these congregations,
and several assemblies made but one church. The third, That the Apostles and
Elders governed, ordered, and ruled this church jointly, and by a
Common Council, and Prebsytery. The fourth, that this church of Jerusalem, and
the government of the same is to be a pattern for all several congregations
and assemblies in any City or Vicinity to unite into one Church, and for the
Officers of those congregations to govern that Church jointly in a College or
Presbytery.
These are his four Propositions.

But before he comes to the proof of these particulars he says it will not
be amiss in general to take notice, That all the Churches we read of in the
New Testament, were Aristocratically and Prestbyterially governed, and were all
Dependent upon their several Presbyters, and produces diverse places of
Scripture to prove the same, and two sheets are spent wholly in proving thereof
from the 12. page to the 29. All which (should it be granted) only proves.
First, That in every City or Church there was a Presbiterie, Acts. 14.23.
(...), cumque per suffragia statuissent illis per singulas Ecclesias seniores,
that is, When they had ordained them Elders in every Church by the Suffrage or
stretching forth of Hands, also Titus 1.5. (...), and constituas oppidatim
seniores, that is, And thou may Ordain Elders town by town, or city by
city, or village by village.

Secondly, that as there were Apostles and Elders in the Church of Jerusalem,
Act. 15.2,4. So there were Elders in the Church of Ephesus, Act. 20.17,28. And
in the Church of Corinth, and in the Church of Galatia, and in Philippie, etc.

Thirdly, that these several Churches were Dependent upon their several
Presbyters, and were to obey them who had the rule over them, Heb. 13.7,17,24.
Or who were their Guides, (...), Obedite ducibus vestris, that is Obey your
Guides.

Fourthly, that this Presbyterian-Church-Government, God has has appointed as
his Ordinance, to be continued to the end of the world, the which whosoever
resists, resists the Ordinance of God, but it does not prove, That this
Presbyterian-Church-Government is Dependent upon a supreme Judicature of a
Common-counsell of Presbyters, or that they must submit, and subject them
themselves and their churches unto the Decrees, Sentences, Constitutions, and
Commandments, of a Common Council, college, and court of classical, or
Synodall Presbyters, which the Doctor should have proved, for such a
Presbyterian-Government he intends, as may appear by the Doctors own words,
page 17.18. As for the Presbyterian Government (in the sense that I understand
it) there is nothing more clear to me in all the Scripture: Yea the very word
and name of Presbytery signifies, a Magistracy, or Aristocracy, or Signory, or
court. And as the word is taken in the civil Polity and Government, so in the
Ecclesiastical, by a Presbytery we understand (says the Doctor) page 18. A
Religious, Grave, Sollid, Learned, and Wise Council of Divines, Ministers,
etc. Without whose joint and mutual accord, or agreement and common-consent
nothing ought to be done or transacted of public concernment. And to make
this good, to wit, That the Presbyters of particular congregations or
assemblies of Believers, and their Churches ought to be subject to a
Common Council or Court of Presbyters. The Doctor urges that Scripture, the
third Epistle of John, the 9.10,11. verses, as an invincible Argument.

You shall find it thus expounded by the Doctor page 15. 'And therefore when
Diotrephes assumed to himself, and his particular congregation a power and
authority to rule according to his will and pleasure, without the consent of
the Presbytery, and opposed John the Presbyter, He sharply reproves his
proceedings, and signifies to the Church; That when he came he would remember
his words, and teach him how to prate against the Presbytery with malicious
words; Which is an evil thing in him says St. John. It was evil in him to
assume unto himself, and his particular congregation, that power that belonged
unto the college or council of Presbyters, and was to be moderated and
exercised only by the conjoynt, and common-consent of the Presbytery. For God
has appointed, that the Church should be governed by a Presbytery; and
Diotrephes would have his congregation Independent, and have an absolute
jurisdiction within it self, which says St. John is an evil thing.

Now let the Reader judge, whether the Dr. be not much mistaken in his
Commentary-exposition and application of this place of Scripture. And let me
give you to understand, that St. John says verse 9. I wrote unto the Church.
Or as Beza upon that verse, (...) Scripsi nonnihil Ecclesiae, that is, I have
written something to the Church. But seeing no mention is made of any
particular Congregation, how can the Dr. so confidently affirm that it was his
particular Congregation? Now the Reader may see plainly, That the Dr. can
expound those Brethren and their Elders or Presbyters, which the Scripture
calls a Church, to be a particular Congregation. And what it was which St.
John had written to the Church is not in this Epistle, nor any other Scripture,
declared, except it was, to receive those Brethren, which he says verse 8.
ought to be received, and verse 10. whom Diotrephes would not receive, how then
does the Doctor say? That Diotrephes assumed that power to himself, which
belonged unto the College and council of Presbyters; without whose joint and
mutual agreement, and common-consent nothing ought to be done or transacted of
public concernment. Is the receiving of Brethren, or casting out of Brethren a
power which belongs to a College of Presbyters, and neither the one nor the
other may be transacted by the Elders and Brethren of a particular
congregation, unless the court or common council of Presbyters conjoyntly
consent unto it? Let it be also considered, That Diotrephes opposed the
Brethren and forbade them, that would have received those, who St. John says
verse 8. we ought to receive, yea and cast them ought, verse. 10. (...) and
volentes (admittere) prohibet and de Ecclesia dejicit. That is, and forbids
them, that would (or are willing to admit them) and casts them out of the
church, to wit, excommunicates them. Does it hereby appear that Diotrephes
would have his congregation Independent? and have an absolute jurisdiction
within it self. No, but Diotrephes would Lord it over the church, and have the
pre-eminence above his brethren, whether fellow Elders or fellow Saints, verse
^. (...), sed amans primatum gerere in eos Diorephes, that is, But Diotrephes
loving the primacie amongst them. He would be the Primate and Metropolitan of
the church, and have the Pre-eminence of all the Presbyters in it, and Brethren
of it. The Doctor could have urged this Scripture against the domineering
Prelates, and why should he marvail, that his Brethren should now urge it
against the court of Presbyters. It is confessed Diotrephes did that which was
evil in usurping Authority over the church, and those Brethren, whom he cast
out of the church; But that he was the first that opposed the Presbyterian
Government, or that he did affront a Court and common council of Presbyters,
is more then I know, or the Doctor can prove. For had Diotrephes done so, why
was he not convented before them, surely the Apostle and Elder St. John would
rather have written to the college of Presbyters (if there were any such) then
to the Church, or in writing to the Church, would rather have sent him a
summons to appear at some consistory before the Court and common council of
Presbyters, then to warn them to take heed of his evil, that they did not
follow it: And doubtless St. John would have written thus, Diotrephes loves to
be a Primate among you, wherefore when the Presbytery that is to say, the
Magistracy or Signory of grave, solid, learned, religious, and wise Divines and
Ministers come to keep order, and met together in a Court and common council,
I will remember his deeds, and inform, or complain to the Court and
common council of Presbyters, that he prates against us (the Presbyters) with
malicious words. But the Apostle St. John (did not know any Court or
common council of Presbyters, neither Classical, nor Synod call, to appeal
unto) [Nor can the Doctor make good those Appeals he mentions page 10. to be
according to the Scripture of Truth, to wit; That every particular man, as well
as any Assembly or Congregation, may have their appeal to the Presbytery of
their Precinct, hundred, or devision under whose jurisdictions they were; And
if they find themselves wronged there, then they have appeals to some other
higher Presbytery or Council of Divines for relief and justice. I only ask
the Doctor how he can prove these appeals by Scripture; and if he could,
whether that higher Presbytery or Council of Divines, (especially if they may
say the Holy Ghost and we) be not as Independent as these Brethren and their
Churches, against whom the Doctor has written: And if so, then such a high
Presbytery or Council of Divines, is not Gods Ordintnce, by the Doctors own
confession and Affirmation.] Therefore the Apostle writes to the Church or
particular Congregation whereof Diotrephes was a Member and an Elder, whom he
knew had power to judge him, as well as the Church or particular Congregation
of Corinth had power to judge them that were Members therein. 1 Cor. 5.12.13.
And therefore might as warrantably admonish Diotrephes, as the Church of
Colosse might Arckippus: Coloss. 4.17. 'And if nothing of public concernment
ought to be done or transacted without the joint and mutual accord or
agreement, and common consent of the Presbytery; John the Presbyter would not
have transgressed so far, as to take upon himself this Authority over
Diotrephes to tell the Church of his faults, and to say he would remember him
and sharply reprove him, and teach him to prate against the Presbytery with
malicious words, which belonged to the Court and Common Council of Presbyters:
But I shall have a just occasion to say more touching this matter in the answer
unto the third Question, and therefore passing by the objection with its answer
mentioned page 19. to the 29. unto its due place. I shall desire seriously to
consider the Doctors proof of his first proposition, which he labors first
by producing such Scriptures, as he conceives make for the manifestation of
the Truth, and from thence frames and forms his Arguments. 'His Scriptures
are these, viz. Matthew. 3. verse. 1.2.5.6. Mark. 6.20.21. Matthew. 14.5. and Luke
20.4.6. And diverse other Scriptures, which you have at large set down in the
Doctors Book with his Arguments framed from thence, page 29. to 82. where this
first proposition ends. The sum of all which, I shall give the Reader to
understand as briefly as I can, to wit; 'Where there was an infinite multitude
of Believers, or a very City of Believers, so that they kept a tyrannical King
in awe, and all the Magistrates and Elders in whose hands was all the power and
Authority, even a world of Believers, with many Rulers and men of great place
and and Office, with such an increase of multitudes of Believers, 8000 new
Converts besides women and children, yea many 10000, of Believers, and where
there were almost an hundred Preachers and Ministers, besides the 12. Apostles,
and all these continually taken up in Prayer and Preaching, There must of
necessity be many Congregations and Assemblies. But in the Church of Jerusalem
there was an infinite multitude of Believers, and a very City of Believers
(which kept Herod himself, the tyrant in awe, and all the Magistrates and
Elders) even a world of Believers, with many Rulers and men of great place and
Office, with an increase of multitudes of Believers, and 8000. new Converts
besides women and children, yea and many 10000. after all the persecutions, and
almost an hundred Preachers and Ministers besides the 12 Apostles, and all
these were continually taken up in Prayer and Preaching; Ergo, they must of
necessity be dispiersed into many Congregations and several Assemblies. I do
deny the Minor proposition of this Argument. Neither has the Doctor proved,
That there was an infinite number of Believers, nor a very City of Believers in
the Church of Jerusalem. The Scriptures quoted by the Doctor speaks no such
thing; those places in Matthew, Mark and Luke, tell us of very many who were
baptized by John, and by Christ's Disciples, but do not declare how many of
these baptized persons were of the Church in Jerusalem; and the Scripture
witnesses Acts 9.31. that there were Churches throughout all Judaea, as well
as in Jerusalem, and for ought I know, or the Doctor either, many of those
baptized persons might be in these Churches, yea the most of them, and but a
few, it may be no more but those 120. mentioned Acts 1.13,14,15. To whom were
added about 3000. souls, who continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. Acts 2.41.42.44.46. And as
for the world of Believers mentioned in another argument drawn from Joh. 12.19.
behold the world is gone after him. Page 37 and 40.
That Scripture does not say they believed in him, much less that there was a
world of Believers in the Church in Jerusalem. Neither is there mention in any
Scripture quoted by the Doctor of 8000. new Converts besides women and
children. Neither does that Scripture produced Acts 4.4 prove any such thing:
For the Reader may consider that the number of them there mentioned are but
5000. And albeit the Doctor make them up 8000. by saying those 5000. men were
added to the Church, and joined to the formers Believers page 57. Yet there is
a twofold mistake in the Doctors Addition, to wit; First, that some of the
3000. (may be) were women, and how then can the Doctor say, there were 8000.
new converts besides women. Secondly, these 5000. are only called men and not
converts, not believers. For howbeit many of them hearing the Word believed,
yet it is not said the 5000. men believed: And the truth is the Text well
considered only holds forth, that, the number of men was made up five thousand.

(...), and factus est numerus virorum, quasi millia quinque, and the number of
men was made about five thousand, not 8000. And as for the many 10000 s.
mentioned Acts 21.20. (...) comes of (...) infinitus (and though the word (...)
do sometimes signify numerum december millium, yet not always, but for some
great number which cannot suddenly be told) as Luke 12 1. And Beza both
according to the old and new version of the Greek into Latin, reads it millia
1000 s. not december millia 10000 s. and so we have it in our English Bibles
translated thousands. And the following verse 22. will make it probable that
there were not many 10000 s. for there we thus read; The multitude must needs
come together, so that I say its probable, that they were not so many 1000 s.
but they could, yea must assemble together. Neither can the Dr. make good from
those Scriptures he produces 'pag. 62. to wit, Acts 1. verse. 21.22. cap. 6.
verse. 2.4. and cap. 8. verse. 1. That there was almost a hundred Preachers and
Ministers besides the 12. Apostles in the Church of Jerusalem. The 12. are
named indeed in Act. 6.2.4. but not 100. besides, no nor any one Preacher but
them 12. And as for the other two places Acts 1.21.22. and Acts 8.1. there is
not any word concerning Preachers or Ministers, only some directions touching
the choice of Matthias, who was one of the 12. mentioned Act. 6.2. And although
they who were scattered preached the Word Acts 8.4. yet the Scripture does not
declare that they were Preachers or Ministers of the Church in Jerusalem.

But the Doctor has one Argument, which is more to the purpose then all the
other, which I desire the Reader seriously to consider, page 64. he thus
further argues.

That, which the Holy Scripture in express words, and in diverse places has
declalred unto us, that every Christian is bound to believe. But the Scripture
in express words, and in diverse, places has declared unto us, that there
were diverse assemblies, and Congregations of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, and that the Apostles, and all the Believers in Jerusalem, did
continue daily with one accord in the Temple, and that they brake bread from
house to house: and that daily in the Temple, and in every house, they ceasad
not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.

Ergo, There was diverse congregations, and several assemblies, of Believers
in the CHURCH of Jerusalem, where they did duly partake in all the Ordinances,
and enjoyed all the acts of Worship.

Now I do desire the Reader to consider how the Doctor Proves his Minor, which
he says is manifest from Acts 2.46. and chap. 5.12,42. and chap. 3.11.12. and
many more places, that might be produced, page 64.65.66. In all which
discourse, the Dr. gives you nothing, but his own suppositions, and
conclusions, for the proof of his Minor proposition which is his manner of
discour-throughout his book.

This argument I answer; First, by denying the Assumption, or Minor
proposition, and the reason of my denying all, is because the Scriptures
produced by the Doctor, do not in express words declare, that there were
diverse assemblies, and Congregations of believers in the Church of Jerusalem,
The Scriptures quoted do in express words declare the contrary to what the
Doctor would prove; For, Acts 2.44,46. All that believed were together, and
they continued daily with one accord in the Temple. and Acts. 3.11,12. It is
expressly said; That all the people ran together to them, in the porch,
which is called Solomon's. Act. 5.12. And they were all with one accord in
Solomon's Porch. So that these Scriptures produced by the Doctor to prove, that
there were diverse assemblies and Congregations of Believers in the Church of
Jerusalem, who met together in several places, at one and the same time, to
wit, upon the first day of the week, where they did partake daily in all
Ordinances, does expressly prove the contray, to wit, that the Apostles, and
all the Believers in the Church of Jerusalem, met together with one accord, in
one place, to wit, the Temple, and in Solomon's Porch, and brake bread from
house to house, (...), Domatius, not (...) per singulas domos, and thus they
did (...), quotidie, day by day, and they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers, and all
that believed were together, Acts. 2.42,44,46. Yea, the Doctor himself says
in his Minor Proposition, the latter part of it. That the Apostles and all the
Believers in Jerusalem did continue daily with one accord in the Temple, and
that they brake bread from house to huse: And this shall suffice for refutation
of What the Docter has Written touching the first Proposition.

The second now follows page 81. viz. That all the Congregations and several
Assemblies made but one Church. And to this the Doctor says, the Brethren
themselves acknowledge, that all Believers in Jerusalem were all members of
that Church, and they accord further, that it was but one Church. And it is
manifest out of the Holy Scripture, Acts 2.3.45.46. chapters. To which I also
consent; But the Brethren have not acknowledged, neither has the Doctor by
Scripture proved, that in this one Church of Jerusalem there were averse
Congregations and several Assemblies of Believers; and therein I must mnnifest
my dissent from the Doctors opinion, promising him, that whenever he shall
soundly prove it by express Words of Scripture (which he has undertaken) I
will acknowledge it.

The third proposition, which the Doctor comes next to prove, is, That thee
Apostles and Elders, or Presbyters governed, and ordered, and ruled this Church
jointly and by a common council and Presbytery, page 82. Which the Doctor
says is evident by these places following: Acts 11.27. to the end. The words
of this Sccripture which the Doctor makes use of, to prove his Assertion, are
these, Verse 30. And sent it to the Elders by the hands of Barnabas, and Saul.
Here in these last words (says the Doctor) We see, that the Presbyters, and
none but the Presbyters received the Alms, which sufficiently proves, that
the Presbyters in all Churches were, the men of Government: page 82. It is not
denied by the Brethren, that the Presbyters in all Churches were the men in the
Government of the Churches in which they are Elders. But this I conceive (by
the Doctors favor) does not prove it, to wit; Because the Alms was sent to
the Elders. Much less does that Scripture prove, that the Apostles and
Presbyters governed and ruled the Church in Jerusalem by a Common Council and
Presbytery, which is the Assertion that the Doctor undertakes to prove. But in
the 15. Chapter verse 2.4.6.22. and in chap. 16.4. And in Acts 21.17,18. The
Presbyters of Jerusalem by name (says the Doctor page.) 83. are expressed. Out
of which places of Scripture before the Doctor frame his Arguments, he pleases
to make a digression from page 48. to 90. Wherein he highly extols the
Presbyters, making them equal with the Apostles in all the Acts of
Church-Governement, (as appears by the Doctors own words, page 88. I do
verily believe (says the Doctor) that the Presbyters did act as authoritively
as the Apostles: and that the Presbyters might as well conclude, It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us, as well as the Apostles, and not only the
presbyters, who sat in Counsel with the Apostles, and other presbyters, who
were Ordained Elders by the Apostles; And the Assembly now of Divines, or any
other, may congregate and meet together in some one place, for the deciding of
controversies, and differences of opinions in Religion, to state the Questions,
and debate them from Scripture, or warrantable authority and evidence of reason
deduced from thence, and may determine the qestion by joint consent, or by the
most voices, and may say it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and us. page 87.88.
Page 88.
And that Presbiters have their authority as well grounded in the Word of God,
as Kings and States have theirs, page. 89. And the Doctor does more especially
extol the Presbyters of this kingdom in these our dais, telling what they have
deserved from the Church, Parliament, and Kingdom more then any of their
Predecessors, having ended his Digression, he gives you his Argument, page 90.
To wit: 'They that in the holy Scripture are called Presbyters, and acted and
ordered things in a joint body, and Common-counsell with the Presbyters, and
exercised that ordinary power committed to them in the 18. of Mattew, they
acted as Presbyters. But the Apostles in governing the Church of Jerusalem,
consisting of many Congregations and Assemblies, acted and ordered things in a
joint body and Common council with the Presbytery of that Church, as
Presbyters. Ergo, the Church of Jerusalem was Presbyterianly governed, and by a
Common council of Presbyters. The Major, and Minor of this Sillogisme being
proved (says the Doctor) the conclusion will necessarily ensue. I know not
that the Brethren ever denied, That the Church of Jerusalem was Presbyterianly
governed; And although the Dr. be pleased to make that his conclusion, yet
(under Reformation be it spoke) that conclusion does not follow upon the
premises. For if the Dr. please to review his Argument, He shall find, First;
that the subject of his Major proposition is left out both in his Minor, and in
his Conclusion: The first part of the Doctors Minor should have been this, to
wit, But the Apostles in the holy Scripture are called Presbyters, and who
ever denied this; Also the first part of the Doctors conclusion should have
been this, from these two premises, to wit; Ergo, The Apostles acted as
Presbyters which Conclusion is not the thing in Question. Secondly, that from
the second part of the Doctors two propositions (to wit, They that acted and
Ordered things in a joint body and Common Council, which the Presbyters, acted
as Presbyters; But the Apostles in governing the Church of Jerusalem acted and
Ordered things in a joint body, and Common Council with the Presbytery, (or
Presbyters either) of that Church: Ergo, the Apostles acted as Presbyters.)
This should have been the Doctors conclusion.

Now the truth is, though the Apostles were called Presbyters in the Scripture,
yet it follows not, that they acted as Presbyters, but as Apostles Acts 15.
And they cannot therein be a pattern and president for Presbyters; First,
because the Apostles had the care and charge of and over all Churches. 2 Cor.
11.28. But the Presbyters had the care and oversight of some one Church only,
as Ephesus Acts 20.28. or Philippi, Phil. 1.1. and this the Dr. often inserts
in his Book. That all the Churches we read of in the new Testament (though they
were Presbyterially governed) were dependent upon their several Presbyters,
page 12. Page 12.
And secondly, because this would make the Presbyters Independents indeed, for
so the Apostles were in the Government of all the Churches; The Presbyters of
Jerusalem, of Ephesus, and of all the Churches were dependent upon the
Apostles, and the Apostles only depended on Christ, by whose holy spirit, they
were all always guided in the government of their Churches, and therefore they
said Acts 15.28. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us. And though the Doctor
say the Presbyters might say so, as well as the Apostles because the Elders or
Presbyters are mentioned there: The Dr. might have also considered that the
Brethren, even the whole church, the multitude (how many soever the D. can make
of them) were present as well as the Presbyters. Acts 15.4.12.22.23.25.27.28.
And so have made the Brethren, the multitude, even the whole Church Independent
also; and the Dr. might as well have affirmed, that the Brethren even the whole
Church might say, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us.

To the fourth proposition; 'That the Church of Jerusalem and the Government of
the same, is to be a pattern for all Congregations and Assemblies in any City
or vicinity to unite into one Church, and for the Officers and Presbyters of
those congregations to govern that Church jointly in a College or Presbytery.
page 97. And for the proof of this fourth Proposition, the Doctor says; 'That
all men acknowledge, that the mother Church must give an example of Government
to all the Daughter Churches. Neither do the Brethren deny (says the Dr.) but
the Government of the Church of Jerusalem must be the pattern of Government to
all Churches. But the Dr. knows, that the Brethren deny that the Church of
Jerusalem consisted of diverse Congregations and several assemblies under a
Common Council, Consistory, College, or Court of Presbyters. And this they
have not granted, neither has the Doctor proved. And this may be sufficient to
be said in answer to the four Propositions touching the first question.

And now I come to the second Question, which is concerning the manner of
gathering of Churches, and admitting of Members and Officers page 98. which
Question the Dr. thus states, viz. 'Whether Ministers of the Gospel may, out
of already gathered assemblies of Believers, select and choose the most
principle of them into a Church Fellowship peculiar unto themselves, and admit
of none into their society, but such as shall enter in by a private Covenant,
and are allowed by the consent, and approbation of all the Congregation? And
this Question the Doctor brancheth into six Queries page 98.99. Wherein the
judicious Reader may perceive the Doctor (through misinformation I conceive)
has mistaken the stateing of the Question, which he partly acknowledges page
100.

'But now I shall set down (says the Dr. page 100) Gods method and the
Apostles practice in gathering of Churches, and the manner they used in making
Members in every Church, and compare it with the method our Brethren (the
Independents) use, etc. And to this purpose the Doctor begins with Christ's
commission, Matthew. 28.19,20. and Mark. 16.15,16. and Acts 26.15,16.17,18,19,20.

Out of these several Scriptures the Doctor observes these three things, page
101. and 102. To wit, First, 'That they should teach no other things but what
Christ commanded them, and appeared to them in, and for which thy had his Word
and warrant. Secondly, the condition, which they were to propound unto all
nations and people, upon which they were admitted into the Church, was Faith,
Repentance, and Baptism. And thirdly, that this commission was delivered only
to the Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel, that they should admit whosoever
believed, and were baptized; And they that believed not would not be baptized,
were not to be admitted. These are the Doctors own words, page 102. and page.
103. The Doctor for proof quotes the third Chapter of Matthew, and Luke 3.7.
And the sum of John's preaching (says the Dr.) is mentioned, verse 3. It was
the baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins. Also he there cites
Luke 7.29. That all the people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God,
being Baptized with the Baptism of John; But the Pharisees and the Lawyers
rejected the council of God against themselves, being no Baptized of him. page
103.104. But now to go on (says the Dr. page 104.) after the Resurrection and
Assension of Christ, etc. Where he quotes, Acts 2.37,38. Then they that gladly
received the Word were Baptized, and the same day were added unto them about
three thousand souls.

Hence the Doctor observes, that the Apostles propounded no other condition or
terms for the making all and every one of them members of the Church, but
Repentance and Baptism, The which, when the people had accepted of (says the
Doctor) They were forthwith admitted, etc. page. 104. For another proof the
Doctor produces, Acts 10.44,47,48. Where the Doctor affirms, page 106. That
those Brethren who came with Peter did not intermeddle in that business, to
wit, of their admittance (by Baptism) into the Church. Now I conceive the
reason, why those Brethren did not intermeddle to hinder their admittance to
that Ordinance of Jesus Christ, (to wit, Baptism in water) and so to an
entrance into the Church; was, not because they had not such Liberty, but
because the Brethren had no just objections or kindrance to declare to Peter.

That the Brethren had a liberty to have declared any thing, which might justly
have hindered the administration of that Ordinance of Baptism unto them, does
appear by the Question which the Apostle expounded. verse 47. Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized? 'And the Dr. himself
acknowledged, page 102. That the Brethren or Disciples of the Church of
Jerusalem (who must be a pattern (says the Dr.) of all churches) had this
liberty to except against some sorts of persons, and hinder their admittance
into the church, though baptized according to Christ's Commission, and Preachers
chosen and sent by Christ himself. And that in case such persons have been
formerly known to be open Enemies, and persecuters of the church, and then they
are justly to be suspected (says the Dr. page. 102.) until they have given
public Evidence by witness to the Ministers of their true Conversion, and
there produces a plain instance to prove this page 102. Acts. 9.26,27,28. And
when Saul was come to Jerusalem ((...) tentabat jungi) he assayed to join
himself to the Disciples, but they were all afraid of him, and believed not
that he was a Disciple, etc.

Now this liberty have all the disciples in the like case, because Jerusalem
the Mother church is the pattern of all other the Daughter Churches, as the
Doctor confesses, yea affirms, page 97. And says, all men acknowledge, That
the Mother Church must give an example of government to all the Daughter
churches. And this is also by the Doctor acknowledged, page 102. to be a part
of the power of the Keys, to open and shut the doors of the Church; that is,
to admit such as are for their Faith, Knowledge and Repentance sufficiently
qualified, and fitted to be made members, and to refuse such, as are not fit to
be recived into the fellowship of the church; either for their Ignorance or
other sins and offenses, etc. Now, then when it does evidently appear. That the
Disciples or Brethren (not to say Sisters, though they are Disciples also) of
the Church in Jerusalem (in her most flourishing condition) had this liberty
to declare their fears, and the ground thereof against Paul, who was at that
time a Believer, a Baptized person, and a Preacher, or minister of the Gospel,
so that although, he came, and assayed, to be joined to the Disciples, and be
admitted a member among them, that he might have fellowship with them in the
worship, and ordinances of the Gospel: Yet was thereby hindered from
admittance until Barnabas witnessed his condition and conversation to the
Apostle, and then he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem. How
can the Doctor make good, that 'The Presbyters alone without the consent of
Brethren may admit members, and cast out members, and that the Brethren or the
congregation has nothing to do to hinder any such thing, page 102.106.

For further proof hereof: 'The Doctor urges Act. 8.35. to 40. The example of
the Eunuch, to whom Philip being sent preached Jesus, and Baptism in his Name,
and it is related, That when they came to a certain water the Eunuch said unto
him; See here is Water? What does hinder me to be Baptized? And Philip said, If
thou beleevest with all thy heart thou may, (...) licet, And he answered and
said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: And he commanded the
Charet to stand still; And they went down both into the water, both Philip and
the Eunuch, and he Baptized him. Here we set (says the Doctor) that PHILIP
admits him into the number of believers, and makes him a member of the Church.
But the Doctor says, this was without consulting with the Congregation, by his
own authority, and upon the Eunuch his own testimony, page 106.

I answer, that PHILIP had a special command from God for what he did herein,
and so had Ananias, Act. 9.15. touching Saul, which is the next Instance which
the Doctor brings in this same 106. page And albeit the Doctor affirm; 'That
ANANIAS did not say to SAUL, I will consult with the Church to see whither they
will admit thee to be a member, for thou have greatly wasted the Church, and
made havoc of the Saints, and therefore I will have their approbation, and
consent, and thou shall give in evidences of thy true Conversion, etc. And so
be received and admitted.

'But without all this ado (says the Dr. page 107.) he baptized Paul, and
admits him into the number of Believers, and makes him a Member of the
Church. Yet if the Reader look back into the 102. page of his Book, The Dr.
there makes an exception from the power which he a little before had affirmed
the Presbyters have to admit Members, by virtue of Christ his commission, upon
the profession of their faith and repentance, and receiving baptism, without
any further Testimony; 'Unlesse (says the Dr.) they had been formerly known to
be open enemies, and persecutors of the Church, and then they were justly to be
suspected, till they had given public evidence by witness of their true
conversion: And gives an instance in Paul, who for a time the Disciples feared
Acts 9.26.27. till they had better information, and proof, that he now preached
the faith, that he had once persecuted, and had suffered for it, page 102. To
rehearse all the Scriptures alleged to prove this method of God and practice
of the Apostles were needless. But passing by such as are not so plain and
clear for the proof thereof, and also omitting, what the Doctor has said
touching the Brethren, in comparing their practice with the Apostles: Because
the Dr. is mistaken in stateing the Question, and also in his Queries, as
before I mentioned in the 14 page of this my answer, and the Reader may see
page 98 99. and 100. of the Doctors Book. I shall give the Reader the result of
all, that the Dr. has written from page 100. to the end of his Book, touching
Gods method, and the Apostles practice in gathering of Churches and admitting
Members, viz. 'First, That Christ having given a Commission to his Apostles to
teach all Nations, and baptize them, Matthew. 28.19.20. Mark. 16 15 16. the
Apostles practiced accordingly. Acts 2.37.38. Acts 10.44.45.46.47.48. and so
did Philip Acts 8.35.36.37.38. and Ananias Acts 9.10.18. Secondly, That the
condition or terms, which they were to propound unto all Nations and people
upon which, they were to be admitted into the Church, were Faith, Repentance,
and Baptism. Mark. 16.15,16. For the commission was delivered to the Apostles,
that they should admit whosoever believed, and would be baptized, and they,
that believed not, and would not be baptized, were not to be admitted, page
102. and page 104. The Apostles (says the Dr.) propounded no other condition
or terms for making all and every one Members of the Church but Repentance,
and Baptism, Acts 2.37.38. Thirdly, that the Apostles and all succeeding
Ministers of the Gospel should admit whosoever believed, and were baptized, to
be Members of the Church, and teach them to observe no other things but what
Christ commanded them, and for which they had his Word and warrant: page 101.
and 102. Matthew. 28.19.20. And this (says the Dr.) the Apostles did practice,
without requiring them to take a private covenant, or enter into the Church by
way of a particular covenant, page 105. Acts 2.37.38. This being the sum and
result of that method and practice, which the Dr. conceives should be done in
gathering Churches and admitting Members, which the Scriptures will warrant,
and Christ Jesus approve of as his fathers will, I shall now take liberty to
declare, what I know by mine own experience to be the practice of some Churches
of God in this City. That so both the Dr. and the Reader may judge how near the
Saints, who walk together in the Fellowship of the Gospel do come in their
practice, to these Apostolical rules and practice propounded by the Dr. as
Gods method in gathering Churches, and admitting Members. I say, that I know by
mine own experience (having walked with them) That they were thus gathered;
viz. Some godly and learned men of approved gifts and abilities for the
Ministry, being driven out of the Countries, where they lived by the
persecution of the Prelates, came to sojourn in this great City, and preached
the Word of God both publicly, and from house to house, and daily in the
Temples and in every house, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ:
and some of them have dwelt in their own hired houses, and received all that
came in unto them, preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things,
which concern the Lord Jesus Christ. Matthew. 28.18.19.20. Mark. 16.15. Act. 8.4.
^ap. 1^.19 20.21.22. Act. 10.20.21. Act. 5.42. Act. 28.23.30.31. Acts
17.1.2,3,4,5. Acts 17.5.11,12. Acts 2.38.40,41,42.
And when many sinners were converted by their preaching of the Gospel, some
of them that believed, consorted with them, and of professors a great many, and
of the chief women not a few. And the condition which those Preachers both
publicly and privately propounded to the people, unto whom they Preached, upon
which they were to be admitted into the Church was Faith, Repentance, and
Baptism; and none other. And whosoever (poor as well as rich, bond as well as
free, servants as well as Masters) did make a profession of their Faith in
Christ Jesus, and would be baptized with water into the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, were admitted Members of the Church; but such as did
nor believe, and would not be baptized they would not admit into
Church Communion. Act. 16.30,31,32,33. Acts 8.35.37.38,39. Acts 8.12. Acts 18.8.
This has been the practice of some Churches of God in this City, without
urging or making any particular covenant with Members upon admittance, which I
desire may be examined by the Scriptures cited in the Margent, and then
compared with the Doctors three conclusions from the same Scriptures, whereby
it may appear to the judicious Reader, how near the Churches some of them come
to the practice of the Apostles rule, and practice of the primitive Churches,
both in gathering, and admitting Members. And my humble request to the Doctor
is; That he will use all means, that the method of God, and practice of the
Apostles in gathering of Churches, and admitting Members, may be conscionably
practiced by his Brethren of both sides according to the revealed Word and Will
of the Father.

FJNJS.

