NO FOOL, TO THE OLD FOOL:
Hark ye my Masters; -- for one half quarter of an hour now, let us be as Wise
as Woodcocks; and talk a little Treason. Why should not we thrive in the world
as well as our Neighbors? had not other people Heads, and Souls to lose as
well as we? If men will be Damned, they had better Damn Rich than Poor: -- as
Bradshaw; and the Attorney General Damned; and as they Damn at Westminster; --
as Bishop Arthur does Intend to Damn: and there is another Fellow -- what do you
call him? -- Pish -- I Am the worst at names -- he had a writing office, I
remember; -- he that sold a Parcel of Prisoners to a Scrivener: -- he served a
Lawyer once, and afterward a Brewer, Both of a name -- That fellow, will Damn,
Damn'dly Rich. His Master too, is in a fair way to the Devil. I could name you
a Hundred of these thriving Lads, whom, though the honest world despises; --
believe me, -- Two or three hundred-Thousand pound, is a Convenient Plaster for
a Broken Head; there is something to bear Charges yet. There Is Power and Plenty.
-- They cosen, whom they please: -- Hang, and Draw, at will; -- they keep
their Lacquies, and their Whores: and at the last, they go to Hell in Triumph.
They have their Blacks, and Elegies, and leave the State to pay the Draper, and
the Poet. Twould make a man bepisse himself, to see the soft, and
tenderhearted Needham, weeping (like Niobe, till he turn's t'a stone) over the
Tomb of Bradshaw, -- to see him cry with one eye, and Laugh with the other, and
yet, the Tragicomical puppy, keeps his Countenance. The Tears of such a Saint,
cannot but Fall, like drops of Lambeth-Ale, upon the Tongue of Dives, -- how
great a Consolation was it (think ye) to the late Protector, to find himself
placed at the Right hand of God? by Sterry (that Blasphemous, bold Phanatique)
of whose Condition, Charity it self can scarce admit a comfortable thought.
For, after a long Course, of Treason, Murder, Sacrilege, Perjury, Rapine, etc.
he finished his accursed Life, in Agony, and Fury; and without any mark of true
Repentance. You Will say he was the Braver Villain for it. -- Crimes of this large
Extent, have indeed something that is Masouline to allay them. But to be Damned
for Sneaking, To purchase Hell at the price of all that is pleasant here: -- to
contract sin, and Beggary, in the same act and Moment; This is the most
Impudent, and Ridiculous wickedness that may be. He that Indents with the
Devil, has a merry Bargain, compared with us; There Is Time, and Pleasure. Here,
the Vengeance treads upon the Heels of the offense; and the Punishment of our
Misdoings, is the necessary* and next immediate effect of them. -- In Paying
Taxes, to an Usurped Power; There, a Defection from the Righ^, and a Compliance
with the Wrong, renders us Doubly Criminal -- and in this Case, we do but buy
our Chains, and the very next effect of our Disobedience, is Slavery* It comes
all to a Point, in what concerns subjection to unlawful Powers. Under a Force,
-- is a Brutish Argument. Vice is the Obliquity of the Will: That Is Free. The
same Plea lies in the Case of Martyrdom: and by the same Rule we may
renounceour Maker.

If wicked, we are resolved to be, -- Let Us go a nobler way to work -- let us get
a matter of Half a dozen crafty Knaves toget^e^; take in some thirty or forty
slye Rascals into the Gang, and call our selves a Parliament. Why Gentlemen?
this is no imp^ssible thing, Our Title is as good as theirs, that have done the
same thing before us, but then be sure of the Proportion. Seven parts of eight
must have neither Wit nor Honesty: yet do look as wise as Judges, and in the
middle of their Pater-nosters pick their neighbors pockets. These are to be
directed by the Rooks, and by them both, the Nation, which would be over*
stocked with Cheats, were any more admitted into the Grand Conspiracy against
the people, To Personal abuses, the rest are likewise qualified. They may
imprison when, where, and whom they please, without cause showed, their Will is
a sufficient warrant for the well-affected. In Fine, they are the Peoples
voice, and that'^ the voice of Heaven.

Why now should we despair of the same events, from the same means,
considering, what a drowsy Patient, and phlegmatic People we have to deal
with? Shall's Fool a little? Let us vote down Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right! -- Settle a Preaching Militia, and a fighting Ministry? -- out with our
whinyards, and off with the names, instead of the Heads of the Kings Tryers; as
Okey did upon the Change. Take away Monk's Commission; Petition the Soldiery
to petition us, to declare our selves perpetual; -- Bind up the Nation under
Limitation for the next Session, and exclude all but our own party from the
Choice. No matter for the Law or Conscience of the business -- ARTICLES OF
SURRENDER; and Public ACTS of INDEMNITY, amount to nothing* -- OATHS, and
COVENANTS, are but occ^sion^l Submissons to convenience: not binding any man,
that in the very act of taking them, resolves to break them. Let things come to
the worst; when we have overturned the Government; -- Polluted the very altar,
with our MASTERS BLOOD -- Cheated the Public, etc. -- It is but to whine, and
snivel to the People; tell them we were misled, by Carnal Appetites; -- cloth
all our Rogueryes, in Scripture Phrase -- Humble our selves before the Lord;
(but not a Sy^lable concerning Restitution) and they will forgive us; Nay,
perhaps, Trust us too: Think us their Friends for doing them no more than All
the Harm we could. -- It Is a good natu'rd sort of Beast, -- the Common People,
if it be Pleased; and it is the Easiest thing in Nature, for Fools and Knaves to
Please it. They have not been gulled half long enough yet, -- what will you say
now, to a New-Parliament made of an Old one? as There Is no Fool, to the Old
one, so there is no Knave to the Old one.

What do ye think of your Episcopal Cole-marchant Sir Arthur, for Durham: and
let him bring in his Fellow Laborer Sir Harry Vane for Newcastle? In the City
of London, you cannot choose amiss, provided, that Ireton or Titchburn, be
One; and that he choose his Fellows. -- For Kent, no man like Sir Michael
Livesy, (a Knave, a Fool, and a Coward.) -- For Norfolk, let Miles Corbet be
one, and if the House does not like him, let 'um recommend him to the Red Bull,
for he personates a Fool or a Devil, without the charge either of a Habit or a
Vizor. If the Nation be so charitably disposed, as to erect an Hospital in
favor of the Lame, the Rotten, and the Blind, let 'um take in Limping Luke
Robinson; Rheumatique Mounson (this poor Gentlemen has the mourning of the
Chine;) Bobtayl'd Scot; and the Blinking Cobbler. -- But why do I pretend to
direct in particular? -- Among the Kings Tryers; Excise men, Sequestratours,
Close Committee Men, Major-Generals, Buyers and Sellers of Crown and
Church Lands, etc. -- they may wink and choose. Alas, they are all converted. I Am
sure he is Right, cries one; he Told me so. Dull Sotts that we are! let us be
Right our Selves; and then, what need we care who is wrong? I Will put a Case to
you: suppose, upon the Dissolution of this Session, six or seven thousand of
the Phanatique Souldjery, that knows, a Settlement destroys their Trade; should
Try a Blow for it yet; and by the help of some of their Confedederates, yet in
appearance of Authority, should put a Force upon the Honest Party: ('It Is but to
suppose, what many of that Gang are bold enough in Public to declare) I have
a Phansy you will look on still, and betake your selves to your Old senseless
Plea, -- They have the Power. -- Which, if you do -- No no; you cannot be so
tame, and witless. Be careful whom you Trust, either in your Militia, or
Counsels; Choose Persons of Estates Honestly gotten; Such, whom the Law
preserves, will preserve the Law.

Whereas, If you choose such as have an Interest of their Own, that th'warts the
Public; you're very Charitable, to Believe that those very People, who all
this while, have cheated you to benefit them selves, should, at the last,
adventure all to preserve you.

Look before you leap THO. SCOT.
March 16. 1659.
FINIS.

