The Knavish MERCHANT (Now turned Warehouseman) CHARACTARIZED OR A severe
Scourge, for an unjust, cruel, and unconscionable Adversary

By Philadelphus Verax a Cordial friend to his honest (though injuriously
oppressed) acquaintance Thomas Crocker Merchant.

17. 2 Samuel 23. Now when Achitophel saw his Counsel was not followed [took not
effect] he sadled his Ass, and arose and went home into his City, and set his
household in order, and hanged himself.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena paricula cautum. Printed The second month of the
next year
That Tyrants ceas't to domineer.


The Knavish MERCHANT (now turned Warehouseman) CHARACTARIZED
THE Accrostick of these lines, if you read out,
In them to find a knave, you need not doubt.
Repute and liberty while I enjoyed.
I met a knave at last who both destroyed
Cheated me of the one, the other blasted;
Heap't wrongs upon me whilst my patience lasted.
At length I did resolve for to oppose,
Right against wrong, and all his prancks disclose,
Deceiptfull Villian! had I been aware,
No feigned friendship should have been my snare.
Ever here after let all men take heed,
Avoid him if they do intend to speed.
Varlets discovered make a wise man wary
Even fools prove fearful when they once miscarry.
The Case,
In Anno 1655 John Crocker English Merchant in Cadiz did by Bill of Lading
(which is recited verbatim in the last page) consigne unto his brother Thomas
Crocker Merchant (amongst other goods) 19 pieces of Sherry Sack; all for his
own proper account, the which by their account of sales amounted unto neat
101. l. 1s. 6d. sterling which in conformity to the said John's order was
accordingly disposed of.

But so it is, that one Richard Neave (a pretended Signee, unto Andrew Beasley
a runnagate Roman Catholic) (through knavish ignorance) did about five years
last past pretend an interest in the aforesaid Wines, and for them commen^ed a
suite in the Court of Admiralty against one James Marshal of Exeter, the
Assign of the said Thomas; in which suite the said Neave durst not proceed to
Trial as the Proctor Mr. Cheek does possitively affirm.

Notwithstanding which the said Neave (with whom the said Thomas Crocker never
had the least dealing) did about November last, cause the said Thomas to be
Arrested upon an action of the Case for three hundred Pounds: unto which the
said Thomas Crocker then procured Bail, which the said Neave perceiving before
the acceptance of Bail then tendered (whereby to hinder him of being Bailed, he
being a stranger in London) maliciously and on set purpose to procure his mine,
caused to be entered in several Persons Names (unknown to the said Thomas
Crocker) several Actions amounting to the value of about 6000. l. (a thing too
too commonly practiced in and about London to the horrid shame of the
Government thereof) by which means many Merchants of repute, and diverse others
(especially those of meaner capacities) have been ruined and utterly undone, as
to expectation of all future preferments. As is sufficiently apparent in this
Gentleman's (Tho. Crockers) case, who was most disgracefully Arrested and taken
off the public Exchange, and thrown into the Loathsome Counter from whence
with great expense of Money; he removed himself by Habeas Corpus to the Fleet,
where he still remains Prisoner.

But the said Neave perceiving the intent of the said Thomas Crocker to remove
himself (having had some notice of the same, and minding nothing but perverse
mischief) went about to hinder his removal, to which end he would have entered
an Action against the said Thomas in the Lord Majors Court to have it charged
at the Counter, which he knew very well would not only put the said Crocker to
a longer stay in that Prison, but also a great deal more extradorinary expense
of Money, but the causes being returned, and the body gone, before he could
effect this design he mist his aim. Such diabolical and Devilish practices (as
I am credibly informed) are usual with the Citizens of London which the very
Turks and Infidels would abhor, and punish with no less then death.

That by reason of such and so many great Actions no friends will become
engaged for him, so that in the Fleet he is enforced to remain close Prisoner,
even so may the most innocent suffer (if they want friends) and if such
abominable Cheats be tolerated (for so they are not being punished) more
Families will hereafter be destroyed (as too many already have by such
practices) then did the late War consume.

Whether to ruin the said Thomas Crocker by this means or not, was the intent
of the said Neave, is out of Question, or whether the said Neave did this not
only upon that score, but also in disobedience to his Majesty's gracious
pleasure is a Question. That Neave could not be ignorant of what preferment Mr.
Crocker was likely to have, by the gift of his Royal grace the Duke of York,
is the Question. Which Question last proposed he could not but know, and in
knowing that, he knows that Mr. Crocker lost not only an honorable but
profitable emploiment, in his Majesty's service beyond the Seas.

Now that the world may take notice of the honest intention of the said Thomas
Crocker, and that they may see the damnable absurdity of the said Neave, let
them observe this one thing, (viz.) that the said Thomas Crocker, knowing the
justness of his cause, not only at the time of his first being arrested, but
many times since his being imprisoned, has offered to come to an Arbitration,
have all differences referred betwixt them, offering security to stand to the
Award of such Arbitrators, as shall indifferently be elected and chosen, one or
two of each part. But the said Neave being a cross base and ill conditioned
fellow, refuses this proposition, and contrary to his promise to Sir John
Colleton Knight and Barronet, will not refer the differences aforesaid. But now
as formerly he gives only this for answer, that he will declare, etc. If such
be the laws and practices of the Londoners, God send me to live amongst
Indians, Turks and Jews.

For prevention of such hellish practices, it were to be wished, that there
were a Court Merchant erected in England, as is usual in other Countries where
Trade is most encouraged, (which I hear for many years past in former
Parliaments has been endeavored, but hindered especially by the Lawyers) such
Villainies would not be practiced. But to corrupt offices and officers, this
will be but false doctrine because it will hinder the hellish grist coming to
their Mill. This practice for the sake of particular gain has been too long
used, and those that are concerned will cry up their Diana, old customs though
never so wicked, for which detestible practices (if not speedyly remedied by
authority) God will certainly visiet, who has threatened that for three
Transgressions and for four, he would not turn away the punishment of Moab,
because they sold the needy for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes; and
the practice of our times nearly resembling their Cruelty, (whose punishment is
threatened in the same Chapter) who inhumanly burnt the bones of their Brethren
into lime.

But to return to Neave, least (that for two or three Terms) the malicious
custom he forget, I hope this short caution will mind him which might have been
sweld into a larger volume with a particular list of his knaveries, and that it
will prove a sufficient admonition to all such who heretofore have dealt with
the said Neave, how hereafter they trust him, or keep company with him. Nor do
I doubt but in short time to see his knavery so far detected, by all men, that
they will avoid his and kick him (and all that are of his Religion) out of
their company. And that every one may be forwarn'd, and so forearm'd, the
knaves lodging is at present in St. Thomas Appostles, though without question
such dealings as these, will shortly reduce him (when every bird has his own
feathers) to the retired life of a close Prisoner, or to a more wandering life
of a Fugitive Vagabond.

Thus much a Cordial friend to the greatly wronged and oppressed (Thomas
Crocker) in his vindication thought good to commit to public view, that the
World may see the Villainous malice of his unjust Adversary (I had almost said
unparalled, but that as it is said before, it is too common in London to meet
with such practices) against whom he questions not but to recover good damages
at law, and to have his case become a president of unjust oppression at the
sitting of the next Parliament, in hopes that the remedy will not there prove
worse then the disease, as has been usual in most of the late Parliaments, who
like Godfathers and Godmothers (at their first sitting) used to promise much,
but in conlusion performed little or nothing to the verifing of the old English
proverb, whilst the grass grows the Horse starves.

Let Neave therefore for the present take this in part of payment, for his
inhumane, unatural, unchristian, unconscionable, unjust, incharitable and
unmerchantlike proceedings. Which seven rare imperfections and qualifications,
like the seven Planets, have a continual motion in, and reign over him which
being valued each of them at 1000. l. may and no otherwise will make up the
pretended sumes against Crecker, with a complete knave to boot, from whom,
and such as he is, Good Lord deliver every honest man.

Copia.
SHipped by the Grace of God in good order, and well conditioned, by me John
Crocker, in and upon the good Ship called the Fortune of Topsam, whereof is Mr.
(under God for this present Voyage,) Walter Furler. and now riding at Anchor in
the Bay of Cadiz, and by Gods grace bound for Topsam (To say) nineteen
Hogsheads of Sherries Wine, and four barrels of Raisons for my account being
marked and numbered as in the Margent; And are to be delivered in the like good
order and well conditioned at the aforesaid Port of Topsam (the dangers of the
Seas only excepted) unto Thomas Crocker or his Assigns, he or they paying
freight for the said goods, with Primage and Avarage accustomed. In witness
whereof the Master or Purser of the said Ship has affirmed three bills of
Lading, all of this tenor and date, the one of which three being accomplished,
the other two to stand void, and so God send the good ship to her desired Port
in safety, Amen.

Walter Furler.
Dated the 23 of November, 1655.
Brother Thomas.
GOd sending you well at Topsam, pray see the Vesse^ discharged, and for what
goods I have aboard dispose thereof which is four Barrels of Reisons and
nineteen hogsheads of Sheries Sack, and one hundred and eighty dozen of Cork,
and what Salt she may have and Orringes and Lemonds. And after all if you can
fit her out in time to come here against the Lent with Piltchards, so that you
can come before the end of January and bide of and send a boat a shore to Mr.
George Andrews, and consigne the Ship and goods to Mr. Andrews. And if not,
follow further order. So in have I Rest Your

loving Brother John Crocker.
Dated in Cadiz the 23 of November 1655. Poscript.
And be sure you draw up the Account of the Ship before you come for England,
and charge the freight for the goods a board, and if the Bills of lading should
not appear for what is a board, desire the Master to take care to deliver it to
my father. So I Rest and God send you a good Voyage.



For Mr. Thomas Crocker Merchant


