Mr. Lenthalls Answer, TO A PAPER, ENTITLED, Remarks on Mr. Lenthalls Petition,
Now Lying before the Honorable House of Commons.
MR. Lenthall Averrs it to be True, that he never Received of Sr. John Cutler,
nor Mr. Bolter, nor any other, upon the account of his Mortgage, any more then
11152 l. 04 s. 08 d. The Rent, and Fine for renewing the Lease of Haseley, to
the Deane and Cannons of Windsor, being therein included.

And deny's that ever he received any Moneys, directly or indirectly, of the
Right Honorable the Earl of Radnor: But what Moneys he did Receive, was of
Mr. Simon Folks for subsistence Money, pursuant to an Agreement made with him,
till the said Mortgage could be removed, and touching his Granting the Office
of, Marshal to Mr. Gimbert, at 1400 l. per Ann. Rent, (as Mr. Folks perpos'd)
which proves in the said Grant to be but 1000 l. per Ann. for which Moneys he
gave Notes under his Hand to Mr. Folks, Repayable upon Demand.

That Mr. Folks did undertake to remove the said Mortgage, and pay Mr. Bolter
15000 l. which he Agreed to take in full discharge of the same, with which he
might well be satisfied. If Mr. Folks will declare the Truth of the Agreements
betwixt him, Mr. Bolter and Mr. Lenthall, which Mr. Lenthall hopes he will be
Compelled to do, before this Honorable House: It will fully show how Mr.
Lenthall has been imposed upon.

Mr. Bolter in his Answer in the High Court of Chancery upon his Oath, setts
forth, no more Moneys paid to Mr. Lenthall by Sr. John Cutler nor himself,
then the aforesaid sum of 11152 l. 04 s. 08 d. so all the rest of the
pretended great Debt upon his Estate and Office is swelled up by Interest upon
Interest and Charges, notwithstanding they have had the Land, and Office in
Possession about 8 Years, which always yielded Mr. Lenthall 2000 l. per Ann. so
Mr. Lenthall hopes there cannot be above 12000 l. really due upon the said
Mortgage.

Mr. Lenthall being in their Power, they having his Estate in Possession, was
forced to Sign their unreasonable Accounts, otherwise he must have Starved.

SO he Humbly Prays he may be heard by his Council at the Bar of this
Honorable House, to be Releived against so great oppression, and that he may
have an order, that all Deeds and Writings may be produced, and Persons
concerned may attend.


