THE SPEECH OF Mr Arthur Knight OF Grays-Inne, Gentleman; WHO Was Executed in
the Covent Garden the Second day of March, 1652.



London, Printed for Tho: Heath at his shop in Russell-Street, near the
Piazza's of Covent Garden.

The Speech of Mr Arthur Knight of Gray's Inn, Gentleman; who was Executed in
Covent Garden, March 2. 1653.
Gentlemen,
I Am come hither to Act, or rather suffer my part, no strange part, though a
sad one, I heartily wish I could perform it perfectly, and to the life, as
becomes my innocence; that the shamefullnesse of the Stage might not cause me
to make an unhandsome Exit.

I stand here before the All-seeing God, I speak before Angels, unto men, I
shall not therefore increase my sins by dissembling them; upon the Files of
heaven hang the records of every truth; and I will not as a man, I dare not as
a Christian spend my last breath in falsities; let the world form what
Judgment of me it pleases.

I am now to suffer upon a score of murder, a foul and heavy score, were I
guilty thereof: but it is my comfort, that though I die as criminous, both my
self and very many others are fully convinced of my innocence: yea Mistress
Furnefall herself (Relict of the Gentleman for whose death I die) has
confessed to more then a few, that she esteemed me guiltless, and that her
conscience would not suffer her to prosecute against me, and that for her own
part she did not, and was sorry from her very heart that others had been so
violent, and that she would redeem me if she could by any means possible. But
my fall is unavoydable, the crime is murder, for which I am cast and sentenced,
and now brought hither to forfeit my life, I thank God although I stand not
Justified before my earthly Judges, I do fall justified before my heavenly
Judge.

Gentlemen, I am now going to my Trial, the Trial I have passed is none;
death is but the Beadle that brings me to the celestial Bar, To that
Tribunal I hasten; that though I be condemned as a guilty person in foro Soli;
I may be acquitted in foro Poli.

I carry with me many witnesses and good, a good conscience is Mill testes,
and whilst a thousand witnesses stand for me, I am sure I cannot finally
miscarry. That Judge above proceeds by an unerrable and most conspicuous
light; he knows things as they are, not as they appear, and therefore cannot
be misinformed, or mistaken in his sentence.

Truly, Sirs, though I suffer as a murderer, (besides the acquittance of my own
conscience) no one here present of greenest years and reason, will think me
guilty, if at least he knew, that at the time when the Gentleman was wounded,
my sword was in a readiness; wherewith if my intents had been murdrous, I might
easily have clapped him through without venturing my own life or liberty. I had
then a sword by my side, but made no use of it; nay, I did not so much as draw
it, nor attempt to draw it: had I harbored any bloody revenge, or had I
intended him ill, or death, I could, yea I should have drawn it.

What ever provocation was given me, (and indeed I had enough) I had yet no
premeditation of evil unto this person; nor did I lodge in my breast any malice
against him; I wished him no harm, for I scarce ever saw the Gentleman before;
what affection he did bear toward me, I know not, God knows: but I conceive
his craziness within, the neglect of timely physic, or the ignorance of the
assistants, has precipitated his and my death. I hope, good people, none of
you think me so bad a Christian, as now in the last period and article of my
life, to dissemble my guilt if I were inwardly convinced. I beseceh you allow
me who am upon the marches of death, so far your credit and good opinion, that
if my innocence cannot rescue me from this punishment, it may yet preserve my
memory from common prejudice and scandal.

True indeed I am a man obnoxious to many faults and failings, and as a sinner
I need a great allowance of pardon for youthful frailties and offenses. But I
am taught to believe that in this life there is no perfection or exemption from
sin; and I hope that in the merciful balance of the Almighty, I am found
passable and current for heaven. I would have none believe I excuse my self
from crime, I only profess my self innocent from the sin of murder, that
imputation for which I now suffer. The greatest matter that troubles my peace, is
this, that the misfortune of untimely death should defeat me and deceive my
parents of the glad expectation they conceived of me: I had most dear and
tender parents, and they of me a dutiful son, and they hoped to be once happy
in my welfare having bestowed upon me qualities, travel and learning, expecting
at the hand of Providence the harvest of their pains and expenses. But God the
supreme and sole arbiter of life and death, who has the conduct of all actions
and ends, has suffered them to be disappointed of their hopes, and me of my
desires of compensating their large charges and care. These things thou
permittest, O Lord, that all of us might learn to submit and fear. I submit
therefore (O thou Father of infinite mercies) to thy good pleasure to this my
premature death, this ignominious death, enable me (most gracious Father) to
despise the shame, endure the cross, and to wade through this sea of blood
unto the shore of everlasting happiness. Lo, O Lord, I come, I come unto thee,
because thou bidst me come, because thou drawest me.

Alas; I had almost forgotten somewhat essential to my own duty, and my
brothers security, to wit the clearing of my brother Thomas Knight from all
guilt in this unfortunate Action, I hope my life does satisfy the law, and
expiate the offense, however I am bound in conscience to declare that not any
part of this matter can be justly charged upon him, for I protest by the faith
of a dieing man, he is as free from it, as I am reputed guilty: he had no hand
at all in this fact.

Concerning my faith, I need not speak many words it having been never doubted,
only thus much I shall profess, that I die in the faith wherein I always
lived, and into which I was baptized, to wit the faith of the Church of
England, that established faith I die in, whereof I have lately made profession
to some persons of honor, who were intimate to my last preparations.

And now oh Jesus witness for me, that what measure soever I have received, I
die peaceably and in charity with all men, I forgive all my enemies, and am
more favorable to my Judges, then they have been to me, Lord, let not the
least drop of my blood stand upon their account: blood oh Lord lies heavy, yet
thou know that therein I have a conscience full of serenity and Calmness.

Lord receive my soul, my soul I resign unto thee, I trust it with thee, thou
art a faithful Creator and keeper.

Lord Jesus receive my soul.

FINIS.
AN ELEGY On the Execution of Mr. ARTHVR KNIGHT.
AS Socrates, because he durst defy
Plurality of Gods, was forced to die:
Yet when his friends bewaild his unjust fate,
Incurred for noble Truth, and Popular hate;
He gladly said, Who would not be content
Rather then guilty, to fall innocent?
So injured Arthur, since thy blameless mind
Has purged thine hands, and inward parts refined,
Since thy unshackel'd conscience disdains
Guilt woven Fetters, or heart-binding Chains:
(For vile intents may stamp good actions, ill,
But no man can be had against his will;)
We must thy death a persecution call,
And more a Sacrifice, than Funeral:
The Altar of thy breast being free from dress,
Makes the Line, Fillets; and the Tree a Cross;
Whereon thy former crimes did offerings lie,
That so thy soul unclog'd might climb the Skit.
None while he lives his own Cause justly Tries;
Each proves his own best Judge yet, when he dies.
FINIS.

