AN ANSWER To the Marquis of WORCESTER'S Last Paper; to the Late KING.
Representing in their true posture, and discussing briefly, the main
Controversies between the English and the Romish Church.

Together with some Considerations, upon Dr Bayly's Parenthetical
Interlocution; relating to the Churches Power in deciding Controversies.

To these is annexed, SMECTYMNUO-MASTIX: OR, Short Animadversions upon
Smectymnuus in the Point of LYTVRGIE.

By HAMON L'ESTRANGE, Esqr.

Magis amabo inspici a Rectis, quam timebo morderi a Perversis.

Augustine. London, Printed by Robert Wood, for Henry Seile; and are to be sold
at his Shop, over against St Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1651.

To the truly Noble, Religious, and my dearly honored (...), the Lady ANNE
L'ESTRAN^^ (...) Hunstanton in Norfolk
Madam,
I Have entitled this Treatise, An Answer to the Marquis of Worcester. If it
really proves so, I shall be most glad; for then, I know it will prove an
Answer to you, I mean to your Desires, and those Desires I should extremely
rejoice to answer, in this, or any other kind whatsoever. But prove that as it
may, this is my comfort, that it will be in some sort an Answer to God for the
time it stood me in, which might have been worse employed. It humbly resorts in
this Dedication, Lady, to you, why should it not? It is the Revenue the product
of your commands. To those commands next God, I totally resign the glory may
result from the little I have done well, the many Imperfections I shall file
upon mine own account; And as I have ever found in myself a Disability to
resist your commands, so your commands never found my will in readier mode and
posture of compliance than in this Subject; for had not they pressed me into this
service of Truth, and this Church, my peculiar inclination had listed me a
Voluntier. For no little impatience has possessed me, to hear Error so long and
so uncontrolled, crow and triumph over Truth in that his Lordships Paper, the
great pretenders to the Protestant belief (to their shame be it spoken) or not
willing, or not able, or not daring to oppose her. Those whom it more concerned
making thus default of their devoir, resolved I was (though the weakest of many
hundreds) of this Churches Votary, to become her Champion, and put my self into
the Forlorn; being most assured I should thereby not only in some measure, pay
a tributary Vote to the Cause of God, but also in part vindicate the Reputation
of that side to which I so constantly adhered, and to demonstrate to the face
of calumny, that amongst those so decry'd and reproached as popishly affected,
some there are of that animosity and courage, who dare tell Rome to her teeth,
that that thing which she calls her Religion is but mere Policy, not founded
upon Christ or his Apostles, but new modeled in most, and those the weightiest
Points, within these last five hundred years. How my atchivement and
performance has answered my daring, it becomes not me to judge. Suppose the
worst, and that I have made too public my many failings, yet have I not
failed to publish a zeal firm and cordial to the Protestant Profession. And
that zeal will, I trust, bid these unworthy Labors, in some degree, welcome to
God and his Church. It is one and the same spirit, to defend the Masters
Interest, which animateth the smallest lap-dog, and which rouseth the stoutest
Mastiff. I have in this Work done what I could, had it also been what I would,
then should this Tract, without the auxiliary allowance of favor and
indulgence, have counterpoised the merit of this great Cause, and value of your
commands. As it is, it must beseech your acceptance, as one Act of grace
superadded to those millions of Obligations, which consign me

Madam, Your most honoring Brother, and sincerely addicted Servant, Hamon
L'estrange.
Ringsted, June 1. 1650.
TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
I Present thee here with an Answer, such as it is, to a Reply to the Late
Kings last Paper to the Marq. of Worcester; Whose Reply that is, is difficult
to determine: Dr Bailey tells us, it is the M. of Worcesters, but sure it may as
well be styled the Cardinal of Persons, it suting so exactly with that
Cardinable Reply made long since to the Apology of King James, Father to the
late King; but call it what you please, the Marquesses, or the Cardinals, or
the Cardinal of Worcesters (like Chrysippus his Medea in a similary case) thou
have here an Answer to it; Laaet. in vit. Chrys^p.
yea, to that Reply, wherein the main Differences between the Papists and the
Protestants are acurately discust, Title page.
if the Doctor be not mistaken, as I much fear he is: 'twas well and advisedly
done he said not All the main Differences, for Prayers in an unknown Tongue,
and the Popes Supremacy are Differences, and in the main too, yet not so much
as saluted in passage, nor any the least notice taken of them; and Adoration of
Images, no petty Difference, has but a very perfunctory, a slight glance, and
is far from being discust. And for those Differences treated of, few will, I
think, of the Protestant persuasion, say with the Doctor, they are acurately
discust; for wherein does that acuratenesse consist? View the order and array
of the Points, and Tenets there set down, never was there such a confused
Rhapsody, such an independent medly shuffled pesle-mesle together, without
coherence, without care. In the Scheme and frame of his Positions, there is I
grant a great, an eminent care; but not a commendable, not an honorable care,
not a care to state the Questions ingenuously right, but rather to render them
more dubious and dark, but a care to dissemble the Errors of his own Church,
the Truths of ours; a care to dis-guise the Protestant Opinions under his own
imaginary Fictions, and to represent Romes putrid and ulcerous Body with a
specious and glorious outside; in short, a care to contrive that Paper with
such artifice as might render it unanswerable. And therefore I have qualified
my Answer with these additional words, Such as it is, implying such an Answer
as that Paper will admit of, a full and complete one being not only difficult,
but almost impossible: for it being farced and stuffed thick with Quotations,
the words of the Authors are rarely recited, very often the Chapters and
Sections omitted, and sometimes the whole Books; so that besides an infinite
waste of Time, it requires a kind of Divination to decypher and set forth what
the Marquis his mind was fixed upon. This notwithstanding, I have with most
diligent impartiality collected what might in any degree favor his Lordships
opinion, or abet his Cause, and to every Proof fitted a suitable Answer, where
Conjecture could not attain, I there freely acknowledge it, being secure under
the candor of thy Charity, which will consider* that to find an Indictment, it
is not enough that the Witnesses be produced and appear, but they must also
give in Evidence; and till that Evidence in all particulars be given in, an
Answer to all particulars cannot be required.

But this Answer to that Reply cannot comprehend the whole Arrest and content
of this Tract: there are some Animadversions relating to Dr. Bailey, which I
have stitcht, as an Appendix and Lean-to to that Answer* the word is (I think)
concinn and apt enough, it relating to that Doctor whom his Majesty suspected
page ^0.
a Lean-to to the Marquis. And truly that Discourse of his which I have
undertaken, speaks him little less; wherein his Majesty, not the Marquis,
steps in as Opponent; he that pretended so much Epist. to the Reader.
wariness of seeming to present the late King worsted, was not wary at all of
seeming to present himself (according to the idiome of speech) Worster'd.
Christian Charity bids me repute him under a notion more modified than Papist,
but Truth it self enforces me to say he erreth in some particulars with the
Church of Rome; yet were he more than popish Papist professed* my witness is in
Heaven, (...). Chrysostom. in S. Phoc.
ill will to the man I bear none, a Member of the Church he is, and (...).
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. c. 1. ^om. 1.
as the Church is a name of Unity not of Separation, so I heartily beseech God,
that all those who are Members of that Church, and consigned Christians, may be
of one mind in the Lord; and keep the Unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace: which peace the Lord of peace himself give us always, by all means. Vale.

The (late) Kings Paper, in answer to the Marquis of Worcester; Introductorily
discussing some Controversies between the English and the Romish Church.
MY Lord, I have perused your Paper; whereby I find, that it is no strange
thing to see Error, triumph in Antiquity, and flourish all those Ensigns of
Universality, Succession, Unity, Conversion of Nations, etc. in the face of
Truth, and nothing was so familiar, either with the Jews or Gentiles, as to
besmear the face of Truth with spots of Novelty; for this was Jeremiahs case,
Jer. 44. 16. viz. As for the word which thou have spoken unto us in the Name of
the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do whatsoever
thing has gone forth of our own mouths: to burn incense unto the Queen of
Heaven, and to power out drink offering unto her as we have done, we, and our
fathers, our Kings, and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem as we have done: there is Antiquity, we and our fathers: tbere is
Succession, In the Cities of Judah and Jerusalem: there is Universality: so
Demetrius*

urged Antiquity and Universality for the goddess Diana: viz. That her Temple
should not be despised, nor her Magnificence destroyed, whom all Asia and the
World Worshipped. So Symmachus that wise Senator, though a bitter Enemy to the
Christians: Servanda est inquit tot seculis fides and sequendi sunt nobis
parents qui feliciter sequuti sunt suos: we must defend that Religion which
has worn out so many Ages and follow our Fathers steps, who have so happily
followed theirs* So Prudentius would have put back Christianity it self, viz.
Nunc dogma nobis Christianum nascitur post evolutos mill demum Consules: Now
the Christian Doctrine begins to spring up after the revolution of a thousand
Consul-ships: But Ezekiel reads us another Lecture. Ne obdurate cervices
vestras ut patres vestri cedite manum Jehovae ingredimini sanctuarium ejus,
quod sanctificavit in saeculum and colite Jehovam Deum vestrum: Be not
stiff-necked as your forefathers were, resist not the mighty God, enter into
his Sanctuary which he has consecrated for ever, and worship ye the Lord your
God.

Radbodus, King of Phrygia, (being about to be baptized) asked the Bishop, what
was become of all his Ancestors, who were dead without being baptized? The
Bishop answered; that they were all in Hell; whereupon the King suddenly
withdrew himself from the Font, (saying) Ibi profecto me illis Comitem
adjungam: Thither will I go unto them: no less wise are they, who had rather
err with Fathers and Councels, than rectify their understanding by the Word of
God, and square their Faith according to its Rules.

Our Savior Christ says, we must not so much hearken to what has been said
by them of old time, Matthew. 21. 12. as to that which he shall tell you, where
Auditis dictum esse antiquitis is exploded: and Ego dico vobis is come in its
place; which of them all can attribute that credit to be given unto him, as is
to be given to Saint Paul? Yet he would not have us to be followers of him
more, than he is a follower of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Wherefore if you cry never
so loud, Sancta matter Ecclesia, sancta matter Ecclesia, the holy mother Church,
holy mother Church, as of old, they had nothing to say for themselves, but
Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
we will cry as loud again with the Prophet; quomodo facta est meretrix Urbs
fidelis? How is the faithful City become an Harlot? If you vaunt never so much
of your Roman Catholic Church, we can tell you out of Saint John, that she is
become the Synagogue of Satan: neither is it impossible, but that the house of
prayers may be made a Den of Thieves: you call us Heretics; we answer you with
Saint Paul, Acts 24. 14. After the way which you call Heresy, so worship we
the God of our fathers, believing all things which were written in the Law and
the Prophets.

I will grant you that all those marks which you have set down, are marks of
the true Church; and I will grant you more, that they were belonging to the
Church of Rome: but then, you must grant me thus much, that they are as well
belonging to any other Church, who hold and maintain that Doctrine which the
Church of Rome then maintained, when she wrought those Conversions; and not at
all to her, if she have changed her first Love, and fallen from her old
Principles; for it will do her no good to keep possession of the Keys, when the
Lock is changed: now to try whether she has done so or no, there can be no
better way, than by searching the Scriptures; for though I grant you that the
Catholic Church is the white in that Butt of Earth at which we all must aim;
yet the Scripture is the heart center, or peg in the midst of that white that
holds it up, from whence we must measure, especially when we are all in the
white. We are all of us in gremio Ecclesiae; so that Controversies cannot be
decided by the Catholic Church, but by the Scriptures, which is the thing by
which the nearness nnto Truth must be decided; for that which must determine
Truth must not be fallible: but whether you mean the consent of Fathers, or the
Decrees of General Councels, they both have erred; I discover no Fathers
nakedness, but deplore their infirmities, that we should not trust in arms of
flesh: Tertullian was a Montanist; Cyprian a Rebaptist; Origin an
Anthropomorphist; Hierom a Monoganist; Nazianzen an Angelist; Eusebius an
Arrian; Saint Augustine had written so many Errors, as occasioned the writing
of a whole Book of Retractions: they have oftentimes contradicted one another,
and some times themselves.

Now, for General Councels; Did not that Concilium Ariminense, conclude for the
Arrian Heresy? Did not that Concilium Ephisinum, conclude for the Eutichian
Heresy? Did not that Concilium Carthaginense, conclude it not lawful for
Priests to marry? Was not Athanasius condemned, In Concilio Tyrio? Was not
Eiconolatria established, In Concilio Nicaeno secundo.

What should I say more? when the Apostles themselves, less obnoxious to Error,
either in Life or Doctrine, more to be preferred than any, or all the world
besides; one of them betrays his Savior, another denies him; all forsake him.
They thought Christ's Kingdom to be of this world; and a promise only unto the
Jews, and not unto the Gentiles; and this after the Resurrection.

They wondered that the holy Ghost should fall upon the Gentiles. Saint John
twice worshipped the Angel, and was rebuked for it; Apoc. 22. 8. Saint Paul saw
how Peter walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2.
14. Not only Peter, but other of the Apostles, were ignorant, how the Word of
God was to be preached unto the Gentiles.

But who then shall roll away the stone from the mouth of the Monument? Who
shall expound the Scriptures to us? One pulls one way, and another another: by
whom shall we be directed?

Scinditur incertum studia in contraria vulgus.

You that cry up the Fathers, the Fathers so much; shall hear how the Fathers
do tell us, that the Scriptures are their own Interpreters.

Irenaeus, who was Scholar to Policarpus, that was Scholar to Saint John, l. 3.
c. 12. thus says; Ostentiones quae sunt in Scripturis non possunt ostendi nisi
ex ipsis Scripturis: the Evidences which are in Scripture cannot be manifested
but out of the same Scripture.

Clemens Alexandrinus, Nos ex ipsis deipsis Scripturis, perfect demonstrantes
ex fide persuademus demonstrative, Strom. lib. 7. Out of the Scriptures
themselves, from the same Scriptures perfectly demonstrating, do we draw
demonstrative Persuasions from Faith.

Crysost. Sacra Scriptura seipsam exponit and auditorem errare non sinit.

Basilius Magnus, Quae ambigue and quae obscure, videntur dici in quibusdam
locis sacrae Scripturae, ab iis quae in aliis locis aperta and perspicua sunt
explicantur, Hom. 13. in Genesis Those things which may seem to be ambiguous and
obscure in certain places of the holy Scripture, must be explicated from those
places which elsewhere are plain and manifest.

Augustinus, Questiorum asceticarum secundum eptt. regula trecentessima
sexagessima.
Ille qui cor habet quod precisum est jungat Scripturae, and legate superiora
vel inferiora and inveniet sensum. Let him who has a precise heart join it
unto the Scriptures; and let him observe what goes before, and that which
follows after, and he shall find out the sense.

Gregorius says, (Ser. 49. De verbis Domini.) Per Scripturam loquitur deus
omne quod vult; and voluntas Dei sicut in Testamento, sic in Evangelio
inquiratur. By Scripture God speaks his whole mind; and the will of God, as in
the old Testament so in the new, is to be found out.

Optatus contra parmenonem, lib. 5.

Number quis aequior arbiter veritatis divinae quam Deus aut ubi Deus manifestius
loquitur quam in verbo suo: Is there a better Judge of the divine Verity than
God himself? or where does God more manifestly declare himself than in his own
Word?

What breath shall we believe then but that which is the breath of God; the
holy Scriptures? for it seems all one to Saint Paul to say, Dicit Scriptura,
the Scripture says; Romans 4. 3. and Dicit Deus, the Lord says; Romans 9. 17. The
Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3. 22. For that which Romans 11. 32
he says, God has concluded all, etc. How shall we otherwise conclude than but
with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We have received not the spirit of the world,
but the spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given unto us of God.

They who know not this spirit, do deride it: but this spirit is the hidden
Manna, Apoc. 2. 17. which God gives them to eat who shall overcome; it is the
white stone wherein the white name is written, which no man knows but he that
received it. Wherefore we see the Scripture is the Rule by which all difference
may be composed; it is the Light wherein we must walk; the Food of our Souls;
an Antidote that expels any Infection; the only Sword that kills the Enemy; the
only Plaster that can cure our Wounds; and the only Documents that can be
given toward the attainment of everlasting Salvation.

AN ANSWER TO THE Marqu. of WORCESTERS Late Paper to the KING.
M. YOur Majesty is pleased to wave all the marks of a true Church, and to make
recourse to Scripture.

His Majesty waves not the marks of the true Church, but waves the frequent
Roman Church as not true, because she wants those marks. That he has recourse
to Scripture, why should the Marquis blame him? it is the witness of God,
greater than that of men, 1 John 5. 9.

M. I humbly take leave to ask your Majesty, what Heretic that ever was did
not so?

Here the Marquis calls his Majesty Heretic by craft, but first is at King,
King by your leave, that he might do it with the more civility.

M. How shall the greatest Heretic in the world be confuted or censured, if
any man may be permitted to appeal to Scriptures, margin'd with his own Notes,
sensed with his own meaning, and enlivened with his own private spirit; to what
end were those marks so fully both by the Prophets, the Apostles, and our
Savior himself set down, if we make no use of them?

We deny utterly any such Appeal, we say, The Scripture must be margin'd with
its own Notes, for what is doubtful and dark in one place, is elsewhere
clearly and evidently explained: Quae ambigue and obscure viden^ur dici in
quibusdam locis sacrae Scripturae ab a^^is quae in allis locis aperta and
perspicua sunt explicantur. Basil. qu. ^scet. Reg. 367.
Sensed with its own meaning, from the Scriptures themselves must we receive
the sense of Truth. Ex ipsis Scripturis sensum capere veritatis oportet non
sensum extrinsicus alienum extraneum deberes quaerere. Cl. Ep. 7.
So Clemens the second Bishop of Rome; nay, and more than so, we must not go
out of it to a foreign Interpreter: and enlivened with its own Spirit, For the
things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: 1 Cor. 2. 11. And
therefore cursed, say I, be he that removes the Lords Landmarks.

The M. finds the K. firm and close to Scripture, and seeing him so resolved
pretends, in compliance with his Majesty, recourse to that too; yea, and
promises to lead the K. to his Church through the full body of the Scriptures;
and it is indeed the best, the nearest way to the Church; yea, and to the M.
his Church too, but then he must set on fire all that superstructure of Wood,
Hay, and Stubble, which is built, I fear, not upon the true Foundation neither.
But before he enters into that way, some Obstacles, some Rubs are to be
removed; it is fit the Kings way should be made smooth.

M. The first Rub is, [Your Majesty was pleased to urge the Errors of certain
Fathers to the prejudice of their Authority] Not so pleased as the Marquis was
to urge the supposed Blemishes of Luther and Calvin to the prejudice of our
Church. No, not pleased at all, for he said, I deplore their Infirmities. 114.
But to the prejudice of their Authority they are urged, nor could the M. excuse
them, but argues from his Majesty's own words [So did the Apostles, but when
all were gathered together in Council, and could send about their Edicts, with
these Capital Letters, in the Front, Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis, then
I hope, your Majesty cannot say, that it was possible for them to err. So
though the Fathers migh err in particulars, yet those particular Errors would
be swallowed up in a General Council.] By the Marquis his comparing General
Councels with that in Acts 15. we may infer, that in his sense, These may say,
as well as That, Visum est Spiritui sancto and nobis, It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us. And indeed it is no more than what Bellarmine and
Stapleton said before him, Bellar. l. 2. de Council. c. 2.
and the Doctrine of Infallibility infallibly implies as much. But let the
Marquis and his party say what they please, Stapleton Relect. contr. 6. q. 3.
art. ^.
sure I am, Antiquity never durst think so, much less say it: take one instance
for all; That Great and General Council of Nice, observe what a prudent and
wary course she took in setting down her Determinations; in statlng the
business concerning the Celebration of Easter, it being a matter of
indifferency, Placuit ut adderetur visum est, (barely so, not Spiritui sancto
and nobis) ut omnes obtemperarent, We think fit that all obey our Decree: but
when she came to that great Confession of Faith, Athanas.
now called the Nicene Creed, de Synodo Arimin. and S^leuc. Ep.
you hear no more of Placuit then, but delivers her self, Credit Catholica
Ecclesia, The Catholic Church believes. And this was done on purpose, ut
ostenderent quae ipsi scripsissent, non sua esse inventa, sed Apostolorum
Documenta; to declare, That what they had written was not their own Fiction,
but the doctrine of the Apostles. This was the wisdom of that eminent Council.
As to the Marquis his supposition, that the Fathers particular Errors would be
swallowed up in a General Council, I grant it, but certainly the Council would
be little the better for them: it is not the reducing and incorporating many
several Poisons into one Bowl, can alter the venomous quality, or hinder their
operation; but it may be said, those Poisons may meet with so many benign
Corrections, as will in all probability render them inoffensive: true, I grant
that too, but then it is not their number will do it, for all that are innocent
as Doves are not as wise as Serpents, (...).
an honest meaning (says Nazianzen) keeps no Court of Guard; and Heresies if
they cannot predominate in power, they will undermine with craft. At that
General Council of Ariminum, branded by his Majesty for heretical, the far
greater number were pious and orthodox men; the Arrian party perceiving they
could not out-vote them, resolved (if possible) to out-wit them, and therefore
moved in Council, that, whereas the Nicene Creed had brought in are word (...)
signifying, the second Person in the Trinity, to be of the same substance with
his Father; which word gave much offense to many, because it was not to be
found in the Scriptures, and was very dark and intricate in it self; that
therefore it should thence forward be forborne, and instead thereof should be
inserted, that the Son is like unto his Father in all things, according to the
Scriptures. Sozomen* Hist. L. 4. c. 18.
This sly practice passed not undiscerned to so me of the quicker sented
Bishops, who tooth and nail opposed it; but others (yet well-meaning men too)
being persuaded by some (whom the Heretics had suborned) that the difference
was not so considerable, as worthy to make an absolute breach in the point, and
that in effect there was as much implied in what was added instead of that
word; and finding that the Emperor would tire them out, if they did not yield
at length, consented to have that word omitted. Thus this Council erred by
Circumvention, and that it erred is enough for us, and against the Marquis; for
if one erreth, another may, yea all may; and that others have done so too, his
Majesty has instanced, which is to the Marqhes his second Rub.

M. Nor is it enough that the Marquis replies, Those Councels were called when
the Church was under Persecution; seeing General Councels they were still (for
all that) the five Patriarchs with their subordinate Bishops being present,
either in Person or by Proxy.

M. And if we should suppose them to be General and free Councels, Anno 451
yet they could not be erroneous in any particular man's judgment, until a
like General Council should have concluded the former to be erroneous.] So that
by his Lordships Rule, had not the Council of Calcedon, nor any other since,
condemned Eutyches for an Heretic, we must all have held to this day but one
Nature in Christ.

[Wherefore if it should be granted that the Church at any time had determined
amiss, yet the Church cannot be said to have erred, because you must not take
the particular time for the Catholic Church.] Sure if at that time the
Catholic Church did err, no after-act or rectification can make it otherwise;
and admit she once erred, it will follow, she may err again, and again; and
that her seeming rectification may, whatsoever is pretended, swerve as much
from the Truth, as her first Error. [For as in Civil affairs, Regula fidei una
omnino est sola immobilis and irreformabilis. Hac lege Fidei manente caetera
disc plinae and conversationis admittunt novitatem correctionis* Tert. de
veland. Virg.
the Parlaments alter their Laws upon experience of present inconveniences, so
the Councels change their Decrees according to that further knowledge which the
holy Writ assures us shall increase in the latter end.] This similitude must
infer a power in General Councels to change their Decrees and Canons, as well
as Parlaments their former Statutes; and I yield that Power resident in them in
matters of outward Polity, and Government in the Church; but that they have a
power to decree matters of Faith, which shall bind the Church, needs no other
Confutation, than the allowing them a power to change their Decrees. For the
Rule of Faith (as Tertullian says excellently) is one only, immovable, and
unreformable. This Law of Faith continuing firm, other matters of Discipline
and conversation admit the novelty of reformation.

[If I recall mine own words, it is no Error, but the avoidance of an Error.]

The recalling mine own words may be an Error, as well as the avoidance of one;
for a man may err in retractation of what he has said, (as Bellarmine has
done more than once) as well as in saying what he retracts; but in one place
there must of necessity be an Error, and light that Error where it may, that
Church which so erreth, I shall be loath to trust with matters of Faith. The
last Rub in his Lordships way is so inconsiderable, as I shall stride over it,
and accompany him to his Church.

M. First, we hold the Real Presence, you deny it; we say, his Body is there;
you say, there is nothing but Bread.

Before I come to direct Answer, I shall briefly, and I hope not impertinently,
premise. First, it is fit those Opposite Terms of We and You being so
considerable, should be further explained. What is meant by We is little
questioned, the M. certainly intends the Romish Church; what by You he does not
clearly resolve us, till p. 159. and there he tells us, in capital letters,
it is The Church of England; and indeed, writing English to an English King,
(not Head, but) a Member, (though the noblest) of the English Church, it cannot
in reason be supposed he should under that word You, point at any other than
the Church of England. So then the Church of England is his Lordships You^ and
being so, it is in my opinion a great blemish to his Honors Cause, to charge
and accriminate a Church with no less than Heresy, and not with one only, but
many, very many, and not produce any one Book, or one Article, where those
Heresies are to be found; but to accuse a Church of Heresies which are no where
to be found, (and this he has done very often) is a blemish to his Honor, as
well as to his Cause. What the Marquis has omitted in setting down the
Doctrine of our Church, shall be by me supplied, and I will do it with that
ingenuous integrity, Art. 28.
that I will not suppress any one syllable, which may advantage her Adversaries
in the least. And first, to the point of Christ's presence. Thus [The Body of
Christ is given, Art. 94.
taken, and eaten in the Supper only after an heavenly and spiritual manner.]
Observe, here is the Body of Christ, so something more than bare bread; Aug. con.
then, it is given, taken, and eaten; Max. l. 3.
if so, it is there sure; and verily and indeed (as the Catechism has it, and
the Church of Ireland) substantially, we will grant that too; so that it had
been much more for his Lordships credit, Ser. 13.
to have forborne the urging of this Real Presence against us. Cant 2.
Non opus erat ut ea contra nos diceret, quae dicimus secum; why should he urge
that against us, which we assert with him? Well, but is there no difference
between us? Yes, a very great one Rome holds, a Transubstantiation, a
Conversion of the whole substance of the Elements in the Sacrament into the
very body and blood of Christ, as the Council of Trent has it; why did the
Marquis suppress this Tenet? Durst he not own it? He is then no Papist, for
what that Council has determined, the Papists do, and must hold. On the other
side, our Church says, Christ's body is there given, taken and eaten, only
after an heavenly and spiritual manner. Now you have heard what both sides
hold, we will give the Marquis his Scriptures leave to speak next. [Matth. 20.
26. Take, eat, this is my body. Luke 22. 19. This is my body which is given for
you.] I can see Christ's body here indeed, but where is the Conversion, the
Transubstantiation the Papists hold? I cannot see that: and though I can see
Christ's body there, yet there is something else which should be there, I
cannot see; and that is, Do this in remembrance of me, which we conceive is an
evident Explanation of the Mystery; this his Lordship thought too hot for him,
so that if we stand to his carving, we shall be sure to have that we have least
mind to. Now let his Fathers be produced; Ignatius says, The Eucharist is the
flesh of Christ; 2 Ep. ad Smyrn.
so say we too, and Ignatius tells you for all that, Ep. ad Philad.
it is Bread still, and after Consecration too, both are indeed most sure, as
Saint Hillary says exceeding well, Figura est dum Panis and Vinum extra
videtur, veritas autem dum corpus and sanguis Christi in veritate interius
creditur; It is the figure, whilst the Bread and Wine are beheld outwardly;
but the truth it self, when the Body and Blood are inwardly in truth believed.
Justin Martyr says, That after Consecration, the Elements become the body and
blood of Christ, who doubts of it? but speaks not of any Conversion of the
substance, nay, says expressly in the same place, that the Deacons distribute
after consecration the bread and wine, clearly implying, he thought not of any
Transubstantiation, but that the Elements kept their substance still. Cyprian
and Ambrose I confess spoke the first of a Change, the other of a Conversion of
the Elements; but it is not of their substance neither, but only of their use,
Sunt quae erant and in aliud commutantur; They are still what they were before,
but are changed in quality. Such a Conversion we grant too; we hold the
Elements after Consecration differ in use and virtue from common Bread and
Wine. Rhemigius speaks not of Conversion, if Christ's body be there, sure his
flesh is, and I never read of any other flesh he had, than what he took in the
Virgins womb. The difference is not whether Christ's body be here, but how? And
if I did not think it time misspent, I could destroy this carnal Doctrine by
the testimony of twenty several Fathers, who all understand the Presence to be
no other, than as a Symbol, Type, figure, representation, sign, image,
likeness, and memory of Christ's body crucified upon the Cross; and as for
Transubstantiation, they never dreamt of such a word, nor thought of such a
thing. I will only instance in one, and I hope his word may be taken, Gelasius
cont. Eutic. de duabus nature. Chr.
because a Pope: Non desinit substantia vel natura Panis and Vini; The
substance of Bread and Wine is not changed or destroyed. So Gelasius.

M. We hold that there is in the Church an infallible Rule for understanding of
Scripture, besides the Scripture it self; this you deny.

Our Church has no where delivered her self expressly in this point, yet I take
it to be the General Doctrine of Protestants, that there is no other Rule
besides Scripture, to understand Scripture, that is infallible. For if
Scripture be an infallible Rule, why should we cumber our selves with more than
one, unless this one were hard to come by, or easy to be lost. And it seems
his Lordship thought Scripture was one infallible Rule, when he said, there is
another besides it: and Bellarmine comes in with his Convenit inter nos and
omnes omnino haereticos. Bellarm. l. 1. in praes.
In this point we are all generally agreed, Heretics and all; that the Word
of God is the Rule of Faith: l. 1. c. 2. sect. 5.
and after he tells you, why it must be so, because a Rule must be certain and
known; for if it be not certain, it is no Rule; and if not known, it is no Rule
to us: now there is nothing more certain or more known than the Scriptures.
Compare the Marquis his infallible Rule of Traditions, with this saying of
Bellarmine, and it will appear they have little of a Rule in them. For
certainly, what is more uncertain? When the Primitive Church it self, within a
hundred years after the Apostolical Times, was split into that great Schism
about the Celebration of Easter, which was but a mere Tradition, and was not
reconciled till the Council of Nice. And for being known, nothing is less,
seeing in the very Church of Rome they are not yet agreed which are Apostolical
Traditions. Vide Suar. in part.
The Scriptures he urges, are Romans 12. 6. And there is a Rule of Faith I
grant, and an infallible one too, Thom.
but it is not praeter, besides; nor extra, without the Scripture, but that
mentioned in the Scriptures, Gal. 6. 16. there is a Rule, but a Rule of
Doctrine concerning Christian Liberty in the point of Circumcision, no Rule of
Faith, Romans 6. 17. there is neither Rule, nor Faith, but a form of Doctrine
delivered to them by the preaching of the Gospel: what he urged out of 2 Cor.
10. 12, 16. is so extremely and grossly impertinent, as sure when he cast his
eye upon that place, his Lordship was either entering into, or newly raised from
such a nap wherein the Doctor found him.

M. But lest we should mis-understand what this Rule of Faith is, the Marquis
tells us, [By it, is not meant the holy Scriptures, for that cannot do it, and
he gives the Reason, whilst there are unstable men who wrest this way, and
that way to their own destruction.] So that Scripture is now with the Marquis
no infallible Rule at all, Traditions have outed her clear; and the Reason
infers plainly, that we must not walk abroad at high noonday without a
Torch, because some men notwithstanding the Sun shined clear, have fallen into
a Ditch. Of far more weight I must needs confess are his Humane, than Divine
Authorities, which yet shall not pass without my Animadversions. Irenaeus lib.
4. c. 45. speaking of those who succeeded the Apostles, says, Hi fidem nostram
custodiunt and Scripturas sine periculo exponunt; These preserve our Faith, and
expound the Scriptures, without peril of error. Quemadmodum audivi a quodam
Presb. etc.
Observe first, it is hi, these men, who were so near the Apostles, as they were
instructed by those who were contemporaries with them, as himself says. Then
again it is exponunt, they do expound, not that they are infallible, or cannot
expound otherwise; what is this to the infallibility of the Church 1600 years
after Christ? Irenaeus is full enough in this point, and point blank against
the Marquis, Secund. Scripturas expositio legitima et minime periculosa. ib. c.
63.
To expound Scripture decording to Scripture, is the truest way, and least
perilous. As for Tertullian, his meaning is thus made out, Ista haeresis non
recipit quasdam Scripturas, et si recipit non recipit integras, et si integras
diversas Expo. etc. Tert de Praescript. Tantum veritati obstrepit adult. sensus
quantum corrupt. eflyl. id. ib.
The Heretics with whom the Church was to dispute, did not receive all
Scriptures for Canonical; and those they did receive, entire they did not; or
if entire, they feigned strange Interpretations of their own fancies; and a
corrupt sense prejudiceth Truth as much as a corrupt Text: were they accused
for vitiating and falsifying the Text, or for introducing absured Expositions,
They retorted the same Charge upon their Adversaries. In this case of malicious
obstinacy, the Church had only this remedy to provoke them to declare who
founded their Churches, for if it appeared they were the Apostles, there was no
more to be said, it being in those days Constat omnem doctrinam quae cum illis
ecclesiis apostolicis matricibus fides conspiret, veritati deputandam. ib.
constat, and evidence enough of Truth, that their Churches were of Apostolical
foundation. As for Vincentius having spoke before of the perfection of
Scripture, with a satis superque, that it is all-sufficient and to spare; he
supposes it may be demanded, what need is there then of the Churches sense? to
which he answers, because all men understand it not in one sense and alike,
therefore it is necessary (says he) that the line of interpretation be
directed according to the rule of the Catholic and Ecclesiastical sense. Now
what is intended by a Catholic sense is the Question, the Papists will have
it to be Tradition unwritten; but we say, it is that which the Universal Church
has always held; for Vincentius explains his Catholic to be that, Quod
ubique. quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum: c. 3.
which always, every where, and of all men has been believed; and this Rule we
willingly admit in points essential, where variety and different senses are
inconsistent; but in other points of less concernment, we say with Saint
Augustine, Quod ab exercondas mentes fidelium in Scripturis sanctis obscure
ponitur, gratulandum est simultis modis non tamen insipienter exponatur.
If any thing be set down in sacred Scriptures more obscurely, as an exercise
for the minds of Believers, it is commendable if it be interpreted many ways,
provided no way absurdly.

M. In matters of Faith, Christ bids us do and observe whatsoever they bid us,
who sit in Moses seat, Matthew. 23. 2. therefore there is something more to be
observed than Scripture.

True, it is to be observed, that his Lordship here takes observing and doing
to be matters of Faith, which I never read in Scripture, nor any where else.
Aug. cont. Max. l. 3. c. 22.
But are we to do whatsoever they bid us who sit in Moses seat? Surely no; if
they have any Commission it is not greater than that of Moses was, (...),
Chrysostom. T. 5. de Leg. Not.
and his was after the tenor of the words delivered him in the Mount, Exodus
34. 27. And therefore Christ says, In vain ye worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of men. Mat. 15. 9. [Wil you not as well believe what
you hear Christ say, as what ye hear his Ministers write?] Yes sure, and much
more; for what Christ says is truth it self, believe it I must; but what his
Ministers write is many times erroneous, and then credat Judaeus Apella, non
ego, believe it who will for me. Their Commission is All things which I have
commanded you. Hom. 1. part. 2. Hom.


M. We say, the Scriptures are not easy to be understood, you say they are.

Our Church says, it is full as well of low valleys, plain ways, and easy for
every man to walk in, as also of high hills and mountains, which few men can
climb unto. And this the Marquis in a manner grants, p. 129. saying, it is easy
in aliquibus, but not in omnibus locis, in some places, not every where.

M. We say, this Church cannot err, you say, it can.

What his Lordship means by this Church, we might demand, Page 79.
had he not told us at first to what Church he would lead his Majesty, and that
was the Romish Church, of which our Church makes no bones to say, It has erred
not only in living, Art. 19.
and matters of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith. Here she is I confess
somewhat bolder with the Church of Rome than the Marquis was with his Majesty.
But perhaps the Church of England (for she is not infallible) may err in her
censure of the Romish Church, and his Lordship hopes to prove it out of
Scripture; If you neglect to hear this Church, you shall be a Heathen and a
Publican, Matthew. 18. 17. This Church in the Marquis his sense is the Church of
Rome; and I grant it is, but not the Church of Rome only, for it is as well
the English, the French, the Geneva, or any other particular Church: and admit
it were only the Church of Rome, yet the matters wherein that Church is to be
obeyed, are not Articles of Faith neither; the very Text tells us, it is only
in points of scandal and breach of unity, in civil matters. His next Scripture
is, Ephesians. 5. 27. where the Church shall be presented unto Christ a glorious
Church, not having spot or wrinkle. Here is a Church I yield, that cannot err;
but it is not the Romish Catholic Church; Salmer. in ep. ad Romans Part. 2.
disp. 1.
no, neither Romish, nor Catholic: if his Lordship means the Catholic
militant Church, for it is a Church that can neither err, nor sin, without
spot; and therefore their own Salmeron says, It must be understood of the
Triumphant Church; and if his Lordship thought otherwise, Aug. de Haeres.
Augustine would have told him he was a Pelagian.

M. We say the Church has been always visible, you deny it.

Our Church says nothing of this Point; and therefore if I say any thing, it
must be ex abundanti dictum, more than Covenants; yet something I will say, and
something shall Liberius say too, as Salmeron in Luc. Tract. 23.
Salmeron quoteth him, replying to Constantius his boast of the multitude of
Arrians, Non refert numerum esse magnum, aut parvum, nam Judaeorum Ecclesia in
Babylone constituta ad tres pueros redacta fuit; No matter whether the number
be small or great, for the Jewish Church in Babylon was reduced to three. And
at this time Liberius was Pope of Rome; and because I am fallen upon this time, I
would gladly have an answer where the Visibility of the Romish Church was
(unless they mean a Visibility of Heresy) when Liberius himself excommunicated
Athanasius, and turned Arrian? Nay more, and to the very point, where was the
Visibility of the Catholic and true Church it self at that time, but only in
that Pillar of Faith Atha. ad solit. vitam agent. ^p.
Athanasius? Orat. 12.
I confess Nazianzen says his Church had it (...) most singular to it self, to
be preserved from drowning in the Arrian Deluge, but the visible shock and
storm of Persecution, no man stoutly withstood and overcame, but Athanasius
only. His Fathers, Origin in Matthew. hom. 30. says, The Church is full of
light, but that light is fulgor veritatis, he himself tells us so, the
brightness of Truth, no external splendour: what is this to a visible Church?
Cyprian, the Church of God encompassed with light, sheds her beams through all
the World Cyprian's light is like Origen's, an inward light too, and were it
(as the Sun) an outward Light, it would not shine always in every Horizon, and
where it does shine it may sometimes be eclipsed. Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in Esaias. 6.
speaks of the duration and perpetuity, not of the Visibility of the Church,
and says, It is easier for the Sun's light to be extinguished, than for the
Church utterly to be destroyed; or if you will (...), to disappear, so says
Chrysostom, and so say we too: the Church will be always visible, for an
Invisibility we hold not absolutely, but comparatively, it may be reduced to so
inconsiderable a number as in regard of the paucity and fewness of the
Professors the World will not own it under the notion of a Church. Again,
Persecution may so control the outward Profession of the Gospel, that nothing
belonging to external Government, Discipline, and Exercise of the Ministry
shall be performed otherwise than by stealth, and in a clandestine way.
Augustine speaks of the Visibility of the Church in his time, that it was then
visible not that it had been before, or should be after him always so visible.

M. We hold the perpetual universality of the Church, and that the Church of
Rome is such a Church; you deny it.

Our Church denies not the Catholic or universal Church, Artic. 8.
it is an Article of the three Creeds, she holds; That the Romish is such a
Church, she does deny, because it is in none of their Creeds; and yet if it be
in the Scripture, I dare promise for her, she shall and will believe it. As to
that place of Psalm. 2. 8. I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. It is a most clear
Prediction of the calling of the Gentiles, and that all the World shall be
subdued by the power of the Gospel; so here is an Universality of Christ's
Kingdom, but not of the Romish Church. But I confess the mischief is, here is a
Tibi dabo, I will give thee, and wheresoever the Church of Rome finds that,
she takes all for her own that follows. Let us observe now, Romans 1. 8. I thank
my God, that your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World. That is, to
all the World it is published, that Rome has embraced the Christian Faith. Is
she the Catholic Church because of that? sure, this Text no way enforces any
such Illation; for we are told as much of the Church of Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians.
1. 8. that their Faith to Godward is spread abroad in every place; and then we
must mend our Creed, and say, I believe the two Catholic Churches, that of
Thessalonica, and that of Rome. For his human Authorities, take this note by
the way, and they are soon cleared; The Primitive Church held, that consent and
unity in Doctrine made all Churches in truth to be One, however distinguished
by names; L. 4. c. 2.
The Church of Christ is One, says Cyprian, divided into several Members
through the whole World: and this Unity made them al not only One, but
Apostolical and Primitive also; De praes^r.
for Omnes primae, omnes Apostolicae, dum unam omnes probant unitatem, says
Tertullian, All were Primitive, all Apostolical, whilst all showed the same
Unity: yea, and it made all Churches (though otherwise particular) Catholic
too. Athanas.
Therefore the Church of Alexandria was called the Catholic Church by
Arsenius; Apol 2.
so Augustine was Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus, Bishop of that Church which
held the Catholic Faith; and in this sense Rome was anciently styled the
Catholic Church. So it was truly said by Hierome, It is all one to say, the
Roman Faith, and the Catholic Faith: but though it was true then, it is not
true now; for the Then and Now Roman Church, are two.

M. We hold the Unity of the Church to be necessary in all points of Faith, you
deny it.

Our Church is here silent, yet an Unity the Protestants hold too in essential
matters of Faith, and hold it so, that if this Unity be a Note of the true
Church, they have there much the odds of Rome.

M. We hold that every Minister of the Church (especially the supreme Minister,
or Head thereof) should be in a capacity of fungifying his Office in preaching
the Gospel, etc. you deny it.

How his Lordship makes the Church do Penance, and puts her, head and heels
together; for how the supreme Head can properly be a Minister of that Church
whereof it is Head, passes my understanding: what our Church denies, is this.
Art. 23
It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of public
Preaching or ministering the Sacraments in the Congregation, before he be
lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And this is all his Lordship's
Text urges.

M. Nor we only deny it, says the Marquis, but so as that our Church has
maintained and practiced it a long time; for a Woman to be Head, or supreme
Moderatrix in the Church, and many have been hanged, drawn, and quartered for
not acknowledging of it.

I have read indeed of some such Women as his Lordship speaks of, one in Revel.
17. 1. and by her fine clothes, verse. 4. she should be a Queen, and as a Queen
I am told she sits, chap. 18. verse. 7. I will not say what that Queen is, for
fear I procure my self ill will. Martinus Polonus, Marianus Scotus, etc.
Another who first made Rome the Mother Church. And another in England called
Qu. Mary, who used that Title of Head of the Church, Statutes of Queen Mary.
and no offense taken at it, having been conferred upon her Father by Act of
Parliament in the time of Popery; Cambdeni Apparatus ad Hist.
but her Sister Elisabeth thought it enough to be called supreme Governess; who
were martyred for not acknowledging her so, Eliz. idem Hist.
neither can I, nor does his Lordship tell.

I shall say little to his Lordship's points of Absolution and Confession,
their practice is very ancient and commendable, and as in other cases, our
Church leaves them arbitrary, so in some she injoyns them. For Absolution you
may see her form prescribed in the Liturgy in the Visitation of the Sick, for
Confession the Rubric Paragraph 2. before the Communion.

M. We hold men may do Works of Supererogation, this you deny.

Had not Supererogation (or Superarrogancy rather) been a saucy and malepert
Tenet, it might have given, in good manners, the Possibility of keeping the
Commandments to have been before it; for sure we should in reason be out of
Gods debt before we bring him into ours. But we must take it as we find it,
nor am I ashamed to own what our Church holds, viz. Voluntary Works besides,
Art. 14.
over and above God's Commandments, which they call Works of Supererogation,
cannot be taught without arrogance and impiety; and she reasons from Christ,
saying plainly, When ye have done all that are commanded to you, say, We are
unprofitable Servants. His Lordship voucheth only one single Text, and that of
the Vow (as he takes it) of single life. But I observe, All hear not that
saying, but they to whom it is given; so then it is a gift, and if we return no
more than was given, where is the Supererogation? and whereas the Marquis tells
us it is no Commandment, had he consulted with the Greek Grammar, he would have
found (...) let him receive it, in the Imperative Mood; and therefore
Athanasius calls it, Apol. ed Constant.
Caeleste aeternae virginitatis mandatum, the heavenly commandment of perpetual
virginity. The Fathers were, I grant, much enamored with the vow of continency,
as a condition of life more agreeable to the service of God, than the coupled
state usually is; but they never thought it a work meritorious, much less able
to supererogate at God's hand. If they held any such opinion, the Marquis
should have told us their words, for the places urged and quoted, demonstrate
no such thing.

M. Art. 10.
We say, we have free will, you deny it.

Our Church says, We have no power to do goodworks, pleasant, and acceptable
to God, without the Grace of God by Christ, preventing us that we may have a
good will, and working with us when we have that good will. So then, we deny
not all free will, not a free will to evil, but to good: for the Apostle
speaking of us in an unregenerate state, Ephesians. 2. v. 5.
says, When we were dead in sin, God has quickened us together with Christ;
so that there is death first, a total disability in us to good; then there is
the new birth, quickened with Christ; without this we live, neither the life of
faith, nor of works; not of faith, for Whosoever believes is born of God, 1
John 5. 1. not of works, for Whosoever loves is born of God also, 1 John 4. 7.
His Lordship's three Texts oppose not what we say, b Deus ideo iubet aliqua
quae non possumus, ut noverimus quid ab ipso petere d^beamus.
1 Cor. 7. 37. The Apostle speaks of a thing in its own nature indifferent, and
in such things free will we deny not. Deuteronomy. 30. 11. Though Life and Death be
there propounded to our choice, yet does it not follow that the power of
choosing Life and Death is our own; and if any say with Pelagius, Non iuberet
Deus quod soiret ab homine non posse fieri.
God would not command what he knew we could not perform; Aug. d. Great. and l.
Arb c. 16.
my Answer is, with Augustine, q God commands some things more than we can do;
to teach us what we are to crave at his hands, Matthew. 23. 37. We read, that
the children of Jerusalem would not be gathered together, which argues a
perversity and freeness of will to disobey Christ, to obey him no power at all
of our selves. [But there might (says his Lordship) have been a willingness as
well as an unwillingness, else Christ had wept in vain.] True, and there had
been a willingness, no doubt, had God willed their gathering by his secret, and
efficacious, as well as by his revealed will. To his Fathers. A folly it is to
deny, they, many of them, expressed themselves somewhat loosly in this point, and
having to deal with those Philosophers who held the fatal necessity of all
things, went so far on the other side, in advancing free will, as they were in
the ditch of error before they minded it; yea, Austin himself was a while in
it, till Pelagius with his Heresy roused him to look up, and discover where he
was: Austin being awake, first calls up the Church, who upon serious
consideration, finding her Doctrine in this particular warped somewhat from the
Truth, by the heat of Disputation, sets all those right in two eminent
Councels; first, of Milevis, where she says, Dominus non ait sine me
difficilius potesiis facere, sed fine me nihil potestis facere. Conc. Milevit.
ca. 3.
God says not, it is harder for you to do without me, John 15. 5. but without
me ye can do nothing at all. Then, that of Orange, Divini muneris est quum
pedis nostres ab iniquitate declinemus. Conc. Arausicanum 2d. Anno 444.
It is the gift of God, when we turn away our steps from wickedness.

[We hold it possible to keep the Commandments, you hold it impossible] We do
not hold it impossible to keep the Commandments, we have kept them all; we hold
it is possible, for some of them by some to be lost; for we miss the second out
of the first Table, in the Popish Bibles: but as touching observing the
Commandments, we hold it impossible, for any man in what state soever, to
observe any one, much less all, should God be extreme to mark what is done
amiss: yet we hold too, that in some sort the whole Law may be fulfilled; and
that is, in Saint Augustines sense, Omnia mandatae Dei facta esse deputantur
quando quicquid non fit ignoscitar. Retract. l. 1. c. 19.
All the Commandments are then accounted observed, when what is defective in
our obedience, is forgiven. The Scripture Luke 1. 6. urged by his Lordship, was
produced long since by Pelagius, and Augustines Answer shall be mine, Eminenti
Justitiae suit Zacharias, qui tamen necessitatem habebat sacrificium primitus
pro suis peccatis offerre.
Zachary was a man of singular sanctity, yet was it necessary for him to offer
sacrifice, first for his own sins, Hebr. 7. 28. So then, if Zachary had sins,
he kept not all the Commandments, for sin is but the transgression of the Law.
But it is said, 1 John 5. 3. His Commandments are not grievous: nor are they;
but are his Commandments there spoken of the Moral Law? assuredly No. Saint
John will tell you clearly what they are, chap 3. v. 23. That we should believe
on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, And love one another. Nor can we fulfill
these Commandments, but we must first be born of God, v. 1. and chap. 4. 7. So
that an unregenerat person will not be able to set a step forward to that
performance; nor can our new birth render us so perfect, as to say, we have not
sinned; for that were to make God a Liar. 1 John 1. 10. The Marquis says, the
Fathers are for us. But if they be, why then did he not cite their words, as
well as vouch the places; but I fear it is otherwise, for I cannot make out, no
not by conjecture, what either Origin, or Cyril, or Hillary has to his
advantage. Hierome indeed says, In nostra potestate positum ese vel peccare
vel non peccare. l. 3. con. Pclag.
It is in our power either to sin or not to sin, but it is with this caution,
and Salvo pro condition fragilitatis humanae, as far as human frailty will
admit. And how little Hierome is for them, his Commentary upon the Galatians,
chapter 3. will inform us, where he says, Neminem posse explere legem and facere
cuncta quae jussa sunt,
No man can fulfill the Law, and perform all things which are commanded.

M. We say, Faith cannot justify without Works; you say, good Works are not
absolutely necessary to salvation.

Here the Marquis slides from the point, and wilfully leaves his old wont of
challenging our opposition; for whereas he should have said, You say, Faith
alone can justify; he tells us here, we say, good Works are not absolutely
necessary to salvation. Necessary to salvation is one thing, necessary to
justification another: salvation and justification are different things, one is
the cause, the other the effect. We hold good Works are necessary to salvation,
but not absolutely. The Thief upon the Cross was saved without them; thousands
who believe and are prevented by Death before their Faith can show it self in
Works, are saved without them; Infants dying are saved without them; so they
are not absolutely necessary, no not to salvation; but to justification they
are not so much as necessary: for as our Church says, We are justified by
faith only; this will appear, first by considering what things are required to
justification, and those are three; Art. 11.
first, God's great mercy and grace; Hom. of Justif. 1.
secondly, Christ's Justice in satisfying and paying our ransom, and
fulfilling the Law for us; lastly, by a true and lively faith in Gods free
grace, and Christ's merits. So that good works are clearly outed. Secondly,
faith alone justifies without works, because we are justified by faith before
we can do good works, Sequuntur iustificatum non precedunt iustificandum. Aug.
de fid. and op. c. 14.
and works are not good till justifying faith makes them so. But though faith
alone justifies without works, yet it cannot be alone and without them, for
impossible it is for any man to believe God will be gracious to him, and that
Christ's righteousness and merits shall be ever imputed to him, who at that
instant of believing, does not seriously and unfainedly resolve to obey, and
observe to his uttermost all God's Commandments. The places of Scripture
alleged by the Marquis against our Faith alone without Works, are; first, 1
Cor. 13. 2. Though I have all Faith, and have no Charity, I am nothing. There
is faith indeed, but no justifying faith, it is the faith of miracles, Saint
Paul tells us so, chap. 12. v. 9. The faith mentioned, Luke 17. 8. of removing
mountains, and so the Apostle would have told us in this very Text, had not his
Lordship, by what faith I know not, removed those mountains, those words out of
his way. Secondly, James 2. v. 24. By works a man is justified, and not by
faith only. This I confess is an eminent place, and has exercised the wits
of all Expositors how to reconcile it to that of Saint Paul, Romans 3. 28. A man
is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. Many have gone several
ways, and some not the right. Luther having beaten his brains about it a good
while, at last threw the whole Epistle of Saint James out of the Volume of
Canonical Scripture. Hugo Grotius, that great Scholar of the latter Age, has
taken it to task by it self, and has indeed shown great Reading, but I
confess as to the elucidation and clearing of the difficulty, he makes me no
wiser than I was before: and indeed, after all has been said Aquinas his sense
will I think have most voices, that good works justify, declarative, by
declaring our faith before men, not, offective, by making us just before God.

M. This opinion of yours Saint Augustine says, l. de fid. and op. c. 14. was
an old Heresy.

Augustine mentions it not as an Heresy, but only says, that in the Apostles
time some misunderstanding that place of Paul, Romans 5. Where sin abounded,
there grace superaboundeth, thought faith only necessary to salvation, and
therefore neglected moral duties, and sanctity of life; and this we call the
high way to Hell, as well as Augustine, Hillary in his 7. chapter or canon upon
Matthew. has nothing tending to justification, either solitary without, or
associated with works, but can. 8. he is expressly at, Fides sola justificat,
Faith alone justifies. Ambrose says, Eternal rest belongs to those who have
that faith Quae per dilectionem operatur, which works together by charity. So
Ambrose, and so say we.

M. We hold good works to be meritorious, you deny it; we have Scripture for it.

Our Church says, Hom. 1. part of salvat. 1.
All the good works that we can do be imperfect, and therefore not able to
deserve our justification. His Lordship produces out of Scripture, Matthew. 16.
27. He shall reward every man according to his works. Answer, I confess our
Translation gives it so, but the word in the original is not He will reward,
but (...), He will render. But though reward be not there, yet Matthew. 5. 12.
it is said, Great is your reward in Heaven, and there is reward, and great
reward too; and the Marquis infers that Reward in the end, presupposes
merit in the work: but sure it is no general Rule; for when the Laborers were
called, Matthew. 20. 8. to receive their (...), or Wages, (for it is the same
word both there and here) The Steward gave to him that wrought but one hour a
penny, which was (...), the wages for the whole day, was this work of an hour
adequate to, or did it earn that wages? Deuteronomy coronat dona sua non opera nostra.
Again, this Reward is not such to which the Lord is tied by any precontract,
but it proceeds from his mere grace. Lastly, could the Work merit the Reward?
it is but still God crowns his own gifts, T. 3. de Sacram. Bapt. l. 1. c. 6.
not our works, as Augustine says. But if it be true what the Apostle says,
That the sufferings of this life (even Martyrdom it self) which remitteth all
sins both original and actual, Sic operatur iustificationem in Sanctis suis in
hujus vitae tentatione laborantibus, ut tamen sit quod petentibus largiter
adjiciat and confitentibus clementer ignoscat.
and which justifies ex opere operato, by the very act of suffering (if
Bellarmine may be believed) are not worthy of the joys which shall be revealed
hereafter, what will become of his Lordships merits? He says, The Fathers were
of his opinion. But the first Tract. de Apolog. David. wants a Father, it being
clearly spurious, Hierome has nothing to the purpose, and Augustine is so
clear of another mind, that the whole chapter is little else but a confutation
of the Doctrine of Merits, God says he, so works justification in his
Saints, whilst they are cumbered with the temptations of this life, as he has
still somewhat to add to them who ask, and somewhat to remit to those who are
penitent.

We hold that faith once had may be lost, if we have not a care to preserve it,
you say it can, it cannot.

Our Church has determined nothing in this point, Art. 34.
yet because their sister of Ireland affirms, That a true lively justifying
faith is not extinguished, nor vanishes away in the regenerate, either
finally, or totally. I shall for this time own her Tenet, and consider the
validity of his Lordships Texts: and first for Luke 8. 13. They on the Rock,
are they which when they hear receive the Word with joy, which for a while
believe, and in time of temptation fall away. Answer, the faith mentioned there
was but a false conception, no living, no justifying faith. But I see the
Marquis has left part of the Text behind him, and left that be lost, as well
as faith, I will for this time bring it after him; the words are, And these
have no root, evidently implying, the reason why that seed took no better, but
was scorched with the heat of persecution, was that it took no root. Now for 1 Timothy 1. 18, 19. Which some having put away, have made shipwreck of their
faith.] Answer, the faith there spoken of is not justifying faith, nay, so far
from it, as it is not so much as the faith of assent, to the general promises
of God revealed in his Word; but it is the faith which denotes the Doctrine of
Christianity, in which sense it is frequently used in Scripture, Acts 6. v. 7.
Gal. 1. 23. 1 Timothy 3. 8. and 4. v. 1. Jude 3. Such a faith we grant may be
lost. The authority his Lordship alleges is Augustine, and I must
ingenuously confess, T. 3. de fide l. 13. c. 21. sect. ult. De praedest. and
Great.
neither Chamier, Perkins, nor any other do, to my seeming come clearly off
with him: it is not enough to say as they do, that Augustine speaks not of
solid and perfect Faith and Love, but of imperfect; this is no Answer but a
mere shift; for Saint Augustine says, that some sons of perdition begin to
live, yea, and a while do live, and that faithfully, and justly in faith which
works by love, and afterward fall away. Huius (Cypriani) authoritati non
ten^or. Aug. contr. Cresc c. 32.
So that here is not only a beginning to live, but here is a living, and a
living faithfully and righteously, and where these are, there is and must be a
living and justifying faith. My answer shall be, what he once said of Cyprian,
I am not bound to his authority, Nobis qui vere Chr. insiti sumus, talis data
est gratia, non solum ut possimus si velimus, sed ut velimus in Chr.
perseverare. de Corrept. and great. c. 11.
and I am the less bound, because I find Augustine at odds with himself, for
he elsewhere says, They who are once ingrafted in Christ, are endued with
grace, not only to persevere, if they will, but also to will perseverance.

We hold, that God did never inevitably damn any man from all eternity, you say
he did.

Was our Church so weak? Is it possible a Church (consisting of as many gallant
and eminent Divines, as ever any Age afforded) should fall so foully, to assert
what never yet to my reading dropped from any private pen? To save and damn are
proper to God, as he is supreme Judge of all the World, who is so far from
damning any man, from all Eternity, or before he is born, as he actually does
it not when born, till he is dead. Decree, I grant, he did from all Eternity,
to leave a certain number of the common mass of all mankind in the state of
Damnation, being plunged therein by the default of their own free will, and as
sole Lord and Master of his own, not to bestow upon them such grace as would
infallibly raise them out, and without which they would, in time, unavoidably
incur, by their own corrupt, and rebellious will, eternal Damnation. The Texts
cited are and must be understood of God's revealed, not of his secret will, and
without allowing that distinction he must be accounted as weak as we (according
to the Romish censure of us) argue him cruel.

We hold that no man ought infallibly to assure himself of his salvation, you
say he ought.

Our Church is silent in this point too. Zanch.
Some, I confess, Tom. 7. de certa salute Eccles. Perk. de praedest. and Gr.
there are of prime note amongst the Protestants, hold, that every man is bound
to believe himself predestined; and their main Reason is, because every man
in the Church is bound to believe the Gospel; which I take to be very strong
against their own opinion, unless the Gospel did tell every man that he is of
the number of the predestined. But it will be said, though this Proposition,
Such and such a man is predestined, is not expressly found in Scripture, yet
it may be inferred from thence by unavoidable consequence; as, such, and such a
man has Faith, and Charity, and therefore he assuredly belongs to God. Most
true, but then he cannot be assured that he is predestined, till he has
Faith, and that the true justifying faith too; for he may believe there is a
God, he may believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, he may believe all
things contained in them to be true, and yet come short of a justifying faith
still: nor must he only have faith, but he must also know that he has it, or
else he must not assure himself of salvation; and certain it is, Faith he may
have and not know it, yea, and a living justifying faith too; it may be so weak
he cannot feel the Pulse, them motion, the operation of it, and yet the faith
may be alive for all that; and though we are commandded to examine our selves
whether we be in the faith or not, yet assuredly many a dear child of God,
notwithstanding all possible search, sobs, and sighs, and howls, and laments,
because he finds not that faith in himself, which yet in the effects and
fruits there, as self-denial, unfeigned contrition, an hungring and thirsting
after the righteousness of his blessed Redeemer, is most evidently visible to
all beholders. In this very sad agony, and bleeding distress, Satan is ready
enough to suggest to him, that faith he cannot have, but he must be sensible of
it, that the children of God are always assured of their salvation; and that
the faith which justifies, is and must be without the least doubting. This is
the woeful consequence of being taught, that all the sons of God ought to be
and are assured of their salvation. A far wiser and warier course take they,
who with the Church of Ireland hold only thus, Art. 38.
that a true believer may be certain by the assurance of faith of his
everlasting salvation by Christ; implying, first, that every faithful person
has all-sufficient and enough within him in his heart to give him that
assurance: and secondly, though in some, the beams of that gladsom light are
much darkened, with the fumes of predominant melancholy, and Satan's
suggestions cooperating with it, yet in other some, The Spirit of God bears
witness with their own spirit that they are the sons of God, Romans 8. 15, 16.
and gives them infallible assurance of being heirs of the promise. But to
return to the Marquis; his Lordship urges for Scripture, 1 Cor. 9. 27. and
says, St Paul was not assured but that whilst he preached unto others he
himself might become a cast-away] Answer, Saint Paul is his own best Expositor,
and certainly if we may believe him, he was not so diffident as the Marquis
makes him; nay, it appears clearly, he was most assured of obteining the Crown,
when he said, I run, but not as uncertainly, there is Paul's assurance. As for
his scleragogy, and strictness of life, that he exercised, to declare to the
world his conversation was conformable to his doctrine; least otherwise,
whilst he preached to others, he might be deemed (...), not a castaway (as
our Translation has it, very corruptly, I must needs say,) but a counterfeit,
not the man he seemed, for that is the true and proper signification of the
word, and the most natural to this place, as all Expositors agree. Next is Romans
(...), Plutarch. Marius.
11. 20. Thou stand in the faith, be not high minded, but fear, least thou
also may be cut off.] The Apostle here gives the Gentiles a memento of the
vicissitude of humane affairs, such an one as Marius gave the L. General
Sextilius by his Messenger, Go tell thy Master, said he, that thou did see
Marius, (that Marius who had been six times Consul of Rome) sitting in Exile,
upon the ruins of Carchedon,

that once famous City. Seneca.
Exemplifying thereby (says my Author) the misfortune of that City, and his
own change. So the Apostle would have the Gentiles take God's casting off the
Jews to be a document against their overmuch presumption, Stas eo loco unde
Troja cecidit, said the Tragedian, thou stand'st in the very place from whence
Troy fell. So the Gentiles were they to whom salvation came, through the fall
of the Jews, v. 11. This is an argument against assurance of our temporal, not
of our eternal state. Lastly, Phil. 2. 12. Work out your salvation with fear
and trembling.] Here we are taught to distrust our own worthiness, and to
stand in aw of offending God: nor are we the less assured of our salvation
through this diffidence of our selves, but rather much more. As to the Fathers
cited, I cannot discover any thing in them following suit with this Tenet,
only Bernard (who comes very tardy a thousand years after Christ;) and he only
upon Septuagesima (for in that upon the Advent, there is not a syllable
pertinent to this question) has indeed these words; Who can say, I am elected?
I am predestined? I am the child of God? But Bernard speaks of such a
certitude and assurance as Reason should demonstrate, and deriveth his
inference, from Ecclesiast. 9. 1. Who can know whether he be worthy of love or
hate? True it is, know it we cannot, but though we cannot know it, yet we may
believe it, and undoubtedly believe it too, and so says Bernard himself;
Propter hoc data sunt signa quaedam and indicia manifesta salutis, ut
indubitabile sit eum esse de numero electorum in quo ea signa permanserint, For
this very cause God exhibiteth manifest tokens of our salvation, that he who
has these signs in him should not doubt of his Election. And again, Quibus
certitudinem negat causa solicitudinis, fiduciam praestat gratia consolationis.
To make us the more solicitous and careful, he restrains the certainty of
our salvation; yet to comfort and support us, he affords us confidence.

M. We say that every man has an Angel Guardian, you say he has not.

This is a matter so indifferent, as we leave every man to think what he
please; the Fathers, Origin especially, held many of them as the Marquis holds;
whether we are guarded by one peculiar, or many Angels, is not worth the
dispute, since on all sides we are agreed, that guarded we are by them.

M. We say the Angels pray for us, knowing our thoughts and deeds, you deny it.

I deny that Deny; we hold that the Angels pray for the Church in general, and
that they know our Deeds, but not our thoughts, and because they do not, we
hold it unlawful to invocate or pray to them; nor do the places alleged,
import any thing to the contrary.

M. We hold it lawful to pray to them, you not: we have Scripture for it, Genesis
48. 16. The Angel which redeemed Me from all evil, bless these Lads, etc.
Hosea 12. 4. He had power over the Angel, and prevailed, he wept, and made
supplication unto them.

In both these places, one and the same Angel is understood, yet no created
Angel, but the second Person in the Trinity, so Athanasius; and something more
than so too; his Lordship would be loath to hear of: Athan.
Nec enim quispiam precaretur accipere ab Angelis, Sermon. 4. contr. Arianos.
aut ab ullis rebus creatis; For no man would supplicate the Angels, or any
other created nature to receive any thing from them. But Job says, Have pity
on me, O my Friends, Job 19. 21. And Saint Augustine says, expounding these
words, that holy Job addressed himself to the Angels: But under his Lordships
favor, Augustine goes no further than videtur, It seems he did apply
himself to the Angels; so he was not certain, not positive in it. And his
Lordship knows videtur, in others many times, but in Aquinas always goes by the
worst.

M. We hold, that the Saints deceased know what passes here on Earth, you say,
they know not.

His Lordship might have omitted this, it being to receive the same answer
which we gave to his Intercession of Angels. And of Abraham we shall have
occasion to speak anon: nor shall I insist upon his Intercession of Saints, it
differing nothing from that of Angels.

M. We hold, that we may pray to them, you not, we have Scripture for it, Luke
16. 24. Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, etc.

Ladies, this proof is for you, far fetched and dear bought; dead and damned in
Hell: who would have thought to have taken Dives at his Beads? Nor are the
place and person more odd, than the prayer, for it is no Ora pro me, Pray for
me, but Miserere mei, Have mercy on me; so Saint Abraham was no ordinary Saint:
the Marquis would prevent us in what we should say, that this is a Parable, and
we say so indeed; but no matter what we say, his Lordship has ready a grand
Inquest of ten Fathers, Theophylact, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Gregory, Euthymius, and venerable Bede, who give their Verdict, that it was a true History; these are all good
men and true; but were they all agreed upon that Verdict? Certainly no; Theoph.
in loc.
nay the very Foreman (so ill luck had the Marquis) has it not only (...),
this is a Parable, but also not as some, Chrysostom. de Laz.
(...), ridiculously, and senslesly have thought an History of a thing done.
Euthym. in loc.
Chrysostom calls it (...). So does Euthymius, and Ambrose is but at his
videtur, Tert. adv. Marc. l. 4.
It seems to be an History. Tertullian stands mute, Bellar. de Sanct. Beat.
l. 1. c. 4.
and only tells us, He thinks Abraham's bosom was not Hell, whether an
History, or Parable. But what need we more, when Bellarmine maintains the
historical part only till Death, and that Theophilact was in the right, when
he called it a Parable.

M. But, suppose it a Parable, every Parable is either true in the Persons
named, or may be true in some others.

Not every Parable, not this, for Bellarmine tells us that Christ when he
descended into Hell went into the Conclave of the Fathers, (where then Abraham
was) and preached to the souls there, Et tempore suo corpora etiam recepturas.
that he now had finished the work of Redemption, and they must go along with
him to Heaven, and that afterward in the proper time they should receive their
bodies. Bell. de Chr. Anim. l. 4. c. 13.
So that clear it is by him, that Abraham had not now his body, and how he
could discourse thus to Dives without his Tongue, a member of that body, is to
me a miracle. [Job 5. 1. Call now if there be any that will answer thee, and to
which of the Saints will thou turn.] Eliphaz bids Job expostulate with, not
pray to the Saints, nor are they dead Saints, but living; such as from whom Job
might expect an answer. His Lordship's Authorities are, first, Dionysius
Areopag. c. 7. but the prayer there is for the dead, not to them. Athanasius is
such a piece of forgery, as Cardinal Baronius himself says, Baron. ad an. 408.
S. 19. and 20.
It is a great blemish to the Catholic cause to urge such counterfeits. Basil
speaks of devout persons who resorted usually to make their supplications to
God at the Monuments of Martyrs; not one syllable of praying to the dead.
Chrysostom Hom. 66. is a Bastard. Saint Hieromes Epitaph upon Saint Paul is no
better Saint Maximus, we know not any such Saint, nor Father. Bernard is a
thousand years after Christ, and we grant Invocation of Saints had got footing
in the Church by that time.

M. We hold confirmation necessary, you not.

We hold confirmation as an invocation of grace, to confirm and strengthen us
in the performance of what we promised in Baptism. But not as necessary by
divine Ordinance, nor as a Sacrament, nor that the holy Ghost with the gift of
miracles is conferred thereby. His Lordships Scriptures are only Evidences of
Fact, what was done; they contein no precept, nor is there any one word of
Chrysme, or anointing with oil, See after Titulo confirmation.
which is the ( sine qua non,) the main ingredient into Popish confirmation,
and though ancient, yet it is not Apostolical by their own confessions.

M. We hold it sufficient to communicate in one kind, you not.

Our Church says, Art. 30.
The cup of the Lord is not to be denied to Lay People. And certainly, if any
one of the Elements may be denied, it must be the Bread, the cup cannot; for of
the Bread it is only said, Take, eat, this is my body, but of the Cup it is
said expressly, Drink ye all of this; implying plainly, all are to communicate
of it. But if the Marquis has Scripture, by that we will and must be governed.
First then, Joh. 6. 15. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever.]
True, And therefore Biel says, In toto illo sexto capite Johannis loquitur,
Dominus de manducatione and bibitione spirituali non carnali. in can. missa
lect. 84.
in the sense our Savior spoke it, who told us, v. 63. the words he spoke are
Spirit and Life, implying they are to be spiritually interpreted, and how that
is, he explained himself before, v. 35. He that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thirst. Nor did he speak here
of the sacrametal bread, and if he did, the Church of Rome is clearly cast;
for, verse. 53. he is express enough, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood; (so there the Cup comes in, it cannot be excluded) you
have no life in you. What can the Papists here say, that judgment should not
be given against them? Next, the Marquis alleges, Acts 2. 42. And they
continued in breaking of Bread, and prayer; and tells us, here is no mention of
the Cup. I answer, granted; but what if we say, there is no absolute necessity
enforces us to understand these words of the Eucharist, how could the Marquis
prove it? But if the Papists will take it for a courtesy, we will not stand
with them about it. And though the Cup was not there mentioned, yet for ought
the Marquis could tell, it might be there; for breaking of bread are words
large enough to hold it, else Eutychus had but a dry and choking repast. And
why may not breaking of bread include the cup, as well as eating comprehends
drinking? Christ sat down with the Disciples to eat the Passover, Luke 22.
15. 16. and yet we find a cup there, verse. 17. and the fruit of the vine in it
too, verse. 18. and no Communion chalice neither. His last Text is Luke 24, 30,
35. where Christ communicated with his Disciples under one kind, where he tells
us that Augustine, Theophylact and Chrysostom expound this place of the blessed
Sacrament: well we will not quarrel about that neither; but this triumvirate of
Fathers had not it seems kond their lesson right, for they should have told us
that Christ communicated under one kind only: Nay, had they told us of any
such practice in the Primitive Church, it had been somewhat, but nor they, nor
any other, for the first 500 years, I might say 1000 have left us any such
thing upon record, and therefore here his Lordship forsakes his old wont of
saying the Fathers are of this opinion, and stands ingenuously silent; no more
then what Bellarmine did before him, who in this very point, leaves his old
Idem probatur ex Patribus, The same is proved by the Fathers, and fairly gives
them the slip.

M. We hold that Christ offered up unto his Father in the sacrifice of the
Mass, is a true and lively sacrifice; this you deny.

Our Church says, Art. 31.
the sacrifices of the Mass are blasphemous fables and dangerous deceits. His
Lordship urges Malachy 1. 11. In every place incense shall be offered to my
name and a pure offering. This could not be meant of the Jewish sacrifices, nor
of that real sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, but of the daily sacrifice of
the Mass.

Of the 2 former I grant with the Marquis it could not be meant, and fear the
sacrifice of the Mass comes in so late, and so many to be served before it,
that it will speed as ill as they.

For first there is a sacrifice of Prayer. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 33.
Psalm 50. It might be meant of that, Hieronim. in Zach. l. 2. c. 8.
and so Irenaeus and Hierome understood it. There is a sacrifice of Praise, the
fruit of our lips. Heb. 13. 15. It might be that so Augustine and Cyprian
understood it. Aug. c. Petil. l. 6. c. 86 Cypr. ad Quir. l. 1. c. 16.
There is a sacrifice Eleemosynary, of alms, with which is God well pleased.
Heb. 13. 16. It might be that; there is the sacrifice mentioned. Romans 12. 1. a
living sacrifice. It might be that; any of these, or all these it might be. And
therefore that great Commemorative sacrifice, of the blessed Eucharist,
comprehends them all in our Church Leiturgy, the 2 and last in the Prayer
after the celebration of the Sacrament, Our sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, we offer our selves, our Souls and bodies to be a living
sacrifice, etc. The first and third in the Prayer for Christ's Church, we
beseech thee to accept our Alms and receive these our Prayers which we offer
unto thy Divine Majesty. His other Text is, Luke 22. 19. This is my Body which
is given for you; (but (...), what have we here?) not to you, said the Marquis;
then it seems Christ mocked his Disciples, as the Biscains do the King of
Spain, with their bag of Maravides, when he said, Take, Eat, and when they were
about to take what they thought they should eat, he said, Soft there, it is
given for you, not to you. Now to his humane Authorities; and he begins from
the Apostolical Times, if those Constitutions were of Clemens, which sure his
Lordship thought we had more wit than to grant, but be the Author who he will,
Omnia omnino sacrificia destruenda erant, si viventia per eccisionem si inanima
solida per combustionem, si liquid a per effusionem. Bell. de missa. l. 1. c. 2.
what says he? he calls it a reasonable, unbloudy, and mystical Sacrament.
True, but then it is no proper Sacrifice: for it is Bellarmine's Rule, that all
Sacrifices whatsoever must be destroi'd; if they be living, they must be
killed; if dead, they must be consumed; solid things, as meat, salt, etc. by
fire, liquid by pouring out, as wine, water, etc. so the Sacrifice of Crist's
body, if proper must not be unbloudy. But this supposed Clemens was going on,
why did the Marquis interrupt him? ('it is too hard to put upon us counterfeit,
and clipped money too) for his next words are, which is celebrated by the
symboles of the body and blood in commemoration of his death. We hold with
Augustine, the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ is a singular and most
excellent sacrifice; (...), Chrysostom. in Act. c. 5.
and with Chrysostom, it is a heavenly, and most reverend sacrifice; but still
it is no true and proper sacrifice.

We say, the Sacrament of Orders confers grace, etc.

The Ordination of Ministers we deny to be a Sacrament, and if it were, we deny
also that the opus operatum, Tho. Aqu. c. 2. q. 88. art. 11. and alii quod ego
verissimum puto, says Bell. de c^^ricis L. 1. c. 18.
or imposition of hands, confers grace; Man's hand is imposed, but it is God
that does the deed; nor does the Texts urged prove any such thing; for the word
is 1 Timothy 4. 14. not (...), Grace, but (...), the gift peculiar to that
Function.

We hold, that Priests and other religious persons who have vowed chastity to
God, may not marry afterward, etc.

This the Papists hold indeed, and (...), somewhat more, viz. That the vow of
continence is indispensably annexed to sacred Orders. The Marquis should not
thus niggardly dispense to us the Oracles of his Church. Let any Romish
Catholic prove this by Canonical Scripture, and then he shall speak to
purpose, to better purpose than the Marquis; for his first place out of Deuteronomy.
is meant of a lawful Vow, and all Vows are not lawful, not that of Michah,
Judge. 17. 3. not that of the 40, in the Acts 23. 12. not this of chastity, it
being not in any man's power. Nor is that of 1 Timothy 5. 11, 12. more pertinent,
though his Lordship takes it to be most clear, saying, What can be meant hereby
but the vow of obastity? Bell. de Monach. l. 2. c. 24.
Yet Bellarmine could have told him, that Faith neither here, nor any where
else, nusquam, signifies a Vow; a promise it sometimes does, he confesses,
and so do I, and so is it meant here. For there were in those Times some Women
chosen, who might wait upon the necessities of the Poor, and were called
Diaconisses; and in order to that service, requisite it was they should be
Widows, free from domestique cares and distractions; nor were they only chosen
such, but when chosen the Church exacted of them, to continue constant in that
state, as well they might, if of 60 years before that choice.

We say Christ descended into hell and delivered thence the Souls of the
Fathers, Artic. 3.
you deny it.

Our Church says, As Christ died for us and was buried, so also is it to be
believed, that he went down into hell, But that there was a goal delivery of
the Fathers upon his going thither, or that they were in any Limb of it, she
does not believe, but leaves every man at liberty to think what he please. And
truly I must crave pardon here of the Marquis, for my heart will not serve me
to go along with him in this particular, Arch Bish. of Cant. against Fisher p.
46
and of that very reverend Prelates mind I am, that it is a kind of descent
into hell to be conversant in the controversies about it. For indeed he that is
once in, will not so soon out, for about the manner and place of his descent,
Aug. Ep. Hilario. Ep. 89. de Jejunio Sabbati.
it is interminabilis contentio, generans lites, non finiens quaestiones, an
endless contention, begetting new strifes, not deciding old questions. For my
part, I believe he was buried and descended into hell, nor will I enquire
further, ne curiosus in inquirendo, cur, and quomodo, excidam e bonis nobis
propositis, as Athanasius in a not unlike case, Athanas. Orat. unum esse
Christum.
lest inquiring too narrowly into the Why and How, I loose treasures of higher
concernment.

M. We hold Purgatory fire, where satisfaction shall be made for sins, after
death; you deny it.

Our Church says, Artic. 22.
The Romish Doctrine concerning Purgatory is a fond thing vainly invented and
grounded upon no warranty of Scripture, but rather repugnant to the word of
God. But his Lordship has Scripture for it. 1 Cor. 3. 13. and 15. The fire
shall try every man's work of what sort it is, if any man's work shall be burnt
he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.

I cannot see Purgatory by this fire-light, Nusquam in Scriptura fit mentio
ignis ubi aperte agitur de Purgatorio.
and Bellarmine is at his nusquam again. There is no where mention of fire in
the Scripture says he, where it is plainly meant of Purgatory. And tells us
that Augustine and Gregory understood this place of tribulations, and
Chrysostom and Theophylact, of Hell. Bell. de Purg. ^. 1. c. 5.
But his Lordship says Augustine and Ambrose, Hierome, Gregory, and Origin
understood it of Purgatory. For Augustine I confess he is in many several
tales, one of his last tracts, that de Civitate Dei, and one book of that Tract
represents him thrice differing from himself, Purgatorias poenas nullas futuras
opin^tur nisi (...) Judicis di^^.
lib. 21. cap. 16. Let not any man think of Purgatory pains to come before the
day of Judgment. Go 8 chapters further cap. 24. there he comes in with a
constat, it is manifest some are purged before the day of Judgment by temporal
pains. But 2 chapters beyond, there be some who think the fire in this place to
be meant of a purging fire after this life; I do not contradict it, perhaps it
is true. Who can tell what to make of S. Augustine now? yet this we may
infallibly conclude, had Purgatory been then an Article of Faith, as the
Council of Trent has now made it, Sess. 6. c. 30
Augustine would not have come off so staggering, with a forsitan, perhaps it
is true.

Ambrose does not interpret this place at all, for it is no Interpretation, that
leaves the Text as dubious as before; Poenas ignis passurum ut per ignem
pu^gatus fiat. Amb. in locum, in Psalm 118.
all he says, that he who shall be saved shall endure the punishment of Fire,
that he may be purged by it. But whither in this life, or that to come, not a
word. But in another Treatise, he applies it clearly to the day of Judgment.
Hierome speaks of a purging fire, but neither says where, nor when. All this
time Purgatory fire was not heard of, and though, I confess about five hundred
years after Christ, it began to be kindled, so as one might discern the smoke
of it, yet it did not burn out till Saint Gregory's time, which was Anno
Christi six hundred, and ever since then, the Popes have had a special care to
keep it from going out, seeing their cake would be very dough without it. But I
must retract here; for Origin, who lived about two hundred and thirty, was
clear for Purgatory, so clear, that he took away Hell it self, and thought the
very Devils themselves should be saved at the last day.

Lastly, we hold extreme Unction, to be a Sacrament, you neither hold it to be
a Sacrament, nor practice it as a duty.] The M. did extremely proper, to
reserve Extreme Unction for the last, which it is true we hold not to be a
Sacrament, for there is to us no precept for it; the Text in James only relates
to those times, whilst that miraculous gift of healing lasted; had we the same
gift, we should continue the same practice. As to the Fathers, who he said are
on his side, they speak clear beside the point. Origin only of Remission of
sins by Repentance, Chrysostom of saving the souls of dying persons by the
help not only of doctrinal Admonitions, but of prayers also. The two pieces of
Augustine alleged, are confessed to be Impostures. Beda is short of the
Marquis his thousand years, it being but nine hundred since his time.

M. Thus most sacred Sir, we have no reason to wave the Scriptures Umpirage,
etc.

The Marquis here triumphs over-early, the bitterness of Death is past, said
one; yet lived few hours after it. And what ever his Lordship was persuaded of
his Scripture proofs, sure I am, his Majesty concludes with an Otherwise to his
Thus. After this preposterous boast, his Lordship with much ado, scrueth
himself into the discourse of the Authority of the Church, and invalidity of
Scripture light, Consideration upon Dr. B.
which because I have already in part, and shall more largely elsewhere insist
upon; for this time I shall pretermit. But the M. is not yet empty, a vent he
has found, and we shall have him now, dregs and all. And perceiving he could
not in solidity of Arguments overtake our Church, he now throws stones at
her, Epist.
which Balsack says is but boys play. The two Objections against her are;
first, the maintaing a Woman to be Head in the Church, Virg. Aen* 11.
but this is already answered, with, a capite cane talia, (I will not make up
the Verse) let him chant that to his own Church. The other, against our Lay
Chancellors excommunicating; To which I answer, Lay Chancellors do not
excommunicate, but some Ministers assistant to them; but the Truth is, as their
Authority was too much, so their practice exceeding their Authority made our
Church obnoxious to such reproach, as his Lordship is pleased to cast upon it,
and though this one be a blemish to our Church, yet may she glory that she has
but one.

Now for the Church of Saxony, you shall find Luther, etc.

The Marquis his next Task is to discover and rip up what Luther, Melanchthon
Musculus, Calvin, etc. being under the notion of Protestants, have been guilty
of either in Doctrine, and manners. It Is well known, his Authors are not very
credible Witnesses, nor are all the points urged, matters of Faith, or
Morality, nor are they all so to be understood as represented, nor all
represented so faithfully as they ought; but admit them all for such, and in
that sense his Lordsh* would have them meant, yet what are Luther, Calvin, etc.
to us, being not of our Church, or were they of our Church, they are not our
Church, which is not to be measured by particular men. De praeser.
'Twas well said by Tertullian, Ex personis probamus fidem an ex fide personas?
Does our faith contract esteem by the persons who profess it: or are not they
rather the better thought on for the faith they profess? But then perhaps they
will demand after all his Lordship's 45. pages, of elaborate pains of rendering
these men thus odious, Quorsum haec? To what purpose did he sweat so much in
the matter? Answer, to very good purpose, both against our Church, and against
his Majesty. Against our Church, who had been bold with the Popes of Rome.
Against his Majesty, whose Father spoke his mind of them also, as freely as
our Church. Well, and what has he gained by it? very little certainly. For
what if Luther denied some parts of the Canonical Scripture? Leo. 10.
It was but some part, it was not all, as Luthers great and first adversary
Pope Leo did, by consequence, though not expressly, to the Cardinal Bembus, Bale
Oth^ Meland^r Jo. Ser. 140.
saying, (concerning the treasure of indulgences) in a mockery, what a mighty
revenue make we of the fable of Christ? Make a fable of Christ, and what
becomes of either Testament? What if he, or Calvin, erred concerning the
Trinity, did not Liberius as I showed before subscribe to the Arrian Heresy?
What if Calvin held with Nestorius two Persons in Christ, did not Pope Honorius
hold but one will in him? an heresy full as gross, and for which he was
condemned by the 6 General Council of Constantinople. Act. 11.
What need we run into exact paralleels with them? it is enough we can produce,
a Caelestine the 3. Alphon, de Castro de Here Is. l. 1. c. 4.
teaching that heresy is a sufficient cause of Divorce in Matrimony: A John 22.
who taught that the Souls of the just did not see: Ockham. l. dierum 23.
Adrian. de confirmat. Council. Constanc. Sess. 11.
God before the Resurrection. Another John 23. that denied the Resurrection of
the body. And how I pray do the great Clerks of the Romish Interest come off
here? very poorly most certain, even just as S. Augustine said, quasi hoc sit
respondere posse, quod est tacere non posse, as if to answer and not to say
nothing, were all one. For if the evidence be given in so full against their
Popes, that find them guilty, they must, and all other shifts fail, then such a
Pope did not define e Cathedra, fitting in his in-erring-chair, but ut Doctor
peculiaris exposuit obiter opinionem suam, (...)
only delivered his opinion as a private Doctor; which is a plain confession
that this rare knack of Infallibility, is not by his Holiness carried always
about him. Again, sometimes 't is no heresy what such a Pope thought, because
nulla adhuc praecesserat Ecclesiae Definitio, Bell. ibid. c. 14.
the Church never desired any thing in the Point, so that, be the opinion never
so gross and absurd, never so destructive to the many principles of Faith,
never so repugnant to the express Text of sacred Scripture, yet heresy it is
not with them till the Church define it. Lastly, some have held erroneous
oppinions, but upon their deathbeds have been of another mind, and would have
defined the Truth, but (see the ill luck of it) the good men have been
prevented by death; this is Bellarmines excuse for John 22. Bell. ibid.
And yet the Cardinal's relation out of Villarius of this John's retractation,
represents his holiness in no Definitive posture, and as far from the thought
that he was, as Pope, Summus judex controversiarum in Ecclesia, Supreme Judge of
controversies in the Church, which is the main Subject of the Jesuits fourth
book de Romano Pontifice. For first, the Pope says, Existimare se jam
probabiliorem esse sententiam eam. He is now of the mind that it is the more
probable (mark that, Bell. l. 4. c. 14. de Romans Pontif.
he goes no further than probability in his Retractation and Palinody, and
probability is no good foundation for a Decernimus, for a definition) opinion
that the Souls of the Saints enjoy the beatifical vision before the day of
judgment. And that he did now adhere to that opinion, unless the Church (mark
that too) to whose definition he would subject most willingly his own
judgment, should otherwise determine: sure the Pope was brought as low in
mind as body, who did thus pusillanimously, submittere fasces, and vail to the
judgment of the Church, or else was certainly persuaded, that, whatever their
Parasites give out, Popes in truth differ little from meaner persons in the
point of deciding Theological questions.

The M. his next remove, is from the Protestants Doctrine, to their divisions
in Doctrine, and denied it cannot, it must not be. But divisions there are:
this sad, bleeding Church of England is a most lamentable, a most deplorable
demonstration of it. And what if there be divisions amongst us, are they
always the marks of the false Church, and unity the note of the True? His
Lordship will scarce be able to prove that. De praescr. Haer.
Tertullian did I am certain think otherwise, Schismata apud haereticos fere
non sunt, Heretics says he seldom differ, they agree too well. But why should
his Lordship urge our differences so against us? Are the Protestants only
guilty of these dissentions? Did not Paul and Barnabas grow into such a
paroxisme and cholerique fit as they parted upon it? Acts 15. 39. Did not Paul
and Peter strive about a thing indifferent? Gal. 2. 11. Were not Polycrates,
Bishop of Ephesus, and Pope Victor at defiance? Did not Chrysostom and
Epipharius proclaim (...), implacable War each against another? And is the
Church of Rome so unison, so all of a piece, as to afford no jarres? The
happier she sure, and happier now than of old, when she had as good, as prudent
Governors as now, and I think a little better. Romans 16. 17.
And though St. Paul had charge of her as a Gentile Church, yet could he not
look so narrowly into her, but some there were who caused dissentions in her
contrary to the Doctrine he had delivered. But if such harmony there be at
Rome, how comes it then to pass that in that great Article of the
Romish-Catholique Faith, about the Popes-Infallibility, Bellarmine himself
undertaketh Durandus and Adrian, for accriminating Gregory the First of error?
How comes it then to pass that he takes Panormitan and Gerson to task, for
saying that a private man furnished with better Authority of Scripture is to be
preferred for his opinion before the Pope? How comes it then to pass, that he
censureth Nilus, Gerson, Almain, Alphonsus de Castro, and Pope Adrian the
sixth, for teaching that a Pope may be an heritique? And to be short, how
comes it then to pass that in his vast volume of controversies, there is very
rarely any one, wherein the Cardinal has not to do with some one or other of
his own party; as dissenting from his own Thesis and Position; B. Halls peace
of Rome.
so that a grave Author has culled out no less then 303 oppositions amongst
the Marquis his un-jarring Catholics? And he that knows nothing of the
quarrel between the Jesuits and Seminary Priests may see enough in Watson the
Seminary, who is so liberal a libeller, so full of gall and bitterness, as me
thinks I hear the Jesuit expostulating with him, as Absalon did with Hushai; 2 Samuel 16. 17.
Is this thy kindness to thy Friend? Nor are they only the smaller Bells in
the Romish Church that ring thus awake; the great ones, the Popes themselves
interfere; witness the difference about the Translation of the Bible, between
Sixtus the fifth, and Clement the eighth; and that so great an one, as all the
Wits of Rome will never be able to make them Friends again. James his Bellum
Papale.
So that if his Lordship takes these to be no jarrs, his ear is not (I think)
very musical. And because the Marquis voucheth for the Catholics no jarrs;
Relations p. 189
Sir Edwin Sands: True it is, he says, the Catholics have a readier way to
reconcile their Enmities, and to decide their Differences, having the Pope as a
common Father, Adviser, and Conductor to them all; whereas the Protestants,
being not united under one Prince, nor Patriarch, are as severed and scattered
Troops, Page 179
etc. His Lordship might have remembered, that but ten pages before, Sir Edwin
says, speaking of France, The Catholics are here divided into as different
Opinions, and in as principal matters of their Religion, (as they esteem them)
as the Protestants, in any place that ever I heard of. By which it is evident
both that the Catholics have jarrs, and no small jarrs neither.

From Divisions the Marquis dislodgeth, and proceeds next to the bad Lives of
Protestants. I confess by the little I have searched, I see a great deal of
false play in his Lordships Instances, to lay all open were time misspent: I
will neither admit all his Accusations for true, nor affirm them all false;
enough I conceive, it is for us in this particular to say, The best is, the
Triple Crown it self is able to match them, and over-match them too, choose what
vice, what sin you please: for it has afforded conjurating Popes, who have
made private Contracts with the Devil; Alexander the sixth, Paul the third,
Sylvester the second, Benedict the ninth, John the thirteenth, Gregory the
seventh; for it has afforded an idolatrous Pope, as Macellinus; for it has
afforded incestuous Popes, as Paul the third, Alexander the sixth, and John the
thirteenth; for it has afforded bloody and truculent Popes, as Boniface the
seventh, Paschal the second, Urban the sixth; And lastly, it has afforded
Whoremasters an innumerable Crew* so that Bellarmine himself is so hard put to
it, to salve the matter, of the dissoluteness of Popes, as he has nothing
else to say, De Romans
but Quot numerari possunt qui rectissime credunt, Pont. l. 4. c. 14.
and tamen perditissime vivunt; How many may be reckoned up who are of sound
belief, yet of wretched lives.

His Lordship having as he conceives given sufficient caveat what it is to rely
upon such men's judgments, as Luther, Calvin, Beza, etc. Next takes notice of
an Objection his Majesty made, That the Church of Rome has fallen from her
first Love, and old Principles, and undertakes to prove an Identity, and
samenesse of Doctrine in the now Church of Rome, and in the Primitive Church
during Saint Augustine's time; for which Father's worth, he produces the great
esteem he has amongst Protestants themselves: and indeed he deserves all the
good can be said of him, being of all the Fathers the chiefest Florist, fullest
of Elegancy, and therefore most delightful; Aug. de Haeres. ad Quod vult Deum.
and also the most judicious and solid, and therefore most edifying: but yet
for all that, Saint Augustine himself had his Re^^ctations, and he calls it
himself a necessary work. In this Parallel and comparing both Churches
together, the Marquis spends many pages, which I shall answer in as few lines.
And first, I might demand, were his Lordship living, as David did of the Widow
of Tekoah, 2 Samuel 14. 19.
Is not the hand of Joab (or Cardinal Peron) with thee in all this? Could he,
or durst he deny it? Undoubtedly no, there being no other difference than
between French and English, and the Reply of a Cardinal, to the Father; of a
Marquis, to the Son. But as the Cardinal saved the Marquis a great deal of
labor in penning his eighteenth Chapter of his Reply to King James; Andrews
Opusc. posthuma.
so a very reverend and learned Bishop has saved me as much, in already
answering that eighteenth Chapter of the Cardinal's Reply; and he has done it
so full, so home, that never as yet durst any Jesuit, or other of the Romish
persuasion, take him to task for it: to that excellent Piece I shall transmit
the Reader, with this only cautionary hint, that what the Bishop page 7.
cites out of Saint Augustine de Civit. Dei l. 17. c. 20. is no where to be
found in that Tome or Tract, but is in his sixth Tome contra Faust. Manich. l.
20. c. 21. and instead of Post Adventum in the Bishops, read Post Ascensum,
for so it is, and so it must be, I wonder much that his own Manuscript (he
being so diligently precise) should have it so, and that the Error should
escape also those judicious and exact Supervisors, who published those posthume
Works.

After all these borrowed, or rather stolen Comparisons, the Marquis makes no
doubt but his Majesty's judgment will tell him, that [the Church of Rome has
not changed her countenance, nor the Papists fled from their Colors, but that
they do antiquum obtinere.] True indeed, the Romish Catholics do still
antiquum obtinere, keep their old wont, the old wont of the ancient Heretics,
and what that was Tertullian can inform us; Adjectionibus, by foisting in (as,
Tertul. de praescript.
This is my body which is given for you, not to you) and detractionibus, by
lopping and laming (as leaving out, Do this in remembrance of me) Scripturas ad
dispositionem instituti intervertere, wresting the Scriptures to serve their
own turns. This is all the Antiquity his Majesty's judgment could tell him of
in the Romish Church, where differing from ours. Nor is it enough his Lordship
proves (as he would persuade us) the Romish Antiquity, but he will also show
the Protestants theirs in the condemned heresies of the ancient Church; as for
Example, the Protestants hold that the Church may err, this they had from the
Donatists.] But I would gladly know from whence the Marquis had his Information
concerning this opinion of the Donatists? he quoteth Augustine for it, I
confess, and with a passion as if every where you might find it in him, where
he undertaketh Donatus; but sure it is, his Lordships every where will come to
no where; for the opinion of Donatus was clearly this; that all Churches but
his own were erroneous, his own only infallible, and out of which hold he did,
that none could be saved; which I conceive is the very Tenet of the Romish
Catholics, and so the Donatists and they are nearest allied.

Protestants deny unwritten Tradit ions this they had from the Arrians.

I deny that Deny, Traditions we hold, and grant in Ceremonies and matters not
fundamental, Baldwin. in Optatum l. 5.
and we oppose to the Romish party their own comparison of Traditions to a
nuncupative will, which cannot, by the Rule of our Law, convey a freehold and
Estate in Fee. So it is with Traditions in Divinity, they cannot constitute any
Articles of Faith, or impose any thing of the necessity of salvation, for which
recourse must be had to the written Word, and to that only. Though Arrius is
branded for an Heretic, yet neither Augustine nor Epiphanius, so far as I am
able to understand them, have discovered any such Heresy in him as a Recusant
to unwritten Traditions.

Protestants teach that Priests may marry, this they had from Vigilantius.

This is Heresy now adays, but ab initio non fuit sic, 1 Timothy 3. 2.
'twas not so in Saint Paul's opinion, who appointed a Bishop should be the
Husband of one Wife; 'twas not so in Tertullian's opinion, who was a married
Presbyter; 'twas not so in the opinion of those Bishops Athanasius Epist. ad
Dracent. Episc. fugient.
speaks of, who were married; nor so in our Island Gild. Epist.
for near six hundred years.

Protestants deny Prayer for the Dead, this they had from Aerius.

Aerius was not condemned for an Heretic, by Saint Augustine, for denying
Prayer for the Dead; Aug. de Haer. 53.
he only says, that Aerius fell into Arrius his Heresy, Propria quoque
dogmata addidisse nonnulla, dicens orare pro mortuis non oportere; and added
some private opinions of his own, saying, that we ought not to pray for the
Dead. So Augustine; and Dogmata, opinions are not Heresies.

Protestants deny Invocation of Saints, this they had from Vigilantius, for
which he is condemned by Saint Hierome.

To deny Invocation of Saints was no Heresy in Hieromes time, De Civit.
for Augustine his Contemporary, says, Dei l. 22. c. 10.
that the Martyrs whose names are celebrated at the Altar, non tamen a
sacerdote invocantur, are not yet invocated by the Priest.

Protestants deny Reverence to Images, this they had from Xenias.

It Is well known, Worshipping of Images came first into the Church by the second
Council of Nice; Irenaeus l. 1. c. 24.
and as well known, that that Council was condemned by the Council of
Frankford. August.
And the Fathers ancienter far than both, Haeres. 7.
enroll the Gnostics and Garpocratians aamongst Heretics, Epiph. in Haer. 27.
for adoring of Images; and if it be Heresy to adore them, it is certainly
none to deny them Adoration.

Protestants deny the Real presence, this they had from the Capernaites.

The Capernaites were no more Heretics than the Disciples themselves of
Christ; for as one said, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? John 6. 52.
So the other, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? v. 60.

Protestants deny Confession of sins to a Priest, so did the Novatian
Heretics, and the Montanists.

Protestants deny not Confession Auricular; Luther, who says, it is not
necessary, nor to be exacted, Luther de Com. pop.
yet withal says, it is utilis and non contemnenda, Profitable and not to be
slighted. Opusc.
Bucer commends it, Anglican.
and says, It is the duty of Ministers to exhort rich persons to it. Our
Church in some cases injoyns it. Nor did Novatus deny it; his Error was, that
they who in Times of persecution fell away to Idolatry, and delivered up the
sacred Scriptures to be burnt; should never be admitted to communicate with the
faithful in the Congregation, Cypr. de Lapsis.
not excluding them from all hope of mercy with God, but from Communion with
the Church, that the strictness of this Discipline, might strike into men the
terror of Apostatizing. And the Catholic Church her self went but one degree,
but one step further in her Indulgence beyond Novatus; for whereas he in
Reconciliation, thought once was too much, she her self thought but once
enough, and this was done as Augustine said, Ne medicina vilis minus utilis
esset aegrotis. Lest the cheapness of the medicine should hinder the cure.
Epist. 54.
Nor did Montanus (though too rigid in this particular) deny it wholly, for his
Excommunication was but ad omne pene delictum, for almost every offense, and
almost is a word of qualification, of abatement.

Protestants say, we are justified by faith only, this they had from the
Pseudo-Apostles.

Our Justification by faith only we had from Saint Paul, Romans 3. 28. and we
hope he was no Counterfeit, no false Apostle. The false Apostles Saint
Augustine speaks of, were they who held, that justifying Faith might be severed
from, and without works; such an Opinion the Church of Rome maintains to this
day, and Protestants undertake the Papists for it.

Lastly, as I have showed your Majesty, that your Church as it stands in
opposition to ours, is but a Congeries of so many Heresies; so you shall find
our Doctrine amongst your own Doctors.

At last the Marquis is come to his Lastly; and if his So here, proves no
better than his former As, his Lordships shows will be but So So; And first, he
begins with the Greek Church, who he says holds Invocation of Saints,
Adoration of Images, Transubstantiation, Communion in one kind; but his
Lordship is clearly out in the last, for they communicate under both kinds,
though received at once (...), The Bread sopt in the Wine, as Christophorus
Angelus, a Native of that place, assures us. And for Worshipping of Images, he
is half out there too, for though they worship Images yet in their Churches
they will not endure them, as the Papists do. In many points it cannot be
denied, they have confederacy with the Church of Rome, they have their Errors,
Cap. de Incolis terrae sancta.
and are censured for them by us, and so they are by Bocardus a Monk, with a
Faxit Deus, etc. God grant there be no Fopperies crept into our Church (meaning
the Romish) also. His Lordship did toto coelo errare, was Heaven wide when he
reckoned the Greek Church amongst our Doctors, though true it is, they hold
indeed with us in the weightiest, with the Papists in the most points. And to
little better purpose was it, that he urges against us Luther, the Hussites,
Wickliff, and the Waldenses; we own them not for our predecessors, they had
their Errors, the Rancidity of Rome was not wholly out of them, nor could it be
expected otherwise. For Illumination is not in Divinity, as in Philosophy, an
instantaneous action; we bless God for the light they had, though umbrageous
and clouded, yet was it such as discovered the nakedness and shame of the
Church of Rome. And since the Marquis has begun to us, we will requite him,
with showing the Romanists our Tenets amongst their own Doctors; whom they do,
and always account undoubted Catholics; and because he begins with
Transubstantiation, we will follow him in his own Order.

And first, Transubstantiation.
take notice when this opinion began to be an Article of Faith, and for that
hear Scotus: Transubstantiation was not a point of Faith, Scot. in 4.
till the Lateran Council. And Tonstal: Of the manner how Christ's body is in
the Bread, Sent. d. 11.
it were better to leave every man to his own opinion, Tonstal. de Euch. l. 1.
as it was free before the Lateran Council. This Council was celebrated, De
Euch. l. 3. c. 20.
as Bellarmine holds, Anno 1215. And yet her decision has not passed very
current neither. For Scotus says, it does not seem to be deduced out of
Scripture, that the substance of the Bread is not in the Eucharist. Scot. ib.
in 4. q. 6. art. 2. in Sent. 4. d. 11. q. 1.
Petrus de Alliaco: That the substance of the Bread cease to be, there is not
evidently implied out of Scripture. Durandus: It Is rashness to affirm the body
of Christ cannot be in the Sacrament, but by conversion of the Bread into it.
Cajetan: There appears not in the Gospel any coercive Argument that these
words, in Them. 3. q. 75. art. 1.
This is my Body, are to be understood properly. Walfridus Strabo: After the
celebration of the passe-over, c. 16.
Christ delivered the Sacrament of his body and blood, in the Substance of
bread and wine. Ferus in Matthew. 26.
Ferus: Since certain it is the body of Christ is there, what need we dispute
whether the Bread remains in Substance or not.

The Gloss of the Canon Law: De Consecr. did. 2
The Bread is called Christ's body improperly, meaning that it signifies
Christ's body.

Against the Infallibility of the Church, Infallibility.
that is, (as the Marquis confessed to his Majesty, p. 79.) of the Church of
Rome, Disput. theolog. tom. 3. disp. 1. page 24. cont. Haer. l. 1. c 4.
that is, (as Valentia says) the Bishop of Rome, Alphonsus de Castro. Every
man may err in Faith, yea, though he be the Pope himself. Gerson, The Pope as
well as an inferior Bishop is obnoxious to err in Faith. Catharinus, Nothing
hinders, but the Pope may err in Faith, Tract. An liceat appellare a Papa in
causis fidei.
though some Novellists are so impudent to hold the contrary against the common
sense of all antiquity. Adrian the sixth, a Pope himself affirms it for
certain, That a Pope may err in asserting heresy by his Decree, and that many
Popes have been heretics. Catharin. Comment. in Gal. 2.
Bannes, It was the general opinion of all the ancient, both Popes and
Schoolmen, till Pighius; and since him of the more sober Doctors, Adr. de
Confirm. art. 3. ad finem. Bannes. in 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10. lib. 57.
as Cajetan, Turrecremata, Victoria, Soto, Canus, and others; that the Pope of
Rome may become an heretic.

Against Merits and Supererogation. Merits. Sacrament. tit. 7. chapter 7.
Waldensis, He is the best Catholic, who confesses, that simply no man
meriteth the Kingdom of heaven; Comment. in Math. c. 20.
but obtains it of Gods free grave. Ferus, If thou desire to keep in Gods
favor, make no mention of thine own Merits. Durandus, If God give any reward
to our good deeds, 2 Did 27. q 2.
it is not because he is a debtor to our works, but out of his own bounty. 1.
Did. 17. q. 1. art. 2.
Ariminensis, No work performed by man is condignely meritorious of eternal
life, Pigh. controv. 2. L. 1. d.
no nor of any temporal reward. Pighius, We are made righteous not by our own
righteousness, but by the righteousness of God in Christ. Gratia and lib.
Arb. c. 3.
This is that Pighius who Bellarmine says was miserably seduced by reading
Calvin's works. Bell. Tes^am. ult.
But who was it seduced the Cardinal himself to pray that God would admit of
him amongst the Elect, not a priser of his Merit, but a dispenser of pardon and
forgiveness?

Against Invocation of Saints, Invocation of Saints.
Halensis our Countryman, God alone is simply to be prayed to, the Saints are
rather assistants in the behalf of those who pray, Did. 4. q. 26.
then fit to be prayed to. Bannes, That Saints are to be prayed to, art. 3: 2.
2. q. 1. art. 50. in 3. Thom. q. 52. did. 42. in 2. Timoth. 2. did. 8.
and images to be worshipped, is neither expressly nor by implication taught in
Scripture. Suarez, That in the Old Testament any one did directly pray to the
Saints departed, either to help them, or pray for them, we no where read.
Salmeron Invocation of Saints is not mentioned in the New Testament, and it may
administer occasion to the Gentiles of worshipping many Gods. Rational. l. 4.
c. 39.
Durandus, Adoration must be bestowed only upon God, not upon the Angels, lest
we fall into the sin of Idolatry.

Against Communion halfed. Communion, halfed.
Halensis, whole Christ is not contained in either kind Sacramentally, but his
flesh under the species of bread, and his blood under the species of wine.
Did. 4. q. 4.
Lorichius, It Is heresy and execrable blasphemy of Bastard-Catholiques, Memb.
^. De Missa.
who say, that Christ spoke only to the Apostles, saying, Drink ye all of
this, De legit. usu Euch. c. 10.
when both these words, Eat and Drink were spoken to the whole Church.
Valentia: Communion under one kind began to be generally received a little
before the Council of constance. Apud Gratian. de Consecrat.
Pope Gelasius: We find that one part of the Sacrament cannot be received
without the other, Did. 2.
without committing great Sacrilege.

Against the Sacrifice of the Mass. Sacrifice of the Mass.
The Master of the sentences: It is demanded, if what the Priest consecrateth
be properly a Sacrifice? to this it may be briefly replied that what is offered
by the Priest is called a Sacrifice, L. 4. did. 12.
because it is a Memorial and representation of the ture Sacrifice made once
upon the Cross.

Against the seven Sacraments. 7. Sacraments.
Cardinal Bessarion: Baptism and the Lords Supper are the only Sacrament
delivered evidently in the Gospels. De Sacr. Euch. in 4. Sent. d^st. 23. q 1.
art. 4. Matrimony.
Thomas Aquinas, The form of Baptism and the Eucharist are extant in the
Scriptures, but not the form of other Sacraments.

Matrimony is not to speak properly a Sacrament. Durandus: There want not some
Catholics, who grant that Matrimony is no Sacrament of the new Law, L 4.
did. 26. q. 3. de sacr. Matrim. l. 1. c. 5.
Bellarmine.

Penance, Penance.
is divided amongst the Papists, into Confession, absolution and satisfaction.
But Confession is denied to be any part of this Sacrament by Scotus, in 4.
did. 14.
Major and Gabriel, and absolution is denied by Dominicus a Soto, in 4. did.
14.
and Bellarmine himself says, that inward contrition is sufficient to save us
without either absolution or Confession. de Poen. l. 1. c. 19.


The Sacrament of confirmation, Confirmation.
as it is a Sacrament, was neither instituted by Christ nor his Apostles,
Halensis. The Apostles delivered neither the matter nor form of this Sacrament,
p. 4. q. 24. Art. 2.
but only confirmed some without the Ministry of a Sacrament, 4. did. 7.
Bonaventute. Of the form of this Sacrament we read nothing in Scripture: if we
resort to tradition, in 3 Thom.
we shall find a great deal of variety amongst the Fathers Sudres.

There are but two places urged from Scripture for extreme unction, Extreme
Unition.
Marc. 6. verse. 13. is the first, where it is said, that the Apostles anointed
with oil, many that were sick and healed them. de Extrem. Vunct. l. 1. c. 2.
But Bellarmine denies that unction to be Sacramental, because says he the
Apostles were not yet made Priests. The other is James 5. 14. cited by the
Marquis, and Cajetan says, in locum.
neither from the words nor from the effect can it be gathered, that the
Apostle speaks thereof the Sacramental union.

Against Purgatory. Purgat^ry (...) there.
Roffensis, Purgatory cannot be proved by Scripture: and amongst the ancients
there is none at all, or very rawly any mention of Purgatory, and the Greek
Church denies it to this day. Otho Fris. That there is any such place of
Purgatory in hell, wherein they, who are to be saved must be purified by an
expiatory fire, some (but not all) assert.

By this time, I hope, I have made good my promise; for, I think, the Romish
Catholics nor can, nor will deny, but all these are their own Doctors, and
all this our Doctrine.

Finally: If neither prescription of 1600 years possession, and continuance of
our Churches Doctrine, nor our evidence out of the Word of God, nor the Fathers
witnessing to that evidence, nor the decrees of Councels, nor your own
acknowledgements, be sufficient to mollify and turn your Royal heart, there is
no more means left for truth or me, but I must leave it to God, in whose hand
are the hearts of Kings.

This Finally contradicts his Lordships late lastly, and it is a formidable, a
terrible conclusion, a conclusion able to make the stoutest Protestant reel;
did we not know that these are but words of course, and mere set forms of
Ostentation: what is indeed more feasible then to be foiled when he who is our
enemy, (...), is become all he can desire, (...).
accuser, witness, Judge? But shall his Lordship carry away this conclusion
(...) without control? No sure, admit they could prescribe for 1600 years,
must prescription prescribe and out Truth? But can they prescribe for 1600
years in any one point where in they differ from us? Can they in many for 1000?
can they in some for 600? their grand Novelty of Transubstantiation will tell
them no; and it is well known, the slender possession their errors have had,
has not been so quiet, so peaceable, so undisturbed, but that Truth has made
her constant and continual claim. As for their evidence out of the word of God,
Oration^^ esse ad sanctos faciendas, venerandas esse eorum imagines,
memoriasque eorundem in Ecclesia celebrandas solemniter, sacramenta ordinis and
confirmationis non esse iteranda, neque express neque implicate, sacrae
literae docent, Bannes in 2. 2. q. 1. art. 10. p. 170. can. loc. com. l. 3. c.
3. sundam. 3.
out of the word of God it is, I confess, but it would do much better in it;
And in it they have so little as their greatest Clerks acknowledge, that prayer
to the Saints, worshipping of their Images, celebrating their festivals, the
not iterating of the Sacraments of Orders and confirmation, are taught in
Scripture, neither expressly, nor by implication. So Bannes, from whom Canus
differs only in superadding the Sacrifice of the Encharist. As for the
Fathers and Councels witnessing to that evidence, such as the Scripture
evidence is for the Papists, such is their witnessing to that evidence, just so
and no more, which more explicitly is, just none at all. For I challange them
to produce any one Father of the first 500 years, who held and maintained any
one point of Doctrine as the Council of Trent now holds, where differing from
us; of Doctrine I say, for in ceremonies they may I grant find many presidents
in antiquity conformable to theirs. As for our own acknowledgements, sure his
Lordship did not in good earnest and seriously think we Reputed and owned
Luther, the Hussites, the Waldenses for Ours; no, we always constantly urge
them as Romish Catholics, though in some particulars they oppugned her
Doctrine. Thus his Lordships specious and flashy conclusion is reduced to a
mere nothing. And his Majesty was at this brunt in no great danger of becoming
the Marquis his convert.

Certain Considerations upon Dr BAYLY'S Interlocution, concerning the True
Church its being Judge of Scripture.
THe Doctor's Invective against Sacrilege shall create him no trouble from me,
I desire not to meddle with Impertinencies. [Since your Majesty was pleased to
discharge the Watch which I had set before the Door of my Lips] The Watch
before the Door of your Lips was, it seems, of your own setting, and because
so, it is like his Majesty thought fit to discharge it; not desiring to leave
them without a Guard, but hoping they might be relieved with that which the
Prophet David called to God for, Psalm 141. v. 3.

I shall make bold to put your Majesty in mind of holding my Lord to the
Demand, which your Majesty once made unto his Lordship, concerning the true
Church; for if once that Question were thoroughly determined, all Controversies,
not only between your Majesty and his Lordship, but also all Controversies
that ever were, would soon be decided, at a short race end] And is there no
way, no means to end Controversies, but by that which this fifteen hundred
years and upward, has been disputed what it is, and where to find it? Did God
provide so ill for us, as to leave us in suspense concerning the main points of
Faith, until that Church, which is yet in the clouds, shall define what is the
true sense of that Scripture, which must guide us to eternal happiness. And if
after 15 hundred years debate this Church were but in view, some comfort it
were to us; but clear it is (and a miserable case) she is as far off, for ought
we know, as ever; for we are not agreed upon those marks and tokens by which
she must be known. Our Church (the Church of England) holds the purity of
Doctrine preached agreeable to God's Word, De not is Eccles. l. 4. c. 3.
and Sacraments administered according to Christ's Ordinance, to be the notes of
it. The papists hold they know not how many; Bellarmine reckons fifteen, but at
last reduces them to four, (according to the most usual and received Opinion
amongst them) Unity, Holiness, Universality, Succession; as they are in the
Nicene Creed; but yet he comes reeling off too, giving them no more than an
Evidence of Credibility; so that if a man will believe them he may, Evidentiam
credibilitatis ib.
and may not if he will: and if we were agreed upon the true marks, yet should
we not be agreed upon the true Church; for suppose the four mentioned before
and urged by the Church of Rome be they, yet we say, they are more visible in
our Church, than in that of Rome. There are not amongst us, three hundred and
three differences in points of Religion, B. Halls peace of Rome.
as has been demonstrated in the Church of Rome, and therefore ours the
greater Unity. For Holiness, that is a grace keeps home, and stirs little
abroad, yet if we may judge of it by its fruits, the papists cannot show us
more wicked members of our Church, than we can them Heads of theirs; so the
thing Holiness is ours, let the Title be theirs. For Universality, Rome
(wherein she differs from us) cannot prove her Assertions from the testimony
of the primitive Church, in some points for a thousand years, not in any for
five hundred after Christ; so we are the more Catholic. Lastly, for
Succession of Doctrine (which is the best Succession) we derive ours from all
the Apostles; Rome only from Peter, derives only a Succession of Chairs; and
yet it is not infallibly certain that ever Peter was at Rome, much less Bishop
there; and therefore our Succession the best too; so that as the case now
stands between us, we are not like to agree in haste.

Doctor, I wish you could set us through; and truly I must needs say, in my
opinion you have made a fair offer at deciding this Controversy, when you
said, Page 79
The true Church must be a Society of Men, though I can go no further with you,
for that, That Society of Men are to be supreme Judge of Scripture, and
Controversies Theological will not down with me, nor I believe with many more.
For let that Society of Men be a General Council, which is a supposition of as
much advantage to you as you can desire, because it represents the Catholic
Church; and it is but a supposition too, for though there have been before the
Empire was split, General Councels in former times; yet as the case stands now,
it seems to wise men an incredible thing, that ever such a Council shall be
again: and Religion would be in a most sad condition, were all controversies to
stay for decision till then. Conc. Ephesians.
Besides Doctor, it has befallen some General Councels, that there has been
shameful packing and fore-stalling of Suffrages and Voices before they met;
and when met, many have been frighted and minaced to vote clean contrary to
their own sense; and such Councels are but ill to be trusted with Questions of
Faith, in my poor opinion. But suppose your Council met, and assembled, and
with all the fairest carriage and freedom you can desire, they are but weak,
finite, and erring men still, their Canons are no Articles of Faith, their
Decrees no infallible Rules. Not so in the primitive Church, I am assured, by
the confession of both sides. Augustine being to dispute with Maximinus, his
first demand was, Dic mihi fidem, Rehearse to me thy faith, the subtle
Heretic (supposing Augustine would urge the Nicene Creed against him)
replied, I believe as the Council of Ariminum believes; but finding after that
Augustine would not take this for an Answer, says further, I did not plead the
Council of Ariminum to excuse my opinion, but to show the Authority of the
Fathers; who, according to Scripture, delivered to us a Confession of Faith,
which they had out of the Scripture. Augustine perceiving Maximinus let go the
Council of Ariminum, was resolved to stand as little upon the Council of Nice,
but closed with him thus, Neither ought I to produce the Council of Nice
against thee, nor thou that of Ariminum against me; I am not bound to the
authority of this, nor thou of that; let us in our conflict urge the authority
of scripture witness indifferent to both, and not peculiar to either. See here
the Orthodox and Heretic, both compromise to abide the order of Scripture,
and both wave the Authority and Judgment of two General Councels; which
certainly they would not have done, had they reputed them infallible, and a
Judge not infallible shall rule no Faith of mine. But the Doctor tells us page
79. [His Society of Men must be such as can say, [It seemed good unto us and to
the holy Ghost] Now Doctor, you speak to the point indeed, that Society of Men,
that Church would I fain see; but are you well advised what you say? If yea,
then it must seem good to the holy Ghost because so to us, whereas the first
form if he ever promised to be there with infallible assistance, I dare take
his word for it; but had it to the holy Ghost first, and then to us. But assign
the holy Ghost what place ye please, if he be there, 't is all I look for, and
I will not take yours, unless you show me that promise, which hitherto you have
not done. But we will not part so neither, admit for once you find the Church
you so hunt for, and a spirit of infallibility directing her in that Council,
must and will all Controversies presently cease? Certainly no such matter; for
may not perverse spirits wrest to their own destruction, what the holy Ghost
shall declare in a General Council, as well as what he has delivered in the
sacred Scripture? Did not the Nestorians vouch for their Heresy the Authority
of the Council of Nice, as General a Council, and as much endowed with the holy
Ghost, as ever any (since that of Jerusalem) was, or I believe shall be. Nor
do I speak only of what the malice of Satan sowing Tares, and man's crooked
and untoward will (a soil proper for them) may produce; for the holy Ghost
speaks in a manner, signanter, and expressly, there must be, notwithstanding
such assistance, Controversies still. For if there must be Heresies, there will
be without controversy, Controversies still; and that Heresies must be, the
holy Ghost tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 19. So that the revenue and product of all I
have said is this, That the true Church has not the supreme Judicature over
Questions of Faith; and if she had, yet Controversies would and must still
continue; and all this I hope I have not only said but proved.

I confess ingeniously (sure he meant ingenuously, for there was no great wit
in his confession) that there is not a thing that I ever understood less, than
that Assertion of the Scriptures being Judge of Controversies, though in some
sort I must and will acknowledge it.

The Doctor was here going a step beyond the Papists themselves, who all hold
the Scriptures to be an infallible Rule; but resumed himself, and modifieth his
speech with an acknowledgement of it to be so in some sense; but in what, he
thought us not worthy to know. Nor, since he is so reserved, will we much
inquire; because, when known, it can extend little to our satisfaction. But
though we must not know in what sense it is sole Judge, yet in what it is not
he tells us; and that is,

Not as it is a Book consisting of papers, words and letters; for as we
commonly say in matters of civil Differences, The Law shall be Judge between
us, we do not mean that every man shall run unto the Law Books, or that any
Lawyer himself shall search his Law-cases, and thereupon possess himself of
the thing in question, without a legal Trial by lawful Judges constituted to
that same purpose.

How the Doctor thinks he has nickt it, and yet I fear he is so far from
hitting the White, as he has mist the But. For first, the Comparison is
extremely wide. Things ad extra, and what are without us, may be stated and
determined by civil Judicatories; but Faith is a thing mixed of the
understanding and the will, over which none can claim Jurisdiction. Man may
adjudge away my Land, my Faith he cannot, and therefore I must say with the
Poet,

Hane animam concede mihi, Virg. Aen. 11.
tua eaetera sunto.

Secondly, in civil Differences, will the Doctor say that the Judges decide the
Question, or the Law? For if the Judgment be given according to the Law, then
the Law is the Judge I take it; and if contrary to Law, or not according to it,
he who so determines, is not a Judge, but an Arbitrator. Our Law judges no
man, Joh. 7. 51.
etc. says Nicodemus: there the Law was the Judge. And though with us in
England, the Law is a kind of Craft or Mystery, full of Quirks and
Intricacies; yet in other places, as in Denmark, Only the Parties at variance
plead their own Cause, and then a Man stands up and reads the Law, and there is
an end; for the very Law-book is the only Judge; says my royal Author, Ki.
James his Speech in Starchamber, 1616.
and adds, Happy were all Kingdoms if they could be so. Lastly, where the
Doctor says, [It is not our meaning that every man shall run unto the
Law-books] We will, though not yield it, yet suppose it so in other
Differences, but in Divinity it is clearly otherwise, for there is an express
Command given by Christ himself, not to the Pharisees only, but generally to
all, Search the Scriptures; and it were a mere mockery in our Savior, to bid
us Read the Scriptures, Suet. in Caligula.
if they were like Caligula's Laws, written in so small an hand that we cannot
read them, or in so obscure words as we cannot without the help of the Church,
in matters of Salvation, understand them.

In like manner saving knowledge and divine Truths are the Portion that all
God's Children lay fast claim to, yet they must not be their own Carvers,
though it be their own meat that is before them, whilst they have a Mother at
the Table.

It is no Argument of ill nurture for Children, who are adult and grown to full
stature, and past the danger of cutting their own fingers, sometimes to be
their own Carvers, though their Mother be at the Table. But how comes it to
pass, that the Doctor here places our Mother the Church, in no obscure place
neither, but in the Carvers place, at the Tables end, where she should be
visible enough; and yet say afterward, he would fain find out this Church? And
if at the Table she be, the more hard-hearted is she sure, Fratees a Beyo.
Americ. part. 6. or Attaliba, as Benza de Nov. Orb. l. 3. c. 3.
for truly Doctor, I must say, (as Powhaton did to the Jesuit, or Attaliba an
Indian Prince too, to Friar Vincent) she has carved me nothing, no, nor any
man else for these fifteen hundred years; and it is an hard case, that Children
should cry, and pine, and sterve, and die eternally, for want of this Food
everlasting, which is before them, and all because their Mother will not carve
them, and themselves they must not. It Is time then for God to take away, and I
heartily pray he may not take away, and deprive this Church of that blessed
Food, for such wicked Tenets as this.

They must not slight all Orders, Constitutions, Appeals, and Rules of Faith.

Most true, the Churches Orders are not to be slighted, nor yet to be obeyed
without further disquisition and scrutiny: the Apostle spoke as to wise men, 1
Cor. 10. 15.
yet left them to judge what he said, so may the Church determine what she
please, and if not agreeable to my sense, endeavor I will to inform my self
better; and if after after all my study, I cannot subdue my Reason to hers, yet
to her Orders my outward conformity I will, provided she makes no Rules of
Faith, and obtrudeth nothing destructive to saving principles, things above her
sphere.

Saving knowledge and divine Truths must not be wrested from the Scripture by
private hands.

This is that we desire, let them there remain, fit it is, that in what every
man has equal propriety, he also should to it have equal access; and most
unfit, that the means of eternal livelihood should be monopolized.

Doct. There is nothing more absurd to my understanding, than that the thing
contested (which is the true meaning of the Scriptures) should be Judge of the
Contestation.

Nor to mine, Cum de rebus Dei erit sermo, concedamus cognitionem sui, Deo
dictisque eius pia veneratione famulemur.
that any one should tell us what God means better than he does himself; or
that the Church, a thing subordinate to Scripture, and not to be known, or
discovered but by Scripture, should tell us the mind of the Scripture, better
than it does it self.

Doct. No way inferior to that absurdity which would follow would be this, if
we should leave the deciding of the sense of the words of the Law to the
pre-occupated understanding of one of the Advocates. Idoneus enim sibi testis
est, qui nisi per se cognitus non est. Hilar. de Trinit. li. 1.
Neither is this all the Absurdity that does arise upon this supposition; for
if you grant this to one, you must grant it to any one, and to every one; if
there were but two, how will you reconcile them both? If you grant that this
Judicature must be in many; there are many manies, which of those manies will
you have? Decide but this, and you satisfy all.

Decide you it Doctor, whence it concerns, for your Church must be one of those
manies, and yet I believe you will not satisfy all, not those I am persuaded,
whose suffrage is for the Scripture against all manies whatsoever.

If you make the Scripture the Judge of Controversies, you make the Reader
Judge of the Scripture.

Not so Doctor, no Judge; yet a more competent Judge, to himself, than any
other, or all the World can be; seeing Knowledge and Understanding cannot be
produced and perfected in any man, any other way, than by his own Reason.

If I make the dead Letter my Judge, I am the greatest Idolater in the World.

A great Idolater you should then be I grant, but not the greatest in the
World; for you worship then but what you see, and something really existing;
but to worship such a thing as has not yet been, nor can be divined when it
shall be, as your Church is, certainly must be the greater Idolatry of the two.

Doct. It will tell me no more than it told the Indian Emperor Powhaton, who
asking the Jesuit how he knew all that to be true which he had told him, and
the Jesuit answering him, that God's Word did tell him so; the Emperor asked
him where it was? He showed him his Bible; the Emperor after he had held it in
his hands a pretty while, answered, it tells me nothing. But you will say, you
can read, and so you will find the meaning out of the significant Character,
and when you have done, as you apprehend it, so it must be, and so the
Scripture is nothing else but your meaning.

Not so Doctor, but so it must be to me, be it to the Doctor what he please;
nor perhaps shall it be always so to me, as I now apprehend it; for I am no
infallible Judge to my self; rectify I may, and will, upon better reason, what
I formerly mis-apprehended upon worse.

Wherefore necessity requires an external Judge for Determination of
Differences besides the Scriptures.

If an external Judge besides Scriptures be necessary, then necessary also it
is, that that Judge be first infallible; for else better it were the
Dissentions continued, than the Error be stated, and put into possession, as
may well be feared in an erring Judge. Secondly, that that Judges authority be
allowed of for infallible by general consent; for else all will not abide her
arrest and doom. Lastly, that that Judge be always ready and forth coming upon
all emergent Differences to still them; never out of the way, never to seek;
for else the Differences will the more increase and fructify, by staying the
longer for judicial sentence and decision. Now because for these fifteen
hundred years, controversies have been, and no such Judge as yet discovered in
rerum natura to quiet them, we may safely conclude from the no Judge, a no
necessity, or accuse God for improvidence and neglect in leaving us destitute
all this time of so necessary a Requisite.

Doct. And we can have no better recourses to any than to such as the Scripture
it self calls upon us to hear, which is the Church, which Church would be found
out.

The Scripture calls upon us to hear the Church, but is this to hear, to obey
her Gloss and Interpretation of the Scripture, to give up, and resign our
judgments to her sense? Calvin, Beza, Grotius, all Expositors, the Context it
self will tell you no; it is to submit to her censure in point of satisfaction
for mutual offense, whereby she is scandalized: so that, Doctor, you must
before you find the Church you so look for, find some other Text to warrant
her Authority, or she is like to be no external Judge, whom all must obey in
matters of Faith.

Here the Doctor takes breath, and gives his most Excellent Majesty leave to
speak; who, like himself, most judiciously catechiseth the Doctor in the
all sufficiency of Scripture, after which the Doctor rejoyns.

All that your Majesty has said concerning the scriptures sufficiency is true,
provided that those Scriptures be duly handled, for as the Law is sufficient to
determine right, and keep all in peace and quietness, yet the execution of
that sufficienciency cannot be performed without Courts and Judges.

The Doctor holds his own Comparison still: Well Doctor, we have a Court too,
Forum conscientiae, the Court of every man's conscience, and a Judge also of
that Court; if you demand Who? It Is every man's self, and therefore they who
control that Court, are by the voice of truth it self (...) condemned of
themselves. Titus 3. 11


For as Hierome tells us, who was no great Friend to Popes or Bishops. If there
be not admitted in the Church the Authority of one eminent and peerlesse Power
above others, there will be as many Schisms in the Church as Priests.

Doctor, you are out, let me put you in; the Questions we speak of, are of
Heresy, not of Schism, that relates to dogmatical points of Faith, this to
outward Rites. Ceremonies are the Garments of Religion, not the Body; and
Cloth are for Ornament, yet not for that only, they are also to keep the Body
warm; a Religion naked without Ceremonies will have but little outward warmth,
but a frozen zeal (if I may so say) and too many Clothes are as bad and
cumbersome on the other side. Fit it is the Church should appoint her self,
what and how many she will wear; for leave it at liberty, there will indeed be
Schisms as many as Hierome speaks of.

Wherefore I would fain find out that which the Scripture bids me hear, Audi
Ecclesiam, etc.

The Doctor is again at his Hear the Church, Matthew. 18. and I again must tell
him that place is only applyable to Ecclesiastical discipline. But that the
Church may the better be heard, the Doctor tells us from Saint Paul, that she
is the Pillar and Foundation of Truth: from Ezekiel, that God will place his
sanctification in the midst of her for ever: from Esaias, that the Lord will
never forsake her: from our Savior, that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, and that he will be always with her unto the end of the world. All
this we grant, and yet deny all that the Doctor would from these Texts infer;
for first, it is evident, not any one of all these is to be understood, or has
any reference to a Representative Church, or General Council, but to the
Universal Catholic Church. Secondly, if a General Council were intended by
them, yet there is not any grant of an infallible spirit to direct that
Council, and without the spirit of infallibility, men will be (and no more than
need) very cautelous of yielding plenary obedience to her Decrees.

Doct. For although the Psalmist tells us that the word of the Lord is clear,
enlightening the eyes, yet the same Prophet said to God, enlighten mine eyes
that I may see the marvels of thy Law, etc. The Doctor labors here to prove
the obscurity of the Scriptures; and that they are so in some places I never
heard and man yet deny, Sp. Sanctus ita Scripturas Sanctas modificavit, ut
locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus fastidia detergeret. de Doct.
but that they are so in all, the Doct. himself dares not, cannot deny. The
truth is as Augustine said Excellently, The holy Ghost has so modified and
tempered the Scriptures, that there are clear places to satisfy the hunger,
and darker to procure the appetite of the Soul, and if (...), whatsoever is
necessary for us to believe is there clear and manifest, we are well enough.
[But the Doct. says, no man has ever yet defined what are necessary and what
not, what points are fundamental and what not. Christ. l. 2. c. 6.
] Has no man defined what is necessary, what is fundamental? Yes Doctor,
Chrysostom. in 2. These. Hom. 3.
Learned Hooker tells you it is the Doctrine which the Prophets and Apostles
profess; the late Reverend Archbishop tells you, Discourse of Just. p. 503.
the Articles of the Creed which is but the summary of that Doctrine are such,
and so is the belief of the Scriptures to be the word of God and infallible.
Against Fisher. p. 42. ^. 10.
[Necessary to salvation is one thing, and necessary to knowledge as an
improvement of our Faith is another thing. Nescire velle quae magister maximus
docere non vult erudita est inscitia, Scalig. Gnom.
] True Doctor, there are different things; but quid refert, what matter is it
what is necessary to that knowledge, which is not necessary to salvation. It Is a
learned ignorance not to know, that which our great Master will not teach us.
It Is fides tua, said Tertullian, thy Faith, not the curiosity of being skillful
in the Scriptures has saved thee: cedat curiositas Fidei, cedat gloria saluti,
Let curiosity give place to Faith, vanity and ostentation to Salvation. [For
the first, if a man keeps the Commandments and believes all the Articles of the
Creed, he may be saved though he never read a word of Scripture.] May he be
saved Doctor? I hope it is more then possible, then may be; he shall
undoubtedly be saved: and so he shall if he believes all the Scripture, though
he never read a word of it. But why Doctor do you distinguish between the
Articles of the Creed and the Scriptures? are not those Articles the word of
God, as well as the Scripture? I take it they are. First, as framed by the
Apostles themselves, men Divinely inspired as all the Fathers agree. Secondly,
because they contain the pith and marrow of the Scriptures, all the Doctrine
necessary to salvation being there abbreviated. [He who means to walk by the
rules of Gods word must lay hold upon the means that God has ordained, whereby
he may attain to the true understanding of them; for as St. Paul says, God
has placed in the Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Doctors, to the end we should be no more little children, blown about with
every wind of Doctrine.] Were I disposed to quarrel, I could tell you Doctor
Bailey, or Doctor Stapleton, (choose you which) that your Text is out of date,
and that the Prophets and Evangelists there mentioned were extraordinary, and
proper only to those times; and the Presbyterian party will tell you as much
of the Apostles; so that there will be only left Pastors and Doctors, (which
with St. Augustine. I conceive to be both one) of perpetual use in the Church,
Aug. Ep. 59. Paulino.
for the work of the Ministry, part of which work, I freely grant, is the
interpretation of the Scriptures. Again, I might expostulate as the Apostle
does 1. Cor. 12. 30. do all interpret? have all Pastors that gift? And admit
they have, have they all that assistance of the Holy Ghost in an infallible
guidance, which those Pastors of the Apostolical times had? Nay, is that
infallible assistance now afforded to any one of all the Pastors in the world?
If yea, let us know the man, so qualified: if not, then what remedy but we may
be still blown about with every puff of Doctrine, and what will then become of
your external Judge, besides Scripture. [Though it be true, the Scripture is a
river through which a Lamb may wade and an Elephant may swim, yet the meaning
of that place is not that the child of God may wade through the Scripture
without directions, help or Judges, but that the meanest capacity may find so
much of comfort and heavenly knowledge there easily to be obtained, that he may
easily wade through to his eternal Salvation.] If the meanest capacity, may
wade through the Scriptures to his eternal Salvation, they are mad men will
seek to go therein beyond their depth: what can God give us, or we desire more,
than the Salvation of our Souls? Luke 12. 31.
Seek the Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added to you; the most
abstruse mysteries of Art and Nature shall there become obvious to us, the most
transcendent speculations of all sciences shall there be revealed, the most
intricate and perplexed subtilities of School Divinity shall there be resolved;
Quid est, quod ibi nesciant ubi scientem omniae sciunt? Greg. Dialog. l. 4. c.
33.
it is therefore a preposterous curiosity, to hunt with so laborious
disquisition for that here, which will come so cheap and easy to us there.
[Wherefore with pardon craved for my presumption in holding your Majesty in so
tedious a discourse, as also for my boldness in obtruding my opinion, which is
except (as incomparable Hooker in his Ecclesiastical polity has well observed)
the Churches Authority be required therein, as necessary hereunto, we shall be
so far from agreeing upon the true meaning of the Scripture, that the outward
letter sealed with the inward witness of the Spirit, (being all Heretics have
quoted Scripture, and pretended spirit will not be a warrant sufficient for any
private man to judge so much as the Scripture to be Scripture, or the Gospel to
be the Gospel of Christ.) The Doctor is now entered into a weighty point, and
not more weighty then intricate, viz. how we are ascertained that the
Scriptures are the word of God. The Doctor with the Church of Rome, derives
that assurance from the Testimony and tradition of the Church, and her
Testimony is indeed of all, sufficient to render us so assured, if she be so
infallible and in-erring as they pretend; for our Faith, in this particular,
cannot be guided by any thing beneath infallible. This question being so
considerable, and of such concernment, it will not I hope be thought amiss, if
I spend a little the more time about it. Therefore for elucidation, and
illustration thereof, I say, That the Scriptures are the word of God is a
proposition, which must depend upon the evidence either of knowledge, or Faith.
If of knowledge then it must be elicited, and extracted from the principles of
natural reason. But all the reason in the world will never be able to
demonstrate, either that the Scriptures are the word of God, or that they are
not. Mistake me not, I do not exclude reason, as a guide, nor place it so in
the line of incidence, as if it stood neuter, or indifferently inclined to both
the affirmative and negative; no, I hold vastly otherwise; Arguments she has
many, and ponderous to persuade that the Scriptures are of Divine inspiration;
that they are not so, to diswade she has and can frame none. But yet those
Arguments are but soluble, no Demonstrations; for in Demonstrations the
understanding is so clearly convinced by reason, that it can possibly incline
no other way then one, Scalig. de Emend. Temp.
Ea est vera Demonstratio quae cogit, non quae persuadet: and if reason were
able to demonstrate the Scriptures to be the word of God, then all men who have
reason, would assent presently without more ado, to her dictates, and
consequently the whole world would become Christian, so that impossible it is
for us to know that the Scriptures are the word of God, and if know it we
cannot, Articuli Fidei sunt indemonstrabiles. Posnamenses in Scotum. l 1. did
1. q 1. art. 5.
it rests only that we must thereof be assured by Faith, and Faith will
assure us of it as infallibly to the full, though not so evidently (in regard
the principles thereof are indemonstrable) as reason can; well then, Faith it
is which teaches us infallibly that the Scriptures are Divine and sacred, but
how that Faith is produced and wrought in us, is next inquirable. The Doctor
tells us out of Hooker, (that the Authority of the Church produces it, and
unless that be required, the inward witness of the spirit will not be a
warrant sufficient for any private man to Judge so much as the Scripture to be
Scripture, or the Gospel to be the Gospel of Christ.) But the Doctor has here
most shamefully abused that judicious worthy, who has in his whole 5. books of
Ecclesiastical Polity no such words, and which is more, no such thing. If I
belly the Doctor, let the shame lie upon me, Hooker has thrice, and no oftener
occasion in those books to declare himself in this point, l. 2. sect. 4.
whose very words are these. [1. Unless besides Scripture there were something
which might assure us that we do well, we could not think we do well, no not in
being assured that Scripture is a sacred and holy rule of well doing.]

What that something is besides Scripture, Hooker mentions not, and if the
Doctor say he means the Church, I demand of him to prove it, for sure I am
Hooker does not so much as name the word Church in all that Section. [2. ibid
sect. 7.
The Scripture is the ground of our belief, yet the Authority of man is the key
which opens the door of entrance into the knowledge of the Scripture.] Hooker
says not here that the Authority of man creates in us the belief that the
Scriptures are Divine, but only that it is the key to the interpretation of
the Scriptures: and you may note withal, that it is the Authority of but man,
not of God speaking infallibly by man. Lastly, l. 3. sect. 8.
( The first outward motive leading men so to esteem of the Scriptures is, the
Authority of Gods Church. For when we know the whole Church of God has that
opinion of Scripture, we Judge it even an impudent thing, for any man bred and
brought up in the Church, to be of a contrary mind without cause.] Observe here
that the Authority of Gods Church is with Hooker, the first outward (so no
inward, nor the only outward) motive. 2. That it is an outward motive too, but
only to us who are born and bred up in the Church, Sola est Authoritas quae
commovet stultos ut ad sapientiam festinent.
and to such I grant the Authority of the Church is a very great motive, for
nothing brings fools and ignorant persons to knowledge and wisdom a sooner and
gainer way then the Authority of wisemen; but must Faith acquiess, and set up
its rest in the Authority of the Church? Augustine de util.
assuredly no. Cred. c. 16.
The Church may, it is possible, ten thousand General Councels may, (says
Hooker) be deceived, and Authoritate decipi miserum est, Hooker. l. 2 c 7.
it is a lamentable thing to err with Authority, August. ubi supra.
sed certe miserius non moveri, but to be obstinate against it, and of a
contrary mind, as Hooker says, without cause, is more lamentable. But though
to the members of the Church, the Authority of the Church be a vehement and
strong motive, yet to Pagans and Infidels who will own no such thing as a
Church, it is no motive at all; if they question the Scriptures Divinity
studious either of cavil, or to be converted they must be refuted, or invited
by arguments drawn from reason, wherein they intercommune with us; and to speak
truth, reason will carry them a very great way on toward, even to the very
brink of Faith; reason will tell them that the Soul is immortal, that it is not
only capable, but desirous of happiness, that that felicity of the Soul
cannot consist in either riches, honor Beauty, strength, learning or any
earthly thing, they being all too narrow for it and too short-lived, but in the
beatifical vision and contemplation of its Creator, who is only able to fill
it, and in whose presence is the fullness of joy for evermore. It will tell
them, Aug. in Joh. Tra 2. Animae causa omnis relig.
that though God is their last home, videant quo eant they may see whither they
should go, non habent qua eant, yet how to come there is beyond the ken of
Reason; and that though Religion be the way to him, Aug. d. Vt. Cred. c. 7.
yet dim-sighted reason will never be able to find that way, till God himself
reveals it; Eusebius. l. 9. c. 7.
for Author de Deo est ipse Deus, God himself is, and must be the Author of
that which brings us to him: and it were inconsistent with the Providence of
the All-wise God, to withhold from man that means, without which impossible it
is for man to attain that end for which he was created. Therefore Augustine
charge it hence upon the Pagan Gods as a gross neglect, in not instructing
of their worshippers in the way and means to happiness. To the care of the
solicitous Gods, Pertinebat ad consultores Deos, vitae bonae preceptae non
occultare populis cultoribus suis, sed clara praedicatione praebere per Vates
etiam convenire atque arguere peccantes palam, minari poenas male agentibus,
premia recte agentibus polliceri. Augustine. d. Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 4.
says he, it did belong not to conceal from their worshippers the rudiments of
living well, but to teach them by clear publication, also to convent and
reprove offenders; by their Prophets to threaten open punishment to those who
do ill, and to promise reward to those who live well. Reason therefore will
thus teach them the necessity of some conveyance from God of his revealed will,
and that necessity will also infer the actual being of such a Revelation,
considering that Deus non deficit in necessariis, God is not wanting in
affording what is necessary. This necessity and being of Divine revelation once
allowed, reason will make it further credible that the Scriptures now received
and entertained amongst us Christians as the word of God, are indeed and in
truth, that revealed will of God.

For first they have no rival, there is none other stands in competition with
them, the Gods of the Ethnicks gave their worshippers none.

Secondly, if there were any other, yet none must compare with them, they
having many Prerogatives above all other. These Prerogatives are.

First Antiquity, Primam Instrumentis istis authoritatem summa antiquitas
vendieat.
the Doctrine of them being far ancienter then all other Religions in the
world, and almost as ancient as time it self, had it but begun with Moses, it
had carried the priority and antecedency of time from all other, Tertull.
by the confession of the heathens themselves, as Josephus proves: but it was
before him. Nam unde Noe, Apoleget. cap 19.
etc. For how was Noah found righteous, but by the preceding Justice of the Law
of nature? How was Abraham reputed the friend of God, Contra Appionem So also
Tacitus and others vide Annot. Hug. Grotii in de veritat. Christ. Felig. l. 1.
unde Noe Justus inventus si non illum naturalis legis Justitia precedehat? unde
Abraham amicus Dei deputatus? si non de aquitate legis naturalis, unde
Melchisedech sacerdos Dei summi nuncupatus, si non ante Leviticae legis
sacerdotium Levit. fuerunt, qui facrificia deo offerebunt? Tertul. advers.
Judaeo^.
but by the equity of the same Law? How was Melchisedeck called the Priest of
the most high God, if before the Priesthood settled by the Levetical Law,
there were not Priests to offer Sacrifice? Nay, it was before the Flood, even
in Paradise it self, there was the doctrine of saving Truth first instituted;
which afterward was not renewed, but enlarged; was not changed, but perfected.

Secondly, the Spirituality of the doctrine, as God is a Spirit, and must be
worshipped in spirit and truth, so is the fabrique, frame, and contrivance of
the Scriptures conformable to him; it is not a doctrine of sensuality and
dissoluteness, not a doctrine of self ends and by-respects, not a doctrine of
worldly pomp and state, not a doctrine of wicked principles and discipline, but
a doctrine of sobriety, and of self-denial, and of humility, and of virtue; a
doctrine tending only to God, and what is in order to him, which sequestreth
the soul from all earthly imaginations and cogitations, and fixes them only
upon God.

Thirdly, (...). Chrysostom. Hom. in Genesis 18.
the perfection of them, the excellent symmetry of parts, there is nothing
lame, nothing idle, nothing impertinent in them, they were not written by
chance, and at all adventure; there is not a syllable, not a tittle, but has a
mass of treasure comprehended and contrived in them.

Fourthly, the excellency of the mode, style, and form of expression descending
to the meanest, transcending the highest capacities; where God one whiles
insinuates himself into the conscience in the language of a familiar Friend,
Quasi amicus familiaris ad cor loquitur. Aug. Ep. Volutiano. 3.
another while reclaims it with the indignation of an incensed Judge, where
Elegancy is without levity and affectation, plainness without irksonesse, and
satiety, wherein the most curious spirits may be exercised, the most ignorant
instructed.

Fifthly, Ne dubites credere quod videamus fieri. Tert. adv. Jud.
the truth of them, in the accomplishment of what was there prophesied (and we
may confidently believe what we see performed) as Cyrus his very Name and
principal achievements, foretold by Esaias; the end of the Siege of Jerusalem,
by Jeremiah; the translation of the Assyrian Empire to the Medes and Persians,
by Daniel; but most especially the coming of our Savior Christ the true
Messiah at the very time designed of seventy Weeks, by Daniel 9. 24. The
calling of the Gentiles by Esaias, c. 60. The rejection and dispersion of the
Jews by Zechariah, 12. 13. Lastly, the destruction of the second Temple by
Daniel, c. 9. And our Savior Christ, Luke 19. 43.

Sixthly, the miraculous preservation of the Books themselves; first, against
the injuries of neglect, as the Law found in the rubbish of the Temple, 2 Kings
22. after the wretched neglect thereof in the time of Manasseth. Secondly,
against the injuries of alteration, Josephus contra Appi^^. D. 1.
(...), etc. For in the Flux of so many Ages no man durst either add, diminish
or change any part of them; for which end Esdras, Gamaliel, Eleazar, and others
contrived that excellent Treasure of the Masoreth, to denote the diversity of
Readings in the Hebrew Text. Lastly, against the injuries of persecution, as in
the time of Dioclesian, who commanded all the Bibles he could discover to be
burnt, They who delivered them up being called Traditores, Tom. 7.
Traitors, a word frequent in Saint Augustine against the Donatists, the main
quarrel being between the Church and them, about the non-reception of those
Apostates into the Congregation.

Seventhly, (...).
the thrift and propagation of the Gospel, in spite of all opposition and
persecution: By how many Tyrants was the Church afflicted, yet never conquered
and destroyed? The Romans often pruned and lopt its Professors off, and still
the more they increased, Chrysostom.
says Dion, himself an Heathen. It may be here objected, Hom. 4. in Esaias 6.
that Dion speaks of the Jews; true, I grant it, and as true it must be
granted, (...).
that Dion tells us, also (...). This appellation is given to others also,
though of different Nations, who adhere to the same principles of institution;
and what those are he tells us, viz. (...), They zealously worship a certain
one God, will not endure Images in their Temples, Dion. Hist. L.
observe the Sabbath: and such were the Christians as well as the Jews: nor
must Dion be understood in this place to imply any so properly as the
Christians, who like the House of David, at that time waxed strenger and
stronger, whereas the not Christianizing Jews like that of Saul, 2 Samuel 3. 1
waxed weaker and weaker. And that by so inconsiderable, so despicable means,
against so implacable, so powerful Opposites, Victi victoribus leges dederunt,
teneo. Senec. and Mart.
Christianity should so triumph, so mightily prevail, as that the conquered
should command, subdue, and at length give Laws to the Conquerors, till almost
the whole World became her Convert, Reason cannot conclude less than non haec
sine numine -- This must be the Lord's doing, that by the foolishness of this
Word preached, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
so many millions have been converted, Acts 12. 22.
and made wise unto salvation. The voice, the Word of God it must be, and not
of man.

Lastly, the failing and defection of other Religions about the time of our
Saviors Incarnation, the Heathen gods durst not abide his coming, but forsook
their stations, abandoned their Temples, and left their Oracles speechless, as
Tully, Tull. de Divin. l. 2. Juv Sat. 3
Juvenal, and others assure us: and Porphyry, that sworn Enemy to Christianity
confesses, that since Jesus came to be worshipped, their gods have stood them
in little stead. The Jewish Religion, which gloried so much in formality and
external splendour, was deplum'd and stripped of all in a few years. The Vrim and
Thummim, those precious stones of the high Priests pectoral or breast plate,
whose sparkling luster (an index of God's atonement, and sure presage of
Victory) even dazzled the eyes of all Beholders, about a hundred years before
Christ's Birth, Joseph.
lost their wonted radiancy and brightness, Antiq. Jud. l 3. c. 9.
and became ever after totally dusky and obscure; evidently presignifying that
the glory of the ceremonial Law was bidding the World good night. To the fail
of these Oracles succeeded the fail of the sacred Priesthood, soon after by
Herod alien'd and conferred in an arbitrary way on whom he pleased, without
regard had either to Law or Line. The Priesthood thus profaned, what remained
but the complement and last act of desolation, the destruction of the Temple,
which delayed not after Christ's Passion, above forty years, ever since which
time the Jews have had neither true Priests, nor true Sacrifices, nor true
places of Worship, nor a true home.

All these are motives and inductions from Reason to make it credible that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, but not all these, nor the Testimony of the
Christian Church it self, is able to create faith in us, Aug. contr. Manich. c.
14.
which must be ipso Deo intrinsecus mentem nostram firmante and illuminante;
God himself inlightning and strengthening our inward mind, Ephesians. 2. 9.
for Faith is the gift of God, and be the object never so credible, believe we
cannot, till God's Spirit works Faith in us. For the final resolution,
termination, and rest of our Faith must be upon God alone, and by him alone
wrought in us. That the Authority of the Church should be the sine qua non, so
absolutely necessary, as that the inward witness of God's Spirit cannot
warrant us that the Scriptures are divine without her testimony, needs no
further confutation than the History of the Evangelists and Acts, where we
read of thousands converted to Christianity, who never entered at that door. In
short, to contract my discourse within a straighter compass, Faith being an
Habit infused, and every Habit requiring some preceding dispositions and
degrees to it, Faith must have hers also to make the thing credible, before it
be actually believed: of these motives and preparatory dispositions the
Tradition of the Church is I grant to us Christians the first and most
prevalent: but the Church is not herein in unsociable, it is not her testimony
alone will make it credible that the Scriptures are divine; other deductions
and inferences framed by light of Reason, must, and usually do cooperate in
working the mind to that persuasion. Contra Ep. Fund. c. 5.
And by this time that famous place in S. Augustine is easily resolved, which
the Marquis urged against his Maj. page 157.
and Englished with more advantage to his cause, than conformity to the mind
of that Father. Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae authoritas commoveret.
I should not believe the Gospel it self unless I were moved by the Authority
of the Church, so the Marquis. But Saint Augustine, Nisi commoverit, unless
the Churches Authority together with other inducements did move me to it,
clearly implying she could not move alone.

Having dwelt thus long and unavoidably upon this point, lest the Doctor should
think he has quite lost me, it is high time to apply my self to him again.

This Church being found out, and her Authority allowed of, all controversies
would soon be decided.

You say true indeed Doctor, her Authority being allowed of, but then it must
be allowed of for divine, and who will so allow it amongst us Protestants? And
how can it be proved she has any such Authority, you will send us back, I
know, to Audi Ecclesiam. But there will be a controversy what is the genuine
interpretation of that place, whether hearing implies an absolute or limited
submission; and who shall decide that controversy? You Will say, the Church, I
say, no, she must not, for it is her own case, and she must not be (...),
witness in her own cause, that our Savior held incompotent in himself, John
5. 31.
If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true. But the Doct. tells us
['Tis one Article of our Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church] That Is
true too, but it is Credo sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, I believe there is an
holy Catholic Church, not I believe in the holy Catholic Church.

As the Lion wants neither strength, nor courage, nor power, nor weapons to
seize upon his prey, yet he wants a nose to find it out, wherefore by natural
instinct he takes to his assistance the little Jack-call, a quick-sented beast,
who runs before the Lion, and having found out the prey, in his Language gives
the Lion notice of it: now to apply this to our purpose, Christ crucified is
the main substance of the Gospel, etc.

The Doctor is here fallen upon a comparison wherewith he is much taken, I
confess I am not so well read to tell whence he had it, nor of so easy belief
to credit the Fable; nor is it essential or to the purpose, whether a Fable or
a Story, since the main design lies in the Moral and Application; wherein the
Doctor has rendered himself so impertinently tedious, and so intricately
perplexed, that (to use his own words) I must confess ingenuously (yet under
his highest correction) there is not a thing that I ever understood less than
the Doctor in this particular; of whom I may say in part, as Socrates did of
Heraclitus, (...), He requires Delian Diver, and no less than Apollo to wade
him through. I wish I could say also the other part, (...), What I understand
is excellent, Diogenes Laert. Socrat.
and so is, I am persuaded, what I understand not: his scope and meaning being
so darkly dispensed, I shall adventure to bolt out by conjecture, and make his
application in what I can follow suit with his Comparison. The Lion is, as I
apprehend him, Man's Soul; the Prey, Christ crucified; the place where this
Prey is to be found, the holy Scriptures; the quick-sented beast, the
Jack-call, the Church; these put into frame, and set together, seem to exhibit
and represent, that though the Scriptures contain Christ the food of our souls;
yet cannot our souls find out that Food, till the Church (like a Setter) makes
her paint, and directs us where it is. But Doctor, we say and you shall never
be able by Reason and Scripture evidence (though by words you may) to gainsay
it, that our Souls are not so dull sented, nor Christ so obscurely tendered to
us in the Scriptures, as that the simplest and most ignorant soul which humbly
and devoutly seeks him, can possibly miss him; and if found, he cannot be
till the Church cry So ho, and show him to us, we are but in an ill plight,
seeing we have need of a quick-sented Jack-call to direct us to that Church,
which you Doctor would so fain find out. But will you see the artifice of this
devised Plot, the cunning of this contrived similitude? Behold it here.

There is a quick sented Assistant called Ecclesia, or Church, which is derived
from a Verb which signifies to call, which must be the Jack-call, to which this
powerful Seeker after this Prey must join it self, or else it will never be
able to find it out.

Here Is the depth of the design laid open, the Doctor, happening by chance upon
the Fable of the Lion and Jack-call, thought it would serve his purpose most
happily, because the Jack-call was to be resembled by the word Church, which he
conceived was derived from a Verb signifying to call; but here the Doctor is
miserably, shamefully, even to ridiculousnesse grossly out; for Ecclesia is
derived from (...), which does not signify to call, but to cull, separate,
choose, appropriate, and set apart, to elect. And whereas he says, Saint Paul
confirms the use of this Etymology, writing to the Corinthians, and elsewhere,
he must be hinted, that the word is constantly there one and the same (...),
called, not (...), elected, or called forth; calling is one thing, Election
another; calling is in time, Election from all Eternity; all that are called,
are not elected; nor are all that are elected, called; for children dying
infants are many elected, but not any called. But perhaps the Doctor will say
the word Church or Ecclesia comprehends, in a large notion, not only the
Elect, but all that are called to the external profession of Christianity. I
answer, true, but it is still derived from (...), and that Church is a chosen, a
peculiar people selected from the mass of all mankind.

When dissension arose between Paul and Barnabas concerning Circumcision, their
disputations could effect nothing but heat, till the Apostles and Elders met
together, and determined the matter.

Good Doctor, if it be not too much trouble to you, I pray revise the Text
again, for I fear you are much out of the story, and wide in two points; First,
in affirming Paul and Barnabas to differ in the doctrine of Circumcision, who
were (...), thought taught, and defended one and the same Truth, as is evident,
Acts 15. 2. Secondly, in affirming their dissension to be before the Council of
Jerusalem, whereas it is clearly directly said to be after it, Acts 15. 39. A
Question there was I grant about Circumcision, before that Council, but not
between Paul and Barnabas, but between them and some who came from Judea:
again, a dissension there was, a Paroxisme between Paul and Barnabas, but it
was after that Council.

There must be a society of men who can say, Been visum fuit nobis and Spiritui
sancto; or else matters of that nature will never be determined, which society
is there called the Church, which Church we are to find.

That your external Judge is a society of men, you tell us here; but there are
many societies of men; there is a society of men after the Geneva Model, there
is a society of men according to the Romish persuasion, there is a society of
men assembled in a General Council, not subordinate to the Pope, which of these
societies is it you mean? If none of all these, explain your self; why should
you be thus reserved, like a sullen Cow that will not give down her Milk? Come,
impart, communicate your notion freely to us; if you say it is a society that
can say, Been visum fuit nobis and Spiritui sancto, you are not explicit, not
yet clear enough; for the Holy Ghost may be so assistant to a society, as that
form mentioned ( Acts 15.) may be assumed by it (though none has as yet
presumed so far) and yet notwithstanding, the definitions of that society may
be not absolutely infallible. But Doct. I observe an Elegancy in your form,
singularly, and peculiarly, your own, you have reformed the visiun est or
placuit, used by other Interpreters, into been visum, the mystery of which
diversity, I would gladly learn I nor is this all, but by what warrant I know
not; I find nobis take place of Spiritui sancto, whereas the Apostles rendered
them counter-changed, and put the holy Ghost in the upper hand. But it is time
to make an end; no more but this; you say still, this Church you are to find;
and because if findable, your good fortune may be to find it, in case you do,
let me advise you to proclaim your (...); for assure your self, it will be
treasure trouve, and then it belongs either to the King or State, and then
Concealment may create your Trouble.

FINIS.

