PHYSICIAN Cure thy Self: OR, AN ANSWER To a Seditious Pamphlet, Entitled
EYE SALVE for the English Army, etc.

Written and Published for the Information and Benefit of the Souldjery; and
to them Directed.

April 23. 1660.

LONDON, Printed for H. B. at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1660.

Physician cure thy Self, etc.
There Is a lewd Pamphlet titled, -- EYE SALVE for the English Army, etc. --
which being but a Breviate of PLAIN ENGLISH, and the ALARVM, etc. -- needs no
Particular Answer. He that reads One, reads All.

It is divided into 4. Heads.

First. A Tedious and Scandalous Charge against the Late King.

Secondly. A Groundless Invective against our Present Sovereign.

Thirdly. Reasons to the Private Souldjers: persuading them of the necessity to
Alter both the Laws and Government in order to their Safety.

Lastly. A Letter from some Regiments of the Army, to encourage the Rest, into
a Revolt from the General, and an Attempt of Violence upon the Nation.

IT were time lost to spend 20. Sheets of Paper upon the first Section, and no
body 20. Pins the better for it* First, the Particulars have been already
answered; and Then, all before 1648. is beside the present Question. The Reason
of the War, or the Transactions of it, is not the Point; but why was Blood
shed in the time of Peace? why did these Fellows, that during the Hazard of
the War, Vowed, and Covenanted to Preserve the King: but having got the Power
of the Sword into their hands, usurped also that of the Government, and
Murdered him: Acting Extravagancies Themselves, far greater than Calumny it
self could ever have the Face to fasten upon the King? and all this under no
pretense of other Necessity, than what the Fowlenesse of their Crimes, and the
Guilt of their own Souls engaged them in.

In one word: The Question dates from the Seclusion of the Members in 1648. and
That Act shows us who were Reformers, and who Jugglers.

Now for his Clamours against the present King: As they are neither Likely in
themselves, nor credited by the People; so I shall not clogg my self with
proofs unnecessary, to Acquit him: Referring rather what I have to deliver,
upon This Subject, to the next head; and That is, His Advice to the Private
Soldiers; to which, I should subjoyn my Own, and to whom I shall dedicate the
rest I have to say.

This Eye Salve, Gentlemen, which our pretending Oculist presents you with, is
a medicine of the same Composition, which (by general report) struck Milton
Blind: and it is his Interest that You should be so too. You cannot but observe
how full of Calumny and Treason it is: and One thing most remarqualle take
notice of.

Your Safety is the only Argument he employs, to engage you in the most Bloody,
Unchristian, Traiterous, Hopeless, and Ridiculous Design that ever was
projected. Consider, my Masters: you are Men, not Beasts* Christians, not
Turks; Subjects, not Governors; Reasonable Creatures, not Asses: And in fine,
you have Souls to save. I should esteem my self exceeding happy to see a good
event of my Wishes, and Endeavors toward you: and I do undertake by a plain
evidence of sober Reasons, to show you both a clear Light to walk by; and a far
safer way to a much Nobler End than he proposes.

His Counsel is, That for your future Safety you would seriousl^ mind these
ensuing Particulars. And mine is the same Counsel too; mind them well, and
you will find your Safety lies in avoiding what he advises you to follow: and
that his hand was in the wrong Box; For, what he calls an Eye Salve, is rather
a Plague-Plaster -- But now to the Particulars themselves.

First, to abandon King, and Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal, for these Reasons.

1. They Will seek Revenge against you, for what you did against them.

2ly. They Will have the Sword in their Hands; and Regulate their Actions by
Will, not Law, etc.

3ly. Expect the same, if not Greater Tyranny than formerly, over your Persons
for Conscience sake; by Whips, etc.

4ly. By the establishment of a Single Person, Monopolies will be upheld, and
Trade destroyed, etc. --

5ly. If the King should be established; that Money which should pay your
Arriers, must go to pay his Debts.

6ly. You that have no Fortunes, will be punished in your Carcasses; and
Branded with Scorn, and Ignominy as Traitors to all Posterity.

In Order: -- and to the First, in the first place:

1. Can any thing be more unreasonable, than to object Revenge as Dangerous to
the Private Souldjers? were Ours the most vindictive Prince that ever lived (as
you your selves know the Quite contrary, so much as you know of him) They were
still safe. That Revenge must be exercised either upon your Lives, or Fortunes.
--

As to your Lives: what would that Cruelty avayl him; or what should move him
to employ it? a Personal pique there can be none, he Knows you not; and
beside;-many of his Father's Party are mingled with you; that took up Arms for
Bread, and not in Malice. -- Neither are you looked upon as Designers, but as
Souldjours; under command: and such, as during a suspension of the Civil
Government, subjected your selves to the Law of Arms: -- You were neither
Judges, nor Executioners; -- your Business was in the Field; and the Kings
greatest Harms were done in the Intervals of Peace. -- Further, your
Obligations under your Present General give you both Honor and Protection.
From whom, when ever you start, you are lost for ever.

These very Circumstances, would secure you, even from a Barbarous Enemy: much
more then, from a Prince, that by a Principle of Courage loves a Souldjour: --
by an impression of Generosity, that loves a candid Enemy: -- and by a strong
Impulse of natural Goodness and Divine Charity, that reckons Duty in a
Subject, as a Friendship: -- and softens Treason it self, in his Familiar
Discourses, with the Terms only of Humane Frailty. -- How eagerly was he
Persued at Worcester, and how miraculously Preserved! yet after This; with how
much Tenderness, and Bounty (out of his Little Stock) did he Compassionate,
and Relieve Those very Persons, in Flanders, that sought his Life at Worcester?

Enough is said to This Point. Examine now your Danger in the Point of Fortune.
(I do not find many Purchasers among the Private Souldjery.) What have you got,
for all your Hazzards, but Hunger, Infamy, and Rags? When yet your Thanklesse
Masters have put up half the Revenue of three Kingdems into their private
Pockets: without the venture of a broken Head for it.

For shame, Gentlemen, bethink your selves. Leave these ungrateful wretches to
their, Lot: and Save your Souls; your Lives; your Freedoms; -- Briefly; all the
Benefits which your condition is capable of, you may enjoy; and it is not
possible for you to prevail against the present Posture and Unity of the
Nation. Do you consider what it is these your sweet Counselors oppose? The
KING forsooth. -- To That; -- No body names him, but in return to them: and the
main Issue of our Settlement is committed to. This Immediate, and next
Parliament; So that effectually; -- You are advised to alter the Foundation of
our long-establish'd Laws, and some two thousand of you to make a War upon the
whole rest of the Nation. To end this point; here is the Question.

Whether you should rather serve a Pack of Inconsiderable, Covetous Traitors;
that contrary to Law, have Rifled, and Embroiled three Nations; and cheated you
of your Pay, that did their business for them; and then Ruin your selves too
into the Bargain; -- or on the contrary, Return to your Right Mastor; Redeem
your Honor, and your Country, by serving Him, who having Lost all that these
People Got; yet succored you? ( Having been Long upon this Particular, I shall
be the Shorter in the Rest)

2ly. You are advised to provide against a Lawless Tyranny

Do so, and Quit Them. But let me tell you; They fear the Law, more than the
Tyranny.

3ly. You shall be persecuted for Conscience. ( they tell you)

No. They Are afraid of being Lashed for want on it. Can you have better
Security in Nature, for all Religious Liberties; than the Promise of that
Prince, whose Habitual Piety; -- Tenderness of Nature; -- Exact Faith, and
Justice to his Word: and whose Unalterable Firmness to the Protestant
Religion, under so great Temptations to desert it; -- are so unquestionably
evident?

4ly. Trade will not flourish under a Single Person.

Committee-Trade indeed it is like will down: so will the Trade of Juggling in a
Pulpit; -- of showing Tricks with Rings, and Bodkins. But where is the Trade
These Fellows drive? They would be Major Generals again perhaps; -- or is it,
that Hewson has a mind to Cobble again; -- and my
Lord-Sir-John-Master-Jack-Berkstead would fall again to his old Trade of
Thimble-making.

5ly. Your Arrieres must go to pay the Kings debts.

No: They that Oppose the Government, will probably be Desired to pay for
Settling of it.

6ly. Your Carcases shall be punished, if you have no Fortunes; and you
recorded for Traitors.

These Gentlemen measure others by themselves. The First, has been their
Practice, and the Latter will be their Fortune. For Traitor is a Brand upon
such as Resist Authority, not upon those that Submit to it.

Hitherto; why no King. -- Now; -- why the Law must run in another Name; (in
truth a seasonable Consideration) and a Commonwealth be Established.

The Reasons are so Trivial, and so Tedious, I shall not trouble my self with
the Particulars. This, in short, is the gross of them.

The Law in the Kings name speaks you Traitors; --


