Abraham's Image In one of his SONS: OR, THE PICTURE OF A Good Old MAN,
Represented in a SERMON upon the Third of November, anno Dom. 1657. in
West-Newton, at the Funeral of John Dethick Esquire, Father to the late Lord
Mayor that was of London in the Year 1655.

By WILLIAM KNAPP Master of Arts, of Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, now Rector of
VVest-Newton in Norfolk.

HEB. 11 10. For he looked for a city which has foundations, whose Builder and
Maker is God. Languet amore sponsa Christi, prae magno faciei ejus videndi
desiderio, vitae taedium patitur, and vix praesentis exil^i moras sustinet.
Rupert. in Cant. LONDON, Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, and are
to be sold at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1658.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JOHN DETHICK, Knight, all Grace and Happiness.
Sir,
YOUR friends (which were present at the Sermon which I preached at your aged
Fathers Funeral) comparing what I had said of him, of my own particular
knowledge, with those expressions of your affection (which they had formerly
apprehended from you) were verily persuaded that the Sermon would have made a
very graceful sound in your ears: and Sir, what with their incessant
importunity and the sense that I have of my obligation to you, I am bold to
present you with it, that so I may represent him to your thoughts, in whose
precious memory you may so far delight your self, that through his reverend
antiquity and goodness he was the Glory and Comfort of the Country round about
him; as for my part, I took my acquaintance with him as a blessing from God;
and thus much I may say as in the sight of God, that when ever I went to visit
him (as I was by a strange and extraordinary motion excited to do it
frequently) what through the observation of his outward and inward form, I had
the thoughts of faithful Abraham renewed upon my spirit; so that (to speak the
truth) I loved him in the truth, and not I only, 2 John 1.
but also al they that have known the truth, as St. John speaks of the Elect
Lady: I confess Sir the piece of work (which I presume to tender to your
acceptance) is but lean and dry and unfit to abide the test of your Judicious
Eye; yet Sir, give me leave to hope that as the reviving of his memory (from
whose loins you sprang) was part of my aim in this, so the very mention of
his Worth may somewhat counterpoyze its imperfection; and this hope I do also
feed my self withal, that I deserve not your displeasure in making have to
please you. But this is that which I also fear, that your candid disposition
(which knows not to give any other than a favorable interpretation) will not
let me understand my errors; however Sir, I beseech you, where ever you do
discry them know them to be rather the errors of love, not any love of errors.
I bless God, whatever weakness of mine may appear to a critical eye, the
sincerity of my desire is in this, (as in all others the endeavors of my
profession) that I may be instrumental to the glory of God in the building up
of Men in the Faith and Fear of His Name; and to this purpose I had rather be
the meanest vessel in His Sanctuary, than sit equal in glory to the greatest
Potentate, I had rather be of use to the adding (though it be but a little
Goats hair) to the building of the Temple, than have all the affluence of the
Earth added to my Estate, for though the Calamities of this inferior world may
Eclipse the external luster of my profession, Yet, I question not, but if the
almighty shall deigne me the * (...), or help of his holy spirit either toward
the reducing of any of the lost Sons of Adam, 2 Cor. 6.1.
or toward the confirmation of any of the Saints in their most holy Faith, I
may shine as the Stars for ever and ever. And as we in our profession, Dan. 12
3.
are consecrate to such spiritual and eternal purposes so I desire in this
present work of mine to drive on such a design; If therefore (Sir) by this
slender oblation of mine together with the example of your worthy Father (whom
I have proposed to your imitation) you shall so recount with your self the
return of the Body of Abraham (that great Patriarch and friend of God) to the
dust of the Earth, and the sweet and peaceable resignation of his Soul into the
hands of his God, and if you shall also so far recall to mind his being gathered
to his People in Heaven as lightly to esteem of the vanity of this transitory
life and more and more to prize the Rock of your Salvation the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the only new and living way to the new Jerusalem and Bosom of
Abraham, then shall I attain my most ambitious aims, who am,

Sir, Yours in all Humble Observance. William Knapp.

Abraham's Image In one of his SONS: OR, The PICTURE of a good Old MAN.
GENESIS 25.8. Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and dyed in a good old age, an old
man and full of years, and was gathered to his people.


TO preach a Sermon of death in the presence of a dead corpse, is a kind of
Pleonasmus in our concionatorie office. This sad spectacle here before us, is
Death's Emphasis of mortality to all flesh, and by preaching J may augment its
expression; and truly this is one end of three of this so solemn a meeting in
the house of God; Whereof,

The First, is to difference the bodies of Saints from those of beasts and such
as are worse than beasts, which without respect are drawn and cast forth beyond
the gates of our Cities, as was that of Jehoiakim, Jer. 22.19.

The blessed incarnation of Christ may be sufficient to re-minde us of some
discriminative respect even to the bodies of his servants, after their souls
have made their retreat into the bosom of Abraham; and for this so laudable a
custom, we have an authentic example in 1 Samuel 25.1. where we find that
Samuel dyed, and all Israel were gathered together, and lamented him, and
buried him.

The Second, is to represent the Virtues of the deceased to the view of others
for imitation. 2 Samuel i: 26 2 Chronicles: 35:


Thus David commended Jonathan for his more than foeminine affection; The holy
Ghost King Josiah for his integrity; St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Patriarchs and Prophets; and thus our Savior himself commanded, that where
ever the gospel should be preached, there that which the woman had done to him,
should be told for a memorial of her, Matthew. 26.13. And therefore (Brethren) if
J speak in commendation of this our deceased brother, according to his desert,
I do but my duty. The soul of a just man (after death) lives with God, and it is
pity but the virtues of his mind should do so too in the memory of men.
Pingitur in tabulis formae peritura Venustas, Owen.
Vivat ut in tabulis, quod perit in facie, says the Epigrammatist; We often take
care that the beauty of the outward man (when it decays) should live in
pictures, as this our dead friends picture was drawn to the life at London in
the time of his sons Mayoralty; and truly I think it as meet to delineate the
beauty of his soul, and show it to the world: Virtus nihil erubescit praeter
quam abscondi: In the life of a man Virtue is ashamed of nothing but of being
hid, and godly men will show themselves in the exercise of goodness; and after
their death (when they can no longer show themselves) it is but charity for us
to continue their worth in a good report.

Concerning this Gentleman therefore, I shall do both him and you this right,
as to speak a little; and with the number of his Virtues I shall not rank his
descent and parentage, though I find nobility of birth to be a special jewel
in the diadem of a Prince, in Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou (O Land) when thy
King is the son of Nebles: For though his Progenitors were Gentlemen and
Knights of great quality; yet I am not making an Oration in a Hall, but a
Sermon in a Church, where nothing but matters divine and of edification to the
precious soul, are seasonable and comely. In order whereunto, let me propose
(for example) the sobriety, righteousness and godliness of this deceased
Gentleman; those three Virtues which (like so many stars of highest magnitude)
the grace of God fixes in the firmament of the Saints conversation, Tit. 2.12.
First, he lived soberly in this present world, making no Romans 13 14.
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but living temperately,
using the creatures to that end for which they were created, to help, not to
overburden Nature; and truly to this moderation of his (which was known to all
men) we may next under the good pleasure of God (whose sovereignty is over all
events) ascribe the length of his days. The French say of the English (and
truly not undeservedly) that we dig our graves with our own teeth. God has
enriched our Nation with a plenty above others, and commonly we turn it into
luxury and riot; it is a sottishness of many men to think by a lautitious fare,
and over-high eating and drinking to plump their bodies into a proportion of
beauty, and raise the operations of Nature; for so they usually destroy it, as
too much fuel puts out the fire, Arist. Li. Phy.
according to a principle of natural Philosophy, (...), too much is Natures
enemy. It Is reported of old Parr (who was 152. years of age) that using but
mean and moderate diet in the Country, he kept himself in health; but coming
up to the Court at London, the dainties which he was tempted to at the Kings
table, soon overthrew his body.

But this our deceased friend was once requested and prevailed with, to go to
London; where his friends thought their eyes blessed in so venerable a piece of
antiquity; and to gratify the favor of his society, they tendered to his
acceptance all those varieties which that city could afford: But he being then
(as formerly) temperate in all things, so resisted the temptation of excess, as
he returned into the country in perfect health. If ever therefore my Brethren,
you desire to see many days, and that your bodies may be in a sweet
subserviency to your souls, and your souls to God, live as this our departed
friend did, soberly.

Secondly, he lived righteously, or justly, as to his dealings with men; he
dealt well with himself by living soberly, and well with others by living
righteously: He paid those twofold debts which all men (especially Christians)
are concerned in. 1. Debts of Justice according to the Apostles rule in Romans
13.7. where he says, Render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor; and thus did
he, and that not for Romans 13.5.
wrath, but for conscience sake. 2. He paid his debts of charity and mercy,
which J call debts, because J find the Apostle does in Romans 13.8. and
therefore the discharging thereof is the true badge and cognizance of a
Christian, as Ioh. 13.35 and Coloss. 3.12.

To satisfy debts of Justice, men are taught (as commonly the fear of God is)
by men, Esa. 29.13. and hereunto they may be constrained by the dint of the law
of a Commonweal; but to love one another, men are taught of God, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
which (being a duty not only in deed and word, but extending it self to a
charitable heart) is only found in the spiritual law of Christ; he therefore
is the only true Disciple of Christ, who loves as in the sight of God, (who is
the searcher of the heart) and whose soul melts with a tender compassion
toward all men, especially toward the Gal. 6. io.
household of faith, and such as bear about them the marks of the Lord Jesus:
And thus did our friend, who did not so much pour forth his charity out of his
purse, as out of the bowels of mercy; not so much out of the hand as heart; as
much of this temper J am sure, appeared by the distribution of his estate,
which he gave not to such as were already furnished with a plenty, as commonly
men do, with purpose only to transmit an airie name to posterity; but to such
as he thought might stand in some need; and thus he always desired that his
estate might be rather supplemental than ornamental.

And now Brethren, as in time of his life his hand was always open to give to
the poor; so he lent the Lord, and the Lord (who is a debtor to no man)
returned him what he gave in a manifold blessing; God blessed him as he did
Genesis 24.1.
Abraham, in all things; he blessed him with a numerous issue of sons and
daughters, whereof the youngest of his sonns he lived to see advanced to a
place of the greatest eminence in our Metropolitan city, as good old Genesis 46.6.
Jacob saw his son Joseph in Egypt: God also blessed him with a considerable
estate to supply both his, and also the wants of others. But above all, God
blessed him with a portion of divine grace, whereby he was enabled to live not
only soberly and righteously, but also in the third place godly, (...),
always offering up to God (as a royal priest) the holy sacrifices of prayer
and praises; and always waiting (with old Simeon) to see the salvation of the
Lord through his holy ordinances: Of which gracious temper of his, not only I
my self, (having sometimes discerned him to weep at a Sermon) but also the
whole town of Kings-Lynn (where he spent great part of his latter days) can
give sufficient testimony; For there as he lived under a very able and godly
ministry, so their doctrine distilled upon his heart as dew upon the grass,
and as the soft showers of heaven upon the tender herb, and brought forth the
fruit of love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, and (that which is the luster of them all) temperance. As for his
love, he did first pitch it upon God, and then upon man for Gods sake, and upon
such especially as did nearest communicate as he thought of the likeness of
God. He was tender in point of censuring others, whose judgment differed in
matters rather of the superstructure, than the foundation of faith; or in
matters intricate and of controversy, and not opposing an holy life:
Difference in judgment in such affairs, should not with him make a breach of
charity, especially if the parties so erring were conscientious in their
outward conversation, and seemed desirous to prove all things, and hold fast
that which was good, according to the Apostles rule, 2 These. 5.21. And where
he found any going astray, there he would seek to reduce them with the spirit
of meekness, Ephesians. 4.15
speaking the truth in love, and pitying rather than insulting over their
infirmities. And as touching his own faith, 'twas strongly built upon the
Scriptures, which were to him (as Genesis 24.65.
Isaac to Rebecca, velum oculorum) the veyle of his eyes, he desired to confine
his sight within that blessed compass. When between the Ministers of Lynn there
was a difference about the extent of divine grace, he carried himself with an
amiable wisdom and circumspection; for he became an Auditor to both parties,
accounting that whatsoever was propounded in the name of God, and his Son Jesus
Christ, might well deserve audience; and when he had well weighed their
opinions, he concluded that God had a peculiar people whom he knew from the
beginning of the world, and into whose hearts he purposed (by his determinate
counsel) so to put his fear that they should not depart from him, as Ier.
32.40. yet so as not to lay any violent constraint upon the liberty of their
wills, but to make them willing in the day of his power in the beauties of
holiness, and to draw them with a certain omnipotent facility, who otherwise
through natural corruption would never become subject to the divine will. When
once he and I had discourse concerning the Universalists, I told him, that the
sacred Trinity of Persons, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as they had a Genesis
1.26. Psalm. 8.3. Luke 1.51
finger in the creation of man, and of the whole fabric of heaven and earth,
so they had an arm in the redemption of man, and were all equally sharers
therein; 'twas the Fathers good pleasure to send the Son into humane flesh; and
the Son's good pleasure to take it upon him to work salvation for men; and the
Holy Ghost's pleasure to work that salvation in them which the Son works for
them; so that unless the sun of righteousness did arise upon the hearts of men
by the healing power of his spirit, neither could they discern, nor would they
embrace the way of their eternal peace; and because this gracious work of Gods
spirit is found in some and not in others, we therefore say, God loves some
more then he does others, and though many be called, yet few are chosen; and
that there should be any one (I told him) 'twas the infinite free mercy of God
in Christ Jesus; and this he certainly did believe; and was not this faith of
his like that of Abraham? yes verily, in this he was a true son of Abraham;
and therefore as God was to Abraham a shield, and an exceeding great reward,
Genesis 15.1. so he was and is to him; he was a shield to defend him from the
fiery darts of Satan, and to keep him safe from the dominion and condemnation
of sin, and he is now (questionless) his exceeding great reward, giving him a
crown of righteousness in his glorious and eternal kingdom, where we will
leave him to the reward of his working, and betake our selves to the working
out of our reward, who are yet but laborers in the Vinyard here below, or
rather strangers in this wilderness of sin, and sojourners, as all our fathers
were; whereof to have a more firm and active remembrance, is

The third and last end of this our funeral concourse: Hereunto therefore let
me beseech you, friends, to receive with meekness and reverence that portion of
divine Writ before rehearsed, out of Genesis 25.8. which words do present
themselves to ordinary view in three obser. vables: 1 Something before
Abraham's death. 2 Something at his death. 3 Something after his death.


First, Abraham (before he dyed) was an old man, a good old man and full of
years; the words are a compendious, but a full narrative of Abraham's life;
Abraham was a great man in years, and he was as good as great, and therefore
was said to have dyed in a good old age; they which lived before him, lived
much longer, even above eight hundred years; yet we read not that they dyed in
a good old age, and they which lived after him, lived not so long; so that
Abraham was remarkable in years, and as much in goodness; God made him great in
years, and his grace crowned his years with goodness: From whence therefore we
may draw a twofold observation.

1. Observe. It Is a blessing from the Lord to live long.

God blessed Abraham with length of years; length of years comes within the
compass of Gods promises; now all his promises are exceeding great and
precious; God promised Solomon that if he would walk in his ways and keep his
statutes, he would lengthen his days, 1 King. 3.14. And this the Lord annexed
to the fourth Commandment, as a reward of obedience to father and mother, Exo.
20. and the contrary is the just doom of all blood-thirfty and deceitful men,
they shall not live out half their days, Psa. 55.23. Now as in other gifts of
God, so in this, God has a further intendment of grace to all his people; when
the Lord reaches forth his hand in any gift of his, he does it to draw a man to
himself in the knowledge of, and sweet communion with him: The Lord 2 Cor. 6.1.
labors for the advantage of men, both in his word and works; and thus he does
in the gift of a long life: The Lord in his Sabbaths, intends a peculiar
sequestration of our selves unto his divine service, not only that thereby we
should symbolize or betoken the God of our creation or redemption, but that we
should benefit our selves in a fuller knowledge of God, and the way of
salvation; for, to that purpose the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the Sabbath, Mark 2.27. and as upon all such days of rest, Psalm. 90.12. And so
much as we see of the goodness of the Lord, in the length of our days, so much
we ought the more to be led to repentance, and to do good; length of days are
a talent from the Lord, which he puts into our hands to improve, and not to lay
up in a napkin, nor yet to drive away, as some (by vain and unprofitable
sports) do their time: There should be Apelles.
nulla dies sine linea, no day but we should be doing something, and that
something should be to purpose: If we would be every day geting a little more
knowledge of God, and be every day endeavoring after a further strength of
grace; Oh what fruitful Olive trees might we become in the house of our God,
within the compass of a long life!

'Twas said of an old man, Mr: Audl^y
sometimes high Sherff of this County, that he should say, As for his part, he
had no covetous intention to scrape up much in the World; but only a certain
humor, to try how much a man might get with frugality and good husbandry,
within the limits of a man's age; whether the old Gentleman were covetous or no,
we may not say, but this we may, that he was every day geting a little, and at
length he raised his estate to a mountanous bulck: Thus might that man raise
his spiritual estate, whosoever he be, that endeavors to go on from strength
to strength, he may arive at perfection in Christ Jesus: It Is true, our lives
are short at the longest, and all arts and sciences, whether human or divine,
are long at the shortest, and extend themselves to infinite branches of
knowledge; and therefore but a short time we have to compass them in: Ah, but
may we not attain to more knowledge of God by industry than idleness, and do
more of the work of the Lord, by putting our hand to it than into our bosom, as
Prove. 19.24.
Solomon spoke: Besides if the Lord see we be industrious, may not he do by us,
as i King. ii. 28.
Solomon did by Ierob^am, prefer us, and that unto such a competency of
knowledge, as may serve both his and our turn? may be not bring us unto a
soul-saveing knowledge, in the redemption of Jesus Christ? and then we are well
enough. Oh therefore, as we grow in years, let us grow in grace, and as days
are added to our years, so let us add amendment to our days; and now since
this is our duty, they are much too blame, 2 Use.
who turn this grace of God into wantonness, and throw away those precious
hours, which the Lord affords them to be afeeding their faith with the
contemplation of his truth and promises: It Is both a wickedness and folly for
men to misspend their years, a wickedness to abuse the loving kindness and long
suffering of God, whereby he i Pet. 3.20
waits for the return of men into that fold, from whence at first they went
astray, and a folly to let go that, which lost is irrecoverable. But men
consider not this, but lull themselves asleep in carnal security, and dream
that their decay hastens not, because they see not their time a going, when in
the mean while they are swiming down the dead sea of eternal misery. Let me
advice you therefore (my dear Brethren) that if you be young, you slight not
the present tenders of grace, upon presumption of living longer. God may
require your souls this night for ought you know, and if you be old, think not
that you have your Supersedeas from the works of piety, and that you are
honorable enough because of your gray heads; no, think not that your being old
makes you a friend to the Dan. 7.9
Ancient of days, so much as your being good: It Is not years that beatifie a
man, but a man's goodness that beautifies his years; and this brings me to the
second observation.

2. Good men only makes their old age good.

We never read of any but good men that died in a good old age: We read of
three such, and they were all good, Abraham, Gideon, and David: Old age is good
in it self, not as it is a decay of nature, for so it is an effect and fruit of
sin, which is derived upon all men as they are the sons of Adam, to whom God
said, that in the day that he did eat of the forbidden fruit, he should surely
dye, Genesis 2.17. and so he did, as being subiectum corruptionis, subject to
corruption, or, as 22.2 dae. q. 164.
Aquinas, senescendo moriebatur, he died by growing old, which he did begin to
do the first day of his disobedience; and then began the very heavens to wax
old as does a garment; then began man, the master of the house (for whose use
both the heavens and the earth were built) and the house it self nutare in
ruinas, to incline to ruin; but old age is good, as being annorum
multiplicatio a further length of years; but this, though good in it self, is
not good to wicked men; it had been better for them if they had not been born,
as our Savior speaks, Matthew. 26.24. therefore much worse that they should live
so long, to multiply sin, to the great defaceing of the Image of God, greiving
his holy spirit, and wronging of their own souls, Ephe: 4: 30:
Soli ergo viro bono contingit senectus bona, as Philo, a good old age is only
proper to a good man; and to such it is good in a threefold respect.

1. As it is honorable, and of a reverend esteem among men, it is a goodly sight
to see a good old man, his age is a crown of glory, when it is found in the way
of righteousness, Pro. 16.31.

'Twas the chiefest luster of the honor which Job found in the time of his
prosperity, that to him the aged arose and stood up, Job 29.8 for them to stand
up to him, when men of the noblest quality will account it their duty to stand
up to them, this was honor indeed; as 'twas a laudable custom among the
Lacedaemonians to rise up in reverence to the aged; whence the Roman Orator
called their city Cic. de Sen.
honestissimum senectutis domicilium, the most comely seat for old age: old age
bears before it a certain authority; but what says the same Orator? non cani,
non rugae repent authoritatem erriperepossunt; sed honest acta superiore
aetas, not gray hairs, nor wrinkles do presently become aweful, but when they
are found in conjunction with virtue: And thus good old men meet with us, armed
with such through-experience of arts and sciences and exercitations of
goodness, as they cannot choose but strike us into a reverentiall fear of them:
and thus their old age is good, as being honorable.

2. As it is profitable: Length of years in a good man is not much unlike the
long Bagg of an old Usurer, out of which may be drawn a comfortable abundance;
length of years is an old man's treasure, out of which he can draw things both
new and old, as our Savior speaks of the Scribe instructed unto the kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 13.52.

Youth is like the spring, hopeful for fruits to come; middle age like the
autumn signifying their maturitie; and old age like winter, which argues they
are reaped and laid up, ad varios usus depromendos, to be forth coming upon all
occasions; a good old man has been so frequently exercising his faith and hope
upon the promises of God, as he can now rely upon them with a great deal of
comfort and complacency: a good old man has been so frequently clothing the
backs and feeding the bellies of the poor and fatherfess, as he has now gained
himself a throng of friends to make supplication for him, Luke 16.9.
and to help him in the day of his infirmities. Oh (my brethren) what a great
deal of difference there is between old wicked men, and old good men! They have
a long time been sowing the wind, and in their old age they reap the
whirlwind, as in Hosea 8.7. they sow vanity and reap vexation of spirit;
they have been spining of the Spiders web of many vain and trivial pleasures
and works of the flesh, with which, because they cannot Esa. 59.6.
cloth themselves, they lie the more naked and open to the fierceness of divine
wrath: but these, these have been so continually hastening through faith into
the great name of Jesus, as now they are Prove. 18. 10.
to wer'd in so great a strength, as that they are safe against all the
batteries of the powers of darkness; these have made so faithful and so
fruitful an improvement of their former days, that their old age is to them
as Mount Nebo to Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. from whence they can look into the holy Land,
and see the Lord ready to receive their souls, as soon as their bodies (which
are ripe for dissolution) drop to the earth; and thus the old age of good men
is good to them, as being profitable.

3. As being pleasurable and delightful; a man would think it strange at the
first sight, that that age (which has such a ponderous clog of sinful
infirmities, and wherein Solomon says, a man will say he has no pleasure in
it, Eccle. 12.1.) should taste any delight? It Is true I confess, wicked old
men, having spent their former days in the profanation of Gods blessed name, in
abusing his creatures to gluttony and drunkenness, and in sheding no other
tears for their sins, but those of the tanker, have at last nothing but
horrors of conscience, and preoccupations of Hell, being afraid they shall step
as soon in there, as into their graves, which they drawing near (by reason of
their age) are so much the more in trouble; but good old men have such joyous
reflections upon the long experience that they have had of the goodness of the
Lord in the land of the living, how the Lord has born them as an Eagle upon
the wings of his mighty power, and delivered them from many dangers (which
otherwise would have overwhelmed them) as they are in their old age comfortably
sustained with such apprehensions; think we that a Soldier (having been long
in the wars; and been led by the gracious hand of God through many difficulties
and hazzards of life) does not (upon thoughts of such deliverances) sit down in
his old age with comfort; certainly, if old covetous men can delight
themselves, in recounting their golden Elizabeth's and Iacobus's, which they
have in heaps before them, then how many thousand times more do the Saints of
God joy themselves in telling over their mercies, which they have frequently
been enriched withal? and no wonder therefore that the Psalmist in sense
hereof breaks forth so pathetically, in Psalm. 104.34. my meditation of him
shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord; Beside, Conscientia been acta
vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio jucundissima, as Cicere, the review
of a well spent life, and those many works of piety and charity, (whereby eyes
have been given to the blind, and feet to the lame, and the poor delivered that
cried, Job 29.12
and the fatherless, and him that had none to help) cannot choose but solace the
heart of an old man, and he being sensible of all those blessings (which he
has received from God) to have been evidences of his loving kindness in this
life, and but beginnings of more love in the life to come, cannot but possess
himself with such a joy in the Holy Ghost, as shall make his old age
pleasurable.

barba non facit Philosophum, that specious formalitie and appearance of years
is no infallible sign of goodness; a man with a beard and no wit, shows that
he has more hair than wit, and then he is the more contemptible for his but
seeming beauty: it is with years as it is with the outward things of the World,
they are good, non quod bonos faciunt, sed de quibus bona facimus. August. not
that they make any man good, but that good may be made of them; and thus ought
we to do; and if we grow not better by this gift of God, we shall grow worse,
more hardened in sin, more miserable, more abominable: Solomon in the 25. of
Ecclesiasticus reckons up three sorts of men which his soul did hate, a poor
man that is proud, a rich man that is a liar, and an old adulterer that
doateth; he might have added a forth worse then all, a poor old wicked man; if
a man be old and poor, he is like never to be rich, and no great matter; and if
he be old and wicked, he is like never to be good, but this is sad enough:
There may be (I confess) great possibility, but very small hopes with many.
It Is true, he that bore upon the cross all the crimson and bloody sins of the
unconverted part of the lives of the Saints, (wherein they drew iniquity with
cords of vanity and sin as it were with Cart-ropes) may bear the many sins in
the long life of an old man, and through the sent of those Sovereign waters,
which come from the Sanctuary of Christ's blood, the dry bones of their carrion
souls may live: But Oh! do not such men run a great hazard in the willingness
of God? to give them a portion in Jesus Christ after so many grievous repulses
of his spirit, who has said, I will not always strive with flesh, Genesis 6.3.

Have therefore (my Brethren) a care I say again, that you approve your selves
faithful as in the sight of God, in all your several places and stations,
that your latter days may be your best days, and when you come to dye you may
dye (if the good hand of providence shall lengthen out your lives so long) in a
good old age; especially too considering, that when you dye you must give up
that same depositum (which the Lord has put into your hand to use for his
glory) even your immortal souls, and this all men must do whether good or bad;
but with this difference, some do it actively, others passively; these do it as
being made to do it, but the Saints of God sweetly resign up their souls, as
here faithful Abraham; and this brings me to the second general observable in
the words.

Secondly something at his death; he gave up the Ghost.

He did freely expire, his soul was not taken from him as the rich fools in
the Gospel, Luke 12. to whom God said, thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: Indeed, the death of all flesh in the old world as Genesis 7.21.
and the death of Ishmael, Verse 17. of this Chapter, is expressed by the same
word; all gave up the Ghost, yet, because all give not up the Ghost in the same
manner, we may therefore interpret the word (seeing it will clearly admit of
such an interpretation) to such a sense, as may befit the quality of such a
person, and say, that Abraham gave up the Ghost by the way of freedom and
willingness, and so from hence observe, that good men when they dye they dye
willingly; Observe.
and this interpretation we may justify upon a fourfold account.

1. Good men freely resign their souls, inregard of that gracious temper and
frame of their spirits, whereby they do cheerfully submit to all the
determinations of God, and dispensations of his providence. God does whatsoever
he pleases both in heaven and earth; and whatsoever pleases him, pleases them:
I remember once what a good man said, that he could have what weather pleased
him, either wet or dry; whilst I was museing at the presumption of his words,
he told me, he meant, that certainly we should have what weather pleased God;
and what pleased God, pleased him; and so it is the best way to yield to the
government of Divine will, which is the creatures chiefest rule, according to
Voluntas Divina summa regula. Dav. against Hoard
Aquinas: It Is B. Davenants Opinion (and it savors of grace) that as it is a
certain appointment of God for all men once to dye, as Heb. 9.27. so if any man
were as sure to dye eternally, or could see his name blotted out of the book of
life, 'twould be an act of an irrational and irregular wit to be discontented;
for it is the perfection of the creature, to lie patiently under the infinite
absolute soveraigntie of God; but all men are not of such a temper; it is some
men's work to call his glorious attributes of wisdom and mercy and justice into
question, and they are always charging him foolishly; Chap. 51.20.
if God lay any cross upon them, they are like wild bulls in a net (as the
Prophet Esaias found some) furious, and full of wrath against God; so that as all
sicknesses and diseases, and other previous dispositious to death, so especialy
death it self they undergo with a great deal of discontent against God; but the
Saints of God and all the true sons of Abraham, do captivate all their
fleshly reasonings in the unsearchable wisdom of the most high, and undergo all
events (not with a Stoicall apathy, in regard of an inevitable fate in them)
but with a passion of love in the heart to God, whose blessed hand (they know)
deals out nothing to them unadvisedly or without mercy, nay even when he comes
unto them with his black rod of death: And therefore hereupon they have that
Lesson always ready, to say with the Prophet David in 2 Samuel 15.26. behold
here we are, let him do unto us what seems him good.

Secondly; They give up their souls freely, in regard of that rest which they
shall assuredly find from all their labors, as Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the
dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the spirit, that they
may rest from their labors: the wafaring man having numbered many wearisome
steps in the heat of the day, comes with haste in his mind in expectation of a
quiet repose at night; so the Saints of God (being scorched with the heat of
adversities) desire to hasten into the shadow of death, as Job speaks Chapter
7.2. and upon this same account Job himself wished for the grave; for there the
wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary be at rest, there the
prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the oppressor, Chapter
3.17.18.



Simeon) Now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for our eyes have seen
thy salvation; yet, always with a holy subjection to the blessed will of God;
for we may not be our own carvers in any thing, neither may we wish for death
but conditionally, and with respect to the Lords good pleasure; and thus we may
both wish and long for a repose in the grave: 'twas the earnest prayer of the
holy Prophet, that God would grant him space to recover his strength in, before
he went away from hence, and should be no more, Psalms 39.13. and when he had
recoverd that strength of divine grace, which fortified his soul against all
the dark and uncomfortable suggestions of Satan, and had been refreshed with
the clearer irradiations of Gods countenance, then, even then did he wish (with
a holy resignation of his will to Gods) that he had wings like a dove, that he
might flee away from hence and be at rest, Psalm. 55.6. his soul then was in a
condition apt enough, to have taken her fligh to heaven, and would fain have
been delivered from the burden of the flesh; David was too sensible of the
vanity and vexation of all things here below, to desire any long stay; our
souls (whilst they are in the flesh) are in a condition not unlike to the dove
(before she had set footing in the arc) never at rest, for whilst we are in
the flesh we are under a body of sin, and how wretched we are then, hear how
the Apostle sighs it forth; Oh wretched man that I am; who shall deliver me
from this body of death! Romans 7.24.

Whilst we are in the flesh, we are under the miserable fruits of sin, even
those numerous outward troubles and inward tears which keep our poor souls in
bondage, Heb. 2.15. but he that is dead is free from sin, which is the Saints
greatest freedom, free from the motions, infections, seductions of sin, and all
those scourging scorpions of miseries which issue forth of the womb of sin, as
so much is intimated by the term which St. Mark gave the diseases which our
Savior cured; in Mark 3.10. (...), as many as had scourges.

And now because of this freedom which the Saints know they shall then find by
giving up their souls, they do give them up therefore willingly and freely; but
thus the wicked do not, because they leap but out of the frying pan into the
fire, as we say; they go from some glimps of comfort, or rather but shadows of
joy, to an utter darkness of misery: they go from the Jayle to the Dungeon,
from a better to a worse prison, and they having a Heb. 10.
fearful expectation of this fiery wrath and indignation from God, are very
loath to die, and therefore never die but a violent death, even when they die
quietest upon their beds.

Thirdly, all the true sons of Abraham resign their souls freely, in regard of
that faithful account, that they know they can make (before the tribunal of
the heavenly Judge) of all things done in the flesh.

Romans 3.20. there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: Oh then, what shall
become of us, who stand guilty before the Lord, of infinite swarms of unclean
thoughts vain and idle words; wicked and rebellious actions, such as has often
greived the good spirit of grace, and re-crucified the Lord of life, and put
him to an open shame! Oh (blessed God) can we for shame lift up our face to
God? It Is true; Vae laudabili hominum vitae, si remota misericordia discutias
eam, says St. Aug. to become an earnest advocate with God, we had been undone
for ever; but having such a powerful God-man to stand our friend and plead our
cause, we may Job 22.26
lift up our face, we may be as bold as a Lion; for through faith in his name
our sins (which are as crimson) are made as white as wool, Esa. 1.18. God (who
spun out the curious web of man's salvation, out of the tender bowels of his
compassion) clears us from all sin for Christ's sake, and through him, we are
presented faultless before the presence of divine glory; so that though at the
last day all our sins shall be examined and laid before us, and we shall see
them again, and know how often we have by them pierced the precious sides of
Christ; yet we shall see them (as once the Isrealites did their Egyptian
pursuers, after their entry into the red sea, Exo. 14.13.30.) all slain with
the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 5.9.



Gilead, I mean in the blood of Christ, and if application be made thereof,
'twill most certainly cure all the most grievous wounds of the soul; for God so
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever beleiveth
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. so that it is
faith (it seems) that gives a saving interest in Christ Jesus, it is faith
whereby (...), God (who is good to all) becomes the Saints own and proper good,
as God promised to be to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. And now this faith (which is the
life of the new creature) must be (as the spirits in the head and heart) able
to actuate the whole man unto royal and peculiar servics; and then, when a man
(of such a faith) shall walk in Christ, according as he has received him,
Colos. 2.6. shall be sorrowful for his sins (when ever he does sin) not only
as cursed things, deserving the wrath of God, but as unclean things against the
spirit of holiness, and shall also after such tripings mind his peace in the
way of Gods law, and walk more worthy of God; then I say such a man shall be
able to make a good account to God, and appear with joy before the judgment
seat of Christ; for thus he may plead.

Oblessed Jesus, I know if thou be strict to mark what by me has been done
amiss, there is matter enough to condemn me to utter darkness, for my very
righteousness is as filthy rags; I acknowledge thine infinite free grace, to
bring me into thy knowledge, and to make me to walk with some observation of
thy law; but yet I beseech thee look not upon what I have done; for no clean
thing can come out of an unclean; rather pardon me, that I have entertained thy
holy spirit in so foul a room as my heart, and look upon me as thou have
satisfied thy Fathers justice for all my sins, and have abundantly merited for
me a seat with thy self in heavenly places. And thus the Saints of God may
plead before the Judge of the quick and the dead, and they being comfortably
persuaded and assured of this by the glorious obsignation of the spirit of
adoption, they are ready (with the holy Prophet David in Psalm. 42.2.) to say,
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God? And hereunto when they dye, they give up their souls with
cheerfulness; and thus have I done with the third reason, why all the true
sonns of Abraham do as Abrabam did, who gave up the Ghost freely; I come to the
Fourth.

Fourthly because they know they shall not only be delivered out of the Prison
of a corrupt body, but into the glorious liberty of heaven; they are assured
that when they come to give up their souls, they shall not only be able to look
their Judge in the face with a fair account of what they have done in the
flesh; but shall be made to sit with him together in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2.6.

When a poor prisoner (having sat a long while in darkness, and in the shadow
of death, being Psalms 107.10.
bound in affliction and iron) shall be made to understand that his pardon is
sued out; and not only so, but that he is made worthy to sit upon the Bench
with the Judge; Oh how joyful does he come forth of prison! And thus do the
sons of Abraham; they know (when they dye) their souls shall lodge in the
downie bosom of Abraham, as heaven is expressed to be, Luk 16.23.

When children in their parents absence, and at distance from their own dear
home, are evilly entreated at the cruel and merciless hands of strangers, how
do they double their haste in their retreat homeward, in expectation of ease
and quiet in their tender Parents bosom, where they hear nothing but comfort,
and remember nothing less then former miseries! even so do the Saints of God,
they know that whilst they are at home in the flesh they are absent from the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. and (in that interim) do sit in Captivity, as sometimes the
Israelites by the waters of Babylon, Psalm. 137.1. and are scornfully made to
sing the song of the Lord in a strange land, Verse 4. but when they come to dye,
they know they shall be gathered to the glorious society of Angels and holy
spirits in heaven, where they shall sing uninterrupted Haleluiahs to God and
the Lamb for ever; and this brings me to the Third and last general observable
in the words.

Thirdly something after Abraham's death; He was gahered to his people.

St. Augustine understands by people the blessed quire of Angels, Quaest. 226.
in Genesis
who together with the Saints make up one body, reconciled by the blood of
Christ, Col. 1.20. others understand by the phrase, the state of the dead, as
being aequivalent to sleeping with his fathers, being buried in the dust, where
all they were; and this opinion is not much amiss; yet if we would more gently
draw milk from the breasts of the Scripture, we may understand by the words, the
state of Abraham's soul after death; for it is not said, his body was gathered to
his people, but he was, bearing denomination from the better part, He, that is,
according to his soul, he was gathered to such spirits of just men as were gone
before him to heaven; from whence we may observe that

The souls of men dye not, Obs.
but after dissolution go to their several proper places.

There are certain proper receptacles for the souls of men after death; the
souls of good men go to their people in heaven; the souls of wicked men go to
their like accursed crew in hell; the souls of good men go to the glorious
Palace of the Son of righteousness, as was Christ's prayer to his father, John
17.24. but the souls of wicked men go into everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; and heaven is proper for those, and hell for these, as
Judas is said to have fallen from his Apostleship Act. 1.25
(...), to go to his proper place, so that the case is very plain, that the
souls of men dye not with their bodies; and so much is demonstrable, not only
by that marvelous light which shines from the Sun of righteousness in the
meridian of the Scriptures, but by that light in the Lamp of the soul, which
remains unextinguished by the fall of Adam; take notice of (in the first place)
the 12. of Ecel. 7. then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the
spirit shall return to God who gave it; note also the 12. of St. Mark, 26.
where our Savior told the Sadduces, (who denied the resurrection) that God was
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who certainly were alive as to their
souls, because our Savior told them that God was the God of the living, and
not of the dead, Verse 27. Note also, 2 Cor. 12.2. where we read that St. Paul
was caught up to the third heaven, but whether in the body or out of the body,
he could not tell: It seems St. Paul thought his soul might have a being either
in or out of the body; note yet a clearer place than all, in 2. Cor. 5.8. where
we find that the Apostle desired to be absent from the body, that he might be
present with the Lord. And now if there be any so far drowned in their natural
corruption as to deny the scriptures, then let them hear those of their own
Tribe averring this truth.

Pythagoras thought, when the soul had left one body, it did presently inform
another, and so ad infinitum; most of the Poets believed an Elysian Field where
the souls of good men had a pleasurable repast after death, and in Lact. ^
Cicero affirmed, castos animos and puros, levi quodam and facili lapsu ad
Deos, id est ad naturam sui similem pervolare, that chaste and pure souls did
make their flight to the Gods, of whose Divine nature they did participate; and
thus the very heathen thought; nay, the immortality of the souls of men is so
clear a truth, that the very Devil himself cannot deny it, as appears by one
of his Prophetesses Sibylla Erythraea. in Lactare.


(...)
(...)
(...)
They which fear the true God, inherit everlasting life, and eternally inhabit
the most and fruitful garden of Paradise.

And now (my brethren) since this is a truth so manifest, out of the blessed
word of God, and by confession of all sides, it may be matter of First comfort
to some. Secondly reprehension to others. Thirdly instruction to all.


First, this may be comfort, First to such, whose dearest friends and relations
are dead in the Lord, as this our friend doubtless is; such as they, are not
amissi, only praemissi, not lost or utterly perished, but sent before us
thither, whether (the Lord grant) we may follow; for they have exchanged a
Hadadrimmon or valley of tears, for a glorious seat of pleasures at the right
hand of God for evermore; Psalm. 16. they have only left of serving the Lord at
a distance, and are gone to wait on him at his own court.

Secondly, comfort to such who for conscience sake are under the hands of
implacable persecutors, who can but kill the Mat. 10.28.
body, and are not able to kill the soul and if their bodies only suffer which
suffer for an advantage, they may be killed; but not hurt, as a Philosopher
once said of a Tyrant, occidere potest, laedere vero non, Seneca
he may kill me, but he cannot hurt me. Julian that bloody Apostate in
slaughtering the Christians, pretended, that if they looked upon their
condition as so good after death, he did them no wrong to send them the sooner
away; and truly, no more hedid not; for he did but send them away from such
incarnate Devils as he was, unto a glorious company in heaven; they were but
ground with the teeth of such furious beasts, the better to make bread for
Angels, as saint Jgnatius.

Thirdly, comfort to such who with the holy Prophet in Psalm. 31.10. have spent
their life with grief, and their years with sighing for their sins, and who
have walked soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, and have
been painful and faithful laborers in the Lords Vineyard, having born the
heat of many laborious days in the service of God; let them know, that (when
they dye) their hope is not at an end; for if it should be, the most precious
Saints of God, of all men would be the most miserable, 1. Cor. 15. No
certainly, they have not their pains only for their labor (as we use to say)
but if they sow in tears, they shall reap in joy; if they go forth weeping and
bear in their hearts the precious seed of Gods holy word, they shall doubtless
return with rejoyceing, they shall return with the sheaves of their souls so
laden with much grain of grace, as shall render them only fit to be laid up in
the Barn of heaven, and there they shall be and possess themselves for ever
with the joy of their Master Math. 25.21.

Secondly this may be matter of reprehension to others, and to those,

First, who are Atheists in Judgment, and Epicures in practice, who say in
their hearts, (like fools) there is no God, and live as if there were neither
heaven nor hell; there are some who think if they be but half good in this
life, they shall be made up perfect in purgatory; there are others who care not
to be good at all, presuming that as they live like beasts, so they shall
totally perish like beasts, and t^lium stultorum plena sunt omnia, all places
now a days are full of such fools; and some having wickedly armed their
fancies with a few ends of Poetry, and a little of the out side of Philosophy,
go go too and fro like the Devil himself, seeking whom they may devour into
such blind and pernicious persuasions; but if such men would but look into the
Parable of the rich man and Lazarus, they might soon spy out the immortality
of the soul, nay, if such men would but con over their own Bible (for so I call
their books of Poetry) a little more ingenuously, they would find that Noctes
atque dies patet atri janua Ditis, when ever such as they are dye, the Devil is
ready to receive their souls.

This may be matter of reprehension to all earthly muck-wormes, who by
endeavoring with such an overanxious care to feather their own nests,
acknowledge nothing more than that felicity confines it self within the limits
of this transitory world; otherwise why should old men oftentimes (who have one
foot already in the grave) lay out the choice of their thoughts and affections
that way; it is indeed a wonder, and that to the more ingenuous sort of heathen,
as Tully. Potest enim quicquam esse absurdius, Desenct.
quam quo mi^us vitae restat, eo plus viatici quaereres can there be any thing
more absurd than when a man has traveled out the journey of his life almost to
an end, that then he should lay in greatest provision for the way? certainly,
such men in all their gatherings remember not that their souls shall be
gathered unto another life after this, either unto a life in hell, or a life in
heaven, which life only deserves the name of life, for in that of hell the
soul is in perpetual dying: Oh therefore how does it concern men rather to lay
up in store such a foundation of faith, as that when they come (through death)
to let go their hold of this vain and empty world, they may lay hold on
eternal life, 1. Tim. 6.19. hence then, this may be in the next place matter
of instruction to all.

Thirdly, then since there is a certain day of death for all men, as well for
the friends of God as Abraham was, Esaias. 41.8. as for his greatest enemies;
since no man can redeem his life from the hand of the grave, and that after
this life is ended, another will certainly follow, and as we fall in death, so
we shall lie to all eternity; let us gird up the loins of our minds and fit
our selves for our Christian race, and in it be always looking at the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Author and finisher of our faith; lets have a care of making
all the Prove. 18 10.
haste we can, into the strong tower of his great name; lets be careful that we
desire him here as a Christ, for grace and Government in his service, that at
the great and terrible day of the Lord we may have him to be a Jesus, to
shelter us from the fire of Gods anger: It Is certain the Lord hatl. Act. 17, 31
appointed a day to judge the world in; and therefore lets remember that of St.
Cyprian, Qualem te invenit Deus cum de hoc mundo evocat, In Ser. de Mer.
talem pariter and Judicat, as death leaves thee, so judgment will find thee;
and if thou be an aged man and dyest in thy sins, what account will thou be
able to make to God for so many days misspent? what will thou think, when thou
shall peep out of thy grave and see all the world in a flame about thy ears?
Will not the noise of the last Trump strike thee into horror and amazement to
think, that then thou must be hailed before the Tribunal of Christ, to give an
account of that talent of thy soul, which he has put into thy hands, to use to
his glory, and shall have nothing to say why the terrible curse should not be
executed upon thee? Will thou not then rather wish, that (with Michaiah) thou
had always eaten the bread of affliction, or (with Esaias) had continually
gone barefoot, so that thereby thou had gotten interest in the Lord Jesus?
Then think upon these things in time, you (my dear brethren) that are young,
remember your Creator in the days of your youth; you that are old, despair
not; you are yet alive, and under the call of God to faith; and if you have but
faith as a grain of mustard seed, you may say to the mountains of your
manifold sins, be ye removed into the midst of the Sea, and they shall be
removed so far out of the sight of God, Micha 7.19. and this the Lord has
graciously promised in that immaculate Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of
the world, John 1.29. and therefore 'twill be but just for God to forgive such
sins, John 1.9. nay he does not only allure us to himself with the promise of
remission of sins, but of eternal life in the fruition of his face for ever.

Oh blessed God! Me thinks then, if there does remain such a blessed rest for
all the people of God, how should we strive to enter in, since, when the bodies
of Gods Saints shall drop to the earth, their souls shall be carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom, and be gathered to the innumerable company of
Angels, Heb. 12.22.23.
to the general assembly and Church of the first born, which are written in
heaven, to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect;
how should we endeavor to be one of that number? With what violence of
devotion should we press forward for the price of the high calling of God in
Jesus Christ? Phil. 3.14. Oh me thinks, what should hinder the manifestation of
our love to him, (in the oblation of all holy sacrifices to his name) whom
neither iniquity, transgression, nor sin, could constrain to despise the
workmanship of his hands, but, notwithstanding our enmity against him by
wicked works, he should prepare an habitation for us eternal in the heavens,
and not only so, but prepare for us a way thither, a new and living way which
he has consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say, the flesh of
Christ, in whom, whosoever (whether young or old) approaches unto the living
God. God will in no wise cast out: Heb. 10.21
Having therefore such an high priest over the house of God, let us draw near
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; let us hold fast
the profession of our faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised,
and let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works, not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but
exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching; the
day, what day? the day of Judegement, which particularly is after the
dissolution of soul and body, but generally is at the end of all the world;
which though both days are certain, yet because it is as uncertain when will be
the one or the other, it concerns us to make use of the present time, and
whilst it is called to day, be a working out our salvation with fear and
trembling, that when the Lord shall be pleased to demand our souls, we may
freely and with alacrity resign them up into his hands, as into the hands of a
most wise merciful creator and redeemer.

And now, what shall I say more as to the text, unless I should (...) show you
this diseased Gentleman's picture in the words? Abraham before he dyed, was 175.
years of Age, our friend was above 90. An age that did as kindly ripen him for
the Grave as that of Abraham's, in regard of which therefore that may be said of
him which was said of holy Job chap. 5, 26. That he came to the Grave as a
Shocke of Corn comes in his season. Abraham before he dyed was a good old
Man, his goodness stands upon record in these four particulars: First, In his
meek and peaceable disposition toward men, as appeared in that he would rather
remit of his right than stand to contend with his Cosen Lot, Genesis 13.9. And
this disposition was in our Friend, I know it in one particular my self:
Secondly, Abraham acknowledged that of whatsoever he possessed God was the
Lord, by paying into the hands of his Priest his tribute of Tithes, Genesis 14.20.
And this Reverence to God, the Lord had taught this Son of Abraham here
departed; He never would dare to rob God of what he claimed as peculiar to
himself, He always made a conscience of paying that to the Stewards of the
mysteries of God, which the Apostle calls (...) 1. Cor. 9.14. A reward for the
glad tidings of the Gospel, whether it were by Tithes or otherwise. Thirdly
Abraham, when he saw three men at his door in the heat of the day, most
freindly invited them in, and gave them entertainment, and this was the fruit
of his Hospitality, that he entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13.2. And this
disposition in our Father Abraham, was drawn to the life in this his Deceased
Son, and 'twas known to be in him, wheresoever he was known, and no question,
but by the entertaining the needy members of Christ (as frequently he did) he
entertained those three persons, (which some interpret Abraham did) Father Son
and holy Ghost. But then Fourthly, Abraham by the eye of Faith saw the day of
the Lord Jesus Christ at almost two thousand years distance, and so did this
his Son, in whose soul so firm and lively a Faith was wrought, in Christ's
blessed Incarnation, Crucifixion, Resurrection, Ascension, Session with, and
Intercession to the Father, that certainly as in the time of his life he thus
saw Christ in part, so now he sees him Face to Face. Now as it appears that
Abraham before he dyed was a Good old Man, so when he dyed he freely resigned
his Ghost to God, assuredly knowing that as God promised, so he would be as
good as his word to him in becoming his exceeding great reward; and thus did
this his Son, whose willingness to depart this sinful life and to be with God,
he delivered to me upon his Deathbed, in many comfortable expressions: And
thus when Abraham had given up the Ghost, he was gathered to his people, even
to the spirits of those just men, who dyed before him, as to his Soul; and to
his Wife in the Cave of Machpelah, as to his Body: and thus was his Son, we
trust; (as to his Soul) he is beholding the face of God and Christ, upon whose
redundant merits he devolved himself, and as to his body we see that he is
here brought to his wives (whom he buried here) and to his eldest Son and
Daughters, whose Souls together with his (we trust) are joined to the Quire of
Angels in the glorious and eternal kingdom of God, To which the Lord bring us
all through the blood of sprinkling, Amen.

Quid enim nisi vota supersunt?
FINIS.
Over-sights in the Printing.
PAge, 12. l. 3. and 5. for a friend r. a kin, for beatifie r. beautify, p.
13. l. 15. and 16. for erripere r. Arripere, for superiore superior, p. 15. l.
29. for actae r. actae, p. 20. l. 26. for tears r. fears, p 21. l. 26 and 27.
for man r. men, for enter r. enter, p. 23. l. 6. and 7. mind his peace, r. mend
his pace, p. 27. l. 2. for (...) read (...), p 28. l 20. for much grain of
Grace, r. such grain of, p. 32 l. 32. for (...) r. (...), diseased Gentleman
r. deceased.


