FIVE SEASONABLE Sermons. As they were preached before Eminent AUDITORIES, Upon
several ARGUMENTS.

BY PAUL KNELL Master in Arts, OF Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

Sometimes Chaplain to a Regiment of CURIASIERS in His late MAJESTY'S Army.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

TO THE SACRED MAJESTY, OF THE Most High and Mighty MONARCH, CHARLES the
Second, BY THE Especial Grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc,
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WEre not your Regal Clemency and Candor very eminent, the Tenuity of that
which here I offer to your Majesty, might indict me for familiarity. But as the
Israelites were not to appear before the Lord their God, so neither durst I
before my Lord the King, empty-handed. Silver and gold indeed I have none,
scarce so much as that which Solomon says, is like Apples of Gold in pictures
of silver; but such as I have, I most humbly offer to your Majesty, knowing,
that as Artaxerxes did not disdain two handfuls of ordinary water offered to
him by Synaetas; so your Royal hand will graciously accept one handful of
Sanctuary-water from him, who as in duty bound, has both actively and
passively approved himself a faithful Subject to the King, and a dutiful Son
of the Church of England, that has no better Present. One of these slender
Sermons has already been honored with your Royal ear at the Hague, they all
now humbly crave a glance from your gracious eye at White Hall.

The Inscription indeed and subscription of this Dedication are so vastly
distant, that some large Apology ought to intervene. But your Majesty's many
important affairs dispense with no further avocation. I humbly add therefore
only a short Halelujah and Hosanna, Blessing the Lord by whom Kings reign for
so signally visiting your sacred Majesty, and so seasonably redeeming your
distressed People; Beseeching also the same Lord of Lords to save and defend
your Royal Person, as with a shield, to make your Throne here as the days of
Heaven, and hereafter to translate You to an Heavenly Throne, which is the due
and daily sacrifice offered up with a true heart fervently by

Your Sacred Majesty's Most Humble AND Most Loyal SUBJECT PAUL KNELL.

THE CONVOY OF A Christian. A Sermon PREACHED Before His MAJESTY, KING CHARLES
the First OF Ever blessed Memory, at Matson near Gloucester, in time of the
Siege there on Tuesday, August 22. 1643.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

THE CONVOY OF A Christian.
ISAI. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.


QUem miserum video, hominem scio, Trouble is the very badge and cognizance of
humanity; we are born to it, holy Job says, as the sparks fly upward, to this
end were we born, and for this cause came we into the world. Or if this be not
Finis intentionis, yet it is Finis executionis, I am sure; if we came not
hither on purpose to be troubled, yet without great trouble we cannot get from
hence, from the Cradle to the Coffin, being like Ezekiel's roll, full of
Lamentation, and Mourning, and Woe. There are some indeed (I mean the
traitorous Reformers of our Age) that live wholly at ease in their usurped
possessions, they come in no misfortune like other folk, neither are they
plagued like other men. But these look like the Devils Darlings, or rather like
the worlds Bastards; though we may be men therefore without Trouble, yet
without it we cannot be loyal Subjects, we cannot be good Christians; in the
world ye shall have tribulation, were the words of our departing Savior to his
Church. But he told them just before, that in him they should have Peace, and
he tells them in effect the self same in our Text, That he will deliver them
in six troubles, yea, that in seven there shall no evil touch them, that in
Famine he will redeem them from death, and in War from the power of the sword;
let their troubles be external, corporal corrections; let their Troubles be
internal, spiritual desertions, yet their Jehovah, and their Joshua will
deliver them out of all, When thou, etc. In which words we may observe four
parts, The Passenger, the Passage, the Concomitant, and the Consequent. The
Passenger is the Church, Cum transieris, when thou passest. The Passage is
twofold, Per aquas, and per ignes, through waters, and through fire, When thou
passest through the waters, when thou walk through the fire. The Concomitant
or Convoy is Almighty God, Tibi adsum, I am, or will be with thee. The
Consequent is the Churches safety, Flamina non operient, flamma non incendet,
the rivers shall not overflow thee, the flame shall not kindle on thee. And of
these parts in order. I begin with the Passenger, which is the Church, cum
transieris, when thou passest.

Had we retained our first integrity, we might easily have stepped to heaven,
with as great facility, as from one room to another, from the Parlour of an
earthly, to the Presence Chamber of an heavenly Paradise. But sin has placed a
(...), a great gulf between us and heaven; we that were sometime; near, are now
afar off; whosoever will hereafter enter into Canaan, he must undergo a tedious
passage through the wilderness.

There are four Titles that pertain to the very best of Adam's sons, Advenae,
Inquilini, Hospites, Peregrini, we are Strangers, we are Sojourners, we are
Guests, we are Pilgrims. But of all four, the last, methinks, fitteth our
condition best: Peregrini, we are Pilgrims; Viatores, we are Travelers;
Transeuntes, we are Passengers; here we have no continuing City, but we seek
for one to come. Look upon the Patriarch Abraham, the great Grandfather of the
Church, and ye shall find him, like St. Paul, in journeying often, from Caldea
to Charran, from Charran to Canaan, where he sojourned; the Apostle tells us,
as in a strange Country, dwelling in Tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, he had
there none inheritance, (...), says St. Stephen, no not so much as to set his
foot on: to teach him, and us all, that we must not set up our staff here, Plus
ultra, we must go farther, we being but Pilgrims on the Earth. This we know
likewise to have been the condition of the Israelites, who wandered in the
Wilderness in a solitary way, and found no City to dwell in. Their own houses
were Tents, Gods house was but a Tabernacle, all portable, to be carried up and
down from one place to another; They had neither Tenement nor Temple, till they
were settled in the land of Canaan, nor have we any certain dwelling place, till
we come thither, where the Lamb is the Temple. For while we are at home in the
body, we are not properly at home, we are but in via, in the way that leads
us to it: we are born from above: and therefore there is our Native country;
all the while we are on earth, we are, as it were, going a pilgrimage to
heaven. And the application of this now may be twofold.

First, Seeing we are but Passengers here and Pilgrims, this may serve to set
spurs to us, and hasten us toward our Country. For no Passenger would
willingly tarry long upon the way, but makes all the haste he can to get him
home. So let us think it our greatest punishment (next to this rebellious
reformation) that we are constrained to dwell with Mesech, to have our
habitation among the Tents of Kedar, and therefore let us wish with holy David,
to have the wings of a Dove, that so we might fly home to Heaven, and be at
rest.

Secondly, Though here we are but Passengers, yet seeing heaven is our home,
this may comfort us amidst all our plunderings and persecutions; all our
necessities and distresses. For let a passenger meet with never so bad
entertainment by the way, yet he will not greatly murmr at it; I have better
at home, he will say, and it will not be long, I hope, e're I get thither. So,
as long, Brethren, as there are Quarters taken up for us in Heaven, if we have
any Christian Courage, let us not faint by the way, be our usage never so
course, be our passage never so perilous, which leads me from the first part
of the Text, the Passenger, the Church, to the second, which is her Passage,
and this I find to be twofold, per aquas, and per ignes, through waters, and
through fire, When thou passest through the waters, when thou walk through the
fire. Her first passage is per aquas, when thou passest through the waters.
Which waters have sundry acceptions in holy Scripture; the literal is first in
nature, and must be so in order. And Hugo Cardinalis will have an Alleotheta
here, one tense put for another, Transieris for Transibas, when thou passest,
or shall pass, instead of when thou passedst, or did pass, alluding to the
passage of Noah in the Deluge, or rather to that of Israel through the red sea.
But whether these or no be the meaning, these examples suit well with the Text;
and of the same nature we have some other in holy Writ, the example of Moses,
of Elijah and Elisha, of the Disciples, and of St. Paul; I shall anon touch
upon these in their proper place, I shall here only show you the several
acceptions of these Waters: The literal I have briefly pointed at already.

Secondly, By Waters we may understand the Enemies of the Church, so they are
expressed by holy David, Psalm 88.17. They came round about me daily like
water, and compassed me together on every side. And Psalm 144.7. He prays
after this manner, Send down thine hand from above, deliver me, and take me out
of the great Waters, from the hand of strange children. And Rev. 17.15. The
Angel expounding the vision of the great Whore, which sat upon many waters,
tells St. John in express words, The waters which thou saw, where the
Whore sits, they are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

Thirdly, by waters we may understand Heresies, and doctrines of Devils. So
Aretius, and others expound that, Rev. 12.15. Where we read, that the Serpent
cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her
to be carried away of the flood.

Fourthly, and lastly, by waters, we may understand the Abyss of desperation.
So we may construe that of the Psalmist, Psalm 69. The waters are come in even
unto my soul, verse 1. I am come into deep waters, ver. 2. Let not the
water-flood drown me, verse 16.

The Churches second passage is, per ignes, when thou walk through the fire:
which fire is first literally to be taken, and we have examples of some in
Scripture that found a safe passage through this fire, as Lot, and Isaac, and
the Israelites, and the three Children.

Secondly, by Fire, we are to understand persecution and affliction, according
to that of the Psalmist, Psalm 66. Thou laydst trouble upon our loins,
Ingressi sumus per ignem, we went through the fire. And St. Peter uses the same
Metaphor, Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you,
1 Pet. 4.12.

The result then of all is briefly this, That it is the portion of the Church
to pass through fire and water; it is her destiny to suffer persecution and
affliction.

Noah's Ark was a notable representation of the Church, that was tossed upon
the waves in the general inundation, so is this in the worlds troubled sea
which cannot rest. The Disciples Ship, in the Gospel, was another figure of the
Church, that was covered with waves, almost overwhelmed with a raging Tempest;
so this is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy, the deep waters of
the proud are ready to run even over her soul. The Church is a Ship, the world
is the Sea, a Sea of glass mingled with fire, Rev. 15.2. Of glass, there is the
brittle and inconstant condition of the world; mingled with fire, here are the
troubles of the Church, St. Peter's fiery Trial. Troubled alas! she is, and so
has ever been. Look upon Jacob, look upon Joseph, look upon David, look upon
the Son of David, the time would fail me to tell you of the Prophets and
Apostles, of the Martyrs, Confessors, and other holy men of God, how they
passed through the waters, how they walked through the fire, how they had Trial
of cruel Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover also of bonds and imprisonment,
how they were stoned, as Saint Stephen, how they were sawn asunder, as the
Prophet Isaiah, how they were slain with the sword, as the Apostle St. Paul,
how they were beneaded, as St. John Baptist, how they were hanged, as Tomkins
and Chaloner, Yeomans and Bourchier, how they wandered about in deserts, and
mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth, in sheepskins, and Goat Skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented. Thus we see that all which will be loyal
to God and the King, all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution. Till our Savior came into the ship, the Sea was calm and quiet;
but when he was once aboard, there straightway arose a mighty Tempest. So long
then as thou art without Christ, or without God in this world, the Devil will
make fair weather round about thee; but when once Christ Jesus is, as it were,
come aboard thy soul, then will Satan raise a storm to try if he can make
shipwreck of thy faith; when thou have listed thy self a soldier to fight
under thy Saviors and thy Sovereigns banner, then look for a whole shewer of
fiery arrows from the wicked one, for the Messenger of Satan to buffet thee,
with St. Paul, both by inward temptations, and outward tribulations, by private
suggestions, and public persecutions, the Devil will strive to split thee
against the rock of desperation. But take this for thy comfort, that although
thou art dangerously tossed, yet thou shall not be cast away, for even He that
upholdeth the Heavens is thine upholder. Which leads me from the second part
of the Text, the Churches Passage, through fire and water, to the third, which
is the Concomitant or Convoy, Almighty God, I am, or I will be with thee.

I that am the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, I that fill all places, and
am contained in none; I that am about thy path, and about thy bed, and spy out
all thy ways, I will be with thee.

But what need then is there of this promise? For we may say it without
Blasphemy, that God must still be with us, it being as impossible for him to
deny his Omnipresence, as to deny himself, he can sooner separate heat from
fire; he did that in Nebuchadnezzar's furnace he can sooner separate light from
the Sun: He did this at our Saviors expiration: The Creator can better do any
thing, than divorce or divide his presence from his Creatures, for herein not
only our well-being, but our very being does consist, should he substract his
presence from us, we must return into our first nothing. He is not far
therefore from every one of us, as St. Paul told the Athenians, nay, he is
nearer to us, than we are unto our selves, I will be with thee. But, ye know,
there is a twofold presence of Almighty God. First, His general presence, which
is his universal power and providence, whereby he governs and disposes all
things, both in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm 139. If I climb up into heaven, thou art there; if I go down to
hell, thou art there also: If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in
the uttermost parts of the sea, even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Secondly, There is Gods special presence, whereby he
is present with his Elect only; either to prevent their Troubles, or else to
comfort and support them. And chiefly is he with his servants in his Temple, at
his public Worship, which may easily be explained by an example. The King is,
or ought to be by his Power in all parts of his Dominion; yet he is said to be
there especially, where his Courtiers, where his Retinue is: In like manner the
King of Kings by his unbounded Power and Providence is at all times, in all
places, yet we may know him to be with us after an especial manner in the
Temple, from the Retinue of heavenly Courtiers that are there attending on him.
For it was not for Ornament only that the Walls of Solomon's Temple were carved
round about with Cherubims, but also to signify that the holy Angels are ever
about us at our public services. And if Angels be there, much more is the King
of Saints, Tibi adsum, I am, or I will be with thee.

There are three things especially that will continually be with us; The Air,
our Conscience, and Almighty God. We may as well be without our being, as
without our breath; take but away this from us, and take away us too. The Air
leaves us not till death: Our Conscience, this goes further with us, it
remains with us after death to all Eternity. Do not therefore the least sin,
though none be with thee but thine own conscience, for this will accompany thee
to thy deathbed; nay, this worm will live for ever. And thy conscience is not
more inseparable from thee then thy Creator; whisper never so softly he will
hear thee; hide thy self never so closely, he will see thee; run away never so
swiftly, he will still be at thine elbow, Tibi adsum, I am, or I will be with
thee.

But I should not speak so much of Gods general presence, his special presence
is that which I must here insist upon. That presence which he promised his
Patriarchs and Prophets, that presence which our Savior promised his Apostles,
Lo; I am with you always, even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. ult. Always,
there is no Intermission. To the end of the world, that is, world without end,
here is no Termination. We may have men for our companions that will forsake us
in distress; or if they stick to us all our life, they must leave us in our
death. But if God be our Companion, if God be present with us, it is not
distress, it is not death shall ever part us; nay, death shall unite us more
nearly than ever we were before; we shall always be with him, he will always be
with us, Tibi adsum, I am, or I will be with thee.

But if God be thus always present with his Church, we may then expostulate
here, as Gideon once did with the Angel, Judge. 6.13. Oh my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befallen us? Why is the blood of his dear
servants shed like water on every side? Why suffers he the Turk Turk and Pope
to drink themselves drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus? I answer, though seemingly God absent himself from his Church
for a season, yet never will he finally forsake her. Seemingly, I say, for
indeed he absenteth not himself at all, it is but in our apprehension that he
is ever from us; if we can but believe it, he is present with us always, Tibi
adsum, I am, or I will be with thee.

And the Application of this now may be twofold. First, Here is comfort for all
that mourn in Sion, and with good Hezekiah, turn their face to the Wall. Let
them be cast into prison as Joseph was; Let them be cast into a dungeon as
Jeremy was; let them be cast into a den, as Daniel was; let them be cast into
the water, as Moses was; let them be cast into the fire, as the three Children
were; let them go through fire and water, famine and sword, never so many
dangers, never so great disasters, yet so long as they have God with them, this
will sweeten all their pills, in the multitude of the sorrows, which they have
in their hearts; his comfortable presence will refresh their souls. Secondly;
Seeing God is still with us; this should teach us likewise to be still with
him, seeing he vouchsafes to keep company with us on earth, therefore our
conversation should be with him in Heaven. When we are lying down to sleep, to
him we should commit our spirits; when we wake up likewise, we should be
present with him. It was Jacob's vow, Genesis 28. That if God would be with him,
then the Lord should be his God. We need not speak so doubtfully, for God is
certainly with those that fear him, not only by his general, but also by his
special presence, to direct and protect them, to deliver and to defend them,
which leads me from the third part of the Text, the Concomitant, Almighty
God, to the fourth and last, which is the Consequent, the Churches safety,
Flumina non operient, flamma non incendet, the rivers shall not overflow thee,
the flame shall not kindle on the.

I propounded four acceptions of these Waters, ye shall see that the Church
passes safely through them all.

First, Through waters, taken in the literal sense, as we may see by sundry
examples. The first may be that of Noah.

Sin had once so soiled the earth, that God was fain to lay it a soak; it was
so foul, that nothing would cleanse it but a flood. There were Giants in sin,
as well as in Stature, the wickedness of man was great in the earth. And
Abyssus abyssum, this depth of sin called for as deep a deluge, the floodgates
therefore were plucked up, the windows from on high were opened. And what
distress of Nations was there then with perplexity, the sea and the waves
roaring, and men's hearts failing them for fear? Methinks I see how abruptly
their Marriage-feasts are dissolved, what haste they make out adoors, that they
may get up into trees; how some climb the tops of mountains, Tamen ultra
pergere tendunt. But the waters continually following them at heels, when all
hope that they should escape drowning was taken away; methinks, I hear them
curse the day that ever they were born, and wish, if it were possible, that
they might be metamorphosed into fishes. But Noah found grace in the eyes of
the Lord, when the flood was brought in upon the world of the ungodly. For
though it rained, as if heaven and earth would have come together, though the
waters were so grown, as to overtop the highest mountains, yet heavens great
Palinurus preserved Noah in this Ocean, Elumina non operient, the rivers shall
not overflow thee.

The Children of Israel may be a second example, whose preservation was indeed
far stranger than Noah's; for Noah had a ship, the Isrealites had none, which
made them think that there was no way in the world with them but drowning, Mars
in the rear, and Neptune facing of them; they thought that one of these must
needs devour Israel with open mouth. But He that brought light out of darkness,
brought safety out of their greatest danger: what they feared would be their
destruction, this God made their preservation, for rather than Israel should
miscarry, Jordan shall forget his fluid nature, the floods shall stand upright
as an heap, and the depths shall be congealed in the heart of the Sea. Gods
people need not fear the waters; the waters saw them, and were afraid, and
therefore ran away with might and main, to make way for them. The waters indeed
faced, as if they had known the Israelites from the Egyptians, drowning the
host of Pharaoh, but inmmuring the host of Israel, Flumina non operient, the
rivers shall not overflow thee.

Moses may be a third example to this purpose. There were never two crueller
Tyrants than Pharaoh and Herod, one drowned the male Children, the other cut
their throats. But as Christ escaped from Herod, so from Pharaoh Moses, whose
Parents durst not long entertain him in their house, when he was but a quarter
old, they shipped him in an Ark of rushes. But how properly may that of the
Psalmist be applied to him. Psalm 27.10. When my father and my mother forsook
we, then the Lord takes me up. Or rather indeed the Lady did this, even
Thermutis, the King of Aegypt's daughter, Flumina non opertent, the rivers
shall not overflow thee.

And to these examples, I may add Elijah's and Elisha's passage over Jordan,
the Disciples with our Savior in the ship, and St. Paul's most dangerous
voyage toward Rome; all corroborating and confirming this Assertion in our
Text, Flumina non operient, the Rivers shall not overflow thee.

The Lord sits above the water-flood, Psalm. 29.9. I remember a story of one
that wondered why any man would go to sea, seeing so many die at sea, to whom
one replied, he might wonder as well, why any man will go to bed, seeing so
many di^ in their beds. Dii maris and terrae, may be put into Gods royal Title,
His way is in the sea, and his paths in the great waters; he that was able
without a ship to walk safely on the sea, must needs be able to save those that
go down to the sea in ships: while they are following their honest vocation,
they may be assured of his protection, he shall give his Angels charge over
them to keep them in all their ways, the Angel of the water mentioned, Rev.
16.5. This Angel shall be their Pilot, and conduct them to their wished haven.
Flumina non operient, the Rivers shall not overflow thee.

Secondly, By Waters we understand the Enemies of the Church; neither shall
these waters be able to overflow her. The seed of the Serpent will still be
warring with the woman's seed; the Dragon and his, against Michael and his
Angels. The Church of Christ will ever be maligned by the Synagogue of Satan;
but though these waters swell, yet they shall not prevail against her. David's
enemies were daily in hand to swallow him up; but these waters of the proud had
bounds, which they could never pass. Hezekiah was both Invaded and besieged by
the Assyrians; but how strangely was he preserved from him that had drunk
strange waters, and who with the sole of his feet had dried up all the rivers
of besieged places. I have not time to show you all the particular
preservations of Gods people, how he has saved them still from the reproof of
those that would have eaten them up.

And from this experience of Gods former, together with the promises of Gods
future favor, we may draw this application, we may here put on the resolution
of holy David, not to fear, though the earth be moved, and though the hills be
carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Let the Heathen
never so furiously rage together, and let the people imagine a vain thing; let
the Rulers stand up, and take Counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, and against his Church; Let Gebal, and Ammon, and Ameleck, the
Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire; let Gog and Magog, Antichrist and
Mahomet, the Pope and the Turk, nay, let all the devils in hell be confederate
against the Church, yet still she shall be safe, the son of wickedness shall
not hurt her, the gates of hell shall not prevail against her, Flumina non
operient, the rivers shall not overflow her.

Let me apply this more particularly to my Sovereign Lord the King. The floods
have risen, as David speaks, the floods lift up their voice, the floods lift
up their waves. But these floods of ungodly men I trust shall not overflow him,
though the waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly, yet the Lord (that is
one good turn) which dwells on high, is mightier, and he will send down from
the high to fetch him, he will take him out of many waters; he will make these
Traitors, according to our common phrase, as weak as water, as water spilt upon
the ground, which cannot be gathered up; he stills the raging of the sea, and
the noise of his waves, and the madness of the people; from the waters of
strife, he will bring the King to the still waters, he will deliver him from
the strivings of the people, and he will make him the head of the heathen, the
fierceness of these wicked men shall turn to his praise, and the fierceness of
them he will certainly refrain, Flumina non operient, the rivers shall not
overflow thee.

I have seen, said Solomon, and so have we, Servants upon horses, and Princes
walking as servants upon the earth; but I hope we shall not much longer see
this sight. Water is a good servant, but a bad Master; God therefore, I trust,
will shortly deliver us from the Tyranny of an arbitrary Anarchy, from the
Sovereignty of our fellow subjects, Flumina non operient, the rivers shall not
overflow us.

Thirdly, By Waters, we understood Heresies and doctrines of devils; neither
shall these waters overflow the Church. The Devil is ever changing Gods Truth
into a lie; if God have said, ye shall, Satan will say, ye shall not die. And
God sends some such strong delusions, that, as Eve did, they believe a lie;
the Dragons flood of errors quite drowneth them in perdition. But the Church
shall not miscarry for all this Dragon-water, the earth (as it is Rev. 12.)
shall swallow up the floods; The Earth, that is, the earthly minded, the
ungodly of the world, shall swallow up the flood, that is, shall approve of,
and entertain these wicked errors. Not a little of this water has been
emptied into the river Tyber, the Church of Rome has swallowed down a great
part of this Dragons flood. The residue has been swallowed by Pelagians and
Antinomians, Donatists and Novatians; Marcionites and Manichees, Socinians and
Arminians, Presbyterians and Independents, Brownists and Burtonists,
Scismaticks and Separatists, Familists and Anabaptists, while we that are right
Protestants take in none but living water, drawing the water of Truth out of
the well of salvation; the flood of error shall never surround or overwhelm
us, Flumina non operient, the rivers shall not overflow us.

Fourthly, and lastly, by Waters we understand the Abyss of desperation,
neither shall these waters overflow the Church. One while the devil tells men
that God is made up of all mercy; another while, that his Mercy is not so great
as their sins; first, he would flatter them into Presumption, then he would
fright them into desperation. And when he has brought them to this latter
state, then they are apt to drown themselves, like that Lunatic, which
oft-times fell into the water, Mat. 17.15. But the Lord, says St. Peter,
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. He will not suffer them to
be tempred above that they are able, says St. Paul, but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it.

Art thou come therefore into deep waters, so that the floods are running over
thee? Has Satan brought thee to the very brink of desperation? why, yet he
shall never be able to bring thee any further, if thou belong to Christ; he
could not drown the silly swine without Christ's leave; (and thy Savior will
never license him to do thee such a mischief) he is but like a dog in a string,
like a Dragon in a chain, so that thou may assure thy self, he can do thee no
hurt without Gods special warrant and commission. Though thou walk therefore
through the valley of despair, yet fear no evil, for there is a way to heaven
just by the gates of Hell. It is the nature of clay to dam up the eyes, yet our
Savior put clay upon the blind to make him see. It is the nature of water to
put out fire; yet Elijah poured water upon his sacrifice to make it burn. God
many times brings about his ends by means, which to our thinking, are quite
contrary. As he lets some therefore soar with Icarus upon the wings of
presumption (I mean the Rebels of our age) ut lapsu graviore ruant, that their
downfall may be the greater, the heat of Gods wrath melting them, as wax
melts at the fire, and they precipitating headlong into the sea of
desperation: So God suffers others sometimes to fall into despair, that the
depth of misery may invoke the depth of mercy, he throws them as it were
balls against the ground, to make them bound the higher. When thou think
therefore he has quite left thee, then he is nearest to thee; when thou
walk through the brook of despair, then he will lift up thy head, his rod and
his staff shall conduct thee through these Stigian waters, Flumina non
operient, the rivers shall not overflow thee.

1. And so ye have the safety of the Church in her first passage, which was,
per aquas, through the waters. Ye shall see her safety likewise in her second
passage, which is, per ignes, through the fire, when thou walk through the
fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

Non combureris, thou shall not be burnt, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God. It has therefore been the practice of persecutors in all
ages to burn up all the Bibles that they could lay hands on, knowing this to be
the ready way for them to destroy the faith of Christ. But how strangely has
the Bible escaped even in the most fiery persecutions! though some part of it
may be lost, as the prophecy of Enoch and the book of Jasher, yet there is so
much left still, as contains in it all things necessary to salvation, God
would never suffer all of it to be made fuel for the fire, Non combureris,
thou shall not be burnt. Neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. The damned
in hell are ever burning, never burnt, but who can dwell with those everlasting
burnings? They could with a good will put up that petition, Hic ure, hic seca,
that God would cut them all in pieces, and then burn them up to very nothing.
But should they make many such prayers, there would none of them be heard, they
shall not be burnt, The flame shall not kindle on them.

But to come nearer to the Text we propouded some examples out of the
Scripture, of men that passed safly through fire literally taken the First may
be Lot.

2. God usually proportioneth the punishment to the sin.

Sodom burned in lust, and was therefore burnt with Fire, but though brimstome
and fire were rained upon the Sodomites, yet God delivered Lot out of the midst
of the overthrow, Non combureris, thou shall be burnt.

The second example may be Isaac, who came very near the fire, behold the fire
and wood, nay, behold he is laid on the Altar upon the wood. Yet for all this,
God suffered not Abraham to do him any hurt, he made an offer to offer up
Isaac, and the will went for the deed, Non combureris, thou shall not be burnt.

The third example may be the Israelites in whose company the fire was kindled,
there went out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fifty men
that offered incense, Number. 16.35. But though the flame burnt up the ungodly
mutiniers, yet every obedient Israelite escaped, Non combureris, thou shall not
be burnt.

The fourth example may be the three Salamanders, in the furnace Dan 3. who
though they walked through the fire, yet their coats were not changed, nor so
much as the smell of fire had passed on them. And this last example is without
example; I never heard of any fire-proof before, for Fire is of a most
devouring and consuming nature, turning all combustible things into ashes that
come near it, yet the children of the fire, the sparks hurt not these three
children, with the shields of their faith they quenched the violence of fire,
when they walked through the fire, they were not burnt, neither did the flame
kindle upon them.

And to these I might add, though somewhat out of order, the example of
Abraham, whom God brought out of Ur of the Caldees, Genesis 15.7. Now Ur, as Huge
observes, signifies fire, the Greek word, from which our English word seems
to come, has but one Letter more; and therefore the Hebrews had a tradition,
that because Abraham would not worship the Fire, as the Caldeans did, he should
have been cast into the fire, had not God given him notice of it, and so
preserved him.

But though Vr signify fire, yet the ordinary Gloss takes it not for a
common, but a proper Name, for the Name of the town or village where Abraham
dwelt. This example therefore cannot claim kindred of the Text: I might more
properly bring in our preservation from the Powder Treason, but I will rather
answer a question that may rise from our Text: for is this promise always
performed? Thou shall not be burnt, the flame shall not kindle on thee. What
shall we say then to that fiery persecution in Queen Mary's days, when there
were so many Bethels in this Kingdom, so many Cities wherein men's bones were
burnt?

I Answer, it is true that the Church of Christ, this Church in particular has
endured the fiery trial. But as Rex non moritur, so Ecclesia non comburitur,
as the King is never buried, so the Church is never burnt, James may die, and
so may Charles, (yet God maintain his life) but the King (let rebels do what
they can) never dies: So Latimer may be burnt, and Cranmer may be burnt, but
the Church is never burnt. If Pagans should prevail so far (which God forbid)
as to burn up all the Christians; or if Puritans should prevail so far (which
God forbid too) as to burn up all the Protestants, yet I verily believe that
out of their very ashes, God would raise up a new Phoenix, Cinis Mariyrum
should be Semen Ecclesiae, the ashes of an old should be the seed of a new
Church, she shall not be so burnt, as to be quite extinct, neither shall the
flame so kindle upon her.

And the Application hereof now may be briefly thus. Seeing God will not suffer
his Church to be finally burnt up by others, this may teach us (as it were) to
set on fire our selves, not with the fire of lust, it is better to marry than
so to burn; nor with the fire of wrath, rather heap coals of fire upon the head
of the enemies; but let it be with the vestal fire of devotion and affection,
let our hearts burn within us with love to God and men. So shall neither the
sun burn us by day, nor the moon by night, the Lord shall preserve us form all
evil, it is even he that will keep both our bodies and our souls, when the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat, when the earth, and the Works therein
shall be burnt up, he will preserve and keep us from everlasting fire, and
exalt us to his Coelum empyreum, his fiery heaven, there for ever to behold
him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as
if they burned in a furnace: And so ye have the safety of the Church in her
passage through fire literally taken. Ye shall see her safety likewise as she
passes through the fire of affliction and persecution; When thou walk through
this fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee.

It is the nature of fire Congregare homogenea, and Segregare heterogenea, to
bring together things of the same kind, and to separate things of diverse kinds;
A Refiner therefore is wont to bring his Mine to the fire, and by this means he
severeth the silver from the dross, which is likewise wise the very practice of
Almighty God, it is the Prophet Malachie's similitude word for word, Mal. 3.3.
He shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver, and he shall purify the sons
of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver. And the sweet Singer of Israel
harpeth upon the same string, Psa. 66.9. Thou, O God, have proved us, thou also
have tried us, like as silver is tried. Non sicut foenum, sed sicut argentum,
non in cineres convertisti, sed sordes abluisti, says St. Austin, God tries
us not with a consuming, but with a cleansing fire, turns us not into ashes,
only takes away our sullage and our ashes from us, purely purges away our
dross, and takes away all our tin. God purges men by affliction, as the
Israelites were to purge the spoil of the Midianites. Numb. 31.23. Every thing
that may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be
clean. God tries men by affliction what metal they are made of, they that
endure this fiery trial, they are good gold, they are Gods Children; they that
endure it not, they are but dross, they are but Cast-awayes. Good men are like
Shadrach, Meshack and Abednego, though they walk through the fiery furnace of
Affliction, yet they are not burnt up, no not so much as singed; but wicked men
are like the soldiers that bound and cast them in, when they are yet but at
the mouth of the fiery furnace, when the fire of Affliction but begins to
seize upon them, it prevails against them, and consumes them in a moment.

Good men are, in this, like clay, the fire of Affliction strengthens and
confirms them; but wicked men are like wax, as wax melts at the fire, so do
the ungodly perish in the fiery trial; Affliction to them is like the fire that
burns up the wood, and like the flame that consumes the mountains; God
makes them like a fiery oven in time of his wrath, the Lord destroys them in
his displeasure, and the fire consumes them. Affliction makes wicked men a
great deal worse, as water becomes much colder after heating, than ever it
would have been, if it had never been heated. As for the Righteous; it is not
so with them. God burns them indeed thoroughly, as the bricks of Babel were,
but this is only as a Potter frames his vessels in the fire, that so they may
be vessels unto honor, and for the Masters use, though they walk through the
fire, yet they are not burnt, neither does the flame kindle upon them. When
Job's wife heard of all the evil that God had brought upon her husband, she
grew so mad, so out-ragious and impatient, that she would fain have persuaded
him to make away with himself, what, says she, all that ever thou had taken
away from thee? Is this the reward thou have for thine integrity? Well, serve
God, who will, I would serve him no longer, make good the devils words, if thou will be ruled by me, do, as he said thou would in such a case, even curse
God and die, Job 2.9. But ye have heard of the patience of Job, says St.
James, let his wife therefore say what she will, he will have none of her
counsel, thou talkest like an Ass, says he, thou speak like one of the
foolish women. And indeed (as he goes on) shall we receive good at the hand of
God, and not receive evil also? Shall we receive health and not sickness,
wealth and not poverty, peace and not War, honor and not dishonor, liberty
and not restraint? yea, my brethren, if we be Christians, we must resolve to
endure all. And if we do this, then we may assure our selves, that although we
sow in tears, yet we shall reap in joy, though God have long suffered wicked
men to ride over our heads, though we have gone through fire and water, yet God
in his good time will bring us and our Sovereign out into a wealthy place, he
will cast these rods of his anger into the fire, and then mercy shall embrace
us on every side, our light affliction, which is but for a moment, shall work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; which God of his
infinite mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.
THE ASSUMPTION OF THE Messiah.

A Sermon PREACHED Before His MAJESTY, KING CHARLES the IId. AT THE HAGUE in
HOLLAND, on Sunday May 29. old style 1649.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

THE ASSUMPTION OF THE Messiah.
ACTS 1.9. And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken
up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.


THat which is spoken of the Sun in the firmament, Psalm. 19.6. St. Austin upon
that place applies unto the Son of Righteousness, His going forth is from the
end of heaven, there, says he, is Christ's descension from the bosom of his
Father; and his circuit unto the ends of it, here, says he, is his ascension
to the place from whence he came. And our Savior himself has much such
another passage, John 16.28. Which place may not unfitly be compared unto a
Circle; I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world, there is the
semicircle: again, I leave the world, and go to the Father, here is the
complete Circle.

And by this we may see what agreement there is between the material Sun and
the Mystical. The Sun in the firmament is appointed to light the day: so as
long as I am in the world, says our Savior, I am the light of the world, John
9.5. The Sun, though in the firmament, stoopeth to lighten us below: So, though
our Saviors dwelling were in heaven, yet he humbles himself to behold us here
on earth. The Sun arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the place
where he arose, Ecles. 1.5. So the Sun of Righteousness came from one
hemisphere, from light inaccessible, from the place of blessed Saints and
Angels, that he might shine unto the other hemisphere, to us their forlorn
Antipodes, to us mortals that sat in darkness, and shadow of death.

But as the Sun makes have to the place where he arose, dwells not always
with us, but returns again according to his circuits. In like manner the Sun
of Righteousness having lightened his Apostles understanding by his Doctrine,
and having warmed and cheared their hearts by his promise of sending them the
Holy Ghost, having given them the word of resolution, of instruction, and of
benediction, he took his leave of the earth, and returned into heaven, And when
he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud
received him out of their sight.

This Text then is a description of our Savior's Ascension, wherein there are
six particulars to be considered, four plainly expressed, two necessarily
implied. The first is Quis, the Person that ascended, which was Christ, he that
descended was the same also that ascended, He was taken up. The second is
Quando, the Time of the ascension, which may be considered two ways, in
reference to his Resurrection, forty days after that, or in reference to his
last exercise, the resolving his Apostles doubts, the instructing, and the
blessing of them, immediately after this, (...), when he had spoken these
things. The third is Vnde, the Place from whence he ascended, which by
comparing Acts 1.12. with Luke 24.50. we shall find to be that part of mount
Olivet next to Bethany, he was taken up from thence. The fourth is Quo, the
Place whither he ascended, which was heaven, he was taken up thither. The fifth
is Quomodo, the manner of his ascension, set down here two ways, First
Positively, he was taken up. Secondly Expositively, a cloud received him out of
their sight. The sixth and last are Testes the Spectatours, or the witnesses of
his ascension, which were the Eleven Apostles, while they beheld he was taken
up, etc. And of these in order.

I begin with the first particular, Quis, the Person that ascended, Christ, He
was taken up.

He that was from the beginning, nay, he that is the beginning, Alpha, and
Omega, the beginning and the ending; He that is (...), Imamnuel, God with us,
he that is one in Trinity and Duality, he that made on Person of two Natures,
And which of these natures then was ascended? It was his Humane nature, as may
easily be gathered from those words of the Angels to the Apostles, Acts. 1.11.
The same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. Now we know that our Savior shall
come to judgment, as he is man, according to that of St. Paul, Acts. 71.31.
where he says that God has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. Our Savior
therefore ascended according to his humanity. The Royal Psalmist seems to say
indeed that his Divinity ascended, Ascendit Deus in Iubilo, Dominus in voce
tubae, God is gone up with a shout, and the Lord with the sound of the trumpet,
Psalm. 47.5. As for his Humamity, our Savior seems to say that this was in
heaven before, Ioh. 3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came
down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven. But to these and all
other such objections I answer with Theodoret, the Divine and Humane nature of
our Savior being Hypostatically united into one Person, (...), those things,
which are proper to either of his Natures, are attributed and communicated to
his whole Person, Thus St. Paul says, that God was manifested in the flesh,
and that God was received up into glory, 1 Timothy 3.16. Notwithstanding therefore
these objections, the Person that ascended was Christ Jesus according to his
Humanity, He was taken up.

He, it is not said She was taken up; The Papists have Ascension, or rather
Assumption-day for the blessed Virgin Mary, which they annually celebrate upon
the fifteenth of August, whereon they say, She was taken up corporally into
heaven. But this is as true as that the Disciples stole our Savior out of his
grave: I am very sure there is not the least mention of any such thing in
Scripture, and where the Holy Ghost has no tongue to speak, nor pen to write,
there must we have no ear to hear, nor any heart to believe. Not the Woman
therefore Christ's mother, but the man Christ Jesus himself He was taken up.

And so I pass from the first part of the Text, the Person ascending, which
was Christ, to the second part, Quando, the Time of his ascension, which we are
to consider first, in reference to his Resurrection, forty days after that,
then he was taken up. But here two questions may be moved, First, Why Christ
did ascend so soon? Secondly, seeing so soon, why no sooner?

The first question may be, why he ascended so soon after his resurrection, why
he deferred not his ascension till the last day, that we might have been taken
up together with him? To which I answer two ways. First, that Christ should
ascend so soon, was not convenient in respect of him. Secondly, That he should
ascend so soon, was not expedient in respect of us. First, That he should
ascend so soon, was not convenient in respect of himself. And that first in
respect of his glorified body. Heaven was the most convenient place for his
incorruptible and immortal body.

Earth is a very Golgotha, a region of corruption, a place of dead men's skuls.
Though Christ's body therefore could not have seen corruption, had it continued
still on earth, yet the fittest place for such a body were the incorruptible
heavens. Again, it was convenient that Christ should ascend so soon after his
resurrection, that he might manifest and declare the truth of his Divinity.
Earth is a region of death,

Quocunque aspicias nihil est nisi mortis imago, All that ever came hither,
have, or must die once; and I assure my self that Lazarus, and all the rest
that were raised, either by the Prophets, or by our Savior, or by his
Apostles, died twice; should Christ therefore after his resurrection have
continued here longer than he did, men would scarce have taken him to be God,
but have mistaken him for a mere Man; and they would have thought that Christ,
like Lazarus, had been to die the second time. Thus ye see, it was convenient
in respect of Christ, that he should ascend so soon after his resurrection as
he did. Ye shall now see, that this was expedient in respect of us. And the
expediency of it we have from Christ's own mouth. John 16.7. It is expedient
for you, says he, (and what he says to them, we may apply to us) that I go
away; and he gives his reason in the very next words, If I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I will send him unto you.
And John 7.39. we read, That the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified. Had there been no Holy Thursday, had not our
Savior ascended from his Apostles on the fortieth day, there had likewise been
no Whitsunday, the Holy Ghost had not descended upon the Apostles on the
fiftieth day.

Again, Had Christ remained still upon earth, he had not been so proper an
object of our faith, which is (...) The evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.
Thy Fides will not well stand with thy Vides; we do not properly walk by faith,
when we walk by sight, Apparentia non habent fidem, sed agnitionem, says St.
Gregory, fruition puts a period unto faith, and therefore Credimus ut
cognoscamus, non cognoscimus ut credamus, says St. Austin, we come to
knowledge by faith, and not to faith by knowledge; the nature of faith is to be
exercised about things absent, wherefore though we have known Christ after the
flesh, says St. Paul, yet now henceforth know we him no more, 2 Cor. 5.16.

The second question may be, seeing Christ ascended so soon, why did he ascend
no sooner? Why did he not make one ascending for all? As soon as he rose out of
the grave, why did he not ascend immediately into heaven? To which I return a
threefold answer. First, This was not convenient in respect of Christ.
Secondly, it was not convenient in respect of his Disciples. Thirdly it was not
convenient in respect of us. First, that Christ should ascend so soon, was not
convenient in respect of Himself, for we know what a tradition the Jews have
among them until this day, namely, that his Disciples stole him away, while
the soldiers were asleep. Had not Christ therefore showed himsef alive after
his passion, though not to all the people, yet to certain selected witnesses,
the tradition of the Jews might have passed for current truth, it might have
been doubted to this day, whether he had been risen from the dead or no.
Secondly, that Christ should ascend immediately after his Resurrection, was not
convenient in respect of his Disciples, whose faith was almost quite
shipwrack'd at his death; they little thought he would make his word good to
rise again, and therefore the relation of the woman seemed to them as an old
wives tale, they believed it not; nay, when our Savior himself appeared unto
them, they would scarce believe that it was he, but were terrified and
affrighted, supposing that they had seen a spirit. It was fit therefore that
Christ should be conversant awhile with these raw Scholars, both to confirm
their faith touching that truth of his resurrection, and also to instruct them
in those things that were pertaining to Gods Kingdom. Thirdly and lastly, that
Christ should ascend immediately after his resurrection, was not convenient in
respect of us. For his Disciples were not properly Apostles till after his
resurrection, a good while; if they were Apostles, their Diocese was very
narrow, though they were Apostles to the Jews, they were no Apostles to the
Gentiles, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, said our Savior to them, but
only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Had not Christ then after his
resurrection enlarged their Commission, we had not heard, I doubt, unto this
hour, whether there had been a Christ or no. For his Apostles would not have
been like the Mechanics in our days, they would not have run about the world,
and preached without Commission; without an Ite, Praedicate, go, and preach,
how should they have preached, except they had been sent? Our Savior therefore
delayed his ascension into heaven to furnish his Apostles with a Catholic
Commission, that so their sound might go out into all Lands, and their Words
unto the ends of world.

And so ye have the Time of Christ's ascension in reference to his Resurrection.
Be pleased now to consider it in reference to his last exercise, which was the
Resolving of his Apostles doubts, the Instructing, and the Blessing of them, by
and by after this (...), when had spoken these things.

The Church of Rome keeps much ado about These things, she would hereby have
her unwritten Traditions to be understood.

But though all things are not written, which our blessed Savior spoke, yet
all things necessary to salvation, I am sure, are written; the Gospel were
imperfect, should Traditions be entertained. So that we are not to heed men's
inventions, but only Christ's instructions, He was the way, and he showed all
men the way that they should walk in, as he showed it his Apostles here, when
he had spoken these things.

These things, that is, First when he had resolved their doubts. They asked him
whether he would at that time restore the kingdom to Israel, Act. 1.6. To
which he returned them a short answer, that it was not for them to know the
times, or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power.

And this first may teach the Laity to bring their Queries, their Questions to
the Clergy, the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and they must seek the Law
at his mouth, Mal. 2.7.

And as the People must bring their questions, so the Pastor must resolve
them. And to this end St. Paul would have him (...), apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.
he must be both able and also ready to teach, and resolve doubts, our Savior
ascended not till he had done this, till he had resolved his Apostles doubts,
(...), when he had spoken these things.

These things, That is, Secondly, when he had thoroughly instructed his Apostles
in the way to heaven. Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved
them unto the end, he preached unto them, till he departed from them, till he
was taken up into heaven.

And herein he was first a pattern to all that are Preachers of his Gospel,
who, having set their hand to his plow, ought never to look back.

The Levites at fifty years old were freed from the service of the Tabernacle.
But no age will exempt or discharge us of our office, we must not cease to
exercise it, till we are just putting off this Tabernacle, though we are never
so superannuated, though we are such as Paul the Aged, or though so feeble,
that like St. John we were fain to be carried to the pulpit. For as the Echo
repeateth only the last part of the voice; so the people are aptest to remember
the last part of the Sermon, and the last Sermon best: And therefore St. Peter's
resolution was, that he would not cease to be a Preacher, till he ceased to be
a man, as we read 2 Pet. 1.12, 13.15. I will not be negligent to put you
always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and be established
in the present truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle,
to stir you up by putting you in remembrance; moreover, I will endeavor that
ye may be able after my decease to have these things always in remembrance.

And as this affords a lesson for Preachers, so does it for Parents and
Masters, who ought to give their children and servants good instructions in
their health, but then to do this especially, when they lie upon their bed of
sickness, when they have the sentence of Death in them, when they are ready to
depart out of this world, the best Legacies they can then give them are godly
admonitions. For the words of a dying friend, like those of our Martyred
Sovereign) live with us till our death, they are as goades, and as nails
fastened by the masters of Assemblies, every syllable seemetha sentence to us,
their words make a deep impression in our minds and memories, when therefore ye
are going the way of all the earth, do as religious Joshua then did, call for
your families, and charge them to persevere in pious duties, to fear the Lord,
and to serve him in sincerity and truth: Charge them also as a dying David
charged his Son Solomon, to know the God of their Fathers, and to serve him
with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind. And after your benediction, give
them St. Paul's valediction, Finally (as he took leave of his Corinthians)
Farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and
the God of love and peace shall be with you. Or let our blessed Savior himself
be your pattern and ensample, who ceased not to instruct his Apostles, till he
was taken from them (...), when he had spoken these things.

These things, that is, lastly when he had blessed them, so we read Luke 24.50,
51. he lift up his hands, and blessed them. And it came to pass while he
blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven. Thus Jacob,
when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseth,
Genes. 48.16. and Heb. 11.21. Nor did he bless them only, but also all the
twelve tribes of Israel, every one, according to his blessing he blessed them,
Genesis 49.28. This was also St. Paul's custom to close all his Epistles with a
benediction. And thus likewise the New Testament is concluded. The Old
Testament ends with a threatened curse, lest I come and smite the earth with a
curse Mal. 4. ult. But the New Testament ends with a blessing, The Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Revel. 22. ult.

And this may serve to teach the Ministers not to dismiss the assembly without
a blessing, and the assembly to have so much patience as to tarry till it be
pronounced. It may indeed teach all sorts of people, Sovereign and Subject,
Clergy and Laity, not to part company at any time without a Dominus Vobiscum on
both sides, the Lord be with you, the Lord prosper you, we wish you good luck,
in the name of the Lord.

Herein indeed lies the difference between our blessings and our Saviors, Our
benedictions are in the Optative mood, we do but wish them, but our Savior's
benedictions (as that Royal Martyr has an expression in his prayer for a
blessing upon the Treaty) our Saviors benedictions, I say, are Imperative, he
commands them, he ascended not till he had done this, (...), When he had spoken
these things.

And so I pass from the second part of the Text, the Time of Christ's
ascension, to the third, Vnde the Place from whence he ascended, which was that
part of Mount Olivet next to Bethany, as will appear by comparing Act. 1.12.
with Luke 24.50. So that here we have three steps, First he ascended from a
Mountain, Secondly from Mount Olivet, Thirdly from that part of it next Bethany.

First, he ascended from a Mountain, And why so? He styles himself the Lilly
of the valleys, Cant. 2.1. Why then did he not ascend from the valley of
Iehoshaphat, he shall from heaven come thither at the day of judgment, Joel
3.12. Why then did he not from thence go into heaven? Was it to show that he is
the God of the mountains only, and not also of the valleys: or was it that he
might be a little nearer to heaven, and by this means shorten his way thither?
No such matter, but he ascended from a mountain, chiefly for two reasons.

First, to teach us, says L^rinus, that we should always use means, where they
may possibly be had. He could at all times have, walked upon the water, but he
would not, when he came where shipping was, he went aboard. He could have
satisfied the multitude without food, he could have taken, ^way their Hunger
with a word, (...), be ye filled; but he would not, he fed them at one time
with seven, at another time with five loves, using means, though
inconsiderable and weak. He could have cured him that was born blind with an
Epphatha be opened, but he would not, he bade him go to the pool of Sil^^^, and
wash. All to teach us that we should not neglect means, and look for miracles.
When we are sick we must send for the Physician, not look for Gods help without
his.

When an house is fired, we must cast water on it, not hope that God will
quench it by a shower. When perjured rebels have usurped the Crown, to recover
this out of their hands, we must put on, not only the armor of God, but the
armor of man too, we must not only have the sword of the Lord, but of Gideon.
For to look for help from God, and use no means, is not to trust in God, but
even to tempt him. And that we might avoid this, our Savior would not ascend
from a Valley, but rather chose the mediation of a Mountain.

Secondly, he ascended from a mountain, to teach us that as mountains raise
and elevate our bodies, so they should likewise elevate our souls, they should
put us in mind of heaven and things above. Whensoever therefore we go up an
hill, we should be thinking upon God's hill, and we should fix our cogitations
upon him, who was transfigured upon a mountain, mount Tabor, crucified upon a
mountain, mount Calvary, and ascended from a mountain, even from mount Olivet.

And why from this mountain of all other? The reasons seem to be chiefly two,
First, that as upon this mountain he showed himself to be a frail man, so he
might there show himself to be the mighty God too, as he manifested the
weakness of his humanity upon this mountain, by his agony and bloody sweat,
and by his grovelling on the ground; so he might likewise manifest the power of
his Divinity upon the same mountain: by his glorious ascension from thence
into heaven, Secondly, the Olive Tree is the emblem and hierogliphick of Peace;
good reason then that our Savior should ascend from mount Olivet, seeing he is
our Peace, the very Prince of peace, this was the Legacy that he bequeathed to
his dearest friends, Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you.

And as Christ ascended from a mountain, and from mount Olivet, so lastly from
that part of it next Bethany.

Now Bethany, by interpetation, is the house of affliction, and fom Bethany our
Savior went unto his Passion, for just before his apprehension, he was in
Bethany in the house of Simon the Leper, Math. 26.6. he went from the same
place to his Cross, and his Crown. And so must we, we must not think to go a
delicjis ad delicias, as St. Jerome speaks, from the jollity of this world to
the joys of heaven, no, if hereafter we will have good, we must here have
evil things. Per angusta ad augusta, through heaviness to happiness, Per
varios casus, per tot discrimina rerum, through many tribulations we must enter
into the Kingdom of God, Acts. 14.22.

Lift up therefore the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees. For what
if thou art imprisoned, and, as it were buried alive in thy bed of languishing?
What if sickness have taken such hold upon thee, that thou are not able to
look up? What if thou art feeble and sore smitten, so that all the night thou
washest thy bed, and waterest thy couch with thy tears? Why, yet let this
consideration be instead of an handkerchief to wipe thine eyes; consider that
thy Savior (and thy Martyred Sovereign) went from Bethany to Bethel, from the
house of affliction to their Fathers house, and if thou have faith and
patience, thou shall do so too, thy bed of sickness, or if it be thy scaffold,
or thy gibbet; this shall be the same to thee that Bethany was to thy Savior;
thou shall from thence be translated and exalted into Abraham's bosom, thy
light affliction, which is but for a moment, shall work for thee a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

And so I pass from the third part of the Text, the Place, from whence Christ
ascended, to the fourth, Quo, the Place whither he ascended, which was Heaven,
he was taken up thither.

In the first chapter of Ezekiel's Prophecy, we read of four living Creatures,
and every of these creatures had four faces, the face of a man, the face of an
Ox, the face of a Lion, and the face of an Eagle. Whereunto Expositors resemble
four actions of our Savior, his Nativity, his Passion, his Resurrection, his
Ascension.

At his Nativity, he was like a man, more than like, he was a man indeed, man
of the substance of his mother, born in the world. At his Passion, he was like
an Ox, offered up for us in sacrifice upon the Altar of the Cross. At his
Resurrection, he was like a Lion, even a lion of the tribe of Judah, he brake
the bonds of death; because it was not possible that he should be holden of it.
At his Ascension, he was like an Eagle, he soared up into heaven.

Into heaven? But did he go no higher? St. Paul says, he ascended far above
all heavens, Ephesians. 4.10 But for answer to this, we must observe that the
Scripture makes mention of a threefold heaven. First the Air is called Heaven,
he commanded the cloud above, and opened the doors of heaven, Psa. 78.23.
Secondly, the celestial orbs and spheres, are heaven, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars are called Exercitus coeli; the host of heaven, Dent. 4.19. Thirdly and
lastly, the place of bliffe is heaven; the Lord has prepared his seat in
heaven, Psalm. 103.19. which distinction of heaven, St. Paul seems to allude
unto, when he says, that he was caught up into the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2.
Now where the Apostle says that Christ ascended far above all heavens, we are
to understand it of the Orbs Celestial, he ascended above the Orbs Celestial,
above all visible and material heavens.

But here then perhaps that of the Philosopher may be objected, in the first
book, De coelo, (...), without, or above heaven there is no place, now it is
essential to every body to be in some place or other, quod nusquam est, non
omnino est, if Christ's body therefore be in no place, it will be so far from
being every where (as Lutherans would have it) that it will cease to be at all.
To which I answer, that to speak physically and strictly, there is indeed no
place above the visible heavens; But though there be not Locus, yet there is
Ubi, though there be no place, yet there is a certain space, (as I may so
speak) and it is sufficient for a body glorified to be in such a space, which
our Savior notwithstanding calls a place, I go to prepare a place for you.
Ioh, 14.2.

And this was indeed the chief reason why he ascended into heaven. Adam's sin
shut him out both of the earthly and the heavenly Paradise, there was no place
for him in Eden, nor for his posterity in heaven. But the doors of heaven were
opened upon Holy-Thursday, when Christ had overcome and trampled upon death by
his resurrection, he did open the kingdom of heaven by his ascension. Not as
if heaven were so fast shut before, that none could enter in, no not in soul,
till Christ ascended thither in body, the Papists might have some kind of
ground for their Limbus Patrum, if this were so. That cannot therefore be the
meaning of it; there were glorious mansions prepared for us from the foundation
of the world, as it is Math. 25.34. But though places of glory were from the
beginning prepared for us, yet the plenary and the perfect preparation was made
by Christ's ascension.

And seeing our Savior Christ is ascended corporally into heaven, this earnest
may ascertaine us of our ascension, our Head being ascended, we shall also
ascend that are his Members. It may be objected perhaps that flesh and blood
cannot inherit incorruption. I answer, it is true that our bodies, as they are
now, are not capable of going to heaven; they must therefore be crumbled to
very dust and ashes, and new molded by him that made them at the first, before
ever they can be admited into that holy place. And as our bodies must be
refined, so likewise must our souls. Heaven is a City of pure Gold, no unclean
thing must come into it. We must therefore lay aside every weight, and the
sins that do so easily depresse us; David could not go with Readiness armor,
nor can we ascend to heaven with the weapons of unrighteousness. If then we
will ascend thither at our death, we must begin our ascension in this life, if
we hope to go to heaven, when we take our farewell of the earth, then while we
are here on earth, our conversation must be in heaven. For anima magis est ubi
amat, quam ubi animat, says St. Bernard, the Soul is rather where it loves,
than where it lives; If therefore we love the Lord Jesus, let our affection be
with him, where our heavenly treasure is, there let our hearts be also, where
the Lodestone is, that way let the Iron tend, where the carcass is, thither
let the Eagles resort; by religious meditations, and by assiduous supplications
let us ascend unto that place whither our blessed Lord and Master is gone
before.

St. Austin would rather have been in hell with Christ, than be in heaven
without him. How then should our hearts be inflamed with love of heaven, now we
are sure that our Savior is ascended thither? How should we contemn, though
not abdicate the world, use it, I mean as though we used it not? Seeing Christ
has left it, we should strive to leave it too, dying daily as St. Paul did,
though not in deed, yet in desire, having a desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, our souls must be athirst for him, our flesh also must long after
him, with an How long Lord Jesus, when shall we come unto thee? And so I pass
from the fourth part of the Text, the Place whither Christ ascended, to the
fifth, Quomodo, the Manner of his ascension, set down here two ways, I begin
with the Positive part of it, (...), he was taken up.

Taken up, why so? Did he not go up of himself? Lazarus was taken up, carried
by Angels into heaven. And these carried up Elijah too, the charet and horses
of fire were holy Angels, the Charets of God, says David, are twenty thousand,
even thousands of Angels, Psalm. 68.17. But though they were carried up, yet
Christ went up of himself, in his ascension; of all circumstances, Quibus
auxiliis, came not in, Christ went up of himself, he ascended by his own power.
Why then does our Text say that he was taken up? as if he had been some way
assisted in his ascnesion up to heaven?

I answer, the Text says that he was taken up for this reason, to signify and
show his obedience to his Fathers Will, for otherwise he might have ascended
upon the very day of his resurrection, every glorified body being of that
agility and lightness, ut ubicunque volet esse anima, ibi statim erit corpus,
wheresoever the soul would be, there is the body straight. But though Christ
might have ascended sooner, yet he would not till his heavenly Father saw good,
for which reason the Text says that he was taken up.

And this may teach us not to lay violent hands upon our selves, thinking to
get so much the sooner into heaven. If we be in poverty, or sickness, in
imprisonment, or banishment, yet we must not make away with our selves, nor
must we repine or be impatient that we are let into heaven no sooner, that we
have so long sought for death, and cannot find it, but we must tarry the Lords
leisure, we must not be our own carvers, all the days of our appointed time we
must wait, till our change come; following the example of our blessed Lord and
Master, who submitted himself in all things to the Will of his heavenly Father,
and therefore he ascended not when first he might, but when his Father would
have him taken up.

And so ye have the manner of his ascension positively set down. I now proceed
to the Expositive part of it, in these words, A cloud received him out of their
sight.

He makes the clouds his charet, Psalm. 104.3. Not that this cloud did any way
help to lift him up, but he used the Ministry of a cloud chiefly for two
reasons. First to declare and manifest his Divinity. Angels minister to men,
but clouds after this manner, minister to God only. And the clouds were
servants to our Savior more than once. At his transfiguration, when he gave
his Disciples a glimpse of his Divinity, a bright cloud overshaddowed him. Mat.
17.5. So likewise at the day of Judgment clouds shall minister unto him, He
shall come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory, Mat. 24.30. As
therefore in Herauldry it argues a good family, when a man has clouds in his
Coat of Arms; so in this place, it is an argument of Christ's divinity, that he
has a cloud to serve him, his bearing is all Nebuly, a cloud received him out
of their sight.

A cloud, I say, received him. His body then is not every where, as Lutherans
would persuade us; that which is contained in any thing, must needs be less
than the thing which does contain it. The body of Christ was once contained in
a virgins womb, and here a cloud received him. And it received him out of
sight, which makes good that saying of our Savior to his Disciples, A little
while and ye shall not see me, Joh. 16.16. And that was indeed a second use of
this cloud, namely, to take off the Apostles from curiosity. Had it been
necessary for them to know any further what became of their departing Savior,
this cloud, that received him out of sight, had not been thus interposed. But
to show them that they had corporally seen him long enough, and that hereafter
they were not to see, but to believe, to exercise their faith, and to abate
their curiosity, a cloud received him out of their sight:

God allows us not to pry inquisitively into hidden mysteries. When the Lord
descended upon Mount Sinai, there was a thick cloud upon the mountain, to keep
the people from gazing, lest they perished, Exodus 19. which was also one main
use of this Cloud at Christ's ascension, that his Apostles, namely, might not
gaze after him as he ascended into heaven.

We must walk by faith now, and not by sight. For the Spouse of Christ has a
twofold eye, the eye of faith, and the eye of glory. As Jacob, therefore
married first of all blear-eyed Leah, before he could obtain beautiful Rachel;
so we must fee Christ on earth, with the tender eye of faith, before we can in
Heaven have the fruition of his glorious Godhead. For he is not so gone up
into heaven, but that we may see him still on earth: We may see him in his
Word, we do not only hear of him there, but we even see him. When we steadfastly
believe what we hear out of Gods Word, we fare not only as if it were related
in our ears, but indeed verily acted before our eyes. And as we may see Christ
in his Word, so we may also see him in his Sacraments, especially in the
blessed Sacrament of his holy Supper, and yet even in that Sacrament he is
under a Cloud too. The Papists indeed would fain dispel and dissipate this
cloud, telling us, that he is corporally and visibly there present, handle and
see, they bid us, that it is even he himself. But this Herefie is confuted so
at large; that a bare denial of it might now suffice: yet let me me urge
against it one Text of Scripture, which is Mark 7.19. Where our Savior says,
that Whatsoever enters into the belly, goes out into the draught. And what
horrid blasphemy were it to say thus of Christ's blessed body? We can eat Christ
with no other mouth, but that of our faith; not can we see him here with the
eye of our flesh, but of our faith. And faith indeed is the most perfect
perspective, when all is done. As Abraham therefore said to the damned rich
glutton in another case, If they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither
would they believe, though one should come unto them from the dead. So he that
believes not the New Testament, the History of our Savior Christ, would not
believe that he were the Messiah, though he should see him face to face; he
that believes not St. Luke relating the manner of Christ's ascension, would
not have believed his own eyes, though they had been witnesses of his
Assumption, though he had been present upon Mount Olivet, when Christ was taken
up into heaven, When a cloud received him out of the Apostles sight. We must
endeavor therefore by faith to see Christ in his Word and Sacraments; the
exercising of this faith was one principal reason, Why a cloud received him out
of their sight. And as our Savior, so our martyred Sovereign was taken up in a
cloud too. Never was Royal Majesty so disguised, or under so thick a cloud, but
that cloud was a triumphant Charet, wherein he was carried up into heaven: the
rebellious fools that murdered him, accounted his life madness, and his end to
be without honor: But yet honorable in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints. And in spite of all their villainy, He is among the children of
God, and his portion is with the Saints.

And so I pass from the fifth part of the Text, the manner of Christ's
ascension, to the sixth and last, which are Testes, the Spectators or Witnesses
of his ascension, which were the eleven Apostles, (...), while they beheld.

The ascension of our Savior was not seen of all the people, but of certain
Witnesses chosen before of God, even of those who did eat and drink with him
after he rose from the dead.

The adulterous generation of the Jews sought altogether after signs; Show us
a sign from heaven, come down from the Cross, that we may see and believe. But
our Savior would be the object of men's faith, not of their sense: Now says
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; if the Jews therefore will
believe Christ's ascension, they have the Apostles, let them hear them, they
were eyewitnesses of his Majesty, He was taken up while they beheld.

While They, it is not while He beheld, for unus Testis nullus testis, one
witness is as good as none: In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every
word be established, Mat. 18.16. And yet Pluris est oculatus testis unus, quam
auriti december, one eyewitness is more worth than ten of those that go by
hearsay. Had the Apostle told the Jews that they heard Christ say, he would
ascend at one time or another, O how ridiculous had they been! who would have
given any heed to this report? That the Apostles therefore might preach no
uncertain Tradition, they were made spectators of Christ's ascension; he
ascended in their presence, He was taken up while they beheld.

Behold him then they did, and indeed how could they choose but behold him? It
was one of St. Austins three wishes, that he might see Christ in the flesh. And
this was the wish of many others long before St. Austins time, many Prophets
and Kings desired to see those things, and could not see them.

The Angels seemed to reprove the Apostles for their steadfast looking after
their Master, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? Acts 1.11.
where the Apostles, methinks, might have expostulated with the Angels after
this manner, Thrice blessed Spirits, why should ye ask us this? Ubi amor, ibi
oculus; we could even look out our eyes, yet not be satisfied with seeing; our
eyes naturally turn upward, and shall they not do so, especially to see such an
object as this is? Think it not strange that we are so loath to lose this sight,
it being that which ye your selves so much desire to see. But the Angels
reproved not the Apostles love, it was their curiosity which they reproved;
they would have them take off their eyes, and pry no further, for as much as one
day they should see that same very sight again; and not only they, but also all
of us shall see him, we know that our Redeemer lives, and that we shall see
him not with other, but with these same eyes. Which may teach us to take heed
of wanton lustful eyes, to make a Covenant with our eyes, not to look
lasciviously on a woman, to turn away our eyes, lest they behold vanity. For
how will ever those eyes dare to look on our Chaste Savior, which have been
eyes full of adultery? as St. Peter speaks.

To conclude all therefore in one word, let us circumcise, not only our hearts,
but even our eyes too, let these often see themselves here in their own tears,
and they shall have the honor hereafter to see Christ, they shall behold his
presence in Righteousness, and we shall be satisfied with it, satisfied for
plenitude, for in his presence is fullness of Joy; and satisfied for perpetuity,
For at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Of which God in his appointed
time vouchsafe to make us all partakers, for the intercession sake of his dear
Son, who now sits at his right hand.

FINIS.
ISRAEL AND England PARALELLED.

A Sermon PREACHED Before the Honorable Society OF GRAYES-INN, Upon Sunday,
Apr. 16. 1649.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

ISRAEL AND England PARALELLED.
AMOS 3.2. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities.


THE first verse plainly shows us who are meant here in the second, even the
Children of Israel, and the whole family that came out of Egypt. Neither are
these last words to be counted a Tautologie, for after the revolting of the ten
Tribes from the house of David, Israel was one Kingdom, Judah was another,
we will go no farther back to clear it, than the title of this Prophecy, which
runs thus, The words of Amos, which he saw concerning Israel, (that is,
Israel and Judah) in the days of Uzziah, King of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam, the son of Joash, King of Israel: Now though but ten Tribes were
revolted from David, yet all twelve Tribes were revolted from God, the children
of Israel, and the whole family that came out of Egypt.

(...), as Caesar once said to Brutus, will Gods children of Israel and Judah be
such Rebels? Ingratum si dixeris, etc. so an heathen could conclude, that
ingratitude was the abstract and abridgement of all sin, as if it had been
(...), the great offense. And even unreasonable creatures will not be guilty of
unthankfulness; The Ox knows his owner, he will not gore him, and ye remember
the gratitude of that Lion in the Roman story, nay, (to go one step lower) Non
ingratus ager, that which has not so much as sense, is not unthankful, the
Earth does not entomb, or always keep the seed close Prisoner, but most
thankfully returns it to the sower with increase. Yet the land of Israel
proved a barren Common, whereon nothing but weeds, nothing but unthankfullness
would grow; where as the Inhabitants should not so much as have rendered evil
for evil, they continually rewarded God evil for good: He did not faster
multiply his benefits upon them, than they did their transgressions and
rebellions against him. And shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord,
shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Yes, seeing fair means
will do no good on them, I will try what foul will do, forasmuch as they have
forsaken me, and not walked in my judgments; having broken my Statutes, and
not kept my Commandments, I will therefore visit their offenses with the rod,
and their sins with scourges. You only have I known of all the families of the
earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

In which words, any one will say, there are two general Parts. Commemoratio
beneficij, the rehearsing or calling to mind of a former benefit, You only have
I known of all the families of the earth, and Comminatio supplicij, the
threatening of a future judgment, therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities.

But before I come to handle the parts in their order, it will not be amiss to
premise some brief explication of the words.

First then, you only have I known. I ever thought that God had been
Omniscient; but our Text seems to deny it, In Jury is God known, and God
knows none but those of Jury, you only have I known of all the families of
the earth.

But we must observe that this word Know, has diverse acceptions in the Holy
Scripture. I shall instance but in three.

First to know, is to behold, to discern and overlook. Thus God knows the
whole world, and all that therein is, thus he knows all the fowls upon the
mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are in his sight: thus there is not
a word in our tongue, nor a thought in our heart, but he knows it long
before, even long before we spoke or thought it.

Secondly to know, is to approve, or to allow of. Thus the Lord knows the way
of the righteous, that is, he approves of it. Psalm 1. ult. As for the ungodly
(such as are the Reformers of our age) it is not so with them, our Saviors
word to these will be (...), I never knew you, that is, I never liked your
doings, Luke 13.27.

Thirdly, and lastly, to know, is to bless, to pity, or show mercy to. And the
phrase seems to be borrowed from a custom among men, who seldom show any
kindness, but to persons that they know, Ignoti nulla cupido, a stranger can
scarce get any thing of them, but ill words; David's servants were strangers to
Nabal, and therefore the Churl would give them nothing; Shall I take my bread,
says he, and my water, and my flesh, and give it unto men whom I know not
whence they be? 1 Samuel 25.11. No; few or none will relieve any, but only such
as are well known to them. And to this custom God seems to allude here in
our Text, You only have I known, that is, I have blessed you only, on you have
I multiplied my favors and loving kindnesses, on you only, or at least chiefly
of all the families of the earth.

And in this sense is the word Known used, Psalm 31.7. I will be glad, and
rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my trouble, and cognovisti, and
have known my soul in adversities. Thou have known, that is, thou have pitied,
thou have had compassion on my soul, cognoscere est miserari, so Agellius
expounds the place. And Solomon has a passage that may be referred to this
purpose, Prove. 12.10. A righteous man regards the life of his beasts, so we
read it, Novit justus, etc. so it is in the Latin version; but (...), so it is
in the Septuagint, a righteous man has mercy on the souls of his beasts. If
now we put the Latin and Greek together, we shall find that to Know, is to show
mercy to. In which sense the word is likewise used here in our Text, You only
have I known of all the families of the earth.

But if the Commemoration must be so construed, why follows there a
Commination: because God has been so good to Israel, is it therefore that he
threatens them? This indeed seems somewhat strange. But if we take middle,
and both ends, these things will soon be reconciled; You only have I known of
all the families of the earth, we must hair here a while, Desunt nonnulla,
there seems to be somewhat wanting, but it comes in at the end of the verse,
we may paraphrase therefore upon the Text after this manner, the words are, in
effect, as if Almighty God should have said, I have nourished, and brought up
children, and (like our pretended Parliament) They have rebelled against me,
destruction and unhappiness is in their way, and the way of peace have they not
known. I have known them, but they have not known me, The Ox knows his owner,
and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not
consider. I threaten them, not for the good I have done to them, but for the
notorious evil they have done to me; You only have I known of all the families
of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

Idcirco, therefore. Sin is the Causa impulsiva, that which moves, and as it
were, compels almighty God to punish. The Prophet Jeremy puts the
Question, Lam. 3.39. wherefore does a living man complain? and he gives an
answer to it before the verse be out, a man for the punishment of his sins,
that is, a man is punished for his sins; and therefore one old translation
reads it thus,, let him murmur at his own sins, these, these are the only
cause of all his sufferings, Idcirco, Therefore, Therefore I. Shall there be
evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. Siracides tells us
indeed of Spirits that are created for vengeance, and these evil spirits many
times lay on sore strokes, but they have Gods commission, at least permission
for what they do; they do this to pacify the wrath of him that made them,
Eecles. 39.28. As all punishment is for sin, so it is from God. But how can
this consist with Gods goodness? yes, the very next particle will show us, for
he speaks not in the present, but in the future tense, I will, he gives
Israel warning of his intention, before he proceeds to execution, that if
they had any grace, they might repent, and so prevent the Judgment threatened;
And he threatens them but after a mild and gentle manner, he threatens, not
to plague and consume them, but only to punish and correct them, You only have
I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities.

And so much for the connection and explication of the words. It is high time
now to come nearer to the parts. I begin therefore with the first, which is
Commemora^io beneficii, the rehearsing of a former benefit, in these words, You
only have I known of all the families of the earth. And that we may know how
well God dealt with the people of Israel, we may observe that he bestowed upon
them two sorts of blessings, Privative and Positive ones. I begin with the
first, Gods Privative blessings.

The children of Israel were for a long time bound Apprentices in Egypt, where
they were grievously oppressed by Pharaoh and his Taskmasters, who compelled
them, not only to make brick, but it should seem by the story, they would have
them make straw too. From which intolerable servitude, God set them free at
last, he eased their shoulders from the burden, and their hands were delivered
from making of pots. He brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness, and gave them the lands of the heathen, and they took the labors of
the people in possession. As for Pharaoh and his Host, they were overwhelmed in
the red sea, they sunk down to the bottom as a stone. After this God made good
his word to Joshua, not suffering a man to stand before him all the days of
his life. And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barach, and of Sampson, and of Jephthah, and of David, what
mavelous deliverances God wrought for his people, discomfiting their enemies
both by these Worthies, and by other Champions; the Sun, Psalm. 19. is compared
to a strong champion; and rather than Israel shall be worsted, insensible
champions shall fight for them, the Sun shall stand still in the midst of
Heaven; the Stars in their courses shall fight against Sisera; so mightily did
God deliver his people, even the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

And as God bestowed many Privative blessings upon Israel, so many Positive
blessings too: And these were of two sorts, Temporal and Spiritual. I begin
with the first, Gods Temporal blessings, which are recorded, Isa. 5.1, 2. My
beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill. And he fenced it and gathered
out the stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a
Tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine press therein. It will be no
digression to touch briefly upon each of these particulars, the Situation of
the vineyard meets us First, which was in clivo uberrimo, in a very fruitful
hill. The hill of Sion was a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth, Israel
had a goodly heritage, Canaan flowed with milk and honey. And the fruitfulness
of it is described at large. Deuteronomy. 8, 7, 8, 9.

Next to the fruitful situation, Gods Fencing of the vineyard follows. He
made a Wall about it, says the Margin, and Mat. 21. it is said, he hedged it
round about: Now an hedge serves for two uses, for distinction and for
conservation; Israel was hedged about both ways; for distinction they had the
Law, by this they were discerned from other Nations, what Nation is there so
great, says Moses, that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all this
Law which I set before you this day? Deuteronomy. 4.8. other Nations dwelt as it were
in a Champian country, without a hedge, without a Law; but Israel was
enclosed, and hereby distinguished from all other people. God dealt not so well
with any other Nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Laws. And as
Israel had an hedge for distinction, so they had another hedge for
conservation, which was the providence of God, and the protection of his
Angels, The hills, says the Psalmist, stand about Jerusalem, even so stands
the Lord round about his people, from this time forth for evermore.

In the next place, God gathered the stones out of his vineyard. Whereby we
are to understand the wicked Nations, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
80.10. Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt, Expuleras gentes, thou have cast
out the heathen, God gave away their land for an heritage, even for an heritage
unto Israel his people; That is the next thing presented to us, he planted it
with the choicest vine, the vineyard of the Lord of hosts was the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah were his pleasant plant.

The next observable is Gods building of a Tower in his vineyard, and Turris,
authoritas est sacerdotalis, says Aretius, the Tower in Gods vineyard, is the
office and authority of Gods Ministers; for as watchmen from a tower
overlooking all the coast, give notice when any corporal enemies are
approaching; so Gods Ministers, who are the watchmen of his Church, these give
her warning of her ghostly enemies, so that neither the Boar of the wood can
waste her, nor yet the wild beasts of the field devour her.

In the last place, God made a Wine Press in his vineyard, whereby the juice
of good living was to be, as it were, pressed out of the people. But to explain
all this in three words. By the Fence, by the Tower by the Wine Press, by all
this care and cost bestowed upon the vineyard, there is signified Gods abundant
love toward his people Israel, so that he could not possibly do any thing else
for them, having done more for them already than for all the world besides, You
only have I known of all the families of the earth:

And as God bestowed upon Israel, many Temporal, so also many Spiritual
blessings, which are mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 9.4, 5. where speaking of
the Israelities, he tells us, that to them pertained the adoption, and the
glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the promises theirs were the Fathers and of them, as concerning the flesh,
Christ came. It will not be amiss likewise to examine briefly these
particulars. And first to the Israelites pertained the adoption, they were
culled out of all nations to be Gods peculiar people, the quotations to this
purpose are very many, I shall cite but only one, which is Isa. 43. 1. Thus
says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O Israel,
fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou art
mine. Called thee by thy name? nay, I have called thee by my own name, so it
is, 2. Chro. 7.14. My people, which are called by my name. And Dan. 9.19. Thy
City, says the Prophet, and thy people are called by thy name, Whence we may
observe that there was a twofold relation between God and Israel, the relation
of father and children, and of husband and wife.

First, they were related as father and children; Children bear their fathers
name, God therefore calling Israel by his own name, this shows that he was
their father; they his children. And the Prophet in their name testifies as
much, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou, O Lord, art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not. Secondly God was related to
Israel as an husband to his wife. The wife bears her husbands name, it has
been thus ever since Isaiahs time, I am sure, for God threatens by him to send
a sword upon Judah and Jerusalem, which should make so great a slaughter and
dearth of men, that seven women should take hold of, or should come a wooing to
one man, saying, We will find our selves meat and clothes, we will eat our own
bread, and wear our own apparel, only let us be called by thy name, Isa. 4.1.
Called by thy name? what do the women mean by this? why, the very next words
will show us, which are, to take away our reproach.

(...), Barenness was a reproach among the Jews, let us therefore be called by
thy name to take away our reproach, that is, let us be married to thee, be thou
our husband; God then calling the people of Israel by his own name, hereby
shows that he was, as it were, their Husband, they his wife. Almighty God was
to the Israelites both a father and an husband, as a father he nurtured them,
as an husband he nourished them; never did any one hare his own flesh: God
therefore must needs be loving unto Israel, they being, as it were, bone of his
bone, flesh of his flesh, they were his Spouse, they were his Sons, to them
pertained the adoption.

And the Glory, that is next, which glory some would have to be a consequent of
their adoption, and indeed to be Gods own people was no small dignity. But this
glory may be taken rather for the glorious presence of God amongst them, which
he manifested most especially from off the Mercyseat that was upon the Ark, and
therefore when the Israelites had lost the Ark, Phineas his wife concluded that
they had lost the glory too, the glory, says she, is departed from Israel, for
the ark of God is taken, 1 Samuel 4. ult.

And to Israel also pertained the Covenants, for the Covenant that God made
with Abraham runs thus, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting
Covenant to be a God unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee.

Israel's next privilege was the giving of the Law, that is, the Moral Law was
given to them, and Almighty God himself was their Lawgiver.

The Promises were theirs too, the promise of long life here, and of eternal
life hereafter, of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, To
Abraham, and his seed were these promises made, Gal. 3.16.

Theirs also were the Fathers, the promises were made as well to their Fathers,
as to them, according to that of St. Peter, Acts 3.25. Ye are the children of
the Prophets, and of the Covenant, which God made with our fathers, saying unto
Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. In thy
seed that is in Christ, who was the Israelites own Countryman, which is their
last Prerogative recorded by the Apostle, Of whom, as concerning the flesh,
Christ came.

Thus ye have seen how God loaded the Israelites with blessings, with
Privative, and Positive, with Temporal and Spiritual, you only have I known
of all the families of the earth.

And now Israel, as Moses once said, Deuteronomy. 10.12. What does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to
love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul?

But alas, the God of Israel is here forced to complain, that notwithstanding
all the cost he had bestowed upon his vineyard, when he expected grapes from
it, it brought forth wild grapes, notwithstanding those many benefits he had
bestowed upon his people, they continually rewarded him evil for good, they
thought not of his hand, nor of the day when he had delivered them from the
hand of the enemy, how he wrought his miracles in Egypt, and his wonders in the
field of Zoan, neither destroyed they the heathen, but learned their works, for
they shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters,
whom they offered unto the Idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled with blood.

In general terms, their sins are set down, Deuteronomy. 9.7. But they are more
particularly described in the third and fist chaptel of Isaiah. In the third
chapter, ye may see their women's sins, the Prophet brings you, as it were,
into the Exchange, he shows you the pride and vanity of their women's
dressings, he gives you such an inventory of their toys, as is able to make a
very Cato change his countenance. In the fist chapter the Prophet shows you
their Men's sins, after the catalogue of Gods benefits, he gives you another
catalogue of their sins. At the seventh verse he shows you their oppression
and injustice, I looked for judgment, but behold oppression, for
righteousness, but behold a cry, At the eight verse their encroaching
coverousnesse, in joining house to house, and field to field until there was no
place, that they might be placed alone in the midst of the earth, At the
eleventh and twelft verses, their drunkenness, and riot, in rising up early to
follow strong drink, and continuing until night, till Wine inflame them,
having the harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe, and wine in their feasts. At
the eighteenth and nineteeth verses, their contempt and slighting of Gods word,
in defiance of this drawing iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were
with a cart-rope; as who should say, let him do his worst, let him make speed
and hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the counsel of the holy one of
Israel draw nigh, and come that we may know it. ver. 20. Their hypocrisy, in
calling evil good, and good evil, in patting darkness for light, and light for
darkness, in putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Ver. 21. Their
self-conceit, Being wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight,
verse 22. Their Porvalour, in that they were mighty to drink wine, and men of
strength to mingle strong drink nverse 23. Their bribery and corruption, in
justifying the wicked for reward, and in taking away the righteousness of the
righteous from him.

And shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord, shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? yes, the wrath of God was kindr'd against his
people, insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance: for three transgressions
of Judah, and for four, he resolves that he will not turn away the punishment
thereof. And so I am fallen upon the second part of the Text, which is,
Comminatio supplicii, the threatening of a future punishment, therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities. You only, etc.

Ye have heard that God bestowed upon Israel two sorts of blessings, both which
he threatens to withdraw for their unthankfulness. First, his Privative
blessings, they must expect no more deliverances from him. He brought them
forth out of the iron-furnace, even out of Egypt, but they had so provoked him,
that he threatens to bind them Apprentices there the second time. Apprentices?
nay worse, he threatens to make slaves of them, so we read, Deuteronomy. 28. ult. The
Lord, says Moses, shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way
whereof I spoke unto thee, thou shall see it no more again, and there ye shall
ye besold (offer your selves at least) unto your enemies for bondmen and
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you. God threatens to sell his people for
naught, and to take no money for them. And whereas the Israelites were wont to
have the better of their enemies, they had so angered the Lord of hosts, that he
threatened to give their enemies the victory, so we read, Deuteronomy. 28.25. The Lord
shall cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies, thou shall go out one way
against them, and shall flee seven ways before them, and shall be removed into
all the Kingdoms of the earth. And I am sure they have been thus dispersed for
many hundred years, they are strangers in all Countries, they have lost both
their place and Nation.

Secondly, God threatens to withdraw his positive blessings from them. We have
a plain Text for this, Isa. 5.5, 6. I will tell you, says God, What I will do
to my vineyard, I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up,
and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down, and I will
lay it waste, it shall not be pruned, nor dug, but there shall come up
briars and thorns; I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon
it. So true is that of the Psalmist, Psalm 107.34. A fruitful land makes he
barren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. For though the Land of
Canaan were as the garden of Eden, yet for the iniquity of the Inhabitants, it
shall be turned into a wilderness, and though the Israelites had the blessings
of the right hand and of the left, yet for their ingratitude and disobedience,
God threatens to withdraw both, You only have I known of all the families of
the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities: Therefore I
will punish you: You that were my darlings, mine own peculiar people, you that
were as dear to me as the apple of mine eye, because ye have broken my
Commandments, and been unmindfull of my loving kindness; therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities.

And the observation from hence for our instruction is most obvious, Gods
hatred against sin is such, that he will not let it go unpunished in his
dearest Children. Adam was the Masterpiece of all Gods workmanship, and highly
in favor with him at the first, and yet as soon as ever he had tasted of the
forbidden tree, God banished this very Adam cut of Paradise. Moses is often
styled the servant of God, but indeed he seems to have been more, with
reverence be it spoken, to have been Gods familiar acquaintance, for Exodus
33.11. The Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks unto his
friend. Yet as great, and gracious, and familiar as Moses was with God, for one
sin of infidelity God fell out with him, as we read, Number. 20. Where when the
people murmured for water, God bid Moses but only speak to the rock, and it
should give forth water, but Moses thought, that speaking would not do it, not
a word therefore, but a blow, two of them for failing, he smote the Rock twice;
and for ^^is he had his doom immediately, that he should not enter into the
Land of Promise. He that prophesied against the Altar at Bethel was Gods
favorite, a man of God; yet forasmuch as he disobeyed the mouth of the Lord,
in going back to eat and drink with the old Prophet, his carcass must not come
to the sepulcher of his Fathers. I shall give one signal example, our Savior
himself, that Lamb without spot, the only righteous person that ever lived upon
the earth; though he were Gods bosom son, and had not the least sin of his
own, only took ours by imputation, yet how harshly did his Father handle him?
Never was there any sorrow like unto his sorrow, wherewith the Lord afflicted
him in the day of his fierce anger. And if these things be done in a green
tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke 23.31. The righteous shall be
recompensed in the earth, much more the wicked and the sinner, Prove. 11. ult.
If Judgment begin at the house of God, what shall the end be of those men that
obey not the Gospel of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4 17, 18. If an Israelite indeed, in
whom there is no guil, if this man shall be recompensed, shall be punished in
the earth; with whom shall Hypocrites have their portion, that are full of
deceit and fraud, and under whose tongue is ungodliness and vanity? If a
perfect and upright man, one that fears God, and striveth to eschew evil, if
this shall be recompensed, shall be punished in the earth, what will become of
him that has no fear of God before his eyes, but lives as if there were no
God, committing all uncleanness, even with greediness? If a man of a strict
life and tender conscience must be punished, what will become of those
rebellious Reformers of our age, whose consciences seem to be seared with an
hot iron? If Jerusalem, the holy City must be punished, Lord, what will become
of London and Westminster, places every what as sinful as Sodom or Gomorrah?
If God go so roughly to work with them he knows, oh how will he handle
strangers without mittons? If he execute his Judgments upon Jury where he was
known, oh what fiery indignation will he pour upon the heathen that have not
known him, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon his N^me.

This teaches us to flee from sin, as from the face of a Serpent, considering
how odious and abominable it is in the sight of God. Though Coniah the son of
Iehoiakim King of Judah were the signet upon his right hand; yet for sin God
threatens to pluck him thence, Ier. 22.24. The King of England will not pardon
wilful murder, though his chiefest Favorites should commit it. The King of
heaven and earth will let no sin go unpunished, no not in his Favorites, in
his own people. And he will never connive at sin in us, that threatens here to
punish it so severely in Israel, You only have I known of all the families of
the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. And so I have
gone through the several parts of the Text. A few words now of application, and
I have done.

Truly God, says the Psalmist, is loving unto Israel, and truly he has been
as loving unto us, he has bestowed many Privative and many Positive blessings
on us. First Privative, many deliverances, I will instance but in three. The
first was from Popish Tyranny and superstition; a Tyranny more than Egyptian,
an Antichristian Tyranny. The damned glutton, Luke 16. desired only a little
water for his thirst; but water will not quench the thirst of Babylon, the
whore must have blood; till she make her self stark drunk with it; no blood of
beasts, it must be of men; no blood of sinners, it must be the blood of Saints;
no blood of Malefactors, it must be the blood of Martyrs; and these Martyrs
none of Mahomets, they must be Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.6. Sad experience of
this Tyranny we had in Queen Mary's days: Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris
hirudo, the Romish horsleach would not give us over, till she had full gorged
her self with our blood. Or indeed, it is a question, whether she would ever
have been satisfied, had we not been strangely delivered from her Tyranny by
the Queen of all Queens, or rather by the King of all Kings, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth.

A second deliverance was from the Spanish Armado in the year 1588. which
Fleet, had it prevailed, our Thames had been turned into Tyber, Romish
superstition had invaded us once more, and then by the waters of Babylon we
might have set down and wept, as often as we remembered this our Sion. But God
brake the ships of the sea through the East wind, You only have known of all
the families of the earth.

A third deliverance was from that horrid Powder Treason, November 5. 1605.
which was carried on with so great secrecy, that it made the man of sin insult,
Teque his, ait, eripe flammis, who is that God that shall deliver them out of
my hands? But he that dwells in heaven laughed the Bishop of Rome to scorn,
and plucked us, as it had been firebrarnds out of the burning, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth.

And as God has befriended us by his Privative, so by his Positive blessings,
answerable to those which be bestowed upon his vineyard. And first we may
compare with Israel for a fruitful situation, being neither under the torrid,
nor the frozen zone, neither burned always with parching heat, nor benumbed
always with pinching cold, but seated in a temperate Climate and fertile soil,
our folds are full of sheep, our valleys stand so thick with corn, that we may
laugh and sing. God has also fenced us about, like the Israelites in the red
Sea, with a wall of water, the waters are a wall unto us on our right hand, and
on our left. But especially God has fenced us by his providence and
protection, salvation has the Lord appointed for walls and bulwarks. He has
likewise gathered the Stones out from us, he has cast out the Romish Rabble,
and has planted our Land with the choicest Religion, that of Orthodox
Protestants. And he has built a Tower among us, he has set up Episcopal
Authority. Some think this Tower too high, and would fain have it quite
demolished; down with it, down with it, say they, even to the ground; But these
are an Assembly of birds that would fain build in others nests; there are
Presbyterian Levellers as well as Independent; but let them both do what they
can, I hope I shall never see the day wherein these Towers fall. God has, as
it were a Wine Press among us too; No Nation under heaven has better Laws than
we; many of them of late years have been cast into a deep sleep, but I hope
that within short time they will be wakened. And that in telling you of one
blessing, I may tell you of all the rest, God has set over us a gracious and
most religious, a prudent and most pious Prince, a King, for his faith and life
unspotted from the world, a Patron and Pattern of good men and all goodness, a
Maintainer of his Countries Laws, and however Rebellion has traduced him, a
zealous Professor and Defender of the Christian faith.

O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint, Angligenas! Happy Nation we to be in
such a case, happy nation we to have the Lord for our God, to have him as kind
and good to us, as ever he was to Israel: You only have I known of all the
families of the earth.

And now, England, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord
thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul?

But here God may as justly complain of us as he did of the Israelites, that
when he looked for grapes from us, we have brought forth wild grapes, there is
not a sin, Isa. 5. charged upon Israel, but we stand guilty of it: I have not
time to arraign all the sins that reign among us, the time would fail me to
reckon up the oaths and imprecations. Our sins therefore being as many, nay,
more, I doubt, than those of Israel, of two things one, we must either plead
more privilege to sin than they had, which I am sure, we cannot, or else
without great mercy, we must look for greater judgments, at least to have God
so threaten us, as here he threatens the people of Israel, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquities.

I will punish You, You that have seven years set in Counsel, been in covenant
for him, but have armed your selves against him and have at last most
traitorously imprisoned mine Anointed, you that have turned judgment into
wormwood, you that have turned your still waters into blood, you that have
turned your Kings house, nay your Gods house, into a den of thieves, you that
imagine wickedness and practice nothing else, you that have set your selves in
no good way; you that dare do any thing but justice, you that dare rob your
Sovereign, nay, even your God, you that are made up of cousenage and
contradictions, you that have no religion but rapine and rebellion, you that
are Papists in practice, though ye will not own that name, you that neither
fear your God, nor honor your King, You that resolve to beggar all that refuse
to be such Rebels as your selves, you that, with Herod are deeply dyed in blood
of Innocents, that make no more of cutting a man's, than cutting off a dogs
neck, you that have filled the grave with bodies, and hell with souls,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.

You likewise of the silly Schismatic Assembly, that, out of mere
opposition, preach in Cloakes; you that are no legal Synod, but rather the
Synagogue of Satan, you that for a pious Liturgy, would give the Church a pure
piece of Non-scence, you that would banish the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles
Creed, and the ten Commandments, you that call evil good, and good evil, you
that teach for doctrines the commandments of wicked men, you that preach up
rebellion for four shillings a day, you that would be more than Deanes or
Bishops, though you dislike those Titles; you that are greedy dogs, never
thinking ye have enough, you that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own
bellies, Therefore I will punish You for all your iniquities And You also of
the Court for your flattery and prodigality, and You of the cowardly City for
your disloyalty, You that dare fight against none but your King; and you of the
Country for your stupidity, and sottishness, in sufferring your fellow
subjects so long to enslave you: You of the Clergy likewise for temporizing,
for fearing the face of men, for not daring to speak truth; You of the Laity
for tenebrizing, for your Conventicles, You that are rich, for your
covetousness, You that are poor for your idleness, You that are men for your
day-sins, gluttony and drunkenness, you that are Women, for your night-sins,
chambering and wantonness; all you that are against the King, for forswearing of
your selves, some of you that are for the King, for your customary swearing,
you that swear not as Joseph did, by the life of your King, but by the life of
your God, and by the Prince of life, whom ye swear over once a day from top to
toe, as if ye would swear Christ in pieces, or God out of heaven, Therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities. Ye have been told of this sin (...),
and if I now told you of it rightly, I should tell you weeping, that they who
thus mouth their oaths, and their God damn them, they are no better than the
very enemies of the Cross of Christ. Nor are they enemies to him only, but
arrant Traitors also to their King and Country, as arrant Traitors as those
that have imprisoned him, let them never tell me they are the Kings friends,
for they are the worst of enemies, because of Swearing the Land mourns, Ier.
23.10. And mourn it will a great deal worse, unless this, and many other horrid
sins be banished. We have seen hitherto, but, as it were, the morning of
mourning, the beginning of sorrows: except we repent, our land, like Rama, will
be filled with bitter mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of
Megiddo, Zech. 12.11. For indeed how can we ever hope to have God bless us,
when we are daily at him to damn and confound us? how can we hope for peace
with men, so long as by oaths and other sins we fight against our God? No,
there is no peace to the wicked, their portion is desolation, which, though we
hope still to outrun, yet in the end it will overtake us, Quod differtur non
aufertur; as God has leaden heels, so he has iron hands, though he has
spared us therefore a long time; yet he will pay us home at last, he will
bruise us with a rod of iron, and break us in pieces like a potters vessel. If
a man will not turn, he will bend his bow. Now the farther back ye draw the
bow-string ere ye shoot, the more forcibly the arrow flies when ye shoot. So
the longer God delayeth to punish us for our sins, the more harshly will he
handle us, when once he begins with us. He has long begun with us, I know,
but, without our repentance, he will not make a full end; if we continue in
sin, our sufferings shall be of long continuance; if we keep not the Laws of
God, the Laws of the Land shall still be kept from us, if we will not suffer
Christ to reign over us, God will not suffer our Lord the King to reign.

To sum up all therefore in one word, let us repent, and be converted, or if
we do not this for our own sakes, yet let us do it for our poor Kings sake,
who, in my conscience, has a long time suffered for our sins. Let not us,
brethren, forget God; and he will never forget us, he will speedily remember
King Charles, and all his troubles; let us by a new life show our
thankfulness for Gods former loving kindness, and this will encourage him to
confer new benefits upon us, he will be our God, We shall be his People; as he
has been good to us in former, so will he be in afterages to us and our
posterity for evermore. he will turn Ours and our Sovereigns captivity as the
rivers in the South; he will turn our heaviness into joy, he will take off our
Sackcloth; and gird us with gladness, he will put a new song into our mouth,
even a thanksgiving unto our God, though the Prologue have been Tragical, yet
the Catastrophe shall be Comical, God will make good to us that promise, Zech.
8.19. The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the sift and the fast of
the seventh month, and the fast of the tenth shall be to us joy and gladness,
and cheerful feasts. Which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to grant unto
us, for the merits of his eternal Son, our blessed Savior.

FINIS.
A LOOKING-GLASS FOR LEVELLERS.

A Sermon PREACHED At ST. Peter's Pauls-wharf, Upon Sunday, Sep. 24. 1648.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR LEVELLERS.
LUKE 20.14. But when the Husbandmen saw Him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, This is the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours.


THe first particle is discretive, and severeth the Text from the foregoing
verses, wherein our Savior holds forth, as it were, a dark Lanthorn to the
chief Priests, that seeing they might see, and not perceive; and that hearing
they might hear, and yet not understand. Or rather he shows them their faces
in a glass, wherein they might plainly see what manner of men they were. The
Looking-glass is this present Parable of the Vineyard, wherein he insisteth
chiefly on three things. First, He shows the Descent and Pedigree of the
Priesthood, A certain man planted a Vineyard, and let it forth to husbandmen.
Secondly, He upbraideth the ingratitude of these husbandmen in abusing their
Landlords servants, they beat them, they entreated them shamefully, they
wounded them, they killed them. Thirdly, he threatens a punishment for their
ingratitude, which is no less than a Reenter, the Lord shall destroy these
Husbandmen, and shall give the Vineyard to others.

But more punctually to survey and view this Parable, by this Certain man, the
Planter of this Vineyard, we are to understand the worlds Creator, God himself.
By the Vineyard, his Church, confined for a long time to Judea, Isa. 5.7. By
the Husbandman, to whom the Vinevard was let out, we are to understand the
Chief Priests, who by their Doctrine and Example were, as it were, to prune and
dress Gods vineyard, that so it might be fruitful in good works. By the
Servants sent to demand some of the fruit of this Vineyard, we are to
understand the inspired Prophets, who were sent by God to call the chief
Priests to repentance, to bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life.
Trium autem mentiofit, etc. says Aretius, God is said to have sent severally
three Servants to the Husbandmen, because three is a perfect number, and is
therefore used to show Gods uncessant desire of their conversation. Incessant,
I say, it was, for though it knew a little Intermission, yet it knew no
termination though the word of the Lord were preci^us in the days of Eli, even
then God raised up Samuel to reprove the lewdness of the Priests; there was no
time, there was no place, but the Jewish Priests had Prophets sent among them.
Before their captivity in Babylon, they had Isaiah, Jeremy, Amos, Micah,
Zephany, and others. In time of their captivity, they had Ezekiel and Daniel.
After their captivity they had Haggai, Zachary and Malachy. And the last was
not the least, for among those that were born of women, there was not a greater
Prophet than John the Baptist.

But what entertainment found these Servants amongst their Masters Tenants?
just such as we, that will not preach Treason, meet with in these days; just
such as the Messengers of Truth have ever found, Convitia, Verbera, Vulnera, as
Stella speaks, Revilings, Blows, Wounds; nay, very death it self: Isaiah was
sawn asunder, Jeremy and Zechary were stoned, Amos had his brains beaten out
with a club, Micah was thrown down headlong from a rock; and all the rest did
the Jews either kill; or at lest hunt after them; (...), as St. Stephen asked
them, Which of the Prophets did not their Fathers persecute? Acts 7.52.

Yet see the never wearied goodness of Almighty God; though the chief Priests
had killed his Prophets, and had stoned them that were sent unto them, yet he
did so long to do them good, that Nullum non movebit lapidem, he will leave no
stone unrolled, no not the Cornerstone; he had but one bosom- Son, and he
sends him to them for his rent, presuming that for shame they would not send
him away empty; they will reverence, says he, their young Land-Iord, when they
see him. But when the husbandmen saw him, they reasoned among themselves,
saying, This is the Heir, Come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be
ours.

The Text then, ye see, is a conspiracy against Christ, where we meet together
the four causes of it. First here is the Efficient cause or Conspiratours, the
Husbandmen. Secondly, the Material cause or person conspired against, the Heir,
when they saw him. Thirdly the Formal cause or manner of their conspiracy, they
reasoned among themselves, saying, come, let us kill him. Fourthly and lastly,
the Final cause or end of their conspiracy, which was, that they might be Lords
of the Manor, that the inheritance may be ours. These are the parts, of which
in order briefly, and very plainly. I begin with the first part, the
Conspirators, which are Coleni, the Husbandmen

If the first Man had been a good husband, there had been no Husbandman, the
Earth need have had no Midwife, she would have brought forth of her self. But
Haec maledictio Adae etc. says St. Bernard, this was a curse entailed on
Adam's sin, that for his sake the ground it self was cursed, his barrenness in
obedience made the very Earth grow barren. Which may therefore serve to mind us
sinners of repentance, the husbandry of the hand may teach us the husbandry of
the heart, even to break up our fallow ground; and sow in tears. But I must not
insist upon these Georgicks, I must lead you from corporal to spiritual
husbandmen. And these are the painful Preachers of Gods word. For as the Earth
must be plowed and harrowed by the Countryman, before she will ever bring
forth her increase; So the men of the earth must be directed and corrected by
the Churchman, before they will bring forth the fruits of righteousness. The
Clergy, like the Prophet Elisha, are a kind of Plow-men. They that do, as it
were, drive the plow, are ordinary Ministers. They that hold the Plow, are the
reverend Bishops, the Plow would not go so well, should Episcopacy be
abolished. Let these Laborers therefore have their due, they are worthy of
their hire. And let them likewise have a respectful estimation set upon them,
for the Courtier cannot live without the Countryman, the King himself is served
by the field, Ec. 5.9. As then where no Husband men are, the people sterve; So
Likewise where no Ministers, where no vision is, the people perish.

Which admonishes Gods Husbandmen, the Clergy to be industrious. There is no
profession more laborious than that of Husbandmen, who in the sweat of their
face most commonly eat their bread. And herein they are a pattern and ensample
unto us, who indeed should labor more abundantly than they all; because they
labor but to sustain men's bodies, we to feed their souls. We must therefore
abound always in the work of the Lord; we must preach the word as St. Paul
charged Timothy, not slothfully, but painfully, we must labor in the Gospel,
we must be instant, and eager, and earnest in our preaching, in season, out of
season, in time of peace, in time of War, we must reprove, we must rebuke, we
must exhort with all long-suffering and doctrine, as the Apostle speaks.

And as we must be fervent, so we must be perseverant in our office, having put
our hand to Gods plow, we must resolve not to look back: we must not with Demas
forsake our function, and embrace the world; nor must we cease to exercise it,
till we just put off this Tabernacle, though there be never so great danger in
the exercising of it: Husbandmen will not give over plowing for a shower of
rain, nor must we give over preaching, because of persecution, though we are
never so superannuated, though we are such as Paul the aged, or though so
feeble, that with St. John, we must be carried to the Pulpit.

Neither must we lord it over Gods heritage, like these chief Priests in our
Text, who, that they might be Lords of the vineyard, conspired to murder the
right Lord of it; the conspirators, our Text tells us, were Coloni, the
Husbandmen. And so likewise Pontius Pilat told our Savior, thine own nation,
and the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me, Joh. 18.35. What prodigious
unthankful miscreants were these! there can be no Epithet bad enough for such
Traitors. For they that taught the people, taught they not themselves? They
that were dressers of the vineyard, durst they conspire against the owners of
it? Durst men of the Temple venture on the worst of treasons?

Well, we see by this the truth of that old axiom, Corruption optimi est
pessima, the best wine, makes the sharpest vinegar, if Clergymen once turn
Traitors, they are incarnate dviils. So our Savior styled the Traitor Judas,
and thus likewise all Synod-traytors may be styled. And so I pass from the
first part of the Text, the Efficient cause of this conspiracy, or the
Conspirators, the Husbandmen, to the second, the Material cause of it, or the
Person conspired against, which was the Heir, when the Husbandmen saw Him.

The Heir. The wise God of peace and order, will not have every man his own
carver, for the best weapon would then be the best evidence, the strongest arm
would be the surest title. But as he has ordained a succession of Men, so of
Esates, their children must be their Heirs, they must leave their substance to
their Babes. Dominio non fundatur in gratia, they that call themselves babes of
grace, all things are not theirs; had not Jacob supplanted Esau, this
graceless one had been Isaac's Heir. For the inheritance was ever challenged by
the Eldest son; and therefore this title of Heir must needs be due to Christ,
who was the first-begotten of his heavenly Father, the firstborn of his
earthly Mother, the firstborn of every creature, the firstborn among many
brethren, by right of primogeniture he was the Heir, (...), faith the Apostle,
Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is,
the compass of the world, and they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1. And he that
is owner of all things, makes his Eldest Son a promise of them, he promises
to give him the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. The Devil, I know, made his brags once,
that he was the Heir of the World, when he showed our Savior all the Kingdoms
of it, and told him, they were His: But as he was a Murderer, so he was a Liar
from the beginning. It is true, Abraham had a promise that he should be heir of
the world, as the Apostle testifyeth, Romans 4.13. But though to Abraham and his
seed there were such a promise made, yet Christ for all this was still to be
the Heir, it is the same Apostles observation, Gal. 3.16. He says not, to
seeds, as of many, but to thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.

But here we must not be mistaken, for though our Savior be styled the Heir;
yet we must know that his inheritance is no temporal but a spiritual
inheritance, his Kingdom, his Church, his heritage is not of this world. And
as we Christians are not of it, so our inheritance properly is not in it, we
are heirs to a better country, that is, an heavenly, though not by nature yet
by grace, though not by birth, yet by faith we are made partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light, we are heirs of God, coheires with Christ,
we have an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for us, where we shall see the Son of man siting on the
right hand of God, where we shall see our pierced Savior, not to our terror,
but our triumph, where we shall see him with no other, but with these same
eyes; the same numerical, though not the same mortal eyes, where we shall see
that which St. Austin so much wished to see, Christum in carne, Christ in the
flesh, and that which many Prophets and Kings desired to see, and could not see
it. They saw this sight indeed afar off, which did not a little cheer their
hearts, Abraham rejoiced, says our Savior, to see my day, and he saw it, and
was glad, John 8.56. But when Simeon saw him in the Temple, his eyes were
satisfied with seeing; close them now, Lord, said he, let me die in peace, For
mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And we may observe here by the way, that if
ever we will see Christ in Heaven, we must first see him upon earth, for though
we cannot see him as Simeon, and these chief Priests did, with the eyes of our
body, yet we may see him as Abraham did, with the perspective of our faith; we
may, and we must see him through this glass darkly, before ever we can see him
face to face. A Christian must not be like a Cyclop, with one eye, the Spouse
of Christ, as Peraldus observes, must have two, Oculum fidei, and Oculum
gloriae, the eye of Faith, and the eye of Fruition. We must walk by Faith,
before we can walk by sight. We must, like Jacob, be first married to
blear-eyed Leah, before we can obtain beautiful Rachel; we must first see our
Savior with the tender eye of faith, before ever we can behold him with the
brighter eye of glory.

Now though our Savior pronounce them blessed that have not seen, and yet have
believed; and though Faith be defined by the Apostle the evidence of things not
seen, yet Segnius irritant animos, etc. as the Poet speaks, a man will give
more credit to his eyes, than to his ears; Saint Thomas would not go by
hearsay, except he might see, he resolved not to believe. But the chief
Priests were so perverse, that they would not believe their own eyes, for they
conspired against our Savior, though they saw him, though they knew him,
though they knew him to be the Messiah, and could say (...), This is the Heir.

From whence we may observe, that as there is a zeal without knowledge, so
there is a knowledge without faith. The very Devils knew our Savior, they knew
him to be the Son of God, Mat. 8.29. Jesus I know, said the evil spirit to
those Exorcists, Act 19.15. But their knowledge was merely hystorical, like
their faith. And just after this manner did the chief Priests know Christ.

There are indeed some places of Scripture that seem to contradict our Text,
and to say, that the chief Priests knew not Jesus to be Christ, knew not that
he was the Heir. For St. John says plainly, That the world knew him not, John
1.10. And St. Peter upbraiding the Jews for killing the Prince of life, uses
these very words, I wot that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your
Rulers, Act. 317. And St. Paul speaking of the Wisdom of God, which I take to
be his Son, tells us in express words, That none of the Princes of this world
knew it, for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.

But I answer, First, To that of St. John, the world knew not Christ, that is,
the greatest part of it. To that of St. Paul, None of the Princes of this world
knew him, that is, few of them. To that of St. Peter, the Jews and their
Rulers slew him ignorantly, that is, some of them did so, thus the ordinary
gloss would have those places construed.

Secondly, I answer, That the Ignorance of the Chief Priests was not Purae
negationis, but Pravae dispositionis, if they were ignorant of Christ, it was
because they would be ignorant, as the people used to say to their Seers, See
not, so these Seers themselves seem to have stopped their ears, and shut their
eyes, for otherwise they could not choose but acknowledge Jesus to be the
Messiah; because all the prophesies of his coming were fulfilled. First, That
prophecy, Genesis 49.10. pointing at the time of his birth, The Scepter was then
departed from Judah, the Jews paid contribution, they were Tributaries to the
Romans. Secondly, that prophecy, Mic. 5.2. pointing out the place of his
Nativity, he was born in Bethleem of Judea, which was the place assigned for
Christ's birth, as these chief Priests or their predecessors told King Herod.

But if neither the time, nor place of his birth, yet his miracles might
perfectly assure them that he was the Messiah. And therefore when St. John
Baptist sent two of his Disciples to ask him if he were Christ, all the answer
he would return by them was this; Go, and show John again those things ye do
hear and see; the blind receive their sight, the deaf hear, the lame walk, the
Lepers are cleansed, the dead are raised up etc. Mat. 11.4, 5. And when Christ
comes, some asked the question, shall he do more miracles than these which
this man does? John 7.31. Though the chief Priests then would not believe his
words, yet they might have believed him for his works sake. But neither of
these would prevail with them; they had ears, yet would not hear; they had
eyes, yet would not see, which was a most notorious aggravation of their
Treason, for had they been stark blind, their sin happily might have been
remitted; but because seeing they would not see, therefore their sin remains.
And this sin of theirs seems to be no better than the very sin against the
Holy Ghost; for against conscience, out of mere malice they conspired to put
this Heir to death. And I pray God the Ringleaders of our rebellious
Reformation be not guilty of the self-same sin, for it seems to be out of a
despetate, inveterate malice that they persist in their conspiracy against the
best of Kings. But these Traitors shall bring up the rear of my Discourse. I
pass therefore from the second part of the Text, the person that the chief
Priests conspired against, which was the Heir, to the third, which is the
Formal cause, or Manner of their conspiracy, They reasoned among themselves,
saying, Come, let us kill him. (...), they reasoned. Treason is a sin of
deliberation, a studied sin. These chief Priests reasoned, they argued the
case. All sins are not Cognita, known sins, there are sins of ignorance, as
well as sins of knowledge. But there is neither Ignorartia facti, nor
Ignorantia juris in Treason, it is wilfully contrived and complotted, it is a
premeditated sin. To sin out of infirmity or ignorance, to be overtaken in a
fault, this is but (as it were) Chance-medly, pardonable by the Law of God and
man. But to sin with a full career, of set purpose to consult about it, this is
no less than wilful murder, a sin that never must go unpardoned; and yet this
was the sin of these chief Priests in our Text, They reasoned among themselves,
saying, Come, let us kill him.

(...), Come, wicked men use to call and invite one another to commit sin, they
are a sociable sort of people, they are unwilling to go to hell alone, they
entise and engage as many as they can to be partakers with them, they are in
league and covenant; there is a combination among them, especially among
Traitors, such as these chief Priests were, who conspired against Christ, just
as Joseph's brethren against him, (...), Come let us kill him. Joseph indeed
escaped with life, thanks to his Eldest brother; but Jesus had not one Reuben
to speak for him, none but a woman, and she could not prevail, the of Kings
the earth standing up, and the Rulers taking counsel together against the Lord,
and against his Christ, for against the holy child Jesus both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of the Jews were gathered together;
they gathered them together against the soul of the righteous, that they might
condemn the innocent blood, They reasoned among themselves, saying, Come, let
us kill him.

Kill him. As the Devil is a murderer, so all those that are of his party
thirst after blood. Shimei did a great deal of wrong to David in calling him
so, but otherwise Bloody-man, and man of Belial may well go together, for there
is no man desperately wicked, but he is a blood-thirsty man. It has been thus
from the beginning of the world, and will be so to the end. Cain was of that
wicked one, what is next (...), and slew his brother, 1. Ioh. 3.12. This was
also the resolution of wicked Esau, The days of mourning for my father are at
hand, then, says he, will I slay my brother Jacob, Genesis 27.41. Thus Pharaoh
commanded the Egyptian Mid-wives to murder every male-child of the Hebrews, if
it be a Son, then ye shall kill him, Exodus 1.6. And thus Herod slew all the
children in Bethleem, from two years old and under. Math. 2.16. Thus we read of
Herodias, that nothing would satiate her malice but St. I hn Baptist's blood.
Math. 14.8. Thus the Jews cried out against St. Paul, away with such a fellow
from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live, Act. 22.22. and Act.
23.12. we find some that bound themselves under a curse (they took the
Covenant^ saying, that they would neither eat nor drink, till they had killed
Paul. And the whore of Babylon is said to be drunk with the blood of Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Revel. 17.6. I might be almost
infinite in examples, but this in our Text shall be instar omnium, we may see
the bloody-mindednes of wicked men by these chief Priests, who conspired not to
banish or imprison, but each to murder Gods own Son, they reasoned among
themselves, saying, come let us kill him. And the voices of the multitude, and
of the chief Priests prevailed, this treason stood not always in consultation,
but went on to action; what the common counsel determined wickedly, the common
people executed greedily, they cast the Heir out of the vineyard; and slew him
with this dreadful imprecation, His blood be on us, and on our children: And
seeing our Master was thus used, we must expect no better meature, but even to
be killed all the day long, as the Psalmist speaks, and to be counted as
sheep appointed to be slain, the Alpha, and the Omega of the Church is writ in
blood,

Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguine crevit, Sanguine firmatur, sanguine
finis erit. And we need not wonder at this, if we believe our Savior, for it
is but that which he told us long ago, that we should be hated and hunted
after for his sake, yea, the time will come, says he, that whosoever kills
you will think he does God service. A prophecy that seems to point directly
at our very days, when the bloudiest of Soldiers think themselves the best of
Saints, when murdering of loyal Christians goes for pure religion. But though
our blood be shed like water on every side, yet our God that is true and holy,
will, in his good time, judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth, there will on day be a strict inquisition made for blood, for the blood
of Strafford and Canterbury, for the blood of Lucas and Lisle, for the blood of
Tomkins and Chaloner, for the blood of Yeomans, Bourchier, and Burleigh, for
the blood of Dunkin, and others in Kent; there will be a time, I say, if not in
this, yet in the next world, when all the righteous innocent blood that has of
late years been shed in this Kingdom, shall be required at the hands of this
Tyrannical I will not call it, but a Satanical generation.

And so I pass from the third part of the Text, which was the Manner of the
chief Priests conspiracy, in these words, They reasoned among themselves,
saying, Come let us kill him, to the fourth and last, the End of their
conspiracy, which was, that they might be Lords of the Manor, that the
inheritance may be ours. But now the Husbandmen, etc.

In every action, there is both Opus, and Intentio oper antis, the doing of the
work, and the end for which we do it, and by an Hysteron Proteron, the last of
these is first, what is last in execution, the same is first in our intention,
the End being always the beginning of the action.

Now it is an Axiom in Philosophy, Finis and bonum convertuntur, let the
action be what it will, good is always propounded for the End, either Honestum
or Iucundum, or Utile, either an honest, or a pleasant, or a profitable end,
they that do evil, will say they do this that good may come of it, good to
themselves at least, though hurt to others, or if it be not good indeed, yet it
shall seemingly be good, and the last of those three ends, the chief Priests
here propound unto themselves, Bonum utile, they set up profit for their end,
Come, say they, let us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours. They
propound the same end with those sinners that Solomon cautioneth us to take
heed of, Prove. 1.11, 13. Where hope of gain is used as a motive to invite
others to join with them, Come, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily
for the innocent without cause, we shall find all precious substance, we shall
fill our houses with spoil. And at the 19. ver. there is just such another
passage, So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which takes
away the life of the owners thereof. -- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis
Auri sacra fames? --
There is not any villainy but will go down with a man, if it have a golden
bait. The love of money is the root of all evil. 1. Tim. 6.10. Balaam will
endeavor to curse Israel, if he may gain but the rewards of divination. Achan
will take of the accursed thing, if he may gain a Baylonish garment, two
hundred shekels of filver, and a wedge of gold. Saul will spare the spoil of
Amalek, if he may gain good store of rich plunder. Gehazi will tell an arrant
lie to Naaman, if he may gain two talents, and new clothes. Judas will betray
his Lord and Master, if he may gain thirty pieces of silver, The Soldiers will
say that Christ was stolen out of the grave, if the chief Priests will give
them large money. Iezebel will plot Naboths death, if she may gain his vineyard;
she proclaimed a fast, yet knew no other godliness but gain; and this likewise
set the chief Priests awork to conspire the death of Christ, Come, say they let
us kill him, that the inheritance may be ours. That we may be no longer
dressers, but possessors of the vineyard, that there may be no Superior, no
Lord, over us, but that the Church may be ruled and governed as we list, that
the doctrine and discipline of it may be what we see good; nay, that we may
have dominion as well over men's freehold, as their faith, that their
consciences and coffers may both be at our command. This was the end that the
chief Priests aimed at, when they conspired against the Heir, come, let us kill
him, that the inheritance may be ours.

And herein the Bishop of Rome looks very like them, who styles himself
Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's successor, he says that he is the right Heir, the
Head of Christ's whole Church, he arrogateth the title of Universal Bishop, he
chalengeth (as it were) the Wardship, nay the Lordship of the Church,
whatsoever he says must go for Gospel, merely because he says it, he takes
upon him more than Apostolical authority, even that which is Gods peculiar, To
forgive sins, for which cause fall the silly people unto him, and thereout he
sucketh no small advantage, it is a mass of money that his Pardons annually
bring in to him. And other stratagems he has, but all to enrich himself, he
will release men out of his pretended Purgatory, if they will give him money
enough, he will warrant they shall be heirs of Heaven, though herein he
contradict himself, for sometimes he tells them, that they can never be sure
of heaven til they come thither; yet thus he befooleth the people, he will
warrant them an inheritance in heaven, if they will make him their Heir on
Earth. His whole Religion indeed is nothing else but a politic project to get
money, he feeds not the flock of Christ, but feeds upon it, he keeps the
people in ignorance, seeking not them, but theirs, He and all his Cardinals,
Monks, and Abbots, they seek their own profit and preferment, their own gain
and greatness, like these chief Priest in our Text, whose aim was to get the
inheritance, Come, say they, Let us kill him that the inheritance may be ours.
And so I have gone through the several parts of the Text, a few words of
application, and I have done.

Our Text is a plain conspiracy against our Savior. And the conspiracy of
Levellers against our Sovereign will match it right. Our Savior let out his
vineyard to Husbandmen, so our Sovereign did (as it were) let out his Kingdom
to Statesmen, he gave them power to prune and dress it, to take off
superfluities, to rectify enormities, he gave them their hearts desire, and
denied them not the request of their lips, he granted that which none but a
most indulgent Landlord would ere have granted; they asked a lease of him, and
he gave them a long lease, longer than any of their Predecessors ever had, he
made them no Tenants for years, much less at will, but reserving his
fee-simple, I mean his Negative voice, he gave it under his hand that he would
not re-enter, till they themselves consented to it.

O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua n^rint, Agricolas! What men were ever so
happy, as these might have been? How might the glory of their God, of their
King, of their Country, and even of themselves have been advanced by them? But
neglecting the three first, they aimed chiefly at the last, at their own glory.
For as soon as their unlucky lease was sealed, they straight way thought
themselves freeholders, taking Regal power upon them, as if the Militia, the
Kings Inheritance, had been theirs, they divested their Sovereign of it, and
invested themselves with it, making the Heir of three Kingdoms (though no
child in any thing, but malice) to differ nothing from a servant, when he was
Lord of all. For, without him, they took upon them to un-make, and to make
Laws, saying, we have the Legislative power, who is Lord over us? And that
they might the better enjoy the Crown, they entered into Covenant against the
Miter, resolved to abolish the excellent government of Bishops, root and
branch. And because the King against his oath and conscience would not yield to
this, Come, said they, let us compel him to it by force of arms; they set the
people awork first to mutiny, then to fight against him, as who should say, we
have no part in Charles, neither have we inheritance in the son of James, every
man to his tents, O England, they proclaimed open war against Him and his
Adherents, giving out Commissions to kill and slay all persons that should
oppose them, their Sovereign Lord the King was not excepted, for bullets cannot
distinguish between a Scepter and a Shovel, the sword (as David said) devoureth
one as well as another. But seeing they could not kill him in the field, they
have since attempted it in prison; it is too apparent that the Ringleaders of
this rebellion had an hand in that late conspiracy against him. Nor is it only
Carolus, but even Rex that they strike at going about not only to kill the
Person, but the very office of the King.

Come, say they, Let us break his bands asunder, and cast away his cords from
us; Come, let us make no more addresses to him, but let us make our selves a
Free State, that the name of Monarchy may be no more in remembrance. And to
effect this, they have made the Kingdom not only a field, but even a sea of
blood, breathing out nothing but slaughter against all loyal Subjects, killing
and slaying, butchering and murdering their brethren, whose blood they have
shed like water on every side, like that woman in the Revelation, drinking
themselves drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus.

It is no marvel if these bloodhounds will not have God's Commandments read in
Churches, for one of these tells them expreslly, they must do no murder, and
as almost all the rest, so most especially that sixth Commandment they count
Apocryphal, for murdering of men is their profession, and a great part of their
Religion, as if Mars were their god, and Mahomet their Messiah. Let them usurp
the name of Christians while they will, I am sure their bloody practices
proclaim them arrant Turks, Christianity is for the saving of men's lives,
Turcism for the destroying of them, and such is the Religion of these Rebels,
Destruction is in their way, they are still opposing of Treaties; the way of
peace have they not known, like horsleaches they never think they have blood
enough, they would have it even to the horse bridles, as if they had a mind to
swim in blood.

And all this under pretense of Religion and Reformation a pretense so pitiful
and so threadbare, that I wonder men are not ashamed to be seduced by it, for
Religion was ever made the stalking horse to Rebellion; and indeed this must be
the pretense, or else the design will soon be dashed, for should they proclaim
themselves open Athiests, and profess the subverting of Religion, I think the
world is not so bad, but that it would be ready to tear them all in pieces.
They are bound therefore to pretend piety, like Absalom and Jezebel, but their
actions tell the world that they aim at other ends, even at Libertinism, that
they may be lawless, that they may do what they list, that they may roar and
whore, yet never be questioned or controuled, for there are no men living more
given to the flesh, than they that pretend so extremely to the spirit; but
chiefly the Inheritance, the Kingdoms wealth is that they aim at, they seek not
the Kingdom of God, but the riches of this Kingdom, that the Revenue of the
Crown, and the Patrimony of the Miter, and the estate of every loyal Subject
may be theirs. Most truly may that of the Prophet be applied to them, Jer.
22.17. Their eyes, and their hearts are not but for their covetousness, and for
to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence to do it, witness
their Sequestrations, their Decimations, their Confiscations, their
Contributions, their Excize, their Fifth, and Twentieth part, besides their
greediness in getting all the gainful offices in the Kingdom. Their love of
money has been the root of all evils, we may see this by their dividing of the
spoil, their sharing of the Kingdoms wealth among themselves, especially by
their sacrilegious selling and usurping of Church Lands, they had long-ago
ended the Wars, or rather they had never begun it, but to get these Lands; they
kill, as St. James speaks, because they desire to have, to have other men's
possessions, the whole world, and even their own conscience bear witness to
this Truth. And their Chaplains of the Assembly are just like them, those
Iourneymen Rebels that love the wages of unrighteousness, that have four
shillings a day to make Rebellion good by Scripture; an heart they have
exercised about covetous practices, through covetousness with fained words,
making merchandise of men, Their aim is to get the greatest Livings, even
Pluralities, which once they so much railed at; and under the name, forsooth,
of Lecturers, they creep into Deans and Prebendaries houses, some get
Master-ships of Colleges, some of Hospitals; all their aim is that the
Inheritance, the profitable preferments may be theirs.

I shall not need to rake this Dunghill, nor stir this Camerina any further. It
is most evident how bloody and covetous all these rebellious vine-dressers are.
What therefore shall the Lord of the vineyard do unto them? Sure in Justice he
might destroy them (though he deligheth more in Mercy, and might let out his
vineyard to others, he might discard these unjust Judges, he might displace
these unfaithful Stewards, these Zimries deserve no peace, no pardon, that
would have slain their Master, these Sheba's deserve to have their heads thrown
over the wall, these Hamans to be executed upon their own gallows, those mine
enemies (might the King say) which would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before me, -- neque est lex justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art periresua.
They might justly be served, as the Scythian Queen served Cyrus, have their
heads thrown into a blood-bowl, with this exprobration of their Tyranny,
Satiate vos sanguine, Sanguisugae, quem sitistis. Their heads should go down to
the grave with blood, theirs especially that have shed the blood of war in
Peace, that for mere envy, have murdered their Captives in cold blood. And
methinks indeed these men of blood should have such an Hell within themselves,
that, like Cain, they should be afraid that every one that meets them, will
slay them. For blood thirsty men, as David speaks, shall not live out half
their days, if they do, they seldom die peaceably in their beds, Ad generum
Cereris sine caede and vulnere pauci
Descendunt -- and sicca morte tyranni.
But to speak no more of those that are absent, let me now apply my self to you
here present, and let me now entreat you to be no longer-partakers in their
sins, walk not ye in the way with them, refrain your feet from then path, for
their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood; and bloodshed, rethren,
how light soever now esteemed, is a most crying sin, the cries of it enter into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Wash therefore not your hands only, but your
hearts too from this sin, let no bloody thoughts any longer lodge in you. As
the death of men is dear in the sight of God, so let it be in your sight.
Remember what Almighty God says, Genesis 9.5, 6. Surely the blood of your lives
will I require, at the hand of every man's brother will I require the life of
man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Take heed then
of shaking hands with those men that delight in blood.

This sin will not suffer God to be quiet, till he avenge it. To the slain his
ears are open, but fast shut to those that slay them, all your days of Fasting
and Humiliation will be ineffectual, if ye be still for War, though ye make
never so many prayers. God will not hear you, so long a^ your hands are full of
blood. Wash your selves therefore, I beseech you, make you clean from the blood
of all men, be no longer accessory to murder, by raising money to maintain War;
ye know that no Murderer (no not a second-hand Murderer) has eternal life
abiding in him. Let then your prayer be, that God would deliver you from this
kind of blood-guiltiness, and hereafter make better use of your money, make it
not the price of blood. Cursed be he, says God by Jeremy, that keeps back
his sword from blood, Jer. 48.10. A place of Scripture that Assembly-men have
strangely wrested of late years, pressing it upon men's conscience as a warrant
for them to cut throats, urging it as a Commission and command for them to kill
and slay; and many thousands have followed their pernicious Doctrine, even
London, the sometime faithful City is become an Harlot, Righteousness did once
lodge in it, but now Murderers. But let not these bloody wolvish Prophets
seduce you any more. Woe to the bloody City, this is the voice of the Lords
Prophets, And if any man teach you otherwise, let him be accursed.

O that ye would know therefore in this your day the things that belong unto
your peace, lest otherwise they be hid for ever from your eyes. Consider what
Almighty God faith to the Jews, Isa. 1.19, 20. For the very same he says now
to you, If ye be willing and obedient, willing to have your King restored, and
will henceforth be obedient to him, Ye shall eat the good of the Land, but if
ye refuse his gracious pardon, and resolve still to rebel against him, Ye shall
be devoured with the suord, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. If ye
still keep up the sword, ye will in the end perish by it; your sword will
certainly penetrate your own heart. Obey not them therefore that think they can
kill the body, and that would have you make a trade of killing, but obey him
that can kill body and soul, whose express Command is, that ye shall not kill.
If ye will not follow peace, ye shall never see the Lord, if here ye banish
that from you, he will hereafter banish you from him, he will renounce you with
those words of David, Psalm 139.19. Depart from me, ye bloody, ye blood-thirsty
men. And as God abhors the blood-thirsty, so does he the covetous man, Psalm
10. He that said, Do not kill, said also, Do not covet, as therefore ye must
abstain from blood, so must ye from covetousness; let not this be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints, but learn of the Apostle in whatsoever state
ye are, therewith to be content; see that ye covet no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel, but having food and raiment, be therewith content. Ye know whose Law
it is, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, take heed then, brethren, of
coveting Bishops houses, or any thing else that is another, and not yours. All
covet, all lose, ye have good Scripture for it. Jer. 8.10. I will give their
wives unto others, and their fields to them that shall inherit them, for every
one from the least even unto the greatest is given to covetousness; from the
Prophet even unto the Priest; They that greedily get away other men's, beget a
gangrene in their own Estates* De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius Haeres.
Take heed therefore, as our Savior exhorts, and beware of covetousness; the
caution is ingeminated, and therefore the more emphatical, Luke 12.15. Consider
also what St. Paul says. Ephesians. 5.5. No covetous man, who is an Idolater, has
any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. And consider what the
same Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6 9. They that will be rich (as it were whether God
will or no) fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. Covetousness
tempts men to murder; this i^ that which makes Rebels so bloody as they are;
From whence come. Wars and fightings among you? Surely Covetousness has been
the Original of them all; the lower sort of people strive to be in an higher
room; the poor would fain turn Tables with the Rich, they would thus have every
valley to be filled, and every mountain and hill to be laid low, as if in this
sense, every man were bound to seek another wealth; they that were born to
nothing, strive to get others birthrights, calling themselves, forsooth, the
Saints, who, say they, must inherit the earth; they would make themselves rich,
that have nothing, and others poor, that have great riches.

But to conclude, this brethren, is not the office of Saints, but of the King
of Saints, it is the Lord that makes poor, and makes rich, 1 Samuel 2.7.
Presume not then to take God's office out of his hand, strive not per fas and
nefas to make your selves rich, if God have made you poor, but be content with
that portion of outward things that he has given you. The silver is mine, and
the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts, Hag. 2.8. Deny him not therefore
that privilege, which your own selves challenge, give him leave to do what he
pleases with his own. Let not the least root of covetousness remain in you,
remember that godliness with contentment is great gain; if the riches of others
increase, set not your hearts upon them, seek not these things below, but those
above, strive not for an inheritance on earth, but to have one in heaven; that
ye may banish cruelty; let covetousness be banished first, that ye may not
thirst after other men's blood; covet not their goods. Have thou killed, said
God to Ahab, and also taken possession? Well, ye know what became of him and
Jezebel for this. Stifle therefore not only your murtherous, but also your
covetous thoughts. If you must needs be killing, mortify your earthly members;
if ye must needs be coveting, covet earnestly the best gifts, God has chosen
the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of his Kingdom; labor
therefore to get the gold of faith, whereby ye may be rich toward God; and
then, though here ye have no temporal Inheritance, yet hereafter ye shall have
one far better, ye shall be Heirs apparent unto Heaven, ye shall inherit glory,
God will give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified: Though
now you are in your nonnage, yet at the last day ye shall be perfect men; ye
shall attain to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, who shall
then invite you to enter upon your Inheritance, in these words, Come ye blessed
of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
world.

FINIS.
A SEVERE Sentence AGAINST SECVRE CITIZENS.

A Sermon PREACHED At ST. Mary's in Oxford, Upon Sunday, March 17. 1644.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

A SEVERE SENTENCE AGAINST SECVRE CITIZENS.
JONAH 3.4. And he cried, and said, yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.


HEre are two of the divine Attributes, which are Gods Mercy, and his Justice,
so that I may say with the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 11.22. Behold here the
goodness and the severity of God, for the words of our Text are both a
Premonition, and a Commination; as they give warning, so there is Mercy in
them, Adhuc quadraginta dies, yet forty days; as they threaten, so there is
judgment in them, Subvertetur Nineveh, Nineveh shall be overthrown. This might
be the general division of these words. But if we examine them more
particularly, they will afford us these five parts. Here is first the Preacher,
He, the Prophet Jonah. Secondly, The Manner of his preaching, He cried.
Thirdly; The Matter of his preaching, he threatened an overthrow. Fourthly, The
place of his preaching, the City Nineveh. Fifthly, The Time, when his Preaching
or Prophecy was to be accomplished and fulfilled, and that was within forty
days, And he cried, and said, yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.

And of these in order: I begin with the first part, the Preacher, He, the
Prophet Jonah. And in him we may observe four things; His Name, His Country,
His Parentage, His Commission. The first thing observable in the Preacher or
Prophet, is his Name, which I shall little more than name, Jonah, which is
Hebrew for a Dove. And in some sense every Prophet or Preacher should be a
Jonah, should be a Dove, not only innocent and harmless, but also patient and
revengeless, without gall or bitterness, putting up any wrong or injury,
without desire of revenge, like a Dove. The second thing observable in the
Prophet or Preacher here, is his Country, he was a Jew, I am an Hebrew, so he
told the Mariners, cap. 1. verse. 9. An Hebrew, and sent to the Ninevites, who
were Assyrians, why should they give any credit to such a fellow? Suppose a
Weather-beaten wandering Jew (Jonah looked now like such a one) should come into
our chief City, and proclaim that within forty days it should be overthrown,
O how ridiculous would men think such words as these, they would certainly take
them but for some Jewish fables. But these Ninevites were nothing so
incredulous as men are now adays, they conferred not with flesh and blood, but
repented at the preaching of Jonah, though a Jew, though a mere stranger to
them. But the men of our age are so far from giving heed to strangers, that
those of their own Nation cannot bring them to repentance. The third thing
observable in the Prophet or Preacher here, is his Parentage, he was the son of
Amittai, chap. 1. ver. 1. Now Amittai, being interpreted, is as much as True or
Truth. And this Amittai is therefore thought by some to have been that son of
the widow of Zerephath raised up by Elijah. The probability whereof is taken
from those words of the widdowwoman. 1 King 17. ult. By this I know that thou
art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is Truth. From
whence some would observe, that because the woman found Elijah a true Prophet
in restoring of her son to life, therefore she called her sons name Amittai,
True, or Truth. But this cannot be so for two reasons, as Luther has well
observed. For first, Elijah lived, we know, in the days of Ahab. But Jonah and
Amittai lived in the days of Jeroboaem the second. Secondly, The widow of
Zarephath was a Zidonian, and so a Gentile. But Jonah and Amittai were of
Gath-Hepher in the Tribe of Zebulon, and therefore Jews, 2 King 14.25. But to
pass by this Genealogy, we will observe only in general, that our Prophet here
was the son of Amittai, that is, the son of Truth. And so indeed should all
Prophets, all Preachers of the Word be, sons of Amittai, like this our Prophet
here, not speaking lies in hypocrisy, but rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

But how few such sons of Amittai: are there at this day? Our Saviors
prediction is long since come to pass; false Prophets are risen up amongst us,
and have deceived many, such as have changed the truth of God into a lie,
privily bringing in most damnable Heresies. And too too many follow their
pernicious ways; by reason of whom, the way of the Church of England, the good
old way of Truth is evil spoken of. Thus a wonderful and horrible thing is
committed in our land. The Prophets prophecy falsely, and the people love to
have it so; and what will they do, unless it please God to restrain them in the
end thereof?

But here perhaps ye may ask, as Pilate once did, what is truth, how shall we
know the sons of Amitai, these sons of truth, how shall we try the spirits
whether they be of God? For answer to which I must lead you to the third thing
observable in our Prophet here, and that in his warrant or Commission, he was
sent from God. And he was sent twice to Nineveh before he went thither once, he
had one commission in the first Capter, and another in this third. And so had
the Apostles of our blessed Savior, one in the tenth of St. Mathow, and
another in the eight and twentieth. No man takes this honor to himself.,
says the Apostle, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. If any
man shall intrude himself, we are to brand him for a false prophet, for he that
enters not by the door into the sheepfold, by the door of Episcopal
ordination, as well as that which some call their pretended inspiration, the
same is a thief and a robber. And how many such thieves and robbers are there
at this day? Such are they which presume to preach when they were never sent^^
great is the company of such pitiful preachers, as some call them, but the
Lord gave them not the word; though now therefore they stretch forth their
mouth unto the heaven, and though their tongue goes through the world, yet our
Savior at the last day will put such a question to them, as they shall never
answer, wherefore did ye preach my law, how durst such as you take my covenant
in your mouth?

And so I pass from the first part of the Text, which was the Preacher, He, to
the second, which is the Manner of his preaching, he Cried. And this is the
tenor of many other prophets commissions as well as his. For thus Isaiahs
commission runs, c. 58. v. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, etc. And thus Jeremies,
Cry in the ears of Jerusalem, c. 2. v. 2. Thus likewise Hosea's commission
runs, cry aloud at Beth-aven. c. 5. v. 8. And we read of S. John Baptist
that he was a Crier in the wilderness. Isa. 40.3. And so should indeed all
prophets, all preachers of the word be.

For Praedico some will have derived from Praeco, the Preacher therefore should
be a public Crier, to cry the lost sheep of the house of Israel, or he should
be a Crier to rouse men from carnal security, or, as it were, a Bell man, like
St, Paul, telling them it is high time for them to awake out of sleep. For if
men be not dead in sin, yet sure they are asleep, if not fast asleep, yet their
ears are dull of hearing. Preachers therefore must not whisper, they must cry
aloud. Not as if they should be like Plinies nightingale neither, vox, et
praeterea nihil, their Doctrine to consist merely in their voice, for what St.
James says of the wrath of man, the same may I say of his voice, the voice of
man works not the righteousness of God. And yet how is vociferation and
lung-labour cried up in these days! if he do but thunder and thump, Oh! non
vox hominem sonat, who teaches like him, will the women say, a great prophet
they cry out is risen up among them. But a Preachers whole duty consists not
in making of a great noise, there must not only be words to sound, but there
must be sound words, there is a Dixit in the Text, as well as a Clamavit, the
Prophet did not only cry, but cried, and said, which leads me briefly from
the second part of the Text, the manner of Ionah's preaching, he cried, to the
third, which is the Matter of his preaching, he said there should be an
overthrow,

There are three names especially given to Prophecy in holy Scripture. First,
it is called the word of the Lord, from the Lords revealing of it. Secondly, it
is called a vision, from the Prophets attending to it. Thirdly, it is called a
burden, from the peoples groaning under it.

The name given to this prophecy of Jonah is verbum Domini, the word of the
Lord, chapter 1. ver. 1. But by the argument of it, this seems to challenge
rather the title of Nahum's prophecy, which is Onus Nineve, the burden of
Nineveh, Nah. 1.1. For it threatens the city of Nineveh with utter ruin and
desolation, Subvertetur Nineve, Nineveh shall be overthrown. As if he should
have said, though Nineveh, like Jerusalem, be full of goodly buildings, yet
there shall not be left in it one Stone upon another, which shall not be thrown
down; it shall be made empty, it shall be made waste, it shall be turned upside
down. And if Nineveh had been served so, (as indeed afterward it was) yet
Almighty God might have asked as David once did in another case, what have I
now done? Is there not a cause; For though our Text make no mention of it, yet
if we look back to the second verse of the first Chapter; we shall find it
there, Arise, go to Nineveh that great City; but why? the reason follows
before the verse be out, For their wickedness is come up before me. The
iniquity of these Ninevites was as great as their City, and this was the reason
why God told them that they should be overthrown. Sin is that which provokes
Almighty God, both to execute and to threaten Judgment. Which teaches us all
to fear the cause for fear of the effect; to eschew evil, left we provoke God
to threaten us with Judgment. It is a fearful thing, says the Apostle, to
fall into the hands of the living God. He shall rain, says the Psalmist, snares
upon the sinners, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, this shall be their
portion to drink. When the Scripture speaks of God in Judgment, it
represents him terrible and dreadful, it describes him in the most
affrighting manner that can be imagined. I will give you but one expression or
instance for all the rest, Our God is a consuming fire, says the Apostle. Heb.
12. ult. The Nations are but as a drop of a bucket, says the Prophet, Isa.
40.15. Now if that fire at Elijas sacrifice made nothing, as it were, of twelve
barrels, but licked up the whole trench-full of water; what would become of us,
think we then, if God should enter into judgment with us, when we, and the
Nations, even all the Nations of the earth are but as one drop of a bucket, and
God is a consuming fire: we must needs cry out as those Israelites did at the
promulgation of the Law: surely this great fire will consume us. Let us then,
brethren, give no entertainment to the evil of sin, lest the evil of punishment
dog and ghost it at the heels, lest we provoke God to threaten us as his
Prophet here threatens Nineveh, Subvertetur Nineve, Nineveh shall be
overthrown; Overthrown, says he, oh but Durus est hic sermo, this is a hard
saying, who can hear it? for most men are like Ahab, they hate a Michaiah, a
plain-dealing Prophet or Preacher, because he prophecyeth no good concerning
them, but evil. Or they are like those who are complained of, Isa. 30.10. Which
say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right
things, speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits. And this being the
humor of most men, how then durst Jonah threaten the Ninevites with an
Overthrow? yes, as St. John Baptist resolved to tell Herod of his incest,
though he lost his head for it; so let the Ninevites here take it how they
will, Jonah is resolved to do his message; Subvertetur Nineve, Nineveh shall be
overthrown. Here is an instruction then for all those that are the Ministers of
Christ, not to play the Gnathoes, not to be Placentia-Preachers, not to fashion
their Sermons according to the humor and temper of their Disciples, though
indeed, Is quaestus nunc est multo uberrimus, this is the way to thrive, I
know, for this cause fall the people unto them, and thereout suck these
Temporizers no small advantage. But this must not be our practice, we have not
so learned Christ: We must not be the devils Fiddlers, to play what tune the
people bid us, nor must we be the Devils upholders to sew pillows under men's
elbowes; nor must we be the devils Plaisterers to daub men up with untempered
mortar; we must not make fair weather, preaching peace, peace to sinners, when
there is no peace to the wicked, but we must plainly denounce wrath and
vengeance against impenitent sinners, unless speedily converted, threatening
them that they shall be confounded: we must deal with them as Jonah deals
here with the City Nineveh, who threatens it with a Subvertetur, it shall be
overthrown. And so I pass from the third part of the Text, the matter of
Jonah's preaching, an overthrow, to the fourth, which is the place of his
preaching, the City Nineveh, Subvertetur Nineve, Nineveh shall be overthrown.
And this Nineveh, Strabo tells us, was the Metropolis of Assyria, the chief
City of that Country, situate by the river Lycus. A City we know it was, and
(...) Civitas, from (...), Multus, from the multitude of people that use to be
in Cities. In the Original it is called a City of God, which at first sight
seems somewhat strange, seeing there was neither Worship, nor Temple, nor
Prophet of God in it. Luther thinks it was so called from the care of God to
preserve it. But I am rather of Oecolampadius his opinion in this, who will
have it called a City of God, by an Heb a^sm, for so indeed the Hebrews, when
they speak of an high mountain, a tall Cedar, or a great City, because Gods
dwelling is on high, and because he is of such immensity, therefore they think
they cannot express these things so to the life, as by calling it a Mountain,
or a Cedar, or a City of god. And therefore that which should be Civitas. Dei,
according to the Original, is rendered Civitas magna, by St. Jerome, whom our
English Translators follow, calling it a great City. But if Nineveh were so
great a City, even of three days journey, as we read, how then durst Jonah be
so bold as threaten it after this manner? Yes, he had good reason for it, for
Prophets must not be afraid of the face of men, though briars and thorns were
with them, and though they dwelt among Scorpions: we that are Preachers must of
all other, be full of godly courage and resolution, not fearing to denounce
wrath and vengeance against sinners, though for number they be many, though for
Power mighty, Jonah here threatens Nineveh, though an exceeding great City.
Nineveh, I say, a great City. Little Zoar, we know was spared; Great Nineveh
must be overthrown. God regards not so much the goodliness, as the goodness
of a City. Nay, the greater it is, if wicked, the greater punishment he still
lays upon it. For it is with sinful places, as with sinful persons, the
more famous the one, the more infaemous the other; Nineveh-sins, London-sins,
City-sins, these are exemplary, leading sins, they may do a great deal of
mischief in the Country; the Ninevites sins were aggravated from the greatness
of their City.

Again, Nineveh is intepreted Speciosa, fair or beautiful. An Epithet given
also to Jerusalem, which was indeed called beauty in the abstract, the
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth, as may be easily gathered
from Lam. 2.15. And yet as beautiful as these Cities were, there was neither
of them spared. What became of Jerusalem, ye have heard. And though Nineveh
escaped awhile, yet she went not still unpunished, but returning to her old
sins, Nahum's prophecy fully came to pass, and this likewise of our Prophet
Jonah here, Nineveh was overthrown. God regards no beauty, but the beauty of
holiness, beauty in the Abstract, without this, it is no Beauty, but deformity,
Nineveh, though never so beautiful, yet God threatens this very Nineveh to
overthrow it. And so I pass from the fourth part of the Text, the place of
Jonah's preaching, the City Nineveh, to the fifth and last, which is the Time
when his prophecy or preaching was to be accomplished and fulfilled, and that
was within forty days. And he cried and said, yet forty days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown.

Forty, but why so? (...), yet three days, so it is in the Septuagint, and
how come they to fall short of the Original seven and thirty days? The
ordinary gloss answers it thus, Sive per quadraginta dies, sive per triduum,
idem Christus significatus est, whether it be forty, or three days, the same
Christ is hereby signified, who was three days in the grave, and afterward
forty days conversant with his Disciples. But this seems to me a very
affected and far fetched answer.

Hugo Cardinalis will have a further mystery in it. Tres dies, says he, Fidem
Trinitatis, quadraginta poenitentiae tempus significant, the three days in the
Septuagint, says he, point at faith in the holy Trinity, the forty days, in
the Original, point at time of repentance; and therefore, as he thinks, was
this voluntary mistake and difference between the Greek and Hebrew, to signify
that faith and repentance are the way to avert Gods Judgments. But whether the
one of these by three days aimed at such a faith, I will not say; that the
other by forty days aims at repentance, this is somewhat probable; For
Numerus quadragenarius, poenitentialis est, says Rupert. the number of forty
is a penitential number; it is said therefore to these Ninevites here, Adhuc
quadraginta dies, yet forty days, to let them know that there was yet time of
grace and repentance for them, and to admonish them that they husband well this
time of their visitation. For as other days, so even the day of grace and
repentance has an end. Esau found no place of repentance, though he sought it
carefully with Tears, Heb. 12.17. The very time of repentance lasts but for a
time, according to that of the Angel, which swear by him that lives for ever
and ever, that there should be time no longer, Rev. 10.6. Let this accelerate
our repentance, while there is time for us to repent, while there is Adhuc
quadraginta dies, yet forty days. Ye may remember how our Savior bewaileth
Jerusalem for trifling away this precious time, Luke 19.41. He beheld the City,
and wept over it, saying, If, or, O that thou had known, even thou at lest,
in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace, but now they are hid
from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall
cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round; and keep thee in on every
side, and shall lay thee even with the ground, and thy children within thee,
and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knew
not the time of thy visitation.

It is most dangerous, brethren, to trifle away the day of grace and mercy,
Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. It will be
too late for us to knock when the door of mercy is shut; to day, if we will
hear Gods voice, harden we not our hearts. God suffered the manners of the
Israelites forty years in the wilderness, and he would have suffered the
manners of these Ninevites forty days in the City; but I am sure he has no
where promised to bear with us so long, he has promised no years, nay he has
promised us no days, (...), even this very next night our souls may be
required of us. Let us not then despise or abuse Gods goodness and
longsuffering, let us not drive off our repentance till the nine and thirtieth
day: we have a common saying, that we were better leave than lack, the
Ninevites here seem to have made good use of it, for they repented as soon as
the word was out of Jonab's mouth, though they had Adhuc quadraginta dies, yet
forty days.

But here arises a question that must needs be answered, namely, Why Gods
threatenings come not to pass? for we read, Genesis 20. That God threatened
Abimeleck with present death, Thou art but a dead man for the woman that thou
have taken, yet we know, that Abimeleck died not at that time: So likewise God
threatens Hezekiah with death, 2 King 20.1. Set thine house in order, for thou
shall die, and not live; yet we know there were added unto his days fifteen
years. In like manner God threatens Nineveh to overthrow it within forty
days, and yet when these forty days were expired, Nineveh was not
overthrown. And how comes this to pass, that Gods threatenings should not take
effect? I answer, as Gods promises, so his threatenings likewise are not
absolute, but conditional, for there is a twofold Will in Almighty God,
Voluntas signi, and Voluntas beneplaciti, the Will of the sign, or the sign of
Gods Will, which is the revealed Will of God, and the Will of the good
pleasure, or the good pleasure it self, which is the secret Will of God. Now to
instance only in the case of Nineveh, (for one answer may serve for all
objections of this nature) that Nineveh should be overthrown within forty
days, this was voluntas signi, the will of the sign, the revealed Will of God,
but that Nineveh should repent, and so not be overthrown, this was voluntas
beneplaciti, the Will of the good pleasure, the secret Will of God. Neither
were these two Wills contrary, but the one of them wrought for the effecting
and bringing about of the other. The revealed Will of God, his threatening of
the Ninevites within forty days to overthrow them, this brought them to
repentance, that so his secret Will might be fulfilled in sparing of them.
Though Nineveh therefore were not overthrown, yet God might safely threaten so
to serve it, yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown.

And so I have gone through the parts of the Text severally. Let us now put them
altogether again, and see what general instruction they will afford us. The
proposition for our instruction may be this, That God usually lets off a
Warning-piece, before a Murdering-piece, seldom executing any Judgment either
personal or national, but he sends some kind of Herald or other to give warning
of it. And God has both an extraordinary and ordinary way of threatening and
giving warning of Judgment either of which is twofold. First his extraordinary
way is either immediate or mediate, private or public; Private, by
inspirations; Public, by apparitions. First, God threatens and gives warning
of Judgment, with an Adhuc qua^ragintadies, as it were, Yet forty days by
private inspirations. Thus he gave Noah warning of the flood. Thus he gave
Abraham warning of the destruction of Sodom. Thus he gave Samuel warning of
the destruction of Elie's house. And thus he warned all his Prophets of his
approaching Judgments, according to that of the Prophet Amos, Surely the Lord
will do nothing, but he reveals his secret to his servants the Prophets, Amos
3.7. Secondly, God threatens and gives warning of Judgment with an Adhuc
quadragintadies, as is were, Yet forty days, by public apparitions. Thus he
gave the Jews warning of the destruction of Jerusabem, and that by two very
prodigious signs, the one tendered to their ears, the other to their eyes;
the former was an hideous voice, heard often in the siege of Jerusalem,
Linquamus has seeds, or Migremus hi^^ Come, let us be gone, let us leave this
cursed place, thought by some to have been the voice of the tutelar and
protecting Angels; thought by others to have been an extraordinary voice of
Almighty God himself. The other was a prodigious blazing star, which Josephus
tells us, stood many months together right over Jerusalem. And thus likewise
shall God give warning of the general and last Judgment, When there shall be
signs in the Sun, and in the moon, and in the stars, Luke 21.25.

And as God has an extraordinary, so he has an ordinary way of giving warning
of Judgment. And this likewise is twofold, Domestic, by the preaching and
ministration of his Word; Foreign, by the executing and administration of his
Justice.

First, God threatens and gives warning of Judgment, with an Adhuc
quadraginta dies, yet forty days, by the ministration of his word. Thus he
warned the primitive disciples by St. Paul, who ceased not to warn every one
night and day with tears, Acts 20.31. Though we have no Urim and Thummim, as
they had under the Law, though Ministers are not acquainted with Gods purposes
by immediate inspiration, yet notwithstanding we may in some sort,
prognosticate a Judgment, and may speak in a strict sense, as the Oracles of
God. For if every man can discern the face of the sky, as our Savior speaks,
why may not Ministers the signs of the times? yes, without Question we may do
it, when the heaven is covered with black clouds, we may conclude there will be
a storm; so when the earth is clouded with horrid sins, we may conclude there
will be a judgment, by comparing of spiritual things with spiritual, by
looking into Gods ancient ways, and considering how God has dealt with
sinners heretofore, though we cannot absolutely determine; yet we may give a
near guess, when a storm is impending, when Judgment to the uttermost is
coming on a Kingdom.

Secondly, God threatens and gives warning of Judgment with an Adhuc
quadraginta dies, as it were yet forty days, by the administration of his
Justice, by the Judgments which he executes upon others. Their harms are our
warnings, Nam tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet: We have a common
saying; that the burnt child dreads the fire. In malice we should be children,
but in this we should be men, to dread the fire before ever we are burnt; the
destruction of others should be instruction for us. I conclude this point
briefly with that in the phecy of Zephaniah, c. 3. v. 6, 7. Where God tells
Jerusalem, That he had cut off the Nations, so that their towers were desolate,
he had made their streets waste, that none passed by; their Cities were
destroyed, so that there was no man, there was no inhabitant. And wherefore was
all this done? why did God so miserably overthrow those other Nations? Why,
only to give Jerusalem warning, lest she were served so too, I said, Surely
thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction. And so ye have briefly the
several ways how God gives warning of, and threatens Judgment: With like
brevity ye shall have the principal reasons why he does it. And these are of
three sorts. The first concerns all men. The second concerns the righteous.
The third concerns the wicked. The first reason is extended unto all men,
which is this, God lets off a warning-piece, Adhuc quadragintadies, yet
forty days, that hereby he may bring sinners to repentance. For Ad poenas
tardus Deus est, ad praemia velox, says the Poet, God is flow to anger, and of
great goodness, says the Psalmist, he desires not the death of a sinner, but
rather he should turn from his wickednese and live, why will ye die, Ohouse of
Israel, seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him, that dies, says the
Lord. It was once the policy of the King of Syria suddenly to surprise the King
of Israel. But the King of all Kings goes not so covertly to work, for being
desirous of prevention, he usually acquainteth men with his intention, hereby,
if it be possible, to bring them to repentance, to see if there be any hope of
their conversion, that so he may never bring them to confusion. This was his
manner of dealing with the people of the old world. He sent not the flood upon
them of a sudden, but threatened them with it an hundred and twenty years, had
they repented all that while, the flood had been prevented, had they wept in so
many years, the heavens had not wept forty days, all those sixscore years the
goodness of God waited for their amendment, he spoke but in the future sense, I
will destroy man whom I have created. But when once he perceived that his
warning-peece was slighted, then have at them in good earnest, a
murdering-peece goes off, he proceeds then to a speedy execution of his
Justice, and speaks in the present tense, I, even I do bring a flood of water
upon the earth to destroy all flesh. This was also his manner of dealing with
these Ninevites in our Text, he destroyed them not, as in a moment, but warned
and threatened them by his Prophet Jonah here, Yet forty days, and Nineveh
shall be overthrown. The second reason hereof concerns the righteous only,
which is this, God lets off a Warning-peece, Adhuc quadraginta dies, yet
forty days, that his people may make provision for their own safety and
security: God many times lets alone the tares for the wheat-sake; he often
spares the wicked for the righteous-sake, but he seldom or never slays the
righteous with the wicked, Genesis 18.25. And therefore when he intends to bring
a Judgment upon any place or nation, he uses to threaten and give warning of
it before he send it, to the intent that such as fear him may provide for their
own safety. Thus we read, Exodus 9. that God threatens the plague of hail
before he sent it on the Egyptians, for otherwise that of Solomon, even in this
sense, had been most true, there had been but one event to the righteous and to
the wicked, they had all been in the field, and they had perished altogether.
God therefore gave warning of it a day before hand, that such as feared him
might, as they did, make provision for their own safety. So likewise we read,
Exodus 12. that God threatened to slay the firstborn in Egypt ere he slew them,
and therefore commanded the Israelites to keep close that bloody night; none of
them to go out at the door of his house until the morning. Wicked men have a
care of one another safety, and therefore warn each other of approaching
danger, as appears by that letter which occasioned the discovery of the
Powder-Tre^son. And shall not the righteous God much more tender the safety of
his secret ones? yes, he does. And therefore when the destroying Angel, when
Gods Judgments are abroad, God would have his faithful people, as it were,
keep at home. We have a pregnant Text to this purpose, Isa. 26.20. Come my
people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy
self, as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast. The
third reason hereof concerns the wicked only, which is this, God lets off a
warning-peece, Adhuc quadragintadies, yet forty days, that the wicked may
have no plea against the Justice of his proceedings. If God should punish
sinners before he warns or threatens them, his way might seem to be unequal,
and sinners might begin to plead for themselves after this manner. It is very
true, we have done amiss, for who can say my heart is clean? But we, like all
other sinners put far off from us the evil day, not thinking thy judgments had
been so nigh unto us.

We never saw it rain, when the sky was all over bright and clear, black clouds
are wont to come before a storm, thou threatnedst the old world before thou
sentest the flood, had thou dealt but so with us, we would soon have been new
men, we would have repented of the evil of sin, and so have prevented the evil
of punishment. These and other such like cavils might sinners use, if God
should execute his Judgments upon them without threatening. God therefore to
prevent this, that he may gag, as it were, and muzzle the mouth of iniquity,
that the mouth of all wickedness may be stopped, that sinners may have no plea,
nothing to say for themselves, but may be constrained in spite of their hearts
to acknowledge the equity of his proceedings, saying, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, and true are thy judgments, to this end he threatens and gives warning
before he proceeds to execution, Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be
overthrown.

And so ye have briefly the several ways, and the principal reasons, how, and
why God threatens and gives warning of his Judgments. Let us now, for the
close of all, apply this to our selves, examining whether or no, as God here
threatened Nineveh, so he has not likewise threatened and given us warning of
his Judgments. And first, for Gods extraordinary way of premonition. For the
former branch of it, I will not say that God has warned us by immediate
inspirations, No, let Enthusiasts say what they will, that way of warning is
long ceased, God reveals neither himself, nor his intentions to us in these
days any other way than he and they are revealed in his written Word. But
though he have not warned us by inspirations, yet he has warned us by
apparitions, by wonders in heaven above, and by signs in the earth beneath, as
in our English Chronicles we have manifold examples.

Secondly, For Gods ordinary way of premonition, For the former branch of it,
God has warned us of judgment by the Ministration of his Word.

We may read, 1 King 19.17. That Elisha had a sword as well as Hazael or Jehu,
him that escapes the sword of Jehu, shall Elisha slay. And when Elisha draws
his sword, when Gods Ministers unsheath the sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God, when they give warning of those Judgments which they see coming
on a Kingdom, it is a manifest argument that the devouring sword, the sword of
Hazael and Jehn, the sword of War, and the enemy is at hand. And have not
Elisha and Jonah long since drawn their swords? Have not Gods Ministers for
many years given you warning of his Judgments? There is none, I hope, such a
stranger to the Temple as to deny it. And yet here we may complain, as Isaiah
does, in another case, Isaiah 53.1. Quis credidit auditui nostro? Who has
believed our report? Prophesy of future judgments while we will, we were as
good say nothing, we speak but into the air, men give us the hearing, but as
sure as the Lord lives, they believe us not. Most truly therefore may that be
applied unto us, Hab. 1.5. Behold and regard, and wonder marvelously, for I
will work a work in your days, which ye will not believe, though it be told
you. Though we, I say, be thus threatened, yet for all this, we regard it not.
Well, the men of Nineveh therefore shall rise up in judgment with the men of
this generation, and shall condemn them, for they, we know, repented at the
preaching of Jonah, but we are so far from repenting, that we will not believe;
we sin by infidelity, we will not believe God, we sin by incredulity, we will
not believe Gods Ministers, but flatter out selves, as St. Peter would once
have flattered our Savior Christ, with a Nequaquamerit, this shall not be unto
us. And yet the Ninevites could see no such probability of danger, as we may
see, unless we wilfully shut our eyes; without are fightings, within are fears,
hostility abroad, no great tranquillity at home, for all this we stop our ears,
we think the forty days will never be out. God has warned us of judgment
likewise by the administration of his Justice, by the judgments he has
inflicted upon other Nations. We have heard what a grievous famine there was in
Germany of late years, where men, like so many Nebuchadnezzars, were fain to
eat grass like oxen, yea, like so many Cannibals, were ready to cat up one
another. We have heard also what grievous Wars have been there and in other
Countries; and because we were not bettered by their sufferings; God has put
England into the Swords commission, saying, Sword, go through this land, we know
that it has seized on us, as well as upon our sister. Countries. But O thou
Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thy self into
thy scabbard, rest and be still.

And that the sword may rest and be still, while it is called to day, let us
desire conditions of peace; and the only condition that I know is contrition,
godly sorrow for our sins. For how can we hope for peace with men, so long as
we are at defiance with Almighty God? Can we possibly imagine, or can we say,
we shall have peace, so long as we follow the vain imaginations of our hearts?
No, let us not deceive our selves. What peace, said Jehu to Joram, so long as
the Whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts are so many? So what
peace, may I say, can we hope for, so long as our abominations and impieties
are so many? No, there is no peace to the wicked. We may flatter our selves,
and say, we shall never be removed, the Lord of his goodness has made our hill
so strong. But if we turn not from our sins, God will turn us up-side down, he
will drive us out of our land, as he drove out the Amorites, and he will give
it to some Neighbor of ours that is better than we, he will take away the
Kingdnme of God, that is, the Gospel of the Kingdom from us, and he will give
it to a Nation that shall bring forth the fruits thereof. For we have heard
what he has done to other Nations by destroying them utterly, Jam seges est
ubi Troja fuit, and shall we be so besotted as still to think we shall escape?
No, If we husband not well this Adhue, we must expect a Subvertetur, if we
despise or abuse Gods goodness and mercy, there is nothing to be looked for but
judgment and severity, that which is threatened against the Ninevites, shall
certainly be executed upon us, though not within forty days, yet within a
short time we shall be overthrown. For what if the voice of joy and health be
within many of our dwellings, yet if we repent not with these Ninevites, God
will send his pale horse among us, pining sickness, pestilence and death. What
if our Garners be full and plenteous with all manner of store, what if our
sheep bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets, yet if we repent
not with these Ninevites, God will send his black horse among us, famine and
cleanness of teeth in all our coasts, our fruitful land God will make barren,
for the wickedness and unworthiness of us that dwell therein. What if our eyes
swell with fatness, yet if we do but what we list, we shall find that God has
but fatted us up against the day of slaughter. As for Gods red war-horse, we
more than hear him dash, I am sure, we find by sad experience, that of Solomon
most true, that there is a time of War, as well as a time of peace. Again, what
if the Sunshine of the Gospel light our feet now into the way of peace? What
if the Lord give us the word, and great be the company of the orthodox
Preachers? yet if we repent not with these Ninevites, our Candlestick shall be
removed, there shall be a Famine not of bread only, but also of hearing the
word of God, the time will come when we shall desire to see one of the days of
the Son of man, and shall not see it, we shall wander from sea to sea, and from
the North even unto the East, we shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, and shall not find it, as the Israelites are threatened, Amos. 8.11, 12.
In a word, what if our land for the present, were as the garden of Eden? yet if
we repent not with these Ninevites, it shall be turned into a wilderness; it
shall be an habitation for Ziim and for Jim, the Cormorant and the Bittern
shall possess it, Owls shall dwell in it, Satyrs shall dance in it, God shall
stretch out upon it the line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness, as the
Prophet speaks; he that has exalted the Kingdom of England up to heaven, as
he threatened Capernaum, will bring her down to hell, she that sits as Queen
of the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, that lives in pleasure, and
says, she shall see no mourning, if she humble not her self in the ashes of
humiliation, she shall be humbled by some other into the ashes of destruction,
she shall sadly sit down in the dust, and shall no more be called tender and
delicate. She that has the noise of harpers heard in her, and that in some
places yet rejoices at the sound of the Organ, she that has in her the voice
of the Bridegroom and of the Bride, she that is so thronged, and crowded with
multitudes of people, that they go in and out at her gates by hundreds and by
thousands, as the Prophet speaks; yet if she repent not, like these
Ninevites, she shall utterly be overthrown, the days shall come upon her when
no more pleasant voice shall be for ever heard in her, but Lacrymae shall be
all her lesson; Woe and Alas shall be her note, and every head in her, instead
of perfume; shall be covered with ashes, every limb, instead of silk, shall be
girded with sackcloth; every hand instead of clapping, shall be wrung; every
cheek, instead of painting, shall be furrowed with tears; nay her very gates
shall mourn for want of passengers, her houses shall drop down for want of
Inhabitants, and her Temples shall be ruinated for want of Worshippers. But why
speak I all this while in the future tense? for has not Almighty God begun
with us already? Yes, he has, I am sure, the wrath of God has been long
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, for he
has moved the land and divided it, so that out enemies are those of our own
house; and for these divisions that are among us, there are great thoughts of
heart, many men's hearts fail for fear, and for looking after those things that
are coming on us. Yet as dangerous as our condition is, let us not despair of
Gods goodness toward us; As I would not seem to bring you in fear where no fear
is, so neither would I have your fear swallow up your hope, for if we do but
repent of the evil of our sins, God will likewise repent of the evil of his
judgments. We have a most pregnant Text for this, with which I conclude, Jer.
18.7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it, if that Nation,
against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil
that I thought to do unto them. To wind up all therefore in one word of
exhortation, let us repent, and be converted, that our sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Let Gods
warning-peece reclaim us, and then his murdering-peece shall never go off; let
us repent while there are Adhuc quadraginta dies, yet forty days, so shall we
escape the fatal Subvertetur, the overthrow here threatened. And let us make no
long tarrying to turn unto the Lord, let us not put off our repentance from day
to day, but let this very day present be the birthday of our new birth, I and
ye, and all that hear me this day, let us now turn every one of us from our
evil ways, and from the wickedness that is in our hands. Which if we do, God
himself will likewise turn and repent, he will turn our calamity and our
captivity as the rivers in the south, he will turn from his fierce anger, that
yet we perish not. Which we humbly beg of him, not for any of our own merits,
we utterly renounce them all, but for the merits of his eternal Son our blessed
Savior.

FINIS.

