Christ Exalted: IN A SERMON Begun to be preached at Debenham in Suffolk, upon
the 14. day of Febr. last, upon Coloss. 3.11.

By HANSERD KNOLLYS.

Who was stoned out of the Pulpit (as he was Preaching) by a company of rude
fellows, and poor women of that Town; who were sent for, called together, and
set on by a Malignant High-Constable, who lives in the same Town.

ALSO, ANOTHER SERMON Preached at Stradbrooke in Suffolk, the 13. day of Febr.
last, concerning Sanctification; upon Ephesians. 1.4.

GALAT 4.16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth.
HEBR. 12.14. Follow Peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord. 2 CORINTHIANS. 11.25. Once was I stoned. JOHN 10.32. For which
of these good works do you stone me? LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE Committee of Examinations; Grace and Peace from God, through
CHRIST.
HONORABLE,
IT may be judged an act of great boldness in me, who am under the Examination
of this Honorable Committee, to dedicate my poor labors at Debenham and
Stradbrook, to your patronage; especially to publish them to the world: Had not
the hard reports of some persons (too much credited by many) constrained me to
vindicate first the truth, and in the next place to give some satisfaction to
many, who have heard those reports, I should not have been so bold; the
consciousnesse of mine own inability, and the knowledge of the profitable
labors of many both learned and godly, has to this time, and still had justly
hindered me from publishing any thing by print to the view of the World:
Wherefore I (being thus enforced to print my Sermons) present them to your
Honors; wherein you have the sum and substance of all that I preached in
Suffolk (as many witnesses can testify.) For my main endeavors there was, to
exalt Christ, and to press my Hearers to Sanctification in heart and life. And
if the Lord shall please to make my poor labors a blessing to any, he will get
glory, and I have my reward with him. Howsoever, I humbly submit both my self
and my Book, to the Examination and determination of this Honorable Committee.

Your Honors to serve you in the Lord, HANSERD KNOLLYS.

COLLOS. 3.11. Christ is all, and in all.


THe Apostle Paul, who was a chosen vessel unto the Lord, to bear his name
before the Gentiles, Acts 9 15. wrote this Epistle to the Saints, and Faithful
brethren in Christ, which were at Colosse, chap. 1. verse 2. And as the
Ensigne-bearer of His glorious Name displayed the Magnificency, and
transcendent Excellency of Christ, in the words of the Text, Christ is all,
and in all. And that he might lift up Christ's All-sufficiencie, he nullifies
all other excellencies whatsoever, chap. 3. ver. 11 Where he gives the
Colossians to understand, that the advantage of a Jew above a Gentile, the
dignity of a Scythian, above a Barbarian, or the Immunities of a Freeman above
a Bondslave, however esteemed amongst men, are nothing without Christ, who is
all, and in all; These words have their dependence upon the exhortation unto
Mortification, chap. 3. verse. 5. Which exhortation the Apostle pressed upon the
Colossians, by telling them, verse. 9.10. they had put off the Old Man with his
deeds, and had put on the New-Man, etc. Where (that is) in which State of
Regeneration, there is neither Greek, nor Jew, etc. But Christ is all, and in
all. The lesson to be learned hence is this, to wit, Christ is all, and in all,
in the New-Man.

Doct. Two thighs needs some explanation in this Doctrine, viz. 1. Who is here
meant by the New-Man? and secondly, How Christ is all, and in all, in the
New-Man? By the New-Man, here, we are to understand (as was intended by the
Apostle) a true believer, or a faithful Brother in Christ, one sanctified in
Christ Jesus, called a Saint, who is redeemed in the Spirit of his mind, and
has put on the New-Man, Ephesians. 4 23, 24. which is done, when by the mighty
operation of the holy Spirit, in the Promises given unto us, we are made
partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Non per participationem
Essentiae, sed per communicationem Spiritus, and gratiae ejus. Gal. 4 6. Ephesians.
4.6. thus being by the Spirit and Faith united with Christ, we are made a new
creature, or creation. 2 Cor. 5.17. have a new Heart, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. and
walk in newness of life, Romans 6.4. And such may be said to have put on the
New-Man, the sum then is this, Christ is all, and in all, in every true
Believer in every Justified-Sanctified person, woe has a New-heart, and walk
in newness of life. Touching the Second particular, to wit, How Christ is all,
and in all, in the new man? The Lord Jesus Christ, (who is all in himself, for
in him dwells all the Fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. which was the
pleasure of God, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1.18,
19.) is all, and in all, in the New-Man. First, Fundamentally, I mean Christ is
the Foundation of all, 1 Cor. 3.11. For other Foundation can no man lay then
that is laid, which is Jesus Chirist; I say Christ is the Foundation of all
that Faith, Repentance, Love, and other graces, gifts, and fruits of the
Spirit, which are in every true believer: He is a living fountain full of
grace, and from his fullness have we all received grace for grace, Joh. 1.14,
16. Secondly, Communicatively, I mean, Chirst does communicate all unto the
New-Man, to wit, Life, Light, Grace, and Glory, etc. We have nothing, but what
we have received, and we have received all from his fullness, Ephesians. 4.7. Joh.
1.16. The Titles given to Christ in the Scripture of truth, will make this
appear yet more fully, viz. That Christ is all in the New-Man, or in every true
Believer: I shall instance some.

1. Christ is our life, Col. 3.4. Christ is the life of a Believer, even
eternal Life, 1 John 5.11, 12. That is to say, The everlasting Spiritual
well-being of a believer, is by union and communion with Jesus Christ, in whom
he lives a life of grace here, and with whom he shall live a life of glory
hereafter. Yea all those spiritual breathings of the hunger-thirsting soul
after the enjoyment of God in any of his holy Ordinances, are from Christ, and
from him are all those quicknings, and all that life we have in Prayer,
Preaching, Conference, and other spiritual duties. In a word, the spirit of
life himself, who so sweetly refreshes the weary soul, comforts the
sorrowful heart, and quickens the sanctified affections, is from Christ, and
he is called the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. whom God sends forth into the
hearts of his Children.

2. Christ is the true light of every believer, or in the New-Man; That was the
true Light, Joh. 1.9. even Jesus Christ, who inlightneth the eyes of our
understanding, that we may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the
riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, and what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward, who believe, Ephe. 1.17, 18, 19. And though
the hearts of men and women be very dark, yet God who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, (who are believers) to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ. 2
Cor. 4.6. And the Apostle tells the sanctified Ephesians, that they were
sometimes darkness, but now ye are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. And indeed,
all that heavenly knowledge, and spiritual understanding, which believers have
in the mystery of the Gospel, they had it from Christ; In whom are are hid all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.2, 3.

3. Christ is the Bread of life to believers, Joh. 6.35, 48, 51. He is the
Spiritual meat and drink of their souls, who believe in him, they that eat him
shall live by him, Joh. 6.55, 57. All that Spiritual nourishment, and soul
refreshment, which believers have in promises, duties, Ordinances, etc. is from
Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed,
communicated by his holy spirit unto his people in those promises, duties,
Ordinances, etc. Christ is Milk and wine, to be had without money, Isa. 55.1.
that will quench the thirst of the newborn babes in Christ, which so much
desire the sincere milk of the word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2,
3. and that will make the mournful spirit of a a doubting or backsliding
Believer, to have a cheerful countenance, when his broken heart is cheered
and warmed, yea melted, and comforted with the blood of Christ his Redeemer.
Christ is Water of life, a pure River of living Water clear as Crystal,
flows from this Fountain in the hearts of Believers, Rev 22.1, 17. Joh. 7.37,
38. and Ioh. 4.10.13, 14. This will satisfy the thirsty soul, as Chirist
Promised Mat. 5.6, 11, therefore he cried, If any man thirst, let him come to
me and drink. Christ is the the tree of life, which bears twelve manner of
fruits, and yields her fruit every month, whose leaves are for the healing
of the Nations. Revel. 22.2. Christ is said to make a feast of wine and fat
things full of Marrow, Isa. 25.6. and he thus speaks to believers, eat, O
Friends, drink, yea drink, abundantly, O beloved, Cant. 5.1. I might be
exceeding large in particularizing many other his Titles, as namely; Christ is
a believers Justification, Sanctification, Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. He is also
our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. our Righteousness, Ier. 23.6. Our Advocate with the
Father. 1 John 2.1, 2. Our King, High Priest, and Prophet, Our Father, Husband,
Brother, our All. Thus it may appear, that Christ is all in the New-Man. How is
Christ all, in all in the New-Man? I conceive, It is spoken by way of
Pre-eminence, as it is expressed, Col. 1.18, 19. That is, In all, which is in
the New-Man, or in a Believer Christ ought to have the pre-eminence; First, as
he is the Author thereof, for instance, That precious faith of Gods Elect,
which is in the New-Man is an excellent grace, but yet Christ must have the
pre-eminence above that faith, because he is the Author of it, Heb. 12.2. And
so above all other graces, gifts, and fruits of the Spirit.

Secondly, as he is the preserver of all in the New-Man, every believer, is
called and Sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, Jude 1.
And the Believer is not only preserved in the state of Grace by Christ, but
the Grace of God wrought in him, to wit, faith, etc. Is by Christ preserved
also; namely, by the Intercession of Christ. I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not.

Thirdly, as he is the finisher, who strengthens, stablisheth, and perfecteth
all in the New-Man. Christ is not only the Author, but the Finisher of our
Faith. Heb. 12.2. He is the Alpha, and Omega; the beginning and the ending of
all those Graces, gifts, and fruits of the Spirit, which are in the New-Man.
Revel. 1 8. Thus Christ is all, and in all, in the New-Man. He is the Author,
Preserver, and finisher of all. He purchased all, He is the Donour of all, He
is the Beauty of all, the Sum of all, the Perfection of all, in the New-Man.

Christ is all, and in all. Which honor and dignity, Christ will at the last
day prostrate at the feet of his Father, that God may be all in all. 1 Cor.
15.28. Moreover, this being the design of God, that Christ should communicate
all grace, gifts, etc. unto his people. It was requisite, that all fullness
should be in Christ, and so we read, John. 1.14, 16. Yea the great necessity
of the Lords redeemed ones, to have a constant supply of grace, and spiritual
gifts, also a continual growth of the fruits of the spirit, requires this
all-fulnesse to be in Christ.

Christ is all, and in all, in the New-Man; Let us hence be Instructed. First,
to prize Christ highly, to set an high esteem upon Christ, to let Him have the
pre-eminence, who is all in all. It is that which the Prophet complained of,
Isa. 53.3. He, to wit Christ, was despised, and rejected of men, and we
esteemed him not. We are apt to slight Christ, and to disesteem Him, because we
discern not that beauty, excellency, riches, and glory, which is in Himself,
we are ignorant of the worth of Christ, and know not our need of him, and
therefore we do not so prize him, as we ought. These two Considerations, I
desire, to propound, as motives, to prize Christ. First, Christ his worth,
which I may hint unto you in three particulars, to wit, 1. The unvaluable
preciousnesse of his blood, which has in it a cleansing virtue, 1 John 1.7, 9.
And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleansed us from all sin, therefore, we
are said, to be justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. Let me ask you, who now
believe, How did you esteem of this precious blood of Christ? When you were
sighing-out your mournful request to God in secret corners, for one drop of
Christ's blood, one dram of the grace of God, and faith of God his Elect, one
word of promise, one smile of a reconciled Father, or one beam of the light of
Gods countenance, did you not prize the blood of Christ above all corruptible
things, as silver, gold, honor, riches, pleasure, etc. Did you not esteem the
least drop of it more precious, then all creature comforts whatsoever, as
friends, liberties, and life? Again, the precious blood of Christ has a
purging quality, Heb 9.14 The blood of Christ shall purge your consciences from
dead works, to serve the living God. Sin does both contract guiltiness, and
pollution, and therefore the blood of Christ does both cleanse, and purge,
pardon, and purify, therefore we are also said, to be sanctified by the blood
of Christ; Heb. 13.12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people
with his own blood; Suffered without the gate. Oh beloved, what can be esteemed
so precious to a gracious heart, as this blood of Christ, which washes away
all those defilements, and uncleanness, which through our corruptions cleave
unto us, even in our best actions, and holy duties: Such of you, (as have many
a time groaned in prayer to God under the feeling sense and sight of any
corruption) know by experience, what high esteem you have had of the blood of
Christ to save you, from your uncleanness.

Secondly, the unsearchable riches of his grace. Ephesians. 3.8. To me who am less
then the least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among
the Gentiles, the unsearchable riches of Christ. Christ's riches are of such an
hight, depth, length, and breadth, that passes knowledge, yea thus much is
spoken of the love of Christ. Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Also Faith in Christ is called
precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. To them, that have obtained like precious faith
with us, through the Righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ, yea
all the Graces of Christ are the riches of the poor Saints, Jam. 2.5. God has
chosen the poor of the world, rich in grace, etc. Tell me, beloved, how did you
esteem of the riches of Christ, when you being poor in spirit, mourned for
Christ and his grace, when you discerned Faith, Love, Humility, etc. in others
of the children of God, did you not prize it highly in them? Did you not
account them happy, rich, and blessed, whom Christ had enriched with those
jewels, and adorned with such graces? Ah how much more should you now prize
Christ, in whom is all fullness of these unsearchable riches, and especially
considering, that from his fullness you have received grace for grace, Ioh.
1.14, 16.

Thirdly, the glorious liberties of his Spirit; for where the Spirit of the
Lord is, there is liberty. 2 Cor. 3.17. Not any carnal liberty to sin, and so
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5.13. but Spiritual liberty, and freedom
from sin. I mean not a perfect and total freedom from all sin, as if the
people of God could never sin after Conversion. For if we say, that we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1 8, 10. But I
mean a freedom: First, from the guilt of sin. Romans 8 33. And the Apostle
says, Colos. 2.13. That he has forgiven us all trespasses. Secondly, from the
polution or filth of sin, Zach. 13.1. A fountain set open to Believers for sin
and for uncleanesse. And Ezekiel. 36.25, 29. God promised they shall be clean,
and he will save them from all their uncleanness. Thirdly, from the reigning
power of sin: Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, under grace.
Fourthly, from the punishment due for sin, which is the cure of the Law, Gal.
3.13. or condemnation, Romans 8.1. or any other satisfactory punishment.

2 The great need you have of Christ, may move you to praise him, and set an
high esteem of him. Christ is the one thing necessary, and therefore the
Titles given him in the Scripture, are such as declare his usefullnesse to
Believers, for he is our Life, our Light, our Bread, Water, Milk, Wine, His
flesh our meat indeed, His blood our drink indeed; He is our Father, our
Husband, our Brother, our Friend, our King, Priest, and Prophet; He is our
Justification, Sanctification, and Redemption; He is our Peace, our All. We can
have no access to God but by his Mediation, no acceptance with God without his
Jntercession. Revel. 8.3.4. We cannot resist the next Temptation, neither can
we overcome the next Corruption, nor shall we be able to suffer with patience
the next Persecution, or endure any tribulation, unless we have renewed
strength from Christ. Believers have received, that Grace, they have, from
Christ, John 1 16. And they cannot have increase of grace bu by Christ, John
15.1, 2. Lord increase our Faith said the Disciples, neither can they persevere
in grace, unless they be preserved in Christ, Jude 1. To conclude, we are
nothing, have nothing, can do nothing without Christ, John 15.5. Without me you
can do nothing; that is to say, you cannot in your own strength, nor in the
strength of any grace received, do any thing to please God, or to glorify God,
without me; unless you abide in me, and have renewed ability and strength from
me, you can do nothing that God my father will own or crown with acceptance or
reward: But yet we who are Believers, have all and abound, Phil. 4.18. can do
all things through Christ that strengthens them, Phil. 4.13. can suffer the
loss of all, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. yea and conquer all, nay be more then
conquerours through Christ, Romans 8.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Oh consider your need of
Christ and learn to prize him, let him be exalted highest in your hearts, as
the pearl of greatest worth, as the one thing necessary which you most of all
need, let him be all in all in your communication and conversation.

2. Use. Seeing Christ is all and in all in the new-Man, let every one examine
whether Christ be in him. 2. Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, know you not that
Christ is in you, etc. This nearly concerns you beloved, for if you have
Christ, you have all. Christ is all you heart but if you lose him you lose all;
you will lose your hopes, Comforts, and all your duties, yea you will lose God,
Heaven, and soul, and all. It matters not what you have if you want Christ, no
gifts, duties, reformations, qualifications, or other things whatsoever, will
make you happy without Christ; And if you enjoy Christ, it is not material
what ever you want, for my God (says the Apostle) shall supply all your need,
according to his riches, in glory by Christ Jesus Phil. 4.19. Therefore make
sure that Christ is yours. Some would ask this question, How shall I so
examine, that I may know assuredly that I have Christ? I answer, you must bring
your hearts to the touchstone of the Word of God, and cast them into the
balance of the Sanctuary and weigh them there. And to this purpose, I shall
propound one Scripture of truth for your examination and trial, to wit, 2 Cor.
5.17. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature, or creation; That is to
say, he is newborn, born again, or born of God, Joh. 1.12, 13. But as many as
received him, etc. which were born of God. And our Savior urged the necessity
of this new birth, Joh. 3.3.5.7, 8. Except a man be born again he cannot see
the Kingdom of God, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, verse. 5. Now
every one who is a new creature in Christ, all things are become new in him, or
all things are made new [as in the Greek (...), ecce nova facta sunt omnia.] To
wit; first he is made a new man, Ephesians. 4.21.22.23.24. Col. 3.10.11, and have
put on the new-man where Christ is all and in all. Secondly, he has a new
heart, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also will I give you, etc. That is, a new will
and new affections, yea and a new spirit will I put within you, verse 26. That
is (Ephesians. 4.23.) to be renewed in the spirit of our mind, to wit, a new
judgment or spiritual understanding in the knowledge of Gods will, Col. 1.9.
Thirdly, he walks in newness of life: Romans 6.4. Even so we also should walk
in newness of life. That is, the conversation of a new creature should be such
as becomes the Gospel: Phil. 1.27. To wit, humble, harmless, and holy: 1 Pet.
1.15 16. And thus God has promised in the everlasting covenant of grace, that
all and every one of his people shall walk: Ezekiel. 36.27. And I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, etc. Examine your
selves, Are you a new creature? Such of you as have not put off the old man,
but still have your old hearts, and your old sins, and walk in your old
ways, and fulfill the old lusts of your sinful natures, are not in a new
creature, you are not in Christ, nor Christ in you.

But some may thus say within themselves, I hope my soul is in a better
condition, I am not so wicked and carnal as some others are, neither am I so
vilde a sinner as I have been formerly; but I am somewhat reformed, and have
forsaken my sinful courses, and begin to delight to hear Sermons, and I pray
with my family. To this I would answer, although your condition be not so
desperate as others, who have lived long under ordinatie means of grace, and
yet are not at all wrought upon, I must tell you, Professors may (through
strong Convictions, horror of conscience, and fears of Hell) leave the Acts
of some sins, and may customarily perform some religious duties, and yet not
regenerated. Professors may have leaves like the unfruitful Figtree, and
Lamps like the five foolish Virgins, they may seem to be Religious, and have a
form of Godliness; and not be a New creature, or creation. I might instance
many such in the Scriptures. Herod, Mark. 6.20. He heard John gladly, and did
many things. Saul, 1 Samuel 10.6, 9. was turned into another Man, had another
heart, yet unconverted: So thou may be another Man, and not a New-Man,
may have another heart, but not a new heart.

But I speak not this to add sorrow to the afflicted, nor to break the the
bruised, for though some may deceive themselves herein; Yet such of you as are
borne again or borne of God, though but Newborn babes, who have put on the
New-Man, have a New heart, and walk in Newness of life, are in Christ, and
Christ in you.

3. Use. Seeing, Christ is all, and in all in the New-Man; Let it serve for the
consolation of every true believe, Christ is yours, and all things are yours: 1
Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God. Christ
is your life, your light, your food, your All, and by union with Christ, you
are one in God, John. 17.21. God is your God and Father, John 20.17. All that
is Christ's is yours, his Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Faith, Love,
Humility, etc. All in all fullness, was in Him, and dwells in him, for his
people, to communicate to them, Epes. 4.7. Are you full of spiritual wants,
you may have supply from the fullness of Spiritualls in Christ. Do you want
Wisdom, Faith, love, etc. What ever you want, go to Christ for that grace;
There is enough in Christ to satisfy the most hunger-thirsting souls in
spiritual things, Epes. 1.3. God has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, in heavenly things in Christ; In whom are hid all the treasures of
Wisdom, and knowledge: Col. 2.3. Do you want power against corruptions? go to
Christ for strength, His grace is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.8.9. There is
an all-sufficiencie in Christ, Christ is all, says the Text, therefore the
Apostle having Christ, said, I have all, I can do all through Christ, Phil.
4.13, 18. And know for your further consolation, that Chirist is in all in the
New-Man, or in every true Believer.

He is in you, Col. 1.2. Christ in you, the hope of glory; Christ lives in me
says the Apostle, 2 Gal. 20. Christ is, and lives in a true believer by
participation of his Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. By incohation of his holy
Spirit, Gal. 4.6. and by communication of his saving grace, Ephesians. 3.17. and 4
7. Christ is in your hearts, in your gifts, in your graces, in your duties, in
all, by whom you find acceptance of your persons, and services with God your
heavenly Father, Ephesians. 1.6. Christ is with you, and in you, in all conditions,
in all relations, in all Afflictions, Isa. 63.8 9. And to conclude this use,
know for your increase of joy; that Christ, who is all, and in all in you will
abide in you for ever; Nothing shall be able to separate Christ and your
souls, Romans 8.35, 38, 39. Christ is the strength of your heart, and your
portion for ever, Psalm. 73.26.

4. Use. Seeing Christ is all, and in all in the New-Man, suffer a word of
exhortation, which will conscerne every one present to hearken to, viz. Both
such as are in Christ, and out of Christ. And I am sure evere one of you are in
one of these two estates: either you are in Christ, or without Christ. The
first branch of the exhortation shall be you, who are believers, and sanctified
in Christ Jesus, called Saints, seeing, Christ is all in all, Let him be all in
all in your justification, take ye heed you bring not any righteousness of
your own, nor any grace or work of his in you, to join with Christ, and his
righteousness in point of justification: Phil. 3.9. This glory Christ will not
give to another. He is our jujustification, or righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.
Christ will not permit any coadjutor, concause, or cooperator whatsoever in
justification of sinners.

Consider this you who will not believe, unless you could see your selves so
holy, so humble; except you can first have such a sin subdued, you will not
believe any of your sins are pardoned, until you find and feel in your
selves a soft heart, a broken heart, a praying spirit, a mourning spirit, you
cry out you are not justified. Oh, say you, if I could pray, mourn for sin,
profit by the means, as such and such do, then I would believe: but alas, I
have a hard heart, a blind mind, a perverse will, carnal affections, etc. I
cannot, dare not, I will not believe that my sins are forgiven. Thus most
professors would bring in (if not their own righteousness) some grace or work
of God in them, to join with Christ in their justification, not considering
that God justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5. and that Christ is all and in all in
the justification of sinners.

Secondly, let Christ be all, in all the gifts of the Spirit, and graces of
sanctification: for, as you heard, he is the Author, the Preserver, and the
finisher of them all, therefore let him have the pre-eminence, above all, set
an high esteem of every gift and grace of God, account a little grace better
then all the riches, honors, pleasures, and creature comforts of this world.
But you ought to prize Christ far above all his own gifts and graces in us,
for he is the life of them all, the marrow and substance of them a I. What is
all knowledge, unless ye know God in Christ? 1 Cor. 13.2 nothing. What is all
Faith, except Christ be the object of it? 1 Cor. 13.2 Nothing. Patience,
Temperance, and all other Virtues, what are they? but either natural
qualities, or moral habits, unless Christ be the root of them; Nature,
Education, and acquired gifts of Art may produce the like, yea the same, in
Heathens. But Christ is the luster and beauty of each spiritual gift and
grace: that influence believers receive from Christ, and those rays that come
from this Sun of Righteousness upon their graces, makes them shining Saints,
beautiful and all glorious within. Hear this you poor in spirit, you
newborn babes in Christ, who have the persons of believers (especially
Preachers) in admiration, and set them up on high in your hearts, and extol
them with your tongues, because you discern so much humility, love, patience,
faith, and other gifts of the Spirit, and graces of sanctification in them:
should you not rather admire Christ, exalt Christ, and extol him, who is the
purchaser, the owner, the donor, and the author of all these spiritual gifts
and graces, for we have nothing but what we have received, by his grace we are
what we are, and all the grace we have, from his fullness we received it, Joh.
1.16. therefore let him receive the glory of all, and let him have the
pre-eminence in all, for he is all in all.

Thirdly, let Christ be all, in all your affections, words, and actions. Set
your affections on Christ. Oh let the discoveries of that superlative
excellency, and glorious beauty of Christ, which are made out to your souls
by the Spirit and Word of God, draw you to set your affections on him, Col. 1.1
2. Love every one, and every thing that God has put the name of Christ upon,
for his sake, but chiefly set your affectionate love upon himself, love Christ
in his Saints, love Christ in his messengers, in his ordinances, etc. this will
quicken your desires to enjoy more of Christ, more of Christ in his Saints,
Ministers, Ordinances, and in your own hearts. On let Christ be chiefest in
your affections, he is altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16. Let him have your dearest
love, he is the wel-beloved of his Father and yours, 2 Pet. 1.17. let him be
your wel-beloved. Christ bears you in his arms, everlasting arms of mercy,
yea in his bosom, Isa. 40.11. and 63.9. Do you bear him in your heart, and
let Christ be exalted highest there. Again, let the absence of Christ be the
chief occasion of your sorrow and mourning, Matthew. 9 15. cry after him,
enquire for him, give him no rest until he return: this was the practice of
the Spouse, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. and Cant. 5.4, 6, 8. Oh how was her affections
set upon her Beloved! tell him I am sick of love, Cant. 5.8. Though there be
many other just occasions for mourning to the Saints, yet this is the chief.
If a loving wife cannot think of the departure of her dear husband without
sorrow, how much more sorrowful will a gracious heart be in the absence of
Christ? Mary likewise who wept, and being asked the reason by the Angels,
answered, Because they have taken away my Lord, etc. Joh. 20.11, 13, 15, 16.
And as Christ should be all in your affections, so let him be in your words and
actions: speak for him, do for him, suffer for him, let him be the matter of
your communications and conferences, that you may minister grace to the
hearers: what ever you do in word or deed, let all be done to the honor of
Christ, for he that honors the Son, honors the Father also.

The other branch of the exhortation, is to such as are in their natural
condition, without Christ, seeing Christ is all and in all, be exhorted to seek
Christ. Paul preaching on Mars-hill to the Athenians, tells them, God made of
one blood all Nations of men, that they should seek the Lord, Act 17.22, 26,
27. and there be many exhortations in holy Scripture to this purpose: as Isa.
55.6, 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, etc. Let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, etc. The Apostle Peter in his speech to Simon Magus, Act. 8.20, 21, 22,
23. told him his heart was not right in the sight of God, that he was in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. And yet he exhorted him to
repent and pray to God, verse. 22 Not that any man in his natural condition can
of himself come to Christ, desire him, or seek to enjoy him for none can come
to Christ except the Father draw him. Joh. 6.44. It is God that works in us to
will and to do according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. So then, says the
Apostle, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy; only know this, God requiring poor sinners to use the
means, he has appointed, is pleased to make that means effectual for their
conversion and salvation. For if God have purposed to show mercy, and confer
his grace upon your souls, he will cause you to seek unto him, Ezekiel. 36.26,
27 37. A new heart will I give you, and I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes: Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for this
be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them, verse. 37. Gods
gracious and free promises do not exclude the means he has appointed to
attain the mercies therein promised. It pleases him to tie his creatures to
the use of means, when he affords it them, though he will sometime work
without it. Now the ordinary means which God has in his infinite wisdom
appointed to convert sinners, and also to build them up in Christ, is the Word
preached, Romans 10.8, 17. This word of the Gospel God will have preached to
every creature in all parts of the world, Mark 16.15. None are exempted or
prohibited from hearing the Gospel preached, but every one that has an ear is
required to hear, Revel. 2.7. And let such as neglect the hearing of the word
of God (preached by such as are called and sent of Christ) consider what the
Lord says, Prove. 1. from the 20. verse. to the 32. verse. But albeit some of you
see it is that you ought to do, and that you had need to do, to wit, to seek
the Lord; assenting to what you heard in the first verse of the doctrine, that
there is much worth, beauty, and excellency in Christ, and that
poore-lost-undone sinners stand in need of him: Notwithstanding how to obtain
Christ you know not as yet. Let me tell you, God offers you Christ upon
Gospel-termes, which are these three.

First, God in the dispensation of the Gospel propounds Christ to lost
sinners, as the only necessary, and all-sufficient means of Salvation: Christ
is the only necessary means of Salvation, Act. 4.12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other. And Christ is the All-sufficient means of Salvation,
so that we need none but him: Heb. 7.25. He is able to save them to the umost,
etc.

Secondly, God does offer Christ to lost sinners without respect to price or
person, He invites them, that have no money, to come, and buy Wine, and milk,
(that is to say, Christ) without price, Isa 55 1. And any one, that will, are
invited to take Christ freely: Revel. 22.17 And whosoever will, let him take
the water of life (that is, Christ) freely.

Thirdly, God requires, that those, who do receive him, shall depart from
iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19. Live soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present
world, Ti^us. 2 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And that they shall sell all, lose all, and
hate all for the sake of Christ, and take up the Cross and follow him.

You will say to me, Alas, here is my misery, to wit, although God propound
Christ upon good terms to poor sinners, to me among others, I have no power of
my self to receive Christ, to believe in him, and accept of him. True, It is
not (as I said) in him, that wills, nor him that runs, but in God, who
shows mercy; Romans 9.16. It is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us-wards, who believe, which must be put forth in your hearts, to make you
believe also, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And you ought to
wait on God in the diligent use of means until the day of his power come upon
you, and then you shall be a willing, a believing people: Psalm. 110.3. I may
exhort you to repent of your wickedness, profaneness, etc. as Peter did:
Act. 8.22. But God must give you repentance unto life, Act. 11.18 It is my duty
to preach the Gospel to you, and to exhort you to seek Christ. Act. 17.22, 27.
but it is the mere mercy and free grace of God to drive you to Christ, which
nothing but his everlasting love can move him to do, Ier. 31.3. You ought to
seek, and wait, ask, and have, and use all the means which God has
appointed, and afforded you, both secret, private, and public, Revel. 2.29.
But God must make the means effectual: Acts 16.14. And therefore I must say,
It is not in me, I cannot draw you to Christ, that is the Fathers work: John
6.44. But having exhorted you to seek him in the use of means, there I must
leave you to wait on God for the moving of his holy Spirit, where you must lie
and continue like the poor impotent man at the poole of Bethesda for healing:
And though as he did, so you may see many a Lame, Blind, Deaf, Dumb,
Naked-leprous soul, get healing and go away rejoicing and praising God, and
you remain still so impotent, that you cannot get in to the Fountain, set
open for sin and for uncleanness, nor have any that can help you in, that you
may be cured: yet be not disheartened, as Christ came suddenly and unexpectedly,
and healed the impotent man after long waiting; so Christ will come according
to his promise to your souls that seek him, Malac. 3.1. The Lord whom you seek
shall come, shall suddenly come, says the Lord of Hosts.

THE SECOND SERMON.
EPHESIANS 1.4. That we should be holy.


IN this chapter you have; First, the inscription of the Epistle, verse. 1. and
therein is declared both the Penman Paul; and his Office, an Apostle of of
Jesus Christ by the will of God; also the persons to whom the Epistle was
written, the Saints, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus, which are at Ephesus.

Secondly, A salutation, verse. 2. and therein is expressed the matter of the
Salutation, Grace, and Peace; the persons saluted you, to wit, the Saints; the
Author from whom Grace and Peace comes to the Saints: From God our Father, and
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, A congratulation, verse. 3. for spiritual blessings in general,
(...) etc. Who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings etc. or with every
spiritual blessing. Whereof the Apostle mentions some particularly in the
following verses, to wit, Election, Predestination, Adoption. In this 4 verse
Saint Paul hints to us.

First, That there is an Election.

Secondly, That the Elect are chosen in Christ.

Thirdly, That Election was before the World was founded.

And fourthly, that the Elect of God should be holy, and without blame in his
presence, in love.

Thus you see the occasion, and dependence of the words of the Text, which
offers to your religious consideration this plain Doctrine.

Doct. God will have his people to be an holy people. This point of doctrine
needs no explanation; And it is a truth so generally assented to by all
professors, that I shall give you but one Scripture, to confirm it. 2 These. 3.
This is the will of God, (...) your Sanctification. And indeed it appears
manifestly in the Scripture of truth, that this is Gods holy will.

First, because God has chosen them in Christ to this end, Ephesians. 1.4. That
they should be holy.

Secondly, God calls his to holiness, 1 These. 4.7. God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness.

Thirdly, God has given to every one of his the holy spirit to sanctify them,
Romans 15 16. being sanctified by the holy spirit.

Fourthly, God affords them his holy word, which is a means of Sanctification.
John. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Yea when they
sin against God, he will chastise them for their profit; that they may be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. So that God would have his people holy.

Reason 1. God will have his people to be holy, that he may be justified in
justifying the ungodly, Romans 3.26. That he might be just, that justifies the
ungodly, Romans 4.5. God justifies the ungodly, that is, He finding men and
women in their blood, or in their sins, Ezekiel. 16 6, 8. he (in the the time of
love) forgives them all their sins, covers their nakedness with the skirt of
Christ's Righteousness, and bids them live; This is done when God enters into
covenant with them, and so they become his. Now that God may be justified in so
doing, though he found them ungodly, unbeleevers, impenitent, profane, etc. He
does not only forgive them all their sins, and so leave them ungodly, to go on
in their wicked ways; But he gives them his holy Spirit of Sanctificaton, who
changes their hearts, renewes the spirit of their mind, sanctifies their
wills, and affection, and produces all those fruits of the spirit in them,
mentioned, Gal. 5.22, 23. whereby they are made holy in all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. And this reason the Apostle gives, Ephesians. 1.4,
6. That we should be holy: to the praise of the glory of his grace, and verse
12. That we should be to the praise of his Glory. And herein is God justified
in justifying the ungodly, in that he does make and keep them holy, Jude 1.

Reason 2. God will have his people to be holy, for the honor and glory of his
Son Jesus Christ to whom he has given them. All mine are thine (says Christ
in his Prayer to his Father, John 17.1, 10.) and thine are mine, and I am
glorified in them, also verse. 19. And for their sakes, I sanctify my self,
that they also might be sanctified. Christ shall be glorified in his Saints,
especially in his Kingly Office, Revel. 15.3, 4. Just and true are thy ways;
Thou King of Saints; Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name,
for thou only art holy. And albeit, now Christ, and his poor Saints are
scorned, and despised of men; yet that Prophecy of Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, will have its accomplishment, Jude 14. Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
mighty Angels; When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, 2 These. 17 10.
And in that day it will appear to all the world, that it is the great glory of
Jesus Christ, that his Father has given him so many, ten thousands of Saints
to be his Subjects, and himself to be their King, Isa. 33.17, 22.

Reason. 3. God will have his people holy, that they may enjoy spiritual
communion with him in this life, and Eternal communion with him in heaven. The
Saints do enjoy spiritual Communion with God in this life, 1 John 1.3 Truly
our fellowship is with the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the
Spirit, Phil. 2.1. And they shall have eternal communion with God in Heaven,
in that Kingdom prepared for them, which then thy shall receive, Matthew. 25.34.
Now this communion with God, none can have without holiness. Heb. 12.14.
Therefore God will have his people to be holy.

1. Use. Will God have his people to be holy? Let it be useful to us, first
for enquiry, what holiness is? And how God makes His holy? (...) 1 These. 4 3.
7 Holiness or Sanctification is a real change of the whole Man, from the
pollution of sin, to the purity of the Image of Christ Romans 6.22. But now being
made free from sin, and become servants of God, ye have your fruits unto
holiness Here was a real change in them from the pollution of sin, 2 Cor.
3.18. But we all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image. Here was the other part of that real
change in them, to wit, into the purity of the Image of Christ. For as men in
their natural estate bear the Image of the Earthy first-man Adam; so men in
their spiritual estate bear the Image of the Heavenly second-Man CHRIST, 1
Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. This holiness or sanctification (if you have respect to
the Author and efficient cause thereof) is called the sanctification of the
Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. and 1 Pet. 1.2. (If unto the divine act of God) it is
called Renovation or Renewing of the mind, Ephesians. 4.23, and Romans 12.2. (If
unto the Acts and fruits of holiness in believers) it is called Faith, love,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, etc. Gal. 5.22.
(If unto the root, fountain, and foundation of holiness) the Scripture says;
Christ is our sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. Thus you hear what holiness is. Now
God makes His holy by his Spirit and Word; Whereby he does convince them, that
they are without Christ: Ephesians. 2.12. Makes discovery to them of the worth of
Christ, their need of him, and Gods offer of him in a covenant of Grace upon
Gospel terms; changing their hearts into the Image of Christ, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Gives them Faith in Christ, Repentance from dead works, Love to all the
Saints, etc. And so the very God of Peace Sanctify his people, 1 Thessalonians
5.23. Thus much may suffice touching the Jnquiry.

2. Use. Will God have his people to be holy? Let us make use of this, to
discover who are the people of God, and who are not. Those people, that are
ungodly, unsanctified, are not the people of God, such may boast of their
Justification, but they deceive themselves, for God has no
justified-unsanctified people, 1 Cor. 6 9, 10, 11. They may talk of the
free grace of God manifested to them and bringing them Salvation, but they are
deluded; for the grace of God, that brings Salvation, teaches us to deny
ungodliness, and to live godly. Titus. 2.11, 12. Now there are three sorts of
professors, who would be esteemed the people of God, and yet are not sanctified
by the holy spirit, they are not holy, and therefore are not the Lords people
in Covenant.

The first Sort are all those legal professors, who having been by the spirit,
and word of God much convinced of sin, John 16.8. Sorely wounded in their
consciences, Proverbes. 18.14. and somewhat reformed in their conversations, by
hearing godly Preachers, as Herod was, Mark 6 20. after all this, go about to
establish their own righteousness, and rest upon their duties, humiliation,
and legal reformation; And never have their hearts changed, and renewed, nor
Christ given of the Father unto them: These are not sanctified, are not the
Lords. Hear what the Apostle speaks to such among the Galatians. Are ye so
foolish? having begun in the Spirit, are you now made perfect by the flesh?
Have you affired so many things in vain? If it be yet in vain. Well such of
you as God has chosen in Christ, that you should be holy, etc. He will also
by his Spirit and Word convince you of Righteousness, to wit, that all your
own Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64.6. That being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, you have gone about to establish your own righteousness, Romans
10 3. and that you must be found in Christ, not having your own righteousness,
which is of the Law; but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3 9.

The second Sort are all those formal professors, who seem only to be
religious. James 1.26. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5. These will tell you they rest not on duties, trust not to
their own righteausnesse, confide not in their Humiliation, as legal
professors do; But they (after much trouble of conscience for their sins) got
comfort, joy, and peace in applying some promises of the Gospel to themselves:
Consider, I pray you, the Parable of the stony ground hearers. They on the
rock, are they, which when thy hear receive the Word with joy, and these have
no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away, Luke
8.13. Here was some (plowing, though it went not deep enough,) and some
Harrowing also, to cover the good seed; after this the^e was some joy, but no
root; Here was the Word convincing, and wounding, and comforting, but no Christ
(who is called the root Coloss. 2.6, 7) to quicken, renew, and sanctify: And
therefore, though they believed awhile, yet they fall away, in the time of
Temptation. And this is the condition of formal Professors, they get comfort
in promises, but they receive not Christ and His sanctifying comforting-spirit
in the promises, let such hear what the Lord by His Prophet speaks to a
formal professing people, Isa. 50.11. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass your selves about with sparks; Walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have at my hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow.

The third sort are all those carnal Professors, who say they are the people
of God, and hold the common Faith, Titus 1.4. which is the faith of Gods Elect,
Titus 1.1. and believe the common salvation: Jude 3. That is to say, common to
every one that believes, both Jew and Gentile: Romans 1, 16. But notwithstanding
all this profession of general redemption, they themselves are the servants of
corruption: 2 Pet. 2.19. For they take liberty to live in sin, and walk after
the flesh fulfilling the lusts thereof; turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ:
Jude 4 They are so fa^re departed from the Faith, which they sometime
professed, and seemed to have, 1 Timothy 4.1. that they question whether the
Scriptures of truth be the Word of God? Whether Christ be the son of God?
Whether the first day of the Week be the Sabbath of God? And they are so far
from living godly, and walking in the way of holiness; that they totally omit
all holy duties, they refrain prayer, they speak not of the Word of God when
they rise up, nor when they lie down, nor as they sin in the house together
with their family: They do not partake of any Ordinances, nor perform any
worship to God. And as for sin, they make a mock at it; some of them say God
takes no knowledge of their sins, He sees no iniquity in them; others affirm,
that they have no sin, they are born of God, and they cannot sin: And some
others are bold, to say, they are justified persons, and therefore all their
words and actions are alike acceptable to God, and well-pleasing in his sight
etc. But these carnal professors are not holy, are not the people of God: This
may make some discovery of those, whose hearts are not right with God; to whom
I would give the Apostles exhortation, Acts 8.22.

3. Use. Will God have His people to be holy? Then may this doctrine occasion a
deep Humiliation, and godly sorrow in believers for their unholinesse,
carnallnesse, and sinfulness in heart or life, O beloved, let you and I
commune with our own hearts, how much unbelief, hypocrisy, self-filthinesse,
formality and wickedness, shall we upon diligent examination find still
remaining in us? What vanity of mind and carnality is in our hearts? How many
hard thoughts of God have we still? Notwithstanding all the experiences God
has given us of his unchangeablenesse, his faithfulness, and his everlasting
loving kindness in Jesus Christ: How apt are we by an evil heart of unbelief,
to depart from God? Alas what sinful contemplations have we in our spirits?
What evil concupiscence? How do our hearts run out after the creature comforts
of this world, and how are our affections still set upon the things below
Christ and God? How many Idols are set up in our hearts! How great is our
self-love, self-seeking, self-confidence, self-dependence, and
self-sufficiencie! O what high thoughts have we sometimes of our selves, our
gifts, our graces, our experiences, our performances? Surely we have just cause
(if God will in mercy work in us godly sorrow) to be ashamed, to mourn after a
godly manner, and to loath our selves for the abominations of our own hearts.
But my brethren, let us examine our lives, and search and try our ways, as
well as commune with our hearts, for the eye of the world is open upon us; God,
and Angels, men and Devils, all observe us (who are believers) they hear what
we say, and take knowledge what we do. O beloved, how much vain, carnal, and
sinful communication comes out of our mouths, that ministers no grace to the
hearers! How many idle words do we speak? What unprofitable talk have we among
our selves and with others; not gracious, nor seasoned with the salt of truth
and holiness, but very unsavory speeches. And when we meet together, and
speak one to another of Religion, we are apt to speak slightly, rashly,
formally, inconsiderately, and not soberly, humbly, and graciously, as becomes
the Saints. Yea, our conferences sometimes turns to vain janglings, and
un-edifying disputes, wherein we strive for victory, or to maintain our own
opinion, more then truth; But besides all this, How much ungodliness is there
in our actions? Albeit God preventeth us by His grace, from doing actions
simply and grossly evil and ungodly, as drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. Yet
in doing lawful things, we often mis-carry; the Messengers of Christ do
sometimes preach themselves, Fathers of Families do correct their children
sometimes after their pleasure, provoking their children, being bitter to their
Wives sometimes; Oh how uneven do we walk in our callings and relations!
Wherein we should especially show forth the power of godliness. Oh had we
tender hearts and were we truly sensible of our sinful miscariages, we could
not speak of those particulars without tears of godly sorrow. Can we consider
how many years we have professed the Gospel, how long we have enjoyed the
Word preached in season and out of season unto us, and yet how little our
conversation is as becomes the Gospel, how little we have profited, how little
we have grown in Grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and not be
affected to mourn under the feeling of our unprofitablenesse, and great
barrenness. But I hope God will give us repentance unto salvation, not to be
repented of for all our unrighteousness.

4. Use. Will God have his people to be holy? Let it be useful for the
consolation of every true Believer, especially such as at present groan under
the tyrannical power, or captivating bondage of any corruption; And sigh to
God for supply from Christ of any grace wanting, or weak in their
apprehension, sense, and feeling. Hearken poor mourning soul, and consider what
may be said for thy comfort, and search the Scriptures whether it be so or not.

Know first, That Gods eternal purpose toward thee (who art a true Believer)
in choosing thee in Christ, was, that thou should be holy, Ephesians. 1.4 and
Romans 8.30. I have purposed it (says God) I will also do it, Isa. 46.11.

Secondly, That God has made with thee an everlasting Covenant of Grace and
Holiness, wherein he has given thee many great and precious promises, to
pardon sin, to subdue iniquity, and to put his Law in thy mind, and write it
in thy heart: Jer. 3.31.34, and 32.40, with Heb. 8.10.11.12. Micah. 7.18, 19,
20, with 2 Pet. 2.3, 4, to the 11. verse.

Thirdly, that Christ has prayed to His Father for thee, that he would
sanctify thee, John 17.1.17.20.

Fourthly, that Christ sanctified himself for thy sake, that thou also might be
sanctified, Joh. 17.19.20.

Fifthly, that God has given thee the spirit of his son, Gal. 4.6. who is a
comforting sanctifying spirit, yea the Comforter; John 14.16, 17.18: And he
that sanctifies all the people of God, 1 These. 5.23.

Sixthly, That faithful is God, who called thee, who also will do it; 1 These.
5.24. He called thee unto Holiness, 1 These 4.7, and he will both make thee
holy. [He has said thou shall be holy, Levit. 11.44.45, and 19.2. That is such
a command, as has the force of a promise in it; And though that place, Levit.
20 7, is, (...) Sanctify your selves therefore and be ye Holy; yet the 70.
Interpreters renders it, (...). Et sanctificabimi, and eritis sancti. And so
does the Chaldees Paraphrast render it also. And Hierom translates that place,
in the first of Pet. 1.16. (...), Be ye holy, Sancti eritis, Ye shall be holy:
And indeed, there is (...), in the Margent of one Greek Testament, for God can
put a being to His Word] And therefore be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee. Matthew. 9.2. And sin shall not have dominion over thee, Romans
6.14. The grace of Christ is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9. He is full of
grace, John 1.14. And from his fullness, thou shall receive grace upon grace;
John 1.16. According as his divine power has given us all things, that pertain
unto life and godliness. 1. Pet. 1.3.

5. Use. Will God have his people to be holy? Let me conclude with an use of
exhortation to holiness; As he that called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. God will have his people holy at all
times, in all relations, and in every condition. Therefore I beseech you
brethren, and exhort you in the Lord, and for his sake, to be holy in all
manner of Conversation, holy in your callings, for godliness is great gain:
holy in your Families, in your shops, in your journeyes in all your ways, and
in all your relations. Godliness has the promise both of this life, and that
which is to come. Piety has a majesty in it, it will give you a throne in the
Consciences of others, that they dare not sin in your presence. Holiness is an
ornament to your callings, to your persons, to your families, and to the place
where you live. The more holy the more like your Heavenly Father, and the more
you, glorify your heavenly Father, and the more you adorn the Doctrine of
Christ, yea the more communion you have with the Father and with Christ. Having
therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God,
2 Cor. 7.1, 4. great is my boldness of speech toward you in this exhortation,
because I desire fruit that may abound to your account; And give me leave to
press this exhortation upon such believers present who have carnal parents,
yoke-fellowes, or other carnal friends. You would have your natural friends
converted, and to that end you pray for them, mourn over them, many a sigh,
and many a tear, it may be, they have cost you; but they live in the flesh
still, are carnal still. Oh let not an holy conversation be wanting, that may
further their conversion, 1 Cor. 7.16, 17. And if any obey not the Word, they
also may be won, without the word, by your Godly conversation, 1 Pet. 3.1.
And if they be not drawn thereby to a love of the truth, yet their mouths will
be stopped, that they cannot speak against it. Would it not be a comfortable
thing, to have a carnal father speak thus of his godly son, or daughter, to
wit, I was unwilling my children should go so often to hear Sermons, and be so
often at Conferences, and private fasts, and the like; But I have observed,
that since they professed Religion, and gave themselves to pray, and read the
Scriptures, They have been much more dutiful to us their parents then before,
and they are more diligent in their callings. If this be the worst, they shall
have liberty to profess the Gospel still. The like I might speak of other
relations but should carnal parents or friends have cause by your loose or un
evenwalking to speak evil of the ways of God, it would be very uncomfortable
to you, and dishonorable to the Gospel. I shall conclude in the words of the
Apostle, Phil. 4.8. Finally, Brethren, Whatsoever things are true, Whatsoever
things are honest, just, pure, lovely, or of good report. If there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things, and the God of
peace shall be with you. verse. 9.

One objection had need to be answered, before I end, and that is this; May
some say, you have exhorted us to holiness, and the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy
3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

Object. How may we be encouraged and strengthened against the fears of
persecution?

Solu. I answer, First pray to God, that he will furnish you with suffering
graces, against persecuting times, Colos. 1.9.10, 11. Secondly improve your
interest through Christ in the promises, and believe, that the more sufferings
for Christ, the more comfort by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. The more sufferings the
more holiness, Heb. 12.10. The more sufferings the more happiness: 1 Pet.
4.14. Only take heed of suffering as an evil doer, verses 15.16. And if any
suffer as a Christian, Christ will suffer with him, Isa. 63.9. Christ will
share with you in your suffering persecution. Acts 9.4, 5. And you shall share
with Christ in glory, Romans 8.17. But you must be holy in sufferings also,
praying for them that persecute you, as Christ taught and practiced: and so did
his Martyr Stephen, 7.60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge: And so let us
pray for them that now disturbed us.

FINIS.

