THE MARTYRDOM OF KING CHARLES, Or his conformity with Christ in his
sufferings.

In a Sermon on 1 Cor. 2.8. Preached at Bredah, before his MAJESTY of Great
Britain, and the Princess of Orange.

By the Bishop of Down. June. 3./13. 1649.

PSALM. 2.2. The rulers take Counsel together, against the Lord, and against
his anointed. JOHN 15.20. The Servant is not greater than the Lord, if they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. TERTVLLIAN. Christiani
nunquam sunt inventi Cassiani, HAGE.

Printed by Samuel Broun, English Bookeseller, Dwelling in the Achter-om at the
Sign of the English Printing house, Anno M.DC.XLIX.

1. Corin. 2.8. Which none of the Princes of this world knew: for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory.
TO clear the passage unto my text, I must first show unto you the coherence
of these words with that which goes before: and if you will be pleased to look
back, you will find, that the Apostle in this Chapter does highly magnify his
ministry, by showing the exellency of his doctrine, both for matter and for
manner. First, for manner; for his preaching stood not in excellency of
speech, ver. 1. not in the entizing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of spirit, and of power, ver. 4. Again, the matter of his
doctrine is wisdom, which above all things is to be desired, as may appear
by Solomon his choice, and Gods approbation of it. And it is not the wisdom
of men, but of God, ver. 5. not the wisdom of this world, ver. 6. but the
wisdom that is from heaven, as far above the wisdom of men, as heaven is
above earth, God above men. This wisdom is not known by nature; for it is a
mystery, ver. 7. We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden
wisdom. It is hid from the wise and men of understanding, hid from the princes
of this world, as he says, ver. 8. Which none of the Princes of this world
knew: for had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
So that the text contains a charge against the Princes of this world, wherein
consider first, the persons accused, the Princes of this world: then the charge
that is brought against them, which has two parts. 1. They are charged with
ignorance of the wisdom of God; Which none of the Princes of this world knew.
2. They are charged with a heinous and horrible murder; They crucified the
Lord of Glory. And (which will make up our third point) their ignorance of the
wisdom of God, led them to committing of that horrible murder; For had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of Glory. But they did
crucify him, and therefore they knew it not. Now I must be brief in
expounding of my text, because an other task will take up my time.

The persons accused are called Princes, and Princes of this world. They are
called Princes, because they did excel others in power, rule, and dignity; as
namely Pilat who condemned Christ, Herod who consented to the sentence, Annas
and Caiphas the high Priests who did prosecute him, and with them the Scribes,
Pharisees, and Elders of the Jews, who in Scripture are often called Princes
of the people, Princes of the tribes, Princes of the congregation, Princes of
Israel, Princes of Judah; because being chief heads of their families, they
were above others, in dignity and power: and it is familiar in Scripture to
call them Princes, who are in any great authority. But they are not simply
called Princes, but princes of this world; because they were wicked Princes:
they are called Princes of this world, as the devil is called the God of this
world, 2 Cor 4.4. The God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not. And he is called the Prince of this world, often by our Savior in
St. John's gospel: Ioh. 12.31.14.30.16.11.
The Prince of this world is cast out, the Prince of this world is Judged, the
Prince of this world is come. And all evil spirits are called Princes of the
darkness of this world. Ephesians. 6.12. Wicked men are called, men of the world
who have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14. And the children of this
world, in opposition to the children of God; Luke 16.8.
The children of this world are wiser in their generation, than the children of
light. And the friends of the world, Jam. 4.4. Whosoever will be a friend of
the world, is the enemy of God. They are friends of the world, because they
love the world and the things of the world, where as those whom God has chosen
out of the world, those whom he has translated from the power of darkness
unto the kingdom of his dear Son, have their hearts weaned from this world,
their affections are set on things that are above. They are not of the world, 1
Ioh. 4.4.5. 1 Ioh. 5.19. Ioh. 15.8.
but of God. Thus you see that the world for the most part is taken in an evil
sense; the world lies in wickedness, says St. John, the world hates me,
says our Savior, and again, Ioh. 17.9. Gal. 1.4.
I pray not for the world. But especially when it is called this world, in
opposition to that world that is to come; Then are we to understand a wicked
world, as the Apostle terms it, this present evil world. Now the Apostle
here speaks of the Princes of this world; amongst whom we must not reckon
Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathea; they were Princes of the people, as well as
the rest of the elders, and they were not ignorant of the wisdom of God, nor
consenting to the death of Christ: but they are not to be accounted Princes of
this world; and the Apostle here speaks only of the Princes of this world,
and of them all he says, that they were ignorant of this wisdom, which none
of the Princes of this world knew.

This is the first part of their charge, they are charged with ignorance of
heavenly wisdom, or, if you will, ignorance of that glory prepared for us; the
relative which may be referred unto both. In the verse before he says, We
speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God
ordained before the world unto our glory, then follows, which none of the
Princes of this world knew: that is which wisdom of God none of the Princes of
this world knew, or, which glory none of the Princes of this world knew. And
indeed they were ignorant of both, as the Apostle proves in the words
following: and first ignorant of the glory prepared for us, ver. 9. Eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. And as they were
ignorant of that glory prepared for us, the knowledge whereof is but a part of
heavenly wisdom; so were they altogether ignorant of that wisdom of God, ver.
11, 12, 14. For who knows the things of a man, save the spirit of man? even
so the things of God knows no man, but the spirit of God. Now we have
received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit that is of God, that we
might know the things that are given us of God. But the natural man receives
not the things of Gods spirit, they are foolishness unto him; neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned. This wisdom is a mystery,
ver. 7. and therefore it is not known by nature; but by revelation from God.
When St. Peter had made that excellent confession of Jesus, that he is Christ
the Son of the Living God, our Savior said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon:
Mat. 16.16.17.
for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father. So that all
who are endued with this wisdom, are Theodidactoi taught of God, as our
Savior says, Joh. 6 44. No man can come unto me, except the father draw him.
And this he proves out of the Prophets, saying, it is written, they shall be
all taught of God. Every man therefore, that has heard, and learned of the
father, comes unto me. As if he had said, no man can come unto me except the
father teach him; for all that are taught of God, and only they, come unto me:
and therefore no man can come unto me except the father draw him, that is, move
him effectually; for indeed Gods teaching is an effectual working; he not
only opens the eyes of the understanding, but also convinces the heart of the
truth of his Doctrine, and inclines us to embrace this wisdom. So that a man
may be learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, in all the philosophy of
the Graecians, he may be as wise as Achitophell, whose counsel was esteemed as
the oracle of God; and yet be ignorant of this wisdom, as our Savior says,
Math. 11.25. I thank thee O father, because thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Yea, a man may be well
learned in the Scriptures, and yet ignorant of this wisdom; the Scribes and
Pharisees were doctors of the law, and yet even of them the Apostle says,
which none of the Princes of this world knew.

In the second place he charges them with an heinous and horrible murder,
they crucified the Lord of Glory, where every circumstance in the text does
aggravate the murder. 1. The person murdered is the Lord of Glory. 2. The
death inflicted on him was crucifixion, the most shameful and accursed death
in the World. 3. The persons who did this, were they his own people, who of
all others should not have done it, even they crucified the Lord of Glory. The
person murdered is the Lord of Glory, our blessed Savior Jesus Christ. He is
the Lord, as we confess in our Creed, by reason of the dominion which he has
over all, and particularly over his church. He is the Lord, by right of
creation; For all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made that was made. Ioh. 1.3. By him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, etc. Col. 1.16. He is
the Lord, by right of inheritance; for he is the heir of all things. Heb. 1.2.
He is the Lord by the right of donation; for the father is brought in saying
unto him, I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Plalm. 2.8. So he says,
Matthew. 28.18. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. He is the
Lord by the right of redemption; for he who redeemeth a captive becomes his
Lord, and Christ when we were captives, has redeemed us, by giving himself a
ransom for us: we were redeemed (says St. Peter) not with silver or gold, or
corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Jesus, as of a lamb
undefiled. Finally he is our Lord too by the right of conquest; for after that
he had redeemed us, by paying a ransom unto God for us, Satan the Jailor
would not let us go, but kept us fast bound in the fetters of sin; and
therefore he is fallen to come with a mighty hand, and outstretched arm, and
violently take us out of his gripes: He is the stronger man mentioned in the
gospel, who has overcome the strong man, taken his armor from him, Col. 2.15.
and divided the spoil. He has spoiled principalities and powers, triumphing
over them. And as he is the Lord, so the Lord of Glory, that is, a glorious
Lord, by an Hebraeisme. He is called the King of Glory, Plal. 24.7. Lift up
your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King
of Glory shall come in. And the God of Glory, by St. Steven. Act. 7.2. The God
of Glory appeared to our father Abraham. And here, as also Iam. 2.1. He is
called the Lord of Glory. Glory properly signifies beauty, praise, honor; and
it is ordinarily used in scripture, to express that Majesty and perfection of
bliss, which God injoyes from all eternity, and which in some measure he
communicates unto his blessed Angels, and Saints in heaven. Now well may our
Savior be called the Lord of Glory, because he is the brightness of Gods
Glory, and the express image of his person. Heb. 1.3. He did enjoy Glory with
the Father from all eternity, as he says, Ioh. 17.5. And now O father,
glorify thou me, with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the world was. And again he prays for his Disciples, saying, ver. 24.
Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory. And as he enjoyed glory with the father from all
eternity; so after a short eclipse of that glory here on earth, and after he
had overcome the sharpness of death, he was received up into glory. 1 Timothy
3.16. He is crowned with glory and honor. Heb. 2.9. And he tells us that at
the last day, he shall come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great
glory. Mat. 24.30.25.31.
Then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. Finally he is called the Lord
of glory, because he is the author of glory unto others: for says the Apostle,
when Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him
in glory. Coloss. 3.4. He gives unto his servants eternal life, which in
scripture is called glory, a Kingdom of glory, a crown of glory, an eternal
weight of glory.

This is the person who was murdered, and therefore the murder was most
heinous; For if it be a greater sin, for a man to murder his father, than to
kill a stranger; to murder the King, than to kill a fellow subject; to murder
an innocent person, then to kill a malefactor; Then how heinous a murder was
it, to kill him who was more than all these, even our everlasting father, the
King of Kings, and Lord of glory, and withal a person so innocent, that no
guile was found in his mouth, none could convince him of sin? Heb. 7.26.
he was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher
than the heavens: And yet this was done; they crucified the Lord of glory. But
here you may say unto me: how could the Lord of Glory be crucified? seeing he
is God, and God is impassible, he cannot suffer. For answer, you shall
understand, that there is so straight an union and conjunction between the two
natures of Christ, in one person, that that which is proper only to the one
nature, is vouched, not (as some foolishly imagine) of the other nature; but,
it is vouched of the person being denominated from the other nature. This kind
of speech is by the fathers called koinonia idiomaton, a communication of
properties. And it is a plain Synecdoche, very usual in speech, whereby that
which is proper only to the part, is praedicated of the whole. We have diverse
instances of it in Scripture. Acts. 3.15. Ye killed the prince of life. Christ
was killed only as man, and yet, because the same man was also God, he says,
ye killed the prince of life. Acts. 20.28. Feed the church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood. Christ had blood only as he was man; but
because the same man was also God, his blood is called, the blood of God. John.
3.13. No man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the
son of man which is in heaven. Christ descended from heaven, only in respect
of his divine nature, and he was in heaven at that time, when he was speaking
unto Nicodemus here on the earth, only as he was God, and yet because the same
person was also man, he says, the Son of man which is in heaven. So here,
Christ was crucified only as he was man, and yet because the same man was also
God, the Apostle says, they crucified the Lord of glory.

And so I come unto the second circumstance, the kind of death that he
suffered: it was crucifixion, the most shameful and ignominious death in the
world. The Apostle mentions scandolum crucis: the offense of the cross. Galat.
5.11. and the shame of the cross too. Hebr. 12.^. There is more shame in it
than in any other death, and therefore the Heathen termed the cross, arborem
infoelicem, and stipitem infamem; a wretched infamous tree. This death was so
infamous, that the Romans did not inflict it upon any, but only such as were
esteemed base rogues, and notorious malefactors. And therefore we find in the
Ecclesiastical History, that albeit St. Paul suffered martyrdom at Rome, as
well as St. Peter, yet they could not crucify St. Paul: he being a Roman, had
the privilege of a gentleman, and was beheaded; but Peter being but a
fisherman by his trade, was esteemed a base fellow, and so crucified as was his
Master. That which made this death more shameful and ignominious, was, because
all that were crucified, were first scourged before they were crucified, and
that was peculiar to this death of the cross. Now for a man to be scourged, is
a foul disgrace, a vile and servile punishment, not to be offered unto any but
unto bondslaves: and therefore he in the comedy says in great disdain, loris?
liber sum: he took it in great scorn, the whippe should be once named unto
him who was free borne. And yet our Savior being to be crucified, was first
scourged. And as this was a shameful, servile, and ignominious death; so was
it a most execrable and cursed death; for says the Apostle, it is written,
cursed is every one that hangs on a tree, Gal. 3.13. It was not only
esteeemed so by men, but it was so indeed, being accursed by the mouth of God
himself; for it is said, Deuteronomy. 21.23. He that is hanged is cursed of God. And
therefore Christ suffering this death, the Apostle says, that he was factus
maledictum, made a curse for us. And as this death was an ignominious and
accursed death; so also a most painful death. First, his flesh was torn with
whippes: They ploughed on his back (says the Psalmist) and made long furrows
on it. Then his hands and his feet were bored with the nails, and the hands
and feet of all other parts are most sensible, by reason of the texture of all
the sinews there. And being thus nailed unto the tree, his whole body was
stretched out on the cross, as on a rack, till all his bones were out of
joint, as was foretold by the Psalmist. This stretching was such, that it made
his very ribs and bones, break through the flesh and the skin, which must
needs be a pain out of measure painful. Therefore the heathen termed the
cross, cruciabile lignum, a tree of torture; and most sharp and bitter
pains, have their name from the cross, being called cruciatus. Christ was no
less than six hours in this torment; even from the third hour, until the
ninth, and all that while in perfect sense; for it is said, he cried with a
loud voice, and gave up the ghost. He did not cry with the faint voice of a
dying man, but with a loud voice, to show that his (...) strength was not one
whit abated. This death was devised for our Savior, not so much by Pilat and
the Soldiers, as by the Jews; for they cried out, crucify him, crucify him.
Ioh. 18.31*
When Pilat said unto them, take ye him, and judge him according to your law:
they answered, it is not lawful for us to put any man to death. And this came
to pass, says the Evangelist, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled,
which he spoke, signifying what death he should die. Now what was that which he
spoke signifying what death he should die? we find it Matthew. 20.19. The son
of man shall be betrayed unto the chief Priests, and to the Scribes, and they
shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock and
to scourge, and to crucify him. Thus they put off his trial from themselves,
unto the Roman Governor, of purpose, that he might suffer that Roman death.
At first they condemned him of blasphemy, and then he should have been
stoned; but that death seemed too mild, for it would have dispatched him
quickly: Therefore they indite him a new of treason, for speaking against
Coesar, that so he might suffer the death of a traitor, even that ignominious,
accursed, and painful death of the cross. No less could satisfy their
malice.

And who were they that did all this? even his own people, they who were his
brethren, and kinsmen according to the flesh, they crucified the Lard of glory;
they unto whom he came, and for whom he came, for he was sent unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel; they amongst whom he had preached the word of
life, for it behooved the Gospel first to be preached unto them; They among
whom he had wrought many miracles, and unto whom he had done many good works;
even they were such unthankful traitors, that they crucified the Lord of glory.

In the last place, the Apostle tells us, that their ignorance of the wisdom
of god, led them to the committing of that horrible murder: for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. But here ye may say
unto me, did these malicious Jews sin only out of ignorance, as did Paul in
persecuting the Church? O no; they sinned out of malice, against knowledge and
conscience; for they knew that Jesus was a good and just man, and had given him
that testimony, that he had done all things well; they knew that he was a
great Prophet, a teacher come from God; they were in some sort too covinced
that he was the Christ, Mark. 7.37. Ioh. 3.2.
for Ioh. 11.47. they held a council against him, saying, what shall we do?
this man does many miracles, if we let him alone, all men will believe on him,
namely, that he is the Christ. Where ye may behold them fighting against the
light of their own knowledge, wherewith our Savior expressly charges them,
Ioh. 7.28. Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am, and Ioh. 15.24. Now have
they both seen and hated both me and my father. This appears further by that
which is said in the parable of the householder, Matthew. 21.31. A certain
householder planted a vineyard, and let it out to husbandmen, and went unto a
far country. And when the time of the fruits came, he sent his servants to
receive them; and the husbandmen took his servants, beat them and killed them:
again he sent other servants, and they did unto them likewise. Last of all he
sent unto them his son, saying, they will reverence my son. But when the
husbandmen saw him, they said, this is the heir, come let us kill him, and
cease on his inheritance. And says the Evangelist ver. 45. when the chief
Priests and the Pharisees heard this parable, they perceived that he spoke of
them. So that they had some knowledge of Christ: but it was not the true
knowledge; they were not endued with heavenly wisdom, nor taught of God; for
their heart did stand out against the light which did shine on their
understanding, and (as Solomon says) They hated knowledge, and, did not choose
the fear of the Lord. Prove. 1.29.
Therefore says our Savior unto them, ye neither know me, nor my father,
Ioh. 8.19. So that even sins of malice committed against knowledge and
conscience, yet are accompanied with some kind of ignorance. This is clear in
the crucifying of Christ, for they knew that it was evil to kill him that was
innocent and just; but this knowledge was only habitual and general, they
did not actually know that it was evil, at the instant when they did it, or
they did not consider it; or though they knew that it was evil, yet they did
not know, that that evil was not to be done, for the obtaining of a greater
good which they proposed to themselves, namely, the retaining of their places
and dignities, which they feared to lose if he were acknowledged for the
Messiah. Thus it holds true that the Philosopher said, omnis malus ignorans,
there is some ignorance in every sin; for seeing the will cannot possibly
affect evil, as it is evil, but that the same is still presented unto it,
under the mask of good, it follows necessarily, that every one that sins,
is some way ignorant of good and evil. For which cause Solomon says, nonne
errant omnes? Prove. 14.22. Psalm. 14.4. Psalm. 53.4.
do they not all err that work iniquity? And David oftener than once in the
Psalms says, have all the workers of iniquity noe knowledge? Indeed they
have no true knowledge. And therefore howsoever some have commended ignorances
as the mother of devotion, I may say more truly, that is the mother of error;
our Savior said so much to the Saduces, Matthew. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing
the Scriptures. It is the mother of Idolatry, Galat. 4.8. When ye knew not
God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no Gods. It is the mother of
pride and arrogance, Romans 10.3. Being ignorant of the righteousness of God,
they went about to establish their own righteousness. It is the mother of
lust, These. 4.5. The Gentiles which know not God, walk in the lust of
concupiscence. Finally, it is the mother of all sin, Ephesians. 4.18. Having
their understanding darkened, through the ignorance that is in them: and being
past feeling, they gave themselves over unto lasciviousness; to work all
uncleanness with greediness. And on the other part, all grace is from the
true knowledge of God, 2 Pet. 1.2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you,
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. As this knowledge brings
grace and peace, so it brings glory; for says our Savior, This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.
Ioh. 17.3
This knowledge is the wisdom of God, which the Apostle here magnifies so
much, Which none of the Princes of this world knew: for had they known it,
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.

I Have now done with my text, but not with the Princes of this world; for I am
to present unto you another sad tragedy, so like unto the former that it may
seem but vetus fabula per novos histriones, the stage only changed, and new
actors entered upon it, other Princes of this world, yea, of the darkness of
this world, Far worse than then Pilat, the high Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, who have lately murdered, (if not the Lord of glory, yet I am sure)
a glorious Lord, though not Christ the Lord; yet the Lords Christ, Gods
anointed. This is a parricide so heinous, so horrible, that it cannot be
paralled by all the murders that ever were committed since the world began,
but only in the murder of Christ. And indeed the providence of God gave me
first occasion to institute this parallel: for that day that our gracious
Sovereign was murdered, being the 30. of January, a day for ever to be noted
with a black coal, as his Majesty was at divine service, before he was led
forth unto the scaffold, the chapter that was read unto him, was the seven and
twentieth of St. Matthews gospel, which contains the passion of Christ; and
that chapter was read not by choice* but by the direction of the rubric, it
being the lesson appointed for that day, so that we could not but conceive,
that the murder then to be acted, was like unto that which in the chapter is
described. And indeed you will find it very like unto it, if you will but
consider the three circumstances which I before observed in my text, the
dignity of the person murdered, the kind of death that he suffered, and the
quality of the murderers.

The person that was now murdered, was not the Lord of glory, but a glorious
Lord, Christ's own Vicar: his lieutenant and vicegerent here on earth, within
his dominions. And therefore by all laws, divine, and humane, he was
privileged from any punishment that could be inflicted by men. Albeit he was
as inferior to Christ, as man is unto God; the creature, unto the immortal
Creator; yet was his privilege of inviolability far more clear than was
Christ's. For Christ was not a temporal Prince, his Kingdom was not of this
world, and therefore when he vouchsafed to come into the world, and to become
the son of man, he did subject himself unto the law; he who only could
choose when to be borne, made choice to be borne at that time when there was a
decree for taxing all the world; that so soon as he was borne, he might be
enrolled a subject unto Caesar: Luc. 2.1.
he lived as a subject, paid tribute unto Caesar; he submitted unto Pilats
jurisdiction, acknowledging that he had power given him from above. But our
gracious Sovereign was well known to be a temporal Prince, ^oh. 19.11.
a free Monarch, and their undoubted Sovereign, to whom they did allow, and
had sworn allegience; and therefore he could not be judged by any power on
earth. He disclaimed their authority, as he well might; for they had no power
at all over any, much less over him: and what power they usurped was not de
super, as Pilats, but de subter, from beneath, even from the angel of the
bottomless pit, whose name is Abaddon; For as he seeks the destruction of all
men, so especially of Kings, because by their government, peace is preserved,
justice executed, and religion maintained. But from above they had no power:
for God never gave unto the people power over their King; as is evident by
Scripture, by the law of nature and nations, by the known laws of England, by
clear and undeniable reasons, and by the constant doctrine and practice of the
true, ancient, and Catholic Church; as were easy for me to show, if time
would permit. And yet those monstrous traitors, have sacrilegiously invaded
Gods throne, and usurped his office, whose peculiar it is to be Judge of Kings,
and so have ventured to try, judge, condemn, and execute their King, in
despite of all law, reason, religion, nature, and God himself. As it is in the
parable of Jotham, they have advanced the bramble, above the cedar of Lebanus,
while they set the people, even the basest of the people, on the bench, and
placed the King a prisoner at the bar. So they have overthrown the order of
God and nature, dissolved the bands of humane society, bringing in a mere
confusion, and dissipation of all things.

This was such a thing, as has not been known since the world began: Pilat
knew by the light of nature, Ioh. 19.15.
that a King is not to b^ put to death; therefore he said unto the Jews, Shall
I crucify your King? As if he had said, if Jesus be a King, he is not to be
put to death; but it is said he is your King, and shall I then do such an act
against the law of nature and nations? And the chief priests, as impudent and
malicious as they were, they did not deny the proposition, that a King is not
to be put to death; but they denied the assumption, that Jesus was their King,
saying, we have no King but Caesar. But these murderers are worse than the
Jews, for they confessed him to be their King, and yet took upon them, to
judge, condemn, and put him to death. And as they are worse than Jews, so
they are worse then Pagans: for Tully pleading before Caesar, for Diotarus King
of Galatia, albeit he was but a tributary King, yet he does challenge that
privilege unto him, saying, ita inusitatum est, Regem capitis reum esse, ut
ante hoc tempus sit inauditum. For a King to be guilty of death, is such a
thing as has not been heard of. And as they are worse than Jews and Pagans,
so they are even worse than devils; for the devils never rise up against their
prince, though he be as bad as can be: but the Puritans rage against their
King, be he never so good, as indeed our gracious Sovereign was the best of
Kings. Never was there yet any prince that sat upon a throne, who was beyond
him for piety and prudence, for all heroical and christian graces. But here I
dare not venture to praise him, lest coming short, I may seem to wrong him;
that is a theme fitter for the tongues of Angels, than of men; and therefore
as Apelles did, so will I, draw a veil over that which I am not able to
express, and desire all men to judge what he was, by his divine meditations;
of which book I hare boldly say, that since the spirit of prophecy ceased,
never yet was there any book written, with so great strength of reason, depth
of judgment, height of devotion, and elegancy of style, as that golden Manual.
That will tell you what we have lost, and how heinous the murder was. As he
was the Lord, and their Lord, he had no superior on earth, and so could not be
tried; as he was a glorious and gracious Lord, he ought not to have been
condemned. As Christ was above the law, being the son of God; so was he above
the censure of humane laws, he being a King. As Christ was most innocent,
there was no guile or guilt found in him; so was he innocent of all the crimes
objected against him. As he was a King, he did represent Gods person here on
earth; and as he was a good King, full of grace; he was a most lively image of
Christ, so lively an image of him, that amongst all the Martyrs, who followed
Christ unto heaven bearing his cross, never was there any, who expressed so
great conformity with our Savior in his sufferings, as he did.

And this will further appear by the second circumstance in my text, the kind
of death that he suffered, which was not the death of the cross, but
aequivolent unto it, for two things were in the cross which made it so odious,
pain, and shame; the Apostle joins them together, Heb. 12.2.
Jesus endured the cross, despising the shame. Our Sovereign suffered both, I
begin with the pain. Indeed Christ's cross began at his cratch; for no
sooner was he borne, than persecuted by Herod; and his whole life afterward
was a perpetual gainsaying of sinners: Verse. 3.
So I may say of our Sovereign, that the ten last years of his life, was such
a gaine-saying of sinners; all that time he fought with beasts, even with
unreasonable men, who were resolved to be satisfied with nothing, but with the
utter destruction of him and his. To bring that to pass, first of all they did
asperse him with many foul and false calumnies, against their own knowledge
and conscience, only to render him odious unto his people; they slandered the
foote-steps of Gods anointed; their tongues, and their pens too, were sharper
than swords, piercing deep into his soul: many scandalous pamphlets were
every day cast abroad, which (as he says in his book) like sparks in great
conflagrations, did fly up and down to set all places on fire. From every
pulpit was sounded a trumpet to rebellion, the Ambassadors of peace being made
the heralds of war. And as our Savior by the pharisees was called an
impostor, a deceiver and perverter of the people, a blasphemer, a Samaritan,
and one that had a devil: So, such language, and worse too, was bestowed upon
his Sacred Majesty, by a pharisaicall brood of men, who are great pretenders
to religion, but utterly void of it. They have a show of godliness, but have
denied the power thereof. Ioh. 8.59.
When our Savior was at Jerusalem, the pharisees stird up the people to stone
him, whereupon he withdrew himself: so when the King was at Westminster,
tumults were raised, stones and blasphemies cast out against him, that he was
feign to remove from thence, and then they cried out against him, for deserting
his Parliament, though it was the thing they most desired, and they knew very
well that he would have been glad to be with his Parliament, as he often
offered, if he could have been there with any safety. Being thus forced to
retire from London, they seized all his houses and furniture, forts, magazins,
ships, and revenues; they hunted him like a partridge, from mountain to
mountain, that he might have justly taken up the complaint of our Savior,
Mat. 8.20.
that The foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, but himself
had not where to lay his head. When our Savior had withdrawn himself from
Jerusalem, The Chief Priests and the Pharisees gave a commandment, Ioh. 11.57.
that if any man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take
him: So upon his Majesty's flight, such a commandment was given, a more cruel
and bloody ordinance was made, that whosoever should harbor or conceal the
Kings person, or did know where he was harbored, unless he did immediately
reveal it, should forfeite his estate, and die without mercy as a traitor.

As our Savior was rejected of his own people, Ioh. 1.11.
He came unto his own and they received him not: So was our Sovereign
rejected by his own people; they would not own him for their King; but
disclaimed his authority, and yielded their service unto his enemies; and as
the Jews denied the holy one, and the just, and desired a murderer to be
granted to them: Act. 3.14.
So they denied their holy and righteous King, and desired the Parliament might
rule over them: in this they preferred robbers and murderers worse than
Barabas, choosing rather to live in bondage, under their Iron yoke; than to
enjoy the liberty of subjects, under the peaceable government of a most
gracious King. As our savior was rejected by his own people, so was he
forsaken of his own Disciples; when the time came that he was to make his
soul an offering for sin, then one of his own Disciples betrayed him, an
other denied him, all forsook him, Isa. 63.6.
and left him to tread the winepresse alone: So when our Sovereigns afflictions
grew great, some of his servants betrayed him like Judas, others denied him,
and almost all forsook him; albeit they had got well by him, yet they were
loath to suffer with him. And which was yet much worse, he was forceably
deprived of the comfort of his dearest wife, his most sweet and beloved
children, and for a long time had none to converse with, but beasts more
savage, than those which did company with our Savior in the wilderness. When
Christ was on the cross, one of the thieves who was crucified with him railed
on him, because he did not relieve them: so when our Sovereign was at Oxford,
some who suffered with him, upbraided him, and added grief to his afflicted
soul, even railing on him, because he did not help them, when indeed he could
not. As our Savior was tempted: so was our Sovereign, tempted to distrust, to
perjury, to sacrilege, to atheism; tempted to deny God, by forsaking his
religion, and destroying the church, which his righteous soul abhorred. As the
devil made great proffers unto Christ, of all the Kingdoms of the world,
saying, All these will I give thee, Mat. 4 9.
if thou will fall down and worship me: So great proffers were made unto our
Sovereign, that they would make him a glorious King, if he would humble
himself unto his Parliament, and worship the Idol which they had set up.
Besides, his soul was daily tortured with reiterated unreasonable
propositions, and insolent demands, as absurd as those which the devil made
unto Christ.

The enemies of our Savior sought how they might take him by craft and put him
to death. Much more craft and deceit too, was used to catch our Sovereign in
their pit. Mark. 14.1.
As when Christ was at Jerusalem, the Pharisees not daring then to lay hands on
him, because they feared the people; sought to fright him with Herod, Saying
unto him, get thee out, Luke 13.31.
and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee: when it was they themselves that
intended to kill him: So when his Majesty was at Hampton Court, his enemies
perceiving, that the hearts of the people were so turned toward him, that it
was not safe to lay violent hands on him; they did cunningly suggest fears
unto him, that there was a plot to kill him, and so they made him fly into the
snare which they had laid for him in the I Will of Wight, where they thought that
Rolph should have dispatched him by poison or poinard; but that being
discovered, they resolved to do it in a more public way. Our savior was
apprehended at night: Mat. 26.51.
so was our Sovereign in a dark cold winter night, taken out of his bed in
the I Will of Wight, and carried unto Hurst Castle. Mat. 25.59.
They sought false witness against our Savior: so did they against our
Sovereign; for open proclamation was made with sound of trumpet, that all who
could inform against the King, should come to the painted chamber, and give in
their evidence: and what was it they intended to prove? even that he had done
that whereof they themselves only were guilty, in raising arms and making a
war in the Kingdom. The people being suborned by the Priests, cried against
our Savior, Away with him, John 19.15.
crucify him: so some of the soldiers were suborned, and hired to cry against
our Sovereign, Justice, Execution. Our Savior was mocked, They wagged their
heads at him: so our Sovereign had the trial of cruel mockings. Christ was
reviled: so was our Sovereign reviled by his enemies, especially their false
Prophets: Matthew. 27.29, 39, 41.
Hugh Peter's instead of comfort, did reach Gall and Vinegar unto Gods anointed,
in the agony of his sufferings, as the Jews formerly had done unto Christ. Our
Savior was spit on: so was our Sovereign; Matthew. 27.30. John 18.12.
Bradshaw and Cook did spit out the froth of their ulcerous lungs against him
to his face, and a barbarous soldier did really spit in his face. Our Savior
was bound: so there was as intent to have bound our Sovereign, as himself
observed on the Scaffold, by the rings which were fastened to the block. Our
Savior was watched the night before he suffered; for he was apprehended at
night in the Garden and carried away unto the High Priests house, where he was
haited all night: in the morning sent to Pilate, from him to Herod, then back
again to the common Judgment hall, where he was condemned, and at the third
hour led forth to be crucified. But our Sovereign was watched many nights
before he suffered; for all the time of his trial, his chamber was filled with
barbarous soldiers, who deprived him of his rest, and of all manner of
privacy, which was more bitter unto him then death. At last our Savior
suffered death: so did our Sovereign, at the very same hour of the day; for
our Savior gave up the ghost at the ninth hour, which is our three of the
clock in the afternoon: the same hour put a period to our Sovereigns life,
and to the happiness of three Kingdoms.

I have now taken a brief view of the pain: in the next place, consider the
shame, and then you will see a perfect cross. What greater shame and disgrace
could be offered unto a King, then instead of a Royal train, a guard fitting
the Majesty of his person; to be watched and warded, and dragged from place to
place, by the common soldiers, the most rude and barbarous of all the people.
But in this he was like unto his Savior also. Matthew. 26.25.
They came against him as against a thief, with swords and slaves. As our
Savior was hurried from place to place from Annas to Caiphas, from him to
Pilat, from Pilat to Herod, and thence back to Pilat, to the common Judgment
hall: so was our Sovereign hurried from the Isle of Wight to Hurst castle,
from thence to Windsor, from Windsor to St. James, from thence to Westminster
to the common Judgment hall, to be tried as a malefactor at the Bar, where no
prisoner was ever tried, but in the Kings name, and by his authority, for that
Hall was never invested with any power of judicature, without the King, much
less against him: but (as he says in his Book) They thought fit to add the
mockery of justice, to the cruelty of malice (as they who crucified Christ)
that so they might destroy him with the greater pomp. They pretended justice
and religion to cover their perjury and paracide, and so did establish iniquity
by a Law, and father their sin upon God, who is the author of justice. And as
his trial was public, and disgraceful, so was his execution: it has been a
custom to hang notorious traitors before their own doors for their greater
shame: so did they put our Sovereign to death, in a most insulting manner, on
an open scaffold, erected before his Royal Palace, as if they meant to bid a
defiance both to God and men. Now join these together, and tell me if ever any
man might more justly then he, take up that complaint which was uttered in the
person of our Savior, by the Spirit of Prophecy, Lam. 1.12.
Behold and consider all ye that pass by, if there be any sorrow like unto my
sorrow.

Let us now see how he did bear this: even as his Savior had done, Hebr. 12.2.
Who for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the
shame. He contemned an earthly Crown, for the assured hope he had of an
immortal Crown, that fades not away: and so like his Savior; when he was
reviled, he reviled not again; but was led as a sheep unto the slaughter, Luc.
23.34.
and opened not his mouth. As Christ prayed for them that crucified him: so did
our Sovereign pour out many devout prayers for his enemies, which might serve
to melt their hearts, if they were not harder then the nether mill stone. As
Christ wept over Jerusalem: so did our Sovereign weep over his three Kingdoms,
Luc. 19 41.
being more sorry for the miseries that are to come upon them, Luc. 23.74.
Verse. 28.
then for all that has happened unto himself. As women beholding Christ's
passion wept: so many women beholding their Sovereign on a Scaffold, wept
bitterly, unto whom he might have said, as our Savior did unto the other, Weep
not for me, ye^ daughters of Jerusalem, Ephesians. 5.25.
but weep for your selves. Christ gave himself for the Church: he dyed for the
people: so our Sovereign, in another sense, gave himself for the Church, and
died for his people; for he might have saved his life, if he would have
consented to destroy the Church, and enslave his people. So that (as he said on
the Scaffold) he was the martyr of the people, Matthew. 26.39.
martyred by them, and for them. When our Saviors agony began, he prayed unto
his father, that that Cup might pass from him; Hebr. 5 7.
but with a submission to his will. He offered up prayers and supplications
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death. So
was our Sovereign frequent and instant in prayer unto God; but as for removing
the bitter cup he was to drink, he prayed only with a submis^^^^ unto the will
of his heavenly father. Luke 22.48.
When our Savior was in his agony, There appeared an Angel unto him from
Heaven strengthening him: so almighty God did from above minister abundance of
comfort unto our Sovereign; otherways it had not been possible for him to
have endured his cross with such cheerful patience as he did. When Christ was
apprehended, he wrought a miraculous cure for an enemy, healing Malcus his
ear, Luke 22.53.
after it was cut off* so it is well known that God enabled our Sovereign,
when he was in prison to work many wonderful cures, even for his enemies, and
yet all that could not move these hard-hearted Jews, who sought his life: he
might have said unto them, as our Savior did unto the other, Many good works
have I showed you, John 10.32. Matthew. 27.52.
for which of them do you persecute me? When our Savior suffered, there were
terrible signs and wonders; for there was darkness over all the Land, the
earth did shake, the Rocks clave asunder, the veil of the Temple was rent, and
the graves were opened: so during the time of our Sovereigns trial, there
were strange signs seen in the sky, in diverse places of the Kingdom; and it
was thought very prodigious, that when he suffered the Ducks forsook their pond
at St. James, and came as far as Whitehall, fluttering about the Scaffold: so
that our Sovereign might have said unto his murderers, as it is in Job 12.7.
Ask the beasts and they will tell thee, and the fowls of the Heaven, Matthew.
27.54. Thomlinson.
and they will instruct thee: what an unnatural murder ye are now committing.
When our Savior suffered, the Centurion beholding his passion was convinced
that he was the Son of God, and feared greatly: so one of the Centurions who
guarded our Sovereign, beholding his most Christian, pious, and magnanimous
carriage, was convinced, and is to this day stricken with great fear, horror,
and astonishment. When they had crucified our Savior; John 19.23.
they parted his garments amongst them, and for his coat, because, being
without seam, it could not easily be divided, they did cast lots: even so
having crucified our Sovereign, they have parted his garments amongst them,
his Houses and Furniture, his Parks and Revenues, his three Kingdoms; and for
Ireland, because it will not easily be gained they have cast lots, who should
go thither to conquer it, and so take it to themselves. In all these things our
Sovereign was the lively Image of our Savior.

NOw if your patience will go along with me while I consider the third
circumstance in the Text, the quality of the murderers, their you will find
the parallel to hold also; Our Savior was crucified by his own Nation: They
crucified the Lord of Glory. They who were his brethren and kindsmen, according
to the flesh. John 18.35.
So Pilat told him, Thine own Nation have delivered thee unto me. More
particularly the great Council consulted against him, hired Judas to betray
him, sent Soldiers to apprehend him, falsely accused and injustly condemned
him. The great Council was their high court of Sanhedrim, which was their
standing Parliament. In it were many members of diverse Callings and
Professions: some Priests and chief Priests; some Elders, and those
Lay Elders; for as there was a Parliament against Christ, so also a Presbytery:
some Scribes and Lawyers, who were Chair-men, for they sat in Moses Chair.
They drew also into this conspiracy against Christ wicked Herodians, whom
otherwise those precise Jews could not endure. And were they not such who
murdered our Sovereign? His own Nation, his great Council the Parliament,
the Presbytery, some Priests, (but they are Jeroboams Priests of the basest of
the people) some Scribes and Lawyers. And they drew into that combination too,
wicked Herodians, that is, dissembling Courtiers, and profane Ruffians; and as
pure as they would seem to be, yet were they content to endure all their God
dammees to gain their assistances for to damn and condemn their Sovereign.

As Christ's Enemies were of diverse professions, so also of diverse Sects and
Religions, some Pharisees, some Saduces; and those were very opposite one
against the other, yet both joined together against Christ: To crucify him
even Herod and Pilat were made friends: Act. 4.27.
For (as the Apostles say) against thine holy Son Jesus, both Herod and
Pontius Pilat, with the Gentiles and people of Israel were gathered together.
So the enemies of our Sovereign were of diverse Sects and Religions, some
Papists, some Presbyterians, some Independents; And though they be at odds
enough between themselves, their heads are as far asunder as Sampsons Foxes,
yet being linked by the tails, they banded against the Lord, and against his
anointed. The Papist may seem to have little hand in that murder, yet they
contributed very much unto it: For they raised a most horrid and bloody
Rebellion in Ireland, and most falsely pretended the Kings commission for it,
whereby they enraged his other Subjects against him; they weakened his Forces
there: destroying many who would have assisted their Sovereign, and keeping
others so busy that they could not come to his relief; they promised him
great aid, but when he depended upon it, they utterly failed him. The
Presbyterians are deeply imbrued with his blood: for they assaulted him both in
England and Scotland, deprived him of all power and means, declared him
unworthy to reign, and so weakened him, that it was an easy matter for the
Independants, who are drunk with his blood, for to kill him. The Presbyterians
framed both the Major and Minor Propositions, and the Independants, drew out
the conclusion: for thus the Presbyterians both preached and published; a
tyrant is to be opposed and destroyed: but the King is a Tyrant. Then comes the
Independants and draw forth the conclusion which naturally follows from the
premises: Ergo let him be destroyed. Or to use their own distinction which
they have so much abused; the Presbyterians murderd the King in his political
capacity, the Independants in his natural capacity. Thus our Sovereign, as
well as our Savior was crucified between two thieves, but neither of them a
good thief. These two factions (as his Majesty well expresses it in his Book)
Are the twins which lately one womb enclosed, the younger striving to prevail
against the elder; what the Presbyterians have hunted after, the Jndependants
seek to catch for themselves. And indeed they have taken the prey out of their
mouths: They who at first were but journey men unto the other, have now set up
for themselves.

Albeit these be the chief murderers: there be many others who though (as
himself says) Their hands are not embrued in his blood by acting and
consenting to his death, yet they are sprinkled with his blood by deserting
him. Even all those who had power and means, and did not use them for his
defense. Seneca.
For Non caret scrupulo occultae societatis qui manifesto discrimini non
occurrit. By the Law of nature and Nations, all subjects are bound to defend
their Kings Person, Crown, and dignity. Our Savior said unto Pilat: If my
Kingdom were of this world, Joh. 18.36.
then would my servants fight, that J should not be delivered to the Jews.
Where he insinuates that the servants and subjects, of an earthly King, are
bound to fight for his defense: And therefore all those who did not aid him
according to their power, have incurred the curse of Meroz. Judge: 5.23. Curse
ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the inhabitants
thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. Besides these neutrals, who because they were not for the
King, were against him, there are many who fought for their soveragin, who have
yet by their sins fought against him: their debauched carriage gave much
advantage to his enemies, and provoked God to forsake their armies: by their
rapine and plunder they did alienate the hearts of the people from their
Sovereign, and by their strifs and emulations, they lost the Kingdom and that
gracious King: there was a strife amongst Christ's followers which of them
should be the greatest; but the strife that was among the Kings followers for
places and preferments, was far more hurtful and pernicious. Yea, as all of
us were in some sort, Romans 4.25.
guilty of Christ's blood; for our sins were the meritorious and procuring
cause of his death: He was delivered to death for our offenses. So the sins
of every one of us has added force unto this great stroke and wound given unto
these Kingdoms in his Majest^es death. As the good King Josiah was taken away
by a violent death, for the sins of Judah, that God might the more freely power
out the fiercnesse of his wrath: so was our Gracious Sovereign taken away for
the punishment of our sins, that the iniquities of these sinful nations
being now finished and come to an height by an horrible rebellion and
particide, he might power out the violls of his wrath upon them, there being
now nothing to hinder the stroke of his vengeance, when he is taken away, yea
made away by themselves, who like Moses stood in the gap, between the sins of
his people, and Gods judgments. So that we may all of us take up that
lamentation, Lam. 5.16.
which the Church made for the death of Josiah: The Crownt is fallen from our
head; woe unto us that we have sinned

But howsoever our Savior had many enemies, yet his most violent adversaries
were the Pharisees, and if you will but observe how they are described unto us
in the Gospel, Ill all not need to make any application. The Pharisees were
the most strict and precise sect of the Jews, Matthew. 6.16.
the Puritans of that age, they were men of a sad countenance and great
austerity; they did bow down their heads like a Bulrush, when as their inward
parts burnt altogether with deceit: they were outwardly (though
hypocritically) holy Whited sepulchers beautiful without, and within full of
uncleanesse. Great pretenders they were to religion, and desired to be
accounted more pure than others, Matthew. 23.27.
the only saints upon earth, and so did separate from the rest of the Church,
and from thence were they called Pharisees. Matthew. 6.5.7. Matthew. 23.14.12.2.
Luke 11.45.46.
They pretended (especially such of that sect as were Scribs) great knowledge
of the Scriptures, and revelations of the Spirit: they were much for preaching,
made long prayers, and that openly, to be seen of men, used vain repetitions:
Under color of long prayers they devoured widows houses. They were
superstitiously zealous of keeping the Sabbath, but great profaners of the
temple; they made Gods house a house of merchandise, and Den of thieves, for
which they were sharply reproved by our Savior, as they often quarelled him
for breaking the Sabbath Whereas the fifth commandment injoynes us to honor
our Father, not only our natural Father, Mark. 7.11.
but also our civil father, who is Parens Patriae: they made this commandment
void by their Corban, that is a gift where by Gods cause, or rather their own
ends is advanced. They did draw the people after them, who were so much
addicted unto them, that they would not believe nor follow any without their
allowance; for that is the rule they gave to the people, Ioh. 7.28.
Have any of the Pharisees believed on him? And indeed their faction was so
popular, that (as I^^ephus testifies) they governed not only Jerusalem, but
all Judea too. They did bind heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, Matthew.
23.4. Verse. 6. Verse 23.
which themselves did not bear, and so they made the way to heaven strait to
others, and wide to themselves. They were invited to feasts, and loved to sit
at the head of the Table. They made conscience of smaller matters, as of
ceremonies, but omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment and mercy.
Now would you not think that the souls of these Pharisees by a pythagorean
transmigration, were entered into our new reformers.

As the murderers of our Sovereign resemble the crucifiers of our Savior; so
we find them acting all the same parts. And first Judas who sold his Master, of
all that conspired against Christ, is most odious; for he was his disciple, a
domestic servant, one whom he trusted with his purse; and yet he, his familiar
friend, who did eat of his bread lift up the heel against him. So our
Sovereign was sold at a greater price than our Savior, by those who had as
near a relation unto him, as Judas had unto Christ: for they were his country
men, brought up with him, his servants and familiar friends, whom he trusted
with his purse, with his counsels and his person, cherished in his bosom, and
enriched with many princely favors. In many respects they were far worse
than Judas: for when Judas sold his Master, he thought he would not have
suffered, but have escaped by a miracle, as he had sometimes done before. This
is the conjecture of the Fathers, and may be probably gathered out of the Text;
for it is said, Then Judas when he saw that he was condemned, Matthew. 27.3.
repeated himself: so that before, he thought it should not have come to that,
but that Christ would have escaped, and he gone away with the money. But the
Judases who sold their Sovereign knew very well that he could not escape, being
delivered into the hands of his enemies. Again Judas saw not the horror of his
sin before he had committed it; if he had, it is probable he would not have
done it, but these men saw and knew very well what horrible fact it was to
deliver up their King, as may appear by Lowdon his Speech, therein he professed
that it is against the law of Nations for them to deliver up a stranger, who
had put himself under their protection, much more to deliver their King. And
yet all that was only for form sake, that he might better beat the bargain,
and raise the price, as did appear by the event. Besides they have acted many
more parts than Judas did: for they were the first that took arms against
him, engaging all his Subjects by a solemn League and Covenant, to distroy the
Church and the King, they divested him of all authority within that Kingdom,
Seized his Castles and revenewes, and by their example and Covenant, encouraged
their Brethren in England to do the like: and when his Majesty was like to
have prevailed against his Rebels in England, they, notwithstanding that the
King, to secure them on his side, had gratified them, by granting them all
their unreasonable and impious demands, yet came in the second time with a
great army, to assist strangers against their natural King. And they have
persecuted all the Kings party in that Kingdom, imprisoning, banishing,
forfeiting and barborously murdering, even under color of justice, all that
adhered unto him. Alas poor Judas did none of these things, but would have
rescued his Master out of the councels hands, if it had been in his power; and
yet because he sold him for money, he is odious and infamous unto all
generations: Oh then what shall these men be? Finally Judas repented, was
swallowed up of sorrow, confessed his sin, made restitution, for he gave back
the money, and made some satisfaction too, for he took revenge upon himself
when he betook him to the halter. But we see not as yet so much repentance in
these Judaises.

Here let no man think that I charge that horrible crime upon the Scottish
Nation: I know it was not the fault of the Nation; but of that religion wherein
most of them were brought up. Yea, and albeit the greatest part of that Nation
be infected with the leaven of Knox and Buchanan, yet are they not all alike
guilty. Some of them and the far greatest part, were merely cousened out of
their loyalty, 1 Samuel 15.11.
by their blind guides; Like those woe hundred who followed Absalom out of
Jerusalem, in their simplicity, knowing no thing of his treason; for they were
made to believe that their religion was in danger to be overthrown, and that
they were bound in conscience to take arms to defend it, and to assist their
brethren in England; yet so as that they never intended any violence unto the
Kings person, and did from the bottom of their hearts, abhor the delivering
him up unto his enemies. Others again never approved of any of their
proceedings against the King, knowing that their rebellion was most unlawful:
yet did they in some sort comply with the Rebels, for fear of losing their
estates, their liberties, their lives: these are more like unto Peter who out
of fear denied his Master, than to Judas, who sold him out of covetousness.
Besides both these, there are many other noble Gentlemen, who expressed as much
loyalty to their Sovereign, as ever subjects did, and gave as good proof of
it, by their service, under the banner of that most renowned Lord, the Lord
Marquis of Montrosse, the glory of this age, and honor of this Nation. All
these being deducted, it will appear, that it was the smallest part of that
Nation, who acted Judas his part, howsoever by craft, they had got the power
into their hands and used the tongues of their fiery preachers, to charm the
discontended people, from making any opposition against their proceedings. And
even these too, as infamous as they are, have not dishonored their Nation
more, than their brethren of England have done theirs: as the Scribes and
Pharisees expressed more malice against our Savior, than Judas did; so those
who murdered our Sovereign, expressed more malice, than they that sold him:
and are to be accounted the greater Traitors, because of the reward which they
ga^e unto the other. For God himself aggravates he whordome of Israel, by this
circumstance, that she gave a reward unto her lovers. Ezech 16.33.34. Thou art
not like other women for they receive gifts, but thou give a reward to all
thy lovers. As she is a more shameless whore, who hires men for her lust, than
she that prostitutes her body for a reward: so are they to be accounted the
greatest Traitors, who not only did rise up against their Sovereign, but also
hired others into a Rebellion, and to betray him into their hands.

From Judas come we to the great council. The Parliament is the great
Council, and has acted all and more against their Lord and Sovereign, than
the other did against Christ: they consulted how to put him to death, gave money
to betray him, sent soldiers to apprehend him. In that great Council Annas
and Caiphas were chief: In this Cromwell and Ireton; and Cromwell prophesied a
Caiphas did, using almost the same words, It is expedient that he dye, and
unless he dye the Nation will perish Bradshaw and Cook are the Scr^bs and
Lawyers, who fiercely pursued him: they cursed themselves with his blood, as the
others did with Christ's; for Bradshaw spoke to this purpose on the Bench: Our
Lives are threatened, if we meddle with his blood; but whatsoever shall befall
us, we will do justice upon him. And is not this just as the Scribes and
Pharisees said His blood be upon us and on our Children. Fairfax was Pilat the
Governor, Matthew. 27.25.
who seemed unwilling to consent to his death, and sought to wash his hands of
his blood, by laying it upon others. And his wife Lady Pylat, who diswaded the
murder of our Sovereign, more than the other did the killing of Christ. The
Army are the Soldiers who apprehended him, watched him, mocked him, reviled
him, cried justice and execution against him, and at last crucified him, and
parted his garments amongst them. Revel. 11.8.
And London is the great city spiritually Sodom where our Lord was crucified.

We have now taken a view of the actors in both tragedies, and of their
several parts: in the third place, if you will consider their proceedings you
shall find them alike too, save only that the proceedings against our Sovereign
were more illegal, and in many things more cruel. Their accusation against
Christ was only general, that he was a blasphemer, a deceaver, and one that
perverted the nation; but wherein they could not show: and dolus versatur in
generalibus. So was the charge against our Sovereign general, and as far
from truth too, as that he was a tyrant, and which is ridiculous a Traitor: but
they could prove no particular crime against him. When Pilat desired the Jews
to bring a particular accusation against Jesus showing what evil he had done:
They answered, if he were not a malefactor, Matthew. 22.23. Joh. 18.30.
we would not have delivered him up unto thee. And such is the plea that the
murderers use for themselves, if the King had not been a wicked tyrant, the
Parliament would not have used him as they have done. The Jews pretended a Law
for killing of Christ, saying unto Pilat who was a stranger, We have a Law and
by our law he ought to die. But they had no such law to produce. Ioh. 19.7.
So the murderers of our Sovereign labor to persuade strangers, that they
acted according to the Laws of their own Land; but their consciences can tell
them that they did it without Law, and quite contrary to the Law of the land,
the Law of God, the Law of nature and nations. Christ was condemned, not by any
rule of Law, but by the vote of Parliament: Caiphas asked the question, What
think ye? they answered he is guilty of death. So was our Sovereign condemned
by vote, Matthew. 26.66.
Crumwell the Caiphas asked the rest, What think ye? and they all being packt
by him, and chosen for the purpose, answered he is worthy to die. In Christ's
first trial before the great council, his enemies were his judges; but in his
second trial, when he was sentenced to death, Pilat only was judge, who was
willing to have released him, and his enemies were only his accusers: but in
the whole proceedings against our Sovereign, his enemies were not only accusers
and parties, but also his judges, the most professed enemies he had; and the
most desperate Traitors that ever the sun did shine on, who had acted so much
villainy, that they could not imagine any safety for themselves, unless he were
destroyed, and all that belong unto him. The Jews confessed that they had no
power of life and death, saying, It is not lawful for us to put any man to
death: Joh. 18.31.
But that high court of justice (as they term it) which was erected for his
Majesty's trial, had less power, it was not lawful for them to put any man
to death, much less their Sovereign: for the great council of the Jews had
some power, being instituted by God himself; it was proper for them to judge
of blasphemy, if they had judged aright; though power of life and death was
taken from them by the Roman conqueror: but the court that condemned our
Sovereign had no power at all, neither is it any court, as not being instituted
by any who had authority; they did honor themselves, and so their honor is
nothing. The great council that condemned Christ; was rightly constituted of
all its members, and under no force: so was not the council that condemned our
Sovereign; for the better part of it, the house of the Lords, was wholly laid
aside; and the house of Commons often purged, so that the tenth man legally
elected, was not present, and those that were their, under such a force, that
they must say, and do, as their Caiphas would have them. Ioh. 8.54.
Christ was allowed to speak for himself, and Pilat desired him to make answer
unto those things they witnessed against him, and marvelled greatly that he
answered not. But our Sovereign was not allowed to speak for himself, he was
condemned before he was heard: Matthew. 27.13.14.
Bradshaw and Cook, two foul mouthed Dogs, interrupted him, and told him
plainly, that the court would not allow him to speak, nor hear his reasons; for
they knew well that they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by
which he spak. So that their proceedings were more illegal than the
proceedings of the Jews.

And as their proceedings were more illegal, so in many things more cruel
too. Ioh. 19.25.
Christ's followers were not barred from coming unto him; for his mother stood
by the cross, and other women of her kindred, so did the beloved Disciple: but
our Sovereign was not allowed any of his servants or friends, to attend him,
during the time of his trial, and long before: he could not so much as obtain
any of his Chaplains to Minister ghostly comfort unto him, which (as he said
in his Book) Was a greater rigor and barbarity, then is ever used by
Christians to the meanest Prisoners and greatest malefactors; whom though the
justice of the Law deprive of worldly comforts, yet the mercy of religion
allows them the benefit of their clergy, as not aiming at once to destroy their
bodies, and to damn their souls. These murderers were more cruel: for
having deprived him, of all things else, they were even loath that he should
save his soul: and therefore as they denied him the service of his Chaplains,
so the soldiers by their rude and barbarous carriage in his Chamber, did as
much as they could, hinder his private addresses unto God. A great company of
people and of women, Luc. 23.27.
bewailed and lamented Christ's death, without any check or reproof: but men
could not express any sorrow for his Majesty's death, without the danger of
their own life, and when some silly women wept bitterly seeing his Majesty's
execution, they were mocked, threatened, and some of them beaten. The Jews did
not much trouble the followers of Christ, before his death, Joh. 9.35.12.10.
only the blind man whom he cured, was excommunicated for confessing him, and
Lazarus was threatened: but none of them suffered: yea when they apprehended our
Savior they suffered his Disciples to depart as he himself desired, saying, If
ye seek me, Ioh. 18.8.
let these go their way. Yea and after Christ had suffered, they would not
have persecuted his followers, if they could have been silent; for at first the
council only admonished them, Not to speak at all, Act. 4.18.
nor Preach in the name of Jesus. But these murderers most cruelly persecuted
all his Majesty's friends and followers, putting many of them to death, for
their loyalty, even in his life time, which much grieved his righteous soul:
and they cut off others after his death; for his precious blood was not
sufficient to quench their thirst; as they thirsted after Royal blood so also
after Loyal blood: and herein they imitate the savage Tartars, who, when their
great Chain dies, they cast many of his dearest friends into the grave after
him. When our Savior was upon the Cross he commended his Mother to the
beloved Disciple, and that was not envyed, nor the disciple questioned for it:
but when our Sovereign on the Scaffold commended those who were nearest unto
him, Ioh. 19.26.
and delivered such small Tokens as were left him; unto one who was by to be
given unto them, as the pledges of his love; Ioh. 19.38.39.
that was envyed, the party questioned, and the Tokens taken from him. Our
Savior was not denied a burial; for two honorable counselors took a care of
his Funeral, and the Jews, as malicious as they were, did not oppose it,
only they desired a watch to be set upon his Sepulcher. But our Sovereign was
denied this honor, though three honorable counselors begged his body, to have
buried it in the Sepulcher of his Fathers, they could not obtain it: but the
murderers carried away his Corpse to Windsor, thinking there to hide it in a
private corner, where no man should know: and those honorable counselors
following after, with much ado, obtained to have the disposing of it, in a
more seemly place; but without all Funeral solemnity: which yet in a most
sumptuous manner is bestowed upon a base rigicide, Dorislaus, that all the
world may see, they prefer a Barabas before the Lords anointed. The Jews
could not endure to hear Christ magnified, after they had crucified him and
therefore they raged against the Gospel which contains the History of his
life: As much have these Jews raged against his Majesty's Book, the issue of
his divine soul, and labored by all means to suppress it; but they can no
more obscure his glory that shines in that book, then they can obscure the
sun in the firmament: Finally they are more malicious than the Jews, because
they committed this parecide, more directly against their knowledgd and
conscience; for the Jews did not clearly know that Jesus was the Christ; they
expecting a Messiah to come with great pomp and worldly glory, were offended
at the baseness of his birth, and many of them seduced to believe that he was
an impostor. Therefore said our Savior, Luke 23.34. Act. 3.17.
Father forgive them, for they know not what the do. And Saint Peter, Through
ignorance ye did it. And our Apostle, If they had known it they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But the murderers of our Sovereign, knew very
well that he was their King, their undoubted Sovereign, and a most pious
Prince, and yet even for that cause, and no other, but because he was their
King, they put him to death.

And this leads me to the last consideration, or the ends and causes that moved
them to murder, both our Savior, and our Sovereign, which were the very same.
The cause pretended for crucifying of our Savior, was Salus populi, the safety
and liberty of the people, which is the common pretense of all Rebels: Caiphas
said, John 11.50.
It is expedient that one man die, (meaning Jesus) and that the whole Nation
perish not. The same was pretended for the murder of our Sovereign; Crumwell
said, Unless he die, the whole Nation must perish. But as that which was
pretended to be for the good of the people, proved the bane of the people,
bringing a fearful destruction upon them: so also will this, because they
killed their King, therefore shall the Nation perish. Those who promised
liberty unto the people, and style themselves, custodes libertates Angliae,
have brought them under greater slavery and bondage, then the Jews are at this
day. Now that people who stood so much with their King, upon their privileges,
and the property of their goods, have nothing which they can call their own.
The true cause that moved them to crucify Christ, was envy, which Pilat
observed, Matthew. 27.18.
For he knew that for envy they had delivered him. So the ground of all the
proceedings against our Sovereign, was envy and malice; but if you will ask me
the reason why they did so much malign him, none can be given, but because he
was their King; for as the Jews said, Whosoever makes himself a King, John
19.12.
speaks against Caesar. So may I say, whosoever is a King, though made by God
as he was, speaks against the Parliament: for it is as inconsistant with the
grounds of these men's religion, to have a King, as to have a Bishop: that Text
which they formerly mis-applied against Bishops, The Kings of the Gentiles
exercised dominion over them: Matthew. 20.25.
but it shall not be so among you. I say that Text now fits their turn bettter
against Kings then it did against Bishops; for indeed between Kings over
Gentiles, and Ministers of the Gospel, there is no right opposition; but
between Kings over Gentiles, and Kings over Christians there is a fit
antithesis: and so howsoever the Gentiles have Kings, yet they being
Christians, will have no King over them. And now tell me whether Kings will not
rather desire to have their Subjects Pagans, then such Christians as they are,
who are worse then the Rebels mentioned in the Gospel; they said only,
Nolumus hunc regnare; but our Reformers are come to Nolumus ullum regnare super
nos, they will have no King at all. They are the true seed of Korah; for as
Korah and his accomplices, Tw^ hundred and fifty Princes of the assembly, (all of
them Parliament men) gathered themselves together against Moses and against
Aaron, and said unto them: ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
congregation are holy, and the Lord is among them, Numb. 16.3.
wherefore then lift you up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? So
these Rebels have risen up against the King and the Priest, upon the very same
grounds: they are all holy, and therefore need no Bishop to direct them: and
the Lord is among them, and therefore they need no King to govern them.

An other reason that moved the Jews to crucify our Savior, was a desire to
retain their places and dignities, which they feared to loose, if he should be
acknowledged for the Messiah. This is expressed Joh. 11.48. If we let him
alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans will come and take away our
place. The same was the cause why they murdered our Sovereign, that they
might keep those places, and that power which they had got into their hands.
And they are far more unrighteous then the Jews; for the Jews sought only to
retain those places whereof they were lawfully possessed, and which of right
did belong unto them; but these murderers were not content to enjoy what was
their own; but killed their King, that they might keep those Places, Revenues,
and power, which they had sacrilegiously usurped and taken from him. Like Achab
they killed and took possession: He first killed before he took possession; 1
King. 21.19.
but these murderers first took possession, and then to maintain their
possession, killed their King, the right owner, and barred all his heirs from
succeeding. As the Husbandmen in the Parable said, This is the heir, come let
in kill him, Matthew. 21.38. Luc. 20 14.
and seize upon his inheritance. Or, (as St. Luke has it) that the inheritance
may be ours. So have they killed the true Heir, and seek to destroy all his
Heirs, that the inheritance which they seized on long before, may be theirs
for ever: even all his Houses and rich Furniture, his Parks, Navy, Revenues,
and all his Power and Authority: and not only the Inheritance of the Crown, but
also the Patrimony of the Church, Gods own Inheritance; and the Inheritance
also of every man else, whom they at their pleasure can make a Delinquent. But
as is said in the Parable, Verse. 40, 41.
When the Lord of the Vineyard comes, he will miserably destroy those wicked
men. So we all know that he brought a fearful destruction upon the Nation of
the Jews: and certainly he will bring the like upon those murderers, who have
followed their example, and gone far beyond them in all manner of wicknesse;
Their damnation sleeps not. We know what has been heretofore the end of
Rebels. What became of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their accomplices? they
did not die the common death of all men, but the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up, so that they went down quick into Hell. Optatus calls unto
the Donatists to remember their example, saying, Aspicite perditos magistros
vestros. And yet the Donatists never came so near unto Korah and those Rebels;
as the desperate Traitors of whom I speak What became of Absalom and
Achitophel, Number. 17.31, 32
of Shimei and Sheba, of Adonijah and Joah, of Zimri and Josabed, of the two
Eunuchs who conspired against King Assuerus, and of many more, of whom we read
both in sacred and profane story? Did they not all perish in the gainsaying of
Korah? So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord; but upon the Kings head let his
Crown flourish.

Thus you see that as the Princes of the world crucified the Lord, of glory, so
others worse then they, have crucified our glorious Lord. I wish that my
detection of that murder might find such success, as St. Peter's discovery had
in the first Sermon that he preached, Act. 2. When he had convinced them that
Jesus whom they had crucified is Lord and Christ, They were pricked in their
hearts, and said, Act. 2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do? They repented, and became very zealous to
advance the Kingdom of Christ: so let us be zealous to advance the Kingdom of
our glorious martyr, in the person of his Son. Let the same spirit inflame
us, which came upon Amasa, 1 Chr. 22.11. Then the spirit came upon Amasa, and
he said, thine are we, O David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: peace,
peace be unto thee, and to thine helpers: for thy God helps thee. Indeed God
is the Guardian of Kings, has a special care of their preservation, because
they are his Deputies and Vicegerents on Earth, by whom he procures the safety
of his people. And therefore he has been often seen to stretch out his naked
arm for their defense. And his arm now is not shortened, nor his affection
changed: and therefore in his own good time, when he has chastized us for our
sins, he will certainly, Sir, look upon the justice of Your cause, he will
bruise your Enemies with a rod of Iron, he will divide them in Jacob, and
scatter them in Israel; for Your cause is Gods own cause. And as it is Gods
cause, so it is the cause of all Kings: they are deeply concerned in it, and
ought to pursue those bloody Paracides, who now invade your Throne, tanquam
hosts humani generis, as the common Enemies of mankind, and violaters of the
law of nature, who have dissolved the bonds of humane society, and overthrown
the order of God and nature.

ANd now to draw to a conclusion, I will reflect a little upon my Text. The
Apostle tells us, Iam. 3.17.
that the ignorance of the wisdom of God, led the Jews to the committing of
that horrible murder, For if they had known it, they would not have crucified
the Lord of Glory. I may say so much of the murderers of our Sovereign, they
were ignorant of the wisdom of God, because utterly destitute of the true
Religion: for the true Religion is the wisdom of God, The wisdom that is from
above, which (as St. James says) is first pure, then peaceable, etc. The true
Religion is said to be pure, because (as Lactantius observes) it allows of
nothing which in it self is evil, or known to be evil by the light of nature;
and so it allows in no way of any Rebellion against Princes. The true
Religion delivered unto us in Scripture, and ^^^^ed in the true ancient and
Catholic Church, does teach us to honor and obey the King as Gods Minister
set over us, and that the injuries of Kings, though never so great, are to be
endured by their Subjects; who have no other remedy, and are to use no other
Arms against their King, be he never so wicked, but prayers and tears; that
they are to pray for him unto God, who has the hearts of King in his hand, and
can turn them when he thinks fit. That in no case they are to resi^^ the King
by force, nor take upon them to judge him, bec^a^e he has no Superior here on
Earth; but is reserved to Gods tribunal, to whom only he owes an account of
his actions. As for that doctrine of opposing, deposing, and killing of Kings;
it was first brocht in the Court of Rome a thousand years after Christ, to
maintain the Popes faction against the Emperor and other Princes; and has been
since hotly defended by the Jesuits, and others of the Popes parasites: and
what they have spued out of their mouth, the Puritanes have licked up borrowing
all their arguments, and indeed have gone so far beyond their Masters, in all
treasonable doctrins and practice, that in comparison of them, even the Jesuits
now may be accounted loyal Subjects. But that is not the wisdom of God; But
the wisdom of this world that come to naught. Verse. 6. James 3.15.
That wisdom descends not from above; but is earthly, sensual, axd
divellish. The Church of England did abhor that doctrine of resistance, and in
the point of subjection, as in other things, followed the true ancient
Catholic Church. That Religion only, among all Christian Religions, does
promise safety and security to Kings, submitting them neither to Pope,
Parliament, Presbytery, nor People; but unto God only, by whom and from whom
they reign. In the profession and maintenance of that Religion, which your
glorious Father sealed with his blood. God will yet establish your Throne, and
make you to possess the Gates of your enemies, which Almighty God grant, etc.

FINIS

