A SPEECH, Of Colonel Edward Leigh, as it was delivered by himself to the
Honorable House of Commons, upon occasion of presenting a STAFFORDSHIRE
PETITION: As also the Petition it self, presented by the same Colonel, and
diverse other Gentlemen OF STAFFORDSHIRE, On Monday the thirtieth of Septem.
1644.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for Matthew Walbancke, at Grays-Inne-Gate. 1644.

A True Copy of a Speech of Colonel Edward Leigh, suddenly composed, and
spoken by himself to the Honorable House of Commons, upon occasion of
presenting a Staffordshire Petition, published by himself, to prevent the
printing, and scattering of any false Copies.
Mr. Speaker;
WE are sent hither by our Chief Commander (though we could be ill spared at
this time) to represent unto this Honorable House the sad condition of our
Country. What a misery it is for a Politic body to be deprived of its head,
you all know sufficiently, and will therefore be the more sensible (we hope)
of our troubles in Staffordshire. England has heretofore been divided from
the whole world, ( toto divisos orb Britannos) but was never in any age so
much and so long divided in it self we labor now, not only under the grand
division of King and Parliament, Head and Members, but under many subdivisions
of Generals, and Committees, and commanders. These unhappie divisions in the
State, and diverse other sad differences in the Church, do threaten sudden
ruin to both, unless You honorable Worthies (who are the grand Physicians
or our Church and State) do wisely and seasonably compose them. Inveterate
diseases are hardly cured, evil spirits are more easily raised then laid
Principis obsta, is good counsel in this case. The eyes of the three
Kingdoms, shall I say? Nay of all the Christian world are upon you, Worthy
Patriots, expecting a happy Reformation, and timely redress of errors in
Religion, and grievances in the Commonwealth: And as you have given ample
Testimony already both of Your zeal to Gods glory (and your love to your dear
Country) so we doubt not but you will still persist in so good a Cause, that
both our selves and our posterity may bless you, as Repairers of our breaches,
and the maine Pillors (under God) of upholding our tottering State. The Earl
of Denbigh first received his power from you, and my Lord General, and
therefore it must be dissolved by you, before it be void. The chief
commanders, the Deputy Leiutenants, the Gentlemen of quality, and greater part
of the Committee, with thousands of the Communaltie in Staffordshire, do humbly
desire, that he may be accommodated as a Noble General, and then speeded into
the Country, action being now more seasonable then dispute. Many of the
subscribers to this Petition have attended on my Lords person in this service,
and ventered their lives with him. They see no reason to question his
fidelity, who has for this cause lost great friends, displeased near
friends, spent his estate, and hazarded his life. His wisdom and affability,
are generally known, his courage and resolution has appeared to those, which
have been eyewitnesses, of his actions, and one vertuou qualifications in a
Commander, I cannot omit in this Honorable Lord, though he have been much
opposed by some ever since he first embarked himself in this employment, ^et
he has ever had a great command over himself and his own passions, therefore
I shall thus conclude, humbly submitting to your wise Judgments; He is fit to
command others who can so well command himself.

To the Right honorable the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament; The
humble Petition of the Committee, Commanders, Gentlemen, and others well
affected in the County of Stafford.
Humbly shows.
THat whereas the continual and grievous pressures of Plunder, insupportable
taxations, imprisonments, terrors and murders by the Enemy, now much
increasing by the addition of many falling into these counties of Stafford and
Salop, being the weakest part of the Kingdom, as we conceive, through our
distractions, and the unhappy absence of our Lord General the Earl of
Denbigh, and are now (as we are credibly informed) preparing to plant
themselves in Garrisons for this winter.

We are forced humbly to pray, as formerly, that no obstacles (not worthy to be
compared with the sufferings of these Countries, and the cause in general may
any longer retard the accommodation and timely dispatch of our L. General, by
whose wisdom and power (under God) we are confident there will be raised,
united, and disposed such a seasonable and considerable Force in these, and
parts near us, that are disingaged, which now for want of a head, are disioynt
and unserviceable) as will not only clear these, But assist other parts. And
that the differences betwixt his Lordship and others, may either be speedily
reconciled and ordered, or deferred until the leisure of the honorable Houses
and the exigents of our condition will admit.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. With 4000. hands of Gentlemen and
others of good ability.
FINIS

