ISRAEL AND ENGLAND Paralelled, In a Sermon preached before the honorable
society of Grayes-Inne, upon Sunday in the afternoon, April 16. 1648.

By PAUL KNELL, Master in Arts of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

Sometimes Chaplain to a Regiment of Curiasiers in his Majesty's Army.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1648.

To all those that are friends to Peace, and to King CHARLES.
SIRS,
THough Rebels seem to have so much Law and Logic, that none but argumentum
Bacillinum, Club-law, will ever nonplus them, yet as the Pulpit and Press
have both helped to heighten this Rebellion, so it is fit they should both
endeavor the de-throning of it. I know that Apologies are as much in use as
Printing, but let no such complements henceforth come to the press, seeing
such lean unpolished notions as these have been persuaded thither. And indeed,
should truth and loyalty have no better Advocates then my self, Heresy and
Rebellion might well hope to be perpetual. But I know there are many
thousands ready to make up my defects; and truly that tongue deserves to be
cut out, that hand to be cut off, that will not now be lifted up in His
Majesty's behalf, whose captivity every loyal subject should account his
own, remembering him that is in bonds, as bound with him, no friend of his
having any hope of liberty, till He can lead him to it; and heavens hasten
that happy day. This is the bounden daily prayer of

Your friend and servant, P. K.

AMOS. 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth; therefore
J will punish you for all your iniquities.


THe first verse plainly shows us who are meant here in the second, even the
children of Israel, and the whole family that came out of Egypt. Neither are
these last words to be counted a tautalogie; for after the revolting of the
ten tribes from the house of David, Israel was one Kingdom, Judah was another;
we will go no farther back to clear it, then the title of this prophecy, which
runs thus; The words of Amos, which he saw concerning Israel (that is Israel
and Judah) in the days of Uzziah King of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam
the son of Ioash King of Israel. Now though but ten tribes were revolted from
David, yet all twelve tribes were revolted from God, the children of Israel,
and the whole family that came out of Egypt.

(...), as Caesar once said to Brutus; will Gods children of Israel and Judah
be such rebels? ingratum si dixeris, etc. so an heathen could conclude, that
ingratitude was the abstract and abridgement of all sin, as if it had been
(...), the great offense. And even unreasonable creatures will not be guilty of
unthankfulnes, the ox knows his owner, he will not gore him, and you
remember the gratitude of that Roman Lion in the story. Nay to go one step
lower, non ingratus ager, that which has not so much as sense is not
unthankful, the earth does not entomb, or always keep the seed close prisoner,
but most thankfully returns it to the sower with increase. Yet the land of
Israel proved a barren common, whereon nothing but weeds, nothing but
unthankefullnesse would grow; whereas the inhabitants should not so much as
have rendered evil for evil, they continually rewarded God evil for good, he
did not faster multiply his benefits upon them then they did their
transgressions and rebellions against him. And shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
Yes, seeing fair means will work no good on them, I will try what foul
will do, forasmuch as they have forsaken me, and not walked in my judgments,
having broken my Statutes, and not kept my commandments, I will therefore
visit their offenses with the rod, and their sins with scourges. You only have
I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all
your iniquityes. In which words any one will say there are two general parts,
Co^memoratio beneficii, the rehearsing of a former benefit, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, and Comminatio suplicii, the threatening
of a future judgment, Therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, And
of these with all the brevicy and plainnes that I can. But before I come to
handle the parts in their order, it will not be amiss to premise some brief
explication of the words. First then you only have I known; I thought that God
had been ommniscient till now, but the Text seems to deny it, in Jury is God
known, and God knows none but Jury, You only have I known of all the
families of the earth. But we must observe that this word, Know, has diverse
acceptions in holy Scripture. I shall instance but in three. First, to know, is
to behold, to overlook, or to discern. Thus God knows the whole world, and
all that there in is, he knows all the fowls upon the mountains, and the
wild beasts of the field are in his sight, there is not a word in our tongue,
nor a thought in our heart, but he knows it altogether, and before we knew
it, before we either spoke or thought it. Secondly, to know, is to give
approbation, and to allow of. Thus the Lord knows the way of the righteous,
that is, he approves of it. Psalm. 1. ult. As for the ungodly (such as are the
reformers of our age) it is not so with them, our Saviors word to these will
be (...). I never knew you, that is, I never liked your doings. Luke. 13.27.
Thirdly, and lastly, to Know, is to bless, to pity, or show mercy to. And the
phrase seems to be borrowed from a custom among men, who seldom show any
kindness; but to persons that they know, Ig^^ti nulla cupid^, a stranger can
scarce get any thing, but ill words; David's servants were strangers to Nabal,
and therefore the churl would give them nothing, Shall I take my bread, says
he, and my water, and my flesh, and give it unto men whom I know not whence
they be? 1. Sam. 25.11. No, few or none will relieve any but only such as are
well known to them. And to this custom God seems to allude here in our
text. You only have I Known, that is. I have blessed you only, on you have I
multiplied my favors, and loving kindnesses, on you only, or at least chiefly
of all the families of the earth. And in this sense is the word known used
Psalm. 31.7. I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have considered my
trouble, et cognovisti, and have known my soul in adversities, thou have
known, that is, thou have pitied, thou have had compassion on my soul,
Cognoscere est miserari, so Agellius expounds the place. And Solomon has a
passage that may be referred to this purpose, Pro. 12.10 A righteous man
regards the life of his beasts. Novit justus, so, it is in the Latin
version, a righteous man knows, but (...), so it is in the Septuagint, a
righteous man is merciful to the lives of his beasts. If now we put the Latin
and Greek together, we shall find that to know, is to show mercy to. In which
sense the word is likewise used here in our text, You only have I known of
all the families of the earth.

But if the Commemoration must be so construed, why follows there a
Commination? because God had been so good to Israel, is it therefore that he
threatens them? this seems somewhat strange. But if we take middle and both
ends, this will soon be reconciled; You only have I known of all the families
of the earth, we must halt here a while, Desunt nonnulla, there seems to be
somewhat wanting, but it comes in at the end of the verse, we may paraphrase
therefore upon the Text after this manner, the words are in effect, as if
Almighty God should have said, I have nourished and brought up children, and
(like our pretended Parliament) they have rebelled against me, destruction and
unhappiness is in their way, and the way of peace have they not known; I have
known them, but they have not known me, the ox knows his owner, and the
ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does ^ot consider, I
threaten them not for the good I have ^one to them, but for the notorious evil
they have done ^o me; You only have I known of all the families of ^he earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniqui^ies. Idcirco therefore. Sin
is the causa impulsiva, that which moves and as it were, compels Almighty
God to punish. The Prophet Jeremy puts the question, Lam. 3.39. Wherefore
does a living man complain? and he gives an answer to it before the verse be
out, A man for the punishment of his fins, that is, a man is punished for his
sins and therefore our old translation reads it thus, Let him murmr at his
own sins, this, this is the only cause of all his sufferings idcirco therefore.
Therefore I. Shall there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it?
Amos 3.6. Siracides tells us indeed of spirits that are created for
vengeance, and these evil spirits many times lay on sore strokes; but they
have Gods commission, at least permission for what they do, they do this to
pacify the wrath of him that made them Ecclus. 39.28. As all punishment is for
sin, so it is from God. But how can this consist with his goodness? Yes, the
very next particle will show us, for he speaks not in the present, but the
future tense, he gives Israel warning of his intention, before he proceeds
to execution, that, if they had any grace, they might repent and so prevent the
judgment threatened; and he threatens them but after a mild and gentle manner,
he threatened not to ruin and consume them, but only to visit and correct
them; You only have I known of all the Families of the earth; therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities. And so much for the coherence and
explication of the words. It is now high time to come nearer to the parts. I
begin therefore with the first; which is Commemoratio beneficii, the rehearsing
of a former benefit; You ^^ely have I known of all the Families of the earth.
There are many other Scriptures very like this Text, I will give you but one or
two, the first shall be Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there so great, says Moses,
who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we
call upon him for? The second shall be Psalm. 147. ult. He has not dealt so
with any Nation. And that we may know how well God dealt with the people of
Israel, we may observe, that he bestowed upon them two sorts of blessings,
Privative and Positive ones. I begin with the first, Gods privative blessings.
The children of Israel were for a long time bound Apprentices in Egypt, where
they were grievously oppressed by Pharaoh and his Taskmasters, who compelled
them not only to make Brick, but, it should seem by the story, they would
have had them make straw too. From which intolerable servitude God set them
free at last, he eased their shoulders from the burden, and their hands were
delivered from making of Pots, He brought forth his people with joy, and his
chosen with gladness, and gave them the Lands of the Heathen, and they took
the labors of the people in possession. As for Pharaoh and his host they were
overwhelmed in the red Sea, they sunk down to the bottom as a stone. After
this, God made good his word to Joshua, not suffering a man to stand before him
all the days of his life. And what shall I more say? for the time would fail
me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephthah, and of
David, what mervailous deliverances God wrought for his people, discomfiting
their enemies both by those Worthies and by other Champions; the Sun, Psalm.
19. is compared to a strong Champion, and rather then Israel shall be worsted,
insensible Champions shall fight for them, the Sun shall stand still in the
midst of heaven, the Stars in their courses shall fight against Sisera; so
mightily did God deliver his people, even the sons of Jacob and Joseph: You
only have I known of all the Families of the earth. And as God bestowed many
Privative blessings upon Israel, so many Positive blessings too. And these were
of two sorts, Temporal and Spiritual. I begin with the first, Gods temporal
blessings, which are recorded Is. 5.1, 2. My beloved has a vineyard in a very
fruitful hill; and he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and
planted it with the choycest Vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and
also made a Wine Press therein. It will be no digression to touch briefly upon
each of these particulars; the situation of the Vineyard meets us first,
which was in clive uberrimo, in a very fruitful hill. The hill of Sion was a
fair place, and the joy of the whole earth. Israel had a goodly heritage,
Canaan flowed with milk and honey. And the fruitfulness of it is described at
large Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. Next to the fruitful situation, Gods fencing of the
Vineyard follows. He made a wall above it, says the Margin, and Mat. 21. it
is said he hedged it round about. And you know that an hedge secureth for two
uses; for distinction, and for conservation. Israel was hedged about both
ways; for distinction they had the Law, by this they were discerned from other
Nations. What Nation is there so great, says Moses, that has Statutes and
judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day? Deuteronomy.
4.8. Other Nations dwelt, as it were, in a Champion Country, without any
hedge, without a Law, but Israel was enclosed, and hereby distinguished from
all other people, God dealt not so well with any other Nation, neither had the
Heathen knowledge of his Laws. And as Israel had an hedge for distinction, so
they had another hedge for conservation; which was the providence of God, and
the protection of his Angels; The hills, says the Psalmist, stand about
Jerusalem, even so stands the Lord round about his people from this time
forth for ever more.

In the next place, God gathered the stones out of his vineyard, whereby we are
to understand the wicked Nations, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
80.8. Thou have brought a Vine out of Egypt; expuleras gentes, thou have cast
out the heathen; God gave away their land for an heritage, even for an heritage
unto Israel his people; that is the next thing presented to us, he planted it
with the choicest Vine, the Vineyard of the Lord of hosts was the house of
Israel, and the men of Judah were his pleasant Plant. The next observable is,
Gods building of a Tower in his Vineyard, and Turris, authoritas est
Sacerdotalis, says Aretius, the Tower in Gods Vineyard, is the office and
authority of Gods Ministers; for as watchmen from a Tower overlooking all the
coast, give notice when any corporal enemies are approaching; so Gods Ministers
who are (...), the watchmen of his Church, these give her warning of her
ghostly enemies; so that neither the Boore of the wood can waste her, nor yet
the wild Beast of the field devour her. In the last place, God made a
wine press in his Vineyard; and by this some understand the discipline of the
judicial law, whereby the juice of good living was to be, as it were, pressed
out of the people. But to explain all this in three words, by the fence, by the
Tower, by the wine press, by all this care and cost bestowed upon the
Vineyard, there is signified Gods abundant love toward his people Israel, so
that he could not possibly do any else for them, having done more for them
already, then for all the world besides; You only have I known of all the
families of the earth: And as God bestowed upon Israel many temporal, so many
spiritall blessings, which are mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 9.4, 5. where
speaking of the Israelites, he tells us, that to them pertained the adoption,
and the glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the law, and the service of
God, and the promises; theirs were the Fathers, and of them, as concerning the
flesh, Christ came. It will not be amiss likewise to examine briefly these
particulars: and first, to the Israelites pertained the adoption, they were
culled out of all nations to be Gods peculiar people: the quotatio^s to this
purpose, are almost innumerable, I shall cite but only one, which is Isa. 43.1.
Thus says the Lord that created thee, O Jacob, and he that formed thee, O
Israel, fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name,
thou art mine. Called thee by thy name? nay, I have thee by mine own name, so
it is 2 Chronicles. 7.14. my people, which are called by my name. And Dan. 9.19. Thy
city says the Prophet, and thy people are called by thy name. Whence we may
observe, that there was a twofold relation between God and I^rael, of father
and children and of husband and wife: first, they were related as father and
children: children bear their fathers name: God therefore calling Israel by his
own name, this shows, that he was their father, they his children: And the
Prophet in their name, testifies as much, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou, O Lord,
art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us
not. Secondly, God was related to Israel as an husband to his wife; the wife
bears her husbands name, it has been thus ever since Isaiahs time I am sure,
for God threatened by him to send a sword upon Judah and Jerusalem, which should
make so great a slaughter and dearth of men, then seven women should take hold
of, or should come a wooing to one man, saying, We will find our selves meat
and clothes, we will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel, only let
us be called by thy name, Isa. 4.1. Called by thy name? what do the women mean
by this? why the very next words will show us, which are, to take away our
reproach: a (...), that is, barrenness was a reproach among the Jews; let us
be therefore called by thy name, to take away our reproach; that is, let us be
married to thee, be thou our husband: God then calling the people of Israel by
his own name, this shows that he was, as it were, their husband, they his
wife: and God makes them a promise of marriage in one place, where the Banes,
as it were, are asked twice betwixt them in one verse, Hos. 2.19. I will
betroth thee unto me for over, yea I will betroth thee unto m^ in
righteousness and in judgment, etc. And in another place, the match seems
to be consummated, for God speaks in the present tense, I am married unto
you, says the Lord, Jer. 3.14. God was to the Israelites both a father and an
husband, as a father he nurtured them, as an husband he nourished them; never
did any one hate his own flesh: God therefore must needs be loving unto Israel,
they being, as it were, bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh, they were his
Spouse, they were his sons, to them pertained the adoption; and the glory,
says the Apostle, that is next, which glory some would have to be a consequent
of their adoption, and indeed to be Gods own people was no small dignity: But
this glory may be taken rather for the glorious presence of God amongst them,
which he manifested most especially from off the Mercy-seat, that was upon the
ark, and therefore when the Israelites had lost the ark, Phinehas his wife
concluded, that they had lost the glory too; the glory, says she, is departed
from Israel, for the ark of God is taken, 1 Samuel 4. ult. And as the adoption
and the glory pertained to Israel, so the Covenants too; for the covenant that
God made with Abraham runs thus, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee.

The next privilege that Israel had, was the giving of the Law; that is, the
moral Law was given to them, and almighty God himself was their Lawgiver: The
Promises were theirs too; the promise of long life here, and of eternal life
hereafter, of the life that now is, and of that which is to come; to Abraham
and his seed were these promises made, Gal. 3.16.

And as the Promises were theirs, so theirs also were the fathers, that is, the
Promises were made as well to their fathers as to them, according to that of
Saint Peter, Acts 3.25. Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the
Covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed
shall all the kindred of the earth be blessed. In thy seed, that is, in Christ,
who was the Israelites own Countryman, which is their last prerogative recorded
by the Apostle, of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came.

Thus you have seen how God loaded the Israelites with blessings, with
privative and positive, with temporal and spiritual; You only have I known
of all the families of the Earth. And now Israel, as MOSES once said, Deuteronomy.
10.12. What does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? But alas, the God of Israel is here
forced to complain, that notwithstanding all the cost he had bestowed upon his
Vineyard, whem he expected grapes from it, it brought forth wild grapes;
notwithstanding those many benefits he had bestowed upon his people, they
continually rewarded him evil for good; they thought not of his hand, nor of
the day when had delivered them from the hand of the enemy, how he wrought his
miracles in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan; neither destroyed they
the heathen, but learned their works; for they shed innocent blood, even the
blood of their sons, and of their daughters, whom they offered unto the Idols
of Canaan, and the land was defiled with blood.

In general terms, their sins are set down, Deuteronomy. 9.6, 7. but they are more
particularly described in the third and fifth chapter of Isaiah: in the third
chapter you may see their women's sins, the Prophet brings you, as it were,
into the Exchange, he shows you the pride and vanity of their women's
dressings, he gives you such an inventory of their toys, as is able to make a
very Ca^o change his countenance: In the fifth chapter the Prophet shows you
their men's sins; after the catalogue of God's benefits, he gives you another
catalogue of their sins; at the seventh verse he shows you their oppression
and injustice; I looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry. At the eighth verse, their encroaching
covetousness in joining house to house, and field to field, until there was
no place, that they might be placed alone in the midst of the earth. At the
eleventh and twelfth verses, their drunkenness and riot in rising up early to
follow strong drink, and continuing until night, till wine enflamed them,
having the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and wine in their feasts. At
the eighteenth and nineteenth verses, their contempt and slighting of God's
Word; in defiance of this drawing iniquity with coards of vanity, and sin, as
it were, with a cart-rope; saying, let him do his worst, let him make speed
and hasten his work that we may see it, and let the counsel of the holy one
of Israel draw nigh and come that we may know it. At the twentieth verse, their
Hypocrisy, in calling evil good, and good evil; in putting darkness for
light, and light for darkness; in putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter. At the one and twentieth verse, their self conceit, being wise in
their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. At the two and twentieth
verse, their Pot-valour, in that they were mighty to drink Wine, and men of
strength to mingle strong drink. At the three and twentieth verse, their
bribery and corruption, in justifying the wicked for reward, and in taking away
the righteousness of the righteous from him. And shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
Yes, the wrath of God was kindled against his people, insomuch that he abhorred
his own inheritance; for three transgressions of Judah and for four, he
resolves that he will not turn away the punishment thereof. And so I am
fallen upon the second part of the Text, which is Comminatio supplicii; the
threatening of a future judgment; therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities. You have heard that God bestowed upon Israel two sorts of
blessings; both which he threatens to withdraw for their unthankfulness.

First, his private blessings; they must expect no more deliverances from him.
He brought them forth out of the Iron Furnace, even out of Egypt; but they had
so provoked him, that he threatened to bind them Apprentices there the second
time. Apprentices? nay worse, he threatened to make Slaves of them, so we read
Deutr. 28. ult. The Lord, says Moses, shall bring thee into Egypt again with
Ships, by the way whereof I spoke unto to thee; thou shall see it no more
again; and there shall ye be sold (offer your selves at least) unto your
enemies for Bo^d-men and Bond-women, and no man shall buy you. God threatens
to sell his people for naught, and to take no money for them. And whereas the
Israelites were wont to have the better of their Enemies, they had so angered
the Lord of hosts, that he threatened to give their Enemies the victory, so we
read Deutr. 28.25. The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten before thine
enemies, thou shall go out one way against them, and shall flee seven ways
before them, and shall be removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth.

And I am sure they have been thus dlspersed for many hundred years; they are
strangers in all Countries; they have lost both their place and Nation.

Secondly, God threatens to withdraw his positive blessings from them: We have
a plain Text for this, Isa. 5.5, 6. I will tell thee, says God, what I will
do to my Vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten
up; and I will break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down; and
I will lay it waste, it shall not be pruned nor dug: I will also command the
Clouds, that they rain no more upon it. So true is that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
107.34. A fruitful Land makes he barren, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein. For though the Land of Canaan were as the Garden of Eden, yet
for the iniquity of the Inhabitants, it shall be turned into a Wilderness;
and though the Israelites had the blessings of the right hand, and of the left,
yet for their ingratitude and disobedience, God threatens to withdraw both;
You only have I known of all the Families of the earth; therefore I will
punish you for all your iniquities.

Therefore I will punish you; You that were my darling, mine own peculiar
people; you that were as dear to me as the apple of mine eye; because ye have
broken my Co^mandeme^ts and been unmindfull of my loving kindness, therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities.

And the observation from hence for our instruction is most obvious; Gods
hatred against sin is such, that he will not let it go unpunished in his
dearest children. Adam was the masterpiece of all Gods workmanship, and highly
in favor with him at the first, and yet as soon as ever he had tasted of the
forbidden tree, God banished this same Adam out of Paradise. Moses is often
styled the servant of God, but indeed he seems to have been more, with
reverence be it spoken, to have been Gods familiar acquaintance, for Exodus
33.11. the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend.
Yet as great, and gracious, and familiar as Moses was with God, for one sin of
infidelity God fell out with him, as we read Numb. 20. where when the people
murmured for water, God bid Moses but only speak to the rock, and it should
give forth water: But Moses thought that speaking would not do it; not a word
therefore, but a blow, two of them for failing, he smote the rock twice; And
for this he had his doom immediately, that he should not enter into the land
of promise. He that Prophesied against the Altar at Bethel was Gods favorite,
a man of God. Yet forasmuch as he disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, in going
back to eat and drink with the old Prophet, his carkase must not come to the
Sepulcher of his fathers. I shall give you but one example more, which is
without example, our Savior himself, that Lamb without spot, the only
righteous person that ever lived upon the earth. Though he were. Gods bosom
Son, and had not the least sin of his own, only took ours by imputation, yet
how harshly did his father handle him, never was there any sorrow like unto his
sorrow, wherewith the Lord afflicted him in the day of his fierce anger. And if
these things be done in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? Luke
23.31. The righteous shall be recompensed in the earth, much more the wicked
and the sinner, Prove. 11. ult. If judgment begin at the house of God, what
shall the end be of those men that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? 1
Pet. 4.17, 18. If an Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile, if this man
shall be recompensed, shall be punished in the earth; with whom shall
hypocrites have their portion, that are full of deceit and fraud, and under
whose tongue is ungodliness and vanity? If a perfect and upright man, one that
fears God, and striveth to eschew evil, if this man shall be recompensed,
shall be punished in the earth, what will become of him that has no fear of
God before his eyes, but lives as if there were no God, committing all
uncleanness even with greediness? If a man of a strict life, and a tender
conscience must be punished, what will become of the rebellious reformers of
our age, whose consciences seem to be feared with an hot iron? If Jerusalem
the holy City must be punished, Lord, what will become of London and
Westminster, places every whit as sinful as Sodom or Gomorrah? If God go so
roughly to work with them he knows, oh how will he handle strangers without
mittons? if he execute his judgments upon Jury where he was known, oh what
fiery indignation will he power out upon the heathen that have not known him,
and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon his name?

This teaches us to flee from sin, as from the face of a Serpent, considering
how odious and abominable it is in the sight of God, though Coniah the son of
Jeboiakim King of Judah were the signet upon his right hand, yet, for sin God
threatened to pluck him thence, Jer. 22.24. The King of England will not pardon
wilful murder, though his chiefest favorite should commit it. The King of
heaven will let no sin go unpunished, no not in his favorites, in his own
people. And he will never connive at sin in us, that threatens here to punish
it so severely in Israel, You only have I known of all the families of the
earth, therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.

And so I have gone through the parts of the Text; a few words now of
Application, and I have done.

Truly God, says the Psalmist, is loving unto Isael, and truly he has been as
loving unto us, he has bestowed many private, and many positive blessings on
us. First private, many late deliverances, I will Instance but in three.

The first was from Popish tyranny and superstition, a tyranny more then
Egyptian, an Antichristian tyranny. The damned glutton Luke 16. desired only
a little water for his thirst, But water will not quench this thirst of
Babylon, the whore must have blood, till she has made her self stark drunk
with it, no blood of Beasts, it must be blood of Men, no blood of sinners, it
must be the blood of Saints, and these Martyrs none of Mahomets, they must be
Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. 17.6. Sad experience of this tyranny we had in Queen
Mary's days. Non missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo, the Romish
horseleach would not give us over, till she had full gorged herself with our
blood. Or indeed it is a question whether she would ever have been fatisfied,
had we not been strangely delivered from her tyranny, by the Queen of Queens,
or rather the King of Kings, You only have I known of all the fam^lies of the
earth.

A second deliverance was from the Spanish Armado in the year 1588. Which Fleet
had it prevailed, our Thames had been named Tyber, Romish superstition had
invaded us once more, and then by the waters of Babylon we might have sat
down and wept, as often as we remembered this our Sion. But God brake the ships
of the sea through the East wind, You only have I known of all the families of
the earth.

A third deliverance was from that horrid Powder Treason, November. 5. 1605.
which was carried on with so great secrecy, that it made the man of sin insult
-- Teque his, ait, eripe flammis, who is that God that shall deliver them out
of my hands? But he that dwells in heaven laugheth the Bishop of Rome to
scorn, and plucked us as it had been firebrarnds out of the burning, You only
have I known of all the families of the earth.

And as God has befriended us by his private, so by his positive blessings,
answerable to those which he bestowed upon his Vineyard. And first we may
compare with Israel for a fruitful situation, being neither under the torrid
nor the frozen Zone, neither burned away with parching heat, nor benumbed away
with pinching cold, but seated in a temperate climate and afertile soil; our
folds are full of sheep our valleys stand so thick with corn that we may laugh
and sing. God has also fenced us about, like the Israelites in the red sea
with a wall of water, the waters are as a wall unto us on our right hand, and
on our left. But especially God has fenced us by his protection, salvation
has the Lord appointed for walls and bulwarks. He has likewise gathered the
stones out from us, he has cast out the Romish rabble, and has planted our
Land with the choicest Religion, that of Protestants. And he has builded a
Tower among us, he has set up Episcopal authority. Some think this Tower too
high, and would feign have it quite demolished, down with it, down with it,
say they, even to the ground. But these are an Assembly of birds that would
feign build in others neasts; there are Presbyterian Levellers as well as
Independent; but let them both do what they can, I hope I shall never see the
day wherein these Towers fall. God has made, as it were, a winepresse among us
too, no Nation under heaven has better Laws then we, many of them or these
seven years have been cast into a deep sleep, but I trust that within few
months they will be wakened. And that in telling you of one blessing more I
may show you all the rest, God has set over us a prudent, and most pious
Prince, a King for His faith and life unspotted from the world, a Patron and a
Pattern of good men and goodness, a maintainer of His Countries Laws, and,
however Rebellion has traduced Him, a zealous professor and Defender of the
Christian Faith. O fortunatos nimium, bona si sua norint, Augligenas! Happy
Nation we to be in such a case, happy Nation we to have the Lord for our God,
to have him as kind and good to us, as he ever was to Israel, You only have I
known of all the families of the earth. And now, England, what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul? But here God may as justly complain of us as he did of
Israel, that when he looked for grapes from us, we have brought forth wild
grapes, there is not a sin Isa. 5. charged upon Israel, but we stand guilty of
it. I have not time to arraigne all the sins that reign among us, the time
would fail me to reckon up the oaths and imprecations. Our sins therefore
being as many, nay, more, I doubt, then those of Israel; of two things one we
must either plead more privilege to sin then they had, which I am sure we
cannot, or else without great mercy we must look yet for greater judgments,
at least to have God so threaten us, as here he threatens the people of Israel,
You only have I known of all the familes of the earth, therefore I will
punish you for your iniquities. I will punish You. You that have seven years
sat in Council, been in Covenant for, yet armed your selves against, and have
at last most traitorously imprisoned the Lords Anointed, you that have turned
judgment to wormwood, you that have turned our still waters into blood, you
that have turned the Kings house, nay, the house of God into a den of thieves,
you that imagine wickedness and practice it you that have set your selves in
no good way, you that dare do any thing, but justice, you that dare rob your
Sovereign, nay, even God himself, you that are made up of cousenage and
contradictions, you that have no Religion but rapine and Rebellion, you that
are against Papists in practice, though ye will not own that name, you that
neither fear God, nor honor the King, you that would beggar all that refuse to
be such Rebels as your selves, you that, with Herod, are deeply died in blood
of Innocents, that make no more of cutting off a man's, then of cutting off a
dogs neck, you that have filled the grave with bodies, and hell with souls,
therefore I will punish you for your iniquities.

You likewise of the silly Schismatic Assembly, that, out of mere
opposition, preach in Cloaks; you that are no legal Synod, but rather the
Synagogue of Satan; you that for a pious Liturgy, would give us a pure piece of
nonsense; you that would banish the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles Creed; you
that call evil good, and good evil; you that teach for doctrines the
commandments of wicked men; you that preach up Rebellion for four shillings a
day; you that would be more then Deanes or Bishops, though you dislike their
Titles; you that are greedy dogs, never thinking ye have enough; you that serve
not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies, Therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities.

And you of the Court, for your flattery, and your prodigality; and you of the
cowardly City for your disloyalty; you that dare fight against none but your
King: and you of the Country for your stupidity and sottishness, in suffering
your fellow subjects so long to enslave you: you of the Clergy likewise for
temporizing, for fearing the face of man, for not daring to speak truth: You of
the Laity for tenebrizing, for your Conventicles: You that are rich, for your
Covetousness: You that are poor, for your idleness: You that are men, for
your day-sins, gluttony, and drunkenness: You that are women, for your
night-sins, chambering and wantonness: All you that are against the King, for
forswearing of your selves: Some of you that are for the King, for swearing;
you that swear not, as Joseph did, By the life of your King, but By the life
of your God, and By the Prince of life, whom ye swear over once aday from top
to toe, as if ye would swear Christ in pieces, or God out of heaven, Therefore
I will punish you for all your iniquities.

Ye have been told of this sin often, and if I now told you of it rightly, I
should tell you weeping, that they who thus mouth their Oaths and their God
Damn them, they are no better then the very enemies of the Cross of Christ.
Nor are they Enemies to him only, but also traitors to their King and Country,
as arrant traitors as those that have imprisoned Him, let them never tell me
they are the Kings friends, for they are the worst of enemies, because of
swearing the land mourns, Jer. 23.10. And mourn it will a great deal worse,
except this, and many other horrid sins be banished. We have seen hitherto,
but, as it were, the morning of mourning, the beginning of sorrows, unless we
repent, our Land, like Rama, will be filled with bitter mourning, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valey of Megiddon, Zech. 12.11. For indeed how
can we ever hope to have God bless us, when we are daily at him to damn and
confound us? how can we ever hope for peace with men, so long as by oaths and
other sins we fight against our God? No, there is no peace to the wicked, their
portion is desolation, which though we hope still we outrun, yet in the end it
will overtake us, quod differtur, non aufertur, as God has leaden heels, so
he has iron hands, though he have spared us therefore a long time, yet he will
pay us home at last, he will bruise us with a rod of iron, and break us in
pieces like a potters vessel. If a man will not turn, he will bend his bow.
Now the farther back we draw the bow-string ere we shoot, the more forcibly the
arrow flies when we shoot; So the longer God delaieth to punish men for sin,
the more harshly will he handle them when once he begins with them. He has
long begun with us, I know; but, without repentance, he will not make a full
end, if we continue in sin, our sufferings shall be of long continuance; if we
keep not the laws of God, the Laws of the Land shall still be kept from us, if
we will not suffer Christ to reign over us, God will not suffer our Lord the
King to reign. To sum up all therefore in one word, let us repent and be
converted, or if we do not this for our own sakes, yet let us do it for our
poor Kings sake, who, in my conscience, has a long time suffered for our sins.
Let not us, brethren, forget God, and he will never forget us, he will speedily
remember King Charles, and all his troubles, let us by a new life express our
thankfulness for Gods former loving kindness, and this will encourage him to
confer new benefits upon us, he will be our God, we shall be his people, as he
has been good to us in former, so will he be in after ages, to us and our
posterity for evermore. He will turn ours and our Sovereigns captivity as the
rivers in the South, he will turn our heaviness into joy, he will take off
our sackcloth and gird us with gladness, he will put a new song into our
mouth, even a thanksgiving unto our God: though the Prologue have been
Tragical, yet the Catastraphe shall be Comical, God will make good to us that
promise, Zech. 8.19. The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth,
and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth shall be to us joy and
gladness, and cheerful feasts. Which God of his infinite mercy vouchsafe to
grant unto us, for the mercies of his eternal Son, our blessed Savior, To
whom, with the Father, and holy Ghost, Three persons, one God, be rendered and
ascribed, as most due is, all Honor, Glory, Power, Praise, Might, Majesty,
Wisdom and Dominion, the residue of this blessed day present, and for ever
more world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

