A Letter and Declaration of the Nobility and Gentry of the County of YORK, To
His EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK.
The LETTER.
My Lord,
WE find our selves constrained by writing to supply the Omission of
acquainting your Lordship with our thoughts and desires when you passed through
our County, which we had then done, if upon so short notice we could have met
for a mutual Understanding; Your Lordship will find in the Enclosed
Declaration the sum of our Apprehensions. We thought it not necessary to
multiply particulars, but leave all other things to a duly constituted
Parliament; neither have we been sollicitous to multiply Subscriptions,
trusting more to the weight of the Proposalls than to the number of
Subscribers; yet we may safely affirm this to be the sense of the Generallity
of the County, as your Lordship sees it is of others. We have only to add the
earnest desires to your Lordship, that you would be pleased to further the
Accomplishment of what we have represented with such seasonable speed, as that
the fear of Friends, and the hopes of Enemies concerning a dangerous Confusion
amongst us, may be prevented.

The DECLARATION.
WE being deeply sensible of the grievous Pressures under which we lie, and
the extreme dangers whereunto we are exposed at this time through the violent
alteration of our Government, the Multiplication and Interruption of
Parliaments: And having no Representatives to express or remedy our
grievances, have thought meet (according to the example of other Counties) to
Declare and Desire, That if the Parliament begun November the third 1640. be
yet continued, The Members that were secluded in the year 1648. be forthwith
restored to the Exercise of their Trust, and all Vacancies may be filled up,
that right may be done to their Persons, to Parliaments, and the People that
have chosen them. If otherwise, That a Parliament may be presently called
without imposing of Oaths or Engagements, (the greatest prejudice to Civil or
Christian Liberty) or requiring any Qualifications, save what by Law or
Ordinance of Parliament before the Force in 1648. are already established. And
until this or One of these be done, We cannot hold our selves obliged to pay
the Taxes that are or shall be imposed on us, We not enjoying the Fundamental
Rights of this Nation to consent to our own Laws by equal Representatives.

Tho. Lord Fairfax Lord Fawconberge Bar Bourchier, Sheriff. Christo. Wivill
Thomas Wharton Tho. Remington Tho. Harrison William Gee William Fairfax William
Osberton Thomas Hutton Gustavus Boynton Har. Berhell William Dawson Rob. Wivel
Nicholas Bethell Jo. Ledgar Henry Fairfax John Hotham Thomas Slingsby Will.
Cholmley Mert. Robinson Hen. Stapleton George Marwood Tho. Heblethwait Rob.
Redman Rob. Belt VV. Adams Jo. Micklethwait Bryan Layton Tho. Lovell VVil.
Rokesby Rich. Levit Roger Langley Francis Boynton Hen. Cholmley John Dawny John
Gibson James Moyser George Crake Jo. Peirson Tho. Yarborow Jo. Richard VV.
Dalton F. Driffield Walter Bethel VVil. VVoodver Jo. Vavasor, etc.


Printed at YORK, and reprinted at LONDON for John Starkey, 1659.


