A LETTER From an Officer of the ARMY in IRELAND to a Kinsman of his in the
ENGLISH ARMY.
Good Cosen,
THe enclosed is both a Duty, and a Legacy: if you Love your Self, Peruse it;
if you Love Me, Publish it, for it is intended to my Friends, and to my
Country. It is the Last, and it is the Greatest Good I can do you, and it is as
well the Last, and the Greatest Right I am capable of receiving from you.

Farewell.
Fellow Soldiers,
I Am not in condition for many words, and I hope these few will be profitable
to You, although the Fruits of a repentance, very Late, as to my self. The
Damned only can express what at this present I Feel, betwixt the Horrors of
pain, and Conscience; and this wretched extremity affords me no other prospect
(without a Miracle) then Death, and Damnation. I wish that the Agonies I
endure, may prevent the greater Sufferings of my Fellow-transgressours; and
that you come not as well to partake in My Torments, as I have done in your
Offenses. Which that you may not do, reflect seasonably, and seriously, with
me, upon the Rapine, Sacrilege, Perjuries, and Murders, we have committed
together; and let This moment be That of your Return to your Duty, and Reason.
Do not trifle with Eternity: it depends upon this Instant, and there is no
redemption from the pit. Heaven and Earth are your declared Enemies, and your
courses are not less Ridiculous, then Impious. Your portion even in This
world, is contempt, and Beggary, and that of the Devils, is to be your
Inheritance in the Next. You are cousened of the very Bread you Fight for, and
you digg, like the Indians, Naked, to furnish your unthankful Masters with
Treasure. Your Liberties, fortunes, Reputations, Lives, and Souls, are but a
Sacrifice to a pack of Cheates, Cowards, and Atheists: and there is not a Sword
advanced against you, which carries not Infamy, Death, and Hell, upon the Point
of it. All Hands, and all Interests are engaged to your Destruction. The whole
Nation looks upon you but as so many Wolves, and the very Sheep you have
flayed to cover your sneaking Villainies, will have their skins again. But this
is nothing, compared with the Impressions of Divine Vengeance upon your wounded
Souls. God will not be deluded; he knows, that you understand the Crimes you
act; and the Conscience of your Sin, shall be the Sting of your Punishment.

Oh Gentlmen! I speak to such as have not cast off Humane Nature, with
Christian Religion: to such, as have not Sinned unto Death: to such, as wear
not the Seal of Reprobation upon their foreheads: by all the Tenderness you
owe to piety, and Nature; as ever you expect Mercy from Heaven, or Peace upon
Earth; I Beg of you; nay I charge you; spill no more Innocent blood: Take this
counsel; as you expect an Interest, in That, which was shed for the world.
Betake your selves to Tears, and penitence for what is past. Reserve your
selves for more Honorable, and Needful Occasions to employ your Courage,
hereafter. That which possesses you at present, is the Spirit of Mutiny, and
Sedition, not that of Valor. The time is at hand, which will both Glorify
your service, and Reward them. Draw your Swords Then, and you will find the
difference betwixt committing a Murder, and Offering a Sacrifice.

God give you his Grace, and so I bid you farewell for ever, Dublin, August 14.
1658.

