A LETTER FROM A PERSON OF HONOR, RECONCILING The Dissenting Brethren,
(commonly called Independents) AND The Presbyterians, in matter of Judgment,
about the settling of the CHURCH.

Sent to an eminent Divine of the Assembly.

LONDON, Printed by R.A. M. DC. XL V.

SIR,
FOr the satisfaction of your desire expressed in the Letter, I will first lay
down some grounds, which I conceive to be agreeable to truth, and thereupon
give you the Reason of my judgment and practice.

First, I conceive a visible Ministering Church, under the Gospel to be a
Company of Believers, joining themselves together in the name of Christ, for
the enjoyment of such Ordinances, and exercise of such spiritual government, as
the Lord has appointed for his worship and honor, and their mutual
edification.

This description does sufficiently express what is intended.

An exact definition, such bodies are not so Capable of as some other things
may be: Neither needs it when what is meant is fully understood by both
Parties; therefore in such a Case to stick upon that, does produce rather a
Litigation about words and terms, then any satisfaction: If the truth of any
thing herein be questioned that must stand or fall according to Scripture.

I call it a [Visible Ministring] Church to distinguish it from that
Universal, which can be neither: except we will admit the Pope or some Image
of him, some such humane device, to be it virtually, always to exist visibly,
for the performance of such duties as Christ has enjoined his Churches to
perform upon all Occasions of Offense, or otherwise; And yet that will not
serve, neither except Courts and Officers be allowed, even to the Apparitors as
hands in all places to supply defects in this way.

I add [Under the Gospell] because the Constitution under the Law was
National, the Officers, Ordinances and Places of Worship, all fitted to such a
frame; and typical; which under the Gospel was changed as appears both by
Christ's institution, Matthew. 18. and all the Apostles practice throughout in all
places, who best understood our Saviors intention and meaning for the
Constitution of Churches Evangelical being by him instructed and left
authorized thereunto. Secondly, The matter of this Church is a Company of
Saints, such whom as the Apostle, so the Church that admits then or joins with
them ought to think it meet to judge of every one of them that Christ has
begun a good work in them and will finished it. The Apostles always style them
Saints, and faithful Brethren, or the Church of such a place which is in God
the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ, Saints by Calling, sanctified in
Christ Jesus, the Church Elected together with them, and such like titles
applyable only unto men sanctified: That they ought to be such in profession
will not be denied, that they ought to be what they profess is as evident. The
power of the Church and the exercise of that power commanded by our Savior, is
for this end that Offenses may be taken away, when men shall appear to be other
then they make profession to be, and that they may be prevented so far as man
can judge by keeping out false brethren, that they creep not in privily: the
unruly are to be admonished, and if upon admonition they will not reform,
Christ directs what course shall be taken with them. And he who is to be cast
out when he is known, ought not to be admitted could he be known to be other
then a Saint by the Church before he was received.

Thirdly, The Form of such a visible Church, I conceive to be the Relation,
which by their mutual consent is raised between them for Spiritual Ends, by
which it is that they have power of jurisdiction: and may and ought to judge
those that are within, 1 Cor. 5.12.

Which jurisdiction no man can lawfully be subjected unto, but by his own
agreement. The superiority of Jurisdiction either in things Spiritual or
Temporal (if it be not natural as the paternall) must be voluntarily
subjected unto or it is usurped and tyrannical: Therefore to raise this
Relation which gives a power of judging, there must be a voluntary submission
of themselves one to another testified by some Act, whether you will call it a
Covenant, or Consent, or Agreement between fit Members for such ends.

This Consent and agreement ought to be explicit or the well being, but not
necessarily to the being of a true Church; for it may be implied by such
constant and frequent Acts of Communion performed by a company of Saints joined
together by cohabitation in Towns and Villages, as that the falling in of
their spirits into this brotherly fellowship and communion in things spiritual
is acted unto the true being of it, but for the want of the clear and full
expression thereof among themselves, the relation it raises, the power it gives
them one over anoher, the duty it obliges them unto in the exercise of that
power is obscurely and little apprehended, and less practiced.

This I conceive to be the present state of most of the Churches in this
Kingdom, which although they be true Churches (I do not mean it of the whole
Towns) yet being too ignorant wherein that consists, and what power and
privilege they have and ought to exercise by it; they suffer themselves by
usurpers to be deprived of the exercise of this power, and thereby a mixed
multitude press in among them to their own hardening, to the Churches levening,
contracting guilt through neglect of their duty to separate the vile from the
precious suffering sin to fret like a Gangreen^ and to the great dishonor of
Christ (who hereby is held forth through the negligence of the Church to be an
Head unto such members in the eye of the World. There is besides through the
same usurpation a yoke of bondage cast upon the Churches by the imposition of
many humane devices, both upon Officers and Members, full of tyranny and
Superstition; the suffering whereof will cause the Lord to have many things
against them, but does not unchurch them, since many wants and many corruptions
may stand with the being of a true Church as all Experience shows.

I expect hereupon to be demanded what Reasons I can give why Separation should
be made from such Churches, which are acknowledged to be true Churches,
although with many wants and corruptions: In answering whereof I shall give you
an account of that I undertook. And first, I say this word Separation is no
such Bug-beare as many would make the world and themselves believe, who hand
over head without differencing things or persons, or understanding that whereof
they affirm; take it up and cast it abroad with as little Charity as Learning.

Separation whereof we speak is either from the Communion of the Invisible
Church, Heb. 12. the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn which are
written in Heaven; or from this or that particular visible Churches Communion.

The first cannot be made but by denying the faith for the Requisites unto that
Communion are Faith and Love, and this is a Separation as fearful and terrible
as they would or can make Separation to be.

The second consists in refusing to join in the external Communion of this
or that particular Church, as in their Liturgies, public Prayers,
participation of Sacraments, and this Separation upon due Cause may be made
without any more danger or ill Consequences, then there is in keeping our
selves free from pertaking with other men in their sins; and being made, it
neither seperates those men who made it from the Communion of the Catholic
Church, nor from internal Communion with the Saints of that particular visible
Church, as they are Saints and Members of the Catholic Church, but only from
the Corruptions of their External Communion, which they hold in that visible
Church whereof they are.

Luther made a separation from the eternal communion of all the Churches in
the world, and he with those that adhered to his doctrine in that separation
did constitute Churches more pure, both in regard of their constitution, and
exercise of external communion, yet none but Papists or such in our times as
linger after popery, and would be glad of a Captain to lead them back again
into Egypt, will accuse him to have made a Schism; and brand him with the
odious name of a Schismatic: For he separated not from believers as believers,
but from those corruptions, which were universally spread over all in the
external communion that then was held in the Christian world. And this he was
bound to do, and others with him who believed his doctrine; if they would
keep themselves pure from the guilt of those common corruptions.

In the second place I answer that there is a necessity laid upon many, and it
is (as I conceive) the duty of all that have light to see it, to separate
themselves from holding external communion with many Churches here in England,
although acknowledged true Churches, and that for these reasons.

First, Because such things are required of them to be performed if they will
hold external communion, as they cannot practice without sin.

Secondly, If they might be free for their own practice, yet they cannot
perform that duty, which by Christ's command lies upon them as members of a
visible Church to perform and fulfill, that they may not contract guilt, and be
leavened by the sinful practices of fellow members.

For the first I will instance in those things which being retained in these
Churches, and enjoined upon all, have been ever since the reformation of
Religion opposed and witnessed against by the greatest Lights of this later
age, both strangers and of our own Nation, yea and cast out by the purest, if
not by all other reformed Churches, abjured as Antichristian by some, only
these which hang between heaven and earth, and are still moving downwards
toward the center of their old superstitions, do not only retain them, but
will suffer none to join in external Communion with them, except they will
approve and practice what they do. These are the usurping Hierarchy, and the
popish Ceremonies, the devices of men, the Ornaments and dress of the Romish
Whore, thought decent and fittest for to adorn Gods worship, not in my judgment
at any time tolerabilis ineptiae (in their use here) as one calls the
Ceremonies, but at this time much less tolerable as they are maintained and
pressed, the one not by Commission from the Magistrate but as a Superior
degree of Ministry by divine Institution, not esteemed to be jure humano; the
other not as idle, empty Ceremonies, but serving to teach and express the
inward affections of the heart: The white Linen, what can that express, but
Angelical purity; The Cross has its expression, and what it teaches is
given unto it, Constancy in Confession of the faith, kneeling in the act of
Receiving urged as a Gesture of more reverence, and fitter for that Ordinance,
then that which our Savior used and thought Congruous to it. Unto these I will
add that Composition of a Divine public worship by men, which they call the
Public Prayers of the Church, the Service book, containing the divine Service.
White in his Epstle to the Archbishop of Canterbury, before his book against
the Sabbath, styles it the universal Sacrifice, which amongst the Jews was the
daily Offering, the Morning and Evening Sacrifice. This shows what
apprehensions they have of it, and in what sense they strictly enjoine that no
part of it shall at any time be omitted, that so the Divine Worship which the
Church has set apart and consecrated unto God may be fully observed and
performed; and then the Offering of God, the daily Sacrifice, wherein all have
vote and interest is offered up: see his own words in the place, which is in
the end of his Epistle.

Now this Consecrate thing more holy then the singlar and affected devotions of
private Spirits, because devoted to God by the Church and State for his public
service, what is it but a device of man? a new Cart taken up from the Papists
as the Israelites in imitation of the Philistims heretofore did to case the
Levits who ought to have carried the Arc upon their own shoulders, and not
suffered to be carried by beasts instead of men.

The same thing is done here, Christ has given gifts to men, that those gifts
may be the foundation of Offices for the Edification of his body: He has
given Pastors and Teachers, and therefore the Gift of Teaching the Word of
Wisdom, and the Word of Knowledge by the exercise of these gifts (in the
several administrations, whereto they serve) he will be honored, and by an
effectual operation edific his body: Those who are fitted for such Offices,
and called to them, must therefore to these ends give themselves to prayer and
to the Ministry of the Word: In place hereof is brought in and enjoined to be
used, this new Cart which a boy of 12 years old may drive, even the meanest of
the people if he will draw near and fill his hand with this Service book, may
be a Scribe instructed sufficiently; and furnished to bring forth what is here
required; so that instead of Christ's way for his own honor and his Churches
edification, here is man's way brought in instead of the Gifts which he gives
and furnishes men with all to be exercised in the Ministry: here is a
composure and frame of Divine Service pieced up together into a body by some
men, which must serve instead of Gifts to all Men, and for all Times, and be
enjoined to be used without variation, as coming from the public spirit of
the Church, and thereby devoted. Hereby they do not only set their Posts by
Gods Posts, but they lay aside his, and enjoine theirs only to be used as
fitter for the building.

If it be said Men are not prohibited to exercise the gift of prayer, nor
preaching in their public Ministry. I answer they are expressly enjoined to
use no Prayers but these consecrated Prayers of the Church in their public
Ministry, and this is de jure, what ever in some places is done de facto. And
again, if we yield, that they have authority to consecrate and enjoin one
form, which must not in a tittle be receded from, for sanctifying of some
Ordinances, as in the administration of the Sacraments; they may with as good
authority enjoine a set form for other Ordinances, as the preaching of the
Word, and they have done so.

For preaching I never yet saw substantial reason given; that might show a
difference between these two, the taking authority to make a book of common
public Prayer to read which all shall be tied to in the exercise of the
function of pastor and teacher, instead of praying and the taking authority to
make a book of common public Sermons, and enjoining all Pastors and Teachers,
to read those instead of preaching. But if it be unlawful to introduce and
enjoin a public Homily book in place of the gift of teaching, it will be no
less unlawful to bring in a book of common and pubique Prayers, and enjoin
the same upon all Pastors and Teachers in place of the gift of prayer.
Therefore as they have done the one they may with as good reason and authority
do the other: For if the reading of Homilies, commanded in place of preaching,
and all other preaching prohibited do appear unto us unlawful, and in that
case we should apprehend Gods Ordinance thrust out, and man's device brought in
in place of it, I would see a reason given why we should not have the same
apprehension of the other also, but that use and custom has reconciled us to
the one and not to the other.

Here to fall into a dispute of set forms of Prayers in general, and
endeavor, (as Master Ball and others do) to prove that some set forms of
Prayer, may in some cases by some persons be used, or to ask whether all
directary Liturgies appointed in some other Churches, by way of direction only
not of injunction (the Officers being left at liberty, and the Churches to make
use of them, or not, as they see occasion, and as their own gifts may be
excited and helped thereby) be altogether unlawful, is altogether besides the
question, and rather changes the state of the Question then answers the
Objection that is made against this (to use King James his words) ill
translated Masbook, wherein some gross things only are pared off, and that as
being enjoined upon all Churches, and thus pressed for such reasons, and with
such respects and circumstances, for if this may not be used; the parties whom
they seek to satisfy, receive no satisfaction by all that can be spoken of the
other to induce them to use this.

In the second place, if men for their own practice, could be free and
dispensed withal for these particulars, yet there lies a duty upon every
member of a visible Church, which he is obliged to perform, or else he will
partake of the guilt of other men's sins, and this duty he shall not be suffered
to perform.

This obligation lying upon every member in communion with a visible Church
arises from the power of the keys, wherewith every visible Church, and every
member thereof for his part is in trusted by Christ, and for the exercise of
Church trust, as the whole body, so every particular member shall be
accountable according to the neglect of duty therein,

For this end the Lord by the Apostles has cast Evangelicall Churches into
such bodies, as might conveniently meet together in one place, upon all
occasions to exercise this power, as the Apostie directs the Church of
Corinth to do, and blames them that they had not done their duty therein
before, whereby it came to pass that they were all leavened and became guilty,
1 Cor. 5.

This was the constitution of all Churches that were Apostolical; Gal, 1. 22.
2 Cor. 8. 1. Gal. 1. 2. The Churches of Judea, Churches of Macedonia, Churches
of Galatia, and such Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 23. as might come together in one
place, When the whole Church shall be come together in some place. 1 Cor. 5. 4.

Other frames of Universal, National, Provincial, and such like visible
Churches are men's Devices and Constitutions; serving for and tending to an
Universal Vicar, being either the same or the Image thereof, standing upon the
same grounds and reasons of humane policy, and cannot be always existent for
the remedy of Offenses and Scandals to be brought to them as Christ
commands, but in a way of Antichristian usurpation by Courts, Chancellours,
Commissaries, Officials, and such like Officers of the Kingdom of Antichrist,
in imitation of earthly Kingdoms, whereof there is no footstep in Apostolical
direction or practice, but the clean contrary, as appears in the places
forecited: But after their times the mystery of iniquity soon brought forth,
first, the foundations of this Tyranny, and then by degrees the entire
building. This power therefore being placed in the whole Church Officers and
Members, and to be exercised when these are gathered together, and this Church
such as may for that end come together in one place, as is evident out of 1
Cor. 5.4. When this duty is neglected, and such power not exercised upon due
Occasions, according to the Commandment of our Savior, the whole Church is
guilty and every Member, except that be done by particulars, which may keep
them free from partaking in the guilt of such common neglect. I think it will
not be denied but that the whole Church of Corinth was guilty, and every
particular Member involved in the common guilt of their negligence.

The duty that lies upon every Church by Christ's command, Math. 18. Is to
cast out obstinate sinners who will not by the use of all due proceedings be
brought to Repentance: This if they do not, but will endure those, who are
evil, and impenitent in their evils, the Church brings a great guilt upon
themselves, 2 Cor. 5.8. and that is the condition of most, if not of all the
Churches in this Land.

The ways for particular Members to keep themselves from being leavened and
involved in the guilt of such common sins, are but two, Either first, the doing
of that for their part, which is their duty in such a communion; or secondly,
if that will not be suffered, or will not prevail to disclaim the holding of
such communion, and join in a more pure.

The necessity therefore that lies upon particulars, who live in communion
with such Churches, is, either to perform that which in such a case is their
own duty as Members of such Churches and interested for their parts in this
power, which should be exercised according to the Commandment of the Lord to
separate the vile, but by the Church is neglected; or else for their neglect
also together with the rest, to be involved in the guilt of this common
disobedience.

That which is their own duty in such a case being equally entrusted, is, to
exhort the rest to obedience, to be humbled and mourn for their Offenses and
Scandals given by parties offending, and obstinate, and for the Churches
neglect to apply that Remedy that Christ has enjoined: to profess to the
Church their own readiness to perform obedience to Christ's command, if the
rest of the Church will join with them; to protest against their disobedience
if they refuse, either through negligent security, being puffed up with pride
as the Church of Corinth, or through the base fear of man.

I think it will be granted that if any particular Member in the Church of
Corinth, had done this in case of the Incestuous person, he had bin free, and
no way involved in the guilt of that Church, which the Apostle charge them
all with: For which the Apostle expresses to have bin the duty of all, if any
particular for his part had performed the same as far as lay in him, and made
public confession of that truth, to the edification of the rest, professing
against their disobedience, he had not bin leavened for the leavening and
corruptions in this case is not physical, as one man receives the infection
of the Plague from another, but only moral; by reason of neglect of duty;
and the corrupting by ill example, working upon the same ill Principles of our
evil Nature is (through the just judgment of God) a consequence of such
neglect of duty, which were it performed either in general or in particular,
as it is appointed for a remedy, so would it be a preservation: And I think
such a particular Member or Members in such case might (as altogether
unleavened) keep the Feast in sincerity and truth, and with comfort and profit
partake of the Ordinances, notwithstanding the sin and obstinacy of other Men,
and the sin of that Church (in neglecting to cast them out) with which they are
in Communion; yet with these Cautions.

First, that they be not otherwise pressed with Superstitions in the use of the
Ordinances for their own practice:

Secondly, that if they cannot prevail with the Church (by their duty so
performed) to exercise that power that Christ has given them for edification,
and to keep his Temple undefiled, that the Members of Harlots may not still be
held forth in profession to be the Members of Christ, one body with the rest,
as partaking of one bread, then that they leave such external Communion which
they hold with them, if they can join in communion with a purer Church, where
they may bring more honor to the Lord Christ, and more comfort and edification
to themselves and others with whom they do walk in communion.

This I was willing to express by the way because it is usual for men to fall
into long disputes, and bring many arguments to prove that the Ordinances are
not made less comfortable, or the partaking in them made sinful to one man,
because of the sins of other men who partake with them: They set up a man of
straw to contend with all, and fight against what themselves have framed. It is
not the sins of other men, as they are their personal acts that can cast guilt
upon any but themselves, but it is the suffering of these sins and sinners to
pass without such censure as the Lord has appointed to be pronounced against
them, by those whom he has invested with power to that end, which makes these
sins the sins of the whole body, that so neglect their duty enjoined them. and
hereby a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. So that they either deceive
or are deceived that agitate with so much eagerness, this (as they say)
strange opinion that another man's sins should hinder any from partaking
comfoitably in the Ordinances. It is not another man's sin that hinders but
their own (as they that will see may perceive, consisting in the neglect of
what (upon his sinning) is there duty to do, and not in any act by him
committed.

Now particular members are not suffered to discharge themselves by doing that
duty which in such a case of the Churches This ^^scours ^as writ^^n some ^^ars
since ^hen the ^^mes ^^ere peri^^us.
neglect does ly upon them to perform, or if they will perform it to their
own acquitting, and the Churches edifying whereof they are members, they are no
less certain to run upon ruin in * these times, then to qrevail nothing at
all with Churches so constituted, and consisting of such mixed multitudes as
the most are.

Not to make such public profession as they think their duty obliges them
unto, is to live in sin against conscience and that is, against Christianity,
to do it to no profit and with certain ruin, when another way may be taken to
prevent the sin and avoid the danger is against Christian wisdom; therefore
there is a necessity that does ly upon many to disjoyne themselves from being
members of diverse Churches in this Kingdom, that the obligation which by
reason of such a relation will ly upon their conscience may not press them when
they cannot discharge the same, and to unite themselves in membership and
communion, where they may in doing and submitting themselves mutually unto all
that Christ enjoyneth them, for his honor and their edisication exercise a
Communion in the use of all the Ordinances, free from the mixture of humane
inventions, and antichristian usurpations.

Suppose a congregation in this Land, some Town or Parish (to speak common
road language) wherein a company of godly men (Saints all) so far as man can
judge had united themselves together by mutual consent to walk in all the
Ordinances and ways of the Lord, without admitting the Linsy-woolsie mixture
of any humane invention, and with resolution not to be the servants of men, but
to cast off their yoakes in things spiritual, and exalt the Lord alone, to
rule and judge in them and by them according to the guidance of his word, if
finding this society, and their course fully to answer the persuasion of my
heart concerning the way af God: I should change my habitation, and take a
house in that Town that I might thereby join my self to this company in
Church fellowship, because this is your dark and ignorant way of falling into
fellowship here in this Land, there would be no complaining no out cry of
separation, no whispering and muttering of forsaking the mother Church, no
writing up and down to intimate the great fear there was of seduction and
separation; and the scandal that would arise from thence, and yet I should
come out thereby, from holding external Communion with one Congregation whose
external communion I saw so many corruptions so weaved into that I could not
hold it and be free from them, and join my self in communion with another,
who exercised a Communion between themselves free from such corruptions and
bondage; And should I or others do any more but the same thing if in one
street of a Town we should join our selves together in Communion for
spiritual ends, and separate our selves from the external communion which is
held in another, burdened with many superstitions, and submitting themselves
to bear the yoke of bondage imposed by men, who Lord it over them in things
spiritual, and all this without breaking off from internal Communion. Will any
Saint amongst them, consisting in the embracing and holding the doctrine of the
same true faith and obedience, but seperating alone from their corruptions and
continuance in disobedience. Whereunto then serves the raising of so much
noise, and clamor, of separation, but to give up friends into the hands of
enemies.

I have in my plain way endeavored to express my judgment in these
particulars, desiring to be always ready to open mine eyes, to receive further
light from whomsoever it shall be showed unto me* in the mean time I must walk
according to that I have accepting no man's person, nor giving flattering titles
to man, as is said in Job.

I pretend not to so much Scholership, that you should require of me exactness
in Method or Expression: therefore I pray you stick not upon some Expressions
which you may conceive not so meet to winnow and fan them by Scholastic wit.
Neither quarrel me for a loose discourse: I rest satisfied with expressing my
self to be understood; But if there be any begged Principles or Grounds wanting
proof, or any thing inferd from Grounds too weak to maintain the same, stay
upon these and make that appear unto me, and I shall either make them good, and
able to stand upon solid foundation (at least to my apprehension) or quit them:
Any other way of answer but this only will be received by me as the fruit of
an acute wit, much exercised in Controversall writing, and work no other effect.

I expect upon your answer to be put to make good these two.

First, The Constitution of a visible Church under the Gospel.

Secondly, the power thereof wherein will consist Card^ Quaestionis, all
turning about upon the determination of these.

I shall make appear what I have said, I hope not to be the fancy of M. Jacob
(as you please to say) a learned man deserving not to be slighted) nor of any
man, but the truth of God having ground in his Word, and embraced for such not
by Shrubs in Learning, as some may be thought to be, but by the strongest and
tallest Cedars of Lebanon for Learning and Piety.

FINIS.
Errata. Page 4. line 30, for eternal read external.


