A LETTER From a person of quality in Edinburgh to an Officer of the Army,
wherein is given a true account of General Moncks proceedings, Dated the 25th.
of October, 1659.
Dear Friend,
THough I have not been wanting (by using various ways and means) to impart to
you the state of affairs here, yet lest there should be a miscarriage in all or
any of them; I thought it a duty incumbent upon me in this our day, to dispatch
a sure Messenger to Newcastle, where I trust he may meet with you, to give you
a full account of things as they stand here, who is able to make you an ample
relation, and to whom I desire you would give credit in what he shall impart to
you; And lest he should omit any thing of moment, I shall as briefly as I can
hint it to you in these following lines.

Upon Tuesday last the 18th. instant, the General had notice that the
Parliament was dissolved. Whereupon he called Col. Wilkes, and Capt. Miller,
Morgan, Hubblethorn, Jerem. Smith, Grimble, and Lt. Col. Clobery (who had been
with him 2. or 3. days before) to consult what to do; And it was resolved,
that he with the Army under his command should declare for the Parliament
against the proceedings of the Army in England, and for the better effecting
thereof, agreed to turn out all as should oppose the design. The next day he
came to Edinburgh, where he had appointed his own Regiment, and Col. Talbots to
be in Arms. The latter had orders to have lighted matches, powder and bullet,
but his own had not. When he came to them, he declared to them, that a factious
party of the Army in England had interrupted the Parliament, and that he
resolved with the Army under his Command to stand to the Parliament in
opposition to them, and expected that they would stand by him accordingly;
Declaring that he would satisfy them all their Arrears, at which they were
made to shout, and gave him three volleyes of shot. Which being done, he caused
Captain Parker, Hatchman, Sto^, Lieutenant Carter, Wells, Wilson, Lindon, and
all the rest of the Anabaptist Officers (except Grom, and Walton) to be
secured. Then coming to Leith (the Regiment of Col. Wilkes being drawn up) He
declared the same things to them, and past from them with the like ceremonies,
and Col. Wilkes for a farewell gave him 15. or 17 great Guns from the Citadel.
Of whose Regiment, the General caused to be secured, Major Knoles, Lt. Burrell,
Lt. Hughes, Ensign Wilkes, and Ensign Wood. Having thus secured these three
Regiments, and placed other Officers in the rooms of those whom he had turned
out, He dispatched Letters to Lt. Col. Young, of Col Cobbets Regiment, and Lt.
Col. Keyn, and Major Kelke of Pearsons Regiments, to come over and consult with
him, about some weighty affairs: and when they came, he clapped up Lt. Col.
Young, and Major Kelke, and at the same time received advertisement from Col.
Read, that he and his Regiment was at his service, as likewise the same from
Col. Fairfax.

Upon the 21th. instant, he marched with some troops of Horse and some
companies of Foot to Lithgowe, in order (as it was thought) to have gone to
Air, but receiving intelligence there, that Lt. Col. Homes was got thither,
did not proceed for fear he should meet with a repulse, which in the beginning
of this enterprise would have been of ill consequence to his affairs. So that
upon the 22th. he retreated to Edinburgh again with his forces, where he
created new Officers by Commission under his own hand and seal, viz. Cloberry
he made Colonel of Cobbets Regiment, Hatt Lt. Col. and Dennis Major. To his
own Regiment he has made Morgan Lt. Col. Nicolls Major, and Winter Captain of
Homes his Company. Collins of Wilkes Regiment, has Hatchmans Company. Bishop
the Farrier is a Lt. Sherman (one of our cashiered waiters) is made an Ensign,
and all the rest of the vacant places supplied by some such men. Hublethorn is
made Lt. Col. and Emerson Major of Talbots Regiment. All the forces here abouts
being by this means at his devotion, He being assured of the rest in all other
parts but Air, He resolves to draw all to a randevouz in and about Edinburgh
against the last of this Month at furthest, except such as must be left in the
Garrisons, (which he intends shall be but few) and expects to make 5000. Foot,
and 800. Horse, with which he intends (as it is said) immed^ately to march for
England. Witter commands in the Citadel of Johnstons, and Keyn is this day gone
over to fetch hither the rest of that Regiment, Fairfaxes, Cobets, and Reads,
are already on their march hitherwards.

This day Capt. Groom told me that both he and Walton would throw up their
Commissions, as many that are inferior Officers and private Soldiers (who had
the face of honesty) have already done. The General has wrote 3. Letters: one
to the Speaker, another to the Lord Fleetwood, and a third to the Lord Lambert;
which he has put in print and are herewith sent.

He has also put forth a Declaration, which you shall receive from the bearer,
signed by Clerk in behalf of the rest. When none was at the contriving of it
but himself, Wilks, Morgan, Emerson, Smith and Grimble. There is likewise a
Letter he has written to the Churches (drawn by Mr. Collins) stuff, with much
of Booths Language, but I doubt I shall not get it for you, before the bearer
goes away.

All these printed papers he is dispatching away in whole bundles to Hull by
the Pearl Frigot, whereof Capt. Nixon is Commander, who sails too morrow if
wind and weather serve.

Homes came very safe to Air, though a party of Horse was at his heels. That
place he and Col. Sawry with all the Officers resolve to keep, till they
receive orders from the Council of Officers above, (as I was assured by
Letters from themselves to me the last night.)

The General threatens that he will quarter some Horse about that Garrison, and
will not let them have a penny of money. Major Kelke desires that some of them
will acquaint his Wife that he is in health, and that his Son is this day
arrived safe from London, which I entreat you will signify to her accordingly.

I had almost forgot to tell you that the General has secured Barwick, Lt.
Col. Mears having received in there, two of his foot companies and one of
horse. And as Col. Cobbet, and Mr. Brown past by there, they were detained
Prisoners till the General sent a party of horse for them. This night they are
both come with a guard to Edinburgh, (where I heard from one that read their
Mittimus) they were presently to be committed to the Castle.

Thus much I thought good to communicate to you, desiring that the Lord would
direct you to make such use of it, as may be for his own glory, and his poor
peoples peace. Farewell.

Edinburgh 25. October. 1659.
London, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for Thomas Hewer, and are to be sold at her
house in Eliots Court in the little Old Baily.


