A LETTER FROM The Earl of NORWICH, The Lord CAPEL. AND Sir CHARLES LVCAS,
TO The Lord General FAIRFAX; And his Answer thereunto.

ALSO, A salley forth upon the Lord Fairfax his Forces on Friday last, and
Propositions for making addresses to the Prince.

WITH A great Fight in the County of Hereford, between Sir Henry Lingen, and
Major Harley. Another Fight in the North between Lieu. Genesis Cromwell and the
Scots, and Major Genesis Lamberts Speech at the head of his Army.

Printed at London by B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.

NEVVES From the NORTH
SIR,
WE are here in continual fears of the Scots Army, not only from the
present sufferings of our Neighbor Counties who have most grievously tasted of
their cruelties, but because we hear they have many friends in parts more
remote, and unto them we shall only say this (for a charitable co^struction is
best) that had we not by the relation of our fathers and our present and
pastime sufferings palpably felt that which is like to ring in the ears more
and more every day of the whole Kingdom we might have been deluded in the like
manner, as others spetious pretenses and colorable excuses oftentimes avail
much with those which are not acquainted with the manners of the people which
may be rendered as one reason why those that inhabit in the South of England
have generally been observed to hold a better opinion, of that nation, then
those which live in the North (this in the time of peace) now we are come to
dispute it with the sword. It is not necessary for us to remember the service
they did heretofore in reducing Newcastle or mentioning their Iosse at the
siege at Hereford; for their Army was since new modeled and but few that were
in those services, are now in England, or under the same conduct; we thought we
understood the cause of their coming in then, and conceived they would never
have broken amity, with the Parliament of England, neither would they if the
advice of the Kirk had been taken (and in that the Clergy of that Kingdom
deserve double praise for whereas it has been the General speech abroad of
late years, that the Clergy wereas forward if not more, then others in
abetting of a War) the Clergy of Scotland are of a contrary judgment, and for
that the coming of that Army into this Kingdom was against their consents
they have excommunicated most of the chief Officers and others that were the
occasion of their coming in by which if they persist, it seems that censure
is much slighted; for in ancient times men were of opinion, if history may be
credited, that if they lay under the censure of excommunication they thought
their corn would not grow, or if it did, it would not be well inned, and if it
come into the barn, some causualty would fall upon it before it came to be made
use of, but I shall leave this discourse and proceed to that which is more
pertinent by way of the intelligence concerning our present affairs the
conjuncture of Major General Cromwell and Lieutenant General Cromwell was not
without great exclamation, Scarborough is well blockt up and no shipping
suffered to come thither by Sea, and no coming in of any supplies that way,
which is the more care taken of, for that we hear that the Prince has a fleet
at Sea, and has attempted to have men at some other places of this Kingdom,
and this place is the better secured against that danger, for that the harbor
but little above 30 miles from York, and is an inroad into the heart of that
County, it was hardly believed that Lieutenant General Cromwell would have
appeared so soon in these parts, the expediting of his work in Wales was very
seasonable, some of the Scots confess that their march into this Kingdom was
hastened by intelligence was brought them of the rising of a party under the
Earl of Holland in England, the discipating of which has been very small
discouragement to them, but now they are here, they play swoop stake, and what
will not make money, or be for present use, if valuable, they seize for
redemption as they have done the sons and young daughters of diverse Country
Gentlemen and Yeomen, if men say they are for the King hoping to fare the
better, they call them Cavaliers and took all under that notion, if they say
they have taken the Covenant; they say they are against the King and must take
what follows if they say they have not taken the Covenant they are used a like,
which the Countries adjacent, through which they have not yet marched are so
sensible of, that they come in a pace to the Major General, and Lieutenant
General Cromwell and were but moneys procured for buying necessaries and food,
for bread-corn, is very dear, we hope to prevent the further march of the Scots
Southwards, the taking of the Town of Pomfract was a very corsiderable service
performed by Lieut. General Cromwels, about forty men were killed and the
Enemy driven into the Castle and close begirt there where we hope a small
number of the new raised men will keep them, and the old Soldiers keep in a
body in the field, the Lieut. Genesis was with Maj. Genesis Lambert at Leeds the 12
instant, and some of their forces had a Randezvouze about three miles off, when
the two Brigards met the Major General with the Lieut. Gen showed themselves
at the head of each Regiment and the Maj. Genesis as well by way of entertainment
as favorable reception made a speech Declaratory to the same effect as also by
way of encouragement to the soldiers which was recented with great applause
ecchoing a forwardness in the service.

The Scots advance not, as if they intended to relieve Colchester, neither can
they, for the Maj. Genesis has made good the passes about which there has been
some dispute, when the forces for the Parliament in these parts and others
expected are drawn into entire body which is hoped to be done in few days you
are like to hear of further actions til, when I rest,

York August the 14 Your humble servant.

Westminster, 19 August 1648.
Letters from the Leaguer before Colchester say, that the Earl of Norwich,
Lord Capel. Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest of the Officers in the Town, sent
a letter to the Lord Fai^fax wherein they desire 20 days leave to address
themselves to the Prince, and if things go not suitable to their desires, then
etc. This Letter was received by the General, and answer was returned by a
Trumpetter, though not according to the expectation of the besieged. Hunger
bites those in the town, and their desires not being granted, if the old
proverb be true, that hunger breaks stone walls, some are of opinion, that men
of that desparate condition will endeavor to break the line once again,
before they submit, but more danger is in attempting a quick line (to hold out
the proverb) then a dead wall; for the General has fitted al things for a
storm if occasion be, and is every minute so well provided to receive the Enemy
if they sally forth that if the distressed condition of the besieged should put
them upon any desperate design is more probable they will be accessory to
hasten their utter destruction then that that any of them should deliver
themselves by an escape.

Letters out of Hereford-shire, say, that there was a late fight between a
party of horse for the Parliament commanded by Maj. Harley and a party for the
King commanded by Sir Henry Linging, in which its said Sir Henry Linging had
the better at the first but Maj. Harley having a reserve charged with great
gallantry, rescued some prisoners, took many other of the adverse party, and
diverse Officers; amongst whom it is said Sir Henry Lingen himself is one, but
receiving this only upon report I shall leave the certainty to further
relations, Col: Stepkins which have betrayed a Garrison against the Parliament
in Staffordshire betook himself to a house of defense and having g^tten men to
his assistance the Governor of Stafford came against them brought a deny
Culverin with him began a battery took the house by storm, Stepkins finding an
entrance made, betook himself with some few men into a Tower belonging to the
said house, fought it out to the last, and himself died in the assault.

FINIS.

