A LETTER FROM General Blakes Fleet WITH The Particulars of the Great and
bloody Fight with the Dutch, near Goodwin Sands, on Tuesday night last.

AND The pursuit of the Hollanders by the ENGLISH then and since.

ALSO The Particulars of the Loss on both sides.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane.
1652.

A Letter from Genesis BLAKES fleet Dated in the Downs the third of October 1652.
SIR,
ON the 25 of September. 1652. There was a great meeting of the Officers of the
Fleet with General Blake, about engaging with the Hollanders then about Goodwin
Sands, and it was resolved after several meetings, that on Tuesday last we
should endeavor to engage with them.

And accordingly, on Tuesday last we sailed toward them, and the Hollanders
stood to us; being well manned, and every ways very well fitted, and about our
number, each party being between 50 and 60 sail, and the Hollanders had two
Admirals.

First Major Bourne with the Andrew led on, and charged the Hollanders stoutly,
and got off again without much harm.

Captain Bodily with his ship also (for we have one of the Bodelies a Captain
with us, besides Capt. Bodily in the Straits,) he charged exceeding gallantly;
but was in very great danger to have lost his ship, for the Hollanders were so
close on both sides of him. charging against him, that one might have flung
biskets out of his Frigot into the Dutch ships.

All his sails were so torn and shattered, that he could not sail either too
or fro, or any more but as the Tide drove him, and there were about 60 men
killed in that Frigot, and she had near 100 shot in her Hul, and was in danger
of sinking or taking.

But blessed be God they got her safe to Harbor, the fight being not above 6
leagues from the shore.

The w^ter being shallow upon the sands, we were in some danger of sustaining
great loss, In so much that the Sovereign, and the ship in which Genesis Blake
was, with the Admiral began to stick, but blessed be God were got off again
without any great harm thereby.

The Sovereign that great Ship, a delicate Frigot (I think the whole World has
not the like) did her part, she sailed through and through the Holland Fleet,
and played hard upon them.

And at one time there were about 20 Holland Frigots upon her, but blessed be
the Lord she has sustained no very great loss, but in some of her Tacklings,
and some shot in her which her great bigness is not much prejudiced with.

We had some other losses in several other ships, some 2 or 3 in some ships
slain, and in others twice or thrice that number: and some of the ships had
loss more, and some less, in their Sails and Tacklings.

We fought them stiffly as long that night as from four a clock until we could
not see to fight longer.

I am persuaded that if we had had day to have prosecuted the fight, we had
utterly spoiled them, and yet I am persuaded that their loss is very great.

The Hollanders Vice Admiral was sunk in our sight, a very great and stout
ship.

Also another very good Frigot, and of a good bulk, we saw sink in our view.

Two of their ships we have taken, one of 30 guns, and the other of 36 guns,
neither of which did much oppose us, after we attempted to board them. By which
we perceive that their hearts are much broken, and they are much discouraged.

We hear of two ships more of theirs since sunk, some say three, but of that I
cannot yet assure you the certainty, but blessed be God we lost not one ship.

We pursued them the next day, and made some discovery of them, and sent out
some vessels toward them, but they fled, and sailed away, we pursued them near
Holland, but could not get them to engage.

I believe it will be sad news to the States; and although they thought to have
foundered our ships in the sands, yet blessed be God, we have gotten the
Victory, and they are fled home by the weeping cross.

We are come back now to the Downs where we are to take in supplies, and then
shall endeavor to act further service, as God shall give us occasion.

I am persuaded that the Hollanders were drunk generally the most part of them
when they fought, for at first they fought exceeding desperately, as ever I
saw; but after some hours, were nothing so valiant.

But let God have all the glory, we went forth in his strength, and I hope
shall still wait on him, who has thus far manifested his presence with us, and
blessing upon us.

All our Captains generally played their parts, and so did the Sea men and the
Soldiers, who plied their work, in discharging upon the Enemy, though some of
the men were up to the middle in water in some of the ships.

Dated in the Downs the third of October 1652.
FINIS.

