A LETTER: BEING A full Relation of the siege of Banbury Castle by that valiant
and faithful commander, Colonel WHETHAM Governor of Northampton, now
Commander in chief in that service.

With their particular proceeding from the the beginning, and how they have
taken the Church, planted their Ordnance, and are battering the Castle
continually.

As also, How they took two Cavaliers which were let down from the Castle,
with a Letter of great concernment sent from the Governor to Prince Rupert,
which was found about them.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old baily, September. 4. 1644.

SIR,
THat I may give you and others satisfaction touching the siege of Banbury
castle, I must tell you that though we have for about a months space straytned
their quarters, and hindered their forcing the Tax on the Country; which grew
so heavy a pressure, that they had forborne the payment for diverse weeks in many
Towns, though threatened to be plundered of all for their neglect. This Castle
is of more concernement to Oxford then any other, for besides the provisions of
victuals by droves of Sheep and beast weekly, it is upon good ground aver'd
that for a long time this Garrison has paid 18000 per week to Oxford, diverse
Towns being taxed to more then the yearly revenue of them; so that the taking
of this Den of Thieves would much conduce to the straitning of Oxon. and give
liberty of Trade to London from many parts.

On Thursday Aug. 22. they came out of the Castle with about 80 horse and fell
on a guard of ours who retreating a mile to Workworth to their body, as many as
took the Alarm followed them, beat them down the hill, killed their grand
rob-Carrier Lieutenant Midleton by a Carbine shot through the brain, and took
his Cornet one Smith a stout plunderer, slew two others, and took two, and
wounded 4 or 5 desperately, and beat the rest into the Castle.

On Sabbath day Aug. 25 two Companies of our foot that lay for a guard to the
horse advanced into the Town of Banbury and took possession of the Church
about break of day, the enemy not taking any Alarm, until some of our
soldiers by knocking at diverse doors in the Town to look for Cavaliers that
lay in houses near the Castle, awakned them. Our foot all this while were
unloding their Ammunition, and planting their Drakes and Musketeers in the
Church; and our Troops were all entered the Town, and stood to assist the foot
near the Church, if need should be. About an hour after day the enemy came
out of the Castle with about 100 Musketeers, and all the horse they had; their
Musketeers got into gardens and houses many of them, and shot at our horse, and
slew a horse or two, which made our horse to remove to the Towns end; and by
this time we had drawn out three small parties of foot to encounter theirs, who
made diverse ways to the Church; and having slain three of them we did by
degrees get them into the streets; and so drove them into the Castle again,
but still they came out in parties, until about noone they saw a supply
coming toward us from Northampton, and then they betook themselves to their
strength, and never stirred out since.

On the same day came two great Guns with some more foot and Ammunition from
Northampton, and with them Col. Whetham the Governor there, Commander in
chief of this service; on Monday and Tuesday the enemy played at us from the
Castle where ever we appeared, to hinder us in our making brest-workes for our
Ordnance or men: they played fiercely at the Church, where we had some with
long Guns which did much annoy them in the Castle, and killed diverse of their
Cattle: on Wednesday we played one of our Cannons at the wall and made about
six shot, but they with their Cannon brake the Carriage of our piece, so that
for that night we could do no more, but first we battered the wall so on the
outside that we much weakened it, and beat a hole four or five yards square.
The same day Wednesday Aug. 28. there came to our assistance Colonel Purefoys
Regiment of horse, and Col. Boswels Regiment of foot, and with them three great
Guns, one carrying 36 pound Bullet, the other two somewhat less, 3
Morter-pieces for Grenades. On Thursday Aug. 29. they played with their Cannon
from the Castle to prevent our planting our great pieces. On Friday Aug. 30.
the enemy fired diverse houses stood near the Castle, as they had done the day
before, the fire burning fiercely both the days, about 30 houses burnt, and
the enemy still endeavoring to fire more; All this day they played fiercely
both with Cannon and Muskets from the castle at any house or place where they
saw any man appear, and we likewise played at them; we about noone got our
great piece planted, and played 8 or 9 times that afternoon, and had our
Cannoneere slain with a Drake-bullet at night, and another piece we played with
at the same time, but the enemy with a bullet of twelve pound weight brake one
of the wheels, and slightly hurt the cannoneer. The enemy made about 40
cannon-shot that day, and some thousands of musket shot, yet killed but that
one man, and hurt another in the thumb, we not seasing to ply them with small
shot as often as they appeared, and with cannon all the afternoon; about noone
we played the great morter-piece five times with a Granado of above 100 pound
weight, twice it fell amongst them, and tore up the earth and brake as we could
desire it, but what effect it wrought we know not, not having any intelligence
from them. On Friday night we wrought to plant the rest of the pieces, the
enemy preventing us the opportunity of doing it by day; We keep them in
continual work, that so they may spend their Ammunition, which yet they do
freely, as if they hoped we should not lie there long, they pleasing themselves
with Pr. Ruperts coming to their aid. I have been the more particular, that
you may know we have need of your prayers, and that God may have the praises in
our great preservation, so many shot being made and so few slain, or hurt, and
that we may account it a mercy worth praising God for if ever we be master of
it, which though we must not look for suddenly, yet we need not doubt of if we
may have time (though undoubtedly there are not many stronger holds in
England,) our soldiers, through Gods mercy being supported with courage, as
ever I saw them in any service.

Saturday Aug. 31. we took two poor tatered rogues without hose or shoe put
over the castle-wall early in the morning with intelligence to Pr. Rupert, Col.
Green the valiant Tailor Governor of the castle having writ a Letter in a
shred of Paper close written and cut in the midst, that if but one of them
had been taken we had not known what to have made of it, but having both the
pieces I shall acquaint you with the substance of the Letter, which was, that
our strength was not above 800 horse and 700 foot that did beleaguer them: that
we had drayned three garrisons for them, and that the Townsmen were now left
to keep our garrisons, he therefore desired the Prince to come with, or send
1500 Horse and 500 Dragoones between Northampton and Banbury, and bids him not
doubt of taking our Guns, and routing our Foot, and then he might be revenged
on Northampton for the other design he missed on before. By these two
messengers being examined a part we find that their chief Cannoneere was
slain on Friday, and another of theirs wounded in the eye with a
musket-bullet, not like to live; that one of our Grenades did fire in the
castle, but did not much hurt.

On Sabbath day September. 1. we planted our three great Guns, having wrought all
the night before, we played two of them all the morning on the meddow-side, the
third the great Demi-cannon not being ready until toward night, we shot through
the Castle but made but a small breach yet, but such as it was, and another
Granadoe firing in the Castle made them lamentably skreeke out, and some women
would have come forth but we would not suffer them; they shot from the
Castle fiercely at our Work, but yet have done us no hurt, we hope in time we
shall cool their courage, though we hear the Gentlemen and Officers have
taken the Sacrament not to give or take quarter, and some bitter malignant
Papists are there that will do their utmost to keep it. The good Lord give us
courage; and patience to weight his leisure, and be content to stay for it
until he will give it us in mercy; Which is the desire of yours, etc.

Banbury, 2. September. 1644. What Is material you shall have as I can send it,

Vale.


FINIS.

