A Letter from the General meeting of Officers of the Army, and directed to the
Officers of the several Garrisons and Regiments of Soldiers both in Ireland,
Scotland, and England.
DEAR FRIENDS,
AFTER it pleased the Lord so wonderfully to appear for his people in owning
the poor endeavors of his servants as to the late Wars in Ireland and
Scotland, and by that Glorious victory he was pleased to give us at Worcester,
this Nation being restored to such an unexpected peaceable condition, It was
the expectation of those that feared the Lord, that some suitable returns would
have been made to the glory of God, the comfort of the godly, and the well
being of the People of this Commonwealth.

But hitherto it has been matter of sad lamentation, that the good things
hoped for, have not been brought forth amongst us; insomuch that the work of
the Lord has seemed to stand still, and all the instruments thereof have been
like men of no might, or like a woman in travel ready to faint for want of
strength to bring forth, whilst those that stand by are waiting for the birth;
Which Satan, the grand Enemy of God and his people, observing, has not been
wanting to stir up his instruments, to conceive new hopes, and by new designs
to endeavor the destroying of that interest the Lord has hitherto owned; and
to set up an opposite interest, which might reproach the glorious works of God,
and make the instruments whom he has used, and blessed, Offenders.

Whilst the consideration of these things lay sad upon our hearts, together
with the late miscariage of our Fleet, it pleased the Lord to put into the
heart of the General and the Officers now at the Headquarters being of, and
belonging to the Forces in Ireland and Scotland, as well as England, to seek
the Lord together, and to humble our selves at his seet, for those evils which
might cause him to withdraw his presence from us, and to manifest tokens of his
displeasure against us. And after several days waiting at the Throne of Grace,
we were generally convinced.

That our hearts have been looking after the things of this world, and our own
private affairs, more then the things of Jesus Christ and his People.

That we have been overtaken with a slothful spirit, and growing weary of the
work of the Lord, have been ready to say with Baruch. Woe is me now, for the
Lord has added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and I find no
rest, Jer. 45. 3.

That those that fear the Lord, both in the Army and elsewhere, have not in
this time of peace so improved their interest one in another as they ought, to
the edifying of each other in love, as the Churches did Act. 9. 31. ( Then had
the Churches rest throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria, and were
edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy
Ghost were multiplied.) But have been too apt by evil sirmisings, and
jealousies, to grieve the hearts, and weaken the hands of one another.

That the people of this Nation are subject to grievous oppressions through the
obstruction of Justice: and that the Lord might say to us, for whom he has
done such great things in England, as he did to his Vineyard Isa. 5. 7. And he
looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression, for Righteousness, but behold a
Cry.

That through the corruption of many in places of authority, some good men are
made to suffer for conscience sake and many bad men take encouragement in their
licentious principles, and profane practices, by reason whereof wickedness
does very much abound amongst us.

Upon all these and the like considerations, we have been strongly convinced,
that it is a duty very much incumbent upon us to awaken our selves, and by all
lawful ways and means to endeavor the procuring of these following things,
which have been promised by the Parliament, and, as we are informed, are under
their present consideration.

First, For the preventing the many inconveniences apparently arising from the
long continuance of the same persons in Supreme Authority, That there may be
successive Parliaments consisting of men faithful to the interest of the
Commonwealth; Men of truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness.

Secondly, That the Laws may be regulated in such sort, that what is good in
them may be maintained, and the corruptions, abuses, delays, vexations,
unnecessary travels and expenses, and whatsoever shall be found really burden
some and grievous to the people, may be taken away.

Thirdly, That liberty and protection may be given by a Law to all the truly
godly though of different judgments, to worship God peaceably, without
imposing upon, or molesting one another. And that no encouragement be thereby
given to such as are popish or profane in the exercise of their superstitious
forms, or licentious practices.

Fourthly, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ may be dispensed to all the people
of this Commonwealth, and those that labor faithfully in that work, receive
all due countenance and encouragement.

And having thus freely opened our hearts to you, we earnestly beg the
assistance of your prayers, (in which we trust you will be frequent and
fervent) that we may in all things demean our selves as becomes us. And what
the Lord shall set upon your hearts, by way of conviction either as to sin, or
duty, if you do communicate the same to us, we shall take it as a sign of your
acceptance of this our brotherly freedom toward you.

We shall now commend you to the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and remain your
most affectionate Friends and brethren.

James's, Westminster January 28. 1652. Signed in the name and by the
appointment of the General meeting of Officers of the Army Thom. Margetts.

January 29.
Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot Agent to the Army.

London printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold by him in Fleet-yard, and by
Thomas Brewster at the Three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard 1652.


