Sir POLITIC UNCASED, Or, a Sober ANSWER TO A JUGGLING PAMPHLET, Entitled, A
Letter Intercepted Printed for the Use and benefit of the Ingenuous Reader: In
which the two different Forms of Monarchy, and Popular Government, are briefly
Controverted.

The Commonwealth Party are advised not to buy this.

By N. D. Gent.

Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto.
By D. N. Gent.

London, Printed in the year 1660.

A plain Answer to a Juggling Pamphlet, Entitled, a Letter Intercepted, etc.
I Have heard of one that has made himself a Cuckold, -- that has picked his
own pocket, -- and it is possible, a man may Design upon himself, and Intercept
his own Letters. The Miscariage, I confess, is a little odd; where the Courted
party, -- the Contriver, -- and the Intercepter, are all One, and the same
Person. (The Plot is Borrowed from the Story of Narcissus;) but by what Enemy
both to the Author, and Reader, this Discourse is made Public, were an
Enquiry fitter for Authority, than a Private hand. Since so it is, let us make
the best of a bad Market: what the Composer has sold Cheap, -- We have Bought
Dear, and Both must Lose by the Bargain. Without further Prologue -- Here Is SIR
POLITIQVE himself, and we will take the measure of the man from his Titlepage.

A LETTER INTERCEPTED, -- Printed for the Use and Benefit of the Ingenuous
Reader -- in which the Two Different Forms of MONARCHY, and POPVLAR GOVERNMENT,
are briefly controverted. -- (The Commonwealth Party are advised not to Buy
this, by N. D. Gent.)

EX UNGUE LEONEM. The VOICE is JACOB'S, but the HANDS are ESAU'S. Popular
Arguments are of late become such a Drugg, the Author dares not own his
Inclination, for fear the Pamphlet should not off: but rather chooses, under the
color of a Philosophical Debate, to advance a Seditious Design; and instead of
delivering a sober Opinion, to excite a turbulent Faction. This will appear in
it is due place; but in the Front, 'twas not so proper to disclose himself. The
Title is but a more formal kind of Bo-peep, -- a cousenage of the Reader into a
Two*penny expense, upon a thing not worth Three*ha'-pence.

In the next page, you will find him more composed, and Magisterial. He
complements himself, -- Kisses his own Fair Hand, -- Promises us an Honest,
Plain, Rational Discourse, not clogged with Maxims, or Examples; -- and then he
falls to work upon the Question: --

Page 2.
Whether Monarchy, or the Popular form of Government, be in Reason, more Safe,
and Profitable for the People?]

Ibid.
He proceeds thence, to Distinguish Monarchy, into Absolute, and Mixed or
Regulated. (though, by his Favor, Mixed, implies a contradiction.)

Ibid.
The Absolute (he says) is absolutely Unlawful; and disconsonant both to the
Laws of God, and Nature, etc.]

If either One, or the Other: How comes it then, Ior. 27.
that God himself, styles NEBVCHADNEZZAR (the King of Babylon) HIS SERVANT: upon
the most express, and severe penalties imaginable, commanding an Obedience to
him? What means the Prophet David when he says, -- The Lord keep me from doing
that 1 Samuel 24.
thing unto my Master, THE LORDS ANOINTED? That Tyrants Life, which pursued
his, was then at his Mercy; and a Phanatique Counsel, at his Elbow, advising
him, to improve the Providential Opportunity of taking it away; (but our
Commonwealth's-men are wiser, possibly, and honester, than David.) This might
suffice; but He goes on, and so shall I, to bear him Company. --

It is against the Moral Law, (he tells us) for me to dispose of my own life;
since that Law, which Commands Page 2.
me, not to kill; does certainly require me* not to kill my self; and the Law of
Nature and Nations, does warrant any man to kill, rather than to be killed. But
He, that willingly and of Choice, lives under a Monarchy absolute, must, and
does submit all that he has, Life not excepted, to be at the will of the
Monarch, etc.]

What pains this worthy Gentleman takes, to prove himself as good a Statesman,
as he is a Casuist* Is not my Life as well exposed to any Government? since
wheresoever you place the Rule, the last appeal lies There; and There Is the
Power of Life, and Death, by the Agreement of all Nations. Again, An absolute
Monarch must be wicked, to destroy a Loyal Subject: and if a Limited, will be
so Impious too, their's no Relief, but Flight. The right of self preservation,
which our Author Intimates; concerns but Individuals, at Liberty; -- Grotius
his Dissociatam Multitudinem. There Every man is every Bodies enemy: but when
we come to find, that very end of safety, better secured by social Compact; and
by reducing all these several, and Disagreeing Particulars, under the Regiment
of some certain Laws; directing to the Common benefit of All: In this Case; we
part with our Original Right, for the obtaining of a Nobler Good; -- Society,
and Order, without which, there is no Peace. I might here mind our Prevaricating
Author, of a Morality which he forgets, and that is Obedience, Rebellion is a
Blacker Crime, than Murder; for it is That, and More; but I would first
convince him, that Killing is not always Murder, and that in many cases, a
man must rather choose to be Killed, than Kill. The Law strikes with the Sword
of Justice; and sure it is not Murder, by a Legal process, to destroy a
Malefactor. 'Twere That at least in me, to Kill the Judge, to prevent his
condemning me. (But I suppose, our Author speaks his Interest, rather than his
Opinion.) In fine, I cannot justify the Commission of a sin, to save my Life.
To draw my Sword against my Prince, although to save my self, in me, is
Treason: but if I lose my Life, by not opposing Him, it is He alone that is
Criminal, I am Innocent. Nor does the Choice alter the Case one jot. If I may
Obey an Absolute Monarch, I am as Free to choose One, where I am at Liberty to
choose the Form I would be governed by. It is the Ruler's part, not to Command
amiss, and it is the Subjects Duty to Obey; (modo nihil Imperet, Naturali Juri,
aut Divinis praeceptis Contrarium) and at the worst; refuse, without Resisting.

Page 3.
Nay, but our Author tells us; -- A Free People, that have it in their Choice
and Power (as Englund now) to do otherwise, and shall submit their Lives to the
will, and Dispose of an absolute Monarch, are most evidently thereby, in danger
of becoming guilty of Self-murder.]

Go thy ways N. D. for a profound Head piece! -- They are in more danger of
self-murder, in submitting to a Limited Monarch: that is, of Hanging
themselves, if the King should come. Was there ever a more exorbitant Tyrant
than Cromwell? Our Freemen were content enough with him. Come; -- out w' it,
Our modeller would speak, if he had a spoon, but the man is modest; I Will do it
for him. It Is This, he would be at.

That we are now at Liberty to choose our Government; and that the King would
play the Tyrant, should he return. If his own Head does not sit sure, he may
thank himself. I would fain learn, from whence we date our Freedom. Who has
ABSOLVED US, of our OATHS, and DVTIES of ALLEGIANCE? Did we not swear to the
Late King, and to his Heirs? And can a Government be Altered, but by Consent of
all the Parties to it? This is too much said, upon a Subject not properly my
Business. I Will proceed, and wait upon him to his next Enquiry; and that is
concerning Regulated Monarchy; but so Embroyled, it is infinitely harder to
Understand, than to confute. Of Regulated Monarchies, Ours here in England is
beholden to him, he likes That best, and gives his Reason, Thus. -- The
Excellency of that Monarchy, WAS, that the Monarch Page 3.
without his Counsel could do no considerable thing.]

By his fair Leave, the Excellency of the GOVERNMENT, he would have said: for
it is the Imperfection of the Monarchy. But why WAS? Is it not, de Jure, still
the same?

Ibid.
He prosecutes this Trayn of Errors, yet with more; All things were to be done
in conjunction with his Counsel; either that Grand one, his Parliament,
consisting of Nobles, and Commons; or his Lesser Counsel, consisting of Nobles
chiefly, etc.]

Our Author, I perceive, is willing to confound Counsel, and Authority:
Whereas, to represent, is one thing; it is another thing to Judge. It is the
Counsell's duty to propose, and Advise, according to their Reason, but still it
is the Monarch's part to Act according to his own: without that Freedom, the
Prince is bound to Act in many Cases against his Conscience; and his Assistants
are become his Governors. Not to insist upon the Gentleman's mistake, in
asserting All things to be done in conjunction with his Counsel. This is too
evident, to need a refutation. He spends his Two next Pages, in dilating upon
the Desire of Absolute Page 4.
Power in the Monarch; and the Reserves, or Acquisitions of the People; where
he Dashes the Kings Prerogative, and the Privileges of Parliament, the One
against the Other. Whereas the King has some Prerogatives without a
Parliament, but the Parliament has not so much as any Being, without the King:
(he being an essential of it.)

To pass over his False-fires, I shall come now to his main strength: And thus
it runs --

Page 5.
The Monarch cannot Rationally be thought to have other Business, or Study,
than to confirm, and establish the Monarchy to himself.

To this: First, He Is Entitled to the Government: (That, pro concesso) Next;
he is Entrusted, in Order to the Public Welfare, to Uphold it; and That, not
only in the Form, but to Himself: 'Twere to Betray his Trust, should he do
Less.

As to the Appetite of Rule, which (as our Popular Champion will have it)
transports the Monarch, into a dangerous elevation above the People* -- That
Restless impotency, is much more Hazzardous, in any other Government, than in
that of Monarchy. For, the Monarch's upper most already: and rationally,
Ambition seeks rather to Raise it self Above all Others, than when it is at that
Height, still to exceed it self. It Is but a Glorious Envy, which aspires till
it be highest, and there determines.

As there is less temptation from without, so must the inclination, be much
calmer. Greatness is native, and familiar to the Monarch: or; in case any
eagerness of Spirit should enstame him; It spends self upon his Neighbors
liberties, rather than upon his Peoples: and it is extent of Empire abroad, not
enlargement of Prerogative at home* he covets.

This is not to exempt the Person of a Prince, from the srailties of a Man* he
may be vicious. But that too with less mischief to the Public than to
Himself. He has no private Ayms, but what proceed from Principles nearer
allied to Kindness, then to Malice.

Now, to examine the likely Incidences to popular Government, and to proceed
upon his Postulatum, that in all men there is an in bred appetency of Power.
That granted, what can we expect from Persons of mean Fortunes, and extraction,
(invested with a title to Dominion) but Bondage, and Oppression? The short is,
there are many men, -- earnestly intent upon the same end; spurred on by keen
and craving Desires, to make themselves Rich, Great; and these design to raise
their Fortunes, and Reputations upon the Public stock of blood and treasure.
At last, when they have skrewed themselves up to that pitch of Power, by force,
and craft, where divine providence, by birth, had placed the single Person: --
when after a sharp, long, and chargeable contest, they have brought us within
view but of the counterfeit of what we quietly enjoyed before: Ready to seize
the sum of their own wishes; and the dear-purchas'd Fruit of all their Labors:
-- they find that point, which supports Sovereignty, too narrow for them all;
-- too large for any one of them; -- and, as they climbed together, so they
fall; -- crushed by those Hands, and Principles that raised them. We need not
look far Back for instances, what has obstructed our long-look'd-for
Settlement, but Competitours for a personal rule; even among the
Salus-populi-men themselves? It Is nobler at the worst, to yield our selves a
prey to a single Lion, than to a Herd of Wolves: and that is the Difference,
upon experiment, betwixt the tyranny of one, and of a hundred? ( -- old Oliver,
and the Rump.) Methinks it is a strange Confidence, to Argue for a Cause,
confuted by the loss of so many Lives and Millions. For these twelve years
last past, we have been Slaves to Tyrants; Divided, in design to supplant one
another, but still united, to destroy the Nation, under the gay amusement of a
Free State. But I grow tedious.

The next thing I take notice of, is very remarkable, Page 6:
(i. e.) Our Author's in the right -- he says that From the Sovereignty, there
lies no appeal. But then he follows; that where a People will be ruled by a
King, they must give that King absolute Power to Govern.]

No need of that sure neither, -- the Sovereignty is in the King, though in a
Limited Monarchy: which, so attemper'd; as that the People may not Rule in any
Case, nor the King, (singly by himself) in All; secures all Interests. I must
fix one note here, before I pass.

Page 7.
Although our Author tells us, that Absolute Monarchy is Unlawful; and
Regulated, Dangerous: nevertheless, he rather advises the former, than the
latter; -- That, which he terms Disconsonant to the Laws of God, than the
Other, which he pronounces only Dangerous, Nota.
as related to the civil Good, and Utility of the People.

This is the Method of the whole Party; they decry, first, the Form it self, as
being too Tyrannical; yet they condemn, the Limited of Insufficience, as to the
Exercise of Government; and the Absolute, of Exorbitancy, as to the end of it.
One has too much Liberty, the Other, too Little. What is it they offer in
Exchange? a Free State; -- of a Model, ten times more Arbitrary, and
Pernicious. When they have spent their Powder upon the Government; (for it is
but Powder) their Shot is still directed to the Person. Hinc ille Lacrymae. How
have they courted the General, (whose Honesty, is as Invincible as his courage)
to Accept of what these Paper-Kites so much disclaim against? Our Grave,
Philosophising Monsieur, he makes one too, and tells us, -- that Providence
has cast the Lot upon the Peoples Ibid.
side, and the Monarch has lost; if the people will exclude him. --

Alas Good man! the Congregation's Holy, every one of them -- Precious Beagles!
to ascribe that to Providence, which they owe to Perjury, and Sacrilege.
Where Is your Prescription? where is your Title? Enform the People, by what Power
they are Absolved from all their ties of Conscience, Honor, Thankfulness, and
Piety. Show them the Laws their Fathers Purchased with their Bloods. Preach to
them out of Magna Charta. There Is the Foundation of the Peoples Freedoms. But
Ibid.
Sir I ask you pardon; The King's a Woolf you say, and all the abjuring Saints
are Lambs, I warrant ye. But by your leave once more; you are absolutely of
Opinion then, not to admit the King by any manner of means? -- Indeed you
should do well, not to Anticipate the Parliament, it spoils the project, to
play the Tyrant, while you argue for the People. Pray let the King come in, if
the next Parliament pleases. --

I must be now a little serious; for your next Paragraph Ibid.
has a spice of Conscience ^^^ (the word I mean) you would persuade the world,
that if the King comes in; it is neither Faith, nor Honor, nor Humanity, nor all
together, can tie up his Revenge. (None so bold as blind Bayard; does it hit
you or not?) It would become you now to tell the People, where ere he brake his
Faith; Nay, I Will content my self, if you will show me, where ever your
Phanatiques kept an Oath, or Promise, if they might gain (the least) by
Breaking of it. The Conversation of the Person you inveigh against, is beyond
all Exception, Honorable: and it is in vain to misenform, against an evident and
contrary assurance. Many of those very men that sought against him, will
witness for him: both for his Courage, and his Clemency. His Prudence, and his
Piety, are manifest, in This: that in despite of all Distresses, and
Temptations, he stands Firm, to his Temper, and to his Conscience. A Better
Friend, there lives not; nor a Better Nature. And this is He, at last, our
Guilty Pamphleter bestows his Gall upon. I am no stickler for Prerogative; my
Patience, will hold out till the next Session: but to see Majesty Invaded by a
Private Hand, -- the people Poisoned, by the same Instruments that destroyed
the Prince, -- all I can say, is, we are tame Fools, to suffer it. But though
his passion may be Troublesome, our Author gives us some Diversion in his
Argument, and (Kinder still) he proves best company at last. Kingly Government,
if not absolute, (he says) is Page 8.
Lame; If absolute, -- Destructive to the people. Very good: Help the Defect,
(if that be all) of the One: or at least, do not Impose upon us, in another
shape, the possible Mischiefs of the Other -- Pray what is the Difference, as to
our Security; the Supreme Authority under a Popular Form, or the same power
under a Monarchique? You Will have your Popular Assembly, the Judge
Unquestionable of all Expediences, and Dangers: why not a Single person as
well? You say, He may abuse Ibid.
that power; and I say* so may They. For instance, suppose they judge it fit to
change the very Form, what Hinders them? or if they rather choose, to entayl the
Government upon their own Families, and to perpetuate themselves, what Remedy?
It any, they are not Absolute: if none, we are worse Here, than Before. The King
cannot Betray the People's Trust; these may.

Page 9.
What signifies your telling us, that the King absolute, is not bound to the
Laws he shall make? and, by and by, -- that contrary to the Monarchy, this,
(meaning Ibid.
Democracy) makes not any one Law, to which every individual person in the
Assembly, is not subject? (the whole Assembly indeed, as it is the Sovereign
power, is unquestionable, you say.) It Is not the Persons, but the Power, we are
to consider, Conjunctim, they are as litttle subject as the single Tyrant; and
possibly, they will never dis-joyn, they that can make what Laws they please,
will doubtless make this one of the number, -- that their own Members shall be
only tryable by their Peers: and by that device, they make themselves both
Parties and Judges.

To grant more than is needful; -- be it -- that in a State of Quiet, and
Universal liberty, such a Form might be admitted, as our Contriver thrusts upon
us; but to attempt to force a Government, that excludes nineteen parts of
twenty of the people, from the exercise of it; and this, upon a Nation
pre-engaged by Oath, and (by a sad experience) interessed against it. -- How
practicable, or how prudent, such a Proposal may appear to others, I cannot
say: To me, it wears the Face of a Design, promoted by a factious, guilty
Party, to sacrifice the Nation, to their private interests, and despayres.

And yet such is the charity of our Author, he reckons Ibid.
all the miscarriages of these late years in Government, but as foul way upon a
Journey: and bids us not conclude against our Inn at Night because the Passage
was dirty. (This is according to his wonted tenderness.)

Now to my Phansy, it looks rather thus. We have been hitherto misled; our very
Guides have robbed us, and yet they bid us follow them still, they will bring us
into Paradise at last, -- whither they will carry us, we know not; -- wee're in
the Briars at present: -- we know the way home again; -- what have we then to
do, but to return?

P. 10.
Our Authors little Reasonings concerning Trade, are trivial; I shall refer him
to the Merchants for his Answer. They are the fittest Judges in the Case. They
have tried war, and peace, Monarchy, and Popular Government; let them say which
they like best. -- His Pen begins to run a little muddy; and what I do not
understand, I Am not obliged to answer. Something he talks of Peace abroad, and
of the Motives to it; which he pronounces to be Advantage; and no Body denies
it.

P. 11.
This does not hinder, -- because the Reasons of the Peace betwixt the Crowns
of France and Spain, might properly result from a Particular Convenience of
State betwixt them; that therefore the effects of that Agreement cannot referr
to Us. They Are more at Leisure now: nay there is a high necessity incumbent upon
them, to send abroad those Forces, which otherwise would be both Expensive, and
Dangerous, at Home, (not to press other arguments, of themselves obvious, to
hasten our Composure, even for that very Cause; that they are Agreed.)

I presume not to direct, as our Imperious Commonwealths-man does; but as one
Private Person, I pretend to Reason the Opinions of another, submitting still
my Judgment to any Legal Determination, or Rational Conviction.

Touching the King of Spain's Design to Propagate the Romish Ibid.
Religion; -- we are the securer for that very desigu, if we unite upon the
Basis of the English Law: The mere Antiperistasis preferves us: whereas, If we
compel that Person, who by divine Assignment, and Civil Right, is our
undoubted Sovereign; to employ Foreign Succors to recover his Dominions; It
may be feared, (and it is but Reason) that Spain will Article for some
concessions, in Favor of the Catholics, more than otherwise would, possibly,
be granted to them: where the Fault lies, in case of this extremity, let the
People Judge. --

'Blesse us, -- what a Fit of Piety has taken our Friend, now of a sudden! he
calls in the Ministers, for his Compurgators, and desires them to declare --
what Government. P. 12.
(he will feed their Flocks in the mean while.) Indeed, these Pulpit-Politiques
are not amiss. The Priests shall tell us what Government fits their
Reformation. Pray Sir, let me help you out; -- a Closs upon the Covenant, does
your Business: it is but to tell the people, that in the Holy Tongue, KING,
signifies COMMONWEALTH, and the work is done.

The Gentleman, begins now to Rumble, and Talk Idle; and, in effect, he is
drawing home. But first he recommends Page 12.
the Nurcery and Education of his Brat-project, even unto any Kind and Powerful
hand that will promote it. From Ibid. Page 13.
hence he passes into a Quaint Resemblance of the state of the Nation, to a man
in a Feavour, and the People in Gross, to a Restive Horse with a Galled Back:
and so commiting the issue to the Lord; the man Departs.

His thoughts, and mine do not agree; what ere the matter is. His Conceit is
this, The Nation's mad; and Prompted by false appetite, covets things
Mischievous; (that is, Monarchy) the Wise and Charitable Physician, (that is,
the Commonwealths-man,) he forces upon it what he knows to be more proper for
the Cure, (and this is a Free State) -- Now here is our difference.

I Am of opinion, that the Physicians are mad; the Nation sober, we have tried
their Physic, for some dozen years together; and every day we are worse then
other upon it; although we find upon Experiment, that they prescribe us
Poison, instead of Remedies, and that they are but Mountebanks; they Live by
Killing us. Our Former Diet agreed much better with our Constitution, we have
no way left, but to fall to That again.

But to conclude; -- his conceit of a Jadish People, with a Galled Back, That Is
his Masterpiece. He tells us, it will neither suffer a Rider, nor a Dressing,
till it be overcome by force, and then a Child may up, and Ride it.

These are somewhat broad signs. Now by your favor, Sir, the Faults not in
the Horse; but rather in the Rider, and the Saddle; the Nation has been Ridden
these 12. years together, at Switch and Spur, and in a Commonwealth-Saddle;
That must needs pinch the Back of a Monarchical people. -- Nor will it be yet
so Tame, as you imagine, Change but the SADDLE, and the RIDER, and you shall
see the Nation will do well, without a Horsleech.

FINIS.

