A LETTER FROM The Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
LONDON; In answer to a Letter from the L. General, and the Armies seizing and
carrying away great sums of money from Weavers Hall, and Goldsmiths Hall; and
an account what that money was for.

AND A fight at Sea, certain ships lying before Portsmouth, and the last
remarkable News from the Earl of Warwick.

ALSO A Warrant from the Lord General, to the Aldermen and Deputies of the
respective Wards within the City of London; and the Proceedings thereupon.

London: Printed for A. R. 1648.

A Letter from his Excellency the Lord General to the Lord Mayor of London.
My Lord,
I Have given Order to Col. Dean and some others, to seize the Treasuries in
Goldsmiths-Hall and Weavers-Hall, that by the said Moneys I may be enabled to
pay quarters whilst we lie hereabouts; having also Ordered Receipts and
Assurance to be given to the Treasurers of the said moneys, that they should be
fully reimburst for the said sums out of the Assessements of the City due to
the Army, and out of other Assessements thereunto belonging; and indeed,
although I am unwilling to take these strict courses, yet having sent so often
to you for the said Arreares, and desired sums of money to be advanced by you,
far short of the sums due from you, yet I have been delayed and denied, to the
hazard of the Army, and the prejudice of others in the Suburbs upon whom they
are quartered; whereof I thought fit to send some Forces into the City to
quarter there, until I may be satisfied the Arreares due unto the Army: and if
this seem strange onto you, it is no less then that our Forces have been
Ordered to do by the Parliament, in the several Counties of the Kingdom where
Assessement have not been paid, and there to continue until they have been
paid: And here give me leave to tell you, the Counties of the Kingdom have
born Free Quarter, and that in a great measure, for want of your paying your
Arreares equally with them; wherefore these ways, if they dislike you, yet
they are merely long of your selves, and are of as great regret to me and to
the Army, as to your selves, we wishing not only the good and prosperity of
your City, but that things may be so carried toward you, as may give you no
cause of jealousy: I thought fit to let you know, That if you shall take a
speedy course to supply us with 40000. l. forthwith, according to my former
desire, and provide speedily what also is in Arrear, I shall not only cause
the moneys in the Treasuries to be not made use of, but leave them to be
disposed of as of right they might, and also cause my Forces to be withdrawn
from being in any sort troublesome or chargeable to the City; And let the world
(judge whether this be not just and equal dealing with you. I rest, My Lord,

Westminster, 8 Dec. 1648. Your affectionate Servant, T. FAIRFAX.

His Excellencies Order for seizing the public Treasuries in Goldsmiths,
Weavers and Haberdashers Hall.
Whereas the Arreares of the City to the Army being near an Hundred thousand
pounds, and upon the security of them, there being but Forty thousand demanded
by us, to be advanced by the Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Council for the
present supply of the Army, yet the same has been now for a week delayed, and
at last refused: And whereas to avoid the grievance of Free Quarter, and
inconveniency of quartering Soldiers at private men's houses, the Forces in
these Suburbs having for the week past ^n kept in void houses, Inns, and the
like, without trouble to private Families, or Free-quartering to any; and that
the extreme necessity of the Forces before Pontefract may be supplied, you or
any one or more of you are hereby required, with the assistance of such Forces
as shall be needful, to march into the City of London, and there to seize upon
all such sums of Money as you shall find in the public Treasury at
Goldsmiths-Hall, Haberdashers-Hall, and Weavers-Hall, or in any of them, giving
to the Keepers of the said Treasuries respectively, receipts under your or one
of your hands for the Sums, or number and proportion of Bags so seized; All
which Sums you or any one of you are to cause forthwith to be conveyed into
Blackfryers, there to be disposed of for the end aforesaid, as shall be further
directed by his Excellency the Lord General; and you are to acquaint the
Treasurers or keepers of the said Treasuries, that they repairing to morrow or
on Monday next to the Headquarters, shall have assurance of their payment of
the respective sums so seized, out of the Arreares of the City, or the
Assessements of the Army.

The Lord Generals Warrant sent to the City to provide Beds and Bedding.
WHereas (for the avoiding the inconveniences of quartering Soldiers upon
private men's houses) it is intended and desired, that the Army shall be lodged
in great and void houses, while it shall continue in and about the City of
London; to the end therefore the Soldiery may be accommodated to lodge in such
houses, which at this season of the year, without convenient bedding, they
cannot bear; These are therefore to will and require you, that upon receipt
hereof you do forthwith cause the proportion of (...) hundred and (...) feather
beds, or flock beds, with one bolster, one pair of coarse sheets, and two
blankets, or one blank t and one coverlet for each bed, sufficient for the
lodging of two men in a bed, to be equally apportioned upon the several
Divisions within your Ward, and upon the sev (...) Householders that are of
ability to furnish the same within the said several Divisions; and the said
beds, with the appurtenances aforesaid, to be brought to (...) by Saturday next
at noone, being the ninth of this instant December, and there to be delivered
unto the hands and custody of (...) for the supply of the Regiment under the
Command of Colonel (...) and the said (...) (...) is to give receipt or
receipts under his hand for what bedding he shall receive, thereupon expressing
from what Ward or Divisions the same do come in, and upon the removal of the
Army, or the said Regiment, from about the City, such bedding shall be restored
to the respective Inhabitants, Divisions or Wards from which it was had; and
there shall be care taken to prevent, as much as may be, any spoil or
imbezilment thereof; and in such case, after such delivery, any part thereof
shall be lost or spoiled, so as to be made useless, reasonable satisfaction
shall be given or assigned for the same out of the Treasury of the Army. And
you are on the same day by eight of the clock in the morning, to return to my
self, or my Secretary, in writing under your hand, an account of your
proceeding upon this Warrant, with a list of the proportions charged upon the
several divisions of your Ward, and upon the several householders in each
Division, that if any failer be, it may be known where it rests. Hereof you are
not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your peril: and this shall be
your Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at my Quarter in Westminster, the seventh day of
December, 1648. To the Alderman of the Ward of (...)

Saturday the 9. of this instant December, Colonel Deanes Regiment of foot,
and some Troops of horse marched within the Walls of the City of London,
brought 4. Drakes within Ludgate, and placed them in Blackfryers, put some
Companies in Martins Ludgate Church, and others in Paul's Church; a party of
Colonel Hewsons Regiment, and others went to Weavers-Hall (in Bassingshaw
street, where upon search they found about thirty thousand pounds, which
(according to Orders) the soldiers carried in 5. Carts to White Hall; It was
at the time of the seizure alleged by some which stood by, that all, or at
least part thereof was Orphans money, to which it was replied, that if it
appeared to be so, it should be returned without loss: But what should Orphans
money do in Coffers out of Guild Hall, is the Chamber of London not large
enough to hold it? this was money which was raised above 6. Months since for
supplying such as formerly lent out of zeal to the cause, and confidence of
the public faith such Sums as they could then spare, hoping to have it again
in a short space, and for that they might appear on record not to be
Malignants of that time; and what through want of that they then parted with,
the loss of trade, and paying of taxations with other men, they became
necessitous, and unable to maintain their own Families; which miseries of
theirs being made known after long and tedious attendance, some course at last
was taken to pay those off whose debt was not above ten pounds, of which this
money was part, and as yet undestributed to those which dearly wanted the same,
but knew not where to find it, so that by this discovery the parties to whom
this money was due, (and could not receive it) will not only in a very short
time enjoy that which is their due, but the other design for which that was
kept, so much weakened, if not wholly prevented.

A Common Council was called and this 9. day of December. held in Guild Hall, at
which there was a large debate about his Excellencies Letter to the Lord Mayor
before recited, and the Warrants for furnishing the soldiers with bedding: a
Letter was last agreed upon to be sent back again to the Lord General,
acquainting his Excellency, that they have made choice of a Committee to
satisfy his Lordship and such Officers as he shall appoint concerning the
money was taken out of Weavers-Hall, and to declare their willingness to obey
the Warrant for accommodating the soldiers with necessaries and bedding.

Yesterday after a private fast kept in the House, the Commons adjoined till
Tuesday next, but there came Letters from the Navy thus.

Sir,
The Lord Admiral (according to the late Orders of Parliament) sent a squadron
of Ships toward the Isle of Wight, some whereof do now ride about Portsmouth,
we hear the King is removed to Hurst Castle, which was so suddenly done, a
Glasier had not time to mend the windows before his coming thither; neither
(as we hear) is he to stay long there, but will shortly be removed to
Windsore: most of the revolted Ships are come in to us, we attend the rest at
Helver sluice: there was a great fight last week between some Irish Pirates and
3. Ships which came from the Canaries, the Irish took one, and sunk another; I
remain your friend

From aboard December. 6. 1648. T. M.


FINIS.

