A LETTER From A MEMBER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, To a Gentleman now at London,
touching the New Solemn LEAGUE and COVENANT.

OXFORD, Printed by H. Hall. An. Dom. 1644.

A Letter from a Member of the House of Commons, to a Gentleman now at London,
touching the New Solemn League and Covenant.
SIR,
It Is no wonder, but common experience, that the division of King and People
(so destructive to public peace and private happiness) draws with it the
breach of all relations: for when the foundation of public order is
subverted, we may soon expect the fractions of families and friends, (bonds
sacred in all ages) the late strangeness between us arising from our
different ways in the present distractions is one instance, which yet may not
withhold me from expostulating your taking the new Covenant, and preaching with
much vehemence (as is affirmed) the necessity of taking it by others. I shall
not look back on the causes of your engagement to that party, who have thus
advanced themselves; though I conceive the clearenesse of your judgment must
discern the unsoundnesse of these grounds that were laid for taking up Arms
against the King, and that you could not secure your conscience in partaking
with such black designs by principles, which constitute the King only
passive in government, and that he must sic as an idle Spectator of the
disorders and miseries of his Subjects, and think his account well discharged
toward God and Man, if he leave all to the Counsels of others, without his
own deliberation or trial of them by Scripture or reason. Surely the charge
of a Prince is not so weighty, if this be the greatest burden, nor his final
account in this respect so terrible, neither were the prayers for him so
necessary in respect of his people depending on him, as the Scriptures assure
us, if their good or evil were so little concerned in him. Your former
resolutions not to conform to humane Laws in any thing, wherein your
conscience was unsatisfied of divine authority, extended not to enforce others
to repeal laws by the sword, which they are persuaded were a sinful
disobedience to God and his Vicegerent. And unless your passions have darkened
your judgment, and made you impatient of contradiction, though from your own
or the most undeniable principles of divine truth, I may hope you will satisfy
or ease a doubting conscience, in this your Covenant. And first upon view of
the Title, being a solemn League and Covenant amongst Subjects without, as
much as a royal assent: or authority of law, without which all agreements to
alter religion or government are a known high treason. I find most men though
far engaged on your party, stand amazed, how they can defend religion by
treason, how they can break the supreme laws of government, without breach
of duty to God, fidelity to his Vicegerent, or peace of conscience. I have not
yet found any answer to this, unless it be expected that our president of
violence may as well justify, as cause another.

But it seems the end of this Covenant is the foundation of its legality, and
being for Reformation and defense of religion, etc. The Laws of civil
government must give place to it. A Position which I still accounted, till of
late, the peculiar of the Jesuits; and if that be the support of your Covenant,
the affinity it has with that sect, should at least render it suspected, if
not hated by your self: but the opposition it has to the practice of
Christians in all ages, the scandal it gives to the cause of religion, by
shaking all governments where it is entertained, make it odious to Christians,
that desire the union of truth and peace.

The name of Reformation and defense of religion has seldom been wanting to
any rebellion, the foulness of which crime seek to lurk under the most
plausible pretenses. And as I plainly see by this Covenant not reformation or
defense but alteration and introduction is avowed, and there is no invasion or
violence, but may usurp the title of defense, if alteration of laws and
government by force against the mind of the Prince, be such. Therefore the
penners of this Covenant warily omitted laws, out of the particulars to be
defended by this Covenant, in the Title, which must cast shame on the front so
contradictory to them.

The next end, the honor and happiness of the King, whether sincerely
intended, I appeal to your self, or any that take this Covenant, whether the
maine Scope be not to take away his just authority, divest him of power, and
place all, or the principal parts of Majesty in others, without whom he shall
be disabled to resist any rebel or enemy: if this be a truth, as I think it is
known to the most common understanding, you will stand guilty to God, as well of
gross hypocrisy, as disobedience; and I should gladly know what honor is
meant the King, that shall be reduced to such a condition. I believe few
foreign Princes will understand such an estate of much honor, and they will
quickly find it of less power; and that the peace and safety of the three
Kingdoms will be kept by this Covenant, when the Sovereign power, the band of
union is dissolved, I may rather dream then believe.

To the preamble, that makes the danger of Religion, the motive of this
Covenant, whosoever looks on the progress of the present distractions, and by
what degrees they rose, that sees the credit and employment that Sectaries and
Schismatiques of all sorts have among those Covenanters, that such, as in the
cleerest and most unsuspected times were branded for disturbance of Church and
State, now undertook to declare them enemies to Religion, that have been the
Champions of Gods cause against the common enemies of our Religion, (if Papists
are so intended by this Covenant) that sees by whom Armies have been raised,
Towns taken, the King pursued, will find plots against the true Religion and
the professors thereof, under the mask of defending it, and all the miseries
raised in the three Kingdoms, to take their original from these Covenanters,
who, while they violently acted their designs in England and Scotland,
defrauded Ireland of necessary releife, and cast it into that infelicity it so
long groaned under.

The commendable practice of those Kingdoms in former times, and the example
of Gods people in other Nations, is of weight, if the allegation were of
credit, and the times had been pointed out, that we might have been informed
of their certainety and authority. I have heard of the unholy league in France
to resist Henry the 4 of that Kingdom, if he submitted not to the Roman
religion: if that be one of your examples, as it has great likeness to your
present Covenant, (and difference of true and false Religion makes not a
difference in the legality of Arms against the Prince, which are rebelliously
borne, if against him or his laws, and you well know there is no law to alter
Religion against the will of the King.) I shall not deny you the truth, but
leave you the strength of that example.

There was an attempt of the Papists, near the death of Queen Elizabeth, to
oppose any successor not of their Religion: I remember but these that are so
well like your case, and I believe there are none nearer in this or other
kingdoms.

The first article, to endeavor the preservation of the reformed religion, in
the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Disipline, and Government against
our common enemies, carries such doubtful sense, as I may justly suspect it,
rather a snare to entangle, then a rule to guide the Conscience. It is not
only rash presumption, but irreligious profaneness, to swear preservation
of unknown precepts: and the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of
the Church of Scotland are known to few that take this Oath, who with an
implicit faith swear to preserve they know not what, perhaps that, which if
they knew, they would rather desire to destroy. I think your self would not
swear to preserve the Doctrines, etc. of all the reformed Churches, and I am
sure, no law binds me to preserve this, and Christian duty forbids me to
swear defense of that which I know not, which may be sinful in it self, and
must needs be sin to him who swears in ignorance, so much more to them that
enforce it on others, and whereof God will one day require an account. And
they, who formerly found the Canons of the late Convocation so full of
exception, have herein justified them, and given all the offense they took at
these Canons, and much more, in the injustice of this oath; being of things
unknown, of an other Church and Nation, of Discipline and Government which are
of humane institution, and perhaps opposite to our own fundamental laws,
dishonorable to our Church and Nation, and destructive to both; a matter of
worse consequence, then the late etc. and your self, if I hear truly, are
much departed from your former resolutions, that thought subscription should be
forborne to some tender consciences, and now judge there is no pretense for
avoiding this Covenant, that has not only doubtfullnes but apparent danger of
perjury and presumption, and in comparison whereof the most rigid of the former
Canons was a most innocent and tender Injunction.

I inquire not why Scotland may not be reformed, why England and Ireland must,
but why in doctrine, I pray demand of these that have acknowledged the
soundness of it by their oaths and preachinge and when that famous and
conscientious Doctor Reynolds and others at Hampton Court moved a reformation
of some things in Ceremony and Clergy, they openly professed their
unquestionable assent to the Doctrine of the Church of England in the thirty
nine Articles, and the oath of Supremacy (which how observed in this Covenant
undertaken without the King, and to be performed without respect to him, is
seen of all.) I may more then suspect these new reformers are not of our
Church, that deny her Doctrine, and that these men, who had no conscience in
their former subscriptions, will not express any in their reformation. The
rule they pretend is the word of God, with an addition of the example of the
best reformed Churches. Doubtless the example of other Churches is not the
touchstone whereby we must try doctrine or worship, it seems the word of God
will not do the work these men intend, they will herein allow the
superstructure of traditions; and they are contented to exclude the example of
the primitive Church, (a name venerable to all Christians, and in all true
Christian Churches;) and to reform their mother, the Church of England, by
other Churches, where neither the word of God, nor primitive practice covince
her of error, is far from the duty of sons and Charity of Christians. I
conceive the word [best reformed] will beget a Schism, rather then close the
breach of the reformed Churches, and while we express our esteem of some, in
such language, as upbrayds others with defects, we provoke their just complaint
against us. There is not any reformed Church that I have heard of that accounts
it self worse then other in their confessions of doctrine, and therefore some
will be undoubtedly scandalized by this expression and a faction raised among
our selves, while every man takes, [best reformed,] in his own sense; and the
consideration being of so great variety of circumstances, when some that are
accounted best in government may be worst in doctrine, and the contrary, it
must prove unquietness to the conscience, and an uneven rule to reform the
Church. We may depend on Gods promise, that he will dwell among us, that have
one faith, one baptism, one Lord Jesus Christ who died for us, and if in
matters of form and circumstances of government we differ, and yet retain the
unity of spirit in the bond of peace, as is our duty, we may be assured he will
still delight to do so, rather then in the causeles rents for indifferent
things. But the use these men make of scripture is for phrase, not for proof.

2. For the extirpation of Popery, Superstition, Herisie, Schism, and
profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound doctrine, and
the power of godliness, you have an universal consent, that it is fit to be
done by every one as he has the warrant of a lawful calling to it. But why
Prelacy, etc. that has the authority of longest continuance, and practice in
the first and best ages of the Church of God, of legal establishment in this
Kingdom, that has been eminent for the Learning, Piety, Zeal, and
Martyrdom of many in these Orders, and from whom we must in a great part by
Gods great blessing, acknowledge the happy reformation in this Church, may
justly be demanded, if any among us, as many do, conceive this government as
necessary to continue, as you do to be destroyed, will you not put as great a
burden upon their conscience in pressing it in this Covenant, as you imagine
upon your own by the continuance of this government? surely more, for your
Covenant in this very point is a breach of duty, being a plain and wilful
resistance of the higher powers, and not only contempt, but subversion of Laws.

Sir, I have no intent to travel into controversies, but the Lord was and will
be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms, if this government continue;
and I am sure a Covenant to take it away against the mind of the Prince, while
it thus stands by law, is rebellion against God and his Vicegerent.

3. It might move any man to just indignation that reads your ostentations of
loyalty, when the very act you do and the forms of publishing these words
denounce the contrary. I am sure the King is not consulted with, no reservation
made of his consent in this very thing that is thus imposed on all his
Subjects, and the World that is called to witness will testify, loyalty is
spoken, treason acted. And I appeal to your self, with what ingenuity the
defense of the Kings Person is professed, the words are [defend the Kings
Majesty's Person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
religion etc.] I pray observe the evasions of this profession, they will defend
the Kings Person in defense etc. that is the defense of Religion is the defense
of his Person and Authority, so as if they defend religion etc. in heir own
senses, they defend him, though they destroy him. Or if that evasion be not
subtle enough, they have another, they will defend him etc. whiles he
preserves and defends religion; both which equivocations these words admit, no
plain meaning at all. I assure my self it was fitted purposely to avoid the
profession of loyalty without condition, or ambiguity, and by these cautelous
shifts, it is evident they intend no subjection to any Christian Prince who is
not of their own opinions.

For the discovery of such as have divided the King and his people, or one of
the Kingdoms from another, all the world has discovered these Covenanters to
be the men, who have made so many Declarations against the King, divided him
and his people, denying his just authority, and forbidding his Subjects bounden
duty to him, and if any man has been a cause that the King has denied any
justice or right to his people, I shall admit that part of this covenant into
my private practice, to discover him, but I shall never think him Incendiary,
Malignant, or evil Instrument, that shall assist him for preservation of his
person and rights, and defend him against any that shall demand his consent to
any thing by Arms, as is now done by this Covenant. For the Kingdoms, they
are in themselves naturally and legally divided; what divisions of affections
have been wrought among the people, has proceeded from the wayward passions
of these men, that against all order nature and duty make an independent
Kingdom, their native Country subject to the Subjects of another Kingdom, nay
two Kingdoms to one, in whose laws they have no interest, destroy their own
laws to receive another, and cut asunder the band of all union, the power of
the Prince, in all his Kingdoms. And herein I would gladly know, what the
fault is of doing contrary to this Covenant, for certainly the crime as well
as the punishment, is a stranger to law; and what conscience is left in these
men, that punish without law, God will one day reveal; in the mean time, I
see that law is no longer practiced by them, then it serves private purposes.

4 It was lately our happiness, that we enjoyed the blessing of peace between
these Kingdoms, which our progenitors wanted, and posterity may; we may
refer that peace, by Gods blessing, to our union under one King: but when we
take away that band, and place the Sovereignty in divided bodies, we may not
long rest secure of that former happiness; and the alteration of this first
article from the first edition, is an evil omen which leaves out the
observance of the late treaty, and of justice to be done upon the opposers,
which makes me think, they already lay plots for retaining these unhappy
divisions, which were formerly so hereditary to these Nations.

5. The resolution of constancy in this evil cause, as it makes the cure of
the present miseries of this nation; so these men they were desperate, who bind
themselves against their King and nation, and disavow all repentance and
remorse of conscience, for the evil they have done.

Sir, Having thus expressed my sense of your Covenant, I shall, on occasion of
it, digress to give you the state of the present business, accounted a
controversy so great, as nothing but the sword is likely to decide, which I
think a mind free from prejudice and passion would soon resolve.

I am confident your self never doubted, that there was a necessity of the
Kings personal consent, called the royal assent, to every act of Parliament.
And that it could not bind without such assent; that the King had the same
power over his Towns; Castles, Ships, and Subjects, sitting a Parliament, as
when it sat not; that it is high treason in any Members of Parliament to make
war upon the King, or his Subjects, or to take his Towns, or any part of his
Dominions, as well sitting a Parliament, as not. If any of this be denied, the
evidence of time, as far as practice has proof, besides the testimony of
law, as far as it is known, makes it unquestionable. From hence I proceed,
that if the two Houses of Parliament, declare a thing necessary for the
Kingdom, being a fact, and therefore only probable, and wherein they are
subject to error, the Kings dissent shall not give a power unto the Houses, to
make any ordinance without him to bind the people. This is a truth so
undoubted, that he holds his Crown but ad placitum of the Houses, if they have
such a power. These premises I pray take into your thoughts, and satisfy your
friends, what you have against any of them; and if nothing, then I am sure the
taking, fortifying and keeping Towns against the King, commanding the Militia
without him, and raising Arms to defend the Ordinances made for it, are
illegal and high treason without contradiction: That Arms were raised for
defense of these Ordinances before they were invaded, I cannot think any man
doubts, and therefore some will justify these Arms for taking Delinquents,
that is, such as assisted the King upon his command. I never yet heard any
deny, that these Delinquents were pardonable, if faulty, and to be prosecuted
for the King only, and that no Court in which capacity is the Lords House, or
House of Commons, sends for any, can use any other power for their
apprehension, or suppressing opposition, but the ordinary officers of law and
justice, and in case of their want, or weakness, they have recourse only to
the royal power, resident in the person of the King. And I never knew yet a
denial of this truth; and it is as apparent, that the Members of Parliament
sitting at Westminster having thus raised these Armies, and expelled all from
their counsels that concur not with them, that admit foreign counsels,
instead of the royal assent, that require a Covenant from their Members to
repeal established laws, and in case of refusal expel them, that awe their
Members with Armies, Tumults, and Threats, that have called in strangers to
invade the Kingdom, are thereby no longer a Parliament, having taken away all
freedom from it, and the King to come to it, but on their conditions; and
hence you see where to refer the effusion of so much Christian blood, and all
other miseries of this nation.

Sir, Though your confidence be great in the pretended Houses, yet weigh
impartially their proceedings, and you will see the condition they have put
themselves in, is not of Subjects, and consequently are not their Kings
Parliament, which they must be, or none at all.

I conclude with your Covenant, that our great and crying sins have brought
this evil upon us, that our present calamity is a scourge from Heaven, and yet
these wicked hands by whom God afflictes a people, escape not his revenge of
their treachery, cruelty and injustice. We have enjoyed the free use of our
religion, the land was covered with knowledge as the waters covered the sea,
foreign Churches rejoiced in beholding our order, constancy and increase and
all eminent gifts, yet we despise our Church, cast off the guides thereof as
Antichristian, heap to our selves multitudes of Ignorant Teachers, please our
selves best with these that take pleasure in despising dominion, and speaking
evil of dignities; calumnies, disgraces and libells against those that were
set over us, are cheifely affected by us; these were the seeds of the present
rebellion by which God visits these and our other sins upon us: for aversion
of whose wrath we must all confess our own, and the sins of our nation, and
by timely repentance and sincere reformation of life, turn and cry mightily
unto the Lord, that he will hear, and forgive, and heal the land.

FINIS.

