A LETTER FROM An Eminent Person in the Northern ARMY: How Sunday night, March
5. 1647. A Party of Horse and Foot came to the walls of Carlisle, and having
ladders, entered the Castle, broke open the Jail, wounded the Governor, let
out the prisoners, And retreated into SCOTLAND.

WITH The proceedings of the Parliament in SCOTLAND.

ALSO A Letter concerning the Lord Inchequin

March 13. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 164^. 1647

The Copy of a LETTER FROM An eminent Officer at YORK, Dated March 11. 1647.
Honored Sir.
I Received yours and thank you, and make bold once again, because I find no
contradiction to trouble you with the sending the enclosed for Cap. Wisdom, who
desires to present his service to you.

Affairs here go on peaceably and silently, the work of Disbanding in these
Northern Counties being finished, except only one Company of Foot in
Westmerland, which had also been done before now, with the rest, but that the
money unsigned for their supernumeraries, fell short.

Further Orders are lately sent again for the speedy disbanding of them also,
which will suddenly be effected.

The works about Skipton Castle in Craven are appointed to be demolished, of
which the Country thereabouts are generally glad, in regard it has been so ill
a neighbor to them in the time of war, and are thinking, instead of
demolishing the works only, to demolish the Castle also.

The remaining Forces of these parts, appointed to stand, are also formed
Officers appointed, and Troops, and Companies closed according to directions
to that purpose: And they are now upon their mustering, and nothing but
quietness, as yet, appears in these parts:

What the late business in Westmerland and Cumberland, will amount to, we
cannot yet perfectly discern, but for ought I see, it carries a very suspicious
countenance, being upon this juncture of Disbanding: A party of Horse from
hence will be sent to discover more perfectly the business, something more we
understand of it, for last night we were informed by a good hand out of
Cumberland, that Sir Philip Musgrave, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale are in
Scotland, and that it is reported they have Commission for the raising of
Forces in these Northern parts, the Troop of Horse that lately marched through
Westmerland, are informed to consist of 140. Some understanding men inform,
that there is an intention of in-Garrisoning Carlisle and Barwick within 14
days by that party.

Sunday night last, there came above 70 Horsemen with a small number of Foot,
to the walls of Carlisle and having ladders entered the Castle, and broake open
the Goal, released the Troopers and other prisoners, wounded the Jailer and
retreated toward Scotland.

I have sent you two Letters which I received from Barwick and Cork.

Signed by an eminent Officer of the Northern Army.
York March 11. 1647
THE Copy of a Letter from Cork in Ireland.
Sir,
I Lately writ a large Letter unto you with others, from your friends in
Bandon, enclosed and sent by one Mr. Parsons a servant to major general
Jepson, which I hope are delivered you.

In that Letter I acquainted you, that my Lord had marched into the County of
Limrick and Kerye and distroyed all he came at, dis-inabling them to aid the
enemy: his men and horse being wearied out, he came home, but stayed not above
fourteen days before he was forced out by wants, to look for a livelihood for
his men another way, he marched to Caker Castle that was in some distress and
releived it. That night being ready to lie down to sleep, he had intelligence
that my Lord Taffe and others would be that night at Carrick, and some boats
laden to go from Clomell to Waterford: My Lord presently made ready, and could
at present get but 300 Horse, with those he went himself in person, and gave
order for the rest of the Horse and Foot to follow him, he came before day to
Carick, and with those few Troopers got over the Wale, took both the Town,
Castle and the boat, but my Lord Taffe was not there. In the boat was good
pillage. And my Lord broke two swords to preserve it, but could not from the
Horse and Foot.

After my Lord had put in a Governor and settled a Garrison, he marched to
Calien and took the Town and two Castles there with the loss of a Captain
and ten Soldiers which they paid dear for, for my Lord put above 300 of them
to the sword.

My Lord still lies there and has destroyed home to the City of Kilkenny, and
has and will destroy all in both the Counties of Tipporary, and Kilkenny,
which was the nursery and grainary of the Rebels, All this affords but a
present livelihood for the men that are abroad with my Lord, and many of them
daily dye with cold, for want of clothing. The Irish know our wants as well as
we our selves, and are making ready all the force they can against us, and if
we be not speedily supplied with men, money, clothes, arms and ammunition I
fear the whole Province will be lost, if we lose it, the getting of our town
again, will cost more then the getting of the whole Province would now, for
they are at present so much distracted, that if they saw but considerable
supply come to us, the better sort would leave the Kingdom and run away, my
Lord has written several Letters to Collonell Jones to meet him with his
Forces and has received answer from him, but the great raines has so swolen
the Rivers that they cannot as yet meet, but I hope they will shortly, and then
I hope you shall hear that Kilkenny is taken and some others places.

Your humble servant, Tho. Dowrich.
Cork 20 Feb. 1647.
The Copy of a Letter from a Gentleman in Barwick.
Sir,
YOurs I received and do return thanks, I cannot enlarge my self for matter
of news as yet, out of Scotland, only that the Parliament began last Thursday,
nothing as yet done, the Earl of Stamford set out of this Town for Edinburgh
last Monday, and Mr. Bryan Stapleton this morning, things as yet continue in
their infancy, and very great hopes of an happy accommodation, Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, Sir Charles Lucas, Sir Lewis Dives with some others that served the
King in these Wars, as I am informed lie lurking in a place called Preston
Pannes about eight miles from Edinburgh, expecting God knows what. No news as
yet appears from the Parliament at Edinburgh, but it is thought that a short
time will produce much (God send good) and then you may expect to hear at
large, from

Barwick March the 8. 1647. Your real friend, RA. THORNEY.

FINIS,

