A LETTER OF High consequence, Principally concerning the indamaging of this
our Kingdom of England, subversion of Religion, and many more Papisticall
divisions compiled, and directed to Colonel Lunsford scattered in the Church
of Saint Paul, and since come to public view.

As also certain Articles whereby the said Lunsford is convinced of high
Treason, both to the King, State, and House of Parliament.

Printed in the year 1642.

A Letter of high consequence, principally concerning the indammaging of this
our Kingdom of England, subversion of Religion, and many more Papisticall
divisions, compiled and directed to Colonel Lunsford, scattered in the Church
of Saint Paul, and since come to public view.
Renowned Sir,
We are generally joyful beyond expression, to hear of the honor His
Majesty has been pleased to confer upon your so well deserving self,
though we must confess we are no less sorrowful for the unexpected commotion
of that ungoverned Commonalty which have been the occasion of suppressing your
power, the which by the guidance and careful diligence of your severity and
austere demeanor, might have been a great furtherance to our present designs,
which nevertheless, although extenuated and lessened by this present
hinderance of losing that prerogative and place of honor of being Lieutenant
of the Tower, we make no question but the luster of knighthood which his
Majesty has been pleased to transplant since upon you, will be a means to
extol and strengthen your authority, to the ayding and assisting of our poor
brethren there with you: of which we shall not only be mindful, but also by
our indulgent and vigilant indevours be ready to grant and employ our
furtherance in whatsoever you shallbe pleased upon serious confederation to put
in practice for their relief and establishing of the Catholic faith and
supremacy of the Church of Rome; let me entreat you in the behalf of all the
rest of our wellwishers, to be diligent in the prosecution of your intended
enterprise, and to make as much expedition in the same as may possibly be
conceived, unless the perspicuosity of our more curious than wary enemies pry
into the secrets of our intentions through our too much tediousness and
slackenesse in the performance of this our so necessary undertaking. Privacy
will be likewise expedient, and a special care ought to be had in electing
such as you may impose trust in: you know our enemies, therefore I need not
specify them; as for our friends, we have a faulkon, and pepper is very dear
to us, (you understand me): you may draw together some forces of our friends
under pretense against us, his Majestyes favor toward you will be sufficient
to blind the intellect of the people whose eyes are already dimmed with the
veil of ignorance. Make your self as strong as you may: as or the charges, we
will be correspondent in defraying of them: if any scurrilous spirits should
scandalize you and endeavor to defame your person with opprobrious speeches,
of a suspicion of some illegal intents, you may soon help that, for you are
not without those on your side who will be more ready to assist, then you to
command, and are of sufficient ability to resist a mean power, yea a greater
then a sudden commotion or a tumultuous rabble can proidve against you: as for
what shall be wanting in you, shall be made good by our endeavors, and what
you begin we will end.

As for the present, we have been lately scattered, by reason of a sudden
approach of the Scots upon us, so that we have lost some of our Officers, and
some thousand soldiers. Captain Denis Carley dyed volorously, and Captain
Thurlongking with Lieutenant Matchet, whose names with us shall be eternized
for ever, who chose rather to dye valiantly in the defense of the Church of
Rome, then to yield themselves prisoners to the Heretic Scots; I will cease
to speak further of them, whom we daily lament: We are now gathering up our
scattered forces, and make no question but to be of ability to give them
battle speedily: Our eyes are upon you in behalf of brethren, we know there
is no want of valor, power, wisdom, assistance, or whatsoever may be
available for the design in you or your friends; be valiant for the truth
then: in so doing, you shall joy us, deliver our brethren, and prove your self
an everlasting, real and constant friend to the Church of Rome.

G. Sartwell, Redmond,
your friends, E. T. W. S. M. O.
join.

Articles of high consequence against Colonel Lunsford, late Lieutenant of the
Tower.
1 THat he has trecherously conspired against this City of London, to subvert
the same, and endeavored to plant the ordnance in the Tower against it,
diverse laborers being found there transporting Powder, and other Ammunition
to the Bulwark, and high Tower. 2 That he has labored to alienate the
Parliament from the King, speaking invective words, and scandalous aspersions
against them, and by this means to make them become odious unto his Majesty. 3
That he has endeavored to subvert the fundamental laws of the Kingdom, to
the utter demolition of the State. 4 That he has studied with great sedulity
to advance the Sea of Rome, and to supplant the pure sanctity of the
Protestant Religion. 5 That he has introduced many Popish innovations and
Idolatrous superstitions into our Church, laboring to bring schismatic
divisions and Heretical opinions amongst the people. 6 That he has endeavored
to maintain the Episcopal Hierarchy and prelaticall Primacie, opposing the
determinations of the Parliament. 7 That he has gathered a regiment of horse
being all Papisticall adherents, with an intent if that they cannot obtain the
fruition of their so devilish intentions, to innovate the Popish Religion,
that then to force it in hostile manner, and thereupon have linked themselves
in the Irish Covenant.
FINIS.

