A LETTER From the Fleet, with a DIVRNAL Account of the Military affairs
between the English and the Dutch, From Friday the 3d. of June, till Thursday
the 9th. of June.

RELATING The taking and firing many of the Dutch since the late fight, the
blocking up Flushing and other harbors, the landing of men at the T^xel and in
Zealand, and the opposition made by the Hollanders.

London, Printed by J. C.

From our Fleet riding upon the coast of Holland came as follows.
SIR,
THe signal victory which the Lord has been pleased to give over our Enemies,
I hope will raise up the hearts of all Gods people in England to praise him,
not only in words, but in deed and truth; and I wish that it may be recorded
amongst the chief of those mercies that God has bestowed upon his Saints, that
all posterities to come may give him honor, and that the present age may not
be so stupid as they have been, let them take notice of, and keep in perpetual
memory those which the Lord has wrought even in our days; and likewise be
assured that he will go forward with his work until he has perfected the
same, notwithstanding all the Treasons, Plots, or Conspirtions of men; God has
taught us notable Lessons of this already, of which I shall only mind you of
one or two and proceed to Intelligence.

The very day that the Treaty began at Vxbridg, that same day we lost a strong
garrison, but the very day that we brake off Treating with the Kings party, a
strong Castle was delivered up unto us. And that very day that a Letter came to
the late Parliament from the Dutch with some overtures of peace, one of the
principal ships belonging to this Commonwealth was consumed by fire.

A Diurnall Account of some proceedings between the English, and the Dutch,
from Friday the third of June, till Thursday the seventh of June, 1653.
THe third of June in the evening. The Enemy making all the sail he could to
get homewards, the ablest of our ships which suffered least damage in the two
days sight; made after the Dutch fleet, and did good execution upon them for
many Leagues pursuit and some ships of ours that had received prejudice in
their Masts and Tackling, together with our wounded men (which were about 236)
and about 1130 prisoners which we had taken of he Dutch) were sent away for the
English shore. Genesis Blake, and Genesis Monk Anchered this night between Ost^nd
and the Wellnigs.

The names of the ships which came in with Genesis Blake were these.
The Essex Frigot, Hampshire Frigot, The William, The Eagle, The Culpeper, The
the^th whelpe, The Phenex, The Storke, The Hopeful Luke, The Employment, The
Prosperous, The John and Abigale, The Swan.
June the forth. In the morning Inteligence was brought that Tromp was near
Flankenburgh, and it was thought he would make way toward Flushing which is
one of the best Ports they have. This day we had brought into us several Dutch
vessels, and Scouts were sent forth several ways for making a further
discovery of such of the Dutch as had escaped away in the fight into any of
their Ports, as likewise to catch up any of their Merchantmen that should be
sliping into any of their Harbors, and it was resolved by a Council of War
that our maine Fleet should follow the pursuit of Tromp and such as had escaped
with him, and so toward Flushing.

June the fifth. We were again within sight of some of the Enemy, but he crept
away by the Sholes and Sands where we could not come at them; something like
the Highlanders in Scotland who save themselves by their inaccessable holds.

This day a view was taken of many hundred sick and wounded soldiers soldiers
of the Dutch who were taken by our fleet, and care taken for setting them on
shore in their own Country, and they being in pain and misery are likely to
give their other Country men the truest information after their vapouring
against Dover, which (though it savoured rather of impudent insolency then of
valor, yet) was printed a huge and mighty victory at the Hague.

June 6. Our Fleet came near the Texel, and the sick and wounded soldiers of
the Dutch before mentioned, were put into long boats and other vessels (upon
their parole) and lanced out to go on shore, and making forth toward the land,
they (being descried from the Castle) the Dutch let fly many great guns at
their own men, and upon this they received a great allarum into the Country,
about which time the main body of our fleet appeared within sight, at which the
people cried out they were betrayed and undone, and in such an amazement they
continued.

The next day we did not only take many of their ships near their own
harbors, but fired others, and sent many hundred great shot on shore amongst
them, and now judge you whether we are not even with them for their attempt
upon Dover; and we are upon another design to find them work at home, not
doubting but by the next you will hear that some of their strong holds are in
our possession.

This day some of our Scouts brought in two Dutch vessels, and diverse water
ships and others came from the English coasts with supplies of such
necessaries, as we stood in need of they also bring us news that many supplies
are coming after which will be very serviceable for carrying on of the work in
hand.

The greatest part of the Dutch fleet which esaped is is gotten into the
harbor at Flushing, where we hope to keep them from doing further mischief
upon the seas against England.

A Letter from Dover, dated, the 9th. of June.
SIR,
THese three or four days together many ships which came out of the River of
Thames, passed this way toward our fleet which is on the Coast of Holland,
wherein went a considerable number of soldiers, and a great quantity of
powder, shot, and Ammunition, as likewise a great number of Shovels, Spades,
Pick-axes, and other necessaries for land service, we hear also that the like
supplies are going to them from several other parts belonging to this
Commonwealth. Some wounded soldiers are gone up to London and others remain
here under cure, the State having taken special care for sending down able
Chyrurgians into these parts to cure such as stand in need of their help.

This day arrived a vessel here which landed several persons, which say that
they have been with our fleet, and one of them reports that Genesis Blake and Genesis
Monk, are before Flushing, and be heard at his coming away that some of our men
were landed in a kind of a small Island near Flushing in Zealand, where no horse
could get to them, and if we could keep it, it would conduce very much to the
effectual blocking up of that City, and securing their shipping in the harbor.
Some of our fleet is sent out several ways to discover the preparations and
motion of the enemy, and we hear they are in a great distraction among
themselves, and Trump whom not long since carried a Broom in his Topmast to
sweep the Seas, dares not so much as sweep his door, scarce daring to show his
head. The Officers in general accuse one another, and the common people blame
not only them but their high and mighty Hogen Mogens. I trust the Lord will
put a sudden period to these wars, to the praise of his great Name, and the
good of his servants that desire to walk uprightly before him, which is the
prayer of

Your assured friend, T. Leigh.
9 June, 1653.
FINIS.

