A LETTER FROM A NOBLEMAN Of this Kingdom, (Now in Arms for his King and
Country) To the Lord SAY, seriously inviting him to his Allegiance.

printer's or publisher's device

July 18th LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

A Letter from a Noble man of this Kingdom (now in Arms for his King and
Country) to the Lord Say, seriously inviting him to his Allegiance.
BEcause I know (my Lord) you are wise, and capable of conviction, and for that
you are noble by extraction, whereunto I also pretend: I cannot doubt of your
kind acceptance of a Letter which shall accent Truth, and breathe Love: were
you a Plebeian, believe it and Phlegmatic, I would not spend either time or
paper to reduce you to a fond understanding. Deeply (Right Honorable) prudent
men err, and there is no such irremediable defection from Virtue and Religion,
as when a sapient head has occasionally slipped from truth; so unwilling is
humane nature to confess an error: Which to do, Divinity accounts it most
honorable, most truly Religious. Is it that specious pretense of Gods Cause
which led you on these 7 years into horrid Rebellion against your natural
Prince, meriting: better things at your hands, even by personal favors? Does
the Law seem to afford a chasme or riffe, wherein to hide the guilt without
immediate repentance inexpiable? Does it by any inversion seem to justify
your transactions? Or does (which is most probable) a sweet ambience of
supereminent liberty and command over your fellow Subjects, subjecting them to
despoticall and Arbitrary Votes, illaqueate your understanding? Verily Sir, one
of these three or all, must undeniably be granted to be ground, to every
prospective Epicle appear to be the foundation; whereupon, so unhappily
hitherto the artificial Babell you have raised, is laid. I desquire them
respectively I will examine them impartially. I am a Gent. a Christian, a
Protestant, a man qualified, even for an Ordinance of Parliament: Nay, truly to
speak, no less a lover of your natural endowments, then admiring your advised
wickedness. Pardon that biting truth, which your hodiernall perpetrations and
guilt has wrung from me, your amazed friend. Gods Cause can be concentred in
nothing, but in Religion. What offers our second Solomon has made for the
establish of the Soul of the world, need I tell you? Discipline is a shell, no
art can make it analogically comparate to dogmaticall truth, not adequate unto
it, no Scripture susceptible of such a stretch, that it can be justly asserted,
it is necessarily enjoined to be identicall in all polities: it is necessary,
but in spene may admit of alteration. It Is not that has made you burn with
zeal, we know you are of a more plausible conscience. How the seem of our Law
will statuminate, will justify you: I would you would discover, and send me,
and all Lawyers away with conviction. Has an English Prince a natural and
politic capacity inseparably joined? None denies it. Is it high Treason to
maintain, our Sovereign ought to be obeyed rather out of a respect unto His
politic capacity then His natural? Raise the means of the conscious speuers
they have signed it with their blood. Else may Rebellion be made a justifiable
trade, and His Majesty properly enstiled the King of Devils. These are not
(noble Lords) the adle issue of a melancholy brain, but subuxt with rights
reason, use it rightly,; and see your slips. Stawell was fined for his
Delinquence against the Parligment, for levying War against the King, he stands
indicted, strange contradictions no whimsey of virtually trasmitted power from
His Majesty unto His Subjects will vindicate that device from being rightly
honored with the title of the most absolute piece of senseless iniquity in
the world. Are you a fraid to trust the King? Greater security then an act of
Parliament, you can never have; fight on till doomsday: which I guess by the
Symtomes of maritime aspects to be approximant and ready to show her face. But
there is a sweet covenant, whose sanction must be regarded, as to eradication
of the hierarchy, which the King denies, because inconsistant with damnable
sacrilege, the main cause which makes scarlet gown men arch up their eyebrows
on Thanksgiving-days for Victories, for air, for the Echo of the vain rumurst
for shedding innocent blood, and deep depopulating England the late jem and
Ormusium of the universe; their is the knack of interest, and in that I fear,
your honor hopes to share: suspend a while your judgment in the covenants
seen, till it be defined, what scene it will bear, in malis promissis rescinde
fidem, is a gloden rule, excellent Aphorism. I tell you once more, our Law can
protect it self without a Sword. England will bleed her vital breath, and
never close her orifice of necessities, till our excellent Law be suffered to
inchannell it self rightly to the ocean of Honor. Who sees not with what
cables she is made to retain some vessels, and how easily she lets go the
other flat bottomed Barges of our unhappiness? How is he constrained to yelp
ruin to wisely qualified and religious how smoothly she utters Placentia to
the hellish Caterpillars of this our Isle? There is not the least shadow of Law
on your side, there must then be still behind, Execrable in Moral Policy, that
other presumption strongly fortified with vehement probability, since that your
Lordship and others has to long in gross, and wallowed in the Royal Bath of
Sovereignty. Is it possible a few transient hours of impety in this
Tabernacle, in this subterlunary habitation, can transport such a star of
humane reason beyond its due course? dares it encounter with Charles-Waine? and
unhinge Religion, Laws, make common Equity a foolery, do such actions as were
never exemplified, since this Island lost the name of Olbion. Must Religion
upon Machiavillian principles be collaterally respected, and premised, as
worthy some animadvertence, because she has a quality to harness high shoes
unto the carriages of Hell watraved aims? See, see, (thou great ingrosser of
Policy) those paths which conduct to thy future happiness our immediate
tranquillity, so humane, (for it is thy miseries thou do see) what opportunity
is. yet left by heavens indulgence unto thee, to return and: ingremiate thy
self with him, who will forgive thee: Whose Virtues, whose Religion has
startled Europe, and begot just obloqui upon our Nation, for abusing
Sovereignty, for subiecting Piety it self in abstruce to the whistle of
contemptible villainy. I burst with grief, what remedy? it is thy soul I love;
it is thy actions I abhor: which should I comprobate, that God, which for our
great sins has unchained Hels Bandogs these seven years elapsed last, would
expunge my name out of the Book of Life.

Be not (I conjure you) any longer so desperate an enemy to your own Eternity.

FINIS.

