A Letter from SCOTLAND, Giving a full and impartial Relation of the
scattering of those Forces risen against the Parliament; Being all taken
Prisoners by Lievtenant-Generall David Lesly, and now remaining in his hands at
Mercy. With a true Account of all those Officers of State removed which had a
hand in the late Engagement against England: With the Names of those placed in
their rooms by the Parliament of Scotland.
AS with you so with us divine dispensations are wonderful; albeit for a while
in the Lords manifold wisdom he is pleased to let men more unrighteous
persecute his own People, yet his anger is but for a moment; an earnest
whereof we in this poor Kingdom of Scotland have often tasted, and especially
now in the midst of many both fears and dangers, He has given us wherewith to
say, verily there is a God that judges the Earth.

This day Letters are come from the Generall-Lievtenant David Lesly out of the
North, showing us that by the good hand of Gods Providence upon our Forces of
the Parliament, the very considerable Forces of that rebellious late
insurrection are dissipated and scattered, and the Leaders thereof all taken,
and are at this time Prisoners at Mercy.

And that which fills up the measure of the Mercy, in all this there was not one
drop of blood spilt. I shall not for the present undertake to give you the
particulars, only a brief and short account: That is to say, in the General,
Pluskardy, Brother to the Earl of Seaforth, the Lord of Cromarcy, Master
Montroe of Lemlaire, and Collonell Fraser, having by their power drawn a very
considerable Body together, did thereby much encourage those of their Faction,
especially in that part of the Country, to join with them. But the
Lievtenant-Generall approaching toward them, the Lord struck them with such
fear and terror, that of themselves they mouldred away to nothing: Insomuch
that their Leaders were necessitated to secure themselves with their own
Followers at the next safe Passages; where they were all surprised by the
Lievtenant-Generall, and are all now (as I said before) his Prisoners at Mercy.
In this we behold a Morning Star appearing, which gives us hopes of a glorious
Rising-Sun, and yet we see more, and look upon this as an omen of Gods
displeasure, against all such troublers of his People: And for any others,
whatsoever they are, that shall threaten Invasion of this Kingdom, It is the
resolution both of Church and State to keep close to their Covenant, and never
to vary from their first principles, trust in that God with the issue, who has
owned them from the beginning, and has delivered them from the troubles of
their own People, bred in the bowels of their own Nation, will also deliver
them from the violence of others: Nay, I dare assure you they fear not their
fear.

No doubt but ye have heard of the pious and honorable Proceedings of our
present Parliament against the late Ingagers for the invading our Brethren of
England. I shall at this time give you but a short and brief account thereof.

A List of the Officers of State, and Lords of the Sessions put out of their
places by the Parliament of Scotland, for their being of the late unlawful
Engagement against England, and other points of Malignancy, with the Names of
these who are put in their rooms.
THe Earl of Crauford Treasurer, put out. A Commission for Treasurers
appointed; viz. The Marquess of Argyle, the Earl of Eglinton, the Earl of
Cassils, and the Lord Burly, and the Lord Chancellor supernumerary. Sir James
Curmichell Treasurer Deputy, put out. Lord Dury Clerk-Register, put out, and
Lord Warriston put in his place. M. Tho: Nicholson, made Advocate for the King.
Lord Orbiston Iustice-Clerke, put out and put in his room. Lanericke Secretary
put out, and Lothian Cassills put in his room.
The Lords of Sessions put out.
L. Habbertan, Halrony, Orberston, Inerpeffer, Newton, Lee, and put in their
rooms, L. Cesnocke, Brody, Ciberton, Sir James Hop, Sir William Grot, M. Alex:
Preston. M. Rob: M. Gill, and M. Rob: Bruce. The Earl of Clencarne as Justice
General, is put out. The Earl of Roxbrough Lord Privy-Seale, put out, and the
Earl of Sunderland put in his room.

What wants, you shall have by my next, for the Parliament is now at 10 a
clock at night, sitting, discussing them.

Our Commissioners, L. Libborton, Earl of Cassills, L. Brodu, M. Jaffry, M.
Rob: Bailey, and M. James Wood for the King.


