To a Gentleman, a Member of the Honorable House of Commons assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
Sir,
YOur Birth speaks you capable of honor, and reason; your profession, of
Piety and Religion; Your employment, and Interest, they furnish you with
occasion, and power of exercising those offices: which your quality, and
protestations oblige you to. My misfortune wants such a friend, and
necessitates me thus to seek him: having attempted all other modest, and
ordinary ways in vain. If you be that gallant man, be pleased to know, that I
have suffered above twenty months imprisonment; with what effect, either in
order to my subsistence or health, I forbear; for Sir, I intend only a sober
representation of my condition, and desires: no Libell, or Satyr,

As for my condition,

It is such, as will speedily, and certainly destroy me, I hope better things;
But if I be destinate to ruin, me thinks I might perish by some way more
worthy of a GENTLEMAN. then to languish and expire among Whores and Thieves. As
for my desires, My Petition speaks them: and I would not be much impertinent.
My Request (Sir) to you, is only that you will present this postscript-Petition
to the House, and but so far to favor it: as you feel your self in Honor
and Humanity concerned. If any man can object, and prove it, that I have ever
abused any Liberty, or Civility I have received; or that I have in the least
scruple receded, from what I believed just and honest, let me dye for it. If
not, I hope my sufferings may have expiated for my diversity of opinion.

I do presage, this paper will hear much of vanity and ostentation. In truth
I do not like any thing of singularity; but being reduced to this choice,
either to rot in a Goal, or thus to importune my liberty, having none other
way left me; This necessity (I hope) will justify and excuse the course I have
now taken.

It is possible, a providence may conveigh this trifle into some kinder hand
then I am yet acquainted with. If not, Facilis Jactura, It is but an Essay
lost; If otherwise, This letter is yours. So am I; both by obligation, and
purchase: If you be that kind soul, who will make me, mine own.

Newgate July 8. 1646. Sir, Your servant Roger L'estrange.
To the honorable the Commons assembled in Parliament. The Petition of Roger
L'estrange, Prisoner in Newgate
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioner has suffered a long, chargeable, and harsh confinement;
whereby he is exposed to a certain, and swift destruction, either by want,
sickness, or both: without a seasonable redress.

Wherefore he makes it his humble suite to this Honorable House, that he may
either upon his Parole, or security, enjoy such liberty: as Your Honors shall
judge proper, and necessary for his preservation, Your Petitioner standing
engaged, not to act, or advise any thing of prejudice, to the Parliament.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

