A LETTER FROM THE SYNOD OF ZELAND, TO THE COMMISSIONERS OF The General
Assembly of the Kirk of SCOTLAND: Written by them in Latin, and now faithfully
translated into English: EXPRESSING, 1. Their fellow-feeling of the present
condition of the Kirks of Ireland and England, and exciting us to the like. 2.
Their respects and affection to the Kirk of Scotland. 3. Their zeal to the
Reformation of the Kirk of England, in Government and Ceremonies, and to the
preservation of Religion there, Against the pride of Popery at this time. 4.
And their desire of Unity in Religion, and Uniformity of Kirk-government in his
Majesty's Dominions.


Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee,

Ps. 122.6. July 18. 1643.
Imprimatur.

JOHN WHITE.



First Printed at Edinburgh, and now reprinted at London for Edward Brewster,
and are to be sold on Fleet-bridge. 1643.

Right reverend, learned, and much honored,
THe anxiety and sorrow, arising from the lamentable condition of the Kirk in
Ireland, and troubled Estate of the Kirk in England, does so vex and torment
us, and the extreme danger to which they are brought is so great, and our
desire of their delivery so vehement, that if we would, yet we cannot
sufficiently express the same.

We acknowledge, that for our sins the Kirks are afflicted with these great
miseries, forasmuch as in this so great light of the Gospel, Pride,
Covetousness, Ambition, Drunkenness, Wantonness, filthy Lusts, and such like
pestilent evils, do no less abundantly spring up among us, then when we sat
in the darkness of Paganism and Popery: wherefore that which is written has
befallen us: I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage, I have
given the dearly beloved of my Soul into the hand of her enemies: with what
measure we have mete out unto the Lord, with the same he is again measuring
unto us.

We hear from all quarters, of the boasting and pride of Moab; of the
loftiness and arrogance of his heart; that skipping for joy, he glories, that
now the fatal day is come, and the fairest occasion that ever was, is now
offered to cut off such as they do hate with deadly hatred, and with one stroke
to overthrow the reformed Kirks, and to root them out together, that they be no
more. And verily, if we looked only to the arm of flesh, we might conceive
this their insolent boasting not to be without cause; for if they be able to
prevail over the Kirks of the flourishing and potent Kingdom of England, they
are hopeful without difficulty to overturn the Kirks of Scotland, as also to
bring easily the reformed Kirks of the Netherland^ to the same desolation; and
that there is no reformed Kirk in Europe which shall be able to withstand their
formidable power: yea, they shall with open throat swallow them all up as a
morsel of bread, feeding themselves upon these hopes, with great courage,
extreme endeavors, and united forces, they address themselves to this work.
So must also the reformed Kirks do, they must join their Counsels, courage,
and strength, that they may make the present pernicious blow aimed at them,
return upon the heads of the enemies; if herein they be deficient, such
shameful cowardice will be inexcusable to all posterity.

And whereas (much honored) we use this compellation by our Letters, we
earnestly entreat you, that ye take not this our dealing in ill part, as if we
took upon us to waken you out of a deep sleep (far be such arrogance and
rashness from us) there are extant to the world most evident testimonies of
your zeal for the reformed Religion. But the true cause of saluting you by
these our Letters, is, that we may approve by our suffrage your diligence and
zeal, and that we may pour out into your bosoms the fear of the doleful
event wherewith we are perplexed. And that we may declare our desire and
affection toward the Kirks of England, with which the Kirks within our bounds
are so united, that we judge if the Kirks of England perish, they cannot escape
ruin. Pardon therefore our freedom, in that we make bold thus to trouble you
with our Letters, if it may be called trouble.

We entreat your wisdoms, forasmuch as ye are joined to these afflicted Kirks
in neighborhood, and nearest bonds under the government of one King, who is
resolved to live and die in the reformed Religion, as in his public
Declarations plainly he has professed, that with all careful endeavors ye
aid them against the rage and fury of the factious and malignant.

And first, seeing the deplorable division between the Kings most Excellent
Majesty and his Parliament, is exceeding perilous and hurtful to the Kirks of
that Kingdom, that ye leave nothing unessayed for healing of that rent, by
prayer, supplications, intercessions, and all other lawful means.

Secondly, let it never come to pass, that these Kirks, deserted by you,
become a prey to Popish Forces, and be woefully torn by them. O how much blood
would be spilt! The times of Queen Mary would return, yea much more cruel
then these: no cruelty that savages could devise would be omitted, no sex would
be spared: keep not therefore your selves quiet in this difficil time, as if
from a high rock ye were beholding securely a tempest and present shipwreck:
Far, far be such a mind from you, as it is indeed; not like to Meroz whom the
Angel of the Lord accursed: Therefore make haste to help the Lord, to help the
Lord against the mighty. So shall ye oblige all the reformed Kirks of Europe
unto you.

Thirdly, so far as in you lies give all diligence, that the foresaid Kirks,
now freed of the Episcopal yoke, and purged from all the rites and dregs of
Antichrist, be not drawn back to the same bondage, neither by fraud nor force.
The Lord of his infinite goodness has bestowed this favor on you, and has
put it in the heart of the Kings most excellent Majesty, that he will not have
your necks pressed any longer with the yoke, or rather intolerable tyranny of
Episcopal government, (we heartily congratulate with you in this your
happiness.) But withal it is our desire, that ye lay your account, that if
the neighboring Kirks be drawn back to that yoke of bondage, (which God of
his mercy avert) your liberty will not be long sure: for the enemies of the
truth being strengthened by a new addition of forces, and increase of power,
they will uncessantly pursue you, that at last ye will yield, and of your own
accord take on that iron yoke, which, though by a slow, yet by a sure pace,
leads to utter destruction.

Ye ought therefore to strengthen and support the Kirks of England by your
whole power, and to exhort them, that they come never again under that
tyrannical yoke; but rather that they may stand courageously for the
maintenance of their liberty (yet so, that they fall not on the other extreme,
Anarchy, a more dangerous evil) yea, that they have not the least fellowship
with any idolatrous rites or ceremonies. The Christian tabernacle no less then
the Jewish ought to be built according to that pattern showed in the Mount of
the Scripture, so that there be not in the curtains thereof so much as a loop
or a tach, but according to the prescript of God the only Lawgiver.

Long experience has taught us, that there is in such rites a secret and
wonderful power to defile, if but the smallest part thereof be admitted, it
will not long continue so, but speedily, like a gangrene, it will begin to
spread, whilst at ^ast it corrupt the whole worship, having lost the simplicity
and purity of Christ's institution. What? were she not a foolish and mad woman,
who would adorn her self with ornaments borrowed from some vile harlot,
supposing thereby the better to please her husband? What filthier harlot is
there then the Romish strumpet, most accomplished in all sorts of spiritual
villainies, surpassing all the bounds of impudency? Let us never therefore be so
demented, as to account the worship of God, most pure by Christ's institution,
to be more pleasing unto God, when it is performed with ornaments borrowed from
the Romish Bordell. Let us think that the Lord cannot but be highly offended,
take away his holy Spirit, and depart far with the light of his grace, so soon
as men begin to be so mad; then he suffers them from day to day to sink
deeper in the dunghill of superstitious rites, wherein they delight, while at
last they be suffocated therein as it came to pass in the Papacy.

We confess indeed, that for things indifferent we like not to be
contentious, neither left we the Romish Kirk for these or such like things; but
for the denying of that only sacrifice of Christ in their Mass; for their
adoration of a breaden god and of Saints, for their exalting the Pope above
God, and for his tyranny; for their contempt and prohibition of the use of
Scripture; for justification by works, and hundreds more of that kind. If the
Romish Kirk had been tainted only with some smaller blemishes, or had been
defiled only with some indifferent rites; if for these we had departed from her
we might have been justly taxed as Scismaticks, yea, a generation of vipers,
which bursting through the mothers bowels, is not brought forth but by
particide.

But first having once departed for their accursed idolatry, and the Kirk being
purged, to return back again unto Popish rites, once cast out, appears
evidently to be extreme dangerous, by reason of the subtilty and restlesnesse
of Satan.

2. Whosoever cease not eagerly to press and to introduce these rites,
though they perceive all things to be turned up side down thereby, they make
manifest, that it is not for these ceremonies alone they stir up such troubles,
but that they do secretly project some other thing

3. As for such ceremonies and rites as have their origin all from minds
arrogant, and not contented with divine institution, and to which an opinion of
necessity is added, as if without these, holy things could not be decently gone
about, and the worship but coldly performed; truly we cannot see how such
ceremonies can be called indifferent.

Suffer never therefore (much honored brethren) so far as is in you, that
the English Kirks be forced to receive such ceremonies; but rather use all
means that they and ye in Kirk-government may be brought to as near agreement
as may be. Hence shall redound manifold and great utilitie. 1 The pure manner
of worship being preserved, the inestimable treasure of the purity of doctrine,
which is committed to us, shall be the better kept, and transmitted incorrupt
to Posterity. 2 If the Kirk be purged from all Popish leaven, she will be the
more comely in the eyes of her bridegroom, and will obtain the larger shower
of blessings; and, as a field purged of tares, shall be the more fruitful. 3.
This will exceedingly settle the Estate of your Kirks against the continual
Plots and Conspiracies of Papists; united Forces are strongest. The purity of
worship being established, your Kirks shall grow up together with the English in
a more sollid and durable concord. 4 This will cut short the Popish Emissaries
of all hope of coming speed by their crafty wiles. They perceive that the
reformed Kirks do extremely abhor their Idolatry: therefore they despair to
introduce the same wholly and together: but they essay to creep in by degrees.
They labor to persuade, that there is no danger, if with the singing of
Psalms, Organs be joined as a part of Divine worship: if for the simple and
ordinary habit of Ministers the Surplise be used: if with the Lords day, there
be celebrated also Festival days in memory of the Martyrs: If these things
shall prosper in their hands; then in place of a Table, ye shall have an
Altar; for sitting at Communion, kneeling: and if they have success herein,
then shall ye have Images, and the whole mask of Popery: with this hope they
uphold themselves, and of this hope they are to be cut short. 5 This also shall
constrain such of ours who are busied about Reconc^liation that is to say, who
labor to make up a Communion between day and night, darkness and light, to
relinquish their foolish undertaking.


And let not that move you which is pretended; that such ceremonies as kneeling
in the holy Supper, conduces much to stir up piety, and to avoid contempt:
that forewarning of the Apostle has taken deep impression in our hearts, That
such things have a show of wisdom in will worship and humility: but in effect
are of no worth. Such things have the appearance of wisdom, but not the
reality thereof. What? came not such a thought into our Saviors mind? Why
then sat he after the ordinary custom of the country? Why enjoined he not
kneeling? Next, what if some other should appoint for greater humility and
submission of mind, that we should come with sackcloth and ashes to the holy
Supper? Yea, if another should appoint, that we ought to come with ropes about
our necks, that by this sign they might openly declare their extreme
unworthiness, and that they had deserved death, as the servants of Benhaded
came unto the King of Israel? And in end, what shall be the end, if this door
shall once be opened? therefore we must not pass from the Primitive worship.

But wherefore then, may some say, do your selves pass from the Primitive
way? Why stand they in the French Kirks at the Lords Supper? Why sit ye in the
Netherlands? And why do ye not lean every where? The reformed Kirks have
their answer ready: When we come to eat and drink at Table, it is all one,
whether according to the custom of our country, we lean, sit, or stand; in
none of these gestures is Religious worship placed: but to receive meat
kneeling, is no where usual.

But that juggling enemy, who can transform himself into a thousand shapes,
after he has brought in kneeling, can remove a Table: for what has kneeling
to do with a Table? And having once removed a Table, can easily bring in an
Altar: and then at last persuade to offer there a sacrifice for the living, and
for the dead.

Neither need ye (Right reverend) to be afraid of them, who by their vile
lies and calumnies labor to stir up against you the hatred of your most
excellent King, as if ye were enemies to His Honor, and Royal Highness, or
envied His greater Honor and Glory: For the King out of His deep Wisdom
knows, that He has not any more loyal Subjects, then these who are devoted
to the reformed Religion: He knows that there is nothing can establish more
His Throne, that can enlarge His Royal Honor and Magnificence more, or can
better preserve His Royal Person, then if with His whole Power He defend the
reformed Religion, against all the adversaries thereof: For the Kings most
excellent Majesty knows, that such flatterers carry the show of good will,
but in effect are the most deadly enemies of His Honor. Let not therefore such
vain shadows of fear scare you, but go on constantly, and courageously in
helping the afflicted Kirks. God shall abundantly bless your endeavors, and
shall grant unto you that the whole Antichristian crew, in vain showing their
teeth, and opposing you, ye having obtained your desires, shall have large
matter of giving thanks to his divine Majesty.

As for us, both in public and private, in all the reformed Kirks throughout
the Netherlands, we pour forth our earnest desires to God, that at last he
would pity his afflicted Kirks, would calm their horrible tempests, and make
them flourish in truth, piety and peace, would remove all the impediments that
hinder so great happiness.

Farewell, right reverend and dearly beloved Brethren, and interpret to the
better part this our brotherly dealing, as flowing from our good affection.

FINIS.

