A LETTER FROM The Lord Major, Aldermen and Common Counsel of LONDON, To His
Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax.

WITH Another LETTER from His Excellency to the City, in Answer to the same.

Also two Orders and a Letter of the General and general Council of the Army,
For the discharging such Soldiers the Army, as formerly served in the KINGS
Army:

And for the apprehending of others to be tried by a Council of WAR, about the
late Distractions in the ARMY.

Novem. 25. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.



LONDON: Printed for Laurence Chapman, Novem. 27. 1647.

To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by
the Parliament of ENGLAND.
May it please your Excellency,
YOur Letter dated at Kingston the 19 instant, we received this day; and having
duly weighed the contents thereof, we cannot but as in the first place (with
all due thankfulness) acknowledge the great favor and respect unto this City,
for the tenderness and care had by your self and the Army, to preserve it from
the least damage or prejudice, and for other favors in the Letter intimated, Do
also express our hearty sorrow for your apprehension of Just Occasions and
great Provocations to have bin given by this city, which might have diverted
that your Honorable favor: And that the Arrears to the Army, or any thing else
from this City, have given occasion both of the coming and stay of the Army so
long about the same, as to oppress these parts, if not the undoing of some, as
is expressed in the Letter. And that Colonel Hewson with one thousand Foot
should be appointed to come as upon this day, to quarter in this City, and
within the Lines of Communication, in such places as he finds fittest, until
the service of Collection, and levy both of the Arrears, and penalties imposed
by Ordinance of Parliament be accomplished; Verily, we cannot but with sadness
of heart consider how this City (which has always showed it self upon all
occasions to its power, instrumental for the preservation of Parliament and
Kingdom) should now without president have been disturbed and disquieted by the
Soldiery, and what ill consequence it might produce to the Parliament, City,
Kingdom, and Army it self, if not prevented by the wisdom of the Parliament and
your Excellency, we are not willing to express: It is our humble Desire, That
your Excellency and Council of War will vouchsafe to take the same into due
consideration, as a matter of great concernment; and to be assured, That we
have not obstinately withholden what has been due to the Army, in affront to
the Ordinances and Demands of Parliament: And we profess, That we have done,
and shall do our best endeavors to further the speedy Collection, and getting
in of the Arrears due from particular inhabitants, upon whom the same are
charged by Ordinance of Parliament.

It is also our humble Desire, That your Excellency will be pleased to take a
view of the Paper enclosed, of some apparent obstructions presented from us
unto the Parliament, touching the not getting in of the Arrears, to the end
your Excellency may see the readiness of our endeavors to remove the same:
Likewise, That you will be pleased further to consider of the great sums of
Money (yet unsatisfied) exhausted from the City by Loans and otherwise, for
service of the Parl. and Kingdom; The Free Quarter of the Army upon Citizens,
who have dwellings in the country; The great and many Taxes upon the City; The
great decay generally of Trade within the same, and The high prizes of all
manner of Victual; All conducing to the impoverishment of the people, and
obstruction to the ready payment of the Assessments upon the City. And for
remedy herein, we rely upon your Excellencies goodness, That we doing our
endeavors in this business, you will be pleased in a short time to remove your
Army to a further distance from hence.

Lastly, It is our earnest Desire (as formerly) to manifest our Integrity and
faithfulness unto the Parliament and Kingdom, giving to our power all obedience
to their Ordinances; and likewise to keep and maintain a right understanding
and good correspondency between your Excellency, Council of War, the Army, and
this City.

London, 20 Nov. 1647. By Command of the Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the
City of LONDON in Common Counsel assembled: MICHEL.

To the Right Honorable, The Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Counsel men of
the City of London, in Common Counsel assembled.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
MY last to Your Lordship from Kingston, was not intended to charge you with
the Arrears of the City, or to put the levying thereof upon any other, besides
those that are empowered and charged by the Parliament for that purpose; But
the business of sending for their assistance some Soldiers into the City being
resolved on (as the best way, and of present necessity for the timely and
effectual dispatch of that Service) I thought fit by that Letter to acquaint
you therewith, both as a respect to your Lordship and the City, and that by you
the City might the better understand the Grounds and Intentions of that
Resolution (to prevent any inconveniences from misapprehensions thereof:) Nor
did I expect that either that Resolution, or the Letter (in stead of a vigorous
and speedy dispatch in a business so just and necessary) should beget any
Interposals or Intercourse tending to further Delays: But since the Parliament
has thought fit to put a stop (for present) to that way of Proceeding (which
here was conceived most necessary and agreeable to their Orders) and to
undertake some other effectual course in the business, I shall wait the hoped
issue thereof, and of your promised concurrent endeavors; Which if it prove not
timely answerable to their Undertakings, to your Professions, and the Armies
and Kingdoms Expectations, I much doubt the consequences (whatever you or I can
do to prevent them) will be every way sad, and that not more to the Parliament,
Kingdom or Army, then to the City it self; The safety and prosperity of which,
shall be always endeavored as much as lies in the power of

Windsor, 24. Nov. 1647. Your faithful Friend and Servant, T: FAIRFAX.

Two Orders of the General and general Council of the ARMY.
ACcording to a Resolution of the general Council, you are upon the issuing
forth of this Months Pay, to dismiss and discharge, or cause to be dismissed
or discharged, all such Soldiers as have been entertained in the several Troops
of your Regiment, since the day that the Army marched through London; as also
all such Soldiers and Officers as have served the King in the late War, and
have been entertained in any Troop within your Regiment, since the Engagement
of the Army at Newmarket. Heath: And you are to return to the Commissary of
Musters, a List of the Names of all such persons in any Troop, as are to be and
shall be so discharged as aforesaid; with a particular Account for how much
time every one of them, since his Entertainment, does remain unpaid: The chief
Officer of each Troop, at the discharging of them as aforesaid, to give a
particular Certificate to each of them accordingly: And you are to give order,
That from henceforth no new men be entertained in the room of any that shall be
discharged according to this Order, without further Order from my self. You are
likewise to cause Returns to be made from every Troop in your Regiment, of such
Subscriptions as have been taken to what was published from the General at the
late Rendezvous. You are likewise to apprehend in safe custody unto the
Head-quarter, the Body of of your Regiment, to answer to such things as shall
be objected against them before a Council of War, concerning the late
Disturbances and Distractions by them and others wrought or endeavored in the
Army. You are also to give strict Order, That no person be henceforth permitted
to have Quarters with any Troops of your Regiment; who are not actually
mustered within the Army. And you are also to give Order, That henceforth no
Horseman take above half a Peck of Provender for a day and night for one Horse,
upon any pretense whatsoever, unless he pay for the same, until further
allowance thereof by Order from my self. And these things the Officers of each
Troop are to see to at their perils, if (contrary hereto) they suffer such
Abuses to be henceforth done to the Country.

Given under my Hand at Windsor, this 24. of November. 1647.
To Colonel (...) or the Officer in chief with this Regiment.
YOu are on sight hereof forthwith to dismiss and discharge all such Soldiers
as have been entertained by you, or any Officer under your Command, since the
time that Sir Hardres Waller came down to you with Orders from me, viz. since
the Third of August last, and this you and every Officer of the respective
Companies under your command, are to see immediately performed, as you will
answer the contrary; That the country may no longer be burdened with them:
And you are to take Order, That from henceforth no more be entertained in the
room of any such as shall be so discharged without further Orders. You are
likewise to return a List of the Names of all such as shall be so discharged;
And also a List of those men that went off with you from the Army, that care
may be taken for their Arrears.

Given under my Hand at Windsor the 23 day of November, 1647.
To Col: Kempson, or the Officer in chief with that Regiment.
The like Orders were sent to the Officers in chief with Colonel Oconellies,
Colonel Herberts, and Colonel Grays Regiment. And this Letter following to the
several Committees of Wilts, Gloucester, and Oxfordshire, where those Regiments
quartered.

Gentlemen,
I Am very sensible of the burden that lies upon your country, by the
quartering of those Soldiers that go out for Ireland; And being desirous to
lessen it as much as may be, I have sent an Order to the Officer in chief
commanding those Forces quartered in your county, forthwith to dismiss and
discharge all such Soldiers as have been entertained by them or any Officer
under them, since the third of August last, and that the country be no longer
burdened with them, but that for the future they do take special care no more
be entertained in the room of any such as shall be so discharged, without
further Orders from the Parliament or my self: And I hope the Officers will be
very careful to see this Order punctually observed, which I thought fit to give
you notice of, to the end the country may expect and receive ease accordingly.
I remain

Windsor, 23 Nov. 1647. Your assured Friend, T: FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

