A LETTER FROM HAMPTON-COVRT Containing The substance of His Majesty's most
Gracious ANSWER to the Propositions presented to him from both KINGDOMS.

WITH Twelve Proposals from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council
of his ARMY.

Concerning the Kings Majesty, and his Friends that have adhered to him, which
His Majesty does better approve to treat of.

AND His Majesty's PROPOSITIONS to the PARLIAMENT therein.

London printed for V, V. and are to be sold at the Exchange, Anno Dom.
MDCXLVII.

A LETTER FROM HAMPTON-COVRT, Containing The substance of His Majesty's most
Gracious Answer to the Propositions, presented to him from both Kingdoms.
Right Honorable,
THE Commissioners of both Kingdoms came hither on Tuesday night last
September 7. instant, And delivered a letter to the rest of the Commissioners,
whom they found here with His Majesty from both Houses of Parliament, that the
said Propositions should be presented to the King that night and that the Scots
Commissioners would be there to join with them to present them to His Majesty.

They also showed the instructions from the Houses to their fellow
Commissioners, which were to present them that night, and to certify His
Majesty that they were to expect a positive Answer thereunto within fix days.
The Scots Commissioners were also here ready to join with ours in presenting
them to His Majesty.

About five of the clock that night they all came to the King, The Prince
Elector had been there but was returned to Richmond His Majesty's Children were
also there, who had dined with His Majesty that day, and the Countess of
Northumberland with them, and they were then with His Majesty being not at that
time returned to Ston-House. And Mr. Maxvill was then come to the Court, who is
Chamberline to His Majesty.

The Commissioners acquainted His Majesty with their Message from both
Kingdoms, and desired audience, which His Majesty granted, and presently met
them in one of the Chambers where His Majesty was with His Children: And there
the Propositions were presented and read; And His Majesty told them that He
would give them an Answer as soon as He could.

Then the King withdrew for some time, so that His Majesty went late to Supper
that night, the Commissioners wrote letters to the Houses to acquaine them what
was done, and what His Majesty said, and desired that they might all return to
the Parliament when His Majesty gave them a dispatch.

Wednesday September 8. Instant the King was up early in the morning, being
very desirous to dispatch the Commissioners with all possible speed, his
Majesty walked forth a little before Dinner, and so a little again in the
afternoon to refresh himself; Diverse came from London, and else where, and
some obtained leave to kiss His Majesty's hand.

Thursday September 9. His Majesty called for the Commissioners and gave an
Answer to them, which is to this effect.

That his Majesty takes notice of these Propositions to be very little
differing from the former presented to him at Newcastle, to which his Majesty
returned Answer when he came to Holdenby, That his Majesty conceives they
cannot but take notice of the Propofals of the Army which all rational men
cannot but confess are much more reasonable, and tending to a firm and
settled peace, And therefore his Majesty defires that Commissioners from the
Parliament, and Commissioners from the Army, may be sent to His Majesty to
treat with him upon the Proposals from the Army, That a firm peace may be
settled.

This Thursday the 9. Instant, The Earl of Pembrooke, and Major general
Brown, returned with his Majesty's Answer betimes in the morning, for it was
to late before they could return over night, by reason of some things which
were to be done by the Commissioners that night, The letter is directed to the
Earl of Manchester Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, to be
communicated to both Houses of Parliament (The like to the Scots Commissioners)
His Majesty is very confident that his Answer will give much satisfaction, And
his Majesty does exceedingly approve of the proceedings of the Army.

Dated at Hampton Court, Septem. 9. 1647.
TWELVE Proposalls from his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
his Army, which his Majesty seems better to approve of, then any thing which
has hitherto been presented to him.
I.
AN Act to be passed to take away al coercive power, authority and jurisdiction
of Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever, extending to any
civil penalties upon any; and to repeal al Laws, whereby the Civil Magistracy
has been, or is bound, upon any Ecclesiastical censure to proceed (ex
officio) unto any civil penaltys against any persons so censured

II.
That there be a repeal of all Acts, or Clauses in any Act, enjoining the use
of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties, for neglect thereof,
as also of all Acts or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalties for not
coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for prayer, or other religious
duties, excercises or Ordinances, and some other provision to be made for
discovering of Papists, and Popish Recusants, and for disabling of them, and
all Jesuities or Priests, from disturbing the State.

III.
That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any nor any penalties
imposed upon the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take it against
their judgments, or consciences, but all Orders or Ordinances tending to that
purpose to be repealed.

IIII.
That (the things here before proposed, being provided, for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the Kingdom,) his
Majesty's person, his Queen, and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition
of safety, Honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their
personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal power
then according to the particulars aforegoing.

V.
That a less number out of the persons excepted in the two first
qualifications not exceeding five for the English) being nominated particularly
by the Parliament, who (together with the persons in the Irish Rebellion, in
the third qualification,) may be reserved to the further judgment of the
Parliament, as they shall find cause, All other excepted persons may be
remitted from the exception, and admitted to Composition.

VI.
That the rates for all future Compositions may be lessened and limited, not
to exceed the several propo rtions hereafter expressed respectively: That is to
say. 1. For all persons formerly excepted, not above a third part. 2. For the
late members of Parliament, under the first branch of the fourth qualification
in the Propositions, a fourth part. 3. For other Members of Parliament, in the
second and third branches of the same qualification a sixth part. 4. for the
persons nominated in the said fourth qualification, and those included in the
tenth qualification, an eighth part. 5. For all other included in the sixth
qualification, a tenth part. And that real Debts, either upon Record, or
proved by witnesses, be considered and abared in the valuation of their estates
in all the cases aforesaid.

VII.
That those who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant put
upon them, as a condition without which they may not compound, but in case they
shall not willingly take it, they may pass their compositions without it.

VIII.
That the persons and Estates of all English, not worth two hundred pounds in
Lands or Goods, be at liberty and discharged: And that the Kings meniall
Servants, that near took up Arms, but only ettended his Person, according to
their Offices, may be freed from Composition, or to pay (at most) but the
proportion of one years Revenue, or a twentyeth part.

IX.
That in Order to the making and perfecting of Compositions at the rates
aforesaid, the Rents, Revenues, and other Dues, and Profits of all sequestered
Estates whatsoever (except the Estates of such persons, who shall be continued
under exception as before) be from henceforth suspended and detained in the
hands of the respective tenants, occupants, and others, from whom they are due,
for the space of six months following.

X.
That the Faith of the Army, or other sorces of the Parliament given in
Articles upon surrenders to any of the Kings party, may be fully made good, and
where any breach thereof shall appear to have been made, full reparation and
satisfaction may be given to the parties injured, and the persons offending
(being found out, may be compelled thereto.

XI.
That there may be a general Act of Oblivion to extend unto all (except the
persons to be continued in exception as before) to absolve from all Trespasses,
Misdemeanors, etc. done in prosecution of the War, and from all trouble or
prejudice for or concerning the same, and to restore them to all privileges,
etc. belonging to other Subjects, provided, as in the fourth particular under
the second general head aforegoing concerning security.

XII.
And whereas there have been of late strong indevours and practices of a
factious and desperate party, to imbroyle this kingdom in a new war, and for
that purpose to induce the King, the Queen, and Prince, to declare for the said
party, and also to excite and stir up all those of the Kings late party to
appear and engage for the same, which attempts and designs, many of the Kings
party, (out of a desire to avoid further misery to the Kingdom,) have
contributed their indevours to prevent, (as for diverse of them we have had
particular assurance, (we do therefore desire, that such of the Kings party
who shall appear to have expressed, and shall hereafter express that way
their good affections to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and to hinder
the imbroyling of the same in a new war, may be freed and exempted from
compositions, or to pay but one years Revenue or a twentieth part

FINIS.

