A LETTER FROM EXETER, Advertizing the State of AFFAIRS there: ALSO, A LETTER
to the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL, Esquire. SPEAKER of the PARLIAMENT. EXON,
Jan. 14.
SIR,
THe enclosed is a Copy of what this Grand meeting to which the most
considerable of the Gentry have Subscribed: Mr. Bamfield Recorder of EXON is
gone this night Post to deliver it to the SPEAKER.

We the Gentry of the County of DEVON finding our selves without a regular
Government, after your last interruption, designed a public Meeting to
consult Remedies, which we could not so conveniently Effect till this Week at
our general Quarter Sessions at EXON, where we found diverse of the Inhabitants
groaning under high Oppressions and a general defect of Trade, to the utter
Ruin of many, and fear of the like to others, (which is as visible in the
whole County) that occasioned such Disorders, that were no small trouble and
disturbance to us, which (by God's blessing) upon our endeavors, were soon
Suppressed without Blood. And though We find since our last Purposes an
alteration in the State of Affairs by the reassembling at the Helm of
Government, yet conceive that we are but in part redrest of our Grievances, and
that the chief Expedient for it, will be the recalling of all those Members
that were secluded in 1648. and sat before the first force upon the
Parliament, and also by filling up Vacant places, and all to be admitted
without any Oath and Engagement previous to their Entrance; for which things
(if you please to take a speedy Course,) We shall defend you against all
Opposers and future Interrupters, with our Lives and Fortunes: For the
accomplishment whereof, We shall use all lawful means which we humbly conceive
may best conduce to the Peace and Safety of this Nation.

This City in very great Numbers lowdly expressed their Desires for a Free
Parliament; The Apprentices and young Men of the City got the Keys of the
Gates, and keep them locked, without taking Notice of the Magistrates and less
of the Soldiers.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Creake. Jan: 28 1659


