A LETTER from diverse of the GENTRY of the COUNTRY of LINCOLN: To his
EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK.
May it please your Excellency,
WE being Strangers to your-Person, and failing of the Honor to see you in
your March Southward; When we might have Communicated our Thoughts and
Desires more freely unto You; are now enforced to represent them in this
Enclosed Declaration, craving your best aid and assistance for the effecting of
what is therein comprised, (being our Just Birthrights) the Defense whereof
will be to Gods Glory, your EXCELLENCIES great Honor, and the Peace and
Happiness of these Distressed Nations: Which is the only Endeavor and Desire of

Lincoln 7 Febr. 1659. Your Excellencies most humble Servants.

The DECLARATION of the Gentry, Ministers and Freeholders of the County and
City of LINCOLN.
WE the Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the County and City of LINCOLN;
being truly sensible of our Miseries and Grievances, namely, the sad
Consequents of an Intestine War; The Fears of Invations from abroad at this
time of our Distractions and Divisions both in Church and State; The Violent
Alterations of Government; the Heavy Impositions of Unheard Of Taxes: All which
have of Late years Ruined one Trade, and Impoverished the whole Nation; And are
all occasioned by reason of the many Violations and Breaches made upon our
Known Established Laws, and Fundamental Liberties: Do therefore humbly Propose
and Declare, (having first Met and Consulted) as other Counties have done, That
the only Remedy for our said Grievances will be found in a Free Full
Parliament, speedily to be Called and Assembled; to Sit according to our said
Known Established Laws, wherein the Votes of all Free People of this Nation may
be included; Since that Such only can have a Legal Capacity to Enact Laws and
Statutes, that may equally bind all the Free People of ENGLAND: And therefore,
If any persons (how ever empowered) not having the Authority of Such a
Parliament, shall take upon them to Lay Impositions upon the Free People of
this Commonwealth; or to prescribe, or enjoin any Limitations, Restrictions,
or Qualifications whatsoever, (not formerly agreed upon in Full Parliament;)
We do Declare our Selves not obliged hereto, as being destructive to the true
Freedom and undoubted Privileges of PARLIAMENT.

[This LETTER and the DECLARATION therein enclosed, (subscribed by thousands of
hands) were presented to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Monck, by Sir Michael
Armyn Baronet, Coll. Edward Rosseter, and John Hatcher Esquire on Thursday the
16th. of February, 1659.]

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.


