The RESOLVE of the CITY.
Our Respects to Peace, and Order, are too notorious to be questioned, since by
the mere Impressions of Charity and Obedience, we have thus long suspended the
Justice we owe to our Selves, together with that Vengeance, which the Blood of
our Murdered Companions requires at our hands. Nor has the Power of these
Principles of Public tenderness been less Eminent, upon our Judgments,
than upon our Passions; For, We have as well Believed, in Contradiction to
Evidence of Experiment, as we have Suffered, in Opposition to the very
Elements, and Dictates of Humanity. Witness that Execrable Monday (sacred to
the Eternal Infamy of this City) even Then; When we had that Enemy at our
Mercy, toward whom, by the Rights of Nature, and of Generosity, we were not
bound to exercise any; even then, I say, in the very Heat, and Course of an
Honest, and Powerful Indignation, we returned Quietly, to our Houses, upon the
first Notice, that the Authority of the City would have it so. But it is
likewise true, that this Assurance, was added to the Message, viz. That the
Common Council, was Sensible of our Grievances, and would duly Consider them.
Since this, we find nothing done in Pursuance of that Promise; but on the
Contrary, Injuries are Multiplied upon us; and those of that Day, serve but as
Arguments of Encouragement to Greater. Some of us Killed, Others Wounded, and
lead in Triumph Naked through the Strets: Two or Three Hundred Thousand Persons
Looking on, to Celebrate the Conquest, and the Shame. A Citizens Skull, is but
a thing to try the Temper of a Soldiers Sword upon; Give us but every man a
Red-Coat for a Cash Keeper, and the work's done. They Are come within a Trifle
on it already; and all this while, an Order to be Quiet, is all our Patient
Masters would afford us. Give us an Order that may make us Safe (although we
need not Ask, what we can give our selves) Persuade these people to be Gone, or
Bid us Drive them out; What Law made Paul's, and Gresham College, Garrisons? If
nothing else will do, we will do it our selves: We have Engaged, and Sworn the
Vindication of the City, and nothing can Absolve us from the Oath we have taken
This must be done betimes too, 'twill come too late else, to prevent, either
the Necessity of a Tumult, or the greater Mischief, of a Supine, and Credulous
security. A Parliament in January, will do us no more good, than a Cordial will
do him that was Hanged last Sessions. Our Sense at Large, we delivered to the
world, in a Paper, Entinuled, The Final Protest, and Sense of the CITY: Which
is Public enough, notwithstanding the great Design used to suppress it, and
the Insolences of diverse Persons, disaffected to the good of the City, toward
those that sold them. To that we adhere, That Protest of Ours, produced Another
from the Common Council, of the 20th. Current, to which something ought to be
said, (by the way, let the Reader take Notice of an Error in the Printing, and,
for -- Not Soon Vote up the City, ande. Read, Soon Vote up, etc. --) The sum of
that Order is, but in effect, the Justification of the Lord Mayor, in the
matter of Prudence and Integrity: we do not Deny, but finding our selves
abandoned to all sorts of Outrages, by the Cold Proceedings of the Court, in
our behalf, We were transported to some bitter Reflections: Involving the
present Mayor, with his more Criminal Predecessor, Ireton, in the Imputation.
We shall not more Gladly find it a Mistake, than Readily Confess it one, when
we reap the Effects of that Care for the Good of the City; but so long as we
are tied up from all Lawful Defense, and the Public Enemy at liberty to
Practice all Unlawful Violences upon us, We desire to be Pardoned, if we
suspend in the Case. The Cloze indeed is very Noble, and worthy of the Court,
where they Declare; For the Fundamental Laws, and the Protestant Religion,
etc. -- and in fine, to endeavor the Convening of a Free Parliament, in order
thereunto. But in Contradiction to this Resolve, the Committee of Officers have
yesterday published a Paper, Entitled, The Agreement, etc. -- -- fairly
telling us, That we are to be Governed by People of their Choosing, and by a
Model of their framing, without any regard had to the Practice, and Reason of
the Ancient Laws, or to the Interest, and Liberty of every Freeborn Englishman.
This Usurpation is to be considered in its due Place; at present it concerns
us, to hinder them from making the Slavery of the City, their first Step
toward the Subjection of the Nation. The seasonable Care of This, we do
Humbly, and Earnestly recommend to the Court of Common Council; Our Hopes are,
that we are now fallen into Better hands, and if our Magistrates will but
Command us, they have an Hundred Thousand Lives in Readiness to Engage for
them. If we should be so unhappy, as to be still delayed; we do however wash
our hands of the Consequences: And so God Direct and Deliver Us.

December 23.

