A Letter from Scotland: Giving a true Relation of the present Posture of
Affairs in that Kingdom, in reference to the expected Invasion from France; And
particularly, the care that was taken to prevent the Castle of Edinburgh from
being betrayed.
Together with two Proclamations, the one against Ministers not Praying for
Their Majesty's King Willam and Queen Mary. The other for a Solemn National
Monthly-Fast
Licensed May the 7th, J. F. 1692.

Edinburgh, April 30. SIR,
I AM sorry to find by yours, that in England you have no very good Opinion of
us here, in this critical Juncture; but allow me to tell you, that though you
have more Strength than we, we seem at least to have as great Zeal. I shall
give you only the bare Matter of Fact. The Chancellor having an Express from
Mr. Johnston our Secretary at London, called the Council, and imparted to them
Her Majesty's Pleasure, for putting the Kingdom in a posture of Defense, that
we might not be surprised in case our Enemies from abroad should make any
attempt upon our Coast, or in our Neighborhood, as it seems they intended;
upon which the Council, in two or three meetings, did what belonged to them to
do, in the following particulars.

The Commander in chief of the Forces had immediately Orders to post them so,
as that they could conveniently and speedily meet upon occasion; and in order
to this, a Thousand Horse and Dragoons are to lie at Edinburgh, or not far from
it.

The Governors and Commanders of Castles and Forts were sent for, and Enquiry
made what Stores and Provisions they had in them, and Orders given to furnish
them with Provisions for six Months, and with all necessary Ammunition; for
which end such quantities of Powder and other Ammunition as were to be had
here, were ordered to be bought, and Orders were sent over the Kingdom to the
other Towns, for sending to the Council an account of what Powder or other
Ammunition was any where to be found: And in the mean while, the Magistrates of
the place were ordered to take care, that none of it be sold without their
Authority.

Upon some Information which the Council received, particular care has been
taken of the Castle of Edinburgh, by removing all suspected and unnecessary
People out of it, and by putting one of the inferior Officers under an Arrest.
Upon information that many disaffected People were come to Town, and some
lately from abroad, the Gates of the Town were shut, and a general Search was
made, and some few apprehended; but for the greater secrecy in time coming, the
Council signed a Warrant to the Chancellor, to seize on the Arms and Horses of
persons whom he should judge disaffected, and such persons themselves, whom he
should keep in Custody till they were presented by him to the Council at its
next meeting. The Magistrates of this City were called for, and the care of the
same recommended to them, particularly, to double their Guards, and to have the
Names of all those that come hither every night, and that are not Inhabitants,
to be brought to them; and that the Magistrates consider those Names, and
deliver to the Chancellor at least once every week Lists of such of them as are
suspected or unknown. The Council has likewise ordered, That Fencible-men, and
Heretors, (that is, as you call 'em, the Gentry and richest sort of
Freeholders) all over the Kingdom, to be in a readiness with their Horses and
Arms to meet under their several Commanders upon Advertisement given them,
either by particular Order, or by the signal of Fires upon Beacons, which are
ordered to be kindled upon the first appearance of a Fleet on the Coast.
Letters are also sent to all the Members of Council, requiring them to attend;
and the Council or Committees of Council are to sit every day during the
present Alarms.

The Council being informed, that some disaffected Churchmen prayed either for
the late Government, or not for this, or in such ambiguous words, that their
meaning was clear enough to be understood they meant the late King, ordered the
Proclamation which I send you enclosed to be published. The Council had
published the other Proclamation, which I also send you, some time before; but
I send it to show you, that the generality of our Churchmen are well inclined.

Thus, Sir, whatever Zeal you in England may have inwardly, we do hitherto at
least show as much.

It Is true, there are Discontents and Divisions among us, but the subject of
them is either the lesser concerns of what generally we take to be Religion,
and for which sometimes we may indeed considerately enough venture, but sure,
will never in a plain case throw away the greater; or it is Remains of
Animosities from the memory of the Violences of the late Reigns; but to
endeavor to bring back those Reigns, were an odd way of resenting such
Violences, and which one would think no man in these Kingdoms, that has either
Sense or Honesty, should be guilty of. I am

Sir, (...)


A Proclamation Anent Ministers not Praying for Their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary.
WIlliam and Mary by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain, France
and Ireland Defenders of the Faith.
To Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part,
conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch, as albeit, by the Act of the Meeting of Estates of this our Ancient
Kingdom, Dated the 13th day of April, 1689, Our Leidges were Certified, not to
own or acknowledge the late K. James the Second for their King, but that they,
and every one of them, should render their dutiful Obedience to Us; and in
particular, that all the Ministers of the Gospel within this Kingdom should
publicly Pray for Us, as King and Queen of this Realm, under the Pains and
Certifications specified in the said Act: As also, We with Advice of Our
Estates of Parliament, by Our Act of 22th of July, 1690. Ordained the said Act
and Proclamation of the Estates of this our Kingdom, to be put to further
Execution, against all such Ministers who had not given Obedience thereto, by
praying for Us, in manner mentioned in the said Act: And that the Lords of Our
Privy Council should proceed therein, or empower other Magistrates to do the
same within their respective bounds, as they should see Cause. Yet
nevertheless, the said Acts have been so far from receiving the punctual and
exact Obedience due to them, That many Preachers have either presumed wholly to
neglect Praying for Us, as King and Queen of this Realm, conform to the said
Acts, or at least have so far testified a want of Ingenuity and Plainness
required in a Duty of this Nature, that they make use of such ambiguous and
unclear Expressions in their Prayers, that the hearers cannot distinctly know
they Pray for Us, to the Great Disparagement of the said Laws, and contempt of
Our Authority. Therefore We, with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do
strictly require and Command the Sheriff of the several Shires, Bailies of
Regalities, Stewarts of Stewarties, and Magistrates of the Burghs Royal of this
Kingdom within their Bounds and Jurisdictions respective, to make due and exact
trial what Ministers Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, within their
respective bounds, Pray not ordinarily for Us, in such circumstantiat Terms, as
their Hearers may distinctly know that they Pray for Us, as King and Queen of
this Realm; and for that effect, We with the Advice foresaid, Hereby Require
and Empower the several Magistrates respective foresaids, to conveen and call
before them such persons as they shall think fit, to give Information and
Evidence against such Ministers Preaching in Churches or Meeting Houses, who
fail in their Obedience to the Acts abovementioned, in manner above set down,
and that the said Magistrates respective, Transmit under their Hands, to the
Clerks of Our Privy Council, betwixt and the first day of June next to come,
(for such as are on this side of the Water of Tay, and the fifteenth day of the
said Month, for these on the other side thereof,) the Names of the several
Ministers offending in the Premises, with the place of their residence, and
the original Information and Evidence they have received and taken against
them, to the Effect they may be Prosecute with all Rigor, and the Penalties and
Certifications in the said Laws contained, justly Inflicted and Executed
against them. With Certification to the said respective Magistrates who fail
herein, they shall be repute as Connivers at, and Abettors of the said
Offenders, and negligent in the Execution and performance of their Offices and
Duty committed to them, and prosecute as such accordingly. Our Will is
Herefore, and we Charge you strictly and Command, That incontinent these Our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market cr^ss of Edinburgh, and to the remanent
Mercat-crosses of the Head-Burghs of the several Sheres of this Our Ancient
Kingdom, and there; in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make
intimation of the Premises: And Ordains these Presents to be Printed and
Published in manner foresaid.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the twenty eighth day of April. And of
our Reign, the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, In
Supplementum Signeti. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti, Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary.
A Proclamation, for a Solemn, National, Monthly Fast.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God, King and Queen of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith;
to Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of our Privy
Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly,
and severally, specially constitute, greeting:
Forasmuch as several Synods, and others of this Church, have applied to the
Lords of our Privy Council, that they would interpose their Authority, for
indicting and keeping a solemn National Fast and Humiliation, in all the Kirks
and Meeting Houses of this our ancient Kingdom, to implore the Blessing of the
Lord upon us in our Counsels and Undertakings, in defense of the true Reformed
Religion, and of these Lands, and relief of the Oppressed abroad; and
especially, that God would countenance Us in the present War, preserving our
Royal Person, and giving Success to our Arms by Sea and Land, and preserve and
establish the Protestant Religion at home and abroad. Therefore We, with Advice
of the Lords of our Privy Council, do hereby command and enjoin, That the said
solemn Fast and Humiliation, for the Ends above set down, be religiously
observed by all persons within this Kingdom, both in Churches and
Meeting Houses, upon the 25th day of May next, being the last Wednesday of that
Month, and thereafter monthly, upon the last Wednesday of each Month, until the
last Wednesday of September next inclusive. And ordains all Ministers, either
in Kirks or Meeting Houses, to read these Presents publicly from the Pulpit, a
Sunday or two before the first day appointed for keeping the said Fast and
Humiliation, and upon a Sunday before each last Wednesday, during the space
foresaid. And to the effect that this so necessary and religious a Duty may be
publicly performed, and punctually observed, and Our pleasure in the Premises
known. Our Will is, and We charge you straightly, and command, that incontinent,
these our Letters seen, ye pass to the Marcatcross of Edinburgh, and remanent
Marcat Crosses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within
this Kingdom, and in Our Name and Authority, make publication of the Premises,
that none may pretend Ignorance. And We ordain our Solicitor to dispatch
Copies hereof, to the Sheriffs of the several Shires and Stewarts of the
Stewartries, and their Deputes or Clerks, to be by them published at the
Marcat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs, upon receipt thereof, and immediately sent
to the several Ministers, both in Kirks and Meeting Houses, to the effect they
may read, and intimat the same from their Pulpits, and may seriously exhort all
persons to a sincere and devote Observance thereof, as they will be answerable
at their Peril: And ordains th^se Presents to be printed, and published in
manner aforesaid.

Given under our Signet at Edinburgh, the 21st day of April, and of our Reign
the fourth Year, 1692. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. In Supplementum
Signeti. DA. MONCREIF, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

God save King William and Queen Mary
Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead in Fleetstreet.


