A DECLARATION OF His EXCELLENCY the Earl of Leven: Concerning the rising of
the Scottish Army from the Seige of the City of HEREFORD.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 14. Sep. 1645.

A Declaration of his Excellency the Earl of LEVEN, concerning the rising of
the Scottish Army from the siege of the City or Hereford.
LLest the mis-representation of our afaires at a distance, and the
mis-constructions of such as want affection, might possibly beget a
misunderstanding of the reality and sincerity of our ^^emions a^^ desires, to
be useful to this Kingdoms, and to improve every opportunity and advantage for
advancing the Public Service; I have thought it necessary to declare and make
known the grounds and reasons of the rising of this Army from the liege of
Hereford: Which are as follows:

At our first undertaking of this Service we had large promises, for furnishing
and providing our Army with Victual and with all materials necessary for a
siege; in both which we have been exceedingly disappointed. Concerning the
first, The Honorable Houses of Parliament did appoint 200. l. per diem to be
assessed upon Herefordshire and the adjacent Counties, to be paid to the
Infantry of the Army, whereof they never received a farthing, but for the most
part have been left to their own shift, and constrained to eat fruit and the
Corns that were growing upon the ground, and now for these six or seven
months past, have received but one months Pay, which was advanced by the City
of London.

As the Army has been much discouraged for want of necessary Provisions for
their maintenance, so the Service has been exceedingly retarded by the want of
battering Pieces and Ball, for we had only from Gloucester three Gunnes of
eighteen pound Ball, and to each of them fifty Ball, so that we were forced to
send to the Iron Mills to cause more Ball to be cast, which spent a great deal
of time; we entertained fifty Miners, and when the Mines were brought to
perfection, they were drowned by reason of eight days continual rain, the
Town being low in situation; Notwithstanding all which discouragements, after
consultation with the general Officers, Orders were issued upon Monday the
first of this instant, to the several Regiments, to make ready for a Storm
against the next morning; but within a few hours after these orders were
issued, there came a Messenger from Evesham with intelligence that the Kings
Horse, being about 3000. had a Rendezvouze on Broadway and Cambden-Hill, and
were marching to Worcester: This intelligence was immediately confirmed by
Letters from the Committee of Evesham, and from Gloucester, to the
Commissioners of Parliament, and from Colonel Freeman and Colonel Deverux,
(who sent a Copy of a Letter which he had from one of his servants,) some of
those Informations say the Enemy was 7000. others say 6000. and at least 3000.
All this could not have made us alter our former resolutions, but at the same
time we received a Letter from Lieutenant General David Lesley, showing that
he was gone to Scotland with the whole Party of Horse and Dragoones under his
command. In this conjuncture we were not a little perplexed how to carry our
selves, for when we thought upon all the pains and hazard we had undergone,
and the fair probability of our speedy compassing the end we proposed therein,
we were very desirous to have continued in our resolutions, and the next day to
have adventured a storm; but the Enemies Forces consisting in Horse and
Dragoones, and we having no considerable strength of Horse to interpose betwixt
us and their Quarters, which were so near, that they might easily have
assaulted us before our breaches could be made, and so have interrupted us in
the midst of the action; It was generally conceived a very dangerous attempt,
for if the Enemies forces should fall upon us before we could enter the Town,
it was the apparent ruin and destruction of the Army: And albeit we had been
assured to carry the place before the Kings Forces could have come this length,
(which by our intelligence we find was not possible for us to do,) yet having
no considerable strength of Horse to oppose the Enemy, all the ways and
passages had been close shut up by their Cavillry, all accommodation of
draughts and Provisions of Victuals had been totally cut of, beside many more
inconveniences, from which we knew no way how to be relieved. For preventing of
all which, and the preservation of this Army, for the Public good of both
Kingdoms, (which is the measure of our desires, and the end of all our
Actions) after a full debate and serious deliberation, it was resolved by the
Committee of both Kingdoms, residing with this Army, that the Siege should be
raised, and thereupon orders were given for drawing off the whole body of the
Army to the open Fields, which was accordingly performed next morning, without
any loss upon our side, and the Enemy several times sallying forth, both with
Horse and Boat, were beaten back with the loss of diverse, both Officers and
Soldiers. These grounds and reasons impartially weighed, will evidence a
conjuncture of necessities laid upon us for preferring the safety of the Army
to the uncertain event of a dangerous assault, in the now posture of affairs,
when a cruel Enemy is master of the Fields in Scotland, and for these three
weeks past, has robbed, plundered and spoiled the substance of that Kingdom
at his pleasure, destroying the Lands and houses of the well affected by fire,
and imprisoning their persons, for all which he pretends no other quarrel,
but the assistance given by us to this Kingdom, which as it was performed with
much readiness and cheerfulness, and no less expense in the hardest season
of the year, and when this Kingdom was in its lowest condition: So we are
confident to meet with the like kindness and cheerful affection in the day of
our calamity, when the Lord is pleased to hide his countenance from us for our
sins and provocations against him.

LEVEN.

Gentlemen,
KNowing the great Importance, that the knowledge of the motion of the Kings
Army may be unto you, in discharge of our duty; these are to signify unto
you That yesterday the Kings Army kept their Rendezvous near Marton in Marsh,
where the King was in Person: (since we hear he is gone to Oxford.) This
morning his Army Rendezvouzed upon Broadway-Hills, and are marching over
Bidford-bridge, and thence to Worcester ( as prisoners taken by us inform us.
Their Commanders in Chief, are General Gerrard, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale,
their number about 3000 Horse, scarce any Dragoons; their Horse are much spent
with their long marches: How far this may concern Hereford, is referred to
your Judicious consideration, by

Evesham, 31 of August, 1645. Your affectionate Friends and humble Servants
Edward Rouss. William Lingon. John Dormer. Sam. Knightley. Edward Smith.


For the Honorable, the Commoners of Parliament of England, residing with the
Scottish Army.
Gentlemen,
We have Intelligence but now, from the Committee of worcester, which we were
by them desired to communicate to you, That upon Saturday last the Kings Army
kept their Rendezvous near Marton in Marsh, (where the King was in Person)
That yesterday morning the King kept his Rendezvous upon Broadway-Hills, and
did march over Bidford-bridge, and thence to Worcester, they were about 3000
Horse, few Dragoons, or none, their Horse much spent, Commanded by Langdale,
and Gerrard: The King himself is gone to Oxford. The which having acquainted
you with, we rest assured, that you will presently acquaint the General, with

Gloucester 1. of September. 1645. GENTLEMEN, Your loving Friends and Seevants
Tho. Morgan. William Shepherd. Henry Jones.


For our much honored Friends, the Commoners appointed to assist the Scottish
Army residing in Herefordshire.
May it please your Excellency
NO sooner had I addressed my self to the obedience of your Commands in
settling part of our Brigade in a ready posture to serve your Excellency, but I
received this intelligence. That the Enemy fell upon Captain Bernard and
Captain Ennes Quarters at Cambden, and took all their men but two, which
brought me the news thereof, they tell me that they march 6000. strong in
horse, but neither trame of Artilery nor Infantry attending them. The smallest
number I hear of is 3000. very able horse newly recruited out of the
associated Counties, and joining with Oxenford, Wallingford, Woodstock,
Radfoord, Faningson, and Banbury Horse. I am uniting all the Foot possibly I
may, and have drawn all my Horse to pursue the Rear, and if their Army come
toward your Excellency, I will leave that pursuit, and draw all the Force I
can to serve you. In the mean time I shall beg your Excellency to esteem me

Corssour the first of. September. 1645. The humblest of your Excellencies
servant EDW. FREEMAN.

Honorable Master:
THese are to certify you that His Majesty came yesternight into into
Worcester, they say he has 7000. Soldiers, the speech is amongst the
Soldiers, they are this day to go to Cannon-Froom; if you please to send by
this Messenger where I shall meet some other man to morrow morning, you shall
have further Intelligence, and in the interim I will use the best means I can
to further the business.

September. 1. 1645. Your servant Sic subs.

For Colonel Devereux.
May it please your Excellency:
I Did acquaint you formerly with my resolution to go to Scotland, with four
Regiments of Horse and a Regiment of Dragoones, and leave the rest under the
command of General Major Middleton; but I am since forced to alter that
resolution; for the sad news of the last defeat of our Army near Kilfith, and
of the enemies being Master of the field at home being noised abroad amongst
the common Soldiers, they all openly professed that none of them would stay,
but all go for relief of their native Country. Upon which consideration, and
the confidence that Colonel General Poyntz professed to me, that with his
own and the rest of the Country Forces, he was strong enough to oppose the
King. I have marched with the whole party for Scotland, expecting your further
Orders, which shall be carefully obeyed by

Nottingham 26. August 1645. Your Excellencies most humble servant DAVID LESLEY.

FINIS.

