THE DECLARATION AND PROPOSITIONS OF His Excellency the Lord General LEVEN,
and diverse other eminent Commanders of the standing Army in the Kingdom of
Scotland; to the Parliament assembled at Edinburgh, concerning the dis-ingaging
of a war with England; as also, touching the Parliament, and Army.

Likewise, the progress of the Scots Army under the command of the Earl of
Calender, with their approach near the Confines of England. And the gallant
preparations of Sir Arthur Haslerig, Governor of Newcastle.

Also, a Declaration of the Parliaments Army in the Kingdom of Ireland, under
the command or Colonel Jones, concerning the Lord Inchiquin's disserting the
Parliament of England, and declaring for the KING.

April 20. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbott.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

Letters from IRELAND Scotland, and the North, relating the true Affairs from
all the said places.
SIR,
I Suppose you are not ignorant of the sad condition we are in, by means of
the Traitrous proceedings of the Lord Inchiquin against the Parliament, and
Kingdom, in that he has betrayed the trust reposed in him, and declared, that
he will not acknowledge the Parliament of England to be a Parliament, neither
will he submit to any Order or Ordinances of Parliament; but on the contrary,
if occasion serve, oppose them: he has also by his Agents, endeavored to
persuade the Protestant forces in other parts of this Kingdom, to desert the
Parliaments and Protestants cause, and join with him, under a pretense of no
body knows what, but himself: it is greatly feared he will join with the
Rebels, but as yet he keeps those forces which adhere unto him, in a body by
themselves, without admitting any Irish to march under his command, yet there
is a Cessation of War concluded between them and the Lord Inchiquin; and by the
correspondency which is held between them, we may assuredly gather, that when
need requires, they will use their endeavors to assist each other; Inchiquin
has gathered his forces into a body, and is marching into a body, and is
marching toward Dublin, as it is thought, with an intent to besiege the City,
and if it be possible, by force or policy to get it into his possession, and
this supposition is not without some ground, for those of Inchiquins party give
out, that all those that will not join with him, were best to pack away for
England, and if any oppose him, they shall receive such a reward as shall prove
a terror to others, if he should ever have a strength to set down before the
City, it is much doubted that some of the soldiers will be too forward to run
unto him; but for the generality, they declare themselves very averse to his
proceedings, and do declare that with the utmost ability, and expense of their
blood and lives, they will use their endeavors to oppose him, and bring him to
his deserved punnishment and if they know any of their fellow Soldiers or
officers that shall adhere unto him or but seem to favor or give any liking
to his undertakings, they will upon the first knowledge thereof lay hands on
them and bring them forth unto exclaimation or commit them to custody where
they may remain, until such time as they may have convenient trial concerning
the Premises; such a hatred have the well affected to the cause against his
proceedings.

This is the condition that at the present this City is in, you see we are in a
very sad condition, and likely to be made a prey, unto those more then
barbarous bloodthirsty inhumane Rebels, who have, as it were with devouring
jaws, long gaped to devour us, and which by means of our own divisions and
distractions, they will undoubtedly bring to pass, if the English parliament do
not take us into their serious considerations, and speedily contrive some way
to relieve us, and prevent the inevitable ruin which now thretens us, and will
speedily take us, if not prevented by their wisdoms, whom next under God, have
preserved us hitherto, and for whom we are ever bound to pray.

Dublin 12. April 1648.

Declaratory Letters from the Kingdom of Scotland.
SIR,
IT is concluded in Scotland that an army shall be sent into England, and
although many will not be persuaded to believe it, yet it may be easily
gathered, that such a thing is intended, and will speedily be effected, if not
prevented; for the Scots army draws Southward, and many of them are ordered to
be quartered near the Borders, the Lord Belcarouse Troop have taken up their
quarters within five miles of Berwick, having order so to do. Many other
Troops have quarters assigned them in the South of Scotland, and especialy in
the Towns and Villages nrer adjoining to England; also from other parts of
Scotland we perceive the Scots Forces to creep Southward, but they are wary,
and do it by little and little, the better to avoid suspicion, but if their
intents are, as is suspected, England may chance to frustrate their designs,
and the Scots after all their juggling be deceived of their expectations.


Sir, Arthur Haslorig, keeps a vigilant eye over the Malignants of Newcastle,
and is very careful as becomes a Governor of a place of that strength to see
and provide all things fit for the safety and fortification and defense of the
Town, and Castle, and will quickly be able to defend it against any force or
combination whatsoever, yet in these parts the Malignants that a long time have
been glad to keep silence begin to talk high again as if they were possessed
with some great hope, and had great expectations of a third to accomplish their
design, and some ill affected Stewards have been so bold as in open court,
publicly to declare and charge their Iuries, to present all such persons in
their Jurisdictions as have taken up Arms against the King, and to fine and
punish them, and Sir Richaad Graham at Cumberland, at a Court gave charge to
all his Tenants, that they should be ready when he should have occation to call
them, and the Cavaliers are fo^bold as to encourage the peopl saying, fight for
King Charles, and if you will you shall speedily be employed.

The Parliament of Scotland have given answer to the English Commissioners
papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory. and that they refer the
substance of all to their own Commissioners who are coming into England, of
whom the Lord Lee is one to treat with the Parliament, and have Propositions
and instructions given them, to treat about settling Religion according to the
Covenant for the King his removal to one of his house, and a personal treaty
with him as also for disbanding the Army and other Propositions that I have not
as yet; the certainty of the difference between the Clergy and state is as
great as ever, they will by no means consent to the raising of men, listing in
diverse parts of this Kingdom; it is supposed 'twill be speedily effected; and
because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this Kingdom do not
concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be disbanded, and the Earl
of Calender is to be General of their new Model; insomuch, that the Cavees and
English Fugitives grow very high, treating ruin and destruction to the
Parliament and their Adherents.

But indeed, some days there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days
the distance is so far, as scarce any man shall know how near they are to have
an Army: many English men are at Edinburgh, and they do daily increase.
Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Friday night last; what she is, is not
yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty.
Some Irish Rebels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Maro. of
Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march toward them. This is
all, I earnestly request a correspondency weekly, and where I shall direct my
Le^er unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self.

Your obliged servant, R. S:
Barwick 12 April, 1648. Postscript.
Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an
answer to our Commissioners papers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory,
and that they refer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are
coming into England to treat with the Parliament.




SIR,
IN the Marq. of Argyles Country, there is risen up in Arms one commonly
called Kolkittoh, which has caused some of the Forces that lay in the South of
Scotland to march Northward for the suppression of them, all the Officers in
the standing Army or Scotland except Lieutenant General Middleton) have
petitioned to the Parliament, and presented these Proposals, viz. 1. That they
will be pleased to consult with the Ministers of the Kirk, in relation to their
proceedings touching the Kingdom of England.

2. That they will be pleased not to engage in a War against their Brethren of
England, unless the Kirk of Scotland do concur therein.

His Excellency Genesis Leven, and the rest of the Officers of the Standing army,
have declared their unwillingnesse to engage in a war against the Kingdom of
England, Parliament, and army. Sir, I am

Your assured loving friend, R. G.
Barwick 12 April, 1648.

FINIS.

