The Samaritans Box Newly opened: Pouring his Oil into the wounds of a
distresled Kingdom; And communicating wholesome advice to all Estates,
especially to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, the Honorable Council of War,
together with the Agitators of the ARMY. Wherein is laid down 1. The particular
causes of all our calamities. 2. Diverse Considerations tending to Moderation.
3. Rules to prevent growth of Evils. 4. Assured means to procure Peace, and put
an end to all our Troubles.


By WILLIAM LEVITT.

I speak it to your shame, is there not a wise man among you, no not one that
can Judge between his brethren, but a brother goes to law with a brother, and
that under Insidels.

1 Cor. 6. 5. 6. The Prophet is a Fool, and the spiritual man is mad, for the
multitude of thine Iniquity, therefore the hatred is great.

Hos. 9. 7. Let your Moderation be known to all men, the Lord is at hand.

James 3. 17. Beati Pacifici.

Matthew. 5. 9. LONDON, Printed by James and Joseph Moxon, at the sign of the
Sugar loaf in Hou^s-ditch. 1647.

Gentlemen and loving Friends,
THat due and Dear respect I ow to you all, together with that Obligation lies
upon me, in regard of God and my Native Country, enforces this undertaking:
and indeed such is my interest in, and affection to you, so far as God has
made you Isntrumental to clear the Kingdom of those Catterpillers that
threatened consumption both of Church and State, that I desire death, rather
then detract the least iota of your noble deservings: such having been the
footsteps of God with you, that no power could stand before the aw and Majesty
where with your Army was clad: witness those many matchless Victories and
Successes obtained by Gods blessing upon your un-defatigable and undaunted
resolutions, so that generations to come may bless God for you, and from whom,
under God, the well-affected receive their present protection.

Notwithstanding, such are the various occurrences of Church and State, that
all the vast expense of Treasure and Blood, and all your unparalleld pains, to
deliver this poor Kingdom from oppression and Tyranny, is like to be utterly
lost, if God unexpectedly strike nor in, i^ s^^nders by may say or see any
thing.

I dare not have the least thought of any ill Intent, in your meanest
Instrument; yet our divisions and distractions are so great, their consequences
so destructive, that your faithfullest ^^^ends fear overthrow of all.

Time was, when our externalls only were corrupted, the disease not half so
dangerous; but now our very Vitalls are infected, and we become more
destructively incurable. The difference is not now between the Malignant and
well-affected; but the envyous man has sowed Ta^es among the ^ain^s, who under
God, are the life and being of a Nation; Nay, and these unhappy j^rrs in a time
when all expected Peace! Thi^ has been the stratagem of Satan from the first
rise of our unhappy commotions, to set the Godly together by the ears; he well
knowing the design would not stand with his honor: neither could he so easily
effect to divide his own, they being wiser in their generations then the
children of light.

I have adventured his prevention, either by an endeavor of re^uniting the
dissenting parties, (viz.) ^he Presbyterian and Independent; or at least, a
moderation of that violence which is too too apparent in each, when prevalent.
And although I may meet not only with misapprehensions, but harsh Censures for
my pains, and peradventure accounted a Self-seeker, although (impartially
considered) there is little cause. I am in this, as in all other my public
undertakings, armed against both good and evil reports; and would willingly
have shunned that occasion, had not the Ordinance of Parliament forced me to be
more public then otherwise I would.

I thank my God, I never was sinister, or do I at all plead for employment: I
am not so low wintered to seek an Office, (I abhor the thoughts) being better
able to pass by personal injuries, then to see general despite cast upon the
well-affected, who for some circumstantiall difference, are generally cast out
of places of Honor and Trust, or shamefully neglected; in whose behalf, I have
taken upon me this thanklesse task: In prosecution whereof,

I shall lay down, 1. The particular procuring Causes of all our Calamities. 2.
Diverse Considerations tending to moderation. 3. Rules to prevent growth of
distempers. 4. Certain approved means, to put an end to all our Troubles.


Only let me premise that I detest to speak one word in behalf ofany man of
public dis-affection: or justify the illegal proceedings of any, of what
Judgment soever, utterly disclaiming that giddy engagement, although diverse
honest men were drawn in to it: and condem^ing that unparalled piece of
violence offered the Parliament so dishonourably permitted, neither the Actors
enquired after, or the actions declared against; I mean when the Votes were
forced, by which the second Militia sat the second time: neither do I in the
least own the declining and neglect of our Independent friends, who had both in
Militia and Command sufficiently declared their fidelity: But as I said, in
behalf of such as have been found faithful, and are either by
mis-representation, or only for that they are Presbyterian, dishonourably
entreated; being willing to own a Godly man of either Judgment.

1. For the Causes of our Calamities.
1. The original and ^oot of all our maladies, as they proceed from God, is
sin, both National and personal: as pride, profaneness, Idolatry,
uncleanness, fulness of bread, Contempt of the poor, oppression, violence,
light esteem of the Gospel, formality, unthankfullnesse, unsuitable walking
with God in the midst of manifold mercies and deliverances; for these things
the land mourn.

2. Carnal Confidence, too much trusting in an arm of flesh, one Idolizing a
King, another a Parliament, a third an Army, a fourth a Synod, (in reference to
Church settlement peradventure) a fifth a Common Council: God now lets us see
all is vain, He infatuates our Councels, shakes our foundations, so that our
Prophets are as in the days of Hosea, turned Fools, the spiritual man is
mad, all our Champions from whom we expected deliverance, become rotten reeds,
all telling us there is no trust in secundary causes: God has been, God will
be our Reformer, our Deliverer: He it is must speak Peace, and he only must
settle the affairs of Church and State, that his Name may have more praise.

3. Idolizing our own opinions, though never so monstrous, every one hugging
his own Apes, because they are his; and hence is it not only the Godly Learned,
but the balance of the Sanctuary are so much slighted.

4. Corrupt men in places of Honor and Trust, seeking themselves, not the
public.

5. Ingratitude, and more then ordinary incivility and dishonor offered those
that under God have delivered us from our common enemies, not taking care
either for their payment, or making sufficient provision for Indemnity, or
Tender Consciences, before endeavors of disbanding.

6. Jealousies, mis-understandings, and mis-representations of each others
words and actions.

7. From our corrupt hearts, each party being partial to it self; the
Presbyterian sleighting and outing men of Independent principles, although
never so faithful and Godly; the Independent as unworthily sleighting and
outing all that correspond not with them, although otherwise without exception:
Certainly these warrings and jarrings proceeds merely from our Lusts, and its
in vain to expect peace so long as any one party seeks to set up it self.

8. Too much indulgency to Delinquent Clergy, who in all places rake up their
old Relics, and poison the people with their Egyptian hotch-potch, imboldened
hereunto by hope of general Tolleration.

9. Ignorance of that small difference that's between Presbyterian and
Independent discipline. Certainly if the generallity of each knew the
Government to be one, only in point of appeal, as indeed it is; they would
never be so mad to emulate: they must have both Pastors, Teachers, Elders,
Deacons, the same Officers, the same Ordinances, the same Church Censu^e: to
speak truth, the Independent Churches are all Presbyterian, but Presbyterian as
now stated, not Independent; yet easily might be reconciled if the Lord would
open our eyes, and ^^cline ou^ hearts to Love and Peace.

10. Want of Christian affection, which breeds ill constructions on each side.
If a Godly Minister shall zealously press on to that government to which his
principles and Conscience leads, without which, he cannot be found faithful,
this must be called rigor, malice, violence, etc. both charging that upon
violence, that's often done out of pure zeal to God and his Cause.

11. Playing so long Fast and Loose with the King: Certainly the expense of
less Treasure and Blood, would have served turn, if we had dealt roundly with
him at first; neither would our wars have worn out one General; the truth is,
we sought him so long, till we have almost lost the Kingdom; believe it He
shoots well in the Long Bow; yet let no man mistake me, I wish his Majesty as
much honor and happiness as he that peradventure may shoot his first bolt;
but I wish also for his and his posterities and kingdoms good, that speedy
provision may be made for the Kingdoms Indemnity and future security, without
which, we have been fighting to small purpose.

12. Former suffering so many base scurrilous scandalous Pamphlets, so frequent
about City and Country, nursing corrupt humors in malignat and discontented
spirits, and deluding abundance of ignorant people, bringing the Vulgar sort
generally into dislike both of Parliament and Army.

13. Permitting so many corrupt Magistrates, and notorious Delinquents in
offices of Trust, in most parts of the Kingdom, who have (as much as in them
lies) made the well-affected objects of their revenge.

14. Accounting all Presbyterians that are not Independants, and all
Independants that are not Presbyterians, when the major part is owned by
neither, nor sit for Communion with either; nay, indeed are enemies to both:
the Independent reckoning all Profane to the Presbyterian; the Presbyterian
accounting all men of rotten and unsound judgments Independants; and there is
a great fault in both, for their indulgencie one to the profane, and the other
to the erroneous in not declaring against them.

15. The Pride, Covetuousnesse and Profaneness of the generality of our
Clergy, who have thereby caused many (otherwise well-affected) not only
tobecome enemies to government but even to loathe the Ordinances of God for their
sakes: yet blessed be God we have as many Godly learned whose hearts mourn in
secret for these things, as any Nation under the Sun.

2. Diverse Considerations tending to Moderation.
1. Consider the Presbyterian has gone hand in hand with you, against the
Common enemy, have neither spared person or purse; but have been as prodigal
of their bloods for you, as you for them; I mean the well-affected: therefore
let us take heed of that foolish pastime of taking one another by the beard,
etc.

2. Remember you cried out on them that cast out your Independent friends, for
non-correspondency in opinion: Why then will ye write after so foul a Copy? I
dare presume you cast out many that were heartily grieved for that
mis-carriage: Thou that say a man should not steal, will thou commit
Sacrilege?

3. Although all Independents are not Saints, nor all Saints Independents; yet
you pro^esse Sanctity, and I hope, not in vain; and if so, be merciful as
your heavenly Father is: and ^emember the Apostle James tells us all, that the
Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without judging and hypocrisy.
James 3. 17.

4. Consider the things for which many are now condemned, was (when acted) very
disputable, not things ordinary in our Kingdom, for an Army not to dis-band
when commanded by the State, by whom raised, employed, and from whom they
received their power and entertainment; the demanding the Impeached Members
with a menace; the change of the Militia in like manner; the seizing the Kings
person, and disposing of him contrary to command, etc. things which men of
ordinary capacities could see neither Law nor President for; nay, of that
nature that I believe puzzled both Parliament and your selves to accomodate:
Your best plea then necessitas non habet: although blessed be God well blown
over: and although men wi^^ed you never so well, and your intentions were never
so good, yet many of your best f^iends were dubicus: now in such cases best
constructions should be made of men's disp^^es and actions: and if when such an
Army move toward such a considerable City and Garrison as London then was, men
were willing to be put into a capacity to receive Friend or Foe, Certainly they
might, they ought to do it, and remain your Friends, much less be accounted
^^aytors; especially men of known sidelity and trust, not guilty o^
mis-demeanour: you may please to take notice, at that time the City was utterly
out of all military capacity, their Commanders all ou^ed by change of the
Militia, and indeed had not (the power by which they sat, viz.) those forced
Votes, been questionable, which was one grand cause why myself and diverse
others declined the business; the law of God, Nature and Nations, would have
rendered them ridiculous, and they had certainly swerved from the principles
either of So^ldiers or sensi^le Creatures, had they neglected a business of
such concernment; If any had any further design, I will not open my mouth in
their defense: I am sure when the question was put to the Militia, they
protested against any further proceedings, Calling God to witness their
Integrity.

5. Consider ^ear of Non enjoyment of your own liberties, estates, etc. was one
grand cause of your non di^banding, and might not the Cry upon like reason, put
themselves in a posture, without breeding ^o much ill blood? You feared all in
the Parliament were not your friend^; the City that all in the Army neither
were or could be expected fai^h^ull; whether they might have commanded their
^ommanders at the sight of Bo^ty, who knew? (Opportunity makes a Thief)
However, God be thanked for so real a Remonstance to the cont^a^y, as neither
we nor you could promie.

6. That that gave you entrance into the (...), was the good affection of the
Citizens, who would not engage against you, who are now put into the scale with
ne^te^s and malignants, who opposed you most.

7. In ^idged proceedings you imi^^te the Malignant, not the Godly party of the
Presbyterians, who were much grieved at that sudden outing of your and our
Independent friends.

8. Consider you are now upon the Pinnacle of temptation; A man is never tried
till he has power to do good or hurt, to be merciful or oppressive; the eyes
of the whole Christian world is upon you. Suppose ye were naked, and those ye
now look upon as enemies, were armed: Think upon that good old rule, What ever
ye would men should do to you, do ye to them, for this is Law and Prophets.

9. Hereby ye exasperate the spirits of Neuters and Malignants, who would be
glad of opportunity to be avenged both upon you and the Presbyterian Godly,
and who only wait a turn of the wheel, now by dealing unworthyly with the
Godly party, although different in Judgment, you give but occasion of more
violence if opportunity serve, unless God be the more merciful, the breach
will be then more wide then ever.

10. This causes men to say, You seek your selves, not the public, when men
of Gallantry and Fidelity, (otherwise without exceptions) are neglected,
because not of opinions with you in all things; and putting into place of
Honor and Trust, men of sinister and unworthy principles, some of them who (to
my knowledge) never lent Ten groats freely to the public, either hazarded
life or fortune in the Kingdoms cause, or could (till very late) give you a
good word, while many neglected have pleaded your Cause before God and man,
when you were at greater distance and less strength: and let me tell you, in
such general negotiations you were better spare ten knaves then deal
unworthily with one honest man. It is true, the City of late have kept their
purses, whatsoever is said to the contrary, not being so able as formerly the
well-affected in it; having had diverse occasions of weakening, yet peradventure
some others have too unworthily dealt this way; doubtless Nabal dealt as
unworthily with David, and it never repented him to spare the Churls blood.

11. Give the Presbyterians their due, although they neglected your and their
Independent friends, yet they loved them better then to send them by Troops (as
it were) into prison: therefore take heed while ye plead against persecution
and tyranny, you your selves act not that part.

12. Did your Master the Parliament forgive you ten thousand talents, when ye
refused to disband, seized the Kings person, changed the Militia, demanded the
impeached members with a menace, and will you pull your poor brother by the
throat for an ^undred pence, for one act, yea so disputable, they acting by
Command, you contrary? Gentlemen, I must deal plainly with you, I cannot, I may
not, I dare not to speak Souldier-like, I will not flatter; and I am consident
I speak to those that regard more the reproof of a friend, then the flattery of
a foe.

13. This makes Religion ridiculous, in that there is no forbearing one
another, not a wise man amongst us to moderate, but we must jar before the
uncircumcised, that would gladly see us both ruined: for shame let not this be
told in Gath, or published in Askelon: Let not the daughters of the Philistims
rejoice in our divisions. What, shall we now at last, that have been joining
against the Common enemies, become the devils Pack horses to drive on the
design of him and his? God forbid: What (say they) is this your harmless
Army? Is this your Reformation? Have we not a Church and State well settled? Is
this the fruits of your Fastings, and Prayers? these are your brethren the
Saints; Marry God send us a King upon any terms. This is the Language of your
and our enemies at home and abroad; and I verily believe our divisions adds
more to the strength of Antichrists Kingdom, then all his Champions; and I do
as verily believe, that he has a competent number both in City and Army,
(viz.) Jesuits, that are the fomenters of this mischief; God grant the
Parliament be clear of them.

14. Consider how wide a door our domestic dissentions sets open to a Foreign
Adversary: Certainly, but that God unexpected and undeservedly on our parts
has engaged them one against another, we had heard more of them ere this.

15. Take notice the hand of God is upon us, he is pleading with us by his
Judgments: the sword has devoured much flesh, and still threats his
pestilential arrows are flying about us, striking on the right and lesc hand,
and although the season promise better then a famine, yet price of bread corn
etc. is sach, as that the poor are not a little pincht: I Gods controversy on
foot, and shall we provoke him by our unnatural conte^tions? I look upon the
jarrings of the godly, as a spiritual and heavy Judgment: Surely our hearts
are divided from God, therefore he divides us. Let us not be in ensible of his
hand, and take heed of biting one another, least we be devoured one of another,

16. Violence and Oppression are grand causes of Civil commotions and
insurrections: believe it, the whole Kingdom is in ^ardly disturbed: Oppression
makes a wise man mad. Our studiet erefore should be, to ease, not burden; if
fire break out, its not easily quenched.

17. Shall Pagans, Papists, Heathens and Tu^ks agree, and shall Christians be
the only men of contention? Let us not give occasion to blaspheme.

Are the arch enemies of God and Kingdom overcome, and shall we now breatne out
threats and slaughters one against another? Remember the Apostle says, If any
man lust to be contentious, the Churches of Christ have no such custom.

18. Consider you have a har^ task to undergo; I believe in the accomplishment
whereof, you I^ave need enough of the assistance of ali the well-affected in
the Kingdom: work which would have been carried on with les difficulty, while
the affections of the Kingdom were warmer toward the Parliament, and you also,
then now.

19. Hereb, you sad the hearts of many faithful Instruments of Church and
S^a^e, and discourage diverse of those you employ (...) with ife: a ^minister
much matter of mirth to a lmalignants, to see ^uch now slig^ted by you, who
were ever envied by them for their activity and sidelity.

20. Fear of violenc^ both from within and without, caused the Ci^y to endeavor
a capacity of desence; no^ this being over sufficient satisfaction to Saints,
is vindication of their own innocence, not revenge. Have ye done all for God?
Trust all with God.

21. Forget not What the City has done for you and the Kingdom: A man will
ever be tender of a friend, and make best constiuctions of his actions: Suppose
that with Diogenes it has once in its sise gone backward, me thinks that ever
forwardness and freeness that has been found it it, should cover one fault.

22. Herein you seem to pr^fer shaddows before substance: Is there any man
slighted that is Independent, though never so erroneous and unsound in his
opinion? while men though never so O^thodox, if dissering in that punctillo,
are neglected: so that it seems a less matter to be an Anabaptist, Antinomian,
Anti Scripturian, Anti Sabatharian, an Anti-God, or an Anti Christ, then a
Semi-Anti Independent.

23. This mightily corrobocats and consirms all the Roman Catholic crew: nay
the profane wretches in the world are encouraged hence to abominate our
Religion, and the very name of it; while they are unanimous, though never so
Idolauous and profane; and we thus extremely filled with contentions and
divisions.

24. Consider harsh dealing from friends goes harsh, goes nearest the heart:
What thou my familiar friend that sat at my Table, that are my bread, with
whom I took sweet counsel, with whom I ven uredlife and fortune may this City
well say, especially the well affected in it: Truly should Cavaliers and
Ma^ignants oppose the godly, it were no wonder; for wolves to ^^vour sheep is
natural, but it would astonish a man to see one sheep shouldering and devouring
another; I am sure our shepherd will not well like it.

25. Let the Cities former service prevail so far with you, as to b^^ish: he
th^ught^ of billerting upon i^; i^s very fit the sou^dier should have his pay:
but I hope the Parliam^nt both can and have made better provi^ion then billet,
of Ordinances are not obeyed where men are able, let them suffer distress: for
want of which, many dis affected laugh at such, whose freeness and obedience to
the State, has dis enabled them to do as formerly, while others malignantly
disposed are much in arrear, with whom speedy and strict course should be
taken: but the houses and shops of Citizens are fit to entertain better guests
then common soldiers.

26. Lastly, although not the least consideration, Poor bleeding dying Ireland
which lies gasping for our help, while we lie c^uslesly contending one with
another: Woe be to them that are cause of that ^ad retard of their relief, I
believe if God call him once to account, who ever it be, it were better that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then to bean
Instrument of shedding so much Christian blood, we^l is it while we in effect
say it shall be destroyed, the Lord says no, in the absence of humane help I
will save and deliver it. Friends, I pray God grant when he makes Inquisition,
that Irelands blood be not charged upon Englands account, for all we do is to
talk of their relief; we say to the hunger starved, be ye warmed, and be ye
filled, and to the naked, be ye clothed, and to the wounded, be ye healed; but
who administers help? Surely we are all Priests and Levites.

3. Remedies to prevent growth of future evils.
1. Take heed of too much listening to whispering Informers, who do more hurt in
private, then ever they will do good to public; especially give them no ear when
they strike at men of public Trust, fidelity, and spirit.

2. In placing or displacing, consult not with men of self-ish and peevish
spirits, although otherwise godly: he is fittest to advise withal, that loves a
godly man, let him be Presbyterian or Independent.

3. Let not a single report serve in point of public concernment.

4. Judge no man by a particular word or action, that generally has appeared
faithful.

5. Make best constructions of the words and actions of any godly man, of what
opinion soever in circumstantialis.

6. Condemn no man till called to answer his change, nor g^ve much he^d to one
that gapes for preferment.

7. If the Parliament would acquiesce in their own Judgment and
determinations, it would prevent much discontent, they being the proper
Trustees and Representative Body of the Kingdom, and not the Army; and then
would likewise the Kingdom acquiesce in them.

8. Avoid all things that may breed disunion, and listen to any thing that may
promote peace, or tending to a Religious accommodation.

9. If they would be more caresul to keep their credit in payment of the
public faith, then solicitous to reward themselves, t^ere would be less
heart-risings against them: Take heed of cutting too large thongs, neither slay
the poor man's Ewe-Lamb.

4. Means to put an end to all our Troubles.
1. Let us break off our sins by righteousness, and our iniquities by showing
mercy, for they are cause of all our troubles, Corrupt Councillors and
Statesmen have slain their thousands, but our sins their ten thousands.

2. Let every one of us in particular seek the Lord, call upon him, and wrestle
with him by prayer, for settling Peace and Truth, and let both Presbyterian and
Independent jointly and solemnly seek the Lord in public, for his direction
and blessing, that however our opinions differ, our affections may be one for
God; like a wise Father, if he see his children altogether by the ears, will
never leave lashing till he make them agree.

3. Let the difference be publicly debated, by men of moderate spirits, able
and Godly, that the Kingdom may receive satisfaction.

4. Every one deny himself, Let all Estates, King, Parliament, Army and City
too, smite upon the thigh, all confesting their mis-treadings, for so long as
each stands upon his own Justification, there can be no true Peace.

1. For the King.

None can deny that his doings have been destructive; the sad stories whereof,
may be yet read in lines of Blood.

2. The Army.

However happily owned by the Parliament since their refusing to disband, etc.
although the most renowned in the Chri^^ian world: I believe no age can produce
so many sump^ome^ and trophi^s of Honor in so short a time as they; yet this
cannot be reckoned less then a digression.

3. The City extremely too blame

In permitting it not countenancing that mischievous combination and
engagement, that horrid riot and violence upon the Parliament, neither
punished, nor declared against: As also in outing the Militia, and their
Commands, their Independent brethren, who had been faithful and active in
worst times.

4. The Parliament.

1. In sleighting such an Army, who under God, were their and the Kingdoms
deliverers, endeavoring their disbanding, before sufficient provision, either
for Pay, Indemnity, or Tender Conscience.

2. In pleading a Force, some of them saying they were forced to Vote: a
shameful plea for any man entrusted with a Kingdom: Conscience certainly cannot
be compelled; were the sword at the breast, a man ought rather lose his life
then betray a Kingdom: if a man could not sit without apparent haz^^d of life,
he were better of the two, protest and withd^aw: but if there come li^e or
death, he ought to sp^ak his Consci^^^^. Now if all this would c^use out a
Committee of able, godly, (...), considerable m^n, confess all their failings,
and let their business be only to accomodate, using those foregoing (...), of
Fasting, Prayer, Repen^ance. etc. I am consident a short and seasonable period
would be put to all our Troubles.

5. Let after all this provision be made, if both parties agree not, for the
dissenting: What though they cannot join with us in our Discipline, cannot we
allow our own Countrymen as much privilege as the Dutch and French had in the
Bishops days, whose discipline ever differed from ours? That which is of God
will stand, if not, it will undoubtedly fall.

Lastly, Short and seasonable advice to the suffering Party, whether
Presbyterian or Independent.
1. Take heed of suffering as an evil doer, and then be not at all troubled, it
is and has been the portion of the most precious, to be evilly entreated:
neither art thou alone.

2. Be comforted in that God is the avenger of the oppressed, neither do
extremes last long.

3. Be comforted that thou have discharged a good Conscience while entrusted.

4. Let this thy condition be so far from causing thee to take part with
malignants, which thy corrupt heart will be apt to, that it cause thee to walk
more closely and circumspectly with God; and let patience have its perfect work.

5. Be not perplexed for that providence are promiscuous, or for that Gods
dispensations are misterious, in that, notwithstanding all our expense of
Treasure and Blood, after so much wrestling with God in public and private,
our hopes of Reformation is so much clouded, but honor God in staying thy
heart upon him in most unsettled times, yea even in the dark, who is able to
bring light out of darkness, life out of death, nay heaven out of hell: consider
he that is faithful has promised, no cross occurrences can alter his purpose:
He that preferred Joseph by the prison, Led Israel to Canaan through the Sea,
Created all things of nothing, can, nay doubtless will, after a while exercise
of our Faith and Patience in the wilderness of our unhappy divisions and
distractions, bring us to a blessed Land flowing with milk and honey of peace
and truth. Yet will he give us pure Ordinances, perfect the work of
Reformation; yet will he set his Son upon his holy hill of Sion, It is good to
see Sions beauty in the very dust thereof.

Object. If any shall object I have pleaded the Presbyterian cause more then
the Independent.

Answ. 1. I answer, At this time there is more need the Presbyterian being most
despicable.

2. Time was not many years since, when the Independents were as much despised,
when (under God) I was as isntrumental for their entertainment; I desire to
look upon the suffering party whichsoever, desiring to heal and compose, not to
make wider the wound.

Thus having freely unboweld my self, (peradventure not without displeasure on
all sides) some will say I have spoken too much against the Army: another that
I have wronged the King: others that I have wronged the City: others I have
abused the Parliament, which is the least of my thoughts in any particular, I
honor them all; only I love them all too well to flatter any: and if every one
will but enter into his own heart, and smite upon his own thigh, I know none
will condemn me. However, if I have come near the quick, I hope all will
consider that a faithful Physician takes more care to cure then please his
Patient; neither is he a good Surgeon that cannot cut and lance when need
is: the ^ore must be thoroughly searched lest skinned over, again putrify: I^ I
have by this poor ^ling and stone, struck our Gyant-like j^^ings in the
forehead: I^ by this clay and sp^tl^ God please to open our eyes, and in^l^^e
our hears to a happy accommodation: i^ I have pleased my God, and been
^aithfull to my Count^ey, I pass not: and if the physic be not so toothsom, I
am sure it is wholesome; The Lord make it effectual to the l^easing our un^appy
di^^erences.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNHAM.


