A LETTER WRITTEN UPON OCCASION from the Low Countries, Concerning a
difference, betwixt the Prince of Orange, and the States, showing upon what
occasion it grew.

Whereunto is added, Aviso's from several places, of the taking of the Island
of Providence, by the Spaniard, from the English.

London, Printed for Nath: Butter, March, 22. 1641.

Hage, March the 20. stilo novo. THE COPY OF A Letter written from Charles de
la Fin, Page unto the young Prince of Orange, unto James de La Fin his brother,
Secretary unto the Duke of Vallette, residing now in Coven-garden, touching the
late proceedings of the Prince of Orange.
Written from the Hage in Italian, and translated by William Vmfrevile, Gent.
March. 14. 1641.
Brother,
AS I am acquainted from you with the state of things in England, so let me
impart unto you some alterations here, that more near touch us: Grave Henry our
Prince, and Master, by some information, from Martin Van Trumpe, the States
Admiral, is fallen into some more then distrust with the States, in matter of
his proceedings in the Army, their jealousies brake forth into open discontent,
upon occasion of a meeting of a great crew of his Commanders, at a supper in
Flushing, upon the arrival of the Queen of Great Britain, where his health
being drunk before the Lords General, the Bourgemasters of the Town, took
great exceptions at it, giving out that the Prince of Orange was but their
servant, and took pay of them, as well as the meanest soldier in the Army;
that it was disorderly done, to drink his health before his betters: to whom
replied Mounsieur de Varracaville, a French Captain of Horse; that he trusted
the Prince his Master so well understood himself, that having married his son
to the eldest daughter of the King of great Britain, he would scorn to be
counted, much more to be termed, the servant of Brewers and Bakers, and
Felt-makers: hereupon the Burgemasters surlily, and saucily replied, that
taking their allowance, he was either a true servant, or a false Traitor.

Varracaville was rising to let fly at him: and some others were as ready as
he; but noise and tumult arising, the Governor of the Town came in, and
commanded all to be quiet, great muttering was in the Town, the next two
days about it: on the third, the Prince was summoned to the Hage to make his
appearance before the States General, to make answer unto such things, as
should by Martin Van' Trumpe, John Van Eslerdort be laid against him. His
Highness took such homely dealing bad, and his servants worse: his Army worst
of all, who summoning a Counsel of war to his Highness lodging; plainly
told him, that except he would, he should not go, and that they should know,
that if they had money, they had swords; and that they having command of the
one, would not be long without the other, and that should shortly appear;
hereupon we all, as well servants, as Commanders, took an oath unto His
Highness, and his son, to serve them toward all, and against all; which
taken upon mature deliberation, it was ordered by His Highness himself,
because of the Queen of great Britains presence to go to the Hage, but not
to take notice of any summons, and with such a company with him, that he should
not greatly need to fear them; and here we are in that posture, not caring for
those that look so big upon us: I trust the Army is wholly made for His
Highness; not being desired of their service, but freely offering it: We his
servants, and those of my young Masters, are resolved to see our end shortly
accomplished, or to die every man of us: I trust there are no false parties in
the Army, then before May day I hope we shall see an alteration: and those
that hold themselves our masters, shall be glad to give us all fitting
respect: the King of Denmark is assuredly for it, and has promised both
coin, men, and shipping: France hearkens to it, and Spain upon some
conditions, will yield assistance; it is more honorable for a Prince to be
tied in some ceremonious concernments unto a Monarch, then to any other, either
by Democrasticall, or Aristocraticall Government* more pleasant tidings I hope
to write you, at the Queens return, if not before; for this must not be long
in doing, and it is here thought, that she will not stay long here, by reason
that these achievements cannot long remain without a period, nor without some
bickering, we hold it not fit, she should be eye witness of it: His
Highness, although he is counseled to send away speedily his young son;
and our hope, into France, yet he will not, but is resolved, that he shall
partake of his fortune, what ever it be; I hope we shall shortly cry, Vivez
Oraneye; and in this expectation, wishing heaven to say Amen unto it.

I rest from the Hage, your ever affectionate Brother, Charles de la Fin.
This present March. 20. new style.
Avisoes from several places.
THe 20. of December. stilo novo, arrived at St. Lucar the Admiral of the Nova
Spania's Fleet, in company of another small ship; they came in 91. days from
the Havana, and were parted by a storm from the rest of the Fleet 12. days
after their setting forth. I suppose they may be arrived at Porto Rico, for
they had most of them spent their masts. The said Admiral was cast away in the
going into St. Lucar, of 4. millions, which he brought, about 1. million lost;
the whole Fleet worth 10. or 11. millions, the richest that ever was known; in
the said Admiral was lost 500. Chests of Cuchinill, and a 1000. Chests of
Indigo, with a great quantity of other goods. I have Letters by an Aviso from
Cartagena, dated the 14. of September, wherein they advise that the Gallions
were ready laden with the filver, and would depart thence the 6. of October.
The General of the gallions, named Francisco Dia^ Pimienta, had been formerly
in the month of July, with above 3000. men, and the least of his ships in the
Island of Santa Catalina, which he had taken and carried away all the English,
and rased the Forts, wherein they found 600. Negres, much gold and Indigo, so
that the prize is esteemed, worth above half a million.

This unexpected, and undeserved act of the Spaniard, in supplanting our
Nation, will I hope ere long be requited, when as in cool blood the Spaniard
shall do us a mischief, in demolishing, and ruining that which another has
built, and is not able, or will not make use of it himself supplanting our
more industrious people, which endeavored to do good, both to the bodies and
souls of men, and only to show his greatness, with his multitude to destroy a
handful, and to account that a victory, which is rather a credilous treachery:
but let him triumph that wins at last.

FINIS.

