A LETTER SENT To His Majesty, From the Lords Justices, and Council in
IRELAND, April 23. 1642.

Concerning His Majesty's Resolution to go into Ireland.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

23. April. 1642. The Copy of a Letter sent to His Majesty, by the Lords
Justices, and Council in Ireland.
May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
BY Your Majesty's gracious Letters of the thirteenth of this Month, and a
Copy of Your Majesty's Message sent lately to Your Parliament in Your Kingdom
of England, (both which came to the hands of us Your Justices, on the
eighteenth of this Month) we observe that Your Majesty (out of a just sense
of the great miseries and afflictions of Your distressed Subjects in this Your
Kingdom of Ireland, occasioned by the inhumane cruelties of the Rebels here;
And out of Your tender and gracious care of Your good Subjects on this side,
has firmly resolved (by the assistance of Almighty God) with all possible
speed to make a Journey hither, in Your own Royal person, for the full and
final suppressing of this Rebellion.

Those Letters and Message we Your Majesty's Justices then immediately
communicated with the Council, as we always do all matters of Importance
concerning Your Majesty's Services; And caused the Copy sent us of Your Message
to Your Parliament in England to be Printed here; so to make known here Your
Majesty's gracious purpose, as You commanded us.

And we all jointly do humbly beseech your Majesty to give us leave to cast
ourselves at your Majesty's feet, and (with the Duty and Loyalty of faithful
Subjects) most humbly and thankfully to acknowledge to Your Sacred Majesty, as
well Your continued Grace and Goodness, upon all occasions expressed to this
Your Kingdom, and all Your Subjects therein; and amongst them, even those
wretched Rebels themselves heretofore, when they stood in the condition of good
Subjects, though they want the gratitude to be sensible of it; as particularly,
this high addition of Your Majesty's gracious favor to us, in not sparing the
pains, or hazard even of Your own Royal Person, for the suppressing of this
hideous Rebellion, and punishment of these ungrateful and treacherous Rebels,
who are thus unnaturally risen in Arms against Your Majesty, Expressed such
unparalleled hatred and detestation against Your Government and Nation, Spilt
(unprovoked) the blood of so many thousands of Your faithful and innocent
Subjects, Destroyed the Estates of all the British and Protestants in the
Kingdom, And (which is above all) as appears by several examinations, and many
other concurring Circumstances here, notwithstanding all their false and
feigned Pretenses to disguise their wicked and traitorous purposes, aimed
finally at no less (which we tremble to write, and cannot think without
horror and astonishment at their Impiety) then even to deprive You of Your
Royal Crown and Dignity, and to place over them some of themselves, or some
Foreign Prince, and so altogether to shake off the English Government.

Wherefore we cannot but rejoice (even in the midst of our present
Calamities) to hear Your Majesty's Princely purpose to take just vengeance on
them, for vindicating your Honor, revenging the blood and destruction of so
many of Your faithful Subjects, and securing the fu^ure Safety of Your Crowns
and Kingdoms.

And as we do thus joyfully apprehend the happiness we are to enjoy by those
your Majesty's Royal purposes, so we hold it agreeable with the duty of us
Your loyal Subjects and faithful Servants, whom You have advanced to the
Honor to serve You as Councillors to You in this Your Kingdom, humbly to
represent to Your Majesty upon this occasion the present estate of Your
affairs here, and the condition wherein this Kingdom stands, which we have done
by our Letters now sent to Master Secretary Nicholas, to be made known to your
Majesty, that so your Majesty understanding them, may on that side provide for
supplying our defects here, and rendering safety to Your own Royal Person
against these bloody Rebels, as your Majesty in Your Excellent judgment shall
think fit; whereby You may (to the comfort of Your good Subjects, and terror
of Your Enemies) appear in this Kingdom, in that Majesty which is suitable to
the Greatness and Wisdom of so Mighty a King as God has appointed You, whom
we pray God to Bless and Prosper with length of days, and a happy and
blessed Government over this and all other Your Kingdoms and Dominions, to the
Glory of God, the Honor of your Majesty, and the Joy and Comfort of all Your
Subjects, and amongst them of us,

From Your Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 23. April 1642. Your Majesty's most
loyal and most faithful Subjects and Servants. Subscribed by Sir William
Parsons Sir Jo. Borlase
Justices. E. of Ormond Ossory. Lord To. Digby. Sir Th Rotherham. Sir Jo.
Temple. Sir Fra. Willoughby. E. of Roscomon. Lord Cha. Lambert. Sir Ad. Loftus.
Sir Ja.Ware. Sir G. Wentworth. Sir Rob. Meredith.


FINIS.

