A LETTER TO A NOBLE LORD AT LONDON FROM A Friend at Oxford: Upon occasion of
the late COVENANT taken by both HOUSES.

Printed, 1643.

A LETTER TO A NOBLE LORD at London from a friend at Oxford, upon occasion of
the late Covenant taken by both Houses.
My Lord,
I Have received your Lordships Letter of the tenth of this instant, with much
more trouble and sadness of mind then any thing you have sent me this whole
ill year: All your Declarations, Votes, Ordinances, and Orders with your
Generals powerful Commission to kill and slay all good people, made not half
that impression in me (though I have not been ender in letting you know what
I think of the best of those) as your Sacred Vow and Covenant (as you call
them) which with Mr. Pym's Speech at the Common Hall of the discovery of the
great Plot, (I received enclosed in you Letter) has done. Are all your humble
and earnest desires and solicitations for Peace, all your Pangs and Throws for
a Reformation in Religion, delivered at last of a Sacred Vow and Covenant
against both? Have you at last thought fit to tell the World that there is no
possi^ility or hope of Peace, but by blood and desolation? Have Mr. Burroughes,
and Mr. Case so perverted all ^ts of Scripture, and Sergeant Wild, and Mr.
Glyn so confounded all Rules of Low, that your Consciences are grown so dead
to the one, and your Understandings so dull to the other, that in plain
English, you promise God Almighty to assist any body as kill the King, and set
up new Covenants of your own, point blanke against your Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and publish all this to the people as the Articles of your new
Creed? And yet that your Lordship should tell me that your affection and duty
to the King continues still the same you have pretended it, that you have still
not only the same desire, but the same hope of peace; and that you are
confident that the Anabaptists and Brownists (whom me thinks you have sworn
to defend) will shortly ship themselves for another Climate, is so strange to
me that Amazement it self is not more confounding. You tell me of a trick your
Lordships have found out, to save your harmelsse from any obligation by this
Oath, a Salvo to all your other Oaths Lawfully taken, and those being in a
Diameter contrary to this, you have upon the matter engaged your selves to
nothing by this new Covenant, and so having cunningly evaded the design of the
Contrivers: Oh (my Lord) can you please your selves with these shifts? Is this
the Wisdom, Vigilance, Integrity, and Courage of the Highest Court of
Judicature (for so the House of Peers in Parliament is) to lead the people by
their Example to so solemn an Act as a Covenant with God Almighty, which at
the instance you took it you intended should signify nothing? Will the poor
people of England, whereof it may be too many have looked upon your example
with Reverence, and thought many things fit or lawful only because you did
them, when they shall find that you have vowed in the presence of Almighty
God, the searcher of all hearts, as you shall answer at the great Day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, that you will according to your
power assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses of Parliament,
against the Forces raised by the KING; will they (I say) think that your
Lordship intended nothing by this Vow, but what you were obliged to by your
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, that is, to defend the KING, to the utmost
of your power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall
be made against His Person, His Crown, and Dignity, and to do your best
endeavor, to disclose, and make known to Him all Treasons and Conspiracies
which shall be against Him, to your power to assist all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preheminences and Authority belonging to Him, or united to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, and indeed to do all things which by this
your new sacred Vow you have forsworn to do? Will this Salvo reconcile all
those contradictions? and is this subtilty the first fruirs of your Humility
and Reverence of the Divine Majesty, your hearty sorrow for your own sins,
and the sins of the Nation, and your true intention to endeavor the
amendment of your own ways? For Gods sake (my Lord) talk not of preserving
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and opposing Papists and Popery, when
your Actions destroy the Elements of Christianity, and admit a latitude to your
Conscience to introduce Atheism, and Rules which the Turks in pure natural
honesty abhor and detest. Get your self to an opinion and avow it boldly, see
what you hazard, and ply your game out above board, be a desperate Gamester, if
you cannot be a skillful one, and so be capable of advantage by good luck; but
to be couzened and cheated to serve other men's turns, and to help to cousen
your self by little shifts and evasions, makes you be hated by them you serve,
despised by us, and will make you be laughed at when you are dead.

But (my Lord) admit you were indeed too hard for them by this Salvo, and by
the interposition of three or four other words (in order to the security of
preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, etc. according to your
Power and Vocation, etc.) had notably reserved a liberty to your selves of
complying with your former Oaths; That Oaths were to be intercepted according
to the Intention of the Person that takes them, (which being an instrument
between God and Us, and so every Covenant being to be taken strongest against
our selves, cannot be admitted) yet if another man who has taken this Vow
believes himself obliged by it, to the utmost Act even against the Life of the
King, has not he reason to believe that you have bound you self to assist
that Person in what he shall do in pursuance of that Oath? I would I were able
to make an answer for you; but admit further, that in all the promisory part
which contains what you will do, or what you will not do, that you were
safe, and had enga^ed your self to do no more or no less then your Duty:
pray consider the positive part, what Salvo have you for that? you do believe
that there has been and now is a Popish and traitorous Plot for the subversion
of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject, and
that in pursuance thereof a Popish Army has been raised, and is now on foot
in diverse parts of this Kingdom: which Army you imply to be the Army raised
for the King, and therefore you promise to assist against it. Now it seems
your Lordship does not believe the Preamble to be considerable, or any part of
the Oath, for I am sure you cannot believe any Popish or Traiterous Plot to be
on this side; where the Treason is, the Law will judge, and where the Papists
are will best be found in the Muster-Rolls of both Armies; you have had whole
Troops of that Profession, and no fault found with their Religion, till they
have given over being Rebels: whilst they are with you, they defend the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, but when they revolt to their Allegiance they are
Papists, and ought to be disbanded: indeed you take the course to compel the
King to do His duty by driving them to Him for Protection, which he cannot
deny to His Subjects, but you keep them from performing their duty in
assisting their Prince, by stripping and plundering, and leaving them naked to
the World. In good faith (I ask Pardon of Discretion and Truth for being
startled) your confident discourses of Popish Armies and Supplies from Papists
made me once imagine the King might in truth receive some notable supplies from
the persons of that profession, and it was not hard for me to believe that
that party which felt so much rigor and cruelty from you, and were sure to
suffer an utter extirpation if you prevailed, should willingly sacrifice all
they had to that Sovereigne Power which might mercifully allay that fury, and
preserve them still in the number of his Subjects; but I find there is a
narrowness, a vulgar spiritednesse, and a scandalou^ par^imony in all
Religions, even these men will have the comfort of being starved with money in
their purses, for I am a^red by those who are conversant with those Accounts,
that all the money His Majesty has received from all the Papists of England,
since He has been put to raise and continue these Forces, is not half so
much as is in truth due to Him by the Law, upon those moderate Compositions
made with them: And for any assistance He has by their personal service you
have long ago heard (and I have reason enough to believe) that the Papists in
all His Armies will not make one Regiment: how many more you have, and how many
more you would be glad to have, your Lordship can better judge then I.

Well, there has been a treacherous and horrid Design lately discovered, to
surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, and God knows what, and you do
abhor and detest that wicked and treacherous Design. It Is well done, whether
you know it or not: but what may this treacherous Design be, that Mr. Pym
says, would have destroyed the City and the Kingdom, and in their Ruins have
buried Religion and Liberty? Another Gunpowder Treason, like that of the
Protestation against the first Remonstrance? The King has sent a Commission
(for now it is printed, all the World knows what it is) to certain persons to
use their utmost power to suppress those who are in Rebellion against Him, and
assist those who are oppressed by them. Is there one Popish or popishly
affected person in that Commission, or to be employed in the whole Design? Is
there one clause in it on the behalf of Papists, or against the Liberty of the
Subject? Indeed it may seem strange that the King should so much consider that
Apostate City, (where the rage of some, and the tamenesse of others, have made
up one general Guilt) as to offer them any countenance to relieve themselves:
but that it should be a horrid and treacherous Design, when you have in all
the Counties of England, Commanders of your Militia and Commissioners even at
this present to assesse, rate, and collect Money for the maintenance of your
Rebellious Army, for the King to be willing to have an Army in London or
Middlesex, whereby all other Armies, and that too might be speedily disbanded,
will need an Orator no less powerful then Mr. Pym, or his Excellency
himself, (who in in these nice Arguments is the better Orator) to make evident
to the World. Believe it (my Lord) whilst there is one honest man left in that
City, there will be always a Plot to reduce it to its Loyalty, and to destroy
this wicked Rebellion: neither will that unparaleld Act of inhumanity executed
upon the two famous Citizens of Bristol (who will live gloriously in the Annals
of this Nation, as the stout Champions and Martyrs of Allegiance, when the name
of their Murderer (Fienes) shall not be mentioned but with infamy) so far
fright good men from their Duty, that your wild fury will rage long
uncontrould.

Another of your Propositions is, that you do believe in your conscience, that
the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament, are raised and continued for
their just defense, and for the defense of the true Protestant Reformed
Religion and Liberty of the Subject, against the forces raised by the King:
Does your Lordship in truth believe this? Take it in pieces. The two Houses of
Parliament, being convened by the Kings sole Writ, to advise with Him about the
great Affairs of the Kingdom, formed their Coursels with such success, that
in above fifteen Months, (time enough to have reformed and repaired all
former mistakes and irregularities in Church and State) they never found the
least nonconcurrence with them from His Majesty in any particular proposed for
the ease or benefit of the Common wealth; what was during that time done by His
singular Justice and excess of Bounty is so well and particularly known to all
the World, that if your Treason and Rebellion were away, there would be
ingratitude enough left to make you odious to the present, and infamous to
succeeding Ages. When did the first Act of your defense begin? Not till you
came to Edgehill; then I must confess, you were put to it: for it cannot be
denied, the King went eight Miles out of His way to find you; from thence you
took your style of defensive Arms; except you will needs date them from the
tenth of January, when you had been overun by the Law, if that defensive Army
of the City had not been raised to rescue and preserve the good Lord of
Kimbolton, and his five precious Members from a legal proceeding.

In this sense you have, I confess, been much upon the defensive part,
otherwise you never pretended ground or Argument for your taking Arms, but
Fears and Jealousies, no danger of an assault from an active Enemy; except
some few Papists under ground, whom your vigilance has kept still there. When
you first voted your great General, and raised your wanton Army, it was to
fetch up the King to you from York, not to defend your selves against him: and
you cannot but know you were so far from being in danger to be assaulted,
that setting aside your acts of hostility in your Votes and Ordinances, by
which you had surprised Forts, Towns, and the whole Navy, when you had a
formed Army of Horse and Foot (I believe much greater then you have now) the
King had not so many Muskets, as you had Cannon, nor so many Swords as you had
Companies; and on my Conscience (I will so far excuse you from intending it
should come to this) if you had thought He could have got any, your Lordship
and many more of your good friends, who for quietness sake have done much
mischief, would have prevented these troubles. But why are you less ashamed
to be couzened still then to confess you have been so; you expressed well in
your own honest Speech, how much you have been deceived, trust them no more
that deceived you, much of that is fallen out you then foresaw, the rest will
follow, it is a misery to foresee, and not to prevent, at least bearing a part
in doing the mischief which you foresee must destroy the Doers. Remember you
were told there was no design against Bishops to alter the Government of the
Church, you see they are now inconsistent with the Protestant Reformed
Religion, and a new way must be found out of Government; and then as M. Martin,
and M. Morly use you now, M. Case and M. Calamy will use you then, between
both, you will be a great Lord. Remember you were promised when this Army was
first raised, there should be no fighting, no Resistance, (and in truth when
you saw Votes could enable you to raise Armies, who had no power, it is no
wonder you believed they could keep the King from raising any who had Power)
that the King should be brought gently up to you, and you should have what
Places you pleased: There has been fighting and resistance, the King is not
yet brought up to you, and I do not find the places are like to be disposed as
you desire. You were assured all possible regard was to the safety of the King,
and you were your self required by your Protestation to promise to defend His
Person, you have since been assured in what danger His Person has been, by the
assault of your Army, and you are now compelled to swear you will assist that
Army against him; When will you think your self couzened enough to abhor
these men? do you not yet apprehend that these men every day whilst they
persuade you they intend a Peace, do somewhat to make Peace impossible? Is the
imprisoning the Kings Messengers who come to move you to Peace; the accusing
the Queen of high Treason for loving Her Husband, and for doing that for which
the present Age must reverence and posterity will envy Her; the murdering of
the two good men of Bristoll in cold blood (a murder that will call for
Vengeance from God, and Justice from the King till a full expiation) and this
new sacred Vow, excellent ingredients toward a Peace? Are you awake, and do
not see those things thrown in only to make Peace impossible, but content your
self with a Vote that your Arms are defensive, when all the distractions and
all the Violence throughout the Kingdom are the effects of those Arms.

The next Article of your Creed is, that these godly Forces of yours are for
the defense of the true Protestant Reformed Religion; This indeed has always
been your care, and your Reputation, but give me leave to tell your Lordship I
much fear you rather hate that which is not the Protestant Religion, then love
that which is. I will not grieve your memory by representing to you the happy
flourishing state of the Protestant Religion in this Kingdom, till your
Counsels disturbed and endeavored to deface it. Let Us only consider what
you have acted and what you have designed toward this defense, and to use your
own phrase of your Covenant, in order to the Security and preservation of this
Religion. There is not a Godly, Learned, Orthodox Divine in England, whom you
have not traduced, imprisoned, or eminently reproached and discountenanced,
even those whose Learning and Integrity first gave credit and reputation to
your great Reformers; you have not only difused and suppressed that Excellent
Book of Common Prayer, (the first and glorious instance in this Kingdom of the
true Reformed Protestant Religion) but scurrilously and profanely reviled and
scoffed at it, to the scandal of Christianity; you have carried your selves
with such impious and debosh behavior in Churches and Consecrated places,
committing such horrid and Beastly outrages, that the Heathen themselves would
tremble at the mention of them, and all this out of pure zeal to the true
Reformed Protestant Religion. This you will say is done withou your Consents by
the disorderly Soldiers, whom you cannot restrain. By your Lordships favor
you have very pretty Votes of one or both Houses which directly encourage those
Soldiers to most of this. What remedy have you provided for these disorders,
if the King concurred with you in all you propose to your selves? You have
presented Him a Bill to pull down the whole Fabric of Church Government, to
leave Heresy, Incest, Blasphemy, and Adultery, as unpunishable as any other
Acts of good fellowship, to take away His Supremacy, and so cancel the Oath
you have all taken to Him, and to take away Bishops, and so cancel the Oath He
has taken at His Coronation to defend and protect them, and have not yet so
much as fancyed amongst our selves into what shape you will lick that monstrous
Chaos you would produce, this you leave to your Synod, of such men, as most of
them no Schools or Nurseries of Learning ever knew, men never known or heard
of but by their Faction, Treason, and Rebellion, such who never had title or
subsistence in the Church of England, till your Votes, as Patron and Ordinary,
imposed them upon Parishes, and over Cures in the places of those, whose
Religion was not Rebellion. Oh (my Lord) can you forget the excellent times in
which you were borne, and the happy times in which you have since lived, the
flourishing state of Religion here in Doctrine and Discipline, in the Lives and
Learning of so many reverend Divines famous throughout Christendom, can you so
much forget this, to believe these courses, the way to defend the true Reformed
Protestant Religion? If you were a Protestant two years since, I am sure they
are none whose directions you now follow; Is the countenancing and joining with
Anabaptists, and Brownists, (names as odious to you, and so mentioned by you
even in your last Letter, as the Papists) to advance the Protestant Religion?
But it is no wonder when you take your Rules of Allegiance and Fidelity from
Traitors and Rebels, that you should take your directions of Religion from
Hypocrites and Schismatiques. I do not know your face better then your heart
in this point, you are no more of my Lord Says mind in Religion, then Bishop
Wren is; when you have recovered the Courage to love Truth again, this Clause
if there were nothing else in your Covenant, will take your Sleep from you, and
leave you no comfort, but in the Charity of those you have endeavored to
destroy.

A word now of the Liberty of the Subject, the last pretense of your Army, and
I have done. In so sad an Argument I should not be merry with you, and say,
that by this Liberty of the Subject, you mean Liberty in every Subject, to do
what he list, which indeed seems to be the proper business of your Army, and
yet I would you would leave men this liberty, that you would not compel them
to be worse then they have a mind to be, and you would be contented to absolve
them from the Law, and trust them with their own inclinations; though you pull
down the Enclosures, use no violence to hunt them from their known Paths;
let their own love of Liberty lead them, without being driven by your fury:
Consider the liberty of the Subject before you found out this device to defend
it; How strongly was it guarded and fenced by known, clear, excellent Laws,
not capable of any damage or inconvenience, to which there was not a proper
reparation and remedy prepared: if any little breaches had been made in this
Fence (for in comparison of the gappes you have since made in it in one hour,
what was done in 16 years before was but little) with what diligence, Industry
and Bounty did His Majesty comply with you to make them up, and so finished the
Work, that if you had not taken all this monstrous pains to destroy it, you
Country now had been the wonder and envy of Christendom, in Peace, and all
the Ornaments of Beauty, Plenty, and Luster which Peace desires to be adorned
with: What pressure or violation was offered to this Liberty when you first
took up your defensive Arms? See now to what degree you have advanced it, as
it has reference to our Goods, Estates, your Ordinances of sequestration, your
weekly Assessements, and your order for the twentieth part, abundantly
expresses your Care; as it has reference to Our Persons, the full Gaoles in
all places, and the very many Houses you have turned into Gaoles for the safe
keeping of Our Liberty, will be rare Monuments to Posterity, as it concerns
Our Conscience, you need no other Evidence (though you have store) then this
your sacred Vow and Covenant. If this be your course to defend Liberty, I would
you would for variety sake practice some way to destroy it, it may be it might
prove the more Sovereigne Remedy to the Commonwealth: It Is Mr. Pyms third
Observation of the evil Conscience of those who were in the late Plot, they
that pretended to take Arms to defend their own Property, obtained a
Commission to violate the Property of others, they would take the Assertion of
the Laws of the Land, but assumed to them such a power, as was most contrary
to that Law, to seize upon their Persons without due process, to impose upon
their Estates without Consent, to take away some lives by the Law Martial;
This is a Text I hope your Lordship will believe, and is so truly an instance
of evil Conscience, that if His Majesty had used these words in any of His
Messages or Declarations, they had been voted at least an imputation upon both
Houses, and a Censure of their Proceedings. But Mr. Pym may Libell against you
(and in earnest you will find most of his speechs to be such) without breach
of Privilege, he has found out too new Conservators of our Liberty which we
never heard of till now, instead of King, Lords and Commons, The Parliament,
(that is the close Committee) the City, and the Army are the three vital parts
of the Kingdom, in which (he says) not only the well being, but the very life
and being of it does consist, and yet they persuade your Lordship they are
willing to disband this Army. You will say these Invasions upon Liberty are the
effect of these distempers, which it is your business to suppress, which being
done the Subject shall have no more cause to complain. But, my Lord, We that
live at a distance have well observed that the principles and foundations for
all this mischief were laid, long before your Mistress Necessity was owned by
you, long before your Arms were raised; all your rapines, all your Plundrings
and Imprisonings are not more destructive to the Liberty of the Subject, then
your Votes of the fifteenth of March, your assuming power so to declare Law,
that what you said or did, was therefore Law because it was yours. How many men
were imprisoned and undone by you, expressly against the Law and the Petition of
Right? How many Acts of Parliament suspended, and actions done by you in a
Diameter, contrary to Acts of Parliament, so that in truth all your excesses
since which you excuse by imputing them to your Army, and the raising that
Army, are but superstructures upon the foundations you laid in your calmest and
most undisturbed Government, and there is nothing that you of the moderate
Party have since refused to consent to, which might not very well have followed
from some of those propositions which even your selves have before admitted,
defended, and contrived.

I have troubled your Lordship longer in this Argument then I meant, and have
the vanity to believe, that your often reading this over, though it be no more
then you knew before, may make some impression in you, do not think that which
is in it self simply ill can be made good by a Vote, or that the word
Parliament can give Reputation to Actions absolutely wicked in themselves: Mr.
Pym tells you in this goodly Speech of his, that a Parliament is but a Carcass
when the freedom of it is suppressed, that is it be deprived of its own
Liberty, it is left without life or power to keep the Liberty of others: Alas
(my Lord) though you will answer no other part of my Letter, tell me upon your
Honor, would you have taken this last Covenant, if you had had liberty to have
refused it, if you had not, where is your freedom of Parliament? Can you yet
look upon that Assembly with reverence? Think of their number, think of their
quality, think sadly of their Actions, and you will easily find a way (and
there is but one that I know) to evade your Covenant: It was unjustly,
impiously, imposed upon you, rashly, unlawfully (to say no worse) taken by you,
you ought no^, you must not keep it* But that is not enough, wind yourselfe
out of this Labyrinth with Courage and Magnanimi^y, and in your ^vening do
somewhat that may redeem the faults of the day. Consider that these men who by
your Assistance prosper in their bad ways, are doing their own business, and
every day make a Progress to their own ends. My Lord Say, since all honest
men have been undoing, has bette^ed his own Estate above twenty thousand
pounds, besides advancing his younger sons to full and ample Revenues: Mr.
Pym has swet to purpose, and has thrived so well in two years, that he is
your equal at least. They who abhor Bishops revenge themselves at your
charge, and every Action that advances that Design is more pleasant to them
then life. Your great General has the Sovereigne delight of opposing the
King, and having his Health drank with loud Music. Pennington, Ven, Fulk,
and Manwaring are from broken, beggarly, contemptible Varlets, become your
fellow Peers, and no doubt when they have reconciled your Lordships and the
Commons into one House, will have the negative voice, which you two have
s^atched from the King, deposited in their hands. That vital part of the
Kingdom, the City, will never be trusted in your Custody who have managed all
the rest so ill. If any Accident should happen, Providence or Victory to defeat
them, these men have been good and wary Husbands, and have the fortitude to
love any Country equal to their own; Is your Lordship of a constitution fit
to mingle with these men? Is your Revenue improved, or Exchequer enlarged since
these troubles? Is any one design of yours satisfied by your concurrence, or
can you be content to die a Peer of New England, or the Isle of Providence? Is
not your Reputation and interest with all good men lost, and have you one
friend left whose face you knew a year before this Parliament? These are
Melancholique considerations, but you must pass through them, and then if some
Noble, at least honest resolution do not possess you, resolve to dye the last
of your name, and to leave this Character behind you, That notwithstanding all
your discourse and pretense of Religion, you would have turned Turk, if the
Major part of both Houses, and the stronger part of the Kingdom had required
you to take a Covenant to that purpose.

FINIS.

