LETTERS FROM THE HEADQUARTERS OF OUR ARMY IN SCOTLAND: BEING A DIARY of all
Proceedings in the Army to October. 30. 1650.

An Account of Col. Kerr and Straughans Overture to the Lord General CROMWELL,
about Accommodation.

Also Commissioners from them, with a Declaration against the Interest of the
Scots King and Lords, etc.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. in the Old Bailey. 1650.

SIR,
I Cannot but continue my duty in acquainting you what passes here, I shall be
glad to hear from you, now we are like to stay here longer then expected.

My last told you of a Letter to be sent to Col. Kerr and Straughan from hence.
Satturday the 26 the Commissary Genesis dispatched away a Trumpet with that letter,
as also gave another to the Shiriff of Cumberland to be speeded away to M. John
Scot Bailiff and B. brother to the Lord of Buccliew, for his demanding
restitution upon his Tenants the Moss-troopers, for the horses by them stolen
the night we quartered in their Country; since which, promises has been made
of restitution, and we doubt not to receive it very suddenly, or else to take
satisfaction another way our selves.

Sunday the 27. the Commissary, with Col. Fitch, Col. Hacker, and diverse
Officers of the Army heard Sermon in the Cathedral at Carlisle, where preached
before them in the forenoone M. Bywater the Governors Chaplain, and in the
Afternoon an Officer of our Army.

Monday 28. We had intelligence of some of our Messengers being taken, and
their Letters intercepted: also we were informed that a yielding to us was in
probability like to be shortly from some of their Grandees, who now better
understand themselves then formerly, and are ready to listen to us, especially
the good people of the west of Scotland, from whom as also from Kerr and
Straughan some Gentlemen are sent to treat with his Excellency.

Tuesday 29, Mr Caithnes came safe hither in the evening, and the Provost of
Dumfreeze with him (who was a Major at Dunbar fight, there taken, and now upon
his Parole) came to renew it. Also our Trumpeter sent with the Letter to Kerr
and Straughan came in this night, who informs us of his kind entertainment at
Dumfreeze, but their Scouts blinded him for many miles up and down the
Country, but Kerr was sent for post to give answer to the Letter, who promised
to return it speedily by a messenger of his own. The Enemy having left
Dumfreeze expectating of our coming. Many of their soldiers run away daily.
Both Horse, Foot, and Dragoones were ready for a march, and Thursday morning
next we were to have exchanged English for Scottish ground, but now (upon other
grounds) our desired march is suspended. Our soldiers (not long since drooping
and sickly) are now most lively, well, and cheerful, desirous of nothing more
then action: Of such vigor is a little English refreshment, whereto some
timely supplies of moneys would be a most comfortable addition. This day Mr.
Caithnes was dispatched away with other Letters to the Headquarters, which is
all at present from.

Carlisle, 30 October. 1650. Your servant, T. F.


The Letter sent Kerr and Straughan from Carlisle, was as follows:

Gentlemen,
IT is not unknown to you what Amicable and Christian ways, both before and
since our coming into Scotland, and even after our never to be forgotten
Victory, My Lord General and the Officers about him have taken to avoid the
effusion of Christian blood; but hitherto (to our great grief) God has
permitted all to be ineffectuall; yet knowing God can change the hearts of men
in a Moment; It troubles me not to be further solicitous, the union of Gods
People, in both Nations, yea even throughout the whole world, being that which
above any thing in the Earth we desire, It Is that which God has commanded,
that which he has promised, that which we pray for, that which with confidence
we believe shall be, and that which indefatigably I hope we shall endeavor;
those that are acquainted with the secrets of God do clearly see, the
Quarrel is betwixt Christ and the Devil, betwixt Christ's seed and the
Devils. Here it began, here it will end. The whore of Babylon, has received
her deadly wound, let the Devil be her Surgeon; Babylon is falling, let not
Gods People (to the loss of their outward man) stay in it, much less labor
to support it; And this ye are doing, though ignorantly: And our prayers for
you shall be that the Lord would forgive you in that you know not what you do;
and that he would give you a clear sight of the great work, he is now in
these latter days carrying on and then I am sure we shall not differ. I shall
say no more further, then to let you know, that the Arms of our Christian love
are still stretched out, ready to embrace you, when ever God shall incline your
hearts to come in to us: When you shall see, (as already we have declared) We
seek not for domination over you, we seek not to enslave you, nor the
depressing your Kirk-government, we seek not your Goods, nor Estates, but to
carry on the Work of the Lord, which from our very souls, we desire you may
have a joint share in. But if after all this, God shall still suffer your eyes
to be blinded, as that seeing, you will not see; and your hearts to be hardened
as to persist in your gainesaying and opposing way of the Lord what ever
further misery befalls your Nation, either through Famine or Svvord, I must
plainly tell you will lie heavy upon you: And this before any attempt be made
upon you by these Forces under my Command, I thought my self obliged in
Christian duty to acquaint you with, I remain

Carlisle, October. 26. 1650. Your servant, E. W.


By a special Express from Edinburgh, thus:

SIR,
THe Mine intended to be sprung under Edenburgh-castle goes on very well, they
have now wrought 60 yards into it, and are come to the hard Rock, so that a
few days (if there be not some unexpected interruption) will produce the
desired effect. The two Morter-pieces being come from Hull. I hope we shall go
to work that way. Major Brown has with a party of Horse possessed a strong
house not far from Dalkeeth called Dalhouz, it was suspected to have bin an
harbor for those villainous Moss Troopers who murdered some of our men that
were either straggling or going for provisions. They found in it 50. Muskets,
50. pikes, four Barrels of powder and some store of provisions and provender.

On Tuesday last a Lieutenant came with some intimations from Col. Ker and Col.
Straughan as to their Resolution for a conference, they having already sent
four Commissioners to the Court Commissioners with a Declaration, that they
will not own the interest of King and Lords, and that as to the Executive part
of the Kingly power they did not think it fit the King should be admitted to it
until he had given better satisfaction to their Kirk, that his father was
justly put to death for his acts of tyranny though there might be some
miscarriages in the way, that the Commissioners and Kirk had done very ill in
provoking the English, but that the Parliament were too much to blame to send
an Army to make an Invasion to proceed to blood before they gave them warning.
They sent also a Letter to the General with some Queeries enclosed concerning
what security or satisfaction was expected and to whom it should be given, etc.

From Saint Iohnstons we understand that the Kings and Kirks party are still
at variance. That the Royal party (having notice from some of the Kirks who
deserted them of the quarters of Sir Io. Brounes Regiment) fell upon that
Regiment, took six score Horse and prisoners: That thereupon L. G. David Lesley
was gone with four Regiments of horse to fall upon them, and that Major General
Mountgomery was gone with 800 horse to reduce Straughan and that party to the
obedience of the Kirk. That the Kirk had persuaded the King to proclaim, that
if those in the hither parts of the North should not come in within 15 days,
and the rest within 20 days, and lay down their arms, that they should be
proceeded against as Traitors and enemies to to him. The Kings party insist to
have a free Parliament, and that they may sit in Parliament with the rest; the
Kirk say none shall have any hand in government that were engaged in Hamiltons
invasion. Our work now is to stand still and see salvation wrought for us,
this Nation being destinated for ruin, which makes them thus to divide amongst
themselves, when an Enemy is in their bowels.

We are raising a Platform for a battery against Edinburgh castle, which we
hope (with the mine) will tend much to the reducing the same. They in the
Castle have been so angry at it, that for two or three nights together they
discharged seven pieces of Ordnance against it, but did not spoil it much.

Saturday Oct. 26. The General and Officers of the Army kept a day of
humiliation to humble themselves for the sins of the Army, and to desire Gods
blessing upon their proceedings.

Edinburgh, 27 October. 1650.

FINIS.

