A True RELATION OF The total Routing of the Lord GEORGE DIGBY And Sir
MARMADUKE LANGDALE By the Scottish Forces under the command of Sir John Brown
of Fordell, Knight.

Certified by an Express from his Excellency General LEVEN to the
Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland residing at London.

Dated at Allerton October 28. 1645.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings Head in Paul's
Churchyard. 1645.

A Letter from his Excellency the Earl of LEVEN to the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland at London.
May it please your Lordships:
THe enclosed from Sir John Brown and Generall-Major Vandruske, will inform
your Lordships particulary what success the Lord Digby and Sir Marmaduke
Langdale had in their voyage to Scotland, and that their intended invasion of
that Kingdom, and conjunction with The pretended Marquess of Montrosse.
James Grahames Forces, by Gods blessing, is now happily prevented, the notice
whereof it seems had not come to the knowledge of the Committee before this
Messenger was dispatched, though I sent the copy of Sir John Browns Letter to
them with all speed immediately after the receipt thereof: But I remit your
Lordships to the Papers, and shall likewise show you, that being certified this
night from the commander in chief of the Forces about Bolton, that the
remainder of the Enemy upon the retreat, being but two hundred, had escaped
colonel Wrens Horse, and were enquiring the way through the Dales to
BoltonCastle, and might possibly surprise some Ordinance and Ammunition at
Bedall going for Bolton-Castle: I did forthwith order three hundred commanded
men to go thither for preservation thereof, and the safe conduct of the same
to Bolton; for my Lord Wharton and the commander at Bolton do both write to
me, that they are but two hundred in all that are come back seeking resuge,
either in Bolton or Skipton. I did communicate Vandruske his Letter to the
Committee at York, that they might timely cause interruption of them at
Skipton, and give notice to some Foot-Forces, which I understood they sent
thither. I sent away a Post likewise to the commander about Bolton, that they
might be stopped there also, and did constantly give Orders to our Party to
pursue them close, and omit no opportunity of advantage against them, who will
do it carefully, I hope; but now that the Enemies body is routed and resolved
to so small a number, they may make the more speedy motion, and escape.

My former Letters, with the enclosed Papers, concerning the Declaration
intended to be published by the Committee at York, will show your Lordships my
care to keep a right understanding betwixt the country people and us. Sir Henry
Gibb and the general Quartermaster have returned since, showing me they have
appointed some of their number to join with such as I should authorize, for
hearing and redressing what shall be found amisle in the several Quarters,
wherein I shall take care that all possible satisfaction may be given to all
parties aggrieved; but the sooner we remove from hence for the ease of the
Quarters, it were the better.

Since the writing hereof, two Prisoners of Sir Marmaduke Langdales that were
taken as they past through the Lord Sincklairs Quarters, being brought to me and
examined, declared, That the Lord Digby, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, the Lord
Carnewath, and another Scottish Lord, either Johnston or Maxwell, have shipped in
at Ravenglosse for the Isle of Man or Jreland, they knew not which. They
inform likewise, that they were above too strong when they went to Scotland,
and that Sir Marmaduke at his parting with them gave them their free liberty to
dispose upon themselves as they thought best, erther to go to the Country or
to Newarke, so that they are all dispersed now and gone several ways. I shall
trouble your Lordship no further, but am,

Allerton 28. Octo. 1645. Your Lordships most humble Servant, Leven,

A Letter from General Major Vandruske to his Excellency the Earl of Leven.
May it please your Excellency:
SInce I wrote my last unto your Excellency I divided my party, and kept your
Excellencies Regiment with me, and joining with Sir I. Brown marched over the
river into Scotland, another way then the enemy did, with intention to come
before them and beat them out of Scotland again; and I took the English
Regiment that came with me, and some other forces of Horse and Foot of
Cumberland to guard the passage of the river, that they might not come back
again without being interrupted, and so I marched toward Annan, but the enemy
hearing of my approach toward him, and of some of my Lord Balcleughs men,
retreated back again toward the passage of the river where he came over; I
thinking my self very happy to have once the occasion to meet with him,
marched as fastas I could after him, hoping that the English according to their
promise would have kept the pass, but they as soon as I was marched toward
Scotland left their posts and went away, and so by that means the enemy got
leave to pass over again. I marched after them as fast as I could and came
over the main river by night time, but within three miles of that there was
another river which I could not pass being then Seawater, and so I was forced
to stay and give the enemy leave to be a great way before me. They are gone
toward Millam Castle, and by reason that our Horses are so extreme weary with
so tedious a march, I have sent a party to follow them for that I am not able
to follow withal, being that I have marched so long and in so evil ways that
I believe no Horse before have marched it; I am extreme sorry that I am not so
happy as to give your Excellency a better account of them. I humbly beseech
your Excellency to believe, that it is against the will and endeavor of

Your Excellencies most faithful and most obedient Servant, Jonas Vandrusk.

A Letter from Sir John Brown to his Excellency the Earl of LEVEN.
May it please your Excellency:
I Intended to have marched to Dumfreis and to join with the Country Forces
there, for the better opposing the intended invasion, but being desired by the
Committee of Cumberland to advance and join with their Troops, having obeyed
their desire, and come to the place appointed, none of their Forces would stay
with me but ran all to Pireth, (and as I conceive) of purpose to let the enemy
out of their Country into Scotland; so the enemy did enter Scotland, they would
give me no assistance to pursue them, I followed with my own Regiment, they
were 600. that went to Skipton, 150. come out of Skipton, and 200. of the
Country did join with them, so they were in all near one thousand Horse; I
sent away my Standards, and betwixt hope and despair did charge them, they not
knowing what way to go did stand to it very well, for it was full Sea, so that
they could not go back to England; at last after a long and sore skirmish they
were routed, I not being above 300. strong, for I had two Parties out of my
Regiment that were not there, about 100. of them killed in the place, several
drowned in the water, three Standards taken from them, their general
Quartermaster taken, one Colonel, two Lieutenant Colonels, three Captains,
and sundry inferior Officers; my Lord Digbies Trumpeter and Colors taken, as
also Sir Marmaduke Langdales, all their Baggage and Ammunition lost, 200. Horse
taken. I have killed to me above 30. Troopers, and 50. sore wounded. Captain
Lesley is deadly hurt, I am likewise shot in the body, but I thank God able to
Ride as yet; many of my Officers hurt: I am going forward with my Regiment to
join with General Major Vandruske; their Horse are so weary that I hope I
shall meet with them within two days, and your Excellency may be confident
their destruction shall with great earnestness be endeavored, by

Carlisle 24. of October. 1645. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, John Brown.
All that did join with them in Cumberland are run back and many more also,
they will daily grow weaker for they are in great confusion.



FINIS.

