AN ACQUITTANCE OR DISCHARGE FROM Dr E.H. his Demand of a Fifth Part of the
Rectory of Br. in Barks.

PLEADED As in a Court of Equity and Conscience.

By JOHN LEY Preacher of the Word of God there.

And now Published.

AS 1. Part of an Apology for him against the Doctors Defamations of him at
Oxford, and elsewhere. 2. As a Preparative to further Contestation with him
about other Differences betwixt them.


The Contents whereof follow next after the Epistle Dedicatory.

LUKE 10.7. The Labourer is worthy of his hire.

JAM. 5.4. Behold, the hire of your Laborers which have reaped down your
fields: which is of you kept back by fraud, cries: and the cries of them which
have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

ISA. 61.8. I hate Robbery for burnt Offering.

London, Printed in the Year, M.DC.LIVE.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE my very good Lord Colonel Charles Fleetwood Lord
Deputy of IRELAND.
Right Honorable,
THough, in an Answer to two injurious Petitions, put up the last year to the
Parliament (that then was) against all set and certain Maintenance of
Ministers, I borrowed the Name of Theophilus Philadelphus, because I was
unwilling to own the many misprisions of the Printer, I made bold to
acknowledge You For the military men, I can say somewhat upon mine own certain
knowledge: at the Committee for Plundered Ministers, I found more favor from
one Colonel (whose name I then knew not, viz. Colonel Fleetwood now C^mmander
in chief over Ireland, and I thought he had not known me) then from any, yea or
from all the rest ((...) ancient friend excepted) though at that ^^me th^^
(...) extraordinary number. So (...) the Ministers before the (...) Petitions
in the last le^f but one.
by your Name, as my Patron and Protector then, when I knew you by none other
Title, then a Member of Parliament, and as such an one (happy it had been for
this Nation, if all had been such) you acted (on my behalf) according to the
uprightness of your heart, and equity of my cause, to bring mine adversary to
better terms then otherwise I could have hoped for. And when the Committee for
Plundered Ministers to make me some amends for my precedent sufferings (whereof
I can tell a true and a strange Story, and it may be shall do, when a fitter
opportunity inviteth me to it) sent me to officiate as Minister of Brightwell,
and assigned unto me the Rights and Emoluments of the Rectory sequestered from
Dr. H. you were pleased to write a very respective Letter to the Governor of
Wallingford, Mr. Arthur Evelin for his assistance and favor to me, as my just
occasions should have need of it: and for your sake I found him so ready to do
me not only all Right, but so many courtesies besides, that I must humbly
beseech your Honor, to thank him for me: and since we were well acquainted, I
found him for mine own sake, the best Neighbor that ever I enjoyed, and by his
removal from these parts (upon the sleighting of Wallingford-Castle) not only
my self, but all that are rightly principled, and sincerely affected to the
best Reformation of Religion and Government, are apprehensive of a very great
loss: Dr. Owen Dean of Christ-Church. Dr Stanton President of
Corpus-Christi-Colledge. D. Wilkins Warden of Waddam College. Dr. Langley
Master of Pembroke-Colledge. Dr. Wilkinson Principal of Magdalen-Hall. Dr.
Conaunt Rect. of Exeter. Mr. Cornish Prebendary of Christ-Church, with others
of eminent note for learning and godliness in that University.

for he liberally and cheerfully entertained a choice number of Preachers from
Oxford, who (by turns) contributed their pains to a weekly Lecture at
Wallingford, and has managed both his military Authority, and the Office of a
Justice of Peace, with such constant Prudence and Impartiality, as made him
both a great Comfort and Encouragement to the Good, and as great a Terror and
disheartning to the wicked: which I the rather now profess in public, because
I cannot (notwithstanding the discontinuance of intercourse betwixt us) either
forget, or not gratefully remember, the many friendly and affectionate Offices
I have received from him, and have not any other, or not any better way (at
present) for that purpose, then this occasion of thankful acknowledgement of
your Lordships favor (immediate by your self, and mediate by him) has
ministered unto me, which I conceive you will not take for an unpleasing
impertinency, or digression: because I have good reason to believe, that as he
much honors you, so you have a good esteem of him as worthy (for his Abilities
and Fidelity) to be accepted under the relation, and with the affection and
confidence of a Friend. And for my self, as by the Divine Providence, and your
own Goodness, I found you a gracious Advocate in my cause, when I knew you not;
so now I do know you, I shall not doubt of your propitious Patronage in this,
which now I humbly present to your equitable Cognizance and Consideration, and
shall endeavor by my heartiest Devotions to Almighty God for your Honor, to
make a supply for the unwilling defects and failings of more real returns,
which if my Means were answerable to your Merit, or mine own mind, would
certainly be made by

Your Honors deeply obliged, and sincerely devoted Servant John Ley.
Brightwell in Berks, October. 17, 1654.
To the Honorable Humphrey Mackworth Esquire, ONE OF THE Council of his
Highness the Lord PROTECTOR.
Honorable Sir,
THough you were not at leisure (when I waited on you about the beginning of
May last) to receive a true and full Information betwixt D. H. and me: I was
not dismissed from you, with such discouragement, that I should not have hope
of abetter opportunity, both for Audience and Acceptance of any just motion, I
had to make unto you: which (at that time) was, that you would be pleased, to
cast your eye upon those Papers, then Manuscripts, which now I humbly offer in
Print to your Perusal. They are the same in substance which then I showed to my
Reverend Brethren M. T. G. and M. T. P. two worthy Ministers of your County,
and both before and since ( viz. the last Act at Oxford) to my highly honored
Friend, D. P. F. Prebendary of Christ-Church: which I note as a circumstance of
time, to clear me from all suspicion of, or spirit of Presumption or
contradiction, against the Proviso of the late Ordinance of his Highness the
Lord Protector, and you of his Council of the 29. of August. 1654. in the
behalf of the outed Ministers Wife and Children: For I could not then divine
what your Wisdoms would Order or Ordain for that particular.

For the Ordinance it self, entirely taken, it is the Judgment of many wise
and godly men, that it will much promote the Reformation of corrupt manners
(which from scandalous Ministers, like a pestilent contagion, have spread
abroad among the people, as the Prophet complained of old, From the Prophets of
Jerusalem is profaneness gone into all the Land, Jer. 23.15.) and it will
prove the more effectual to that purpose, because it is committed to their
execution, whose Zeal will not cool into careless Negligence, or partial
connivance: that was it which made the Government of the City of Geneva, to be
so much commended (even by Bodine a Papist) to which he applies the saying of
Ridiculum est ad legem esse bonum, ita fit ut quae legibus nusquam vindicantur,
illio i. Genevae coerceantur ab ils censoribus, qui summam virtutis opinionem,
de seipsis excitarunt. Igitur nulla meretricia, nullae ebrietates, nullae
saltationes, nulli mendici, nulli otiosi, in ea civitate reperiuntur. Bodin.
Method. hist. c. 6. p. 246.
Seneca, It is a ridiculous thing (says he) there to be good only by
ordaining righteous things, their manner is, to be practically as well as
legally just, as strict in execution, as wise in constitution of good Laws,
thence it is that those excesses, which no where else are duly punished, are
there restrained; so that no whoredom, no drunkenness, no dancings, no
beggars, no idle persons, are to be found in that City.

And for that Proviso (of the fifth Part) his Highness, and you of his Council
had to induce you to it, 1. An Ordinance of Parliament. 2. Examples of Practice
in several Committees answerable to it. 3. An Opinion of Charity as the ground
of both: which I humbly conceive, might make you less willing to debate the
Point, and more ready to pass it, then otherwise you would have been, if it
had been (as a new thing) to be cast into the mould of your own judgments. The
less cause is there for such as suffer by it, to be offended at the Ordinance
(as it is yours) and the less offense I hope will be taken at the reasons or
deprecations of the pressure of it (by those who feel it heavy upon them) as it
is theirs, who have urged it to their prejudice: requiring a fifth part for the
Wife and Children of the offending Party, but awarding nothing for him nor his,
who offended not, when he is (without any Pretense of insufficiency or
miscarriage) put out by the Patron, upon the death of the former Incumbent;
which if it should be ratified (as a Law of the Medes and Persians, without any
alteration, Daniel 6.8.) may not sin seem to have a perpetual privilege,
which to innocence shall never be permitted.

But I am persuaded better things of you, for I am confident, you never thought
to make any of your Ordinances (in such matters to be received (as the Pope
obtrudeth his Dictates) for infallible Decrees: Nor did our Bishops (though
some of later time were forward enough, to take too much upon them) assume any
such Authority, to the Canons of their Synods, as if they could not err: for
they all subscribed, to the 21th Article of the 39. Articles made in the year
1562. not only of the Fallibilitie of General Councils, but of their actual
failing in things pertaining unto God.

Nor can I fear from you or any of your Honorable rank, the tart entertainment
of Amos by Amaziah, for being too bold at Bethel, Amos 7.13. in presenting my
Conceptions to your Cognizance (though as yet it may be somewhat different from
some of yours, who sit and act in so high a Sphere) since you are not more
eminent for Dignity or Authority, then for the Profession of the purest kind
and degree of Reformed Religion, which if it be sincere (and I dare not think
otherwise) is founded in Humility, and Humility will dispose you to receive
(without disdain) any considerable Advertisement, though from a Servant: You
have read it said of Job, by God Himself, That he had not his like for
Goodness in the Earth, Job 2.3. and for Greatness, he was the greatest of all
the men of the East, Job 1.3. and yet was he so low in his own Eyes, that he
did not despise the Cause of his manservant, or maidservant, when they
contended with him, Job 31.13. And of Moses, as well the worthiest as the
meekest man that was upon the face of the Earth, Numbers 12.3. (for he was
Captain General under the Lord of Heasts, and over his own peculiar People, a
miraculous Deliverer of them out of the hand of a most Potent and Obstinate
Tyrant) that he slighted not the Counsel of Jethro was a Priest of Midian,
rather then a Prince (though the Original word be taken sometimes for a Prince
or chief Ruler, because his Daughters were so meanly employed, and so little
respected by the Shepherds, Exodus 2.16.
Jethro, Exodus 18. though in Gifts, in Graces, in all Authority, Divine and
Humane, Ecclesiastical and Civil, by many degrees inferior to him.

I have been thus far drawn on in an ingenuous freedom of Speech unto you
(Worthy Sir) by the Remembrance of my first Acquaintance with you (many years
ago) occasioned by that rarely Religious Gentlewoman, then my gracious
Parishioner, and since your worthily and singularly beloved Yoke fellow: who
was not more Honored for her Piety, by the Godly, then loved for her Charity
and Humility, by all that knew Her: in which Graces my conceit has hitherto
been, that you were both sutably and happily matched.

But now it may be it will not become me to look so far backward (to what is
past) but rather to look upward to what you are at present, by your high
Pre-eminence: and from you, and for you, I must raise my thoughts far above
you, even as high as God himself, blessing him for you, and for your Honorable
Colleagues (though principally for his Highness the Lord Protector) in that
you have all concurred in a pious as well as a charitable Providence, for the
Ministers certain and comfortable Maintenance (for you considered them as by
Office the Servants of God, so by Nature, Nation, and Religion, Brethren to
your selves) manifested many ways, particularly by the Instrument of
Government of Art. 35.
December 16th, 1653. and the Ordinances of Page 633.
August 29. and September 2. both of the year current, 1654. which we cannot
but account not only as a gracious Beneficence of yours unto us, but as a
merciful Deliverance of us, out of their hands, who think us worthy of no
better cherishing (for the best Service we can do to God or man,) then such as
Ahab appointed for Micaiah, Put this fellow in prison, and feed him with the
bread of Affliction, and with the water of Affliction, 1 Kings 21.27. whose
principles since we know them to be such as are as repugnant to the Right and
Propriety of Civil Authority as to the Right and Propriety of Sacred
Ministrations, we shall hold it our Duty by all warrantable ways of
opposition, (within the compass of our Faculty and Function) to appear and act
against them, as well for your sakes, as for our own; I speak in the Plural
Number (though in my present Address I be alone) because I am well assured
that the most, and worthiest of my Brethren of the Ministry (with whom I have
conversed) are wholly of my mind, in this matter: Though our Conditions in
some respects be so different, as may put some of us to Petition to your
Honors, for an Additionall or Supplementall Ordinance or Declaration, that may
succor us against injury, and secure us against misery, which (without our own
faults) may befall us, if by a seasonable, and sufficient Remedy from your
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, they be not prevented. Mine own present case, may
be an Instance in one particular; which I have here drawn up with more Care and
Scruple, lest I should offend against Truth and Conscience, in the least point,
then desire to obtain any self end, or worldly interest of mine own: as having
my most intentive Thoughts set upon mine Account, and Hope of a better World,
whither I can have now but a very short Journey, mine Age being already arrived
at David's period The days of our years are threescore and ten.
Psalm 90.10. Yet, while I am here, I shall heartily pray, That God will both
perpetually direct and assist you, in all your Consultations and Resolves for
the Public Welfare of Church and State, and graciously Requite all your good
Offices, to his House and Household, and shall faithfully profess, and
seriously endeavor to approve my self,

Your Honors humble and faithful Servant JOHN LEY,
Brightwell in Berks October. 17. 1654.
THE CONTENTS.
GEneral Reasons against the Payment of a fifth Part.
SECT. I. Some Cautions and Distinctions premised, before the Reasons, p. 1.
SECT. II. The first Reason, taken from the Necessity of Ministerial Service, in
the Sequestered Benefit, and from the Parity of the Ministers Case with others,
on whom no Payment of a fifth Part is imposed. p. 4 SECT. III. The second
Reason taken from the Pre-eminence of that Authority (which appointed us to be
Incumbents) above that of private Patrons. p. 5 SECT. IV. The third Reason
taken from the manner of our Admission into the Pastoral Charges of the outed
Ministers compared with theirs. p. 6 SECT. V. The fourth Reason taken from the
Aphorism of our Savior, The Labourer is worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7. p. 7
SECT. VI. The fifth Reason taken from a comparison of the condition of the Wife
and Children, of the outed Minister, when he is alive, and when he is dead. p.
8 SECT. VII. The sixth Reason taken from the ill Use our Adversaries make of
the Allowance of the fifth Part. p. 9 SECT. VIII. The seventh Reason taken from
the Oppression of the Laboring Ministers, by payment of a fifth Part, with
Objections against them, and Answers for them. p. 10
Particular Reasons against the payment of a fifth Part to Dr E. H.
SECT. I. Reasons against Doctor H. his claim of a fifth Part, in Particular of
the Rect. of Br. p. 15 SECT. II. Reasons why I should not pay a fifth Part to
the Doctor, p. 18 SECT. III. The Doctors claim of my promise to pay him a fifth
Part answered, p. 22
TO THE UNPREJUDICED READER.
READER,
IF such a one as I wish and style thee, I shall not doubt to be believed by
thee, in that I now seriously profess (as in his presence, who does most
exactly discern the difference betwixt pretenses and intentions) 1. That in the
penning of these reasons against the payment of a fifth part of Sequestered
Benefices, it is so far from my thoughts to preclude any just way of succor
or sustenance, to any that want (much less would I do it to the Wives and
Children of Ministers (though contrary minded to me) that I wish them a better
means of Maintenance then that is like to be in most places. 2. That I have so
much desire to rectify the error (both in opinion and practice) about it, and
to relieve my Brethren (the Incumbent Preachers) oppressed by it; that, if it
did not concern my self at all, I should be willing to act and appear on their
behalf, as in the former part of this Treatise, I have done. 3. That (but for
the common Interest of the Reformed Ministry) I had never made a public
Business of the particular passages, betwixt Dr H and me, though he have been
too openly injurious against me, to suffer me to be silent toward him, or to
make my defense in a mere private manner; nor would I (but for this occasional
inducement) clear my self in print, from a greater change, which he has laid
against me (as much greater, as the whole exceeds a fifth part) for he has
often said it to my face (more often I doubt not behind my back) and once he
gave it me under his hand in a Letter, That I snatched his Benefice out of his
hand, before he was outed by the Committee at R. If he can prove this
suggestion, I give it under my hand, that not a fifth Part only, but the other
four (so far as lies in me) shall be all his again: for that done, I will
give up all to him, if he can procure the repossession of it to himself. But in
disproof thereof, I aver, and shall (if occasion require) confirm what I say
upon Oath.

First, That I never (to my best remembrance) heard of him, or of his Benefice,
until he was outed by the Committee of R.) and some means was made for it to
the Committee for Plundered Ministers at Westminster, by Mr T.G. a learned and
godly Minister (then of R. and well acquainted with all the preceedings against
the Doctor for a friend of his) who received answer from him (who best knew the
mind of the Committee) that it was the meaning of the chiefest of them, to
reserve it for me, and from him I had the first news of the vacancy of the
Church of Br. and of that kind intention toward me: whereupon Mr G. desisted
from all further solicitation for his friend, and offered his best assistance
to me, for mine accommodation upon acceptance of the place, which he performed
accordingly.

Secondly, When the Committee had made their Order, for mine Admission to it, I
came not to take Possession of it, though I were within a days journey from
Br. until about a month after.

Thirdly, And when I did come, I did not require any hasty removal of him, or
his household, but gave him as long a time as he desired, for their continuance
there: which was from October 13th 1649. until April 1. 1650. reserving not so
much as one chamber for my self, though I began my Residence and Ministry, with
my first coming thither, and went on with it, without any thing but labor and
charge for almost a whole year.

Fourthly, From October 13. to April 1. he (being yet in Possession, which (as
the Proverb has it is an eleven Points of the Law) had time enough to have
settled himself where he was, if he could have done it, and he used all the
means he could, to have the Order against himself, and for me, reversed
(without any opposition at all from me) and when he was out of all hope of
prevailing he wrote to me, That he would give me possession of the house, as he
had done of the Church, and in his Letter professed, That (since himself might
not be permitted to hold the living) he was contented I should have it before
any other man. This I have yet to show under his own hand.

For other things which he has said, or can say against me, I shall care the
less, because 1. I am confidently and cheerfully conscious of mine own
innocence, and clearness from any charge of injustice that he can take up
against me. 2. I believe it lies not in the power of his tongue or pen, to
lessen my estimation, in the Judgment of those good men, with whom I am best
acquainted, nor with any good man at all, to whom both he and I are thoroughly
known: though it may be some who were mine intimate Familiars, before our late
troublesome Mutations, and after long intermission of mutual intercourse
(whereby they may not know how far, nor upon what grounds, I have been
constant or changeable with the vicissitude of affairs and times) may (happily)
be as credulous as mine adversary is clamorous against me: for there are some
men whose passionate prejudice, will admit of no pause to take in any true
intelligence against misinformation: and it is no marvel, if such do sacrifice
not only common charity, but special friendship, to diversity of opinion and
partiality of interest: from which (whether levity or iniquity) I hope my
practice shall always prove my disposition, to keepa just and religious
distance. 3. For such as know me not (if they be wise) they will not lend too
open an ear, to the accusations of an open mouthed adversary, since they may
very well think it is more like that (out of envy, because I possess what he
has lost) his ill will would not suffer him to say well, then that I, out of
avarice or any other corrupt motive, should do so ill, as he suggesteth; and if
they be not wise, their folly must be allowed the privilege of a patient
permission, and of free pardon. 4. That which I have now published, as it will
(I trust) give full satisfaction to the particulars objected, so it will be an
earnest of the like satisfactory returns to other Objections, (if the Doctor
have any) to bring in against me. But 5. That on which (as upon a rock of
surest refuge) I set up my rest is, the precept and promise of the Lord by the
Psalmist, Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also unto him, and he shall bring
it to pass; and he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy
judgment as the noonday, Psalm. 37.5, 6.


I bless his Name (for it) he has given me grace to obey the Precept, and
faith likewise to believe, I shall receive the Promise: and if his Providence
make use of thy wisdom and goodness (good Reader) to such a purpose, it will
engage me the more affectionately to remain

Thine in all Christian Observance JOHN LEY,
Brightwell in Berks October. 17. 1654.
General Reasons against the Payment of a Fifth Part, out of Sequestered
Livings, for Maintenance of the outed Ministers Wife and Children.
SECT. I.
Some Cautions and Distinctions premised before them.

WHile I speak against the payment of a fifth part, in the general, my meaning
is not to lay the blame of that heavy burden, upon all or the better part of
the Members of that Parliament (by whose Authority it was ordained:) for though
the King Mr Prinne in his Speech in Parliament concerning the Kings
concessions, p. 51, 52. of Edit. 3.
proposed, That such Ministers as were sequestered (for malignancy, and were not
scandalous) might have a third part of the Livings out of which they were
ejected, and the House of Peers (for relief of their disaffected Chaplains)
meant them as liberal an allowance, as they could hope might pass in the House
of Commons (which was a fifth part at the most) yet diverse, and those very
eminent men, for wisdom and godliness in that House, were (as I have been
credibly informed) against all defalcation of any part of the Ministers means,
who were to bear the whole burden of the Pastoral charge, and consented to that
proportion rather as a Prohibition (as in case of usury) This sense since this
Treatise was finished I found in the late Ordinance of his Highness the Lord
Protector for the ejecting of scandalous, and ignorant, and insufficient
Ministers and School masters, p. 625. priucip
That none should have any more then a fifth part, then as a Concession, that
every one should have so much; and therefore the Committee for Plundered
Ministers at Westminster, (which the House of Lords never liked, consisting
wholly of the Members of the House of Commons) often ordered against that
allowance: and where they permitted it, they did it with much more moderation,
and ease to the Incumbent Minister, then Country Committees used to do, where
some leading men, were sometimes so favorable to sequestered Ministers
(probably out of some carnal or worldly Interest of their own) as to make their
condition more comfortable, then their who succeeded them, which was much
against the minds of the soundest Members of that Assembly.

2. Concerning the ejected Ministers (I conceive) there may be some such
distinction made of them, as Dr Du Moulin makes of the Popish Clergy in
France, I know (says he D. Du Moulin in his Defense of the Catholic faith in
King James his Book, c. 6. p. 94, 95.
) that in this great body of the Clergy, there are a great number (though many
also are of a quite contrary mind) on Whose Spirits Nature has more force
then their habits, and the love of their Country more then the maxims of Italy.
So I may say, there is great difference of those Ministers (whose lot has been
a like for outward losses) not only in their spirits and affections, but
otherwise, for some of them are ignorant and erroneous in their judgments,
irreligious and scandalous in their conversation, rash, proud, uncharitable and
turbulent, in their spirits speech and behavior: who both wish and watch for
an opportunity to be fishing in troubled waters, and are every way such, that
as it was a very ill deed to put them into the Ministry, so it was a very good
one, to put them out again.

But there are others, who are Learned, Orthodox, Discreet, Humble, Charitable,
who cordially desire the peace of their Country, and would not (if it were in
their power) redeem themselves from private damage, with any public calamity:
their greatest fault being, their error in opinion, and affection too adverse
to any form of Government, that is not hereditarily and absolutely Monarchical,
and to any form of worship, but that of the Service Book.

For such as these (or if they be not altogether such without the abatement of
some grains of just weight) I wish them rather a plentiful, then a competent
Subsistence, rather five parts for their Portion, then a fifth only: which they
might have (if the State have no Just Cause, to be Jealous of their
peaceablenes or loyalty) by being admitted to other places: for as to the same,
it is like our pious and prudent Superiors are most of them, of the late Earl
of Kent his mind, who (as I have heard him say) was resolved (so far as he had
to do, when he was one of the Lord Keepers of the Great Seal) that he would
send them as far as the distance betwixt East and West, North and South, rather
then place them in the Parishes from whence they were removed.

But for my self, I am so far from hardening my heart against the grievances
of any of my godly Brethren (who suffered any hard measure under pretense of
Reformation, or Propagation of the Gospel) that I heartily wish the Declaration
lately published under the Title of Gemitus Ecclesiae Cambro-Britannicae, may
be seriously considered, and enquired into, and if the complaints therein be
true, that due and seasonable redress may be applied unto them. And if the
State had been pleased to allow any of them whom they have displaced, a
competent maintenance, out of the Bishops, or Dean and Chapters Lands, to which
(the Offices put down) no personal service is annexed, Cambd. Annal. Eliz. lib.
2. page 56.
as Queen Elizabeth did, to Abbots and other Ecclesiastical persons, out of
their confiscate Lands, and other Revenues, their charity toward them had been
(as I conceive) not only lawful, but commendable, or had they made a rate for
their charitable relief, (as for the Taxes or Impositions which are general all
over the Land) I should willingly have born my proportionable share, with those
who are bound to charity, as well as my self, or had they put but one or a few
Delinquents upon our whole Tribe to be maintained, as Solomon is supposed by
some to have done, by He was not to live upon the Levites portion, but was
consined to his own fields in Anathoth, his own (not in common with others,
but) proper and personal, as his own Inheritance So Mr Gillespy in his Book
called Aarons Rod Blossoming in Append. added to the first Book, page 138. For
though the Tribe of Levi had not a part of the Land of Canaan, separate or set
apart by themselves (as the other Tribes had) yet upon extraordinary occasions)
it might and sometimes did fall out, that some might have peculiar Interest in
particular Lands, not only since they lost the Land of Canaan, as Joses
surnamed Barnabas a Levite had, and sold them, Act. 4.36, 37. but before that
time, as Jeremy (who was of the same Tribe, as Dorotheus writes in his Book of
the Proph. etc. added to Eusebius. Socr. and Evagr. p. 527.) who bought a field of
Hananiel his Uncles son, Jer. 32.9.
Abiathar, 1 Kings 2.26. (though I conceive it is their mistake) I should not
have thought it a just occasion of complaint.

But that it should not be imposed upon every one severally, to pay a fifth
part of the Revenue belonging to his Pastoral Charge, I hope I may have leave
to assert upon the Reasons ensuing.

SECT. II.
The first Reason, taken from the Necessity of Ministerial Service, in the
Sequestered Benefice, and from the Parity of the Ministers Case with others, on
whom no Payment of a fifth Part is imposed.

1. THough they and their Abettors, account such as are placed in Sequestered
Livings, Intruders into their Rights, they may hold themselves fairly and
justly possessed of them; for when a place of Office, is made void, (whether it
be Civil or Ecclesiastical) which necessarily requires an Incumbent upon it, to
officiate, and the Party put out, is disabled to do any Ministerial Duty in it,
it is lawful for another to supply his place (especially in a Pastoral Charge)
that Gods Sabbaths may solemnly be observed, and the people spiritually
provided for (that their souls may be saved) which must be done, whether the
Minister were injuriously ejected or not, and Beneficium belonging to Officium,
the reward (the whole reward) is due for the whole work, to him that does it.

But if the party be put out for criminal miscarriage as the Sequestration is
more Just, so is the Entrance of another into his place, more justifiable:
Especially, if he had no hand, either dirrctly, or indirectly for his putting
out: Upon this ground, such as have possessed Civil Offices, as the Keepers of
the Great Seal, Judges, Recorders of Cities and Towns corporate, Heads of
Colleges, Halls, Hospitals, in the Universities, and elsewhere, as also
Military Officers (who possess the places of cashiered Commanders) have never
been charged with payment of a fifth part, to their predecessors wives and
children, though those that were put out, had as much need, and they that
succeeded them, had as much means, to relieve them in their wants as Ministers
have, and for the most part much more, and they may crave, and hope also to
enjoy the same immunity with them, unless some color of reason may be rendered
to the contrary, which they cannot answer.

SECT. III.
The second Reason taken from the Pre-eminence of that Authority (which
appointed us to be Incumbents) above that of private Patrons.

2. THe next consideration for Exemption from this Charge, is of the
pre-eminence of that Authority, (which appointed the substituted Incumbent)
above that of private Patrons: (which is the same by which settled and itinerant
Justice is administered, men's lives and livelihoods disposed of, all matters of
peace and war ordered and managed (throughout three populous Nations) by
whose power, the people are protected, for the safety of their persons and
propriety of their Estates: and but for which (whatsoever is pretended for
another Title) we might come under more calamity (by Anarchical and
Democratical confusion) then by Monarchical or Oligarchical Tyranny.

Taking those who have such predominant power for our Patrons, we may (we hope)
desire, deserve and expect as much privilege and protection, as the Clerks of
private Patrons have enjoyed, who were never compelled to pay a fifth part, to
those that have been put out upon the death of the outed Minister: though
liable to no manner of Exception, either of Insufficiency, Negligence,
Scandal, or Disaffection to the present Powers: and it should not be
forgotten, and (being remembered) it may stop the mouths of such as are apt to
clamor (if the fifth part be denied them) that Bishops (when the Church door
keys hanged on their girdles) suspended ab Officio and Beneficio, diverse of the
most learned, godly and conscientious non-Conformists of this Nation, merely
for scrupling a superstitious Ceremony, which themselves confessed (at the
best) to be but a thing indifferent, and often times absolutely deprived them of
their Benefices, and instituted and inducted others into them: thereby cutting
from them all hope of recovery, but allotting no portion at all, for supply
either of them, or their wives and children. So that the Benefit came in entire
to them, though they were admitted to their Benefices, but by the Right of
particular Patrons: and should not the Parliaments Patronage, bring with it as
great a privilege to their Chaplains, as that of private Patrons to the Clerks
they present?

SECT. IV.
The third Reason taken from the manner of our Admission into the Pastoral
Charges of the outed Ministers compared with theirs.

3. THat our Condition should not be worse then theirs, we may (I speak
sometimes in the Plural number, because my case is not singular, many being in
the same condition, and I presume in these considerations consenting with me) I
say, allege the different manner of our Admissions to our respective places,
and that in two particulars, 1. In the Trial and Examination of Ministers,
before their Admission into their Incumbency, which was nothing so strict and
exact in former time, as in the way prescribed by the Parliament. 2. In the
freeness of their Patrons benevolence without any Exaction or Expectation of
any profit, yea without any suspicion of Simony, either express or implicit,
which was so familiar in former times betwixt Patrons and their Clerks; that
there were few presented, whom secular gifts did not make more gracious in the
eyes of their Patrons, then Spiritual: which if it were known, the Clerk was to
be turned out of his Benefice, and the Patron to lose his next turn of
presenting. In these respects our entrance being more fair and free from just
Exception and Suspicion then theirs, I humbly conceive, we should enjoy our
places (at least) with as much freedom as they have done.

SECT. V.
The fourth Reason taken from the Aphorism of our Savior, The Labourer is
worthy of his hire, Luke 10.7.

4. WHere our Savior says, The Labourer (not he that labors not) is worthy
of his hire, Luke 10.7. he means, That he that does the whole work, should
have the whole wages; and this is as just as that he that has the whole wages,
should do the whole work: Though the time has been (before the Parliament
called in the last Kings time) that many (in London especially) took the whole
pay of Parsonage, and would do but half the duty of a Parson or Pastor,
preaching (at most) in the forenoon of the Sabbath day, and putting the
Parishioners to pay for the afternoons Sermon, upon another account: for they
were fain to take it as a courtesy, that their Parson gave them leave to
choose a Lecturer, and to pay him themselves, for the performance of that
Service, which belonged to his Office in his own person ( if he were able to
undergo it) (for he was to use double diligence according to that of Solomon,
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thy hand rest: for
thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that, or whether they both
shall be alike good, Eccles. 11.6.) if not, and the means were competent, he
was to bear the charge of his assistants Service: but no body should be
compelled to pay to him, or his, that assisteth not, that does no Service in
the Office, for which a Salary or Maintenance is assigned.

SECT. VI.
The fifth Reason taken from a comparison of the condition of the Wife and
Children, of the outed Minister, when he is alive, and when he is dead.

5. IF the outed Minister be justly put out, and another as justly put in by
the Supreme Authority (though most offenders will be rather querulous then
quiet under the justest sentence, that is or can be passed upon them) it cannot
but appear just, to allow the entire maintenance to the Incumbent Minister, as
well while the Delinquent lives, as when he is dead (in which case the fifth
part is neither allotted by Authority, nor looked for by their widows or
fatherless children) yea rather, while he is alive, then when the case is so
far altered with him, as to be sequestered not only from his super-intendency
over a particular Parish, but from all Society with the whole world, and that
for two Reasons: 1. Because mortui non mordent, being dead they can do no more
hurt, but while they live, their repining at the power, which took their
Benefices from them, their envy at those who are put into possession of that
they have forfeited, and their inordinate zeal for restitution of a contrary
Authority, (whatsoever it cost either in blood or treasure) and the like degree
of superstitious devotion to the Service Book, and corrupt customs, make them
sometimes boldly and busily to bestir themselves, to cherish the like
disaffection to the present State, and fond affection to the former in the
people, and so to harden them against the Reformation both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, as also to make those odious unto them, who in compliance thereto (out
of conscience) officiate contrary to their affected forms, and prejudicating
fancies: wherein some have done more disservice to the present Government
(rambling about to make now proselytes, and to confirm old Malignants (which
they do so much more busily, as they have the less to do, and the more boldly,
as they have the less to lose) then they could have done, when their constant
Ministry was confined to one place: for so their corrupt Doctrine was but as
the poisoning of a Pond or Cistern, whereas now some of them take leisure and
liberty to poison the chief fountains in the Land with superstitions, unsound,
and (as far as they dare) seditious doctrine. 2. Because while they are living
(though the wisdom of the Parliament has thought it fit, to cut off all hope
of restitution to the same Churches sequestered from them) they are not out of
hope of maintenance (especially since the Engagement is laid aside) if they do
not wilfully persist in their opposition to the State and Reformation proposed:
for some of them Isocrates gained more silver by teaching of a School, then
ever any professor did, so that he was able to defray the charge of a Galley
at Sea. Plut. Morals in the lives of the 10 Orators, p. 924.
Isocrates-like, by teaching of Schools, have thriven more (by what they have
gotten and saved that way (living in a more private and less expensive manner)
then when they possessed their Benefices, and bare the burdens incident unto
them. Some again have gained more by preaching without them, then when they
possessed them: And some I am sure have been put out of a small Benefice, and
(upon taking the Engagement) have been put into a great one, so that they may
say as Plutarch in the life of Themistocles, p. 131
Themistocles to his sons, My sons, we had been undone if we had not been
undone. So they, We had been impoverished in our small livings, if (for our
opposition to the Parliament) we had not been put out of them, and by
compliance with the Parliament, (whether sincerely or deceitfully they cannot
tell) we had not been placed in such as are better.


SECT. VII.
The sixth Reason taken from the ill Use our Adversaries make of the Allowance
of the fifth Part.

6. THe allotting of the fifth part of Ecclesiastical profits (as aforesaid)
hardens many both against the Parliament, and against those whom they send to
succeed the sequestered Ministers. for they take this fifth part as a rent,
whereby their right of re-entry is reserved to them, and so they and their
accomplices have made account hitherto, that their Successors tenure holding
what they have (as yet they have done) not for their own, but another life, a
turn of providence (which they hope for, and will help forward all they can)
will return them into their former estate, and so (after a Parenthesis of
Sequestration is past) the whole sentence of restitution, and repossession,
will settle them where they were, in a right of perpetuity, and this (believing
the lying reports and predictions of their Newsmakers, their false prophets, as
Ahab did his) they expect will speedily be brought to pass.

SECT. VIII.
The seventh Reason taken from the Oppression of the Laboring Ministers, by
payment of a fifth Tart, with Objections against them, and Answers for them.

7. BEcause by the taking away of the fifth part from them, they are (in
effect) put every fifth year to serve the Cure, without any wages, and if the
fourth years fruitfulness were but doubled, as by the blessing of God every
sixth year was trebled to the Jews, Levit. 25.21. when the seventh was to rest,
and so to bring forth none increase: or that they might out of all the former
years, not by scandalous nigardice, but by ingenuous Providence, lay up a
portion, which might make a competent supply, for that annual diminution, they
might be very well content with the one, or with patience and silence endure
the other. But as the case is with them, by payment of public impositions,
rated by those who to spare themselves (and sometimes to spite us) aggravate
our charge without either Mercy or Justice: by the tax of this I call it an
Egyptian Tribute, in regard of the proportion, the fifth part, which was paid
to Pharaoh by his people, Genesis 41.34. though otherwise contrary to that which
many of us have cause to complain of, for the Egyptian fifth part was laid up,
as provision for prevention of famine, to those that paid it: our payment of a
fifth part is our present oppression, without the expectation of any good for
hereafter.
Egyptian Tribute, by the open and wilful defraudings of some of them, as if
it were rather their right then any wrong to us to rob us of the tenth by many
accidental expenses which come upon diverse of us, after the proportion of the
common report of the value of our livings (exceedingly one rated sometimes of
purpose, to advance the fifth part to the greater advantage of those that
require it) wherein they expect no less liberality from us, then when all came
in without such paiments, and went out at the market upon far more profitable
prizes, then now they do, receipts and disbursments rightly reckoned together,
the allowance will be little for the subsistence of the Ministers in service,
and their Families; nothing at all to be saved to pay debts (contracted partly
by precedent plunderings, partly by the charge of enforced removals, from place
to place) which draw in damage at both ends a termino a quo and ad quem, (from
the place whence they come, and whither they go) nor to raise any reasonable
portions for their children, nor to make any competent provision for their
wives, in case of widowhood, when they survive them. For mine own part (and I
doubt not but there are others of my Brethren of my mind) though the R. of Br.
(if duly paid and not unduly charged) would be as Beneficial as I would
desire, yet as it is to me (with all the defalcations and burdens incident unto
it) if my conscience could be discharged, from obligation to the Pastoral
Charge of it, and would allow me to reap where I sow not, I should be
contented to give it up, and to be confined to a fifth part only: especially if
I had D. H. his either present means, or future hopes.



I answer

and therefore there was at the first a kind of necessity, to allot them such
a portion, though otherwise many godly and worthy Members of the House of
Commons were against it, as before has been observed.

Secondly, Though some Country Committee men have (against all equity and
ingenuity) urged the letter of the Ordinance, as if (like the Rule of Ignatius
Loiola) Ad literam, ad literam, fine glossa, sine glossa. Reg. Societ. Jesu
To the Letter, to the Letter, without a Gloss, without a Gloss, it were
punctually to be observed in all cases, without Exception or Limitation. The
Committee for Plundered Ministers at Westminster, have (by their usual
practice) expounded it otherwise, allowing sometimes no fifth part at all, and
that they might very justly do, in diverse cases: As 1. Where the Benefice will
not bear it, and leave a competent Subsistence for the Incumbent. 2. Where the
outed Minister has means of Subsistence of his own, or by his wife. 3. Where
the Father or Grandfather is rich enough to maintain the wife and children, in
which case, the For this see Mich. Doltons Justice of Peace, p. 84. fine, and
p. 85. princip. printed for the Company of Stationers, au. 1619.
Law the charge upon them. 4. Where the Party put out continues scandalous,
and disaffected to the Government, and contumaciously opposes the Reformation,
either of Church or State: For it seems just and reasonable that he should
thereby forfeit the fifth parts, as well as the four parts before, for his
former miscarriage. And for such as were scandalous, the Sea the quotation of
Mr. Prinne at the beginning of the first Section.
late King (though tender to his party) required none allowance, and sometimes
they allowed less then a fifth part, as if the Delinquent had any means at all
that was to be reckoned to make up a fifth part, as if the fifth part were 40
l, and he had 20 l of his own, he was to receive but another 20 l of the
Incumbent Minister.


Thirdly, The Ministers acceptance of a Pastoral Charge, with the burden of
priment of a fifth part, should be no prejudice, either to their suing or
speeding for deliverance from it: because it was then imposed, when they were
driven from their own places, and plundered by the Malignant party, of all they
had: in which extremity they were glad to take pains, upon any terms: he that
has nothing will not refuse to do service, though he have not so good pay for
his pains, as Micah his Priest had, Ten Shekels of silver a year, a suit of
apparel and Victuals, Judge. 17.10. and thence it was that the House of Lords
(at the first) made no scruple, to order that not a fifth part, or third only,
but a Witness the case of D. R. from whom the Rectory of F. in Essex was
sequestered, and he was by Order of the House of Lords, to have half the profit
of the Benefice, and M. l. now (or late) Minister at Br. but the other half, to
serve the Cure, and this Sequestration to last but half a year, as a person of
eminent place, parts, and integrity, told me not long ago.
full half of the maintenance of a Preaching Minister, should be paid to him,
who was not to preach, and as if this were too great a favor to be long
enjoyed, it was to hold out but half a year.

But now their I mean not by any thing I have said of the House of Lords, any
diminution of dignity to those truly noble and worthy Patriots of that House,
who have been faithful and constant to the cause of the Commonwealth, against
the boundless Prerogative of an absolute Monarchy: for upholding whereof
thirty eight Earls and Lords revolted from the Parliament to the King, who are
particularly named in M. Mays History of the Parliament of England, lib. 2.
cap. 5. page 87. nor from these would I detract any honor due unto them,
though I have no reason to like their resolution, in this particular.
Lordships have no such power (in favor of their Chaplains) to oppress the
Ministers put into their places by the House of Commons (who now without them
are reputed a complete Parliament) they may both with good Conscience complain,
and upon just reasons (such as have been given in this cause) expect, that that
burden which at first was laid upon them, and taken up by them, by a double
necessity (as has been showed) should not still be continued when it is in the
power of their Patrons to relieve them.





Secondly, I hold that we are bound by the rule of Scripture, to give bread and
drink to an hungry and thirsty enemy, Proverbs 25.21. Romans 12.20. but I take
not this to be a mere ministerial Duty, but a Christian Duty common with us,
to all others of our Christian Profession, and therefore

Thirdly, I wish the case of all indigent persons may be taken into
compassionate consideration, and such means ordered and ordained (for their
relief) as is most just and reasonable: and it is most just and reasonable,
that a common duty (as that charity is) should be exercised in such a
proportion, as that it may not be oppressive to any particular person, as the
payment of the fifth part is, even to those who are possessed of Benefices of
good value, for as in part I have said before, 1. The Parishioners in most
places make no conscience to pay them their dues, or to rob them of their
portion, because they take them for intruders into other men's Rights. 2. They
care not how heavily they load them in taxes to ease themselves. 3. The
Ministers have not such ready means to require or recover their dues, as the
Clerks of particular Patrons have formerly had. 4. Some of them are burdened,
with providing for those who (according to the Law forementioned) are put upon
them for relief, to which adding the payment of a fifth part (with the relief
of the poor, besides many extraordinary charges, no less then if they enjoyed
the whole Benefice to themselves) add to all these the many harsh usages they
meet withal, from their ill affected people, their condition becomes so
displeasing to themselves, that they are as capable of pity with those that
know it, as of envy with those that know it not.


Fourthly, For the particular way or means of extending Charity to such persons
as for offense to the State have forfeited their places of imploiment, and
benefit annexed thereto: I will not take upon me to give any directions, but if
there were a Committee appointed to that purpose, and liberty given for others
(as in some cases it has been) to make proposals unto them, I doubt not but
such an Expedient might be offered to their approbation, as might be more
comfortable for Sequestered Ministers, and no ways grievous to any, as the
payment of a fifth part is, to most on whom it is opposed.

Particular Reasons against the Payment of a fifth Part to D. E. H.
SECT. I.
Reasons against Doctor H. his claim of a fifth Part, in Particular of the
Rect. of Br.

TO these Reasons against the payment of a fifth part in general, I shall annex
some others in particular: which may evince, That though a fifth part might
justly be assigned to some outed Minister, from some Minister Incumbent, yet
not in our case; for neither is the Doctor such a man as is capable of it, nor
am I in a condition to part with such a portion of my dues to his use.

1. For the first, That he is not capable of the fifth part in the intent of
the Ordinance (as the regular practice of the Committee for Plundered Ministers
at Westminster expounds it) I shall show by two Reasons: 1. The one is that he
needs it not. 2. The other is, That if he did, there are other ways for supply
of his wants. 1. That he needs it not, I can prove it by double evidence. 1.
From Himself. 2. From Others.




1. From Himself, he has said diverse times, But for the Means he has in
Wiltshire the Parsonage of Br. would not have answered his Charge in the time
of the Wars; how much that addition amounted unto, I have not been informed;
but secondly, That it is enough now for a competent Subsistence himself
confessed, when ( March 24, 1649.) he said, That he should not need a fifth
part above two years, and to both these Testimonies of his, I can produce
sufficient witness upon Oath (if he dare for conscience, or can for shame deny
his own words) but I think he will not, because he did not, when I had mine
evidence ready to produce against him, before the Committee at R.

Now since he is known to be so good an Husband, as not only to know his own
Estate, but how to manage it to his best advantage, and to speak as much for
his own Interest, and to pursue it as eagerly as any man can do, that makes not
mammon his God, none that knows him, will ever believe he would have said so
much to the prejudice of his own profit, if it had not been true, and such a
truth as he was familiarly acquainted withal, and whereof he might be
convinced if he should say the contrary.

2. From Others: I was ready at R. upon the 19th of October, 1652. the day
agreed upon by the Committee (our Judges) and the Doctor himself, and me (the
parties) for the hearing of our differences, to produce my Witnesses for proof,
that in Wiltshire he had Lands, let for the yearly value of about 80 l, and
Woods upon them worth many hundreds. But he knows, who would not suffer them to
give in their Evidence upon this pretense, That the Ordinance allots the fifth
part without any exception, of other means or maintenance, more or less,
though he were so assuredly informed, That he could not but believe it, that
the Committee for Plundered Ministers at Westminster, did by their ordinary
practice clear the meaning of the Ordinance, to be for the allowance of a fifth
part only, where other means of necessary Subsistence was wanting: and that
upon good reason, for if a man may have a good Estate of his own, and
nevertheless, without any pains, may have a fifth part of his portion who
bears the whole burden of Ministerial duties, in the Church, of Hous-keeping
and of Hospitality at home, and of all Taxes and Impositions for the Public:
the condition of many (both pains, means, and charge considered) will be better
by putting out, then theirs who are put in to possess their places, which
surely cannot be according to the mind of the Parliament.

Besides, for the Doctors wife and children (she being an inheretrix of a fair
Estate, when her father dies, who is a weak man, and well stricken in years,
if he be yet alive) there is no fear of their want, though they have neither
Right nor part in the Rectory of Br.

2. For the other Reasons, That if he had no means of his own, he should be no
sharer with him in wages, who does all the work (when he does none of it for
which it is due.) Besides the Arguments against the fifth part in general,
already produced, it may reasonably be pleaded, in bar to his claim of the
fifth part by particular application unto him, That 1. If he be not invincibly
wilful, against the Government which gives him Protection, he may no doubt
have employment for his good parts, and a competent Salary, for the good
service he may do, in the use and exercise of them. 2. If he will not be taken
off, nor abate any whit of his rigid misconceits, and disaffection to the
present Government, and to their public proceedings, nor forbear to do them as
much disservice, as he can and dare (upon all occasions in private and
public) they may think it a matter rather of favor, then of rigor, if he
want to send him for supply to the known Laws of the Land (so much cried up by
him and his party) and they will send his wife and children, to the able
Gentleman, her Father and their Grandfather, for in such a case it is thus
ordered by Law, The Father and Grandfather, Mother and Grandmother, being of
sufficient ability, shall relieve them, in such manner as the Justices of
Peace, in that County where such sufficient Persons dwell, at their quarter
Session, shall assesse. Dolt. Justice of Peace, printed for the Society of
Stationers, an. 1619. p 84, 85.


But he and his, if they were in want (being such as they are, with such an one
as his Father in Law is) would find mercy ready enough to receive them,
without any order of Justice of procure their entertainment.

SECT. II.
Reasons why I should not pay a fifth Part to the Doctor.

NOw as by what has been said it appears in respect of him, That it is not
reasonable he should require a fifth Part of the Parish of B. So I shall now
give Reasons (in respect of my self) which may conclude it as unreasonable that
I should pay it.

1. Though I acknowledge with all thankfulness, the Parliaments benevolous
intentions toward me, in designing me to officiate in such places, as promised
me a very comfortable reward, for the work of my Ministry: yet such has been
my mishap (through others Malignity) that I have been a loser by them, and so
little a gainer or saver by the exercise of my calling (for the best part of
forty years together) that upon a just occasion (though but an unjust surmize
of my thriving by adherency to the Parliament) I made bold to tell some of the
most eminent Commonwealths-men of this Nation: That if they would make mine
estate as good in Lands, as it was before I went to the University, or in money
and goods, as good as before I had an Ecclesiastical benefit, I would serve the
Church and State with my best abilities (according to my Conscience) for
nothing as long as I lived. Or if they would but put me into as good a
condition as I was possessed of before I was driven to fly from all I had,
because my Judgment and Conscience engaged me to be of the Parliament Party: I
would give up all I had of their gift, without any desire of further Benefit
from them. Which being true, I cannot but so far confide in their wisdom and
goodness, as to believe, they would not have taken a fifth Part from me, to
gratify such a Doctor that so little needed it.

2. I may be the more confident herein, because where I was last disposed of,
and where for my Settlement, there passed an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament (though it wanted a formality of accomplishment, by the great
Division betwixt the Parliament, City and Army, which then happened) I was so
great a sufferer in all kinds by those who hated the Right and Reformation of
the Parliament, and me for their sakes, that if my Cause had been seasonably,
thoroughly and truly represented unto them, I doubt not, but they would rather
have awarded me reparations for wrongs, and damages sustained, then mulct me by
diminution of my wages, for the work which lies wholly on me, and nothing at
all upon the Doctor to perform.

3. As it was my losing lot to part with the last Parsonage I had too soon (for
it was a little before the harvest was ready for the Reaper) and so to be At
Astb. where upon the death of Dr. Dod the Sequestered Rector, by pretense of a
Writ, De vi laica amovenda, I was violently and illegally put out of possession
by the under-Sheriffe, but upon complaint to the Committee for Plundered
Ministers, restored within a fortnight after by an order coming from them,
commanding the same under-Sheriste to put mine Antagonist out, and to put me
into possession again (and he did so) and to make his appearance before the
Honorable Committee, to answer for his unwarrantable proceedings against me,
but upon the request of the high Sheriff on his behalf, and because he pleaded
the Obligation of his Oath to serve all Writs that came to his hands, I excused
his appearance: how the Sheriffs great Fee prospered with him (for he was
either liberally paid or promised for that illegal Act) I cannot tell, but
sure I am, they for whom he did it prospered not, for he who was the pretended
Presentee possessed not the Parsonage, and had so much trouble with it, as he
told me when I left it, that he wished he had rather given 200 l then disturbed
me in it, and he that was really intended and put in in my room, was afterward
for scandal removed.
both injuriously and barbarously driven from it, without any recompense either
of my pains, or charge upon it which was very great, by Housekeeping,
Impositions, and Quartering of soldiers; besides that I was forced to put off
my stock of Cattle at a low rate, which cost me very dear: So was it my hard
hap also, to come to Br. too late, when the Doctor had newly inned as his own,
all the provision of the year past, and left nothing for me but ministerial
duty, and Chamaelion solus anim alium, nec cibo, nec potualitur, nec alio quam
acris alimento. Plin. Not. hist. l. 8. c. 33. p. 118.
Chamaelion-diet, until the next Harvest.

4. The Committee at R. taking into their serious consideration, the necessary
supply of him that should undertake the Pastoral Charge, made an Order, That
the Doctor should enter August 14. 1649. on which day part of their Order was,
And he is permitted to receive the Tithes, provided he give security to the
Committee to pay 100 l to the next Minister in lieu thereof in case he be
removed, which I have attested under the had of the Clerk of the Committee.
into Bond (which he did accordingly) for payment of an 100 l, for his
maintenance, out of the profits of the year precedent, which amounted to more
by a double advantage, both of the value, and quantity of Corn, then had been
known in one year, within the memory of man. But the Doctor got the Bond out of
their hands again, by what means, whether direct or indirect, I determine not,
but sure I am he is a 100 l the better by having it, and I a 100 l the worse by
missing of that Sum: which should have fallen to my share, as his immediate
Successor, and happily had done, if they that put him out, had put me in, but it
is like it was displeasing to some Committee men at R. that they made a Blank
at Br. and the Committee at Westminster filled it up: and yet I required not a
forbearance of the fifth part, until I had paid the Doctor 69 l -- 12 s -- 2 d
(upon a very hard bargain) a double price to the just value of many of the
things I bought, as some of better Judgment then my self, and of better
conscience then he, made the estimation of them: and well nigh as much more
under the Title of fifths, and thereby (by the ebbing of Tithes to me (which
came in with full tide to him) and by the augmentation of my charges of several
sorts) I found my self unable to pay him any more under the name of fifths.

Yet he complained to the Committee at R. that I had not conformed to their
Order therein, when I had his Acquittances for receipt of a fifth part for the
time past, and at that time he could claim no more until the next Harvest,
whereof having made due proof before the Committee, his Suggestion was found By
the Committee of Parliament for the County of B. sitting at R. the 15th June,
1652. This Committee being satisfied by M. John Ley Rector of Br. that Dr H.
did mis-inform them touching Mr. L. his non conformity to the Order for fifths,
and the yearly value of the Parsonage. It is now thought fit that the value
proposed in the letter of the 28 of April last, shall be no rule to apportion
the fifths. And it is ordered, That the difference between M. L. and Dr. H. be
heard before the Committee on the 20th of July next, at which time Dr. H. is to
prove the value of the Parsonage by substantial Witnesses upon Oath, which are
to be of the Parishioners. W. W. Major of R. W. St. J. W. G. W.

a falsehood, and I was discharged from payment according to that proportion,
which he had procured upon it to be rarated and ratified by their Letter unto
me.

5. And lastly, I am put to relieve and maintain those, whom the Law assigns
to me for Sustenance, under that Relation, which obliges the Doctors Father in
Law, to provide for his wife and children, if destitute of means: and this
Charity of the Statute, is to take place, and be served before that of the
Ordinance for a fifth part, if none other Objection could be made against it.
[A part of this P^ea put into the Committee at R. moved four or five to
consent, to order the repeal of the former Order, for payment of the fifth
part: but he refusing to join with his Colleagues (though men M. Stroud. M.
Nutkins. M. Webb. M. Wooldridge.

of eminent Integrity and Godliness) for Reasons which I forbear (until I
have further cause to produce them) it was not ^o fully ratified, as it should
have been in the Terms and Tenor following.

By the Committee of Parliament, Berks. ss.
for the said County sitting at Reading the 19th of October, 1632.
FOr as much as this Commit, by an Order bearing date the 8th of March 1649.
did assign the fifth part of the profits of the Rectory of Br Sequestered from
Dr E. H. for Scandal in life, and disaffection to the Parliament, toward the
maintenance of his Wife and Children, to be paid unto her, by Mr John Ley
Incumbent there (according to Ordinance of Parliament in that behalf.) Now we
the said Committee, taking the usual practice of the Honorable Committee for
Plundered Ministers, both for interpretation and limitation of the said
Ordinance, in such cases, as a warrantable pattern to follow, who make the Wife
and Children incapable of the fifth part, where the sequestered person, has a
competent Estate, for their maintenance, and having now received testimony upon
Oath, that the said Dr. H. has a temporal Estate in Lands, in possession, in
the County of Wilts of the yearly value of 80 l, or thereabouts, and woods upon
the said Lands, estimated to be worth many hundred pounds, and taking into
consideration that about the time that Dr. H. was sequestered from the said
Rectory, he entered into Bond to pay an 100 l to the next Incumbent, out of his
last years profits toward his pains and charges to serve the Cure until the
next Harvest: and notwithstanding the said last years profits, was very
advantageous to the said Doctor, both in the quantity and price of Corn, yet
was the said Bond re-delivered to him, without any Satisfaction given to Mr.
Ley the next Incumbent: As also Mr. Leys constant adherence to the Parliament,
whereby he has sustained great losses by plunderings, and great charges by his
enforced removals from place to place far distant, and his maintaining three
Orphane Children, whose Parents were impoverished in the Parliaments service.
We conceive it Just and Equitable, and do likewise order, that the said Mr.
John Ley, be from hence forth discharged from farther payment of the said fifth
part, or any part thereof to the said Dr. H. his Wife and Children.

Mr Richard Whistler of Satwell, and Robert Hues of Bright-well were ready to
depose upon Oath (as they received information) to the value of Dr. Hydes
temporal Estate, and the Order above-recited was agreed upon, but one of the
Committee refused to sit and join with the other four that voted to take away
the fifth part, which is certified, and (if required) shall be attested upon
Oath by

Will. Carter Clark then attending the said Committee.
And the same Seal shall I be ready to set to what I have said, (if I be called
to it) so that an Oath may be (as the Apostle writes to the Hebrews) the end
of all strife, Heb 6.16.



SECT. III.
The Doctors claim of my Promise to pay him a fifth part, Answered.

ANd here I thought I had ended with the Doctor, for this difference about the
fifth part: but while I was setting my papers in order for the Press (the day
before I was to send them to London) I received a Letter from him, wherein he
challenges a second promise of me (for once he did the like before) for the
payment of the fifth part of the Parsonage, after such a proportion as he could
procure the whole to be let to, and paid by sufficient undertakers, which was
far more then ever I could make of it. Of these two promises he claims one
(though not in this Letter) before the date of the Order of the 15th of June,
1652. forementioned in the Margin: The other since the Order October. 19, the
same year, though within a while after, as about two or three hours of the same
day.

For the former, the truth is upon his importunate pressing of me to let it
(because he saw I was not worldly minded enough to make the best of it) I told
him, if a competent number of the chief of the Parish would take it, and give
good security for payment of the Sum to be agreed upon, I would farm it out
to them, he promised to bring me such to Wall. by a day prefixed.

That day come, he brought with him to Wall: (the place appointed for our
meeting) only two men, to take all the profits of the Rectory, and to undertake
for the payment of what he agreed upon: against whom I took exception jointly
and severally: Jointly, because both of them together, were not held of
sufficient Estate (by such as knew both of them better then I did) to answer
such a Sum as the Doctor had drawn them (by what artifices or secret security
I know not) to engage for: for the one of them had no Land at all, the other
but about half a yard Land, and for their Estate in stock, that was very
uncertain, and not visibly such as might be sufficient security, if they should
put me to sue them for breach of Covenant with me: and against them both the
principal Parishioners took exceptions, as men disposed to deal a great deal
more strictly with them, by a more rigorous exacting of all Ecclesiastical
Rights, then their Minister would use. And yet that year had they taken it they
might have lost at least a 100 l, as they made the estimation, who were best
acquainted with the constant revenue of the Rectory; and if it had so fallen
out or somewhat near it (the truth whereof I was not able to discover) would
they not have fallen from their Covenant? and have been clamarous against me,
if I had put them in suit for the whole, when they had fallen so far short of
their expected profit? and might they not, having my goods in their hands, and
I but their paper and wax in mine, have advantage enough to weary me out, if I
took a legal course to recover my Right? And as these were joint exceptions
against them both, so there were some several or peculiar to each of them, for
the one was not of the Parish (as I proposed, he consented, and both
conditioned the Tenants should be) and besides be was too intimate a friend of
the Doctors: The other not so well-affected to me, as my mind toward him, and
the Parochial relation betwixt us required: for living in the Parish, and near
the Church, yet he constantly excommunicateth himself out of the compass of my
Ministry (and has done as well before that time as since) for what causes, and
how he has carried himself toward me otherwise, some do know, but God who
best knows us both will one day judge.

The other promise of October. 19. was not as the former only verbal, but
written and testified by two witnesses, it was of this form,

Nineteenth of October, 1652.
IT is this day agreed by the mutual consent of Mr John Ley Rector of Br. and
Dr E. H. from whom the same stands sequestered, that the Doctor shall take his
fifth part (for the year 1652.) proportionably according to Mr Leys account:
and that for the year to come, the Doctor shall have a fifth part after the
Rate of -- And he deducting and allowing a fifth part of all such charges and
paiments, as he allowed for the year past: provided that such and so many
sufficient men become bound to Mr Ley for the payment of the said Sum as he
shall accept, and approve of.

Witness to this Agreement Alex. Bl. Will. Car.

To this neither his hand nor mine was subscribed, because he went out of R.
before it was drawn up, and whether he would approve of it or no in terminis, I
could not tell: and therefore I suspended my ratification of it, yet when we
met we both agreed to it, though without Subscription on either part.

It was his part to begin to act, according to this agreement, and he makes
account he performed it, when he brought M. D. of W. to bid me a price for the
Rectory, which was on Tuesday Jun. 13. 1654. for of that he says, He has
performed his part of the agreement in his Letter dated from Hart-Hall,
September. the 9. 1654. Buc.

Answ. He failed both 1. In the Sum. And 2. In the Security.


1. For the Sum, M. D. offered 20 l less then the written agreement. 2. He
fell off from that he offered 40 l or 30 l at least: because I told I was
engaged by promise, not to conclude with him (who was none of the Parish)
before I had proposed his terms unto the Parish: wherein I was the more willing
to keep my word, because they were very unwilling he should be my Tenant for
the Tithe.

But the chiefest of them (who appeared in the Business) confessing they could
not pay so much, and so soon as he had undertaken, were content that I should
proceed and conclude with him.

This I thought would please him well, and therefore (so soon as I parted with
them) I went to Wall. to tell him of it, he being not at home, I left the
intelligence for him in a Letter, desiring him the next morning to come to me,
that (the great rub removed (the Parishioners dislike of his Tenantship for the
Tithes) we might finally conclude what was formerly proposed.

That day he came not, but on Thursday June 15. he came and told me, If I would
abate him 30 or 40 l of what he had bidden me, he would take the Tithes of me,
otherwise not: it was strange to me that he should now refuse the bargain, and
think it worse by so much (when he might have it with peace) then when there
was much displeasure and indignation taken at his motion.

2. For the Security (whatsoever Sum was agreed upon) he would give me but
his own Bond, without a Surety, whereas by the written agreement, the Doctor
was to bring such, and so many sufficient men to be bound for the payment of
the rent, as I should accept and approve of. This made many confident (which
upon surmise I would not believe at the first) that the Gentleman (being the
Doctors intimate friend) this Treaty with me, was but a design to raise the
fifth part to an unequal growth, that it might be to the other four, as the
thumb among the fingers: There were other suspicions taken up by some, That the
Gentleman meant to take the Tithe and Glebe in his own Name, but after to turn
over his Bargain to the Doctor, that he might by that means set him in
possession of the Parsonage again. But he assured me he had no such meaning,
and I meant to assure my self he should not do it if he would, resolving of an
express condition to the contrary, with a considerable penalty if it were
broken: and for my performance of promise, the Doctor himself has (upon
sufficient experience) said, he doubts not of keeping of my promise, but he was
not pleased that I was with much difficulty drawn to make a promise, and even
in his last Letter Septem. 6. 1654. his words are these, If you have not a
mind to let your Living, you may keep it, but withal I suppose you will have
more mind to keep your word: that you may do if you come to a less propertion
with my consent, else you cannot.

Why not? when the failing was on his part, not on mine, both for the Sum and
Security, as has been shown, and may be more fully evidenced by M. D. his
Letter of the 19. of June, as follows,

SIR,
HAd you been pleased to have accepted of my offer which I made to you in
presence of D. H. I should then have stood to it, and not have gone back: but
in regard you did then refuse me, and have since treated with others, I shall
entreat you, now to hold me excused, in my non-accepting their refusals: for I
shall not deal now upon any terms: not else, but respective salutes, from

Wall. 19. Jun. 1654. Your assured loving friend and servant Fr. D.


I was willing enough to have accepted of this offer, but so as I might keep my
promise with my Parishioners, which had but suspended our agreement for a few
hours, had he been at home: for the same day, he made that offer before D. H.
(with a strong temptation to break my word; for he told me, if I would then
take him at his word, he would then pay me an 100 l before I went out of his
house) I came to acquaint him with the Parishes consens (at least the consent
of the chief of them) for renting the Rectory unto him.

Now when neither the Doctor, nor he whom he propounds for a taker, come up
to the Conditions of the Covenant betwixt us, Is it reason that I should be
tied up alone to it? I doubt not but every wise and good man will (the premises
considered) account me free from the precedent Engagements, and being free, it
is time for me to give over, both promises and paiments to him, who has had
much more from me, and I much less from him, then (in equity and conscience)
was due betwixt us.

FINIS.

