A LETTER WRITTEN By A LEARNED AND REVERENT DIVINE, TO WILLIAM LAUD, NOW L.
BISHOP OF CANTERBURY: CONCERNING HIS INCLINAtion to Popery, persuading him not
to halt between two Opinions, but to be steadfast to the Protestant Religion.

Printed in the year of Gods great and merciful deliverance from sundry Romish
and Jesuiticall plots against this State and Kingdom.

Expostulating the cause of his unsetlednesse in Religion, which is pleaded to
be our dissensions: showing the insufficiency of that motive, and comparing
the state of our Church herein, with the Romish.
I Would J knew where to find you: then I could tell how to take a direct aim,
whereas now I must rove and conjecture. To day you are in the tents of the
Romanists; to morrow in ours; the next day between both; against both. Our
adversaries think you ours, we theirs; your conscience finds you with both, and
nether. I flatter you not: this of yours is the worst of all tempers: heat and
could have there uses; lukewarmnesse is good for nothing but to trouble the
stomach. Those that are spiritually hot, find acceptance; those that are
stark cold, have a lesser reckoning; the mean between both, is so much worse,
as it comes nearer to good, and attaines it not. How long will you halt in this
indifferency? Resolve one way, and know at last what you do hold; what you
should. Cast of either your wings or your teeth; and loathing this Bat-like
nature, be either a bird or a beast. To die wavering and uncertain, your self
will grant fearful. If I must settle, when begin you? If you must begin why
not now? It is dangerous deferring that, whose want is deadly, whose opportunity
is doubtful. God cries with Iehu, who is on my side, who? Look at last out
of your window to him, and in a resolute courage cast down this Iezabel that
has bewitched you. Is there any impediment, which delay will a bate? is there
any which a just answer cannot remove? If you had rather waver, who can settle
you? But if yor love not inconstancy, tell us why you stagger. Be plain or
else you will never be firm: What hinders you. Is it our divisions: I see you
shake your head at this, and by your silent gesture bewray this the cause of
your distaste: would God I cold either deny this with truth or amend it with
tears: But I grant it, with no less sorrow, then you with offense. This earth
has nothing more lamentable, then the civil jarres of one faith. What then?
must you defy your mother; because you see your brethren fighting? Their
dessension is her grief: Must she lose some sons, because some others
qua^rell? Do not so wrong your self in affecting her. Will you love Christ the
less, because his coat is divided? yea let me boldly say; the hemme is torn a
lettle, the garment is whole; or rather it is fretted a little, not torn; or
rather the fringe, not the hemme. Behold, here is one Christ, one Creed, one
Baptism, one heaven, one way to it, in sum, one religion, one foundation,
and (take away the tumultuous spirits of some rigorous Latherans) one heart:
Our differences are those of Paul and Barnabas not those of Peter and Magus if
they be some, it is well they are no more; if many, they are not capital. Show
me that Church, that has not complained of distraction: yea that family, yea
that fraternity, yea that man that always agrees with himself. See if the
Spouse of Christ, in the heavenly marriage song, do not call him, a young Heart
in the mountains of division. Tell me then, whither will you go for truth,
if you will allow no truth, but where there is no division? To Rome perhaps,
famous for unity, famous for peace. See now how happily you have chosen, how
well you have sped: Lo, Card. Bellarmine himself, a witness above exception,
under his own hand acknowledges to the world and reckons up 237. contrarieties
of doctrine among the Romish Divins. What need we more evidence? O the perfect
accordance of Peter's See! worthy to be accorded for a badge of truth. Let now
all our Adversaries scrape together so many contradictions of opinions among
us, as they confess amongst themselves, and be you theirs. No, they are not
more peaceable, but more subtle; they have not less dissension, but more
smothered. They fight closely within doors, without noise; all our frays are in
the field; would God we had as much of their cunning, as they want of our
peace, and no more of their policy, than they want of our truth. Our strife is
in Ceremonies, theirs substance; ours in one or two points, theirs in all. Take
it boldly from him that dares avouch it, there is not one point in all
Divinity (except those wherein we accord with them) wherein they all speak
the same. If our Church displease you for differences, theirs much more;
unless you will be either wilfully incredulous, or wilfully partial: unless
you dislike a mischief the less for the secrecy. What will you do then? Will
you be a Church alone? Alas, how full are you of contradictions to your self!
how full of contrary purposes! how often do you chide with your self! how often do
you fight with your self! I appeal to that bosom which is privy to those
secret combats: believe me not, if ever you find perfect unity any where but
above: either go thither and seek it amongst those that triumph, or be content
with what estate you find in this warfairing number. Truth is in differences,
as Gold is in dross, Wheat in chafe; will you cast away the best metal, the
best grain, because it is mingled with this Offall? Will you rather be poor and
hungry, then bestow labor on the Fan or Furnance? Is there nothing worth your
respect but Peace? I have heard that the interlacing of Discords graces the
best Music; and I know not whether the very evil spirits agree not with
themselves. If the body be sound, what though the coat be torn? or if the
garment be whole, what if the lace be unript? Take you Peace; let me have
Truth, I cannot have both. To conclude: Embrace those Truths that we all hold,
and it greatly matters not what you hold in those wherein we differ: and if you
love your safety, seek rather grounds whereon to rest, then excuses for your
unrest. If ever you look to gain by the Truth, you must choose it, and cleave to
it. Mere resolution is not enough; except you will rather lose your self then
it.

FINIS.

