A Letter to the Kindome of ENGLAND, To stand upon their Watch, least the dark
winter nights (by the lightning of Cannons) prove terrible to their Spirits.
To all that wish well to the Church and Commonwealth, greeting, with desire
that the multitude of frivolous Pamphlets, may not hinder them from reading, or
perusing of this affectionate Letter from a Friend, or Brother of theirs.
Dear Contrymen.
MY Prayer to God, and hearts desire is, that you may be safe in this life, and
saved in the world to come. Are not good Laws the Life of a Kingdom, and the
Gospel in its purity the power of God unto salvation? Can you be in safety, if
the streams of Law, running through the Channel of Equity should be damned up
by black Envy, and desperate Malignity? What will become of your Liberties and
Estates, your Selves and your Posterities, if boundless Prerogative sore
aloft; And the wholesome Statutes enacted, and good Laws prepared, be so
depressed, that their depression prove no less then their annihilation? It is
the Word that begets Faith, and Gods Ordinance that instrumentally vivifie our
dead, and refoscilate our drooping and distressed spirits: Can the Vision
therefore fail, and you not be in danger to perish? It is the boldness of Gods
Messengers, and the late enlargement of their bounds, that now enrageth
nefarious and Malevolent persons. That the Law may not be your Protection, that
the light of Sacred Truth may not shine so clearly; that they may be advanced,
and you and yours for ever enslaved, diverse corrupt Men, Men of corrupt
spirits have persuaded His Majesty to desert His Great, His Wise, and His
Faithful Council, the Council of Parliament: yea, I wish they may not (if
they have not) prevailed with Him to take up Arms against those, who are and
will ever be found to be his Loyal Subjects: But what means the sounding of
the Trumpets, and the striking up of Drums in several Counties, by virtue of
his Majesty's Commission, if War was not intended in this our Nation? It may
be you are, or shortly will be sent unto, for Men, Moneys, Horse, and other
Warlike Ammunition, and if not to bear at least to lend your Arms, which you
have provided for the good of your Countries, that under pretense of Defense of
his Majesty, and the maintenance of your own Peace they may be borne by others.
It is not his Majesty, but his Majesty misinformed, that calls for this from
you, not himself, but his ill affected Counselors and the Cavaliers, who
follow them at the heels, and (as it may be thought) many of them, not only
criminous, but of desperate Fortunes, desiring through the Sea of your blood to
swim to their hoped haven that put him on upon these strange and unheard of
courses. The wise man's eyes are in his head, stand upon your Watch, look about
you, the Romish party and the Malecontented Courtiers would ensnare you; Sleep
not, Security precedes Misery: it is ill resting in a Sirens arms; fair
Pretenses sometimes open the door to let in a Troop of Evils. You have of
late had many goodly Protestations, but few real actions: take heed what you
do, you have cause to Fear, not to Confide, and if to Confide, not in a
Prince carried away by private Council, but in the great Council of State,
that Council is his Majesty's; they were Summoned by his own Writ; They are
yours; they came together by your own Election; should you do contrary to
their Advice, you would desert both your King and your Selves. It is for God
and the Common good that they stand. Meroz Curse will be your portion, if you
come not out to help Them, much more if you should go forth or send any Force
against them. The Lords and Commons intend nothing but Loyalty to his Majesty,
and the continued and continual preservation of your Safety: Therefore help
them with your Prayers, neither let your Estates and Lives be dear unto you
for their sakes; and see that you lift not up a hand against them, least you be
sound fighters against the Lord. Defend his Majesty's Royal person to the last
drop of blood in your Veins; maintain his Dignity, with the privilege of
Parliament, with the hazard of your Lives; and further, according as you lately
Protested, endeavor to bring all underminers of Church and State to condign
punishment. Go not out of your Counties, but defend them and your Selves. Lend
not your Arms, least being naked you be beaten with your own Weapons. Take my
advice, you may come to prevent Dangers. It is the advice of a Friend, and of
one that is a Loyal Subject to his Majesty; therefore let his promonition be a
premunition to you all.

London, Printed by R. O. and G. D. in the year, 1642.


