A LETTER Sent from his Excellency General Blake To the King of DENMARK
TOUCHING The Dutch Fleet now in the Sound; and his desires and proposals unto
him, and the rising of the Danes in arms to prevent the landing of any enemy.

ALSO A full Relation of the last great Sea Fight between the English and the
Dutch, and the number sunk and taken. With the taking of an 100 Fishermen, and
the Hollanders fortifying themselves in Bressies Bay in Scotland.

LIKEWISE, The proceedings of Sir George Ascues Fleet, his motion Westward and
his design therein, with the Council of States letter to him WITH Joyful news
from China, and the receiving of the Christian faith, by many both of the
Nobility and Commonalty there.

LONDON: Printed for D. G. 1652.

A LETTER Sent from Genesis Blake to the King of DENMARK Touching The Dutch Fleet
in the Sound, and his Desires and Proposals to him. With a perfect Narrative of
the last great Fight between the English and the Dutch, upon the Coast of
Denmark.
SIR,
IN my last of the eighth instant, I acquainted you with the News in these
parts touching the proceedings of the Navy at Sea, under his Excellency General
Blake: for your further information in what has happened since his departure
hence, take this. The 13 instant, the wind serving very fair for his purpose,
he set sail from hence to meet with the Dutch, who (as he was informed) were
returning homewards, with a very strong guard of Men of war to secure them from
our Fleet. His Excellency (being in the Resolutiou) with great Resolution and
courage, sailed headmost of the Fleet, the whole Fleet cheerfully bearing up
after him; and being come in sight of the Dutch, prepared themselves for the
fight, making such a shout that it seemed to have thundered: and coming
somewhat nearer to them, was descried by the enemy, whose hearts began to
melt, and their courage failing, they declined engagement; but our Heroic
General would not lose so fair an opportunity, but closely pursued them,
forcing them to a dispute, maugre the have they made to escape away. The
conflict was hot for about the space of two hours and an half, after which time
our General became victorious, sunk four, and took many of their Men of war; I
have not yet the exact particulars of this fight, but it is said, that he has
taken above forty, all good stout ships, which carry some thirty, many forty
Guns a piece. Whilst his Excellency was thus engaged, the enemies Fishermen
endeavored to esc^pe from us, but our men perceiving it some of our ships made
after them with all speed, and notwithstanding all the have they made, seized
upon an hundred sail of them, wherein they found Fifteen hundred men, which (as
I hear) they intend to send into Harbors in these parts. Those that escaped,
have secured themselves in a Harbor or Island belonging to this Country,
called Bressies Bay; they think to fortify themselves there, but I hope they
will be prevented. His Excellency pursued the remainder of the enemies Fleet,
who having got off, sailed up the Sound, where he now rides with his fleet. At
his coming into the Sound, the Danes fearing an invasion, beat up their Drums
and rose up in arms, preparing themselves to withstand the landing of any that
should attempt it. But General Blake to prevent all misunderstanding, sent a
Letter to the King; wherein he desires his Majesty, That he would be pleased
to prohibit the Dutch to remain in his Harbors, and to give no Protection to
them, being the known and open Enemies of this Commonwealth; but to command
them to put forth to Sea, and to depart out of his Ports and Harbors; which if
his Majesty please to do, there should not any Hostility in the least be
offered to any within his Dominions. Whether his Majesty will agree to this we
know not, but it is conceived that he will, by reason that he is in Treaty with
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

Your assured friend, T: B.
Aberdeen, July 18, 1652.
A Letter from Goa in the East Indies.
Sir,
THe Hollanders and Portugals have made peace here, but the Japponians have
prohibited all commerce with the Hollanders. The King of China has totally
vanquished the Tartars, and slain their General, and is settled in Pechin; and
eleven principal Eunuchs of his Kingdom have been lately baptized by a
Jesuit; and the Kings eldest son, called Constantine, shall be committed to
those Eunuchs for Education; and the Kings Mother, and the Queen his Consort
(being formerly also become C^ristians) make a great progress in virtue. The
King of Siringer, bordering upon the Great Mogor, has also admitted diverse
Christian preachers within his Territories, which is likely much to advance
Christianity in these (yet) unbeleeving parts.

A Letter from Paris, dated 27 of July, (...)n.
SIR,
THeir Majesty's are still at Ponthois, and there are but few forces left there
for the guard, there being not above two thousand soldiers in all, the Marshal
de Seneterre is come with some forces from Lorrain, and is joined to Marshal de
Thuren near Noyon. The death of the Lord Mancini Nephew to the Cardinal
Mazarine, has much grieved the King and Queen, and other of the favorites,
being dead three days since of his wounds that he had at St. Anthony gate of
this city; the 20 instant the Parliament being sat in the Chambers assembled,
the business which for so many days before was in debate, was passed, being a
substance to constitute the Duke of Orleans Lievt. Genesis of the Kingdom during
the Kings restraint; also to appoint the Prince of Conde as Generallissimo, and
the Duke of Beaufort his Lievt. Genesis with a strict command to all persons his
Majesty's subjects to obey the said Duke of Orleans his orders and no others,
forbidding all Receivers, Treasurers, Farmers, not to pay any money but by the
said Dukes order and direction, as it is at large contained in the said Arrest
or Decree two days ago, the Parliament also ordered, that such goods as yet
remain to be sold of the Cardinals should be sold without delay, to make up the
50000 Crowns for the reward of him or them, that will bring the Cardinal alive
or dead. The Princes is still quartered in the Suburbs of St. Victor, they are
not very numerous and so are not in a capacity to attempt any considerable
business; the dearth of provision is not so great in this City as it has
been, the price being much abated.

The Parliament has passed an order that the sentence passed the 20 instant
shall be imparted to all the Parliaments and other high Courts of Judicature,
that so they may ratify the same and confirm it, giving each of them a
sentence to the same effect, it is doubtful what will be the success, some
Parliaments standing affected for the Prince and some for the King, among them
is the Parliament of Brittany, and that of Daulphine, besides the Parliament of
Roan, which is much divided; the Province of Normandy seeing the Court within
their borders, has therefore proffered a very large sum of money, that they may
be excused of quartering any soldiers, and be oppressed with the like evils.
The City of Rochel is still blocked up by sea, the Duke of Vendosme with his
Fleet not yet appearing for their relief. The City of Barcelona is still close
besieged, and little hopes of any relief from France, so that it is thought the
Ctty will be yielded up ere long.

Fhey write from Bourdeaux that the Marquess of Lisignam is gone from hence
with some forces to Langon to retake that place from the Kings forces, but at
his arrival he found the work already done; they began to batter the Castle
with three pieces of Ordnance, and having taken it by storm, all those within
it found in arms, were all put to the sword. The Count d'Harcourt is with his
forces before Villanova, which he hops to take in few days, at this leagure
he has been like to be killed with two musket shot, but both did miss him,
only pierced his hat.

A Letter from Port-sea, dated July 21.
SIR,
THe Parliaments Fleet under the command of Sir Geo. Ascue, set sail from the
Downs, being 50 sail of gallant firm ships, well manned, he was bound Westward
as we conceive, after those 18 sail of Hollanders that went by here 5 or 6 days
ago, he had a very fair wind till he came near our road, but then the wind
turned full against him, so that he was constrained to put in to us for a
little space, and then taking the benefit of the tide, he bore up again to
Sea-ward, and by night got clear of Bembridge point. His putting in here, was
surely a special act of providence, though it was contrary to his intent; for
that the Council of State had sent letters to him, which came here an hour
before night, and so were instantly sent to him, and the boat was within a
league of them by night, in our sight; the wind yet favors not his purpose,
but continues almost South-west, and yet he is resolved not to anchor, but to
tide it Westward higher, where I hope God will make him instrumental for his
praise, as he has formerly been in those parts. Pirates infest these parts very
much, especially a small vessel of 6 guns, which yesterday chased a vessel of
Plymouth, which hardly escaped.

FINIS.

