Lex Parlamentorum: OR, AN ABSTRACT OF THE Antiquity and Jurisdiction of the
High Court of PARLIAMENT, According to the Laws and Constitutions of this
Realm.

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648.

A short Treatise of the Parliament of England, and Jurisdiction thereof.
THE thing ever amongst men in every Country had in most Reputation and
esteem, is the Public flourishing of their Countries Commonweal: and he that
endeavors the same, is worthy to be commended; to which every one Naturally
has a love and zeal; And it follows, that Man cannot attain these things,
but by a mean, which mean is none other but Reasonable Ordinances and Laws;
the which Laws proceed and come principally of God, for the Providence and
will of God is ever assistant.

The Parliament is the High, and most Honorable, Coke li. 10. fol. 123, 124.
sect. 97.
and most absolute Court of Justice of England, consisting of Lords in
Parliament and Commons: The Lords were formerly divided into two sorts,
Spiritual and Temporal; The Commons are divided into three parts, viz. Knights
of Sheirs or Counties, Citizens out of Cities, and Burgesses out of Buroughs.

The Antiquity of the High Court of Parliament. Antiquity of the Court of
Parliament. Bract. c. 2. Regist. 280. 5 H. 4.


The King of England is armed with diverse Counsels, one is called Commune
Concilium, and it is Legally called in writs Magnum Concilium Regis Angliae;
and that is applied to the House of Peers, which is called the Lords house of
Parliament.

The Jurisdiction of the High Court of Parliament.

The Court of Parliament is so transcendent, that it makes Laws, diminishes
and inlargeth Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances; concerning matters
Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common, Civil, Maritine, etc.

None can begin, continue or dissolve the Parliament but by the Kings
Authority. Mirr. cap. 2. sect. 4 10.14. c 4. de default, and cap. de Homicid.
c. 11. sect. 13. cap. 4.
The Court of Parliament is of that high Honor and Justice, that none ought to
imagine any thing dishonorable that proceeds from that High Court of Justice:
The writ of Summons is the Basis and foundation of the Parliament, Rex est
habiturus colloquium, Calvin's case.
and Tractatum cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus, super arduis negotiis
concernentibus 1. Nos. 2. Defensionem Regni nostri. 3. Defensionem Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, 2 and 3* Ed. 6. c. 1. 11. H. 7. c. 1.


Every Bil which passes the Parliament, shall have relation to the first day of
the Parliament, though it be put in at the end of the Parliament: 33 Hen: 8.17.
If diverse Sessions be in one Parliament, Diverse Sessions in one Parliament.
and the King does not sign the Bill until the last, then all is the same day,
and all shall have relation to the first day of the next Sessions; and the
first day and the last, are both one Parliament, and one day in Law.

No Bil is an act of Parliament, Ordinance or Edict in Law, although both
Houses agree unanimously in it) till it have the Royal Assent it is no act.
Assembles de ceux tres estates est appelle une act de Parliament, Assembles de
trois Estates.
car sans touts trois, nest ascun act, for without all 3 Estates it is no Act.

The Kings consent signified under His Great-Seal, 3 H. 7.21.
shall be to all intents of Law, as valid and effectual as if He were
Personally present.

The first Authentical report of that name Parliament that I find, 3 Ed. 1.
called Westm' 1.
is in the Statute made 3 Edw. 1. called Westmin 1. where the Assembly is said
to be le primer Parliament, apres Coronment le Roy. For in the Statute Articuli
Cleri published 9 Ed. 2. these words are read amongst others, Temporibus
progenitorum nostrorum quondam Regum Angliae in diversis Parliamentis suis,
etc. Which-words progenitorum and quondam must reach higher then 1 Ed. 1.
Sigbert, King of the East Saxons.
I read that Sigbert King of the East Saxons being moved to be Baptized, did
first call a Council of his Subjects; and finding them to favor his motion,
did then himself Assent unto it.

I read moreover in Matthew Paris, M. Paris temp. H. 4.1225.
that King Henry 3. Anno Dom. 1225. called together omnes Clericos and Laicos
totius Regni, or Vniversi Regni, as the same Writer expresses. Vide Magna
Charta, Magna Charta, c. 29.
Parliament Charter. Vide the Stat. 15 Ed. 1. c. 1. Confirms the 2 Charters,
and other Statutes made by the King, Peers, and Commons of this land: The
Statute published in the 20 year of the same King Henry, Stat. de Merton.
called the Statute of Merton, which says, Provisum fuit and Concessum tam a
praedictis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, quam ab ipso Rege
and aliis. The Statute of Westm' first made 3 Ed: 1. the title of it is, [The
establishment of King Edw. made by his Council, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of the Land, etc.] The Statute of
Gloucester, made in the first year of the said Kings reign thus providing,
pervenant pur le Roy and appeals le pluis discretes de son Realm, 4 Ed. 3.
and 36 Ed. 3. c. 10.
auxi bien des grondres come des maindres stabiliter est and concordantment
ordine, once every year.

The Judges of the land have resolved, Nevills case, 7 part of Coke 34. 2
Iacobi.
that no Noble men committing Treason shall forfeit their office and dignity,
their office is to Counsel the King in time of Peace, to defend him in time of
War.

No man shall be imprisoned by the King and his Council, 25 Ed. 3. c. 4.
Petition de droit, 3 Carol. Magna Charta, c. 29.
unless it be by Indictments, presentment of his neighbors, where such deed
is done by due process of law, made by writ Original at the Common Law, page
29. and expounds Lex terrae.

The order to make an Act, 7 H. 7.14. 12 H. 7.20. 9 H. 3. Magna Charta.
is to have the joint Assent of the Communaltie, the Lords and the King; where
a Statute is made to restrain the liberty of all people; the King shall not be
bound by this Statute, unless he be named in the Statute.

A Statute which is in the negative binds the Common Law, Westm' 2. c. 40. 21
H. 7.21.
that a man may not after make use of the Common Law.

The Members of the House of Commons at every Parliament take a Corporal Oath,
1 Eliz. cap. 1. 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Caudrees case.
that the King is the Supreme Head, and only Governor in all Causes over all
Persons.

Where there is a saving or Proviso in an Act of Parliament, Coke rep. fol. 7.
Plowden Com. 563. The Judgment in the high Court of Parliament.
which is repugnant to the body of the Act, it is void.

The Judgment in the High Court of Parliament is of as ample Authority as the
sentence of any or all other Courts whatsoever, for it delivers Laws that do
bind al persons in all causes; as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal; it has
Jurisdiction in such cases as have need of help where there is no help by any
Law already in force; it reverseth erroneous judgments given in any Court.

No Court can fine and imprison but a Court of Record: The House of Commons is
no Court of Record. 8 part Coke republ. 120. 27 H. 6. f. 8.
The House of Lords, where the King is in Person, his Nobles, and his Judges,
and Council of Law, the masters of the Chancery assisting, is a Court of
Record: That is the Court of Parliament, where the Colloquium and Tractatus est.

No privilege of Parliament is grantable for Treason, 8 H. 6. numb. 57. Rot.
Parliament' Coke 4. Calvin's case.
Felony, or breach of the Peace, 17 Ed. 4.57. Coke 4 part Instit. 25. 17 Ed. 4.
numb. 39. Coke 7 part, fol. 21, 22.

A Parliament is to be holden once every year, Parl. 4 Ed. 3. and 36 Ed. 3. c.
10.

All Treasons, Felonies, Trespasses, Treason.
are contra pacem Coronam and dignitatem Regis.

Humane Laws.
All humane Laws, are either the Law of Nature, Customs, or Statutes, which
are called Constitutions; but Customs, when they were first put in writing,
and by sufficient Authority of the Prince published and commanded to be kept,
were changed into the nature of Constitutions and Statutes; and did after that,
more penally bind the Subjects.

The Laws of England.

The Laws of England.
The Laws of England stand for the maintenance of the just Privileges of the
Crown of England, the just Rites of the Church of England, the just Rights of
the liberty of the People of England, and do lay forth their interest, in the
preservation and maintenance of 3 things:

1. The first is called, the Register of Writs, privilegium Regis, or jus
regni. 2. The second is called, jus Ecclesiasticum, or jus Ecclesiasticae. 3.
The third is called, jus Populi, or libertates Angliae.
These 3 make up the Body of the Common Law; a Law so peaceful for the keeping
all these in unity, that for this cause it is by the Authority of the Laws of
this Realm styled by the name of Peace, Mich. 7 Ed. 1. Rot. 21. Linwood de
jure competenti 71. Coke Instit. 2.489.
pax Dei, as relating to the Rites of the Church; and pax Regni, as relating to
the Rights of the People, vide the words of the Kings Charters in former times,
concessimus Deo and Ecclesiae, etc.

THat no Members of the House of Commons do presume to sit or take their
Places in the lower House of Parliament until they, Proclamation before the L.
Steward, 3 die Novembris, 1640. an. 16. Regis Caroli.
and every of them have first taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance in
the usual manner and place, nor until the Sheriff shall make retourn of his
Writ, according to the Statute, unto the Clark of the Crown in Chancery, and
his or their Names be entered in such manner, as it has been heretofore
accustomed.

The number of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, Chosen to attend this
present Parliament, out of Counties, Cities, and Borough Towns of England and
Wales, and the Barony of the Ports, now sitting at Westminster, (3 die November.
1640.) 424. besides the Lords and Peers of upper House of Parliament.

FINIS.

