THE LETTERS, Commissions And other PAPERS WHICH Were communicated to the
Common Counsel of the City of London, by a Committee of the Honorable House of
Commons, on Monday, July 31. 1648.

Die Martis, 2 Augusti, 1648.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the said Letters be
forthwith printed and published.

Ordered, That the Instructions given to Captain Green from the Prince, and
other material Commissions and Papers, be forthwith printed.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 4. 1648.

For Mr. William Tompson, Town Clerk of Edinburgh.
LONDON, 26 Iulii, 1648. Honest Cozen,
I Have yours by Will. Lamb of Carcadia, and have fully enquired into your
business, and there is no fear in the behalf of I. M. I have fraighted Mr.
Hambleton with News, who will communicate all to you; what you write, let it be
by Sea, for that is the safest way of Intelligence at present, and there is no
fear of any stop of Trade that way. I commend the prudence of the Committee, to
give leave now and then for a Ship of Corn to come to this Port, it will be a
means to keep Trade open to our people: W. G. has written about the other
business you mentioned of 261. or else given L. private Instructions: We are
advised the Earl of Kallendar is coming with the Artillery through
Northumberland. I shall not need to tell you how forward the Commons are; but
their voting will be according to our Armies marching; The Presbyterian Priests
begin to comply with the Independents; and which are most violent, to tell you
I cannot. 83. is not in town, but is gone to consult with 219. the business I
wrote to you of D. H. is almost perfected; the Furniture shall be sent next
Ship without fail, but the Earl of Warwicks inconsiderable Fleet lying in the
River, by their searching of our Ships makes us more then ordinary cautious: I
have no more, but wishing you to send me back the great Trunk that your
Curtains and Vallens were sent in, but to take leave and subscribe my self

Your perfect loving friend and Cozen, T. H.
You will hear of comfortable News within few days.

Vale.

Remember all our faithful respects to Sir Arch: Primrose, and thank him for
all his Intelligence communicated.



For the Right Worshipful, Sir Alexander Gibson, Clerk of the SIGNET at
Edinburgh.
London, 26 July, 1648. Right Worshipful,
HAving so trusty a Messenger and so sure conveyance, I could not but advise
you something of the state of our Affairs here: We are here in this City
generally right, only Skippon makes some disturbance by Listing Horse and
Foot, which though inconsiderable to what we have Listed for us, yet we hope
not only to null his Listing, but out him from his being General of this City;
the Lords have already done something, but wait for some further encouragement
from hence; to which purpose the Common Counsel are about framing a Petition. I
shall refer you to T. Hambleton for the business in the West; for that in the
North, its ours already, and Col. Matthew. Boynton.
Matt. shall be Sainted: 291 is not yet ready to be dispatched; for Colchester,
its in no great straights, able to hold out this month. I hope you had mine by
D. H. wherein I advised of the unfortunate success of E. of Holland.
H. We have no safer way for conveyance of Intelligence, then by Sea: I am in
very much haste, and have only time to subscribe my self,

Your faithful Serviture, W. G. 2 x:
We are not idle, but active: God give good success.

Vale.


The Princes Commission to Capt. Green, taken and sent to the Parliament by Sir
MICHAEL LIVESEY.
CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain, Duke of Cornwall and Albany, Highest Captain
General under His Majesty of all Forces both by Sea and Land, within the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick: Whereas we hold it
very convenient and necessary for His Majesty's Service, to Arm, or cause to be
Armed, and set forth to Sea as many Ships and Vessels of War as possibly can
be, for the weakening and suppressing the Rebels usurped Power, and for the
effectual stoping and breaking of their Commerce and Supply by Sea: And
forasmuch as we have received sufficient testimony of your abilities and
experience in Sea affairs, and of your good affection to the King our Royal
Fathers Service; we do by these presents, by virtue of the Power and Authority
given and committed to us from our most dear Father the Kings most excellent
Majesty, constitute, authorize and appoint you Captain Richard Green, to be
Captain and chief Commander of the good Ship called the Christopher of
Sunderland, authorizing and commanding you, with the said Vessel completely
manned and armed for the War, and with such others as shall associate with you
for our dear Fathers Service, to do and cause to be done to the Rebels all
possible damage and hostility in their Shipping, Commerce and Navigation; and
in case of resistance, to use your best vigilance and endeavors during the time
of this Rebellion, to take, apprehend, sink and fire, or otherwise to impair
and destroy the Ships, Vessels and men, their goods, and all things to them
belonging, of all and every of those His Majesty's Subjects, who are or shall
be in Rebellion against Him, or of those who shall be aiding, abetting or
assisting to them; and of all others who shall transport or convey any goods
belonging to them, or which shall bring or carry any Arms, Ammunition, Victuals
or Provisions of Arms, or Warlike Provisions whatsoever to them, or for their
use, or to any City, Town, Port, Creek or place in their possession, and out of
his Majesty's obedience, contrary to His Proclamations made or to be made on
that behalf: All which you shall and may do and perform by virtue of this our
Commission; as also to anchor, victual and refresh in any His Majesty's Roads,
Ports and Havens, and from thence again to put forth to Sea, and to bring the
Prizes by you taken, the Papers and Evidences found on board, without breaking
bulck into any Port or Haven within His Majesty's obedience and possession, and
to have the same adjudged as lawful Prizes, and the same to be divided, parted
and shared, according to the ancient custom of the Sea: And in case it shall so
happen, that you cannot without eminent and apparent danger bring the Prizes so
taken into some of His Majesty's Ports, without danger or hazard of having them
surprised or taken from you again by the Rebels; then and in such necessity you
shall have free Power and Authority to carry such Prizes into any Port or Haven
of any His Majesty's Friends or Allies beyond the Seas in League and Amity with
him, there to dispose of the same: Except always, and reserving to his Majesty
all Tenths heretofore used to be paid in cases of like nature to the Admiral of
England, and all customs and duties due or accustomably paid to his Majesty for
or upon any of the said Prizes, which we will that you pay and justly account
for to his Majesty. Provided always, That before the said Ship or Vessel of War
to be set out by you shall put forth to Sea, you shall enter into security with
his Majesty, according to the course of the high Court of Admiralty of England,
in such caution as shall be thought meet and necessary by the Judge of the
Admiralty or Vice-Admiralty in the place from whence you shall put forth to
Sea, That you will do, or suffer to be done no wrong or violence to any of his
Majesty's Friends, Allies, or Loyal Subjects; but on the con rary, as occasion
and need shall require, to yield and afford them all favor, furtherance and
assistance, excepting such of them as shall be employed in aid and service by
the Rebels, or any of them: And we further charge and command all the inferior
officers and their Mates, and all the Soldiers and Mariners of the said Ship
(whom we hereby likewise give you full power to nominate and appoint) you to
obey and observe as their captain and chief commander, and to receive, execute
and fulfill readily ally our orders, commands, and all things tending to the
good and advancement of his Majesty's Service; and you your self likewise to
accomplish such Orders and Directions as you shall receive from time to time
from his Majesty, from us, or from any other your Superior Officer for the time
being touching the Premises; for which this shall be unto you, and to every one
employed under you, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge, the same being to
continue in full force for the space of one whole year, from the day of the
date hereof.

Given at St. Germain en Lay, the 6. of June, 1648. CHARLES P.
By his Highness Command, Rob. Long.

The Princes Instructions to Capt. Green, directing him to expect Orders either
from the Prince himself or the Lord Jermin, the Lord Willoughby of Parham being
Vice Admiral in Name only (as it appears) and not trusted with the Secrecy
of Affairs.
CHARLES P.

Instructions for Captain Richard Green, touching the execution of his
Commission of Captain of the good Ship or Vessel called the of bearing date
herewith, that is to say, the 6. of June, in the Four and twentieth year of His
Majesty's Reign.
FIrst, Because it is not seasonable to put the said Commission in execution,
you shall therefore for the present conceal the same.

Secondly, You shall not put the said Commission in execution by taking any
Prizes, or doing any act of hostility by virtue thereof, until we shall have
published our Manifest and Declaration, whereby it shall be expressed who are
the Enemies against whom you are to execute our said Commission, or until you
shall receive further and particular Order from us, or from our right Trusty
and welbeloved Henry Lord Iermin in that behalf.

Thirdly, You shall in all things concerning our said Commission, obey such
Orders and Directions as you shall from time to time receive from the said Lord
Iermin, to whom we have given full Power and Authority and in that behalf.

There was at the same time communicated to the Common Counsel, a Judgment
given in the Admiralty Court held in the Isle of Jersey the 30 of March, 1648.
against one Thomas Tatnel, Master of the Frigot called The Saint Christopher;
by which Judgment Tatnel is adjudged to lose his said Frigot, for this Reason
entered (in terminis) in the Instrument of Adjucation, Pur ceo que est Troue
que le dit Tatnel and ses Consortes avoient prise le detestable Serement dict
le Covenant, Because that it did appear, That the said Tatnel and his Consorts
had taken the detestable Oath called the Covenant. Look to your selves
Covenanters.

FINIS.

