A LETTER sent out of HOLLAND from Hans Hue-and Cry, van Hang-and-draw, The
Executioner; To his trusty and ill-beloved friend, Gregory the second, son of
the Destinies, Terror to Treason, Arch-Arme-strong of the Axe, Knight of the
Noose, Ruler of the Rope, and Lord of the Triple TERRITORY.

With his Letter sent in answer, treating deep and dangerously of affairs in
State.

September 28. and October 4.

London, Printed for Thomas Johnson. 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM a device consisting of an open book with a sword,
scepter, and surrounding motto
A Letter sent out of Holland, from Hans Hue-and-Cry, van-Hang-and-Draw, The
Executioner: To his trusty and ill-beloved friend, Gregory the second, son of
the Destinice, etc.
Cord worthy, ANd thrice deserving Greg.
I with my Followers, and Hangers-on; salute thee with one a Cord: not
forgetting, but always remembering my love to both thy wives, and thy Heir
apparent, whom we doubt not but in time will be brought up to the Gallows, to
equal, if not exceed his father Gregory; well may thou remain praiseworthy
in the most lasting memory of Officers, that so carefully against a time of
such great employment did provide two such wives, which in case of extremity,
are as two strings to your Bow; or (according to our Cordage phrase) like a
Rope and Butter, if one slip the other will hold; But setting aside this
preambulation, I shall at large declare to thee my Embasie, and the cause of
it; I have been informed, that there is a lasting tie of friendship conferred
of, and confirmed betwixt you and the Destinies, that Atropos the third fatal
Sister, has resigned her office, converted the thread of Life, to the Halter of
Death, and only left it to thy cutting.

These are humbly to certify thee, that the late honesty of our Nation, have
almost undone us; they are grown so unworthy, that there is scarce one man
amongst twenty that deserves Hanging (more is the pity) but it is reported (to
your joy and comfort) that in your Country, scarce one amongst forty deserve
less. It is reported to us, that Treason is but a trifle with you, and (if
your civil war go on) Murders will seem but modest Mischiefs; which if it
be your fate to outlive, there will be work in abundance for you; but if
Treason, Murder, Rapine, (by strange Rhetoric) be proved no less then the
Liberty of the Subject, I will not give a Whipcord for your Office; the
Rope-maker will not trust you, and then you may hang your self in your own.
Garters; but for mine own hopes I wish things may be otherwise. My request to
you therefore is that you will provide me a house near Wapping, for it is my
intention (since I know I shall escape drowning) to take shipping for London,
where, I doubt not but I shall perform the Office of an absolute Journiman,
and very cheap (in time of full doings.) I will execute Man or Woman for two
pence a person, which (according to the English account) is three slips for a
Tester; upon condition, that when the Rebellion is concluded, you will make me
your deputy in Ireland, where I hope I shall lay my sword at the root of the
tree; and show my self (for your honor, and my own) not much inferior to
you, we will divide our labors into fit seasons; The Papists shall suffer one
day, the Brwnists the second, and the Anabaptist the third, because the first
has occasion to stay in Purgatory, till the other two are ready for a further
journey; And that we might be famed the greatest Noose-mongers in Europe, we
will have the form of our Engines of Execution contrary to all that ever was;
my Gallows shall be made Square, and yours shall be Round, you shall hang with
a Cord, and I with a With, you behead with an Axe, and I with a Sword. If you
like well of these honest propositions, which are but modest and civil, I will
not Hang-an-Arse, but presently present my service to you; My brother
Breake-necke of Amsterdam, My Cozen Cut throat of Rotterdam, with my honest
friend Hans-van-stripe (the Beadle) commend their service to you, and would
think them selves very happy to wait upon you: so likewise would my Uncle
Burne-in-hant, with his honest son Brand-well van Crop-eare; all waiting the
execution of your will: I pray fail not to send me a speedy answer, as you
respect,

Your most humble servant of the Noose. Hans Hue and-Cry, van Hang-and-draw.
From my house in Rotterdam its Sledge-street, at the Sign of the Gibbet this
28 of September. 1642.
The Answer to this Letter, written by Gregory, and by the way intercepted.

To his much respected Friend. Hauns Hue-an-Cry van Hang-an-draw at his House
in Sledge-street in Rotterdam, at the Sign of the Gibbet; these present.
To the Gallows worthy and forty times deserving Hue-an-Cry van Hang-an-draw,
Gregory the second sends greeting.
I Have received your last Packet, dated the 18. of August, wherein you became
an humble Petitioner for my Service, and fully express how laborious a Reaper
you would be in my harvest. It is most certain, I shall have daily use for
such Artists as your self; but as yet I am somewhat doubtful in my choice, I
would entertain none but known and approved men of honest lives and
conversation, whose credits have hung up fair in the sight of people, and
whose reputations can endure the Rack; For it is not unknown to you my
predecessors (of happy memory, were no less, who have been nearly and dearly
acquainted with great Statesmen, and many well borne (though ill heed)
Gentlemen; Who have so devoutly loved him, they would sooner lose their lives
then part with them (and oftentimes it happened so) Therefore if you can bring
over with you an Epistle commendatory, or a Letter of your Commendations for
you and your friends, no question but I shall give you favorable attention,
and a gentle hearing, and when I have disposed you to your several quarters, I
hope (like loving Cord-crackers) you will hang together in the chains of
amity. I must confess, I do daily expect employment; for (as you say) Treason
is such a trifle with us, that some can speak no other language, their mouths
so flowing over with Blasphemy, as if they intended transversion of
Christendom to its first Paganism. I do very well approve your fancy for a
Round and Square Gallows; we shall have use for them.

I thank you for your kind commendations to my two wives; but since you heard
last from me, the Law will allow me but one, and for that fault have confined
me to my Office, which as times happen, will appear to me an easy bondage.
You will converse with men of great birth in Ireland, nor shall I treat with
men much inferior in England, if they give not over their Malignancy, which if
they do, they will in spite of my teeth preserve an old Proverb, And Cousen
the Hangman. I pray come over as well accoutred as you can, and give the same
advice to your Hangers-on; It will be for my credit, as for your own
employment; I believe you are almost as skillful as my self, but for your
followers they are but newly come to it; therefore you may be their
instructors, and Hang till they mend.

Much more I should write, but the high affairs which are my hourly
cogitations Cut me off from many things. I thank you Friends for their kind
commendations, and return my love to all of them.

Iohn-Swing-thief of Maidstone, remembers his commendations to you, and thanks
you for your love when he was in Holland. Stephen Strangle-man of Bambery
salutes you with his service, and bid me tell you (if you are well furnished)
Hemp will be a good commodity, and be good chaffer for very choice ware in this
Kingdom, so in expectation of your speedy arrival at Wapping, I bid you twice
God-buie.

Knoc-fargus in Rosemarylane, this 15. day of etc. near Tower Hill. 1642. Your
burning Friend, Gregory Tybourne-proofe.

FINIS.

