A LETTER Sent to the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker to
the Honorable House of Commons: Concerning the raising of the Siege of TAVNTON
by the Parliaments Forces.

BY a worthy Gentleman in Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith
Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by Edward Husbands Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 10. 1645.

To the Honorable William Lenthall Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
SIR,
I Writ to you yersterday, of Gorings Advance against Taunton, after he had
drawn off as far as Black Down, which he did in hopes our men would have drawn
out and engaged; but seeing himself beguiled in his design, he returned again,
had hot skirmishes; but our forces gave him entertainment, and killed abundance
of his men: And on Thursday noon, drew off again, facing the Town till night,
and Quartered on Friday night at Ilmister: The General Advanced on Friday to
Beuminster, twelve miles from Dorchester, his Horse into Crookhorne, where we
fell on the Enemy, took a Lieutenant, and diverse other of Sir Rob: Welches
troop, being on their Rear; we sent another party between Sherborn and
Somerton, and fell on their Van, and took some Prisoners there also: This so
Alarumed the Enemy, that they broke down their bridges. There are three
Regiments of Horse, and six hundred Dragoones in pursuit of them, and to bring
intelligence of their motion: Our poor Foot (being impatient of the Relief of
their friends at Taunton) Marched sixty two miles in five days, and offered at
Dorchester, after twelve miles march that day, to march all that night to
Relieve Taunton, hearing that Goring was fallen on again; as yet none of our
friends in the Town is come to us; we expect them this day about noon: and then
a General Council of War being called, there will be a resolution taken, how
to order our marches after the Enemy, with sec^rity to the West: But our poor
foot must a while refresh themselves, before they move, and our Horse are yet
in no condition to follow far: I cannot, in this Letter, tell you of the
straights of the Town, or any other particular, but that the Enemy has left
the Siege, and our friends at liberty (the Lord be praised for it) though this
be a service of great concernment to the Kingdom, and the West in particular;
yet I account the quieting of the Club-men, and the reputation our Army has
with them by relieving this Town, and marching quietly through their Country,
and making the Enemy fly, is of more concernment, then at first is
apprehended; one Holles the violent Ringleader of the Club men, came to
Dorchester with 4 others from the Clubmen, for leave to Petition the
Parliament; he was most peremptory and insolent in his Carriage, and but for
his being sent as a Messenger, he had been committed, as this man is the head
of that giddy-head faction in Dorsetshire, so his Brother for Wiltshire;
fellows that delude the poor Countrymen: whom I hope we shall undeceive before
we return, and some stay we must make to salve that sore, for it is not yet
half cured: The Club-men fell upon Goodale, Colonel Pindars Messenger, took
his Letters to the General from him, his horse and Arms; the Governor of
Lime fell upon them, and killed eighty of them, they dared him to fight; the
Governor of Lime is hurt, and the Mayor was unhorsed; this was on Thursday
last.

From the Lady Strode; House, near Beuminster July the 5. Saturday, five in the
morning. THe Messenger not being gone, I thought fit to add that the Army is
marched this day to Crookhorn, where the General now is, and has met with a
Letter from Colonel Weldon, of the liberty they now are in: many wounded, and
driven to great extremities, especially for Ammunition: There is a second and
third Reserve of Horse and Dragoones gone after the first party, to fall on the
Rear of the Enemy: News is come, they are near engagement, the issue I know
not: Lieutenant General Cromwell is gone in person, to take care of the
mannagement of the pursuit; our Horse are harrasted out, yet go after the Enemy
cheerfully: we hear nothing of the Treasure, which will prove much to our
prejudice; for now the Soldier will live on free Quarter, and discontent the
Country. If ever an Army deserved to be trusted with a fortnights Pay before
hand, this does; for they never press for money, till they be extremely
necessitated, and in arrear.

Crookhorn, July 5. 1645. two in the afternoon.

THe Messenger staying till the General returned from the party that pursued
Goring, I may add this, That our Horse pursued them to the Bridge called Load
bridge, which the Enemy broke down, and made good against our Horse, having a
strong Breast-work raised. The General instantly Commanded a Brigade of Foot,
with a Train, to march (notwithstanding their weariness) to beat them off that
pass: The foot marched as cheerfully, as if they had not felt a long march:
but the Enemy broke down another Bridge, nine miles hence, a little on this
side Somerton, and before we could make up this Bridge to pass with our Horse,
they broke down the other Bridge, and made a Breast-work; yet our Horse
Commanded by Sir Robert Pie, Charged them near the Bridge, and took a Cornet
and some others Prisoners: but by reason of their Dragoones at the Bridge, our
Foot and Train being not able to come to us, we could not possibly force them
thence this night; for the General returned, leaving six Regiments of Horse
besides Dragoons, to watch their drawing off, and so make up the bridge as fast
as may be: At Ilchester we cannot pass, for the Enemy has a Garrison there: I
doubt we shall not possibly engage them, by reason we are not in a condition to
follow; besides our great work is yet to do, the settlement of the West: This
bearer, Master Craven the Messenger, went with us after the Enemy, and can
inform you more particularly: I much fear Goring will wheel into Dorsetshire to
join with Malignant Holles, and the Club-men.

But Gorings disorderly running away, perhaps may daunt them that they dare
not: I believe on Monday the General will go to Taunton with a few horse
(where Master Ash and Master Moor are) to see what is needful for that place.

Crookhorne, July 5. twelve at night.

The General left the Foot that pursued Goring at South-Petherton, five miles
from Crookhorne: The Enemies Foot, being not 2500. eight piece of Ordnance, and
thirty Carriages, marched by six this morning from Somerton toward Wells, and
some Club-men with them. The Messenger yet staying longer; I add this, That
the Club-men are risen in Somersetshire, has disarmed an hundred of Gorings
men, taken their Draughts from them: Goring makes a halt about Long-Sutton: our
whole Army marches this morning to engage them if possible; the Bearer can
inform the House more.

Crookhorne 6. July, two in the night.

SIR,
PArdon my scribbling, I am forced to do things in haste, you have thtee days
passages together in the enclosed.

Crookhorn, July 7. two in the morning. Just now another is come out of Gorings
Army, informs of his stay in hopes of the Club-men to join with him: I believe
our Advance will interrupt him: more hereafter.





FINIS.

