G. F. gent

Do As You Would be Don Unto




Oh I confess my fault, forgive therefore
Good Mr. Marriot, I Will do no more!
I have dear bought Repentance, it is so scarce,
And seal it with my lips thus on your ar --
If once again to wrong you, I turn Fool,
Then make my mouth for ever your close stool.
A LETTER TO MR. MARRIOT from a friend of his: WHEREIN His Name is redeemed
from that Detraction G. F. Gent. has endeavored to fasten upon him, by a
scandalous and Defamatory LIBELL, INTITVLED The Great Eater of Grayes Inn, or,
The Life of Mr. Marriot the Cormorant, etc.

LONDON, Printed for the Friends of Mr. Marriot, 1652

A Letter to Mr. Marriot, from a Friend of his, wherein his name is redeemed
from Detraction.
Mr. Marriot,
HAd I not known you my self as well as by the report of your neighbors, a
common easiness of credulity might have carried me on to believe a late
published pamphlet, pretended to be the True History of your life, for the
Author assures the Reader he sets down nothing but what has truly been acted
by you: whereas indeed, it is nothing else but a mere Libell, of Lies, Scandal
and Defamation, spun out to a great length without one syllable of wit or
honesty, whereof he sufficiently accuses himself by shrouding his name under
the covert of two Letters, and thereby securing his person from that punishment
the Law has provided for him, the injury of fastening upon your name so vile a
detraction, and presenting you a derision to posterity is of so high a nature
that it exceeds any satisfaction such an abject vermin can give, neither can I
find out a better expedient for your reparation, then by leting the world know
what you are indeed: and this I shall do as an equal friend to you and the
truth.

That you are a Gown-man, and the most ancient Member of the Honorable Society
of Grayes Inn now Resident, the book of Entrance can witness, having been a
Student and Professor of the Law above 47 years: for your abilities and
knowledge in the Law, and for your easy fees, your Clients do very much
commend you: For your private way of life, you have given it a Geometrical
proportion, squaring your mind and fortune with equal lines to a fit
subservency of Natures requisites in food and raiment: For your Society you
have made choice of honest men, not despising the meanest, whereby you have
stood firm in these National Hurricanoes which have blown down the lofty and
ambitious: and for your general deportment, it has been so fair and clear,
that I never yet heard you had wronged any man.

How comes it then this unprovoked miscreant should bewray the press, and
soil your name with the excrements of his skull? Sure his maine design is a
beggarly project, the sale of his book: Let him have the full price of it, and
it is a Whipping-post, etc. that he fears, and therefore conceales himself
under the Characters of G. F. Gent. Homogeneously insinuating his name to be
Graceless Fool Gentile. For had he not been a very graceless fool, and an
unconverted Gentile, he would never have committed to perpetuity so scandalous
a piece, composed of lies and nonsense, and that for a very little money, soon
to be spent; in due time he will have a just reward: for he serves a Master,
though a Liar from the beginning, yet faithful in paying his servants their
wages. In the interim let him stand to the public view in that becoming
posture the Frontispiece presents him, as destined by charity to repentance.

FINIS.

