A LETTER Written and presented To the Late Lord Protector, Then Lord General,
and the Council of War: but smothered in his Hands.
To the truly Noble from the Fountain victory, and somewhat more, Conquerours
of Nobility, the Religious CRUMWEL, and the rest of the Council of War.
I Did think to Petition you: but what? to be valiant, honest, wise? that were
to suppose you not so. Not so. God's given the Vote on your side.

It shall be a Remonstrance of the most horrid Monsters that ever eyes beheld.
They say they are from God. Do you startle?

Will you fight them? Dare you fight them?

You have fought with men and overcome; but dare you fight with Monsters? such
Monsters, do: for believe it, if you do not, if others shall, it will be sung
of you, as of Saul, his thousand, and David his ten thousand.

I Will tell you their Names, and if you will embrace the Adventure, I Will discover
their Denns.

The first the Law of England, (Treason! oh Treason!)

The Law of England claims its Original from the Law of God: so that whatsoever
is not so, is void ipso facto, by the Principles of Parliament, though nothing
more contrary. If this fail, it claims its extract from Reason, yet nothing
more unreasonable; I Will prove it with my life, but then the Honor is mine, not
yours.

Jenkins the Judge, who is of the Country of Heralds, and (by Law) proves them
Traitors that preserve him, ingeniously confesses their Pedigree from Custom
or President: then which, what more uncertain? what more wicked? what more
unconstant? what more Devilish?

The other is Tithe Piggs, a Monster too, far more dangerous then the wild Bore
of the Forest.

Will you fight them? say, I Will leave you this Momento; When the Parliament
were so modest as to Petition the King 7 or 8 years leave to be just, they were
at last compelled to be so whether they would or no. If you ask leave to be
valiant, to be honest, who will grant it you, but they that cannot hinder it?
Be valiant, be wise, go on and prosper, you have the Prayers of the Worthies of
the Nation.

LONDON, Printed by J.C. for the Author, 1659.


