A Letter written out of Bedfordshire unto the Earl of MANCHESTER, And
intercepted by one of His MAJESTY'S Scouts.
My Lord,
THE Sadness of our condition (though I have been a long while silent)
enforces me to write unto you, and again become a suitor, that laying all
other thoughts aside, you will be pleased to think of your own safety, upon
whose depends ours that are your friends. They are no Romanses that I shall
relate unto you, but such truths as, in good faith (if they wake you not now
from your Lethargick Dream) I think you must sleep till the last Trumpet, for
my part I must ingeniously confess it has dispersed all the Chymera's that have
Iingled about my understanding, and I must ask your pardon for that I can be
no longer of your Opinion, To omit all other of the Kings, or rather Heavens
Scourges of us, who have boasted so much of our strengths, a lessen for all men
to learn, to beware of that hand that strikes with the Sword of Justice, would
any man have believed, after we had seen so many Pamphlets of the great
Strength, and huge Victories of the Lord Farefax, against the Lord of
New Castle in the North, we should have seen the QUEEN lead an Army from
thence under our Noses (no man daring to oppose Her) up unto the King, able to
beat us in the South, and in the mean time the Lord Newcastle taking from us
all our Towns, not leaving a hole to hide our heads in (except Hull,) and that
too, how near loosing? Did not you write me from London, that Sr William
Waller (who you styled the Conqueror) had beaten Sr Ralph Hopton:, and the
Cornish who you so much dreaded, into the Vies, and that you hoped by the next
you should write me, he had made sure the West by the taking the Foot from the
Prince, and the Horse they were all routed and run away. On the contrary I
know of certain, that the Horse you so despised, have on Thursday last in the
afternoon totally routed Sr William Waller, taken all his Foot (said to be
1500.) all his Ordinance, Arms, and Ammunition, killed and taken diverse of
his Horse, and so dispersed the rest, that there is hardly ten of them in a body
any where, and whether he himself escaped is not yet certain, but if not, so
wearyed and discomforted, as I am confident he can never make head again in
that County to any purpose, which Victory was given by Heaven as a happy Omen
at the Joyful meeting of the King and Queen at Edg-hill where the first
Battle was Fought, at the very instant when they met as an earnest no doubt
of their future favors. They coming afterward to OXFORD in little less then
a Triumph, accompanied with the Joyful acclamations of all the People as they
came along, making Bonfires on the Hills (as if they had a desire the Light of
Israel should be seen) what the issue of this will be, you well know, and how
you have now nothing left you to trust unto, but the false-hearted South, who
assure your selves having becn false to their King, will never be true to you.
I Will say no more, it is high time to bethink your self, and God of his mercy
give you understanding to see and eschew evil, so wishes

July 15. Your most affectionate friend.
I have sent you the Particulars. Our strength in Foot. 2500. Six Regiment of
Horse. 2500. One Regiment Dragooners 500. We lost. 600. Taken Prisoners of
ours. 900. Colors lost of Foot. 28. Cornets of Horse. 9. Brass Ordinance. 8.
Prisoners redeemed from us. 130. Their Horse was 1500. We lost all our Arms,
Ammunition, and Baggage.





