Contemplations upon these Times, Or, THE PARLIAMENT Explained to WALES.

Digested into three Parts.

I. Containing, A brief, faithful, and pithy History of the PARLIAMENT,
wherein (as in a Mirror) is represented the mavelous mercies of GOD in its
preservation: Whence it is evinced, That doubtless it is designed for some
notable purposes of His in these later times; And (by some material
Probabilities) even to set up the Kingdom of His SONN^ in all the World.

II. Clear Resolutions of such Doubts, as his Countrymen of Wales are not so
well satisfied in, as could be wished: which are reduced to these 3 Points,
touching the KING. COVENANT. Common Prayer Book.


III. A closer Application unto the state of Wales, interwoven with sundry
remarkable and profitable Observations.

Written by a Gentleman, a cordial Well-wisher of his Countries happiness.

LONDON, Printed by R. VV. for Nath. Webb, and W. Grantham, at the Gray-hound
in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

TO The Religious, and most Worthy, Sir ROBERT HARLEY, Knight of the Bath. Sir
THOMAS MIDDLETON, KNIGHT. Master JOHN GLYNNE, Recorder of the famous City of
London. Eminent Members of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
And all other his worthy Friends and Countrymen, that either are, or shall be
Members of the Parliament of ENGLAND.
IF ever it was true, it is now, That Scribimus indocti, doctique So that it
may grow almost a question, whether now the Sword, or Pen is most busy? or
more effusion of Ink, or Blood? What here offers it self to your view, comes
from a modest and peaceable hand and heart, and merely relative to the good of
those Countries, whose happiness I am confident you prefer before any
particular interest. Conceptions of this kind I have not yet seen any; and
though (praised be God) our hands are pretty well restrained, yet that our
hearts be wholly purged of the old poison, there is some slender endeavor to
inform our Countrymen with the right understanding of the Parliament, and its
principles, and clear demonstrations of Gods special providence and goodness
in its preservation; so that to harbor a thought against it, we must take heed
we be not found To fight against God: Act. 5.
I confess them but a rude heap of thoughts; I have labored to be Seneca his
Scholar, and in writing to observe his rule, not so much the Quemadmodum, as
the Quid, being assured None can be more eloquent, then he that has well
conceived a Truth; It is with things of this kind, as with burdens of the
womb that are teemed with perturbations and dangers, they prove less thriving;
and what is here might have appeared more comely, had they not been conceived
at such times and places, when and where indeed I durst not scarce own them as
Thoughts. Worthy Sirs, whatever they are, they implore your favorable
acceptance, they court neither for praise nor preferment; If the poor Author
may not still be under the insultation of our old enemies, Mutato nomine, and
enjoy but Common Justice, it is the Apex of his desires: I would not be behind
for my poor Mite to further the great work, which (blessed be God) I hope I
may say is a finishing, wherein I, not unlike that Bird, (that is fabled) when
the Kings of Asia contributed great treasures to the building of a Temple, it
having no other wealth, went thither to present her Feathers.

Truth was never without adversaries, but never more mortal ones then now. You
may see I have drawn in its quarrel: You are Gods champions, and its; I humbly
beg I may not suffer, but let your countenance and protection be at hand, and I
shall humbly pray, that as He has singled you to be Instruments of His glory
here, you may so act, and honor Him, that has so honored you, that you be
partakers of His glory and bliss for evermore.

The Prayer of him who ever has been, and will be ever really devoted to You
in this great service of GOD and his Country, JOHN LEWIS.

PART. I. Containing a brief, faithful, and pithy History of the PARLIAMENT,
etc.
To my Countrymen of WALES.
SOme have been curious in observing the resemblance between the state of
Israel, and this of our land. Truly, Gods great mercies and deliverances
toward us, have no small affinity with theirs; and our sins and ingratitude
toward Him, does but too unhappily maintain the comparison betwixt us.

But (me thinks) there cannot be a passage in all Histories, profane or
sacred, that more suits to the present fate of our Kingdom, then what befell
Israel by that unhappy King Rehoboam, 1 King. c. 12* 2 Chronicles. c. 18.

Although Comparisons-run not quatuor pedibus, yet in this the Parallel holds
strange: The cause of that great rent in the state of Israel is rendered, that
Rehoboam refusing the council of the old men, and following the council of the
young men. I wish this were not too apparent in our present case.

His Majesty (it will be objected) ever expressed himself willing to ease our
yokes, Obj.
etc.

His willingness could not otherwise better appear, Ans.
then to hearken to his Old men, his Council, his Parliament: And what
semblances soever were cast in our eyes, had the Lord permitted us to have had
the desert of our sins, and to have let the Parliament have been mastered and
destroyed, notwithstanding all fair words and promises, we should ere this, in
stead of whips have felt scorpions. KINGS act not by their proper Minds and
Persons, but by their Instruments and Councels; and woeful experience has
taught us the truth of this, whereof we would be incredulous, when the
Parliament gave us timely notice of it.

I have often mused, what magic and enchantment is in the name KING: I
confess we should behold them as a kind of visible Deity, but not make them a
Deity; And do we less, when in the point of this War we pretend Conscience
toward the King, and nothing at all toward God? What was there more common in
blasphemous mouths, to warrant them in their barbarous murders, Though Gods
anointed, there, does not signify Kings.
then those words of holy Scripture, Honor the KING, Touch not GOD'S Anointed?
How conscientious would they be (forsooth) of these words, and make no bones of
any other words of holy Scripture whatsoever. I wish they would have taken the
words in their order, and put Fear God, before Honor the King; And add to
Touch not mine Anointed, -- Do my Prophets no harm. Never was there more cause
to cry out, O tempora! O mores! I am not sorry that men are so prone to render
their duties to the King, but am sorry they make so little of rendering any
thing to God, (Horresco referens) What more common then Blasphemies against GOD
and his Truth? It is but our sport to question his Essence, and to deride the
simplicity of his holy Word, yea prefer some humane pieces before it, making
our Tables even merry with such discourses: And let there be but reproof for
such monstrous tenets, Oh, then all is for trial of wit, and arguments sake;
Whereas such pleas should not hold against earthly Monarchs. It was amongst
Heathens a rule, Impia consuetudo contra Deum disputandi, sive serio, sive
simulate. I have read, that Remigius explicating the history of the Passion
unto King Clodoveus after his baptism, he was so moved thereat, that he put
his hand to his sword, and spoke in anger, That had he and his French been by
when his master was so used, he would have revenged it. With what more generous
impatience should every Christian heart be transported, when such affronts and
indignities are offered to the name and honor of Almighty God: I wish we may
not be so altogether intent upon the Papist, as to overlook the hateful
Atheist. It is known, holy Martyrs should not be suffered to speak gracious
words, but have been gagged, and iron bals put into their mouths: Oh that
wicked Atheistical mouths were sealed to eternal silence! In the Act that was
for Uniformity of Common Prayer, what care was there taken against the least
traducement and contempt to be offered unto it; and it would grieve, that Gods
holy Name should be left so naked, that every impious tongue may touch it as it
please. As the honor and name of God is concerned, and suffers diminution, I
could beg accordingly there were such Laws provided to restrain such wicked
licentiousness, and discoursing of His Holiness. I am confident the
Parliament, whom the whole world behold as the great Champions of his name and
glory, will in due time vindicate it, and recompense the remissness of former
Laws, with those that shall have more edge and teeth with them.

Reader, not to trouble thee further with this Atheist; only note, when such
damnable monsters as these may be lurking in this Kingdom, marvel not at the
dreadful judgments of God upon it. I am sure thou will not now charge the
Parliament to be the cause; 1 King. 18
which is all one, as Ahab did Eliah, Art thou he that troubles Israel? What
says Eliah? I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy fathers house,
because ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, etc. Atheism, and
other fearful sins of our land, Hinc lachrymae. The Parliament no otherwise
then wholesome Physic to an ill desperate Body, it works and tuggs with the
malignant humors, and perhaps in the operation pains, yet health it labors
for: And as Physic, if overmastered by the ill humors, signifies small hope
of recovery; So, had this Alexipharmacon, this sovereign Preservative of the
Kingdom failed, nothing might have been expected but the dismal ruin of all.
But praised be the Lord for his mercies unto this sinful Land, who has been
pleased, not only against hopes, In Brit.
but almost against means, to uphold this Oracle, this Pananglium (as Mr.
Cambden calls it) this blessed Parliament, upon which all the eyes of the world
are now fixed, as upon the globe of the Earth stupendiously subsisting only by
an invisible hand. I make no doubt but the Lord will raise those, whose Pens
will set forth the glory of his acts in these our days, which truly (well
considered) are little inferior to his wonders of old. (Reader) I dare not
venture into this deep, but for thy delight I will paddle a little near the
shore, and give thee a clear, though brief Narrative of the great favors of
God toward the Parliament; And for thy better help, let me confine thy
thoughts to these particulars: 1. Beginning of the Parliament. 2. Progress of
the Parliament. 3. The present state of the Parliament.


Trace it to the Original, and you shall find all Mr. Pryrre.
To my apprehension, I must needs say that those three Worthies breathed the
first motion into it, D. Bastwi^k Mr. Burton.
whom we may behold as living Martyrs, or as Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego,
having escaped the fiery furnace of affliction, They were at least the Preface
to this great work. Next, (such was the difficulty to have it, Scots.
that) a whole Nation was in Arms to obtain it, (such obstacles and tyranny
reigning among our selves, that scarce we durst once name it) Being once got,
it was scarce a year old, but Rome and Hell began to stomach it, till at last
it was high time to look to it self; His Majesty parts, and leaves them, In his
speech
having formerly resolved wholly to cast himself upon their affections, (which
now I believe his own breast will tell him had been the better course)
notwithstanding they forbore not by all humble means to desire his presence
and concurrence: witness. their numberless Declarations and Messages in that
kind. But to all motions His Majesty was still deaf, and rather (still to hold
to our first instance) did, like Rehoboam, hearken to the council of the Young
men, Ver. 13.
and answered roughly. In the interim all eyes are fixed upon the King, and the
charm of his Name works powerfully upon all Countries, yea upon the very House
it self, so far, that it was like to prove its own felo de se. Those that
framed and consented to the XIX Propositions, flinch from their own Act, and
fly to the King, (which is an eternal scar upon their Honor:) Poor fears and
tumults they pretended; but indeed, their ingratiating with the King, and the
thought they had of the utter dissolution of the House, was all. Most part of
the Nobility and Gentry now gone, there is only left a thin and inconsiderable
number in the House, and those (if you can brook the style) a factious
Roundhead party: But whatsoever they are, these, and no more, must stand the
brunt. In the mean time, what preparations and strength of Arms, with all
industry, both at home and abroad, are levied against them? What plots and
practices are daily invented to overthrow them? what aspersions and calumnies
cast upon their names and actions; yea, the Devil and the World with their
utmost sinews seeming to confront them, and yet behold, some secret power has
still upheld them.

2. The Progress will represent unto you the Newcastle triumphant in the
North, Hopton bestriding the West; and those fatal Pair, Rupert and Maurice,
like Oreb and Zeb, butchering in the bowels of the Kingdom. To say no more,
call but thy thoughts to the siege of Gloucester, (Bristol and Exeter being
newly taken) and behold the Parliament, to the guess of man, quite down and
sinking. But here (good Reader) with holy awe admire the incomprehensible ways
and power of God; the Parliament must be broken in their outward power, that
the work may more sensibly appear to have only proceeded from God: For ever so
it is, when He would be seen in a business, He knows our pronesse to rob him
of his honor, and to bestow it upon external means: therefore they must be
least in sight, when he will have his glory to become most conspicuous.

Capricorn, and utmost Declination; The Degrees whereby the hand of God has
advanced it to this present greatness, affords variety of rich matter of the
mercy and power of God. It stands not with my intended brevity, or ability, to
venture upon it, it deserves the labor of a golden pen: But because I will not
leave thee without a taste (Reader) thou may remember, upon the relief of
Gloucester, (an Act alone sufficiently obliging us to honor the name of the
Noble Earl of Essex, and the glorious City of London) the Parliament again
began to take a little breath, and to lift up the head, and successes a little
adding some life unto them; Forsooth, as the only Engine as would not fail the
business, they rear a lack-a-lent, a Mock, or rather as His Majesty termed
it, a Mongrel Parliament in Oxford, only to confront and ecclypse, if not
utterly to extinguish the Parliament in London; it consisting of the Members
that forsook the House, and with all their gall rendering in their Declaration
the pretenses of their departure, omitting nothing that all wicked art or
malice could invent, to impair the credit of the Parliamennt. To all humane
guess, this was like to prove a notable stratagem for their ends, and they
built no small hopes upon it; But what came of it? There it appeared like a
glaring Meteor for a while, and unawares vanished to nothing, the memory
whereof, even to themselves, savours no better then a snuff: Since which time
the Lord was pleased to bless the Parliament with famous Victories, especially
those two cardinal Battles of York and Naseby. And which is remarkable, even
these were at such nicks, when the main and hazard of all stood upon them. The
mercies of God herein will appear the more admirable, if you will look upon
them through these few Observations following.

About this time twelve-moneth, 1645.
the wisdom of the Parliament thought good to employ Victorious Thomas Fairfax
in this present great service, the Noble Earl of Essex being superseded. What
advantages and mountains did the Enemies promise to themselves? They bruted
abroad, that the Parliaments Army, hereat discontented, came by thousands in
unto them, their army swelling (as they said) with its greatness, advances to
the North; as they pass, all Countries stoop unto them, Leicester they gain,
Gerard afresh tyrannizeth in Wales, Pembroke-men beaten, and reduced almost to
their first handful. By this time (you will say) all was again at hard hazard;
And as if this were not enough, out comes about this very time into our
Countries the noise of the Directory, which gave but more and more matter to
their former exultations and hopes; my own ears being able to witness that it
was said, That the coming out of the Directory at that time, was as if the
Parliament had bestowed 40000 men upon the King. Here now they seem to be at
the height: But, O the wonderful mercy and power of God! what becomes of all
these vaunts and hopes? Just like a statue of glass hanging in the air by a
small clue, suddenly falls and breaks to flitters. They had such a stunning blow
at Naseby, that ever since they have had the Staggers; and like a torrent, the
favors of God have broke in upon our Armies, that the very Enemies are forced
to acknowledge, that they do in legible characters read Digitus Dei.

2. It is not unworthy our observation, that the very means the King most
trusted in, viz. his Soldiery, proved at last most advantageous to the
Parliament, the Divine Will having given them over to such inhumanities and
vileness, and all Countries distasting them as Monsters; by the holy
appointment of God, they proved no small means of the Parliaments present
height and happiness.

3. And though the last, yet it is not the least thing with wonder to be
observed, How the Lord prevented Foraign forces: It was ever their strongest
fancy, That all Kings would be sensible of the business, and what would not
they do? And this with great probabilities did they press upon general
apprehensions; But behold the hand of God as active for them abroad, as at
home! And that humane wisdom may be abashed, rather cross to their
expectations, God disposes things: They look for all Kings to be roused, and
it is more likely to prove, all Subjects have a reflection upon the Parliament,
and are taught their way to their liberties and happiness.

By these, and the like contemplations, as by so many Prospectives, we may
perceive the hand of God even visible in this great work, whence we may infer
(as Erasmus of his time, Nescio quid magni Mundus parturit) That doubtless the
Lord has some great thing or other a hatching, and to bring into the world*
and if so, what can the world behold more likely for such a design, then this
awefull Engine, the Parliament of England?

I am no Prophet, but I dare say with confidence and modesty, that this great
thing, the Parliament of England, may be a means that God has ordained in his
eternal wisdom, not only to shake Rome, but even the Turkish Empire; and put
up the Kingdom of His Son Jesus Christ in all the world.

Thou (Reader) may laugh at this as a fancy of an idle brain: But let me beg
thou suspend thy censure, till thou peruse the Probabilities following.

1. I presume it will be easy to make thee confess, that nothing can be said
so much to uphold Antichrist and the Turk, as the slavery and blindness of
men; And what fairer means can thou imagine to shake off slav^ry and
blindness, then the course the Parliament drives at?

2. It is worth thy notice, That the Lord has evermore singled out this Land,
in C^mb. Gram
as a scene where to act any great matter of his glory. The Christian faith did
(as it were) post over other Regio^^ (...)to come hither first: Dr. Davies ex
Sabel and Platine.
hence it was called Ecclesia prim^genita the firstborn Church: O fortunata
and omnibus beatior terris, Britannia, quae Constanti^um ^rim^ vidisti.
hence the glorious Instrument of the Ch^^ch. Constantine, must be de^^^^ded;
and when Christ adome fell into a dead sleep of Idolatry and Superstition h^
must spring a Wickliffe (...) And since the beginning of the R^ormati^^ of the
Church, Camb. (...) Pancg.
what Land so i^terested (...) it as (...) and what is the main business of
the Parliament but to perfect this Reformation* and the Lord blessing them to
finish it* how far may not their Influence diffuse it self through the world,
and consequently make the Pope and Turk know themselves?

3. It appearing somewhat probable, that God has designed it for some great
work of his; It were not amiss to observe, that it is the guess and
expectation of many of Gods children, that the Kingdom of Christ will appear
now in the later end of the world, in greater glory then ever it did. I am no
maintainer of a Temporal and personal Reign of our Savior upon the Earth,
though (for ought I can see) it is an opinion that contains nothing but
consolation to Gods children. Sure I am, the Prophets abound with most glorious
descriptions of the Church, which, besides the spiritual sense, cannot (I
think) but be temporally meant, at least in respect of the extension and
amplitude of the Church, and which as yet has not been altogether fulfilled
toward it: You need only view the Prophet Isaiah alone, and you shall have
whole Chapters replenished with nothing but lofty eloquence upon this subject*
And if you do but well heed it, the very like expressions* like golden veins,
run through all the holy Books both Old and New.

Neither is it the holy Scripture alone, (though they are instar omnium) but in
all Ages there have been some, that by special inspiration have foretold us of
a most happy state of the Church in the later times. I could refer thee for
this to the Acts and Monuments, Page 1370
where Mr. Fox h(...) collected odd sayings or prophecies of holy persons, as
Bridget, Katherine Senensis, John Husse, Savanorola, and others. For thy
present delight, lest thou heedest them not there, I will allege one or two.

(As he calls her) Holy Bridget said, That the Pope should be thrown into the
Deep as a millstone, And that the cause of the binderance of the Gospel, is the
Prelates and Priests, And that the Clergy turned Gods commandments to two
words, Da pecuniam.

John Husse said, Oh how largely does Antichrist extend his power and cruelty;
but I trust his power shall be shortened, and his iniquity shall be detected
more and more among the faithful people; and let Antichrist rage as much as he
will, yet he shall not prevail against Christ.

And Katherine Senensis, who lived about 1379. told one Antoninus, that after
writ her history, That by the troubles in the Church of God, after a secret
manner unknown unto man* God shall purge his holy Church, and stir up the
spirit of (...) Elect* and after these things shall follow such a Reformation
of the holy Church, and such a Renovation of holy Pastors, that the only
cogitation thereof makes my spirit to rejoice in the Lord, and that all the
faithful shall be glad to see themselves so beautified with so holy shepherds,
yea* and the^^^ Infidels allured by the sweet savor of Christ, shall return to
the Catholic fold and be converted to the true Bishop* Gi^e thanks therefore
to God* for after this storm* He will give to his a great calm*

Even but thus much, signified so long ago, and our eyes seeing the great work
of these times* so much tending to the accomplishment of these things we cannot
but admire the Lord, and acknowledge this Parli^^^^^* not wholly a device of
man*

Neither is it impossible to discover some glimmerings of this Kingdom even in
the monuments of Gentiles, as it has pleased God to reveal unto them some
obscure Notions of his greatest Mysteries, which are sweetly serviceable to the
setting forth of his holy Truths. What more is that of Virgil, as conceptions
of Sybilla Cumaea, (though usually restrained to our Saviors incarnation.)

I am nova Progenies Caelo dimittitur alto,
Te duce, siqua manent sceleris vestigia nosti
Irrita perpetuo solvent formidine terras.
Plainly, A Child shall be born from Heaven to pardon the sins of men, and
fill the world with blessings.

Josephus, De Bell. Iud. l. 7.
a Jew, says, Nations should come from Iudaea, that should be masters of the
Universe. What the Sybils have abundantly delivered of this, I refer you to
the former place of the Acts and Monuments, and only add one thing of Cicero,
which to me seems a very remarkable place: Lib. 3. de Rep.
Nec erit alia lex Romae, alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia posthac, sed apud omnes
gentes, and omni tempore, una lex Deus ille legis inventor, disceptator, later,
etc. All which seems to be englished in the 2. chap. of Daniel, ver. 44. And in
those days the God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom, that shall not he left to
other people, but it shall break in pieces all other Kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever.

But how may this be, Obj.
seeing the Turk is likeliest to be the great master of the world, and at this
present looks terribly toward Christendom?

I answer, Ans.
This may prove but a flash of lightening before his ruin, and it will be at
least a good means to procure peace and charity among Christians, which is seen
to be but too miserably wanting. Remember, that in our God, the Lord Jehovah,
is everlasting strength. Isa. 26. 4.
Let us every one kill the Turks at home, his crying bosom sins, and we shall
be surely able to cope with him abroad: let us do our parts, and God will
surely do his, and in his good time put his book in this Senacheribs nose, and
his bridle in his lips, ver. 28.
For He knows his abode, his going out, and his coming in, and his rage
against us. We have heretofore only read what Jehovah is, and our Fathers have
but told us of his noble works; And truly say what holy Job said of old, Job.
42. 5.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the of the ear, but now my eye sees
thee. But in these days we may say, we have seen him and his noble works, we
have experimentally found the ways of his Omnipotency, and seen the power of
Prayer, and plentifully tasted the fruits of Humiliation, and the dealings of
God in points of utmost extremity. And therefore it is but a sorry courage,
that cannot against any difficulty or danger (as suppose the Turks present
greatness) rear up an heroic heart, and think him no more then a Tom Thumb
against Christ and his King dome.

And it shall come to pass in that day, Isa. 4. 21, 223.
that the Lord shall punish the Host of the High ones, that are high, and the
Kings of the earth upon the earth.

Then the Moon shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts
shall reign in mount Sion and before his Ancients, gloriously.

PART. II. Containing Resolutions of Doubts touching the PARLIAMENT.
To my Countrymen of WALES.
I Hope, by what you have read, you are grown to some good liking of the
Parliament: And being thus suppl'd to a right understanding of it, lest some
Scruples (like roots of Corns) should still remain in your thoughts, I will
(with the like Divine assistance) endeavor to satisfy you. The main Doubts
(whereunto all the rest are reducible) are touching these three things, KING.
COVENANT. COMMON PRAYER Book.


You will confess, KING.
by the event of things, that the Parliament has told you many truths, which
formerly you would not possibly believes* Now you will grant, the King followed
an ill Council, and that the Cavaliers had undone us all. I hope then you may,
by this time, believe alike what the Parliament evermore constantly professed,
That they took not up Arms against the King, but in His, and the Kingdoms
defense, against a Malignant Party. The Parliament ever told us the truth, or
our own sense will give us the lie.

Yet let me tell you, Where the truth and glory of God is concerned, and
Liberty of Conscience, the Christian is not always to play the Ass. Act. 16.
Blessed Paul (in a lesser point) though one appointed to Persecutions and
Patience, yet when he saw his time to stand upon his privilege, as forgetting
the Christian, takes a Roman spirit, They have beaten us uncondemned, now they
thrust us out privily; nay verily, but let them come and fetch us out. Luke
cap. 9. You shall find our blessed Savior giving orders to his Disciples: Ver.
3.
-- And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither slaves,
neither scrip, nor sword, neither money* nor have two coats apeece. But not long
after, how much is the matter altered* Luke 22. But he that has a purse, let
him take it, and likewise his scrip, Ver. 36.
and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment end buy one. What means
all this, but to tell us, that He that is the Lamb of God, is also Lion of the
Tribe of Judah; and that the same holy Lips that bequeathed nothing but Peace
to his Church, pronounces also elsewhere, Luke 12. 51.
Suppose ye that I am come to give Peace (...) earth? I tell you nay, but
rather Division and a sword. We Christians, as we are to be as innocent as
Doves, Mat. 10. 34.
yet as wise as Serpents; and when our Masters credit and honor is touched, we
must have the genius that Peter had, when he struck off Malchus ear. Mistake
me not, this is not to encourage any to Rebellion; but to take off that error
that. Court-Divinity obtruded upon us, That in no case whatsoever Arms are to
be meddled with, he Gods glory, In his ans. to Card. Peron.
and Conscience ever so much concerned. I mean no otherwise then King James his
own pen has resolved it, Bishop In his defense of Christian liberty, against
Antichristian rebellion.
Bilson maintained it, and our King in ayding and succouriug the States, and
Rochellers, confirms as much.

There are those, that in points merely of politic interest, grant much in
this kind. Peter Martyr distinguishing Subjects, says, That those that are
mere privati, Lib lo. com. p. 965.
may not dare to lift up an hand against their Lord and King. But those other
kind of Subjects he there calls, Sic inferiores, out superior potestis ab illis
utcunque pendeat, certisque legibus reipublicae praeficiunt. And he instances
the Ephori of the Lacedaemonians, and the Tribunes of Rome. And what can they
do? Si Princeps pactis and promis^is non steterit, cum in ordinem cogere, ac vi
^digere, ut conditiones and pacta quae fuerat pollicitus complete, idque vel
armis, cum aliter fieri non possit. And then instanceth, how in that kind the
Danes dealt with their King in his days: And afterward urging Polydore
Virgil, Anglos aliquande suos Reges compulisse ad rationem reddendam male
administratae pecuniae. Though this learned man afterward, as a Divine, and
modestly, Ego vero dum illorum consilium ad regul^m Scripturarum examino, id
non probe.

But for thy satisfaction (good Countryman) in the present point, I do think
that our loyalty and obedience to Kings, is always subordinate to God, and we
should through them always look upon him, and rather be accounted Traitors to
the one, then the other, especially when His Glory is publicly asserted. I
marvel this Doctrine was so strange, when even the very Common Prayer book did
teach it, as in that Collect for the King. Almighty God, whose kingdom is
everlasting, etc. So rule the heart of thy chosen servant Charles our King,
that he above all things may seek thine honor and glory, and we his Subjects
duly considering whose authority he has, may faithfully serve, honor and obey
him, in Thee, and for Thee, according to Thy blessed Word and Ordinance.

If now (good Countryman) thou yeeldest to the Interest Gods glory has in us,
COVENANT.
thou will come easily to digest the Covenant, concerning which nothing needs
be more said to satisfy thee, then what the learned Assembly have in their
Instructions. But lest thou have neither seen, or well understood them, let me
tell thee, that this is not a slight Oath devised for temporal and politic
ends, but a most pious and solemn Covenant, whereby Gods honor being at stake,
thou do list thy self for his service. And think not this a new trick or
invention, but a mere imitation of the people of God in their extremities, as
in the times of EZra, and Nehemiah; Read those holy Books, and thoroughly ponder
and understand them, and I will warrant thee, thou will not stick at the
Covenant. It is not unworthy thy noting, how that the enemies there still make
use of the King to frustrate the good works. EZra, cap. 4. you shall see Rheum
the Chancellor, with the malignant party, begin, ver. 13, 14.
Be it known unto the King, that the Jews are come up to Jerusalem, building
the rebellious and bad City: And be it known unto the King, that if this City
be builded, they will pay no custom unto the King; and it is not meet for us to
see the Kings dishonor: therefore we will send to certify the King. So that
here you see nothing but King, Neh. 6. 6.
and King. And wicked Sanballat, he does the like to good Nehemiah: The Jews
think to rebel, for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou may be
their King. So that if any design be on foot for GOD, the only means to dash
it, must still be King. But these good Worthies go on in their good purposes,
though subject to heathen Kings, and acknowledging their sins to be the cause
of their miseries. Neh. 9. 28.
And because of all this, we make a sure Covenant, and write it, and our
Princes, Levites, and Priests, seal to it.

You understand the ground of the Covenant. Now to satisfy you for your common
objections, I say first: Obj.
As for the Oath of Allegiance, it does fortify and confirm it, principally
providing strict Clauses for loyalty and obedience to His Majesty. And for
Ministers who have sworn to maintain the former Church Government, etc. the
Instructions tell them that an Oath binds, Ans.
tantum licitis and honestis; and where the lawfulness of an Oath cease, the
obligation also cease. Constant practice shows, that Magistrates take oaths
to maintain all the laws of the land, and many laws afterward may be
abrogated; the meaning of the Oath being to maintain Laws, while they are Laws;
but when they are repealed by the Power that made them, they are wiped out of
his charge and oath. And withal, is it not all one now in this case, as it was
in the beginning of Reformation, Hen. 8. All the Clergy were formerly bound to
maintain the Popes Supremacy, and the Doctrine of Rome; but when the impiety
and unlawfulness of it appeared, might not they be well discharged of their
oath? And who can better judge of the unlawfulness and corruption of the
Prelatical government, then the wisdom of the Parliament? and they adjudging
it unlawful, what oath soever thou have taken to maintain it, is but vinculum
iniquitatis, and so absolutely void; And, Qui jur at in iniquum, obligatur in
contrarium.

But you are not satisfied, Obj.
because the King is not with the Parliament.

I must tell you, Ans.
it is no new invention to ascribe to the King, a Capacity differing from his
person, and in that capacity and Kingly power he is virtually present in the
Parliament: In this sense, thou have heard say, that the King is immortal; and
where thou have seen his Patents and Commissions, he is said to be present.

Another thing thou can not well brook in the Covenant, Obj.
is the mention of the Church of Scotland.

Indeed I must confess it has got the start of us for that Honor; Ans.
If we call them Brethren, they have Iacob-like robbed us of that Blessing; If
we call her our Sister-Kingdom, she has Mary-like, before us, chosen the
better part: And, alas, all this through our own fault. God has again and
again offered us this Honor, ever since the first Reformation, stirring up
godly men, who have by all means and importunities earnestly sought to procure
us this happiness, but in stead of being heard, have been requited only with
contempts, and all discouragements Prelatical greatness could load them
withal. But for thy satisfaction understand, the Covenant propounds no Church
unto thee as a pattern, but only the Word of GOD to be thy rule and pattern. It
were much to be wished, the Covenant were tendered as piously and solemnly as
the Parliament has prescribed, and not suddenly and violently pressed upon
some, and mincingly given unto others in corners. To be brief (Countryman) if
thou would endeavor to understand the Covenant as the Parliament intends
it, thou would never stick at it, it tending only to no more, but to procure
a better World, and thy self to become a better Man.

I am now come (Countryman) to thy Dagon, COMMON PRAYER Book.
the Common Prayer book. As for the matter and form of it, the Exceptions
against them have been sufficiently made known to the world: I shall only
endeavor unto thee, to justify the Abolishment of it, from that apparent
inconvenience and prejudice it occasioned to the Gospel, L. Falkland speech.
and the Professors of it. It was truly said, that in our days we have seen
Conformity to Ceremonies more exacted than Conformity to Christianity. It is
but fresh in our memories; If a good man should but in tenderness of
conscience scruple any thing against the Common Prayer book, were he otherwise
ever so gracious, he was presently a Puritan, and there was no breathing for
him among us; whilst another that would make no bones of the Common Prayer
book, nor of any thing else, reading only the Common Prayer book, and be
otherwise ever so unworthy and scandalous, he should pass for an Orthodox
Minister, and have Livings heaped upon him; and the other good soul, his wife
and children, left to all contempt and poverty.

Obj. Obj.
But you will say, this was not the Books fault, but must be imputed to the
Bishops, etc.

Ans. Ans.
I say, the Common Prayer book was at least the occasion of their sufferings,
and happily their afflictions have cried to heaven for this vengeance, which must
be no less then the utter abolishment of it. It is ordinary, that but a
Relation to a notorious Evil suffers in the Judgment: Torquin does but a foul
fact, and the harmless name of King must be discarded Rome. One Ravillaick
murders a great King, and his name must no more be heard in France; the Father
commits Treason, and the innocent Issue must suffer in the forfeiture. The
Bishops were the Common Prayer books Patrons, and the main Authors of its
evils, and it with them must suffer in the doom.

But this is not all; it was not so void of guilt as this, though after a close
manner, and not sensible to all, it was very prejudicial, and a shrewd enemy
to the Gospel. You know there was a necessity of reading it; As for the
Preaching of the Word, let it get its place and esteem as it could: And this
necessity of the one rather then the other, drew generally the credit to that
which seemed most necessary; Man's nature is most contented with the easiest way
of serving God, and Public Government countenancing thus the Common Prayer
book, rather then the other. By this means, whatever tended to the more
effectual knowledge, and real service of God, was accounted but Preciseness,
etc.

2. Me thinks that were sufficient reason to abolish it, even to satisfy the
Consciences of our Christian brethren, and so peace, and better communion might
be betwixt us. Our Christian brethren are offended out of mere conscience, and
we will needs retain it out of mere fancy. No doubt but many thousands, in the
beginning of Reformation, were as loath to forgo the Masse-book, who upon
better experience blessed God to be rid of it. We are hardly pleased with the
form of such Mansions, as our Ancestors a hundred years ago were well
contented with, and it is our opprobrium gentile daily to change the fashion of
apparels; and yet to be so wilfully wedded to a kind of Divine service so
apparently prejudicial to the Gospel, even against far better means, seems a
strange Delirium. I appeal to thine own experience (Countryman) have thou not
observed that the better, and most godly kind of Ministers, have been ever most
malecontented at the Common Prayer book; and the most unworthy scandalous, and
corrupter kind, have been most maintainers and patrons of it? Mr. Hooker, its
best champion, says, Eccl. Pol. lib. 5.
That if the Minister powers not his soul in prayer, and speaks not as Moses,
Daniel, and Ezra did for their people, the service of the Common Prayer book
avails but little. Then judge thou, how happy have we been, and are in Wales,
that hear it from some that scarce can read it.

I must clear an error which has been obtruded upon thee, Obj.
and many others, viz. That the Common Prayer book was confirmed by the blood
of Martyrs.

This I have often seen, and especially under the hand of a Minister, accounted
learned in our own country, (among other wide Elogies) to a most understanding
and religious Knight.

I deny not but some of those that compiled it in Edw. Ans.
6 his days, dyed worthy Martyrs, but I cannot learn they dyed martyrs, but in
defense of the Gospel, and the truth of it, against the idolatry and
superstition of Rome, and for nothing else. We may as well say, the Apostles,
Act. 15. having for the peace and convenience of the Church ordained Orders to
abstain from things strangled, and from blood; say, they confirmed these
Decrees with their blood, because afterward they suffered martyrdom for the
Gospel. And to say those Worthies in Ed. 6. his days confirmed the
Common Prayer book with their blood, were by the like logic to infer they
confirmed with their blood, all, the use whereof they did ordain and tolerate
in the Church afterward, as Surplesse, Bells, and all Ceremonies. No, be not
deceived, I know not that it was ever confirmed with blood, unless it was in
these our wars. Those good men in Edw. 6. days, were glad they had gained so
much as to have the Divine Service in the known tongue: But as in laying the
foundation of the Temple, there were those that shouted for joy, Ezra 3.
so there were those that wept, that it was short of the former Temple. So
there were those in the first Reformation, that could have wished they then had
obtained more: The Mass then fell just like Dagon before the Ark of the Lord,
its head and palms were cut off, 1 Samuel 5.
but the stumps of Dagon was left to him. It is with the true worshippers of
God, Genesis 14.
as it was with Abraham, when the King of Sodom offered him the spoils; I
will not take (says Abraham) from thee a thread to a shoe-latchet, etc. lest
thou shall say, I have made Abraham rich. And in those very days there were
those, that fain would not have retained the least thread of the Relics and
trash of Rome; Epist. Hoop.
Bishop Hooper then himself could not away with them, and Peter Martyr advises
him to bear with them, Ne id progressui Evangelii sit impedimento. And yet he
cannot but confess himself delighted to see this goodly zeal in the Bishop,
ut Religio ad castam, simplicemque puritatem denuo aspiret; Professes his
desire was as much as his for a through Reformation: With a Vehementer cupio id
quod conaris, locum habeat. You may do well to observe one trick of the
Bishops: The Common Prayer, though it was the public service, yet they would
permit the use of it in families, which rather then no serving of God at all, I
held it allowable; but of Preaching in families, you know how much they were
against it.

Good Countryman, I have been over-tedious; Therefore in a word, suppose the
Common Prayer book like the Moon, which in its proper motions and seasons is a
goodly beneficent creature; but if it interposes betwixt us and the Sun, it
becomes an opacous disastrous body. In the times of Superstition, Common Prayer
book arising like the Moon at a dark midnight, was comfortable; but now a
Sunshine of the Gospel breaking in upon us, think thou what thou please of
it.

PART. III. Containing an Application to WALES.
IN brief (Countryman) I must tell you, we are deceived, and do not know our
own condition: We will needs be accounted good Protestants, when, alas, how can
that be, when we want the means to become so? To say, a perfunctory reading of
the Common Prayer can make us so, is to say it can do miracles. A wretched
Sermon now and then, and that either by an ignorant, or scandalous Minister, or
both; alas, what can it do? it being commonly too such stuff, you know not
whether it savours stronger of the Ale, In many places not a Sermon scarce once
a year.
or the Pocket; Half an houre's shower in a great draught, will little avail
the chapped earth. I must tell you, abating Gentry and a few others, that by
the benefit of education may be otherwise; generally (I dare boldly say) we can
be but Papists, or worse, in Wales. I need not remember thee of that swarm of
blind, superstitious Ceremonies that are among us, passing under the name of
old harmles customs* Their frequent calling upon Saints in their Prayers and
Blessings; their Peregrinations to Wells and Chapels. Mistake me not, that I
delight to discover the blemishes of my Country; it argues good will, to tell
ones malady before a Physician. Not I first, but our own learned Countryman,
Dr. Powel, does in his Books bewail us for these miseries, as c. 2. annot. in
itin. Giral. Camb. And the reasons of all you shall hear in his own words, Haec
omnia ignorantia and Evangelicae praedicationis inopia contingunt. Want of
Preaching
and a little after, Quicquid in hac re peccatum sit, illud totum Pastorum
paucitati ascribendum est, ad quorum sustentationem satis ampla stipendia, and
redditus Ecclesiastici in Cambria, omnia opima Sacerdotia in generosorum
manibus, Impropriation.
aut ab illis possidentur, qui non in Cambria, sed in aliis quidem partibus
vitam degunt; hi neque animas, neque corpora pascunt, modo ipsi lanam habeant.
And thus copiously and sadly bemoaning our state, concludes, Deus tempore
opportune ecclesiae suae melius providebit. And surely, if ever, now this
Tempus opportunum is come upon us, Let us lay hold upon the lock, and bless
God for it: doubtless if we be not wanting unto our selves, the Lord is in
hand to do great things for us. It were worth our labor, seriously to observe
the gracious accesses of God made toward us in very late favors.

1. He has been gracious to us in the course of this war: We were not such
friends to the Parliament, as to have so good dealing and Quarter as we have
had, we deserved harsher means, and rougher hands to reduce us, then we had:
But praised be his mercy, not strangers, but those of our own bowels we only
knew from; and when we deserved a whipping, He gives the rod to our friends
hands.

2. But this is not all; if we mark, we may see his greatest favor, his Gospel
coming among us: the Bible, before only known in the Church-Volume, has by
the means of worthy Sir Tho. Middleton been translated to the vulgar Volume:
And now again, I hear, Mr. Cradock is procuring the New Testament to be printed
in Welsh in a little Volume, whereby it may grow more portable and common,
which may be of much use in short time to introduce the knowledge of the Gospel
among us.
In some places of Wales the Gospel does already kindle; and that (which our
Countries can never too gratefully acknowledge) by the worthy and godly
endeavor of Mr. Cradock; and especially (which is worth our notice) it begins
to shine in a place heretofore noted for untowardnes, called Llangerick in
Mongomeryshire, a place formerly but of very sorry fame, but now pointed at as
the Puritans and Roundheads of Wales; Mr. Powel. Mr. Roberts
and all this through the godly pains of some persecuted Ministers, resorting
thither through manifold discouragements and dangers.

3. Diverse good Books have lately been translated into our language; and our
learned, Dr. Davies compiled that monument of his learning, and love to his
Country, his elaborate Dictionary, whereby not only we our selves, but even
strangers may become perfect in our tongue.

4. Britanni, Romany and Saxonibus devicti and triumphati fuerint, eum etiam
latis legibus abolere studuerint Normanni.
Neither must we let it pass without our greatest admiration, how the Lord
has so marvellously preserved our Tongue; at which Mr. Cambden himself (though
otherwise not much acknowledged our friend breaks into highest admiration,
that it should survive after so many Conquests of Us, and attempts to
extinguish it. In hac linguarum consideratione non possumus non maxim
admirari, Ib. in Brit.
and praedicare divinam summi Creatoris benignitatem in nostros tannos, Nec
sane ullo modo credendum, linguam voluisse post tot gentium clades and imperii
mutationes, conservatam in haec usque ultima tempora.
etc. linguam suam tectam hactenus conservarint. Hence Dr. Davies inferres,
That God would not through so many turmoiles and conquests, so wonderfully
preserve a Tongue to these last times, Nisi eadem Nomen suum invocari, suaque
magnalia praedicari decrevisset; Without it be especially marked out and
appointed for the setting forth of his glory, and the preaching of his Word. In
prafat. Gram.


Who knows then, but we may recover our ancient Blessing, and become as famous
for Christianity at the last, as we were at first? Apud illos (says Dr. Powel)
vigebat Veritatis praedicatio, l. 2. c. 1. annot. in Giral.
vivificatrix Fides, and purus Dei cultus, qualis ab ipsis Apostolis mandato
divino Christianorum ecclesiis traditus erat. The preaching of the Gospel,
sincere Doctrine, lively Faith, and the pure worship of God, did at first
flourish amongst us: And when it came to be corrupted by superstition, --
Im^rudenter and aequo
Durius, ad ritum Romae voluisse Britannos,
Cogere -- aiebant, -- modo salva maneret
Lex divina, sides, Christi doctrina, Senatus,
Quam primus tulit ore suo, quia ita lita ab ipso
Christi erat humanae doctore, and lumine vitae.

we had the glory (what we could) to maintain the Primitive worship, against
the Superstitions and fopperies which Augustine the Monk would obtrude upon us;
and afterward procured the sword of Ethelfrid King of Northumberland to make a
way for them, when no less then eleven hundred poor Monks of Bangor were
slain, Mantuan in Fast.
(or as Mr. Fox, Vol. 1. p. 154
rather were martyred.) I hope we are not wholly degenerated from our ancient
Progenitors, but that we still retain something of their Noble and Christian
genius. That dark cloud of Superstition which came from Rome, and then darkened
their light, is still to this day undispelled, and hinders us from the
Primitive light of the Gospel. As it is recorded to their honor, to have
labored to keep the light when they had it, let it be also our credit and
honor now, upon so blessed an opportunity, strive and labor to procure it,
when we may have it. We are noted to be a people not of the worst natures, and
truly not much unlike the character our Countryman Giraldus long ago gave of
us; In descr. Camb. c. 18
Sicut malis, nusquam pejores, sic bonis, meliores non ^eperies; If bad, none
can hardly be worse, and if good, Populus ipse praestantis cujusdam naturae
beneficio semper ad audiendum promptus and ad discendum aptus. Annot. in Giral.
c. 2.
none better. But this is not all, but Dr. Powel observes, We are a people by a
singular disposition and benefit of nature, apt both to hear and learn good
things, and ad obediendum paratissimus, and most ready to practice. And then
who will not confess, but that it is a thousand pitties such should not have
the knowledge of the Gospel, and the means of grace abundantly amongst them!
And blessed be the Lord, we never had more hopes, and fairer means offering
themselves, than now.

As when we see stone, timber, and other materials gathered together to a
place, we presently conclude that there is some building in hand; So (by what
you have read) me thinks how the Lord does no less then seem to provide
means, and as it were, materials to rear up his Gospel among us: And as the
Blind man in the Gospel is said to behold men walking as trees; some such
obscure sight (me thinks) we may already have of the Gospel's silent approach
and motion toward us. And as at the famine of Samaria, Eliah said to Ahab,
There is a sound of abundance of rain; So after this great famine of the Word,
(blessed be God) we do now at last (me thinks) as it were, ver. 44, 45.
ken a little Cloud rising like a man's hand, and that ere-while the Heavens
will grow black with clouds and wind, and we shall have a great rain, and the
Lord of the harvest will give a plentiful increase. Doubtless if we be not
wanting to our selves through our wilfulness and ingratitude, God has some
great favors in store for us. I cannot but think what that famous
VVickliffian, our Countryman, wrote near 300 years ago; Walt. Brute in Act.
and Mon.
That the Britons, amongst other Nations, have been as it were by the special
election of God, V. 1. p. 627
called and converted to the Christian faith, and further adds, That it is
very likely they will be employed to overthrow Antichrist.

Then (Countryman) let us humbly look up, and wait upon God, and devote our
selves in our affection and spirits to him, and his choice Ministers among us,
the Parliament; Doubtless we are deep enough in their thoughts, and that they
mind our happiness more then we do our selves; the only compendious way to
make us happy, is to have the Gospel come among us, it has a notable virtue
with it, it will presently purge Church and State; And with humble submission
to their wisdom be it spoken, that the only way to introduce the Gospel among
us, is the pitching upon a course and means* to advance the Ministry: which
cannot be better, then by founding some solemn places in Wales for the
profession of the more necessary kind of Arts and good Literature, (all which
may be without the least injury or disparagement to the Universities) Such a
course would prove a notable encouragement to our Countries, so that I dare
say, three for one would mind Schooling for their children, than there has or
does, being discouraged by the charge and distance of, the Universities; and
without doubt, through the blessing of God, few years would afford us a goodly
number fit to serve at the Altar. It could never have been said truer, then of
us in Wales, The Harvest truly is great, but the Laborers are few. We can
nothing but pray the Lord of the harvest, that he would incline and direct the
heart of the Parliament, that He through them would send forth Laborers unto
the harvest. Such an act as this, would be an honor to our Age; and those that
are yet unborne, and like little Levies as yet lie hid in the loins of their
grandfathers, will have their mouths filled with blessings for so Christian and
noble a work; when they shall consider, that when their bodies were not borne,
the blessed Parliament was then caring for their souls. For something of this
nature, or less, we know what an Elogie was given of the Centurion to our
blessed Savior; He is worthy for whom thou should do this, for he loves
our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue.

Well (good Countryman, or any other Reader) I will now part with thee: If any
passage has offended thee, I must tell thee, I intended only well, and at the
most would do but as he that slew the Serpent, not touching the body of the
Child twined up in the folds. And if thou have mistaken the Parliament, smite
thy breast, and ask God forgiveness for it, for I hope by this time thou
perceivest it is something more, then once thou thoughtest it was.

Good luck have thou with thine Honor; Ride on because of the Word of Truth,
of Meekness, and of righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things. Psalm. 45. 4.

Soli Deo Gloria.

