Short Remains of a Dead Gentlewoman and Wife: Published by her Surviving
Husband, for the Continuance and Advancement of her Memory, and the good
Example of those to whose Hands it may come.
My Dear,
IT has Pleased Almighty God to call me to the Estate of suffering great Pain
and Sickness, thereby to wean my Affections from the things of the World. I do
receive his Chastisement with all Humility and Thankfulness, as coming from a
Merciful and Gracious Father, and do acknowledge he deals with me in great
Kindness; and that hitherto he has laid no more upon me than he has enabled me
to bear. I acknowledge my Sins and Offenses are so great, that if he should be
extreme with me, and mark what is amiss, and Punish me accordingly, he might
justly destroy me, and cast my Soul into eternal Torments. But he is a Merciful
God, slow to Anger, and of great Pity. And I have a full trust and confidence
in him, and in the Merits and Intercession of my Blessed Savior; and that he
came into the World to save Sinners: That he died for my Sins and rose again
for my Justification. That there is no Name under Heaven by which I can be
saved but by my Blessed Savior JESUS. I love God with all my Heart, with all
my Mind, with all my Soul, with all my Strength. I put my whole Trust and
Confidence in him, and do freely and willingly resign my self to his Pleasure
to do with me as he pleases and do humbly and heartily beg, that he will not
leave me nor forsake me; but tha^ when I am weakest he will be strongest, and
will enable me to overcome the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil: And that I may prove a Conqueror thr^ Christ that Strengthens me. That I
may Fight a good Fight, keep a good Faith, and finis^, my Course with Joy, that
I may rest in JESUS; and have a House not made wit^ hands eternal in the
Heavens; where all Tears shall be wiped from mine Eyes; whe^^ there shall be no
more Sorrow, nor Death, nor Crying, nor Pain; but shall be in pe^fect Happiness
without end, and shall follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; an^ this I humbly
and earnestly beg for my dear and ever Blessed Savior's sake. I (...) freely
and willingly resign my Soul to God who gave it, and my Body to the Earth; and
do desire I may be Buried in Rawden Chapel near the place Mr. L --. designs
for his own Burying-Place. I am willing to part with Mr. L --. and with all the
World; and I heartily pray to Almighty God to forgive me all my Sins; and I do
with all my Heart forgive all the World whatever they have done against me. I
desire Mr. L --. that he will forgive me in whatever I have at any time
offended him in. I confess I have been too apt to say such things as he has
taken ill, and has imputed them to ill nature. I am sorry I have at any time
done or said any thing that might give him disturbance. I beg God will forgive
me, and that he will do so too. But I think I ought to do my self that Justice
as to affirm, I have been Faithful to Mr. L --. both to his Bed and Fortune, in
what he has trusted into my Hands. I hope I have a clear Conscience to those
things, that I shall not have any thing to answer upon those accounts. There
has been many Differences betwixt us, and Mr. L --. has both said and done
several severe and hard things to me, which have stuck close to me, and I know
he has thought me a Fool that I could not tell what to say to him; but my
computation was much otherways; for it was very seldom but I could have
answered with as much Sharpness as he: but I knew he would not bear it; and if
I had done so, I could not have lived with him: Therefore I made it my daily
request to Almighty God, that he would enable me to govern my Tongue, that I
might always set such a watch over that, as that it should be no occasion of
difference betwixt my Husband and me. And I humbly thank him, I have been able
to do it, I believe as much as most People; and I hope when I am gone to my
long home, Mr. L --. will be sensible that what I say is true. I heartily pray
to God to bless him, and that when I am gone he may live happy, and enjoy the
Blessing of Almighty God in as great a measure as he shall see good for him,
and that we may have a Joyful Meeting at the Resurrection. And I humbly beg of
Almighty God, that he will forgive us both all our Offenses against him, and
against one another. And I make it my Request to Mr. L --. that he will please
to give to my Sister Constable a Suit of Damask Linen which was my Mother's,
and was bought against my Christening: It lies in the bottom of the great Trunk
in my Closet; at one end there is a long Table-cloth, Two less Table-cloths,
and Two Dozen of Napkins. I also desire she may have a little Scarlet Silk
Purse, and the Gold that is in it, only one Broad Piece taken out of it for a
Ring for my Brother Yarbrough. The Purse is in a private Drawer in the Table in
my Closet at the Stairs-head. I desire my Maids may have every one of them
something of my Clothes, and Joseph and Tim, may have each of them Twenty
Shillings a piece. I desire there may be a Sermon at my Funeral, which I would
have one I had from Mr. Wood: It may be found in a thin Red Book which lies on
the top of other Books, and in it is a little Paper Book of Mr. Wood's Writing.
The Text is Matthew. 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as
you think not the Son of Man comes. I desire Mr. Wood may have Two Guinea's
from me besides what Mr. L --. will give him. This is what I desire may be done
if Mr. L --. be willing: But I know I have no power to dispose of any thing
without his Consent: and if he be not willing, I should be sorry to displease
him in the last Act of my Life: and if he be not willing these things should be
as I desire, I am contented all should be as he pleases. This is all I shall
say, but as long as I live (...) shall continue

Your Dutiful and Affectionate Wife, ELIZABETH L --.
^he foregoing Letter was Superscribed by the dead Person's hand in these
Words: This for Mr. L --. which I desire may be given to him after my Death,
and before I am buried. And this direction was fulfilled and performed
accordingly.




Here follows a Confession of her Sins found after her Death, and written in
and by ^er own Hand.
An Humble Confession to Almighty God of the Grievous Sins I am too guilty of.
O Lord, I confess I offend and Sin in preferring and loving many Worldly
Vanities and Pleasures before the Service of God.

I confess I sometimes neglect to read the Holy Scriptures, and when I do read
them, I do not mark them as I ought, nor do I fear God so much as to keep from
Offending him.

I do not call my self to a daily account for my Sins, nor am I so careful as I
ought to be in examining what my estate is toward God, nor do I repent of my
Sins, and forsake them as I should do.

I confess I am often discontented with my own estate and condition, and too
much troubled when any Worldly things cross me.

I am too forward to credit things which I hear to the disadvantage of other
People, and to relate them again, though I do not know the truth of them; and my
Thoughts and Fantasies are often such as they ought not to be.

I am not so careful of my Neighbors Credit as I should be; but do sometime
talk more of them than I should do: I have not so sincere a Charity, nor do I
forgive my Enemies as I desire God would forgive me; but am too apt to remember
Injuries, and am not sorry enough when any misfortunes come upon those that
have done me unkindness or displeasure.

I confess I am subject to be angry at a small occasion, and Impatient if any
be angry with me.

My Affection is too much set upon my Husband, and I am too desirous to have
his esteem, and I cannot bear his Unkindness with that Patience which I ought:
I am too apt to provoke him to Anger and Unkindness, by saying ill-natured and
cross things: I am too Suspicious and Mistrustful of him, and too Fretful and
Grieving at any thing that makes differences betwixt us: I am more afraid of
losing his Favor and Kindness, than I am of sinning against God.

I confess I am too slack in my Devotion; that when I should be the most Intent
in God's service, then the Devil is the busiest, and puts vain and wandering
Thoughts into my Head: I am not so thankful to God as I should be, for all the
Benefits and Blessings he daily and hourly bestows upon me: All which I am
heartily sorry for, and do beg of thee, Good Lord, to deliver me from all these
Sins.

It is my full purpose to do my utmost endeavor to forsake all these Sins; and
I humbly and earnestly beg of God for his Grace and Assistance: and if he will
please to grant me that, I do not fear but I shall be a Conqueror.

Next follows the Purport of a Dream, which was found set down by Her own Hand,
amongst the last Leaves of one of Her Manuscript Books; expressed distinctly in
the following Words.
THE 24 November 1689. In the Night, toward the Morning of the 25th Day, I
dreamed that I was saying my Prayers, at Night by Candlelight in my Closet,
and something touched me upon the forepart of my Head like a Hand; at which I
was frighted, and looked up, and saw a bright shining Thing with glittering
Wings, but could not see any Face: It hung in the Air and touched nothing. It
seemed to be about the bigness of an ordinary Hawk; It spoke to me and said,
Thy Prayers are heard, and thy Afflictions are sanctified to thee: If thou do
continue to do thy Duty unto the end, God will not forget his Promises; but
thou shall go to the Grave in Peace, and with a resigned and quiet Mind, and
shall receive a Crown of Righteousness. Then it stayed a while. I was very much
frighted, and would fain have spoke but could not. Then it said be not
frighted, but make an end of thy Prayers, and with striving to speak I awoke. I
thought it was in constant Motion with the Wings, and spoke slowly, and not
very high, but very plain to be understood.

The following ELOGY was Composed, and bestowed upon the Memory of his dead
Wife, by her surviving Husband.
UNder this Stone that Head lies low,
Which living made so fair a show,
As drove Beholders to reflect
Thereon, with Kindness and Respect.
Her Favor lived beyond Her Breath,
And made her lovely after Death.
Her Bones and Dust lie here inshrin'd:
But the clear Luster of her Mind,
Remains Engraven deep and high,
In those that love her Memory.
Whilst here She lived, She blessed the Place
With such Effects of Good and Grace,
As in no Time will be forgot,
But told to such as saw them not.
No wonder then, that more than one
Refuse to tread upon this Stone,
Where shrined lies such Wit and Sense,
Such Goodness, Truth, and Innocence,
As may be Samples for the best,
And dignifie her Place of Rest.
Which whosoever sees will sigh and say,
Like as the Luster of the Day,
Has set in Clouds of a dark Night,
The World's deprived of Her and Light.
HERE may She rest, reserved in Store,
Till Heavens and Times shall be no more;
Then shall this heavy Stone remove,
And let Her pass to Clouds above;
Where those, like Her, met in accord
Remain for ever with the Lord.
From Words like these, comforts are given
By a Sound Messenger of Heaven;
Who bids with Moderation weep,
For our dead Friends late fallen asleep:
Because he with Assurance says,
God will dead Person wake and raise.
Thus we confide God's Call to have,
From our dead Slumbers in the Grave;
And being raised, shall mount on high
To Clouds, and Regions of the Sky:
And with fresh Bodies, light and fair,
Meet our Redeemer in the Air.
TRansports of Joy will then surprise
Those Persons, who with craving Eyes
Behold the Luster of that Light,
Then offered to the Sense and Sight.
A Prince once dead by great Oppression,
Comes then to take the full Possession
Of all the Powers of Heaven and Earth:
Due to the Merits of his Birth.
The Trumpet's Sound shall Warning give,
To all the dead and all that live,
Of such Approaches, as this train
Make to the Globe of Earth and Main.
Then shall translated Bodies rise
From Earth, to meet them in the Skies.
Coming to Thrones from earthly Beds,
They with meek Boldness raise their Heads.
To look upon the Lord of Bliss,
Whom they shall see then as he is.
A Prince of Peace to those that stand,
Upon the bent of his Right Hand:
But terrible, sharp, and severe,
To those that on the Left appear.
He calls the first with Words of Love,
And Power to make Mountains move.
Come near, ye blessed of my Father,
Who fought to Death, and chose it rather
Than fail in Duty whilst on Earth,
Ye've now full Shares of the new Birth:
Come forth and take the Crowns of Glory,
In earliest Times provided for you.
Assume your Thrones, not come by chance,
But given as firm Inheritance,
Which in no Time shall find decay,
But last as long and fair as day.
Rising from endless Springs of Light,
God's holy Throne and boundless might
Your teeming Joys shall spring for^
And Care and Grief approach you n^^^
You shall be led over spicy Mountains,
To Shady Groves and Springing Fountains;
Where safe you may past wo's despise,
And have all Tears wiped from your Eyes.
And by the Force of this Decree,
You Kings and Priests to God shall be:
And have large Shares of heavenly Love,
Which in true Value stand above
All things that Heaven and Earth can show,
Or that Man's Wit can frame or know.
HOW can Men bear the strong Reflection,
Of Joys thus grown to their Perfection.
More like in Swoons fainting to dye
And perish in an Ecstasy.
But raised Folk can die no more,
Nor be or'ewhelm'd with this great Store.
They Will have the Power to live for ever
Amidst these Joys, that fail them never.
But till the Time that Christ shall come,
To judge the World and pass the Doom,
Expect we may (since die we must)
A rest together in the Dust.
Job 17.16. FINIS.

