A LETTER Really written by a MODERATE CAVALLIER TO AN Intelligent and Moderate
Independent of Trust and Credit IN THE Now Marching Army.

Occasioned by a Discourse between them entertained at London, June 16 th
concerning the present Grand Affair.

Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis Tudor rose French fleur-de-lis

June 26LONDON, Printed Ann. Dom. 1647.

A LETTER Really written by a Moderate Cavallier, to an Intelligent and
Moderate Independent of Trust and Credit in the Now Marching Army.
Honored Sir,
When I look back upon ray promise, I am at a doubt whether I should be still
your debtor, or make payment with Coin less current by clipping, or allay; of
which there is an unavoydable necessity, the shortness of time not sorting
with a liberty to write much, and the greatness of the subject requiring to
write nothing but what may abide the Test: But having a confidence that your
goodness will bury my errors by a kind suppression, I can the better
adventure upon your judgment, which will communicate nothing that may be of no
farther use then the reproof of the Writer.

It is a Chrysis of time wherein each man labors of expectation, and before
the maine Birth (which we hope will be specious) be produced, there is a
production of Monsters, according as the various size of men's understandings,
the condition, and interest of many, and the fears and guilt of not a few do
frame suggestions. It is and must be nevertheless the glory of that Army,
(which now makes business for every thought) to be pious in, and constant to
prepensed Principles, that accident (which will be encountered) make no visible
Mutation in the maine Design, of the contexure of which your yesterday
Discourse seconding his Excellencies Declaration, begot in me a very wealthy
Opinion; And to the progress, and value of which, I hope the scandals and
pretenses scattered will be neither a Remora, nor an Allay.

The cure of every Malady is then most easy when the Disease it self is
throughliest; known. This Commonwealth was six years fithence pretended to
be sick, and was committed into the hands of Physicians, who have practiced
upon the body by Purgings, and Phlebotomie, till if before it abounded with ill
humors, it is now deficient in good blood and spirits, and rather put into a
condition to be still wrought upon until destroyed, then in any way of health,
or renewed strength after so long a languishing. Certainly it is now high time
to change its Doctors, and find out such who will apply some cordials and
restauratives to a worne-out body, and recover it by degrees; toward which
they may make advantage of the past Errors committed by such who have
pretended to operate for its health, viz. an Eradication of the Kings
Prerorogative, while they pretended only a circumscription, or modest
limitation; A Monopolising of power by pretense of Law, against Law, and
confounding all freedom in Notionall and Fantastic, at least unascertained,
Privileges; An unbounded Liberty given at first to the Plebs, while it
conduced to ends, and at last a shortning of Liberty, and Property into a
Vassalage and slavery; And in all a total defection wrought in the Government
and Countenance both of Church and State, and a shufling of order, and
Discipline, into rudeness and Indistinction.

The Publique-Faith (the Kingdoms reputation) hackneyed upon all occasions,
and forfeited at last, and the Soldiers (after having served a purpose so
far as that it was able to walk alone without so costly supporters)
neglected, and affronted in pay, and credit; In so far, that if the Land
were, or invaded by a Foreign, or embroyled with an intestine Enemy, those
Mannagers could neither find Coin nor Hands to officiate to its preservation,
or defense; And albeit we have not Laws to the Letter of which these
misdemeanors are applyable by the names of Treasons, yet taking their own
liberty of supposing constructive Treasons, their reduction of this distempered
Kingdom in these years past to its present condition will carry a sense of a
complicate crime, not less then for what they have sought, and taken the
bloods of some, and those no obscure persons.

No man will therefore reprove your Armies Demand of those Members, who are
conceived guilty of these heights of Impiety, but each moderate man will hope
that they shall not be denied (though it were just to them if they were) the
Liberties of a legal trial, though themselves and party give out, that a
trial by the Law Martial is only intended for them; yet, the Common Laws
will be found sharp enough to correct them, and doubtless God will be
better pleased with the sacrificing of such men by the hand of Justice, then
with their familiar Solemnities, and Celebrations of Fasts, by which they have
upheld a reverence in opinion to their godless actions.

You have a great Work to do, to restore Religion and Law, upon which depends
the Kings re-enthronement, and re-investure with his just rights, the
Parliaments ascertainment of their just power and equal Privileges, and the
peoples restorement to their known Liberties and Properties, as to their
limited and fitting obedience and subjection, which all are so concatenate, as
that an omission of either makes the whole work ineffectuall, and leaves the
Commonwealth in a condition prepared for new and bad impressions, and
subjected to changes as occasion which will not be long unoffered shall be
administered to its innovation. What influence, honor or comfort can be
derivable from a King merely nominall? what converse can there be with a people
impoverisht and embased? and what Peace with a people uncircumscribed and
irregulate? what expectation of Justice from an aggregate number of men
entrusted with a Kingdoms concernment, who will pretend to have no boundaries
for their Privileges but an involution of all dispository power of the peoples
lives and fortunes, which the free condition I mean the ancient freedom of
this Nation (not yet extinct in the English breasts) will no more relish, then
Kings will Rebellion, or then Subjects Tyranny?

If you come therefore (as I will until otherwise convinced believe) prepared
to state the case of the Kingdom, and to stand by as Protectors to Justice,
while it dispenceth equally to King, Parl. and People, your swords will be the
honored propagators, and the whole Kingdom the happy partakers of a lasting
Peaces; but if a defection be in advancing any of those great concerns we
shall have but a seeming quiet or Cessation, merely to take breath for a new
Embroilment; and have found away by a slight skinning of a sore to fit it for
exulceration, and by pretermitting a part of the remedy prescribed, to render
the disease incurable.

Iunii, 17. 1647. Sir I am Your affectionate friend and humble Servant.

FINIS.

