A Letter to the HOUSE, From the Lord WARESTON, Late President of the
Committee of Safety.
MY LOARDS,
AFter my hearty loove rememberd until your Loardships, hoping that yea are
very weel as my sell, Goad be praised, at the writing of these presents: These
are to giff your Loardships till understaund, that I'se ne crave your pardon at
aw, for that I labored for Advauncement in this woarld, accoarding to the
practicks of aw good men, but that I sought it in se bad a time, whareby I'se
incurd the Odium of your good Loardships, whose displesure has gar'd muckle
sorrow until your pure sarvant, which gares me now to writ thilke lines until
your Loardships, that I'se may humble my sell, and greet before your Loardships
for the sin whilk Ise ha committed against aw the good People in England. I
do mack confession unto your Loardships, fra the vary bottom of my heart, that
Ise ha ne cared ene pin foar the Kirk of England, ne foar the Kirk of Scotland
nather, the Dec'l fa the luggs of aw those men that seduced me until syck an
error and misdemeanour against your Loardships; for in troath, my Loards, I
thought there would nere ha been any Kirk in England again: and Ise began to
hate the Kirk, foar because my good Loard and Master, my Loard Laembert hated
the Kirk as weel as my sell, and for that Sir Harry Vane went about till
destory aw the Kirks and Ministers in England; but shame fa me, Ise now see my
fault, and giff your Loardships gares me till sit in aw the Stuies of
Repentance in Scotland, Ise ne be soarry at aw. The Dee'l bla Machiavels weam
fou a sma steanes, for that he bad me be of that Religion my Superiors were
of. Yet what gar^s me to speak evil of that good man, foar that nouw by my
troath, Ise ne think Ise can gang any better wea than to follow his good
Coonsel, for that now by his ene rule Ise ought to be of your Loardships
Religion, foar that yea are nouw by the permission of God my Superiors, as he
was than; and in troath, my Loards, Ise eene be se, if your Loardships will
give permission to your pure servant.

My Loards, In good sooth Ise ha thought my Loard Lambert had bin a very good
man, and that aw the Committee of Safety had bin alse vary good men: in troath,
my Loards, giff they were not good men, they were aw vary good company, and Ise
had muckle reason to con them muckle thanks; for that though I were ne Prophet,
yet I had mere credit and esteem amid them, than ere Ise had in my ene
Country. But, my Loards, sithence it plainly appears that yea are muckle
wiser and better men than they, Ise tell yea ene great Secret, That none of
them aw ere cared ene button for ye: my Loards, this is the vary troath.

My Loards, When ye had broken the Crags of aw our Undertackings, Ise thought
it was my best way to gang heme again into my ene Country; for my Loards, I was
like to e Ratt, in troath when I was gat till my ene heam, I was as glad as ene
had gin me e groat, and my Loards, Ise warrant ye Ise not come among ye again
in haste. My Loards, I was resolved till have gone till-have kissed the haunds
of my Loard Monk, but the Loard be praised for it, he was marched out of
Scoatland before my occasions would permit me to wait on him, and in troath my
Loards, I did not owe him such muckle service as to gang after him. My loards,
when he was gang'd away, I eene went till ha made some Commotions in my ene
Country, to testify my loove to my good loard Lambert, but I could do ne
good; wharefore I hope your Loardships will mack my excuse till him, and assure
him I did aw that I could, and could do ne mere. My Loards, I ha nouw ne thing
to do, but to bla my pip, and wear a blew Bonnet. I hear that ye are calling
our Committee to an Account, my Loards, I shall desire ye not to send foar me,
foar Ise be vary weel whare I am; Ise be an awd man, and tharefore desire to be
at peace, and to end my days in my ene Country. Pray remember my loove to my
good loard Fleetwood, Sir Harry Vane, my loard Lambert, and the rest of my good
friends, with whom I lately sat in Cooncel. My loards, this is aw Ise ha to
say till your loardships, and giff your loardships have any thing mere to say
to me, it is mere than is desired from you, by

MY LOARDS, Your Loardships most humble Servant, Archibald Johnson.
My Loards, Ise ne date my Letter, for that Ise ne care at aw that your
Loardships should ken whare I am.
London, Printed by Edward Mason. 1659.


