A LETTER TO MR. THO. EDWARDS The Dedication of the Letter To our much
suspected friend, Mr. T. Edwards, Scavenger General, throughout
Great-Britaine, New England, and the united Provinces, chiefly Amsterdam, and
Munster, and indeed by virtue of some fair pretenses, Intermedler in all the
states of Christendom, principally there where any thing of the Spirit of
Christ in the Saints appears, trenching upon the Honor, dignity, and
preferment of the Old man. The Grand Reformer, (alias Reducer) of the free born
Sons of God, into the chains of their old Babilonish captivity, under the
pretense of a Jus Divinum.

At his dwelling in Club Court, between the Pope and the Prelate, a little on
this side the Faggot in Smithfield, (or if in his monthly Pilgrimage) in the
Suburbs of Canterbury, at the known house of Mistress Gangrena Triplex, where
Conscience and he (but for a time we hope) shook hands and bad each other
farewell. Where he was lately discovered by many eyewitnesses: and where you
may be sure at any time to meet with him.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Veere, and are to be sold at his shop at the
upper-end of the Old Bayley, near Newgate. 1647.

A LETTER TO MR. EDWARDS.
Sir, Worthy Sir, Reverend, Honored, Grave, Dear Friend, Father, Good Master.
We cannot wonder at the loftiness of your looks, nor at the exuberant tumor
of your spirit, when we find you so woefully bespattered, and courted from
every part of the Kingdom, where Satan we fear has his throne, with so much
honor, so much worth, so much Sir, so much reverence, etc. But reverend Sir,
if we may be but as bold, and as plain, as your late correspondents have been
false and flattering, give us (or rather take you) the advantage of a short,
but serious warning.

And truly Sir, in the entrance of our discourse, we must tell you, our
thoughts are extremly divided; your folly has been so manifest to all men,
that we know not well whether to look upon you, under the blindness of a
deluded brother, or the perverseness of a resolved enemy; having once (we once
believed) received the knowledge of the truth. We will put our charity on the
Tenters, (as you have put the Covenant,) and if through too much indulgence we
force it beyond the line of its conscience, we hope you will pardon us.

The over-acting of your zeal, and the so violent advance (should we look no
further) has made us jealous, yea confident, that the fire that has kindled,
and consumed the sacrifice was not from heaven; But Sir, In the so desperate
carreer, give us leave sadly to ask you whence? and whither so fast? Is it so
long since you came out of the house of your Bondage, that you have forgotten
your anguish, and your sorrow there, and will needs be posting back again?
was their yoke so easy, and their burden so light, that you can so freely
bow-down your neck and your back, and rejoice in your approaching slavery? Is
your late, and your present mercy (your half hours silence in heaven) so
uncouth, and unsavory, that nothing but the Onions and Garlic of Egypt will
satisfy the lustings of your soul? Is the affliction of Joseph so small in
your eye, that like Hammon all your enjoyments are nothing; while Mordecai sits
in the gate of the King, and will not bow the knee? and nothing else shall cool
the tip of your tongue, but the irons, and fetters, the whips and
imprisonments, the confiscation, the blood, the death, and the ruin of the
Saints? God shall smite thee thou whited wall, that thus in the pride of thy
heart, flyest in his face, and strikest at the very apple of his eye. If divine
justice shall suffer thee without check or control to run on for a time,
adding Iniquity to Iniquity, and treasuring wrath against the day of wrath:
confident we are, when thy soul shall sit upon thy trembling lips, and thy two
last years provocations, and persecutions, (wherein thou so much gloriest)
shall be set in order before thee, and thy conscience awakened, to behold thy
guilt; thou will appear a spectacle, of as much horror and amazement as ever
the Sun beheld; In the mean time, come forth and appear in your colors, and
let the world see whither you have acted the part of a Christian, or of a Jew;
of an English man, or a Turk; of a Saint or of somewhat worse: lay aside the
squint eyed by assing respects of this adulterous Generation, and let
conscience speak; once in your days (if you can) tell truth; who (under God)
have been the pillars and only supporters of a reeling tottering State? At the
price of whose blood for some years have you eaten your bread in peace, and
enjoyed every thing that is sweet and pleasant? who has stepped between death
and you, and for you have offered themselves so gallantly in the high places of
the field? yet once again, (if conscience will be but true) whom has God
honored (as with his power, so) with his spirit in an exellent measure? This
we know is the rock of offense. And yet here will the ass whom you ride, rise
up and unplead the blindness of his master. Take the common people that have
neither God nor goodness, but merely acted by you and your party, (setting
aside the Malignants and the fore stall'd) and scarce any but will acknowledge
a spirit of Gospell-sweetnesse, and that of a truth God is in those people. And
Sir, are these the only objects of your scorn and contempt, and the rage of
your retinue, that rude and Godless Generation? Are these to be trampled under
foot, and not fit to live in a Kingdom? In whose faces no dirt nor dung is too
filthy to be thrown. Had we a desire to gratify that grand accuser, to
publish through Gath and Askelon, and to make the uncircumcised to Glory in
your shame; we could present the world with far more, and more fair
testimonies of the notorious villainies (not in matters of judgment (which is
your charge) for therein their gross Egyptian ignorance takes care) but in
matters of fact) among the rest, we could tell the world and you a truer story
of the late Prankes of Mr, etc. (whose name you know, but we will spare) of his
late supplanting the Merchant, and getting his espoused Mistress with child
(which act, with its circumstancies we find not in all your gangrene
paralleld) and of his public penance and acceptance; we could give you in
another of the same name, order and crime, in a neighbour-Parish in London, and
both (we must tell you) as popular, as Reverend, as Orthodox, and as
Covenant-engaged as your self; we could bring in a bed-roll of those halting
sons of Eli, but we profess it not our trade, and we will not entrench upon
yours.

We could trace you through the unhallowed paths of your Antipologie, and your
ungodly gangrenes, (first, second, and third,) and throw many a lie in your
face. That business of Mr. Bachelors, wherein (though you brand him in your
book) you could not deny to his face, but acknowledged him, to be clear in
fundamentals, (wherein was his charge) and that he was not the man you took him
for. This you confessed, yet (perhaps out of purpose to forswear, when time may
serve) you refused to discourse before his friend, though he offered you the
liberty of yours.

We would ask you what godly Minister, or Gentleman, or Friend that was, that
told you that ungodly lie of that godly Lieutenant, who you say, was thrown out
of the Army, because a godly Presbyterian, when hundreds can testify, he was
casheerd by a Council of war, for drunkenness, and swearing God dam-mee,
etc. we could with a little pains (but less pleasure) dig up those filthy
dunghils, and send home your bastards to their proper parents. Truly Sir, our
wonder is the less that your births are so Monstrous, when we find the
contributions have been so adulterous. Flectere si nequeas superos Acheronta
movebis. To carry on the design you do well to usher in a foreign force:
The Netherlands have done you good service: The Munster Brigade, bearing the
Van, has made the most desperate assault, and yet through a narrow watch, and
diligent inspection, the gust thereof is broken; the Leader on, and Charger,
being found a stranger, is not an enemy. However Sir, be not discouraged (if
you dare) the cause is still the same (as bad as ever) rally once more, and
bring in again (you are good at that) your weather-beaten forces; give not up
at the first repulse, you know whom fortune does usually favor. Send again to
the Reformed Churches, and see if any more aid may be expected thence. Search
Amsterdam once more, (if you please with candles) or any other corner of the
world (so far as the Covenant by you so wyar-drawn will reach) where ever you
can hear of a Saint, and let something be done toward so honorable a work.
Go on Sir in this gallant service, if conscience or prudence will give you
leave, and hug the world as the world seems to hug you, until their turn be
served, and tell us then (for then you will speak truth if ever) whether's more
tolerable, Nick-nam'd Heresy, or Malignant-Prelacy, that seven headed, ten
horned beast, which for a little time has withdrawn, and changing his form in
such furious persons as you are, appears again, acted directly by the same
spirit, speaking great things against God and his Saints, and differing only
in the Number of his name.

Sir, you with your Gangrene have been waighed, and are found too light, and
verily your expected Kingdom is departing; while you are beating your fellow
servants, and your Sect triumphing over us and ours, a third has surprised
both, and all are posting into captivity again: shift for your self and
selves as well as ye can, and in your brick and no straw, remember who were
once the Taskmasters. We do believe the Thumbs and Toes of Adonibezecke, will
one day lie before you. For our parts we know whom we have believed, and (our
feet being shod with the preparation of the Gospel) we doubt not but we shall
be able to tread upon the Lion and the Adder, and to play upon the hole of the
Aspe. We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, neither are we careful to
fall down before Nebuchadnezzar, or his God, though the furnace be seven times
hotter then ordinary; cost us what it will, Truth we know will pay its own
charges: Every institution and truth of God (though slanderously reported) we
honor and embrace; but for that golden calfe, that nec jus humanum, nec
divinum, neque sacrum, nec politicum, neque sanum, nec Christianum, that self
contradicting, groundless, lifelesse, spiritlesse Image of jealousy, whose
external brightness is excellent, and the form thereof very terrible, the
head of gold, the breast and arms of silver, the belly and thighs of brass,
the legs of iron, the feet (or foundation) part of iron, and part of clay; this
we have beheld, and beholding shall expect, until that little stone cut out of
the mountain without hands shall smite head and foot, and over-turning the
foundation thereof it self shall fill the world; we are thoroughly assured
that not by might, nor by power, but by the spirit of the Lord, (which is both
might and power) which you have so desperately denied, if not despited) shall
Antichrist be unvailed, and by the same spirit of burning shall every thing
that is Antichristian be destroyed; what say you Sir, have you not faith
enough to believe this? know you (not who says the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal (why then as men distracted cry ye out so loud for Magisteriall
external force?) but mighty through God, to the pulling down of STRONG HOLDS,
casting down IMAGINATIONS and EVERY HIGH THING that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity EVERY HIGH THOUGHT (or
OPINION) to the OBEDIENCE of CHRIST. Dare you not trust God on his word? but
deny the Scripture, not in the letter only, but in the spirit of it also? who
is the Sectary and the Heretic now Sir? A spiritual man would judge that the
SHIELD of FAITH, the SWORD of the SPIRIT, the GIRDLE of TRVTH, etc. (whose very
anoyntment and ordination is to that very office) might do as gallant execution
in the hand of the spiritual champion (a Minister of the Gospel) and make as
successful an advance upon spiritual wickednesses in high places (as Errors
and Heresies are) as all the unsuitable, Incongruous, unapoynted provision of
your carnal Artillery; ye war indeed, but it is after the flesh, and no wonder
your conquest is no more, for the spirit of the Lord we fear is departed from
ye.

You stand quarrelling away your time, and wasting your little strength, in a
company of frothy, ulcerous Pamphlets; vilifying the upright, and slandering
the innocent, wholly neglecting your work, which (you would make men believe)
is the Ministry of Christ, which you indeed either wholly wave, or grossly
pervert; and to back your unsound interpretations, produce the authority of a
company of (forsooth) Fathers of the Church, as Bernard, etc. men though lights
in their dark Generation, and in many things sound in the faith, yet in others
as palpably heretical, as any of your damnable Sectaries, viz. the suffrage of
Saints departed, prayers for the dead, the real presence in the consecrated
Hosts, etc. Sir, save your relfe this labor of searching these corrupt
records, we pin not our faith on the sleeves of any, though never so ancient,
or Authenticke with you. Your suborning of witnesses makes us suspect the
Scriptures are not your friends; we profess, (except your brains be
intoxicated, or your natural reason be intranc'd (or which is worse then both)
you make it your design with Sophistry to cheat your proselites) we know not
what to think of your impertinent, ridiculous, unschollar-like argumentations,
a baculo ad angulum; from the Jew to the Gentile, from the law to the Gospel,
from the Minister to the Magistrate, etc. Tell us not Sir of a specious
ordination any farther then you can attest its divinity by the concomitancy of
the spirit; we shall else look upon it as a means to delude the simple. Tell
us not (as your predecessors did) of order and decency in the Church: yours
(you know) differs much from theirs, (as NEW LORDS use to make NEW LAWS) and
why may not we (without these complainings to Authority) a little dissent from
you; if you and men of like spirit will constitute more then any (without the
help of specticles) can see to be canonical, Mickle good may they do ye;
for our part, though our orders received not their form from your mould, yet
we are confident the Apostle speaks nothing but truth, when he said, God is not
the Author of confusion, but of peace (or order) as in all CHVRCHES of the
SAINTS, 1 Cor. 14.33.

Let Us not have such brutish dealing Sir, as to be put into Bears skins, and
then your canibals to be let loose upon us; ye idle and loyter, and feed upon
the fat of the flock, and say, to morrow shall be as this day and much more
abundant; your Tithes and other Incomes your three or four or five hundred
pounds per annum take up your time and ye neglect the work, in the mean time
tares are sown, and errors and heresies come up thick and threefold; and
then with open mouth ye cry out, Oh these accursed Julians, Socinians, these
damnable Antinomians, Anabaptists, Independents, etc. that will ruin all (The
world is turned Bishop again to the very life; Bonner himself is risen from
the dead, and nothing will do but the death of dissentors, what say you (Sir)
to the Sacrament of the Altar, fall down to the Idol, or bring in the halter)
Sir, once more in good earnest take home your ugly brats; and ye that upon
your beds of ease have gotten such Monsters, bestow then as ye please: for our
part we do profess they are none of ours, neither do we at all plead for
their tolleration. We abhor the remembrance of them, and shall as freely
contribute to their destruction as any; Only Sir, for the ordinance of
Magistracy, we would not engage them in a practice so dishonorable, and
destructive, but with (Mr. Marshall) shall desire them to peruse their
Commission, and act accordingly.

Sir, Were you a messenger of Christ, your work would be to go and preach, and
hold forth the everlasting Gospel, which alone is the Arm of God to
salvation, you would more cry up the sword of God, then of Gideon; you would
see more cogent, convincing authority, to subdue the heart, by one Evangelicall
Scriptum est, then a thousand political fiat justitia's, or all the Arbitrary,
boundless, canonical, Ipse dixis's, in the world.

Fill not the world with clamors of Schismatickes, and Heretical seducers; you
have an engine in your hand, and that of God, which if weilded, as ordered,
will fetch back the wandering; yea, seduce the seducers themselves. However
Sir, though thousands should fall at your right hand (I mean to errors) and
ten thousand at your left, yet know that every one that the father has given
to the son, is as a star in his own right hand, and none shall be able to
pluck him thence: Many must and shall back-slide, that those that are sound
might be approved; and this Sir, is our everlasting rock, that in the most
desperate apostasy, and falling away) the foundation of the Lord stands sure,
having this SEAL [the Lord knows who are his.]

You have been bold Sir, with the truth and us; give us leave in the behalf of
the truth to be bold with you, 2nd plainly to tell you, that your Clergicall
Interests have broke the back of Christendom, and the mystery of Iniquity
begins to appear; your fathers have eaten (sweet) sower Grapes, and your
childrens teeth are set on edge; your Patent ye received from them, and they
from Antichrist (as his last will and testament) by virtue whereof, the trade
must wholly run through your hands; ye must kill and slay without control,
and wound at your pleasures, and none must bind up the broken but ye. The way
to Heaven ye tell men is by the gate of Hell, and more then half damned they
must be, ere they must think of being saved; and who but ye (in the despair
of poor creatures) ordained to speak peace. And if any other (whom God has
better gifted for the work of the Ministry then with a black coat, an
university dialect, and the external advantage of Arts and Sciences) shall
presume to lay hands on your arc, why presently he usurpes the Priestly office
( alias the Prelaticall preferment) And must immediately be cursed with Bell,
Book and Candle. These Sir, are the shrines whereby your Diana have been so
long supported. This vault of darkness, this hellish conspiracy, by a beam of
the morning star has been discovered, which makes the Heathen rage, and
which we hope will be found to be the last proppe of Antichrist, veniente Rege,
etc.

And in conclusion, as a monumentall relic of your unspeakable atcheivements
in the fundament of Learning, (setting aside those sublime Encomiums of a godly
friend, a Godly Minister, etc. sent from such and such a place in the Country,
and your selfe-flattering dreams of a second Luther, cum multis aliis
ridiculosis) were is not to broad a disparagement to our mother university, we
could send you with your hornbook at your back, to take your degree among the
pupils in Paul's for help to reconcile the absurd contradiction of a believing
Atheist. Turn to Page the ((...)) of your last Gangrene, and blush not if you
can) we know not what were the methods of your Masters Indulgence, but the
Tithe of this error in our School had been six lashes at least: But Sir, this
and twenty such scapes, we will winck at; we will accept of the will for the deed,
and balance the account with your zeal, your loyalty, and your faithfulness
to the Church of England. But Sir, In good earnest let us have more sense and
less volumes, fewer tales and more truths, smaller books and bigger
Arguments. (These bum-baste editions tire all, but satisfy none) Reasons are
sold by weight, and not by tale. No marvel you catch no more birds (except now
and then a woodcocke or two) your bait is so slight and chaffey; your
Industrious SMITH wiltell you so, by that time he has cast up his cards, and
brought in a to tall account, a ruff draught whereof you may take at present,
as follows. Imprimis, given to the Honorable House of Commons, out of hopes
to find favor there, so many books. Item. given to your Reverend self, for
your reverend Copy so many. It. given to a Schoolboy to correct your false
Latin, and other amendments 40 s. in dry money (too much by 39 in so dry a
bargain.) It. given to the Grecian for helping you to the Originals, and
filling up the Hebrew blanks, 59 s. and three groats, (Oh the Lamentation of a
bad market) It. sold at several times with much ado and little profit, so
many: It. sent to the Reformed Churches to show them the variety of our
Sectaries, and your valiant encountrings, so many. It. given away to friends to
make a party, who have taken the Covenant to be faithful to us till death, so
many. It. so many let out at Livery at pence a piece, but finding no
satisfaction returned them, spoiled, so many. It. so many sold for little or
nothing, to the Exchange, to Grocers, Cooks, etc. It. trusted in the hands of
Hucksters, but not yet returned, (nor we believe ever will) being hardly worth
bringing back so many. It. so many stolen for want of care, and looking after,
being pind on the wall for a Lure. It. so many sequestered for my own proper
use, in my study behind the door ( alias the house of office) and for my
servants so many. It. transported for France, that hot inflaming clymate, the
leaves there of (as you said) being very sovereign for the healing of the
Nations. And lastly, (to balance the accounts with the bakers dozen) lying
still in my hands, and are like there to lie so many hundreds; Come along
customers if you lack any. That this is a true and perfect account, I have
hereunto set my hand, R.S. Yet that you may not take all upon bare report (as
hitherto you have done) behold the powerful convincing pen of our Metropolitan
Surveyer, who is able to give you as good an account in this case as he did of
the Tithe in Christ-Chuch.

Brother Tom, this Account though strange and unexpected, yet upon the request
and credit of our well-beloved Trustee R. S. I have perused, and cannot but
judge Orthodox; and though for the honor of our Cause (Consider atis
considerandis) nullo modo Imprimatur, yet for the encouragement of that
speaking Ignoramus, and all such worshipful undertakers, Ambobus manibus,
Iterum Iteru^^ que approbatur, J. C. -- And now Sir, having presented you with
a small Map of your unworthy dealing, your Rabshakah-ralings, your accursed
accusings, your undue, untrue, unchristian slanderings of your Brethren, We
shall spread the same in the presence of the Lord, and leave you to the Rebnkes
of him, who has and will rebuke Kings and Kingdoms for his anointeds sake.
Only (if yet there may be hope) apply to thy Gangrened state, that corroding
plaster, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. And so we bid thee farewell. From our Palace in our
prison, from our Harbor in our storm, from our strong City, in our wayfairing
state, from our all in all in our nothing at all, wherein no stranger shall
intermeddle, nor any thief shall break through to spoil us of our sweet repose.

Primo Febr. 1646.
The Copy of the Letter to the Gentlewoman, in which this Letter to Mr. Edwards
was enclosed.
Mistress,
THe enclosed is the Copy of a Letter sent and delivered to the hand of Mr.
Tho. Edwards, the famous forger of these latter days, whom when you see
commend us to him (for the world and his Conscience well know, how foully we
have been belied) and tell him the Session is hasting wherein our plea will
impartially be heard and manifold reparations awarded us for our manifold
tribulations, till when the Anchor of our Hope being entered into that within
the Veil, we shall be able to pass the streights of this wicked world, and
to ride out the rugged wafts of a Rocky Sea:

FINIS.

