AN AFTER-RECKONING WITH Mr SALTMARSH: OR, An appeal to the impartial and
conscientious Reader, and Lover of Truth and Sincerity, AGAINST His last paper,
called An end of one controversy, or an Answer or Letter to M. Leys large last
Book.

Written by L. M. a Student in Divinity.

Prove. 11.19. The lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment. Eccles. 12.11. The words of the wise are as goa^s,
and as nails fastened by the masters of Assemblies. Act 9.30. -- It shall be
determined in a lawful Assembly. Hieron. Apolog. advers. Iovin. Tom. 2 p. 109.
Sciolitantum ad detra^endum, qui in cose doctos ostent^re velint, si omnium
dicta lacerent. LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

To the indifferent Reader.
REader, this After-reckoning with M. Saltm, was prepared for the press the
next week after he had sent forth his paper, called, The end of one
Controversy, which was time enough for answer to such a small trifle as that
was, begun and ended within the compass of a sheet and an half; but the
Author not importuning for the expedition used in M. Saltm. his cause, for
which two presses have sometimes been employed to give hasty dispatch to a
little pamphlet; but leaving them to their own pace, and pawses, (who sometimes
make a broad blank margin of intermission, as well as a leaf of laborious
impression) it has been lingering in the press until this present. Yet that
delay will be recompensed in part by an additionall of satisfaction in a point
of controversy of some moment, more then the just proportion of a Reply to such
a writer, and such matter did necessarily require. Whereby that thou may
receive direction without error, be pleased to take notice of these
misprisions and corrections of the Printer.

Errata sic corrigenda.
PAge 1. l. 23. for wherein read In the Answer. p. 3. l. 5. for prevaricate r
prevaricating. p. 5. l. 3 after Mordecai r. alone, and l. 4. after destr^y r.
all. p. 19. add to M. Saltm his Text cited out of the 7. page of his paper,
this, Are we to be ever consulting with flesh and blood? did the Disciples and
brethren when they spoke the Word of God, tugge first among so, many Schoolmen?
So many Fathers? So many modern Divines? So many Commentators? So many old
Poets, as you do? p. 33. l. 29 dele and who. p. 46 l. 11. for Thirdly r.
Secondly. p. 40. l. 25. for own r. one. p. 51. l. 11. make a parenthesis of 3.
lines and a piece, from the word which to the word authors, inclusively for
both ends of it. p. 53. l. 5. before the end blot out the figure [1] p. 54. l.
15. for employed r. employed. p. 55. marg. lit. K. for quia r quin. p. 56. l.
ult. for swarivng r. swarving. In M. L. his Light for smoke p. 16. l. 5. for
Presbyteriall r. Prelaticall.

The Contents of this After-reckoning.
First. BY little and cheap pamphlets the people deluded, and better books, if
bigger and deaerer, unjustly prejudiced. p. 1. 2. M. Saltm. makes his return
with less conscience then the unjust steward, Luke 16.6. p. 2. and muchwhat
like a bankrupt. p. 7. 3. A ministry received from the hands of Protestant
Bishops, neither Antichristian, nor to be renounced. p. 3. 4. M. Saltm. his
scoffing misapplication of Scripture in the title page of his Paper answered,
and censured. p. 4. 5. Unworthy persons cried up in a time of schism, who in
times of peace were of no good note, nor of good account. p. 5. 6. It is no
disparagement to truth to be frequently defended, nor any point of popery to
write volumes and Tomes, as M. S. pretends. p. 5, 6. 7. His objection of
reference to others answered. p. 7, 8, 9, and p. 21. 8. His vain conceit that
an advice for his better employment was out of fear of the potency of his pen,
discovered and confuted. p. 10, 11. see the like. p. 13, 14. 9. M. Saltm. his
absurd comparison of prelacy and presbytery in point of tyranny. p. 11. 10. Of
a twosold restitution, in fact, or in affection. p. 12. 11. Of forms of art
and Logic, the school of Christ and of Tyrannus, and of discoveries of Christ
by reason. p. 14, 15, 16, And of humane learning. p. 19, 22. 12. M. Salm. not
slandered by M. L. with any erroneous opinion. p. 16, 17, 18. 13. His poor
shift to excuse his unfaithful dealing with M. Sam. Bolton. p. 17, 18. 14.
Excess in dispatch and deliberation compared, and misapplyed by M. S. p. 19.
15. M. Saltm. his self-confidence, and rare dexterity in contracting and
contradicting. p. 21. 16. Of Tithes and their Tenure. p. 23. 17. M. S. his
frivolous exceptions and answers. p. 24, 25. A clear vindication of M. L. from
vain ostentation, suggested by M. S. out of C. D. his defense of M. Ley. a p.
16. ad 33. 18. M. Saltm. in his collections and concealments very unsincere and
unfaithful. p. 33, 34. 19. M. Saltm. his vain pretense of discovery of errors
mistaken for truths by M L. p. 35, 36. 20. His Conclusion compounded of
calumny, arrogancy, and hypocrisy. a p. 36. ad p. 40. 21. A Review of the
repetition of Salmasius his Testimony, 1. Touching Baptism. p. 41. 22. M. S.
his immodest insisting in the saying of Salmasius, after a full answer unto it.
23. Of the form of Baptism, preparative and executive, first of the
preparative. p. 42, 43. 24. Five Queries of the form of Baptism, 1. Whether
there be any form of words for the administration of Baptism at all, whether
John used any form? p. 45. 2. Whether we find one certain and constant form of
Baptism, either prescribed or observed in Scripture, and what difference of
forms may be collected out of it? p. 45, 46, 47, 48.
25. The third Querie, Of the several forms of Baptism which is the chief? p.
49. 26. The chief is that which is grounded on, Mat. 28.19. viz. baptizing In
the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. p. 49. For it, 1. Scripture. p.
49, 50. 2. Reason. p. 50. 3. Practical example. p. 50. 4. The testimony of
ancient Fathers. p. 51. 5. The testimony of Schoolmen. p. 51. 6. The testimony
of the reformed Churches. p. 52.

27. Of baptizing by trine immersion, or thrice dipping, as a practical
profession of Baptism, In the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. p.
52, 53. 28. The fourth Querie, Whether any form of Baptism be so necessary,
that it is not lawful to vary from it? p. 53. 29. The Apostles thought to
baptize sometimes In the Name of the Trinity. p. 54. 30. Of baptizing in terms
equivalent to In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. p. 54. 31. Not
lawful now to alter the form of Baptism In the Name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost. p. 55. 32. The fifth Querie, If there be any variation from the
form, in Mat. 28.19. what may be admitted without the violation of the
Sacrament, what not? p. 55. 33. Of Baptizing in the first person, I Baptize, or
in the third person, as the Greeks do, Let this servant of Christ be Baptized.
p. 55. 34. Of putting sprinkle, or wash, for Baptize, and of baptizing, In the
name, or Into the name. p. 56. 35. Expressmention of the three persons in the
Trinity how necessary? p. 56. 36. Of a popish Priest baptizing in false Latin,
In nomine Patria, Filia, and Spiritua Sancta. p. 56. 37. Of heretical forms of
Baptism by Marcus the heretic, by Arians, Eunomians, and Photinians. p. 57.
38. Of the Montanists adding the Name of Montanus and Priscilla, to the persons
of the Trinity in Baptism. p. 58. 39. Of Popish Baptism with addition of the
Virgin Mary's name to the Trinity in Baptism. p. 58. 40. Of Baptizing In the
name of God and the true cross excused by Bernard. p. 58. 41. What is to be
done when there is doubt of the form of Baptism? p. 59. 42. Of M. Saltm his
exception against baptizing In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.
p. 59, 60. 43. His misapplication of Salmasius his testimony for patronage of
his opinion. p. 60, 61. 44. An Animadversion upon the unsavory Pamphlet called
A perfume, etc. p. 61, 62.
Imprimatur

Ja. Cranford.
May 28. 1646.
Praeloquium.
IF Mr Leys and Mr S. his Books were both of a price, and ordinary Readers
would not he such truants at their Books, as to be best pleased with the
shortest lesson, there might now (as Mr Saltmarsh styles his last Pamphlet) be
an end of one controversy, (this one betwixt Mr Ley and him,) and he should
now have (that which he often striveth for) as well the last word as the first,
in quarrels of this kind: But since Mr Leys Book is twelve times as dear as
his, and more then twelve times as bigg, it cannot be expected that the number
of buyers, or Readers of both their writings will be equal, and so both truth
and innocence may suffer under a common prejudice, if this last Pamphlet of Mr
S. should seal up the difference betwixt them to perpetual silence.

I shall therefore briefly and faithfully set before the Reader some
particulars or importance, whereby he may the better judge which of these two
Antagonists carries his cause with clearest evidence of truth and sincerity,
and the sum of what I shall say shall be reduced to these two heads.

1. An Apologeticall answer to Mr S. his objections against Mr L.

2. A fresh charge of objections against Mr Saltmarsh. Wherein I shall
distinctly consider in Mr S. his paper, 1. The Title page. 2. His Letter. 3.
His Summary account of Mr Leys 1. Epistle. 2. Treatise.
4. His Answer to it. 5. His reinforcing of Salmasius his Testimony. 6. His
Descant on C. D. his Defense of Mr L. against the Newsmonger. 7. His
self-commending Conclusion.


1. For his Title page.

J. S.

An end of one Controversy.

L. M.

The end of one Controversy, as you use the matter, may be the beginning of
another. If you had meant it should have been an end of the Controversy, you
would not have taken leave of Mr Ley, with such an abuse of his Book, and
reproach of his person, as could not be passed by with silence of himself or
his friends; unless the most did agree with the wisest in the censure of the
sleightnesse and insufficiency of your Answer, as unworthy to receive any
reply, but such a one as is unseemly for him to make.

Title.

J. S.

Being an Answer or Letter to M Leys Large last Book.

L. M.

So short an answer to so large a Book? sure you never meant to make any Reader
(that could judge as well as read) believe that your sheet and half could be a
satisfactory Answer to Mr Leys Book, which you sum up to 17 sheets of paper,
(besides the Treatise of C. D.) unless your hasty return make up a great part
of the sum, as in the account of the or just steward, fifty measures of oil,
quickly written down, stood for 10^. as Luke 16.6.

Title.

J. S.

In which the sum of his last Book, which relates to the most material
passages in it, are gathered up and replied to.

L. M.

The sum is soon taken, as of the number of sheets, and you might do most of
that without so much as reading of the Book; for Mr Ley summed up each section
into short contents, presently after the Epistle Dedicatory; but for your Reply
unto it, it is so poor, impertinent and unsatisfactory, that you had done your
self more favor if you had been altogether silent, then in acting the part of
such a prevaricate Replicant as you have done.

Title.

J. S.

By John Saltmarsh: not revolted (as Mr Ley says) from a pastoral calling,
but departed from the Antichristian Ministry by Bishops and now Preacher of
the Gospel.

L. M.

You have given over your public Ministry at Brasteed, and if you have
forsaken as Antichristian, that is more then Mr Ley charged you with, in the
Title page of his Book; whence it may be probably conjectured, that you either
have, or will renounce your Baptism, since it was administered by one ordained
by a Bishop, and so in your dialect an Antichristian Minister; and upon this
ground many, who know not how to distinguish of Ministerial Acts, will happily
be induced to suspect their parents marriage by such a Minister to be
Antichristian: and that will call in question the legitimacy of the children:
but none of these consequences can trouble those, who hold, as the Lords and
Commons in their Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers have declared, viz. That
although the Title of Bishop has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one,
and that unto him ascribed, and by him assumed (as in other things, so in the
matter of Ordination) which was not meet; Ordination notwithstanding being
performed by him, a Presbyter, joined with other Presbyters, We hold for
substance to be valid, and not to be disclaimed by any that have received it.
And that Presbyters so ordained, being lawfully thereunto appointed and
authorized, may ordain other Presbyters.

2. The places of Scripture misapplied.

J. S.

Isa. 5.20. We be to them that put darkness for light.

L. M.

This Scripture in the sense of it, makes as much for Mr Ley as for you; and
in the letter more; for he put not darkness for light, but light for smoke.

J. S.

Acts 19.32. Some therefore cried one thing and some another, for the Assembly
was confused, and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together.

Verse. 41. And when he had thus spoken he dismissed the Assembly.

L. M.

Because Mr Ley is styled one of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, you
take occasion to abuse the Assembly; and that you may abuse them, you abuse the
Scripture, by misapplying the Text to them, which was spoken of a tumultuary
meeting of Demetrius with his company, and the Idolatrous worshippers of Diana,
confusedly come together they knew not why: And to make your meaning the more
apparent, you write Assembly in greater letters then the rest. With what
discretion can you fall upon them, who did not meddle with you at all, though
you did what you could to provoke them? with what conscience can you compare a
learned, religious and Reverend Assembly of Divines (who were called together
by the Parliament, for causes known, not only to themselves, but all the
Kingdom over, who neither meet nor part without religious addresses to the
throne of grace) to such a superstitious, ignorant and mutinous multitude?

But you meant not only to disgrace them, but to threaten them with dismission
also, or at least you intimate your mind to have it so, and all of your way
have such ill will unto it, that your first desires were to prevent it, your
next to disturb it, and delay the proceedings of it, and now out of the same
disaffection to it you desire to dissolve it. But why you, Mr S. should bring
in the Assembly in such a malignant manner, is a matter much noted by some, and
though they know not the reason, they conjecture at these two causes thereof;
the one is, the pride of your spirit, like that of Haman, who thought scorn to
lay hands upon Mordecai, and therefore sought to destroy the Jews, Esther 3.6.
though those that know Mr Ley and you, say, there is impar congressus betwixt
you, by the advantage on his side, though Haman like you had not set upon the
Assembly; yet as if he were not good enough alone to be your match, you fetch
that venerable Synod within the verge of your reproof; such a giant you are now
grown to be, by being leader of a schism, who had been but a pygmie still, if
you had continued among the Presbyterians; just as Augustine observed of
Primianus and Maximinianus, that were jolly fellows in a faction, else, said
he, Primianus might have been Postremianus, and Maximianus, Minimianus.

The other conjecture is this, you have honored the Assembly too much, for you
almost adored them, and made applications of Scripture to them, which had a
strong savor of Idolatry and flattery, little below the height of blasphemy,
and now you, declining that extreme, stay not your self until, Dam vitant
stu^^i vitia is contraria currum.
Wiseman like, you arrive at the contrary.

2. The second particular is your Letter, wherein you say,

J. S. p. 3.

I think not the truth I defended so weak as to need a new Treatise to bear it
up; I see it is otherwise with you, who dare not let your former Books stand by
themselves, without another to support them.

L. M.

If Mr Ley had made none answer at all, you would have taken his silence for
consent; his silence after such a charge as you laid upon him, for a confession
of guilt, and now he has answered you, make that an argument of a weak cause
that adjective-like needs a substantive support of another book, when that was
not the weakness of the former book, but your waywardness against it, whereby
you hoped to wrangle your self into some reputation, by out wording your
adversary, as it were all one to be able to answer, and unable to hold ones
peace; and whereas you say, that you call the truth needs no new Treatise,
what, I pray you, call you this you have last written? You call your former
Book an Answer, so do you this; you call this a Letter, so do you not that; yet
you make Mr L. his Epistles, whereof the one contains 3 leaves, the other 9,
a competent Treatise of themselves; and yet of your sheet and half you say,
that he that writes any thing of truth, more properly writes much, rather then
he that writes against it, though in more paper: That Is your Aphorism framed
and applied in favor to your self, but you must not be your own judge.

The Letter.

J. S. p. 3.

It is indeed the way of the Popish schools, to fill the world with volumes and
Tomes, and rather to astonish then convince.

L. M.

And is it not the way of the Protestant schools, to make up the fulness of
that world with volumes and Tomes? have not Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza,
Martyr, Bucer, Gualter, Zanchius, Chamier and others, made many and great
books? will you make that their fault which was their virtue; their blame,
which is their glory and the Churches gain?

Letter.

J. S. p. 3.

How has truth been carried out of sight from the Reader in the labyrinth of
Replies and Rejoynders, your self gives us an experiment in this book; for how
are you puzzled to let the Reader know what was yours, and what was mine after
that, and what is yours again?

L. M.

M. Ley was not puzzled, but that the Reader might not be puzzled, nor mistaken
by your imperfect, unfaithful and confused Answers, he brought as much both of
his Text and yours also, as might sufficiently clear the truth to his
understanding.

Letter.

J. S. p. 3.

I hope I shall write you as much, if not more, in one sheet and half, as you
have wrote me in seventeen.

L. M.

Belike you have some such art of couching much matter in a little room, as he
that Plin. not. bist. l. 7. c. 21. p 35.
comprised Homers Iliads in a nutshell; or you return the payment in gold which
you received but in silver, or but in farthing tokens; that as much in value,
this more in weight and more troublesome, because longer in telling; but, Sir,
they that have read M. Leys book, and your sheet and half, say, your return
unto him is after the manner of poor bankrupts, or below that, not paying of
the debt you ow him, so much as two sh^llings in the pound; and they take your
comparison and prelation of your self in this particular, to be but a very vain
vaunting of your self, which bewrays your want both of truth and modesty.

The third Particular is, Your summary account of M. Leys Book. And first of
the Epistles, p. 4.

J. S.

Your Epistles, which are a competent Treatise of themselves, and the very
cisterne of your reasoning, from which you fill all the other pages of your
Book; the parts of my Treatise, with your Answer, or rather much of your former
Reply, which in things of most weight is no refutation, but a reference to
other Divines who have writ of the same subject.

L. M.

You presume the most of those who read your papers, are the fewest of those
that read M. Leys book; but there are so many learned and judicious persons,
who have read them both, that there cannot but be many witnesses of your foul
and unfaithful dealing with him, and with your Readers in this imputation.

Sumons. p. 4.

J. S.

It seems you have a common stock of learning among you, or an argumentative
treasury, to which you refer us with much ease.

L. M.

How does it seem that Presbyterians have a common stock of learning among
them, or an argumentative treasury? is it because, when one man has copiously
and exactly discussed a point of weight, a reference is made unto him for
further satisfaction then can be expected in a discourse of so many particulars
as you shuffle and jumble together in your dark and smoky Treatise? and is the
book he cited any more his treasury then yours, or any man's else that will buy
it, and use it? Did you manage any matter of difference like a scholar, by
stating of the Question, proposing of proofs by Scripture and reason, to which
he has not returned a punctual Answer? Indeed you took upon you to put tasks
upon him, which he did not undertake, and yet held your self free to leave your
own work undone, and you give him cause Light for Smoke. Sect. 4. p. 8. and
Sect. 5. p. 11. and Sect. 16. p. 42.
diverse times to complain of this partiality.

Sum. p. 4.

J. S.

But I cannot take this for good payment, to be put over to another man, when
you are bound to pay me your self.

L. M.

Is there any either law, or conscience, or reason, that he should pay you any
thing who owes you nothing? or any reason why you should complain of
non-payment, when M. Ley is far before hand with you, as any indifferent
auditour betwixt him and you will give in the account? And yet if he ought you
any thing, it is sufficient if you be paid, whether it be by his hand or by
another; and I hope before you and I part, to pay you somewhat in his stead,
while he is employed in matters of greater moment.

Sum. p. 4.

J. S.

I could turn you over thus to as able Divines as you do me, to M. Tho.
Goodwin, M. Joh. Goodwin, M. Nigh, M. Tomes, M. Prinne, M. Buroughs, M. White,
M. Eaton, M. Den, M. Knolls, etc.

L. M.

M. Ley turned you over to none for any argument you brought in the difference
betwixt him and you; but when you would put upon him in transitu, the handling
of a large Controversy, (wherein you had not engaged your self by undertaking
the proof) he referred you to M. Rutherfords book. Now whereas you say you
could turn him over to as able Divines as he does you, viz. to M. Thomas
Goodwin, M. John Goodwin, M. Nigh, M. Tombs, M. Prinne, M. Buroughs, M. White,
M. Eaton, M. Den, M. Knolls, you make your comparison very unequal; for,
first, M. Rutherford for his great learning, and gravity, and seniority, may
well be your Master; whereas you will not say the same of those you have named
with respect to M. Ley. Secondly, Some of them you name have written very
little, so little, that no great satisfaction is to be expected from them in
any point. And thirdly, Some of them are erroneous dogmatists, of no more
learning or authority then your self. Fourthly, in your list of Divines you
bring in M. Prinne, who is by his profession not a Divine, but a Lawyer,
(though I confess he has more divinity in him then diverse of those you have
named with him:) But with what face can you bring him in, as on your side
rather then on the Presbyterians, who has written so much, and so emphatically
against the Independents? and in that he writes concerning the Sacrament,
wherein he and the Presbyterians are at difference, it is as much against the
Independent opinion and practice as theirs, and more too, though such be their
subtilty in that, as well as in other things, that wherein the Presbyterians
and they agree, they will not join with them, because they would have all the
offense of the opposite party to fall upon the Presbyterian party alone, and
none upon themselves.

Next after your Catalogue, you fall upon the Appendix, page 4. and come to it
again, page 10, 11. where I will take what you say into consideration, and will
answer to both. And then you bring in a Breviat of M. Leys two Epistles, and
make an Answer to them; in which since what is in the Breviat is comprehended,
they may both receive satisfaction at once

Fourthly, Your Answer to the Epistle, page 5.

J. S.

1. You bring in M. Ley, desiring the Gentlemen to whom he dedicates his Book,
to counsel you not to cry down the government: To this you Answer by a
Question: Are you in such fear of your government, that you make friends to me
to be silent? is it so weak that it may be cried down?

L. M.

You blame M. Ley for repeating what he has said, when you put a necessity
upon him so to do, by your misunderstanding, or misapplying of his speeches, as
in this particular: He out of pity to see you so ill employed, as he professes
toward the end of his Epistle Dedicatory, entreated the Gentlemen to whom he
dedicated his book, to bestow some of their discreet counsels upon you, for
better employment of your parts and pen, then (he says not in disputing down,
but) in crying down that discipline and government as terrible and tyrannical,
which the prudent Senators of both the Honorable Houses of Parliament in part
have set up and further endeavor to advance.

By crying down here cannot reasonably be meant a vigorous opposition, but a
clamorous contradiction; especially since it is of a private person, as you
are, against that which is set up by public authority. But you, bringing in
the speech to the topicke of your self-conceit, would have it imply some
masterfull power in your pen, before which the Presbytery cannot stand; You
think, as by the parable of the fly on the wheel, you raise all the dust in
the motion, when your performance in polemicks is so poor and impotent, that if
the Independent party had no other agents for it then you, it would quickly
turn from a terror (as to some it is, because of the braggs and threats of
some armed Sectaries) to a very scorn, as is said of the sythed chariots in the
Ignatian Conclave: Therefore I pray you, Sir, cry still against the
Presbyterian cause, be the Independent posthorse, to scrible against the
Presbyterians every day; in the confidence of your puissance, take so much
boldness and insolence upon you, as to provoke the ablest champions, yea a
whole Assembly of learned and venerable Divines to be your An^^gonists; (though
I believe you cannot provoke them so much as may make them to take any notice
of so weak and worthless an adversary) go on as you have begun, to make your
self a litigious Ishmael, with your hand against every man, until every man's
hand be against you; and it will never trouble M. Ley, (but in Christian
compassion to you, and zeal to the truth) that you vent the vanity of your
spirit, and bewray either your ignorance or ill conscience in such
contestations.

J. S. page 5.

Secondly, That no Presbytery parochial, etc. assumes such power as the
Prelaticall: To which you answer by another Question; Is Presbytery, because
Parochial, Classical, Provincial less Tyrannical then Episcopacy, because
many rule in that, in this but one, or rather not more tyrannical, because one
tyrant was not so much as many together, evil in a community is stronger and
more diffusive then in unity.

L. M.

Where is your ingenuity, M. Saltmarsh, or your sincerity in this allegation
and Answer? I appeal to the Reader, (if but of ordinary apprehension, and not
wholly possessed with Independent prejudice) whether in the Epistle Dedicatory,
page 2, 3, 4. there be not so much evidence brought in clearly contradictory to
your conceit, as might have prevented the exception you make, and may presently
remove it upon the reading of M. Leys observations on that behalf; whereto
there needs no other addition, save the English of a little of Seneca his
Latin, quoted in the margin of the fourth page, which is, that Cyrus by
dividing the river Gyndes (which in its full stream drowned a white horse of
his that drew his chariot (to which the Episcopal Sea may be compared) into
360 channels, meant to make it passable by women on foot, and did so; such is
the Division of Ecclesiastical power into a plurality of Presbyters, which
being so lessened and limited as they are like to be, are more like a dried
chanel, then a devouring flood.

J. S. page 5.

Thirdly, If the Question were rightly stated, etc. Is not the Question of the
Presbytery yet stated?

L. M.

It is not rightly stated by all that meddle with the matter? and though it be
rightly stated by the Assembly, that is nothing to common information; unless
the debates, resolutions and proofs of the Assembly therein were printed, which
might be to the advancement of the truth, and great satisfaction of many, both
Ministers and people thorowout the whole Kingdom, and I doubt not will be so,
when the Parliament will be pleased to permit them to be public, which without
their leave the Assembly may not do.

J. S. page 5.

Fourthly, That I should restore such Tithes, if unlawful, as I formerly
received, because the sin till then is not remitted, you say, I have done it.

L. M.

If so, there is more error in your understanding, in mistaking the tenure of
Tithes, then in your conscience, for this particular.

J. S. page 5.

But take heed, say you, how you put forgiveness of sin upon restitution,
for that is not only Popery, but like the Pape you would sell pardons only to
the rich, and none to the poor, and you would put more upon sacrifice then upon
mercy.

L. M.

Though forgiveness be not set upon restitution, yet is it not therefore not
requisite to Christian justice, but necessary either in fact, where a man is
able, or in affection, where he is not: and this doctrine is as meet for a poor
man as a rich; and M. L. cited the saying of Augustine in his fifth Epistle ad
Macedon. as many learned Divines have done before him; and so have they cited
the example of Zacheus, Luke 19.8. to the same purpose; but take you heed you
do not condemn Christianity for Popery. The Papists were wont to blast every
Protestant Truth, with the name of heresy: the profane used to reproach the
piety of the first Table by the name of Puritanisme; and many Sectaries, now
adays, brand many duties of justice and charity, which are branches of the
second Table, by the name of Popery; and you are one that misapplieth that
term as much as any.

J. S. page 5.

Fifthly, You say, I would have men believe as they list, I would only have men
not forced to believe as others list.

L. M.

M. Ley said in the last page but one of his Epistle Dedicatorie, that he was
sorry to see you so unsettled in your judgment, so sedulous to prepare a
patronage for all wild and wicked fancies, that every one may believe what he
list. The fault M. Ley finds with you, is not that you held forth such a
licentious faith, (nor on the contrary can he acquit you of such a conceit) but
that your apologizing for all sorts of Sectaries, as you do, would prepare a
patronage for such a latitude of belief.

J. S. page 5.

Sixthly, That he was wished rather to a silent neglect of me, then to a loud
conquest over me; Truth is not conquered when the man is trampled upon; It is
not your being great can make you a conqueror, no more then your calling by
Bishops a true Presbyter.

L. M.

The former part of this paragraph in thesi is true, in hypothesi false, as the
parts are applied to M. L. and you; for neither is truth on your side, nor any
greatness on his set to oppose it, or to domineer over it. For the later part,
it is answered before.

J. S. page 6.

Seventhly, That he had rather confute Bellarmine, then my new-sprung notions.
And for your desire rather to deal with Bellarmine then me, I did not think I
had been so formidable an enemy.

L. M.

If the Reader look upon the place in M. Leys Epistle, page 2. he will see that
he took you rather for a contemptible, then a formidable enemy; and though you
monopolize truth to your cause, he charge you, in the same place, with
holding old error under the name and notion of new truth.

J. S. page 6.

To the eighth: Nor am I less a disputant in Divinity because against forms of
art and Logic, as you say.

L. M.

M. Ley says nothing of that, but what your self has said, and he cited your
own words out of your book, viz. your professed dislike of Logic, forms of
art, and methods of reason, and renouncing of prudence, and consequences, as
the great engines of will worship, for which he cited, page 16. and 60. of your
book of Smoke.

J. S. page 6.

I may dispute in Christ's school, though refused in the school of Tyrannus.

L. M.

I think, Sir, you know little of the school of Tyrannus, but as a Divinity
school, wherein Paul the great Doctor of Christians disputed daily in the cause
of Christ, Act. 19.9. And if it were a school of Philosophy before, (as it is
like it was) you are such an artist in Philosophy, that you say interminis, if
M. Ley will challenge you in any point of Philosophy, you will not refuse him
in Logic, or forms of art; where in effect you challenge him to dispute; which
the Learned will look upon as a brag, and it may be also a boasting of a
false gift, Prove. 25.14. that is, fasly boasting of a gift which you have not;
and it M. Ley refuse either to make, or entertain a challenge with you in
matter of Philosophy, it will not (by any competent Judges) be conceived that
he has any cause to fear, but rather to scorn a monomachie with you in that
kind, since his learning in Philosophy has been eminently witnessed by his
Lectures on the whole first chapter of Genesis, which diverse Learned men have
earnestly desired for the Press, and hope to see their desires satisfied
therein in time convenient.

J. S. page 6.

They are forms only for the wisdom of men, not of God; nor dare I make my
discoveries of Christ from reason.

L. M.

You mean that matters of Religion (which all of them have reference to Christ
some way or other) should not be set forth in forms of art, nor managed with
any mixture of notions or dictates of reason.

A Learned man, and conversant in Scripture (as you would seem to be) may, if
he seriously mind and mark it, observe in it (besides the principal theme
and scope of it, Divinity) much both of Logic and Philosophy; I could give you
many instances of both, but I may not measure by the long ell (as Comminaeus
calls the pike) while you manage the quarrel with a bodkin.

And whereas you say, you dare not take any discoveries of Christ from reason.
You might know by Scripture, that Religion disdains not discovery of sense,
Mat. 19.34. (much less of reason) concerning Christ, as is clearly evidenced,
Job. 21.29. Acts 1.3, 9. Acts 9.3, 4, 5, 1 Ep. John 1.^. And of both reason and
sense the Protestants make very good use against the Papists, as in many other
particulars (which are to be seen in the book of Martyrs, and Chamierus
Paustratia Catholica) so especially in the point of transubstantiation; and is
there not a discovery of Christ by sense in the Sacraments, where by outward
and visible signs and seals, his invisible graces ateropresented unto us? And
do not you your self undertake to prove the Gospel to be undeniably the word of
God, without miracles, to assure us of the particular duties in it? and are not
your proofs taken from topics of reason? you cannot deny it, and if you do
Smoke of the Temple, page 20, 21, 22, 23.
your own papers will reprove you to your face; testimonies of the Ancients,
though you ignorantly or inconsiderately begin your Catalogue of witnesses with
a Counterfeit Authout and Treatise, viz. Dionys. Areopagim de divinis nominibus.

J. S. page 6.

I allow learning in its place, any where in the Kingdom of the world, but not
in the Kingdom of God.

L. M.

It is no great matter what you allow or allow not, unless your learning were
more, your judgment sounder, and your dealing more sincere. But if there were
any weight in your word, it would be prejudicial, and disadvantagious to
Religion, and would gratify the adversaries of the truth, who by the Arts,
Philosophy, and other secular learning in sound Christians, may be more soundly
confuted in their errors against the Christian Religion; and thus many of the
Ancient Fathers approve of them, as Clem. Alexand. strom.
Clemens Alexandrinus, Orig. l. 1. c. ^. Homil. 31. in Lucam.
Origin, Obrysost. Homil. 3. in Epist. ad Titum.
Chrysostom, Hieron. Ep. 8.
Hieron. August. de Doctrine. Christian. l. 2. c. 40.
Augustine, and Hieron. Ep. 14.
Hierom, compares the use of them in this way to the cutting off Goliahs head
with his own sword, 1 Samuel 17.11. and August. ubi supra.
Augustine to the spoiling of the Egyptians, Exodus 12.36. This the subtle
Apostate Julian knew well enough, and therefore in craft and spite he forbad
the instruction of the Children of Christians in the arts and literature of the
heathens, as Ammian, Marcell n. Rerum gestarum. lib. 22. and 25.
Ammianus Marcellinus both observes and censures, as an unjust edict, though
but an heathen by religion, and a soldier by profession.

J. S. page. 6.

The ninth. For my being an ubiquitary in belief, and your proof of this from
the several opinions stated in my book, Can you be so unfaithful to that
Book? can you, who would be counted an orthodox and a Divine, thus force and
compel those opinions upon me, or rather upon the paper only where they are
printed? because I stated the opinions of men, am I therefore a man of all
those opinions? The best is, the world may convince you of this, and of my
purpose in that. And now you are thus unfaithful in a little, I may suspect
you for more. Are you one of those who pretend to be in the mount with God to
give laws for religion? Can we trust you in the more excellent mysteries of the
Father, while you trifle thus and deceive the Brethren?

L. M.

What a piece of exaggerating Rhetorike is here, to smoke over M. Leys
sincerity with a suspicion of such prevarication, as is but too frequent in
your own practice, not at all in his? and if any heterodox conceits be cast
upon you, which are not yours, you may thank your self, for you set down
opposite Tenets so ambiguously, that it is hard to say what opinions you own
among them; and therefore M. Ley spoke of them with words of caution, as Page
3. of his Epistle to your self.
you seem to me, Ibid.
In your exceptions against Presbytery, and I must rather take your Tenet to be
against, then among the Presbyterian positions, Ibid. page 4.
In the Discovery of Independency you deliver downright Anabaptisme, without
any word of exception, or caution to your Reader. Ibid. page 5.
Such opinions as those, which you seem rather to confirm then to confute.
And if any man take you for a favourer of such erroneous Tenets as you repeat
without a word of refutation or reproof, is it not your own fault rather then
his? your courting of all sects, and compliance with them, might justly
occasion a suspicion of your unsoundnes in Religion.

J. S. page. 6.

10. That I am an Antinomian, and deal with some late Divines as some with
Luther; and hereof you seek to purge your self by asserting some sentences of
Scripture, which you think may clear you from Antinomianisme.

L. M.

But that will not serve your turn, the accusation is lately set closer upon
you, by a M Gataker in his late Book against M. Sal. called, A mistake or
misconstruction removed.
Reverend Divine of the Assembly, then that you can shake it off by so poor an
Apology; and for that laid to your charge by M. Ley, what answer do you make?
none but such an one as aggravates your guilt, by setting one falsehood upon the
shoulder of another, whereby it becomes the more conspicuous; for you say, you
have not misquoted any. Have you not, Sir, when you have so cited one part of
an Author for your sense, and left out the next words, which clearly for forth
his judgment in contradiction to your opinion? Have you not done so by M. S.
Bolton? were you not plainly convinced of it by M. Ley in his epistle to you?
and yet you show not a spark of ingenuity, or grace, in acknowledging your
witting and wilful false dealing in that allegation; but wash your hands with
Pilate (as if you were innocent) and spit the reproaches in his face, which
justly belong unto your own.

You say, as by way of excuse, and (which is more, and worse) by way of
justification of your self, That you but singled out that truth from many in
one leaf, before they spoiled it in the next, and like Pilate, who, asking
only what truth was, would not tarry by it, but departed. And do not you
(Pilate-like again) turn away from the truth of a Testimony, when you admit
of part to serve your turn, and reject another part, though contiguous unto
it, because it is contrary to your Tenet?

Amongst other flourishes of falsehood, you say, that M. L. and his associated
Brethren pretend themselves to be in the mount, to give laws for religion;
where find you this? how can you prove it? did you ever read it in any of
their writings, or hear it from their lips? I am sure you did not: how then
can you object it? have you the inspection of their hearts? If you take that
upon you, you have got above fifteen cubits higher, then the top of Sinai, or
Horeb, even to Gods tribunal, by whom alone the hearts of all men are to be
judged.

And for that you say, of making laws for religion, you know they have no
power, nor do they take any upon them, save only by way of humble advice to
present the result of their debates, and votes to the Parliament, concerning
such matters as from either of the Honorable houses are sent unto them.

And now, Sr, to pay you in your own coin, and return your own words upon
you, Can you be so unfaithful to that Book, can you who would be counted an
orthodox Divine, enlightened above the measure of other Ministers, so grossly
falsify so plain, and perspicuous a sentence? The best is, the world (while
his Book and your Pamphlet are extant) may convince you in this, and now you
are thus unfaithful in a little (or rather in much) J may suspect you for
more. Can we trust you in the more excellent mysteries of the Father, while you
trifle thus, and deceive the Brethren? page. 6.

J. S: page. 7.

That J am unstable, To the eleventh. For my unstablenesse, if to be sometimes
darkness, and now light in the Lord, etc.

L. M.

I will put off this to another place, where I shall have occasion to bring it
in, that I may not trouble the Reader with a needless repetition of the same
passage.

J. S. page. 7.

To the twelfth. Nor do I glory, I hope, in the quick dispatch of what I do;
but do not you as well over-deliberate, as I over-dispatch, and glory in that?

L. M.

Whether you glory in quick dispatch or no let the Reader judge, upon evidence
produced to that purpose. page. 11. 12. of M. Leys Epistle to you; but you
cannot object the like of his deliberations, since he has not told his Reader
how long he was about any Book, as you have done how short a time you took for
yours. For that you speak in disparagement of humane learning, it is an old
humor of the Anabaptists, who at first rejected all Books but the Bible, and
after that grew so wise as to be religious enough without that also, and last
of all they came to blaspheme that blessed Book, as a dead letter, and a
beggarly element; and such proficients are some of our sublimated sectaries.

But however you slight all secular learning, you must not assume to your self,
or your party, (as you seem to do) a propriety either of interest, or
exercise in the word, or spirit, or power of Christ, wherein those whom you
look upon with an oblique spirit have as good right, and as fair evidence as
those of your party, who take upon them to be most spiritual. For that you
conclude withal, concerning the brewer, in a form of affected gravity,
saying, I desire not to show so much of the old man or former corruptions, as
to sparkle so lightly with you. Me thinks you should have brought in a young
man, rather then an old man, so lightly sparkling as will not become your
gravity to answer him. Or if you mean by the old man, that part of humane
nature, which remains unregenerate, that (though you may intend a reproach
upon seniority of years) may be, and for the most part is more predominant in
a young man then in an old, as M. Ley has observed in the tenth Section of his
last Book against you.

J. S. page. 7.

To the thirteenth, My interposing being no delay to the government, as you
say, why then do you call my Book a Remora, and say my Quere was to retard the
government? I pray you now be friends with your self, etc.

L. M.

No doubt he is so, and so was, when he wrote those words, for you might intend
your Book and Querie for a Remora, and yet it might, and I hope it will prove
otherwise. Intentions and events are many times very contrary, as Joseph said
to his Brethren, You thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good, to
bring to pass as at this day, to save much people alive, Genesis 50.20.

J. S. page. 7. 8.

To the fourteenth, That he may be better employed then in writing; they are
your friends indeed that wish so, you cannot be worse employed then in speaking
evil of your Brethren, in advanceing your selves, Lording it over the heritage,
etc.

L. M.

As you have often set upon the Presbyterians with such slanders, so you have
been See light for smoke Sect. 6. page 13. etc and Sect. 18. page 51. 52. and
Sect 19 page 54. etc.
often answered both directly, and by way of just recrimination; which may be a
supersedeas for my further Reply in this place.

J. S. page 8.

For others undertaking me, as many as please, for I fear not an host, nor a
multitude of penmen.

L. M.

You are so bold all men may see, (some unmannerly fellow happily would say, so
impudent) that you dare contend with many together, who taken single were able
to crush you in any encounter that is to be managed with learning and
integrity; and after the rate you write, you need not care how many you
undertake, nor they neither, who are undertaken by you, since you do but with
an impotent malignity nibble at the heel, when you give them fair opportunity
to break your head, unless they choose rather to kick you off with scorn,
then to make a serious and settled business of combating with you.

J. S. page 8. and 9.

The sum of M. Leys treatise and Answer to it.

L. M.

You have an excellent faculty first in contracting, then in contradicting and
confuting, your adversary; for you have reduced the sum of M. Leys Book of
seventeene sheets to less then a single page, and confuted them all, as you
pretend, in less then a leaf; would it not be fit such an able and nimble
champion as you are should be set upon those great Antichristian Goliahs,
Baronius, Bellarm. Suarez, Vasques? how would you enervate, and shrink up
their many vast and corpulent volumes into a poor, dry, and saplesse sckeleton?
O for Bellarminus enervatus of your composing! That of Amesius to it would be
but as a rude steeple clock to a most curious pocket watch. But to the
particulars.

J. S. page 9.

That the graduall subordination of Assemblies is made good by M. Rutherford.
Is this reasoning, or reference? and this you have done all along, referred us
either o your self, or some other to answer for you.

L. M.

Upon your finding fault with classical, provincial, and National Assemblies
as no wholesome words, M. Light for smoke, page. 2.
Ley told you, that the graduall subordination of Assemblies, against the
Independency of Congregationall meetings, was made good by a large and learned
Book of M. Samuel Rutherford; of which reference I see not what may offend you,
unless your idleness mislike the word large, and your ignorance the word
learned, for it is an usual and commendable course of many worthy writers, for
the husbanding of time, that they may not actum agere, to make references for
satisfaction to larger Treatises then the present occasion will permit. And to
find fault with M. Ley for this, shows you rather a wrangler then a Reader.

But whereas you say, that he has dens so all along, it is not your unwitting
mistake, which might easily be pardoned, but your wilful slander, which you
should heartily repent of; and of this I doubt not but there are as many
witnesses, as there be ingenuous and conscientious Readers of his Book and
your loose sheets. And I dare challenge you, on his behalf, to make proof of
any one reference, either to his own Books, or any other, for which there was
not just occasion given, approvable in the judgment of judicious men. And if
references come too often, it is most like to be your own fault, whose
importunate, or impertinent iterations of the same particulars put him to it.

J. S. page 9.

That your Presbyteries are not so singular, more free, convenient, more
peaceable, more Apostolical, more authorized then other Churches; and then you
say, these are good commendations; but had half so much been proved by the
word, your government had passed before this.

L. M.

Here you put him to a necessity of reference to his first Book, (unless he
should make a needless repetition of a whole section, Sect. 5. page 11, 12, 13.
to confute your cavil) where he has given full and clear evidence, (such as
no rational man can deny) how Classical, Provincial, and National
Assemblies are more warrantable then the gathered Churches of Independents.

J. S. page 8, 9.

That Tithes are spoken against by those that scruple not at slander, or
sacrilege, that they usurp upon God, and his Ministers that alienate them from
his worship and service. Having made this the summary of Mr Ley his eighth
section, you add as an Answer to it; For that of sacrilege and usurpation
upon God in alienating Tithes, never did Prelate, no nor Bishop Mountague plead
an higher Title for Tithes.

L. M.

You had condemned Tithes as Popish and Jewish undeniably, Smoke, page 25.
which gave Mr Ley occasion to speak the more fully and freely in the
refutation of your over-confident assertion; yet did he not advance the Tenure
of Tithes above that which Mr Nigh (a Classical Author with you, though
against the authority of classes) has affirmed of them, and he named him to
you, yet you are silent concerning him, and take up a clamor against Mr Ley,
as more Jewish and Popish then a Prelate, yea then Bishop Mountague: what
partiality is this?

J. S. page 9.

What, sacrilege and usurpation to deny Tithes? Where are you, in the Covenant
or no? is it not a Parliament Ordinance you take them by? Will you set up a
divine right over that now? Surely they may justly now withdraw their Ordinance
for Tithes, and leave you to your Divine right, and see what the people will
pay you.

L. M.

M. Ley did not call it sacrilege to deny Tithes, Light for smoke, page 19.
though it may be true, but said, there was a clamor taken up against them by
such as made no conscience, either of slander or of sacrilege; and such are
many worldly Mammonists, and erroneous Dogmatists: and what is this to the
Covenant?

And to that you ask, is it not a Parliament Ordinance you take them by? It may
be acknowledged with humble thanks to the Parliament, that their Ordinance is
an help to recover the right of Tithes; but the right of Tithes is much more
ancient then that Ordinance; for there are many statutes that entitle Ministers
to them, and allow them to sue for them by course of Law: nor will the opinion
of divine right in some, be sufficient ground to abrogate the payment of Tithes
to all, though you would cry down their Tenure, to fright the conscientious out
of their duty, to encourage the covetous in their parsimony, and all to scrue
up your own pensions to the higher proportion. Because while they are to pay
Tithes, as of right, to Parochial Pastors, there will be the less latitude
in the matter, and less light somnes in the man to make an allowance of
courtesy to content you their Independent Doctors. But enough of this. I had
thought to have made none Answer, but a reference to the eighth section of Mr
Leys Book, which is well worth the reading, and sufficient of it self for your
full refutation.

J. S. page 9.

To that of your commending old men and age, I reverence age, but not the old
man in them; and for dreams being more excellent then visions, it is a curious
speculation.

L. M.

Upon your preferring young men so much before old men, as to say, surely we
may more safely hearken to the younger, that see visions of Reformation, then
to the elder, that dream dreams of it only. Mr Ley made an elaborate
comparison, and resolution of both in the tenth section of his Book, from page
23. to the 28. inclusively, which I dare commend to the perusal of any
judicious Reader, and doubt not but he will think Mr Saltmarsh should not have
mentioned it without approbation of the discourse, and thanks to the Author.

J. S. page 9.

Why are you so much in defense of jesting, and so serious in your Scripture
proofs for it?

L. M.

Because you carped at him more then once for a pleasant reproof of your
misapplication of Scripture, which gave him just occasion to show how, and in
what cases a taunting speech may be allowed, which he has so done, Sect. 15.
page 39. etc that the most Readers, (your Life for one) may receive instruction
by his discourse, and so be engaged to be grateful to him, not reproachful,
as you are.

J. S. page 9.

And for other Church-governments not coming under the trial of Parliament,
nor coming out by sheir Authority, etc.

L. M.

If the Reader please to compare M. Leys nineteenth Section (wherein the
Independents and Presbyterians are compared for modesty, and humility,) with
this paragraph, marked with the number six, he will casily perceive how feeble,
and frivolous a Reply this is, to that which M. Ley has written. And the like
conviction he may meet withal, if he take into comparative consideration M. S.
his next paragraph of gospell-governments, page 10. and M. Leyes 21 Section,
from page 60 to page 63.

Thus far for your Answer to M. Leyes, which is such a one, so short, so
slight, so false, and yet to a silly and partial reader so Fallacious, that he
that reads both will find cause to marvel that a pretender to wit should deal
so weakly, and to grace, so wickedly in a cause of this kind.

That which next follows in M. S. his pamphlet, is the Testimony of
Salmasius, which being heterogeneal from all the rest, I will assign to the
last place, as he did in his former answer, where that comes in as a
Postscript, and concludes the Book.

M. S. his causeless and unchristian reproach of M. Ley, taken (without
occasion given) out of C. D. his Defense of M. L. printed with his Book of
Light for Smoke, brought in in this manner.
J. S. page 10.

C. D. his Treatise printed with M. Leys Book, in M. Leys commendation, whether
made by himself or some other he best knows.

L. M.

Whether it were made by himself, or some other, it was not made against you,
but against a scurrilous Newsmonger, as the Title shows, and therefore herein
you meddle where you should not, and deserve to suffer as a busibody in other
men's matters. 1 Pet. 4.15. And you make it your business to reproach M. Ley, as
if he were vainglorious, in five particulars.

1. In affecttaion of Titles.

2. In mentioning of his Books printed and to be printed.

3. In printing an honorable Anagram made upon his Name.

4. In giving the signification of his Name in Hebrew and Spanish.

5. In publishing some letters written in his commendation.

Whereto I shall return you Answer, 1. In general, and then 2. In particular.

In general, I say you have dealt very foully and unfaithfully herein, in that
you have concealed from your Reader the occasion, and scope for which those
particulars (selected by you out of the Treatise) were brought in; which was,
not so much for commendation of M. Ley, as for necessary vindication of him
from notorious contempt, put upon him in the Newsbook of that contumelious
Scribler; who begins thus with him.

There came out this day a Book of 106 pages, written by John Ley, so is the
Title, whether it was of the Lees French or Spanish, J Leave it to others to
enquire.

Upon these words [So is the Title] C. D. tells him, that in the Title page of
M. Ley his Book he might have known him as one of the Assembly of Divines; and
if he had enquired as the Assembly of what account he was with his Reverend
Brethren, he might have known that he was by them chosen, etc.

And because he made a disgraceful descant on M. Leys name, the greek Epigram
made on it and him (when he was President of Syon College, about an year and
half before) was in part repeated.

This might be warrant enough for him to have righted himself from such
reproach, by reporting any truth that might relieve his reputation in that
behalf; which though with such as knew him might be needless, yet to most who
knew him not it might be necessary, and as lawful as necessary: for,

Though it be good advice which Solomon gives, Let another man praise theo,
and not thine own mouth a stranger, and not thine own lips; Pro. 27.2. (and
the counsel holds as well in praise of the pen, as of the mouth,) yet when a
man is injuriously vilified, especially a Minister of note, and public
employment, he may do such an act of justice and charity to his own good
Name, as well as to another man's.

St. Paul was as wise, as modest, as humble a Christian as could be, and yet
(when his adversaries put him to it) he made his own Apology, with comparative
praise of himself with others, and prelation above others; 2 Cor. 11.16.22.23.
and those not only the false Apostles, who were emulous of his glory, and
envious at it, but he compares himself with the chief Apostles, saying, In
nothing am I behinds the chief Apostles, 2 Cor. 12.11. and tells the
Cariuthiaus, to whom he wrote, that he ought to have been commended by them, in
the same place.

If then M. Ley had written that of himself, which you mention as an immodest
vindication, it being true, and uttered it upon just occasion, and had owned it
in his own name, he had not for that deserved either reproach or reproof from
you, or any one else; and if he did it with concealment of his name, he had the
warrant of the same Apostle for that concealment, who, when he spoke of his
rapture into the third heaven, and his hearing words unspeakable, which was a
matter of glory, brought it in as in a third person. 2 Cor. 12. v. 4.5.6.

2 Whereas you say Page 4.
that he who speaks so much in M. Ley his praise, stands a little too near
him; I must tell you you are a man of small reading, if you have not met with
some scores of Authors, of good account, who have printed with their own Books
elogia or laudatory Prefaces, or poems of other men; not as C. D. came in, on
the back side of M. Ley his book, when all was done, but in, or very near the
frontispice, that they might come first in view, and be most like to be read,
what ever was not.

And though your example be of little worth and weight for Answer to another
man's objection, yet against your self (as Opinor tuum testimoniu quod in
alienare leve esset, id in tua, quum contra te est, gravissimum debet esse.
Cicer. Orat. 1. pro P. Quintio page 13.
Cicero said of Nevius, an unworthy and wicked fellow) it is sufficient
conviction; and your self have published a Book of verses, with as high scrued
commendation, both upon your self and them, in the next leaf before your Book
begun, and next after your Epistle Dedicatory, as could be set before the Poem
of Homer in Greek, or Virgil in Latin, Bartas in French, Quarles, or Sandis in
English. Your prological Encomiastes calls your book Est pius, est doctus, quod
voco, plura, tuus. In t^to minimum non cerno corpore naevum. Ni naevus naevum
non habuisse fiet. Page 13. 14.
pious and learned, and makes as if it were the compendium of all praise to
call it yours; and yet afterward adds, that in the whole body of it he sees
not the least mole, or freckle, or blemish, unless it be a blemish to want a
blemish. And yet, by his leave, your Poetical Meditation on The Song of Songs
deserves to be chastised, in the judgment of pious and judicious Critics, for
some want on expressions of, heathen Poetry upon that sacred Sonnet.

And whereas M. Ley desires no more of the Licensers hand then a bare
Imprimatur in the written Copy for his Book, you bring your Licenser in print,
with some solemn attestation, either of praise, or of Apology on your behalf,
witness Jo. Bachilers approbation of your Smoke in the Temple, as more then
ordinarily useful in those times; and his aprobation of your last Pamphlet, or
Letter to M. Ley, as agreeable to the laws of nature, and of grace; wherein
they who impartially peruse what is written on both sides, will in the final
account resolve that he has not so much honored you, as shamed him self.

Thus much for Answer to the imputation in General, now for the particulars.

1 For the Titles you mention, there was just cause and occasion of their
repetition, because the malevolent New monger brought in M. Ley as some obscure
and unworthy Levite, who was not known by any other Title then that which
belonged to him from his baptism; whereas he might have seen in the Title
page of his first book against you, that he was a member of the Assembly of
Divines; and that being remembered, the other particular Titles, being all of
them of use for repulse of his contempt, occasionally drew in one another; and
to a fellow of his condition the Answer was very suitable, because he was most
capable of such a conviction.

But for M. Ley himself, he is so far from a vain affectation of Titles of
prelation, that when, many years ago, he was importuned by many great friends
in the University, and out of it, to take the degree of Doctor in Divinity, he
refused, upon this reason, (as many worthy witnesses well remember) because he
was then in contestation with a Gentleman of his parish, with whom he desired
to be at peace, and he would not take such a title, and degree upon him, as
might perhaps provoke him to anger or envy, (though he were so Religious, that
being dead he hopes he is in Heaven) by reason of the nominall preeminence, and
personal precedence, which (whether by right, or long-received custom, or
both, I cannot tell) is assigned to Theological graduates of that denomination.

And for your scoffing close, or conclusion of that titular objection, page 11.
I remember not any of the Apostles in such Offices and Titles; It is a very
poor, and empty jeer. For, 1. Many things have been, which you never read, nor
heard of. 2. You remembered not that any one of them were styled Academicall
graduates, as either Batchelers, or Masters of Art, Batchelers, or Doctors in
Divinity, Professors of Divinity, Provosts, Prefects of Colleges,
Vice-chancellours: which titles you give to Henry Smith, to whom you dedicate
your book; and yet you will not say they are either to be denied, or derided.
3. Nor do you remember, I am sure, that any one of them played the Poets, nor
took upon them the Title of Mercurius Britannicus, and under that title minted,
and vented news for popular Information, as (if good Intelligencers be not
mistaken) you have sometimes done. 4. Your exception herein is but a negative
testimonial argument in a matter of no necessity, either of existence, or
cognizance. 5. There are many particulars wherein the Apostolical times and
after ages do not agree, and yet the dissent is no fault on either side; of
this you may read an Epistle of Doctor Hall. 5. Decad. of Epist. Ep. 2. page
164.
Doctor Hall, before he was Bishop, I say before he was Bishop (that you may
not startle at the testimony, as if it were Antichristian) wherein he shows
by many instances, the difference of the present Church from the Apostolical,
and needlesnes of out conformity thereto in all things; to which observations
of his it is easy to add much more then he has said, to the same purpose.


The second particular is, the mention of his books printed and to be printed;
which served to the same end, viz. further to confute the conceit of the
scurtillous Novellist concerning M. Ley, whom he so named, as to make his
Reader believe he was a man unknown until he appeared against his misinforming
passages; wherein it is observable, that C. D. left out some books of M. L.
partly printed, and partly licensed for the Press, and you (out of what motive
you best know) leave out some which he has mentioned. But to the approbation
given of them, you say, give them leave to speak themselves in this point, page
11. If you mean this of the books, as you use that phrase after wards, they
have spoken as much as others say of them; if of the Readers, they will speak
or write their judgment of them, as some have done already; whereof
sufficient proof may be produced, when just occasion requires.

The third Exception you take is, at the Anagram and Epigram on M. Ley his
name, made when he was President of Syon College, about a year and an half
age, which was in part Printed in Greek, as it was penned by one learned man,
and rendered in English by another, (both Masters of Art, and Divines of many
years standing) because it very well served to oppose the reproach of the
Pamphleters Etymology, or rather pseudology of his Name, from the Lets of wine,
French or Spanish; but it was so contracted, and turned, by M. Leys direction,
as might well have prevented M. S. his imputation. For

First. The epigram consisted of twelve Greek verses, and he would not su^^er
so much as two of them in the Translation to be printed.

Secondly, He caused the second verse in English to be broken off, before the
words -- (...), because he would not have them translated, as speaking more in
his praise then his modesty would admit.

Thirdly, In that second verse be put out the word rare, and put in the word
now, in stead of it; and so far abated the honor of that Epithete, as to
make it no more thon such an addition as might be applied to any person, thing,
or action, though as mean and contemptible as his adversary, or his scandalous
and scurrilous Queres put out against them.

Fourthly, This modesty has been imputed to him as a fault from the hand of a
learned Friend (who had a sight of the verses in a M S) with a request that he
would prefixe them entirely before the next Book of his that comes forth,
and there is one ready for the Press of his transcribing) that words are part
of a latin letter lately written to M. Ley, which for the learned Readers
satisfaction I have set in Vtinam integrum epigramma subjectsset Novello mastix
(vir cruditus and ingeniosus) nec solum distichon lectori donam, celasset Illas
lauds, quibus nemo te neseentium, modo probus sit, and Graeculus, non
libentissime subscripsisset; etsi autem mutilumin praesentia Novellomastix
ediderit (quod tuo nimto modestiae tribuendum est) sore tamea non despero ut
persectum aliquando prodeat. Teque oratum habeo, ut libro tuo, quicunque fit
quem proxime in lucem emittis, praefigere ne graveris Dated, April. 23. 1646.
the margin.

The fourth particular cavil is made at the signification of M. Leys name in
Hebrew, the grace of God; and in Spanish, law: which was so pertinently brought
in to confute that fond Etymologist, that being true, it could not with
discretion have been omitted.

The fifth note of vain boasting implicitly imputed by you to M. L. is the
recital of some letters of commendation, page 19, 20, etc. where still you
conceal the occasion with an unsincere subtlety, not becoming a Christian, much
less a Minister of the Gospel, least of all one of so refined a Reformation as
you pretend unto. The occasion you know was this, The scurrilous novellist had
suggested M. Leys book stuck upon M. Meredith the Stationers hand, to his
loss, and that therefore he was to make him a recompense, and this, with a
sensles absurdity too, he wrote for news of the same day when M. Leys book came
out; which being made known to M. Meredith, he wrote a letter of confutation of
that folly, and falsehood, and in that said the book sold very well, and that he
had several Letters (from such as were able to judge) in approbation of it, as
worthy both to be bought and read; and he presently sent him that which came
next to hand, the writer whereof, a godly and learned Divine, says thus, I
pray you present my respects to Reverend M. Ley, I bless Gad for him, and for
his learned and faithful labors, especially his last in Answer to Saltmarsh
his Query, and in vindication of the Cities and Ministers Petition.

And this is all, Sir, you were pleased to remember of C. D. his Treatise,
whereas there are many things in it of more weight, of which you seem to take
no notice. Doubtless your intent was to cast a dead fly of vain ostentation
into the ointment of his good name, that a little folly might cause a stinking
savor on him, who is in reputation for wisdom and honor, Eccles. 10.1. and
your motive to this (as it is to be feared) was envy at his approbation and
praise, which made you rather point at the letters, then report their contents,
or the occasion of their writing and Printing.

J. S. page 11.

Thus I have gathered up all in your book that concerns you materially, and
your friend printed on the back side of yours.

L. M.

Thus I have gathered? Even so, Sir, as you gather Churches, with so little
sincerity, that all may gather by your dealing that you make no conscience of
scandalous suggestions, or of fraudulent reservations.

But if you dare be so bold with sin, me thinks you should not be so blind
in judgment, as to think such gross miscarriage in the cause in difference
can be secured with all the subtilty you have, from shameful infamy.

And I wish you did but hear what judicious and wise men, both Divines, and
others, have said of you, since they have read the reciprocal writings betwixt
M. Ley and you. Truly, Sir, whatever you think of your self, they take you (for
such gatherings and severings as you make of clear and plain words) to be
little better then salt that has lost its savor, good for nothing but to be
trodden under feet, Matthew. 5.13. and some of them who are men of note for piety,
and prudence, and who are so far from conceiving you come off with credit in
the cause, that they think you should not go away without punishment, at least
that you cannot escape shame for your wilful falsehood, and abuse of your
Reader.

J. S. page 11.

And for other particulars more substantial, your Books and mine are both
abread, let them speak for themselves.

L. M.

And why may they not speak for themselves in matters of less moment, as well
as more substantial? but whether for either, or both, M. Ley desires nothing
more, then that all who read the one would read the other. But you cannot
without hypocrisy pretend so much syncerity, when you do all you can to delude
your Reader by subtle concealments, and misintimations; and make it a fault in
M. Ley, In the first page of your letter to M. Ley.
fairly and freely to inform the Reader of such alternate passages betwixt him
and you, as make for the clearing of the difference betwixt you.

J. S. page 11.

The Readers must now judge in the spirit, what we both have written in the
Letter.

L. M.

What you mean by the spirit I know not; I doubt you mean some new, giddy,
wavering fancy, such as sets you on scribbling you care not what. But if they
will, as they ought, judge righteous judgment, John 7.24. neither M. Ley nor
C. D. will have any cause to be afraid of their definitive sentence, in the
trial before them.

J. S. page 11.

I intend not to puzzle the world with any more of this controversy.

L. M.

This is one of the wisest, and honestest passages in your Answer, if you be
true to what you tell your Reader; for it implies a confession (of that which
you injuriously object to M. Ley in the beginning of your Letter) of puzling
the world, your Readers, your simple Readers, you should say, for neither the
world, nor the wise in it will be puzzled with such poor trifles as you
present, and send abroad; and a promise that you will offend in that kind no
more; wise and good men will be glad to take you at your word: but I doubt you
will not be so good a man, as to make them believe you will take up a
controversy, unless you may have the last word.

J. S. page 11.

Some truth may be seen, and what is more is but you and I.

L. M.

More truth might have been seen, if you had used such plain dealing as your
duty required. What you mean by What is more is but you and I, I do not
clearly understand; whether what is more then truth, or then that truth which
is already seen, is but you and I, that is, our adverse assertions, yet there
is a truth in them on one side, or other; but for this, Si non vis intelligi
debes negligi.

J. S. page 11.

Sr, I was unwilling to set your failings before you, and the world.

L. M.

It seems so in fact, because you have set none but your own faylings of
truth and honesty before the world; but sure your affection was to make others
believe you have made such discoveries of him as might disgrace him. But are
you so blinded with self-love, as to believe that any wise Reader of M. Leys
writings and yours will think you meant to have any mercy on his reputation,
if he had justly incurred the reproach of your pen?

J. S. page 11.

But since you printed them once over in mistake, I thought I might print them
over in a clearer letter.

L. M.

Not so clear, Sr, but that there is more Smoke then Light in the words you
use. For what mean you by M. Ley his printing of his faylings by mistake? you
mean sure to be mistaken, else you would not wrap up your meaning in such
intricate expressions; and when your mind is known, it will resolve into the
mistake of your last words in your 11. page as they follow.

J. S. page 11.

That you may see things for errors, which before you took for truths.

L. M.

You must be a Thaumaturgus, M. S. and change the nature of things, as Moses
did when he turned a rod into a serpent, before you can make either M. Ley, or
any judicious man believe that error is his, and truth yours in the
controversy betwixt you. But that you should conceive that such a little
broken, dark and dulky glass should make him see any such change as you talk
of, is such a fiction in your own fancy as will never thrive to a fallacy in
any other that is not wholly yours already.

J. S. page 12.

Conclusion.

Thus I have replied to your positions, not to your passions, nor reproaches,
wherein you are something larger then I had thought becomes an orthodox Divine.

L. M.

Your Conclusion, Sr, is but Collusion, wherein you have many ways
uncharitably abused M. Ley. and fallaciously endeavored to make your Readers
misdeem the difference betwixt him and you, as if by such small snipps, and
snatches at M. Leys last large Book (as you call it) you had given a good and
just account of it to competent Judges. You would make them believe that M. Ley
was impotently passionate, and reproachful in his passions, and that your self
were a man of a better mould and temper then Elias was, James. 5.17. made up
merely of Evangelicall mildnes: when indeed M. Ley has been so passive under
you, and patient toward you, as has put him to make his Apology to some of no
mean place, for such an immoderate moderation, as is at further distance from
just severity, then from partial indulgence. And if any of his language seem
harsh unto you, it is but the correspondence of his character to your carriage,
he does but make his expression according to the print of your provocations.

J. S. page 12.

For the dire you cast in my face, I have only wiped it off, without casting
it back on yours.

L. M.

M. Ley has cast no dirt upon your face, but only set a looking-glass and
Light before your eyes, that you might see your spots and wash your face. And
for that wining off the dare you speak of, it is but like the adulteresses
wiping of her mouth (saying, she has done no wickedness, Pro. 30.20.) which was
the more foul, by such an hypocritical clearing of her self; and such is
yours in this place.

J. S. page 12.

For your revilings, slightings, and raylings, if they trouble not your self
to write, the Press to Print, the Reader to read, I promise you they trouble
not me.

L. M.

For slighting of your papers you cannot justly blame M. Ley, since there is so
little in them to instruct, or edify a Reader, that I doubt not but every
prudent and impartial man, that has had the patience to peruse them, and to
compare them with M. Leys Books, has taken his leave of them with extreme
dislike for their slightnes and emptities; as a man would do at the offer of
chaff for wheat, leaves for fruit, Smoke for Light; nay you your self have
slighted them, in a sudden and extemporary obtrusion of them to the Press,
without due consideration of them before they came thither, or considerate
review of their errata when they came thence.

But for revilings and raylings, you cannot object them to him without reviling
and railing, and I dare challenge you, on his behalf, to show any expressions
of his, which you take to come under so contumelious a Title, and I will make
proof that there is warrant for them in your own words; and that there is not
one letter of aggravation in them above the degree of your guilt; and
therefore, S^, they should Trouble you, and humble you, because you have
deserved them, and not M. Ley, whose words, if they be taken at the worst, are
but meet and even with your merit.

J. S. page 12.

And though I am much below many, yet I am in this above you, that I can
forgive you, by how much he that can pardon is greater them he that offends.

L. M.

Who they be, and how many, or few they be whom you acknowledge your self to be
below I cannot tell; but in assuming such a lamb-like lenity, as without any
trouble to take notice of such, and so great injury as you complain of, and yet
to be so ready to pardon, as you pretend, and (as you brag in the next
paragraph) to thank your adversary for his ill usage of you, is to climb much
higher in self-exaltation then M. Ley had done, if he had said ten times more
in his own commendation of that kind which you objected to him. For it is the
highest degree of Evangelicall grace, above Angelical cloquence, Prophetical
intelligence, miraculous confidence (even to removing of mountains) above most
profuse benificence, giving all a man's goods to feed the poor, above the
patience of martyrdom, of willing martyrdom, under the hottest torments, giving
the body to be burned, as Paul sets it out, in the thirteenth chapter of his
former Epistle to the Corinthians.

And whereas, out of your superabundant grace, you say, you can pardon him, why
do you not do it? why did you not forbear further to abuse him in this last
paper of yours? that so, according to the ambition of your mind, you might be
above him in benevolence. But if you had made none other return to his last
book, then your Diploma of indulgence unto him, and pardon of him, under your
hand and seal, he might have scorned to accept it, as a Bull or a pardon from
the Pope, sub annulo piscatoris; since, though you were such a pardoner as Is
(scic Tecelius) inter alia docebat, se tantam habere potestatem a pontifice, ut
etiamsi quis virginem matrem vitiasset ac gravidam secisset, condonare crimen
ipse posset, interventu pecuniae: deinde, non moddjam commissa, verumetiam
sutura peccata condonabat. Sleidan Comment. l. 13. fol. 209. page b.
Tecelius boasted himself to be, he is no offender against you, to put you to
the practice of patience toward him, or him to the purchase of a pardon from
you.

J. S. page 12.

I thank you for your ill usage, you cannot do that against (...) which works
not for my good.

L. M.

What are your rebukes, when your thanks are such reproaches? wherein you
magnify your self, and vilify your adversary as much as may be. And if you
think as you say, he cannot do that against you which works not for your good,
I hope it will do you good, and it is my desire to discover your hypocrisy, by
setting your profession and practice in a posture fit for a mutual and
reciprocal aspect from the one to the other.

J. S. page 12.

For I am learning to bless those that curse me, to pray for those that
despightfully use me?

L. M.

You are learning? with such profciency in charity, as the silly women made in
knowledge, of whom Paul said, that they were ever learning, and never came to
the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7.

J. S.

Learning to bless: To bless in that sense wherein Jobs wife spoke to her
husband, Job. 2.9. Bless God and die, for so the word Barech in the primary
signification of the original must be rendered, though sometimes by a figure,
called Euphemia, it be put for cursing, as in that place.

J. S. page 12.

And to pray for them that despightfully use me.

L. M.

Charity is the chief of evangelicall graces, 1 Cor. 13.1. and you pretend to
the highest degree of it, the returning of blessing for cursing, prayers for
reproaches, and despightfull usages, to be a friend to your enemies, when you
play the enemy with your friend. Such an one you had just cause to account M.
Ley, who first appeared in profession, and performance of respect unto you,
before you showed your self any way well affected to him: and (excepting his
engagement to the truth, which did as much oblige him to be an adversary, as
Christianity did to be no enemy) he was willing to continue an ingenuous
correspondence with you even to the last; and therefore in a friendly manner he
sent you his last book, as well as his first that he wrote against you: But
you, for all your fair shows of Evangelicall lenity and love, have been very
bitter, and splenative toward him, endeavoring to render him to the Reader an
indiscreet and vain boaster, a shifting tergiversator, a slanderer, a rayler, a
reviler, and persecutour, and many times you have with an Ishmaelitish jeer,
like a venomous pill wrapped up in leaf-gold, endeavored to taint, and poison
his reputation, so far as your credit would reach, to the ruin of it.

It is true (and obvious to the observation of any intelligent man, that marks
the temper and complexion of your Genius) that you affect such expressions of
your rancor and reproach, as the Psalmist notes of an hypocritical malignant:
The words of his mouth are smoother then butter, but war was is his heart; his
words were softer then oil, yet were they drawn swords, Psalm. 55.21. and like
a dog Purch Pilgr. of Relig.
of Congo, to bite, though you bark not.

J. S. page 12.

And truly this advantage I shall make of your taxing me for faults which I
have not, to tax my self for many other faults which I have indeed, which you
and the world sees not.

L. M.

You have not, nor can you truly object any charge untruly imposed upon you by
Master Ley. And for taxing your self for faults, which Master L. and the world
see not, you will see ere long perhaps that M. Ley has been chary of your
credit, when you shall read in black and white from another hand, that which
may make you pale with guilt, or red with shame; whereof there may be pregnant
proof, though neither he, nor the world were eye witnesses of your faults; and
which he was not willing to upbraid you with, though he were confidently
informed of it, and seriously solicited to make it a part of his recrimination
against you.

A Review of the Testimony of Salmasius, cited by Mr Saltm. the second time,
with much ignorance, or little conscience, touching the form of Baptism, and
the Right of Presbytery.
J. S.

FOR Salmasius his Testimony, with the Baptism in the Name of the Lord? Jesus
Christ: and his testimony that the Presbytery is but of humane, and positive
right, not of divine; He is mine, and not yours: and all your pains, and
quarelling, and after-quotations cannot make him more yours, or less mine; and
it is no little disadvantage to you, that one so great a Scholar at your whole
Assembly affords my, has thus witnessed with the truth, which so many Scholars
oppose.

L. M.

It was too much unfaithfulnes, especially in such a spiritual penman as you
would be reputed, that you did once endeavor to delude your Reader with a
misallegation of the Learned Salmasius; but now again (after you have been
detected in your ill dealing) and there are as many witnesses of your falsehood
therein, as there have been indifferent Readers of the writings betwixt M. L.
and you) to resume the same Testimony, and not only to misapply it to the
patronage of your erroneous opinions, but to call an ingenuous and clear
confutation of you, quarrelling, and to glory that Salmasius is so much yours,
that it is no little disadvantage to our side, that one so great a Scholar as
the Assembly affords any, has so witnessed with the truth in your sense, and
this upon your bare affirmation, without so much as a pretense of proof, as if
your word were an oracle in your own cause, all these ill qualified
ingredients, made up into an entire Dos, amount to such an excess of
immodesty, as without an overcourteous charlentismus cannot properly be called
by any term or title on this side impudence.

Howsoever, your evil dealing (by an overruling providence, which produces
good out of evil) may bring forth this good effect; viz. That the truth may be
further cleared, and you more abundantly convinced, and consequently the more
ashamed of your confident boasting of your partly forged, and partly feigned
attestation of Salmasius for your Tenets, in point of Baptism and
Independencie.

1. Of Baptism.

Whereof you mention two particulars, the one of the matter of it, the other of
the form. For the matter of it, as you bring it to, it is river water, and of
that for matter of fact, there is no doubt but that the first Baptism in the
New Testament was in river water, and at the river Jordan, Matthew. 3.6.
afterward some were Baptized in Hieron. de locis Hebr.
fountains, as the Eunuch, Act. 8.38. Some in rivers, as Lydia, Act. 16.15.
Some in particular houses, as the Gaiter in the prison, ver. 33. of the same
chapter.

And for matter of right, no orthodox Divine has held any of them unlawful.

But for the form of Baptism, there is much question about that; which, if M.
Saltmarsh had said nothing at all, may deserve a diligent discussion. But I
shall do somewhat the more in it, for the discovery of his either ignorance, or
inconsideration in the cause, For the clearing whereof we are to observe, that
the Sacrament of Baptism has been diversely administered by acts, 1.
Preparative, and 2. Executive.


First, For preparation, such as were new converts to true Religion, and were
competently endowed with qualifications intellectual and moral, prepared
themselves, by Ingressures Baptismum oretronibus crebris, jejunijs and
geniculationibus, and porvigilsij orare portet, and cum confessione omnium
retro delictorum. Tertul de Baptism.
frequent prayers, fastings, kneelings, watchings, with confession of their
former sins.

Secondly, For acts excentive for the performance of the Sacrament, the manner
has been Pro diverso fidelium statu potuit sacramentum Initiationis variari,
Gerard. Job. Vossij, These. 30. page 405.
various in the several ages of the Church; As when John Baptized, there was a
confession of sins made by those who were of years, when they were made
partakers of the Sacrament; And no doubt, though it be not expressed set down,
they made profession of their faith also, because it is said by our Savior, He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall
be damned, Mark. 16.16. and of their repentance also, because John's Baptism
was called the Baptism of repentance, Mark 1.4. Act. 13.24. and chap. 19. ver.
4. And the Baptism of the Apostles was therein agreeable to the Baptism of
John: For those they baptized were baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 6.3. which
could not be without says, nor could the faith be known but by profession; and
repentance was required to be professed as well as faith in their Apostolical
administration of Baptism, and therefore Peter joins them both together,
Repent and be Baptized, Act. 2.38.

Afterward to these particulars some others were added, as the renunciation of
the Devil, with his pomps and Angels, mentioned by diverse Origin. Hom. 12. in
Number. Bas^^. lib. de spit. sonct. c. 11. Chrysostom. Hom. 21. ad pop. Antlech.
Greek, and Tertul. de Sp^^^^. c. 1. Cyprian. ^. ^. de (...) ^ar^y^l^. Ambros.
l. 1. de Sacramentis c. 2. and l. 2. c. 7. Hieron. in c. 6. Amos. August. de
symb. ad Catechumenos c. 1.
Latin Fathers, and expounded in Council, Earis. cap. 10. Tom. 6. Council. p.
326.
Concilic Parisiensi, which were reduced to Interrogatoties, as in the Baptism
of the Eunuch by Philip, Act. 8. which Grot. Annot. in Matthew. 28.19.
Grotins turns into an interrogatory thus: Do thou beleave with all thine
beart? But the words are, if thou believe with all thine heart, thou may
be Baptized, and he answered and said, I believe that Josue Christ is the Son
of God, ver. 37.

Which, though it suited well with those times, (wherein such as were of full
age, were able to answer for themselves) was very impertinently, if not
absurdly applied to the Baptism of children, both in the Popish Missall, and
in the English Service book, either to the child, or to them that presented it
to Baptism, as in the childs name and stead; for so it was meant, as is
manifest by the last Question, will thou be Baptized in this faith? Though to
those that brought the child to be Baptized such a question might be put, as
we find it in the form of administration of Baptism in the Church of Geneva,
set out in Calvin's Opuscula, where also we sinde the recital of the Creed, the
Lords Prayer, end the Imposition of a name on the Baptized, whereof we find no
footsteps in the Apostles time, though Martinus Cantapetrensis, 5. lypotyp. c.
1.
some conceive (but cannot prove out of Scripture) that Saul's name at his
Baptism was changed into the name Paul; much less can the Papists prove their
manifold additions, which reckoned all together, make up the number of 22.
ceremonies, Bell. de Sacrament. Bapt. l. 1 c 25 Tom. 3. p 368.
twelve before Baptism, Ibid. c. 26.
five with it, Ibid c. 27.
and five after it.

But that which most concerns our present inquiry is, The form of words
wherewith it is principally to be administered, whereof Accedat verbum ad
elementum, and fit Sacramentum. Aug. Tract. in Johan. 80.
Aug. says, Let the word be added to the element, and they two make up the
Sacrament. Where we will not take up the Question betwixt Protestants and
Papists, concerning the Chamier de Sacrament is in Genere l. 1. c. 15. Tom. 4.
Ponstrat p. 32. etc.
consecratory and concionatory word, for we may resolve in brief, that the same
form of words, though they be concionatory, as containing public instruction
to those that are present at the Sacrament, (and if they be not so, they are no
meet words for that sacred service) may be consecratory to the Institution, and
Administration of the Sacrament; and that is the special use for which they are
to be rehearsed. Taking the words in this sense, we may divide the whole
Question into these particular Queries.

1. Whether there be any form of words for the administration of Baptism at
all?

2. If so, Whether there have been one certain and constant form observed in
the Scripture, and what difference of forms may be collected out of it?

3. Among diverse forms; which is the chief?

4. Whether any one be so necessary that it is not lawful to vary from it?

5. If any variation be lawful, What may be admitted without marring the
Sacrament, what not?

1 Querie.

Whether there be any for me of winds for administration of Baptism at all?
This question is occasioned by Bellarm l. 1. de Bapt. c. 20.
Bellarmine, who, following Durand the schooleman, holds that John baptized
without any for me of words. But 1 Barth. Medina in tertiam partem Th. q. 38
art. o. p. 803.
Barth, Medina, another schoolman of great note, for he was Doctor of the
Chair in the Universitie of Salmanen, holds the contrary. And secondly as a
learned Gerard, Loc. Com Tom. 4. p 450. number. 46.
Lutheran Answers, To administer the Sacrament without any for me of words,
were to make the Sacrament a dumb show. Thirdly, whereas Bellarm: pretends for
a reason of his opinion, that if John used any form; it was In the Name of the
Messiah to come, and that he used the same form to all alike (to Christ as
well as to others) whom he baptized, Etiam Christum baptizavit Johannes coritu
quo cateros, and certe ridiculum juisset Christum baptizasse in nomine venturi.
Bellarm. ubt supra p. 352.
But it would be ridiculous to say (says he) that he baptized Christ in the
Name of him that was to come. To this it may be replied, and the Reply will be
proved in the resolution of the next Doubt, That John did not use one form
unto all, (that is, to Christ and to all the Christians he baptized) For it had
been rather ridiculous to have made no difference in words, where there was so
great difference in persons, and times, then to vary with respect unto them,
as we shall seasonably observe in the clearing of the next ensuing Quere.

2 Querie.

The Second Querie is. Whether we find one certain, and constant form of
Baptism, either prescribed or observed in the Scripture, and what difference
of forms may be collected out of it?

I shall draw down the resolution of his doubt by certain graduall
propositions.

First, It is certain that John did not baptize in his own name, no more then
Paul, 1 Cor. 1. Were ye baptized, said he, in the name of Paul, v. 13. I
thank God that I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gajus, lest any should
say that I baptized in mine own Name, ver. 14, 15. for he bare witness of
Christ, Ioh. 1.7. as coming after him, yet indeed preferred before him, ver.
15. and though as the Sun of man a little after him, as the Son of God so far
before him, as to be styled the ever lasting Father, Esaias 9.6. and so far
above him, as that he professed, when he baptized him, he was not worthy to
unloose the latchet of his shoe, ver. 27. and he confessed and denied not, but
confessed, I am not that Christ, ver. 20. And being usked, What then? art thou
Elias? he said, I am not; Art thou that prophet? and he answered, No, ver. 12.
and being further demanded, Who art thou, what say thou of thy self? ver.
22. he said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the
way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. ver 23.

Thirdly, Not baptizing in his own Name, these Texts do intimate that he
baptized in his Name, who was so far above him, and whose forerunner he was, to
prepare the way for him. And it is manifest that he baptized In the Name of the
Lord Jesus, Acts. 19.6. for those words are to be referred to John's baptism,
which is repeated in the story of Luke, not to any rebaptization of the
disciples by the Apostle, who before were baptized with the Baptism of John,
as the Bellarm. de Sacr. Bapt. lib. 1. c. 22. Tom. 3 p 359. Loranus in Act. 19
v. 5. p. 506. Estius in lib. Sent. 4. distinct. 2. p. 38.
Papists contend, that they may prove a great difference betwixt the baptism
of John, and the baptism of Christ and his Apostles. And I am sorry to read
the like exposition for rebaptization in the Annotations of so orthodox a
Divine as Deodat; for John's Baptism was a true, and sufficient Baptism, and
therefore there was no need of a rebaptizing of those whom he baptized before;
nor were they baptized again, but hands imposed on them, and their baptism
thereby approved. For though the supper of the Lord be administered often, 1
Cor. 11. ver. 25.26. because we have need to be often spiritually, as well as
corporally fed; yet Baptism, which is the means of our ingraffing into
Christ, of our admission and entolment into the Church of Christ, and of our
now birth, is done but once, as we are born but once.

Thirdly, The mention of Christ by John was not only sermon wise, as Tantum
admamuisse populum, ut crederent in venturum Messiam. Bell. l. ^. de Bap. c. 20.
Bellarmine would have it, who says that John did only admonish the people to
believe in Christ who was to come; But he used some words of Christ in the
administration of Baptism Sacramentally, as all orthodox Divines do
unanimously agree.

Fourthly, For the words used by John at his Baptism, though we cannot be
certain of them, because we find no express scripture for them, as Voss.
These. de Bapt. 8. p. 393.
Vesseus warily asserteth, yet it is very probable that they were Vess. These.
30. p. 405.
varyed, according to the different condition of persons whom he baptized, and
of the time wherein, and the state of him in whose Name he baptized.

First, Before Christ was manifested the Messiah who was expected, (which was
illust riously set forth at his baptism in the river Jordan,) John Baptized in
his Name as yet to come, as may be collected out of Act. 19.4. Hence diverse,
both of the ancient Fathe^s, and of the Schoolmen, have concluded that John
baptized in this form, Baptizo te in nomine venturi Messiae; sic Hicron in Joel
chap. 2. Ambros l 1 de S. S. c. ^. and in epist, de Vniu^ ^xorts v^ro.
Alexander. Alensis 4. part. quest. 9. monit. 2. Lumbard. sen^ent l. 4. did. 2.
page 697. Aquinas in 4. lib. sent. did. 2. Barth. de Medina in 3. part. Thom q
38 art. 6. p. 801.
I baptize thee in the Name of him who was, or is to come; and with them
agrees Vos. ubi supra, p. 393.
Gerard. Ioh. Vossius.

Secondly, When he was come, and gloriously manifested by a visible sign, and
glorious acknowledgment from heaven, Mat. 3. then he did not say, as before, I
baptize thee in the name of him that was, or is to come, but in the Name of him
who is come, and has been among you, in the midst of you.

Thirdly, When he baptized our Savior Christ, it was not like that he would
use such words to him, as he used to others; For to others Baptism was a
washing away of sin, and he had none, and therefore Baptism was not necessary
to him; for, as Baptizarivis Domine Jesus? quid tibl opus suct baptumate?
nunquid san^ ^p^^ est medicina, ac mundatione mundo? unde tihi peccatum ut
baptisma sit necessari^^^? nanqui la patre? patren quidem babes, sed Deum, and
ae qualis es illi, Deus de Deo, Lunen de Lumine; Nam in Deum peccarum cadere
non pass qui^ nesc^? an verb le matre? nam and matrem babes, sed oirgo est --
Quam maculan potest babere agum sine maculd? -- Johannes baptizavit aguum and
aquas Idvit. Bern. sermon. 1. in epiphan. Dom. col. 76. B. C.
Bernard has it in his patheticall Apostrophe to Christ, Lord Jesus will thou
be baptized? why, what need have thou of Baptism I does the sound stand in
need of a physician, or the cleans of washing? whence had thou any sinnne
thai should be washed away by baptism? had thou any sin from thy Father?
why he was God, and thou art equal to him, God of God, Light of Light, and who
knows not that in God there can be no sin? or had thou sin from thy mother?
amother indeed thou had, but she was a virgin. He should have added, and
though not altogether without sin, her seed was sanctified by the holy Ghost at
his conception; He goes on, What stain could be found in him who was a lamb
without spot? John baptized the lamb (says he,) and by that baptism washed
the waters. He was baptized then not as guilty of sin, and so not as needing
baptismall regeneration, but to fulfill all righteousness. Math. 3.15. to submit
himself as under the law, coming in the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. though
he were the Lawmakers; and therefore he was circumcised, as well as baptized,
to honor his own Ordinance with his own example, and to be conformable to
man in all things, sin only excepted.

Nor was it fit to baptize him in the Name of him that was to come; How then,
or with what form of words was he baptized? I have met with no Author but
one, who takes upon him affirmatively and distinctly to answer that question;
and it is Palacius 2. de Bapt. c. 33.
Palacius a Papist who says, he baptized him thus, I baptize thee in thine
own name, who wast to come. Wherein, being so punctual in his resolution, he
was too presumptuous. Yet on the other hand, they are as far out who say, as
Marsilius and Paludanus apud Lorin. in Act. c. 19. v. 4. p. 705. col. 2.
Bellarm l. 1. de Bapt. c. 20. Tom 3. p. 35^.
some do, that John used no form of words at all in the Baptism of Christ.

Fourthly, Magdeburg. Centur. 1. l. 2. cap. 6. Chamier. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 13. p
277.
Some learned Divines hold that John did, at least sometimes, baptize in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy ghost; although some Bellarm. l 1. de sacra.
Bapt. c. 23.
Papists do with such confidence deny it, Lorin. in Act Apost. c. 10. v. a. p.
704. col. 2.
as to hold it impudence to affirm it. And they hold so the rather, to maintain
their Tenet against the Protestants, of the essential difference of the
Baptism of John, from the Baptism instituted by Christ, according to his
command, and commission given to the Apostles, Matthew. 28.19.

But it is probable enough that he did in his Baptism make mention of the
Trinity; because,

1. He had the same warrant of divine authority for what he did, which the
Apostles had, Job. 1.33.

2. Because Sic argument. Chamterus loce citato.
he was an orthodox Divine, and acquainted with the Doctrine of the Trinity.

3. Because at the baptism of our Savior there was a most clear
manifestation of the Trinity, the father acknowledging his Son from heaven,
and the holy ghost lighting on him in the likeness of a Dove. And therefore it
is like he made mention of the Trinity, (at least after Christ's Baptism at
Jordan) by way of supplication, or of sacramental application, though
ordinarily he baptized In the Name of Christ Jesus, or of the Messiah which was
to come. But whether he used the one, or the other form before the act, or
instantly with the act of Baptizing (as our manner is at this day) is very
uncertain.

The third Querie.

Of the several Forms of Baptism which is the chief?

The chief form for authority, and perpetuity, and community is that whereof
Math. 28.19. is the ground, I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy ghost. And though it be not necessary to conceive that ministers are
bound formally, expressaly, and precisely to apply these words to the act of
baptizing, yet since no sense is assigned to them when they are so applied, but
what is very congruous to the act of the Minister, it cannot but be a very safe
way explicitly to mention them in the baptismal action. For whether we mean by
I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy ghost, I baptize thee
by the power, authority, or commission from God (as Acts. 3.6. and Acts. 4.7.)
who is own in substance, three in persons, Father Son, and Holy ghost; or
whether by those words we imply a prayer for the blessing of the Trinity upon
the baptized person, or engage him to the profession of the faith, and worship
of the blessed Trinity, or what other orthodox sense we assign unto the words,
they may well be taken in that sense, when sprinkling water upon the party
baptized, or dipping him in the water, we say, I baptize thee in the Name of
the Father. Son and Holy ghost.

For this form of Baptism there is very good warrant of scripture, reason,
and practical example. 1. For scripture, the Text forecited out of Math, (as
it is expounded) is plain and pertinent, to which may be added the forecited
illustrious testification of the Father to the Son, and the apparition of the
Holy Ghost in the form of a dove, at our Saviors Baptism in the river
Jordan. Mat. 3.

2. For reason, we say that in baptism there is a concurrent operation of
grace, toward the party baptized, (who is within the Covenant) Gerard. Loc.
Com. Tom. 4. p. 488. 91.
whereby the Father receives him for a Son, the Son for a Brother, the
Holy Ghost for a Temple.

3. For practical example, we have first the Apostles, who received a
Commission from our Savior to Baptize In the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; which appears to have been the Apostolical practice, by the
passage betwixt Paul and the Disciples found at Ephesus; for when Paul had put
the question to them, Whether they had received the Holy Ghost since they
believed, and they had answered that they had not so much as heard whether
there were an Holy Ghost or no, he replied with a question, Unto what thou were
ye baptized? as it were wondering, that they that were baptized, should not
have heard of the holy Ghost; which he had no cause to do, unless there had
been practical example to baptize with mention of the Holy Ghost; And if the
Holy Ghost were named at Baptism, it is not probable that either the Father,
or the Son were omitted.

But whether the Apostles constantly kept to that form is uncertain, Popish
Authors confidently contradict each other in this point; for lPetr. Lombard. in
Sent. l. 4. Distinct. 3 p. 699.
Peter Lombard resolves, that the Apostles baptized in the Name of the
Trinity; mEstius in l. 4. Sent. did 3. 4. p. 40. col 2.
Estius avereth, that the Apostles always baptized In the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and he renders this reason, Because, of one Sacrament
there should be but one form, especially after a form is prescribed, as it
was to the Apostles Mat. 28.19.

Others Aur^olus in 4. Sent. Did. 3. Francis Long. in Annot. in Can Apost. 40.
p. 136. Harding. de Cor. sabutra. quespec art. 2.
say, that they had for a time a dispensation to baptize In the name of Christ
Jesus, for special honor to that person, and Name, which was most exposed to
contempt. But, if that had been a sufficient reason why the Apostles should
baptize In the Name of Christ, and not of the Trinity, it is like our Savior
would have given his order of Baptism under that form.

For the times after the Apostles, we find many testimonies for Baptism, In
the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not only in the writings of
suppositious, or suspected Fathers, as Clem. Constit. l 3 c. 16. and l 7. c. 22.
Clemens Romanus, but in such as are acknowledged for legitimate, as Just,
Mart. Apot. 2. ad Anton. Pium an 150.
Justin Martyr in his second Apology, and in the book of confession, or
exposition of right faith, which goes under his name, and if it be not his, as
there is Bellar. de Eccles. Scriptorib p. 64 Scultet medul. patr. part. 1. c.
9. p. 34.
good reason at least to doubt of it, yet is it very ancient, and that in the
judgment both of Ibid.
Protestant and Popish Authors; Origin. in Rom 6. anno 226.
Origin, Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 40. in Sanct. Bapt. an 370.
Greg. Nazianzen, Epiphan haeres. 62. Sabell. an 370.
Epiphanius, Ambros. Mediolanens. de spir. Sanct. l. 1. c. 4. an. 374.
Ambros. Mediolanensis, Gaudent. Brixiens. Tract. seu sermon. 14. an. 390.
Gaudentius Brixiensis, August. l. 13. contra Maxim c. 13. an. 420.
Augustine, Cyril. Alexand. lib de recta fide ad Theodos. Imperat. c. 32. an.
430.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus, Gennad. Massil. lib. de Eccles Degmat. c. 52 an. 490.
Gennadius Massiliensis, Fulgent. lib contra objectiones Arianorum in epileg.
object. 10. and lib de Trinit. ad felicene Notar, c. 2. an 500.
Fulgentius, Pri^sius in cap. 22. Apocalypse. an. 545.
Primasius; All these were in the first five hundred years after Christ; In the
sixth Century was Gregory, surnamed the Great, of whom the saying is, he was
the last of the good Bishops of Rome, the first of the bad; and from him such
as were held most Orthodox in all age, both taught, and administered Baptism
only In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

After the Fathers, rose up a race of Divines, called Schoolmen, of whom the
first, and as it were the Father of the rest, was Petr. Lombard. l. 4. sent.
did. ^. p. 701. an. 1145.
Peter Lombard, called the Master of the Sentences, because he collected the
sentences of the Divines of former ages, and drew them into questions under
several titles, in four books, whereof the first is of the Unity of Godhead
and Trinity of persons; And in the fourth book, where be treats of the
Sacraments, he affirms that the Apostles Baptized both before, and after the
passion of our Savior, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy ghost; and
according to him, in this particular, have the schoolmen that came after him
resolved for the constant us: of Baptism in that form, whereof to give in a
Catalogue, with their testimonies, in a Chronologicall order for the times
wherein they wrote, would be a long labor, and of little use; since (though
universal consent of all sort of Authors make much for the honor, and
estimation of any truth, yet) in this case it is needles, because there is no
learned Reader will doubt of it, and the ignorant will receive little
satisfaction by a list of their names and Testimonies who are altogether
unknown unto them.

If we draw nearer home for time, and place, and conformity in religion, we
shall find the Doctrine and practice of the Reformed Churches concurring in
this form of Baptizing In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy ghost; which
is a thing so well known by the Harmony, and Syntagma of Confessions, and by
the observation of such as have lived among them, that it were a superfluous
pains to produce the proof of them in particular.

Unto plain and express Testimonies by words, we may add a real testimony by
action, for baptizing In the name of the Trinity, which is the practice of
Baptizing by trine-immersion, or thrice dinning, and washing; Petr. Lomb. l. 4.
Sent. Did. 3. p. 70^. ex Greg. Ep. 41. Leandro Episc.
whereof two reasons are rendered by Gregory, the one with significant relation
to the Trinity of persons in the Unity of the Godhead; the other to the
sepulture of our Savior for three days space; but the principal is the
former. And this manner of Baptizing is very ancient, for we find it the
practice of the Church in Dehinc termergitamur. Tertul. de Corona milit. c. 5.
Ter ad singula nomina in personu singulu mergimur Idem advers. Praxeam c. 26.
Tortullians time; so ancient that diverse of the Ambros. l. 2. de Sacram c. 7.
Hieron advers Luciscrum. August. Sermon. 29. and 201. de Tempore.
Fathers take it for an Apostolical tradition, and some have put it into an
Apostolical Canon to be observed upon a penalty, in these words.

Si quis episcopus aut Presbyter non trinam immersionem unius mysterij
celebret, sed semel mergat in baptismate, (quod dari videtur in Domini morte)
deponatur, etc. Can. Apost. 50.
If any Bishop or Prosbyter do not celebrate the mystery of Trine immersion, or
thrice dipping, but dippe but once in baptism (which seems to be given in the
death of the Lord) let him be deposed; for the Lord said not, Baptize ye in my
death, but going teach all nation, baptizing them In the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy ghost.

But these Canons are not Canonical; Orthodox Divines reject them as a parcel
of Apocrypha, and the Vid Petr. Sete Praesat in Caranz. Sum. Council.
Papists themselves admit of them but in part; and though if any should baptize
but once out of an heretical misapprehension of the blessed Trinity, such a
single immersion Theodoret. l. 4. de haereticor. fab.
might be condemned, as it was in the Eunomians, who in opposition to the
Doctrine of the Trinity dipped but once, yet there is no doubt but such as
baptize in a sound sense and judgment of the unity of the Godhead, and Trinity
of persons, though they do it but once, do not amiss; Petr. Lomb. l. 4. sent.
did. 3. p. 702.
for both are lawful, and as the Schoolmen determine, either of them may be
used according to the various custom of orthodox Churches: and for this the
fourth Council of Toledo Council. Toletan. 4. in some Edit. Can. 5. Tom. 4.
Council. p. 583. col. 1. Edit. Bin. 1636.
made an express Canon, decreeing for a single or simple dipping, against
another sort of heretics, who by a trine immersion professed more then a
personal distinction of the Father, Son, and holy ghost, as if they were of
three distinct natures, not three distinct persons only; and by this decree
they endeavored to take away a scandalous difference of Baptism in Spain,
while some baptized with a single, and some with a three fold immersion, or
dipping; and by once dipping and thrice nameing of God by the Trinity of
persons, there was an Antidote provided against both sorts of heresies,
Bonavent. in 4. Seat. did. 3. part. 2. art. 2. q. 1.
and the manner was this; At the first dipping the Father was named, at the
second the Son, at the third the holy ghost.

The fourth Querie.

Whether any form of baptism be so necessary that it is not lawful to vary
from it.

The resolution of this Querie is very various. For

1, Besides that we have observed before out of Bellarmine, concerning John's
baptism without any form of words, we are to observe,

1, That some hold there is no set form of Baptismeset down in scripture
which is necessary to be observed; This opinion Bell. de Bapt l. 1. c. 7. Tom.
3. p. 272.
Bellarmin imputes to Luther, Zuinglius; and Brentius as their error.

2. For the forms that are found in Scripture, that Baptism In the Name of
Christ, or of Christ Jesus was lawful, when John so baptized, for it is
recorded in the Scripture, as before has been showed, and no where reproved;
nor those so baptized by him rebaptized, as has been also showed beofre.

3. Bell l. 1. de Sacr. Bapt. c. 3. p. 276. Francise. Longus in Can. Apost. 49.
p. 136.
Some teach, that the Apostles baptized lawfully In the name of Christ, though
without the addition of these words (which was to come) as well as In the name
of the Trinity.

4. That it is lawful for Ministers so to baptize at this day, for the reason
rendered by Basil de spirit. san^c 1^.
Basil, because in one person all three are vertually included, as in the name
of Christ, signisying anointed, the person anointing, the father is employed,
and the person by whom he is anointed the holy Ghost. So, as Fred. Span. hem
dab. Evang. part 3. in Matthew. 28. p. 79.
Spanhemius says, John Baptized In the Name of the Trinity implicitly, though
not explicitly.

5. For Baptism In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Apul Suares
loco sub citato (...).
some hold, that terms of equivalence, or equpollence, bearing the same sense,
will serve for the form of Baptism; as (...) Clem. Constit. l. c. 23.
In the name of the sending Father, or the Father that sends. In the name of
the Son that is come, and In the name of the witnessing Comforter, or Suarez.
in 2. part Tham. Tom 3. qui est primas de sacram disp 2^. q 66. sell. 4. p. 21^.
In the name of him that begets, of him that is begotten, and of the spirit
proceeding from them both. But the nearer the words come to those of the 28. of
Matthew. 19. the more assuredly lawful; as if one should baptize In the name of
the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost, 1 John 5.7. Nor is that thought
unlawful to name each person with a word of explication added, as, Egote
haptizo in no nine atris in geniti, filij genht, and S S. abu. troque
procedentis Lomb. 4. Sent. did. 3.
I baptize thee In the name of the Father that begets, and of the Son that
is begotten, and of the holy Ghost which proceeds from them both.

These propositions may have a speculative truth in them, and there may be
warrant for them; for it seems reasonable to think, that as (though our
Savior said After this manner pray ye, Matthew. 6.9 and when ye pray say etc.
Luke 11.2. yet) when we pray, it may be lawful to use another form, or that
form with some expository variation; so it may be lawful, in respect of the
thing it self, to use the same words, or others of the like sense and meaning;
and this the rather, because we find not that any other Sacrament, in the old
or new Testament, had any set form of words, wherewith it was by a prescript
order or any peremptory rule to be administered: but to be practically lawful
at this time, after so ancient, and so general a use and custom of most
orthodox Churches is another thing; For to depart from those words, having so
general warrant, not only from Scripture, but from universal observation,
cannot be done without scandal, and so cannot be lawfully done, though the
thing it self, in it self and in thesi be lawful; as though it be lawful for
a Preacher to keep on his hat while he speaks to the people, and in the
thing it self more congruous to his condition then to the peoples to be
covered at Setmon, yet since it has been so long a received custom in our
Church, for the Preacher not to wear his hat though the people do, he that
should preach with his hat on his head, would occasion a scandal, and give men
occasion to conceive. That he were either very proud, or very vain and
fantastical.

The fifth Querie.

If there be any variation from the form in Matthew. 28.19, what may be admitted
without violation of the Sacrament, what not?

In answer whereto we say,

First, That some words in this form are not so necessary and considerable as
others, as

1. It is not necessary to say, I baptize thee, in the first person; for the
Non negamus, quia and per illa verba, [Baptizetur talis servm Christi in nomine
patris, filij, and spir, saucti, vet baptizetur manib^^ meis talis] verum
perficiatur Baptisma, Council. Florent. decretum super unione Iacobinorum and
Armeniorum. Franc. Long. Sum. Council. p. 888. col. 1.
Greeks, baptizing in the third person, Let this servant of Christ be baptized,
or baptized by my hands, in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Gholst, are
acknowledged to have a true baptism.

Secondly, It is not necessary to say Baptize, for a man may perform true and
sufficient baptism by the word wash, or sprinkle, as well as by the word
baptize.

Thirdly, It makes no great difference to say in the name, or into the name,
for as in the name may note the authority of Baptism, and the holy influence
of the Author going along with it, so to be baptized into Christ, Romans 6.1. or
into the name of Christ, may note the effect and benefit of Baptism,
incorporating the baptized into the mystical body of Jesus Christ; and though
we read the words, Matthew. 28.19. In the name of the Father; the Greek (...),
may more exactly in the grammatical sense of the words be rendered into the
name; and the like we may resolve of the same phrase, 1 Cor. 1.13. but to be
Baptized in the name, is properly the true English of (...), Act. 2.38. and of
(...), Act. 10.48. But In nomine utique art, non in nominibus, ut unitas essen.
tiae ostendatur, per tria vero que supposuit tres esse personas declaravit.
Ambros. de si de ad Gratian cap. 1.
Ambrose observes in the Name in the singular number, as importing the unity of
substance in the Trinity of persons of the Godhead.

Secondly, But for the express mention of all the persons of the Trinity, it
is held by many to be Aquin. in 3. part. q. 66. art. 5. ad 7. and in 4 sent.
did 3. art. 2. questi uncula 2. ad ^. Bonarent. art. q. 3. Scotus quest 2.
art. 3 number. 16. Paludanus q. 1. art. 3.
necessary, both Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. Tom. 3. qui est primus de
Sacramentis disp. 21. q. 66. Sect. 4 p. 220 col. 2.
because of the words of Christ, Matthew. 28.19. the custom of the Church, and
the scandal which would be occasioned if any of them should be omitted. And
upon this ground it is held by some insufficient to baptize in the name of the
Trinity, or of three persons, Suar. 2. Ibid.
yea though in this form. I baptize thee in the name of the first, second, and
third person, or if there be an express mention of any two persons, and an
omission of any one, it is resolved to be no Baptism. Sic in Epist. Zach. pap
1. ad Bonisac. Tom. 5. Council p. 488. c. 2.


Here may come in the Question about the baptism of an ignorant priest, which
was, Whether pronouncing the words of Baptism in In nomine patria, stita and
spiritua sancta. Aventin Annal. Boior. l. 3. p 297. and Tom 5. Council. p 48.
col. 2.
false Latin made a nullity of the Baptism? Boniface the Bishop of Mentz had
commanded a child so baptized to be rebaptized; Virgilius Bishop of Saltsburge,
and Sydonius another Bavarian Bishop would not agree to that, for they allowed
of the Baptism theologically, though grammatically erroncous; The resolution
referred to Pope Zachary, he decreed for the validity of the baptism, though
there were such an incongruity in the Priests pronunciation.

Sixthly, The forms of Baptisine (swarivng from the words of our. Savior,
Matthew. 28.19.) invented and used by Heretics, for intimation of some corrupt
and heretical doctrines; especially prejudicial to the honor of the Trinity,
do make a nullity of the Baptism; whereof there are many sorts.

1. That of Osander, Centur. 2. fol. 42. Irenaeus ad. verse. baeres. l. 2 c. 18.
Mark the heretic, who baptized in the name of the unknown Father of all
things, into the truth the mother of all things, and in the name of the
descondent upon Jesu.

2. That of the Athan. Sermon. 3. contra Aria not.
Arrians, who baptized in the name of the Father the only true God, of Jesus
Christ a ereature, and of the holy Ghost the servant of them both.

If it be said, that the baptism of the Arrians was held sufficient by the
Catholic Church, as Bin. A^^^ in Can. 7. Coucil. Laod. Tom. 1. Council. p. 306.
Binius notes upon the seventh Canon of the Council of Laodicea and Framisc.
Francise. Long. summa Council. Annet. in Council. Laod. c. 7. p. 194.
Long his plagiary (for he steals his Annotations word for word, for many lines
together, without a word of mention of him) It may be answered, that the
Arrians did not all of them, or not always baptize in one form, for sometimes
they baptized In nom ne patris per futum in spiritu sancto. Sozom. histor l. 6.
c. 26.
in the name of the Father, by the Son, and in the holy Ghost; which form
(though not so bad as the former) was thought to be so displeasing unto God,
that he miraculously disappointed the Arrian Minister, who meant to have
Baptized one in that manner, by Ibid.
causing the water suddenly to vanish out of his sight, by which the baptism
was prevented.

3. That of the Epiphan. hares. 76.
Eunomians, who baptized in the name of God uncreated, of the Son created, and
of the holy Ghost the sanctifier, and a creature of the created Son;
Theodoret. lib. 4. baret. sabt lar.
who out of an heretical conceit against the Trinity opposed the mannar of
trine immersion.

4. That of the Photinians, whose form of Baptism (as their faith) was See
Bin. in Coned. Laod. Can. ^. Tem. 1. p. 300.
worse then that of the Arriams; so much worse that the Arians themselves could
not endure either them or it, and therefore did they excommunicare them; so
that though some baptism of the Arrians were held sufficient (as has been
noted) the baptism of the Photinians was held not only guilty of impiety, but
a meet nullity.

5. That form of baptism which joins the creature in commission with the
Creator, as

1. That of the Pepuzians, or Basil. prima jua epist. ad Amphiloch. Iconij
Episc. can. 1.
Montanists, who baptized into the Father, Son, and into Montunus, or
Priscilla.

2. That of some superstitious and Gerard Loc Com. Tom. 4. col. 410. 93.
idolatrous Papists, who to the Trinity of persons added the name of Mary the
perpetual Virgin.

3. That which Neque enim Ecclesiaslicam contemplisse formam, sed ex devotione
quadam festi. nantis fidei in banc voce erupisse videtur. Bern. Epist. 340.
Henrico Archiacono col. 1648.
Bernard mentions of a child whom being newly borne, and in imminent danger
of death, a lay man baptized on the sudden, In the name of God, and of the holy
and true Cross; which Bernard allows for sufficient baptism, and excuses
the man, as doing it not out of contempt of the Ecclesiastical form, but of a
sudden devotion; wherein he determines the doubt as a Papist, according to
such principles as Protestants deny; and therefore they may deny that baptism,
both in respect of the Agent, a mere layman, and in respect of the form, as
wanting what it should have, the Name of the Trinity, and having what it should
not, the mention of the Cross, a great Idol with the Papists, (especially
with the ignorant) though he labor to force a better sense out of his words,
then it is like the man himself ever meant.

But what if a child were baptized, not by a layman, but by a Minister,
whether Popish or Evangelicall, and the words were formally used, which are the
usual form, I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
does the addition of the Virgin Mary's name make void what was done by the
words precedently spoken? The addition Bellarm. l. 1. de Bapt. c. 25, 26, 27.
of exorcisme, exsuffiation, salt, spittle, oil, and other ceremonies does not
make a nullity of the Sacrament, and therefore they were not rebaptized by
Protestants who were superstitiously Baptized by Popish priests.

To which I answer, 1. That there may be more cause to condemn a baptism
whose form is corrupted, as that where the Virgin Mary's name is added to the
name of the Trinity, then where ceremonies, though superfluous, and
superstitious, which Papists themselves do not account of the essence of
Baptism, are superadded unto it.

2. If any doubt or scruple yet remain, it must be resolved either by comparing
the danger of such a corrupt baptism with the error of rebaptizing in such a
case, and so resolving either certainly to allow, or disallow the Baptism, or
else by making a conditional rebaptization, as in a doubtful (...) is
prescribed in the Cashiered Servicebook, in the manner of private Baptism in
this form, If thou be not already baptized, I baptize thee in the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost; which form with water (which is the matter) are
there made essential parts of Baptism.

Conclusion.
To wind up all into a Conclusion, The discussion and resolution of these
Questions, I have thus far carried on, not so much for confutation of M.
Saltmarsh, who has said nothing that might deserve such a scrious
disquisition, and determination, but that there might be something presented
with an Answer to him that might be worthy of the view of an Intelligent
Reader, who will hereby understand, that though M. Saltmarsh set forth such
trifling fancies, and worthles shreads, and snips, as are good for nothing, his
Antagonist will not deal with him in trading with such petty parcels, but will
rather endeavor (by proposing that to the judicious Reader that may some way
improve his knowledge) to make some amends for his extemporary emptynes.

And hereby (notwithstanding) 1 is that novell posision of his fully confuted,
and his rashness and presumption checked, who (having so little learning or
reading in the state and story of the Churches dispensations through several
ages of the world) in these days wherein all manner of knowledge does so
abound (though many of his new lights be but the flashes of an ignis fatuus
durst averte and publish in Print, Smoke in the Temple, first Numb. and second
Edit. p. 13.
that Mat. 28.18. rather 19. Mark. 16. etc. are rather and far more probably
to be expounded of the Spiries baptism, or of the baptism of the Holy ghost.
And that the form by which they baptize, viz. I baptize thee in the name of
the Father, Son and Holy ghost, is a form of man's devising, a tradition of
man, a mere consequence drawn from supposition and probability, and not a form
left by Christ to say over them in the water: If Christ had said, When you
baptize them say this over them, I baptize thee In the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy ghost, and unless lesus Christ had left this form, thus made
up to their hands, they practice a thing made up by themselves, and drawn or
forced out of Jesus Christ's words in Mat. 28.19.

And if that form were not made up by Christ, how will he prove that the form
of Baptism In the Name of the Lord Jesus was made up by him? if not, why
should that be made an exception against baptizing In the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, and not against baptizing In the Name of Christ?

2. His missallegation of the saying of the learned Salmasius is further
convinced; who, because he reports Baptisma in aquis perenne bus Apostolici
inftituti and moris, sed non invocatio Trinitatis saper baptizatum cum
Apostoliin solo nomine tesu Baptiza runt. Salmas. in Apparatu ad lib. de
primatu papae, fol. 193.
a matter of Apostolical practice, will infer that Salmasius is a
Dogmaticall opposite to baptism, In the Name of the Father, Son, and boly
Ghost. If that be his meaning to have Salmasius supposed to hold with him in
his opposition against Baptizing In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, he means doubtless to put an absurd paradox upon him, which he would
seriously disavow, if he knew it; if that be not his meaning, he cites him to
no purpose; and though there be some other learned men of Salmasius his mind
in that point, (whose names he cites not, because he brought in that manner of
baptism not ex instituto, but obiter, not of purpose, but occasionally) yet
there are who with much confidence affirm that the Apostles did baptize In the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and not In the Name of Jesus only, as
has been before declared; and the reason is, because though there be ^o clear
proof of their practice of either in the Scripture, yet the words of our
Savior, Matthew. 28.19. are more express and plain for baptizing In the Name of
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, then any text is for a rule of any other
form.

For his testimony produced and pretended to be in favor of Independency of
Churches, I will desire to trouble the Reader no further, but to review what M.
L. has In his book of Light for smoke a p. 53. ^ad 97.
written in answer to it already, and oy that he will see that M. Saltm. in
this controversy is destitute both of a good cause and of a good conscience; of
a good cause, for his eppealing to Salmasius as to a patron of Independency is
at least a belying of him; and of a good cousciouce, because that being
discovered, he still opposes and outfaceth it as much as he can, against an
evident conviction.

A brief Animadversion upon the mad Pamphleter, composer of the Persume etc.
who out of two letters C. D. by a rare spel of Daemonology has raised Cerberus
Diabolus, yet withal, to give the devil his due, A word of Apology for him
against the posted reproach put upon him by John Saltmarsh, and Giles Calvert.
THe unsavory Pamphlet called a Persume came out with such a stinck, that
those that had not lost their sense of smelling cried Fie upon is, and stopped
their noses at it; and if it had been written against me I would have thought
it worthy of none other Answer, then such as I find in Elian which the Ephori
of Lacedaemon made to the Clazomenians, when with soot they had soyled their
seats of Judgment; which was that they caused to be proclaimed throughout the
City, that, (...). ^elian, var. hist. l. 2. c. 15 p. 5^.
it should be lawful for the Clazomenians to do undecent things.

Yet though neither I non C. D. (who has so foundly scourged him that it could
not be but he must snarle and howl like a dog under the whippe) meddle with
him any more, he cannot pass without a last from the hand of a Moderate
adversary, the Moderate Intelligencer, who (though they be both of one trade
(viz. Newsmongers) is in his weekly Intelligence as far above this Perfumer,
the scribler, of miscalled Perfect Passages and Perfect Occurrences, as the
most artificial tailor is above the most bungling botchet in the City. And he
has shaped him a Censure in these terms, Moderat. Intell. Numb. 59. p. 405.
A pamphlet came out on Monday last called A perfume against the sulpherous
etc. said in the title to be written by John Saltmarsh, is put out wrongfully
in his name, and is none of his. Shall we never be ridd of these Mountebanks
and Imposters? who when they have not brains to publish any thing of worth,
feign frothy titles, when no such thing is in the Book; but to put the name
aforesaid to so ridiculous a piece as this, argues the Author to have needed
long since to be cut of the simples.

For fear lest this Brevibus Gy aris and carcere dignus.
worthy writer M. John Saltmarsh should receive reproach by such a senseless
pamphlet, or Giles Calvert his Stationer sustain loss by disreputation of his
papers in time to come, this Antidote was posted up in several places for
public view, A pamphlet came out on Monday, April. 19. 1646. called A persume
against the sulpherous etc. said in the title to be written by John Saltmarsh,
is put out wrongfully in his name, and is none of his. Giles Calvert.

Which is enough for a supersedeas to any ingenuous man for any further Reply
unto it, for such a one may very well disdain to answer that which such an
Author disdaynes to own. Yet, to say the truth, both M. Saltmarsh, and M.
Calvert did the fellow wrong; and because I see he is so silly that he cannot
tell how to make his own defense himself, I will help him out.

He says for himself, that M. Saltmarsh can blears him shat he writ his name
and Title, and with that it was licensed; and that the Printer acknowledged his
fault. The more unwise man he, and no wiser are they (M. Saltmarsh and M.
Calvert not excepted) who so grossly mistook the title page of the Pamphlet;
which makes not M. Saltmarsh the Author of the Perfume, for his name is not
brought in till the letter end of the page, presently upon the Smoke in the
Temp. which was written and Printed with the name of John Saltmarsh, and is
acknowledged both by himself and his Stationer to be his. So, you see here is
need of more Light to disp^ll the darkness of this Perfume now, as well as of
his Spoke before.

FINIS.

