LETTERS FROM Lieutenant General Crumwels Quarters. HIS March from Barwicke to
the City of Edinburgh, with the Marquess of Arguile.

AND THE Transactions of the Treaty in Scotland.

WITH Letters to his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax, concerning the great
Petition coming from the North, to the Parliament of England.

And the state of the whole Agreement in SCOTLAND.

Also the surrender of Barwick and Carlisle.

8ber ye 9th LONDON, Printed for R. Smithurst, near Pye-corner 1648,

SIR
UPon the Treaty between the Marquess of Arguile, and Monro, all is agreed,
and confirmed by Lanericke, The Scots are disbanding all but Arguiles, and the
power of that Kingdom is to be under his command. And the English that joined
with the Revolted Scots are to be sent to Lieutenant General Crumwell, There
is to be a Parliament in Scotland in January next, in the interim, none are to
sit in the Committee of Estates that engaged with Duke Hamilton: And when the
Parliament is called, none is to be capable of sitting that joined in the
Engagement against England, and the Kirk of Scotland. And when the Parliament
meets, they are to judge of all transactions, and sensure miscariages
concerning the State, and the Kirk to judge of Ecclesiastical matters. In the
interim the Marquess of Arguile and those that protested against the Revolting
Scots are to order the State affairs, and the Kirk for the Church. The
Marquess of Arguile entered this Town on Saturday last, 700 of the other Scots
marched out, and are disbanded, Arguile forthwith surrendered it to Lieut. Genesis
Crumwell, who has placed Col. Overtans Regiament in it, and the Lieut.
Collonell is Depury Governor at present, and Orders are gone out for the
surrender of Carlisle. The Marquess of Arguile has invited Lieut, Genesis
Crumwell to march with him to Edinburgh, whither they are now going, But the
Lieut. Genesis intends not to stay, but forthwith to return back for England.
There are many thousand hands which have signed a Petition to come to the
Parliament from these parts to desire them to look to themselves, and clear
their power, and protect the peoples interest against all their enemies, which
will be now suddenly brought to the Parliament.

Barwicke 2 Octo. 1648.
SIR,
THis enclosed is the return to your Summons which is civil but how cordial,
I know not. I have sent back this morning for a Pass for Col. Bright, and the
Scout-Master-Generall, and do expect a return before night. I intend this day
to fall Barwick upon the South-west, and to remain there until four in the
afternoon, where I shall expect Col. Bright, and do intend from thence to
march toward Norham Castle, and quarter there, except I receive your orders to
the contrary, conceiving that to be much more advantageous for the gaining
intelligence, of the affairs of Scotland, and to correspond with the
well-affected nearest those parts, besides, I conceive our so near approach to
the Borders, may be a good Argument to the illaffected, to return a good answer
to you, by your Commissioners. I do very much desire your honest Scotch men,
who in case the Pass be denied, may be very serviceable in joining
intelligence, which is the life of our business, and without which we shall
but act lamely in all things.

Sir, I am Your most faithful and humble Servant, Lambert.
Hagerston 16 Septem. 1648,
Directed for the Right Honorable L. G. Cromwell.
A Copy of a Letter to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, from the Garisions of
Newcastle and Tinmouth.
May it please your Excellency,
WE make bold being pressed in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our
fears, so the matter of our desires. It has pleased God after much plottings
and endeavors of the old and new Malignants, to Crown the Army under your
conduct with great success; and although God by that calls for justice, little
or none is done, to the great grief, as to the Kingdom in general, so unto us
in particular; and less is like to he done, unless your Excellency presently
appear to do so mething, and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us;
we wait for it. Instead of Justice, behold a Treaty with them for Peace, that
God speaks no Peace to: and instead of owning just petitions, they are laid
aside, and not countenanced; some employed in the Treaty, not long since voted
the Army Rebels; what that prognosticates in the future, when they have power,
we leave to your Excellency to judge. We can hardly forbear but Petition the
Parliament; (remembering our engagement at New Market Heath) but we are very
unwilling to do any thing without your Excellencies pleasure, being desirous
in all good things to be led by you: and being confident (as formerly, so
still) you will stand by the Kingdom and the Army in their just Rights. So
hoping you will so far honor us, as to make a favorable construction of our
expressions, and give an answer to encourage us to join with the well-affected,
in their Petitions, for their just Rights and Privileges. We subscribe our
selves in the behalf of the Officers and Soldiers of this Garrison and Tinmoutb.

Lieut. Col. Paul Hobson. Major Cobbet, Cap. Clark Cap. Hutton, etc.

Newcastle 22 September. 1648.
To his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, General of all the Forces raised by the
Parliament, for the Commonwealth of England.
May it please Your Excellency,
Seeing it has pleased God to exalt you to a place of Eminency and trust in the
Commonwealth of England, for the Redemption thereof from Captivity and
Bondage, and to that End God having also blessed you and us with prosperous
Success and Conquests, (beyond the ye of humane sense) both in the late and
present Wars, over yours and the peoples most inveterate Enemies; and seeing
that we and all the well-affected of the Land ventured our lives, and all that
was dear unto us, not sparing cheerfully and thankefully to pass through all
dangers and difficulties with you attending that Engagement; we are imboldened
now at last (having looked round about us, and finding neither Your Excellency,
the Army, nor the People, yet answered as to those ends) to make our humble
Address unto your Excellency in this Juncture of time, wherein we apprehend,
that the blood that has bin spilt, The Conquests God has crowned you withal,
the treasure and wealth of the People expended, is all upon the point of being
rendered in vain and of none effect: For, to the sorrow of our hearts we find,
that even those particulars of Common Right and Freedom, for which we took up
Arms and still continue them, are not regarded, though by way of humble
Petition lately presented to the House of Commons by the well-affected in and
about London and instead of answering those their just desires of Freedom and
Safety to the People, we find a Treaty with our conquered Enemy (who has not
so much as himself to Treat for, and on whom we must, and that of right, lay
the guilt of all the blood that has bin spilt in these wars) is now chosen, and
vigorously pursued; and Compositions of easy rates made with the new
Delinquents for the late Rebellions and Treasons against the Commonwealth;
though we justly expected that their Lands should be made over to us, and the
whole Soldiery for our Arreares: and no justice likely to be done to
perfideous Hambleton, or to his Adherents, who invaded our Land, and made war
upon us: Nor upon the Earl of Holland whom the House of Lords lately and most
unjustly voted out of his imprisonment in Warwick-castle: nor yet upon the Lord
Goring, Lord Capell, Lord Louthbury, Laughorne, Powel, Poyer, etc. Neither any
thing done to those insolent Common Council men of London, that durst join with
the Prince, while in Arms against the Parliament and people, in his Desires:
and petition the Parliament for a Cessation of Arms, even with Hambleton
himself, after the House of Commons had voted him and his Army Enemies; and
those Englishmen that invited them into England, Rebels and Traitors, and
notwithstanding the same, the House of Lords abetted and joined with him and
his Army, by publishing his poisonous Declaration by a special Order of their
own House, to seduce the People into his Rebellion against the Commonwealth:
yet all these wickednesses must be salved up with a Personal Treaty, putting
our Capital and Bloody Enemy into an equal Balance with all the people and
their Representatives, which is more then he had from his Coronation, as
appears by his Oath, which the Parliament has often publicly declared to
the Commonwealth; so that of necessity our Indemnity, our Lives and Freedoms
are left at his mercy, and what mercy when our enemy is received, and the
Adverse Party advanced, can be expected, we leave to your Excellency to judge.
Wherefore May it please your Excellency, we having seriously weighed the
foresaid Petition entitled The humble Petition of Thousands Well-affected
Persons inhabiting the City of London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark
Hamblets, and places Adjacent, Presented to the Parliament Sep. 11: 1648.
Together with a second Petition indevoured to be presented Septem. 13
Entitled, The humble Petition of the presenters of the late large Petition,
etc. As also a Letter from our dear Friends of the Garrisons of Newcastle and
Tinmouth, and finding the common safety of us all wrapped up in those desires;
we cannot in duty to God, to our own Native Country, and in honor to your
Excellencies safety, and all that have adhered unto you, but resent the said
Desires as our own: and humbly implore, That your Excellency will be pleased
so to appear before us in the cause of the People, even in the midst of these
our dangers and fears, that we and all the People, with the Generations after
us, by your Excellencies happy conduct, may have just cause to bless God on
your behalf: And that the same may come to pass, shall ever be the faithful
prayers and endeavors of

Sir, Your Excellencies most humble servants, wholly devoted to live and dye
with you therein.

A Gratulatory Letter from diverse Officers of the Army, at the Leagure before
Barwick, to the late presenters of the Large Petition, of September 11. 1648.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Commoners,
AS we all languish and groan under the insupportable weight of the public
oppression of the Land, so is it our duty to struggle and strive jointly
together for the relief of each other; for to our neighbor we are bound as to
our selves; that we are all the sons of one Nation, and brethren by Nature,
whose several weal and woe is included and wrapped up in the fold of one
Commonwealth; that we must even stand or fall together. We (though we have our
swords in our hands) cannot be without you, nor you without us, in this day of
public calamity, and of this (we do not question, but) as we with you, so
you with us are sufficiently sensible, which to all conscientious and judicious
men may be sufficient to tie us firmly together in one Common bond of unity
against all our oppressors, and opposers of freedom whatsoever, but in this we
give you the pre-eminence; for though we are with you in heart and affection
for the principles of common Right and freedom to the Land; yet we must give
you the right hand of fellowship in appearing and going before us therein. For
to the great refreshment of our spirits we find, that God has preserved yet
thousands for us, that have not bowed their knee to Baal, and are yet (after
all these afflictions and trials) firm and untainted with the poisonous
principles of Oppression and Tyranny, as by your two late Petitions appears:
for which, as we are bound in duty to render the glory thereof unto God, so in
all humane and Civil obligation we cannot choose but render our grateful and
cordial respects unto you for the same, and must profess it our duty to
attest the same with our Swords, in and for those just principles (in your
Petition contained) to live and dye with you, and for you And as you have been
an encouragement unto us, to raise up our spirits and put us upon action, so
let us be an encouragement unto you to pursue with the utmost vigor and might,
those happy beginnings of yours, and we shall by Gods assistance second you
with our utmost power and might in your greatest straits and difficulties
against all opposers whatsoever. And as a testimony of our real intentions
therein, we have sent you some copies of some Papers, which we have intended in
pursuance of your Petitions: And we shall say no more at present, but that we
are,

Gentlemen, Your most affectionate Friends and Servants
From the Leagure before Barwick 30 Sep. 1648.
FINIS.

