A LETTER SENT To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the
Common Council of the City of London, Juno 10.

By His Excellency T. Fairfax. O. Crumwell T. Hammond H. Ireton T.
Rainsborough H. Waller. N. Rich. R. Hammond R. Lilburn, T. Pride, T. Hewson. L.
Disborow.


June 14th LONDON Printed for George Whittington at the blew Anchor in
Corne-hill, near the royal Exchange.

Right Honorable and trusty Friends.
HAving by our letters and other addresses presented by our noble General to
the honorable House of Commons, endeavored to give satisfaction of the
clearness of our just demandes, and also in papers published by us,
remonstrated the grounds of our proceedings in prosecution thereof: All which
having been exposed to a public view, (we are confident) have come to your
hands, and (at the least) received a chatitable construction from you. The sum
of all which desires as Soldiers are no other then a desire of satisfaction to
our demandes as Soldiers, and reparation upon those who have to the uttermost
improved all opportunities, and advantages, by false suggestions and
misrepresentations, and otherwise for the destruction of this Army with a
perpetual blot of infamy upon it, which we should not value i^ it singly
concerned our own particulars (being ready to deny our selves in this as we
have done in other Cases for the Kingdoms good) but under this pretense,
finding no less involved in it then the overthrow of the privileges both of
Parliament and people, whom rather then they shall fail in their designs, or
we receive what in the eyes of all good men is just, endeavors to engage the
Kingdom in a new war, and this singly by those who (when the truth of these
things shall be made to appear will be found the Authors of those Evils that
are feared as having no other way to protect themselves from que^^tion and
punishmen but by putting the Kingdom into blood (being) under pretenses of the
honor of, and their love to the Parliament, as i^ that were d^arer to the a
then us; if they had g^ven gre^ter proof of their faithfulness to it, then
we, then we perceive, that under these vailes and pretenses, they secke to
internesse their design in the City of London, as if that City ought to make
good their miscarriages, and should prefer a few false seeking men, before the
wel-farre of the public, and ind^ed ^e have found these men so active to
accomp^ish their de^ignes, and to have such apt Instrument for their turn^ in
that City, that we have cause to su^pect they ma^ing^ge many therein, upon
m^st^k^s, which are e^si^y swallowed in times of such preju^ice against m^n
that have given (we may speak it without va^i^y) the most public T^stimony of
their good affection to the public, and to that City in particular.

For the things we insist upon as Englishmen, (and merely our b^ing Soldiers
has not strip^ us of that interest, although our malicious enemies would have
it so) we desire a settlem^nt of the peace of the Kingdom, and of the
lib^rties of the subjects, according to the votes and Declarations ^f
Parliament, which before we took up Arms were by the Parliament used as
Arguments, and inducements to invite us, and diverse of our dear friends out,
(some of which have lost their lives in this war) which being by Gods
blessing finished, we think we have as much right to dem^nd, and desire to see
an happy settlement of, as we have to our money, or the other common interests
of Soldiers, which we have insisted upon, we find also the most ingenious and
honest people in almost in all the parts of the Kingdom, where we come full of
the sense of ruin and misery, if the Army should be di^b^nded before the peace
of the Kingdom, and those other thi^g^ before mentioned, have a full and
perfect s^^tlement.

We have said before, and profess it now, we desire no alteration of the
Civil Government.

We desire not to intermeddle with, or in the least, to interrupt the settling
of the Presbyteriall Government; nor do we seek to open a way to licentious
liberty, un^er pretense of obtaining ease for tender Consciences, we profess
(as ever) in these things (when the State has once made a setlement) We have
nothing to say, but to submit or suffer, only we could wish, that every good
Citizen, and every man that walks peaceably in a blameless Conversation, and
is beneficial to the Commonwealth, may have of liberties and encouragements,
it being according to the just policy of all States, even to justice it self.

These in brief are our desires, and the things for which we stand, beyond
which we shall not go; and for the obtaining these things, we are drawing near
your City, professing sincerely from our hearts, we intend not evil toward
you, and undertaki^g to you; Dec^aring with all confidence and assurance, That
if you appear not against us in these our just D^sires, to assist that wicked
party that would embroyl Us, and the kingdom; nor we, nor our Soldiers shall
give the least offense.

We come not to do any act to prejudice the Being of Parliament, or to the
hurt of this in order to the present settlement of the Kingdom. We seek the
good of all, and we shall here wait, or remove to a further distance, there to
abide (if once we be assured that a speedy setlement of things be in hand)
until they be accomplished; which done, we shall be most ready either all of us
or so many of the Atmy as the Parliament shall think fit, to disband, or go for
Ireland.

And although you suppose that rich City may seem an enticing bayt to poor
hungry Soldiers, to venture far to gain the wealth thereof, yet (if not
provoked) we do profess rather then any such evil should fall out, the
Soldier shall make their way through our blood to effect it: And we can say
this for most of them, for your better assurance, that they so little value
their pay in comparison of higher concernments to the Public good, that
rather then they will be unrighted in the matter of their honesty and
integrity, which has suffered by the men they aim at, and desire Justice
upon, or want the settlement of the Kingdoms peace, and their with their
fellow subjects liberties they will lose all, which may be a strong assurance
to you, that its not your wealth they seek, but the things tending in common
to your and their welfare; which that they may obtain, you shall do like
fellow subjects and Brethren, if you solicit the Parliament for them and on
their behalf.

If after all this, you or a considerable part of you be seduccd to take up
Arms in opposition to or hinderance of these our just undertakings, we hope by
this Brotherly Admonition, to the sincerity whereof, we call God to witness,
we have freed our selves from all that ruin, which may befall that great and
populous City, having hereby washed our hands thereof.

Royston June 10. 1647. Your affectionate friends to serve you. T. Fairfax.
Oliver Cromwell. Thomas Hammond. Henry Ire^on. Tho: Rainsborow. Hardres Waller.
Nath: Rich. Robert Hammond. Robert Lilburn. Thomas Pride. Thomas Hewson. John
Disborow.


To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, of the
City of London.

