A LETTER Sent from the Queen of ENGLAND TO The Kings Majesty at Newport;
concerning the Overtures of the Treaty and His proceedings with the
Commissioners for Peace.

WITH Her Majesty's Advice and Desires touching the said Treaty; And Her
Propositions concerning all His Majesty's Subjects within His Realms and
Dominions.

ALSO, His Majesty's last Concessions for Peace, delivered to the
Commissioners, to be sent to both Houses of Parliament; showing how far He has
given His Royal assent to the second Bill, touching Bishops and
Church Government.

London Printed for Nathaniel Williamson, 1648.

THE QUEEN OF ENGLANDS LETTER To Her Sovereign Lord, the King of Great
Britain, Directed to His Majesty at Newport in the Isle of Wight, from Paris
in France.
Endeared Sir,
AFter a long time spent in consultation upon the great affairs of these
languishing and distressed Kingdoms, and having waded through a Labyrinth of
Circumstances and Argument for the composing of all differences within the said
Realms and Dominions: His Majesty were pleased to declare his sense and
resolution to ^he Commissioners, yesterday October. 9. in answer to their former
Proposals, which were as follows.

That His Majesty is pleased to condescend that the Church Lands shall be
confirmed by ^His Royal consent, to an Act to confirm the particular Grants
already made of the Bishops Lands, for the space of 99. years, together with
the abolishing of Bishops for the same term of time; provided, that there may
be an indifferent choice of Clergy men to be supervisors in Ecclesiastical
affairs, accordingly as it shall be ordered and agreed on by the Assembly of
Divines, allowed to consult by his Majesty's former Condescentions.

These, and the Concessions before assented to, His Majesty again proposes to
the Parliaments Commissioners, That He may come up to London, to treat on what
else may conduce to the settlement of His three languishing and bleeding
Kingdoms: But the Commissioners are not altogether satisfied with this Answer;
neither do they take it as satisfactory. What the issue of this will be, we
leave to time and providence. Sir Peter Killegrew is disspatched away from
hence, to the Parliament, with his Majesty's last Answer touching Episcopacy.

It is verily believed, that His Majesty will give His Royal Word to pass all
the Propositions, rather then to have the Treaty obstructed; and the rather,
becuse He finds all the Designs of the Royal party to be frustrated, both in
England and Scotland; as also the Capital and, Metropolitan Design in the
Kingdom of France to be blasted in the Bud, before it could come to any
maturity or ripeness; as appears by an Express from thence to his Majesty,
and sent from the Queen to Her Dread Sovereign the King; the Heads whereof I
have here inserted viz.

That the great differences throughout he Cities of Paris, Roan, and other
parts adjacent within the limits and bounds of the French Territories, has
quite obstructed the Design of his Majesty's friends for England, and that the
Eglish quarrel is so great in several parts of that Kingdom, that no
Integrity or Loyalty can appear visible to its Sovereign: And therefore seeing
no means prevalent, to advance His Majesty's Cause, Her Majesty desires, that
this present Treaty, may be the Salve and Balsome, to cure and heal all
Diseases, throughout his vast and bleeding Nations Concluding, that she does in
a deep sense bewail the sad and intestine Miseries of all His liege people
whatsoever. Further desiring, that his Majesty would be pleased to embrace all
such Counsels and Consultations that may tend to the peace and tranquillity of
his three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

During the time of this Treaty, sundry Expresses have come from several parts
to the King, which represent things to be in a very sad condition touching the
advancement of his Cause; who upon consideration thereof, its conceived will
prove the most Isntrumental, to bring a period to our distractions, and
exclude all thoughts of jealousy from his Majesty's Royal Breast, to his two
Houses of Parliament.

Newport, 10. October, 1648.
By another Express from the Isle of Wight it is said, That

The great business insisted on is, the proposition for settling Religion,
which is like to take up some time, his Majesty gave in a paper to the
Commissioners of the Reasons wherefore the could not condescend to the taking
away Bishops, and the Government by Bishops, the treaty hereupon has held all
the last week, and nothing yet concluded on, yet most are of opinion His Maj.
will assent, and this proposition being over, there is less doubt the other in
course will be agreed on.

His Maj. has promised to deliver in his positive answer this present Monday;
which if it be but satisfactory, no doubt but there will be a good conclusion
of all to an happy peace.

Newport 9. October. 1648.
New propositions presented to his Majesty.
1 That your Maj. according to the laudable example of your Royal Father of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; and that an act of Parl* be passed, for the injoyning the taking
thereof by all the subjects of the Kingdom, etc. 2 That a Bill be passed for
the utter abolishing and taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans and Sub-Deans, and all other Officers
whatsoever, out of the Church of England and Dominion of Wales; and out of the
Church of Ireland. 3 That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of
the Assembly of Divines, be confirmed by Act of parliament. 4 That Reformation
of Religion according to the Covenant be settled by act of parliament, in such
manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon after consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines. 5 That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits,
priests, papists, and popish Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding
the Laws; and for the better discovering, and speedy conviction of popish
Recusants, an Oath be established by act of parliament to be administered to
them, wherein they abjure and renounce the popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, purgatory, worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes
and Images, and all popish Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said
Oath, being tendered in such manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be
a sufficient Conviction of popish Recusants. 6 An Act or Acts of parliament for
education of the children of papists by protestants, in the protestant
Religion. 7 An Act for the true Leavy of the penalties against them, which
penalties to be levied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree
on, wherein to be provided that his Majesty shall have no loss. 8 That an act
be passed in parliament, whereby the practices of papists may be prevented, and
a stricter course taken to prevent tht saying or hearing of Mass in the Court,
or any other part of this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Ireland.
To the four first, its said his Maj. makes some scruple at: to the latter, we
hear, that He gave his Royal assent on Monday last.

Letters further from the Isle of Wight say, That the Kings Answer on Monday
last of the Bill of Religion, were presented to the Parliaments Commissioners,
by His Majesty's Secretary, and were^

Subscribed, CHARLES R.

Wherein is contained, the sense and resolution of his Majesty touching
Bishops, and his Concessions to abolish all Archbishops, Bishops, their
Chancellors and Commissaries, Deans and Sub-Deans, Canons, Prebendaries, and
all other their inferior Officers, out of the Church of England and Dominion
of Wales, for the term of 99 years. He has also promised his Royal Word to
pass an Act to confirm the sale of Bishops Lands for the same time; and
therefore desires, that He may come to London, to treat upon the rest in
course with his two Houses of Parliament personally. The treaty goes on
unanimously, but little concluded on between the King and the Commissioners;
but its conceived before the 16 of this instant October, you will hear of a
happy conclusion.

Newport 10 October. 1648.
FINIS

