The glorious Truth of Redemption BY Jesus Christ, Rescued out of the Hand of
UNRIGHTEOUSNES. OR The Doctrine of Redemption rightly stated: WHEREIN, 1. All
Arminian and Pelagian glosses and absurdities are resuted. 2. All carnal
allegations and reasonings silenced. 3. All concerned Scriptures scemingly
discording, reconciled. 4. The Doctrine of Redemption clearly held forth,
according to the harmony of Scripture, and Analogy of Faith.


By W. L.

Romans 1. 18. For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, which withold the Truth in
Unrighteousness.

Gal. 1 7. Which is not another Gospel, but there are some which trouble you,
and would pervert the Gospel of Christ.

2 Pet. 3. 16. Among which, some things are hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable, wrest (as they do other Scriptures) to their
own destruction.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1653.

To the Worshipful Henry Langley, Dr of Divinity, Canon of Christchurch, and
Principal of Pembrook College in Oxford.
SIR,
THat undeserved respect those worthless Papers of mine which came to your hand
received, has emboldned me to come now a begging to the University: Although
it is sad to have the Father to seek when the Child is come into the World;
especially to a poor mother. Yet this is the condition of this poor Infant;
which however by Divine Providence having received a Being, yet is both naked
and bare; and unless countenanced, covered, and nourished by your care and
charity, it must needs remain despicable, and cast out to common odium. Shall I
therefore commend and commit the care thereof, or rather freely bestow it on
you? This I am sure of, it will be well provided for, if once under your Roof;
and if you as willingly entertain it as I beg: However, let it receive such
accommodation as seems best in the eyes of so skilful a Nurse. I know the Herod's
of our times will be hunting after it; but my care is over, when once under
yours.

Sir, To deal plainly, this poor Paper I know will meet with much opposition,
therefore I as boldly as humbly tender it to your protection; and as I do it
out of that due Respect I owe to your self* so I also aim by this broken and
patched piece, to prompt and provoke some of the able Champions of the Truths
of Christ, to set upon a more learned and perfect Vindication of that precious
Truth of Redemption, so much prevaricated and adulterated in our days. And give
me leave to give you a little encouragement to own it; although a Mephibosheth,
yet it is of the Royal Race, nobly descended, as legitimate as any, begotten by
the immortal seed of holy Scripture, able to derive its Pedigree from and
before Adam was; Therefore setting aside all excuses, I once more entreat its
entertainment, or else I must shamelesly leave it at your Door, to the mercy of
the wide world; yet comforted, that there cannot be less pity harbored in your
heart, then was found in Pharaoh's Daughter. I crave leave to pay that old
debt, due ever since I knew you, viz.

William Levitt,

The glorious Truth of Redemption By Jesus Christ, Rescued out of the Hand of
UNRIGHTEOUSNES.
1 COR. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. ROMANS 5. 18. Likewise, as by the offense of one, the fault came on all
men to condemnation; so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded to all
men, to the justification of life.
FRom these, and such like Scriptures, men of corrupt and unstable minds, with
Pel^gius, Armi^ius, and others in all Ages, have drawn corrupt and unsou^d
conclusions; so that that grand Gospel Truth of Redemption by Jesus Christ, as
held forth in the holy Scriptures, wherein the honor of God, and comfort of
his Saints are pri^cipally concerned, is so exceedingly prevaricated, that
little of either appears:

For the removal of which evils, take notice of the fond conceits of some, yea
too many in our times, wrested from such Scriptures.

1. Some hence affirm (and that boldly)* that Jesus Christ came to save all men
with an eternal salvation.

2. Others there are conclude hence, that Jesus Christ by his death, freed all
men from the guilt of Adam's transgression, and consequently from the
punishment due thereunto, which (as they say) is only temporal, from Genesis 3.
19. Dust thou art, and to the dust thou shall return.

3. A third sort there are (and of these although very many, yet more skilful
to deceive) who hence publicly teach, that Jesus Christ by his death has
discharged all mankind from the eternal condemnation due to Adam's
transgression; yea, and many of them (although of as strong abilities as
plausible conversations yet) make it their study to maintain this Brat of their
own breeding, although they stretch both their brains as well as the
Scriptures, upon the Tenters of their opinion, till they rend both asunder.

The unsoundness of all which opinions, with their several absurdities, are
clearly manifested in the ensuing discourse, and the doctrine of Redemption
rightly held forth, as founded upon the holy Scriptures; both Prophets and
Apostles, nay Christ himself: all agreeing in this necessary truth, that
neither the Death, Resurrection, Ascension, or Intercession of Christ, ever was
or shall be beneficial to any, but such as lay hold upon him by a true and
lively faith; according to John 3. 15, 16. So God loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life.

Where we see,

1. The moving cause, God's love. 2. That Jesus Christ was the Father's free
gift. 3. The extent of God's love to the world, terminated in the Believers,
who only have benefit by Christ: Yea, and this an act of free grace, when he
might justly have sent all to hell.
Come we now to the opinions themselves.

For the first, That Jesus Christ came to save all men with an eternal
salvation, as well from actual as original sin. This is so point blank against
the very current of Scripture, that few or none in their right senses dare own
it; the Authors thereof being (for the most part) either ignorant or profane
men not at all acquainted with the holy Scriptures, which speak a clean
contrary language; as John 5. 29. And they shall come forth that have done
good, to the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to the
resurrection of condemnation. So also Matthew. 25. 34. Then shall the King say to
them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, etc. v. 41. Then shall he
say to them on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
etc. So also Mark 16. 16. and hundreds of Scriptures more: But this not worth
time, Come to the second.

That Jesus Christ by his death has freed all men from the guilt of Adam's
transgression, which they say, procured only a Temporal Death; from that in
Genesis 3. 19. Dust thou art, and to the Dust thou shall return.

But this being as ridiculous as the former, I shall not spend much time upon
it; for certainly, all that know any thing of God as they ought, know him to be
infinite and eternal, both in his Essence and Attributes; and that the breach
of his Law must inevitably procure and deserve eternal wrath; which Adam
himself had found sure enough, had not he by faith laid hold upon Jesus Christ,
that Tree of Life. But that the vanity of this conceit may appear to all men, I
shall leave them to consider an Argument or two.

That which is the portion of the godly as well as wicked, of saints as well as
sinners, cannot be the only punishment of sin;

But Temporal death is the portion of godly as well as wicked, of Saints as
well as sinners;

Ergo, Temporal death is not the only reward and punishment of sin.

If Temporal death had been the only reward and punishment due to Original sin,
then Christ need not to have dyed at all, to free us from it; every man had
been then able to pay his own debt.

Where the effects remain the cause is not removed, But the effects of Adam's
transgression remain to this day;

Ergo, The cause (viz.) the transgression is not taken away.

If the guilt of Adam 's transgression be taken away,

1. How is it we die daily, especially if this were the only punishment due to
it; as the opinion says it is?

2. Why do women still travel in pain and sorrow?

3. What Is the reason of all diseases, aches, pains, that befall us in this
life? Do not men still live by labor? Does not the ground naturally produce
Thorns and Thistles?

4. Whence are all our actual Transgressions? Are they not branches of that old
stem? If the Tree had been dug up by the roots so many thousand years ago,
and cast into the fire, surely it would not bring forth fruit so plentifully,
as by woeful experience we see this does to this day. But to pass this also.

The third opinion being the masterpiece about which the curious Artists of
our times are so much busied, both to prop and paint: I shall speak more
largely to. In the unmasking and refuting whereof, the other two must needs
fall to the ground; viz. That Jesus Christ has freed all mankind by his
death, from the eternal condemnation due to Adam's sin, and has set all men
into a state of innocence and integrity.

The absurdities attending this error are not few; it is a many headed monster,
the belly whereof is ready to burst with its prodigious propagations; some of
which I shall lay down by way of Argument, as follows.

That exposition that is unreasonable, is false;

But this exposition of Scripture is unreasonable;

Ergo, False.

That Doctrine that destroys the harmony of Scripture is false;

But this Doctrine destroys the harmony of Scripture;

Ergo, False.

That Doctrine that is contrary to the analogy of Faith, is erroneous;

But this Doctrine is contrary to the analogy of Faith;

Ergo, Erroneous.

That Doctrine that magnifies the creature, and vilifies the blood of Christ,
is false;

But this Doctrine magnifies the creature, and vilifies the blood of Christ;

Ergo, False.

That Doctrine that derogates, detracts, or denies the omnipotency of God, is
erroneous and blasphemous;

But this Doctrine detracts from, and denies the omnipotency of God;

Ergo, False and blasphemous.

That Doctrine that tramples under foot the eternal Decree of God, and denies
his Sovereignty over the creature, is heretical and blasphemous;

But this Doctrine tramples under foot the eternal Decree of God, and denies
his Sovereignty over the creature;

Ergo, Heretical and blasphemous.

That Doctrine that holds forth salvation by a law of works, and not of grace,
is false;

But this Doctrine holds forth salvation by a law of works, etc.

Ergo, False.

That Doctrine that destroys the end of Christ's coming in the flesh, is
erroneous; But this Doctrine destroys the end of Christ's coming in the flesh;

Ergo, Erroneous.

1. It Is Unreasonable. For,

1. Hereby Christ becomes an half Savior, shedding his blood for the Original
sin of millions of men that perish in their actual Transgressions: Whereas the
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, He never purchases half a 1 John 1. 7.
pardon for any. If any man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever; now the
bread that Christ gives, is his flesh: John 6. 51. His Redemption is an
everlasting Redemption. Heb. 9. 12.

2. Unreasonable, to think that Jesus Christ should pay as great a price for
those that perish, as for his own people; for a company of damned wretches,
preordained to condemnaetion, before the world was. Will any man give a Jude 4.
thousand pounds for a trifle, a gewgaw, a Bartholomew Baby? One drop of
Christ's blood being worth a thousand worlds, surely he would not shed it to so
little purpose.

3. Unreasonable; For if the end of Christ's death were only to free men from
the guilt of Adam's transgression; By what means then are the actual sins of
the Elect. done away? Christ died but once; and without shedding of blood there
can be no remission, Heb. 9. 22. Romans 6. 10. Heb. 9. 28.


If any shall reply, the Elect, or those that are saved, are saved by Faith. I
grant that, but yet give them to know, Faith is only instrumental, not
meritoricus; the blood of Christ being the proper object of Faith; which if
only shed to acquit from Original guilt, then our Faith becoms Romans 3. 35.
of no effect, Romans 3. 3.

4. Unreasonable, Because then Original sin is pardoned without Faith; we know
as all little children are incapable of that grace, so thousand thousands of
men in the world are destitute of it also; yet the Scripture tells us, that 2
These. 3, 2:
except the blood of Christ be drunk by Faith, it cannot profit; John 6. 53.

5. Unreasonable, Because it derogates from the nature of Christ's blood; for
whom he pardons, he purifies: His blood cleanses from all sin; therefore it is
impossible for any man to perish for whom his blood is shed: for whom he
justifies, he sanctifies; yea, and glorifies: Romans 8. 30.

2. It crosses and destroys the harmony of Scripture. For,

1. The Scripture tells us, that no man can receive benefit by the blood of
Christ, but those that drink it by faith, John 6. 53. as meat cannot nourish
except we eat it, so none can receive either life or strength by the blood or
flesh of Jesus Christ, that eats and drinks it not by faith.

2. That without Faith and Repentance there is no remission, Acts 3. 19.

3. That all men are born, yea the best are conceived and born in sin, as holy
Job and David both confess, Job 15. 14. and 25. 4. Psalm 51. 5. That even the
people of God were sometime the children of wrath as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 3.
That all men by nature are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. 5.

4. That except a man be born again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God, Job. 3. 3.

5. That Faith is the gift of God Ephesians. 2. 8. Col. 2. 12.

6. That we are not able of our selves to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5.
But this Doctrine contrary to the whole Tenure of Scripture, tells us, that
thousands go to heaven, never capable of Faith; as all children, nay of very
Heathens and Pagans, etc. That we come into the world as innocent as Adam
before the Fall; therefore no need of Faith or Repentance, or being regenerate;
That we have Free Will to stand or fall; to be saved, or damned; That Faith is
in our own power, etc.

7. Although some Scriptures seem to favor these Opinionists, yet others are
direct opposite; so that they must set them together by the ears, or else they
cannot possibly have any shadow of support from them: To instance, One
Scripture says, Christ dyed for all; as in a right interpretation he may be
said to do; as 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Another says, Though the children of Israel
be as the sand, yet but a remnant shall be saved: Romans 9. 27. and while one
Text says, Christ is the Savior of the world, John 4. 42. another says, The
whole world lies in wickedness; 1 John 5. 19. that he is not sent but to the
lost sheep of Israel; Matthew. 15. 24. that he lays down his life for his sheep;
John 10. 15. yea, that certain men are pre-ordained to condemnation; Jude 4.

3. Contrary to the Analogy of Faith; For,

1. By Faith we believe that all men are born the children of wrath, dead in
trespasses and sins.

2. That God has sent his Son Jesus Christ into the world, that whosoever
believes in him, might not perish, but have everlasting life.

3. That salvation is of Free grace, not from any moving cause in us.

4. That God is omnipotent, and all-sufficient.

5. That some are elected by God to be heirs of glory, some rejected, and
pre-ordained to destruction before the world was.

6. That those for whom Christ dyed, for them also he rose again; and whom he
justifies with his blood, he sanctifies with his Spirit, and them also
glorifies.

7. That all men at the last day shall rise again, some to the resurrection of
life, others to the resurrection of condemnation.

How contradictory this Doctrine is to the faith of Gods elect, I shall leave
all to judge. If Christ has freed all from Original guilt, then we are not
born dead in trespasses: If none but Believers have benefit by Christ, then he
dyed not for all; If salvation be of grace, then there is no place for
free will: If God be omnipotent, he is able to save all whom he pleases; But
this Doctrine tells us many perish that God would save: If some elected, and
some rejected, then Christ dyed not for all; If he dyed for all, he rose again
for all, and brings all to glory: If some men arise to the resurrection of
life, others of condemnation* then this Doctrine must needs be palpably
erroneous.

4. It magnifies the creature, and vilifies the blood of Christ exceedingly;
For,

1. Hereby we become our own Saviors; for if we be all cleared from original
guilt, then come we into the world, holy, innocent, and perfect as Adam.

2. Hence must needs follow the Doctrine of Free Will, that as the destruction
of the wicked is of themselves, so also the salvation of the just is likewise
of themselves; it being in our own power (as this heresy holds forth) to be
saved or damned: we must needs have power in our selves also to believe and
repent; and so salvation is ours by a Law of works, not of grace.

2. It vilifies the Blood of Christ: For,

1. Hereby Christ is held forth an half Savior; sheds his blood for millions
of men and women in the world that perish everlastingly, to whom it becomes
vain; yea for thousands pre-ordained to condemnation.

2. Hence is the blood of Christ held forth as an unholy thing, purchasing
pardon for thousands whom it never purges; justifying those whom it sanctifies
not; he is made sin for many to whom he becomes not righteousness; a Savior to
such as for whom he is not their Advocate nor Intercessor: Contrary to the
whole tenure of Scripture; as Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. Tit. 2. 14. Acts 20. 28.

5. It derogates, detracts from, and utterly denies the omnipotency of God;
For,

If God would save many that perish, or all that perish, and cannot; as this
Doctrine would have us believe, then where is his omnipotence? and if not
omnipotent, where is his essence? therefore they may as well tell us (like
downright Atheists) there is no God; and so appear more palpable fools than
that mentioned in Psalm 14. 1. who only says so in his heart, these proclaim
it in their words, and teach men so. Psalm 53. 1.


6. That this doctrine tramples under foot the eternal Decree of God, appears
plainly; For,

1. If God has elected and chosen some to be vessels of Honor, from or before
the foundation of the world, and pre-ordained others to destruction, then the
blood of Christ was not shed equally for all; and if for all universally,
indifferently, and indefinitely, then the Decree of God is of no effect:
Certainly Jesus Christ shed not his blood for those whom God never purposed to
save: But that God has elected some, and passed by others, is plain, Romans 8.
28, 29, 30. That he has predestined some to be his adopted ones, through
Jesus Christ in himself, according to the good pleasure of his own Will;
according to the purpose of him that works all things according to the
counsel of his own Will. Ephesians. 1. 5, 11. Romans 9. 11. Ephesians. 3. 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9.
Mat. 24. 22, 31. Mark 13. 20, 22. Romans 8. 13. and 11. 5, 7. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 2 Pet.
1. 10. Acts 13. 48. Jude 4. All which places of Scripture, and many more, do so
clearly hold forth the doctrine of Predestination, Election, Adoption, and
Reprobation, as that if Satan had not blinded the eyes of such men, it were
impossible for them to withstand so clear a light.

7. This Doctrine utterly denies Gods Sovereignty over the Creature; For,

1. If the Lord has not power of his own pleasure and Free Will, without any
moving cause in us, of his own free grace and love, to make some vessels of
honor, and some of dishonor; some on whom he may declare the riches of his
grace, and others to make his wrath and power known; if he have not power to
have mercy on whom he will, and to reject others, according to Romans 9. 15.
where is his Sovereignty over the Creature? But certainly, as the Potter has
power over the clay, so has the Lord over all his creatures; as is clearly
held forth in Romans 9. 21, 22.

2. If men of themselves have free will, then the will of God is not only
resisted, but utterly rejected; contrary to the privilege the Master has of
his servant, the power a Father has over his children, and contrary to the
great sovereignty of God, whose will indeed is uncontrollable and irresistible;
viz. his decreeing Will; what he determines, shall come to pass: Psalm. 148. 6.
Jer. 5. 22. Luke 22. 22. Acts 2. 23. Romans 9. 19. Ezekiel. 12. 25.

8. That this Doctrine destroys the very end of Christ's coming in the Flesh,
appears; For,

The main end of Christ's coming in the flesh, was, to destroy the body of sin,
the works of the Devil; his blood being the purchase of his Church, and
applicable to none Romans 6. 6. Acts 20. 28.
but Believers, such as drink it by faith: Titus 2. 14. Who gave himself for
us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us, to be a peculiar people to
himself, zealous of good works: So that for whom he dies, he redeems as well
from all iniquity, as death; he never procures pardon but for his purged ones,
whom he purifies with his blood; he came not only to save from original, but
actual transgression, he being a perfect Savior.

His end was not only to be made sin for us, but that we might be made
righteous in him: For those for whom he Romans 3. 25.
died, for them also he rose again: Them whom he justifies 1 Pet. 2. 24.
with his blood, he sanctifies with his Spirit, and them also glorifies. But
this opinion tells us, he dyed for millions 2 Cor. 5. 21.
that never partake in his Resurrection, Intercession; who he neither
sanctifies, nor glorifies; and so destroys the main end of all he has done and
suffered for the sons of m^n.

Come we now to answer those Objections and Allegations of men contrary minded.

If this be not the meaning of such Scriptures, that

Christ dyed for all mankind, what then is their right sense.

Cor. 15. 22. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; it
has no relation at all to the Doctrine of Redemption, but of the Resurrection,
the Apostle discoursing upon that subject: and so it is true, as in Adam all die,
so by the power of Christ's death and resurrection shall all be raised out of
the grave, he being the first fruits of those that sleep: Nevertheless, some
shall arise to the resurrection of life, others to the resurrection of
condemnation: John 5. 29. So that some are so far from being made alive to
eternity, that they arise to receive the sentence and doom of everlasting death
and torment.

But suppose this place had intended the doctrine of Redemption by Jesus
Christ, as that Romans 5. 18. and other Scriptures do, speaking in general terms;
yet we must take heed of making every particular Scripture its own Interpreter;
for no Scripture is of private interpretation; the spirits of the Prophets
being subject to the Prophets, 2 Peter 1. 20, therefore we must compare one
Scripture with another, lest we utterly destroy that sweet and holy harmony
that is to be found even in Scriptures seemingly opposite one to the other; and
then such places will hold forth this truth, that as all that perish, perish in
Adam; so all that are saved, are saved by Christ: or, as all that die, viz.
eternally die in Adam; so all that live, viz. eternally live in and by Christ:
For all do not die eternally in Adam, so all do not live eternally by Christ:
Although there be sufficiency in the blood of Christ for ten thousand worlds,
yet it becomes efficacious to none but such as lay hold upon him by faith; his
elect, his chosen ones before the world began: Such who are given to him by the
Father out of the world, who are but a remnant, a little flock, compared with
those that perish: The intent of such Scriptures being to declare the way and
means of salvation and damnation; not the number of those that are either saved
or perish: the mistake lying chiefly in the mis-interpretation of the word
[all] and [world] which are in Scripture diversely to be accepted; as appears in
the ensuing discourse. All, in Scripture often put for many; and few, for none;
as in Phil. 2. 21. All seek their own things, but none the things of Christ;
whereas (blessed be God) there are many that do principally seek the things of
Christ, not their own.

But if some be Elect, and some Reprobate, how are men's destruction said to be
of themselves? as in Hos. 13. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1.

Adam to stand, which we having wilfully lost, the Lord may justly charge us
with the guilt of our own blood; for all our actual transgressions and
rebellions, are fruits and effects of that original pollution.

2. By reason there is in all that perish, a desperate heart of impenitency and
unbelief, implacably bent against God despising and rejecting all means of
grace and salvation, men of reprobate minds, who shall never be able to say at
last, at the great and general day, Lord, I would have believed and repented,
but thy Decree of Reprobation kept me back; for such men know,

1. That they were ignorant whether they were in the compass of that Decree.

2. Their own Consciences shall tell them, although it was their duty to wait
upon God in the use of all means of grace, and although they sat many years
under the droppings of Divine dispensations, yet they utterly abhorred all
means and opportunities of grace whatsoever, and chose rather to perish, then
to be saved by Christ: For this is to be noted, that Scripture says not, that
God gives reprobate minds to any, but that he gives them over to reprobate
minds; which all men naturally are of: God infuses not sin, but reprobates.

1. By permission, suffering men to go on in their sins.

2. By subduction, withdrawing or withholding the gifts and graces of his
Spirit, he being a free Agent, and not bound to bestow his graces to any;
therefore whom he intends and purposes to save, to them he gives the grace of
faith and repentance, others he passes by; it being his Prerogative Royal, to
have mercy on whom he will have mercy; it being an effect of mercy that any at
all are saved.

3. By Tradition, delivering men up to the hardness of their own hearts, and
power of their own lusts; saying to the filthy, be thou filthy still; and to
the unholy, be thou unholy still; Rev. 22. 11. and this a just judgment of God
upon them.





2. Unbelief is a sin hereditary from our first parents.

3. As formerly, God hardens no man, otherwise then in a way of judgment,
giving men over to their own hardness.

4. The Lord affords sufficient means to those that perish, as to those that
are saved; and where he ordains the end, he ordains the means.

5. Such is God's sovereignty over the creature, that as the wind blows where
it lists, so he gives his graces to whom he pleases, not being bound to any.



Lazarus, when he called him forth of the grave, he gave him power to rise: the
Lord ordinarily accompanying his word with his Spirit; without which, Paul and
Apollo may both plant and water in vain.

2. God's elect people, whom he intends and purposes to save, and for whose
sake the word is preached, before conversion, lie in the common quarry of
mankind; now its the ministers duty to call upon all to repent and believe, he
knowing that to be the way to heaven, but not knowing so well the secret Decree
of God, who shall be saved, who not; who shall be vessels of honor, who of
dishonor; calls upon all, that so all that belong to the election of grace,
may be brought over to Jesus Christ.

3. Hereby wicked men are left without excuse, while they (ignorant of God's
purpose) wilfully perish in rejecting and refusing the tenders and offers of
grace, indefinitely held out to them as well as others.

How can God be said to will the salvation of all, according to 1 Timothy 2. 4. if
he have elected some only, and rejected others?



2. For that there is a sufficient price paid for all, though it become
ineffectual to many through unbelief.

3. Because God gave us power in Adam to stand, which we wilfully lost.

4. The holy Ghost in such Scriptures speaks the language of the hearts and
consciences of wicked men, who at last shall justify the proceedings of God
against them, and clearly confess their destruction to be of themselves; they
being privy to that implacable hatred they had while opportunities of grace
lasted, both against God, his messengers, and all means and tenders of grace;
all mouths shall then be stopped.

5. Whereas some Scriptures hold forth that God wills the salvation of all (as
in the foregoing sense he does) yet others say, he has elected some, and
passed by others; therefore such interpretation of Scripture ought to be by
comparing one with another, as may maintain the harmony of both: However, we
may conclude this as an heresy of the highest magnitude, to say positively,
God wills the salvation of any whom he does not bring to glory; For, this
argues impotency in God, not omnipotence: Therefore I argue from his
omnipotency, that he saves whomsoever he wills to save.

But why did not God give Adam a Will as well as Power to stand.

Romans 9. 22. it being a jewel belonging to his Crown, to his Sovereignty, a
part of his Prerogative Royal, to make some vessels of Honor, some of
dishonor, according to his own good pleasure; therefore the Apostle says
enough (a man would think) to all Free-willers, That it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16.

2. Such insolent and saucy spirits as will thus adventure to question and
quarrel God, may as well ask why God made man at all; why he rejected the
Angels, and left them irrecoverable from their damnable condition; one of which
is able to do more service then ten thousand men. Why he chose Israel, the
people of the Jews, and past by all other Nations; all being the works of his
hands, and as much in one people as another to move God to accept them; but the
Lord tells them, and all the world, that he loved them, because he loved them;
not that they were either more in number, for they were much less then other
Nations, or that they were better quallifi'd; but, he loved them, because he
loved them; Deuteronomy. 7. 7.

This also might convince all, that Christ died not for all, for certainly, had
his blood been shed for all (which is the greater) the Lord would never have
denied all other people his ordinances, or refused to plant his Name among
them, more then among the Jews; nay, add hereunto how many thousands of the
Jews (although chosen out from other Nations) perished through unbelief; so
that though Israel be as the sand, yet but a remnant shall be saved; Romans 9.
27. But to pass that.

The Apostle Paul gives an answer to such bold spirits in their own kind, in
Romans 9. Who art thou (oh man) that reply against God? Shall the thing
formed, say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the
Potter power over the clay? etc. As if he had said, Thou lump of clay, why
contendest thou with thy Maker? Thou worm, thou inconsiderable part of the drop
of a Bucket, Why pleadest thou with God?

If men be condemned in Adam, why is it said, That this is the condemnation of
the world, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather then
light; John 3. 19.

Adam, but that they are now more deeply guilty, in despising the means of
grace and salvation; trampling under foot the preciou^ blood of Christ as an
unholy thing; hence men become twofold more the children of wrath, adding to
their Original, thousands Actual Transgressions, against so great love and
light; For where God gives much, he requires much.

But if God has determined already who shall be saved, and who damned, what
good will all the Preaching in the world do a man? All his hearing, reading,
and praying is in vain, if not elected; and if elected, then if he should never
hear a Sermon in all his life, yet he should go to heaven.

Romans 10. 17. and therefore is the Gospel called the word of Faith, Romans 10. 8.

2. Consider how srivolous, ridiculous, and destructive to thy self this
conclusion of thine is: Know thou not that man's days are determined, beyond
which none passes, neither do any die before their time appointed: Thou may
as well conclude, well, I know I shall not die before my time be come, therefore
I Will neither care to eat or drink, or to use any means to preserve life; why all
the means in the world will not lengthen out my life one hour: Should thou
do thus, would thou not be guilty of thine own blood? Yea doubtless. Even
so, while thou concludest, because some are ordained to life, some to
condemnation, therefore thou will live in the neglect of means; Judge whether
thy destruction be not of thy self. It Is thy duty, whatsoever God has decreed,
to wait upon him in the use of means, and leave the success to God: And this
know for thy comfort, never any man conscientiosluy thus waited upon God, or
had true desires of heaven, was disappointed of his hopes; The Lord fulfils the
desires of all such as fear him.





1. He gave us power in Adam to stand, after he had created us holy and
innocent.

2. He denies not the means of grace to those that perish.

3. There is a sufficient price paid for all, and for a thousand worlds more.

4. In all that perish there is a desperate heart of unbelief implacably bent
against God, and all means of grace: and although God give such men up to their
own hearts lusts, though he give men up to a reprobate mind, he gives no man
such a heart; although (as before) he withold the bestowing of his graces, he
being a free Agent.

5. Such as thus dispute with God, and call in question his sovereignty, the
Apostle answers, Romans 9. 20, 21. Who art thou oh man, etc? but of this
heretofore.

But the Scripture is full of such Texts as these, That Christ came into the
world to save all; as John 11. 29. Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world: Called also the Savior of the world; John 4. 42. and many
such like.

is the principal ground of the mistake; for no Scripture is of private
interpretation, neither are many Texts to be taken literally, the Scripture
being full of Figures and Allegories. To prevent the evils attending such
interpretation, take notice, 1. How diversely the word [world] is to be accepted
in Scripture.

1. For the created Fabric; as Psalm. 90. 2. Isa. 62. 11. Jer. 10. 12. 1 Samuel
2. 8. Psalm. 19. 4. Luke 1. 70. John 17. 5. 11. and 2. 7. etc.

2. For the people of the world; as Psalm. 9. 8. and 96. 3. and 98. 9. John 3.
16. etc.

3. For the wicked of the world; as Matthew. 18. 7. Isa. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 11. 32.
John 7. 7. and 14. 17. and 15. 18. and 17. 9. and 16. 29. 1 Cor. 6. 2. etc.

4. For the elect, the godly party; as Matthew. 5. 14. John 1. 29. and 3. 17. and
4. 42. and 6. 33. and 12. 47. 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1 John 2. 2. etc.

5. For the honors, pleasures, and profits of the world; as Mat. 16. 26. Mark
8. 36. Luke 9. 25. Matthew. 4. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 10. James 1. 27. 1 John 2. 15.

6. For a part of the people of the world; as Luke 2. 1. John 12. 19. and 18.
20. Acts 19. 27. 1 Cor. 4. 9. etc.

7. For the whole race of mankind in their natural condition; as John 15. 18.
and 14. 17. and 7. 7. and 8. 26. and 16. 20. 1 John 5. 19. etc.

8. For a part of the created Fabric, Continent, or Dimensions of the earth;
as Acts 11. 28. John 21. 25. Matthew. 4. 8.

9. For the Manners, Customs, Governments, or Corruptions of men in the world;
as Acts 17. 6. Gal. 1. 4. and 6. 14. etc.

Likewise the word [all] is also diversely accepted.

1. It refers to the whole race of mankind; as Genesis 3. 20. Romans 5. 12. and 3.
9, 23. and 15. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 10. etc.

2. For a considerable part of that to which it relates; as Genesis 12. 3. and 24.
36. and 28. 14. and 41. 57. John 11. 48. and 1. 7. Exodus 18. 8. Ier. 9. 2. Mat.
2. 3. and 8. 16. and 3. 5, 6. and 21. 6. Mark 1. 5. John 4. 29. and 6. 45. Isa.
54. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 12. Phil. 2. 21. etc.

3. For the Elect; as Gal. 3. 8, 26. Acts 3. 25. 1 Cor. 10. 4. Luke 20. 38.
Heb. 8. 11. Genesis 12. 3. etc.

4. For the wicked of the world; as Rev. 1. 7. Mic. 7. 2. Isa 34. 2. etc.

5. For some of all sorts, Countries, and Nations; 1 Timothy 2. 6. Rev. 1. 7.
Psalm. 75. 11, 17. and 86. 9. Mat. 24. 9. etc.

6. For all in a large and literal sense, as well in relation to persons as
things; as Matthew. 28. 18. Isa. 26. 12. Psalm. 146. 6. Eccl. 3. 20. Romans 3. 9,
10. John 5. 28. Acts 15. 14. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Gal. 3. 22.

Now it is an easy matter for men, either peevish, selfish, ignorant, or
profane, wedded to their own opinions, to draw very dangerous and pernicious
doctrines out of these and such like Scriptures, although to the destruction of
themselves, and many others; and yet have diverse Scriptures seemingly to father
their fallacies upon, merely for want of humble and holy hearts, unbyassed
spirits, to compare one Scripture with another: For want whereof, men of
corrupt minds by their private interpretations of some, and wresting of other
Scriptures, make the everlasting Gospel of Peace, the unerring Word of God, the
very foundation of fallacy, and cause of all heresy, contradiction, and
contention; destroying not only that holy harmony that is in the word, but
seducing thousands weak Christians, yea much impeding, obstructing, and
disturbing the very elect, both in their comfort and confidence: Blessed be God
who has laid an impossibility upon their being totally traduced: Therefore it
concerns all that truly fear God, not to believe every Spirit, but to try them
whether they be of God or no; not to be suddenly moved with every wind of
Doctrine, but like noble Boereans, compare Scripture with Scripture; one
Prophet and one Apostle with another; and with humble, holy, and self-denying
hearts, crave God (the Author of Truth) to give more and more of his Spirit,
that so they may be directed into all Truth, and preserved from the errors of
the wicked.

Now that we may plainly see the danger of private Interpretations and as avoid
that, so take notice of the exceeding benefit and necessity of comparing
Scripture with Scripture; I have collected diverse Texts, seemingly opposite,
and speaking quite contrary one to the other, being literally and particularly
interpreted, and yet compared with one another, and other Scriptures, most
sweetly, evangelically, and harmoniously accord, and as parallel as the
streightest lines; By which few it may easily be discerned how all other may be
rightly reconciled, and the Truths of God preserved and vindicated against all
heresy and errors whatsoever: and certainly, it were a most desirable work,
worth the pains of the most judicious and godly learned, and exceedingly
beneficial to the Church of God, tending much to its peace and edification, to
the overthrow of the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist, the advance of Truth,
Throne, Scepter, and Kingdom of Christ, to endeavor the reconciliation of all
Scriptures seemingly contradicting, and to publish it for common benefit,
although it should cost the labors of a whole life: I know the Lord has many
worthies, able champions, men valiant for the truth; and I hope, will stir up
some of them in this needful time, wherein his Truth meets with so many
adversaries. As for those few Scriptures I shall speak to, I intend not to
enter into a full disquisition of each particular Text, but only in general
give the sense and meaning of the holy Ghost, as they are jointly and
comparatively confidered.

The Scriptures seemingly contradidictory, reconciled; as follows.

Rev. 22. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still.

2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit.

James 1. 21. Wherefore laying apart all filthyness, etc.

Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole, steal no more.

Romans 13. 12. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, etc.

Shall any man from Rev. 22. 11. take encouragement to continue in any ungodly
practice? No, God forbid: God is not the Author of sin; and other Scriptures we
see speak a clean contrary language: The holy Ghost here by way of Irony,
threats wicked men; as in Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice thou young man in thy youth,
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth; but know, for all this
the Lord will bring thee to judgment: A place parallel to this; only in the
one the penalty is expressed, in the other employed: It Is a Judicial menace; as
a father having two sons, the one obedient, the other rebellious; bids the one
go on in his disobedience, take his course, and take what follows; being tired
with his lewd courses, having used all means to reclaim him, now gives him
over, while he encourages the other to continue well-doing, from the benefit
accruing: Or, Let him be filthy still, may be a severe and judicial sentence of
reprobation and rejection; when the Lord affords means and opportunities of
grace, and men will follow their lusts, will be unclean, unholy* God may and
does justly give them over; saying to them as to the barren Fig Tree, never
fruit grow on thee more: while the Saints are encouraged to go on in all ways
of righteousness, bringing forth fruit more and more, to the honor of God, and
their everlasting comfort.

Matthew. 6 25. Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink; nor yet for the body, what ye shall put on; Is not the life more
then meat? and the body then raiment?

26. Behold the Fowls of the Air, etc.

28. Consider the Lillies of the field; they neither toil, neither do they
spin; and yet etc.

34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self: sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.

Prove. 6. 6, 8. Go the to Ant thou sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise:
She provideth her meat in the Summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.

1 Timothy 5. 8. But if any provide not for his own, and especially for them of
his own house; he has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

2 These. 3. 10. For even when we were with you, this we commanded you, That if
any would not work, neither should he eat.

1 Cor. 7. 32. He that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the
Lord, how he may please the Lord:



Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing.

1 Pet. 5. 7. Cast your care upon him, for he cares for you.

1 Cor. 7. 32. But I would have you without carefulness.

v. 33. But he that is married, cares for the things of this life, how he may
please his wife.

Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread.

Eccles. 10. 18. By slothfulness the ro^f of the house goes to decay and by
the idleness of the hands the house droppeth down.

Some there are that vainly conclude from Matthew. 6. 25, 26, 28, 34. and from
Phil. 4. 6. etc. that they need take no care for any thing in this life, but
either Camelion-like expect to live by the Air, or else in the utter neglect of
their callings; while they pretend relyance upon Providence, turn mere tempters
of God, wanderers up and down, busy bodies, medlers with other men's matters,
idle persons, living upon the labors and industries of other men, not at all
considering what the Apostle says in 2 These. 3. 10. that if any would not
labor, they should not eat: the intent of the Spirit of God, and of the Lord
Christ in such places of Scripture, upon which they would plead a toleration
for their intolerable idleness, is, that men and women in the use of lawful
means, should have their dependence upon God; and that as Christians should not
over-incumber themselves with worldly business, so as to neglect the one thing
necessary, so in the midst of the moderate use of the creature, and of their
lawful callings, they should cast of^ all immoderate and inordinate care,
relying upon God who cares for them: for it is an unwarrantable and extreme
presumption, and a temptati^n of God, by a particular or private interpretation
of Scripture, to serve such a senseless sense as this: For although a man rise
early, and go late to bed, and eat the bread of carefulness, all will be but as
put into a bottomless bag, unless God give a blessing: And thus these
Scriptures that seem so to thwart one another, being comparatively and jointly
considered, are really reconciled, and hold forth one and the same thing.

John 11. 17. For the Law came by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ.

Romans 3. 19. What the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, etc.

v. 20. By the works of the Law shall no slesh be justified.

Romans 7. 6. Now we are delivered from the Law.

Romans 10. 4. For Christ is the end of the Law to al^ that believe.

Ephesians. 2. 15. Having abolished the Law of Commandments.

Mal. 2. 6. Remember the Law of Moses.

Mat. 5. 17. 18. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

v. 19. Till heaven and earth perish, one jot or tittle of the Law shall not
escape, till all be fulfilled.

v. 20. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and
teach men so, shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever
shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven.

Romans 7. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and just, and
good.

Diverse other Scriptures of like concernment.

Gal. 3. 10. Romans 7. 46. Gal. 2. 19. 1 Timothy 1. 9. Romans 16. 14. Gal. 2. 16, 21.
Gal. 3. 2. and 4. 21. and ^. 3. Ephesians. 2. 15. Mat. 11. 13. Luke 16. 16. Acts 13.
39. Romans 3. 28. and 4. 13. 15. and 7. 4. and 9. 32. etc.

Other Scriptures of like concernment.

Mat. 15. 3. Mark 12. 30. Romans 13. 9. Ephesians. 6. 2. John 2. 4. Mark 10. 17, 19.
Luke 1. 6. John 14. 21. Acts 28. 23. Romans 2. 13. and 3. 20. Gal 3. 24. James 2.
11. John 1. 3, 4. Mat. 19. 16, 18 19. Mark 12. 29, 30. John 15. 10. 1 Cor. 7.
19. Neh. 10. 29. Rev. 22. 14. 1 John 2. 4. etc.

These Scriptures, and many more of like import not here mentioned, being
compared one with another, hold a sweet and holy harmony one with another; nay
although each Text were particularly discussed, yet being Evangelically
interpreted, according to the Analogy of Faith, would not at all differ: Yet
men of corrupt minds, by sinister and private construction of them, draw forth
such a sense as may suit their own fancy, although they bring them into a
direct opposition; although such private Interpretations are quite contrary to
the Word of God; as in 2 Pet. 1. 20. and is cause of not only that old
Antinomian, but all other heresy and error; it is an old heresy new vampt, to
say, The Law is of no use to Believers now in Gospel times; For certainly, as
the Gospel was of special use to Believers in times of the Law, so is the Law
of precious use to Believers in Gospel times; viz. the Moral Law: I wonder of
what use the Law of God, the ten Commandments given in Mount Sinai, were to
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, Job, Daniel, etc. that it is not to every Believer
in these days! No man thinks they were saved by the works of the Law, or
expected Justification by the Law, but by faith; nevertheless it was the rule
of their sanctification and obedience, it was the way they walked into life,
although not the cause of life; and so it must be to all the godly in Gospel
times, although not the cause of Justification, yet it is the standing rule of
their sanctification, obedience, and conversation: This error arises
principally from the mis-interpretation of the word Law; which is severally in
Scripture to be accepted. Sometime intending the Ceremonial Law, sometime the
Judicial, sometime the Moral Law; sometime the penalty of the Law; as Col. 2. 14.
Ephesians. 2. 15, etc. there it intends the Ceremonial Law: in Acts 23. 3. 1 Timothy 1.
9, 10, 11. there the Judicial Law, and the penalty thereof is intended; the
Judicial Law being a rule of life in Civil respects, none are concerned in the
penalty thereof but evil doers: So although the penalty of the Moral Law
belongs to none but unbelievers and ungodly wretches, yet it is a rule of life
to all, even to the most precious people of God: It was the comendation of
Zachary and Elisabeth, that they walked in all the commands of God
unreprovably; for any man to say the Law is of no use to Believers, is (I say)
an old desparate heresy, that brings hundreds of Scriptures by the ears, which
is prevented, by an holy, humble, judicial, and impartial comparing one
Scripture with another, and interpreting one by another: It Is confessed, that the
damnatory, the domineering, nay the justifying power of the Law is abolished,
as in a legal sense, yet evangelically interpreted, every Believer is saved by
a Law of works, as between God the Father and Jesus Christ the mediator of our
peace, who has fulfilled the Law for us; and therefore salvation is of free
grace to us: yet withal know this, no man shall ever receive benefit by the
fulfilling of the Law by Christ, that practices not obedience to that very Law;
for as Jesus Christ was the Angel of the Covenant that conducted Israel to
Canaan, that appeared in the Bush, Exodus 3. 2. Acts 7. 35. the same has left
this lesson to all that love him, and will follow him to the heavenly Canaan,
to keep his Commandments: And thus those Scriptures before mentioned, although
they seem to speak a contrary language, are to be reconciled.

Come we now to those Scriptures that concern the present Controversy; which
because very many there can be no expectation of a particular account of every,
or any one of them; neither is it my purpose: Yet by Gods grace, I intend so to
ballanee the account, as to give in the summa totalls of them all, so far as is
necessary to the matter in hand, according to the holy Spirit that speaks in
them.

1 Cor. 15. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive.

Romans 5. 18. Likewise then as by the offense of one, the fault came on all men
to condemnation, so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded to all men,
to the justification of life.

John 4. 42. This indeed is the Christ, the Savior of the world.

John 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world.

Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; he that
believes not, shall be damned.

John 3. 15, 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

He that believes not, is condemned already.

John 1. 5, 19. The whole world lies in wickedness.

John 7. 7. The world cannot hate you, but me it hates.

1 John 4. 14. And we have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son
to be the Savior of the world.

1 John 2. 2. And not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world.

2 Cor. 5. 9. That God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself.

Gal. 3. 8. In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.

John 3. 17. That the world through him might be saved.

John 6. 33, 51. Ana gives life unto the world. Which I will give for the life
of the world.

Other Scriptures of like concernment.

John 12. 47. and 15. 18, 19. Romans 4. 13. and 11. 12, 15. and 8, 32. Acts 3.
16, 25. Gal. 3, 28. 2 Pet. 3, 9. Ezekiel. 18. 32. and 33. 11. Prove. 1, 30. Mat.
23. 57. Luke 1. 7. 1 Timothy 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3, 9. etc.

John 14. 17. Whom the world cannot receive.

John 17. 2, 9. Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to them thou have given him.

I pray not for the world, but for them thou have given me out of the world.

Mat, 15, 24. I am not sent but to the lost sheep of Israel.

Rom, 11, 7, Then Israel has not obtained, but the election.

Rom, 9, 27, Though Israel be as the sand, yet but a remnant shall be saved.

Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. Chosen us in him before the foundation of the world.

John 10. 15. I lay down my life for my sheep.

Jude 4. Men of old, pre-ordained to destruction.

Other concerned Scriptures.

Mat. 20. 16. and 24. 22, 24. and 29. 34. Luke 13. 23. and 1. 68. and 18. 17.
Mar. 13. 20, 22, 27. Act, 13. 18. Romans 8 29, 30, 33 and 9, 11, 23. and 11. 5.
Tit. 1. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 1. 2, 20. 2 Pet. 1. 10. Ephesians. 3. 11. and 1. 4, 9. 2 Timothy 1.
9 Rev. 14. 4. Gal. 5, 17.

Forasmuch as that 1 Cor. 15. 22. first mentioned to maintain that pernicious
doctrine of Universal Redemption, has no relation at all to the doctrine of
Redemption, but of the Resurrection, I shall not speak much to it, only this;
It Is true, that by the power of Christ's death and resurrection, all men, both
godly and wicked, shall arise at that great and terrible day of the Lord; but
withal consider, that as some shall arise to the resurrection of life, so also
others to the resurrection of condemnation: the day of resurrection is so far
from being any benefit to unbelievers, as that it is only the taking them out of
prison, to receive their last and dreadful doom, and so to be hurried to the
place of execution: But as for all other Scriptures that seem to plead this
heresy, if we compare them with others, we shall find them directly opposite
to that opinion: For as it is said the Lord Christ bealed all sicknesses and
diseases, and evert one possessed with devils, etc. in like sense he dyed for
all, and becomes a Savior to all; to wit, all that are given to him, and come
to him by Faith: For as millions of men in the world never received cure by
Christ of their corporal diseases, that neither came, nor were brought to him;
so millions perish, that never lay hold upon Christ by faith; his blood being
beneficial to none but such as come to him, and eat his flesh, and drink his
blood by faith; It Is unreasonable, contrary to harmony of Scripture, derogatory
to the excellency of the blood and merit of Christ, overthrows the omnipotency
and very being of God, denies his sovereignty over the creature, tramples under
foot that precious doctrine of election and predestination, makes the eternal
decree of God of no effect, destroys the doctrine of free grace, and instead
thereof sets up free will, or a Law of works, as already has been plainly
manifested, with many other gross absurdities attending; to hold that Christ
shed his blood for all universally and indefinitely, that he has freed all
from the guilt of Adam's transgression, and puts every man into a state of
innocence, that all men have power to stand or fall, to repent and believe,
etc. But that Christ laid down his life for his sheep, for those whom God the
Father has given him out of the world, for all that believe, that many are
called, but few chosen; that Christ's flock is a little flock, that none but
the elect, nay the elect of Israel obtain mercy, that but a remnant (even of
Israel) shall be saved, that certain men are elected and chosen to be vessels
of honor, and some pre-ordained to condemnation before the world was, that no
man can come to Christ, unless drawn to him by God the Father, that we are not
able of our selves to think a good thought, that it is God that works in us both
to will and to do of his good pleasure, that we are all by nature children of
wrath and disobedience, dead i^ trespasses and sins, that faith is the gift of
God, and that without faith none can receive the least benefit by the death,
resurrection, or intercession of Christ, that all men dying in a state of
unbelief, perish eternally; that the ungodly and hypocrite shall be in hell
tormented for ever, while the godly, and such as believe in the Lord Christ,
shall reign^ with him eternally in glory: This Scripture clearly holds forth,
as by comparing one Scripture with another, he that runs may read. The main
cause of this error as aforesaid, is a misconstruction and mis-interpretation
of the words [all] and [world] which are severally accepted; for even the elect
may be called the world, not unaptly considered in themselves, being very many,
Rev. 7. 4. read there of an hundred forty and four thousand of the Tribes of
Israel sealed, and verse 9. a great multitude whom none could number; and yet
all these compared with those that perish, but a remnant, a little flock; and
in this sense is the word [world to be taken in 1 John 29. and 2 Cor. 5. 19.
and diverse other places: And whereas it is said, As in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive; If that Scripture had any reference at all to
the doctrine of Redemption, it should be thus interpreted; That as all that die
eternally, die in Adam; so all that live eternally, live in Christ: the way and
cause of salvation being there intended, not the number that are to be saved or
destroyed; but as all men do not die eternally in Adam, so all men live not
eternally by Christ: God having chosen only a certain number to himself, on
whom he declares the riches of his grace, while he rejects others, upon whom he
makes known his wrath and power: The words [all] and [world] being in Scripture
often put for many, or a considerable part, as in Luke 2. 1. John 12. 19. John
4. 43. and diverse other places before mentioned: And if those two words be thus
interpreted, the harmony of Scripture will be maintained, even in those that
seem most contradictory; for no Scripture certainly intends such a sense, as
that all reprobates, unbelievers, and ungodly wretches, or any of them, should
equally share with the Saints and peculiar people of God, of whose redemption
the blood of Christ is the only price: He gave himself; What, to redeem a
people from Adam's guilt, and to suffer them to perish in their actual sins?
No, God forbid; Whom he pardons, he pu^ifies; whom he justifies, he sanctifies;
and them brings to glory: He laid down his life to purchase a people to
himself, and to purify them as well as purchase them: Therefore we may safely
conclude from all that has been said, that whom he brings not to glory, he
never sanctifies; and whom he sanctifies not, them he never justifies; and whom
he justifies not, he sheds not his blood for: If dogs may not partake of
childrens-bread, if ungodly men may not partake in external privileges, how
much less in the eternal inheritance of the Saints? Shall men pre-ordain^d to
destruction partake of the portion of God's elect? God forbid. It Is true,
wicked men may and do partake of common favors, the sunshine, the rain, etc.
and in this sense the Lord Christ may be said to be the Savior of the world;
as 1 Timothy 4. 10. where the Apostle says, He is the Savior of all men, but
especially of those that believe: he has special favors to visit them withal:
So that we see how easy it is by private interpretation of Scripture, to
maintain the most horrid heresy; while by an humble, holy, impartial comparing
of Scriptures one with another, the Truths of God are clearly held forth, and
all error and heresy trodden under foot.

I should here speak something in answer to those Scriptures that seemingly
plead for free will, as Prove. 1. 29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord. Mat. 23. 27. Oh Jerusalem, etc. how often would I
have gathered thee together as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings,
but ye would not? Although in the preceding discourse I have answered all
objections of this nature, yet I add, that it is true, all men have power and
free will by nature to do that that is sinful and evil; but by reason of our
depravity, we have no power or will at all to do good; methinks that natural
proueness in children and youth to sin, as soon as capable nay sooner capable to
sin, then almost any thing else; that day lie experience the best men have of
the remains of corruption in themselves, the old man not quite destroyed; when
I hear that blessed Apostle Paul crying out of that body of sin and death he
carried about with him; holy David confessing and lamenting the very sins of
his conception and nativity; innocent Job telling us, it is impossible for him
that is born of a woman to be clean; I cannot but wonder why men should be so
destitute of common sense, as to say, we are all by the death of Christ put
into a state of innocence! Again, when I hear the Scripture say, we are not
able to think a good thought of our selves; that the best men cannot do the
things they would; that it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy; Romans 9. 16. that it is God that works in us to will
and to do, of his good pleasure; Phil. 2. 15. that by nature we are all
children of wrath, dead in trespasses and sins; that faith is the gift of God,
etc. I am forbidden to give any further answer to our free-willers, till they
answer those Scriptures, and by that time, I think silence will satisfy; mean
while I entreat them to consider,

1. How strongly they strike at God's omnipotence, and consequently at his
essence, when they tell us, that thousands perish that God would save; as if
God were not able to save whomsoever he pleases.

2. How they (as much as in them lies,) trample under foot the eternal decree
of God, and deny his sovereignty over the creature.

3. How by their advance of free will, they usher in a Law of works, and so
derogate from the doctrine of free grace; within one step to that popish tenent
of merit; that while they profess themselves Protestants, they are strongly
pleading not only the cause of Papists, but of Atheists of the highest
magnitude, ten degrees beyond and above him mentioned Psalm 14. 1.

If temporal death, and all outward calamity, as pain in childbearing, etc. be
effects of original guilt, and that Christ (as all confess) dyed to deliver all
Believers from all, both original and actual Transgressions, what is the reason
the godly as well as the wicked die, that believers as well as unbelievers
suffer like pain?

Eccl. 9. 1, 2. that all things come alike to all, and the same condition is to
the just and unjust, to the pure, and to the poluted: and herein, as in all
other the works of God, appears his wonderful wisdom and goodness, that while
the greatest miseries of this life befall the godly, they are fatherly
castigations, and preparations for glory; he chastens them, that they might not
perish with the world, they having this promise, that all things shall work
together for the best to them; that even death it self is so far from being a
punishment to them, that it is only a bridge or passage to convey them to
Canaan, the promised land of their heavenly inheritance, all things, and all
conditions being sanctified to them, and the sting of all outward visitations
and strokes taken away, while every sickness, pain, calamity, or distress to
the wicked, is but the yernest of that eternal torment of which they are heirs
apparent, and death it self the terrible sergeant that hurries and hales them,
nill they, will they, to the place of execution.

And now having shown the several absurdities and dangerous errors that are
formed in the bowels of this monstrous doctrine of universal redemption; I
shall conclude all with a few directions to weak Christians, who by woeful
experience we see so apt dayiie to be seduced to their utter undoing.

1. Take heed of being moved with every wind of doctrine, according to the
advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 14. Try the spirits whether they be of God yea
or no; 1 John 4. 1. and if an Angel from heaven shall teach any doctrine
dishonorable to God, in denying any of his attributes, destructive to the
harmony of Scripture, believe him not, nay hold such accursed, according to
Gal. 1. 8. though their conversations be never so unblameable; for herein
Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light; and as he, so his ministers,
2 Cor. 9. 14, 15.

2. Attend upon every ordinance of God public and private, not for custom, but
conscience sake; take heed of that vain opinion and practice of too to many in
our times, that while they tell us of living above Ordinances, they live
without them, in the utter neglect and contempt of them, whereby they become a
very prey to the devil, and their own lusts; up to which it is just with God to
deliver them, Romans 1. 28.

3. Beware of slighting and scorning those, that under God have been
instruments of thy conversion, how despicable soever they be in the eyes of
others: the blind man would not be persuaded by the Pharisees out of his senses
concerning Christ, that he was a sinner, etc. Whether he be a sinner or no,
says he, I know not; one thing I am sure of, that whereas I was blind, I now
see; and since the world began it was never known that a man born blind had his
eyes opened: So when you hear able, godly, conscientious ministers and
messengers of God slighted and vilified as it is too common in our days, a
heavy judgment of God upon this Nation: I say, plead thy experiences in their
behalf, and frame arguments from their conversation, doctrine, and work of
grace in thy soul, who was born stark blind, and dead, to maintain the justness
of their cause and innocence against all gainsayers.

4. Have no man's person in admiration, either minister or private Christian,
but let thy affections be so poysed, that the image of God in every man be the
basis and foundation of thy affections; although they may differ from thee in
some circumstantial points, if fearers of God, stand not at a distance with any.

5. Part not easily with any truth of God, resist herefie in the very
beginning; buy the truth, and sell it not, contend earnestly for the faith once
given to the Saints; lean not to thy own understanding, but consult with the
godly judicious learned when any truth is called in question; part not upon
easy terms, for there are that are cunning to deceive; therefore take heed of
being deceived; it is Christ's own caution, Mark 13. 4. Mat. 24. 4. so the
Apostle in Ephesians. 4. 14. Ephesians. 5. 6. 2 These. 2. 3.

6. Be not puffed up with conceit of thy own abilities; think meanly of thy self;
according to Romans 12. 3. be humble, and God will give thee more and more
knowledge of him: He will teach the humble, Psalm. 25. 9.

7. Ever suspect that doctrine that magnifies the creature, that tends to
looseness of life, neglect of religious duties; and embrace that doctrine that
presses holiness and attendance upon divine ordinances, that sets up Jesus
Christ and lays the creature low; and though it be against the grain of nature,
yet it is the more like to proceed from God.

8. Endeavor to walk as becomes thy profession, suitable to that light and
knowledge thou have of God; so shall thou know more of God, if we follow on to
know him; Hos. 6. 3. to him that orders his conversation aright, will he show
his salvation.

9. Be conversant with the most knowing judicious godly Christians, and be very
well advised when either an old received truth is called in question, or an old
error is spread under the notion of a new light; for old error soonest settles
upon young heads: Men and women young in the matters of God, shun the society
of men profane, selfish or peevishly disposed, whose minds run after novelties.

10. Pray the Lord to direct and preserve thee in the ways of truth and
righteousness; so shall thou be preserved from the error of the wicked.

I conclude with the prayer of the Apostle, 2 These. 5. 23.

Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your
whole spirits, souls and bodies, may be kept blameless to the coming of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. FINIS.

