A LETTER SENT From the Court of his Royal Majesty THE KING of FRANCE In the
behalf and defense of the King of Scots: WITH His Declararation and
Protestation thereupon, in the presence of God, Angels, and Men.

Also, The Articles of Peace and Unity agreed upon between the Kings most
excellent Majesty, and their Royal Highnesses, the Duke of Orleans, and the
Prince of Conde.

Subscribed, Lovis Rex.

WITH The new rising of the Scots, their declaring against the Parliament, and
the burning of 100 houses in Glascow.

LONDON: Printed for SAM: COTTON, 1652.

A LETTER From his Royal Majesty's Court the King of FRANCE Touching The King
of Scots, and the Articles of Union, signed between him and the Prince of Conde.
SIR,
Whereas his Sacred Majesty the King of France, having received advertisements
of the uncivil deportments of the Citizens of Paris against the King of Scots,
and being sensible of the inevitable distractions, that might receive
dependence thereupon; immediately mediated with his Council for a timely
prevention thereof, in pursuance whereof, he graciously vouchsafed to send an
express letter to the Citizens, conjuring them from any riotous meeting or
distempers; as also from assailing or prejudicing the person of his well
beloved Cousin, CHARLES -- etc. protesting in the presence of God, Angels, and
Men, that his Advice and Council tended only to the healing of the wounds of
that bleeding Kingdom; and that his innocence was a sufficient testimony to
the world, desiring God to bear him record thereof) that all his negotiations
tended only to peace and unity, and a right understanding between the
Sovereign power and the body politic, this Letter was signed by the Kings
Royal Signet, and

Subscribed, LOVIS REX.
The King is now upon his march toward Paris, and his royal Retinue is come to
St. Dennis: The Articles of union are signed both by his Majesty, and their
Royal Highnesses the Duke of Orleans, and the Prince of Conde, which are to
this effect, to wit. 1. That Cardinal Mazarine, be first justified of all those
things laid to his charge. 2. That seeing he must depart the Kingdom, that he
may be put into so honorable an employment, as is befitting his rank and
eminent quality. 3. That his Royal Highness, the Duke of Orleans, and the
Prince of Conde, subscribe the returnn of the Cardinal, after a certain time.


Thus, are the affairs of France brought to a happy conclusion, and the
distractions of this Kingdom, with great alacrity, and joy composed, to the
great honor, triumph, and felicity of all those that are lovers of Monarchy.

St. Dennis June, 24, 1652.



This Letter coming to my hands, I thought it requisite to present to public
view, to the end, that all Christians may give their construction thereof,
according to its true sense; by paraphrasing upon the subject according to the
particulars enlarged in the ensuing paper. Dated from Paris June 29.

THe 25 instant in the Evening, the Lievt. Civil was beset by a great number of
people in the Chastelet, which is one of the common prisons of the City, and
they seeing the Gates made fast, and those in the house to be in a posture of
defense, and in a capacity to oppose them, did set fire to the Gate, which had
it not been soon quenched, might have proved very ominous to that City,
thereupon harsh Language passing the one against the other, from words they
fell to knocking, where some few were slain on both sides, and those that were
detained there, could not go out till 11 at night. The last time the Parliament
sat, there was but little spoken about the Union between the Princes, by
reason that the Parliament will not meddle too far therein, but keep in a
neutrality, that so they may be still within the capacity of Mediators, and
because the King by his last answer to their Remonstrance presented to him at
Melun, his Majesty does declare that his desire is, That the Cardinal be first
justified of all those things that are laid to his charge, and next that seeing
he must depart the Kingdom, that he may be put into so honorable an
employment as is besitting his rank and eminent quality. The Princes having
again subscribed the former Declaration by them made of laying down their arms
so soon as the Cardinal was gone out of the Land. The Parliament thereupon
passed 2 Votes, to this effect, That all the Declarations, Decrees, Orders, and
Votes which have been made for the banishing of the Cardinal Mazarine out of
the Land, should be executed in their full tenor, and without any hopes of
return. Monsieur du Portai rose up, and said, He knew no fitter employment for
him, then to send him to carry their answer to the Letter of the Queen of
Sweden, which would put him into his first trade of a Letter-Carrier, or
Messenger; in the mean time the general report here is, that the peace is made
between the King and the Princes, the Duke of Orleans having spoken the same
two days since, which is much doubted by many, by reason of the great
difficulties which meet in the business, it being affirmed by many, that the
affairs are brought to that period, upon the earnest instance of the Court to
have the Princes subscribe the return of the Cardinal after a certain time,
which the princes refuse to do, only they will make the promise verbally, but
nothing in writing; but whether the peace be concluded or not, there is no
other talk about the City, and so I believe you will hear the same by many
Letters. The Court is removed from Melun, and come near St. Denis, and as some
say, is expected here to morrow, being now but three Leagues off this City; The
Kings Army is still at Claye, and the Princes Army at S. Clou, and so all along
to Surenne, The Duke of Lorrain is by this time at his own home, and has put
out a Declaration by way of Apology to justify himself about those
imputations laid upon him concerning the late Treaty: Charles Stuart and his
confederates remain still as prisoners in the Louvre not daring to show there
heads abroad, they being so much hated of all the people about their late
actions in the Treaty between the King and the Duke of Lorrain, so that it is
thought he will not tarry here long, but whether for Denmark or the Palatinate,
is not known.

By Letters from Venice, thus. We hear there arrived lately from
Constantinople, in that City an Express with Letters, wherein the Great Turk
and his Council seem very much inclined to the peace; and thereupon the
Senator Giovanni Capello is chosen to go as Ambassador Extraordinary for the
States, who is to be gone with all speed to make the first Overtures, and so
try whether it may be brought to some conclusion. In Dalmatia the Turks being
together in great bodies, there entered the country one Telepowick a renegado,
having with him about 5000. who came near Spallatto, and did much spoil and
wast the Country, carrying away great store of people to make slaves, great
store of cattle and other rich booty, which the Morlacks hearing, did forthwith
draw together in a very considerable number, and being gone in pursuit,
overtook them, and charged them so gallantly, that after some small dispute,
put them to a rout in the Plain of Cracovy, two days journey beyond Clissa:
there was slain of the Turks about 400. a great number wounded, above 300
prisoners, and gained upon the Turks, besides what they had taken 450 horses,
and some Oxen, which were for the Train and carriage, besides, being entered a
days journey into Bosnia the enemies country, they burned some Villages, and
carried away many prisoners, and so returned homewards. From Candia we hear,
that the Turks having made a strong attempt against that city, which they have
close sieged for these three years, which they thought to have surprised, but
it being known to the Governor, the enemy was so well received that he
retreated in a disorderly manner, leaving many of their men behind them. The
Governor of Milan since his taking of Trin, has again taken another castle in
Piedmont, and his forces do make many inroads in Piedmont, they give out that
they will block up Casal, but that seems not probable. The siege of Barcelona
goes on still, but nothing is done lately there, that is any way considerable.

From Scotland thus: There has been lately a great rising, and many declare
for the Scots King, against the union with England, they are very imperious
against the Parliaments soldiers, and some affronts has been given; but that
which is most dismal is, the firing of about 100 houses in Glascow.

FINIS.

