A copy of a Letter serit by Liev. Col. John Lilburne to Mr. Wollaston Keeper
of Newgate or his Deputy.
SIR, I this morning have seen a Warrant from the house of Lords, made
yesterday, to Command you to bring me this day at 10. a clock before them, the
Warrant expresses no cause wherefore I should dance attendance before them,
neither do I know any ground or reason wherefore I should, nor any Law that
compels me thereunto; for Their Lordships sitting by virtue of Prerogative,
pattents and not by Election or common consent of the People, has as Magna
Carta (and other good Laws of the Land) tells me, nothing to do to try me, or
any Commoner whatsoever in any criminal case, either for life, limb, liberty,
or estate, but contrary hereunto as incrochers and usurpers upon my freedoms
and liberties; they lately and illegally endeavored to try me a Commoner at
their Bar, for which I under my hand and seal, protested to their faces
against them, as violent and illegal incrochers upon the rights and liberties
of me, and all the Commons of England, (a copy of which etc. I in Print
herewith send you) and at their Bar I openly appealled to my competent,
proper, legal tryers, and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament (for which their Lordships did illegally, Arbitrarily, and
Tiranically, commit me to prison into your custody) unto whom diverse days ago
I sent my appeal etc. which now remains in the hands of their speaker, if it
be not already read in their House, unto which I do and will stand and obey
their commands.

Sir, I am a freeman of England, and therefore I am not to be used as a slave
or Vassell by the Lords, which they have already done and would further do, I
also am a man of peace and quietness, and desire not to molest any if I be not
forced there unto, therefore I desire you as you tender my good and your own,
take this for an answer, that I cannot without turning traitor to my liberties,
dance attendance to their Lordships Bar, being bound in conscience, duty, to
God, my self, mine, and my country, to oppose their encroachments to the
death, which by the strength of God I am resolved to do. Sir you may* or cause
to be exercised upon me, some force or violence to pull and drag me out of my
chamber, which I am resolved to maintain as long as I can, before I will be
compelled to go before them, and therefore I desire you, in a friendly way, to
be wise and considerate before you do that, which it may be you can never
undo,

From my Cock-loft in the Press yard of Newgate this 23. of June 1646. Sir, I
am Your true and fair conditioned prisoner if you will be so to me, JOHN
LILBURNE

The Copy of the Order.
Die Lu^oe 22. Junij 1646.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that Live, Col. John Lilburne now
a prisoner in Newgate, shall be brought before Their Lordships in the [High
Court of PALIAMENT] tomorrow morning by ten of the clock: And this to be a
sufficient warrant* in that behalf,

To the Genesis Usher of this House, or his Deputy to be delivered to the Keeper
of Newgate or his Deputy.

John Brown
Cler. Parliamentorum.

