A BRIEF PLATFORM OF THAT GOVERNMENT Which is called PRESBYTERIAL.

By WILLIAM LEY Minister of the Word at Charlwood in SURREY.

Volumus eum, qui beatus sit, tutum, inexpugnabilem, munitum; non ut parvo metu
praeditus, sed ut nullo: ut enim Innocens is dicitur, non qui leviter nocet,
sed qui nihil nocet; Sic sine metu is habendus, non qui parum metuit, sed qui
omnino metu vacat. Cic. Tusc. Quaest. Si, salvis hominibus, queam jugulare
vitia, videres quantus sim futurus Carnifex. Eras. Epist. lib 19. page 603.
Nostri sine Cruce CHRISTUM quaerunt; adversarii propter Anti-Christum mill
Cruces subeunt. Bucer. Ep. ad Calv. Perfidae Ignaviae esse arbitror, quamdiu
hanc personam sustineo, non acriter ad extremum usque certare pro sancta and
legitima disciplina. Calv. Ep. ad Tigur. Minist. Gideon said unto them, I will
not rule over you, neither shall my Son rule over you. The Lord shall rule over
you, Jud. 9.23. LONDON Printed by William Du-gard, and are to be sold by
Nathanael Brooks, at the Sign of the Angel in Cornhill. 1648.

To the right Worshipful and Reverend Gentlemen and Ministers of the Classis
at RIE-GATE in the County of SURREY.
Right Worshipful and Reverend!
IT has pleased Divine Providence first to wean me from my Native Country,
then from the World, and now lastly from my self: So that I who am naturally of
an infirm and crazie Constitution, subject to compliance with the stream, and
to turn with the Heliotropium, am supernaturally elevated above common
principles, Spiritually engaged to plead for Christ, even in such Malignant
times, wherein Christ is opposed in his Name, Person, Offices, Word and Works;
when most men rather wag their heads against him, then truly vail their bonnets
and bow their knee before him.

There have been times wherein this Subject might have fallen into the bosom of
Nurses, but now it is like to fall into the hands of Step-dames. PRESBYTERY is
counted Marah, though indeed she be a Naomi; and every man will cry up the
Diana of Licentiousness, not because it is a right way, but the common Rode both
for Libertines and Atheists.

Elijah, John Baptist, Luther had their times, which though perilous to
themselves, yet they accepted as advantageous to their Master: and Paul
consulted with the Spirit and Faith, while Flesh and Blood would have made him
a Renegado to Christ and the Gospel.

But so weak are we, that there is need of reasons to whet our Zeal as well as
examples to strengthen it; let us consider that not only the Cause but also the
Success is God's. Jeremy and Luther died in their beds, while Balaam the false
Prophet die's by the sword: and Tecelius die's wounded with grief by his own
Party.

Moreover it is a considerable truth, that God look's not only at the
substance of the duty, but at the circumstances that attend it: and that he
delight's in Adverbs more then in Neuns; and love's been better then bonum it
self: Therefore though it be well taken that Christians follow Christ when all
men cry Hosanna; yet it is most seasonable when all men cry Crucify: though
it be most sweet to follow Christ when the Crown is on his temples, yet it is
most meet to follow him when the Cross is on his back. It is good to own Christ
on Mount Calvarie, as well as Mount Tabor: when he is spit upon by an
adulterous generation, Mark 8.38. as Moses and Paul did, the first whereof
preferred the reward of Christ above the Treasures of Egypt; the other was not
ashamed of the preaching of the Gospel when all men cast shame upon it, Romans
1.16.

This Kingdom is too like Israel in blessing, and in barrenness; and therefore
may be called Jidsreel disperdendi a Deo, divided, scattered, ruined by the
Lord, rather to be styled Jezrelites then true Israelites as Jacob and
Nathanael were.

God had given us a wise, zealous, active, glorious Parliament; but me think's
the beauty and splendour fade's as a woman does after many throws, and as the
body does after many aguish Paroxisms: no doubt all this for our sins.

Me think's the Scene begin's to change; the Scale which ere while was lowest
now mount's to a considerable height, and all this too for our iniquities.

But I had rather discuss the Cure then the Diseas. Two things must recover
England, and two things must preserv it.

1. The recovering consist's in entire repenting and reforming.

2. The preservation 1. In the holy Union of King with Parliament: 2. In wholly
and entire submission to the Government of Christ. Now our Lord Jesus Christ
has a fourfold Government; 1. Internal, that of the Spirit. 2. External, 1.
Preaching the Word. 2. Administration of the Sacraments. 3. Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which is the present subject now in hand.



And for the opening whereof I have don my endeavor in this ensuing Compendium,
and have made bold to dedicate it to you who are the Right Worshipful and most
Reverend Elders of the Classical Assembly.

Magistrates and Ministers are the duo magna Luminaria; which two great Lights
God made to protect and govern his Church, as the Sun and the Moon to govern
the World: how happy shall the Church be in so noble and sacred a
conjunction? no less beautiful then Tirzah; no less terrible then an Army with
Banners.

The causes which first engaged me to write was no supposition of ability in
my self; Hoc tantu^m scio me nil scire. Soc.
but first I desired to extract an Epitome of the Government for my private
satisfaction; then I faw it necessary to give answer to some scruples of wise
and well-affected persons under mine own charge, unto which this present
Treatise has some relation: and lastly I perceived (which was the main motive)
that the greatest obstacle why it was not generally embraced was, not because it
wanted splendour in it self, but because men wanted eyes and illumination.

It was Ignorance made the Norvegian the first time he saw Roses, not dare to
touch them, for fear of burning his fingers; and it is no less ignorance that
make's common people fear a Government. Must we (say they) com to the
touchstone? just like little children, afraid of Goblins in the dark;
therefore they often turn, and return with Solomon's door upon the hinges,
before they can either bar their hearts against it, or set them open
courteously to give it entertainment.

Such as these must learn by example, and by experience; Yours, (Noble
Patriots and Magistrates!) will do much; you are the great wheels must set the
lesser on gate.

Give me leave a little to withdraw the curtain that stand's before it, and it
will discover it self amiable to you upon an exact survey: I shall only mark
unto you six particulars. 1. It is a Primitive. 2. Pure. 3. Spiritual. 4. Safe.
5. Prudential. 6. Aristocratical Government.

1. It is Primitive. Peter call's himself not a Bishop, but a Presbyter, (...).
1 Pet. 5. who am also an Elder. Paul 1 Timothy 4.14. bid's Timothy neglect not
the gift which was given by imposition of hands, (not of Episcopacie but)
Presbytery.

Totum hoc magis ex consue tudine quam ex dispositionis veritate, Hieron. Ep.
ad Evang. et Com. in Tit.
Hierom tell's us that the distinction of Bishops and Presbyters is of small
use, of different Order rather then Authority: Like power to that which a
Super-intendent or Prolocutor has in a Synod or an Assembly, all this
whatsoever Authority they usurp is more out of custom then Divine ordination.

And as for Lay Elders (if I may so style them) Ambrose expounding these words
rebuke not an Elder, Doctorum desidia aut magis superbia, Ambr. Tom. 5. on 1
Ep. Tim. cap. 5.
complaine's, that the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction-of knowing causes was
degenerated from the Primitive use, and devolved upon the Ministers. First,
says he, the Synagogue, after that, the Church had Elders, without whose
counsel nothing was don in the Church; by what sort of means it went out of use
I know not, whether by the idleness, or rather the pride of the Doctors.

Tertullian, Mox praesident probati quique seniores, Tertul. uti Grotius in in
Matthew 18.
as Grotius recite's his words on his Comment on Matthew. 18. We go into the
Congregation, there are exhortations, prayers, chastisements, and anon approved
Elders take their place. Cyprian says, I received writeings from the
Presbyters, Donatus, Honatus and Cardius, but alone could not rescribe, since I
determined from the beginning of my Office to do nothing of mine own head
without the consent of the Sine consensu plebis nibil, etc. Cypr. l. 3. Ep. 10.
in fine.
people.

Eusebius also lastly record's that Natalius who was seduced by Asclepiodotus,
having seen his Errors, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5.
besought the Church with waterish eyes and wet cheeks to compassionate and
pardon him.

For further satisfaction in this particular, notable is that confession which
was ingenuously acknowledged by Episcopacie it self: for as Mr M. relate's in
his explication of the Covenant, the Archbishops, Bishops and whole Clergy of
England declared to King Henry the 8th and subscribed it with their own hands,
that PRELACIE was but a HUMANE POLITIC DEVICE of the FATHERS.

2. It is Pure. The Scepter of Christ's Kingdom is a righteous Scepter, it
vindicate's the Word from irreverence and contempt, hedgeth in the Sacrament
from profanation and promiscuousness, while Spiritual railes keep back
notorious offenders that Christ may not the second time be betrayed into the
hands of Sinners; with this the Church would be as foul as Augea's Stable; it
would be with Austin Porcorum hara and colluvies rabidorum Canum, a
Swine-stie, a company of mad dogs; or as Christ says, a mere den of Thieves.

2. It is Spiritual, both in respect of the Office. Officers.


1. Of the Office, which consist's

1. In Admonition. 1 These. 5.14.

2. Rebuke, Luc. 17.4.

3. In Censure, Matt. 18.19. Joh. 20.21. Tit. 3.10.

2. Of the Officers, which are

1. Pastors. Ephesians. 4.11,

2. Elders. Acts 14.23. 1 Timothy 5.3.

3. Deacons. 1 Timothy 3.8.

4ly. It is safe, for there be two things which extremely hazard the Church,

1. Want of the Lord's Supper which Christ commanded to have often in
remembrance of him.

2. Falls Brethren who lie in wait to seduce, Gal. 5.12. the tolerateing whereof
was dangerous to Galatia, Pergamus, and Thiatyra.

But some may say can not the Lord's Supper be administered without Government?

Yes; but if the people press in as profanely to the Table as the Tavern, not
so much hungring after Christ, as the Elements, that is not to discern the
Lord's body: or surcharged with surfeiting or drunkenness, as in Paul's time;
or with wrath and malice, as in our times; are these worthy to receive? are
the Seals, Seals, of life or of death to such? and where there are many such
will they be staved off by a Minister alone without thoughts not only of
disdain, but of revenge?

For my part I am resolved on the negative, and lest any should think it to be
Juvenilis Calor, a flash rather of youth then of maturity, let him read what
Chrysostom and Calvin determine in the like kind.

Chrysostom says, it is neither Diadem, nor Purple, Major his nobis est
poteflas. Chrysostom. Hom. in Matthew.
nor Magistrate shall move me to give the Sacrament to an ungodly Person; we
have more Power in the Church then they. Juravi mihi potiu sta^^tumesse m^rtem
oppetere quam ut s^cram Domini Caeuam etc. Call. Epist. ad Virct. p. 164.
Besides the example of Theodosius the Emperor excommunicated by him for his
slaughter at Thessalonica fully declare's it.

Calvin that famous Divine, who is by Zanchius called Galliae Apostolus, the
Apostle of France, says, I have sworn, I have determined rather to die then so
vilely to profane the holy Supper of the Lord, as by giving it to unworthie
Members.

5. Hac disciplina adeo nemo exim^batur, ut principes quoque una cum plebeis ad
eum ferendam subjicerent. Call. Instit.
It is Impartial: Ministers and Elders are subjected to the Government as well
as others, the Judges themselves are subject to judgment, as Trajan nobly spoke
in the Knighting of a Soldier, If I do well, use this sword for me; if not,
against me: the Government is for the prais of all that do well: for the
discouragement of those that do evil.

6. It is Aristocratical: I call it so not in respect of Christum si
respexeris, Monarchia dicitur; nam ipse est Rex noster, qui sanguine sue
Ecclesiam acquisivit. Sunt vero in Ecclesia qui legatione funguntur Presbyteri,
Doctores and alii qui praesunt, quorum respectu merito potest dici
Aristocratia. Pet. Maryr. loc. com. Class. 3. lib. 5. page 783.
Christ, who is a Monarchical head, but 1. in respect of us who are Ministerial
Officers; Councels and Parliaments are Aristocratical: 2. by way of opposition
to all Papal and Lordly pre-eminence counting with Gregory in his Epist. to
Maurice the Emperor, that he that name's himself universal Bishop is the
forerunner of Antichrist. Let the best men be ruleing-Elders, and the best
Ministers Preaching-Elders and this will produce the best effects.

Thus (honored Gentlemen, Patriots and Magistrates!) I have endeavored a little
to possess you with a candid Interpretation of the present Government; and to
blow your zeal to an higher flame. If the cause be God's, leave the success to
him: do but look on and stand still if you dare not advance and go forward, and
see the work of the Lord over in it, and by it God is never wanting to his
Church if she be not wanting to him and her self. We complain of sins and
corruptions, and cry out, O the times! but as fondly as the Mother of her
child, which will not use the Rod a sanctified means for recoverie: it is not
for us to say with Lot Nay my brethren do not so wickedly; nor with Eli It is
no good report I hear of you.

If a garden were overspread with weeds; if a Commonwealth with Thieves; if a
Family with stubborn Sons and Servants, what must be don, think you? would
you not as the Lord command's, bring them out to the Congregation and make them
examples, that all may hear and fear, and do no more wickedly: Bad men brought
forth bad times; let us begin to reform the men and the times shall be
innocent, else the times like the ground are accursed for our sakes.

Gentlemen! Center not your actions upon your self, be not empty vines and
self-bearing trees, build not your own houses and let the house of God lie
waste; do something for Christ, for his Church, for the Commonwealth, that both
Church and Commonwealth may know ye live not only a vegetative and
sensitive, but a rational and spiritual Life.

I confess I am plain with you, but I may say with David Is there not a cause?
has he not don the like, Psalm. 2.10. He take's notice indeed that the
Heathen rage, and the people imagine vainly, yet the total application of
subjection to Christ is pressed home to Kings and Rulers, be wise now
therefore. Ministers must be like bees; painful, profitable, carrying their
stings about them as well as honey. Christ gave his Apostles Tongues, but they
were fiery; a Sword, but 'twas two-edged. John was not only a shineing but a
burning Light: Paul's presence was contemptible, but his Epistles powerful. I
might indeed have qualified some expressions, in respect of that great respect
and reverence I bear to all of you; but because duty must prevail above
interest, and the discharge of Conscience above Courtship, I have therefore set
an edg upon the Government, intending by the sincere performance of my own
Office to oblige you all to the serious and speedy accomplishment of your new
engagements; and thus I commend you to God, and earnestly beg a blessing on
your favorable assistance to the Cause of Christ, whose unworthie Servant I am,
and for his sake

Yours in all Obligations, both of Love and Service. WILLIAM LEY.

A Brief delineation of that Church Government which is called Presbyterial.
THough where the Sun shine's it is not necessary to light Candles, yet seeing
man's neglect in reading the Word, his ignorance in understanding of it, his
wilfulness in opposing it, is very great, all helps are necessary; every stone
is to be moved, whereby he may advance his knowledge in those things which do
manifestly concern the glory of God, and do discover the Kingly power and
prerogative of Jesus Christ. For though it be happy for us that Christ is a
Priest and Prophet, yet has he a more durable and glorious Office then either
of these; to wit, that of a King whereby he reign's in our hearts, rule's in
his Church, over-rule's Satan and all his enemies.

Christ came into the world to manifest his Regal power, to which Satan and his
accomplices have been perpetually opposite; see Psalm. 2.1. Further, the history
of his Passion put's it out of all doubt; for this was the only point of his
accusation, confessed by himself, Job. 8.33. Prosecuted by the Jews, Luke
23.2. Prevalent with Pilate, Joh. 19.12. Mentioned in his superscription, Joh.
19.19. so that his death may in this sens be styled, not a Redemption, but a
Martyrdom; for to be a Martyr, is to die a Witness, and Christ died to bear
witness to the truth, which may shame many brethren in these days, that will
not dare to Seal that Cause with their ink, which Christ has already sealed
with his blood.

I intend not in this discourse to spin out the Cause by any unnecessary
florishes, for I had rather engage the Readers judgment theu his fancy. It is
a juggling art to throw mists of wit and tart sentences upon the advers party,
that so the nakedness of the Cause may lie undiscerned.

The Points I shall insist upon, are these Four:

That God has instituted a Government in his Church.

That the Subject of Ecclesiastical power,

I shall show what Presbyterial Government is.

I shall give account of the variety of Officers distinguished by the Word,

I.
GOD has instituted a Government in his Church.

The proofs, 1 Cor. 12.28. 2 Cor. 10.18. and 13.10. Romans 12.8.

Because there has ever been a Government in the Church of God, as is evident
in the Old and New Testament: and ever since the Apostolical times till now of
late, the Truth of a Government was never called into question.

Because without Church Government Truth cannot be maintained, Order
established, Ignorant instructed, Unity anb Uniformity embraced, the Peace of
the Church secured, Offenders removed, Ordinances purely administered; all which
things ought to be kept inviolably by the Word of God.

If there be a Government in the State, nay in every Family, consisting of
Officers and Elders, much more in the Church, which is the house and family of
God; so it is, that of necessity every body, whether Natural, Politic, or
Ecclesiastical, is sustained by it.

Rules 2.
That Government is best that com's nearest the precept and pattern of the Word
of God, and the best examples of the reformed Churches.

1. To the pattern of the Word of God, for it is all-sufficient, 2 Timothy 3.16.
and to this our conscience binde's us.

2. To the best examples, as, Scotland, Holland, France, Germany, etc. and to
unite with these, Charity, Fraternity and our Covenant bind us.

That Government is best which is not redundant or superfluous, in challenging
any power above, or beyond the Word, nor deficient or wanting in any one branch
or notable particular contained in it.

The Definition of Church Government.
Church Government is a power or authority spiritual, revealed in the holy
Scriptures, derived from Jesus Christ our Mediator, and given by him, only to
his own Officers, and by them exercised in dispensing the Word. Seals,
Censures, and all other ordinances of Christ, for the edifying of the Church of
Christ.

Parts proved.
1. It is Spiritual: The Kingdom of Christ is not of this world; therefore are
they called the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16.19. and 18.15, 16,
17, 18.

2. It is revealed in the Scripture, 1 Cor. 12.28. 2 These. 3.6. and 14. 1 Timothy
1.20. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. 2 Cor. 2.6. Tit. 3.10.

3. It is derived from Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. Joh. 20.21, 22, 23. 2 Cor. 10.8.

4. Only to his own Officers, Matthew. 16.19. and 28.20. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor.
4.21.

5. For the edifying of the Church of Christ, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. 1 Cor, 4, 2. 1
Cor. 14.12.

II.
The Subject of Ecclesiastical Government are not all the members in common,
but the Presbytery, or Church-representative, consisting of Pastors and
Elders; which vindicate's and cleare's up the fourth branch of the Definition,
which I demonstrate by ten Arguments.

Governors, and the people said to be Governed in Scripture, and thereupon
disinteressed from Government: See the names given to Pastors.

They are called not only Overseers, Builders, Workmen, Reconcilers, Pastors,
Salt of the Earth; but Lights, Stewards, Fathers, Ambassadors, Rulers. Lights,
Matthew. 5.14. Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. Fathers, 1 Cor.
4.15. Rulers, Heb. 13.17.

Keys of Government only to them whom he intended should govern: But that
was only to Officers, the Disciples being at that season absent, Matthew. 16.19.
Joh. 20.21.

Acts of Government do belong, they are the eyes, ears, hands and principal
members of the body; but the parts of Christ's body are not all alike, Romans
12.6, 7. Having then gifts differing, according to the grace that is given us,
whether Prophesying, Let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith; or
Ministry, Let us wait on our ministry; or he that Teaches, on teaching, 1
Cor. 12.19. And if they were all one member, where were the body?

whole multitude are not all endued with gifts requisite: for unto Government
is required a new, large, spiritual, and a discerning Heart, 1 Cor. 14.32.

confusion, God being the God of Order, for then the weak as well as the
strong, the ignorant as well as the intelligent; Children as well as Parents;
women as well as men must have the Keys hung at their girdles.

power of Ordination which belong's to Government, as is evident, Act. 6.6.
When they had set before the Apostles, and when they had prayed, they laid
their hands on him, and 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is
in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of
the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be
pertaker of other men's sins; keep thy self pure, 2 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I put
thee in remembrance that thou stir up the gift of God, which is given thee by
laying on of hands, Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou
should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City as I have appointed thee.

power in the people would tend not to edification, but disprofit every way;
for either the days of Church-censuring must be on the Sabbath Day, and then
it hinder's the soul's health; or else on the Week-daies, and then it hinder's
their occupations: besides all this, such censure would be most tedious, for
every one being Judge, must look to pronounce according to truth, judgment and
righteousness, and look to be acquainted with every circumstance of all
actions.

power of Government, have the power of Preaching, and administration of the
Sacraments, saving one exception in the word concerning ruleing Elders, 1 Timothy
5. The reason is, because the Scripture conjoin's both together, Matthew. 16.19.
Job. 20.22.

nature of the Church in the Old Tsstament was otherwise, the government
whereof was committed to Priests who judged of Leprosies, and pronounced
excommunication, Ezekiel. 44.23, 24. They shall teach my people the difference
between the holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the clean and
unclean, and in controversy they shall stand in judgment, and judge it
according to my judgments: and they shall keep my Statutes, and my Laws in all
my Assemblies, and they shall hallow my Sabbaths.

Rev. 2.6. 1. Tim. 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be accounted worthy of
double honor, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine, Tit. 3.10. A
man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition, reject, 1 These.
5.12. And we beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you.

There be three places of Scripture which may stumble us if they be not at
present unfolded.

I. *Matthew. 18.17. If thy Brother neglect to hear thee, tell it the Church, and
if he neglect etc.

The next words explain the sens. There is a two fold Church:

1 Parochial of all the multitude. 2 Ministerial or representative; Christ
speak's of the later, not of the former, Deodat. Calvin. Beza. Tremel.

according to the judgment of many judicious Divines, for this is the Church
that has the Keys of bindeing and loosing, which power was not given to the
whole multitude, but to the Apostles, ver. 18.

2. This does conclude little in their Cause, for the place does establish a
Chuch of lesser Assemblies then the whole body.

3. I should willingly grant them a share were there no danger in it: for we
find that public Votes do not bring forth many happy, pious, peaceable, or
seasonable conclusions, the major part being seldom the better.

1 Cor. 5.4, When ye are gathered together, and my spirit, deliver such an one
to Satan.

See for its explication 2 Cor. 2.2.6. Sufficient to such an one is the censure
inflicted by many, not by all. Besides, the Church of Corinth was not
Congregational, for it was a City of so great strength, that it durst bid
defiance to the Roman Ambassadors; and we find it consisted of diverse
particular congregations, see Acts 8.19, 20. God has much people in it, Act.
18.15. Paul continued there a year and six months, 1 Cor. 1.14. Paul baptized
but a few, yet the Corinthians were baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13.

1 Cor. 5.12. III. Qui facit per alium, facit per se.
Do not ye judge them that are within? The answer is, that what is don by the
Consistory of Ministers, and Elders in the name of Christ, and according to the
rule of the Word, may be said to be don by the Congregation, nay by Christ
himself; as what is don by the Parliament may be said to be don by the people:
the act of Public persons is the act of the Quod in Vrbe est Senatus, id in
Ecclesia est Presbyterium. Call. Instit. l. 4. Praesident probatiquique
Seniores. Tertul. Plebs a cognitione non excluditur. Call. l. 4. c. 11.
Public.

2. Paul judged primarily and authoritatively by way of power, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4,
5. The people concomitantly and approbatively by way of consent.

3. If a godly and understanding congregation do desire to take knowledge of our
Church Censures, and to be present at them, I think there is none will exclude
them though there is little cause of suspicion, says Mr Calvin, that they can
err or dissent from the judgment of God, who do not censure but by the law of
God.

But is not the Church holy, and has it not in it many times rare gifted
Brethren as well as officers.

Is not this objection a kin to that of Core, Ye take too much upon you, you
sons of Levi, seeing that the congregation is holy.

There is a threefold Holiness:

1. A Regenerative holiness of sanctification.

2. A Federall holiness of covenant and Church Membership.

3. A Separative holiness by way of Office, Jer. 1.5.

Though the Church may be granted to be holy in the first and second sens;
yet never in the third. Remembar Vzzah, Corah, Dathan, Abiram and King Vzziah,
2 King. 15.5.

But to the point:

1. Some are gifted, as Christians.

2. Others are gifted as Officers, and in this sens the Brethren are ungifted
Brethren, Romans 10.15. Hebr. 5.4.

But here a great question is moved at this day: Whether the Magistrate have
not the power of Church Government in him, and so the Keys fall not only out
of the hands of the people, but of officers themselves.

The Reverend Divines of London tell us, that the Mag^strate has a power circa
not in Ecclesiam.

1. They have a defensive patronizing power, Isa. 49.23.

2. A Diatactick, or Regulating, Ordering Power.

3. A Compulsive, Punitive Power, as Custodes utriusque Tabulae, the Keepers of
both Tables. But as for a Supreme power, they desire to be excused; as bound,
not only to give to Caesar, what is Caesar's; but to God what is Gods. To these
I add what Sleidan relate's of Luther, Sleid. Com. 1 14.
That he would not have Caesar stirred up as head of the Church: or, as
Protector and Defender of the Faith: for this, says he, is a wrong to Christ,
and these are falls and empty Titles.

Ambrose tell's us in his Epistle to Valentinian, A good Emperor is within the
Church, not above it.

Eusebius bring's in Constantine thus speaking to the Ministers, Eusebius. l. 4.
de vit a Constant.
You are Overseers (...); I, (...), of those things don in the Church, I, of
those things which are don out of it.

Ridley in his conference with Mr Latimer (Fox Martyrol.) says, Fox Martyrol.
page 1564.
Here comes to my remembrance that notable saying of Valentinian the Emperor
for choosing the Bishop of Millain, Set him, says he, in the Bishops seat, to
whom, if we as men do offend at any time, we may submit our selves.

Rivet in his Commentary on the fifth Commandment tell's us, that the
Magistrate may be considered, either as an officer of the Commonwealth, or
else as a member of the Church; as an Officer of the Commonwealth; so he has
authority over each particular person: as a member of the Church, so he is
subjected to Ecclesiastical discipline: this he illustrate's by a Simile: The
The King does command and obey his Physician, and confirm's also by a proof
from Heb. 19.17.

Master Calvin could not brook this Title of Supreme Head and Governor, Calv.
nos Anglos and blasphemos dixit, quod Regem summum caput sub Christo vocarent.
Call. Gom. in Amos 7. ver. 12.
and therefore accounted our English Courtship of styling our King next to
Christ Supreme Head and Governor, to be no less then blaspemie; and he tell's
us further, that sometimes the Magistrate is negligent, nay sometimes the
Magistrate may stand in need of correction himself; as happened to Theodosius
Caesar, who was excommunicated by Ambrose for his great slaughter at
Thessalonica.

Pareus tell's us, that the Magistrate punishes one way, the Church another:
the Magistrate imprisoneth, the Church excommunicateth; the Magistrate
proceed's immediately, the Church by leisure; first admonishing, then
censureing: the Magistrate his eye is upon the Law; the Churches on Repentance.

The promise of bindeing by excommunication, Ista promissio an unius anni
dicenda vel paucorum. Call. in Instit. lib. 4. cap. 11.
of loosing by receiving into Communion, was not a promise made to the Church
for one year only till the Christian Magistrate were grown up; it was not a
Leas, but a Legacy.

And indeed were it otherwise, the Church would be in a wors condition under
Christian Magistrates, then under Heathen. For Paul's command prevailed over
the Corinthians, to purge out their old Leaven, 1 Cor. 5.7. Now it is neither
Paul nor Apollos that sine nutu Caesaris can prevail for Reformation, and bring
his Congregation to an effectual purge.

If a Physician should be prohibited to purge the body of his Patient till he
were backed with a command from higher Powers, as the Officer is to purge the
body of his Church, he would esteem it a thing extreme injurious to him and
his Patient.

III.
By Presbyterial Government every particular Church shall have a Consistory.
consisting of Pastor and Elders of the same Church, who ought to meet once a
week to dispatch incident business, Acts 21.18.

It has authority to assemble and inquire into the conversation of men of all
sorts and degrees, to judge upon Lewdness, Profaneness, Negligences; and
thereupon to admonish, 1. Privately. 2. Solemnly. 3. Publicly. And to withdraw
Communion, that they may be ashamed: to suspend from Sacrament upon
contumacie: 2 These. 3.14.
And to conclude inferior differences ariseing within the Body.

IV.
In the last place I com to set down the variety of Officers which are thus
disposed. 1. Pastors. are thus disposed. 2. Elders. are thus disposed. 3.
Deacons.


1. Pastors are Officers instituted by Christ, Romans 10.15. Heb. 5.4. 1. Pastors.
Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.2. to ver. 8. Naynot only by Christ, but by all the
persons of the Trinity.

1. God the Father, 1 Cor. 12.28. 2. God the Son, Ephesians. 4. ver. 11.8. 3. God
the holy Ghost, Acts 20.28.
Consider, good Reader, the desperate malignity that such bear to the Trinity,
to the Church, to the Scripture that deny the office of the Ministry to be
instituted by Christ; what does the great Wolf Satan desire more then the
delivery up of the Shepherds, that so he may tear in pieces the Flock of
Christ while there is none to deliver, see Matthew. 28.19.20. Go, says Christ,
and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you,
and Io I am with you to the end of the World. [with you] He mean's not their
Persons, for they died; but their Office which is perpetual.

This place will not admit of so frivolous a Descant as some have made of it;
Mr. M. of H.
* That Christ promises his Saints to be with them to the World's end; which
though true, yet it has no ground, nor is deducible from this proof; for there
are two different and distinct Particles in the last verse, [ them and you:] By
them, is understood the Flock; by you, the Pastors. To conclude; that which God
has promised in all ages, that calling which has its Seal from heaven in
illumination, conviction, conversion of sinners, that supply which the Church
shall have need of in all ages cannot be taken away from any particular place,
or Church, but in Judgment, Isa. 30.20, 21. Amos 8.9, 11, 12. The Offices are,
1. Special; as, Praying publicly, Preaching, dispensing Seals. The Offices
are, 2, More general, as, the power of Censures.
Christ call's these Powers by the name of Keys; for Keys denote power in
Scripture: compare Isa. 22.22. with Isa. 9.6, 7. So Revel. 1.18. A fit Metaphor
in this sens, because they lock and unlock those things which he would not
make common to all.

The Keys of the Church are twofold; 1. Knowledge. The Keys of the Church are
twofold; 2. Jurisdiction.
1. The Key of knowledge is grounded on Mat. 28. ver. 18, 19, 20. Romans 10.15. 2
Cor. 2.16. Luke 11.52.

2. The Key of Discipline, or Jurisdiction; for both Keys are joined together,
Matthew. 18.18. Joh. 20.21. 1 Cor. 5. from ver. 2, to ver. 13. 1 Cor. 12.28. 2
Cor. 2. from ver. 6, to ver. 12. and 2 Cor. 7.15. and 2 Cor. 8.1. Romans 12.8.
Gal. 5.10, 12. 1 Timothy 1.20. and 3. ver. 4. and 5. ver. 17. Phil. 3.2. Tit.
3.10.11. 2 These. 3.6. Hebr. 13.7, 17. 2 John ver. 10. Revel. 2.14, 15, 20.

There is another Key which some new lock-Smiths have made, Vindiciae Clavium.
cap. 2. page 18.19.
a Pick-lock of the Power of Church Officers, (says the Vindicator) and it is
called the Key of Liberty, whereby the people have power to join with the
sounder part of Presbytery in excommunicating. The text quoted for it is Gal.
5.13. Brethren, you have been called unto LIBERTY. A strange Gloss, which never
any ingenuous or learned Divine dreamed off till now; which the Authors
knowing, (says he) had rather appeal to the Context, then to the Commentators.

But the Apostle in the first ver. of this chap. uses the same word, [ Stand
fast in the LIBERTY.] where the word is without all controversy understood of
the Liberty and Freedom from the Cerimoniall Law, called there the Yoke of
Bondage; which matter he also treat's off, ver. 11.15. If any desire to see
more of this useless Key in its crooked bent, and rusty wards, let them see the
Author of the Vindication of the Keys, chap. 2. page 18, 19. or that learned
and complete work of the Reverend Ministers of London JVS DIVINVM chap. Eme
librum; si non habes nummos, erue tibi oculum De^^trum, illoque persolvas and
lege Sinistro. Zanch. Epist. ad Bulling.
10. page 116. of the which Book I may say as much to my Readers (considering
the gravity, dexterity and usefulness of it for the present controversy of the
Times) as Montanillus did to Zanchius, of Bullinger's Book de'origine Erroris;
Buy it with the loss of the Right eye, and afterward read it with the Left.

2. Elders are Officers of Christ, Act. 21.18. Their number is Indefinite, more
or less, according to the necessity of the Place where they are chosen. They
are to be nominated or chosen by the Church: They are to be qualified
rightly, men of understanding, sound in the Faith; grave, godly, and
unblameable in Life and Conversation, Tit. 1.

Their Office is in general,

1. To watch over the Flock, together with the Ministers, Exodus 18.22. The
Jews had such an Eldership in their Synagogues, who met, not only for Prayer,
but Censures, Acts 26.11.

Grotius in his Com. on Matthew. 18 tell's us, Seniores apud Hebraeos tanquam
Praesides moderabantur: the Elders did convene and exercise Authority as
Presidents of the Assembly.

This Jethro directed Moses unto; even by the light of Nature; and GOD and
Moses ratify it: God, by permission: Moses, by practice, Ezod. 18.22.

For further proof, see 1 Cor. 12.28. where the Apostle Paul mention's two
sorts of Officers in general, and then descend's to particulars: 1.
Extraordinary; 1. Apostles. 2. Prophets, who expounded and interpreted
Scripture according to the proportion or Analogy of Faith, Romans 12.6. 3.
Powers, or Miracles. 4. Gifts of Healing. 5. Kinds of Tongues.
2. Ordinary, and of continual use; as, 1. Teachers; they are the Preaching
Elders above specified. 2. Governments; there are the Ruling Elders. 3. Helps;
there are the Deacons.



See also Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Here Officers are reduced to two general heads; 1.
Prophecy. 2. Ministry.
1. Under Prophecy is contained 1. He that teaches. 2. He that exhorts.
Also 2. Under Ministry, 1. He that give's, that is, the Deacon. 2. He that
rule's, that is, the Elder.



Because there are great animosities against ruleing Elders, I shall be a
little more full in the point.

See 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
Honor; especially they that labor in the Word and Doctrine.

Against this clear Place, two sorts of Objections are commonly framed.

1. That the word (...) is not a discretive particle, but exegetical, or
explicatory of the former; as if he should say, All MINISTERS are to be
honored, Especially they that are diligent in exercising the Gift of Preaching.

But this cannot stand, for it seems to intimate that Ministers deserve double
Honor for Ruleing Well, though they desert the principal part of their Duty in
Preaching the Gospel. But can we expect from the same Apostle's mouth Sweet,
and Bitter? can He blow Hot, and Cold? can He bless a Forbearance, and curs
it too? as he does, 1 Cor. 9.16.

2. Some conceive he may mean some Super-annuated Ministers that have better
Heads to Rule, then Lungs to Preach unto their Flocks. But I wish such
Interpreters to consider;

1. It is not fair to start our own Conceits and Notions, and then to father
them on the Apostle.

2. Advise whether there be much probability in it that there were any such
men in Paul's time that could Govern but not Preach, which is very rare in our
days, though now Preaching be a more studious work, and we have more store
of Officers (God be thanked) then they could have in the Primitive times and
first Age of the Gospel.

3. Consider whether the Apostle be so deeply affected with this
extraordinary Case, as to lay down a special and particular Rule for Such.

4. Whether the Apostle can be excused in reverencing Younger men above their
Elder's, such as are old Standards to the Gospel, and that ( caeteris paribus
yet) in Senioritie, Gravitie, and Judgment must needs excel.

See the same word how it is took in other places of Scripture; for wheresoever
(...) is used in all places in the New Testament, it is taken to distinguish
Things from things, Persons from persons, as Gal. 6.10. Let us do good to all,
But ((...)) Especially to those of the Household of Faith. It fallows hence
that some are, and some are not of the Household of Faith; therefore we must put
a difference in doing them good.

So Phil. 4.12. All the Saints salute you, Especially those of Caesar's
household. Some Saints were not of Caesar's house; yet all Saints salute: so also,
1 Timothy 5.8.

Their particular Office is,

1. To give notice of scandals, 1 Timothy 5.20. It may become the part of a godly
Joseph to bring to his Father the evil report of his Brethren: so 1 These. 5.14.

2. To judge of them, 1 Cor. 12.28. Acts 20.17, 28. as has been showed already.

3. To admonish, Romans 15.14. 2 These. 3.15.

4. To visit the Sick: see Mr Perkins right way of dying, Tom. 1. page 502.
col. 1. where he expound's the place James 5.14. By Elders (says he) is
meant, not only Ministers, but ruleing Elders; men grave, ancient, endued with
the spirit of Understanding and Prayer.

But is it not better for the People to be subject to the Government of one,
then many? Ob.


1. Surely No; Trying by Elders is a trying per pares, equity and equality:

2. Elders; though placed in Authority above the Governed, Laws of Christ; not
above the Government.

3. If you respect not in your choice of Parochial-Elders, Thorn you make for
your own sides: an Injury you bring upon your own heads: Blame not the
Government, but thank your selves. Be therefore careful, by Praying, Fasting
and Obeying the Ministers seasonable and pious directions, first to choos whom
you may like, and then Like whom you have Chosen.

4. Admonitions may be ill given, and worstaken: I shall lay down Twelve rules
of Direction in this great Case of Admonition and Rebuke, which may be of some
use to the Elders, as Aarons twelve Stones which he wore in his Breast Plate,
which were designed unto him to direct him in Judgment, Exodus 28.21.

ADMONISH Admonish

1. Meekly, Meekly.
Gal 6.1. 2 Timothy 2.25. Tit. 3.2. Consider, it is man against man; one sinful
man against another: and that Michael an Archangel, a pure Angel of Light
durst not bring a railing accusation against an Angel of Darkness.

2. Regularly, Regularly.
according to the three degrees held out in Scripture, Mat. 18.17. that is, 1.
Privately. 2. Solemnly. 3. Publicly. Christ bid's it be don betwixt Him and
Thee; it is a secret business, and therefore the Dutch Church has ordered that
he who shall blaze a Fault before it be com to the third Admonition, shall be
censured and suffer as a slanderer.

3. Compassionately: Compassionately,
This sweeten's the reprehension, which like a Pill in sugar is more easy of
digestion: it cut's off objections from the party: it is not the Wind but the
Sun that make's the Traveller to pull off his Cloak.

It is observed by the Author of the Council of Trent that in the Primitive
times the excess of Charity in correcting, Council. Trent Hist. l. 4 p. 330.
wrote by Pietro Soave an Italian.
did make the Corrector feel greater pain then the Corrected; so that in the
Church no punishment was imposed without great Lamentation of the Multitude,
and greater of the better sort; and this is the cause why to Correct was called
to Lament.

So St. Paul rebuking the Corinthians for not chastising the incestuous, said,
You have not Lamented to separate such a Transgressor from you. And in another
Epistle, I fear that when I com unto you, I shall not find you such as I
desire; but in Contentions and Tumults, and that at my coming I shall lament,
and many of those that have sinned before, De affectu quo debent esse praediti,
qui excommunicant hoc dicere possumus, etc. Nero Caesar cum esset neei
subscripturus, etc. Pet. Martyr loc. Com. Clas. 3. page 786.
See 1 These. 2.10.11. Acts 20.8.31.

Peter Martyr writeing of this point concerning the affection with which those
that excommunicate ought to be qualified, tel's us that great Clemency is to
be used; for if we are members of the same body, how shall we choos but
wonderfully grieve when one member is to be plucked away from the rest.

Nero Caesar when he was to subscribe the sentence against a condemned person,
was wont to say, Oh how I could wish to be ignorant of letters.

4. Practically. Practically.
No man can admonish to the life that Duty wherein his conscience withstand's
him, saying, Thou also art guilty.

Take heed of this, be not like Pharisees, say, and do not. Nor like
Mile-posts, beckning to others to go, and standing still themselves. By this you
will bring a Scandal upon the Government of Christ: you lay a Stumbling block
before the People, and a most notorious guilt upon your own Souls. Odi Homines
quorum ore sententiae natant, in animo nutant, Putean. Comus.


Well said Chrysostom, (...). Nothing more vain then for a man to play the
Preacher in words only: that is not to act the part of a Doctor or Elder, but
an Hypocrite, See Romans 2.21, 22, 23, 24.

5. Holily. Let the Party see your endeavor is to gain him, Holily.
or to re-gain the glory of God. Joshua reproved Achan, not for the Wedg of
Gold, but the Glory of God Josh. 7.19. This is a good end and like to prosper.

6. Charitably, Charitably.
as though thou were to give judgment upon thy self; remember six commands of
the Decalogue run upon this strain, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
so says Christ Matthew. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets.

7. Impartially. Fear no man's face, rich as well as poor: Impartially.
Gods Laws are not like Cobwebs, to let little flies be taken, and suffer great
ones to burst through. In this Case as in the Case of Judgment, there must be a
Levelling of Persons; Husbands as well as Wives; Parents as well as Children;
Masters as well as Servants, Lev. 19.15. Matthew. 3.12. Christ purges thoroughly
his floor.

8. Effectually. Strike the Nail to the head, Effectually.
if ye can at one blow: Remember it is a business of Life and Death. Pluck thy
Neighbor strongly out of the Pit, Jer. 48.10. Cursed is he that does the work
of the Lord by the halvs, deceitfully, negligently.

9. Hopefully. Hopefully.
This causes the Physician to take the Patient in hand because he hope's to
cure him. Hope set's an edg upon the Duty; when else in consideration of
original pravity, customary courses, evil Society, Satan's policy, admonition
might seem fruitless.

10. Diligently. Diligently.
Thus the good Shepherd leav's his ninety nine sheep in the wilderness to
follow that which was lost; the the lazy Shepherds do not so, Ezekiel. 34.4.
Number the lean Sheep as well as the fat, and remember Christ came to seek that
which was lost; and that Angels in heaven rejoice over one Sinner that
repents.

11. Wisely. Wisely.
Iraeneus worthily reproved Victor Bishop of Rome because he resolved to
excommunicate sundry Churches of Asia, for no other cause but that they
consented not with the Church of Rome in celebraing EASTER.

If none but those who were wise-hearted had to do in the rearing God's
Tabernacle, Exodus 31.6. certainly none but wise men should have to do in the
framing or guiding of the Church, Isa. 11.2, 3.

12. Zealously. Zealously.
Let your indignation be showed against the Offense, not the Offender, This
will make you commend your enemy and reprove your friend. Let your exclamation
be, not O this Man! but O this Sin.

3ly. III. Deacons.
Deacons they must be sound in Faith, unblameable in Conversation, 1 Timothy 3.10.

Their Office is

1. To collect and preserv the Alms belonging to the Poor.

2. To distribute the same faithfully, according to necessity so judged by
plurality of Votes.

3. To visit and comfort the needy, and to see the Alms be not mis-applied,
Acts 6.

4. To give an account hereof once a month.

If any do conceive this Government by Elders to have been but lately put in
practice by reformed Churches, let him suspend his judgment till he have read
what Ambrose, Tertullian, Cyprian, have written in asserting its Antiquity; a
taste whereof he may find in the Epistle.

There is one thing common in the whispers of men, that this Government is or
will be tyrannical. O, say some, it will sting, it will pare to the quick!
Behold a vain and sensual opprobrium! I shall endeavor to stop the clamor
before the Government be settled; which the Government it self, when settled,
will confute to the full.

This Government does not kill, but cure; it cut's off not sound but rotten
members. Are you angry with your Barbar for cutting of hairs when
super-numerary? or with the Physician for purging malignant humors? or with the
Scissars for pareing your nails? This Government cut's not off Parts, but
putrefaction: not members, but excrements: not the Man, but the Crime.

Was it not an impudent fellow that said he knew Christ to be a hard Master,
when (alas!) there was not any that ever knew less of Christ and his nature
then himself? But I will evert this fancy, not so much by Rhetoric, as by
Reason.

First then, it is little less then blasphemy to traduce or defame a
Government of Christ. If this were of men it might bear Censure: But if of God,
be not fighters against God. They that cannot endure the refineing fire of
Christ willingly, he can make them endure his consumeing fire whether they
will or no.

2. He that so harshly judges, it is either an Atheist, or a Libertine, or a
Scandalous person; or at best he is ignorant of the Government.

3. Tyranny is a Government beyond or against the Laws established; But this
submit's in all things to the mind of Christ.

4. There is no more power placed in the hands of Ministers and Elders then
what was formerly placed in the hands of the meanest Curate, as the Rubric
before the Communion in the late Service Book does fully demonstrate.

5. If it be Tyrannical, it is so either over

1. Men's Estates: but it has no Mulcts, Fines, Forfeitures, Confiscations.

2. Body: but it has no Banishment, Imprisonment, Branding, Striking,
Dismembring, Killing.

3. Soul: but it desire's to gain that, not to destroy it; and it is so far
from enforcing sin upon it, that it correct's it, 1 Cor. 5.5.

6ly. It cannot be Tyranny, because those who are the Officers and Censurers
of others are and yield themselves subject to the same Spiritual Censures as
well as the meanest; 1 Timothy 5. v. 1. and ver. 19.
and all the favor the Eldership has from Scripture is, not to be Saucily
Censured, or Maliciously Traduced, or rashly Condemned by a fingle witness.

If any person elected to Office shall find in himself such a haughty spirit
as he can neither rule himself, nor be ruled by his Brethren, I wish him with
Ammonius rather to cut off his Ear and fly, then to usurp such an Office to
himself which may cause not only himself, but the work of Reformation to
miscarrie.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

JA. CRANFORD.


