Light shining IN BVCKINGHAMSHIRE, OR, A Discovery of the main Grounds;
Original Cause of all the Slavery in the World, but chiefly in England;
Presented by way of a DECLARATION Of many of the well-affected in that County,
to all their poor oppressed Countrymen of ENGLAND: And also to the
Consideration of the present Army under the Conduct of the Lord FAIRFAX.

The first PART,

Arise oh God, judge thou the Earth. Printed in the year, 1648.

Light shining in Buckinghamshire, OR, A Discovery of the main ground, original
Cause of all the Slavery in the world, but chiefly in England: presented by way
of a Declaration, of many of the well-affected in that County, to all their poor
oppressed Country men of ENGLAND, etc.
JEHOVAH ELLOHIM Created Man after his own likeness and image, which image is
his Son Jesus, Heb. 1. verse 2. who is the image of the Invisible God: now
Man being made after Gods image or likeness, and created by the word of God,
which word was made Flesh and dwelt amongst us; which word was life, and that
life the light of men, 1 John 2. this light is taken to be that pure spirit in
man, which we call Reason, which discusseth things right, and reflecteth, which
we call conscience; from all which there issued out that golden rule or law,
which we call equity: the sum of which is, says Jesus, whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do to them, this is the Law and the Prophets; and
James calls it the royal Law, and to live from this principle is called a good
conscience: and the creature Man was privileged with being Lord over other
inferior creaturs, but not over his own kind; for all men being a like
privileged by birth, so all men were to enjoy the creatures alike without
propriety, one more then the other, all me by the grant of God are alike free,
and every man individual, that is to say, no man was to Lord or command over
his own kind: neither to enclose the creatures to his own use, to the
impoverishing of his neighbors, see the Charter, 1 Genesis from 26. verse. to the
end of the Chapt. and see the renewing of the Charter to Noah and his sons,
Genesis 9. from the 1. verse. to the 18.

But man following his own sensuality, became a devourer of the cretures, and
an incloser, not content that another should enjoy the same privilege as
himself, but incloseth all from his Brother; so that all the Land, Trees,
Beasts, Fish, Foul, etc. are enclosed into a few mercinary hands; and all the
rest deprived and made their slaves, so that if they cut a Tree for fire they
are to be punished, or hunt a foul it is imprisonment, because it is
gentlemen's game, as they say; neither must they keep Cattle, or set up a House,
all ground being enclosed, without hiring leave for the one, or buying room for
the other, of the chief incloser, called the Lord of the Manor, or some other
wretch as cruel as he, and all must be summoned to a Court Leet, there to
acknowledge Fealty and Service, and that with oaths, if required, (at least
wise, if Jurymen) to their Tyrant, called Lord of the Manor; as if a Tenant
admitted, if Coppy-holder, he must take an Oath to become a true Tenant, rather
Slave, as before said; now all this Slavery of the one, and Tyrany of the other,
was at first by murder and cruelty one against the other; and that they might
strengthen themselves in their villainy against Gods ordinances and their
Brothers freedoms and rights; They had always a Commander in chief, which
was the most blindest and desperatests wretch, and he was their chief and
head, as Nimerod, and he became their King; so that I dare make plainly appear
by Scripture and Reason, that Kings were not of Gods institution at first, but
it arose from the Heathens, viz. those that lived after their own beastly
lusts: and when Israel would have a King, their only ground was to be like
other Nations; and God told Samuel, saying, they have not cast off or rejected
thee, but me, that I should not reign over them. Read the whole 8. Chapter of
the 1 of Samuel, etc. where observe the Slavery that the people are in that
have a King, and amongst the whole Catalogue observe the Tenth of Stocks, etc.
and see the 12. Chapter from the 16. verse forward, what judgments God sent in
their Harvest for asking a King, and afterward observe what misery befell, for
they were in continual Wars abroad, and at last divided into divisions; and
had two Kings: Then what woeful civil Wars and murdering one another for the
Kingdom: I refer you to the whole book of Kings to judge; do but read that of
their first King Abimelecks cruelty, which was Gidions bastard, Judges 8.21.
read the 9. of Judges, etc. there he kills his brother with a company of light
fellows; and as Kings are the root of Tyrany, so likewise they were the first
that brought in wars see Genesis 14. for their greatness must be upheld with
murder and cruelty, as aforesaid, in so much, that in Revel. 13. mention is
made of an ugly beast, with seven heads, and ten horns, which horns did
persecute the Saints: now in Revel. 17. horns are there declared to be Kings,
so that Kings are of the Beast, which is a power that makes all subject to it,
but only the Saints, etc. Revel. 13. and 7. And says the Scripture, the Beast
has its power from the Dragon, Revel. 13. and 4. and the Dragon in Revel 20.
and 2. is the Devil and Satan, so that it is plain, that Kings are of the
Beast, and the Beast is of the Devil; and it is as plain, they that worship the
King, worship the Beast, and they that worship the Beast, worship the Devil,
Revel. 13. and 4. verse. Now let us a little behold our English Powers, all that
which is called Magistracy is from the Kings Pattent, and his is from the
Devil; for the Kings Predecessors, the outlandish bastard William, came to be
King by Conquest and murder, now murderers are, says Jesus, the Devils
children, for says he, the Devil was a murderer from the beginning, and he
abode not in the Truth: now Kings are utterly against the truth, and
persecutors of the Saints; for says Jesus, they shall bring you before Kings,
so that Kings are enemies unto the kingdom of Christ.

Secondly, Behold now from license or grant, comes all our inclousures and
tradings, as privilege to buy and sell, and to enjoy occupy and possess lands,
it is from taking the beasts mark: now observe the rich possessors,
incroachers, inclosers, see your holdings, your Pattents, and Charters, and
License is from the King, and all tenures and holding of lands is from your
King yea all Writings, Indentures, Bonds, Leases, etc. is in the name and
authority of him; nay your money is not lawful, if it be not the Kings coin,
and his picture and superscription on it.

So that observe, the King is made by you your God on earth, as God is the God
of heaven, says your Lawyers: therefore all Laws, Writs, Summons, Warrants,
Patents, etc. must be in his name; nay, the Parliament will settle nothing
without him; yea all Honors must be from him. Now then mark if this be not all
from the Dragon: and the Priests to verify this, says in their thing called
Prayer, he is supreme head of their Church, Ecclesiastical as Civil, next under
thee and thy Christ, so that he is their third person of their Trinity, and so
their God, Defendor of their faith. Now here is the blasphemy in Revel. 13.
verse 5. And in the Scottish Covenant, one Article of their Religion is
concernning his sacred Majesty, etc. and Kings are the only chief upholders of
Babylon: see how they weep at her downfall, Rev. 18. when buying and selling
cease, etc.

Now friends, what have we to do with any of these unfruitful works of
darkness? Let us take Peter's advice, 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past of our life may
suffice that we have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in
lascivious lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banqueting, and abominable
idolatry. And let us not receive the Beasts mark, least that the doom in Rev.
14.9, 10. befall none of us: but let us oppose the Beastly powers, and follow
the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

Now here is the chief ground why wicked men stand so for a King; it is to
uphold all their confused cruelties and incests as aforesaid: and herein
upholding him, they uphold that power that set him up, (by our Saviors rule)
and by justifying him, they justify that power that set him a work in all his
tyranny; and they and the Parliament in treating with him, treat with him that
authorized him; and in receiving him, receives him that set him on work, that
is to say the Devil. Then see how we are cheated.

Now the enlightened Saints are commanded to abandon the unfruitful works of
darkness. But all this power aforesaid is, 1 of darkness; therefore to be
resisted.

2. Christ has called the Saints to light; therefore they are to walk as
children of light.

3. The Saints are to have no fellowship with Belial: but the power aforesaid
is of Belial, therefore have no fellowship with it.

4. The said power is to be resisted: and see the promise, for says James,
Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. And this we have experience of,
that whenever the Kings power was manfully resisted, he fled from the
resisters.

And therefore those called the Levellers, their principles to free all a like
out of slavery, are most just and honest in reference to the matter of
freedom: for it is the end of the redemption by Jesus, to restore all things.

And to do this, the removal of the Kingly power will be main forwardness:
and indeed the Kingly power is the being of Tyranny; for if no King, no Lord,
no Patent, etc. 2. If the execution of Laws were not in his name, as all
Assurances, Writs, Commissions, Patents, Warrants, etc. then he should down if
he would, for any use or need they had of him.

Therefore rich men cry for a King, because the poor should not claim his
right, that is his by Gods gift.

2. The horsleech Lawyer cries for a King, because else the supreme power will
come into the peoples Representatives lawfully elected, and so all Trials would
be done in the country, in every Town, etc. by the same Neighborhood, and so
the Law would no more be bought nor sold, and then farewell caterpiller-Lawyer.

3. The things, Lord, Barons, etc. cry for a King, else their tyranical House
of Peers falls down, and all their rotten honor, and all Patents and
Corporations, their power being derived from him, if he go down, all their
tyranny falls too. The like of Lord of Manors, Gentlemen, etc. besides the
Priests of all men must cry for a King; for by his power and oppressing Courts,
all his Judges, Justices, etc. and himself too is their sworn creature, and
they are the Priests pack-horses that carry the whore of Babylons ware about,
and they want but bells about their neck, they may be the better heard, etc. Now
if the King go down, what will become of the Priests ware think you? and
Tithes goes down.

The like of all base Conventions of men of what kind soever. But now the
honest man that would have liberty, cries down all interests whatsoever, and to
this end, he desires common right and equity, which consists of these
particulars following.

1. A just portion for each man to live, that so none need to beg or steal
for want, but every one may live comfortably.

2. A just Rule for each man to go by, which Rule is to be found in Scripture.

3. All men alike under the said Rule, which Rule is. To do to another as
another should do to him: So that eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
etc, and if any one stole, to restore double, etc.

4. The government to be by Judges, called Elders, men fearing God, and hating
covetousness; Those to be chosen by the people, and to end all controversies in
every Town and Hamlet, without any other or further trouble or charge.

And in the Scriptures the Israelites Commonwealth, is an excellent pattern,
if led up to that in Genesis 1. and Genesis 9. mentioned in the beginning.

Now in Israel, if a man were poor, then a public maintenance and stock was to
be provided to raise him again: So would all Bishops-lands, Forrest-lands, and
Crown Lands do in our Land, which the apostate Parliament give one to another,
and to maintain the needless thing called a King. And every seven years the
whole Land was for the poor, the fatherless, widows and strangers, and at every
crop a portion allowed them.

Mark this, poor people, what the Levellers would do for you. Oh why are you so
mad as to cry up a King? It is he and his Court and Patentee-men, as Majors,
Aldermen, and such creatures, that like Cormorants devour what you should
enjoy, and set up Whipping-posts and Correcting-houses to enslave you. It Is rich
men that oppess you, says James.

Now in this right Common wealth, he that had least had no want: therefore the
Scripture call them a Family, and household of Israel. And in the 2. of the
Acts, amongst those that received the Gospel, they were gathered into a family
and had all things common; yet so, that each one was to labor and eat his own
bread. And this is equity, as aforesaid: for it is not lawful, nor fit for some
to work, and the other to play; for it is Gods command, that all work, let all
eat: and if all work alike, it is not fit for all to eat alike, have alike, and
enjoy alike privileges and freedoms? And he that did not like this, is not fit
to live in a Commonwealth. See Genesis 9. And therefore weep and howl, ye rich
men, by what vain name or title soever, God will visit you for all your
oppressions; you live on other men's labors, and give them their bran to eat,
extorting extreme rents and taxes on your fellow creatures. But now what will
you do? for the People will no longer be enslaved by you, for the knowledge of
the Lord shall enlighten them, etc.

And now (according to our knowledge,) we shall discover your pedigree from your
King to your Gentleman, and it is thus:

William the Bastard son of Robert Duke of Normandy, with a mighty Army of
his fellow-Tyrants, and Thieves, and Robbers, enters Sussex, kills the
Inhabitants, the Britains, and their King, that were in an Army to withstand
his cruelty and defend their rights, robs and destroys all places and persons
at his pleasure, setleth Garrisons of Normans to enslave the Britains, takes
all Land, and causes them to hold it by Copyhold, to pay fines and harets at
his pleasure, etc. It is too tedious to relate all Polls, Tolls, Taxes, etc.
that he made our Forefathers pay, Let the Reader view the Chronicle.

But amongst all unnatural, unreasonable, tyrannical and cruel Laws he made,
as that of Curfur, of Felony, That the child must suffer for the Father, etc.
And all his tyrannical Laws he caused to be in an Outlandish tongue. So that
here we take this power to be that little horn in Dan. 7.24 because we never
heard, or read of the like cruelty that any Tyrant did the like, for to cause
his cruel Laws to be in an unknown tongue, Now the poor people knew not when
they offended or no.

2. For the execution of those Laws, the people to come to what place he will
appoint, at four Terms and times in a year.

And 3. to buy their Laws at the Lawyers unconscionable rate, for he set up and
devised the Lawyers. Now as we shall make it appear that this is the horn, so
the Caterpillars, Lawyers, will prove the eyes: which Lawyers are as profitable
as magots in meat, and Caterpillars in Cabages, and Wolves amongst Lambs, etc.

And amongst those, see their preferment (as its called) to suck the people; as
Attorney, Counselor, Barrester, Sergeant, and accordingly Fees to rob, and they
take Oaths, and out of this rubbish stuff are all our Creatures called
Judges, and they likewise all to be sworn. And then places of preferment (so
called) to tyrannize, and to be the head Tyrants Sycophants, Wolves, Lions,
Leopards, etc, as Dutchy-General, Attorney General, Lord-lubber-keeper, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord-Treasurer, Lord Barons of the Exchequer, and I know not what
great Catchpoles besides these; all to be sworn to their dread Sovereign Tyrant
Beast, etc. And so being right whelps brought up to rent, devour, rob, spoil,
tyrannize, etc, over the poor people; then their dread Tyrant, as he has
received power and dignity from the Dragon, or Devil, as aforesaid, does
shelter, breathe out, and all to be daggle them with it, with hairy skin*d
robes, resembling the subtle nasty Fox with his dirty tail. And because the
Lord Keeper, Privy Seal, and Treasurers long tails should not draggle in the
dirt, they must have another Sycophant slave apiece to carry it up for them,
with their hats off, doing homage to their breech O height of all baseness!
What, will they creep in one another arses for honor? Why, oh, his Majesty's
breath of Honor it may be blows out Thire, and therefore he holds up his gown
that might blow him that holds it up, and makes him be called Sir. Likewise
those men thus honored, must have a gue-gaw silver Mace carried before them,
with a Cross a top on it, to show they have their Title from the Defender of
the Popish Faith; the Lord Keeper having a fools-babie like a Purse carried
before him: now all these Lawyers, Liars, and twelve Judges; Besides with their
cowtred Caps; and Sergeants with their womanish Coifs and Peticotes on their
Shoulders, with their Barresters, Atturnies, etc. Howbeit, they rob and devour
the people, striving who shall most play the knave and cousen; so that he may
clime up into high places of profit: for all those upholding their Kings
Prerogative, their Tyranny is unquestionable, that is the reason that they
maintain the King can do no wrong; that he is a God on earth, as God is God in
Heaven, and that he is the life of the Law; all Writs, Warrants, Commissions,
etc. His name gives the being to them; that he is the fountain of our honor
and magistracy: yea, and that he is supreme head, Ecclesiastical and Civil;
also that he is to be accountable to none but God, and all this the better to
hide their tyrany; for they being all from him, and all their Commissions; if
you question them, then you must question him from whom their power was
derived; but they say, he is not to be accountable, etc. so that by this means
they uphold all their Tyranny; and there is no way, but to take down the Kingly
power and then they will down too, and not before: Now these Lawyers are the
Eyes of the Beast, for the twelve Judges sit in the tyranicall House of Peers,
another sort of the Kingly creatures to advise them in all tyranny, and how to
keep the Norman yoke about the peoples necks.

The next thing to show is from whence came our Nobility and Gentry, even from
that outlandish Norman Bastard, who first being his Servants and under Tyrants;
secondly, their rise was by cruel murder, and theft, by the Conquest;
thirdly, their rise was the Countries ruin, and the putting them down will be
the restitution of our rights again; these are called Dukes, Earls, Barons,
Marquess, Lords, etc. And from this Bastard is all our royal blood, therefore
to be utterly disesteemed: O then behold, O England, thy vanity in Idolizing
the King and his Children!

Thy Priests have guld, bewitched, cheated, and betrayed thee into these
tyrants hands with their sorceries only for their own filthy lucre and bellies
sake, because they have the greatest part of the spoil for their preaching up
the King to be the Supreme head, Defender of the Faith, Gods anointed; and that
if thou do resist his power thou resists the ordinances of God; now all
this is but as bridles in thy jaws, and blindes over thy eyes, that thou must
be ruled by the Church, and they are thy enemies, and thou must believe them;
and keep thy self a good Subject to thy Prince, the condition is good: and by
all these and a thousand tricks more they do but mould thee to slavery this
five hundred years and more and by this means the King and his Creatures ride
thee in thy Estates, and Persons, and Labors.

And the Priests over thy Conscience and soul, and keeps thee in all ignorance
and malice; and for so doing thy Priests are thy Princes, and bear rule, and
for their so bewitching thee, they come by their Impropriations and fat
Benefits; and it is for those fat Benefits that makes them turn changelings,
either to King or Parliament, which will best furnish their kitching. Therefore
shake off those locusts and be no more deluded by them, but hearken to the
voice of God in the Scriptures, and his Saints, and pay no more Tithes to those
Priests, nay cast off those abominable deceivers.

All Charters, Pattents, and Corporations was devised only to uphold the Kings
Tyrany, Greatness, and interest; and because the people did rife in many patts
for their Privileges and Right, and he being in straights and knowing not how
to uphold his tyranny devised a way to set the people one against another, by
making some Free, some Foreigners, etc. and so devises these Patents and
Charters in all populous Cities and Towns throughout the Realm to uphold his
Interest.

Now as for these bewitching Charters, see how they run in J. 1. Out of our
Princely grace, bounty, mere motioned p^^^^ely favor, Do give and grant to
this our City or Town, etc. To be a body Corporate, to consist of a Major,
Bailiffs and Burgesses, etc.

Why? Mark the better to serve us and our successors (this is the end of their
grant) then all Towns and Customs whatsoever is due to us and our successors?
We bequeath to the same body Corporate (and every business must be sworn, to
be the Kings creatures) then out of that pack, they have power to choose twelve
Aldermen for a Common-counsell, and they all be sworn again: Then out of this
stuff, all the Burgesses to choose a thing called a Major, and she all to be
sworn to the Kings: then she shall be a Just-asse of Peace and Coram, and have
a silver Hartichoak or toy called a Mase, carried before her; and she and her
twelve Adermen following after in their Conie skin Gowns, as so many fools in a
Mid summer Aile: and those petty tyrants shall domineer over the Inhabitants by
virtue of their patent, and enclose all, letting, and setting of the poors
lands too, and moneys, stocks of moneys to their own use, and claim a
privilege from their Charters and patents, that they scorn to be accountable
to others, but to their Prerogative Masters; so that you see all tyrany
shelters it self under the Kings wings: is it not time then to throw down the
King, and bring his person to his answer: these Patents and Charters is the
main wheel and prop that upholds the Kings tyrany; for by this means the
Prerogative people, strives to uphold the King and Lords interests, to get
favors of them, to hold up their own knavery and deceit; and does choose such
Burgesses for the Parliament, as will be for the King, as Caterp^ller Lawyers,
Coliers, or Lords of the Manor, Imporpriators, or such like; and it is from
those Patent Towns, that the House of Commons is filled with so many kingified
Prerogative self interest, proud and cheating Varlets as now it is: and until
those Corporations be thrown down, we can expect never any hope of freedom by
a Parliament: see how Londons Common-Counsell stir up their Hackneys with
Petitions and Mutineys, for a Treaty with our Conquered enemy, etc.

Therefore let Burgesses henceforth be no more so chosen, but from all the
well-affected in general.

The next thing is to show you, as I conceive, how we came by a Parliament, 2.
What is a Parliament, 3. What good may be expected by a Parliament as it now
stands?

Our forefathers the Britains, being altogether in slavery, did rise in many
parts, and would not endure the slavery aforesaid; then the tyrant and his
brood, not able to overcome, grants a Parliament as follows; the People to
parley, treat, or declare their mind: to this end, to choose men to treat as
follows, 1. The Freeholders in every County to choose two, which should be
called Knights for the County; and his Patentee Towns, each to choose two more,
which should be called Burgesses, and those should sit for the Country, and be
called a House of Commons; and have a firmative voice, to affirm what they would
have done, and the major part to carry it.

2. Provided, that he would have a House of Peers to sit for him from his
Prerogative without Election, by his Patent, and those to have a Negative voice
to thwart the Commons if they please, and if they assented to the Commons, then
it should be an Ordinance; if they did not, then all the Commons did should be
null; and if the Commons and Lord, or the most part did assent, then the King
to have a Negative voice; and no Laws to be made, or repealed without his
consent; and if he consented to it, then it should be an Act, and no otherwise.

3. Before any sitting to Vote, they are to take these Oaths as follows.

1. That he is their lawful King: 2. They will not alter the Government as it
now stands: 3. And they will not deprive his Successor: and in King Henry the
eights time, when they came to be Priest-ridden, that he is the Head of the
Church, Ecclesiastical and Civil, Supreme head, etc. Defender of the Faith,
and such blasphemes: and these oaths, as it is manifest, they have ever since
taken.

Now observe our worthy Parliament, first the King is too hard for the people
to cheat them: for first, the greater number of the Commons are chosen by his
Patentee Burgesses, Major and Aldermen: and the County but two in a County and
those the Freeholders, which had their freedom of the Normans, and all the
people else shut by from choosing, and if 2. The King has a House of Patentee
Lords, to balance them with their Negative voice.

3. The King has a Negative voice, and that is the third State to Balance
them himself.

4. In the House of Commons it self, the King has the bigest part, even near
two to one for most, all the Burgesses be for him, and the major part carrying
it by voice. Now what is this but a mere cheat, and observe all the Cronicles
from Bastard William, to Charles, and upwards, and since, and it will appear
that Kings got more by treaties, then ever their Sword could have done, and
kept it longer, because now their tyranny was settled by a Law, and the people
sworn to those Laws; they thinking they have gained freedom when indeed they
have given away their freedom by their Parliaments, as aforesaid: and now we
see, had not God moved this Army to prevent this Treaty, this Parliament had
utterly cheated and betrayed us into our implacable enemies hands again; and
had settled the whole Norman power again over us, notwithstanding all this light
to the contrary, Treasure spent, Bloodshed, etc. Besides the many Oaths the
Commons took to free us; so that Charles had like to be set up in his
tyrannical Power again; but now blessed be God, the Net is broke, and we are
escaped. And for all our tyranny the Priests are our Inchanters, and those that
preached it up for their own bellies sakes.

Now King, Lords, Commons, three States, as it has been called the little
Horn (as I conceive) in Daniel the seventh; for it alters from all other
tyranicall Powers in the world whatever: secondly, the King is head of their
Church, as aforesaid: thirdly, they alter one tyranicall way and set up
another: and can make up a thing called Religion by one Parliament and throw it
down the next Parliament, and set up another; so here is changing times, etc.
and trampling under feet. And the base Priests, the Ecclesiastical State
preaches all those. Powers and Constitutions to be Jure divino. O wretches,
wretches, the black guard of Satan, what will become of them.

FINIS.
1. Kings 12.16. So when all Israel saw that the King harkened not unto them,
the People answered the King, saying; What Portion have we in David: neither
have we inheritance in the Son of Jesse. To your tents O Israel.


