The additionall Plea of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, prerogative prisoner in the
Tower of London, the 28. of October, 1647. which he sent unto the Committee of
the House of Commons, where Mr. John Maynard the Lawyer has the Chair, with a
letter, which letter thus follows.
To his honored friend, Mr. John Maynard Chairman to the Committee, for
revuing of Lievt. Col. John Lilburnes business against the Lords, at his
Chamber in the Temple, or at the House of Common, this deliver with speed.
Mr. Maynard,
J Cannot but in civility, return you many thanks for your readiness and
freeness to hear me at large make my grand Plea against the Lords unto you
upon Wednesday the 20. present, hoping upon Tuesday last according to your own
Order I should have been heard out to have said unto you what I had behind, and
so have left it to your judgments and consciences what to have reported to
your house; but truly Sir, the Committees not coming together, I look not
upon as an accident, but a real design upon me, that so J should not have a
period put to my business, about the Lords, for which I have (almost to my utter
ruin) waited upon you about 17. months, nor reap no present benefit for all my
most barbarous sufferings, from the Bishops and the Star Chamber, for which I
have earnestly followed you for justice and right now almost full seven
years, to the expense of many hundred pounds; and that upon the motion of Mr.
Henry Martin in your House this day, for the further and effectual ordering of
a speedy care to be taken to put a period to my long since just Appeal, (the
trial of which you have so often taken upon you, that you now cannot well
evade the judging of it) took no effect at all, which I also look upon as a
mere design of the Lords sons, and Lords would be in your house, with the
powerful influence of my grand adversaries, the grandees of the Army, that
have of late eagerly and visibly (for my honesty) sought my ruin. And truly
Sir, being that I have not a penny inheritance in all the world, nor any trade
agoing to bring me in a penny to buy me bread, nor a penny allowed me either
from you or the Lords to buy me food, and all my friends strongly endeavored
to be scared away from me by the strictness of the present Lievt. of the
Tower, the mere creature of my now grand adversary Lievt. G. Cromwell, in
causing all their names at the gate to be taken that come to see me, contraoy
to all law, reason, equity, justice, and conscience, in which condition if I
continue a little longer, I must of necessity perish. And therefore that I may
not be guilty of my own ruin by any delay on my part, I have inclosedly sent
you my additionall Plea under my hand and seal (which on Tuesday (if the
Committee had sat) J intended to have delivered both by word of mouth and
writing unto you, as the conclusion of all I have to say against the Lords
(unless they give in an answer) and now I earnestly desire you to call your
Committee together, and trouble your selves no further to send for me, but draw
your conclusions of the whole matter as it is before you, and then I entreat
you without any further delay to quit your hands of it, by making a speedy
report to your house, that so I may by your long expected justice be preserved
from a speedy and unavoidable ruin, which I cannot willingly suffer to come
upon me, without the attempting of the effectuallest means that reason and
compeld necessity can dictate unto me for my preservation, though I run the
hazard of being cut in ten thousand pieces thereby, and if J perish the ruin
and blood of me and mine must be (both by God and man) requied of your adomant
and flinty hearted house. Sir this I have writ unto you on purpose to
communicate it to your house (before I print it) as my last in tended
addresses, to leave both you and them before God and the whole world without
excuse, so with my service presented unto you, I commit you to God and rest.

From my most illegal Captivity in the Tower of London, this 28. of October.
1647. Sir, your true friend to serve you, (if you will effectually acquit your
self as a true servant of the Common wealth) that dare attempt the effecting
of the the desperatest design in the world, that appears to his understanding
just and honest, if compeld thereunto by necessity. John Lilburne.


The Plea it self thus follows.

And now Sir, I desire to speak a few words to that which I have conceived as
essential to my good and benefit, as any thing that yet I have said, and that
is this, in some of my late letters to M. Martin, I have declared, that I
cannot own the judgment of the present mixed house of Commons, being compounded
of two Anty-parties, the one of which must of necessity upon their own
public declared principles be guilty of the highest of crimes, upon which
some of the active agents of my close and heavy adversaries of the Army, have
taken occasion thereby to do the utmost they can to blast my reputation,
endeavoring to make honest conscientious men in London believe, and report me
to be a man fallen from the principles I formerly went upon, and from the
Parliament, and the interest of the Commons of England, and am totally become a
Gavialeere, and soly captivated, or degenerated to their principles and
interest, and act what they in their desparate Counsels put me upon, when they
have distempered me with drink, etc. And at the Head quarters, and in other
quarters of the Army, I am by the foresaid wicked and Lordly agents, rendered a
man that would distroy the King and kingly government, the Parliament, and most
of the chief men in the Army, and that I am the head and chief of a
generation or faction of men that are altogether for Anarchy and confusion, and
would have no government at all in the Kingdom, but have every man to do what
he list, and have all things common, and so distroy all law and property, and
that I might have my liberty and freedom if I would, which say they I have by
all the ways and means I could invent declined, being a gainer by my
imprisonment; and fully hearing of these things, and how dissignedly,
maliciously, lyingly, and confidently from one company to another, they were
blasted abroad by the Agents and instruments of no mean ones. And although my
principles, and the constant, visible, and public Declarations thereof fully
declares (as my late Plea before you also witnesses) that I am for meum and
tuum; liberty and property, continually professing, that I had rather live
under a very harsh law, whereby I may know by what rule to walk, then live
under the moderatest arbitrary government in the world, begun to be exercised
by the godlyest, justest, or choicest men that ever the earth bred, in regard I
am not then under law, (which all men that ever God created ought to be) but
under will and power, by which (by reason of man's corruption, who here has no
perfection, but are subject to actual backsliding, and degenerating) I am
liable and in danger every hour to be distroyed at the pleasure of him that is
stronger in power then I. And although I had often proffered Bail for my
liberty to the General and his Lieutenant of the Tower, and offered to put any
difference betwixt me and any in the Army, to the full and final determination
of honest men, equally chosen, and in case they could not agree in their
judgment I was willing the General himself (to whom I am but a stranger)
should be Vmpire and finally determine them, but finding my self no whit
secured or preserved for all this, from their designed, blasted calumniations.

I was in no small straights in my own spirit, being sensible of my great and
urgent necessities in my present condition, the continuance of which but for a
small time longer, must needs in reason be the ruin and destruction of me, my
wife and children, and having offered all (time after time to those I look upon
as my present Gaolers) that in my thoughts it was impossible for a man of
brains and honesty to invent, and stoop too, to obtain his long longed
liberty, but all in vain; J was necessitated, seeing I could not own the
present mixed House of Common, nor willingly submit unto their sentence in that
condition I was necessitated I say, to publish in print my Proposition of the
2. of October, 1647. Which in private I had made unto Liev. Genesis Cromwell some
weeks before, face to face, with diverse other things as fair in themselves as
it, And I caused it under my hand Seal to be delivered unto the Speaker of
your House, that so all the Kingdom might know my readiness and willingness to
stoop to any thing in the world that was rational and just to obtain my
thirsted for liberty and freedom.

Which paper your Speaker communicated to your house, and caused it to read and
debated, which as I am told has procured this Committee, unto whose desires so
far as with a good conscience, and the preservation of my principles, and
integrity I am willing to stoop (that so I might stop the mouths of my
calumniators, and bring my business to no issue, being rather willing to
hazard (if I had them) a million of lives, then much longer remain under my
present tyranny and imprisonment) and therefore it is that I have obeyed your
summons, and gone thus far with you as I have done, knowing by your order, you
are not difinitively to judge my cause.

And therefore before your house finally judge my cause, I desire you from me
to acquaint them that Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Army under his command, upon
the 18 August 1647. has published a Remonstrance printed twice by two special
Orders of the present House of Peers, to the view of the whole kingdom, and
approved of by all the Members of the House of Commons, that went to the Army
for protection. In which Remonstrance they utterly disclaim and renounce Mr.
Pellam, and all those that sat and voted with him, as Usurpers of Parliament
authority, forfiters of their trust, and Traitors to their Country, for
actually by their Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, levying of a new war in the
kingdom, against the peace and the power thereof, which Sir Thomas Fairfax is
since by this present House of Commons owned by them for their General, and
the Army under him for their Army, and yet the most of these very Members thus
declared against, sit in the house, being in this condition, by reason of their
crimes declared in that Declaration under the power, lash, and awe of those of
that Army, that have the power of that Army at their beck and command.

Wherefore I desire, that seeing Lievt. Gen, Cromwell is the man that engaged
we originally in my contest against the Lords, and particularly against the
Earl of Manchester, who then in his discourse to me, was the greatest Anti
Lord (I aver it) that I conversed with in England.

And seeing that now of late, (as I have too much cause to judge) he is
apostatized from his principles, and the peoples liberties, and has visibly
shake hands with those he accused and judged to be enemies to the peace and
liberties of England, and is now, as I have too much cause to judge, become a
patron, approver, and protector of them in all their Arbitrary, illegal, and
tyrannical usurpations, with all his interest, with the conductive power of
the Army, which now he has at his beck, and by means of which he holds a rod
of fear and terror over the heads of all those Members of the House of
Commons, that they shall not dare (for their own safety and preservation) to
give their Votes freely against the Lords, seeing that he in interest and
design is now so nearly conjoined unto the present House of Lords, who I may
now justly call his creatures at his beck to execute his will and mind, and
therefore desiring to stoop as low as in justice and honesty I can, to put a
period one way or another to my present contest with the Lords, I earnestly
desire that the House of Commons will publicly declare against the foresaid
Remonstrance (if Mr. Pellam and those that sat with him, were a true house of
Commons) that so all the said Members therein concerned, may effectually be
instated in the full condition and capacity of free and innocent men, that so
without fear of Liev. Genesis Cromwell, or his power in the Army, they may vote
freely according to their consciences, and then I shall freely submit to their
judgment. Or else secondly that according to the tenor of the said
Remonstrance, they may either be totally expelled (or else pro tempore in my
cause) and I shall freely put my self upon the judgment of the remaining part
of the House of Commons, let it be what it will, I value it not, so I may come
to an issue, and thereby fully know what I have to trust to. Or if neither of
these can at present without further delay of time be done, then in the third
place I earnestly desire to put my self upon the issue of my foresaid
proposition, which I desire verbatum to read unto you, but seeing this
Committeee has dealt so fairly, justly, and honorably with me, in granting
me so free open, and public hearing, as I had before you upon Wednesday last
and hearing me with so much patience, without interrupting of me, and seeing
the calumny is so strong upon me, that I have no mind to come out of prison, I
am resolved in this particular, wholly and solly to put my self upon the
judgment and conscience of this Co^mittee, and that if you amongst your selves
judge it fit that I should wholly put my self upon the present judgment and
concience of the final judgment and determination of the present mixed house of
Commons. I do here before you all freely and voluntaryly declare I am willing
to do it, and in testimony whereof I give it you under my hand and seal, and
desire you, that upon all that this day, and upon Wednesday last I have said
and declared to you, that you would immediately consult amongst your selves,
and give your sense and opinions as far in it as your present power will
enable you, and thereupon withal speed make your report unto the House, that
so without any more delay, I may receive their long expected judgment and
final determination, and so I leave you, desiring the Lord to direct you, now
at last to acquit your selves toward me and the kingdom like men of honesty
and honor, and so rest yours in your faithful serving of the kingdom.

Tuesday this 26. October, 1647. John Lilburne.

I cannot but acquaint the Reader, that a grand objection against me, wherefore
I should not have my liberty and justice, is because, if I were at liberty, it
is said I would go down to the Army, and make new hurly bulyes there, but to
take of this ungrounded fallacy, and falsehood I proferred Lievt. Genesis Cromwell
face to face in the Tower, the beginning of September last, (that I was so far
from intending to trouble either the Army, Parliament, or Kingdom) that upon
that condition the house of Commons would forthwith do me but a reasonable
proportion of justice, I would imediately leave the Kingdom, and voluntarily
engage not to come into it again so long as the present troubles lasted. And
for a prevention of any clashing betwixt the present Lords and Commons about
me, in regard he apprehended it of extraordinary prejudice to the kingdom I
proferred him so my Appeal might be adjudged by the House of Commons, and the
kingdoms liberties secured for future against the Lords usurpations, out of
that affection I bear to the peace and quietness of my native Country, I
would willingly wave all things concerning my particular individual self (in
reference to the present House of Peers illegal and tyrannical dealing with
me) till the next Parliament, and if that never came, I would never seek for
reparations of them, nor from them. And I had then diverse very fair promises
from him, but I never enjoyed from him, the least performance in the world,
although my business was moved in the house by Col. Henry Martin the next day
(being Tuesday) after my discourse with L. G. Cromwell, but nothing was done in
it, although L. G. Cromwell was then sitting in the House, and although it was
14. days before by special order of the House ordered to be debated that day,
the next being Tuesday, Mr. Martin moved, it again, and then it was put of till
Friday after, upon which day Mr. Martin moved it again, but it was put of till
Tuesday, and upon Tuesday it was reported to the House, but nothing was don then
in it, saving to turn it back to the Committee, there to be delayed 15.
months longer, and power given them to search for presidents, for no other end
as I conceive, but to see whether the Lords injustice to me, could not easily
be justified by their former injustice to others, and so because to several
men they have done injustice, their tyrannical, illegal dealings toward me
must pass for good law, and with much ado that day, my wife in the afternoon
got the Committee together, where Mr. Knightly (as I was informed) played the
learned Procter for the Lords, and L. G Cromwell came not very short of him,
for though it were to gross for him (especially having been such a grand
Antagonist to the Lords) to plead down right for the Lords and their apparent
encroachments upon the Commons rights yet (as very good intilligence tells me)
he made a zealous and earnest motion, that because the cause was so knotty and
of so great concernment, that they might get a company of Lawyers in their
House to debate it pro and con; although he himself last year being one of my
Committtee, and often times at it when I was before them, declared himself
them as free from scruples, (that by law the Lords had no jurisdiction at all
over me in the case in controversy) as Mr. Henry Martin did; but the wind
being now changed, and the Lords being now become his white boys, he must
become their faithful servant against his own interest (as a Commoner,) yea and
his conscience and the interest of all the Commons of Eng: of which when I
heard, my soul was in an agony and perplexity, that I should be so dealt with
by him, that originally brought me into my contest with the Lords, and who but
the other day had promised me face to face so fairly.

And looking upon this motion of his, as divellish and mischievous a motion as
ever was made against me by any of my adversaries, (for having writ so bitterly
against the Lawyers corruptions as I had done, and especially against those of
the House of Commons; for pleading causes at inferior bars, before Judges of
their own making, and so out of fear over awing them, and thereby as it were
compelling them to do injustice for fear of loosing their favor, who are
able to turn them out of their places) I therefore judged it impossible by all
the interest I had in the world, in half seven years) to get a company of
Lawyers of the House of Commons to come to a Committee to do me or my present
cause a courtesy, and this is all the good I have received by L. G. Cromwells,
serious promises made to me in the Tower, saving his dear and bosom friend,
and creature, stout and valiant Nathaniell Fines, made, I will not say as the
mouth of L. G Cromwell, as I am from good hands told, a most fiery, fierce, and
bitter speech against me, and my cause in the open house of Commons. Whereupon,
my pen and tongue has been very free since in discovering L G. Cromwells Hocus
Pocus dealing with me and the Kingdom, who appears to be one of the notablest
Juglers, that ever I was familiar wchih in the kingdom, with freeness giving
no small distaste to some of my near friends, who coming to see me, fell upon
me soundly and told me I would not only undo my self but all that had any
relatition unto me, or familiarity with me, and pressed me to do something
that was reasonable and moderate to get my liberty, assuring me that if I would
do so and so, he knew I might have my liberty etc. whereupon I drew him up
these following lines which pleased him very well.

For my particular in England were I at liberty, I could not live to follow any
employment, except Oaths or Tithes were abolished, for either J must follow my
traid which hear I cannot do without taking oaths, which I cannot take, or
else I must live in the Country, and there I neither can nor would pay Tithes,
in which regard if I were at liberty I must of necessity go beyond seas, and
do hereby promise that upon that condition the house of Commons will pass
their judgment upon my protest against the Lords and my Appeal to them for
justice and protection, and evacuate and annihilate my sentence, and immediately
help me to the 2000 l. the Lords adjudged me from my Starchamber Judges, and
give me but in ready money one half of my Arrers for the whole, being about 6.
or 700. l. audited before a Committee of their own house, and I will imediatly
lay out my money in cloth or other commodities, and if I can pass with them,
I will forthwith leave the Kingdom, to which I will promise without license I
will not return for the space of 12. months after the receipt of the money,
and so shall leave this Parliament to the management of their own affairs
amongst themselves, witness my hand and seal this sixth of October, 1647.

John Lilburne.

But in stead of obtaining my liberty, etc. hereby, as I was confidently made
believe I should, this my own moderate and fair proffer served my adversaries,
to no other end but to upbraid and calumniate me behind my back, though made by
their own procurement, and to render me contemptible, as a man that neither
cared for England nor the liberties thereof, but merely and only sought for my
money and my own ends, whose juggling dealing with me I shall more largely in
some marginall notes, etc. discover, when I print my letter to subtle Mr. Allen
the Agitator, which by Gods assistance shall speedily follow, and then my
Appeal next to that, wherein I shall cry out aloud, murder, oppression, and
cruelty, to the whole kingdom, and with strong cries press all that have
honest, english hearts, vigarously to press the house of Commons to judge my
Appeal, which I judge is now hindered by the grandees of the Army, who I may
say are body and soul the Lords creatures, and as great lovers of tyranny,
oppression, injustice, and dissimulation as they,

and so I rest, John Lilburn that neither loves baseness, nor fears greatness.

FINIS.

