The grand Plea of Lievt. Col. John Lilburne, Prerogative Prisoner in the Tower
of London, against the present tyrannical House of Lords, which he delivered
before an open Committee of the House of Commons, the twenteth day of October,
1647. Where Mr. John Maynard the Lawyer had the Chair.
Mr. Maynard,
I Have undertaken a mighty hard and difficult work, to contest with so many
powerful and great men of this Kingdom, conjoined in a House of Peers, (and
thereby claiming the exercise of a greater power, then any other Court of
record in England) for the Laws and liberties thereof, but when I read over
the 19. Chap. of Magna Charta, and the Petition of right, and other the good,
and post known, and declared Laws of this kingdom, made for the Common good,
benefit, profit, protection, and preservation of the lives, liberties, and
estates of all the free Denizons thereof, and seriously consider of them, and
compare the present house of Lords, violent and irregular practices and
dealings with me thereunto, it makes my work to seem very facile, pleasant,
and easy to me? And therefore for the clearing up of the justness of my
present Contest with the present house of Lords, I shall desire from you a
little liberty to speak a few words unto two things, before I come to my maine
Plea.

And in the first place, I entreat a little liberty to make some short
repetitions of my desires unto the Committee that examined my business now
about 12. Months ago, where Mr. Martin had the Chai^e; who I know cannot but
remember that at my first pleading of my cause before him, and the rest of that
Committee, in the Inner Court of Wards; J made it my earnest desire unto them,
that they would deal fairelier and iustlier with the Lords then they had dealt
with me, that so they might not justly complain of them for injustice, as I
had to just cause to complain of the Lords themselves, and seeing that it was
not the manner or law of the Heathen, Pagan, Romans to condemn any man before
that he which is accused has the accuser face to face, and have liberty to
answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him. Acts 25.16. and
therefore I earnestly pressed the (...) Lords might be summoned to send their
Lawyers or Proctors to the Committee to plead for them, and that they might
(...) condemned (...) was pressed at present to speak to my own business,
whereupon I desired them to give me leave to speak to two things, and the
first was to matter of law, and the second to matter of fact. And first to
matter of Law, I desired liberty to lay before them my grounds, reasons, and
arguments (and to read my law proofs) which did fully convince my
understanding that the Lords originally, had no jurisdiction over any Commoner
of England what ever, either to try him or pass judgment against him, either
for life, limb, liberty or estate. But Mr. Martin told me, that for his part he
was as fully satisfied in the point as my self, and so he thought was all the
whole Committee, and thereupon addressed himself unto them, to see whether
they were or no. And they all unanimously declared their satisfaction, without
any one then scrupling, and therefore commanded me to go on to matter of fact,
which I did and laid down this assertion then before them.

That in case the Lords had had jurisdiction over me (which I then and still do
deny) yet I did aver and would by particulars make it good, that there was not
the least legal formallitie in any of their Proceedings with me, (and
therefore also void in law) summoning me before any charge, impeachment, or
indictment was filed against me, which was and is expressly against the
fundamental common law of the land, and also against the 29. chap. of Magna
Charta, and the Statutes of the 5. E. 3. 9. and 25. E. 3 4. and 28. E. 3. 3.
and 37. E. 3. 18. and 42 E. 3. 3. Which Statutes are the true expositors of the
29. chap. of Magna Charta, and what is meant by lex terrae there mentioned,
which is as all those Statutes show, That no man be put to answer without
presentment before justices or matter of record, or by due process or writ
original, according to the old law of the land, and if any thing from
henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in law and holden for
error all and every of which Statutes are confirmed by the Petition of right,
in the 3. of the present King, and in that act made the 17. of the King, this
present Parliament, for the abolishing the Star Chamber.

I then further went on, to show multitudes of errors in all their proceedings
with me, and by special order and command of that Committee, the 6. of November.
1646. brought in my said plea in writing under my hand, and the 9. of November.
1646. Delivered it to the hands of Col. Hen. Martin, and since caused it to be
printed and intitulnd an Annotamy of the Lords tyranny, to which plea in point
of fact I desire to refer my self.

2. And secondly, I desire liberty by way of introduction to my plea to state
the occasions of my being summoned before the Lords bar in June 1646. which
were these, that after my deliverance out of Oxford Castle, I was by L. Genesis
Cromwells means made Major to Col. Edw. King, then Governor of Boston. etc.
under the Earl of Manchester which said Edw. King proved unfaithful to his
trust, and committed besides diverse transendent inormities and misdemeanors,
for which by the rules of war (which both he and I was under) he ought to
have lost his life, of which I according to my duty and trust reposed in me
complained to my General and Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, and labored hard to
obtain a trial for his life before a Council of War. But as I conceive by
reason of the great interest of Kings two Chaplains, Mr Lee, and Mr. Garter,
with the Earls two Chaplains, Mr. Ash and Mr. Good I nor the Committee of
Lincolnshire, nor the Magistrates of Boston (who then were persecutors of him
as well as my self) could get no effectual justice upon him, saving the
casheering him of all, or most of his great and profitable commands. Whereupon
in August, 1644. Mr. Mussendon, Mr. W^lley, and diverse of the Committee of
Lincolnshire, preferred 22. Articles to the house of Commons against the
aforesaid Coll. Edward King in the 4. ct 12. articles of which they expressly
accuse him for betraying Crowland and Grantham into the hands of the professed
and declared enemies of the Parliament, and my self in discharge of my duty to
my Country, and the Parliament being an active prosecutor of the said Col.
Edward King to bring him to a trial in the House of Commons upon the said
impeachment, whereupon by way of diversion and revenge to save his own head
upon his shoulders, he maliciously and designedly confederates with Dr.
Bastwick, and upon the 12. of July. 1645. jointly under both their hands, send
into the Speaker a most malicious, false note by way of accusation against me
about 60000. l that then was said to be sent to Oxford by the Speaker,
whereupon without being called into the House (though then at the door) either
to justify or deny the charge fixed upon me I was by vote of the House
committed a prisoner to the Sergeant at Arms, and from thence by Mr. Lawrence
Whitaker, was sent to Newgate and being there, there was an express order of
the House of Commons (for any thing I know to the contrary by Col. King
procured) for the arreigning of me at Newgate Sessions, where I was acquitted
by proclamation as guiltless of any crime, and afterward by the certifying
thereof by Mr. Glyn, Recorder of London to the House of Commons, I was by vote
thereof the 14. of October. 1645. freely and clearly discharged.

But King being conscious of his own guilt, and judging himself not safe nor
long lived, unless he crushed me to pieces, and therefore most maliciously, and
unjustly upon the 14. of April, 1646. contrary to the just privilege of
Parliament and the Common law of England, caused me at Westminster (as I was
following my business) depending (and then in agitation before the house of
Commons (by whom I ought therefore in justice and law to have been protected,
coming, staying, and going, till I had beeen dispatched by them)
to be arrested by the Bayliffe thereof into the Court of Common Pleas, in an
action of trespass for 2000. l. pretending that I the day I was delivered out
of Newgate had said, that he the said Col. Edward King was a Traitor, and I
would prove him one (which according to your Articles of War, or your own
Ordinances had, and still is easy to do, if you will do justice) whereupon
by petition to your House I pressed hard that he upon his impeachment might
speedily come to his trial, or else that I (as in justice, law, and equity
ought to be) might be protected, and the Judges of the Common pleas might be
commmanded to sease their proceedings, till King upon his impeachment (then
depending in the house of Commons) might either be condemned or justified, but
I could get no answer to my petition, although I followed it with all the
interest, might and strength I had, whereupon being in very great straits, I was
necessitated to pen my plea my self to I. Reeves and print it, in the penning
of which I was necessitated, for my own justification, to touch a little upon
the Earl of Manchesters refusing to do me and the kingdom justice and right,
in an open Council of War against Col. King, and having by L. G. Cromwells
means been deeply with him engaged against the said Earl, in actively
prosecuting of that impeachment of Treason and breach of trust, which he
exhibited to your house about two years ago against the said Earl of
Manchester, he the said Earl of Manchester being then Speaker of the house of
Lords, (and so chief Judge in his own case) caused me as ^ conceive (though
most illegally and uniustly) upon the 10. of June 1646. to be summoned up to
their bar to answer (as by their warrant appears) such things as I should be
there charged with, for writing that book or plea, which if there had been any
thing in it scandalous, it was only tryable by a Jury of my Peers or Equals
(which are Commons or men of my own condition) at the Common Law, the house of
Lords having not by law the least cognizance or jurisdiction in the world of
it, and therefore all their proceedings upon me from the beginning to the end
are most illegal and unjust, and coram non iudice,

And now in the third place, I come unto my plea, but by the way I desire to
premise this unto you, that by your own Declaration of the 15. of December,
1641, and 17. of January, 1641. and the 12. of July. 1642. I find the law of
the land, and the ordinary course of justice, called by you the common
birthright of all the free men or people of England. 1. part book Decl. page
7. 38. 39. 459. and in your Declaration of the 23. of October. 1642. you aver,
that it is the birth right of the meanest of the Commonalty of this Kingdom,
to enjoy the freedom and libertyes of the laws of the land, being (as there
you say) entitled unto it, with the greatest Subject. The inviolable
preservation of which in diverse of your Declarations you declare, is the maine
and principal end of all your undertakings, managed both by your swords and
counsels. And this is that for which you have compelled the kingdom to swear
diverse oaths to maintain with the uttermost hazzards of their lives and
estates, and you have also imprecated (in your Declarations) the fearce wrath
and vengeance of the great God of heaven and earth to fall upon you when you
decline th^se ends.

And therefore Mr Maynard considering all these your own words, and considering
your own deep knowledge and understanding in the laws of England, by the
practice of which you have got a great part of your estate, and by the
destruction whereof you are not worth a groate in all the world, having no
propriety in that you possess, being subject every moment of time to have all
you have, taken from you without remidie, by him that is stronger then you; and
therefore well did Mr. John Pym say in his speech against the Earl of Straford
(recorded in your own book of Declarations, 1 part: page 140.) that the law is
that which puts a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and unjust,
if you take away the law, all things will fall into confusion, every man will
become a law unto himself, which in the depraved condition of human nature,
must needs produce many great inormities, Lust will become a law, envy will
become a law, coveteousnesse and ambition will become a law, and what dibates,
what divisions, such laws will produce, may easily be discerned.

And truly Sir, neither the Lords, nor you, can lay it to my charge, that I am
leagally convicted of the least crime that does disfranchise me, or render me
in the least incapable of enjoying the utmost benefit and priveledge that the
Law of England will afford to a freeborne Englishman; neither can the Lords nor
you, justly pretend against me, that I have drawn my sword against, (or
otherwise publicly or privately, engaged with any interest in England, for the
destroying) the laws and liberties thereof, nay, so far have I been from
any of those things, that I do with confidence avere it, that I have as freely
with my sword in my hand (upon your and their primitive declared principles)
adventured my life and blood for the preservation of the laws and liberties of
England (with as much resolution as any Lord in England, and though it may
unjustly be bruted abroad to my disgrace, by the House of Lords, or some other
of my adversaries, that I am now falen from, and forsaken my first principals,
and would have neither law nor government, yet I do with abundance of
confidence avere it, that I am not (if I know my own heart) changed or falen
from my first principles in the least, but that the Lords themselves are the
true apostates: and that they are the men, that in their constant practizes now
of late years; strongly endeavor to destroy all law and government: and to
set up in themselves an absolute arbitrary Tyranie, worse then either Star
Chamber, Council Table, or High commission, or all three of them put all
together in one, which I doubt not but in my following plea, to make as
apparent to this Committee, as the Sun that shines at noone day, for which end
I desire this Committee to take notice in the first place.

That the Lords do not sit in their House by any power or authority, derived
from the peoples free election and choice, (who cannot in justice, reason, and
equity, be bound, but by their own free consents, neither in reason, justice,
or equity, can any be lawmakers to them, that are not thereunto justly
empowered by them, which the House of Lords are not in the least) but are merely
and altogether the creatures of the King made by his prerogative, some times of
the basest and corruptest of the people, being the mere issue of his will,
sitting by his command, who himself in referrence to the bodies and estates of
the people, is lymitted and bounded by the law.

1. As for instance by the 29.th of Magna Charta, the King himself cannot
imprison any man, nor dispossess him of his freehold, liber^ies or free
customs, or outlaw him, exile him or any otherwise destroy him, but by due
process of law, according to the law of the Land, neither can he sell, deny,
or defer, to any man either justice or right.

2. And by the Statute of the 2, Edward, 3 8 and 14 Edwaard 3, 14 and 11 R. 2.
10 the King is tied that he shall not hinder, disturb, nor delay common right
and justice according to the Law of the Land, by any command under the great
Seal, or the little Seal, neither by any letters of his Signet or privy
seal, and if he shall send any such commands, the Judges notwithstanding,
shall and ought to go on to execute the Law in every point, as if any such
command had never been.

3. And by the Petition of right, made in the 3.d. of the present King, all
those laws, and liberties are not only confirmed, but it is there inacted and
fully declared, that no man be adjudged or condemned, but by the laws already
established, and declared, and that all the Administrators of the laws of
England, and all other of the Kings ministers shall serve him and the Kingdom,
according to the declared laws thereof, and not otherwise.

4. And in the acts that abolished Shipmoney, and abolished the Star Chamber,
and rectiffeth the Council Board, all and every the particulars of the said
Petition of right is not only confirmed, but it is inacted further, that
neither his Majesty, nor his privy Council, have or ought to have any
jurisdiction, power or ^er authority, by English Bill, Petition, Articles,
libells, or any other arbitrarie way whatsoever, to examine or draw into
question, determine or dispose of the Lands, Tenements, heredetaments, goods or
chattels of any the subjects of this Kingdom, but that the same ought to be
tried and determined in the ordinary Courts of justice, and by the ordinary
courses of law, which last clause is extraordinary pertinent to my purpose,
that the ordinary Courts of justice, and the ordinary Courts of the law, are
to be tryers of all causes and differences, betwixt party and party.

And in that act there is a remedy provided for any man that shall illegally
suffer imprisonment: or hereafter be committed or restrained of his liberty,
by the command or warrant of the King himself, his heirs or successors in
their own person, yea and the Kings oath, that he takes when he is made King
recorded. 1. part book decla. page 712, 713, 714. ties him to govourn his
people, according to the established Laws, and to preserve unto them their
liberties and freedoms.

Now Sir, if the King the creator of the Lords be thus restrained by Law as he
is, that he shall not do to the freemen of England what he pleases, nor
exercise an arbitrarie, tyranicall, illegal, power over their bodies or
estates.

It is impossible for him to give unto the Lords the exercise of an arbitrarie
tyranicall, illegal power, over their lives liberties, or estates, for it is a
maxim in nature, there is no being beyond the power of being, neither I am
confident are they able to produce any soled testimony that he ever gave them
any such power. And though I grant that the King to the judges gives such a
power, as he can not, nor does not in his own person execute, (...) I say that
it is always a power, not flowing from his own will, but lim^ted by the Law,
by which he is authorized so to do by acts of Parliament, and I am sure by the
words of the writ by which he summond them to sit in Parliament, (as I find it
printed in a late printed book, called the manner of holding Parliaments: page.)
which writ is the foundation and root of their power) all the power that is
given them by that writ, is to come to the Parliament, to confer and treat
with the King (or afford their council) of certain hard urgent affairs,
concerning the King, the State, and defense of the Kingdom of England, and the
Church thereof. But my pretended offense, touching none of these things but at
the most is merely an action, or offense tryable at common Law, Cooks 5. part
reports delibellis Famosis, and besides the Lords about me had no conferrence
nor treaty with the King their prorogative fountain, as by their writ of
summons, which is the foundation and ground of their power they ought to have.

And therefore the Lords not only by the common law, but by their own law, and
principles had not the least ground to pretend to a power or jurisdiction in
the least of my cause.

2ly I am summond by the Lords Warrant to come to their Bar, and to answer
such things as I stand charged with before their Lordships, concerning a
pamphlet intitulled the just man's justification. Now Mr: Maynard, admit that
that pamphlet as they call it, were mine, and full of scandals in the highest
nature, yet lybells and scandalum magnatum is not to be tried by the House of
Lords, but is to be tried only (now the Starchamber is down) by an action at
the common law, as appears by the 5. part of Cooks reports, Page 125. and the
13. Hen. 7. Kelay. 11. Eliz. Dier 285. and 30. assis Pla. 19. all which is
fully confirmed by your own words in your own declaration, of the 19. May 1642.
1. part book Decl. page 208. where you affirm against the King, that he has
ways enough in his ordinary Courts of justice, to punish such seditious
pamphlets, and sermons as are any way prejudicial to his rights, Honor, and
authority, and if any of them have been so insolently violated, and vilified
his Majesty's own Council and officers have been to blame, and not the
Parliament, who did never restrain any proceedings of that kind in other
Courts, and what you there avere of the King, I much more avere of the Lords,
that their remedy in case of libilling (which yet I deny mine to be) is only
at common law where there is a writ, and action by the law ordained, de
scandalis magnatum (as also for libells only triable by a Jurie, upon an
indictment at common law and not others wise, and this also seems to me to be
very clear, and evident by the Statutes 3. E 1. 33. and ^. E. 3. 18. and 38.
E. 3. 9. and 42. E. 3, 3. and 2. R. 2. 5. and 12. R. 2. 11. none of which I am
sure gives the House of Lords, any cognizance of my pretended crime, and
therefore for them to meddle with me, having no jurisdiction of my cause, it
being neither about error or delay of justice in inferier courts, their
proceedings are thereupon all Coram non iudice, and so void and null in law,
from first to last it being a maxim in law, that that which from the beining
is not valid, can never be made good by tract of time, or those things which
are begun from an evil principal, can never, attain to a legal Issue.

3. My third argument against all the Lords proceedings with me is this that no
man what ever he be is to be imprisoned, but by the established laws of the
land, they are the very words of the excellent Petition of Right, but there is
no established Law for the judgment of the Lords in any thing where the King
their Creator is not concurrant 14. Edward 3, 5, for the Lords as I said before
are only there, not by any election, or power, from the people, but as persons
of honor created and made by the will of the King to assist him as before, and
let their Lawyers or any of their Proctors show me one president before this
Parliament to the contrary, without the Kings Writ for Execution

For in the Writ of Error, wherein lies the main and principal power of the
Lords, there must be a Petition to the King for the allowance thereof: and the
King must give them a particular Commission, and power to take Cognizance of it
before they can have Jurisdiction of it, as is clear and plain by the express
words of the 14. E. 3. 5. which Statute is the principal strength and basis of
the Lords power; but my case is neither delay of Justice in an other Court, nor
corruption of Judgment in another Court, which is all the cases the Lords have
jurisdiction of by Law, which is as binding to them as to any other Courts of
Justice in England, as is clear by the 4. H. 4. 23. which Statute positively
declares, it is a subversion of the Law of the Land, for the Lords originally
to take cognizance of causes, or to overruled the just and ordinary proceedings
of the Law in other inferior Courts: As was lately fully pleaded at the Lords
Bar (as I am from very good hands imformed) both by Mr. Recorder Glyn and your
self Mr. Maynard in the remarkable case of Limbry, against Alderman Langham,
unto which Plea concurred the opinion of all the Judges then in England, which
they were commanded to give by the Lords special command, upon which very Plea
as I am told, the cause is since dismissed from before the Lords as not legally
proper for their Jurisdiction, which at least serves thus far to my end, that
an Act of Parliament is as binding to the House of Lords as to any other Court
of Justice in England: I might here also make use of the Duke of Epernoones
case about 2 years ago if I wanted matter and Law against the Lords.
Neither was there made in my case any Petition to the King, nor any Commission
of his granted to the Lords to authorize them to meddle with me, and therefore
all their proceedings against me are illegal from first to last in the highest
nature. Again, it is plain by the Law of the Land, That no man shall be put to
Answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of record, or by due
process, and writ original, according to the old Law of the Land. See the 5.
E. 3. 9. and 25. E. 3. 4. and 28. E. 3. 3. and 37. E. 3. 18. and 42. E. 3. 3.
and the Petition of Right the 3d of the King, and the Act that abolished the
Star Chamber the 17. of the King. And Sir Edward Cooks Exposition of Magna
Charta, but not any of this, was done in my case; for the Lords summoned me
Oretenus before my charge was filed against me, and examined me Viva voce upon
interrogatories against my self, without letting me know either Accuser,
Prosecutor, Witness, Jury, or Charge, and therefore all their proceedings with
me from first to last are totally illegal and most unjust.

4 My fourth Argument against the illegal proceedings of the Lords with me is,
from the 29 Chap of Magna Charta and the 3 E. 1. 6. and the Petition of Right,
which expressly declares, That no man is to be judged but by his peers, and by
due process according to the Law of the Land (see Clarks case in 5 part Cooks
Reports) that is as learned Sir Edward Cook in his Exposition of Magna Charta
(published for good Law by two special Orders of your House) says, by his
equals, that is, men of his own condition, Commons only being peers to
commons, as Barons of Parliament are peers to Barons of Parliament. 2 Part
Institut. fol. 28, 29. 46. 50. where also he declares what title they bear that
are comprehended within the name of peers of Parliament, and also what titles
they have that are comprehended within the title of Commons. And notable to
this purpose is the Record of Sir Simond de Berisford in the 4. E. 3. To. 2.
which M. Henry Martin had from me at large last year under the hand of the
Record-Keeper of the Tower of London* the substance of which Record is, That E.
3. in his own person did charge the House of Lords to give right and lawful
Judgment against Sir Simond de Berisford for his treason and murder in
murdering his Father King Edw. 2. but the Lords to the King in Parliament said
all with one voice, That the aforesaid Sir Simon was not their peer, wherefore
they were not bound by the Law to give judgment against him, yet nevertheless
at the Kings importunity they did, but it was assented, agreed and enacted
(says Sir Ed. Cook 2 part Inst. fol. 50.) by the King and all the grandees in
full Parliament, That that judgment should never be drawn into example, or
consequence for the time to come: And they there gave the reason of it, because
it was against the Laws of the Land, for them to judge those that were not
their peers and equals.

From whence I observe, That if it be illegal for the House of Lords with the
Kings presence, consent and concurrence, (as they here confess) to condemn
Sir Simon de Berisford for Treason and murdering the King, (because he was none
of their peers) although vigorously put upon it by King Edw. the Third in the
behalf of his father, who in his own person sat and concurred with them in it;
much more is it unlawful for the Lords to presume, to pass judgment upon me a
Commoner, for a trivial supposed case, without the King their creators
presence, Commission or Concurrence, which by their own principles, and by the
principles of the Law yet in force, gives life, power and strength to all such
their Judicial actions, and therefore all their proceedings with me are most
illegal and unjust, and utterly null and void in Law.

5 My Fifth Argument against them is, That by the Laws of this Land no man is
to be Judge in his own case, 8. H. 6. fol. 21. 5. El. Dier. 220. and Doctor
Bonbams case 8 part of Cooks Reports, yea and an Act of Parliament in such a
case, is a void Act by Law.

Therefore the Lords ought not to have judged this cause of mine, for that it
concerns themselves, or at least the Earl of Manchester who was Speaker all the
three several times I was before their House, who with the rest of his fellow
Lords, were not only Parties, but Complainants, Persecutors, Witnesses, Jury
and Judges, which practice is against all the Laws of England and the forms
thereof, as you your selves notably confess and declare in the case of the
five Members, 1 part Book Decl. page 201. and a greater act of injustice then
ever I heard done, by either the Star Chamber, Councell-Board or High
Commission Court, in the days of their greatest tyranny and oppression.

6 If the Lords judgment originally were binding in my case, then a few Lords
would bind not only me, but all the Commons of England, who all one after one,
may be so served by them, as I am, and that without any hope of redress in the
world, (which both Law and reason abhorres) either by Writ of Error or Appeal,
Attaint or Certificate of Assize to any Court whatever, no not to the
Parliament it self, for then it would come before themselves again, who would
never condemn themselves nor their own Decrees.

And if the House of Commons suffer the Lords to exercise such an arbitrary
illegal tyranny as they have done upon me, and without all grounds, rules or
forms of Law, suffer them to send for whom of the Commons of England they
will, and at their will and pleasure condemn them in what and how they please,
then the House of Commons stands for mere ciphers, the Judges in
Westminster Hall for ciphers, and all the Laws in England for ciphers, and we
the Commons of England are become the perfectest slaves this day upon the face
of the earth, and by this practice the end of all Government is overthrown,
viz. the weal and safety of the people, as your House declares it to be in
your notable Declaration of 17. April, 1646. 2. part Book Decl. page 879. where
you also declare, (but I may say by your dealings with me, without any
intentions to perform it) that you will not nor any by color of any authority
derived from you, shall interrupt the ordinary course of justice, in the
several Courts and Judicatories of this Kingdom, nor intermeddle in cases of
private interest, otherwhere determinable, unless it be in case of male
administration of justice, wherein ye shall see and provide that right be done
and punishment inflicted as there shall be occasion, according to the Laws of
the Kingdom, and the trust reposed in you.

Yea, and hereby the people of the Kingdom are left without all means to
preserve themselves, which your selves say, it never ought to be, being as old
a Law as any is in the Kingdom, 1 part Book Decl. page 207. in that you suffer
the House of Lords without control to exercise at their pleasure such a power
over the Lives, Liberties and Estates of the Freemen of England, as I
confidently aver it, cannot legally nor justly be exercised by King, Lords and
Commons, joined and agreeing altogether, who are (when the most is said that
can be said of them) but Magistrates (as all other Magistrates are) appointed
for the protection and preservation, but not ruin or destruction of the
people, 1 part Book Dec. page 150. yea and de facto, habitually to do that,
for but endeavoring of which, the Earl of Strafford lost his head by the
decree of this very Parliament, and for which I doubt not but either I or my
posterity shall see the proudest and stoutest of them to do theirs; it being
more just, equitable, and rational, to destroy a man for acting and doing of a
mischief, then intending it, Strafford being a Saint and a just man upon their
own principles in comparison of themselves.

And therefore Sir, if you or the Lords shall show me as many Presidents as
will fill Paul's, that they have done to others as they have done to me, I value
them no more in comparison to the several Acts of Parliament, and the Common
Law of the Land, which are above Acts, that I have cited, which are point blank
against their usurpations, then I value a dirty rag on the dunghill, and I say
unto you, that if the Lords in their House can make Presidents to destroy Acts
of Parliament, (and pluck the fundamental common Law of England up by the
roots) yea such Acts as have been confirmed by scores of Parliaments, then why
do you cozen, blind, deceive and delude the people of England, by sitting for
ciphers in the House of Commons, and therefore awake and rouse up like men, and
powerfully and effectually rescue our Liberties from them, least we do it our
selves, and punish you, as justly you deserve for your cowardly or treacherous
negligence.

7. The Lords being the mere creatures of the King, made by his will and
pleasure, and set there as Prerogative persons, and yet in Law and by their own
principles, as Lords without the King, they have no Prerogative, and yet have
acted upon me, without the King or his particular Commission, which makes all
they have done unto me, to be null and void both in Law and reason; yea, and I
may justly say, that they, both in reference to the King and people thereby
have forfeited their power and honor, and cannot justly by you the Trustees of
the people, (and who should be the Guardians of their Laws and Liberties) any
longer be owned or acknowledged, either in equity, reason, honor, justice,
safety or conscience to be a House of Peers, but a company of Apostats fallen
from their first institution and degenerated into Tyrants, and therefore
deserve at least from you and the Kingdom the Starre-Chambers doom.

Object. But contempt of a Court, by the Law, subjects a man to Fine and
Imprisonment.

Answ. I answer first, I do absolutely deny, that I did either contemn or
affront their Court, for I obeyed their Writ of Summons, and withal respect
and Complement came to their Bar, (which I aver was more then by Law (...) to
have done) where being examined upon Interrogatories against my self, I
pressed hard to be dealt legally with, and to see my charge in writing, and to
know my accuser and persecutor, both of which was denied me, contrary to Law
and Justice, and a judgment in my own case given by themselves, but the
February before against the Star Chamber, where they declared that the
Starre-Chambers sentence and all their proceedings against me (which was upon
the very same (...) for refusing to answer Interrogatories) is illegal and
most unjust against the Liberty of the Subject, and Law of the Land, and Magna
Charta, and unfit to continue upon Record, yea and in another Decree gave me
2000. l. damages, against some of the Judges and Executors of that sentence;
all which I pressed again and again at their open Bar, which was to no
purpose; for they angrily pressed me to give a positive answer to their
illegal questions, and believing in my own breast, I should be committed for
refusing to answer, I delivered in my Plea by way of protest, against their
Jurisdiction, as justly I might do, (it being a maxim in Law, (as I said
before) that that which is illegal in the beginning, by tract of time cannot
be made lawful) for which and nothing else, they most illegally committed me
to Newgate, the 11. June, 1646. which Warrant I desire may be read, as also the
Decree.

2. I answer, their Court was no Court to me in my case, having no Jurisdiction
of the cause, being not any of the causes that they by the 14. Ed. 3. c. 5.
have Jurisdiction of, and if it had yet by that Statute they could not meddle
with me without the Kings concurrence, and his special Commission, which they
had not in the least, and therefore in a double respect all their proceedings
with me, are most illegal and unjust, and therefore null and void in Law.

3 But in the third place I grant, that contempt or affront of a Court that
has jurisdiction over the Cause is fineable and imprisonable, but to affront,
contemn, or abuse a Court that has no Jurisdiction of the cause for which the
party is convened before them, I say by Law is neither fineable nor
imprisonable: As for instance, if a Court of Sessions questions me for my
Freehold, and I refuse to answer them, and give them contemptuous words for
meddling with that which by Law they have no jurisdiction of, they may by Law
bind me to my good behavior, but cannot fine or imprison me, much less
dis-franchise me of all the privileges of an Englishman, as the Lords have
done to me, as appears by their sentence: the same holds good in the Court of
Common Pleas, who if they go about to hold Plea of Murder before them, if the
party refuse to answer, it is no contempt of the Court, because they have no
jurisdiction over such causes. And pertinent to this purpose is Baggs Case in
the 11. part of Cooks Reports, who being summoned before the May or of
Plymouth, in open Court called him cozening Knave, and said unto him, come
kiss etc. for which the Mayor dis-franchised him, and it was resolved, that
the dis-franchisement was illegal, because it was not according to Law, for
that the Mayor in Law had no power to do it, and at most could have only bound
him to his good behavior.

So that the Lords assuming over me a power of Jurisdiction without Law, and
the Kings Commission according to the form of the Statute in that behalf, they
are no Court to me in my case, nor capable of the cause in controversy betwixt
us, and therefore I say again in a double sense, they have not the least ground
or color in Law either to Fine or Imprison me, but at most (in case there were
an affront, as I deny) to bind me (or cause me) to be bound to my good
behavior; and as for keeping on my hat, refusing to kneel, and stopping of my
ears a month after my first commitment in contempt of their illegal
usurpations, having long before that justly appealed to the House of Commons, I
am not in the least sensurable therefore as they have sensured me, even to
4000. l. fine, 7. years imprisonment, and everlasting disfranchisement, seeing
it is a Maxim in Law and Reason both, That that which from the beginning is
not valid, can never be made good by tract of time; or those things that are
begun from evil principles, can never attain a legal or just issue.

Object. But if it shall be objected, That this Argument destroys the Act of
the continuance of this Parliament, because the King is and has bin absent,
and not in a capacity according to the Statute to grant His Commission and
Concurrance.

Sol. I Answer, That the act of continuance gives the Lords no more power then
what they had by the Law before, for it gives them nothing but continuance, and
therefore the Argument is legal and just against them, that the Prerogative
Lords forsaking their own creator, and dealing with me contrary to the Laws
and Statutes of the Kingdom; yet as much in force as ever, and not
appropriating or assuming to themselves any formal new power, but merely stand
by the Primitive power derived from him (he being by their own declared
principles as much their King as ever, all Writs, etc. still running in His
Name) they have lost their Honor and Justice in going beyond their bounds, and
dealing so illegally, tyranically, and unjustly with me as they have done.
Therefore from all the premises and authorities before mentioned laid together,
I do draw my conclusion which is this, That I was originally and still am most
illegally imprisoned by the House of Lords, and illegally fined, and illegally
disfranchized; in such a manner that in all ages by the most oppressive and
worst of Courts of Justice in England, was never known nor heard of before, for
a bare and supposed Misdemeanor.

And therefore I most earnestly and most pressingly crave as my right, the
Judgment of the House of Commons upon my appeal to them against the Lords,
(for which I have waited upon them almost seventeen months) and that I may no
longer run the hazard of ruin and destruction, of me, my wife, and little
children, for contesting for my own, both in the sight of God and man; and
which is mine both by the law of God, Nature, and my Country; that is to say,
My sentence vacated, my liberties for future secured, and the Lords exemplarily
punished, as well as the Star Chamber, High Commission, or Councel-^d, being
they may more justly be charged then any of them, for not keeping themselves to
the points limited upon them by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, but have
(not only with me, but with multitudes of others) undertaken to punish where no
Law does warrant, and to make decrees for things, for which they have no such
authority, and to inflict heavier punishments then by any Law is warranted,
which as the act it self expresses were the principle causes of their
abolition, and may more justly be of the House of Lords, for that there was
hopes of remedy (in case of injustice done by them) by appeal to a Parliament,
which cannot in the least be expected against the House of Lords, the appeal
being still to themselves, unless the House of Commons do instate appeals
against them soly in themselves: "And by how much the more they judge their
Court to be higher then other Courts, by so much the more they ought in law,
justice, equity, conscience and honor, to be transcendent in the equal, legal,
just, and impartial administration of Justice:" an act of tyrany and
oppression being ten times more odious in them then in any other inferior
Court, as learned Sir Edw. Cook well observes in his Instituts.

And also I demand as my right and due, ample reparations from the Lords for
all their tyranny illegally without remorse, pity, and compassion exercised
upon me, to the apparent hazard of my life and being, and that I may also have
from them so much money for my legal maintenance, as in all ages for these
three or four hundred years has been allowed to men in my condition and
prison, and may be provided for for the time to come during my stay there.

And that I may freely be left to take my course at Common Law upon all
Jaylors, Keepers of Prisons, and the Sheriff of London, as have most illegally
and unwarrantably executed their illegal, arbitrary, and unbinding tyrannical
Orders and Decrees upon me, and that now after seven years delay by you, I may
also immediately be put by your House into a certain capacity to receive of the
Earl of Salisbury, old Sir Henry Vane, the Lord Chief Justice Bramston, and
Doctor Allife, who have visible and plentiful estates in being, my long-since
decreed reparations against my Star Chamber Judges, with just additions for my
long stay, large expenses, and great troubles therefore, and not be put to seek
it from the Lord Cottington, Sir Francis Windebank, and Mr. Ingram, late Warden
of the Fleet, whose estates are so wasted and destroyed by sequestration, etc.
that I know not where to find them, and may be hereafter, as I have been
already, seven years in obtaining my just right and due from them.

And lastly, I earnestly desire and press, that speedy care by your House be
taken, to put the Earl of Manchester and Col. Edward King upon their thorough
Trialls, upon the foresaid Impeachments, either to their justifications or
condemnations; and that all Suits of theirs at Common Law against me for words
spoken about or concerning the said Impeachments, may be stopped, as in
Justice, Law, and Equity they ought to be, till they be either condemned or
justified upon the said Impeachments.

And now Sir, I have done with all and every thing that in point of Law I have
to say against the Lords irregular dealings with me till they reply: some other
things in reference to the House of Commons (I think as essential to my own
welfare as any thing I have already said) I have ready to say, but that my
present strength and voice is in a manner quite (...), so that I cannot well go
on at present, though I have all my matter ready; and therefore I earnestly
entreat a new day to say out the rest, and so leave it to your judgment: and
Tuesday next (being the 26. of October 164^. at two a clock in the afternoon
in the same place) being your own appointed time, I earnesty desire your
presence there, when and where I doubt not but I shall demean my self with as
much honor and respect toward you, as you upon Wednesday last, with justice,
candor and fairness did demean your self toward me, and the Kingdom, so much
concerned in me, in giving me so fair, public, free and uninterrupted a
hearing, which can not but in ingenuity be acknowledged a great obligation to
him that in sincerity subscribes himself,

Sir, Yours and the Kingdoms faithful Servant, John Lilburne.

FINIS.

