THE ENGAGEMENT Vindicated and Explained, OR THE REASONS Upon which Leiut. Col.
John Lilburne, took the Engagement.

Published by a Well-wisher to the present Authority, on purpose to satisfy
scrupulous minds in the lawfulness of taking the said Engagement.

January 22. 1650.

Licensed according to Order, and entered into the Register Book at Stationers
Hall.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, and are to be sold at the Blew-Anchor in
Corne-hill, and at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1650.

The Publisher to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
UNderstanding that this following Epistle was pened hy Mr. Lilburne, to be
sent to Alderman Tichburn the speedy ejection of whom out of the Office of a
Common-Counsel-man, by the means of the said Alderman prevented it seems, the
seeing of it; but a Copy of it accidentally coming to my hand, J thought good
for the public benefit, to present it to the public view; that so Scrupulous
minds may receive satisfaction by it, to take the said Engagement.

CERTAIN REASONS Wherefore Lieut. Col. JOHN LILBVRNE took the present
ENGAGEMENT.
SIR,
BEing a Freeman of London of about ten years standing, and having for some
time Resolved, upon Friday last of late to live within the City; in order to
which, I really took such a lodging as by the possession of which (till I can
get one more convenient for my family) as both in the Eye of Law, Reason and
Custom, may entitle and denominate me, to be an Inhabitant in that Ward;
where, and for which at present, you are particularly Alderman; and having
eaten, and drank, and lodged in my new habitation, I was upon Friday morning
last by your public Beadle, warned as an Inhabitant of your Ward, to be at
Blew-coats Hall in Christ's Church at the Ward-mote; where by the affection of
diverse Inhabitants, I was put in nomination for the year ensuing to be one of
their Common Counsel; and when the question was put for me according to your
custom, I withdrew, and afterward found, that my election by majority of
hands was clear, without all manner of dispute; whereupon according to the Act
you tendered me the New Engagement in these words, I do Declare and promise,
that I will be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same
is now established, without a King or House of Lords.

Sir, You may please to remember that I told you, I could easily and freely
subscribe it, provided, in regard I had formerly been very scrupulous, in
taking any Engagements at all made by the Parliament, and had formerly very
much opposed their Engagements and Covenants; and therefore to avoid that
scandal that might redound to my reputation, by signing the present Engagement,
without declaring before all the people there present, the grounds of my so
doing; and therefore I entreated you to let me speak a few words to them,
promising you to be very fair and moderate; but you answered me, it was not
the business of the day; but the people crying out, hear him, hear him, you
were pleased to let me go on a little; but being not well pleased with what I
said, you finally stopped me, whereupon I was necessitated to tell you, that
seeing you would not let me speak my mind, I must be necessitated to write it
to you, which thus follows.

Sir, I am an Englishman by Birth and Breeding, and therefore have inherent in
me an affection, an obligation or tie of respect unto it the Land of my
nativity; but by signing this Engagement, I become solemnly and seriously
engaged and bound by a special tie, to perform that which before was a duty
at large, or at random upon me; for by the Commonwealth of England in the
Engagement mentioned, I can understand nothing else to be meant, but one of
these two things, or else both of them conjoined.

First, By the Commonwealth I understand all the good and legal People of
England to be meant. And this I do conceive the rather, because the
Engagement-makers have voted and declared them to be the Sovereign or true
Fountain of all just power amongst men, and to them by Gods Assistance I will
be true and faithful. Or secondly, By the Commonwealth of England I
understand the essential and fundamental Government of England, as it is now
established, which I conceive principally to consist in 3. particulars. The
first of which is annual and successive Parliaments, which is the Peoples
essential right to in joy, as is declared by 3. several Acts of Parliament,
now in force and unrepealed, viz. 4. Eliz. chap. 14. and 36. Eliz. chap. 10.
Both which are confirmed by the Act of the 16. of the late King, entitled, an
Act for the preventing of inconveniences, happening by the long intermission of
Parliaments; which Acts are strongly backed to be the Peoples undubitable Right,
by several Parliament-Declarations: as particularly the Parliaments grand and
first Remonstrance of the 15. of December. 1641. 1 part. book decler. page 17.
and there declared, of the 2. of November. 1642. 1 part. book declar. page 702.
709. See also the 4. part. Cooks instit. fol. 9. 11. 42. published by the
Parliament; yea and in the Charge against the late King, in the first branch
thereof: the said frequent and successive Parliaments is owned and declared to
be the foundation of the Government of this Nation, and of all the peoples
Liberties, the violation of which is agravated to the King against him, by his
prosecuter Mr. John Cook, in his case stated page 7. 11. 14. 17. 18. 20. And
also by the President of the High Court of Justice, in his last Speech against
the King, the 27. of Jan. 1648. page 11. And in the very beginning of both the
Acts of Treason, upon which I my self was lately Arraigned, which bears date
the 14. of May and the 17. of July 1648, the substance of all foregoing is
confirmed; for it is there declared, that the people shall for the future be
governed by its own Representatives, or National meetings in Counsel, chosen
and entrusted by them for that purpose; so that annual and successive
Parliaments or Representatives is fully owned, and Declared to be the prime, or
chief foundation of the Government of this Nation, unto which by the strength
of God I will be true.

The second main essential of the Government of this Nation, is Trial by
Juries of good and Legal men of the Neighborhood; which manner of Trial,
being far more ancient then the conquest, I Love and Honor, and by Gods
blessing will be true to it.

The third main esenciall of the Government of this Nation is, that no man
shall be dispossed of his life, limb, liberty or estate, but by due process of
Law; as it is more at large (with that just and equitable Trial by Juries)
contained in the chapter 29. of Magna Charta and the Petition of Right; both of
which, are every branch of them fully confirmed by the Act that abolisheth the
Star Chamber, and the Act that nuls Ship-mony, both of them made in the 17. of
the late King; all of which are backed with two several late Declarations dated
the 9. of February, and the 17. of March 1648. In both which, it is fully and
perticularly declared, that the forementioned things, and the prime esenciall
and principal foundations of the Government of this Nation; which good old
Laws and Customs they (there) call the badges of our freedom, the benefit of
which our Ancestors (say they) enjoyed before the Conquest or Norman-slavery,
and spent much of their blood, to have conformed by the Great Charter of the
Liberties of England, and other exelent Laws which have continued in all
former changes, and being duly executed, are the most just, free and equal of
any other Laws in the World, and they there spend many Arguments, to
illustriate the equitablenesse, justness and excilency of them, and also there
solemnly Declare, that really and in good earnest they will maintain,
preserve, keep and uphold the said fundamental Laws of this Nation, for and
concerning the preservation of the lives, properties and Liberties of the
People, with all things incident, appertaining and belonging thereunto; as they
are laid down in that excelent Law of the Petition of Right, as they themselves
there call it; unto al which, by the assistance of the Almighty, I will be true
to.

Now, having affirmatively Declared what I conceive by the Commonwealth of
England, I am necessitated in the second place in the Negative to Declare, that
by the Commonwealth of England, I do not in the least understand it to be
meant abstract, or individually of the present Parl. Counsel of STATE or
Council of the ARMY, or all of them conjoined, my Reasons are; First, Because
the Members of the 3. said Counsels take it as well as any others, and
therefore it is not abstract to themselves that they take the Engagement to be
true to; for it is incongruous in reason, for a man to take an Engagement to be
true to himself, because there is inherent in him, an inbred tie or bond which
is one with him, that ties and binds him in a more nigher relation to be true
to himself then al outward and visible Engagements can compel him to be, and
to tender a man an ENGAGEMENT to be true to himself, would argue, he were
judged to be void of a naturnll affection to himself, which in reason no man in
his right understanding can be supposed to be, and though the people were
compelled to take the Oath of allegiance to be true to the KING; yet that Oath
was never compelled upon him to take to be true to himself.

2. The Engagement-makers own a higher power then themselves, for their own
words in the very beginning of the foresaid Declaration of the 17. of March,
1648. are thus, the Parliament of England elected by the People whom they
represent, and by them trusted and authorized for the common good, and in the
same Declaration, page 27. they have these words, viz. the managing of the
affairs, and ordering the Government of this Commonwealth, and matters in
order thereunto, with which they are entrusted and authorized by the consent of
all the People thereof, whose Representatives by election they are, so that
here is a clean confession of two things, viz.

First, That themselves are not the Commonwealth in the Engagement named.

Secondly, That they are not supreme, but subordinate, being at most but
Trustees, who by virtue thereof, can rightfully make no ENGAGEMENT for me to
take absolutely, but only conditionally, to be true to them as far as they are
true to their trust; the main ends of which are before in their own words
declared, and therefore I took not the Engagement in any sense as apyrehending
them abstracto to be meant by the Commonwealth therein named. And so much at
present for the first part of it.

Lastly, As for that part without a King or House of Lords, for my part I say
Government it self is from God, or the prime Laws of nature, without which by
reason of man's corruption by the fall, he cannot live as a rational Creature,
and the forenamed things are to me the essentialls of the established
Government of England, and were so reputed before the Conquest; but as for the
forms of Government, I for my part look upon none jure divino. And therefore
shall to the utmost of my power, as by the Engagement I am bound, oppose as far
as in me lies, all manner of persons by what names or Titles soever they be
dignified and distinguished, that shall by their own wills seek to obtrude all
or any of those hurtful arbitrary Prerogatives, that the late King or House of
Lords assumed to them, it being not so much Titles as tyrannous, or arbitrary
actions that make the people miserable, that Creature being says John Cook in
the Kings case stated page 8. that Rules by lust and not by Law; not of Gods
making nor approbation, but only his permission, and in page 22. he further
says, Will and Conquest makes a little amongst Wolves and Bears, but not
amongst men. So with my respect tendered to you, I take leave to subscribe my
self, yours, as far as you are truly the COMMONWEALTHS.

December, 1649. JOHN LILBURNE.

FINIS.

