PEPASPISTS

OR A BVCKLER for the Church of England Against Certain Queries Propounded by
MR PENDARVIS (late Lecturer of Wanting) called Arrows Against Babylon.

By way of Reply to the most Remarkable Passages contained in them, and an
addition of several Anti-Queries in the Close.

By WILLIAM LEY Minister of the Gospel at Wanting in Bark-shire.

Ecclesia dum Contemnitur profecit; dum Laeditur vineit; dum Arguitur
intelligit; Tunc stat cum superari videtur. Hilar. Zechar. 3. And he showed me
Joshua the High Priest standing before the Lord, and Satan standing at his
right hand to resist him. v. 1.

And the Lord said unto Satan, The Lord that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke
thee, is not this a Brand plucked out of the fire? v. 2.

OXFORD Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for THO.
ROBINSON. 1656.

To The Right Honorable COLONEL SIDENHAM one of his Highness Council of
State.
SIR,
HAving offered A Sacrifice of praise to God, for that great deliverance which
was wrought for the Ministry, in preventing the subtle designs of such, as
would have subjected the Gospel to the Law: In the next place I waited for an
occasion, whereby I might show my self grateful to the Instruments that
procured this liberty for us, and broke the snares from off our feet, while we
were almost sinking under the burden of legal trial.

And Sir, though it graciously pleased his Highness to grant a public and
seasonable redress, (for which we stand dutifully engaged to his Highness)
yet in particular, you were the happy Medium whereby the first dawning of
deliverance appreached; For in my first address your answer was no less
Accurate then Cordial, while you resolved to Crush the design before its full
birth, and to make it finem operantis if not operis: and indeed (blessed be
God) you made it finem (...), an end of the Artifice, as well as of the
Artificer; To you therefore (Worthy Sir) I presume to dedicate this ensuing
Discourse: It is a Buckler both for Church and State, against some Arrows
lately darted at us by M. P. who has attempted to prove, our England Babylon,
and our Ministry (not to say Magistracy) Antichristian: I know Sir, it is
safer to contend in words, then deeds, And that the Arrows of the tongue are
more blunt, then the Arrows of the Field, yet I favor the peace of Jerusalem
so much, that I would not willingly have her shot at in a Type.

I will not speak so Munceri lactantia Sleid. Com.
boldly, as to say, I dare take up all the Arrows he has shot against England
in my skirt; I leave the Reader to judge of the issue. Yet I hope by virtue of
this Buckler, I have vindicated the cause of Church and Commonwealth, and
placed them, (...), out of all peril of being endamaged by his Quiver. If this
be not enough, the Author is willing (upon so great an interest) if need
require, not only to interpose his Buckler, but expose his life, and to become
a public Sacrifice.

The Lord ever preserve this Church, and Common Wealth, and make you yet
farther isntrumental, to accomplish his manifold, and glorious ends, which is
the prayer of

Your Honors Humbly devoted Servant in Christ, WILLIAM LEY.

To the Author of the Queries.
SIR,
YOU have presented the world with Queries, and whether you desire a Solution
of them, or a compliance with them, will soon be decided, by your Acceptance
or rejection of this ensuing Answer. Had the first part of your Book been
Correspondent with the two last, I suppose you had deserved encouragement: But
seeing your Arrows against Babylon, are indeed prepared against England, I
stand amazed to think how England, that is so far distant from it in place,
and so lately distant from it in Affections, should so soon be crept to
Babylon, by a Retrograde Motion, her Rulers and Watchmen not aware of it, and
the Primum Mobile of the Nation, at this hour, preparing a formidable Army
against it.

Me thinks the Tenderness of the subject calls for a moderate hand; it is the
Church of God, and who can express, how cheary we should be in giving her a
bill of Divorce, or instigating others to give it, before she be manifestly
Proved to be an Harlot, yea an obstinate one, whom no admonition or conviction
can cure.

But I will cast aside the speech of Babylon for the present, till I meet with
it again in your papers, and view the Type of it, which is Egypt, as your
first Query does unfold it self.

Q. 1. Whether Isreal's going into Egypt, their Bondage, and their
deleverance, were not Typical? (...).
And whether this has not been confessed by all the Godly party in England,
etc.

Ans. 1. Though Symbolicall Argumentation by Types and Figures, be like a
Feather in a Soldiers Cap, more for show, then for service; yet if we
distinguish Types into Necessary and Arbitrary, there will be some just
occasion for this present query.

This Type is mentioned by the holy Ghost Revel. 11.8. Spiritually called Sodom
and Egypt: It is also acknowledged by Si compares Romanum Ischarioten caeteris
in orb Tyrannis, qui sunt, fuerunt, vel esse possunt videbis illos fuisse
Vmbras Tyrannicas, corpus autem Tyrannum ipsum esse Remanum Idolu^.
Luther, Whitaker Praelect. in Sacram. p. 109. in 4o
Whitaker, araus in Revel. p. 496.
Paraeus, and sundry other famous Divines. We grant you therefore, that upon
the same account, that we hold Circumcision to be a Type of Baptism, we do
receive this of Egypt to be a Type of Rome: but of this briefly, because we
allow it, and (...): only observe by the way; as there is but one Egypt
Literal, so there is but one Mystical: for what is true in the Type, is also
true in the Antitype.

We now agree like sundry travelers at our setting forth, if we part hereafter
upon the rode, it shall be upon Sober and Religious Grounds: for I hope you
count it with me, a main branch of our Christian freedom, to keep no man
company, farther then he is, or if rightly informed would be, a companion to
the Truth.

Q. 2. Whether the Church of Rome, and principally the Head of that Body, the
Ecclesiastical Powers, the Pope, (...).
with his Cardinals be not Mystical Babylon? Revel 17. and whether those
Characters may be applied to any Church whatsoever as to the Church of Rome?

Ans. 2. That the Church of Rome is Mystical Babylon, I supsuppose an
ingenuous Famosa dicam an Infamis Meretrix? fornicata cum Regibus Terrae, Illa
quidem es, Quam in Spiritu sacer vidit Evangelista, illa eadem inquam es non
alia, seeds super Aquas multas. Petrarch. Ep. 16. and Berk. Evid. p. 62.
Papist will not deny: but that the particular Characters, laid down by the
holy Ghost, to describe Rome, are as applicable to any State whatsoever, no
ingenuous Protestant will grant: for all know the nature of individualls is to
be incommunicable: and that that chapter ( Revel. 17.) does set forth one
individual State, though not one individual Person, is the mind of all
Interpreters: A man at one time one, (says Wollebius) but in succession of
time an order of men, in the same state succeeding each other.

Antichrist (says Jewel 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Jewel) shall be one estate, or Kingdom of men: and he alone that stops his
coming is the Roman Emperor. I will not name unto you Jerome, Chrysostom,
Bernard, etc. But Fox (...) in Revel. c. 13. p. 270.
M. Fox, whom I hope you will the rather own, because you honor him with a
Quotation: he therefore in his Comment upon the Revelations, is point blanck
against your Hypothesis, for says he, besides this one, there is not, nor can
be any City in the World, unto whom all the symptoms and accidents can agree,
that are described Revel. 17.

But to argue, has any other State a situation upon Plutarch calls it (...):
Romans Probl.
Seven Hills? The Names of them are so well known, that I need not mention
them: Has any State Scarlet Rulers beside Rome? Had any ever so great power
over the Nations, as Rome both Heathenish, and Popish has had? Has any a
golden cup of fornication? Is any drunk with the blood of Martyrs? Does the
number Haebr. Latin. Graece. Angice. 200 TO 100 l 30 A 70 as Heb.. the rest 40
M o 70 a 1 Man 160 after the Greek 70 A m 40 t 300 of 200 50 N n 50 e 5 R 100 6
V u 400 i 10 O 70 300 S s 6 n 50 ME 46 o 70 s 6 I suppose the name (...)
according to Wollebius his Account to be most Authentic, for (...) according
to M. Fox signifies 41 and so amounts to 667: and as for Bellarmines Cavil
that it should be wrote (...) it is easily answered, seeing Romanus is in Greek
(...) as well as (...) Latinus, let the Reader observe, that though it agrees
in all Languages, yet the number is found out most variously, and excellently
in that Character, wherein the Evangelist wrote his Prophesies.


666 agree to any in all Languages, save to her? which Irenaeus understood to
be (...), about fifteen Hundred years ago? Saint John in this number is
thought not only to point at his name, but also to hint at the time of his
rise, and continuance Reynolds against Heart p. 214.
Rev. 13.18.

But to examine your quotation of Rev. 17. and consider the precedent verses,
as helps to expound the subsequent, especially the 8, 9, 10, 11. verse.

The Beast it was, is not, shall be, and shall ascend:

The Beast,] By this name is meant a Profane state, viz. the Roman Empire.

It was,] Heathenish in S. John's time.

Is not,] It is not at the time of this Prophesy, what hereafter it shall be,
when once it is destroyed by the Goths and Vandalls.

Shall Ascend,] The Pope shall Ascend, (id est) the Church shall swallow up the
Empire; and what the Roman Empire was, that now the Roman Popedom is.

It is not, and yet it is; a Riddle not to be unfolded, Papismus, prout a
concilio Tridentino fuit confirmatus, est perniciosa Haeresis Ames in Cas.
Cons. de Q. an Pontificii sint Haeretici? l. 4. c. 4. Cos. 1. fol. 121
without distinguishing the various state of the Beast, which retains the
Authority, though not the name of the Roman Emperor. If every corrupt State
might be called Babylon, then the Spirit of God would not have said It is Not,
for at that time the Asian Churches were corrupted, which was infallibly known
by our Evangelist John, Rev. 2. etc. Yea Rome it self was corrupt some
Centuries of years, before it might be called Babylon apparently, even
(according to the Judgment of some) till the Council of Trent, which sat
down in the Chair of Pestilence, and established iniquity by a Law.

We have tried the Revelations, Let us also see Daniel and Paul, that in the
mouth of two or three witnesses every truth may be established: for what John
discusseth Graphically, that does Daniel Typically, and Paul Topically,
according to the Received opinion.

Dan. 7.8. The fourth Beast is the Roman Empire, and the little Horn (says
Jewel) is Antichrist.

So 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 7. Who is he that exalts himself above God, but he who
calls himself a God, and blasphemously preferres his own Canons above the Word
of God? who is he that lets Antichrist from fitting on the Pinnacle of pride,
but the Roman Emperor? Who being taken away by Phocas, gave him occasion to
raise his Ambitious Plumes upon his Masters Ruins: Now if any man, after so
clear evidence held forth to the state of the question, whether such
Characters as these may be applied to any State? shall refuse to give in his
Assent, I leave him to be censured by an higher Judgment then mine own, and
that is Gods, and his own conscience, Titus 3. v. 10, 11.

Ob. Perhaps it may be objected by some, that the Scripture speaks of many
Antichrists 1 John 2.18.

Sol. To it I answer, That Antichrist is took in a twofold sense; either
Largely, or Strictly. 1. Largely for Ebion and Cerinthus. etc. 2. Strictly for
Christ's grand enemy the Pope: whom Paul calls (...): and (...), 2 Thessalonians. 2. Or
with M. Fox, Antichrist may be taken either 1. Personally. or 2 Figuratively.


1. Personally, for any, or every person, that opposes Christ: in which sense
M. P cannot say but himself has been an Antichrist, if he ever opposed either
Nature, person, or offices of Christ.

2. Figuratively or Politically, so it sets forth one State or Kingdom, or
City, constituted under one Head, with diverse Members. As there may be many
petty Lords in a Nation, yet but one Lord Paramount, so there may be many petty
Antichrists, Sunt multi Antichristi, sed unus proprie est Antichristus, quem
seriptura filium perditionis Neminat 2 These. 2. Aret, loc. com p. 375. (...),
or by way of excellency, there is but one Antichrist, but in general all
Haeretiques may be called Antichristian, Wolleb. Alsted.
yet one only by way of eminency: for as Moses his serpent swallowed up all
other Serpents; and as the greater Fishes of the Sea swallow up the less; So
this grand Antichrist has carried away the Bell, that is, the noise, and
denomination from all the rest.

Q. 3. Whether the Church of England (the Nation considered as a Church with
the parochial congregations) be not a daughter of that Babylon, and whether
her ministry in point of ordination the Offspring of the Pope? (...) vel F. P.
Imerrog.
Whether she has disclaimed that Church State? Whether the grossest
corruptions in Q. M. days be not maintained? whether some new pieces added to
the old Garment, Romish baptism etc.

Sir, Jus divinum of the ministry of England; to which Book, but that I favor
the simple Reader, I might justly refer you: I shall speak somewhat to the
most of them, yet briefly, because many of them have been handled before, by
sundry eminent Authors.

1. To the first I answer, that a Church may be called National in two
resepcts. 1. Either because it has one national officer, worship, or place of
worship, such a national Church we are far from asserting. 2. Because
particular congregations agree solemnly in Doctrine and worship, under one
civil Government: examples whereof you may find in Act. 8.1. and 15.4, 22.

2. To the second objection, I answer that the word (...) in the original
signifies a borderer, and in this case the name remains amongst us upon a
civil account, and we do acknowledge, that the bare dwelling in a Parish
makes not a person a Covenanting member. Secondly, we may not allow but much
dislike the unequal division of parishes, that it should confine the Church,
like a rotten parke-pale, and we expect a speedy redress therein; yet Churches
in the New Testament are distinguished by the respective bounds of their
dwelling; as before is proved. Thirdly, Governors and governed must dwell
contiguously, that mutual offices may be the better discharged, and that they
may meet together in one place, and not be forced to travail farther then a
Sabbath days journey, except necessitated by some extraordinary occasions.

3. To the third objection I answer, that England is not a Daughter of Babylon,
either by way of generation, regeneration, degeneration, or imitation. Our
Church State (though Rome with the Gibeonites speaks nothing but antiquity) is
much elder, then to be beholding to Rome for its plantation; for if we enquire
at what time Religion came first into England M. Fox and Gildas p. 13.
Gildas tell us, that Britain received the Gospel in the Emperor Tiberius
his reign, and that it came not from Rome, but Jerusalem. Jewel, Theodoret,
Flaeius Illericus, say that Paul himself planted us, as he came by Spain. It
is mostly received that Joseph of Arimathea was sent by Phillip form France to
Britain about the year of Christ 63. and to this Brittannorum Inaccessa Loca
subduntur Christo. Tertull. contra Judaeos.
Tertullian attesteth in his book against the Jews. Hom. 4. in Ezech.
Origin (that lived in the second Century) tells us, that Britain had
consented to the faith, and so also Hom. quod. Christus fit Deus.
Chrysostom etc. So that it is a falsitie for Rome to challenge the conversion
of us, and no less absurdity for us, to derive succession from them.

The faith continued here from Lucius Britannoru^ Rex, Christianus fuit tempore
Elutherii Romani Episcopi, quod successit faeliciter usque ad tempora
Dioclesiani Par. Eccles. Histor. p. 165.
King Lucius to the coming of Austin the Monk, whom Gregory sent hither 600
years after Christ, and when he came he found here diverse Pastors, and learned
men, that opposed the pride of Austin, the Popes Ambassador.

4. To the fourth objection, we say that the ordination of Ministry came not
from the Pope, or the Church of Rome; it is Apostolical not Apostaticall; and
yet should we grant it any time did pass through the Church of Rome, this will
not make it Antichristian; has not the Gospel also passed through the Church
of Rome? distinguish therefore of the difference betwixt passing through and
from the Church of Rome. I never doubted says Bur. Iren. p. 183.
M. Burrowes of the call of our Ministry, though something was superadded that
was sinful There is now another way of ordination then by Bishops, which in a
short time will supplant the old, though we be silent; Episcopal Ordination is
like an old nail driven off and Cashiered by the succession of a new.

5. To the fifth objection, that the Church State was never disclaimed, I
answer that the Bishops themselves never did give subjection to the Sea of
Rome, as may be found in the oath Ex Officio, and you might easily have
remembered what the Parliament and Synod did in taking Prelacy root and branch.

6. To the sixth objection: that the grossest corruptions are not yet
disavowed, is a mere Cavil: for they consist either in Doctrine or worship;
the grossest corruptions in Doctrine are first, either concerning the Popes
Headship, which was put down in Henry the eights time, and in Q. E. in K. J.
and K. C. we acknowledge Christ to be the only head, and deny that absurd
distinction of natural and ministerial, visible and invisible. Or secondly,
concerning Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament, or concerning
justification by works, Purgatory, for the denial of which Articles our
Martyrs lost their lives. As for worship amongst us it is pure and simple and
unpermixed, as in the Apostles days; We have no Masses, Crosses, Altars,
Surplesses, nothing spoken in an unknown tongue, you might have done well to
have specifyed the corruptions, before you had reproved us for them; and
whereas you say some pieces are added only to the old garment, I answer, you
are mistaken in the terms, for what you call the old garment is the new piece,
and what you call the new piece was the old garment of England. It is true,
that half reformation and a piece does never satisfy a zealous spirit. But
for a man in contempt to call that half Reformation and a piece, which is more
then he or his Fathers have seen, yea and would have rejoiced to have seen,
argues a supercilious and ungrateful spirit.

7. To the seventh objection, wherein you cry out Romish Baptism, I answer,
that you cannot either directly or obliquely, show it is Romish, except you
mean Saint Paul brought it hither with him from Rome. Is it Romish in regard
of its institution; or in regard of its material or formal part? Is any thing
added or diminished in the word of command, or the word of promise? or is i^
Romish in regard of the subject to which it is communicated? do we use any
Eedem modo sat tractatur in Baptismo. and conjecratum secrificans in os
Infantis imponit and Satanam Emigrare jubet and in aquam ter immergit Infantem
and oleo Pollicem intingit, pectus and humeros illius illinit. foris and intus
campanas lavant. Sleid. com. l. 21. p. 366.
superstitions and ceremonies before it, in it, or after it? Is there any Salt,
Cream, Spittle, exorcismes used, or do we administer it to Bells, or any
irrational creatures? Tell me Sir, when you call it Romish do you mean a
Baptism by the Common Prayer book, and forms. This in England is penal and
perilous; Or do you mean Infant Baptism? if you do, I can assure you it
was in use while Roman Pastors suffered Maryrdome for Christ, and I entreat
you, if you can, to name Century of years from Christ's time to this one
wherein it was not administered to them.

8. To the eighth objection, whereby you enquire whether the Characters
forementioned in the second Querie do not in like manner appear upon the
Daughter, the National Church of England; I say perhaps you had forgotten the
second Querie before you wrote the third, for where I beseech you shall a man
find your marks, the Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, in England,
where any blood of Saints that dyed formally as Saints, and not rather upon a
civil account? If you know any other marks, as Jesuits, Friars, Masses,
Indulgences etc. either at New Castle, or in the West, or any other place, it
would be reputed good service to the State to discover them: we know none (we
bless God) we find none, if this be the body of Antichrist, it is a body
without a member, and so a contradiction in the adject. If you had a mind to
save Babylon mystical from the fury of the Nations, and to do Rome some
special service, you might have done well to have consulted with Bellarmine,
and he would have directed you rather to Germany then England, by the name
(...), wherein by our Learning, if you are a good Arithmetician you might have
found out the number 666: but this is but a slender stick to rear Babylon
upon, without a general concurrance of all other characters.

Q. 4. (...).
Whether it is not the duty of all Gods people in the national Church and in
the Parochial pretended Churches together with their Church Ministry, to come
out of Babylon and to separate etc.

A. Candid Reader, be pleased to refer these opprobrious terms. Parochial,
pretended Church State, whenever they shall again accurre unto their proper
place. Q. 3.

To separate,] separation implys a guilt either in our selves or others, If you
say the fault be in our Church, then it is either corrupt in circumstantialls
or substantialls; if in circumstantialls the Church is still a true Church: if
in Substantialls, either in Doctrine or in Worship: but ours fails not in
either of these. And therefore M. Perkins justly reproves such as depart from
us as Schismatic.

Church Ministry,] where would you have Ministers to be but in the Church,
where Christ has placed them 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. If you mean a National
Church, Gildas will tell you they were erected before Popery began. And as for
the Ministry, there are Commissioners chosen in every County, that may sit to
refine the Sons of Levi; if this work were done thoroughly and no cloud of
discontent raised against active spirits, I believe the face of the Church
would shine like the Spouse of Christ, and not be disfigured like the Daughter
of Antichrist.

Come out of Babylon, Revel. 18. Isa. 52. Jerem. 51.] did ever any Prophet
serve the Jewish State as M. Pendarvis serves us, bid them come out of Babylon
at that time when they were not in it, and tell them they were in Babylon when
they were already out of it? Acts 5.22, 23
your warrant here resembles that of the High Priest to the a Officers, that
were sent to fetch the Apostles out of prison, whereas indeed they were out
before.

There was much false worship and Idolatry in Israel, yet a good Prince was
still an effectual organ and instrument of reformation; our Godly Josiah and
victorious Deborah did cast out Antichrist with all most all his trumpery, so
that like Dagon and like Jezabell there was nothing left but some few monuments
of his ruin; And let none think that Queen Elizabeth's reformation was
Hipocriticall, for though some state consciences did wheel about with the
times, yet there was abundance of Gods precious people in England, in King
Edward and Queen Mary's days: for besides all those that were burnt, all that
were imprisoned, all those that submitted with Peter for fear, all those that
fled into corners, there was no less then 30000 banished as Strada de Bell.
Belg. l. 2. p. 71.
Strada relates in his History of the Belgic Wars; add to this what our
grand Parliament has done, and see whether we have not cause to sing that
(...) Revel. 2.3.

Q. 5. Whether the strange and wonderful providence of God in the late Wars
in England, Scotland and Ireland, (...).
have they not cleared the call to the Saints to come out of Babylon etc.

Ans. 5. David lays it down as a mark of profaneness and a signal of ruin
when men regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
Psalm. 28.5. wicked men look upon Providence by parcells, the Godly join past
and present together, and make a golden chain of them; as it is with words in
a sentence, if we disjoyne them and forget precedent and subsequent we can make
nothing of them, so in Providence, except all passages be matched together we
loose the beauty and benefit of all.

Scottish Presbyter eminently overthrown,] what have you to do with Presbyter,
is Presbytery over thrown? did God as eminently appear against Presbytery as
Royalty, and Episcopacy? (poor men) if they had not adhered more to a King
then Christ, more to Royalty then Presbitery I believe they might have been as
happy as our selves: but what say you to Independency, is not that a Horn of
Babylon? for had Independency been beaten as well as Presbytery I doubt you
would have been of Gallios mind, not to have cared for any such thing: but what
though the Scottish Presbiter act no less remisly for his Government then many
of your Profession for no government, yet is he to be acknowledged for the first
opposer of superstition and Episcopacy; for when King Jacobus Rex Brittauiae
An. 1609. conformat ecclesias Scotia cum Anglicanis praeficiendo iis Episcopos
contra intentibus plerisque Scotorum Theolog. Andreas Melvinus eruditissimus
Scotorum in arce Londinensi detinetur. Buchol. Chronol. p. 778.
James intended to conform the Scottish Church to the English by imposing
Bishops upon them in the year 1609, the Scots opposed it, whereby some endured
banishment, others imprisonment, and now they appeared the first in Charles his
days to oppose both Tyranny and Antichristianisme. The heart of Cyrus is to
give liberty to build Gods House, and to his people to walk in their light, it
is well he gave them not liberty to build Castles in the air, or to cook up a
Archimagirus emnis generis edulia in unum conjecit Lebetem, id quod Satan hisce
temporibus enoliri videtur Synod. Dordreck.
mess of all Religions with Rhetoric: as liberty is the most precious thing
in it self, so the corruptions of it are most noxious, it is pity that the
grace of man, as well as the grace of God should be turned into
lasciviousness, I dare affirm he never gave them liberty to walk by any
other light, then that of the Word and of the Prophets Is. 8.20. Liberty may be
opposed two ways, either by our selves or others; by our selves, when we stop
the ear of Conscience and will not be persuaded: By others when unlawful
things are obtruded upon the conscience: his Highness has given his word he
will not oppress you, provided you do not entangle your selves by dealing
coursly with your selves by dealing coursely with your betters, but who gives
security to the orthodox in the mean time, that you and your party shall not
oppress them? Was it not Tyranny in you, to cut off one of your own Disciples
Ears, and not suffer him to hear on both sides. M. T. Antiq.
Though truth give liberty to error, yet errou is so ungrateful it will not
give liberty to truth, as is made clear by that notable Instance of M. Tickell
in his additionall Antiqueries, who shows us you surfeit of liberty, although
you hunger and thirst after more, you seem in this case to be like persons
diseased with the Ephiastes, they think some body oppresses them, when alas
it is nothing but the gross humors of their own blood: never was there less
restraint, never more liberty of conscience in any state then this, wherein a
man may be as Godly as he will. (...) oppositio paris Authoritatis.


Q. 6. Has not God cast the false Church state and worship, root and branch
out of the hearts and affections of very many of his people?

A. 6. Reader I pray thee join to this Query what M. P. has said in his Ep.
ded. where he says, the maine pillars of Babylon the Archbishops, Bishops,
with the grand supporters are fallen and gone: a distempered man when he has
spent his Collar, at last imbraceth milder conclusions: Thus we oppose Luther
indulging his passions to Luther moderate and sober again, and so we must do
you, for these do innervate and confute your grand objections. Observe, he
says Romes maine pillars are demolished, that many, very many of Gods people
have cast out false worship, will not very many and good carry the denomination
by all Rules of Logic and reason. Largue thus, where the maine pillars of
Antichrist are demolished, where very many of Gods People are resident, there
is Jerualem and not Babylon: but thus it is blessed be God with us; we leave
therefore the Author to find out his Babylon in another place: the truth is
Scripture names two Babylons, the one Real, the other Typical, he devises a
third Quis non Impudentissime nititur aliquid pro se Interpretari quod in
Allegoria positum est? Aug. Epist. ad Vincent. Allegoria non ex legentis
voluntate sed ex scribentis Authoritate intelligenda. Hieron. In Gal. 4. Non
est fundamentum sed Diabolica Illecebra, si a fundamento Allegoria setaretur
Luth. cum Fabric.
Babylon, Hypertypicall, which will prove more chargable for him to raise, then
it was before time, to Semiramis, insomuch as he has not a parcel of ground,
but an Aerie non Entity to build on.

Blush to say their Congregations are true Churches] They blush to say that
Parishes are true Churches, but not their Congregations, it seems the Orthodox
are modest, the Heterodox impudent, I am either grossly mistaken, or else you
have as much cause to Hinc Haeresi sconvinci potest, quod quisquis ipsis charus
est etiamsi aliis delictis abundet, and adversus se habeat Argumenta scelerum,
tamen in pretio babetur. Athanas.
blush at your own members, as any Pastor whatsoever, that has had a gathered
Church in England.

Matter and Form,] The matter of the Church are persons called; the form, an
union with Christ and his members: No man need to be ashamed to own such

Q. 7. (...).
Whether the endeavors and tedious labors both of Parliament, and Synod, for
reforming National Church Discipline, has not proved like the washing of a
blackmore white?

A. 7. They have not been in vain, neither in respect of themselves nor
others; I am persuaded they have been isntrumental to save Thousands; And are
your exercises and performances saving? if they be, this liberty proceeded from
them, and what good you do, or have done, proceeds from them as Concauses; I
am almost confident, that if all Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists, were
drawn out, they would make the strongest part of the Nation, and as Anabaptists
are not Babylon in your Eyes, so neither is the Presbyterian or Independent (so
called) in our opinion or in the Eyes of God: But if it should prove otherwise
in the Muster, say, what is the Reason the Nation is more Reformed? Are not the
pernicious Sicubi audieris eos qui dicuntur christiani non a domino nostro Jesu
Christo sed a quoquam alio nominari, scias non ecclesiam Christi sed
Antichristi esse Synagogum. Hieron. contrae Luciferium. Nos Lutherani
Calvinistae non dicimur sed cum Paciano dicimus, christianus mihi nomen
catholicus cognomen etc. Caesariae and Pontificiae factionis Nomina Byzantium
Turcis dedere, dum de Guelfis and Gibellinis certamen. Sleid. c^m. l. 14. p.
223. Nomen Remonstrantium and contraremonstrantium Synodus perpetua oblivione
delendum censet Synod. Drodrec. p. 323.
names of Distinction the cause? whiles some are this way others that way,
Christ himself seems to be divided: We have amazed the ignorant poor people
of the Land, who seeing so many differences in the way, are resolved to lie
still and perish under affected ignorance, rather then to run the hazard of a
laborious and disunited knowledge.

Rejected the ordinance of Excommunication,] True the ordinance has ceased,
and for this cause the Church (though it be a Church) may be said to be
weakened in her nerves, and sinews: without this says Porcorum Hurra and
Colluvies rabidorum camum. Aug.
Austin the Church will be a Swine-sty and a kenell: and were there not liberty
granted by Christian Magistrates to suspend and excommunicate, I must
ingeniously confess this Arrow in time would pierce my Buckler; and though I
should not say with this, England is Babylon for the present, yet I might sadly
presage, that England would be Babylon in the close. In every In omni corpore
politico vel ecclesiastico necessaria est potestas Judiciaria, Quae proportione
respondit illi corporis Animalis facultati, quae Noxia depellit Synod.
Dordrect. p. 114.
Body, whether Natural, Politic, or Ecclesiastical, there is a power of
disburdening it self of that which is unprofitable, or Noxious; for lack of
which, the sincere part may be infected: It is my Prayer, that God would put
into the heart of our Cyrus, to set up the hedge of discipline, in the Church,
and curb the insolent Magnum est Probrum quod inter fili^s Dei locum habent
Porci and Canes. Zanch. T. 2.
affronts of such as grumble to let the Children eat their own bread, except
they may profane the banquet with their unhallowed lives and Persons.

Parliament and Synod,] here is a second ground to answer your grand querie,
Whether England be Babylon? For a Parliament and Synod are the State and Church
Representative. If they be gold and silver, though the commonaltie be some of
them dross, our fear need to be the Iesse Math. 21.42, 43. When the builders
reject Christ, and great men in office, God does either overturne them, or the
Nation. If we have not forgot our Logic, it tells us, that parts are either
principal or less principal, Quibus ablatis tollitur totum.
Principal are the head and heart; if these be sound there is no great peril;
less principal as finger, hand, foot, which though taken away the whole
still retains its old denomination. The Tibia Paralysi vel (...) Laborans vera
quidem est Tibia Twiss. Vind. Gratiae contra Armin. Errat. 8.. 13. p. 39. in 40.
defect therefore that kills is not in integrall parts but essential, A man
may live though his Arm or Leg be Paralyticall, syderated, or mortifyed with
a Gangreen.

Q. 8. Whether the saints and Servants of God ought not to declare the Church
of England to be indeed no Church of Christ, (...).
but a Daughter of Babylon?

God forbid, rather let our Names be blotted out of the Book of Life; then God
should thus reject his people; I see your distempered Argument is now at the
height, therefore I will expose it to view, and then cut its nerves asunder:
the sum of all that has been spoken or hereafter perhaps shall be spoken,
may be reduced to a Prosyllogisme and a Syllogism.

The prosyllogisme runs thus, Rome is Babylon, S. John bids us fly from Rome,
Ergo from Babylon.


The Syllogism is this; An incurable Daughter of Babylon is to be departed
from, But England is an incurable Daughter of Babylon, Ergo to be departed from.


I deny the Minor, and answer to the Predicate, N. (...).
and to the Determination of it: That she is neither a Daughter of Babylon,
nor Incurable: Let England be taken here, not (...), but (...), for the noble
part and most principal; not for the degenerate part of the Commonalty.

Ob: But you will say, will it not be granted, That she was a Daughter of
Babylon in Queen Mary's days.

Sol. The relation may be taken away from the Subject, while the subject
remains, as though she might be a Daughter of Babylon in Q. Mary's days,
Mauere potest Materiale sublato formali Melanct. Log. Membrum Christi posse
esse membrum meretricis nullam in se continet (...). Twiss. Vind. Great. p 94.
yet she may be a Daughter of Reformation in Q. Elizabeth's days and in ours.
That you may see how easy it is to play the part of an Opponent, I will frame an
Argument (...) or by way of Recrimination.

Incurable Authors of Confusion in Church and State, are to be declared (...)
M. P. Q. 15.
Babylon, for so the name Imports, according to your own judicious observation
of it: But such were, and such may be the Anabaptistae nuper nati, etiam
Turpiter docent conjun gem debere descendere a Conjuge abhorrente a Secta
Anabaptistica, and alicubi per seditionem pepulere Legitimos Magistratus.
Melanct. Loc. Com. p: 188. in 80. This mav induce the Judicious reader warily
to observe that remarkable passage discovered by M. Tickell. Antiq. 4.
concerning M. D.
Anabaptists, or Catabaptists, if we believe the Common opinion, Ergo, they are
to be deserted.

I leave you to distinguish betwixt the Germane and Britain Anabaptists, and
Time to verify the Premises.

Q. 9. Whether a bare forsaking of the National Church, (...).
and a verbal declaring against it, is a sufficient witness bearing for
Christ? And whether Gods People ought not to hold forth a true Baptism and
Church Worship?

To this I answer, Non sumus Milites sed Piscatores, What we embrace not by our
gathering, is, for the present, reputed as a refuse. No other Power is given to
the Church, besides the Key of Doctrine and Discipline; such as are unworthy,
are they not excluded by these? Where the word of God is Purely taught, the
Sacraments Purely administered, a People that Honor God by Public Profession,
and dishonouring him not by their Conversations, There is the Church (says
Luther) whether they be few in number or many; And from such, in regard of
Christ's spiritual Presence, and Residence, it is dangerous to separate:
Trouble not your self any more with a Notionall National Church, already
answered Q. 3. Zancheus is contented to Non Inficiamur multa esse vitia in
nostris Ecclesiis Avaritiam, superbiam, inhospitalitatem etc. neque Magistratus
admodum solliciti sunt ut haec vitia ab Ecclesiis Christi tollantur, sed omnes
quae sua sunt Quaerunt. Zanch. T. 2. p. 78.
confess, and so the Prophets, what they cannot remedy: There are many vices
(says that good man) in our Churches, Covetousness, Pride, Inhospitality,
which is a matter of greatest grief unto us; but above all, the remissenes of
inferior orbs, in the State fabrique, refusing to redress sundry enormities,
such are Carding, Lex sine Executione est Campana sine Pistillo. Buc. Chronolog.
Dicing, Drunkenness, Swearing, Sabbath breaking, Acts of Hostility to
Religion; while all seek their own, few or none the things of Christ. Thus
far Zancheus.

Hold forth a true Baptism.] What is that, Anabaptisme? An unscripturall
unwholesome Ceremony, Erroneous in regard of the Form and Subject: First of the
Form, for sundry are Rebaptized with a threefold demersion, which is Popish,
as is related by Sleiden: Baptizant Eutychiani non in Nomen Trinitatis, sed in
Morte Christi solum. Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. l. 7. p. 376.

Arriani Baptizant in Nomen Genitoris, Geniti, and spirantis, Voce Pater, Natus
Corpore Flamen ave, tota Triuitas in Baptismo Christi se vid. praebuit. Til. p.
884. de Bap.


others are Rebaptized only in the name of the Lord Jesus, contrary to his
sacred Institution, who commands to Baptize in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: And though you may tell me of some in the Acts that were
Baptized only in the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 19 5. These places are not to
be understood of the form of Baptism, but of the End and Scope of it; for the
whole Virtue and Efficacy of Baptism, is contained in Christ, because he only
does bestow what Baptism signifies; It is the nature of some to Innovate, as
the Arrians that Baptized In nomen Genitoris, geniti, and spirantis: and the
Eutychians, that Baptized not in the name of the Trinity, but into the Death of
Christ: By the name of Christ, we may understand his Doctrine, and take the
words not exclusively, but inclusively, as though they Baptized in no other
name. You suffer little Children to serve the Devil too long, Ab Apostolis
recepit Ecclesia Traditionem Baptizandi parvulos Orig. cap. 6. ad Romans Quod
uuiversa tenet Ecclesia, nec a Consiliis Institutum sed semper retentum est non
nisi Apostolica authoritate Traditum esse Creditur. Aug. de Bapt. Prav. l. 4.
Cont. Donat.
we engage them in their Infancy: If Infants have the spirit of God, which is
the root of all Graces? If they have been Martyrs for Christ's sake? If he take
them up into his Arms, and blesses them? If he accepts of Hosanna's sung by
them? If they were heretofore under the same covenant of Grace and Faith with
us Romans 4.11. If you cannot prove when, where, how, they were expunged out of
the Covenant, it will be your best way to put them out of the Popish Limbo, and
to give them a place in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Q. 10. Many zealous Ministers ignorant of the times and seasons, (...).
be not in danger of fighting against God, and ought not they to search into
the Book of the Revelation?

A. There be many times mentioned in Scripture, therefore it had been fit to
have distinguished them; there is a Time of Birth, and a Time of Death, Times
of War, Eccles 3.1.2.
and Times of Peace Times of Ignorance, and Times of Knowledge; that
distinction which we are most to regard, is the Times of Law and Gospel Heb.
1.1. The Sea my Rev. Father in his Com. on Genesis
Old time lasted 4000 years, the New, till the consummation of the World; (so
called) because after this there will be no Change in Doctrine or Worship to
the Worlds End: It is a Learned Ignorance, not to pry into those things, which
our great Nescire velle quae Magister maximus nescire nos vult erudita inscitia
est. Acts 1.7.
Master has no desire we should yet understand, Acts 1.7.

Search the Revelations; yea and all the Scriptures, yea and why not Daniel, of
whom Cum ergo sint afflictissima haec nostra tempora studiose cognoscendus est
hic Vates. Sleid. de 4. Sum. Imper. S. 3. p. 678.
Sleidan says, he is studiously to be read and understood, especially because
of our afflicted times: But what Points would you have us study? Is it the
Saints Carnal Reign with Christ a Thousand years? a Thing that I hear of
late, has much tickled the fancy of sundry of your followers; But when Christ
comes, shall he come with a glorified body, or an unglorified? If he come in a
glorified body, he is unfit for our company; if with an unglorified, He is like
to be Crucified amongst us. But the Heavens must retain him until the
restitution of all things.

What if this Thousand years be already past? may not Christ be said to reign,
when Constantine a Christian Prince reigned? and Satan be said to be bound,
when his ten Persecutions were ended? and let loose again, when the Turk and
Pope grew great, Anno 1300?

Paraeus speaking of this Chapter, tells us, Par. in Rev. c. 20.
it is the sum and Recapitulation of all the rest: It is said that the souls
of the Saints reigned with Christ, not their bodies; if it be so, our
inquisition need to be the less, though it be a doctrine of Separation. Or is
it the Rise or Ruin of Antichrist: As for his Papismus circa Ann. 606 in
Nervum erup^t cum Phocas Imperator Bonifacio 3. Romano Primatum Concessit.
Rise, it is commonly held to be in the time of Boniface the third, in the
reign of the Emperor Phocas the Paricide; others say, An: 755. when as the
Pope became not only universal Bishop, but a Temporal Monarch.

As for his Moulin. Accomplished Prophec. page 378. I persuade my self (said
Luther) The day of Judgment is not far off, it will not be absent full 300
years longer Luth. loc. com. C. 1. de Verbo Dei. By whose account there are
not 200 ye^ remaining.
Ruin, some determine it at the year 1672. others draw it forth longer, till
the year 1866.

Mr Fox is fully persuaded he shall not reign long, because we have had of
late, many signalls of his ruin.

Aretius in this Point is worthy to be noted, who tells us, we are under the
6th Vial: when as Euphrates shall be dried up: For as Babylon was took by
Cyrus, by diverting of Euphrates to make way for his Army; so now for sundry
years together, has the Popes Euphrates been dried up, viz. his Trading by
Indulgences with many Nations, that a way may be made for the Kings of the East
(that is, heavenly minded Princes) to Conquer him.

England, says he, Bohemia, France, are turned from him; What if it should
come to pass, that the light of the Gospel should break forth into Italy and
Spain? His Highness great and just preparations against Spain, may through
the good hand of Providence, accomplish this Prophecy: Sorry I am, that any
that pretends knowledge in the Revelations, should disturb his Highness in so
Famous and Religious a work: and had I opportunity I should not fail to
animate the Valiant Fleet, with some promises of Success, fetched out of this
divine Oracle.

Q. 11. Whether the Parish Ministry in their standing and acting as such, (...).
be not found to take part with Babylon? etc. Is it not to make Idols of them?

I refer the Reader to the word Parish, Babylon, confuted before. This Crambe
must needs be Tedious to the Reader, as well as the Respondent; you have
repeated Babylon, as often as Homer does his (...); above Twenty times before you
have absolved your second Page. Ministry in their standing and Acting, Their
standing and acting at all, is, I fear, an Eye sore and burden to you: for I
am easily persuaded, you abhor them as much in the Praedicament of Substance
as Situation; It is not the People that make Idols of them, but your self,
and your Party, the 1 Cor: 8.4. The word in the Original is (...) which
signifies nothing; and who desires to have that signal function Annihilated
and Vilifyed, more then an Anabaptist? The truth is, while you strike
desperately at all, you make others tremble to strike at any, be they never so
culpable.

Peter a misleader, and Barnabas misled.] If such men may mislead, and be
misled, and not only be Passively seduced, but Active seducers, Why may no Mr
P. be in danger of shooting at Rovers? except some of his Disciples Voutch for
his Infallibility? An Error that has been objected unto them by none of the
Orthodox.

Preferments.] I will not say such a mortified man as your self aims at them,
Gloria potius Contemnenda dicitur, quam contemnitur. Buchol.
But I am Sorry that you should harbor this gross opinion, That the choycest
of our Ministers oppose Reformation upon Carnal, Sordid, Dunghill Principles;
Here if ever, it were necessary to take notice of your boldness, Windel. in
Ep. de Eutheranis.
and to give you Convitium Resorbendum, but I forbear; (...) is a moral
virtue taught us in Ethics, Divinity sure will teach it us much more. Phil.
4.11.

Q. 12. (...).
Whether the greater number of People in the Parish Assembly are not in danger
of Eternal Domnation, through their high Presumption they are in Christ and
Regenerate in Baptism?

A. If they be, for the most part, they may thank themselves; either they have
better Teachers, or may have, But that God in Judgment does sometimes make
them like People like Priest. We tie not Regeneration to the time of Baptism,
it may be as well before and after, as in eodem Articulo, Perk. in Gal. p. 204.
Sigillum foederis non facit foederatum sed declarat. Windel. Th. p. 376.
yet there is an Analogy between them, Titus 3.5. See the Confession of our
Faith by the R. Assembly, The Efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment
of time wherein it is Administered; It admits into the Church, but makes not
Members: It Conferres not the first grace, but confirms it: The seal of the
Covenant makes not a Covenanter, but declares him says Windelinus.

If Pharisaicall Spirits, and Moral honest men, will think there is more in
the outward Seal, then there is: If being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
they Labor to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. I suppose
Baptism is not the cause: For if Circumcision may become Uncircumcision, Romans
2.5. Then also Baptism may become no Baptism, and hereupon they may be
reputed no better of, then for Heathens and Publicans.

Q. 13. Would it not be a Praiseworthy deed, (...).
to declare the Sin of their Predecessors, in declaring the People to be borne
again in Baptism? and should they not inform the Godly they are in no
visible orderly Church state? and should they not give a Plain denial to
administer any Ordinance of Christ to the common multitude?

A. There is very little in this Querie to be dissented from, I wish
promiscuous Administration of Ordinances as well of Baptism as the Lords
Supper were repented of, and that by an Edict of State? But I would know, what
you intend by supposed Christnings, in the Close of the Query. If you oppose
that Ordinance as supposititious, I shall God willing discuss that point with
you at farther leisure.

Shall God make Inquisition for blood of Bodies and not souls?] Yea verily,
and as for all Antichristian Ministers, and Prostitutors of Gods Ordinances to
a profane Rabble, I wish (in Mr Latimers phrase) the State would make Quondams
of them: I believe the Henricus septimus Imperator Germaniae venenata Hostia
infectus, dixit Monache Domine, etc. Func. Chr.
Emperor Henry the 7th was not the first nor the last, that was Poisoned by
the Sacrament: The Lord Pardon this Crying sin to England, and let the Godly
Reader say AMEN.

Q. (...).
14. Justifying the sprinkling of ungodly profane and popish children; and
though they refuse to sprinkle them themselves yet strengthen the hands of them
that do.

A. We justify it not any more then Civilians do justify Clandestine
marriages; fieri non debuit, factum valuit. But this Answer does not satisfy
you, for (say you) this may defend any act of will worship, as well as that;
but you cannot make baptism to be will worship, seeing there is a command for
it; I suppose the ground of this answer was took upon this account, that
Baptism in no case was to be Reiterated, which (with submission to better
Judgments) I do not altogether allow. For it was enacted in the Council of
Placuit de Infantibus quoties non inveniuntur Certissini Testes absque ullo
scrupulo Rebaptizandos Council. 5. and River. de Bapt.. 55.
Carthage, that if any Children doubted of the certainty of their Baptism,
when they came to age they might be baptized; And Leo says, that cannot be
counted an iteration which is not known to be done before. This one thing I
desire my reverend brethren to take notice of, that the sprinkling of profane
men's Children promiscuously may prove justly scandalous: Amesius in his cases
of conscience tells us, that that Incuria illa ideirco. neutiquam potest
excusari, qua promiscue and sine discrimimine admittantur ad baptismum
quicunque and a quibuscunque offexuntur. Amesc. c. c. l. 4. c. 28.
carelessness whereby all are admitted to baptism, hand over head, whosoever,
whenever, and presented by whomsoever, cannot be excused: and Calvin also in
his Epistle to Lib. Ep. Calv. p. 112.
Knox, tells us, that nothing is more preposterous, then to offer to insert
such into Christ's body, whom we cannot hope will ever be his Disciples.

Strengthen the hands of them that doe] I do suppose here is some reflection
cast upon your Antagonist: But whose hands has he strengthened? Nay has he
not weakened the hands of M. R. and M. H and prosecuted them upon his own
charge, and brought up some of his own members, for witnesses against their
promiscuous dealings, when not one of your party did afford us the least
assistance or encouragement; If there be any man that acts contrary to any Law
or Act, now in being, oppose him and spare not; The times are strict enough,
and you want not some favorers of yours, to be their judges. I never heard or
knew of any Popish children baptized amongst us, and yet the parish is
populous, and of a great extent: nay I retort, were they Popish Children they
would not be baptized; and though you and I could wish that pure ordinances
might never be polluted; yet there is no mortal man can choose but now and then
an Hypocrite will taste of them: I refer you to Apollonius, Soboles ex sanctis
and piis Atavis progenita (quamvis Apostatae fuerunt Avi and Parents) ad
ecclesiae corpus pertinent. Call.
Spanhemius, Rivet, Calvin, to try whether the immediate unrighteousness of
the parent be sufficient to dispossess the Child of his right to the
ordinance, seeing in the Covenant of grace the Son shall not bear the
iniquity of the Father, nor can the unrighteousness of man make the covenant
of God of none effect Rom 3. (...).


Q. 15. Likeness of the Jewish national Church Babylon, old Romish State and
painted Jezebell.

Sir, was there ever any congregation in the world, that was not mixed? If you
will not preach but to an unmixed Congregation, you must with Acesius, get a
ladder and climb up to Heaven alone. Hypocrites make no confusion, you cannot
discern all Tares from Wheat, many times they excel others, and as a Comet
may make a greater Blazing then a fixed star.

Painted Jezebell,] If England had any Romish paint or old varnish, the heat of
Gods fiery trial and his angry breath has dissipated it; her face at present
is rather furrowed and rough cast with adversity, then levigated and garish by
prosperity. Alas! (like Zion) her tears for the late desolations, are scarce
wiped off her cheeks, and can any man think she can have an itch to painting,
and superstition. M R. tells us, his Highness is Jehu, if then the Church
State be Jezebell he will speedily overthrow it: nay you your self seem to
tell us such a thing in your Epistle, your words are these; She has painted
her face with more art then Jezebell, or else some have less zeal then Jehu,
who having no great power on his side etc. They are Jehu and they are not, they
have his vices but not his virtues, no not Vmbram virtutis: this similitude
will never run current, for it has but one foot instead of four; you may do
well to think more heartily of his Qui summum principent cui debetur obsequium
dedecore affieit Dei majestati cujus est imago vivens ac spirans, contumeliam
infert. Bodin de Rep. l. 1. c. 10. p. 192. Spuit in se qui spuit in Olympum.
Scalig. (...). Jude 8.
Highness and of the Church of England, and to charge others to be afraid to
speak evil of dignities: But I shall have more opportunity to defend them, in
the next ensuing Queries.

Q. 16. (...).
Whether the mystery of iniquity did not work mainly to bring the Saints back
to Moses killing Doctrine, his rudiments and shadows? and whether the Apostle
did not bend himself against the way of confounding the grace of God with man's
works, and Moses old Law with Christ's New Testament Ordinances?

A. What do you mean by Moses Laws? is it the Moral Judicial or
Ceremonial Law that you are offended with? till you speak out, I will take
you in the best sense, and be so charitable as not to think you an Antinomist;
Is there any man amongst us that stands up for ceremonies? or is there any
against all Ceremonies? for without them it is impossible that the ordinances
should be administered. Take this rule from Godly Greenham; a man whose counsel
the Brownists before time were forced to take; whatsoever separates man from
God, or one man from another, that is an abrogated ceremony: But on the
contrary, whatsover joins man to God, or man to man, that's in force. If any be
ceremonious in the former sense, Sir it is you, and your pretended Church, 'which
for her ambition and fingularitie may come near to Babylon, for if a man have
not a new mark in his forehead, he must not pray nor receive with you, though
he may give as fair marks and evidences for Heaven as any of your Tribe, yea
and far excel them; the Apostle tells us Tit. 1.11. That a minister must not
be (...), not self willed, inflexible, contumacious, had you harkened to some
overtures or peace, made by some special friends to you and me, you had not
prostituted your reputation a sacrifice to public fame, nor extorted a line
of contradiction from me.

Q. 17. (...).
Whether the mystery of iniquity be not promoted and upheld by Humane and
Serpentine wisdom with worldly power and policy, exalting the creature above
the Creator?

A. There is a mystery in this Query, whether it be a mystery of iniquity I
know not: sure you desire with the Saepia to lie hid under your own ink, are
you against all wisdom, or against all serpentiue wisdom? Serpentine
wisdom is commended by Christ to his Disciples; would you not have us wise
enough to descrie what designs are a brewing? Perhaps by worldly power, you
may mean the head of the state; and if so, it is Serpentine wisdom indeed
for all men to labor to defend a Public Head; as for natural parts, we
honor them as Gods gifts, yet we will not Idolize them: parts without grace,
is like a Jewel in a swines snout.

Q. 18. God has laid by many Instruments, (...).
he will choose most unlikely instruments in men's account, even the younger
Brethren, as David among the Sons of Jesse, wheether there are not many good
men like to be deceived, who look as Samuel did on Eliab; or some prudent men
to be the only prime instruments for Gods work, which will not be done by
power or might.

A. Sir, in this you deal (me thinks) rather like a Statesman, then a
Minister: I wish you to remember Funcius his Disce meo exemplo mandato munere
fungi, and fuge seu pestem, (...).
Motto: to open this we must have recourse to the 1 Samuel 16.6. and it came to
Pass when they were come, that he looked on Eliab, and said, surely the Lords
anointed is before him: I will not say point-blanke who is Eliab and who is
David in your account: But I beseech you submit to those in Authority, least
you bring this Nation to a Babylon of confusion indeed. The Greeks have a
Proverb (...) not to disturb a bad stone well placed, for fear of
demolishing the whole fabric; how much less a good stone, a Corner stone;
that seeks not to oppress but to cherish Godliness in the highest sphere.

Q. 19. Whether the Faith and Prayers of Gods people, (...).
were not as the Chariot wheels to the great work of God in this Nation? and
whether by leaning to man's Power and Policy, they be not turned aside to
crooked ways.

A. Except some of your Church pray more, I shall not account them Saints; Let
them deal more in Piety, less in Policy, or else they will not deserve the
name: Let us leave says Sua sibi habeant regna! Reges, suas Divites Divitias,
suam prudentiam prudentes and relinquant nobis stultitiam nostram etc.
Lactantius, to Governors their Government, to Rich men their Riches, to Wise
men their Wisdom; so we keep close to Christ, it will be well with us in the
meanest condition.

Q. 20. Whether the continuance of diverse Godly men in Babylon, be, (...).
not an occasion etc.

It is well you acknowledge some Godly men to be amongst us: no marvel if you
are mistaken in your account, when Elijah was in his: God (no doubt) has many
Thousands in England: Every knee that has not bowed to Baal, every mouth that
has not kissed him.

Fly out.] Privation presupposes a habit; would you have those fly out that
are not in?

Q. 21. (...).
Whether the Antichristian Ministry in the Nation, which derive their Church
state from Rome, are not found committing fornication with the Kings of the
Earth?

A. Christ signifies anointed: Those that would pull down Magistracy and
Ministry are Antichrists, because they oppose the Lords Anointed, not with a
Material, but with a Spiritual Unction. I seldom find any persons murmuring
against Aaron, but they murmr against Moses also.

Give me leave to quote here a Passage of Buxtorfes Epistle before his Hebrew
Substraxit Judaeis immorigeris Pastotes Prophetas animarum: sustulit Reges
Tutores Corporum, and conservatores Tran uillitatis publicae, Jude res ipsorum
Caeperunt magis magisque pessum Ire, Religio Concidere, Sectae irrumpere. Tunc
nulla pax domi, sed Horribilis Vastatio. etc. (...).
Lexicon. When the People of Israel (says he) were refractory and Perfidious,
God resolved to cast them off, and to ingraffe the Gentiles: He then takes from
the disobedient Jews the Prophets, who were the Pastors of their Souls, and
Kings the Protectors of their Commonwealth, and conservators of public
Tranquillity; After that, all things were worse with them: Religion fell, and
Sects and Schisms broke in upon them; there was no peace at Home, but horrible
Confusions. etc.

Q. 22. Many found wilful Apostates.

A. Apostasy is a Retrograde motion from Religion; it is either Total or
Partial, of Malice with Julian, or of Infirmity: who these be, I leave to you
to determine: I think many Anabaptists persecute that light, which first they
professed, and oppose that Ministry, that brought them to a state of Grace (if
they have any) more then the graceless Commonalty. (...).


Qu: 23. In Babylon was found all the Blood of Saints.

A. I am sure, if Anabaptists be Saints, there is not a drop of their blood yet
spilt amongst us, there is as yet no violent Persecution (thanks to the Powers
above.) Austin tells us of Three sorts of Persecutions, that shall befall the
Church; the first Violent, the second Fraudulent, the third both Violent and
Fraudulent: Men will sow the Lions skin and the Foxes tail together, to act
their Part against Christ and his cause; But then the Ministers of Christ shall
(as Luther says) be either in Heaven or under Heaven: In which place I would
willingly leave you, and sublimate your thoughts, as Christ did the Sons of
Zebedee, from puzling themselves about a Temporal Kingdom.

Thus Sir, as multiplicity of business would allow me, (besides personal
infirmities) I have endeavored to give satisfaction to your Queries: If hence
either you or others may be admonished, I am sufficiently rewarded; True
friendship says Vera amicitia monet and monetur; Cujus Aures Clausae sunt
Veritati ejus desperanda salus. Cicero.
Cicero does admonish and is admonished: If we will be the Sons of Truth, we
must consider what it speaks, and trample upon our own credit, yea and other
men's too, if either be any way an impediment unto it.

Had I not feared the Insolency of some of your own party, and the Proximitie
of the danger to some of my own flock, I should not have put forth this
defensive Armor: And as for the end I proposed to my self in entering the
Lists of Controversy with you, I solemnly Profess I never aimed at Victory,
but the Truth; and rather at the Conversion of your Person, then the Subversion
of your Queries.

TELOS.
Anti Queries proposed to the Author of the Queries.
Q. 1. WHether you do not revive old Heresies, specially those of the
Donatists, in several branches which they held?

1. That the Church was only in a corner of the Nation.

2. That it was fit to Rebaptize such as were orthodoxly Baptized.

3. That they had a Church without spot or blemish.

4. That the efficacy of the Sacrament depends upon the Minister.

5. That the Magistrate has no authority in matter of Religion.

6. That all other Assemblyes were profane, except their own.

Q. 2. Whether you are not one of the least of those that follow the Lamb, not
in your fained (...), but in regard of your bitter expressions against the
Church of God, calling it Antichristian, Babylon, Jezabell, etc. whereby you
have made your Arrows (...) Ephesians. 6.16.?

Q. 3. Whether you have not pleased the Papist, in this book, as much as
displeased the Orthodoxe? and so made sad the heart of the righteous, whom God
has not made sad; and strengthened the hand of the wicked, that they should
not turn from their wickedness?

Q. 4. Whether M. Lat mer, in his fourth Sermon, did know what an Heretic was,
when he calls the Anabaptist by that name, as such that oppose verity, as well
as unity? And whether also the Martyr Philpot did well to say (in the Book of
Martyrs) that the Anabaptists were a sort of men stirred up to hinder the
reformation of the Gospel? And if so, whether God will not remove every
pricking Bryer, as well as every grieving thorn, from the house of Israel?

Q. 5. Whether had the Anabaptists enjoyed the same liberty in the Kings time
as they do now, it would not have been looked upon as an unspeakeable favor?

Q. 6. Whether Auxentius, one of the Arrian Sect, were not the first that
opposed Poedobaptisme? And whether Agrippine of Carthage, were the first of
mortals that brought in rebaptization?

Q. 7. Whether it becomes Anabaptists to pull down public places of worship,
and to disturb a Godly Ministry, and so to draw upon themselves the guilt of
other men's sins?

Q. 8. Whether disputation be a convenient way to determine differences of this
nature, Except authorized and managed by the public Magistrate? For (faith
Luther) Heresy is the scourage of divine wrath: as a carnal sword in their
coasts was the plague of a carnal people, so is the Spiritual sword amongst
Christians: therefore it is not to be overcome (says he) by wit and learning,
but by prayer and fasting.

Q. 9. Whether Christ did ever authorize any to Baptize but a Minister, or one
extraordinarily qualifyed? And whether you concur not with the Papists in
suffering others to Baptize?

Q. 10. What shall become of Infants under the New Testament, seeing according
to your tenets, they neither believe nor are to be Baptized? Mark. 16.16.

Q. 11. Whether you hold it unfit, that such pious Ministers as preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel?

Q. 12. Whether it be lawful for a Pastor to be circumforaneous? And to take
care of several Churches at a remote distance, except he can show Apostolical
institution? And whether this does not justify the Popish and Prelaticall
Clergy, in their large Commenda's of one man to plurality of Benefices?

Q. 13. Whether Davenants question (mutatis mutandis) An Jesuit: pontificii
possunt esse boni subditi? may not as pertinently be demanded, concerning some
others of your party, that are of the same bitter, subtle, and implacable
spirit?

Q. 15. Whether those that seem to desire the coming in of the Jews, do not
only err in Politics, but also in Piety? The ears of some men being more
open to novelty then truth: and the spirit of men more prone (in this present
juncture of time) to sedition then subjection.

Q. 15. Whether Saint Austin were not a man of incomparable meekness, and of a
Lamb-like spirit indeed, who did often intercede with the Magistrates, in
behalf of the Donatists, though bitter Enemies to him and the truth?

Q. 16. Whether those men that talk so much against Babylon, would not do well
to fight against it? I mean Babylon mystical, not fantastical: and whether
it be not madness for us that have so many enemies abroad, to spend our time
in darting one against another at home? The words of Lucan are not impertinent
to unfold our case

Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda tropheis
Bella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos.

FINIS.
Reader, take notice that in p. 9. l. 27, 28. The heart of Cyrus etc. are M.
P's words. l. 30. for Rhetoric, read Rhetorius.


