THE O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up
thy self into thy scabbard, rest and be still, Jer. 47.6. Merito in terra
homini non gloria, sed pax est qu^enda, pax cum Deo, pax cum proximo, pax cum
seipso, Bernard in fest. omnium Sanctorum, Sermon. 5. col. 297.
FVRY OF WAR, AND And Samuel said to Saul, thou have done foolishly; thou
have not kept the Commandment of the Lord thy God, which he commanded thee, 1 Samuel 13.13. Omnes stulti mali sunt, Senec. de Benefic. lib. 5. cap. 15. Humilis
res est stultitia, abjects, sordida, servilis, multis affectibus, and
saevissimis subjecta: Hos tam graves dominos, interdum alternis vicibus,
imperantes dimittit a te sapientia, qu sola libertas est. Idem. Epist. lib. 5
ep. 37.
FOLLY OF SIN, (As an Incentive to it) declared and applied.

FOR Caution and Remedy against the Mischief and Misery of both.

IN A SERMON Preached at St. Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable House
of COMMONS, at their late solemn and public FAST, April 26. 1643.

By John Ley Minister of Great Budworth in Cheshiere.

LONDON, Printed by G.M. for Christopher Meredith at the Sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard, 1643.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHile I humbly offer that to the view, which I lately presented to the
audience of your ever Honored, and then sacred Assembly (both the preaching
and publishing of it in print, being acts of due obedience to your commands;
and I wish they were capable of titles of gratitude for your favors) it may be
my lot, to have some passages of my Sermon, censoriously met withal, if not
for any falsehood or fault in the matter, yet for some supposed incongruity to
the office of the Author, and with pretense also of some biassed partiality,
in the great differences of our most unhappily divided Kingdom (divided under
those Names as some mistake, and mis state the question) which have best right
to the humblest reverence, and heartiest loyalty of all the Subjects of the
Land: which calumny if I cannot prevent, I may have hope to repel the assault
of it, by such considerations as these: which I crave leave to tender to the
touch of your Lydius lapis the touchstone, Plin. not. bist. l. 33. c 8.
Lydian judgment, and in them to speak to you and of you to others, as the
dictat of duty and discretion shall direct me.

First, It cannot in equity or prudence be deemed an impertinency to our
ministerial profession, or an over-busie meddling (in matters above, or besides
our calling) to appear apprehensive of our common peril, and to do what
lies within the fathom of our power, and the verg of our vocation, either for
prevention of imminent, or for removal or mitigation of our present miseries.

And if we affected the praise of prudent silence, which the Prophet commends
(as seasonable for evil times) Amos 5.12. I do not see, how we could now
observe it, being often required by our superiors, to publish their minds and
our own unto the people, in matters of secular concernement, and many times
also (in private) desired to satisfy their doubts, when they are called upon
to give their assent and assistance in matters of great moment, for the public
welfare: And I thank God, such have ever been the principles, which have set
the deepest impression upon my judgment and conscience, and upon others
likewise (by mine information) that, (to my knowledge) I have not whispered any
resolution or advice in theeare, which I may not warrantably publish upon the
house topps, as our blessed Savior gave direction to his Disciples, Mat.
10.27. Nor have I breathed out any position or opinion, either in private or
public, for which I should be unwilling to bleed or to dye.

Secondly, For my loyal affection to his Majesty, mine own heart tells me, I
prize him as the dutiful subjects of David did him (their Royal Sovereign)
when they valued his life at ten thousand of their own, 2 Samuel 18.3. and had
rather my body should be the sheath of a two edged and poisoned Sword, (as
Speeds Chro^. l. 7. c. 20. p. 300
Lilloe's was, when he stepped betwixt the murderer, and King Edwine his Master,
to intercept the deadly thrust intended and aimed at the heart of his
Sovereign) then consent to lay any hands upon him, but as the Angels did upon
Lot, Genesis 19.16. for his deliverance from danger; in which case a loving
violence has more affinity with duty, then with disobedience: for a King
(being a public person) has no power to dispose of himself (for perilous
adventure) in Basil. Dor. l. 2. p. 165, 166.
respect, that to his preservation or fall, the safety or wrack of the whole
Commonweal is necessarily coupled, like as the body is to the head, as his
Majesty's learned Father, of famous memory, resolved in case of duells: and
though afterward, speaking of a just war, he counseled the Prince (to whom he
wrote) Ibidem.
once or twice, in his own person, to hazard himself fairly, (but afterward,
to conserve himself for the weal of his people; for whose sake, he must be
more careful for himself then for his own:) I conceive the reason rendered for
the security of his Royal Person is of force, not only against the peril of a
single combat, but of a sociable war or set battle (especially for
hereafter) since his Majesty's courage and magnanimity is so well known, that
his cautionary prudence can never come under the misinterpretation of timorous
cowardice; for avoidance whereof, his Royal Father gave advice for the
adventure forementioned.

Thirdly, For the high Court of Parliament (whereof your honorable House of
Commons is the Alpha in order of proceeding) his Majesty (that last was) has
taught me to know it, as the Ibidem.
Kings head-Court; and his Majesty (that now is) advanced mine estimation of
it, by his gracious acknowledgement, His Majesty's Speech, Ian. 25. 1640.
that often Parliaments, are the fittest means to keep correspondence betwixt
him and his people, which he does much desire: His Majesty's answer to the
Petition of the Lords and Commons, Iunij 17. 1642. p. 6.
that it is impossible for him to subsist, without the affections of his
people; and that those affections cannot possibly be preserved or made use of,
but by Parliaments, that they cannot give the least credit, or have the least
suspicion, that his Majesty would chose any other way to the happiness he
desires to himself and his posterity, but by Parliaments. And it is raised yet
higher, by his gracious acceptance of his Speech, who represented it to him,
as a most sovereign remedy against all the distempers of this Nation: were
they ( Mr. Speaker in his Speech to his Majesty, November the 5. 1640.
says he) troubled at Sea, troubled at home, or invaded from abroad? here was
the sanctuary of refuge, hither was the resort, and no other way found for a
foundation of peace. And for a return of all loyal and affectionate
observances to his Majesty, on the Parliaments part, you with your right
Honorable colleagues, have professed your resolution, So in the Declaration of
both Houses, March, 12. 1642.
to keep your selves within the bounds of faithfulness, and allegiance to
his Royal Person and his Crowns; The Parliaments second Remonstrance, p 1.
to provide for the public peace and prosperity of his Majesty and his
Realms; protesting in the presence of the all-seeing Deity, that it still has
been, and still is the only end of all your counsels and endeavors, wherein
you have resolved to continue freed and enlarged from all private aims,
personal respects or passions whatsoever. And your Ibid p. 11.
earnest desire of his Majesty's return to London, that upon it you conceive
depends the very safety and being of both his Kingdoms; and therefore you have
protested you will be ready to say or do any thing, (that may stand with the
duty and honor of a Parliament) which may raise a mutual confidence, betwixt
his Majesty and your selves as you do wish, and the affairs of the Kingdom
do require. And to the same purpose again, Ibid p 13.
we intend (say you) to do whatsoever is sit, to make up the unpleasant breach
betwixt his Majesty and parliament.

By such expressions as these (carrying most clear and legible Characters of
your Loyalty and Love to his Majesty) you have righted your Reputations against
all just cause of suspicion of Popish tenets, or intentions against his Person
and his Crown; and have gained the belief of all good Subjects, that you
spoke in sincerity, when you said, In the third Remonstrance or Declaration of
the Parliament May 26. 1642. p. 4.
You suffered not such things to enter into your thoughts, as all the world
knows, the Papists have put into act: (whereof I shall shortly give instance
in my other Sermons upon this Text, which some worthy: Members of your
Honorable Society have required to the Press.) And so (upon confidence in
your fidelity) have engaged their affections, and all their Interests (both for
the present and the future) under the conduct of your most prudent Counsels and
commands, accounting it a most fickle unfaithfullnesse, and finally destructive
to the foundation of our English Government, if they (who have voted your
Election to places in Parliament) should upon any Malignant surmises against
you, desert either their due obedience to you, or just and necessary defense of
you, though with the hazard of their estates and persons.

Against such assurance as you have given of your faithful allegiance to his
Majesty, your zealous Constancy in prosecution of a perfect Reformation of
Court, City, and Country from profaneness and Popery, imports no color of
contradiction at all (though some, whose condition most requires it, distaste
and desire to wrest it to some such misconstruction) but carries with it an
exact conformity to what you have professed.

For what better proof of integrity in what you undertake, then your pressing
to promote the prosperity of the King, as well as of the Kingdom? And what
means more conducible unto that end then Religion and Justice? As S. Augustine
shows; where he says, Neque no^ Christ^anos quo^^^a^ emperatores ^deo
foelices d^cimus, quia vel diutius imperarunt, etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 5. c.
24.
We account not Christian Emperors happy, because they have reigned long, or
because they have had power to suppress insurrections, or oppress their
enemies; nor because they have dyed a quiet death, and left their children to
reign after their decease: Sed foelices eos dicimus, si just imperarunt, si
inter linguas sublimiter honoran^um, et obsequia, nimis humiliter salutantiam
non ex. tollu^^u^, sed se homines esse memnerint, si suam potes^a^e^, ad Dei
^ui^u^, etc. ^bid*
But we call them happy, if they rule with justice, if among the tongues of
those that too highly extol them, or too humbly salute them, or too
obsequiously serve them, they remember themselves to be but men, if they apply
their power so, as to make it most serviceable to the honor of the divine
Majesty, if they fear, and love and worship God, and more love that kingdom,
where they need not fear competitors or consorts, then that, wherein they may
be afraid of them -- S^^uxu^i^^a^ ^o eis est cast^g^^^^, qu^n^^ possi^ (...)
^upiditatibus (...) quam (...) imperare. Ibidem.
if they so much more refrain from luxury, as (being without restraint of
others) they may be more free unto it; and bad rather reign over evil
concupiscence, then Countries and Nations. Tales Christianos imperateres
dicimus esse foelices. Ib.
Such Christian Emperors (says he) we call happy, and happy surely are the
people, who are governed by such an one, as so governs himself.

And for your zeal against the prevailing of Popery, and for the advancement
of the Protestant Religion, it makes most for his Majesty's honor and safety:
not only in respect of piety, but of policy, for that wise State, man the Duke
of Rohan, in his Treatise of the Interest of Princes and States, makes his
observation of the State of England, in these words The Duke of Rohan his
Treatise of the Interest of Princes and States. p 58.
Besides the Interest which the King of England has common with all Princes,
he has yet one particular, which is, that He ought thoroughly to acquire the
advancement of the Protestant Religion, even with as much zeal, as the King of
Spain appears Protector of the Catholic. And what zeal that is, he has
showed before in the Ibid ^ p 4. ad nonam.
Interest of Spain.

Notwithstanding all this, there be some men, who (deeply guilty of deceit
themselves) will never be satisfied with any evidence of sincerity in other
men: with such there is no security in the Prerogative of the King, nor the
Privilege of Parliament, against in urious traducement: since nothing bears
sway with them, but their self-conceit or particular advantage, or which is
worse, their virulent spleen against the better part, which stirs them up to
reproach them, as tumultuary busybodies, who do but bring some buckets of
water to quench a burning, which they have treacherously kindled against their
own Country, and as confidently (and not more innocently) to cry Sedition,
Sedition against the most loyal and true hearted Subjects of Royal Majesty:
as Athaliah did Treason, Treason, 2 Kin. 11.14. When Sedition is their reigning
sin, as treason was hers, and that the worst Sedition of all others, for what
can be worse then that (and theirs is such) which separateth those in
judgment, affection, and local mansion, who (for the two first) should
always and (for the third) should very often be united together, viz. his
Majesty and Parliament.

But this should not so discourage a single Subject (much less so many thoice
Patriots as make up your venerable number) as to withdraw or withold him
from any devotion or endeavor, to which he is obliged (as a part of the
public) and he is more obliged in reason and conscience to the united
Interests of King and Parliament, then to any divided title of contestation
betwixt them.

And for this your eminent example for untainted integrity, unquenchable
fervency, insuperable patience, indefatigable diligence and untainted
resolution in the pursuance of your excellent purposes (for the good of Church
and State) will be to others both a pattern of practice and a Buckler of
Defense. The Lord God Almighty, be still resident in your venerable Senate, to
guide all your Consultations to his own glory, and the common safety both of
his Majesty, of your selves, and of the many Millions of people vertually
comprised in your Diaconos paucitas honorabiles fecit. Hier. Epist. Oceano Tom.
2. p. 329.
Honorable paucity, being (in equivalence) as a few pieces of gold, to many of
silver, or of other inferior Metals, and to guard your persons by his power
and providence, from all destructive plots, and hurtful mishaps, that you may
live to reap and enjoy the ripe fruit of that Reformation, whose seed has
been sown in many tears of humiliation, both public and private, which the
enemies of Gods truth, and of the English State, would drown in blood; which
God forbid: So prays

Your most humbly devoted Servant in the Lord John Ley.

Errata.
REader, Besides some litterall errors which alter not the sense, as Ammon for
Amnon, Esa for Isai, Egiptians for Egyptians, Sabbath for Sabbath, deiscovered
for discovered, these following which are of some moment to the sense are thus
to be corrected;

P. 3. l. 26. read the words betwixt therefore and when in the next line as a
parentheses. p. 5. l. 21. for the read this l. 13. for 2 Samuel 11.1. read 2 Samuel
11.7. p. 8. l. 4. from the end of the page after the word Of, add many. p. 9.
l. ult. after the word be, add so. p 14 l. 17. for him read them. p. 28. this
mark " to be added to the three last lines, and to all the lines of p. 29. as
nothing the continuation of the Speech. p. 29. l 12. for combustion read
concertation. And l. ult. for confusion read concussion. p. 30. l. 3. from the
bottom blot out the word so. p. 39. l. 27. after the word day, add and to the
men of Judah, etc. p. 46. l. 10. after the word them add the word and. p. 35.
l. penult. for come read comes. p. 58. l. 23. for at least, read or. p. 40.
l. 14. blot out the word then, and instead of it read from these.

A SERMON PREACHED At a FAST before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
JEREMIAH, Chap. 4. Ver. 21, 22. How long shall I see the Standard, and hear
the sound of the Trumpet?

For my People is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish Children,
they have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do good they
have no knowledge.


AMong the manifold fallacies, which that great Sophister (who deceives the
whole World, Revel. 12.9.) imposes upon people, of all times and States, there
is none by which a greater number (with more apparent danger) are deluded (and
therefore none more necessary to be discovered) then the mistitling of moral
qualifications of Virtue and vice: which is, as if an Apothecary should write
the name of a Medicine, upon a Gally-pot of poison, and contrariwise, the name
of poison, upon an Antidote against it.

For so it is, where Wisdom and Folly are mutually mistaken, and miscalled,
as when they whom God approves, and accepts as truly wise, are (by those
who are not such themselves) accounted fools, 1 Cor. 4.10. 2 Cor. 11.16, 17.
or (as our Savior Christ (though he were the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. was
entitled, John. 10.10.) Madmen, and such as are worthy of no better Titles
then those, are taken by themselves, and sometimes also by other men, to be the
only Wisemen of the World.

Against the latter part of this Imposture, (as more nearly concerning our
present condition) I shall endeavor to derive a remedy, out of these two
Verses read unto you, but especially out of the latter of the two, and that
remedy, will most consist of the discovery of the deceit, and that discovery
may (by Gods assistance) help forward our deliverance (which is the maine
design of this days work) out of these distresses, which (by the malignant
subtilty of the Popish party) are cast upon two Kingdoms, Ireland and England:
on that first, as a preparative to the ruin of this, and on this afterward,
lest it should be a succor, and restorative to that; and on both of them, by
that confounding and destructive Engine, whereof the Standard and Trumpet, are
the noted Ensigns, verse. 21. Of them, (as in relation to Military mischief)
the Prophet puts the Question, How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the
sound of the Trumpet? to which, the Answer is given by God himself, in these
words, My people is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish
children, they have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but to do
good they have no knowledge.

First of the Question, How long shall I see the Standard, and hear the sound
of the Trumpet? The vulgar Latin, and as many Commentators as oblige
themselves to it, read Vsque quo videbo fugientem, How long shall I see flying
(i.e.) a Man, or the people flying before, or from the face of the Enemy,
bcause the same consonants of the Hebrew word, thereafter as the pricks are
varied, may signify either flying or a thing lifted up, as a Standard is, Isa.
13.2. and Chapt. 62.10. but the latter acception of the word (as our
translation has it) has better approbation of the best Interpreters, and it
holds better accord with the sound of the Trumpet, they being both of them
monitory signs of military exercise and execution.

Neither the Standard (of it self) was an unpleasing sight, nor the blowing of
the Trumpet, of any ill sound, but both of them, were offensive to any good
man, (as intimating that unto his mind) which is very grievous to be seen, (
as garments rouled in blood, Esa. 9.5.) and doleful to be heard, (as the cries
and groans of wounded or dying men,) and dreadful too, as the Alarm of the
Trumpet, Amos 3.6. the confused noise of the Warriers, noted in the forenamed
9th. and 5th. of Esa. the noise of stamping of the hoofes of strong Horses,
Jer. 47.3. and (as it follows in the next words) the rushing of Chariots, and
rumbling of wheels; that which is much more formidable then all this in our
days, viz. (the horrid tune of our Martial times) in the roaring, or
thundering noise, of the great devouring Ordnance, was not found out in those
days.

And therefore, that is from the intimation forementioned, when the people are
most terribly threatened, a Standard is said to be set up, Jer. 51.12. and a day
of Warre-like wrath, and execution, is called a day of the Trumpet and Alarm,
Zeph. 1.16. Which imports so lamentable a misery, as made Jeremy (though a
man not only of an holy, but of heroic spirit) thus to bewail it. My bowels,
my bowels, I am pained at mine heart, mine heart makes a noise within me, I
cannot hold my peace: because thou have heard, (O my soul) the sound of the
Trumpet, the Allarum of the war, destruction upon destruction is cried, for
the Land is spoiled, suddenly are my Tents spoiled, and my Curtains in a
moment, verse 19, 20. And (in the next words) he winds up his patheticall
Compassion in this Question, How long shall I see the Standard? and hear the
sound of the Trumpet?

As God is Lord of Hosts and Armies, he both stirs and stops them, when he
will: And so they are shorter or longer, as he thinks good to draw them out or
shut them up: He can set the Alpha of Alarm, and the Omega of retreat, as
near together, or as far asunder, as he is pleased to make the measure of
their distance.

Some wars are begun and ended in a few months, such an one might that have
been (which God put to David's choice, which was measured to three months space,
2 Samuel 24. v. 13. And such was the Pirates war, to which Cn. Pompeius (as
Augustine observes) put an end Incredibili celeritate et temporis brevitate
confectum, Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 5. cap. 22.
with incredible celerity, and shortness of time, which took up but a few
months: as Intra paucos menses. Orosius l 6. c. 4.
Orosius notes.

Some are reckoned by years, and those in much different proportions, as the
war made by the Romans (against the fugitive Fencers) lasted Aug ubi sup
three years; The third Carthaginian war Orosius ibid. ubi supra.
four years. The second Aug ubi sup.
eighteen years. The first Aug. ibid.
twenty and three years: The Roman war with Mithridates, was drawn out to
Aug. ibid
forty years, and the Samnits war to Aug. ibid.
fifty years, so long had the war (betwixt the Hollanders and Spaniards
continued at the year, 1624. (as a Balsack let l. 3. let. 10.
French Orator has given in the account) but it is much more which his
Countryman Phil. Com His. lib. 8 c 3.
Commineus observes of the war betwixt the Florentines and the Pisans which
exercised those States three hundred years together.

Of this War (which put the Prophet into such an affectionate affliction) the
time is variously conjectured: It might seem long, though it were but short,
because the sufferings under it were very sharp, but indeed the whole time of
Ieremiahs Prophesying (which was about forty one years) was a time of great
tribulation, by warr-like Commotions and miseries under the reigns of Josiah,
2 King. 23. Iehojakim and Zedechiah Kings of Judah, 2 King. 24. in whose days
Jerusalem was besieged by the Babylonians, from the tenth day of the tenth
month (in the ninth year of his reign) to the ninth day of the fourth month,
in the eleventh year of it, 2 King. 25.1. upon that, followed the desolation
of the Temple, and City in the 3365. year of the world, and six hundred and
six years before the Incarnation of Christ; and if he recounted all the
calamities of war in his time, he might very well enquire of their
continuance, How long?

The Question brought in by such a passionate Preface (as you have heard out of
ver. 19. and 20.) will guide our thoughts, to a consideration of the evil of
war, which made the Prophet to be so mournful for it, and so weary of it.
And for that evil (though in many places of the Kingdom) too many feel too
much of it by real distress: It will not be needless to say somewhat of it,
by way of verbal discourse, that we may have such a compendium of it in our
minds and memories, as may set our hearts and hands against it, I say our
hands, as well as our hearts; for war is not always to be taken up, by
Treaties of peace, but peace sometimes to be procured by and Ipsi qui bella
volunt, -- ad gloriosam pace^ bellandocupiunt pervenire -- pacis igitur
intention geruntur and bella Aug. l. 1^. de Civit. Dei cap. 12.
always to be intended in a prosecution of war. And therefore when David
questioned with Vriah concerning the besieging of Rabbah, 2 Samuel 11.1. He
demanded how Joab did, and how the people did, and how the war prospered: So
in our English Translation; but according to the Hebrew reading, he asked him
of the peace of the war, that is, in what forwardness the war was for a
peaceable conclusion.

The definition of war (to begin with that, though it be too unruly an
evil, to be confined to bounds and limits, as he gives it, who has written
most exactly of it) is this Bellum est status per vim certantium, qua tales
sunt. Grotius de jure belli. lib. 1 cap. 1.
War is the state of them that strive by force (as they are such) that is
under the notion, and consideration of forcible striving against each other, or
to speak of it (as it has proved in the experience of all ages, where the
most Malignant men, have had the greatest stroke in it) It is a wicked, and
wretched compound of all sorts of injuries, and miseries of injuries committed
by the stronger, of miseries sustained by the weaker part.

The name of it in Latin is of good sound, for it is called Bellum, and of
good sense, for it signifies good, and so it has it is name by Antiphrasis
(i.) from the quite contrary; for it is so far from good indeed, (when wicked
men are prevalent in it) that it is the worst of evils, on this Hell; and
therefore with a little alteration of letters, it might rather be termed
Belluinum, bell^ine (i.) Brutish, then Bellum good, which Epithet most
properly belongs only unto God, Matthew. 19.17. though (to say the truth) it
be much worse among men, then it is among the unreasonable creatures: For the
most of their quarrels, are but single combats, for they seldom set themselves
in herds or droves, one against another, as men in troops and numerous
Armies. And as it brings with it a multitude of men; so does it also a
multitude of mischiefs.

Where envy and strife is (says St. James) there is confusion, and every
evil work, Iam. 3.16. And this may be in some places, where there is no
war, for there may be a striving of mental emulation, or a mere logomachy
of wordie contention, 2 Timothy 6.4. without any hostile force, or violence at
all; or if there be violence, it may fall out betwixt some few, who (by Law)
may be judged, and by degall force (if they be injurious and tumultuous)
suppressed: But the violence of war (as the wicked, that are most addicted to
it use the matter) is a lawless and boundless confusion, such as that
complained of by the Prophet Isaiah, The people shall be oppressed, every one
by another, every one by his neighbor; The child shall behave himself proudly
against the ancient, the base against the honorable, Esa. 3.5. And by the
Prophet Jeremy, They that were brought up in scarlet, were brought down to
embrace the dung-hills, Lament. 4. ver. 5. and a confusion wherein such as are
not meetly qualified for servants, will take upon them to be Masters ( servants
ruled over us, say the degraded Masters of Israel, by way of complaint, Lamen.
5.8.) and those usurping upstarts, when they are so lewd and dissolute, as no
good man would willingly endure them to lodge a night in his house, will
boisterously break open his doors, rifle all his Rooms, Closets, Chests,
Caskets and Cabinets, and if he were as rich as Job was in the height of his
prosperity, they will make him as poor as Job, in the depth of his adversity,
and much poorer too: For Job had the goods in his house spared from spoil or
pillage (though he lost all his come and cattle in the field) whereas many,
who carve out their own portion of other men's goods, by the Sword, have not
left the right owners, so much as a ragge to cover their nakedness. So in the
Country, and if they could advance to rifle some rich City, they that are not
worthy to be trusted for a yard of Inkle, would come into Shops, and measure
Velvet for themselves, by the We will enter and measure with the long Ell,
Phil. Com. l. 1. c. 11 p. 30. Upon which words the margin note is this, by the
long Ell, he means the Pike, wherewith Soldiers at the sack of a Town, use
to measure velvets, silks and cl^^ths.
long Ell (that is by the Pike) take it away and pay nothing for it.

And their lust will be as unruly as their thest, making no scruple to commit a
Rape upon a man's Wife or Daughter, or Maidservant, and in that wickedness
have some been so impudent, as violently to bind the Husband to a Bed-post,
while they abused his Wife before his face.

That was one part of the barbarous wrongs of the Irish Rebels, not long ago
committed as I have been confidently informed by a Gentleman of good credit.
And it is upon perpetual record in Cu^ France app^i^uissent, exis^^^^^^ (...)
^am viris, quam mulieribus, tempore missarum in Ec^^esia, ad ea^ (...)
Ecclesiam cum (...) festinatione concurrerunt, and inter^^cie^^es multos, and
depr^^^antes Ecclesiam* aspexerunt (inter caeteras) quandum feminam p^^^iram
(...), and e^e (...) ^orme, qu^^um ^^^in^ converetat ut audiret missas. Ad quam
Nebu^^^es satis intemperanter, in eadem ^cclesia^^^ denies, mox suae libidini
(ut er^nt ar^a^i, prostraverunt etiam di^e^ unus post aliam (...), donec mulier
^a^^^ara spir^tum exhalaret, Tho. Walsingham, H^^^. Edw. 3. p. 166.
Walsinghams History of England, that such an abominable filthy fact, as you
may read of (touching the Levites Concubine) Judge. 19. was committed, in King
Edward the thirds time upon a Holy Day at the time of Divine service by French
Soldiers, in a Church at Winchelsey in Sussex, taking their lustful turns
upon a beautiful woman, until they had turned her out of the world.

And commonly as those three Commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
commit adultery, Thou shall not steal are ranked together in the Law, so are
they violated together in the lawless violence of War, and so you find them
threatened together, in the 13. of Isaiah. Their children shall be dashed in
pieces before their eyes, their houses spoiled, and their Wives ravished, Isa.
13.16. and Maidens too, for that is complained of in the Lament. of Jeremy.
Chap. 5. Ver. 11.

For those that have but little wit and no grace, (which is the ordinary
qualification of mere mercinary Soldiers) let loose the reins of their
corruptions to all licentiousness, making so little account of the Laws, as
gave occasion of the common Proverb Inter arm^ silens Leges.
, The noise of Wars drownes the voice of Laws, which are sure to be trodden
under foot, while the Sword of violence has the upper-hand: with this accords
the complaint of oppressed Jerusalem in the Lament. of Jeremy, The Law is no
more, Lam. 2.9. no more in force, because (by force) suffered to be no more in
use: and when Laws are hush't, matters are hurried by a boishterous
prevalence, not governed by right or reason, Every one doing that which is
right in his own eyes, Judge. 17.6. and that will be whatsoever is wrong in the
eyes of God, and all good men.

But of all Wars that which is called Summum (Brute) nesas, civilia Bella,
fatemur. Cato apud Clandian. lib. 2.
Civil, has in the experience of all times proved most pernicious: when a
Kingdom is not united against a foreign foe, but divided against it self,
and by that division, in great danger of a desperate downfall, Mark. 3.24, 25.
It is called intestine War, which is as a burning in the bowels or
intrailes; and of all Civil Wars, the worst and most woeful that can be, is
that, which is managed under such Titles, as import the most perfect Unity, and
the greatest estrangement from warlike hostility. Such is that which is now
waged under the Colors, and with the sound of our English Standards and
Trumpets.

Which if it should go on, as the wicked wish, and all good-men abhor to
think of, would make this Kingdom, of a famous Sanctuary of peace, a Seminary
of discord, of a Granary or Storehouse of plenty (or garden of delights, as
Vere hortus noster deliciarum est, puteus inexhanstus est, Math. Paris, Histor
major. in Hen. 3. p. 936.
Pope Innocent the 4th. called it) a wilderness of Want; for such is the Wast
of War, as makes the Land which before an Army was as the Garden of Eden,
behind it to be no better then a desolate Wilderness, Joel 2. v. 3. which, (if
it long continue,) must needs bring forth a devouring famine throughout a very
spacious and plentiful Kingdom. And famine has made even pitiful women to
be cruel to their own children, as to act the parts of Butchers, Cooks and
guests at the same Mess, the flesh of their little ones, their little ones of
a span long, Lam. 4.10. and 2.20.

But there is another Famine (sometimes an effect of War,) much worse then
this, proceeding from the interruption of Religion, and the desolation of the
Sanctuary, which (though by the ungodly it be little regarded,) to such as are
truly Religious, will be matter of the heaviest apprehension that can be. How
will it afflict their hearts, to call to mind, what comforts they have enjoyed,
while they had the holy Gospel of peace, and civil peace with the Gospel,
what sweet refreshing they have formerly had, in the Communion of Saints, on
the Sabbaths, and other seasons of sacred Assemblies, yea even in their
meetings of humiliation, when by Civil War they see great Congregations are
dissolved, the Shepherds and their flocks separated, the Sheep scattered, if
not both he, and they butchered, without any glimpse of hope, (of a long time)
to be absolved from that great and terrible excommunication of Pastors and
People.

This is that Calamity which the Prophet Amos compares to a famine of bread,
(but makes it much more grievous) when men (says he) shall wander from Sea to
Sea, from North even to the Easst, and shall run too and fro, to seek the
word of the Lord, but (in that pure, and plenteous, and peaceable manner
wherein they have had it) shall not find it, Amos 8.11, 12.





The one, Of the lawfullnesse of War in general;

The other, What are the Conditions of lawful War in particular.

August cont. Faustum Manich. lib. 22. c 74.
Manicheans: but such also as have been honored in the Church, as Cyprian a
famous orthodox Divine, and a Martyr, who in his Epistle to Donatus, enveigheth
vehemently against it, as not only an unlawful thing, but as absurdly
sinful, and inhumane; Homicidium cum admittunt singuli, crimen est, virtus
voca^^^, cum public geritur; impunitatem sceleribus acquiret, non Innocentiae
ratio, sed sevitiae magnitude. Cyprian. Epist. lib. 2. cp. 2. p. 7. edit.
Paris. 1633.
when any (says he) commits a single Murder, it is a Crime, a Virtue, when
the like is done by many; and then not respect of innocence, but magnitude of
the mischief procures impunity to it: and they make Vt quis possit occidere,
usus est, ars est. Ibidem.
an use of it, and Art of it, (says he) and cruelty is not only committed, but
taught; Scel^^ non tentum geritur, sed and docetur, quid potest inhumanius,
quid acerbius dici* disciplina est ut perimere quis possi^, and gloria est,
quod perimit. Ibidem.
what can be called more inhumane or more grievous, then that men should make
it a discipline to destroy men, and a glory when they have destroyed them.

And Lactantius being (in disposition answerable to his Name,) a mild and
milken man, abhorring bloodshed, thought it was not lawful, for a Neque
milltare just^ licebit, enjus militia est ipsa Iustitia, Lactan instit. lib 6.
cap. 10.
Just man to be a Warrior, whose Justice was to be his Warfare: and his
tenderness of nature, made him so partial to pity, so unjust to Justice,
that he held, a just man should Neque vere ^conser^ quenq^^^, crimine capitali,
quia ^ibil distat, utrum verbo, aut serro pot^^^ occidas; quoni^^^ occisie ipsa
p^^hibe^^^ Ibidem.
not be a witness against any one in a Capital crime: for (said he) killing
being forbidden, it is all one, whether one kill another, with a Sword or with
a word.

Of later times, some of the more moderate Papists, have written against it, as
Cornelius, Cornelt Agrip; de vanttat. sciens. cap. 79.
Agrippa, Jo: Ferus in 4to. Lib. commen. in Math: super. v. 52. cap. 26.
Ferus, Erasin. Epist Anton. a Bergis. lib. 2. ep. 27. Annotat. in Luc cap. 3.
and c. 22. Bnchirid. Militis Christ ian: pas sim. Chiliad. Adag. Vulce Bellum
inexpertis, page 256. typis wechel An. 1629.
Erasmus, but especially Erasmus, who diverse times, in his Books, has made an
assault with his Pen, upon the profession and practice of War; and has pursued
the quarrel against it, sometimes in very large discourses, and by some of the
Anabaptist: Melancthon in loc. commun. cap. de Magistrate.
most rigid Antipapists, it has been condemned, as unlawful, though for the
most part, the later sort of Enemies to the enmity of War, have disallowed it
not simply, or universally to all the godly, in all times, but unto Christians
only under the time of the Gospel.

But most of the best, and most Judicious Divines, in all ages have been of
the contrary judgment, and not without good reason: for

First The holiest and most accepted with God in the old Testament, have been
Warriors, as Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, David, and others.

Secondly, If the profession, and practice of War were utterly unlawful, it
must be, because it is inconsistent with holiness, but that it is not, as it
is plain, Deuteronomy. 23. where it is said: The Lord thy God walks in the midst of
thy Camp, to deliver thee, and give up thine enemies before thee, therefore
shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away
from thee, ver. 14. and I know no cause, but the Camp may be as holy as the
Church, nay a Camp may be a Church, so was the Camp of Constantine, and
Theodosius, and of many other godly Warriors in their times, but very good
reason, why a Soldier should be very holy, and it is, because he is by his
Adventures of his life, to account himself as a daily dying man, and the
consideration of that, may make him so penitent for offenses past, and so
provident for his future happiness, that (betwixt both) his life while it
lasts, may be more religious, and his death when it comes more advantageous.

Thirdly, For those that allow war to the Jews and deny it to the Christians
under the Gospel, they may be refuted.

First, By the example of the Centurion, Math. 8. who by his own authority,
and command over Soldiers, illustrated the power of Christ over the creatures,
in such sort, as that our Savior, (without any touch of reproach) to his
profession, gave this praise of his faith, I have not found so great faith, no
not in Israel, ver. 10. And of Cornelius (the Centurion of the Italian band)
the testimony (given by the Holy Ghost) is, That he was a devout man, one that
feared God with all his house, who gave much alms to the people, and prayed to
God always, Act. 10.1, 2. and his Military calling is made no exception to his
great commendation, because it gave no impediment to his holy conversation.

Secondly, When in the third of Luke, the Soldiers (with others) came to John
Baptist, as Disciples to a Master to be instructed, what to do, he returned
them this answer: Do violence to noman, neither accuse any man falsely, and be
content with your wages, ver. 14. The first prohibition may seem to bind them
to the peace, and so to require a renunciation of their military profession,
but it is to be understood of private or irregular violence, and not of such
force as is exercised according to the rule and discipline of war, but the
last part of his advice, (which bids them to be content with their wages)
allows them to take wages, and if, he allow them to take the wages of
Soldiers, he allows them to do the work of Soldiers.

Thirdly, The Magistrate has the power of the Sword, Romans 13.4. not only
against one single offender, but against many, if many deserve it, and to do
Justice upon many, may require many Swords (so many as may make up a whole
Army) and if there be military force raised to hinder justice, there may
military force be used to pursue it to effect.

Fourthly, as it is lawful, by the dictate of nature, for a private man to
defend himself against an hostile assault of a private man, so it may be
lawful for a number of men assaulted or endangered, by an Army of enemies (by
force of arms in a Military manner) to free themselves from their oppression
and tyranny.

Fifthly, If any people or kingdom should disclaim all use of Arms, in such a
case they could not long subsist, in any condition of safety, from invasion or
assault: for such a tame disposition, would give advantage to invite (...)
enemy to set upon them, and give them opportunity either to inslave them, or to
slay them: As we see by the example of the Jews, superstitiously forsaking
their own just defense on the Sabbath day, whereby they were exposed to the
spoil of those that hated them, 1 Match. 12. from ver. 33. to 41. and by such
deserting of a just defense, may men betray themselves, their lives, Laws,
Liberties and Estates, into the hands of ambitious or bloody enemies, which by
the light of nature they are obliged with all their power to preserve.

Sixthly, God has many times showed his approbation of war, on the better
part, by miraculous assistance to it, and resistance and confusion of the
contrary party, and that since the publishing and spreading of the Doctrine of
Christ: whereof there are many examples in Ecclesiastical Tert Apolog c. 5
Euscb in vita Constant. 1969 Eccles. Hest. l. 9. c. 10 Angust. de Civ. Dei. l.
5. cap. 26. Quest. 2.
Authors. And these reasons are of force, as well in the time of the Gospel,
as under the law, or before it.

Now for the conditions of war, which may qualify it, against just exception.

First, No war can be lawful without the allowance of lawful authority, and
the authority that must allow it, is only that, which is legislative, or a
law-making authority.

Secondly, For the cause of it, it must be just, and not only just, but it must
be weighty too, for every just cause is not sufficient warrant for a war.

A third condition of lawful war is, a good end or ^ime in it, it must not
be undertaken, either for ambition or revenge, or prey or pillage, but as
Christians must pray, so Christian Soldiers must fight, That they may lead a
Merito in terra homini non gloria, sed pax est quaerenda, pax cum Deo, pax cum
proximo, pax cum seipso. Bernard. in Fest. Omnium Sanct. Sermon. 5. call. 297.
peaceable and quiet life, in all godliness and honesty, 2 Timothy 2. and v. 2.

Fourthly, As the end must be good, so must the means and manner of mannaging
the War (the way to that end) be good also: The innocent (as much as may be)
must be spared, and none must be made guilty, (that is not) that he may be
ruined, which John Baptist might mean, when he said to the Soldiers, Accuse
no man falsely; Call him not Traitor or Rebel, that you may have a pretense to
spoil him, when he is a true Subject to his Sovereign, a true Patriot to his
Country, and the Camp must be well disciplined, as well in a religious, as a
Military manner, lest Nostris peccatis barbars fortes sunt, nostris vitijs
Romanus superatur exerci^us. Hieron. Epit. Nepot. Tom. 1. p. 27.
the sins of those, who have the better cause, should fight on the enemies
side, against themselves, and in the Name of the Lord of Hosts must the Banner
be set up, Psalm. 20.5. and Petitions put up for those that fight by them that
fight not, Exodus 17.11, 12. that the success of the battle may be swayed on
the better side.

Fifthly, For the season of war, it must not be taken up too soon, nor too
hastily until other means of peace and Justice have been tried to prevent it,
and those means proved vain and frustrate. The Dlci vix potest quam multa
sunt, quae antea fieri oportet, quam ad bane extremam rationem devenire. Cic^r.
Orat. pro Qu^ (...) 30.
Orato^^ well said, There are many things to be done before matters are to be
put to an undoing extremity: Wherefore is was an Act. of more pride then
prudence, an argument rather of rashness then valor, (like that of Valor.
Max. lib. 9. c. 3.
Semiramis, who hearing that the Babylonians rebelled, while she was dressing
up her head, went presently, partly dressed and partly undrest to the wars
without any more preparation, either for pacification or suppression of them)
in our King Walsingham Hypod. Neustriae.
Richard the first, who being told (as he sat at Supper) that the French King
had besieged his Town of Vernoil in Normandy, protested that he would not
turn his back, until he had confronted the French, and thereupon he caused
the wall of his Palace, that was before him, to be broken down toward the
South, and posted to the Seacoast immediately into Normandy.

Such inconsiderate quickness proves (many times) as unhappy, as an overhasty
birth, the design in such cases does commonly miscarry, and (sometimes) works
as much misery to the undertaker, as the might and malice of the enemy could
do: So did the precipitation of Cambyses, who for want of due providence and
provision for his Army, within a few days brought a fearful famine upon it,
so that his Soldiers were soon put to it, to cast lots, Cum sortirenter
milites ejus, quis male periret, quis peius viveret. Senec. de tra lib. 3 c. 20
who should die an evil death, or to avoid that do worse, by preying on
another life, to preserve his own.

Sixthly, and lastly, when the War is ended, there should be an end of all
warlike enmity, as Post acies, odijs idem qui terminus armis, Claudian.
Claudian speaks in the praise of Theodosius, whose arms and anger, he used
to put-off at the same period of war.

With these conditions is war not only lawful, but so necessary, that to
forbear it is unlawful, and so he that can and will not assist in it (to his
power) comes under the curse of Meroz, Judge. 5. Curseye Meroz, curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof; because they came not to help the Lord, to
help the Lord against the mighty, v. 23. And of the Prophet Jeremy, speaking of
the destruction of Moab, Cursed be he that keeps back his Sword from blood,
Jer. 48.10. If he be a man sit for war, to do execution upon the wicked; and
the more wicked the enemy is, the more warrantable is the war, the more
necessary the resolution to withstand him.

For though war it self be a grievous calamity, yet if the enemy be not
courageously resisted, in his own way of violence, a worse thing then war
will follow upon it, that is perpetual tyranny and slavery upon the
consciences and persons of the vanquished, so that the evil of war, both
concomitant with it, and consequent upon it, well considered, may serve as
incentives of courage, to ingenious and generous spirits, to resist it, to
repel it, since a noble death (especially for him whose reward is in Heaven)
is much rather to be chosen then an ignominious and miserable life.

work for their good, Romans 8.28. And there is nothing, no not war, though it
be as bad as has been said, but may be so handled, as may serve for their
benefit.

That it may be so (in respect of the precedent Discourse) I shall now
endeavor to apply it so.

As 1. To cast us down by a lowly humiliation of our selves. 2. To raise up in
us a just indignation against the causes of war. 3. To uphold those in due
reputation, who are friends to peace. 4. To exhort the better sort, to be at
unity among themselves. 5. To reprove those who desert their own side, and take
part with the adversaries, both of their Religion and Country.

For the first, While we think of all this evil, which partly is come upon
us, and the rest and worst may follow after, if the war (which God forbid)
should proceed to the utmost period, how can we but lament the loss of our
peace, and repent for our ingratitude, for so great a blessing, as (for the
greatest part of an 100. years) our kingdom has both enjoyed and abused; and
for our want of compassion, to our distressed brethren abroad; the relation of
whose miserable condition we have read of, heard and talked of, but seldom
taken to heart, either by a sympathy of sorrow with them, or hearty
supplication for them.

And secondly, how can we but set our hearts against those mischievous
make-bates, who have robbed us of so precious a Jewel as Peace, and broken us
in pieces, by their distracting devices, which have set us in a way of
destructive Commotion against one another. And who be they? Besides our sins
(which I shall have occasion to complain of, in the answer to the Question)
there be many, who have done very much ill service in secret, to so pernicious
a purpose; but the most pestilent enemies of our public peace, are they in
whom all Malignant motives are concurrent: I mean the Papists, for they have
been of old, and ever will be the most bold and busy Incendiaries in all
Protestant States, by them have been cast about the Coals of contention among
us, which now they have blown up into this dangerous combustion.

It is the principal Maxim of those (who would be greatest in Ecclesiastical
and Temporal preeminence all over the Christian world, and the truly Catholic
craft and ambition of the falsely called Catholic Religion to devide those
into as many fractions as they can, over whom they desire to domineere by
united Tyranny; and according to that rule, they have acted the parts of
subtle Seperatists (in an active sense) sowing the Tares of strife, betwixt
several States and Kingdoms, They entered the State in disguise, and
counterfeited letters, not only in the names of particular, persons but of
whole Societies, as of the Republike of Genoa, and the city of Verona. Hist of
the quarrels of Pope Paul the fifth with the State of Venice. l. 2. p. 134.
as the Jesuits did to advance the Popes quarrel against the Venetians: and
in the same State laboring to fill the minds of Governors with jealousies and
suspicions, and to alienate their affections from each other, who should be as
one man, in joint considerations and cares for the public happiness. And for
the people, they ply them with artificial fomentations of different fancies
and opinions, to raise an hearty disaffection betwixt them, which may put them
upon a prosecution of contrary designs, and (when opportunity serves) may
raise them up in open war against one another.

To this purpose were the Instructions given by Cardinal Allen at Rhemes, anno
1579. to such Popish Seducers as then were to be sent from the Seminary in
France into England, to withdraw the people of the Kingdom from their due
obedience, and to make way for their great project of perdition in 88. by
deviding them, under the titles of Protestant and Puritan, and provoking them
(under those different denominations) to real and mutual both hate and
contempt: which I take not upon trust from any private report, nor from that
great and lying Author. [They say] but upon the authority of an Archbishop
(in this case of very great moment) avowing it to the face of a Popish
Adversary, and divulging it to public intelligence in print, in these words.
Archbishop. Abbot his Answer to Duct. Hills 3d reason p 103.
If you chance to deal with a Puritan (says that Cardinal) you must say,
truly (Brother) for you there is more hope, then for those that be
Protestants; because they (for fear of the Prince and the Law) are ready to
say any thing; and therefore (me thinks they be Atheists) but for you there
is more hope, being either hot or cold; If you deal with a Protestant, tell
him there is more hope of him, then of rash haire-brain'd Puritanes, because
they (with Religion) have put off all humanity, and civility with all other
good manners, who would not think that for such mischievous devices, this head
of Allens was soon after thought worthy to be covered with a Cardinals Hat? So
far the Archbishop.

Here I shall crave leave of the more knowing and more observing part of this
Auditory, that I may descend to the Information of the weaker sort of people
(for their better warning, who either have not read, or do not remember or not
consider, or cannot apply the Plots of the Papists to the present condition of
our time and State) of the crafty and cruel solicitations of that party, to
enkindle the fire of warin Ireland, and from thence (notwithstanding all the
water betwixt us and that Kingdom) to disperse it abroad ver all the Counties
of England, as now they have done.

And to this purpose they have impudently given out in Ireland; Sometimes The
Irish Remonstrance. p. 5, 48, 4^, 77.
that His Majesty was personally (though disguised) present with the Rebels
there; Sometimes Ibid. p. 6.
that he was dead, and that the young King went to Mass; but most commonly,
that which they did was by the Ibid p. 45, 48, 56
Kings authority, and that they had the Broad-Seale for it, and that it was the
Kings pleasure Ibid p 68.
that all the English should be banished and loose their goods, because the
Queens Priest was hanged before her face. And that there was a Covenant
(betwixt the Irish and the Scots upon these terms) that the Irish should
never take part with the English against the Scots, nor the Scots with the
English against the Irish; And Ibid. p. 38.
that all the Scottish Nation was joined (with them) for the extirpation of the
English: So that the Ibid.
Scots were to leave never a drop of English blood in England, and that the
Irish had command to leave never a drop of English blood in Ireland; and that
(for that purpose) they had the Ibid.
Earl of Argiles hand, together with the hands of the greatest part of the
prime Nobility of Scotland.

And that many might more readily come into an Association in their damnable
League, and might carry it on with more courage, and higher hope of happy
success, they coined such comfortable Lies as these. That there was an Army to
come to their aid from Spain, Ibid p. 10.
another (of no fewer then 40000.) from France, another from Ibid
Flanders, that Ibid p. 54.
Dublin was taken, and that the distressed in Ireland might have no hope of
succor in England, or Scotland, they told them, that there was the like Ibid.
p. 35.
stirs in both these Kingdoms: meaning that the Papists pursued, and
prevailed over the Protestants there, as they did in Ireland: a thing then (no
doubt) both in their desire, and design, and like to be also in their
endeavor, when they might begin with hope, to go on with success.

And that they might have the more color for their bloody combination, these
seditious Seeds-men gave out, that the Puritan Parliament in England was the
cause of all this; in that they have made an Ibid. p. 4^.
Act, that all Papists in Ireland must go to Church, or otherwise be hanged at
their own doors: and therefore they began with the Protestants first, least
they should begin with them, who had resolved to Ibid. p. 35, 45.
murder all the Papists throughout the Kingdom, and yet (like odious
hypocrites as they be) they sometimes Ibid.
pretended, that if the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (that last was) had not been
put to death, by the Parliament, they had not made this Insurrection: whereas
(indeed,) they held and hated him, as the most heavy-handed Deputy, that was
set over them, (though Protestants had as great cause to complain of the
weight of his hand, as Papists had, if not greater) and plotted this mischief
(as upon Confession is recorded) Ibid. p. 35. ^^.
seventeene years before their Rebellion brake out.

Their hatred of the best Protestants, under the name of Puritans is notorious
throughout the three Kingdom, of England, Scotland and Ireland: but they hate
them most, where they think they are most able to do them hurt, that is in
Parliament: and therefore they have been always forward to falsify their Acts
and Intentions, to blast that venerable Assembly with the blackest calumny they
can conceive, and to do as desperate acts against them as the Devil himself
can put into their heads.

King James premonit p. 328.
King James charge them with three Lies together of the Act of Parliament,
concerning the Oath of Allegiance, and all the Kingdom, yea all the Christian
world knows their devilish malignity toward that most Honorable Court in
the Powder Plot, King James his second Speech in Parliament. p. 501.
purposely devised against the place of their meeting, that where the crull
Laws (as they call them) were made against their Religion, both place and
persons, should be blown up at once, which plot, had it taken effect, they
purposed to have laid it on the Speeds Chron. lib. 10. p. 1252. col 2.
Puritans.

And what they could not then bring about, by that secret satanicall treachery,
they have of late attempted and undertaken by open War, and the War we now
see translated out of Irish into English, and their hate and spite written (in
Capital Letters) with the blood of English Protestants.

I am not so vainly presumptuous, as to present such particulars as these, to
instruct the sage and prudent Senators of this most High and Honorable Court,
(who see, and foresee, a thousand times more, and further into the Popish
mystery of Iniquity, (with all the Engines that are working under it,) then many
thousands of such private persons as my self can possible conceive; but (by
such a breviate as I have brought in) to make some more cautelous resentment of
Popish plots in the common people and of their common peril, thereby, if there
be not a very watchful jealousy in the great Counsel of the Kingdom, over
them, and a zealous and unanimous industry of all true-hearted Protestants, to
disappoint them; but I shall meet with them again before we part.

Thirdly, The Miseries and Mischiefs of War, being such as have been showed,
it cannot but well become every good and wise man to show himself disaffected
to it, and much troubled for it, as well as by it. So did the Prophet (when he
bewailed the condition of his time by the oppression and desolation of War,
as out of this Chapter I have told you) and to do all good offices they can to
promote peace, as the Parliament by their many humble and pressing Petitions,
and other prudent addresses to his Majesty, have endeavored to do: yet so (as
well became their piety and prudence) as to desire no peace but such an one, as
whosoever treats of it admits of God to be of the Quorum in it, and (in
ballacing the conditions on both sides) will suffer his glory and the
conscionable discharge of their trust (to the King and Kingdom) to make down
weight in the final determination thereof: against which an agreement would
prove but a conspiracy, for betraying of trust. But for a peace upon such
terms as those we now mentioned, that Englishman who would not like Jonah
(when to appease a tempest and save a Ship from splitting, he was content to be
cast into and swallowed up of the Sea, Ion. 1.12.) willingly lay down his
life, is not worthy to live.

And the more zealous should every one be of making up the breach of peace, by
how much more worthy they are who are divided, and betwixt whom the nearest
Union that can be, is required, if there were but a single separation, of a
pair of excellent Friends, we should have an affectionate sorrow in our hearts
for their sakes: as Heu mibi qui vos simul i^u^nire nonpossu^^, ut inovear, ut
doleo. ut Itmeo, proc^derem ad pe les vestros, sterem quant^ valerem, rogarem
quaotu a amarem, nu^^ utrumque vestra pro setpso, nunc utrumque pro alterutro
and pro alijs ac maxi are infi^mu -- qut vos tanquam in Theatro vitae bujus cum
mag^o sur pericu^o. pectant. August. Epi^l. (...) Tom. 20 inter opera H^eron p
350. and 391.
Augustine passionately expressed, upon the quarrels and invectives betwixt
Hierom and Ruffinus, Woe is me (says he) that I cannot find you both
together, how am I moved? how am I grieved? how do I fear, how willing would
I be to fall down at your feet, I would weep according to my power, and
beg according to my love, now of the one for the other, and then of both for
both, and for others also, who with great peril and scandal see you, (as in a
Theater) contesting and contending as Enemies. Hoc magnum and triste naraculum
est, ab am^^^^ijs talibus a I has mimt^^^as per to n^sse. (...).
It is a great and a sad Miracle, (says he) from such Amity as has been to be
changed to such emnity as is now betwixt you; And yet this Emnity was not
exercised, with the Pike, but with the Pen, the dropps that were spilt (in
their War) were not dropps of blood, but of Ink.

How would the good man have been grieved to have seen such an estrangement,
betwixt so great and (of himself) so good a King as our dread Sovereign, and
so wise and worthy a Counsel as the High Parliament? how would his heart have
melted into tender commiseration, of so many slain, so many spoiled, and
ruined (for this world) so great a desolation, as is made in many parts, of
this late flourishing Kingdom, by a most unnatural War, and that (under
adverse Titles) in their Names, who are or should be, as nearly allied and
linked together, as the engagements of Religion, Law, Conscience, Prudence and
Fidelity to God and man can possibly make them.

When a man sees Armies prepared, it is a madness (as the Prat a mentis, cu^^
ac^em videres (...) cogirare (...). O^^t de Dejo taro (...) 6
Orator sa^^ (...) o expect a peace?

Augustines sincerity, and charity, did officiate (as Chaplains) and that
while persuasions to peace are proposed on the one side, incentives to war
were not sounded on the other.

Of the Parliaments propension to peace (by offering and accepting of such
conditions as may consist, with the great trust reposed in them, (both for the
reformation of matters amiss in Church and State, and preservation of their
own privileges, and the peoples rights and Liberties.) I have intimated enough
already, for this time and place, there can be no doubt for their part in this
Audience, no need therefore here, either to give intelligence, or make apology
on their behalf, though elsewhere there may be use of both.

Thirdly, For his Majesty's part (to whom humble addresses of reconciliation
have been many times presented, and in whose power it was and yet is to crown
them all with a comfortable conclusion.) We have had so many emphaticall
professions not only of his peaceable mind toward the Parliament, but of his
pitiful disposition toward all his people, that we cannot but wonder by what
impostures, or presumptions in usurping his power and abusing his name, his
subjects, (especially those who in a common calamity should have been severed
from the common sort by a mark of security, as Ezekiel. 9.46.) have suffered, and
yet do suffer so woeful a change of their Peace into War, and of prosperity
into misery, as of late (under pretense of his Commands, or Commissions) they
have done. His Majesty's expresses (such as become a true The Kings of
Palestine were commonly called Abimelechs, a Name compounded of benignity and
Authority, signifying a Father and a King, for Rulers (and among them Kings are
(...)) are Fathers to such as are subordinate to them, as a King ^^.18 Job
29.16. and under that Title they are to be honored by the fifth Commandment,
whereby is employed that they must rule with indulgence as Fathers, and their
Subjects obey with benevolence as children.
Abimilech (that is both a Father and a King, the Royal Son and Heir of
him, who gloried in the Title [Rex Pacificus,] and said King James true Laws of
free-Monarchy, page 195. of his works in Folio.
a King by the Law of Nature, becomes anaturall Father to his Lieges at his
Coronation) are as follows, that So in his Majesty's answer to the
Parliaments Petition, and reasons against his going into Ire-land. p 9.
his life (when it is most pleasant is nothing so precious to him, as it is and
shall be; to govern his people with honor and Justice: In his Majesty's
Answer to the Declaration of both Houses concerning H^ll, sent May, 4. 1642. p.
17.
that it is not in the power of any person, to incline him to take Arms
against his Parliament, and miserably to imbroyle this Kingdom in a Civil
War, and that his Affections abhor, and his heart bleeds at the
apprehension of Civil War, and he does engage himself (in the word of a
King) In the second Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom, p. 4.
That the security of all and every one of the Parliament from violence is, and
ever shall be, as much as his care to preserve himself, and his children: and
Declarat: Parliament. March 12 p 9.
that he will be as careful of their privileges; as of his own Prerogatives.
In his Speech to the Ministers and Freeholders assembled at Heworth Heath in
Yorkeshiere. June 3. 1642.
That in all his time (before the Parliament) having never caused the effusion
of one drop of blood, in his riper judgment in government, he will never open
such issues of blood, as might drown himself and his posterity in them His
Majesty's Answer to the desires and Propositions of both Houses, Feb: 3. 1642.
p 10.
, that he has given up all the faculties of his soul to an earnest desire of
Peace and reconciliation with his people. And we had experience of truth, as
well as of power, in the word of a King, Eccles. 8.4. in his Majesty's
accommodation of Accord with his Subjects of Scotland, which he professed when
he showed himself most displeased with them, in these words, His Majesty's
large Declaration upon the tumults of Scotland, p 5.
if some of their bad blood were shed, he should make account that the blood
was let out of his own veins, nor shall we (says he) draw one drop of it, in
any other case, then a faithful Physician will, and must do, for the
preservation of the whole body. And after a great deal of sharp expostulation
with them, in a Book consisting of 430. pages in Folio, he thus concludes.
Ibid p. 430
As we have found the aid and assistance of our loving Subjects toward this
Journey, so we heartily desire their prayers, all the time of our absence, for
a good success unto it, and that (if it be possible) we may return with
peace, and without the effusion of any drop of our Subjects blood.

Besides these gracious words he gave real proof of his Royal and Christian
compassion, in committing the Treaty of Pacification, unto such pious and
Honorable Lords, as whose consciences liked no compliance with the Popish
Religion, whose innocence was not afraid of peaceable Justice, whose wisdom
foresaw the destruction of two Kingdoms if they should assault one another
with Armed fury, which their goodness abhorred as his Majesty did.

And as David (when he was diverted by Abigail, from his design of destruction
of Nabal, and his family for his churlish ingratitude toward him:) blessed
God, and her, and her advice, for keeping him from coming to shed blood, 1 Samuel 24.32, 33. so his Majesty (though neither so rough or rash in a
resolution of revenge, as David was at that time) In his Majesty's Speech in
Parliament, November: 5. 1640.
gave thanks to those Lords for their pains, and industry before they had
brought their Mediation to an happy period: which I doubt not but he did more
fully, when afterward it speeded to a perfect accomplishment.

And though, (as Solomon says) the heart of a King is unsearchable, Prove.
25.2. Unsearchable by any, except by the King of Kings, we may probably
conceive, upon the consideration of and in conformity to such premises, that
when both the English and Scottish Armies were in Array (for a posture of
encounter) his Majesty might have such meditations as these.

These Soldiers on both sides, now ready to rush upon mutual mischief, are
my natural Subjects, my Subjects are the strength and honor of my State, if I
give the signal of assault, and set one Army against another, it is like to
be a bloody day, and the issue of blood (being opened in a warlike way,) will
not easily be stopped.

If it should thus begin between two neighboring Kingdoms, by their Vicinity,
they may ever find occasions to continue quarrels, and to seek revenge with
cruel rage and ruin one of another; and who shall sustain the greatest loss
at the last by such reciprocal slaughters but my self who am King of both
Kingdoms? If my Subjects kill up one another, my power will be much impaired,
my dignity diminished, for in the multitude of people is the Kings honor,
Prove. 14.28. and their diminution mydisgrace, for what is a King without his
people?

And if King Edward the Confessor, when his Captains promised, for his sake,
they would not leave one Dane alive, Cambdent Rem: p 214.
thought it better, to lead a private and unbloody life, then to be a King by
such bloody butcheries. It cannot but be much better for me, to preserve two
Kingdoms in peace and concord, and to continue a King (over two numerous
Nations) without blood-guiltinesse, then to commit them to a hostile conflict,
with hazard of great slaughter on both fides, and of mine own comfortable
enjoyment of both Kingdoms. And though they have given me occasion of a severe
contestation with them, yet if Ibid. p. 242.
we Princes (as one of my renowned Predecessors wisely said (it was K. Henry
the seventh) should take every occasion that is offered, the world should never
be quiet, but wearied with continual Wars.

And for the cause of this quarrel, of my Scottish Subjects, it is a question
of Rights and Privileges and lawful liberties of their consciences, persons
and estates, fitter to be decided by the prudence of Parliamentary
Commissioners, then by the violence of Military executioners, whose Sword has
not an eye, to see any difference, between right and wrong, nor can show in the
last resolution it makes, which side had the better cause, or better mind,
either in an open War, or in a private Duel, or Bishop Hall, Decad. 4. Ep.
2. page 338.
single Combat: though in times and places, (where Popery has prevailed, it
has oftentimes, been taken up for a trial of truth and right. Once indeed did
that Prince of most admired prudence Solomon call for a Sword to decide a
controversy betwixt two mothers, pleading about their right to a living and a
dead child, 1 King. 3.24. but he did not use it as a Sword, nor did he mean
it, but only (by pretending peril to the living child) to discover the true
mother, both of the living and the dead, by the evidence of her compassion who
would rather have none of it at all, then not all of it alive.

And if one child were so tenderly beloved by a true mother, I that am a true
Father (not a tyrannical Usurper) of my people, cannot but be more chary of
many thousands of them, then to put them into a bloody combustion among
themselves. And my royal Father, who (for his wisdom) has been magnified as
a second Solomon is highly Sir W. Rawleigh Hist. world. l. 5 c. 3. 17.
commended, For having done a most Kingly and Christian-like deed in Scotland,
which the most renowned of all his Predecessors could never do, in beating
down and extinguishing that hereditary prosecution of malice (called the
deadly feud) A conquest which shall give him the honor and power of kingly
prudence for evermore.

And that done, and both Scotland and England united in his Royal Right, K
James his Speech in Parliament, anno 1603. p. 488, 489. and in his third Speech
in White-ball, p. 511.
he proposed and zealously pursued their union under the general title of
great Britain. And I will not so degenerate from his gracious disposition, as
to set them at emnitie, whom he so desired to settle in unity.

And though the Soldiers be ready and forward to fight, better it were that
the most valiant Captains should yield to the persuasions of a weak woman, as
Plut. in the life of Coriolanus, p. 239.
Coriolanus to his Mother Volumnia, or that two complete Armies (ready to dash
one with another,) should suffer their manhood to be overcome by female
mediation; (as did the Armies of King Servce French inventor, p. 193.
Edward the third, and King Philip of France,) then that they should make such
a confusion and dashing together, as might be like to break both in pieces,
and to bring them to a feebleness which might make them, and perhaps my self
and my posterity with them, a prey to that party whose ambition and bloodinesse
have no bounds, but such as an over-prevalent power does force upon them.

Such was His Majesty's good meaning to his Subjects of Scotland (published in
print, not much above Auno 1639.
two years ago) which may be a just ground of all, that has bin hitherto said
in his Name, and we have no cause to conceive that his goodness and kindness
should be less to his people of England, then to them: since though his
Majesty was not borne among us, he is pleased to make his choice to live among
us, as accounting this Kingdom, for the chief part of his Royal birthright,
and therefore fixing his abode here.

And I doubt not but the lives of his true Christian Subjects in common (both
as Christians, according to the pious compassion of Charles the Emperor,
Bu^^^lz. Jud. chronolog ad ^^. 1541. p. ^^.
Who had rather save one Christian, then kill a thousand Moors or Turks or
other perfidious enemies) and as Subjects to whom he has the relation of a
father (as has been showed) may be still precious in his sight (his own sight
I mean, not in others who look upon a Protestant Parliament, and people with
blood-shotten-eyes) whereby he may more comfortably remember, that Mavult
commemor are se (cum posser perdere) p^per^^sse, quam cum parcere potuerit,
perardisse, C^cer Orat pro Quint. ^. 3. p. 2.
He has spared their blood, when he might have spilled it, then contrariwise
that he has killed, where he might have saved alive.

4. Preparations to war are many times (and always should be) made with
purposes of peace (as we have observed before) which each party is so much the
more engaged to accept of (upon so honorable terms) as they make more
profession of Justice and Religion.

5. If we saw no hope of peace by any mediation of man or woman, we may yet
desire it, pray for it, and hope to speed in our prayers, by the favor of God
to his people, and his power over such as are most powerful by the Sword: for
he has overruled, not only the hands, but the minds of such, as have been
most forward for war, as in the difference betwixt Frederick the Prince
Elector of Saxony, and another Germane Prince; when Frederick prepared war
against him, and he (without any preparations to that purpose) had resolved to
commit his cause wholly to God; Bucholz Iud. chron. ad An. 2450. p. 420.
Let another man (said he) be so mad (but I will not) as to make war with him
who commits his cause unto God.

Now if our desires, endeavors and hopes of peace (which we should keep, if
it were possible with all the world, Romans 12.18.) should all prove frustrate,
we must by our Christian Prudence do our best to make a virtue of necessity,
and as cunning Physicians do our endeavor to turn a poison into a Medicine,
then

For a fourth Application of the Point (the sharp point of the Sword of war)
let it be our warning against division among all those, whom the adverse power
would unite in a society of sufferings, if they should successefully proceed;
and how many are they?

All true Protestants must look for nothing less from Papists, if (they get
the better) then the loss of their liberty of conscience, and of their
persons, their lively-hoods and lives; the regular and conscionable Christian
must expect scorns and contumelies of all kinds, and he is like also to have
his ears, and heart smitten with execrable oaths and blasphemies of impious
Atheists; the civil, sober and temperate man, shall be urged, and it may be
forced to swallow down needless draughts (as an Horse does a drench) by
domineering drunkards; the rich man shall be sure to be made a prey to the
needy, or greedy Soldiers, whose luxury will lavish out in a day or night,
what a provident worldling is laying up all a whole years together: And if he
have a wife or daughter, whom their carnal appetite will not refuse for a
familiar companion, he may suffer in the sensual and shameful abuse of their
persons; and he that has but his personal liberty to loose, shall if war
conquer him be made a slave to the conqueror.

If therefore men have any private emulation or exception against each other,
they must now set them aside, as the creatures (in the Arc) laid by their
Antipathies within, because of the common danger of an inundation without; our
danger is much more then theirs, of drowning in the water: For ours is a
drowning in blood, and our reason and Religion both, oblige and enable us to be
more chary of our mutual concord, and more ready to cement up every little
chinke in the Fabric of our State: we should now (above all times) unite our
hearts in affectionate well wishings to the common welfare, our heads in a
communion of counsels and cares to recover it, and our hands for support of our
selves, and suppression of those, who (if they had us in their power) would
fall upon us more fiercely then the evening Wolves, ( Hab. 1.8.) upon aprey of
fatted lambs.

And is this a time for the Protestants of England to fall to variance among
themselves? to break in pieces, and as it were to crumble away into petty
breaches of particular Societies, into new Sects and Factions? Is it a time for
any of them to desert the common cause of their Brethren, by Nation and
Religion, and against them both to partake with Papists, and to put to their
helping hand on their side, not considering or not caring (what shallow heads
or hollow hearts have they the whiles) what intent first set their wheels in
motion, or what event is hoped for and pursued by the furious driver of that
Hell-fiery Chariot of Popery, which is no less nor better, then to wrap up
their native Country in most lamentable ruin, and to bring down the straight
and golden Scepter of Jesus Christ (by which he governs his Church) under the
sway of the crooked and wooden Crosier of Antichrist, who pretends title to the
chief office of a Pastor of Christ's flock, but acts the part of a wolf toward
the Sheep of his fold.

They could not surely be so wanting, much less so adverse to so weighty a
cause in so clear a case, so necessarily requiring a most cordial union of us
all, if they considered how our adversaries, though of It is ordered and est
ablished, and that (upon pain of the high, est punishment to be inflicted by
authority of this Assembly) that every Roman Catholic, English, Welsh and
Scottish (who was of that profession before the troubles) who will join in the
present union, shall be preserved and cherished in his life, goods and estate,
as fully and freely as any native. So in the orders made at the Popish general
Assembly at Kilkenny, Octo. 24. 1642 Ord. 14. and Order 33
several Counties and Countries, are associated in an unreconcileable quarrel
against us, and all our fellow Professors of the same faith, And what they
have determined for the destruction of us all. It is worthy the notice of those
that have not read it in the Irish Remonstrance, and of their remembrance that
have read it, what order they have agreed upon for our confusion, which is this.

First, They have resolved to extirpate all the English out of Ireland, as has
been showed, Irish Remonstrance, p. 31.
That Kingdom settled and peopled only with sound Catholics (it is their title
not mine; for in very truth they are neither sound nor Catholic) Thirty
thousand men must be sent into England to join with the French and Spanish
forces, and the service (they should say the Sacrifice, for they mean a
slaughter of the English) in England performed, then they will jointly fall
upon Scotland, for the reducing of that Kingdom to the obedience of the Pope;
which being finished, they have engaged themselves to the King of Spain for
assisting him against the Hollanders, that was their plot, discovered by
examination taken upon Oath.

There is then more cause, that England, Scotland and the Netherlands should be
united in a league of mutual defense, then that we of this Kingdom should
first break asunder by division, and then break in upon each other with
enraged violence; For if all the crafty Counsels of Spain, of the Conclave of
the Pope and Cardinals, of the Congregations of Jesuits and other Assemblies
of pestilent Politicians (our sworn Enemies) should lay their heads together,
for an undoing device against us, they could not imagne any one more dangerous
and desperate, then that which we are now acting upon our selves; The Lord open
the eyes and turn the hearts of those in whose power it is, to found a Retreat
to this Martial fury: That English valor may be diverted from the ruin of
England to the recovery of Ireland, or if the Sword of war must be the Sword
of divine Justice, to avenge the quarrel of thy Covenant against a rebellious
people, Let it, O Lord, (we beseech thee) do most execution upon thine
obdurate enemies, and sway thou the victory upon their side, whose cause and
persons have better title to thine Almighty protection.

Thus far of the Question, How long shall I see, etc. as importing the
Prophets strong apprehension of, and vehement aversion from the evil of war.

Now of the Answer, For my people is foolish, they have not known me, they are
sottish children, they have none understanding, they are wise to do evil, but
to do good, they have no knowledge.

They neither know God nor acknowledge or glorify him as God, but set their
wits on work for wickedness, therein having a kind of cunning, (which the
unwise world calls wisdom) while they remain ignorant, inconsiderate, dull
and stupid toward the doing of good.

The words are considerable 1. In general. 2. In particular.

In general they contain two parts. 1. An Accusation, My people are, etc. 2.
An Exception, They are wise to do evil.

Under the accusation are comprehended two points of Importance. The one
expressed; The other implied; that which is expressed is the cause of the
calamities forementioned, For my people, or because my people is foolish, etc.
And that will direct us to a twofold Observation.

First, The one of the Malignant operations of sin, in procuring heavy
punishments upon a people.

2. The other the disgraceful denomination of sinners, or the contemptible
titles given unto them, as foolish, sottish, without knowledge or understanding.

The particular implied is the continuance of sin, for the Question being
expressly made of the continuance, How long? and implicitly of the cause; the
answer is satisfactory to both, showing not only, why the people are plagued,
but that so long they shall be plagued, until they be reformed: until the
cause of their sinful folly be removed, they shall not, or not in mercy be
eased of their misery; as long as they be so bad in their disposition toward
God, they must look for no better a condition from God.

First, For the cause in the 18. verse, the Indictment against them is framed
under other titles, Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto
thee, this thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto
thine heart. So likewise in the Lamentation of Jeremy. Jerusalem (says the
Prophet) has grievously sinned, therefore she is removed. Chap. 1. ver. 8.
And that it is not the peculiar case of Jerusalem, he shows in more general
terms: Wherefore does living man complain, and man for the punishment of his
sins? Lam. 3.39. or (as the Geneva has it) Wherefore is the living man
sorrowful? He suffers for his sins. And Jerusalem her self, as if she
made answer to some such Question as this, pleads not any excuse of her
ignorance, but clears Gods Justice, and freely and fully takes the
Accusation of her sins upon her self. The Lord is righteous, for I have
rebelled against his Commandments, Chapt. 1. ver. 18. We have transgressed and
thou have not pardoned, Chap. 3.42. Which is not to be understood of the people
only, but (with them) of the Prophets and the Priests, for the sins of her
Prophets, and the iniquity of her Priests, did Jerusalems misery come upon her,
Chap. 4.12. for the Prophets prophesied falsely, and the Priests bare rule by
their means, Jer. 5.31. And they ruled with bloody and unrighteous rigor, For
they shed the blood of the Just, in the midst of Jerusalem, Chapt. 4. ver. 13.
And in the 30. Chapter, God emphatically avoweth his own Justice against their
wickedness, in these words, I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity,
because thy sins were increased. Why criest thou for thine afflictions? Thy
sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were
inereased, I have done these things unto thee, ver. 14, 15.

So that we must not take this Text, though it impute ignorance unto these
Jews, to import any extenuation of their transgressions which may serve to
excuse them, either a toto, or a tanto, as sometimes ignorance is pleaded, by
way of argument, or inducement to compassion, and pardon, as it is by God
himself, in the Prophecy of Jonah, Should I not spare Nineveh, that great
City, wherein are more then sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern
between their right and their left hand, and also much Cattle? and by our
Savior, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.34. and as
S. Paul gives instance in his own case, I was before a blasphemer, and a
persecutour, and injurious: but I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly
in unbeleefe, 1 Timothy 1.13. for such ignorance was partly inevitable, partly
involuntary, but this was neither, and therefore it is urged rather by way of
aggravation, to augment their guilt: as in the first of Esaias, Hear O ye
Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and
brought up children, but they have rebelled against me; the Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters cribb, but Israel does not know, my people does
not consider; ah sinful Nation, a people laden with iniquity, etc. chap. 1.
ver. 2, 3, 4.

Now since the Prophet, the people, and God himself, so expressly put together
the cause and the effect, (sin and punishment) and that the punishment
expressed in the question, sin is implied in the Answer, for not to know and
acknowledge God, (as God) is a sin as sure as well as a folly, we must first
observe, the Malignant operation of sin in procuring punishment upon a
people, and it is doctrinely or historically so universally diffused throughout
the whole Bible, from Genesis 2.17. to Revelations 22.19. that (besides the
testimonies alleged) there will be no need of farther proof, (from divine
Authority) to confirm it, though some parts of it, do more fully clear and
press this point, then others do; as the 26. of Levit. the 28. of Deuteronomy. the
Lament. of Jeremy.

And for them who never read a leaf of these divine Dictates, as they have by
the light of nature discerned a great difference betwixt Virtue and Vice, (as
their Books of Ethics, or moral Philosophy sufficiently show) so have their
consciences cheared them up in well doing, and checked them for evil, Romans
2.15. and by the same light they have apprehended Ammian Marcelli (an Heathen
Soldier) observes the just judgment of the Almighty-powers in punishing
Maximinus and other bloody butchers. Marcel. hist. l. 25. c. 5. See also the
discourse in Plutarchs Moralls, de Sera numinis vindicta.
a divine Judge or Justiciarie, observing the minds, and ways of wicked men,
and imprinting his displeasure upon them, in outward plagues: and have thence
inferred their duty, to address themselves unto him in supplications, and
other means of pacification of his anger: as the Mariners (in whose Ship Jonah
would have sailed to Tharshish,) showed, by their inquiry by Lotts for the
guilty person who was the cause of the Tempest, Jonah cap. 1. ver. 5, 7. and by
the continual practice of the Heathens in sacrifices to the gods they served,
(acknowledging sin to be the cause of their common calamities,) and offering
them up for pacification of an offended Deity.

I need not then spend time, either in clearing of this observation by
examples, or assuring it by Authorities and reasons: nor will it be necessary,
to bring down the general guilt, and hurt of sin, by showing how
troublesome a thing it is in breaking peace betwixt God and man, Lament. 2.
ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and 17.21. chap. 3. ver. 3, 5. and 15. chap. 4.11. Esaias.
57.20. a man and his own conscience, and betwixt Man and Man in Foreign and
Civil War, Hab. 1.8. Esa. 19.2. this (I doubt not) is done to mine hand
already, neither is there cause I should be copious in application of it to
your consciences, since some of my reverend Brethren (I conceive) who have had
precedence before me in this place) have anticipated the delivery of this
doctrine, and driven it home to your hearts.

All I conceive requisite for this point at this time will be, to make a brief
Application of it, to our present state, and so to proceed to the other point,
of the folly of sin and sinners, which I suppose has been less insisted on
by any, (though it be not less worthy of prosecution at large, nor will be
less profitable to those that give due attendance unto it.)

First then for the present point, the guilt of sin being expressly showed
by this answer of God, to be the cause of all the evil (which was so grievous
to the Prophet.) It is our parts what tribulation soever light upon us, to give
God the glory of his Justice, without murmuring at any thing he does, or we
suffer under his correcting hand: and to make a free confession of our sins,
(without mincing) as Dan. 9. the holy Prophet having a joint apprehension of
the peoples provocation of God by their sins, and of Gods indignation against
them, expressed in his punishment of them, for that cause, makes his
confession to God in this manner, We have sinned and have committed iniquity,
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled: the abundant hatred of sin, in his
heart, made him so full in the mouth, with multiplication of words, of the same
sense, for the aggravation and detestation of sin: yet he goes on, we have
rebelled, even by departing from thy precepts, and from thy judgments, ver. 5.
and then he comes to the cause, whereby they came to such a guilt of sin, it
was from their refusal of their guidance, whom God had sent to lead them in
the right way, (and how could they but wander when they forsook the light)
neither have we harkened (says he) unto thy servants the prophets, which spoke
in thy Name, to our Kings, our Princes and our Fathers, and to all the people
of the land, ver. 6. he spares no person, great or mean, past or present,
ver. 6. Because of all this, he takes both the sin and the shame upon
himself and his Countrymen, and gives God the due glory of his own Justice
in their punishment. O Lord Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us
shame and confusion of face as at this day, because of their trespass that
they have trespassed against thee, ver. 7.

And from this generality of sinners and sins to descend to a search of
particulars in both, both for every man that sins, and every sin that he
commits: and then if we look back upon our precedent carriage toward God,
and his present dealing toward us, we may have cause to conceive, not only
that the burden of our sins (in common) have pressed him even as a Cart is
pressed with Sheaves, Amos 2. ver. 13. and that he has great cause in the
general, to ease himself by diseasing them, who overloaded him with such a
wicked weight, as he says he will do, Ah I will ease me of mine adversaries,
and avenge me of mine enemies, Esa. 1.24. But withal that there be some sins
in particular more provocative then others, which spur on vengeance to a
swifter pace; and those were come to some height, in our State, before these
calamities, (which many have felt, and all have feared) came down upon us, and
chiefly these three. First, Idolatry. Secondly, Profanation of the Sabbath.
Thirdly, Contempt of Gods most faithful servants; and then we shall proceed
to a confutation of the misconceits of the wicked touching the cause of
calamity, and so conclude with an apology for the godly.

First, For Idolatry, I will not tell you (of my self) how much it has
increased in a few years before the summons of the Honorable Senate now
assembled, you may receive information for that, See Ord p. 143, 144.
by better warrant, then any private or particular intelligencer can give, in
the First Remonstrance, p 18, 19.
first Remonstrance of the Parliament, in these words;

The Popish party enjoyed such exemptions from the Penal Laws, as amounted to
a Toleration, besides many other encouragements, and Court Favors: They had a
Secretary of State, Sir Francis Windebank, a powerful Agent for the speeding
of all their desires, a Popes Nuntio residing here to act and govern them
according to such influences as he received from Rome, and to intercede for
them with the most powerful concurrence of the Foreign Princes of that
Religion: By his autherity the Papists of all sorts, Nobility, Gentry, and
Clergy were convocated, after the manner of a Parliament; New Jurisdictions
were erected of Romish Archbishops, Taxes levied, another State molded within
this State independent in Government, contyary in interest and affection,
secretly corrupting the ignorant, or negligent professors of our Religion, and
closely uniting and combining themselves against such as were sound, in this
posture waiting for an opportunity by force to destroy those whom they could
not hope to seduce.

If compliance with Popery, should advance so many degrees, in every 12. or 13.
years space, as it has done since the year 1628. they that have been
solicited (for above threescore years) in vain, to abate some (at the best
indifferent) Ceremonies, for more conformity with the reformed Protestant
Churches, might within a Jubilee (of the A Iubile of 25. years, shortened from
50. by Sixth: 4. Anno 1475. Bucholz p. 425.
shortest size) become as complete Papists as any reside at Rome or Rhemes.

And what an incentive of wrath Idolatry is, we may conjecture, by the near
relation betwixt God and his people, as by the conjunction of Wedlock, Hose. 2.
ver. 16, 19. whence Idolatry is accounted by God spiritual whoredom; Ezekiel.
16. ver. 22, 26, 28, 32, 35, 38. Hose. 2.1, 2. which enkindleth the rage of
jealousy against the disloyal party, for jealousy, says Solomon, is the
rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of vengeance, he will not
regard any ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou give many
gifts, Prove. 6. ver. 34, 35.

And that the wrath of a jealous God, is not more remiss in such a case then
that of a jealous man, we may be sure of, by the patheticall expression of the
Prophet Nahum, God is jealous, and the Lord avengeth, the Lord avengeth, and is
furious, the Lord will take vengeance of his adversaries, and he reserveth
wrath for his enemies, Nah. 1.2. and he counts those rather his adversaries
and enemies, who break covenant with him, (as the Jews did in their
Idolatrous desertions of him) then the most notorious transgressors that never
entered covenant with him, as the Sodomites, and therefore does Jerusalem, or
the Prophet (in her Name complain,) the punishment of the iniquity of my
people, is greater then the punishment of the sin of Sodom, Lament. 4. ver.
6. and so indeed it was, if we limit our consideration of it to a temporal
calamity: for that of Sodom (in that respect) was but of one sort, and it was
sudden, quickly at an end, whereas the Jews, (by wars, famine and
captivity) endured many kinds of misery, vehement in degree, permanent in time,
whereof they would have taken a sudden death, for a certain remedy by what
Element or instrument soever.

The second particular sin is the breach of the holy rest of God, in the
violation of the Sabbath; which was never so profaned, with heart, and hand,
and foot, and tongue, and pen, and press, as of late years it had been,
sixteen hundred years (from Christ downward,) have not disgorged so much
gaul against the Sabbath, nor spent so much Ink, or brought forth so many
tracts of detraction of the divine dignity, and holy duties of that day, as
these last 40. years have done, and is it not just with God, that those who
would justle his religious rest out of it is right, should be restless in their
condition? as the Jews complained, our necks are under persecution, we labor
and have no rest, Lam. 5.5. by continual agitations of hostility. The reformed
Churches (never thoroughly reformed in this point, (though of late better then
they have been) have been grievously scourged, and the more it is like for
this sin; and we since we have been deformed like them, and would conform to
them in their liberty on the Sabbath, but will not endure any of their strict
discipline of manners, we have been made partakers of their pressures.

The third provoking impiety is, the contempt of the Ministry (wherein the
dishonor of the divine Majesty is involved,) Luke 10.16. and with him his
ordinances, his word and Sacraments, and whatsoever he has consecrated as
serviceable to the glory of his name, and salvation of his people; and when
were Ministers more contemned then of late years they have been, when by
greater numbers, or by greater persons, or in deeper degrees of disgrace and
disdain, and yet are even at this day?

I deny not but diverse of our Tribe, have been entertained with a civil
respect, in regard of their good parts, as for their wit or learning, eloquence
of speech, elegancy of carriage, perhaps (somewhat too Court-like) and for
their riches, or refference to great persons; their siding with some potent
party, in times of faction. And I confess the Bishops have found great
friends, to support their preeminency, as well the Temporal as Ecclesiastical
which (of old, and even of late at the Praedicationis munus quod Episcoporum
praecipium est, Council. Trident. Sess. 24. c 4.
Council of Trent, was thought to consist rather in the Pulpit then in the
Chair.

But abstracting from these and such like secular plausibilities, if a Minister
have set himself in good earnest to preach and press sound doctrine to the
conscience, and punctually to exemplify it in his own life and conversation,
if as an Ambassador from Christ (as he is by his calling, 2 Cor. 5.20.) and
(as in duty he ought) he deliver all the council of God, Act. 20.27. lest
keeping back any part of it, he should be guilty of the blood of souls, v. 26.
if he have taken the boldness to admonish and rebuke the rich as well as the
poor, as he may and must do, 1 Timothy 6.17. James 5. ver. 1. if, in the
administration of the Sacrament, he have endeavored to put difference between
the holy and profane, the unclean and the clean, Ezekiel. 44.23. to keep such
as are like dogs and swine (Mat 7.6.) from the holy Table of the Lord, least
they should eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11. and have not
denied to deliver the consecrated symboles of the body and blood of Christ, to
such as made scruple of the gesture, enjoined by the Canon, though otherwise
most worthily prepared, for the receiving thereof ( That this is no
time-serving Denet, my discourse is witness (penned and perused by diverse
learned Divines 14 years ag^^) to prove that ^h Canon cannot discharge a
Minister from his duty, charged upon him at his Ordination for preaching the
Word, and administration of the Sacraments to any, unless greater exception
can be taken against the^, the^ their doubting of the lawfulness of any
particular gesture.
in which case it is not only lawful to receive them, but unlawful to reject
them) if he have opposed profane pastimes, or superstitious customs, such an
one (and he that is not such an one, howsoever accounted of by men, is not
approved of God) has been more hated, contemned, reviled and persecuted, by
the most, and some of the greatest, in many places (as we see at this day) then
such as show little care, or conscience of saving, either their own souls or
others (whereof they have usurped the charge) and are so far below the
endowments of sufficient shepherds, that they are not competently qualified to
be a sheep of the fold.

And how much this bad usage, of the best of Gods servants, may provoke their
great Masters wrath against a people, you may guess, by David's high
displeasure against the Princes of Ammon, and the revenge he took of them, for
their base abuse of his Ambassadors, 2 Samuel 10. from the fourth verse to the
end of the Chapter; but you may be sure, the Lord will severely punish this
high contempt of his most holy and worthy servants, by that you may read, 2
Chr. c. 36. the Lord God of their Fathers sent to them, by his messengers,
rising up betimes and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on
his dwelling place: but they mocked the messengers of GOD, and despised his
word, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his
people, till there was no remedy, 2 Chronicles. chap. 36. ver. 15, 16. no remedy,
but he must take revenge of the unsufferable wrongs done against his own
Majesty and his Ministers fidelity, such indignities against them, cannot but
provoke great indignation in the Almighty; and that may be like to fall upon
the offenders, in a storm of War, as the next verse shows, therefore he
brought upon them the Sword of the Chaldees, who slew their young men with the
Sword, in the house of their Sanctuary; and had no compassion upon young men or
maidens, or on the old man who stooped for age, ver. 17.

And it is no less, but rather a greater Judgment, when in the same Nation, a
Civil War is enkindled, as when the Egyptians were set against the
Egyptians, and they fought every one against his brother, and every one against
his neighbor, City against City, Esa. 19.2. but especially when Gods own
people, professers of the same Religion, are up in Arms (one against another)
as Manasseh against Ephraim, Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against Judah,
Esa. 9.21. And (as now we feel to our sorrow) in the stormy commotions of our
own Kingdom, wherein Protestant is stirred up against Protestant, City
against City, yea in Cities, Towns, villages and Families, many Esau's and
Jacobs struggling, (as in the womb of Rebeccah) Husband and Wife, Fathers and
Children, Brethren and Brethren, breaking through the strongest bonds of
covenant and nature, (obliging them to love and peace) into division and
dissension, and yet better so divided (I confess) then that all should hold
together to drive on a design to the undoing of three Kingdoms.

And if we look beyond the reward of wickedness, (in this world) to the
judgment to come, we shall discover a danger, to such contemners of the Lords
Ministers, far worse, then any that attends on the Trumpet or Standard? It is
that which our Savior threatens in the tenth of Math. Whosoever shall not
receive you, nor your words, when you depart out of that house or City, shake
off the dust of your feet, verily (I say unto you) it shall be more tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, then for that City, Mat. 10.
ver. 14. and 15.

And if it be a thing so displeasing to God, so dangerous to men not to receive
his servants into their houses, what is it then, to drive them out of their
Countries? or shut them up in prison? to strip them of their clothes, to put
them in nasty dungeons, to deprive them of diet necessary to the support of
nature? And if the dust of their feet shall be a witness against them that
receive them not (for that is the meaning of that forecited command given by
our Savior, and practiced by the Apostles, Act. 13.51.) what a Conviction will
be against them, by the words of their mouths, by many sound and excellent
Sermons, preached unto them by their exemplary lives in holy conversation set
before them.

Those who contemn the true Ministers of the Gospel in these times, will
happily say, that if they were men of such extraordinary gifts, in prophesying
and casting out Devils, and in miraculous and mighty operations (as those in
whose behalf our Savior gave out so severe a Commination) we might expect
more respect, and have it too, otherwise not. To which the Answer may be,

First, That the acceptance of Gods Ministers, should not be made for those
extraordinary Acts, wherewith themselves may be damned, Mat. 7.22. and others
deceived, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10. and none saved without other helps, 1 Cor. 13.2.
but for the glad tidings of the Gospel, for dispensation of the word and
Sacraments, the only ordinary means of man's salvation, for their delivering
Gods will unto the people in preaching, and the peoples desires to God in
praying; whereby they may be saved without miracles, but not by miracles
without them, and for such gifts and acts, as serve more for the peoples
profit, then the Preachers credit; and yet this ministration of righteousness,
the righteousness of faith by the Gospel is exceeding glorious, 2 Cor. 9.
ver. 8, 9, 10. So that the feet of those that bring it, should be beautiful to
those to whom it was brought, Romans 10.15.

Secondly, Though they pretend to put such difference betwixt those
extraordinary messengers of old, and these of later days, as if (had they
lived with them) they would not have dealt with them, as they do with these of
their own time: their tongues either hypocritically be-lie their malit ous
hearts, or their fallacious hearts cunningly delude themselves, as theirs did,
Who builded the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the
righteous, and said, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Math. 23.30, 31.
When in the mean time, they did far worse: for they thirsted after the blood
of Christ, the Son of God, and pursued him with implacable spite to the
death, to whom all the Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles, Martyrs and Saints
(how many, how worthy soever, yea and all the Angels of Heaven taken to them)
were not so much as one Grasse-hopper, to all the Inhabitants of the world,
were all of them as glorious, as Solomon in his Royalty.

And I doubt not but if Christ himself, were now alive upon the Earth, and yet
(by his passion) to make an expiation of the sins of the world, and should so
make himself known to be the holy one of God, as he did at his first coming,
and should be so severe in his life, as never to laugh, se impartial in
reproof as to spare neither King nor Subject, Luke 13.32. Priest nor people,
friend nor foe, Math, 16.23. and so sharp in rebukes and comminations, as you
may read him in the 23. of Math. from the 13. verse to the end of the Chapter:
there would be found (among the men of this faithless and treacherous
generation those, who are neither true to King nor Kingdom.) not one, but many
a Judas to betray him; many Scribes and Pharisees to pursue him with slanderous
accusations, an irreligious rabbleto make a clamorous outcry against him,
Crucify him, crucify him, an Heathen Pilat to pass a deadly sentence upon
him, a Longius or to correct the Legend, a Lonchius (that is a Speare-man
soldier) to pierce him, and many one of that pillaging profession (as it is
used at this day) to spoil him of his garment and not as the Soldiers (who
were his guard to Mount Calvary) to dispose of it, with a formality of Justice,
as either equally to devide it, or entirely to allot it to one, by casting of
lots for it, as they did, John 19.23, 24. but (with a plundering expedition) to
snatch it away, and so keep it as an incommunicable prey.

And that I am not uncharitable in this conjecture, you will easily
acknowledge, if you do but observe, how the most faithful, constant and
powerful Preachers, and the most sincere and conscionable Christians in all
places, (where the profane and Popish Tyrants do prevail) are persecuted,
and if overtaken, oppressed with all kinds and degrees of contempt and cruelty;
and that for Christ's sake, even for endeavoring to do his will, and to be
conformable to him in life and conversation.

And yet these men (such as the Prophet Ezekiell shows to have affinity or
rather consanguinity with beasts, Brutish men and skillfull to destroy, Cha.
21. ver. 31.) take upon them the Name of Christians, and which is more, most of
them pretend themselves Champions for the true Protestant Religion, when they
do what they can to root it out, by ruining those, who most sincerely profess
it, and (which is yet more then that, and an undoubted evidence of his
egregious imposture, who so blinds the minds of men, as to make himself
(though a Devil, to be taken for a God, 2 Cor. 4.4.) There are many who
believe what these profess (though their practice be most contrary) and adhere
unto them to the hazard of all their own temporal being, and eternal
well-being, for with them they pursue the slaughter of Gods dearest servants,
with such a mad Malignity, as if it were a service acceptable to himself.

Thus we see that fullfilled on our Saviors Disciples in our days, which he
foretold (of his Apostles) many hundred years ago, whosoever kills you will
think that he does God service, Joh. 16.2.

And they are moved to this madness (many times) by a misconceit of the
soundest Christians (which we must confute and return upon themselves) as if
they were the causes of the common calamities of a Kingdom or Nation: a stale
slander of Satan, cast upon the best in the precedent Ages (as Arnob lib. 1.
contra gent. Tertullian Apologet 640. Origin l. 3. contra Celsum. Eusebius l 4.
Hist. Eccles c. 12. Ciprian. l. adver. Demetrian August Retract. l. 2. c. 43.
and de Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 30 and l. 4. c. 30 31
many of the Ancients testify) and easily taken up at any time against the
most godly, to whom all public plagues (whether from Si Tiberis ascendit ad
mania si Nitus non ascendit in avna, si caelum stetit, si terra movit, etc
statim Christianos ad Leoxes. Tertul. Apologet p 36. 40 Edit. 2. Nic Rigaltij
Luret. 1641.
Heaven or earth or water, whether of war, famine or pestilence) were
imputed, as procured by their impieties: because they did not worship Heathen
Deities, and thereupon (as convicted of the guilt, and desert of all those
miseries) they were presently hurried to be devoured of Lions. Of the like
doting idolatry and calumny the besotted Jews in Ieremiahs time were accused
and by him convicted; for they ascribed their prosperity to their service of
the Queen of Heaven in offering up Cakes and burning Incense unto her, and
their adversity to their omission of that Idolatry, Ier. 44.17, 18. When the
quite contrary was true, and so much was averred by that holy Prophet to their
faces, ver. 20, 21, 22, 23. of the same Chapter.

So when Heathens have cast the calumnies of their calamities upon Christians;
the learned and religious Fathers of those times, have both refuted and
retorted them upon themselves, for example Aug de Civ. Det. l 5. c. 24, 25 26.
August. (in answer to their slanders of the Christians Religion) shows the
happy condition of Christian Emperors, and Romani qui v^tae integritato mala
metuebant ab hostibus (perdita integritate vitae) crudeliora patiebantur a
civibus. Ibid. l 1. c. 30.
That they who durst not be good for fear of war from abroad, for their
being bad, suffered far more cruelties of their own Countrymen at home,
then of foreign enemies they had done.

If then we must frame an indictment against the Troublers of our Israel,
either according to the tenor of Scripture, or experience of all times, we
must do it (and we may do it most justly) in the names and for the crimes of
such as are adverse to the virtue and power of godliness for their speculative
and practical Atheism, their robbing of God of his right in honoring of
Idols and dishonouring his name, and profaning his Sabbath, and for being no
less injurious to man, then sacrilegious to God, for they usurp a power (both
personal and real) over whatsoever their hearts desire, and hands can
compass with the angle, net or dragg, Hab. 1.15. or any other instrument,
which brings in more by rapine then by right; and for their intemperance in
meats and drinks, their incontinence in delights (whereof some are such as in
modesty we may not so much as mention) and all this committed with such high
degrees of excess, as makes the kingdom of Heaven suffer violence in a
forcible pulling down of divine vengeance upon the earth.

Therefore when any epidemicall danger is come upon a people, these Malefactors
(whose wickedness has drawn it down upon them) should like Achan be stoned,
Josh. 7. veo. 25. or as Jonah be cast into the Sea, Ion. 1.15. or as Zimri and
Cozbi thrust through with a Javelin, Numb. 25.8, and 9. verses, that humane
Justice, might make men capeable of divine mercy, as in those cases it did.

And on the contrary the Godly (that we may conclude this point, with their
just Apology) by their interest in Christ (which gives them right to the
enjoyment of all good things) 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. are the means of much
happiness to any State or Kingdom, and for their sakes, do the wicked enjoy
the benefit of light and heat, of fruits of the earth and riches of the Sea,
plenty and peace, and all the comforts of this life; and by the sincerity and
importunity of their supplications, are the plagues (God sends among men)
either remitted or removed, and sometimes the greatest crosses converted into
blessings.

But when they dye, it is many times like Sampsons pulling down the pillars of
the house with him, Judge. 16.29, 30. (their prayers and acceptance of their
persons with God, being as the props on which a Temporal prosperity is
supported,) and they leave a Kingdom destitute of defense, for they are as
Elisha said of Elijah, the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof, 2
King. 2.12. and therefore woe unto the wicked, when God takes the godly away
from them: while Lot was in Sodom the City was safe, though prodigiously
sinful, Genesis 19. for God was so gracious to him, as to say he could do
nothing against the Sodomites, until Lot had taken sanctuary in the City of
Zoar, ver. 22. but when he was departed from them, a shower of Brimstone was
powered down upon them, ver. 24.

And at the final consummation of all things, so it shall be with all the
godly and wicked of the world, when the number of the elect is fully made up,
and all the wheat for Gods Storehouse grown full ripe, the Tares that were
mingled with it, shall be bundled up for burning, after the fanning of his
floor by Christ, whereby the solid grain and light chafe are severed, that
shall be first gathered into his garner, and then this burned with unquenchable
fire, Mat. 3.12. and when the Sheep and the Goats are separated, the one on
the right hand of the Judge, the other on the left, and the Sheep invited and
admitted to his society, with Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. Mat. 25.34.
the Goats shall be presently cast off, with, Depart ye oursed, ver. 44.

Therefore if they were so wise, as to know their friends and Benefactours,
they would endeere themselves in their society, as Ruth did in Naomie's, when
she said, Entreat me not to leave thee, nor to return from following after
thee, for whither thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge,
thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God, where thou die will I die,
and there will I be buried, the Lord do so unto me and more also, if ought but
death part thee and me, Ruth 1.16, 17.

But my Text says, they are foolish and sottish children, they have none
understanding: So their folly is now (in it is proper place) to be considered;
and from the Malignant operation of sin (procuring plagues upon a people) we
may now come to the disgraceful denomination of sinners.

Where we shall principally observe the connection of sin and folly: for their
sin is rendered as a cause of their suffering the calamities of War, but
under the name and notion of ignorance, folly and sottishness, and being bound
in duty and conscience both, to know God and glorify him, as God: their not
knowing of him, and averseness from him, was their sin (for otherwise it
would not make them worthy of Gods wrath, as Ierem. 11.25.) so that sin and
folly be associates, for where sin is there is folly, as Abigail said of
Nabal to David, Let not my Lord regard this man of Beliall ( even Nabal) for as
his name is, so is he, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel 25.25.
She entitles him two ways: First by a Periphrasis, Man of Beliall. Secondly,
by his proper name Nabal. The word Beliall signifies one that is nothing
worth, stark naught, yea the worst of wicked ones, even the Devil is called
Belial, 1 Cor. 6.15. And for his other (which is) his proper name Nabal, it
signifies first a saplesse and unprofitable thing, as a dry leaf fallen from
a Tree, which has no moisture in it, and then it is taken for an unprofitable
person, and for a Fool, and a wicked man: and both in Some fetch the affinity
of folly and sin, from Cains dwelling place the Land of Nod. Genesis 4.16.
calling a wicked man Nodite, a Cainite, that is, one of Cains condition, or one
that as Jude speaks, goes in the way of Caine, therefore a Fool, Noddy or
Nodite, a fit man to be an inhabitant of that Country, where he dwelt, but we
need not look so far back for affinity betwixt folly and sin, for the word
rendered foolish, in my Text, and so used and transtated, Zach 11.1^. is the
same with ^u^ wonted word, for a wicked man, or wicked one, to wit, the word
[evill] for that word is both Hebrew and English, and it signifies not only
foolish and ignorant, but rash and froward: from the word Nabal may come the
Latin Nobulo, which as the word Nabal may note a Knave and a fool; the Greek
word (...) folly, and (...) sin, differ but a letter, and it is like our
English word [Foole] was derived of the Greek word [(...)] a wicked one.
Hebrew, Greek, Latin and English, there is a cognation of Names, which notes
the concurrence of folly and sin in the same subject.

So Abigail made the application forementioned: and as if they were not only
inmates in the same person, but Twins of the same birth, they are both of one
age, of one stature; if sin be big like a Giant, folly is not little like a
dwarf, according to the degrees of the one, is the growth of the other, as we
may observe by the confession of David, I have sinned greatly (says he) in
that I have done, and presently after, I have done very foolishly, 2 Samuel
24.10. great sin and great folly go together, and so a very wicked man is a
very fool.

In prosecution of this point, I look for a paradoxall prejudice, to oppose
me, for there are many that strongly believe, there is more affinity betwixt
folly and piety, then betwixt folly and sin. I shall therefore hold my self
obliged in discretion, more clearly and fully to set forth the folly of sin,
and the more firmly to assure and prove it; and that by a double light, the
one of Scripture, the other of Nature, so that if a man have either of the eyes
of his soul open, the eye of Faith as a Christian, or the eye of Reason as a
man, he shall easily discern it.

First for Scripture: they that read it, and mark it, cannot but observe, in
the holy dialect thereof, that where folly is spoken of, or any of the
denominatives of it (which are to be found above an hundred times) there for
the most part a wicked man or wickedness is meant. To present you with some
passages, for instance, as with a little poesy of flowers culled out of a
large and fruitful garden.

In the Book of Deuteronomy: Moses complaining first of the people, then to them,
exchangeth both the person, and the phrase thus; they have corrupted
themselves, their spot is not the spot of my children, they are a perverse and
crooked generation, Deuteronomy. 32.5. and the next words are, Do ye thus requite
the Lord O foolish people and unwise? ver. 6. a corrupt, spotted, perverse and
crooked people, (which are fit Titles for a wicked people,) is a foolish and
unwise people.

So David varying his Title, but keeping to the same subject, Psalm. 73. says,
I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked, ver. 3.
he might as well have said, I was envious at the wicked, when I saw the
prosperity of the foolish: for he means the same men, and the same vice, by
both appellations; and in his own case he passes sentence on himself, in the
like disgraceful language, Psalm. 38. Mine iniquities are gone over my head,
(says he) as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, my wounds stink,
and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, ver. 5. the same cause is
contained by turns, in two terms, as the same sand of the Houre-glasse in two
bottles, thus is finfull simplicity or foolishness simply condemned, and it is
aggravated, by way of comparison, where a wicked man is set to School to, and
showed to be more ignorant then an Ox or an Ass, Esa. 1.3. then a Storke,
Ier. 8.7. then the Pismire, Pro. 6.6.

In the Proverbs of Solomon, the nomenclature, or phrase of the affinity
betwixt sin and folly, is too samiliar, to require quotations out of them:
and now (as in the midway) betwixt Religion and Reason, and in our passage,
from the one to the other, we may take a testimony or two, out of the Book of
Ecclesiasticus: which is a kind of Participle of Scripture Divinity, and Moral
Philosophy, and so we use it, not as for a proof or assurance of Faith, for no
humane Dictates, (as that is) have place on the Tribunal of infallible Truth,
but only at the Bar of rational Evidence: which yet in this comes nearer
demonstrative conviction, then topicall probability; the wise Author of that
Book (speaking of the sinner) says, he shall be left to his foolishness,
Ecclesiasticus 23.8. and in the 16th. Chapter, he that is God (says he) was
not pacified toward the old Giants, who fell away in the strength of their
foolishness, ver. 7. he might have said, in his sense, in the strength of
their wickedness: (for their sins were like themselves, Giant-like, or
mighty sins (as the Prophet Amos gives the Epithet, Chap. 5.12.) and their
foolishness was equal to their sins, mighty or strong foolishness: and
speaking of a very wise Father, and of a very foolish Son, ( Solomon and
Rehoboam) his words are, Solomon rested with his Fathers, and he left behind
him Rehoboam, the foolishness of the people, and one that had none
understanding, and turned away the people through his counsel, Ecclus. 47.23.

Here was counsel, but none understanding, (wise counsel the while) he turned
away the people from serving the Lord, the counsel that was turned to such an
evil purpose, must needs be as wicked as unwise, so the peoples wickedness
was his wickedness, because he seduced them to it, and he not their fool, but
their foolishness in abstracto, because his wickedness was very wicked.

And that there is sound sense, and good reason (for the equivalence of these
terms) sinner and fool, sin and folly, the most prudent Doctor (of that
sect, which of all that are not Christian, come nearest, to the rules of
Christianity) shows where he says, that a Stultus omnia vitia babet Senec,
de benefic. lib. 4. cap. 26.
Fool has all manner of faults in him, which we may invert, and as truly
say, a wicked man has in him every folly.

Now as in this Chapter, the people are charged first with wickedness, and
then with folly, so in the Position we undertake to prove, wickedness shall
have the precedence, as the subject, and foolishness shall follow it, close at
the heels, as the predicate, thus, wickedness is folly, or because it may
make a better impression (in concreto) a wicked man is a fool, by his
indisposition either to be or to do good: which though I mention but once,
must be vertually presupposed, in every proof I shall produce, and I am glad I
have so many wise men to be judges of the evidence, I shall bring in for his
conviction, and that shall consist of several Arguments.

First Some taken from the causes of folly.

Secondly, Some from the signs, marks and effects of it.

First for the causes: folly is a defect, and therefore the causes of it are
rather deficient then efficient, and they are, Either Without a man, Or Within
him.



Without him is the want of a good Instructor and good Books, which wicked men
willingly and witlessely refuse to hear and to read, or if they do, it is
with so little heed as brings little fruit unto themselves.

For the first, The best Instructor for any thing that is truly good, is God:
by whom they that are not taught, can never be truly wise, or learned; but
they that refuse or contemn his Instruction, are many times punished in their
understanding, and that justly, with very foolish and mad mistakings, and
sometimes given over to strong and strange illusions. And the wiser any
Instructor is, the more does the wicked man reject him, as we may read in the
third of the Proverbs of Solomon, Wisdom cries without, she utters her
voice in the streets, ver. 20. How long (ye simple ones) will ye love
simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorning, and fools hate
knowledge? ver. 22. Wisdom her self offers to be their Instructor, but
they would none of her counsel, ver. 30. and whereas there is a spirit in men
(as Elihu said to Job,) and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding, Job 32.8. the wicked are adverse to his spirit, and if it offer
to enlighten them, and inflame them, they are ready (by their reluctancies) to
quench the light and heat presented unto them, for that is it which the
Apostle forbids (and the wicked forbear not) 1 These. 5.19. and so in effect
they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways, Job 21.14. and so the Father of lights, (as he is called, James 1.17.)
withholdeth the light of instruction from such, because they love darkness
rather then light, Joh. 3.19. and sheddeth forth his beams of illumination
upon such, as have eyes to see it, and hearts to rejoice in it.

And therefore, there is in this respect the like difference betwixt the Godly
and the wicked, as was betwixt the Israelites and Egiptians, in respect of the
Cloud that God put betwixt them, which to them was a bright Cloud, but to these
a Cloud of darkness, Exodus 14.20. So the Lord will enlighten his people, to
see and to know, what is good for their safety: but those that list not to take
him for their teacher, as the wicked do not, are left to the blindness and
darkness of their own understandings, and by that being no better then
brutish, (for every man is brutish by his own knowledge, Ier. 10.14.) we may
say of them, (as the Lord does in my Text,) they are a foolish people, sottish
children, they have none understanding.

Secondly, for the Book, which is the treasury of sound and saving
instruction, (to wit the word of God,) wherein (as Aug. confess. l. 12. c. 14.
S. Augustine said) there is a mavelous profoundnes, and he trebles his words
of it by way of admiration, it is that which makes wise the simple, purifieth
the heart, and enlightneth the eyes, Psalm. 19.7, 8. and makes a man wiser then
his enemies, Psalm. 119. ver. 98. yea wiser then his teachers, ver. 99. (if he
ply that Book more diligently then they,) But the wicked has no liking of it,
takes no delight in it, and if sometimes he read or hear any part of it, he
never learnes it by heart, but so little remembers or respects it, as to do
quite contrary to it: and they that reject the word of the Lord (and therein
they reject him also) what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. if they be such
Rebels against the light, Job 24.13. God can and in Justice he may, make their
Sun is go down at noone, Amos 8.9. and make all their ways darkness,
Prove. 2.13. he can smite the Horse with astonishment, and his rider with
madness, Zach. 12.1. he can make Judges (that should excel in wisdom)
fools, Job 12.17. Diviners mad, turn wisemen backward, and make their
counsel folly, Esa. 44.25. as he did Achitophels, 1 Samuel 15.3. he can (and he
has threatened to do it, and he has done it,) smite the wicked with
blindness, madness and astonishment of heart, Deuteronomy. 28.28.

At least when they reject God for their teacher, and his Book for their
lesson, and like not to entertain, or retain the knowledge of God in their
minds, he will give them over (and such wilful fools well deserve it) to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. Because they receive not the love of the truth, this
they may be saved, God sends them strong delusions, to believe a lie, that they
may be damned, 2 These. 2.10, 11. and he may justly, (and often does) give them
up to his impostures, who of fools, will make them madmen, as he did the
Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 6.11. and who (when he has them wholly in his
power) will use them like to madmen, keeping them in dark lodgings, under
chains and scourges.

Now for the causes of the folly within themselves: they areas deficient,
concerning such as would conduce to their prudent direction, as in their want
of a good teacher, or of such good lessons of his Book as would make them
wise, if they did not very unwisely reject or neglect them both, their defect
in themselves, (which increases their folly) is manifold; as Their want 1. Of
Intelligence. 2. Of Memory. 3. Of method. 4. Of Diligence. 5. Of Consideration,

concerning those things, which are of greatest moment, to make them truly
wise, and happy: for their wise wickedness, (for the Prophet says, they are
wise to do evil) we shall speak of that under the other general part of the
verse, which is the exception.

For the first, if we consider the godly and the wicked in their physical
temperament (which has an influence I confess upon the operations of the
mind:) the observation of Gentes septe^trionales sunt plurimum ingenio
inferiores, sed rebore superiores Australibus: cujus ratio est, quod sub
frigido ext membra indurentur ad quidvis telerandu^, sed ab inclusum interius
calerem babent sanguinem crasstorem, contra qua^ usa venit, australibus quippe
quibus in calere illo externo sanguis and spiritus subtilior, unde and ingenio
and sapientis prevalent. Ioh. Gerard Voss de orig. and progressu Idolat. Iib.
2. cap 34. Tom. 1. p. 484.
Vossius, belongs equally to both, which is; that the Inhabitants of the
Northern Climats are more strong in body, but inferior in wit to the
Inhabitants of the South; because the heat in those, is more kept in, and so
the blood grows thicker, and the spirits grosser in them, then it is in those
of the Southern parts, whose spirits being more subtle, make their wits more
sharp. But as in this respect, (the godly and wicked) (who live under the same
elevation of the Pole) may be even: so the godly have an advantage (for
understanding) above the wicked, by the help of piety and temperance, for the
wicked being destitute of divine light, (as has been said before) that which
is but merely humane in them, is too dim, and weak (toward the most
excellent objects) to denominate them wise, or understanding men.

For as the Apostle says, the natural man receives not, or (as the Geneva
reads the (...).
Greek word) perceives not, (and that will bear both interpretations) the
things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. and with the
want of divine illumination, concurreth, (many times) a mist of satanicall
illusion, blinding the minds of the wicked, 2 Cor. 4.4. as was intimated
before. And if he did not so far benight them, (by putting his dark veil
upon their intellectual eyes) their understandings would yet be and certainly
are ecclipsed, many times, by the excess and disorder of their unruly
passions, and corrupt affections, as the light of a Candle is obscured by puffs
of smoke, from the pipes that took fire from it. I will give instance in the
particulars, as In 1. Love. 2. Desire. 3. Anger. 4. Hate. 5. Hope. 6. Fear. 7.
Sorrow. 8. Joy.

All which, (if they exceed moderation) as they are hindrances to the health
of the body, and hastners of death, (as In my Moni^^r of Mortali^^ p. 14, 15,
16, (...).
elsewhere I have showed) so are they great impediments in the mind, to true
apprehension; and so great causes of error and folly, and this most of all, in
wicked men in whom they are commonly most predominant.

As for the excess of Love, how it be-mists and misleads the understanding, we
may see by its working several ways, the love of beauty, is a Pearl in the
eye of the mind, hindering it from discerning the difference betwixt Love and
lust, and sometimes pursuing its own contentment, until it bring forth the
mere contrary affection: as we find in the story of Ammon and Thamar, 2 Samuel
13.15. it makes a man (though not otherwise unwise) to be easily deceived, and
(after deceit deiscovered) to be taken again and again in the same snare; as
we see in Sampson, the eye of whose understanding was blinded, by his fond love
and delight in Dalilah, before the Philistines put out the eyes of his body:
else he would never have trusted her, (as he did) after she had thrice betrayed
him, Judge. 16. from v. 6. to the 17. The love of gain is a pin and web in
the eye of a covetous man; thence a gift is said to blind the eyes of the wise,
Exodus 23.8. Through immoderate love of glory in the Pharisees of our Saviors
time, though he did such works as no man could do, and therefore his works
did sufficiently testify of him, that God had sent him, as his Son, John
5.36. And spoke such words as never man spoke, John 7.46. yet they did not know
him, and were so far from acknowledging of him, and believing in him, that
they held the people both ignorant and accursed, because they did both, John
7.48, 49. and the reason was, because they loved the praise of men, more then
the praise of God; Joh. 12.43.

The like deceit does darken the Conclave of the Roman Rabbis (the Pope and
Cardinals, the Pharisees of the latter times) to this very day, by shutting out
all informations of truth, which comport not with their proud ambitious and
pragmaticall humor; hence it is that men perceive not the vileness of their
own excesses, so as they do other men's, as a covetous man will cry shame of a
drunkard, and he again will exclaim against the covetous: Little love or
charity to their brethren and neighbors, making them quick-sighted enough, for
discovery of a mote in the eye of another, while self-love so blindes them
toward themselves, that they cannot discern a beam in their own eyes, Mat.
7.3, 4, 5.

Desire is an affection of near alliance unto love, for what men dearly love,
they eagerly desire to enjoy, and it is of as near affinity to folly and
sin, if it be excessive: Such was the desire of Amnon toward Thamar, whose
lusting after her, made him in his body lean from day to day, 2 Samuel 13.4. and
in his mind so besotted, as not to discern that his love was lust, his lust
incest: that incest was not only a great sin in it self, but would prove a
great shame to them both; to him, so as to make him accounted as one of the
fools of Israel, ver. 13. to her, by taking from her, the honor of her
virginity, and stayning her name with the ignominious note of an harlot: As the
sons of Jacob said of their defloured sister Dinah, Genesis 34.31. And lastly in
making him believe, he should find much content in the enjoyment of what he
desired, whereas his lust was soon turned into hate, and the hate more, when
he had abused her, then the love wherewith he had desired her before, v. 15.

It was not so base a desire (I confess) which David his father had of the
water of the well of Bethlem; yet it was as blind an one, through the vehemence
of it (as the expression, 2 Samuel 23.15. shows) which suffered him not to
apprehend (until it was brought unto him) that it was the price of blood,
because it could not be had without breaking through the Host of their enemies
(the Philistines) ver. 16. nor that done without the jeopardy of their lives,
that fetched it, and therefore accounting it too dear a draught for himself,
he powered it out unto the Lord, 2 Samuel 23.16, 17.

The desire of Rachell was more warrantable (for the object) then either of
these; yet the degree of it, raised above all due moderation (when being a
wife, but not a mother, which she longed as much to be, as any breeding woman
longs for that which her appetite most affects) put her upon this
passionate request unto her husband, Give me children or else I die, Genesis 30.1.
her desire was so vehemently set upon Mother-hood, that either she thought she
should die, if her life were not saved by that painful and perilous adventure
of child bearing: or that she should have no delight in life, and so be (as the
Apostle speaks of a wanton Widow) though from a contrary cause, as dead while
she lived, 1 Timothy 5.6. if she continued childlesse; and that made her so
foolish, as to conceive, that the power of Conception was in her husbands
disposal: and that folly was no less then Idolatry, with a spice of
blasphemy, for so much Jacobs reply (as passionate as her demand) imports: Am
I in Gods stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of the womb? Genes.
30.2.

There is the like opposition in quality (but greater in degree) to the light
of reason, and rule of grace in the opposite affections anger and hate.

First for anger, Solomon says, It rests in the bosom of fools, Eccles.
7.9. It may sometimes steal into or rush into the bosom of a wiseman; but a
wiseman will not suffer it there to rest: an unwelcome guest it may be unto
him for a while, but it shall not habitually reside there, as one of the
household; and only where it dwells it domineers, and that is only where a fool
is master of the Family; and when the habit is stirred up into act, and that
raised from the bosom to the head, it distempereth the brain; and so he that
is hasty of spirit exalts folly, Prove. 14.29. and that folly (many times) is
exalted tomadnesse, for (as Senec. de ira. l. 1. c. 1.
Seneca says of it) it is the foulest, fiercest and maddest affection of all
others, and the angry person shows it by his words, his looks, his actions;
his words are wild, and (many times) thrust forward; so many at once, in such
have, as puts him presently to silence; as a crowd hasting to get out of an
house at once, stop up the passage, so that they stick at the door; his
looks are sometimes furiously red, sometimes ghastly pale; His lips
trembling, his teeth grinning, his hair staring, as Labra quatiuntur, dentes
comprimuntur, horrent and subriguntur capilli, Sense de ira. l. 1. 1. c. 1.
Seneca makes the description of him, mad-man-like: for Quidam e sapientibus
viris, iram dixerunt brevem insaniam. Ibid.
Wisemen (says he) have said of Anger, that it is a short madness; and (for
the time it continues in act) the Affectum maxim ex omnibus terrum and
rabidum. Senec. de ira l. 1. c. 1.
foulest and maddest of all the affections: So it was in Achitophell, who
enraged that his counsel was rejected, sadled his Ass, gat him home, set his
house in order, and hanged himself, 2 Samuel 17.23. He should first have set
himself in order, altering his counsels and reforming his affections, and then
he might have hanged his house with Coverings of Tapestry, Prove. 7.26. and with
the broidered work of Egypt, Ezekiel. 27.7. and if he had bridled his anger when
he sadled his Ass, he would not of an oraculous Counselor (2 Samuel 16.23.)
have turned such a notorious fool or madman, as to put his house in order,
and himself into such a desperate and irrecoverable confusion.

It was as foolish an act of King Cyrus (though not so sad or tragical, as
this was, but rather ridiculous) who having raised his wrath against the River
^dem ibid. l. 3. cap. 21.
Gindes for drowning of a white Horse of his, exalted his folly so high, as to
turn his intended War against Babylon upon that River (the greatest next
unto Euphrates) whereof he threatened to take revenge by deviding it into so
many streams, as to make it passable on foot, and so he set his whole Army to
work, and parted the maine water into 360. Channels: wherein he buried the
treasure and strength of his Army, and so lost a fair opportunity of invading
his enemy.

Now as anger is called a short madness, so may hatred or malice be called a
long madness; the sinful absurdity of which, we may observe in wicked King
Ahab, who when he might have known the truth of Micaiah (the man of God) had
no mind to hear him, because, He hated him for prophesying no good concerning
him, but evil, 1 King. 22.8. for the wicked are like unto the beast (some say
it is the Cammell, some the Elephant) that cannot abide to drink of a clear
water, least it should show him his unseemly shape, and therefore before he
drink of it, he first stirs it and troubles it with his feet: So the wicked
of him that will clearly show them the evil that is in them, or imminent over
them, will take none intelligence, unless they can trouble his clear stream,
with flattering accommodations to humor and please; as the false Prophets did,
and Micaiah was solicited to do in that Chapter at the 13. verse.

And may we not observe the like blindness in the minds of many, even of the
learned Papists, out of the hatred of Protestants? Which they show by their
imposing false opinions upon them, and opposing the truth of God, delivered by
them, and that out of mere malice against them, as did the Pharisees against
both the doctrine and person of our Savior?

The first you may see (as in many Popish Writers) so especially in the book
of that fiery Friar Fevardentius called Theomachia Calvinistica. Printed at
Paris n folio 1604.
Theomachia Calvinistica, wherein his fancy (being infatuated by his malice)
makes him to feign 1400. errors, and to impute them all to the Professors of
the Protestant Religion, under the name of Calvinists.

And as they impose falsehood, so (upon the same mistaking motive) they oppose
truth, as Erasmus observed in an Epistle to the Cardinal of Mentz. Those
things (says he) were condemned ( in Compertum est ab his damnata ut haeretica
in libris Lutheri, quae in Bernardi Augustinique libris, ut orthodoxa, immo ut
pia leguntur. Erasm. Epist. Alberto Cardinati moguntino, l 12. ep. 10. col.
585. edit Land. 1642.
Luthers works) as savouring of Heresy, which were read in and received from
more ancient Writers, as very sound and Orthodox Divinity. This misguiding
Malignity made Genebrard(who took up his pen many times with as much passion
and wrath, as any Soldier takes up his Sword) to impute to Calvin as an
error, that he taught God to be (...), that is, God of himself; whereas
Bellarmin. l. 2. de Christo ca. 19.
Bellarmine (a man of more moderation then he) understood the truth of that
Tenet, and so defended an enemy against a friend, Calvin against Genebrard.

And though Maldonat. Comment in Joh. 6.
Maldonat were a Jesuit as Bellarmine was, yet his hatred of Calvin made him
as adverse to the truth (for his sake) as Genebrard was: for he deserted an
Exposition of Scripture, and took up another, though less warranted (by the
testimony of the Ancients) because it was more cross to the Tenet of Calvin;
and even to this day, we may observe many whose malignity (like that of Ahab's
toward Micaiah) shutstheir eyes against the light of Information; and
therefore they will not read what an Adversary writes against their conceits;
for having taken in their opinions by a partial affection, they keep out the
contrary by prejudicial disaffection, though it be never so true, and in
rejecting truth (by what hand so ever it be offered unto them) they are both
unwise and wicked.

The like operation (to the prejudice of reason) may be observed in hope and
fear, sorrow and joy; for the first, how are men befooled by their hopes in
entertaining for truth many improbable and (sometimes) impossible reports:
because they wish things were so, they hope they are so, as they are reported;
Quod valde volumus facile credimus.
for men easily believe and confidently hope for that they heartily desire,
though there be little ground for it, as the foolish Merchant, who having a
Ship abroad, took every Vessel that coasted toward the Port to be that of his
lading. The excess of such hope (in spiritual matters) has been an occasion
of Ship-wrecke to many a soul; for it has made them so to presume of mercy,
as to put themselves more audaciously upon the desert of Justice, and in stead
of working out their salvation (with fear and trembling) Phil. 2.12. to work
out their damnation with a confident jollity; This hope (contrary to that
well-grounded hope, Roman. 5.5.) makes men ashamed, (as being a means to make
them fools) and a sign they are so: and it will end (if thus they hold on) in
shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2.

And how foolishly does extremity of Fear make the wicked fly (when no man
pursues him) Prove. 28.1. And what a gross and mad mistake does a wicked
fugitive make, when (through fear) hetakes the sound of a shaken leaf for a
drawn Sword, Levit. 26.36. and flies from it to save his life; he that shall
judge of his head by the faintness of his heart (in such a case) cannot but
think him a very fool or a madman, to conceive such danger (where there is
none at all) as well as a Coward, running away to some refuge of safety.

And what folly, and how frequent a folly is it in many, out of fear of the
creature to rush upon the displeasure and indignation of the Almighty Creator (
who is a consuming fire, He. 12. and the last) when they dare not (for fear of
offense and danger from man, (whose life is but a vapor, Jam. 4.14.) be really
and zealously religious, least the profane should set upon them with
reproachful contumelies, whereby they expose themselves (which none but very
fools would do) upon the greatest peril that can be imagined, the
fearefullest doom of the holy Ghost, Revel. 21. concerning the fearful (such
as are afraid to be good and to own God for their Lord) Who with the
unbeleeving and other offenders, shall have their parts in the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone, v. 8. of that Chapter.

It is said of Sorrow that it is an Res est ingeniosa dolor.
ingenious thing, yet the excess of it, makes a man foolish, as it did Ahab,
who (when he was denied the vineyard of Naboth the Iesraelite) betook him to
his bed, would look upon no man, for he turned away his face, and shut his
mouth against his meat, he would eat no bread, because he could not drink the
wine of that vineyard (as his own) 1 King. 21.1. There was folly and sin in
his concupiscence of another man's goods, having better of his own, verse. 2.
Folly and sin in his sorrow, because it was without cause, without measure,
and it brought forth madness and mischief for a remedy or cure of his
discontent, as you may read in the same Chapter from the seventh verse forward.

And in the Story of Nabal it is showed, that (when Abigal had told him in what
danger he had been by David's indignation upon his denial of his humble,
moderate and necessary request) His heart died within him and he became as a
stone, 1 Samuel 25. v. 37. which was not (it is like) through fear, for the
danger was past, but through sorrow, that he had so unwisely and ungratefully
returned David evil for good, to the great peril of himself and family; and
when his heart was like a stone, how stupid was his head?

But howsoever it be doubted what passion was so predominant in Naball as to
put his understanding, and it may be his senses also, out of office: certain
it is that excessive sorrow makes many foolishly neglectfull of themselves, and
irreligiously defective in their duty to God: for some when they have buried a
friend, forbear the Church, because they cannot endure the sight of an Hearse,
or any memorandum of his mortality, whom it is like while he lived they had
entertained as an Idol, and by such sorrow (their sin and punishment both)
is their carnal Idolatry scourged, and their sin punished with sin.

I may not here omit a pertinent observation out of the Book of Wisdom
(which though to us it be Apocriphall, with Papists it is Canonical, and
against them it is a good proof, as now I shall produce it,) It is this, a
Father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he had made an Image of his
Child, soon taken away, now honored him as a god which was then a dead man,
and delivered to those that were under him ceremonies and sacrifices, Wisd.
14.15. and a few verses after, so the multitude allured with the grace of the
work, took him now for a god, who (a little before) was honored as aman,
ver. 20. and this was an occasion to deceive the world, ver. 21. by drawing on
Idolatry.

Immoderate sorrow for the dead, required comfort to the living, that comfort
was ministered, by a resemblance of the dead, that resemblance was made an Idol,
that Idol was worshipped with ceremonies and sacrifices, and with that worship
was the world deceived; here is a chain of many sins and follies, and the
first link of that chain was excessive sorrow.

Which sometimes makes a wiseman to think and speak, and do like a fool,
David was the man who was much commended for his wisdom, 1 Samuel 18.5, 14, 15,
30. 2 Samuel 14.17. and he showed himself wise, in acting the part of a madman,
1 Samuel 21.13. but when Absalom was dead, his sorrow for him was so exuberant,
that it drowned his discretion, and made him such an immoderate and unadvised
mourner, as if Ioab had not recovered him out of that fit of fond lamentation,
he had brought upon himself a greater evil, then any befell him from his
youth until then, as you may read, 2 Samuel 18.33. and chap. 19. from the first
verse, to the end of the seventh; and it was the general folly of the
Israelites, (under the Egyptian bondage) that for sorrow and grief of heart,
they would not hearken unto Moses, Exodus 6.9. who came unto them from God for
their deliverance.

Joy (if kept within due compass) cheereth up the spirits, quickneth the
brain, and sharpneth the wit, but (if it go beyond it) does hurt it much, but
not help it at all, for as folly is joy to him that is destitute of
understanding, Prove. 15.21. so is joy a folly in him, both a means to effect
it, and a mark to discern it; and in some degrees it proceeds to madness,
else the Wiseman would not have acknowledged, that he said of laughter it is
mad, Ecel. 2.2. and how madly do many delights mislead a man, when they bring
him to be a lover of pleasures more then of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. though in his
presence be the fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore,
Ps. 16.11.

And even of those joys which have a good relish in Religion, some of them (in
their predominancy) are impediments to a right apprehension of things; for when
our Savior (after his Resurrection) appeared to his Disciples, and offered
them the assurance of many of their senses, for they saw him, heard him, and he
said unto them, behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me
and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have Luke 24, ver.
39, 40. yet they believed not for joy, but wondered, ver. 41.

And in the twelfth of the Acts of the Apostles, we read that when Peter (upon
his miraculous deliverance out of prison) came to the house of Mary (the mother
of John whose surname was Mark,) ver. 12. and knocked at the door, a Damsel
coming to it, and having heard his voice, went hastily back, and told them
within who it was that was without, they said she was mad, ver. 15. but sure
she was (at the least) somewhat foolish, and her excessive joy was the cause of
her folly, for she opened not the door for joy, ver. 14. whereas if her mind
had been prudently composed, she should rather have made them within to stay a
little for the joy they expected not, then have kept Peter without from the
entrance he knocked and looked for.

And surely we find in the experience of our own times, that those who addict
themselves so much to delights, as to have their carnal sports and pastimes,
(on the Sabbath day) are the most ignorant hearers of Sermons, to whom (before
many others) that of the Apostle may be applied: when for the time they ought
to have been teachers, they have need again to be taught which be the first
principles of the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12.

And for men of more eminent parts, we may observe in some of them, how their
misplaced joys and delights have corrupted their judgments, as Augustine was
so taken up with contentment in the Oratory Aug. Confess. lib. 5. cap. 13.
of Ambrose and of Faustus the Manichean-heretick, that he contemned the
Scripture, as neither eloquent, nor learned enough for the elevation of his
wit, yet Idem Confess. lib. 7. cap. 21.
afterward, when he was both a better and a wiser man, he saw his own
shallowness, and admired the Idem lib. 12. cap. 14.
profundity of Gods holy Oracles, and held the style of them very venerable,
and betook him to the reading and studying of the word of God, with a very
vehement and ardent devotion.

And a Mr R. Bolton.
late Divine of our own Church, well known to my self by familiar
acquaintance, and very well accepted of in the world for his worthy Works; was
before his calling (though otherwise both witty and learned) so vain a Mr. E.
B. in his relation of of his life, p. 12.
voluptuary, (much delighted with Stage Plays, Cards and Dice, and thereby so
unable to judge of true, sound and solid Divinity) that he took M. Perkins but
for a Ibid p. 13.
barren empty fellow, and a passing mean Scholar, whose excellent Learning,
the best Divines (both at home and abroad) have highly approved of, and he
himself, when he had taken double degrees (both of Grace and knowledge)
afterward acknowledged his error, and professed Ibid. p. 14.
he thought him as learned and godly a Divine as our Church for many years
has enjoyed of so He was but little above 40. years old who^ he died.
young a Man.

I will add to these observations of the excess of passions and affections,
and their impeachment of the apprehension of man, the saying of Basil in his
tract of reading profane Authors, which is that a man cannot come to the
knowledge of himself (and he is an ignorant or proud fool that knows not
himself) if his mind be not purged from excess of passions; and the sentence
of the Areopagite Judges, who judged inordinate passions, to be such enemies of
true judgment, that they would suffer no pleaders before them, to make any
Exordiums of insinuation into their affections, least that should erroniously
mislead them to an unrighteous decree.

Thus you see when passions are rampant, true Judgment is couchant, when they
are raised to their Zenith above, judgment is put down to the nadir be low.
If to this distemper of mind there be joined the intemperance of the palate,
and excess of diet, there will be place for the vulgar proverb, Laden
bellies make but leaden wits, for thereby the brain is floated with too much
moisture, and over-clouded with abundance of muddy vapors and exhalations
ascending from the stomach to the head, and the blood engrossed and thickened,
whereby the spirits that are engendered of it, are not so spiritual and active
as those that proceed from purer blood, the proper effect of temperate diet.

Both these excesses, viz. of the passions of the mind and pampering of the
body are the sins of wicked men, and so make up a part of the conviction of
their foolishness: for as the Wiseman says, their own wickedness has
blinded them, Wisdom. 2.21.

Thus much of the impediments to true intelligence and right understanding:
whereof I have said the more, because I conceive, the manifold aggrievances,
under which many mourn, and many bleed, and many are dead, and all that
remain alive, do suffer, and are running on toward an universal ruin; may
be referred (as to one chief cause) to the usurping power of passion over
reason; for when the wisest counsel of the Kingdom (so much the wiser as it
is less subject to passions; and in the This wise body politic can have no
passions. Lord Digby in his Speech in Parliament, April. 21. 1641. in the Book
of Speeches, p. 220.
Lord Digbys judgment it seems to be a privilege of Parliament, to be freed
from them) is called, and come together with mature deliberation, and judicious
advice, to give redress for what is amiss; what is it but passion, which will
renounce such a judicatorie? and expect a juster award from the Sword, then
from the sentence of such an Assembly?

And may we not observe, in this obstinate reluctance to the prudence of the
Parliament, a muster of passions? sure there is too much love toward some, too
much self-love in many, else they would not have the public peace given up in
sacrifice to their particular interests, there is too much desire in diverse,
for somewhat (which their covetousness or ambition aims at) though they
cannot obtain or retain it in a peaceable state; there is (I doubt not) a
height of wrath and hate in many, which will not be assuaged (without wrong;)
there is a guilt and fear in offenders, which cannot endure a diligent inquiry
into their crimes, much less the due punishment which (for them) they do
deserve.

And there are that have hope the shaking of the Kingdom by Warlike
commotions, will make somewhat loose, which may fall to their lot, to mend
their estate, though their manners be much worse then ever they were: and how
jocund are such as never had much of their own, or have prodigally spent it,
when they come to rifle the rich, and to commit so great robberies at once, as
divided into many parcels of pilfery, would serve to furnish all the Goales
with thieves, and to garnish all the Gallowses in the Kingdom, with pendents
of exemplary Justice.

These passionate excesses (like wild Horses) having broke the reins of
regular government, run riot with all manner of rudenes and outrage, and so by
refractory oppositions to reason and religion, so violent, so general, the
greatest part of Great Britain is at this day become a great Bedlam of
madmen, by acting such bloody Tragedies upon each other, as the Popish party
(throughout the Antichristian world) will entertain as sportfull Comedies; so
Calvin conceived of the contentions of Protestants in his time, though they did
not proceed to bloodshed or blows, Deus bone quales and qua^ jucundos Iudes
praebemus papistis, quasi illis locaverimus operam nostra^. Calvin. Epist.
Melanct. p. 52.
good God (says he) what delight and sport do we make the Papists? (viz. by
our dissentions) we could not gratify them more if they had hired us to do
them some acceptable service.

To cast up the particulars into a Total (under the Title to which they
belong, least any forgetting my grounds, should suppose I have digressed) the
sum of what has been said, and particularly proved is this: Whatsoever is an
hinderance to Intelligence, or true understanding (especially in good things)
is a cause of error and folly.

But such is the excess of passions and affections as of Love, etc.

Therefore the excess of passions and affections is a cause of error and
folly, and to make the argument personal as well as real we may thence deduce
thus much,

Whosoever is swayed by the excess or predominance of passions and affections,
is most subject to error and folly.

But so is a wicked person;

Therefore is he most erroneous and foolish.

I should in order now proceed with, and prosecute the other causes of the
conjunction of wickedness and folly, but since they are many (and I have held
you long already) I will reserve the rest for such an opportunity of time and
place, as shall be allotted unto me by the all-wise providence and disposal of
Almighty God, to whom be glory, honor and praise for evermore.

FINIS.

