THE FREE-MANS FREEDOM VINDICATED. OR A true Relation of the cause and manner
of Lievt. Col. John Lilburns present imprisonment in Newgate, being thereunto
arbitrarily and Illegally committed, by the House of Peers, June 11. 1646. for
his delivering in, at their open Bar, under his Hand and Seal, his
PROTESTATION, against their incroaching upon the Common Liberties of all the
Commons of England, in endeavoring to try him, a Commoner of England, in a
criminal cause, contrary to the express tennour and form of the 29. Chap. of
the great Charter of England, and for making his legal and just appeal, to his
competent, propper and legal Tryers and Judges, the Commons of England, in
PARLIAMENT assembled.
TRue bred Englishmen, that have a life to lay down, for the defense of your
just Liberties and Freedoms, (for to such alone J direct my speech) against
all incroachers, destroyers, and usurpers thereof, (be they what they will be)
I desire to let you understand, that I your Countryman amongst many others,
have imbarqued all that I have in this world, in this one vessel, called the
good Ship of good Hope, sailing in the troublesome Seas of England, bound for
the long desired Port, called the safe enjoyment of Englands liberties and
freedoms, the direct road tending thereunto, is the path of Justice, without
the sailing in which road, it is forever impossible to arive there; And
therefore fearing my Venture should lately miscarry, I took upon me the
boldness to write an Epistle to Judge Reeve, one of Englands Pilots, which
has occasioned a desperate Storm to arise against me in particular, though
there be nothing but wholesome and sound advice therein contained.

And perceiving by my late being with the Judge, that it was not well taken,
nor likely to provide for my safety, against Col. Edward King, one of Englands
rotten members, and branches, fit for nothing but to be cut off, out of
Englands pleasant and fruitful Vineyard I thereupon writ further instructions
to my Attorney, to draw up my Plea, which thus follows.

To his faithful and much respected friend and Attorney, Mr. George Ingram, at
his Chamber in Cliffords Inn, these.
Sir
IN the cause wherein Colonel Edward King is plantive against me, in an action
for pretended words spoken by me again him: I entertained you to be my Atturny,
whereupon you appeared for me, and received Kings declaration the last Term
to which I am now to plead, I desire you therefore to plead to the same, that
the said Edward King long before the pretended words alleged by the
declaration, to be spoken viz. in August 1644. was by Master Muffenden and
Master Wolley and diverse others of the Committee of Lincoln, accused and
charged before the Honorable House of Commons of high Treason, for his
betraying the town of Crowland unto the Enemy, as by the fourth Article of the
said charge (whereunto reference being had) will appear. And by the twelf
Article of the said charge, the said Edward King is accused for the negligent
loss and delivery up of Grantham to the Enemy, which is adjudged to be high
Treason, Rot. Parl. 7. Richard 2. Number. 38. 39. 40.

And for further plea, that the said charge was before this action brought, and
yet is still depending, and only examinable and triable in Parliament, neither
is the said Colonel King yet acquitted or tried for the same, besides plead
also that I am a witness so the proof of the said Charge, and so not
compellable to make further answer, or oath plea then this, until the said
King have had his trial upon the said Charge of high Treason in a
Parliamentary way. This I hope the Court will accept and approve of, for a
satisfactory and plenary answer and plea to his declaration, which you may draw
up in form as you shall find cause, whereunto I do Authorize you, and for
this pleading, this shall be your warrant and discharge, this I thought good to
do for the preventing of any colorable advantage, Colonel King might seem
to have, or any ways take through my neglect, or for want of a warrant to you
to plead to his declaration, a judgment should pass for him against me by
default.

I have written to Master Justice Reeve, setting forth the true state of the
cause, a printed copy I left at his house for him, which I perceive he has
perused, another I send you here enclosed, whereby you may be the better
informed, and enabled to draw up my plea, and what you shall do herein
according to this warrant, I shall allow, in testimony whereof to this my
warrant I have subscribed my hand, and set to my seal this ninth day of June
1646. and rest,

Your affectionate and faithful friend JOHN LILBVRNE.
Sir, if you think fit to show this to Judge Reeve or any other I shall approve
of it.




Being moved out of mature consideration, to give him these instructions,
because, (as J told him) if J should plead in a formal way to the Plea,
guilty, or not guilty, I should thereby be the beginner of a dangerous
president of destructive consequence to the wholl Kingdom, because that if a
man entrusted, did turn traitor, and a company of honest men did endeavor,
according to their duty, and to avoid the grievous sin of perjury, did
endeavor to bring him to condign punishment for his treason, and for that
end* referred Artickles of high treason in Parliament against him, with their
names to them, and they, by reason of many public businesses, by reason of
the wars in, and distractions of the Kingdom, cannot conveniently, for half
a year* a year or more, try and adjudge the business, the traitor or accused
person, being a crafty fellow, full of ill gotten money, and corrupt Alies, and
because that his trial is delayed, he picks quarrels against his just
prosecuters, and arests them in actions of 2. or 3000 l. at the Common Law, for
calling him (as really he is) traitor, and tosseth and tumbleth them, yea and
it may be, by an unjust Puntillo in Law, brings them unto unavoidable ruin, by
Common Law, which principally is inherent in the oracles of ^rr^ng Judges
breasts, who it may be, two hours before he passes sentence, is not resolved
what to decree for Law, and so by this means every honest man that complains
of a knave or traitor in the Parliament, or is a party interested, in making
good the charge against him, may by such ways and means (by reason of delay
in judgment, which is not his fault) be brought by his cunning adversary into
the Common Law Briars, as I am by King, who ought by Law to be in Prison fast
by the heels) and so all honest men forever discouraged in such a cause, to
complain of such transgressors, let them act treason against the State
universal and representative, and do what they will; and this is just my case
with Col. Ed. King, as by my printed letter to Judge Reeve, I have truly and
clearly declared.

But by my foresaid instructions sent to my attorney, I gave him authority (if
he pleased) to show them to the judge, which for ought I know to the contrary
he did, which it may be may occasion a complaint from him, or some others
against me to the Lords, for immediately upon it, I am summoned before them,
their warrant thus follows.

Die Mercurij 10. June, 1646.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Liev. Col.
Lilburn, shall forthwith upon sight hereof, appear before the Lords in
Parliament, to answer such things as he stands charged with before their
Lordships, concerning a Pamphlet, intittuled, the ^ust man's justification, or a
Letter by way of Plea in Bar. And hereof he shall not fail, as he will answer
the contrary at his peril.

Ioh. Brown. Cler. Parl.
To the gentleman Usher attending this House, or his Deputy.



The Officer coming June 11th. last past to my House, about 6. of the Clock in
the morning, called me out of my Bed, and after I had read his warrant, I told
him that if there were not a tie of respect laid upon me to the Lords, for
their fair and courteous dealing with me about my business, that was lately
depending before them, I would not in the present case, obey their warrant, nor
twenty more of the like nature, but would defend myself in my own house (which
is my Castle) against all that in such cases they should send unto me, to the
death, because they have by the Law, no authority at all to make me dance
attendance upon them, in the present case, or to try me a Commoner, in any
Criminal cause whatsoever, ceither for Life, Limb, liberty or estate, which I
told him was the case now in hand, for his own warrant did su^mon me to appear
to answer a charge then before their Lordships, and this I wished him to tell
them must be my plea at their Bar at which, having promised him to appear,
he departed, so fitting my self in the best manner the present In-comes of God
enabled me for the brunt.

J took my Journey toward Westminster, and in the streets meditating, desired
God according to his wonted manner to direct me, I presently had contrived in
my own brain, without any humane help in the world, a Protestation and appeal,
my heart being set up so high to go on with it, although it should be present
death unto me, so I took sanctuary at a friends lodging to compile it in a
method, which being done I transcribed it fair with my own hand, and then set
my hand and seal unto it, and being loath to run so high a contest with the
House of Peers if by any means possible I could avoid it.

I repaired to a Lord a member of that House, and told him my whole heart in my
intentions, showed him my paper, and read part of it to him, and desired him to
till some more of the Lords of it, if he judged it convenient, that so they
might a little better consider of it before they brought me to their Bar, and
forced me to do that that would tend to their extaordrnary dishonor, or my
ruin and destruction, and do it I both must and would by Gods assistance (I
told him) if they called me to their Bar, telling him I judged it as base an
action in me (both in the sight of God and man) to betray my known and
fundamental liberties, as with my own hands to cut my own throat, protesting
unto him, that if he and the rest of the Lords indevoured to destroy Magna
Charta and to tread, it under their feet, as they would do if they meddled with
me in this case, I would draw my sword against them every man as freely as I
would do against the King, and the desperatest Cavalier with him, with much
more that then I told him he departed to the House, and I imediatly by water
followed him, and what he did in it I do not fully know, but I was not called
in till about one a clock:

And being commanded to their Bar, the Earl of Manchester (their Speaker)
commanded Master Smith to show me my printed Epistle to Judge Reeves, and asked
me (to this effect) if I knew that book, and whether I did not leave (or cause
to be left) one of them at Judge Reeves house for the Judge himself.

Unto which I replied, my Lord, if it may stand with the pleasure of this
House, I desire to know whether or no you have any formal or legal charge
against me in writing, if they had I desired to see it? that so I might read
it, and then I would give them an answer to their question

Whereupon after a little pawze and looking one upon another, the Earl of
Stamford stepped up and with much zeal pressed his Lordship to hold me to the
question, (so says the Earl of Manchester) answer to the question.

My Lord (said I) under favor, I conceive the thing I desire of your Lordship,
is very just and rational (and so it is if you consider their own summons
which expressly commands me to appear before them to answer a charge) but if
nothing will serve your turn but a possitive answer to the question, then my
Lord there is an answer in writing under my hand and seal, which I will
justify and maintain to the death, I beseech you it may be read;

And with this I gave my paper to Master Smith their Cleark then at their
Bar: Whereupon the Earl of Lincoln stepped up and said to the Speaker, my
Lord what have we to do with his paper? command him to answer to the question.

Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne (says the Earl of Manchester) the Lords command
you to answer positively to the question, unto which I replied my Lord, in that
paper in Master Smiths hand is my answer to the question, and to all others
whatsoever that you shall ask me, and no other answer I have to give you,
neither shall I, and if that will satisfy you well and good, if not, seek it
where you can have it, for I for my part shall give you no other, where upon I
was commanded to withdraw.

And one of the Lords commanded the Cleark to give me my paper, (for says he,
what shall we do with it) but I refused to take it, and told them, I would
not meddle nor make with it, there it was, and it was enough to me, that I had
delivered it at their open Bar, do what you will with it, for my Lords, I am
as careless as you are, whether you will read it or no, so the Cleark threw it
after me, but I would not meddle with it, but withdrew, the words of which thus
follows.

The PROTESTATION, PLEA, and DEFENSE OF Lieutenant Colonel JOHN LILBVRNE.
Given to the Lords at their Bar, thursday June 11th. 1646. with his Appeall
to his competent, propper, and legal tryers and Judges, the COMMONS of
ENGLAND, assembled in PARLIAMENT.
My Lords,
THis morning I received a summons under your Clearks hand, to appear upon
sight thereof before your Lordships in Parliament, to answer such things as I
am charged with before your Lordships, touching a Book called by your Warrant,
a Pamphlet entitled, the Just man's Justification, or a Letter by way of Plea
in Bar. My Lords I told your Messenger, Mr. Bakers son, that your Lorships
had dealt friendly, honorably, and fairly with me in my apprehension, in my
late business, being in a legal and Parliamentary way, transacted, first by
the House of Commons, and so brought before your Lordships, which did lie as a
tie upon my spirit, by way of Obligation, and now I would repay it, in laying
aside (so far at present my privilege, as I am a Commoner of England) as in
obedience to your summons (salvo jure) to appear at your Bar, although (as J
told him) your Lordships, by Magna Charta and the Law of this Kingdom have
nothing to do with me, being a Commoner in any judicial way, to try me in a
criminal cause either for life, limb, liberties or estate, which is now the
present case betwixt your Lordships and me, as appears by your own summons,
and this I desired your messenger to tell your honors must of necessity be my
plea at your Bar.

But that it may appear that I do nothing headily or rashly either in contempt
of your just rights and powers, which I desire you may long enjoy, always
provided, you endeavor not my ruin and destruction with them, neither out of
any desire in the least to contest with you, which in me to do, ( I
acknowledge) would argue abundance of ingratitude, it being my principle to do
to others as I would be done to myself; and as much as in me lies, to endeavor
to live in peace with all men.

But to be robbed of my life, or give way to be made a slave to any whomsoever,
either by a voluntary giving up, or in silent suffering to be taken from me, my
native, natural, just legal and hereditary freedoms and liberties, I am
resolved rather to undergo all extremities, hazards, miseries, and deaths,
which possibly the wit of man can devise, or his power and tirany inflict.

And therefore my Lords, you being Peers as you are called, merely made by
prerogative, and never entrusted or empowered by the Commons of England, the
original and fountain of Power, Magna Charta the English man's legal birth
right and inheritance, so often bought and redeemed with such great seas of
blood, and milions of money, has justly, rationally, and well provided that
your Lordships shall not sit in judgment, or pass sentence in Criminal
causes, upon any Commoner of England either for life, limb, liberty or estate,
but that all Commoners in such cases shall be tried only by their Peers and
equals, that is to say their fellow Commoners, as is amply and effectually
declared in the 29. chapter of that great Charter, which previledge and immunity
cannot justly be taken away, from the free Commoners of England by any power
whatsoever on Earth, without a better and larger given in the room of it, for
all betrusted powers must and ought to be for the good of the trusters, Book
decl. Page 150.

And this Charter in all ages has in an especial manner been maintained,
preserved and defended by our Progenitors, and in a special manner confirmed
by 5. of Edward 3. chapter 9 the words be these, that no man from henceforth shall
be attached by any accusation, nor fore-judged of life nor limb, nor his land
Tenements goods or chattles, seized upon otherwise then by the form of the
great Charter, which is further confirmed by the said King, in the 25. of his
Reign, chapter 4. and by the petition of Right-made in the third year of this
present King; and the Act made for the abolishing the Star Chamber etc. made
this present Parliament, therefore my Lords as a free Commoner of England, I
do here at your open Bar protest against all your present procedings against
me in this pretended Criminal cause, as unjust and against the tenor and form
of the great Charter (which all of you have sworn unviolably to observe and
caused the Commons of England to do the same And therefore my Lords I do
hereby declare and am resolved as in duty bound to God, my self, Country, and
posterity, to maintain my legal liberties, to the last drop of my blood,
against all opposers whatsoever, having so often in the field etc. advenrured
my life therefore, and do therefore from you and your Bar (as incrochers and
usurping Judges) appeal to the Bar and tribunal of my competent, proper and
legal triers and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in Parliament: in
testimony whereof, to these presents I have set my hand and seal, this present
eleventh day of June, 1646.

JOHN LILBVRNE.

And being not long without, the Gentleman usher came civelly to me, and told
me I must put off my sword and give it to some of my friends, for I must go a
prisoner to Newgate, so desiring to see my Commitment, and to have a copy of
it before I stird to go, I had it accordingly, which thus follows.

Die Iovis 11. June 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburne shall stand committed to the Prison of Newgate, for
exhibiting to this house a scandalous and contemptuous Paper, it being
delivered by himself at the Bar this day, and that the Keeper of the said
Prison shall keep him in safely, until the pleasure of this House be further
signified, and this to be a sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parl.
To the Gentleman Usher of this House, or his Deputy, to be delivered to the
Keeper of Newgate.



My usage to me semes very strange, that for doing my duty, in a just way to
bring Col. King to condign punishment, I should be so t^st and tumbled as I
am, by his means, (that per Iure, ought to dye for his offense or at least by
Law should be in durance, till he receive his just doom) clapped formerly by the
heels, (as in my epistle to Judge Reeve is justly declared) and lately at
Kings suite arrested upon an action of two thousand pounds, and brought into
Court, that have nothing to do with the business, it being dependant in
Parliament, and there tied up to such rules, formallities, and Puntillo's, as
all the reason I have, cannot understand, and then for writing my Plea,
threatened, and told by the Judge himself I had forever undone my self, by
endeavoring to root up by the roots, the fundamental law of England, by which
I enjoy my life, and all that I can call mine, though as I told his Lordship,
although he were a Judge, yet under his Lordships favor, I conceived he was in
an error, I having not in the least, meddled with any fundamental, known or
visible Law of England.

For the Law that I meddled withal, was merely, and only an invisible,
uncertain, and unknown Law, that resided in the Oracle of his Lordships breast,
and his fellow Judges, which (as I told him) I thought no man in England knew
besides themselves, no nor I thought they themselves neither, no not two hours
before they decreed, and adjudged it for Law.

And yet for all this I must be forced to dance attendance (contrary to Law) to
answer a charge without form or fashion in Law, at the Bar of the House of
Peers, who knew very well, or at least wise might know, that I knew as well as
themselves their power, jurisdiction, and the Prerogative Fountain, from whence
they sprung, as well as any of themselves, having sometimes discoursed of that
subject freely with some of them.

And having lately (though unwillingly) contested with those, to whom by
nature and interest, I am a thousand times more related unto then to them,
merely out of this principle, that I will not be a slave unto, nor part with
my just liberty to any.

But I clearly perceive the hand of Joab to be in this, namely, my old back
friend the Earl of Manchester the fountain (as I conceive) of all my present
troubles, who would have hanged me for taking a Castle from the Cavaliers in
Yorkshire; but is so closely glu'd in intrest to that party, that he protected
from justice Colonel King, one of his own Officers, for his good service in
treacherously delivering or betraying Crowland to the Cavaliers, and never
called, nor that I could hear, desired to call to account his Officer, or
Officers, that basely, cowardly, and treacherously, betrayed and delivered
Lincoln last up to the enemy, without striking one stroke, or staying till so
much as a Troop of Horse, or a Trumpeter came to demand it, his Lordships Head
has stood it seems too long upon his shoulders, that makes him he cannot be
quiet, till Lievt. Genesis Crumwels Charge against him, fully proved in the House
of Commons, be revived, which is of as high a nature I believe, as ever any
charge given in there, the epittomy of which I have by me, and his Lordship may
live shortly to see it in print by my means, and for my Lord of Stamford, at
present I desire him to remember but one Article, made at the de-livery of
Exeter, which it may be, may in time cool his furious endeavor to enslave the
free People of England, the earthly Lord and Creator of his Creator, who I am
confident do, and will scorn to be made slaves and vasssals, by the mere
Creatures of their Creature the King. So being straightened in time at present,
I bid you farewell, and rest.

Your faithful Countryman, and a free Commoner of England. JOHN LILBVRNE.
From my Cock-loft in the Press Yard of Newgate, London June 11. 1646.
To the right Honorable the chosen and Representative body of England
Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of L. C. JOHN LILBURNE A Free man of England.
Shows,
THat your petitioner has and does look upon this Honorable House, as the
chosen and betrusted Commissioners of all the Commons of England, in whom alone
(by right) resides the formal and legal supreme power of England, and unto
whom all the Commons of England have given so much of their Power, as to enable
you alone, to do all things whatsoever for their weal, safety peace and
prosperity, the end of all Government, as is most excellently, by your
Honorable declaration of the 17. of April last declared.

The knowledge and understanding of which, has made your petitioner as a
Commoner (in his Countries straits and necessities) to take up arms as his
duty, to fight against the King (the servant of the Common wealth) and all the
forces raised by his Authority (who sought to destroy the end of Government,
the safety and weal of the people) and to be faithful in your said service,
in the midst of many deaths; contemning and slighting, the large proffers of
the Kings Honors and preferments, sent unto him by four Lords, when he was a
prisoner for you at Oxford, for which he was imediatly laid in Irons night and
day, locked up close in a room, a Centinell set at his door, that so he might
not speak with any whosoever, forced to lie on the floor, kept without one
farthing of allowance although he carried not one penny with him to the prison

And within a few days after was (for his continued resolution) arraigned (in
Irons) as a Traitor for his life before Judge Heath, before whom he pleaded to
his indictment, professing unto him at the open bar (when he pressed your
petitioner to save himself) that he your supplyant was not seduced by any to
take up arms, but did it out of a principle of duty to himself, his country
and the Paliament, and that he was resolved to spend his blood in the defense
of his own and his Countries liberties; also your petitioner upon the same
grounds, has often been in the field since, and done good services, and has
continued faithful in all his engagements, and is resolved (by the strength of
God) so to do to the death.

Now for as much as the liberties and freedoms contained in the 28. and 29.
chap. of the great Charter of England, are the best legal inheritance that
your petitioner has, and for the preservation of which, ye have so often
sworn to spend your lives and fortunes, and enjoined the people that trusted
you to do the same, and for the maintaining of which, your petitioner has run
the hazard of so many deaths and miseries as he has done, amongst which
liberties and privileges this is not one of the least (as your petitioner
humbly conceives) that all Commoners whatsoever in criminal causes shall be
tried by their equals or fellow Commoners; nevertheles the House of Lords
(commonly so called) summoned your petitioner to their Bar to answer a
criminal charge there, contrary to the tenor of the great Charter so often
confirmed, and although your petitioner told their Messenger, and afterward
some of themselves, that by Magna Charta they had nothing to do with your
petitioner in such a case, and that if he were called, he must and would plead
this at their Bar, cost it him what it would, and also entreated one of
themselves, to acquaint the rest of his fellow Lords, that he must and would
protest against them, and appeal to his competent proper and legal tryers and
judges your Honors.

Yet notwithstanding they forced your Petitioner to their Bar, and would have
compelled him, contrary to Law, reason, and Conscience, and to the fundamental
liberty of all the free People of England, (so adjudged in his own case of the
Star Chamber etc. by your honors and themselves) to answer to Interrogatories
concerning himself, without showing him any formal and legal charge in
writing, although he earnestly desired to see it, if they had any, which was
refused, and your Petitioner pressed again and again with much vehemence, by
their Speaker, to answer verbal questions, which forced your Petitioner to
deliver at their open Bar his Protestation, in writing under his hand and
seal, as also his appeal to your Honors, his competent, proper and legal
Tryers and Judges; a true Copy of which is hereunto annexed, for which alone,
they committed your Petitioner to Newgate prison, (as appears by the Copy of
their commitment hereunto annexed) all which your Petitioner humbly conceives,
tends to the disfranchizing him of his just liberties and freedoms, (and so to
the making him a slave) and to the violation of their own Oaths and Covenants,
and to the utter subversion, and alteration of the fundamental Laws and
government of this Kingdom, for the preservation of which, so much blood and
treasure has already been spent.

Your Petitioner therefore, as a freeman of England, (who to his knowledge
never did any act that deserves the forfeiting of his birthright) humbly
appealleth to your honorable Bar and Justice, as his proper, competent, legal
tryers and Judges, and humbly prays.

For as much as he is a free Commoner of England, and ought not to be proceeded
against, nor his liberties and freedoms to be taken from him, in any arbitrary
or extra-judiciall way. And for that their Lordships have no power, nor
jurisdiction, according to the Law and constitutions of this Kingdom, to try
and adjudge any free Commoner thereof, for any criminal causes whatsoever,
concerning life, limb, liberty, or estate; And for that your Petitioner is
imprisoned, contrary to the form and tenor of the great Charter of England,
and therefore altogether illegal, and merely arbitrary; That your Honors will
be pleased, according to your unparaleld Declaration of the 17th of April last,
whereby is set forth, that you will not exercise, nor suffer to be exercised by
any other, any arbitrary power, but that you will provide for the safety and
weal of the People, (the primitive end of all government) according to the
great trust reposed in you, and committed to you, by your Im powrers, the
Commons of England, you will take your Petitioner into your protection, and not
suffer him any longer to be kept in prison, and spoiled of his Franchizes and
liberties, but according to the said Charter of liberties, your Protestations,
Oaths and Declarations, the laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, he may freely
be enlarged out of prison, and restored to his just liberty, with just
reparations for his damages, for the great wrongs done unto him, by his
reproachful imprisonment in the infamous prison of Newgate, and the
vindication and freeing of the whole Kingdom (according to their long and just
expectation) from the like usurpation, and encroachments of their just rights
and privledges, and your Petitioner shall ever be ready to spend his life for
you, and his Countries just liberties, and in obedience to all just authority,
to answer any Charge, when the same shall be in a legal way brought against
him.

And your Petitioner (as in duty bound) shall ever pray to God, to enable you
to go on, to finish, and perfect the great things expected from you, according
to the trust reposed in you. JOHN LILBVRNE.
Newgate, June 16. 1646.
A Postscript, containing a general Proposition.
GOD, the absolute Sovereign Lord and King, of all things in heaven and earth,
the original fountain, and cause of all causes, who is circumscribed,
governed, and limited by no rules, but does all things merely and only by his
sovereign will, and unlimited good pleasure, who made the world, and all things
therein, for his own glory, and who by his own will and pleasure, gave man (his
mere creature) the sovereignty (under himself) over all the rest of his
Creatures, Genesis 1.26.28.29. and endued him with a rational soul, or
understanding, and thereby created him after his own image, Genesis 1.26.27. and
9.6. the first of which was Adam, a male, or man, made out of the dust or clay,
out of whose side was taken a Rib, which by the sovereign and absolute mighty
creating power of God, was made a female, or Woman called Eve, which two are the
earthly, original fountain, as begetters and bringers forth of all and every
particular and individual man and woman, that ever breathed in the world
since, who are, and were by nature all equal and alike in power, digniy,
authority, and majesty, none of them having (by nature) any authority dominion
or majesteriall power, one over or above another, neither have they, or can
they exercise any, but merely by institution, or donation, that is to say, by
mutual agreement or consent, given, derived, or assumed, by mutual consent
and agreement, for the good benefit and comfort each of other, and not for the
mischief, hurt, or damage of any, it being unnatural, irrational, sinful,
wicked and unjust, for any man, or men whatsoever, to part with so much of
their power, as shall enable any of their Parliament men, Commissioners,
Trustees, deputies, Viceroys, Ministers, Officers or servants, to destroy and
undo them therewith: And unnatural, irrational, sinful, wicked, unjust,
divelish, and tyranicall it is, for any man whatsoever, spiritual or
temporal, Cleargy-man or Layman, to appropriate and assume unto himself, a
power, authority and jurisdiction, to rule, govern, or reign over any sort of
men in the world, without their free consent, and whosoever does it, whether
Cleargy-man, or any other whatsoever, do thereby as much as in them lies,
endeavor to appropriate and assume unto themselves the Office and sovereignty
of God, (who alone does, and is to rule by his will and pleasure) and to be
like their Creator, which was the sin of the Devils, who not being content
with their first station, but would be like God, for which sin they were thrown
down into hell, reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day Jude ver. 6. And Adams sin it was, which brought the
curse upon him and all his posterity, that he was not content with the station
and condition that God created him in, but did aspire unto a better, and more
excellent, (namely to be like his Creator) which proved his ruin, yea, and
indeed had been the everlasting ruin and destruction of him and all his, had
not God been the more merciful unto him in the promised Messiah. Genesis Chap. 3.

From my Cock-loft in the Press yard Newgate. June 19. 1646. per me John
Lilburne.

Courteous Countrymen to fill up this vacant place I shall desire thee to read
the words of the Declaration of the House of Commons, published 27. Ianu. 1641.
which you shall find in the 41. page of the book of Declarations thus.

And this House does further declare, That all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or dislike, between the
King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
combination or agreement, to be ayding, or assisting, to any such counsel or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any the
things above mentioned; And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
House of Parliament: or the Speaker of either of the said Houses respectively,
and disclaim it, are declared Public Enemies of the State and Peace of this
Kingdom, and shall be inquired of, and proceeded against accordingly. Secondly
the three Votes of both Houses May 20. 1642. which you shall find in the book
of Declarations pa. 259.

Resolved upon the Question

1 That it appears, That the King (seduced by wicked Counsel) Intends to make
War against the Parliament, who (in all their consultations and actions) have
proposed no other end unto themselves, but the care of His Kingdoms, and the
performance of all duty and loyalty to His Person.

Resolved upon the Question.

2. That whenever the King makes War upon the Parliament, it is a breach of
the trust reposed in Him by His people, contrary to His Oath, and tending to
the dissolution of this Government.

Resolved upon the Question

3. That Whosoever shall serve, or assist Him in such Wars, are Traitors, by
the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, and have been so adjudged by two Acts
of Parliament, and ought to suffer as Traitors. 11. Rich. 2. 1. Hen. 4.

Joh Brown Cler. Parliament. 3. The Declaration of both Houses in pa. 576. in
these words* Whereas the King etc.

4. The words in their Declaration for the vindication of Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax. as you shall find pa. 914. in these words, The said Lords etc.

FINIS.

