To the Chosen and betrusted Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled in the
High and Supreme Court of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of ELIZABETH LILBURNE, Wife to Leut. Coll: JOHN LILBURNE,
who has been for above eleven weeks by past, most unjustly divorced from him,
by the House of lords, and their Tyrannical Officers, against the Law of God,
and (as she conceives) the Law of the Land.
Shows,
THat you only and alone, are chosen by the COMMONS OF ENGLAND to maintain
their Laws, and Liberties, and to do them Justice and Right Coll. of decle:
page, 264 336. 382, 508, 613. 705. 711. 716, 721, 724, 725, 726, 729. 730.
which you have often before God and the World sworn to do coli. decl. page
361 ^63. protestation and covenant.
yea, and in diverse of your Declarations declared, it is your duty (in regard
of the trust reposed in you) so to do coli. decler. page: 81, 172, 262, 266,
267, 340, 459. 462, 471, 473 588, 690.
without any private aims, personal respects, or passions whatsoever col
decler: p. 464, 490. 750
and that you think nothing to good to be hazarded, in the discharge of your
Consciences for the obtaining of these ends. coll. declar. page 214.
and that you will give up your selves to the uttermost of your power and
judgment to maintain truth, and conform your selves to the will of God, coli.
decler p. page 666.
(which is to do Justice and Ier. 22. 15, 16, 17.
right, and secure the persons estates and liberties of all that joined with
you, col. decler. page 666. 673.
impricating the Judgments of Heaven to fall upon you, when you decline from
these ends, you judging it the greatest scandal that can be laid upon you,
that you either do or intend to subvert the Laws, Liberties, and Freedoms of
the people, col. decler. p. 264, 281, 494. 497. 654, 694, 696.
which freedoms etc you your selves call, the COMMON BIRTHRIGHT OF
ENGLISHMEN, col. decler. p. 7. 38 140, 845,
who are borne equally free, and to whom the Law of the Land is an equal
inheritance) and therefore you confess in your Declaration of 23. October. 1642
page, 660.
It is your duty to use your best endeavors, that the meanest of the
Commonalty, may enjoy their own birthright, freedom, and liberty of the Laws
of the Land, being equally (as you say) entitled thereunto with the greatest
subject, The knowledge of which as coming from your own mouths and pen,
imboldneth your Petitioner (with confidence) to make her humble addresses to
you, and to put you in mind that her husband above two months ago made his
formal and legal appeal to you against the injustice, and usurpation of the
Lords acted upon him, which you received, read, committed, and promised him
Justice. But as yet no report is made of his business, nor any relief or
actual Justice holden out unto him, although you have since found time to
pass the Compositions as pardons, for the infranchising many of those that
your selves have declared Traitors, and Enemies to the Kingdom, which is no
small cause of sorrow to your Petitioner, and many others, that her Husband who
has adventured his life, and all that he had in the World, in your lowest
condition for you, should be so slighted and disregarded by you, as though you
had forgot the duty you owe to the Kingdom, and your many oaths, vows, and
Declarations, which neglect has hastened the almost utter ruin of your
Petitioner her husband, and small Children: For the lords in a most Tyrannical
and barbarous manner, (being encouraged by your neglect) have since committed
her husband, for about three weeks close prisoner to Newgate, locked him up in
a little room, without the use of pen, ink or paper (for no other cause but
for refusing to kneel at the Bar, of those, that by Law are none of his Judges)
Magna Charta 29. Sir E. Cook 2. part. institutes folio, 28, 29. 46. Rot. 2. Ed.
3.
, the cruel Iaylers all that time refusing, to let your Petitioner, or any of
his friends, to set their feet over the threshold of his Chamber door, or to
come in to the prison yard to speak with him, or to deliver unto his hands,
either meat, drink, money, or any other necessaries; A most barbarous and
illegal cruelty! so much complained of by your selves in your Petition and
Remonstrance to the King, 1. December. 1641. col. decler. 6, 7. 8.
and detested and abhorred there, by you, as actions and cruelties being more
the proper ishues of Turks, Pagans, Tyrants, and men without any knowledge of
God, then of those that have the least spark of Christianity, honor, or
Justice in their breasts: And then while they thus tyrannised over your
Petitioners Husband, they command (as your Petitioner is informed) Mr.
Seargeant Finch, Mr. Hearne, Mr. Hail, and Mr. Glover, to draw up a Charge
against your Petitioners Husband; without giving him the least notice in the
world of it, to fit himself against the day of his Trial, but contrary to all
Law, Justice, and Conscience, dealt worse with him then ever the Star Chamber
did, not only in keeping his Lawyers from him, but even all manner of
Counselors and Friends, whatsoever, even at that time when they were about to
try him, and then of a sudden send a warrant, for him to come to their Bar (who
had no legal authority over him) to hear his Charge read, where he found the
Earl of Manchester his professed Enemy, and the only party (of a lord)
concerned in the business, to be his chief Judge, contrary to that just
Maxim of Law, that no man ought to be both party and Judge, A practice which
the unjust Star Chamber it self, in the days of its tyranny, did blush at,
and refuse to practice, as was often seen in the lord Coventries case, etc.)
And without any regard to the Earl of Manchesters impeachment (in your House)
of Treachery to his Country, by Leut. Genesis Cromwell. which is commonly reported
to be punctually and fully proved, and a Charge of a higher nature then the
Earl of Straffords, for which he lost his head, And which also, renders him
(so long as he stands so impeached) incapable, in any sense, of being a Judge,
And a great wrong and injustice it is unto the Kingdom to permit him, and to
himself, if innocent not to have had a legal trial ere this to his,
Justification or condemnation. And besides all this, because your Petitioners
husband stood to his appeal, to your honors, and would not betray Englands
Liberties, which you have, all of you, sworn to preserve maintain, and defend;
they, most arbitrarily, illegally, and tyrannically, sentenced your Petitioners
said Husband to pay 4000 l. to the King (not to the State) for ever to be
incapable to bear any office in Church or Commonwealth, either Marshall or
Civil, and to lie seven years a prisoner in the extraordinary chargeable
prison of the Tower, where he is in many particulars, as illegally dealt
withal, as he was, when he was in Newgate.

Now forasmuch as the lords as they claim themselves to be a House of Peers,
have no legal judgment about Commoners, that your Petitioner can hear of, but
what is expressed in the Statute of the 14. Ed. 3. 5. which are, delays of
justice, or error* in judgment in inferior Courts only, and that with such
limitations, and qualifications, as are there expressed. which are, that there
shall be one Bishop, at least, in the judgment, and an express Commission from
the King for their meddling with it, All which was wanting in the case of your
Petitioners Husband being begun and ended by themselves alone, and also seeing
that by the 29. of Magna Charta your Petitioners husband, or any other Commoner
whatsoever, in criminal cases are not to be tried otherwise then by their
Peers, which Sir Edward Cook, in his Exposition of Magna Charta (which book is
printed by your own special authority) says is meant [Equals] folio 28. In
which (says he) folio 29* are comprised, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen,
Citizens* Yeomen, and Burgesses of several degrees, but no Lords, And in page:
46 he says: No man shall be disseised,] that is, put out of seison, or
dispossessed of his freehold (that is says he) Lands. or livelihood, or of his
liberties, or free customs,] that is, of such franchesses, and freedoms, and
free customs, as belong to him, by his free birthright, unless it be by the
lawful judgment] that is, Verdict of his Equals, (that is) (says he) of [ men
of his own condition:] Or by the Law of the Land] (that is, to speak it once
for all) by the due course and prosses of Law. And (says he) No man shall be
in any sort destroyed, unless it be by the Verdict and judgment of his Peers
[that is, Equals, or by the Law of the Land. And the Lords themselves, in old
time, did truly confess: that for them to give judgment of a Commoner, in a
criminal case, is contrary to Law, as is clear by the Parliaments record in
the case of Sir Simon de Bertford: 4. Ed. 3. Rot. 2. the Copy of which is
still in the hands of M. Henry Martin, And they there record it, that his case
who was condemned by them for murdering King Edward. 2. shall not be drawn in
future time into president because it was contrary to law, they being not his
Peers, that is his Equals. And forasmuch as the manner of their proceedings was
contrary to all the formal ways of the Law publicly established by
Parliament in this Kingdom, as appears by several Statutes 5. Ed. 3. 9. 25.
Ed. 3. 4. 37 Ed. 3. 8. 38. Ed. 3. 9. 42, Ed. 3. 3. 17. Ri. 2. 6. Rot. parli.
43. Ed 3. Sir Io: Alees case, Number 21, 22, 23, etc. lib. 10. fol. 74. in case
dela. marshalsea, see Cook, 2* part insti: fol. 46.
which expressly say, that none shall be imprisoned nor put out of his
freehold, nor of his frencheses, nor free Customs, unless it be by the law
of the Land, And that none shall be taken by Petition or Suggestion made to the
King, or to his Counsel, unless it be by endictment, or presentment of good
and lawful people of the same neighborhood where such deeds be done, indue
manner, or by procees made, by writ original at the Common Law: Which Statutes
are Nominally and expressly confirmed by the Petition of right, by the act made
this present Parliament for the abollishing the Star Chamber, and thereby all
acts repealed that formerly were made in derogation of them. But contrary
hereunto the lords (like those wicked Justices spoken of by Sir Edward Cook,
in stead of trying her husband by the Law of the Land, proceed against him by a
partial trial, flowing from their Arbitrary will, pleasure, and discression.
For though they summoned him up to their bar, June 10. 1646. to answer a
Charge, yet they refused to show it him, or give him a Copy of it, but
committed him to Newgate June 11. 1646. (although he behaved himself then,
with respect toward them, both in word and gesture) merely for refusing to
answer to their Spanish Inquisition-like-Interogatories, and for delivering his
legal Protestation. There mittimus being as illegal as their summoning of
him, and their other proceedings with him. There commitment running, To be kept
their not till he be delivered by due course of Law; but DURING THEIR PLEASURE,
which, Sir Edward Cook says, is illegal, 2. part. insti: fol. 52, 53.
and then locked up close, that so he might be in an impossibility to
understand how they intended to proceed against him.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays to grant unto her husband the benefit
of the Law, and to admit him to your Bar himself, to plead his own cause, if
you be not satisfied in ( p) 2. part. insti. 5. 1.
the manner of his proceedings, or else according to Law, justice, and that
duty and obligation that lies upon; forthwith to release him from his unjust
imprisonment, and to restrain and prohibit the illegal and arbitrary
proceedings of the lords; according to that sufficient power enstated upon you;
for the enabling you faithfully to discharge the trust reposed in you, and to
vacuate this his illegal sentence and fine; and to give him just and
honorable repairations, from the Lords, and all those that have unjustly
executed their unjust commands; It being a rule in law, and a Maxim mad use of
by your selves in your Declaration 2. 1642. col. decle. p. 723.
That the Kings illegal commands, though accompanied with his presence, do
not excuse those that obey them much less the Lords, with which the Law
accords; And so was resolved by the Judges, 16. Henr. 6, See Cook. 2. part.
Insti. fol. 187.
And that you will legally and judicially, examine the Crimes of the Earl of
Manchester, and Col. King, which the Petitioners husband and others, have so
often complained to you off; and do examplary justice upon them according to
their deserts; or else according to Law and justice punish those (if any) that
have falsely complained of them. And that you would without further delay give
us relief by doing us Justice. All which, she the rather earnestly desires,
because his imprisonment in the Tower is extraordinary chargeable and
insupportable. Although by right, and the custom of that place, his fees,
chamber, and diet ought to be allowed him and paid out of the treasure of the
Crown) he having wasted and spent himself with almost six years attendance,
and expectation upon your honors for justice and repairations against his
barbarous sentence etc. of the Star Chamber, to his extraordinary charge and
damage, and yet never received a penny, and also lost diverse hundreds of
pounds, the year, he was a prisoner in Oxford Castle for you, neither can he
receive his Arrears for his faithful service with the Earl of Manchester,
although he spent, with him, much of his own money, And the last year, by the
unadvised means of some Members of this Honorable House was committed prisoner
for above 3. months, to his extraordinary charges and expenses; and yet in
conclusion, he was releast, and to this day knows not wherefore he was
imprisoned, for which according to law and justice he ought to receive
reparations, but he never yet had a penny, all which particulars being
considered, do render the condition of your Petitioner, her husband, and
children, to be very nigh ruin and destruction, unless your speedy and
long-expected justice prevent the same, Which your Petitioner does earnestly
entreat at your hands as her right, and that which in equity honor and
conscience cannot be denied her.

And as in duty bound, she shall ever pray, that your hearts may be kept
upright, and thereby enabled timely and faithfully to discharge the duty you
owe to the Kingdom according to the GREAT TRUST reposed in you, and so free
your selves from giving cause to be judged men that seek your selves more then
the public good. Elizabeth Lilburne.


