A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS: At their Public
Fast, Holden in MARGARETS Westminster. Febr. 24. 16 46./47.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOT Staffordiens. A Member of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed by S. I. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard, 1647.

Die Mercurii 24. Febr. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Master Leigh do from
this House give thanks unto Master Lightfoot, for the great pains he took in
his Sermon he Preached on this Day at Margarets Westminster before the House
of Commons: And that he do desire him to Print his Sermon, wherein he is to
have the like Privilege in Printing of it, as others in the like kind usually
have had.

Hen. Else. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

TO THE HONORABLE House of COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
VEstrum est imperare, nostrum obsequi: Your Commands wraped up in your Desires
I have desired to obey, both to the Pulpit and the Press. Not that I can
tender any thing either to your ears or eyes, which may be worth your
acceptance, but that I cannot but most readily tender obedience when you
command, and labor to serve you, when you call for my service. The subject of
that hours Discourse that I had then before you, and of this Book, which is
the same, was very well worthy your eyes and ears, if the managing of it had
but fallen into a skillful hand; [For what more needful duty to be urged or
to be practiced, then Heart-communication.] But according to my poverty I was
then ready to offer, and you were pleased to accept; and I hope for the like
acceptance now. I humbly recommended the words then spoken to your hearts, and
so I do now the same written: and as I desire to present them now written to
your hands, so do I my self, and all I am or can at your feet; as

Your poor humble devoted

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Honorable House of Commons, at their Monthly
Fast, FEBRUARY 24. 1647.
PSALM. 4. verse. 4. Commune with your own Hearts.
WHen I communed with mine own Heart concerning what subject to discourse upon
before this Honorable and great Audience at this time, me thought this Text
when it came to hand would be very suitable, both for the Auditorie, and for the
Occasion, and for the age wherein we live, and for all the age that we have to
live.

First, for this Honorable Auditorie; for how fitting is it, that they that
spend so much time in needful Conferences among themselves about the affairs
of Church and State, should be minded sometimes of spending some time in the as
needful conferences with their own hearts, about the State and affairs of
their own souls?

Secondly, for this solemn occasion; for how impossible is it, that we should
either deal with God, or with these weighty things that we have in hand, as we
ought to do, unless we commune with our own Hearts, concerning our selves,
and concerning God, and concerning these things; with whom, and about which we
have to deal?

Thirdly, for this age wherein welive: for how proper an answer and a check is
this Text for all the inquisitivenesse and censoriousnesse, that so much raveth
and rages amongst us in these times: To answer Inquisitivenesse, by sending
men to enquire after their own hearts; and to check Censoriousnesse, by
minding men to examine their own selves.

And lastly, for our whole age that we have to live: for while we carry our
Hearts about us, we should carry this duty with us, I am sure we carry the
Obligation upon us, of Communing with our own Hearts.

Thus does the Text suit to us, to our present occasion, and to our present
times: The business is, if our heart would but as well and truly suit to the
Text, and then a perfect harmony and unison were made. Now the Lord so tune my
tongue to your hearts, and your hearts to the Text, and all of us to the duty
that the Text holds out, that I may speak a word in season, you receive it
seasonably, and all of us practice it all the season of our lives, that I may
have cause to bless God that I met with such an Audience, you have cause to
bless God that you met with such a Text, and all of us find cause to
acknowledge that God has been amongst us at this time of a truth. And so in
his name let us fall to work.

THis Psalm by the tenor of it, does seem to be made upon the Rebellion of
Sheba the Son of Bichri, as the Psalm preceding is plain by the Title of it,
to have been made upon the rebellion of Absalom, which instantly preceded that
rebellion. The story of both you have in the seventeenth, eighteenth,
nineteenth, and twentieth Chapters of the second of Samuel, and some references
to both, you have in diverse passages of this Psalm, as it goes along. In the
first Verse David speaks to God, who had enlarged him before, in his former
troubles, caused by his own son, to relieve him now in his present distress
caused by the son of Bichri. In the second Verse he speaks to (...) the men
of Arms, and the men of dignity; that they would no longer despise the glory
of his Kingdom which God has chosen, nor follow after a Kingdom of vanity and
falsehood, as was Absaloms and Sheba's. In the 4. Verse, he speaks against the
Cause and Occasion of the present conspiracy; namely, the anger between the men
of Israel, and the men of Judah, mentioned, 2 Samuel 19 43. where the words of
the men of Israel are fierce, but the words of the men of Judah were fiercer.
This anger he seeks to calm, by that calm admonition in the beginning of
the Verse, Be angry, but sin not: for so might the word be very fitly rendered,
and so it is rendered by the LXX, by the Arabic and others; and as may be well
supposed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 26. And in the seventh Verse he speaks out
his own comfort and confidence, collected and taken up, upon the observation of
a special providence: That since the time that Corn, and Wine, and Oil had
increased to him, and been abundantly sent him in by Nahash, Machir, and
Barzillai, as it is recorded, 2 Samuel 17. 27, 28. The Lord had put gladness
into his heart; for now he perceived that the Lord and his own people begun to
look after him in his distress.

If we thus apply the Psalm unto this occasion, then we know to what persons
to apply the Text, namely to persons, now in great divisions and differences
among themselves: to persons in fiery contestation and in heat of blood about
the man that should govern, and the manner of government, even to persons so
parallel to the temper, or distemper rather of our present generation, that I
would we could as aptly take out the lesson of the Text, as we and those
persons do resemble one another; and as the Text does fitly suit both with
them and us. But I shall not be curious in this parallel and application,
since the Text so properly fitteth all persons, and the lesson in it suiteth
all occasions. For there is none among men, not no occasions that a man can be
about, to whom and when it may not be proper and pertinent to read this lesson,
Commune with your own heart. In the Original it is literally or Syllabically
thus (...) Say in your heart: and so it is closely followed by the Greek; and
so it is taken by the Chaldee: The Greek reads it with some difference of the
Mood indeed, and with one word added to the Clause, but to such a sense as
this, for it reads thus, What you say in your hearts: The Caldee renders the
Text, and the words following it thus largely, Say your Prayers with your
mouth, and your Petitions in your heart, and pray upon your beds, and remember
the day of death evermore.

But I shall not trouble you with such varieties of glosses and interpretations
which I might do copiously; I shall spare that labor, since the words
themselves do speak their own sense, and our English has very well and
properly construed and interpreted them, Speak with, or, Commune with your own
hearts.

It is not every speaking in the heart that the Psalmist here ingageth to; For
the Fool speaks in heart, and says in his heart, there is no God, Psalm 14.
1. The Epicure speaks in his heart, and says, I shall never be moved, Psalm
10. 6. The Atheist speaks in his heart and says, Tush, God has forgotten, he
will never see it, Psalm 10. 11. And these persons to whom David speaks, if
we hit the occasion of the Psalm aright, were ready enough to say in their
heart, we will none of David, and nothing to do with the son of Jesse: But
the Text enjoyneth such a conference in the heart, as that the matters betwixt
a man and his own heart, may be debated to the very utmost, that the heart may
be so put to it in communing with it, as that it might speak its very bottom.
Nor shall I trouble you with the diverse acceptations of the word Heart, when it
is used to signify the spiritual part of man, or when it is taken in a
spiritual sense; else I might show you that sometimes it is taken for the
whole frame of the Soul; sometimes for the one faculty, the Understanding;
sometimes for the other faculty, the Will; and sometimes for that which I may
call a middle faculty, the Conscience; but your own hearts will readily tell
you upon the reading of the Text, that the word Heart in it does mean the last
mentioned, the Conscience, and that communing with a man's own heart, is
nothing else, but searching and trying of a man's own Conscience. And you will
easily see, that the words hold out this needful and useful Lesson to us:
That it is a Duty of most special concernment, Doct.
for every one of us to hold serious Communication and clear Intelligence and
Acquaintance with his own heart. I may well repeat it, for it had need to be
inculcated again and again; And as that golden saying, Brethren let us love
one another, is reported to have been ever in the mouth of John the
Evangelist, so had this as golden a saying, Brethren Commune with your own
hearts, as much need to be ever in the mouth of the Ministers; and this truth
ever in the hearts of the people.

That it is a Duty of most special concernment for every one of us, to hold
serious Communication, and clear Intelligence and Acquaintance with his own
heart.

This must be the subject of my Discourse; and for the proving and clearing of
this position, you see there lie before me these four things. 1. To show you
that Communication and Intelligence may be had and held with a man's own heart;
this de posse. 2. That such a Communication and Intelligence must be; this de
jnre. 3. That this Communication and Intelligence with a man's own heart is to
be clear and serious; this de fieri. And fourthly, that such a serious and
clear Communication and Intelligence with a man's own heart is of special
concernment; this de facto. I shall not be very large in these particulars,
because it is but to prove four things, that I suppose are already granted. I
shall apply my self the rather to be more copious in application.

First, that it is possible for a man to hold a Conference and Communication
with his own heart, I should not need to prove it, if you would but put it to
proof within your own selves. And as he ingeniously proved that there is
motion against one that denied it, by rising out of his Chair, and walking up
and down; So your hearts without me would make this assertion clear, if you
would but seriously and soundly put them to it, that they and you might
confer together, I doubt not but many in this great Congregation have done
this already, and have had many a holy and solemn Discourse with their own
hearts, and conclude the truth of this matter by their own experience as soon
as I name it. But as for such as have not had this practice, nor cannot
conclude this by experience, that never hear nor feel their Conscience
speakword to them: should there come over them some dreadful judgment, or
should there come before them some horrid apparitions, or should there come
unto them a sure message of an instant death as there did to Ezekiah; then if
they will but turn their face a little to the Wall, retire their thoughts a*
little to their hearts, they may chance hear their hearts speak something to
them, which it may be they will like but ill, and there it may be they would
feel by experience that there is something in them that would have talked with
them heretofore if they would have talked with it.

But for the better clearing of this to you at this time, [at one time or other
all must have experience of the truth of it in a better manner or a worse] give
me leave a little to recall you a little, first, to the viewing of some places
of Scripture; and then to the viewing of your selves within: or to the
consideration of the Frame and Fabric of your own souls.

First, you may see this asserted even by the experience of him in his own
particular that gives this lesson here to all in general, in Psalm. 77. verse
6. I commune with my own heart, and my spirit makes diligent search. Here
David and his heart are talking together; and see what his heart says unto him
in Psalm. 16. 7. My reins instruct me in the night season. For that the heart
and reins do signify the same thing, when they are taken in a spiritual
sense, and that they so taken, do signify the Conscience, is a matter so
copiously evident in Scripture that I need not to use any instances to prove it.

And so in John 8. 9. when our Savior bids, whosoever is without sin cast
the first stone at the woman taken in adultery, it is said of the company
present, that (...) they were convicted of their own conscience: The word in
the Greek does properly signify a conviction by argument. There was something
within them that over-argued them, and talked and disputed them clean away.
And so in Romans 2. 15. the consciences of the very Heathens spoke as it were
within them, and gave in evidence either for them or against them, their
thoughts either accusing or excusing, (...), inter se invicem, as the vulgar
Latin, as in a discourse among themselves.

But in the second place, consider and study your selves a little within, and
you shall find that the Lord has made every one of our souls of such a Frame
and Fabric, as that there is an Echo in them: the soul able to propose
questions to it self, and to give it self an answer, Like Sisera's mother in
the fifth of Judges and the nine and twentieth she asks, why stay the wheels
of my sons chariot? And her wise Ladies answered her, nay she answered her
self.

To this purpose may I apply that phrase in Deuteronomy. 4 39. Know therefore this day
(...) and make a Return or an answer to thine own heart. And to this purpose
I cannot but apply that gloss of the Chaldee Paraphrast upon Genesis 2. 7. the
latter part of that verse. And God made man of the dust of the ground, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and that in man became a
speaking spirit. Most true in every parcel. That that God breathed into man
became a spirit, or a spiritual substance, and it became a speaking spirit,
inabling men to talk and speak one to another: and it became a speaking
spirit within him, able also to speak and confer with it own self.

There are three parts of the soul as I may so express it, of distinct and
several notion and consideration, as there are three things in the sun, light,
heat, and motion: so in the soul, the understanding, the will, and the
conscience. The Conscience lies as it were in the midst of the other two, as
the Center of the soul, or the midst of the heart, as Prove. 4. 21. whither
there is conflux of whatsoever is good or evil in either of the other
faculties.

Now either of those have its discourse with it self, and conscience if it act
aright, has its conference with them both.

1. The intellective Faculty of the Soul, or the Understanding, does in a
manner talk to the will when it offers it good or evil things to its choice
or refusal, and it does in manner talk to it self in every reflex it
exercises, when it does not only attain to the knowledge of things, but is
also able to say to it self I know, I know them, as 1 Ioh. 2. 3. Hereby we
know that we know him.

2. The Elective faculty of the Soul or the Will, does confer and debate
with, and within it self upon every Election or refusal, when it does either
entertain or lay aside, what is presented to it by the understanding, choosing,
or refusing, upon such a discourse and argumentation with it self as this; I
choose it because it is good, and I refuse it because it is evil.

But 3. the Participle faculty of the soul, as I may so call it, or the
conscience, as it is lodged between the two other, so it receives something
from both, and returns something to both: From the Intellective faculty it
receives knowledge and memory, and it is told by them that such and such things
ought to be done, or they ought not to be done: And then it makes an answer
back to them by conviction, and says, I have done such things, or I have not
done them. From the other faculty, or the Will, it receives moovednesse and
affecting: and when that faculty of the soul is moved or affected with the
grievous or fearful case of another; the conscience answers, why this case is
mine own, and makes a return to the affections by compunction, and says
alas, what have I done in thus doing?

And thus does the soul hold a debate, conference, and communication within,
and with it own self: And thus in the first place is that particular somewhat
cleared, de posse, that it is possible for a man to confer and commune with
his own heart.

Secondly, That this is not only a possibility, but a duty, not only a may be,
but a must be, the Text is enough to prove if we had no more to prove it: For
the Holy Ghost does here command the thing, and where the Holy Ghost commands,
it creates a duty.

But we find this also enjoined again, and again in other places of
Scripture, though under other terms and expressions. As 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a
man examine himself, and so let him care, etc. And 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your
selves whether you be in the faith, etc. And that in Lam. 3. 40. Let us search
and and try our ways, etc. And that in Zeph. 2. 1. As it is rendered by some
(...), Excutite vosmet iterumque excutite, as some express it, Fan your
selves, and again fan your selves; and diverse other places that speak not
indeed the very same Language with the Text, yet speak the very same sense,
and command the same thing, as a duty for every one of us, to commune with our
own hearts.

This duty lay upon Adam in his innocence, and so should have continued upon
him in that estate, had he continued in it. For God turned him into the Garden
with a natural Law written in his heart, and a positive Law uttered in his
ears: This positive Law directed him only as concerning eating or not eating:
but what must he be directed by, as concerning his general conversation
beside? why Adam Commune with thine own heart, and that will tell thee.

This duty lay also upon him when he was fallen: and so does it upon every one
of us, though under the same fall with him. For though the purity, integrity,
activity, and vigilance of our Consciences be utterly gone by our fall and
sin; yet is not Conscience it self utterly gone. It is so essential a part
of the soul, that a soul cannot be a soul without it; and it is so
inseparable a part of man, that even death it self cannot divorce him and his
Conscience. So that though we have not such a Conscience as Adam had before
his fall; yet have we a Conscience; and though we cannot have recourse to it,
upon the same terms that he might have had to his, namely, as to a certain
rule; yet may we, and ought we to have recourse to it upon other terms;
namely, as being a Witness, Judge, and Moniter in the midst of us.

I might show how the nearenesse of our hearts unto us does challenge this
duty; and how the dearness of our hearts unto us should claim it and enforce
it: but I will conclude this, as Paul to Agrippa: Honorable and Christian
auditory, do you believe that this is a duty? I know you believe it: and I
would that I and all that hear me this day, could as readily comply with the
duty, as we cannot but readily confess it, if we will but commune with our
own hearts about it.

Thirdly, the practice of this duty, or the communication with our hearts is to
be serious, and the intelligence and acquaintance we hold with them to be
clear; as the woman's scrutiny for her groat in the Parable to search and sift
every corner of the heart, according to that of Solomon, Prove. 20. 27. The
Spirit of man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the
belly.

You may observe two Arguments used, Genesis 44. the one by Joseph, and the other
by his Steward, to impresse it upon the sons of Jacob, that a serious and true
search would be made for that silver Bowl that they had stolen: the one taken
from the Cup it self: Is not this the Cup in which my Master drinks, and for
which he will make a very trying search. And the other (...) Experiende
expertetur,
from Joseph himself: Know ye not that a man of my authority could make a very
trying search. Two such kind of Topikes may I take up for the proof of the
thing in hand, that the conference with our own heart ought to be with all
seriousness* The one taken from the matter of that Conference, and the other
from the temper of our hearts.

1. The matter whereof we should or can commune with our hearts is most
serious, and sancta sancte, it must be most seriously done: As the two men
that went to Emmaus, communed sadly, because they communed of a very sad
matter, Luke 24. 17.

The only matters that a man can or does commune with his own Conscience
about, are the matters and concernments of the soul: For as the Conscience
lodges in the very Center of the soul, as I showed before, so there are the
proper and the most close transactions of the soul managed. It is the Center,
as was said before, whither if there be any good in the soul it flows
thither; and what evil there is in the soul, it has its Conflux thither also.

The understanding in its actings by knowledge and memory; and the will in its
actings by affections and desires, practices upon and about things of an
extrinsicall and foreign Cognizance, as well upon things of a man's own
concernment, but the Conscience medleth only with ones own concernment, and
that concernment of the soul. As natural affection in the proper sense, or
affection of a relative nature, moves not, nor acts not, unless the thing
presented to it be of its own interest: As a Father or Mother, seeing the
misery or miscarriage of other men's children, their affections may be moved
with it, but natural relative affections, stir not till the story comes
home to their own Children. So is it with Conscience, the knowledge knows
natural, politic, foreign, alien things, and the memory retains them: so
the affections are taken up with foreign, alien, natural politic matters,
and are moved with them: but the conscience moves not, unless the concernment
come home to a man's own soul, and the matter reach thither.

As I might exemplify in Achan, if his Conscience had been awake to have done
its part, his carnal reason and knowledge told him, the Wedge of Gold, and the
Babylonish Garment, would be a rich prize, and mend his estate very well: then
his Will and Affections answer, I would I had them, and they consent and put on
to compass them. Here are extrinsick businesses only in agitation with these
faculties about wealth and growing rich: But then a good Conscience if it had
been there would have stepped in and answered: I but how will this comply with
the good of my soul? And so might I instance in other things, as in men's
desiring riches, honors, pleesures; their carnal Understandings and Wills,
like Haman and Zeresh, cast and conspire, and consent together to compass what
they desire, and it will be so brave for their port, so contentive to their
persons, so beneficial to their posterity: These are fine things, and easily
swallowed, but they are but outside things, there is not a word yet of the
consequent and concernment to the soul: that conscience must take into
consideration, or the consideration of that is quite laid aside: That is proper
for conscience only to act about, and to take to conscience and consultation.

And thus it appears that our conference with our own hearts had need to be
serious, because the things that we can confer with them a bout, only are of
a most serious and weighty nature: viz. the things of the soul only.

And secondly, the needfulnesse of such a serious conference, will appear also
upon the consideration of the deceitfulness of our own hearts. Talk close
and home, and have clear intelligence with them, or else they will deceive us,
they will tell us a thousand lies. As he in Story, who hearing a man talk to
himself as he walked along the high way, and questioning whom he talked
withal, was answered, I talk to my self; why then says he, Cave ne cum malo
loquaris, take heed thou talk not with one that is naught. You may resolve
upon this, whenever you come to Commune with your own heart, that you have
to deal with a very Cheat and a Jesuit, a Proteus, a Jugler; that if you put
it not home to it, will not tell you one true Story amongst a thousand: I speak
this by the sad experience of a base, false, cosening, and deceitful heart of
mine own: and I believe other men's hearts are of the same mettle. O wretched
heart thou have deceived me, and I have been deceived, thou have been too
strong for me, and have prevailed. But I speak this also upon the Warrant of
him that knows all hearts, even the Spirit of God, that discerns the things
of the Spirit, Jer. 17. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Ah sad Climax, deceitful, and deceitful
above all things, wicked, and desperately wicked, and so bad of both, that who
can know it? Such another miserable gradation ye have expressed concerning the
very same subject in Genesis 6. 5. The frame of the thoughts of man's heart was
wholly evil, was only evil, and was evil continually.

There is a mutual or reciprocal cozenage betwixt a man and his own heart,
mentioned in Scripture: Sometimes a man deceives his own heart, as James 1.
26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart. Sometimes a man's heart deceives him, Esa. 44. 20. A
deceived heart has turned him aside that he cannot deliver his soul, nor say,
Is there not alye in my right hand: And thus Manasseh against Ephraim, and
Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against Judah. Sometimes the man cozens his
heart* and sometimes his heart cozens him, and always both these cozenings
help to undo the poor Soul.

Sometimes a man cozens his Conscience with carnal reasonings, as Achan did
his, I shall be enriched, and I shall not be discovered: and as the rich man in
the Gospel did his, My purse is full, and my Barnes are full, therefore soul
take thine case: And so many and many man undoes his own Soul by cozening his
conscience with the bribery of carnal reasoning, I am yet in health, I may yet
repent time enough, I shall not see evil, and the like, etc.

And on the other hand, the conscience is as ready to cozen a man, and to tell
him Peace, peace, when there is no peace.

Sometimes it deceives a man with half answers, as Ananias and Saphira would
have done Peter, with half the money: and makes a man taken up with conviction
only, which the wickedest man under heaven may have, and makes him to think
that he has sorrow enough for his evil actions, when he has only remembrance
of them.

Sometimes it deceives a man with false answers, as Jacob deceived his Father
with Kids flesh instead of Venison; and makes a man believe he has compunction
enough for his evil actions, when he has only some gripes of self love, or a
fear of punishment, as was Ahabs humiliation.

Sometimes it deceives him with silence, and he thinks all is well, because it
tells him nothing ill: as the Fool is counted wise when he is silent; and the
Atheist thinks God like himself when he holds his peace, Psalm. 50. 21. so
many a poor deceived soul thinks his conscience a good conscience, and
himself in a good case, because he hears no otherwise from his conscience,
for it is silent, and says nothing at all to him.

Thus as it is in the Italian Proverb, Con art e conjuganno si vive il mezzo
anno,
Con juganno e con art si vive l' altra part.
With deceit and cozenage men live half the year, and with cozenage and
deceit they live the other half: one part of our lives we deceive our own
hearts, and another part of our lives, our hearts deceive us: And thus our
lives go on in a mist and cloud of delusion, we deceiving, and deceived, and
all because we hold not communication with our own hearts close enough, and put
them not to it home, as Ahab did Micaiah, to tell us the truth and nothing
else, in the name of the Lord: And thus we see very good reason why the
communication with our hearts should be serious, and the intelligence we hold
with them clear.

Fourthly, That this is a duty of special concernment, is even proved already
ere we are aware, in the things that have been spoken, but give me leave to
add one or two things more: As,

1. That this is a duty of so great concernment, that it is naturally the first
duty of all other of the Second Table: For as to know God, is properly and
methodically the first duty of the first and great Commandment, so is this as
properly and methodically the first duty of the Second: for as it is impossible
to love God as we should, unless we first know him; so it is impossible we
should love our neighbor as our selves, unless we first know our selves.

2. It is a sine quanon, a duty or a matter, without which we can neither hear
any condition as we should, nor perform any duty as we ought. As a golden
thread was to be twisted with every twine and thread of the Ephod and
Breast Plate, or it was not rightly made; so if this action of communing with
our own hearts be not intwisted with every one of our actions, we can neither
undergo any thing, nor perform any thing is becomes us to do.

First, How is it possible for a man either to bear prosperity, or endure
adversity unless he seriously talk with his own heart about his own
deservings, and about these conditions: This was the way of David that gives
the Counsel in the Text: when great prosperity and happiness accrews unto
him, in the promise that the Lord makes to him and to his house, he sits down
and talks with his own heart about his deserving of no such thing, Who am I,
or what is my fathers house? 2 Samuel 7. 15. And on the other hand, when great
adversity lights upon him, and he is fallen into perplexity, the way he takes,
is to sit down, and amongst other things to have serious conference with his
own soul about the bearing of such a thing; Why ^rt thou cast down o my
soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? Psalm. 43. 5.

Secondly, As impossible is it to do any duty aright, and as we ought to do,
unless the practice of this duty go before it or along with it. Be they the
spiritual duties we owe to God, or the external duties we owe to his Worship,
or the conscientious duties we owe to our own hearts, we cannot possibly
perform them aright, unless this salt be with the Sacrifice, unless we
commune with our own hearts about them.

1. As for the spiritual duties we owe to God: as to serve him with an upright
heart, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. To walk before him with an humble heart, Mic. 6. 8. To
offer to him a contrite heart. Psalm. 51. 17. To draw near to him with a true
heart, Heb. 10. 22. To receive his word with a good heart, Luke 3. 15. and one
for all, To love him with all our heart, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. How is it possible we
should rightly do these things, if we have not acquaintance with our own
heart? what difference is there betwixt serving a strange God, and serving the
true God with a strange heart? Naball and Abihu are punished for offering
strange fire to the true God, as well as Ahaz and Manasseh for offering true
fire to afalse God. Let me use the style of the Apostle, How can men believe in
him of whom they have not heard; so how can men serve him aright and heartily,
with a heart they do not know?

2. As for the external duties that we owe to Gods Worship, as our hearts are
to go along with them, or else our performing of them is nothing, so are we to
commune with our own hearts upon them and in them, or else we shall never
bring our hearts unto them: It was very pertinently written over the Temple
door at Delphos, (...), Know thy self, for certainly no Temple duty can be
well performed without such a knowledge.

Can thou pray without acquaintance with thine own heart: the very Hebrew
word that signifies Praying, tells thee no, for the word (...) that is
commonly used to signify to pray, does properly signify, To judge a man's
self. Think thou, thou can receive the Sacrament aright without the
exercise of this duty? the Apostle tells thee nay, but let a man first examine
himself, and then let him eat, 1 Cor. 11. 28.

The like might I say of singing of Psalms which must be done with the Spirit;
1 Cor. 14. 15, Of believing, which must be done with the heart; Romans 10. 10. Of
repenting, of trembling at the Word, and of other such duties, how is it
possible they should be done by us as they should, if we have no acquaintance
and communication with our own hearts how they stand to them and in them?

And lastly, as for the duties we owe to our own hearts, as washing them; Jer.
4. 14. Watching them; Pro. 4. 23. Humbling them; Lev. 26. 4. and the like: Who
can do them, but he that conferres and is in acquaintance with his ownheart?
wash my heart? why, I never asked it, not ever took notice how soyled and
poluted it was: Watch it? Why I never observed, nor it never told me of any
danger it was in, nor what need it had to be watched and looked after; nor can
I go about to humble it, for it and I were never so well acquainted, as I to
know how hard, how proud, how unhumbled it is. Must not these be answers of him
that holds not intelligence with his own heart? And must not this want of
intelligence needs spoil the offices that a man owes to it? And thus you see
in the fourth place, the great concernment of this duty of heart communication:
And thus, though thus rudely and unskillfully, have I somewhat cleared the
truth of the Doctrine in clearing these four particulars. And now shall I
crave leave in three particulars more to make use of it, and to bring it home
to our selves by application.

First, By way of just reproof of those that neglect and forget so special a
duty, and of so special concernment.

Secondly, By way of exhortation and persuasion to every one to set seriously
to the practice of this duty.

And thirdly By recommending to you some Quaeres and Interrogatories to propose
to your hearts to practice this duty with them upon.

First then, since it is thus, that communing with a man's own heart is so
special, and so important a duty, it shows ^se 1.
that they justly deserve to be reproved that neglect this duty and hold no
acquaintance with their own hearts at all: And because I will be sure to aim
this reproof aright, I shall in the first place begin with my self, and mine
own heart, for there is a subject that I know, and am sure deserves
reprooving. It may be I shall find some Company in this Congregation, that
will join with me in this matter, and that will find my case theirs, and that
will make my words to be their own. There is a Patheticall Story of Origin,
that when he had fallen into a foul Apostasy, and after some recoverie from
it, came into a Congregation, and was desired to preach; he took the Bible and
opened it accidentally at the fiftieth Psalm, and his eye fell first to read
these words in the sixteenth and seventeenth verses of it; But unto the Wicked
God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
words behind thee? upon reading the words he remembered his own fall, and in
stead of preaching he fell a weeping, and wept so bitterly, that he caused all
the Congregation to weep with him.

The forepart of the story is too much mine own case. I would you would make
the latter part of it somewhat yours. I profess I cannot read the words of my
Text, but like Pharaoh's Butler after a long forgetfulness, I must confess my
fault of that forgetfulness to day; and I cannot speak what I have said upon
this Text, but that I must subscribe to the woman of Tekoas words in her speech
to David, that I speak these things as one guilty myself. Is any one here
whose heart has been a stranger to him, as my heart has been; and is any
ones heart here as my heart is, desirous to be sensible, and to be humbled for
this our strangenes, come give me thine hand, and let us join hand in hand,
and heart to heart to give glory to God by Confession, and to take shame to our
selves in a just reproof, for that we have so much neglected so great a duty,
and for that we have so greatly forgotten so near a concernment.

Behold beloved among your selves, and regard, and wonder marvellously; for I
can tell you a sad story in your ears, which ye will not believe though it be
told you. I have lived these forty years, and somewhat more, and carried my
heart in my bosom all this while, and yet my heart and I are as great
strangers and as utterly unacquainted, as if we had never come near one
another: And is there none in this Congregation that can say the like?

He spoke very good sense and much piety in it that complained that he had
lived so many years above threescore, and had been a Student in the Scripture
all his time, and yet could never attain to take out that Leston in the first
Verse of the nine and thirtieth Psalm, That he should not offend with his
tongue. But it is to speak a thing of monstrousness and amazement to say that
a man should live so long a time as I have done, nay as some do, to
threescore, to fourscore years, and yet never to get into acquaintance, and
to communication with their own hearts: who could believe such a report? and
yet how common is this amongst men?

I remember it was a wonder to me before I knew this City, to hear of Families
living so near together all their lives, as but one Chimney back between them,
and yet their doors opening into several streets, and the persons of those
Families never knowing one another, or who they were. And me thought that
passage of Martial was a strange one when I first met with it, Quisquam est
tam prope tam proculque nobis; and that observation of the Jews remarkable,
that sometime two Verses in Scripture be joined as close together for place as
close can be, and yet as distant for sense and matter as distant may be: and
that relation of Seneca wondrous, if I miss not my Author, that a man through
sickness did forget his own name: and that of the Naturallists as wondrous,
that there is a Beast, that as he is eating his meat, if he but once turn his
head from it, he forgets it. But now a sad experience within mine own self
has lessned these wonders, and does make a thousand of such strangenesses as
these seem nothing; for I and my heart were borne together, grew up together,
have lived together, have lain together, have always been together, and yet
have had so little acquaintance together, as that we never talked together, nor
conversed together; nay I know not my heart, I have forgotten my heart. Ah my
bowels, my bowels, that I could be grieved at the very heart* that my poor
heart and I have been so unacquainted. And is not the same case yours too? I
appeal to our own hearts, if they will but speak, and I beseech you put them
to it. How inquisitive ever were we after their estate, or how it goes with
them, amongst all the inquisition that we make after other things. We are fallen
into an Athenian age, as Act. 17. 21. spending our time in nothing more then in
telling, or in hearing news, or some new thing: How go things here, how
there, how in one place, how in another: But who is there that is inquisitive,
How are things with my toore heart? We are ever and anon lighting upon one or
other of our acquaintance: and take a turn with them in the Hall, or turn
aside with them in the street, and enquire, What news? how do things go? But
who turns aside with his own heart into a private retiredness, or falls into
Discourse with that, and enquires, Ah poor heart, how go things with thee? We
stick not to tell how much money we spend in new Books, and how much time we
spend in reading them; but it it is a shame to tell how little time we spend,
and how little pains we take in reading over and perusing our own hearts.

As it is sometimes used in your House Honorable and Honored, to put a question
whether a question shall be put, so I beseech you apply the Text, Commune with
your own hearts, whether you have communed with your own hearts: you spend
much time day after day worthily and piously in conferring and communing among
your selves about the things of Church and State; but wh^^ time do you spend
either day or night in conferring or communing with your Consciences about the
affairs of your souls? You Ladies and Gentlewomen, that bestow so much time
in visiting and conferring with your glasses and your friends, what time do
you bestow in visiting and conferring with your own hearts and souls?

You that spend so much time in conversing and conferring with others about the
matters of your Callings and Employments, what time have you taken up, or do
you employ, in conversing with your selves about the matters of your nearest
concernment?

I am the bolder to ask this question, because my Text leads me to speak to
your hearts, and it is a question that you must once answer.

Weigh but in the Balance of a serious consideration, what time you have spent
otherwise, and what time you have spen in this, and for many scores or hundreds
of hours or day that you owe to your hearts in this duty, can you write
fifty? or go to the heap of your whole life, and where there should have been
twenty measures employed about this business, can you find ten? Or where
there should have been fifty vessels full of this duty, can you find twenty?

It was a senseless and a sensual will that the Epicure made, that bequeathed
to his Player, to his Cook, to his Jester, and to such as fed and forwarded his
carnal Delights, Talents and Pounds, but Philosopho obolum, a half penny
only to him that would have taught him wisdom. Is not the distribution of
our time and converse much after the same proportion? Days and years bestowed
upon the affairs of the world and worldliness, months and weeks spent and
laid out in converse with friends and strangers, but scarce a minute in
converse with a man's own heart.

There are four things especially that cause this strange and senseless
strangeness and unacquaintance betwixt a man and himself, and they are these:

1 Idleness; when men will not take the pains to put their heart to it to
discourse with them. Heart-communication is not an casie work, and few there
be that for idleness will undertake it.

2 Carelessenesse of their own souls: And so they are not careful to
discuss with them the things that concern them.

3. Worldliness; which takes up all the time and thoughts that should be laid
out upon the heart: As Hos. 4. 11. and as it was with him, 1 Kings 20. 40.

And 4 Readiness to be deceived; Decipi vult populus, men love leasing, as
Verse 2. of this Psalm: and as by our fall, Et bonum perdidimus and
voluntatem, we not only lost good, but also the will to it: So in our first
deception by Satan; we had not only a deceit put upon us, but a
deceiveablenesse, nay a readiness to be deceived put into us.

And thus, as Tempora quaedam surripiuntur, quaedam cripiuntur, quaedam
excidant: so it is with the care of, and converse with our own hearts. What
the Palmer-worme of Idleness leaves, the Locust of Carelessenesse eats: and
what the Locust leaves, the Canker-worme of Worldliness devoures: and what
that Canker-worme leaves, the Caterpillar of readiness to be deceived has
consumed: and thus has all converse and communication with our own hearts
been eaten up.

It is recorded of Jobs friends, that when they came to him, and knew him not,
he was so changed, that they wept and rent their garments, Job 2. 12. I would
this might be the conclusion of this first Use or Application, or the fruit of
all that I have spoken hitherto: Look upon your own hearts, do you know them?
when had you and they any talk together? how much of your time have you spent
in communication with them? Have you not been strangers? have you not been
unacquainted? have you not forgotten them? Be humbled, bemoan, be affected that
you have been such strangers, and lay your hands upon your hearts, and resolve
to be so no more.

And that is the second way that I would apply my self and Use 2.
the Text to you, and that is by way of exhortation, to incite you, and by
supplication to entreat you, to apply your selves seriously unto this duty held
out in the Text. It is strange that we should need to be exhorted or entreated
to such a thing as this, to be acquainted with our own hearts, as that is
strange in 2 Cor. 5. 20. that men should need beseeching to be reconciled to
God: but it is so true, that we need beseeching and entreating, that by what
shall I beseech and entreat it so as that I may prevail in my entreatie. I
beseech you by the Lord, by the Bowels of mercy to your own selves, by your
hearts, by your souls, by any thing, by all things most dear unto you, be no
more strangers to your own hearts; vindica te tibi, acquaint your selves with
your selves; and as Abraham to Lot, let not us fall out, for we are brethren:
so be not forraigners to your own hearts, for they are your own. By what may
I move you, or what words or Arguments may I take up to persuade you.

Think but of these two or three particulars, for I shall spare to mention
more.

1. How sad a thing it is for a man to carry a conscience within him, that is
altogether dumb and can say nothing, or that when it speaks, tells him lies
and nothing else: you grieve for this in your children, be affected with this
in your own souls.

2. Your hearts by disusance of conferring with them may even be utterly lost
to you, as if you had no heart at all. I have read of some that have come to
such a pass, as namely those in Hos. 7. 11. Ephraim is like a silly Dove
without a heart.

3. Time will come when your hearts will speak, and shall speak the truth to
you, though you will not put them to it to do so now: as Hab. 2. 3. At an
appointed time it shall speak and it shall not lie: It may be in this life by
terrors, certainly after death by a gnawing worm, the dumbest, stupidest, and
most senseless conscience that is now upon earth, shall be put to it to speak
and to speak out to him, that had the least care or thought to put it to
speak as the Text injoynes. Thou will not strain thine heart to speak to
thee, and to tell thee the truth now: but God will wrack it, and shall make it
speak and not be silent, and How will thine heart endure then, when the Lord
shall come to deal thus with thee? as Ezekiel. 22. 14. Men will not make their
hearts to hear, nor to give them a faithful answer, but as Esaias 26. 11. They
will not see, but they shall see: They will not hear, but they shall hear:
they will not answer according to truth, but a time shall come when they shall
answer. Put them to it betimes, your selves by a conscienscious communication,
lest God put them to it by a wracking horror.

I shall not go about to give rules how a man and his heart should come to
talk, and how they should talk together, I would I could learn the lesson my
self; only give me leave to mention some things to you which cannot choose but
be very conducible to such a purpose.

As 1. use Retiredness: This thing this verse teaches, when it directs to
commune with our own hearts upon our beds. And this Isaac practiced, when for
his Meditation he went into the solitariness of the fields, Genesis 24. 63. As
when Moses was alone in the wilderness, and there studying on God, God comes
to him, and talks with him, Exodus 3. So when we get alone purposely to study
our hearts, it is a great deal more probable that our hearts will come to us,
that we may entertain discourse with them, then in the crowd of company and
employments. Set some time apart out of your public or particular occasions,
to deal with your hearts, and to talk with them, as David after the public
business is done, turns home to visit and to bless his own house, 2 Samuel 6.
20.

2 Put on Resolutenesse to put your hearts to it, and to hear even the worst
that they can speak to you: as Eli to hear the word of the Lord from Samuel,
be it what it would be it never so bitter. Men are naturally and generally
unwilling that their heart should tell them all it knows, and what it ought.
And as it was a very strange, and a very sad prayer, that is made by the
Prophet Hosea for the women of Ephraim, Hos. 9. 14. Give them, O Lord, what
will thou give? Give them a miscarrying womb, and dry breasts: A miserable
thing to women as may be, yet such a Petition for them as there could not be a
fitter in their present posture; for the children borne were but borne to the
slaughter.

So it is a very sad and doleful condition to a man as possibly can be, to have
his conscience dull and dumb, or to be telling him nothing but what is false:
and yet there are thousands that account this the best posture and condition,
that their conscience can be in, and they cannot find in their hearts, and
they will not take the pains to have it in any other temper, nor would they
have it speak any other ways to them: Ah but let a righteous and a wakefull
conscience smite me, and not suffer me to sin, but tell me of it: this balm in
the end will not break my head, and I shall rejoice at last in such strokes.

3. Take opportunity by any wakening of Conscience, that puts it to speak, to
keep it waking and speaking; If any piercing Sermon, or Fright, or Cross, or
some such thing, do rowze your heart at any time, and set it a talking and
telling you the truth, do like Benhadads servants by Ahab, catch at the
opportunity, plye it and keep it speaking, and let it not grow dumb again:
If you let it alone never so little, like the Disciple in Matthew. 6. 40, 4^. it
will be asleep and speechless in a trice again. I have known him that has
had sometime very fair and familiar society and communication with his own
heart, and they have discoursed seriously and truly one to another, have asked
questions, and given answers without deceiving; when something or other has
come between, and interrupted a while this friendly converse, and my beloved
was gone my heart got out of the way, and neither it, nor a word from it to be
found again.

4. When your hearts and you are talking together, do it as if you were
talking together at Gods dreadful Tribunal: as if you were, and as you must
once be, debating the case there. Charge it as Paul does Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1.
as before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, that it speak the truth, and that
there be no dissembling betwixt you. Before them must you once debate the
matter to the very bottom, do it as before them continually.

And now for conclusion of all, and for our third application I shall crave
leave to leave some few proposalls and Interrogatories Use 3.
with you for your own heart; that as Elijah before his departure out of the
world, left a Letter behind him for Joram the King of Judah to ruminate upon
when Elijah was gone, 2 Chronicles. 21. 12 So before we part, I beseech you take
from me something along with you, to commune and confer with your hearts about,
when you and I see not each other, and when you are alone.

I shall do herein by you as an Israelite did by the Priest, when he would
have him to enquire something for him of the Lord by Urim and Thummim: I shall
put my questions into your hands, and shall leave you to go to the Oracle of
your own hearts, and to take their answer.

Some general things I would propose to all of you in general, and some
particulars to some particulars. I might to all in general desire you to
question with your own hearts, you that have been preserved in these sad
times, and you that have been Spectators of the sad judgments that have been
upon us, what betterings you have had by all these judgments, and what
thankfulness you have showed for your preservation.

But the first question that I would desire every one that hears me this day,
to propose to his own heart is but this; Heart how do thou? A few words, but
a very serious question. You know this is the first question, and the
first-salute that we use one to another, Sir how do you? I would you would as
constantly practice it with your own hearts, Heart how do thou do? how is it
with thee for thy spiritual estate? Get but a true answer from your heart upon
this quaere, and then you will see that I have some cause and reason why I
propose this question: I know what the answer of most hearts will be, before
the quaere is proposed, namely, that it will be either like Elisha's about
Benhadad, No danger of death, though he dyed presently; or like the Pharisees
in the Gospel, Lord, I thank him, I am not as other men's hearts are. Tell that
heart I believe it not, tell it you believe it not: examine it further, press
it like Ahab to Mioaiah again; leave it not, like Dalilah, till you have its
utmost: Get a right, and direct, and real answer to this question, and then
answer me whether it were not worth the asking. This is but the very same
quaere in substance that the Apostle proposes, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your
selves whether ye be in the faith.

Secondly, propose this question to every one of your hearts; heart what will thou do? or, Heart what do think will become of thee and me? As that dying
Roman once said, Animula vagulae blandula, etc. Ah poor, wretched, miserable
soul, whither art thou and I a going, and what will become of thee, when thou
and I shall part? This very thing does Moses propose to Israel, though in other
terms, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they would consider their latter end. And oh that
you would propose it constantly to your hearts to consider and debate upon.
Would you but dispute these two questions every one with his own heart, and
put his Conscience to it to give its clear opinion in these matters, or to
speak the very truth, what it thinks concerning your present and future
estate, I should think I had gained exceeding much by this discourse that I
have made, and that I have spent this hour exceeding happily.

And now Honorable, and most Honored, give me leave to level the last things
I have to speak at your hearts only, and to leave my closing up of all that I
would say, closed up in your bosoms. I would feign commend something to the
serious conference of your selves and your own hearts, when they and you are
together alone; and they are but these three things; What has been done for
you, what has been done before you, and what you have to do.

I would first have desired you to debate seriously with your own hearts, What
the Lord has done for you. But here my labor is happily prevented, and the
work is better done to my hands, then my hands can do it. I shall only add
this, that if you should write such a Book as the Prophet Esaias did, Esaias 8. 1,
2. A great Roll of a Book, and yet nothing written in it but this word,
Maher-shalal-hash-baz over and over again, from beginning to end: so a great
Book, and nothing in it but this written, what God has done for the Parliament
of England, it would fill a great Volume to write what he has done: and when
you have written what you can, you can never write enough.

But secondly, I shall desire you seriously to commune with your own hearts,
of What London has done for you. London the mirror and wonder of Love, Zeal,
Constancy, and Bounty to you and your cause: London, the Arc that has kept
you safe, in this deluge of blood that has over-flowed the Nation: London,
your Ophir and Indies that has supplied you with masses of Money and Plate in
all your wants: London, your bank and stock of men and hearts: London, your so
much, that you had not been what you are, if it had not been for London:
London, that under a Parliament has preserved a Nation: and London, that under
God has preserved a Parliament. Was it ever seen, or could it ever be related,
that any City under heaven ever did, as London has done in love and kindness
to your Cause and you? What one among you can look into his own heart, but he
must needs find London written there?

And now your friend Lazarus is sick; your faithful, constant and loving
London complains she is not well: She finds and feels some sore diseases
breeding in her Bowels, that are like to undo her: She comes to you to crave
your help, and powers her complaints into your bosom. Might I not say, as the
Jews once to Christ, You deserve to do for her? But I shall only say,
Commune with your own hears what London has done for you, and I need say no
more.

If any one shall think that I am now besides the mark, and speak of a matter
that I have nothing to do withal, I shall produce my warrant to speak what I
do, and refer to a proof and testimony of what I speak.

My first Warrant is your gratitude, that is so ready to be thankful to those
that have showed you kindness, that you will not take it unthankfully from
those that do mind you who have showed it.

My second is, the obligation, that you and I, and all the Nation stand in to
London, who has been to us all such a stay, and Wall, and Sanctuary in our
troubles, as she has been, that for Londons sake who can hold his peace?

But thirdly for my Scripture warrant for this, I shall desire you to turn to a
Sam. 24. where the Servants of David do account it a duty as it seems, for
they practice it accordingly, to tell David of the kindness that Jabesh Giliad
had showed to Saul, though he knew it before.

And as for the proof of what I have spoken, I shall desire, whosoever thinks
I am besides my mark, but to turn to his own heart, and there lay down a
leaf, till his heart and he do meet alone, and then to read and study
impartially. What London has done for the Parliament of England, and then let
him judge of what I say.

I know your gratitude will be ready to say still with David, in 2 Samuel 9. Is
there yet any of the kindred of Jonathan, that has showed us kindness, that
we may show them the kindness of the Lord again?

Why yes, I beseech you in the third place, Commune with your own hearts what
the Ministorie of England has done for you. My Warrant for the moving of this
unto you, besides your gratitude, I may show from diverse of your own Orders,
and expressions. For in how many of your addresses and desires to the City or
Country for the raising of moneys, men, or Horses, have you still laid much
upon the hands and fidelity of the Ministers, to promote the Work, and to
stir up their several Congregations to it? And I beseech you now Commune
with your own hearts, how they have discharged that trust and performed your
Injunctions: And in your thoughts take up an account how they have behaved
themselves in that matter, and whether they have not been exceeding faithful.

Have not these Trumpets, and these poor Pitchers had their share, and a good
share too, in bringing down the walls of Jericho, and the Camp of Midian?
Have not they, like that Story in Ezekiel 37. if I may so express it,
Prophesied you up an Army. The Witness of these things is in the whole
Kingdom, and a witness of them is in your own bosoms, and there I leave the
consideration of them to be laid to heart.

But now where is this Ministry of England, that have been so faithful, so
useful to the cause in hand, and so forward to forward it upon all occasions?
how are these real sons of Zion now brought low, despised, oppressed, and trod
under foot in many places of the Land? Their Ministry by many scandalled for
Antichristian, their persons vilified, sometimes violenced and endangered,
their subsistence impaired, their quiet interrupted, their families
impoverished; the function of the Ministry how nearly undone? Now I beseech
you commune with your own hearts what the Ministry of England has done for
you, and what others have done to it; and then consider what you have to do.

A second thing that I would humbly recommend to the serious and sad debate and
communication of your hearts, is, What has been done before you.

And here I cannot but take up a little of the style and manner of expression
that is used by Paul, when he was to plead his case before Agrippa, Acts 26.
2. I think my self happy, most noble Senate, that since my Lot is fallen to
speak unto you from this place, that my Lot has fallen upon such a day, as
that it is now but fourteen days to the time that you have appointed to
humble your selves before God for some of the mainest things that I am to
speak about. I know that they that are resolved to debate of these matters to
the full, betwixt themselves and their own hearts, and betwixt themselves and
GOD on that day, will patiently give me leave at this time, as by way of a
preparation Sermon, to speak the more freely concerning those things that you
are resolved that Day to be humbled for.

I say again therefore, I beseech you seriously Commune with your own Hearts
what has been done before you.

I shall tell you one of the saddest stories that I am persuaded is to be found
in any Record, or in any experience upon the earth, and that is about the
violation of our Covenant.

It is not yet four years since we entered into as Solemn a Covenant as ever
did Nation; and will it be believed in the next Generation [if our guilt upon
it do not make it too evident] Or would it be believed in any remote parts of
the world [but that the fame of it is blown through all Nations] that in so
short a time, after so Solemn an Obligation, and the Parliament that brought
on the Covenant sitting, the Covenant should be so forgot, as we dolefully
see daily that it is.

I would I might say only that it is forgot: for if it were forgot only,
there might be some more excuse, but it is set up as a sign to be spoken
against, nay a Sword is gone through the very soul of it, in such a kind of
violation as I think no Story can parallel. I shall instance only in two
things:

1. We vowed against Error, Heresy and Schism, and swore to the God of Truth
and Peace, to the utmost of our power to extirpate them, and to root them out;
these Stones, and Walls, and Pillars were witnesses of our Solemn Engagement.
And now if the Lord should come to enquire what we have done according to this
Vow and Covenant, I am amazed to think what the Lord would find amongst us;
Would he not find ten Schisms now for one then; twenty Heresies now for one
at that time; and forty Errors now for one when we swore against them? Was
there ever more palpable walking contrary to God, or more desperate crossing
of a Covenant? If we had sworn, to the utmost of our Power, to have promoted
and advanced Error, Heresy, and Schism, could these then have grown and
come forward more, then now they have done, though we swore against them?

2. And so in the second place we entered into as Solemn an engagement for
Reformation in matters of Religion, and this was the joyful sound that stirred
up the hearts of the people, and this was their hopes: five or six years ago
it was proclaimed, and betwixt three and four years ago it was Covenanted;
and our hearts danced within us for the hopes we had in this particular. But
what has been done? I looked, says God, for Grapes, and behold sour Grapes,
and nothing else. When Reformation was first spoken of, we had Order and
Ordinances, but now how is the one lost and the other slighted? We had then
Sacraments, full Congregations, a followed Ministry, and frequented Churches;
but now Sacraments laid aside, Congregations scattered, the Ministry cried
down, Churches empty, Church doors shut up, equestres Samnitum in ipso
Samnio: If you look for a Reformation upon our Covenanting for Reformation, how
little to be found, and how much clean contrary: Go to the Isles of Chittim,
and from thence pass over to Keder in the East, search all the Stories that
are to be found, and enquire in all Nations under the whole Heavens, whether
the like things have been done in any Times, in any Nation, and yet have these
things been done before your eyes.

Give me leave to relate unto you a Story out of the Turkish History, and to
apply it:

Uladislaus the King of Hungary, having made a League with Amurath the great
Turk, and solemnly Covenanted and Sealed to Articles thereof in the Name of
Christ, was afterward persuaded to break it, and to go to war against
Amurath. Being in the heat of the fatal Battle at Varna, the Turk draws
out the Articles of the League out of his Bosom, and spreads them toward the
Crucifix which he saw in the Christians Banner, with these words; Now Christ,
if thou be a God, as they say thou art, revenge the wrong done unto thy Name by
these thy Christians, who made this League in thy Name, and now have thus broke
it.

And accordingly was this wretched Covenant-breach avenged with the death of
Uladislaus, and almost all his Army.

Should Christ spread our Covenant before us, upon the same accusing terms as
he spread his before Christ, what could we answer? Or if Satan should spread
our Covenant before God against us, as Hezekiah did the Assyrians Letter, what
could we say for our selves in so horrid and so plain a case? If the Lord
should implead us, and speak such bitter things as these against us, you have
suffered the Solemnest Covenant to be thus broken that ever was sworn unto by
men: The horridest Heresies and Errors have grown amongst you, that ever did
among a Nation; as glorious a Church as was under Heaven, is thus near ruined
before your eyes: And the gloriousest Gospel that shone upon earth is almost
destroyed, and you look on? How could we answer, or hold up our faces before
the Lord: But how must Iniquity lay her hand upon her mouth, and not be able
to speak a word?

I go not about to charge the guilt of these things upon your Consciences,
far be that from you, far is that from me; I only desire to press the
thoughts of these things upon your hearts, that you may seriously be moved,
and seriously affected with the consideration of so high and of so dangerous
import, and may sadly Commune with your own hearts what you have to do.

3. This is the third thing that I would humbly leave with you, and recommend
unto you to ruminate upon; and to debate with your own hearts, Not that I
think to offer you any thing as your Direction; I am the least able for that
of any that speak unto you, but that I would mind you a little of those things
that you have to do withal.

You have in your transacting three things of the nicest and tenderest handling
and meddling with, that can come to hands of mortal men: and those are, the
work of God, the life of souls, and complaints of poor and oppressed ones.
Who is sufficient for any of these things? and yet all these things do now lie
upon your hands.

1. You are to do, and are in doing the work of God; that is, to build his
House, to maintain his Truth, and to execute his Justice, for so let me style
it: things of the highest Honor and Concernment that can be entrusted in the
hands of men: you had need to be truly sensible, and clearly and
conscienciously to apprehend how great this work is that you are about, and to
discourse, and debate with your hearts again and again, how great a task
there lies upon you.

2. How many thousands, nay millions of souls, and their eternal Estate now
lies upon your hands, of the souls of the present and the future Generations?
Onus ipsis Angelis formidandum. Oh how it does concern you most intimately to
consider of it, and lay it to heart.

I shall humbly recommend to your hearts to debate and to determine upon one
Question, that I may name no more, which I cannot, I dare not go about to
determine. And that is this: there are now many, and many Congregations in this
our Land, that either for want of means, or through unquietness of Sectaries,
or Malignants, want Pastors and have done long; and this want still increases
in the Kingdom daily: And so in diverse places of the Kingdom people run
Riot, and do what seems good in their own eyes, for want of Ministers, and of
Execution of Justice among them. Now at whose hands the blood of these souls,
who in this case cannot but be in miserable danger, will be required; when
Ministers were in those places, when Justices were in their places, we know
then to whom the charge of those Souls belonged; but now I beseech you
seriously to Commune with your own hearts, where the blood and life of those
souls lies chargeable now.

3. You have to do with the Complaints of poor and oppressed ones; things of
as dangerous an edge, if put up to heaven against any person, as any other
whatsoever.

There is a great cry in Egypt, complaining in every Angle of the Kingdom;
some for want of pay, some for want of Justice, too many through the Pressures
of Publicans through the Kingdom, the unjust Exactors of your just Taxations,
that lay on burdens of their own, and either for their own advantage or
revenge, multiply Pressures, and create Complaints in every quarter.

Honorable and Honored, these three things are those things that you have to
deal withal: and upon the import of those three things, give me leave to
represent these two particulars to you.

1. That these things will admit of no delaying; nor doing the Work that
concerns them any negligence: For 1. the Church by delays may be ruined,
Truth may be quite lost, Souls may be undone and perish, Sins are growing
high and complaints loud. Now Lord come before Lazarus dye. 2. A little, and a
little delay still, may chance at last to cause a Decree to pass in the Court
of Heaven, that there shall be no healing at all: So did delay in the matter
of Reformation, in the second of Judges. There Christ at Bochin tells the
people, that whereas he had undertaken to Conquer Canaan for them, and had
done hitherto, and had waited hitherto, that they would expel the Canaanites,
and settle Reformation, and they had not done it, he would now henceforward
Conquer no more for them.

2. These things will not admit the Work that concerns them to be done by
halfes. The Work of the LORD must be perfect, and CHRIST'S floor thoroughly
purged. God abhorres Monsters in Sacrifices in the Leviticall Law, and so does
he in matters of Reformation; all excess or defect, beyond or short of his
Will suits not with his Work. A Word is enough to the Wise. I leave all to the
serious Communication of you with your own hearts; and you and your hearts,
and all that has been said to the blessing of our good God. And I shall only
crave leave to relate and apply one story more, and so have I done.

It is reported of a poor Macedonian, that having his Cause pleading at the
Bar before King PHILIP, the King in the mean while sitting in a sleepie
Posture upon the Beneh; and at last passing a sleepy Sentence against the man,
and casting him in his Cause, the poor man cries out, I appeal, I appeal.
This wakes the King, and makes him to start up: Appeal? says he, To whom
can thou Appeal beyond me? Am not I the King? The poor man answered; I
Appeal from King PHILIP asleep to King PHILIP awake.

If there be any heart here that is moved or raised any whit against me for
any thing that I have thus freely spoken, I first Appeal to the knower of all
hearts, before whom I stand, who knows with what heart I have spoken it.

But again I appeal from that heart asleep, as it lies muffled in Pride or
Peevishness, or Selvishnesse, or Selfe-Interests, or any other distemper or
Passion; to that heart, when it shall be awaked, either by Grace, or by
Justice, or by the summons of Death, or by the sound of the last Trumpe, when
that heart and mine must both appear before the Tribunal of him that knows
all hearts.

Now to that great Judge, the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only
Wise GOD, be Honor, and Glory for ever and ever. AMEN.
FINIS.

