An Anatomy of the Lords Tyranny and injustice exercised upon Lieu. Col. JOHN
LILBURNE, now a prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.
Delivered in a speech by him, Novem. 6. 1646. before the honorable Committee
of the House of Commons, appointed to consider of the privileges of the
Commons of England: The original Copy of which, he in obedience to the order
and command of the said Committee, delivered in writing to the hands of Col.
Henry Martin, Chairm-man of the said Commit: Nov. 9. 1646 and now published
to the view of all the Commons of England, for their information, and knowledge
of their Liberties and Privileges.
To the Honorable the COMMITTEE for the Liberty of the Commons of ENGLAND. May
it please this Honorable Committee, in obedience to your command, and Order of
the 6. of November last, I here humbly present you with the narration under my
hand, which by word of mouth I made unto you upon Friday last, of my particular
sufferings since my commitment by the Lords.
MAY it please this Honorable Committee, I had a hearing before you upon
Tuesday the 27, of October last, and then I truly acquainted you with the
manner of the Lords first sending for me to their Bar, by order of the 10.
June, 1646. to answer a charge there. I acquainted you truly, what passed
betwixt their messenger and my self, and also what was said to me at their Bar,
and how that for no misbehaviour, or any other cause, saving my exhibiting to
them my Protest, and refusing to answer illegal Interrogatories: they, the 11.
of June, 1646. committed me to Newgate: and how that upon the 16. of June,
1646. I sent my appeal to the Honorable House of Commons; which was accepted
of, And the last time I was before you, I was reading the second Warrant of the
Lords to bring me the second time to their Bar: In the midst of which you
were called away; and therefore for what then passed, I shall refer you, Mr.
Martin, to your own Notes, and my Papers delivered in to you; but especially to
my printed relation of their first proceedings with me, which you have.

And now I shall humbly desire liberty methodically to go on: And as to me it
appears, the Lords taking notice that I had appealed to your House (their
indignation being thereby increased;) sent a warrant the 22. of June, 1646. to
the Keeper of Newgate, in these words:

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that Lieutenant Colonel John
Lilburne, now a prisoner in Newgate, shall be brought before their Lordships
(in the high Court of Parliament) to morrow morning by 10. of the clock. And
this to be a sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

And I being in bed, was by my Keeper about 10, a lcock at night, certified,
that such a Warrant was come to carry me in the morning to the Lords Bar: I
rose betimes and went, and spoke with Brisco the Clerk of Newgate, and my
Keepers Master, and told him, the Lords had no power nor jurisdiction over me
by law: and therefore I told him, I neither could nor would give my consent to
go up to them. And then he told me, he would force me. Whereupon I went up to
my chamber, and locked my door, and writ a Letter to Mr. Wollastone, the chief
Keeper under the Sheriffs of London: And in his absence, my wife and a friend
carried it to the Sheriffs, then at Guild Hall with the Court of Aldermen, and
delivered it and my appeal, etc. to them; who, as they conceive, amongst
themselves, read it. But for any thing I know, ordered Brisco to make a
forcible entry upon my lodging: for he came up, and broke my Chamber-wall, and
by force carried me down, and put me in a Coach, which carried me to the Lords.
The Copy of the abovementioned letter in print, I here present unto you.

SIR,
I This morning have seen a Warrant from the House of Lords, made yesterday, to
command you to bring me this day at ten a clock before them: the warrant
expresses no cause wherefore I should dance attendance before them; neither
do I know any ground or reason wherefore I should, nor any Law that compels me
thereunto: For their Lordships, sitting by virtue of Prerogative-patents, and
not by election, or common consent of the people; have (as Magna Charta, and
other good laws of the land tell me,) nothing to do to try me, or any
Commoner whatsoever, in any criminal case, either for life, limb, liberty, or
estate: But, contrary hereunto, as incroachers and usurpers upon my freedoms
and liberties; they lately and illegally endeavored to try me a Commoner at
their Bar: for which I under my hand and seal protested to their faces against
them, as violent and illegal incroachers upon the rights and liberties of me,
and all the Commons of England, (a copy of which, etc. I in print herewith,
send you:) and at their Bar I openly appealed to my competent, proper, legal
Tryers and Judges, the Commons of England assembled in Parliament, (for which
their Lordships did illegally, arbitrarily, and tyrannically commit me to
prison into your custody,) unto whom diverse days ago I sent my appeal, etc.
which now remains in the hands of their Speaker, if it be not already read in
the House, unto which I do, and will stand, and obey their commands.

Sir, I am a freeman of England, and therefore I am not to be used as a Slave,
or Vassal, by the Lords, which they have already done, and would further do.
I also am a man of peace and quietness, and desire not to molest any, if I be
not forced thereunto: therefore I desire you, as you tender my good, and your
own; take this for answer, that I cannot, without turning traitor to my
Liberties, dance attendance to their Lordships Bar: being bound in
conscience, duty to God, my self, mine, and my Country; to oppose their
encroachments to the death: which by the strength of God I am resolved to do.

Sir, you may, or cause to be exercised upon me, some force or vielence to pull
and dragge me out of my Chamber, which I am resolved to maintain, as long as I
can, before I will be compelled to go before them: and therefore I desire you,
in a friendly way, to be wise and considerate before you do that, which it
may be, you can never undo.

From my Cock-loft in the Presse-yard of Newgate this 13 of June, 1646. Sir, I
am your true and fair conditioned prisoner, if you will be so to me. JOHN
LILBURN.


And being in the Painted Chamber talking with Col. Francis Russel, a Member of
your House; Brisco came to me, and before him told me, that the Lords had
commanded, that I should not speak with any. To which I replied, Are the Lords
ashamed of their cause, that they dare not venture my declaring of it to my
friend? But, go tell their Lordships from me, I understand the liberties of
England better then so suddenly to be their slave, and to obey their unjust and
tyrannical commands: And therefore tell them, I will whether they will or no,
talk with any man that will talk with me, till they outstrip the Bishops (who
gagged me for speaking) in cruelty, by cutting out my tongue, or sowing up my
lips.

And by and by I was called into their House: and being by them commanded to
kneel at their Bar; I absolutely refused to do it, unless they would by
force compel me thereunto: which, if they did, I told them, it would be no
act of mine. And I shall (with your favor) give you one reason, which with
some others, that made me I did not kneel; and it was this: I knew, by Law the
Lords had no jurisdiction over me, and accordingly I had performed my duty to
my self, etc. in protesting against them, and had appealed to your House, as
the absolute legal supreme power of the Kingdom, and so) far and by many
degrees above the Lords. Now if I should have done any action that should have
declared any subjection unto the power and judicature of the Lords (which my
kneeling would have done,) I had not only turned traitor there by, to the
Laws and Liberties of England; but I had also undone all that before I had
done, and deprived my self both of the benefit of my Protest and Appeal, and
should also by my own act, have laid my self open, justly to be sentenced, and
punished by the Lords.

And upon refusal to kneel, they commanded me to withdraw, and made this
Order.

Die Martis 23. Junii 1646.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that John Lilburne shall stand
committed close Prisoner, in the Prison of Newgate: and that he be not
permitted to have pen, ink, or paper, and none shall have access unto him in
any kind, but only his Keeper, until this Court does take further order.

To the Keeper of Newgate his Deputy or Deputies.
John Brown Cler: Parliamentorum. Exam. per. Rad, Briscoe Cleric: de Newgate.

Now I shall humbly desire this Honorable Committee, in the first place to
observe; that the Lords Warrant of the 22. June, 1646. expresses no cause at
all wherefore I should dance attendance at their Bar, and therefore illegal.
2. I also entreat this Honorable Committee to observe, that the Lords
Commitment of me 23. June close Prisoner is altogether illegal, and against
the Petition of Right; which is confirmed with every clause in it, by the act
that abolisheth the tax of Ship Money, made this present Parliament, and, as
Sir Edward Cook that learned Lawyer does well and truly observe in the 2. part
of his institutes folio. 52. there are 4. things that are required to make 1.
That he or they which do commit; have lawful authority. a Commitment lawful,
viz. 2. That their warrant or mittimus be lawful, and that (says he) must be
in writing, under hand and Seal. 3. The cause must be contained in the warrant,
as, for treason, felony, etc. or for suspicion of treasou, felony, etc. 4. The
warrant or mittimus containing a lawful cause, ought to have a lawful
conclusion, viz. and him safely to keep, until he be delivered by law, etc.
and not until the party committing does further order. All which 4. are
wanting in this warreat; and therefore altogether illegal and unjust.


Now may it please this Committee; I was very free in my discourse with Mr.
Wollaston, etc. the Keeper of Newgate, about the illegallity of this warrant,
which, it may be, came to the Lords ears, and therefore within 4. or 5. days
after, they sent a more formal warrant containing the cause of my commitment,
and as Mr. Brisco could me, took the aforesaid warrant away, the original
copyes of all which orders are in your hands Mr. Martin, and were delivered to
you upon the first examination of this business, about 4. months ago, to
which I humbly referr you.

Now may it Please you to give me leave to go on with the true relation of the
barbarous and tyrannical execution of this unjust order, by virtue of which
for about 3. weeks together, I was debarred of pen, ink, or paper, and my
Chamber, by Mr. Brisco, for that end, strictly searched, and my wife,
councellers and friends kept from me: my wife, etc. after I was first locked
up, not being permitted to set her foot within my Chamber door, nor permitted
to come into the Prison yard, to speak with me out of my window, nor I
suffered to receive from the hands of my wife, servant, or friends, either
meat, drink, money, or any other necessaries; and yet their Lordships, nor
none by their order, allowing me all that time, the value of one penny loaf to
live upon, and though my wife obtained so much favor from a neighbor to
speak with me out of their windows, at the distance of about 40. or 50 yards,
it being impossible for us to say any thing, but what the Jaylors if they had a
mind might hear, yet such was their inhuman cruelty, that they often
threatened to stop up the poor man's windows, if he would not cease to permit
my wife to look out of them, and also threatened me to board up mine, or else if
I would not forbear, at that distance, to speak with my wife, to lay me in
Newgate Prison, where as they could me, I should neither have a possibility to
speak with her or any other, which I bid them do if they durst, telling them
that would be the only way to get me my liberty; for I had some friends abroad
that would then I did believe, to the purpose bestir themselves to preserve my
life, which they would easily judge was then intended in good earnest to be
taken away by them, and therefore if any mischief followed they might thank
themselves, upon which they forbore executing their bitter menacies and (...)
any further upon me.

But I beseech you further be pleased to observe the Lords guilty consciences,
and their brave justice, who the most part of this time while they keep me
(thus close) (that it was absolutely impossible for me to know what they
intended to do with me) they had as I am informed, 4. Lawyers at work to frame
a charge against me, viz. Mr. Sergeant Finch, Mr. Hail, Mr. Hearne, and Mr.
Glover, and upon the 10. of July 1646. and not before, Mr. Sergeant Nathaniel
Finch, brought in certain Articles, by way of charge into the House of Peers
against me; which you Mr. Martin have in your hand, and therefore I humbly
desire they may be read; which was done.

Now Sir, before you read the sentence, I humbly entreat this Honorable
Committee to give me leave to make some observation upon the charge, the first
of which, that I entreat you to take notice of is, that betwixt the day of my
being first summoned to answer a charge at the Lords bar, and the day that it
was first brought in, or filed upon record there against me, is above 29.
days, I being summoned the 10. of June 1646. and the Charge not brought in
till the 10. of July 1646, which is a most illegal and unjust thing in any
Court whatsoever.

2. I beseech you observe that almost all, and the principal things laid to my
charge, are pretended crimes committed, not before my being brought to their
bar to answer a Charge, but afterward, namely in the time of an unjust and
provokeing imprisonment: and therefore a great injustice it is, as any can be
in the world, to force a man to dance attendance at their Bar, to answer a
Charge, before they have filed one against him, or have so much as the pretense
of a crime to lay to his charge, and then arbitrarily and illegally to commit a
man to a tyrannical imprisonment, there by extraordinary provocations, to
necessitate and force a man as it were, to commit slips and fallings, that
thereby they may pick a hole in his coat, because they had none before, and
then fall upon him, and destroy him: and this, in every particular has been
the Lords dealing with me, which I humbly conceive to be the height of tyranny
and injustice. Now Mr. Martin, I humbly entreat you to read the sentence, for
upon the 10. July, there issued out an order to bring me up again to their
bar, the next day, to hear my Charge read: which was accordingly put in
execution.

Now Sir, you having read the sentence, I shall humbly crave leave, first, to
make some observations upon it, and then secondly, to go on methodically with
the matter of fact.

And first, I beseech you observe that the 10. June 1646. I was summoned to
attend their Lordships in their House: and the 11. June 1646. I there appeared,
and was then committed by them to Newgate: the 16. of the same month, I
appealed to the Right Honorable the House of Commons as my legal and proper
Judges, who accepted, read, approved, and committed my appeal to a special
Committee, and yet notwithstanding the 22. of the same month, the Lords
command the Keeper of Newgate to bring me up to their bar, and there upon the
23. day I was committed close prisonet to Newgate, till the 10. July 1646. at
which time my Charge was brought into the Lords House and not before, which was
a month after the first process, or warrant issued out for me. All which
proceedings (besides their not having any legal Judicature at all over me)
are erroneous and illegal, and principally in these two points.

First, because I was summoned, before any Charge was recorded, which
proceedings are point blanke against the express Statutes of 9. H. 3. 29. 5.
E. 3. 9. 25. E. 3. 4. 28. E. 3. 3. which expressly say, that none shall be
imprisoned nor put out of his free hold, nor of his franchises, nor free
customs, unless it be by the law of the Land, which is, that none shall be
taken by Petition or suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his Council,
unless it be by indictment or presentment of his good and lawful people of
the same neighborhood, where such deeds be done; in due manner; or by process
made by Writ original at the common law, etc. which Statutes are confirmed by
the petition of Right, and by the Statute for abolishing the Star Chamber made
this present Parliament.

And indeed, regularly, both in law and equity, the Declaration or bill ought
to be filed or recorded, before any writ or process ought to issue against the
defendant, or party accused, either in civil or criminal causes; and the
write, warrant, or process ought to contain the matter of the declaration,
bill, or petition: and this appears clearly in every writ (as the learned in
the law inform me) set forth by the Register, and Fitzherberts natura brevium:
and that every English bill either in Chancery, Exchequer, or Star Chamber,
does pray, that process of sub-pena be awarded against the defendant, which
proves, that process, orders or Warrants, ought not to be awarded or granted,
against any man out of any Court of Justice whatever, till his charge be
recorded against him in the same Court; and suitable to this is your own
doctrine, in your own Declarations, Book Decl. page 38, 39, 278, 845.

Secondly, I beseech you observe, that all the Lords proceedings with me, after
my appeal to the honorable house of Commons, are void in Law; because, by my
appeal to the proper Jurisdiction, which is only your House, the Lords are
outed of their Jurisdiction, or conusans of the plea, the cause being removed
by the Appeal, their judgment was thereby determined, or at least suspended,
being but the effect of the cause before them, till such time as the Appeal is
determined; the Appeal being a supersedas to the Lords further proceeding in
the same cause, and they ought not to have proceeded any further at all; but to
give them as much, as by any just color or claim they can challenge, they
ought not any further to have gone on, without the privity, license, and
direction of the honorable house of Commons: and therefore, all their
proceedings with me, especially, since my Appeal to your honorable house, are
coram non judice, and therefore void and erroneous. And I further conceive,
under favor, that the Lords proceedings with me, after your House had accepted
of my Appeal, is as great an affront and indignity offered to the majesty,
honor, and greatness of your house (the absolute supreme derivative power of
all the Commons of England, the original and absolute fountain of all power
therein) as their proceedings are unjust toward me, and destructive to the
laws and liberties of England.

Again, I beseech you observe, that in their Articles, the original and chief
supposed crime that they charge me with, is, for scandalizing the Earl of
Manchester, a Peer, as they call him, of the Kingdom.

Now may it please you, to take notice, that I say, if his conscience had not
been guilty, and told him, that it was possible, I might justly and groundedly
have proved much more against him, then I lay to his charge in my printed
Epistle to Judge Reeve, etc. he would never have shunned and avoided the known
law of the Kingdom, which sufficiently proves a remedy for him, in case I had
scandalized him: as appears by the statutes of 3. E. 1, 33. 27. E. 3. ^8. 38.
E. 3. 9. 42, E. 3. 3. 2 R. 2. 5. 12. R. 2. 11 17. R. 2. 16. which expressly
command, that if any man scandalize any of the great men of the kingdom he
shall be taken, and kept in custody, or put in security, till he prove what he
says; and in case he cannot; then he shall incur the same pain that the other
should have had, if he were attainted: and that process of the law be made
against them without being taken and imprisoned against the great Charter, and
other statutes; but his leaving the common common and just road of the kingdom,
that sufficiently provides for his reparation, if innocent, argues his
knowledge of his own guilt, or else he would never have betaken himself to an
extraordinary means (and especially in such a place where himself is chief
Judge in his own cause) and there against me by a kind of a legislative and
unlimitted power of Judicature, which is not in them (especially singly)
neither can they (take them in the highest capacity that ever law estated them
in) proceed to determine any thing out of the way of the known and established
laws, by any arbitrary, or discretionary Rules, when there is a known law in
the case. And I am sure it is a received Maxim in law, That where remedy may
be had by an ordinary course in Law; the party grieved shall never have his
recourse to extraordinaries.

And Sir, under favor, to speak truly, the Parliament properly are not (nor
ought not) to meddle with causes betwixt party and party that are decideable at
common law, they being the supreme Judicature of the Kingdom and the last
refuge to appeal to, by the people, in case of injustice elsewhere, and so
may properly be called Judge of Judges, rather then Judge of particular parties
and causes.

My last observation upon the sentence, that I shall humbly entreat you to take
notice of, is this;

That although by the 14, Chap. of Magna Charta, it is declared that a freeman
shall not be amer^ed or fined for a small fault; but after the manner of the
fault, and for a great fault after the greatness thereof, saving to him his
contenement or countenance, and a merchant likewise saving to him his
Merchandise. And any other villain then the Kings shall be likewise amerced,
saving his wainage or teame, and none of the said amerciaments shall be
assessed, but by the oath of honest and lawful men of the vicinage.

But I beseech you observe, the Lords had no oath of any honest man what ever,
against me, nor one word of my own confession of any guiltiness of any crime
whatsoever, but a constant resolution manifested to maintain the laws and
liberties of the kingdom against their usurpations; for which just, honest,
and legal action, and for no other, they unrighteously unjustly, and
barbarously sentenced me, not saving to me my contenement or countenance, or
leaving me some reasonable proportion after their Fines, or Amercement to live
upon, in the quality or condition I had done before; but they amerced or find
me at four thousand pounds, which is diverse thousands of pounds more then
either I am worth, or ever was in my life.

Now I beseech this honorable Committee to observe, that by this sentence, the
unrighteous and cruel Lords have done as much as in them lies, every hour of
time to put me into such a condition; that I shall be liable to have all the
estate that I have in the world taken from me, to satisfy this unjust Fine,
and so leave nothing for me, my wife, and small children, to live upon; nay,
and that which is worse then all this, the greatness of the Fine is much more
then I can satisfy; So that in case all that little that I have, should be
seized upon; yet there is such abundance would remain behind, which would rob
me of all credit whatsoever: for, who will be so unwise, as to lend a man money
that is thousands of pounds worse then nothing which is my case by this Fine:
But yet this is not at all; for they commit me for 7. years (the age of a man
in the eye of the Law) a prisoner to the extraordinary chargeable Prison of the
Tower, where I cannot earn one penny, nor, it being no through-fare; for me to
beg a penny to live upon.

Now, Sir, laying all these things together, I beseech you consider whether in
the intention of the Lords, I be not exposed to miseries and torments, worse
then death it self: for either by their intentions, I must perish by hunger
and famine, or else be forced to eat my wife and children, or any other that I
can overcome; and what is this but the height of tyranny and cruelty, and a
torment worse then any death in the world; for, says Jerem. in his
Lamentations, Better is he that dies by the sword, then he that dies by famine;
and he gives the reason; because, there is a speedy end of the pain of him that
dies by the sword; but he that dies by hunger and famine, pines away, and is in
a continual torment, always dying, and wishing, and longing for death. And
undoubtedly, Sir, this is my condition, by the intention of the Lords.

Now Sir, having with your patience, made these observations, I humbly desire
to go on with the matter of fact:

Which is, that upon the tenth of July, when Sergeant Finch brought in my
Charge into the House of Peers, they that day made an Order to command the
Sheriffs of London, the next day to bring me up to their Bar, to hear my
Charge: The copy of which warrant I have not, in regard the Sheriff (contrary
to law) refused to give it me, although I sent to him to desire it: and I
having formerly told the Jaylors of Newgate, I could not, nor would not, go up
to the Lords Bar, by virtue of their own Warrant, without a forcible
compulsion; The Sheriffs sent about 30. or 40. of the attenders upon the
Hangman, when he goes to do execution at Tiburn, to carry me up to the Lords
Bar. And being in the Painted chamber, I desired Mr. Brisco, one of my Keepers
and Tormenters, to to go and tell the Lords from me, that seeing they had the
impudency and boldness to tread the Laws and Liberties of England under their
feet, and did so contemn and under-value the authority of the Honorable House
of Commons, to whom I had appealed, as yet to go on in their illegal courses
with me, with whom by Law they had nothing to do; I must be forced in the
highest nature I could, to contemn and despise their proceedings; and
therefore was resolved not to come to their Bar, without a forcible compulsion,
and to come in with my hat upon my head, and to stop my ears when they read my
Charge, in detestation, and bearing witness against their usurpations and
injustice. So away he went: But I was compeld in; and being brought up to the
Bar, I was commanded to kneel: which I absolutely refused. And then my Lord of
Manchester (my grand adversary, who has for these two or three years thirsted
after my blood, for no other crime but that I was faithful and active in
executing the trust reposed in me, for the good of the Parliament and Kingdom;
he (I say) as speaker of the House of Lords, commanded the Clerk to read me my
Charge; which he began to do. At which I stopped my ears with my fingers, till
such time as I perceived the Clerks lips to leave moving. Whereupon I was
commanded to withdraw: and after some distance of time, I was called in again,
and was again commanded to kneel; but I told them, My Lords, you may save your
selves the expense of your breath, for I shall not kneel without compulsion.
And then my Lord of Manchester told me, that I by my contumacie deprived my
self of much benefit that I might make unto my self by examining witnesses upon
cross Interrogatories, for the evading the charge. So I desired liberty to
speak: which was granted, and I said,

My Lords, I do much wonder at your Lordships proceedings with me, that you
should, (contrary to the ancient and fundamental laws of this kingdom) send
for me to answer a charge at your Bar, before you have any filled against me;
and then when I come up to your Bar, press and endeavor to force me, contrary
to law, honesty, and justice, to answer to inquisition-nterrogatories, and so
to ensnare my self, when you have no crime to lay unto my charge. My Lords,
what is this else, but to build up what but the other day you destroyed? For
did you not here in a full House, the 15. day of February last, in this very
case, decree; adjudge, and determine, that my sentence in the Star Chamber, and
all the proceedings thereupon, shall forthwith be for ever totally vacuated,
obliterated, and taken off the File in all Courts where they are yet remaining,
as illegal, and most unjust, against the liberty of the Subject, and law of
the Land, and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon Record? etc.

And did you not order and adjudge me, to receive of some of the Judges, etc.
of that sentence, 2000. l. for my reparation? But my Lords, I am very sure,
that if you your selves, compare your proceedings against me, with the
proceedings of the Star Chamber, you will find yours to be in every particular,
as illegal and unjust, as theirs: and therefore, I much wonder, you do not
blush at your present dealing with me.

Besides, my Lords, it is very strange to me that the Law of England, should be
so plain and perspicuous, to tell you, that you in such Cases as mine is, have
no legal jurisdiction at all over me, or the meanest Commoner in England, and
that yet notwithstanding, you should, contrary to your duty, Oaths and
Covenants, usurp and challenge a jurisdiction over us so. My Lords, when I was
first at this Bar, I under my hand and Seal, delivered in m^ protest against
you as usurpers and incrochers, upon the Rights and Libertyes of all the
Commons of England, which you received and read: and I also appealed from you,
as unrighteous Judges to my Legal, and Proper Judges, the Commons of England
assembled in Parliament, and upon the 16. of June last, I sent my petition, by
way of appeal to the Honorable House of Commons, with a copy of my Protest
against you, anexed to it, which they received, read, approved of, and
Committed to a special Committee, who sat upon it, and as I understand, Passed
a vote or votes in justification of the Legalitie of my Procedings with you,
and have promised me Justice in it; now, my Lords, I here again at your open
Bar before You all, as in the sight of and Presence of God, protest against
you again, and all your proceedings with me, as unjust, unrighteous and
illegal: and declare unto you all, that to my said Protest and appeal to the
honorable House of Commons, I will stick to, so long as I have a life and a
being, And my Lords, I tell you to your faces, that by Right, they are your
Judges as well as mine in this case: and I do not doubt, but to live to see the
day that they will make you to know, whether you will or no that they are so,
and of their Justice, and protection, I do not in the least; doubt: And
therefore, my Lords, seeing you have dealt so illegally and tyrannically with
me, as you have done; I now bid defiance to your power and malice, to do the
worit you can.

For, my Lords, are not you the men that have been principal instruments to
engage this Kingdom in a bloody War, to maintain their laws and liberties? and
have nor you all often sworn and covenanted so to do? But, my Lords, it seem^s
to me, you nothing at all value your oaths, nor engagements: and therefore, my
Lords, if you were in jest, when you did all this, and never intended, what
you declared, but merely set us a fighting, to unhorse and dismount our old
Riders and Tyrants, that so you might get up and ride us in their steads: But I
do profess and assure your Lordships, that I for my part was in good sober
and sad earnest, and never drew my sword in these wars, but principally for
my liberties and freedoms, and the laws of the land: and in the field I did
adventure my life freely and resolutely, like a man of valor and courage, as
it is well known to some of your selves: And I now look for, and expect the
enjoyment of that for which I fought by your means and iustigation. And
therefore, my Lords, I protest here before the God of heaven and earth, if you
shall be so unworthy as to persevere in endeavoring the destruction of the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, as at present you do; I will
venture my life and heart-blood against you to oppose you, with as much zeal
and courage as ever I did any of the Kings party, that you set us together by
the ears with.

And having concluded, I was commanded to hear my Charge read: But I told
them, they had no judicature at all over me, neither would I in the least do
any thing that should declare my subjection to their power, although I should
presently be destroyed for my refusal. But my Lords, said I, that you may know
that my conscience does not accuse me of any guilt for doing any illegal or
dishonorable action against my country or the Laws thereof, or you, or any of
you that wishes it well; I will wave my appeal to the House of Commons, if you
will cease your proceedings here: and I will answer any of you, or all of you,
according to Law, in any Court of Justice in Westminster Hall, or any other
Court in England, that has a Legal jurisdiction over me. But the Clerk was
commanded to read the Charge quite through: and I stopped my ears till he had
done. And then the Speaker asked me, what I said to my Charge? I told him, I
heard it not (neither indeed did,) neither had they any legal power there to
exhibit, try, or adjudge a Charge against me: And therefore I again appeased
from them; telling them, I did not in the least, value the worst they could do
to me: for I would lose my life before I would betray or part with my
fundamental liberties; either to them, or any one in England.

So I was commanded to withdraw: and being out above an hour, I was the third
time called in, and commanded again to kneel; which I absolutely refused to
do. And then I was told by the Earl of Manchester, what misery and destruction
my obstinacy and contemptuous carriage, had, and would bring upon me. I told
him, I weighed not their malice, nor craved their favor: So he read my
sentence, which I heard: and when he had done; with a smiling and merry
countenance, I thanked his Lordship for his boon: but I desired him to take
notice of it, that I valued their sentence no more then that I had in the
Star Chamber, it being in every particular as illegal as that: nay more, for
the Star Chamber had a legal jurisdiction over me, which their Lordships in
their House have not: so I was commanded to withdraw.

And being by a new Warrant that day brought to the Lieutenant of the Tower of
London (the Copy of which, you Mr. Martin have in your hands; it being one of
the three you had from the Lieutenant the other day) my brother Major Henry
Lilburn, Lieu. Col. Wetton, and my wife being with me, I told the Lieutenant of
the Tower, that my spirit was a little refreshed, for all my great and heavy
sentence, and my commitment to so chargeable a prison, as I understood the
Tower to be, in regard I was freed from my close and cruel imprisonment, and
now should enjoy the society of my wife and friends, but he told me I was
mistaken: Why Sir, said I, my Warrant does not command you to keep me close
prisoner; it only injoyns you to keep me in safe custody, and that you take
care, that I neither contrive, publish, or spread any seditious or libellous
Pamphlet against both, or either Houses of Parliament. Well! says he, I cannot
do that, unless I keep both your wife, and your friends from you; as well you
might say, that you cannot perform my order, unless you look me up in a
Dungeon, where I shall neither see light, nor enjoy candle, or fire; for it is
impossible in a manner, to keep a man from writing, where he has light, who by
one means or other, will come by Pen, Ink, and Paper.

And truly Sir, it was a wonder to me, to hear the Lieutenants hard and cruel
interpretation of my order, and perceiving my wife to be much troubled at his
words, it took a deep impression upon my spirit, and made me go below my
accustomed principles of Resolution; in regard of that indearednesse of
affection, that was betwixt my wife and my self, which made me say to him: Sir,
my wife is all the earthly comfort that now in this world I have left unto me,
and she is that meet help, that the wise God of Heaven and Earth, from the
beginning has instituted and ordained for me, frail and weak man, in my
pilgrimage and valley of tears here below: and Sir, if such a help had not
been requisite for poor man; without which, he could not have had a comfortable
being in his earthly being; God would never have ordained it, and commanded man
to forsake Father and Mother, to live with his wife, as one flesh.

And truly Sir, I must tell you, God has so knit in affection, the hearts and
souls of me and my wife, and made us so willing to help to bear one another
burdens, that I profess, as in the sight of God, I had rather you should
immediately beat out my brains, then deprive me of the society of my wife.

And therefore, for your indemnity; before these my friends, I will make you a
fair proffer, That if you judge, that I have either faith or truth in me, I
will engage my word and promise unto you, that as I am a Christian, a
Gentleman, and a Soldier, I will neither write a line, nor read a line
written; conditionally, that you, according to Justice, and the known Laws of
this Kingdom, permit me to enjoy the society of my wife, and friends.

But the hard-hearted Lieutenant, like a man that took delight to add sorrow,
to the afflictions of the too much afflicted, would not embrace my proffer,
which I would not have broken or violated, for all the gold in England; but
strictly gave command to my keeper, that neither my wife, nor any other friend
should speak with me, but in his presence and hearing; which he being here
present, is able to testify unto you: and then the Lieutenant went to the
Lords, and prevailed with them to make an Order to bear him out, in what he had
illegally and unwarrantably done, and executed upon me, of his own head, for 5
days: which order, you Mr. Martin have also in your hands: So that by the
Lieutenants means I was divorced from my wife, till the 16. day of September
following: Upon which day, the Lords of their own accord, without my desiring
of them (who was resolved in this case never to sue for a farthings-worth of
courtesy) made an Order, again to marry me to my wife, as by the Copy of it in
your hands will appear. And besides all this, he set and ordered his Warders at
the Gate, most illegally to take the names and places of habitations of all my
friends that came to see me, on set purpose, as I may justly conceive, to
affright and scare all away from coming to visit me; yea, and besides the taking
of their names, some of his Warders did extraordinarily abuse both me and many
of those that came to visit me, and denied admittance, and turned away scores
of my friends, as I can easily prove: All which cruelties, and inhumanities
offered to me and my friends; I may, and so do; set upon the Lieutenants own
score: for I often complained to him of them; and the best remedy I could have,
was nothing but a laugh from him at it: So that truly, Gentlemen, I do profess
unto you, that the hard and barbarous usage that I have had from the Lords, and
their Jaylors, (in the number of which, I reckon Col. Francis West, the present
Lieutenant of the Tower, who for all his title, is no more nor no otherwise to
me then a Jailer) to be worse then death it self; which I seriously profess
unto you, I should rather embrace, then the like usage for so long time again.

And therefore, give me leave to say unto you in this particular, as I said
unto my Lord Heath at Oxford, when I was arraigned before him for my life, for
drawing my sword for your defense in the kingdoms; when he pressed me to plead
unto my indictment. My Lord, said I, amend those things in it that are amiss,
and give me, according to the custom of the Kingdom, my right and due; and I
shall with all readiness plead unto it, professing unto your Lordship, that
the cruelties that I have endured by Irons, etc, in Oxford Castle, by the
inhumane Marshall Smith, are such, and so great, that I had rather choose this
night to set my back against a wall, and be shot with 20. Musketeers, then to
endure the constant bitterness of those tormenting sorrows, that I do, and
have under-gone by Marshall Smith, since my captivity under him: and the same I
do profess now unto this Committee.

Therefore, I humbly beseech, and most earnestly entreat you, not to delay me
in my report to your House, but to do it speedily for me; that so I may know
what to trust to, and may not by you, from whom I may justly seek Justice, as
my right and due (and not as a boon) be delayed any longer, having bin already
long enough delayed; it being almost five months since I first made my Appeal
unto you.

For truly, I must plainly and ingenuously tell you, went not the lacombes of
strength, and assistance from God; the more, my condition would be
insupportable, and not any longer with patience to be stoop't unto by me: for
it cannot but be known to diverse of you, that for almost this ten years
together, I have never been free from the lashes and destroyings of the Grand
Prerogative-men of this kingdom, that have ruled and governed by no other law,
then that of their own will; and yet to this day never received a penny by way
of reparation, for all the wrongs and injuries that I from them have sustained;
although I have spent diverse hundreds of of pounds in endeavoring the
procurement of it: and my reparations for my sufferings at the hands of the
Star Chamber Judges sticks in your house at this very day; which I humbly
entreat this honorable Committee, when this my business is reported to the
house, to put them in mind of; and besides, my late extraordinary expenses, and
my shortness of pay for my faithful and successful service with my grand
adversary the Earl of Manchester, and the present extraordinary
chargeablenesse of my imprisonment in the Tower, etc. renders my condition an
extraordinary object of your present relief: For although I have not paid all
the great sums demanded as fees in that place; yet because I have found
civility, and humanity from my Keeper, for my own accommodation and ease-sake;
I have weekly been (I think) very liberal unto him, I am sure beyond my
present ability; besides the charge of my own diet and family, etc. which I
hope, that when your Honorable House has adjudged my cause, (which I am
confident according to law cannot go amiss with me) and thereby given me
ground to present them with my bill of charges; they will not only cause the
Lords to pay it me again; but also ample reparations for my hard and unjust
sufferings: without which, although you evacuate the sentence, and set my
person at liberty, I shall think that I scarce have justice to the half, having
but merely the shell without the kirnell. But if the greatness of the Lords,
by reason of the distractions of the present times, shall stick in my way as an
hinderance thereof; give me leave humbly to tell you, that the Commons of
England are bound by you in a Protestation, to maintain their liberties, and to
stand to all those that defend them; yea, and to bring those that endeavor
their destruction, to condign punishment. In which regard I am resolved by the
strength of God, in a just and legal way, with all earnestness to desire,
through City and Country, the joint assistance of all in England, that are not
willing to be slaves, to join with me in a grand petition to your House, for
the obtaining of my just and honest desires against the Lords. And truly, Sir,
I must venture life and all that I have upon it. For can it appear just to
you, that the Lords should cry out against the King, their Lord and Master, for
injustice and cruelty; yea, and draw their swords against him, and yet be more
unjust themselves? As to go no further then my very case: for sure I am, it
was the Kings constant custom to provide diet, lodging, and pay the fees of
all those he committed to the Tower: but the Lords for no cause in law at all,
have committed me thither, and put me upon it, to pay all the vast
extravagancies there for fees, etc. yea, and that for tormenting and destroying
me. Surely, Sir, they will never be so unjust, but when they know, it is
demanded as a just and legal right; but largely in good current coin to repay
me: the which, if they be so unjust as to refuse, I hope you will be so just
and true to your trust, according to that sufficient power and authority that
is in you to compel them.

And, Sir, I humbly crave reparations from all their instruments, that with,
and upon, me have out-stript the bounds of the Law, in executing their mere
malicious wills upon me. And, under facour, I am very confident, the Lieutenant
of the Tower will be found guilty in this particular; which I have the more
ground to press upon him, then the Jaylors of Newgate: For, to be hardly and
inhumanly dealt withal from such bloody men as they are commonly reported to
be, is no wonder; but to receive the like measure, nay and worse, from the
hands of Col. Francis West, my fellow-citizen, (who out-stript his orders) a
man who has been in the field with his sword in his hand, pretending to
adventure his life for the preservation of the laws and liberties of England;
is that that amazeth me, that he should so far forget himself, as so
furiously to fall upon me, to torment, undo, and destroy me, for no other
cause, but for being true to my principles, and the general and public
interest of the Kingdom, in standing for the Laws and Liberties thereof,
against those that would destroy them; and which action renders him to me, to
be one of the unworthiest of the sons of men; especially of those that would
be reputed to have the principles of an honest man in him.

Now Sir, to conclude all, having sufficiently entrenched upon your patience; I
make my most humble suit unto this honorable Committee, That when you make my
Report unto the house, seeing as you tell me, you are principally to report
matter of Fact, and not matter of law, in point of the Lords Jurisdiction; by
means of which, it may be, in your house many Objections may be raised against
me, for my carriage and expressions before the Lords: I therefore humbly
entreat you to acquaint the house, That it is my most humble desire unto them,
that seeing this business is of so great concernment, not only to me, but also
to your selves, yea, and to the whole Kingdom; that I may have that honor and
justice, to be called to their Bar, and there have a fair, open, and public
hearing, according to Law and Justice; and I doubt not, but by my self singly,
by law and unquestionable authority, against all the Procters the Lords can fee
in England, to plead for them; to make it clear as the Sun that shines at
Noonday; that the Lords have no jurisdiction at all over me, in the case now
in controversy betwixt us, and that my carriage and expressions before them,
was, but the cordial demonstrations of a sound and single-harted man, who
knows himself bound in duty and conscience, to God, himself, and his country,
to the utmost of my endeavors, to defend, and maintain his Rights and
Liberties, which is as justifiable by the Law of this Kingdom, and in the eyes
of all understanding men; as for a true and just man, to draw his sword, and to
cut a Thief or Rogue that sets upon him upon the highway, on purpose to rob
him of his life and goods.

And if after such a hearing before your honorable house, it shall appear to
their judgments and understandings, that I have wronged the Lords in general,
or the Earl of Manchester, or Col. King in particular; (which two are the
principal causes of all my present trouble, and against whom, are two Grand
charges in your house; as I judge them of no less then high treason
commitmitted against the Kingdom; which as I humbly conceive, the justice of
the Kingdom requires should come to a final determination) I shall with all
willingness and cheerfulness submit to what punishment shall be just for them
to inflict upon me; and I hope that by this fair offer, you will be provoked
with the strength of resolution, to deal impartially betwixt the Lords and me,
and without fear, punish those where the just fault is, especially, considering
that you, in your most excellent Declaration, of the 17. April 1646 published
by you to the view of the whole kingdom, have solemnly declared, That you will
preserve the Rights and Liberties of the people, and abolish the exercise of
arbitrary power, and so provide for the safety and weal of the people; which is
(as you say) the end of the primitive institution of all government. And
therefore, in the behalf of my self, and all the Commons of England, I most
humbly beseech, and entreat his thonourable Committee, to improve all the
interest you have in the house of Commons, to make good unto us this their own
just and honest Declaration.

I beseech you hear me but one word more, which I entreat you well to observe;
that the Lords have joined with you in several Declarations; in which the
Kings Oath is printed, which I read in the Book Decl. page 268.713.714, where
you and they declare positively, and back it with many strong arguments; That
the King by his Coronation Oath, is bound to pass such laws, as his people
shall choose: and if so; then he has no power in him to give a law unto the
people, or impose a law upon them: much less can he give a power to the Lords
(his mere creatures made by his will and pleasure) for them to oppose or give a
Law unto the people: and I am sure, if they have a legislative power in them,
to do what they please, and so by the authority of that, presumed to do with
me, as they did: I am sure, by the established Law of the Kingdom, they have
no power at all, not in the least to do with me as they have done.

And therefore, I humbly entreat you, to press home unto your House, the Lords
usurpations and encroachments upon our common rights, that so they may
effectually curb them, as in Justice they ought. For Sir, that which adds
sorrow to all my sorrows, is this, that I suffer all these inhumanities and
illegal usages, during the time of the sitting of a free Parliament, (and yet
can have no effectual redress in five months time, though earnestly sought
for.) Alas Sir, the Parliament is the English-mans legal last refuge; and if
that fail us (to speak as men) we are undone; unless God set his power at
work, to work miracles, and raise up means for our preservation. And Sir, if
the Lords dare thus tyrannize over the free Commons of England in time of
Parliament, (that used to be the fear and dread of Offenders) what is it, that
they will not do unto us out of a Parliament? Therefore, again I most earnestly
beseech this honorable Committee, to remember them, and improve all your
interest to punish, or at least effectually to curb them: for which, as well,
as for your present patience, in hearing me so largely, I shall both now (as
well as formerly) remain obliged to improve my best and utmost ability, for
the preservation of the just, supreme interest, power, and authority of your
honorable House.

Esa. 48.10. Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen
thee in the fullness of affliction.

Job. 23.10. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

November. the 9. 1646. JOHN LILBURN.

Reader, thou art requested to take notice of two faults committed in the
printing of this Book, the first, in page 2. line 1. left out [and also what
passed betwixt my L. Wharton and my self] the 2. in. p. 5. l. 26. where thou
shall find these words [ a Commitment lawful, viz.] to be in the 28. line,
which ought to be placed at the end of the 26. line, as thou may easily
perceive. For other faults (if thou meet with any) impute them not unto the
Author, who could not be at the correcting hereof; but in love to him, amend
them.

Vale.
FJNJS.

