holy inocency is. blessed
The Author of the Dove enclosed sends
Intelligence, and counsel to his Friends;
From West and North, and from North-west she brings
What she has gathered; she reports of things
In Action she might not stay the event;
But make return to him from whom she went.


Be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves. THE SCOTTISH DOVE Sent out, and
Returning; Brings Intelligence from the Armies of both Kingdoms, and relates
other Passages observable, for Information and Instruction.
From Friday the of 1 August, till Friday the 8 of August, 1645.
THursday last, after my Dove was fully plumed, her Intelligence given her, and
her Packet sealed, there came some Intelligence of good News, which then I had
no room to insert, (as you may remember) one was of the taking of Bash, of
which I then gave you a brief relation; another was of the taking of the Kings
Lifeguard, or the most part thereof; they were passing over the River from
Wales to Min-head, and so to Bristol, and in their passage were taken by a
Frigot; The King (as is reported) was intended to follow, and in some danger,
(or rather so near to such a happiness) to be taken about the same time: a
third thing which I would have related last week, is the brave service done by
Captain Shilburne of Alisbury, which I shall new briefly relate, because I
find the Relation thereof made by some to differ much from the truth of the
action; in brief, and for truth, it was thus: The Kings Garrisons at Oxford,
Walling ford, and Bostocke, being denied the money they had Levied upon the
Country, toward Alisbury, threatened to come and Plunder the Towns, and burn
their houses, etc. The Committee therefore sent out Captain Shilburne, with
about 120 Horse and Dragoons to secure the Country; he went out on the
Saturday, and stayed till Tuesday; in all which time he saw no Enemy: But on
Tuesday about noone, he (being at Wadsdon, and his Horses unbitted) received
Intelligence that the Enemy was coming against him with a strong party from
Them; Captain Shilburne, with all speed prepared, and encouraged his men: but
before he could get ready, the Enemy got between him and Ethrop-house (which
was their Garrison) and in striving to get a little lane, which is about the
mid way between Ethrop and Wadsdon, their forlorn parties fell to blows, and
presently their whole bodies; the Enemy being 240, we not above 120. But
gallant Shilburne behaved himself so bravely, that he gave great encouragement
to his Soldiers, and as much dis-heartned the Enemy; he charged the Enemy
twice through, slew diverse of them, some were men of quailitie, he wholly
routed them, and took diverse prisoners, he lost not above 8 men: the Enemy
fled toward Oxford, and as they passed through Winchington, diverse of them
that were wounded stayed; some dyed there, some a little farther: and by the
judgment of the Country that see them, there was not less then 100 of the
Enemy wounded: Captain Shilburne received two flight hurts in the fight. Had
some men (more forward to use the Pen then the Sword) done such a service
(which they seldom do) all the Pamphlets would have rung of their Letters, in
praise of the action: We know that empty vessels make the greatest noise. This
brave Gentleman has done several gallant services, and tells no body, nor
will he let one of our Pamphlets be beholding to him for one letter; others
will be beholding to the Pamphleter to blaze their Letters and their
tainter-strecht Relations, which are fuller of words then of truths; It is the
best praise of Virtue or Valcur, when the actions flowing therefrom, speaks
it more then their own Pen.

The Commissioners sent from the Parliament of England, to the Parliament of
Scotland, set forward on their journey on Friday last.

Colonel Harlow is made Governor of Cannon-Froome, the Garrison lately taken
by the Lord General Leven: From which Army was certified lately, that they
were marched over the Forest of Dean, and (as was conceived) they intended
toward Monmouth: and thereupon it was generally reported, that the Lord
General Leven had summoned the Town: but it was not so, for he struck off
from the Forest to Hereford, and sent summons to it, but was refused by the
Town: He is now before the Town, has laid close siege to it; sent for his
great battering Pieces, and raised works and rampires for battery: what the
issue will be, I cannot tell you; that we leave to God, who I hope will give
that Town and the rest shortly into the Parliaments hands.

And thus much give me leave to say, for satisfaction to some, that although no
great actions have been done by that Army since they came into these Southern
or South-west parts, yet they have done great service (though easy) in
hindering the Kings designs and his recruits; and when God shall be pleased to
put them upon greater action, I doubt not of their good and well performance of
it; if men would have patience to stay Gods time, and not look upon men as if
they were Gods, able to do what they will; nor esteem of them worse then men:
which are two extrenies between which men's fancies are too much divided, and
too often fall upon prejudice by the one or by the other; it were well if men
would avoid both these evils, and look upon men as men, without singularity,
or prejudice, but only as instruments, by which God works to accomplish his
own will.

The Parliament have entreated General Leven to take care to keep the King on
that side of Severne where he is, and to hinder his recruits as much as may be,
and to keep any party from Cheshire and those parts; which no doubt he will
do, and something else, of which I hope you will hear shortly. There are some
Letters from Scotland this week, but they import no action or other news that
concerns our Intelligence.

There is care taken by the Parliament for the keeping in of the Enemy at
Oxford, Bostock, Banbury, Walling ford, Dunington, and Basing, which will with
all possible speed be effected, to the ease of all the Counties adjacent, and
the better if all would freely join in the work for their own good. The
Reformadoes that last went to the relief of Taunton are all to be employed in
that service. Care is also taken for the affairs in Cheshire, etc. and for
Newarke, though for the present they are injurious to the County of Lincoln.
They have taken a Garrison called Torsey-house, about 4 or 5 miles from
Gainsborough, they have burnt the house, and drawn up some Sluices, very
prejudicial to the County. A care is taken to secure that County, and not
only so, but to bring that hellish sanctuary of diabolical robbers into a
better obedience; which if God be pleased to bless the design, will be of
happy concernment to all those Counties, and to the Kingdom; I pray God
prosper the work.

Several debates have been in the house, about the establishment of the
government of the Church in a Presbytery way, and settling all things therein
according to the true meaning and sense of Sacred Scripture: As also to
distinguish (as far as is possible) between them that are Christians indeed,
and those that are only Christians by name, etc. that such as are not fit to
be partaker of holy things, (either by reason of their continued profane
lives, or by reason of their dark ignorance) to receive the blessed Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, may be for a time separated from those that are fit and
worthy receivers of those holy miste^ies, till they be better instructed and
admonished: yet so, as there shall not be any violence to force any man's
conscience (as some have dreamed and given out in words to retard the work,
and to raise jealousies) no otherwise then by holy and Christian exhortation,
according to the rule of holy Scripture, that so we that profess
Christianity, may be Christians indeed, and all of one mind, and one heart, as
the Father and the Son are one; for Christ has but one sheepfold and one
Shepherd; and he that enters not in by the door into the sheepfold, but by
some other way, he is a thief and a robber. It is true, that all authorities
and powers are made subject to Christ, both in heaven and on earth; yet all
Christians and men are by Christ made subject to all lawful authorities on
earth, for the powers that be are ordained of God, and we are all bound to
submit thereunto, even for conscience sake, for so the Apostle teaches: that
is, in all things commanded by God, and in all things not forbidden by God;
else were the sword put into the hand of the Magistrate in vain, which it is
not: for Scripture tells us, He bears not the sword in vain. Therefore, he
that disobeyeth in either of these, resists the ordinance of God; as he that
obeys more then this, transgresses against the command of God; both which
make him liable to wrath, and brings him in danger of damnation: I pray God we
may all seriously consider it, and learn to be godly wise, that we may deny
our selves, forsake our own wisdoms, and our own righteousness, that God
in Christ may be all in all unto us: If we thus do, and seek Peace one with
another, God will surely give Peace to the Kingdom; else we cannot expect it
from God as a blessing.

The Garrison of Banbury has of late done very much hurt to all the adjacent
Counties, and do daily make incursions into all Roads; and have robbed many
Carriers that pass, Coventry Road especially; they are as perfect at that
Trade, as if there were with them some of the Journy-men of the Lord of
Loughboroughs which is the arch rob-Carrier of England; they bestir themselves
devillishly, as if they were in their last year of liberty, now let loose to
trouble the Inhabitants of the Earth.

Sandall Castle, and Skipton in Yorkshire, are both besieged, the Enemy are
yet wilful, and must be whipped into a better humor, which it is likely (by
Gods blessing) will shortly be done: There is great hopes of Latham-house, but
no certainty.

Major General Skippon is recovered very well in his health, and in great
measure healed of his wounds, which is a mercy to the Kingdom; for he has,
as is still likely, to be a good instrument of good to the public.

Lieutenant General Cromwell has been sick of a Fever in Bridgewater, but
is in part recovered; God be praised for the lives of such Worthies.

Major General Brown is now in London, he has made known to the House the
estate of those Counties within his Commission, and is hastening the aid that
shall be for their support.

Major Temple is made Governor of the Garrison of Newport. Pagnell.

Some Letters from Ireland, relate much cruelty daily executed upon the
Protestant party by those Antichristian Rebe's, or rather Hellish Pagans; it
is pittisull to relate, and very grievous to consider the immane dealings of
those bloody men: let us all seek God for them, and send them what help we
are able, and God will in due time deliver them and us.

I shall now endeavor to give you intelligence of the passages in the West.
Last week I told you our Noble General, Sir Thomas Fairfax, was at Wells, and
Major General Massey gone toward the enemy; which was true: but now the
General is before Sherborne. He has raised batteries, and made diverse
battering shot: his whole Army is there with him, quartered at all the Towns
adjacent; Major General Massey is marched that way, toward him. The enemy,
Goring and Greenvile, are between Exeter and Barstable; they have drawn out
diverse of their Ordnance from Exeter, to make them a Train of Artillery: his
Majesty made our Noble General Master of his Ordnance at Naesby field, and
Goring delivered all that was in his custody unto his charge at Langport and
Bridgewater, and is now bringing more to him out of Exeter; if God please, they
may all shortly be delivered to our General to keep, he knows how to use
them well. His Majesty is somewhere in Wales, but I cannot tell you where; I
will at this time obey his Proclamation (yet I never see it) and will not tell
any man where he is. I know he is not where he should be; if he were, it would
be a double happiness, not more to his subjects then to himself: God open his
eyes, and show him the way to find out his errors, and mis-leaders; they hate
him, but his Majesty loves them: but his Majesty loves not them that loves
him most; he takes counsel with them that are the destroyers of counsel.

It is by Letters certined from the Generals Army, that he intends to advance
speedily toward the enemy with his whole Body: the enemy draws all out of
Cornwall, and their Garrisons, to make up a Body: it seems, they mean to have
another field for their part; let them go on, and let God fight his own
Battles, and judge between us and them. The inhabitants of Cornwall (though
they are really Gorings friends, and that party to assist them) will not
suffer Goring to come with his Army into that Country: and to that end they
supplicate, lest our General following, their Country should be destroyed by
both Armies; they begin to faint: if God give their Army now, with Greenvile
and Goring, into the Generals hand, all Cornwall will cry for mercy.

Major General Massey is going toward Bristol (as is certified) with about
2500 Horse and Dragoones, and two or three Regiments of foot, to block up the
enemy at distance; the Plague is still very hot in the Town.

Farnley Castle, the House of Sir Hungerford, in the County of Wilts, has
yielded voluntarily to Sir Thomas Fainfax, and both Governor and soldiers
submit to the obedience of the Parliament.

The Club men are little spoken of in any County, it seems they are in a good
way of submission; and it is not the least of the rest of Gods mercies, that
has disposed so of things, that the enemy is disappointed in that plot and
hope. The Club-men of Hampshire generally have declared themselves, to cast
themselves upon the Parliament for all matters of right, and to submit to such
government of the Church, as by the Assembly shall be propounded to the
Parliament, etc.

There was a party from Basing House, that went to M. Wallops Park, called
Farreley Park, and were there killing and spoiling the Dear; and the Country
came in upon them, and beat them, took some of them, and diverse of their
Arms, the rest fled away. At a place called Tadley, about five miles from
Basing, they intended to keep a Wake, and there came diverse to sell Fruit, and
Pedlars Ware, and it was to be kept the last Sabbath day; but on the Saturday
night a party from Reading went thither, and took from them all their
provisions, Pedlars packs, and other Knacks, which spoiled all their sport.

There has been debate in the House about sending Propositions to the King,
if yet his Majesty will be pleased to accept thereof; and it was voted they
would send Propositions by Bill, but without any Treaty. The world may see the
Parliaments desire of peace, and their tender care of his Majesty's honor and
preservation; provided it may stand with the safety of the Kingdom.

There was published a Murcurous Britanicus on Monday last, dishonorable to
the King; which the Parliament taking into consideration, have imprisoned both
the Author and Printer: it is not the Author that used to write the first
Britanicus. Aulicus of Oxford has continually abused the Parliament in the
basest language that a base heart could conceive, and his Majesty has never
given the least check to him for it; but the Parliament would not so requite
his Majesty.

Colonel Russel is appointed to be Governor of the Isle of Ely.

The Club-men in Dorsetshire being tumultuously gathered together, and sent to
by the General to depart to their Dwellings, would not, but grew more
numerous: The General sent Lieutenant General Cromwell with two Regiments of
Horse, and two Regimenrs of Foot, and sent them home with bleeding pates; a
just reward for their boldness.

Reports tell us of Ruperts coming to Banbury, and the Kings preparation
toward the North; it were good to sear the worst.

There is a Tract entitled Englands Pressures, or, The Peoples Complaint,
extant, which is useful to give satisfaction to all murmuring Complaints, and
worth the Readers labor and charge, to read and buy.

Printed for L. C. according to Order.


