The LIFE and DEATH of Sheffery Morgan, Son of Shon ap Morgan:

ID


Printed for J. Deacon at the Angel in Guilispur-street, near Newgate.

The LIFE and DEATH of Sheffery ap Morgan.
CHAP. I Of Sheffery's Birth and Education.
THE Person we intend to insist upon in this following Discourse; is one
Sheffery Morgan, who was born near Denby, a place eminently known in Wales: His
Father being a Man of no small account, kept two or three Hoggs, and Brewed
week for week the year round, half a peck of Malt: hur being a Man so well to
pass in the world, resolved to bring up hur Son Sheffery Scholar-like; and in
order thereunto put him to the greatest School in those parts, where he
improved his time so well, that in six or seven years, he was able to Spell his
own Name with a small matter of help. But not long after, hur fond Father
supposed hur fir for the University, and disposed of hur accordingly; but
Sheffery grew negligent, unknown to hur Father, and minded more hur Waggish
Pastimes then hur serious Study; and hur Father supposing hur to be capable to
manage a Parsons place, took a Fatherly care of hur, and went to the Bishop of
that Diocese, making suit for a Benefice for hur, which was granted, provided
that hur should Preach a Sermon of Approbation. Old Shon ap Morgan being joyful
of this answer from the Bishop, writ Post to her Son Sheffery, wishing hur with
all speed to come, for hur was likely to become a Welsh Parson, and have a
Benefice of 40 l. per Annum. These good Tidings so tickled the ear of our young
Parson, that hur amitted no opportunity, but took Horse and rid full speed to
hur Fathers House in Wales, who told hur all the matter in hand; but when hur
heard that hur was to Preach before hur could have hur Money, hur knew not what
to think on it.

The day appointed drawing nigh when Sheffery was to Preach, being sensible of
hur inability, he knew not what course to take, or how her should perform the
Task imposed upon hur; sometimes hur thought to fly from the presence of the
Bishop and hur Father both, and then contradicted that thought with this
resolution, That if he could not do as well as he should, that he would do as
well as he could; So the day being come, Sheffery lay somewhat long a Bed, and
seemed to have small stomach to his new Concern; which hur Father perceiving,
stepped up to give hur a call, telling hur the Saints Bell had rung in: O Father,
said hur. I am in a brown Study, look Father upon the top of Mr. Quibus his
House, and behold a Cow-Tuts that lies there; and I have been studying how to
might be; whether the top of; the House came down to the Cow, or whether the
Cow went up to the top of the House! O fie Son, this is idle Discouse, come
make have, for it draws near ten a Clock, the Bishop and the people begin to
think you long. Well, Father, I have but a short Sermon to make, but it is such
a Tickler as has not been Preached at your Church since you came to the Parish.
Well, Son, I shall leave that to your judgment. Sheffery no sooner enters the
Church, but he steps into the Pulpit, and begins as follows.

Good People all, hur knows there is something expected from hur by way of
Discourse, and seeing we are all met together, take this following matter as an
undeniable Truth.

There are some Things that I know and you know not; and there are some Things
that you know, and I know not; and there are some Things that neither I nor you
know.

For thus; As I went over a Style I tore my Breeches, that I know, and you know
not; but what you will give me toward the mending of them, that you know, and
I know not; but what the Knave the Tailor will have for mending them, that
neither you nor I know.

The Bishop hearing such a strange Welsh discourse delivered as a Sermon, fell
into such a laughter, that he laughed himself into a Looseness, that he was
forced to carry his Arse under his Arm ever; after and Old Shon ap Morgan fell
into such a passion, that hur solemnly protested, hur would Dis-inherit hur Son
Sheffery.

CHAP. II. How Sheffery Morgan Traveled from hur Fathers House toward London,
and how he fell in Company with two of his Countrymen, who were driving a
Drove of Welsh Cattle to Smithfield; and what fell out in the sharing of their
Money.
SHeffery Traveled the Road, having but a small Sum of Money in his Purse,
fell into serious Cogitations, sometimes calling to mind the pleasant pastimes
he met with when he was at the University; and then thinking on his present
misery, that those vain pleasures had brought him to: And while he remained in
this disconsolate humor, two of his Countrymen overtook him with a great
Drove of Welsh Cattle; to whom he said, Whether are you going; who answered We
are Drovers going to Smithfield-Market, but we greatly want one to help us,
then Sheffery asked them what they were to have for their pains? who answered a
Shilling: he concluding that he was going to the same City, thought something
better then nothing, so he joined with them, and as they Traveled hard, at
last they came to Smithfield, where the owner gave them a whole Shilling; then
was their care how to part this one piece equally amongst them three: Sheffery
being ingenious, said, We Will go shange it for three Groats, to which they
consented, so going from street to street, at last they came to Lombardstreet,
where Sheffery spyed a Tray full of Groats, and tried, here hur shall do it if
ever: The Gentleman of the shop being at dinner, the Hatch was shut, and no
body in the shop but an old Iackanapes, chained upon the Counter; Sheffery
leaning over the Hatch, said, Good Sir, will you give me three Groats for a
Shilling? and held the shilling forth, which the Iackanapes took, and put it
down into the place, where he used to see his Master; put money, and minding
Sheffery no more but hur was very urgent with the Iackanapes for hur shange,
and said, Good Sir, what does hur intend to do? will hur give hur three groats
for hur shilling or no? hur the Iackanapes not minding, stirred up hur Welsh
plood, scaring that the Old Shentleman was minded to sheat them, which caused
to make a great Crowd about the door, so that the Gentleman of the House heard
them, and coming into the Shop to see what was the matter, began to be rough
with them, doubting they intended to rob his Shop, but they tried out, they
were poor Welshmen, that thought no hurt, but desired to have three Groars for
a Shilling: The Gentleman finding them to be poor ignorant Fellows, asked them
for their shilling; they replied they had given it to hur aged Father (pointing
to the Iackanapes) The Gentleman in great wrath, cry dout, You Uillains, do you
think I am the Son of a Iackanapes? and threatened to set them by the Heels; but
discovering their simplicity, asked them what the Iackanapes did with it? quoth
they, he put it into that Hole: so he supposed it might be, gave them 3 Groats,
bidding them be gone; so away they went, Sheffery's Contrymen to their
places provided for them, but Sheffery had his Fortune to seek.

CHAP. II. How Sheffery being weary of London, and short of Money, took a
Journey toward the North; and how he got the good Will of a Sow, which proved
the first rise of Sheffery's Fortune.
SHeffery being forsaken of hur Country men, and almost moneyless, wandered too
and fro feasting hur Eyes, but starving hur Belly, resolved to travel farther
toward the North: hur had not gone above 20 miles, but hur was surprised by
the dismol Night, and being unacquainted with the way, lost hur self, and
wandered up and down, till at last hur happened upon a small Cotrage, and knocking
at the door, he asked how for it might be to the next Town? the Old Man
answered, he was far from any Town or House except his: then Sheffery craved
for Entertainment for that night; but the old man replied, he had no
convenience, but hur pressed hard for Lodging; so the did man said, I have no
place for you, except you will lie with our old Sow; with all hur heart, quoth
Sheffery. This being agreed on, they went to their Bed, and Sheffery to the
Hog-stye, which joined to the House, near the Did Man and Wontans Beds-head:
Sheffery having but a sorry Lodging and a turbulent Bedfellow, took no rest at
all: the old man and woman waking about midnight, fell in discourse, quoth the
old Woman, Husband, what if the young man should fall in love with our Sow, and
forthwith get her good will to be Married? Who, quoth the old Man, should be
against her Preferment, if they like eath other? Ah! but Husband, she has been
a good Old Servant to us, and if ever she goes, I hope you will bestow
something with her: Well, well, Wife, I shall not be backward, but ten or twenty
pound I will bestow if the Man be deserving. Sheffery minding their Discourse,
arost and went into a Carrot field near by, and pulled some up, and brought
them to the Sow, giving her plentifully to eat, then tied the rest about his
middle, underneath his Coat: and going into the house to return thanks for his
nights Lodging, the Sow having tasted the sweetness of the Carrats, can'd as
though she would have torn down the Stye, longing for more Carrots, the old
Woman hearing the Sow to rave, cried out to her Husband, What is the matter
with our Sow? Quoth Sheffery, hur can tell best what is the matter; for hur and
I have made a match to be Married, and now she finding me to be gone without
her, causes her to rave in this sort: The old Woman runs with speed to her.
Husband, and said, Curs hobby Husband, I told you our Sow is in Love with the
Young Man. Ah! but quoth he, that must be farther tried, i will see first whether
she will follow him sooner then another; and setting her out, she ran directly
at him, and taking hold on him, as if she l^ved him above others; the Did Man
seeing this, was much satisfied, and called Sheffery in, and laid him down 20
pound, wishing them much joy together: This being done, Sheffery took hur leave
of the old people and went hur way, by the smell of the Carrots the Sow
followed him, which the old Woman spying, she cried out, Come hither Mistress
Bride, pray stay and take my best hat with you, which she did, and looked like
Mother Shtpion with her long Nose.

CHAP. IV. How Sheffery was robbed of hur 20 pound, and how hur served the
Thief that robbed hur.
SHeffery wandering farther, came into an uncough Lane, and there met with a
High-way-man, well mounted and armed, who fastening his eyes upon Sheffery,
supposed there was money in the case, and welcomed hur with the usual word
Stand: Sheffery finding it was in vain to dispute, soon yielded up his Purse,
the only thing the Thief-desired, and setting spurs to his Horse, away he rid
full speed, leaving Sheffery much lighter than he found him: Sheffery much
troubled, went on with a light purse, but a heavy heart, and that night wanting
money, Lodged in a Barn: Not long after, Sheffery sitting on the brink of a
drawing Well, near the Highway side, distant from any House; and troubling at
the crosses which happened to him, fell into a passion, and whilst he was in
this Agony, he which robbed him, happened to came by, Sheffery minding him, knew
him though he knew not Sheffery, but asked him what was the cause of his sorrow?
who answered, that he had let a bag of Money fall into the Well. At this the
Thief seemed forrowful, and said, he would pull off his Clothes and you shall
let me down into the Well, and when I have found the Money. I Will call you to
pull me up again: Sheffery was well pleased at this, so off comes the Chiefs
apparel, and into the Bucket he gets, while Sheffery was very ready to set him
down; which done, hur seeing the Road clear, and the Thief safe where be could
not come out without help, now is the time, thought Sheffery, to deceive the
deceiver; so pulling off his old Jerkin, by reason he could not describe him by
his Apparel, throws it down into the Well, then mounted his Horse and rid full
speed night and day, till he and the Well were 60 miles asunder; and then
adventured to open his Portmantle, where he found 300 pound of money, his own
20 pound being part thereof; where we will now leave him and discourse
something of the Thief which Sheffery left to searth for that Money in the Well
which never was there. The Chief finding himself thus deceived and so
trapann'd, that he could no ways help himself, was forced to continue in the
Bucket, to safe his sweet Life; and at last an Old Woman coming from the next
Town to draw Water; as she was winding up, seeing such a strange Beast in the
Bucket, was shrewdly affrighted, for he stared like a dead Pig on a
Market-Womans Stall; the Woman being half dead with fear, in a little time
recovered her senses, and made shift to get to the Town, where she declared how
she was frighted at the Well; they asked what it might be; who replied, she
dared not to stay to look on it, but without doubt it must be the Devil, and
therefore let us all go forth with what Weapons we can get, and destroy him,
who would deprive us of the Privilege of the Well, and has taken possession
of the Bucket: so the rest of the old Women and Men resolved to fight for their
Privilege, and armed themselves with such Weapons as they could get, the Men
with Pirch-Forks and Clubs, and such like, the Women with Distaffs, and swore
by their Maiden-heads, he should never escape their fury, so they drew
themselves up into a Body, and made Old Stump the Tooth-Drawer, their Captain,
and the Gid Woman that brought the tidings, his Second: along they married till
they came to the Well, then setting themselves in order to oppose him, when he
should come out; none so valiant as Old Stump, who went up to the Well to beat
him out of his Harbor, where he found him fitting in the Bucket, as the Did
Woman had told before; and darwing of him out of the Well, he was so amazed to
see so many old Men and women, insomuch that he strove to run for his Life, but
they so pursued him, and so laid on, that they soon ended his days, and gave a
great shout, for joy that they had killed the Devil.

Now let us return to Sheffery Morgan, where we left him, taking an account of
the Money he found in the Chiefs Portmantle, who beholding this great sum of
Money, resolved if he could to raise his Fortune, and get him a handsome young
Woman to his Wife, to the end that he might reap the full enjoyment of his
Youth, so he took up his Lodging at the sign of the Unicorn, where he had not
long lain, but he walked forth one day to recreate himself in the Fields, where
by mere accident, he lit of a young Gentleman, whose Name was Pantillo, who had
formerly been Fellow-Student with him at Cambridge, and wondering to meet
Sheffery in those parts, asked him where he lived? he told him that he Lodged
at the White-Horse with the Barbers-Pole in his Forehead, here in this Town.
Quoth Pantillo, I live about Ten Miles hence, and came hither about Business,
and I should be glad to Drink one Cup of this Country Liquor with you: with
all my heart, quoth Sheffery, and we'll go to my Lodging: So on they went until
they came to the Sign of the Unicorn, where they Housed, and Pantillo Laughed
heartily at the New-Fashioned Horse: But as they were Discoursing together,
Sheffery unfolded the secrets of (...) keepers in the Country gives such a
Crack, which makes such a sound in the Londoners ears, that they are the worse
for it a great while afterward.

Cons. Honest Plain-dealing, I am willing to take thy advice, and see the
Country once more: and now every thing is so plentiful, we will see what
entertainment thee and I shall have, I Will stay Bartholomew-Fair at London, and
thou to Sturbridge, and so to Yorkshire, for there I had used to be much
regarded among them.

Good Ale is the dearest penniworth there; for Victuals will cost you little or
nothing if you be a Good fellow.

But honest Brother, prithee let me give thee some instructions in your travel:
and I would desire some of yours, for where you are, bid them remember me.


Plain. Well I will, and now tell me what I shall do; for Plain-dealing must be
ruled by Conscience, and Conscience by Plain-dealing: for he that uses one,
must use the other.


Cons. First bid the Shopkeepers and Sales-men there provide them light Shops
and not dark Rooms, whereby to deceive their Customers, to make them to take
old clothes instead of new, and course cloth instead of fine. And bid the
whole sail-men sell good penni-worths to their Customers.

And when they trust them not to take too much gains.
For fear they get naught but Ink and Paper for their pains.
And pray bid all Tradesmen here, have a care of lying, for it may be they
dare not Swear for fear they are made to pay for it; and bid their Customers not
believe them, when they say they lose by their Commodities, or get nothing by
them, for such as those will cheat them most; and pray invite all the honest
Horse-coursers in every Fair you come to (that make much of Conscience and
Plain-dealing, and never use Swearing nor lying) bid them to Dinner, but to be
sure do not provide too much Victuals, for fear your company be so small, that
you must be glad to eat it your self: and bid the Bakers remember me, and tell
them you are a friend of mine, and must take notice of such as love not
Conscience and Plain-dealing, bid them all remember thee and I; and tell them
the Fair would be a great deal the better (and all fairs and Markets else) if
they would make use of Conscience and Plain-dealing in their buying and
selling, and not use false Weights and Measures, and deceitfulness in their
Trading; for light gains, and quick sale, will make a heavy purse.


Plain. Well Brother Conscience, I intend to follow thy directions; and prithee
where thou go bid them remember me: and let not Shopkeepers and Trades men
use double-dealing so much as they do, nor keep but one sort of Weights and
Measures to Buy and Sell by; and let them turn out Hypocrisy out of their
Shops, for a great many keeps him to be the Foreman of the Shop instead of
Conscience, and so have deceived the people; But I hope we shall discover them
all, for the people begin to find them out already: For indeed, and Forsooth,
and intruth they have cheated many an honest man: Not an Oath but as many Lies
as you please: I advise all to have a care of them, and not deal with any, if
you know them to be such: For he that will Swear, will Lie, and he that will
Lie would Swear too, if it were not in hopes to cousen you the more by his
smooth Tongue.

Pray remember me to all the honest Inns and Alehouses in your Travels that
uses Conscience and Plain-dealing to their Guests, and tell them they will be
never the poorer for entertaining Conscience. Indeed in the North-parts, and
especially in Yorkshire, they did use some Conscence formerly, therefore I
hope you will find some entertainment there.

Remember me to all our Friends at Shefield, and bid the Cutlers there not
Glate their Knives so much as they do, nor Bromigom neither, for they leave so
little Steel on them, that when they are used a while, the heat of the Meat
melts all the Steel away: There is a place called Cuckolds-Haven near Shefield,
where I heard the Host of the house formerly deal so much with that Ware, and
had so much Credit of his Dealers in Shefield, sore against their Wills, he
has now built him this place called Cuckolds-Haven; which by report cost his
dealers three hundred pounds the Building; but good Brother Conscience come not
there: for he will turn you out of doors; for by report he never knew you in his
life, and he cares not for strangers.

It Is the trick of a Knave, you will say it is pity.
Knaves should flourish so in Town and City.
Pray Brother Conscience bid the Clothiers in Yorkshire to bring as much Cloth
as they can in the Summer, while the weather is dry, but let them give good
measure when they sell it, and persuade the People that buys it, to take
enough, for fear they should find none to match it when it is shrunk.

And pray advise all countrymen and Women that comes to Markets and Fairs, to
have a care how that they part from their Money; and let them not part from it
to them that will take it at a venture, and never tell it, for then they will
have nothing for it, but trouble to find it again.

And pray let all Countrymen, and others, when they are merry, and in drink,
have a care of Gaming, for fear they meet with a dish of Rooks that will be
saucy, they will not be able to digest them in a good while after.

And I would advise Young Men to have a care of their Pockets, and Maids have a
care of their Plackets, for when the drink is in, the wit is out; for both many
have sower Sauce to their sweet meat; if they have not a care.

And in the next place I advise all, let them be rich or Poor, Old or Young, to
hate Swearing and Lying, Couzening and Cheating, Quarreling and Fighting, do as
they would be done by, keep a good Conscience, and love plain-dealing.

Let a Man be Honest, Just, and Fair,
Then what he goes he need not care.
So once more we are resolved to see;
Where Conscience and Plain-dealing best entertained may be.
And when we have gone our Circuit round.
We Will tell you where Conscience and Plain-dealing may be found.
So farewell till we do meet again.
For Conscience and Plain-dealing, amongst some does still remain.

The Authors Advice.
Well, Honest Men and women either in Country or City, let me like a friend,
advise you to take notice of what you have heard in this Book, and be not angry
if Conscience and Plain-dealing has told you of some of your Faults; if you
are wise you will seek to amend them, and not like a gaul'd Horse kick and
wince when you are rubbed: And though it be a Proverb amongst many, that
Conscience is Hanged, and he that loves Plain-dealing.

You tell those knaves where you do them see,
That Conscience is not hanged, though lost with them he be:
And though Plain-dealing dies a Beggar, as some say,
He gains at last, though here he loose the day.
Some grows Rich, and some grows poor,
Some gets houses some turned out of door:
Some gets by swearing, cheating, and lying,
And some gets estates without any buying,
But he that loves Conscience and Plain-dealing too.
To live in these times he will have much ado.
So fare you well, my name begins with C.
A friend to Conscience and Plain-dealing wheresoever they be.
FINIS.
Licenced and Entered accordding to Order.


