In the 150 page of the Book called, An exact collection of the Parliaments
Remonstrances, Declarations, etc. published by special Order of the House of
Commons, March 24. 1642. we find there a Question answered fit for all men to
take notice of in these times.
Question. NOw in our extreme d^stractions, when foreign forces threaten,
and probably are invited, and a malignant and Pop^sts party at home offended?
The Devil has cast a bone, and raised a contestation between the King and
Parliament touching the Militia. His Majestic claims the disposing of it to be
in Him by the right of Law; The Parliament says, Rebus sic stantibus, and
nolenti Rege, the ordering of it is in them?

Answer. Which Question, may receive its solution by this distinction. That
there is in Laws an equitable, and a litterall sense. His Majesty (let it be
granted) is entrusted by Law with the Militia, but it is for the good and
preservation of the Republic, against Foreign Invasions or domestic
rebellions For it cannot be supposed that the Parliament would ever by Law
entrust the King with the Militia against themselves, or the Common wealth,
that intrusts them to provide for their weal, not for their woe. So that when
there is certain appearance or grounded suspicion, that the Letter of the Law
shall be improved against the equity of it (that is, the public good, whether
of the body real or representative) then the Commander going against its
equity, gives liberty to the Commanded to refuse obedience to the Letter: for
the Law taken abstract from its original reason and end, is made a shell
without a kernel, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul. It
is the execution of Laws according to their equity and reason, which (as I may
say) is the spirit that gives life to Authority the Letter kills.

Nor need this equity be expressed in the Law, being so naturally employed and
supposed in all Laws that are not merely Imperial, from that analogy which
all bodies Politic hold with the Naturalls whence all government and
Governors borrow a proportionable respect; And therefore when the Militia of
an Army is committed to the General, it is not with any express condition,
that he shall not turn the mouths of his Cannons against his own Soldiers, for
that is so naturally and necessarily employed, that its needless to be
expressed, insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing against the
nature of his trust and place, it did ipso facto estate the Army in a right of
disobedience, except we think that obedience binds Men to cut their own
throats, or at least their companions.

And indeed if this distinction be not allowed, then the legal and mixed
Monarchy is the greatest Tyranny, for if Laws invest the King in an absolute
power, and the Letter be not controled by the equity, then whereas other Kings
that are absolute Monarchs and rule by will, and not by Law, are Tyrants
perforce. Those that rule by Law and not by will, have hereby a Tyranny
conferred upon them legally, and so the very end of Laws, which is to give
bounds and limits to the exorbitant wills of Princes, is by the Laws themselves
disappointed, for they hereby give corroboration (and much more Justification)
to an arbitrary Tyranny, by making it legal, not assumed; which Laws are
ordained to cross not countenance: and therefore is the letter (where it seems
absolute) always to receive qualification from the equity, else the foresaid
absurdity must follow.

It is confessed by all rational men, that the Parliament has a power to
annull a Law, and to make a new Law, and to declare a Law, but known Laws in
force and unrepealed by them, are a rule as long as they so remain for all the
Commons of England whereby to walk; and upon ra^ionall grounds is conceived to
be binding to the very Parliament themselves as well as others. And though by
their legislative power they have Authority to make new Laws, yet no free man
of England is to take notice (or can he) of what they intend till they declare
it: neither can they, as is conceived, justly punish any man for walking
closely to the known and declared Law, though it cross some pretended
Privilege of theirs, remaining only in their own breasts.

For where there is no Law declared, there can be no transgression; therefore
it is very requisite that the Parliament would declare their Privileges to
the whole Commons of England, that so no man may through Jgnorance (by the
Parl^aments default) run causelessly into the hazard of the less of their
lives, liberties, or estates: for here it is acknowledged by themselves, that
their power is limited by those that be trust them; and that they are not to do
what they list, but what they ought, namely, to provide for the peoples weal,
and not for their woe: so that unknown Privileges are as dangerous, as
unlimited Prerogatives, being both of them secret snares, especially for the
best affected people.

It is the greatest hazard and danger that can be run unto, to dis^rt the only
known and declared rule; the laying aside whereof, brings in nothing but will
and power, lust and strength, and so the strongest to carry all away; for it
is the known, established, declared, and unrepealed Law, that tells all the free
men of England, that the Knights and Burgesses chosen according to Law, and
sent to make up the Parliament, are those that all the Commons of England (who
send and choose them) are to obey.

But take away this declared Law, and where will you find the rule of
Obedience? and if there be no rule of obedience, then it must necessarily
follow, that if a greater and stronger number come to a Parliament sitting, and
tell them that they are more and stronger then themselves, and therefore they
shall not make Laws for them, but they will rather make Laws for them, must
they not needs give place? undoubtedly they must.

Yea take away the declared, unrepealed Law, and then where is meum and tuum,
and liberty, and property? But you will say, the Law declared, binds the
people, but is no rule for a Parliament sitting, who are not to walk by a known
Law. It is answered: It cannot be Imagined that ever the people would be so
sottish, as to give such a power to those whom they choose for their Servants;
for this were to give them a power to provide for their woe, but not for their
weal, which is contrary to their own foregoing maxim; therefore doubtless
that man is upon the most solid and firm ground, that has both the letter and
equity of a known declared, and unrepealed Law on his side, though his practice
do cross some pretended Privilege of Parliament.

And whereas by an Act made this present Parliament, Anno 17 Caroli Regis,
entitled,

An Act for Regulating of the Privy Council, and for taking away the Court,
commonly called, The Star Chamber.

It is there declared, that the proceedings, Censures, and Decrees of the Star
Chamber, have by experience been found to be an intolerable burden to the
Subject, and the means to introduce an Arbitrary power and Government, and that
the Councell-Table have adventured to determine of the estates, and liberties
of the Subject, contrary to the Law of the Land, and the rights and
privileges of the Subject. Which Laws are there recived, as first M^gna Carta,
and the 5 Ed. 3. 9. and 25 Ed 3. 4. and 28 Ed. 3. 3. the last of which says
that it is accorded, assented, and established, that none shall be taken by
Petition, or suggestion made to the King or His Council, unless it be by
Indictment, or presentment of good and lawful people of the same
neighborhood, where such deeds be done, in due manner, o^ by Process made by
Writ original at the Common Law, and that none be put out of his franchise or
Freehold, unless he be duly brought in, to answer, and fore-judged of the
same, by the course of the Law; and by another Statute made in the 42 Ed. 3. 3.
it is there inacted, that no man be put to answer without presentment before
Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process and Writ original according
to the old Law of the Land.

Therefore for the Subjects good and welfare in future time, it is inacted,
that from henceforth no Court, Council, or place of Judicature shall be
erected, ordained, constituted, or appointed within this Realm of England, or
dominion of Wales, which shall have, use, or exercise the same, or the like
jurisdiction, as is, or has been used, practiced, or exercised in the said
Court of Star Chamber.

From the equity and letter of which Law, it is desired that our learned
Lawyers would answer these ensuing Quaeries.

First, whether the letter and equity of this Law, do not bind the very
Parliament themselves during the time of their sitting, in the like cases here
expressed to the same rules here laid down? Which if it should be denied. Then
secondly, whether the Parliament it self, when it is sitting, be not bound to
the observation of the letter and equity of this Law, when they have to do with
freemen, that in all their actions and expressions have declared faithfulness
to the Commonwealth? And if this be denied, Then

Thirdly, whether ever God made any man lawless? or whether ever the
Commonwealth when they choose the Parliament, give them a lawles unlimited
power, and at their pleasure to walk contrary to their own Laws and Ordinances
before they have repealed them.

Fourthly, whether it be according to Law, Justice, or equity, for the
Parliament to imprison or punish a man for doing what they command him, and by
oath enjoin him?

Fifthly, whether it be legal, just, or equal, that when freemen do endeavor
according to their duty, oath and Protestation, to give in information to the
Parliament of Treason acted and done by Sir John Lenthall, against the State
and Kingdom, and long since communicated to several Members of the House of
Commons, but by them concealed and smothered; And now by Gods providence
brought upon the stage again, and during the time that Inquisition is made of
it before the Committee of Examination, before any legal charge be fixed upon
Sir John Lenthall, or he required to make any answer or defense, that he shall
be present to outface, discourage, and abuse the Informers and witnesses in
the face of the Committee, without any check or control from them?

And sometimes while they are sitting about the Examination of his Treason,
that he shall sit down beside them with his hat on, as if he were one of them,
and that he shall enjoy from the Committee ten times more favor and respect
then the just, honest, and legal Informers against him; who by some of the
Committee themselves while they are sitting, are threatened, jeered, nicknamed,
and otherwise most shamefully abused.

Yea and the friends of the Informers for the State are kept without doors, and
the friends of the accused admitted to come in always without control; and
during the Examination of the Information, that the Committee shall refuse to
remove the Informers out of Sir John Lenthals custody of Kings Bench to another
prison, although they have been truly informed, that he has set Instruments on
work to murder them, and also importuned to remove them.

Sixthly, whether it be not most agreeable to Law, Justice, and equity, that
seeing Sir John Lenthall having so many friends in the House concerned in the
business, that he should not rather be tried by the same Council of War in
London, where Sir John Hotha^ and his Son were, then at the Parliament, his
principal crime being against the Law Marshall as theirs was.


