A DISCOURSE OF DISPUTATIONS Chiefly concerning matters of Religion, with
Animadversions on two printed Books, (mentioned in the Contents following next
after the Epistles:) The latter whereof, at the request of Dr. John Bryan, (for
Censure and Advice) being seriously perused; The Author of it, JOHN ONLEY, is
thereupon convinced of Error, Slander, and of arrogant, uncivil, and
unchristian miscarriage, not only toward him, but all the Reformed Churches
of the world, out of the way of his most affected singularity.

By John Ley, Rector of the Church of Solyhull in Warwicksh.

1 King. 18.36. Answer him not.

Dial. inter Aug. and Hieron. Tom. 4. oper. Hieron. p. 397. Non de Adversario
victoria^, sed de mendacio quaerimus veritate^.

WHERETO IS ADDED A Consolatory Letter to Dr. Bryan, etc. upon the death of his
worthily well-beloved and much bewailed Son Mr. NATHANIEL BRYAN: Which
immediately follows after the Discourse of Disputations.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Webb and Will: Grantham, at the black Bear in St.
Paul's Churchyard, over against the little North door, MDCLVIII.

To the WORSHIPFUL My much Honored Friend, RIGHARD HOPKINS, Esquire; STEWARD of
the City of COVENTRY.
SIR,
IN the publication of these papers, I could not but conceive you had some
interest, as a friend to the cause and person most meddled within them; nor to
him only, but to all the Dr. Briaes. Dr. Grow. Mr. Basnet.
three religious and learned Ministers of your City, wherein (methinks) you
much resemble Geneva for number and quality, when it enjoyed an holy Triumvirat
of Farellus, Viret, and Calvin, in that order Beza names them in the life of
Calvin, and gives them their several characters, so as of all three to make up
one Saepe mihi in ment^m veni^ p^rfectum quodammedo videri posse pastorem qui
ex tribusillis esset conflatus. Beza in vitam Calvin. p. 8.
perfect Pastor. I shall do those renowned reformers no wrong, if I say of
your Preachers, that each of them is complete in himself without his partners:
Such has been the proficience of the Pulpit (both by preaching and praying)
since their times, and more in England then elsewhere; as diverse Travelers
(who have had opportunity to know, and ability to judge; and many foreign
Divines, who understanding our language, have read our printed Sermons, and
compared them together with those of other Nations) have censured. I testify
this truth the rather, because, though there be some difference in judgment,
(blessed be God it is not great) yet there is no dissenting in affection among
them. Religious duties are unanimously performed: Christian society and
Ministerial brotherhood sweetly maintained, and all offices suitable to such
relations, mutually and affectionately exchanged: to whose concord and
communion, I shall make bold to apply His Highness Eulogium of the Army in his
Narrative from Bristol, Sept. 14. 1645. in Engl. Recovery. part. 2. p. 118.
these words; Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the same Spirit of
Faith and Prayer, the same presence and answer, they agree here, and have no
names of difference: Pity it is it should be otherwise any where.

Now as I have matched your City with Geneva for your Ministers, so I wish your
City-Magistrates may match theirs in vigilance, vigor, and good effects of
Government, who (as Bodin, a famous French Papist, makes the report of them)
Ridiculum est ad legem esse bonos; allam censuram qua nil magis ac divinius
cogitari potuit ad coercendas hominu^ cupiditates latenter primum, and amice,
quam sequitur animadversio magistratuum. Jo. Bod. Method. Hist. c. 6. p. 245.
Ita fit ut quae legibus nusquam, etc. igitur nullae meretrices, nullae
ebrietates, nullae saltationes, nulli menaici, null otiosi in ea civitate
reperiuntur. Ibid.
holding it a ridiculous thing, to be good only by good Laws, follow
Consistorian Censures against the Contumacious, with civil Animadversion of the
Magistrates. Hence it comes to pass that those vices which no where else, are
there restrained, so that there is no whoredom, no drunkenness, no dancing, no
beggars, no idle persons to be found in that City.

My hopes come up the higher toward my wishes hereof, because you do not only
encourage your able, watchful, and painful Pastors many ways especially, as
the Apostle admonishes, Heb. 13.17. by your Christian compliance with their
holy Ministeries, (seconded by their exemplary practice) but you do the like to
your learned, pious, and industrious Schoolmaster, Mr. Samuel Frankland.
also with the ingenuous and hopeful youths under his institution. This you
manifested in a very eminent manner, when the last year Mr. Major, with your
self, the Aldermen, and many other subordinate Citizens, came in a venerable
equipage to the Free School, to grace their exercises with your presence and
audience: and though I cannot say with intelligence, of all or most, because a
good part of it was Greek, (a strange Tongue even to the Roman Priests, and
that by Graecum est non potest legi.
(Proverb) yet some did understand it; more the Latin: and the pleasantness
of their voices, the gracefulness of their elocution and action, the fidelity
of their memories, presented a grateful experiment to such as were skilled in
neither of them, and exercised no faculty superior to sense and fancy. It is
under consultation I hear hereafter to give some respective entertainment to
such in their Native Language.
But that which the wiser sort of Spectators and Auditors of all ranks (I
conceive) chiefly intended, was, to profess themselves opponents to the late
illiterate Sects, who cry down Schools and Universities, and would have our
Ministers no more learned then the Italian Friars of the order of S. Ignorance,
who (as Luther writes of them) were forced to solemn oaths that they would
neither know, learn, or understand any thing at all, but should answer all
questions with nescio Now if you had confined your beneficence to the Ministers
and other professors of learning within your own City-walls; I should have held
my self the less obliged to this public acknowledgement: but, Sir, Luther,
Colloquia mensalia, or Divine discourse at his Table. c. 40. p. 415.
it is too extensive in this kind to be either personally or locally limited.
So that if the Arminians had not rendered the expression suspected of heresy, I
would call it Universal Grace, or Catholic charity. (to our whole reformed
Tribe, and to all ingenuous Students their allies) if the Papists had not
soiled that word with a savor of their Ubiquitary error. I have this
confidence by intelligence from such as (upon experience) own you as a Patron
of their just causes, in taking timely cognizance of them, and giving your
efficacious countenance unto them: and to my self, you have been pleased,
(though yet I have had none opportunity to be any way serviceable to you) to
anticipate my desires, in the offer of your favor. For all which (in my
brethrens name, and mine own) I profess my self,

Sir, Your sincerely devoted servant, JOHN LEY.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle to Samuel Ebrall, Esquire; in the second Page l. 6. r. Mr. O. Page
1. l. 7. dele two. r. Parenthesis. p. 2. l. 18. r. your. p. 3. l. 5. r.
altercation. P. 4. in marg. r. arrogantia. p. 5. l. 5. r. 40. in marg. r. 26.
r. Roscius. l. 29. r. discovered. p. 6. r. l. 20. r. Trapp. l. 18. r. Butler.
p. 7. l. 1. r. catholics. p. 8. l. 19. r. may. p. 10. l. 11. r. Venice. p. 15.
marg. r. quod. p. 16. l. 37. r. challenges. p. 19. l. 25. r. 1. of God. p. 21.
l. 24. of man. p. 22. l. 11. r. Genoa. l. 29. r. all night. p. 26. l. 1. r.
rightly in marg. r. deletum. p. 28. l. 2. r. dissentire. l. 8. add for. p. 29.
in marg. r. Possed. p. 34. l. 6. r. to. l. 22. r. things. in marg. r. ab. p.
35. l. 26. r. Expositors. p. 37. l. 5. r. the. p. 38. l. 29. r. Papinus. p. 41.
l. 12. r. Phflugius. p. 44. l. 5. add day. p. 46. l. 33. add these. l. 34.
add Campian. l. 35. add, the Conference. p. 47. l. 15. add, it. p. 48 Chap.
V. Contents of the Chap. add with the causes of them. l. 22. r. was. p. 49. l.
1. r. two. p. 51. l. 20. r. 1574. p. 53. l. 31. add, it. l. 36. add, as. l.
38. add forenoted. l. 39. r. some. add, a doubt. d. 54. l. 8. dele is. p. 55.
l. 15. dele in another Chapter. p. 58. l. 10. add, as a fained. l. 34. add, to
doubtful debate. p. 62. l. 17. dele for. l. 33. dele for Costerus. p. 63. l. 7.
r. and. l. 19. r. Costerus. p. 69. l. 3. r. fifty. l. 16. add In. p. 94. l. 1.
r. hinges. l. 26. add them. p. 95. l. 21. add, a man to sleep. p. 97. l. 8.
r. helpless. p. 100. over against. l. 6. r. in marg. So in the Disputation at
Kenelnsworth published by Mr. O. P. 50. p. 124. l. 10. r. like.

To the WORSHIPFUL my very worthy Friend, Samuel Ebrall Esquire;
Sir,
YOu were an hearer (as I have heard) of the Disputation at Killingworth
betwixt Dr. John Brian, and John Only, but (as he has set it forth in print)
it would be more suitable to say Dr. John Only, and John Brian; so far has
the arrogance of the man magnified himself, without due respect to the modesty
of a Christian, the ingenuity of a Scholar, and the discretion of an ordinary
rational man; and so much has he vilified the Doctor (in another book
published by him since) whom all men (who know him, and are of any note for
Learning and Religion,) highly honor for a very eminent degree of them both:
and for his excellent faculty, and indefatigable diligence in Preaching and
Catechizing, there be very few who are comparable to him Nor do I know Mr.
Only his match among the Antipaedobaptists, (as he calls his Assistants at
the disputation at Kill.) for insolence of Spirit, supercilious contempt of
such as are not taken with his Tenets. Some I am sure there are who though they
have too much affinity with some of his fancies and opinions, show much
mansuetude and civility to those that steer their Ministerial and Christian
course by other principles; yea and they hold religious communion with them in
public ordinances not distinctive. But Mr. Only, as he has a name of
singularity, so he is the fitter to be the ringleader of some notorious
Schism; like Primianus a Donatist in the Collation at Carthage, to whom, if a
denomination had been given him (out of a time of faction) according to his
learning and manners, it must have been, not Primianus, but Ultimianus. This
with my discourse of Disputations in matter of Religion, mine animadversions on
the printed Disputation hold at Kill. and on Mr. D. his second book, and my
desired advice to Dr. Brian, (concerning it) whether to answer him or no; I
have presented to public view, with a particular address unto your self; that
of a true and intelligent witness, you may become an equal and competent
judge of the difference betwixt the Dr. and Mr. O. super tota materia as now it
is drawn out in his second book: and I was glad of this occasion to testify
how much contentment I take in the situation of my Residence, as in vicinity to
yours, whereby I have the opportunity of enjoying your good neighborhood, your
friendly visits, and many other affectionate offices; whereto there shall be no
want of any answerable returns which come within the capacity of the hearty
prayers, and best observance of

Your faithful friend. and humble servant JOHN LEY,

For the very Reverend his highly honored Friend, Mr. John Ley, Pastor of
Solyhull.
Reverend Sir,
YOur Consolatory Letters I cannot sufficiently bless God and You for, and
therefore do again return my most humble and hearty thanks for your very great
labor of love therein expressed, withal earnestly craving leave to make them
public; the doing whereof, will (I am assured) redound much to the glory of
God, erecting many souls dejected for the like loss, and furtherance of your
own glorious reward in the great day of account and refreshing, which shall
come from the presence of the Lord.

Sir, there is another trouble fallen upon my spirit, wherewith I take the
boldness to acquaint you; occasioned by an Examination of some of my Arguments
for the truth of our Parochial Churches by my Antagonist John Onley, which has
been abroad (as I hear) a long time, but lately came to my notice by a Minister
20. miles distant. I find the Book so full of bitterness and arrogance, that I
question whether it be better to let the man alone, or to answer him according
to his folly: I have sent it to you, requesting your perusal thereof, and your
advice what I shall do (with all convenient speed) which shall lay a further
Obligation upon.

Sir, your Fellow Laborer in the work of the Lord, and bounden servant, JOHN
BRIAN.
To which Letter of Dr. Brian, a short and summary answer is returned in the
next leaf; a full one in the whole discourse following.



A Table of the Contents of each Chapter.
CHAP. I. HOw some have been, and are averse from, or adverse to disputations
in Religion, how far, and for what reasons. page 3. CHAP. II. Of a contrary
disposition in some too much addicted to disputation, in being too forward to
make, or accept of offers of dispute, and multiplying of needless and
presumptuous questions and resolutions in matters of Religion. p. 12. CHAP.
III. That disputations on matters of Religion are warrantable by Scripture and
Reason, and not only lawful, but sometimes also expedient and profitable. p.
17. CHAP. IV. An Historical collection of Disputations of several sorts,
principally concerning differences in matters of Religion, in two Sections; the
1. Containing examples from the Apostles to Luther. 2. Of examples from Luther
to the present age. p. 31. CHAP. V. Of the various issues and successes of
Conferences, Colloquies and Disputations about matters of Religion. p. 48.
CHAP. VI. How Disputations are to be ordered, that the truth may be cleared;
and being cleared, both it and they who plead for it may be secured from
reproachful misreports. p. 57. CHAP. VII. Of the Disputation at Kenelmworth,
betwixt John Brian Dr. in Divinity, Minister at Coventry, and John Onley,
Pastor of a Church at Lawford (as he calls himself.) How it was occasioned,
undertaken, and continued at diverse monthly meetings there. p. 73 CHAP. VIII.
Of the printing of the disputation. By whose motion it was made. By whom, and
how managed. p. 76. CHAP. IX. Of Mr. John Onley his quality and condition, his
wit and utterance, his ignorance and arrogance, his reproachful speaking of
such as are not of his Sect, and partiality to himself and them; his carping at
the Magistrates for meddling with matters of Religion, and countenancing of
Ministers. p. 80. CHAP. X. A Conclusive Answer to Doctor Brians desire of
Advice, whether it be better to let Mr. O. alone, or to answer him according to
his folly; sent him a good while ago by his Son, but now published with
enlargment for sasisfaction of others as well as of the Doctor himself. Reasons
many and weighty for the Negative. p. 102.
A DISCOURSE Of DISPVTATIONS Concerning matters of Religion.
Reverend Sir,
THough you would not use the liberty I gave you for correction of the long
consolatory discourse I sent you, (...). Saph. Carm. p. 58. Edit. Henr. Steph;
in 12. Cum Pindaro and aliis Lyricis Poetis Graecis.
which (I am glad to perceive by your respective return) was as well taken by
you, as intended by me: Yet have I made so bold with your short gratulatory
Letter, as to expunge the two Parenthesis of the two first lines, as coming
too near the poetical hyperbole, used in the praise of the Poems of Sappho,
wherein though your error of brotherly love might be excused, my error of
self-love would not be pardoned, if I should be so vain as to own your Encomium
as due to any dictate of mine; all I can justly claim being no more then a
witness to my good will, and endeavor to do well. Waving then that part of
the reasons of your request for publication of it in print, I am content upon
the account of the rest which you have rendered, to give it up to your
disposal, in hope of the good effects which (as you presage) it may produce.
And for the second part of your Letter, wherein you make just complaint of Mr.
John Only his injurious dealing with you, and desire mine advice, Whether it
were better to let the man alone, or to answer a fool according to his folly;
you shall have mine answer with my reasons, but first I must tell you that I no
sooner put pen to paper for that purpose, but I found my self by what I have
read and observed of the disputations of the precedent and present age, both
minded of, and moved to an Enlargement of my labor, beyond the limits of your
request and expectation: So far as while I pay a debt of love to you, to make
others indebted unto me (by your occasion, and for your sake) by delivering
somewhat of importance, and (I hope) also capable of their acceptance, which
happily would not have come to their notice by another hand; and this the rather,
because I do not think Mr. O. worthy of so much of my notice and respect, as of
purpose to appear in public against him, or any man of his temper and
condition: It will be enough for him to be brought in as an occasion or an
appendix to that which is of more moment. I shall then thus divide my
discourse; treating

1. Of Disputations in general concerning matters of Religion.

2. Of our Disputation with Mr. J. O. in particular, as by him it is published,
and his examination of some of your Arguments, set forth in print, to set forth
himself as a Triumphant Antagonist (for his Sect,) not only over you, but over
all the reformed Churches throughout the world. Of whom when I come to that
part, I shall give you my sense and apprehension as he deserves; and mine
advice touching an answer to him as you desire, and I conceive to be most
convenient.

First for the General, I shall reduce it to, and comprehend the whole in the
first six ensuing Chapters, as their contents are set down in the foregoing
Table.

CHAP. I. How some have been and are averse from, or adverse to disputations in
Religion: how far and for what reasons.
SOme are not altogether against disputations in Religion, but are jealous over
them with a godly jealousy, as Paul was over his Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.2. lest
they should be inconsiderately undertaken, or indiscreetly managed, and so as
Isti dum nimium scalpunt veritatem amittunt (ut acutusille mimi versiculus;)
nimium altercando veritas amittitur. Ludovic. Vives de causis corruptar.
artiu^. l. 3. p 127.
Ludovicus Vives says; The truth by too much scratching and alteration should
be lost; lest error by artificial arguments and ornaments should have such a
glorious flourish and varnish set upon it, as to make it to be taken for the
truth: which is not unlike to fall out; for some Interdum orichalcum magis
exprimit colorem auri qua^ aurum ipsum. Ibid.
Copper (says he,) has a more glorious Luster then some true gold. And
nothing, as Nihil est tam incredibile quod non dicendo fiat probabile; nihil
tam horridum, tam incultum, quod non splendescat oration^. Cicer. paradox,
Prooem. p. 436. Number. 3.
Cicero observes in the prooeme of his Paradoxes, is so incredible, but by
elequence it may be made to appear probable. Nothing is so horrid, but by a
garnish of words it may be made to shine. This imposture is easily put upon the
vulgar; for Nihil tam facile quam vilem plebeculam linguae volubilitate
decipere, quae quicquid non intelligit plus admiratur. Hierom. ad Nepor. de
vita Cler. Tom. 1. p. 14.
it is very easy with volubility of tongue to deoeive the simple common people,
who What they do not perceive with understanding, they receive with admiration;
nor can they Garrulitatem authoritatem putant. Idem. Epist. Ocean. vol. 2. p.
324.
put a due difference betwixt garrulity and authority: And they are commonly
more affected with what they say who gainsay solid and long believed verity
under pretense of new discoveries of truth; and error then with what has
warrant from the word of God, and consent of all the Christian Churches of the
world, both of ancient or of later times: and the fallacy takes with them the
more tenderly, because these Novell Dogmatists make a fair profession of
mortification and self-denial, refusing those advantages and accommodations of
a comfortable living, which their opposites do enjoy; and bear themselves
boldly against authority, as if they meant to merit that Elogium which the
Disciples of the Pha^isees with the Herodians gave of our Savior, Mat. 22.16.
Master we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God truth; neither
carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the persons of man. And
therefore they set up what Religion they plea^e, making their conventicles when
and what they please, and in them speaking of God and man what they please,
that which is fitter to be whispered in the dark or rather buried in eternal
silence, then as Divine dictates, as our Savior would have them, published on
the housetop, Luke 12.3. yet that their more private carriage of their
profession in Chimnie-houses, where there is ever more smoke then light, may
not be interpreted to their prejudice, as if they had not conscience and
confidence to own their tenets in public; they have presumed many times, even
the weaker sex has so much strength of fancy and will, as to offer to set up
their new lights in our steeplehouses, and to call our Preachers down from
their Pulpits, as having no calling from God to be Preachers of the Gospel: and
herein many of the shallower fort do so applaud themselves, that they had
rather appeal to them to be their judges, Factus est populus spectator,
arbiter, Index. Ludovic. Vives. de causis corrupt. artium. l. 1. p. 38.
as some judicious writers have observed, then to any others; and Inde
arrogantia, quod aliquod sibi viderentur quia stulto judici videbantur. Idem l.
3. p. 327.
they arrogantly applaud themselves in their approbation. But that which makes
the wiser sort more unwilling to give too much way to religious disputations,
or rather to disputations of Religion (especially in public) is the subtilty
of some of unsound principles and the simplicity of others of a better belief;
who suspecting no deceit, and confiding in the strength of truth, are easily
entangled with engagements to dispute to the greatest disadvantage of their
cause, not forethinking how their adversaries may be furnished for assault; and
what liberty of misreport they will take, either to make show of victory, or to
shadow a foil; this inconvenience is obvious to an ordinary apprehension: But
there are some stratagematicall depths, and policies of those who are Masters
in the Mysteries of iniquity, both of the old and new Antichristian faction,
which I confess my shallowness had not imagined, had I not been informed of
them by a double testimony of good account and credit; the one was told me by a
Learned Scotchman, a great Traveller, when we met and became well acquainted in
Oxford, which though above 4 years ago I very well remember it was thus. The
Protestants of Luthers and Calvin's profession have had many disputes and
conferences in several places, which The Protestants have had above 100
meetings, conferences, disputations, councels and Synods, from their first
disputation held at Lypsia upon the year 1519 to their synod in Vilna, 590. So
Parsons Preface to the 10. disputations recounted by John Fox, v. 26. he takes
his ingelligence from. Stanislaus Rescaus his observations, and means, though
he do not particularly quote his Book, which he calls Ministromachiam, in qua
Evangelicorum Magistrorum and Ministro^^^ de evangelicis magistris and
ministris mutua judicia Testimonia etc. recensentur. E^^us. Coleniae. apud
Henric. Falken. birg. 1522.
Parsons numbers to above a 100. betwixt them; at one of their meetings, which
brought them near a conclusion of accord, there came in a man in the name of a
Lutheran Minister, which desired to be heard, and he was admitted to speak; and
he so set up soothed and animated the Lutherans, to stand out against all
compliance with the Calvinists, and so exasperated the Calvinists with reproach,
that they went away worse minded toward each other, then they were when at
first they met together. The other cunning device was, of some of our English
Sectaries about the year 1647. And that was a plot upon a dispute managed in
this manner; some of them had provoked a Minister (learned enough for his time,
but too young to match them in subtilty either of caution or of contrivance) to
a public dispute, which he accepted of: and though he acted his part as well
as could be expected of one of his parts and years, yet he rather lost then
gained reputation to his cause or person, because one of their side pretending
himself till then to be of a contrary judgment to theirs, at the close of the
dispute, openly professed his conviction and conversion to their party by the
satisfaction he had received at that disputation; whereas it was afterward
dicovered that he was a great Zelot to that cause and party in former times,
which (together with the other particulars fore mentioned) induced me to
propose unto my Brethren of the Ministry of Cheshire, when they met to
subscribe their attestation to the Ministers of London, Jun. 1648. (the penning
whereof by their unanimous vote they put upon me) that no Minister might make
or take up a challenge for a set disputation upon any point of Religion,
without consultation and consent of his Brethren, who should judge

1. Whether it should be disputed on or no; if so

2. How the disputation should be ordered, that the truth, and those who are
advocates for it, may be clear and secured from circumvention and slander. The
like (upon an especial occasion) I moved to my fellow. Ministers at our
meeting at Killingworth in Warwickshire, and in both ( viz. that in Cheshire,
and this in Warwickshire,) as many as met together (who were a considerable
number) signified their consent, by subscription to what I proposed, in these
words:

July the 7th. 1656.
At the meeting of the Ministers at Kenelmworth resolved and agreed upon; That
no Minister of this Association, either offer or undertake any public
Disputation concerning any point of Religion, but in such a manner, and order,
and time, as shall be concluded of by the consent of the brethren of the
Society.

John Bryan. Obadiah Grew. John Ley. Daniel Eyres. John Trat. Thomas Hall.
Thomas Dugard. Anthony Woodhall. Alexander Bean. Henry Buller. Luke Milbourn.
Samuel Hawes. Thomas Evance.


Besides these religious considerations which most concern Ministers to look
unto, there is another, which upon a Civil account belongs most to the
Magistrate, viz. the preservation of the public peace, much endangered by a
numerous concourse of people of adverse principles, for debate of their
differences. From which will hardly be separated that pest of concord, as
Concordiae pestis vincendi pertinax libido. Erasm. Epist. praefix. operibus.
Hilar. p. 5.
( Erasmus calls it,) a pertinacious desire to conquer the adversary; which
may be like to break out into opprobrious words, and from such words it may be
to blows and bloodshed. Therefore S. Paul clearing of himself from Tertullus
his accusation, of moving sedition among all the Jews throughout the world,
Act ^q 5. he says v. 12. that his accusers neither found him in the Temple
disputing with any man, nor raising up the people, neither in the Synagogues,
nor in the City; implying that disputation did dispose men to popular
disturbance; and with reference to the affinity betwixt the one and the other,
the Catholic meeting in a less number then the Donatists, (for a public
dispute) made this advantage of the difference, viz. That if any tumults should
arise the disorder could not in reason be imputed unto them who were fewer, but
to their adversaries that in number exceeded them. Pauciores catholici q^^m
Donatisl^e ^e si tumultus esset minori numero non impataretur August. Operts
breviculi collat. Praefat. Tom. 7. part. 1. p. 686.
Though sometimes there is more danger of commotion from a few turbulent
Spirits on the one side, then of a multitude of sober minded Citizens on the
other; whereof you had evidence enough at your City Coventry, when those who
came as abetters to Mr. Knowles and Mr. K^ff^ns contestation, against you and
your brother Dr. Grew, behaved themselves so rudely, that the Committee
residing there thought it necessary to forbid your dispu^tes, and the
City-Magistrates denied the use of their Town Hall for that purpose, though
they had promised it before their coming, when there appeared no such peril of
breach of the public Peace, as after their coming they soon perceived. How it
came to pass, that (notwithstanding the declared unwillingnesse of the
Committee and Magistrates of the City against the public dispute,) you fitted
them with a public place and polemical entertainment, who came so far out of
their way, as from London to Coventry to quarrel with you, I shall show in a
more convenient place: And (to go on with observations of like sort) I very
well remember that in London (when Sir, John Gayor was Lord Major) there was a
disputation betwixt Mr. William Ienkins then Preacher at Christ-Church, and Mr.
Benjamin Cox, in Mr. I. his house, at which I was present, being invited by Mr.
I. And at the end of that dispute, there was another resolved on betwixt Mr.
James Cranford, and the same Mr. Cox, and that within a few days after; but
before the time concluded on I had occasion to bring his Lordship a lift of
such Ministers as I thought fit to be Preachers at Paul's, as he had requested
me to do; and then I telling him (the discourse we had inducing me to it) the
dispute between Mr. I. and Mr. Cox, and that I was present at it, and that
another was intended and concluded betwixt Mr. Cranford and Mr. Cox within a
while after; he replied, that he would have suffered neither of them, if he had
had timely advertisement of them both; but since the one was past and could not
be recalled, he would send his warrant to prevent the other; and that it might
be certainly and speedily done, he put me upon it to draw up a form of
prohibition of it: which I did, whereupon the parties served with it desisted
from their purpose. There was another disputation more publicly bespoken, and
as I have heard agreed upon to be betwixt your two, Cov. Antagonists, and Mr.
Calumy, at his Church in Alderman-bury; but such animosities of Spirit, and
symptoms of tumult began to stir, and to gather near the time and place of the
public meeting, that there was great cause to fear, that how ever it fared
with the truth, the common peace would be much endangered, if that concourse
were not hindered; and therefore by the civil Magistrates it was forbidden, and
as in duty it was requisite, accordingly forborne.

And I doubt not of Religious Civil Magistrates, though their proper office
serve principally for the preservation of peace among the common people, but
some of them have the less liking of disputes in Religion, because they fear
it must be profaned by polemicall contestations of such as are Hoc morbi fere
innatum est hominum ingeiis, ut cedere nesciant. Erasm. ubi supra
too stout to stoop to the truth, and so Est hoc pertinaciae plerisque
mortalium ingeniis insitumut, quod semel quocunque casu pronunciaverint,
nunquam ^u^^ desinant, etiamsi compererint perpera pronunciasse. Ibid. p. ult.
pertinacious in their opinions, as not to recede from what they have
pronounced, nay though they see their error, and that they have pronounced
amiss: and this Erasmus observes as a disease and infirmity naturally
incident to most men. And as the Magistrates are public persons, if withal
they be religious, they cannot think it fit the common interest in sacred and
Catholic truths of doctrine and practice, should be permitted to private
persons to toss to and fro, (as a Ball betwixt two Rackets) in wrangling
altercation. This moved the Emperor Marcianus, in ratification of the Conncel
of Chalcedon, Ne cui amplius liceret public de fide differere. Baron. Annal
an. 452. number. 1. Tom. p. 187.
to decree that none should publicly dispute of matters of Faith; Clericus
fuerit qui, etc. consortio clericorum mov^a^ur; fi militia praectnctus sit,
cingulo spoliabitur; caeteri sanct issima urbe pellantur. Baron. Ibid. number. 4.
col. 688.
and he laid a penalty on such as presumed to act contrary to what he had
decreed: as for Clerks, to be put out of the number of the Clergy; for a
Soldier, that his helt and sword shall be taken from him; for Citizens, to be
expelled the City; and for others, their contumacy was to be Competentibus
suppliciis subjugandi. Ibid.
subdurd with other competent purishments.

There are two great opposites to each other, too opposite to all disputations
of Religion, the Turk and the Pope; who though their Pride make them ambitious
of the highest place, the head, their wickedness makes them worthy of the
lowest, the tail, Deuteronomy. 28.44.

1. First for the Turk, Mahomet, (that famous impostor and false Prophet, the
founder of that impious and impure Sect of the Mahametans) not only forbids
all disputes about the Religion of his Bible, (rather Babell) the Alcoran, but
instructs his deluded disciples how to answer them who are disposed to dispute:
Tecum disputare volentibus dic, Deum so^^ omnes tuo; actus agnoscere, qui die
postremo lites omnes and contrarietates discutiet. Alcaroni. c. 32.
Say unto them, (says he) God alone knows all thy acts, and at the last day
will discuss all controversies and contrarieties. Again, Homines incredulos
taliter alloquere; ego quidem legem vestram minime sequor, nec vos meam; igitur
mihi mea maneat, vobisque vestra. Ibid. c. 109.
to incredulous men say thus, I follow not your Law nor you mine; therefore let
me alone with that which is mine, and I will let you alone with yours.

2. For the Nobis nullum fas est inire certamen cum hominibus communionis
alienae; divina scriptura praedicante homine haereticum post primam and
secundam correptionem de vita. Tom. 3. Council. p. 625. Col. 2. edit. Bin. 1636.
Pope Gelasius decreed against disputation with those who are of another
Communion; for which he pretends the authority of the Apostle Paul, A man that
is an Heretic after the first and second admonition reject. Titus 3. v. 10.
Quaeritur anliceat clericis de fide Catholica disputare public. Neg. Azor.
Instir. Moral. l 8. c. 26. 1 part. p. 569.
Azorius the Jesuit in his moral institutions puts this question, whether
it be lawful for Clerks to dispute publicly of the Catholic Faith? And he
answers negatively, and quotes for it A decree of the Trinity and Catholic
Faith: and for lay persons the Popes prohibition is express and peremptory,
Inhibemus ne cuiquam Laitae personae liceat de fide Catholica dispatare. Sext.
decretal. l. 5. Tit. 2. de Haereticis.
we inhibit (as unlawful for) any layman publicly to dispute of the
Catholic Faith. And if there be Azorius Ibid. p. 571. Col. 1.
any disputes of matters of Faith, betwixt Catholics and Heretics published
in any Mother Tongue, they are forbidden in their Index of prohibited books.

Qu. But did not Bellarmine read his controversies or disputations of the
difference between the Popish and Protestant Religion, at Rome? and (amongst
other questions) did he not discuss the capital questions, of the Popes
supremacy and in-infallibility, as well as others of inferior titles?

Ans. He did so, and because he stood up as a Champion, for the Antichristian
Creed and Church, he was allowed to do so, especially there where his hearers
were wilfully fortified against the true faith: But so little is any
disputation liked by those who are most Popish, that as a very wife and
observant Traveller informs us, (in his judicious Book called Europae
speculum, or a view or survey of the state of Religion in the Western parts of
the world;) that he Sir Edw. Sand. Europae. speculum, p. 121, 122.
sought for the controversies of Card. Bellarm. in verity in all places; but
neither that, nor Gregory de Valentia, nor other Popish Schoolmen, nor any of
that quality could be ever in any shop of Italy set eye upon: which made me
(says he) entertain this suspicious conjecture, that no part of the
Protestants positions and allegations should be known; they were so exact as to
make discurrent (in some sort) even those very books which were constrained to
cite them, that they might refute them; in such wise as not to suffer them to
be commonly saleable, but only to such, and in such places as the Superiors
should think meet. And it is not an improbable opinion of some, that
Bellarmines dispatations are the less pleasing to the Pope and his dearest
favorites, because he cites our Authors too fully, and sets on their
arguments further then his answers reach to take them off. And for the point in
hand, disputation is the most cried down in Italy, the Popes Country, above
other places: for as the same prudent Author observes Ibid. p. 117.
as in the foundation of the reformation (which is the Scripture) so much more
in the edifice it self, the Doctrines and Opinions of the reformed Churches,
they bear away all sound and Echo of them, being not lawful there to allege
them, no not to glance at them, not to argue nor dispute of them, no not to
refute them: he goes on; In ordinary communication (says he) to talk of
matters of religion is odious and suspicious; but to enter into any reasoning,
(though but for argument sake, without any other scandal) is prohibited and
dangerous: yea it was once my fortune (says he) to be half threatened for none
other fault then for debating with a Jew, and upholding the truth of
Christianity against him; so unlawful there are all disputes of Religion
whatsoever, etc. Ibid.
I believe him there in the rather, because Azor. Institut. part. 1. l. 8. c.
26. p 571. col. 2.
Azorius confesses, they are so jealous of all disputations, as that they will
not allow of a confutation of the Alcora n in any Mother Tongue: Not that they
care either for the Jewish or Turkish Religion, but that if they must be so
much secured from common contradiction, much more must that which they call
Roman Catholic, especially for those points which concern his Holiness
indisputable and all disputative privileges, to whom Papal Parasites
appropriate that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. The spiritual man judges all
things, yet he himself is judged of no man: But, the cause common to them both
(why the Turkish and Popish Religion are so tender over their Tet^ets, that
they may not be touched by dispute) is, for that they are like the apples of
Sodom, which how fair soever they seem to the eye, if they be handled they fall
unto ashes and smoke, Joseph. of the wars of the Jews, l. 5. c. 5. fine
capitis.
as Josephus records, because they have no solidity of truth that can endure
the trial.

Having showed in the precedent discourse how averse many have been from
disputations in Religion; why and how far and how adverse the Mahometans and
Papists are unto them; I will add but one observation more under this Title of
Disputations in Religion concerning the Pope and his party of this generation,
who (besides the reason wherein by their dislike of them, they agree with the
Turks (which is a part of their Turco papismus, as Dr. Sutlive has entitled a
book against them) are vehemently bent against them (where their power is most
predominant) out of pride and disdain of all Religions but their own,
especially of the Protestants, because they have done them the most dishonor
and damage; and because by the domineering decrees of the Council of Trent,
and by the Tyrannical authority of the Inquisition, they are better able to
oppose them, then by Disputations and Arguments from Scripture or reasons; and
for this reason among others is the Popish Pope Paul the fourth said it was the
principal secret and Mystery of the papacy. Hist. of the Council of Trent lib.
4. p. 405. and the true Ram to bear down heresy and defend the Apostolic Sea.
Ibid. p. 409.
rather then The very name of the Inquisition is terrible all Christendom
over, and the King of Spain with his Grandees tremble at it. Howels famil.
Letters. Vol. 1. Let. 44 p. 236.
Spanish inquisition, though set up principally against the Jews and Moors,
carried on so cunningly and cruelly against the Protestants, that the Bishops
and other of the Popish Clergy might not be put to too much pains in arguing
with them; as it was said by some who wrote against the English Bishops, for
pressing ceremonial conformity with too much rigor; So in the beginning of a
Dialogue betwixt Diotrephes a Bishop, Tertullus a Papist, Pandocheus an
In-keeper, and Paul a Preacher of the word of God.
that the clink and the Gate House (two common Gaoles) were the strongest
Arguments they had to maintain their cause; but they were as houses with paper
walls in comparison of the Prisons of the Pope-holy inquisition, as, the Sea
the Spanish History l. 28. p. 1031, and a p. 1119. a. 1123. and 1134, 1135.
Spanish History, besides other writers, have reported it.

CHAP. II. Of a contrary disposition in some too much addicted to disputation;
in being too forward to make or accept of offers of dispute, and multiplying of
needless and presumptuous questions and resolutions in matters of Religion.
IN the precedent chapter we have showed how averse from, or adverse to
disputations in matters of Religion, some have been, how far, and for what
reasons: There are others (of another mind) so diverse from them, or contrary
to them, that their difference makes a juster ground of dispute then diverse
others which are drawn out into many and long debates. There have been and are
some men (to pretermit with contempt that daring Bedlamite Theaura John taking
upon him to be high Priest of the Jews, set up a challenge to both the
Universities of Oxford and Cambr. and proclaimed it with a threefold O yes to
answer his printed Dotages in Pauls-Church. April. 5. 1652.
Theaura John) who having an high opinion of their own good parts for knowledge
and utterance, think their eminence cannot be sufficiently known, nor they
enough admired and honored without public oftension, I might say ostentation,
of it in a polemicall concertation. This was the humor of Leontinus Gorgius
primus ausus est in conventu poscere quaestionem, id est, jubere dacere quadere
quis velit audere; audax negotium dicerem and impudent, nisi, etc. Cicer. de
finibus bonor. and malor. l. 2. princip. libri.
Gorgius Leontinus, of whom the Roman orator notes, that he was the first that
took upon him to demand a question, that is, to ask the people what question
they desired to be disputed, and they should presently hear him dispute and
discourse of it. A bold business, says the orator, I would say an impudent
too, but our later Philosophers have taken example by him for the like
undertaking. And if not by imitation of heathen Philosophers, yet by natural
corruption have diverse Christian professors been puffed up to the like degree
of vain glory; being proud of those preeminences for which by the Apostles
admonition and caution they should have been rather humble and thankful: for
he would have none to be puffed up against another for any abilities they have
and others have not, 1. Cor. 4.6. and he pathetically expostulateth with such
as think too well of themselves, and disdain others: who makes thee to differ
from another (says he,) and what have thou that thou did not receive? now if
thou did receive it, why boastest thou as if thou had not received it? v.
7. that is, as if it were thine own of thy self, without being beholding to
another, especially to God, who might have made him whom thou contemnest
glorious, and thee contemptible. It is probable that John Picus Earl of
Marandula (so much admired for wit and learning, as that he is styled,
Theologorum and philosopho^^ sine controversia principis sic in titularipag.
operum cudit. Basil. quam Sebast came. Henric Petriann. 1519.
without controversy, the Prince of Divines and Philosophers) might be lifted
up with appreheasion of his own excellent endowments, and the applause of men
when he put forth a kind of challenge to the Christian world, to dispute
Nengentas de divinis and naturalibus quaestiones proposui, ad quas in publico
doctissimorum hominum consessu essem responsurus. John Pici Mirand. Apol. Tom.
1. operum p. 76.
upon 900. The ologicall and Philosophical questions at Rome, and in any of
them to be ready to be respondent to any opponent: wherein though some
commended his studiousnesse of good arts, yet did his offer give Obtrectatorum
turba multiplex assurrexit. Nonnulli me audacem dicere and temerarium, qui hac
aetate, quartum scilicet and vigesimum nondum natus annum, de altissimis
Philosophiae locis, de emnibus Christianae Theologiae mysteriis, etc. Ibid. p.
1677.
great offense unto many that accounted him an audacious and temerarious young
man, who (not yet fully of age of 24 years) durst propose a disputation, of
the profound points of Philosophy, of the sublime mysteries of Christian
Theology, of unknown arts and disciplines in so famous a City, and so ample and
numerous an assembly of learned men. And much more opposition and reproach he
met withal: for his (at least) supposed presumption, Cum nuper Romam venissem,
pedes su^mi pontificis Innocentii ectavi, cui ab innocentia vitae nomen,
meritissime de more osculaturus. Ibid. princip. Alpo. p. 76.
which gave them just occasion to suspect, (though he were so superstitionsly
humble as to come to Rome to kiss the Popes foot) and seemingly so religiously
lowly as to show himself seriously affected with the forecited saying of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Quid habemus quod nostrum sit? nonne cuncta quae in nobis
sunt Dei sunt? quid ergo oporter se extollere magni facere ostentare? glorietur
qui gloriatur in Domino etc. John Pic. Mirand. Tom. 2. de studio divinae and
humanae Philosoph. l. 2. c. 6. p. 25.
what have we (says he) that is ours? are not all things that are in us the
things of God? why then should any one extol, magnify, or boast himself of
any thing he has? but let him that glories, glory in the Lord, since all good
things are his and by his infinite grace and goodness bestowed upon us.
Whether he thought seriously of this, when he made his challenge forementioned,
we cannot determine, nor will we conjecture: But there are some, of whose
forwardness to dispute we can have no good conceit, as of Felix the Manichean
Heretic, who provoked Augustine (the renowned Bishop of Hippo) to public
dispute; whereto he was so unprepared, that it was a doubt to him that
published the report of what passed betwixt them, Nescio quid potissimum
admirer, Felicisne impudentiam qui provocavit ad publicam disputationem, ad
quam adeo non fuit instructus ut vix asinus potuit insulsius argumentari; an
populi tolerantiam; an Augustini stomachum invincibilem; qui tam^ indoctis
ineptiis tam diu tanta lenitate responderit: sic in Praefat. ad lect or de art.
cum Felici Manichae. post finem lib. 2. Tom. 6. p. 651. operum Augustine.
whether were more to be admired, the impudence of Felix braying, rather then
disputing; or the patience of the people, hearing his absurd arguings without
tumult; or the invincible stomach of Augustine, who with such lenity continued
so long to answer his unlearned follies. Of this over-eager affection to
dissenting altercation, we find many examples among the Romanists, as John
Eccius (whom Johannes Eckius vel Eccius catholicae sidei adversus Lutherum ac
reliquos haereticos propugnatur insignis Antipossevinus Appa. Sacri. Tom. 1. p.
871.
Possevine commends for a notable Champion against Luther and other Heretics,
who when a disputation was appointed at Ratishon, ann. 1541. betwixt Julius
Pilugius, Johannes Gropperus, and himself for the popish party, and Philip
Melancthon, Martin Bucer, and John Pistorius, for the Protestants, Illi
verecundese excusant, and ut alii magis idonei constituantur petunt omnes
praeter Eccium, is enim paratu se diccbat and instructu^. Sleidan. Comment. l.
13. p. 279.
all but Eccius, modestly desired to be excused, and entreated that others more
fit might be appointed to discuss the points in difference betwixt them; but
he said he was ready prepared for the purpose, yet it was to little purpose;
for though he were so hot upon the matter, God took him off with another heart
for Aliquanto post in febrim incidit, it a quidem ut interesse non posset.
Sleid. Ibid. 14. princip. lib. p. 281.
he seized on him with a fever, and thereby served him with a prohibition,
that he could not be present; of him it is to be noted that though he were so
forward to dispute, he wrote one discourse against disputing with Heretics,
and See Possevinus ubi supra.
another that Heretics were to be burned: which shows that he would not have
their minds enligthned with instruction, but their bodies inflamed to
destruction by burning faggots reared round about them. John Cochlens his mate
in malignity to Protestant truths, was so vehemently and confidently bent, (by
disputation) to oppose such as professed themselves Protestants, that he
offered himself to dispute with any Lutheran, upon peril to lose his life if
he failed in his proofs; but his confidence is the less, to be regarded,
because as he persecuted truth; Eccius commentar. rerum inde gestarum ann.
1531. p. 271.
under the name of Heresy so he published Heresy under the title of truth for
he was the first that set forth the works of Johannes Maxentins Cochleus opera
Johannis Maxentii sub. nomine orthodoxi patris primus edidit. Tom. 4. Biblioth
Patr. p. 433.
as an orthodox father whom some of his own side, (more learned then himself,
as Margarinus Dola Bigne) have since dicovered to be an Opera Maxentii
cautissime legenda, nec illis fidendum, cum lateat Eutychianae haereseos
venenum. Ib. etc. p. 445.
Entychian Heretic, as the reader may see in the fourth tome of Bibliotheca
Patrum: the Eutychian heresy acknowledged but one nature in Christ, and that
was the divine, and Alphonsus de castro adversus haereses lib. 4. titulo de
Christi haeres. 4 col. 4278.
held that our bodies at the resurrection shall be more subtle then the wind,
so that they shall neither be seen nor felt. After Eccius and Cochleus was set
up the sect of the Jesuits, which some place upon the year Ibid. l. 13. titulo
de resurrectione, haeres. 2. col. 906.
1530. some in Buccalzer. Jud. Chronol. p. 534.
1540. Among them none ever set a bolder face upon so bad a cause as the Ludov.
Lucius Hist. Jesuit, c. 1. p. 1.
Jesuit Edmund Campian did; who made a thrasonicall challenge to dispute with
the Universities of England, reducing the reasons of his dispute to ten heads,
which Possevine (a fiery-spirited Jesuit, for the good liking he has of them,
and fearing (in time) so small a book as they made might be lost, incorporated
into his See Possevinus Bibliotheca select. part. p. 309. ad 324.
first part of his Bibliotheca Selecta. In these reasons of his offer, he
seems cum ratione insanire, to be mad with such a mistake atheirs who think
they have reason, when they kill Christ's servants, to think they do him
service, John 16.2.

His confident expressions in his cause, argue either a strange imposture of a
deluding spirit, or a brazen impudence of a bragging Jesuit, Si hoc
praestitero, coelos esse. Sanctosesse, fidem esse, Christum esse, causam
obtinui. Camp. in Epist. Academicis Oxonii florentibus. Ib. 320.
If I do make good (says he) that there is an Heaven, that there be Saints,
that there is faith, that there is a Ghrist; I have won the victory. Patres si
quando licebit accedere, confectum est praelium; tam sunt nostri quam Gregorius
ipse 13. filiorum Ecclesiae pater amantissimus ^ Ibid. ratione 5. p. 315.
If we come to try our differences by the fathers, the war is at an end; they
are as certainly ours as Pope Gregory the thirteenth, a most loving Father of
the Children of the Church: But when he was disputed within the Tower, ann.
1581. he that was so loud and vigorous in his challenge, was so low and feeble
in performance, that it gave them cause to conceive who had well observed them
both, See Alex. Nowell and Will: Days Preface before the dispute printed ann.
1583.
that the book was none of his which was published in his name; howsoever he
that reads his challenge, and the true relations of the dispute or conference
forementioned, will find that his rhetoric was more plausible in the one,
then his logic powerful in the other; so that we can neither say (according
to Sampsons riddle) out of the strong came sweetness, Judges 14.14. Nor out of
the sweetness came strength. For it was his weakness of judgment to take so
great a burden on him as he was nor able to bear, and the weakness of his
cause and judgment both, which suffered it to sink when he took it into
protection, and undertook to support it against so many vigorous Assailants as
he provoked to oppose it; when one learned man was able to turn that
counterfeit Divine into a mere Thraso, his reasons into bubbles, his threats
into trifles and vapors of vanishing smoke; Campianum ita fregit Whitakerus,
ut omnes sanae mentis facile viderent ementitum Theologum in verum Thrasonem,
rations in ampullas, denique omnes minas in meras nugas and fumum levissimum
evanuisse. Melch. Adamus in vita Whitakeri part. poster. p. 169.
as Melchior Adamus very fitly sets forth his folly and foil.

There have been some women who have so much forgotten the frailty and modesty
of their sex, as to make chattings to learned men for disputation in matters of
Religion; of this there is a memorable story, but how true it is I cannot tell,
because cause I have it but upon the report of Parsons in the Preface to his
report of 10. disp. p. 29, 30. added to the third part of his treatise
entitled the 3 conversions of England.
a Jesuit, (who howsoever most highly honored by his sect, is for his many See
the glorious Elogium of Robert Parsons in Capital Letters in. Philip. Alagamb.
Bibliotheca. Societat. Jesu p. 414.
falsities, and some forgeries, of little credit among the Protestants,) which
is this: In the year of Christ 403. Acertain wilful woman, of the City of
Antioch, named Julia, infected with the abominable heresy of the Manichees,
and fervent therein, came to the City of Gaza, whereof Saint Porphyrius, an
holy learned man, was Bishop; and beginning there to pervert Christians, and
being reprehended for it by the Bishop, she challenged him to an open
disputation, which the good man admitted, she behaved her self so insolently as
was intolerable: what the issue and effect was, is to be observed under another
title. Another example I had occasion to note in a letter to a worthy Lady, of
a woman for her learning above most of her sort, or sex, her name was Argala, a
Protestant, of whom Gretzer. Tom. 1. defens. Bellarm. lib. 2. c. 51. Col. 833,
834.
Gretzer the Jesuit reports that she sent a challenge to Eckius, (of whom we
have spoken before) to dispute with him, who not so patient as the Bishop
forementioned, sent her a distasse and spindle, to put her upon employment more
proper to her Sex. It had been more to her commendation, if she had been as
learned as the noble Virgin Anna Maria a Schur-man, to have been as modest and
silent as she was, who needed the Immortale virginu^ decus, cum nihil natura
tibi denegaverit, ac omnia detulerit eruditio, videris tamen latere velle, and
comitem recte factorum gloriam repudiare: totne linguas calls, ut sileas?
totne disciplinis generosum istum instruxisti animu^, ut unitas agiter
inglorius arts? 2. Sic Joh. Beverovicius Epist. ad illam p. 5. illius libri
edit. 1641. Lugd. Batav.
urgent persuasions of learned men, to let her learning be known for the
benefit of others: and though Quod tibi nunc offertur specimen faelicissimi
ingenii virginis quae patem non habet, exiguum est si cum iis quae effecta
habet and parata, comparetur: sed pro ea qua est modestia, etc. Ibid. p. 7.
she have written much, worthy to be committed to public view; yet such was
her modesty, that not without much importunity, that little which is printed
was extorted from her, which had not been obtained of her but that some had
anticipated her consent by precedent publication. I can find but few such
examples to commend to the imitation of women; and I need not bring more of
such extravagants from Christian moderation, and female modesty, as some
fore-noted; since our age has afforded many heretical viragoes, who have
dared to set upon Preachers in their pulpits on the Sabbath day, in full
Congregations; taking upon them not only to be opponents of their Doctrine,
but to be judges both of it and them, which offices they usurped with a kind of
papal presumption, as if they were guided in what they did by an infallible
spirit; and some have not been ashamed to put others to blush for their
impudence, and these of both Sexes, as well Evites, as Adamites: but that which
at present we have in pursuit and prosecution, is that intemperate humor of
disputing, of which a wise and learned Statesman said, Pruritus disputandi est
scabies Ecclesiae. Sir Henr. Wootton, Warden of Eaton college.
the itch of dispute is the scab of the Church: Which he might happily take
from Ludovicus Vives, who has an expression of near affinity, or rather
consangunity unto it; As those Quemadmodum qui pruritus tic^latione acti,
nimium scabentes sanguinem eliciunt, and dolor succedit in locum suavitatis;
ita istidum nimium scalpunt veritatem, etc. Ludovic. Vives de causis corruptar.
artium l. 3. p. 127.
(says he) who are acted by the tickling of itch, do scratch too much and draw
blood, (whence there succedeth soreness for sweetness, pain for pleasure:) So
those who scratch the truth too much by disputation, wound it, and leave it in
a condition of a necessity for some other means to cure and heal it.

Quest. But are not the Protestants much commended by a Sir Edw. Sands Europae
Speculum. p. 85.
judicious writer, for their offers of disputation to their adversaries in all
place? For their iterated and importuned suits for public audience and
judgment? and is it not observed by him, for matter of advantage to the
Protestant proceedings, as a thing which greatly assured the multitude of their
soundness, whom they saw so confident in abiding the hazard of public trial?
they standing in like terms as a substantial just man, and a facing shifter;
whereof the ones credit is greatest there where he is best known, and the
others where he is least.

Ans. Whereto I answer, that when Luther and others made revolt from the Romish
Religion, the Romanists were most gross in doctrine, most loose in practice,
(especially the Prelates and the ruling Clergy) most injurious to the right and
liberty of the people (both as men and as Christians;) for which they were
justly made odious to them which had a true relish of Religion or moral
honesty. All these particulars I could undeniably demonstrate if there were
need, and this place were fit for such a proof as the charge will require:
Therefore

It was the prudence of the Protestants, not their intemperance or distemper,
to desire disputation in those times; because then as they had more just cause
to oppose the Romanists, so had the Romanists less ability to defend
themselves: for, as that worthy Gentleman well Ibid.
observes, they were not so cunning then in the questions, nor so ready in
their evasions, as now they are grown: so that (as he says) the effect of
their offers, (whether received or refused) was in most places such, as to draw
with them an immediate alteration in Religion; and he medneth it by turning
frrm the Popish to that which is Protestant. This doubt cleared, I shall
return to my discourse of the disputing discase, whereto as some have it thing
cares, (as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 4.3.) so some have itching tongues; some
itching fingers and pens. Such are those disputing Papists, who are commonly
called Schoolmen; of whom (though Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, was the
founder, father or master, (and well he deserved that title, says Collegit
sententias sacroru^ theologorum, and magister sententiarum and sacrorum
theologorum dici meruit. Bellarm. de Eccles. Script. ad ann. 1145. p. 322.
Bellarmine;) yet his Scholars and followers, (especially Aquinas, and Scotus,
with their Scholastic Commentators) have multiplied the number of needless
questions, far beyond the limits of sober, reasonable and religious inquiries.
I will set down some of them, and those so many as may serve to make good my
charge; (not omitting others as occasion shall induce me to mention them,
though not of their tribe.) Beginning with Aquinas, Aquinas primpart. vol.
prim. q. 6. ar. 1.
and taking more out of him then any other Questionist, because he is a
Canonized Saint of the Romish Church, and in their Schools and Books commonly
styled the Angelical Doctor.

His questions are, 1. Of God. 2. Of. Christ. 3. Of Angels. 4. Of Men.

Aquinas primpart. vol. prim. q. 6. ar. 1.
1. Whether it be agreeable to God to be good.

Ib. q. 14 ar. 2.
2. Whether God understand himself.

Ib. q. 19. ar. 1.
3. Whether there be a will in God.

Ib. q. 21. ar. 1.
4. Whether there be justice in God.

Ib. q. 25. ar. 1.
5. Whether there be power in God.

Apud Ludov. Viv. in Aug. l. 18. c. 16.
6. Whether he can give power to a Crastore to create.

Aquinas ad. 2d. vol. prim. par. q. 44. ar 4.
7. Whether it were convenient that God should require to be beloved with all
the heart.

2d. 2d. vo 2. q. 90. ar. 1.
8. Whether God be to be praised with the mouth:

2. Of Christ, he has some vain questions, but because other Papists have far
worse, I will mention theirs rather then his. First, it is a very vain and fond
question. Orat. Dan. Cromeri. oppos. Bellarmino. p. 170, 171.
which Cromerus notes, viz: Whether Christ were of the order of the
Dominicans, or Franciscans. But they are worse then vain, for they are vile;
worse then fond, for they are mad: which Erasmus has collected, I will set
them down in his Language; for they are most of them so profane and
blasphemous, that I am loath to deliver them in any other: and therefore I will
set them down as I find them in that Author, so much the more worthy of credit,
because by three Popes, Leo Pontifex maximus dilecto filio. Erasmo. Eras.
Epist. l. 1. p. 49. idem l. 2. p. 72. Upon which the note of the index expurg.
is, paternis visceribus pius pater nutantem oviculam blandis encomiis allicere
conatur. p. 237. col. 2.
Leo the tenth, Epist. l. 23. p. 864. 865.
Adrian the sixth, and Paulus P. 3. Desid. Erasm. Rot. Sacr. Theolog. profess.
disect. fill. etc. Epist. lib. 27. p. 1095.
Paul the third, he was acknowledged for a Son of those Ghostly Fathers by
their Letters written to him, two by Pope Leo, by Pope Adrian two, and by Pope
Paul one; in all which he is not only kindly accepted, but highly commended by
them. In his 1 Number sint plures in Christo filiationes. 2 Number possibilis sit
propositio, Deus odit filium. 3 Number Deus potuerit suppositare mulierem. 4 Number
Diabolum. 5 Number allnum. 6 Number Cucurbitam. 7 Number silicem. This is somewhat like
that of Ludovic. Vives, An Deus posset suppositare hanc penna^ qua scribo.
Plut. in com. in libro. Aug. de c. 13.8 Tum quemadmodum si cucurbita esset
concionatura. 9 Number editura miracula. 10 Number figenda cruci. Hac apud Erasm.
Moriae Encom. Quid sit suppositum and suppositare in divinis, vid. Suarez.
disp. Tom. 1. p. 150. disp. 11.
Moriae Encomium he rehearses ten, whereof the first is foolish, the rest
blasphemous, as the learned Reader may see, though but in a marginall
observation: for I had rather set them down on the lest hand, covered with a
Latin mask, then to place them barefaced, for the readiest view of an
ordinary Reader.

To such questions may pertinently be applied the censure of Nazianzen, they
are so wretchedly affected Greg. Naz. vol. 1. orat. 33. p. 431.
(says he) that they make it their delight to make trifling disputes of divine
matters, and are as presumptuous many times in resolving of curious questions,
as rash in proposing them to the trial of disputation; Idem. Orat. 35. p. 561.
whose precipitation and temerity he thinks very fit to be bridled and
restrained.

3. Of Angels, Aquinas inquires Aquin. prim. part. vol. 2. q. 56. ar. 1.
whether they know themselves.

2. Whether their knowledge be matutine and vespertine; which he takes occasion
to dispute from the expression of Aug. Super Genes. ad lit. l. 2. c. 8.
Angustine.

3. Aquin. prim. part. vol. 3. 2. q. 60. ar. 3.
Whether Angels love themselves with a natural or an elective dilection.

4. Ib. q. 63. ar. 9.
Whether as many remained in the state of grace as fell from it.

5. Ib. q. 117. ar. 2.
Whether men can teach Angels.

1. Of man, whether the rib of which Eve, was made were one of Adams necessary
ribs, or one superfluous: this is the question of Peter. super Genesin. c. 2.
q. 6. p. 159.
Pererius a learned Jesuit, which by his own confession is by one of his own
centured for a superfluous questions

Ibid. Tom. 1. lib. 4. q. 2. p. 166 Quomodo statu innocentiae faeminae generati
possunt etc. Ib. q. 3. c. 2. An in statu innocentiae integritas faeminei
genitali s commixtione viri, etc. Ib. q. 4. col. 1.
2. Whether in the state of innocence, the number of males and females should
have been equal.

To these two we may add two more out of the same Jesuit; but because they are
not so modest as the former, I had rather make a marginall note of them, in the
Latin words of the Author, then express any part of them in my English text:
yet be would seem very bashful to the Popish Bishop Abulensis Tostatus, who
discusseth so obscene a question about circumcision, that he cannot for shame
make mention of it, and therefore thinks it best to pass it over in silence;
and so do I: there are many of that sort in Sanchez his great bellied book de
mat^imonio, which makes good the words of De delectatione praeputiatorum, etc.
Ita pudenda est illius oration and disputatio, ut praester ca silentio
praeteriri. Perer. in Genes. 17. disp. 2. p. 596. v. 1. Cu^ coelibatum
profiteantur, nimis^e muliebrium rerum peritos testantur. Pareus in Genesis 19. v.
33.
Pareus, of the badnesse of such as pretending to live chastely single show
themselves by their discourses too well acquainted with women's matters.

Of man's death and resurrection there are moved many disputes, as idle and
audacious as the rest: there is one Bartholomew Sybilla has written a whole
book of strange questions, among which Barth. Sybilla specul. peregrin quaest.
decad. 1. c. 2. q. 7. p. 5455.
one of the passage of the soul out of the body, whether it go on the right
hand or the left; whether forward or backward.

Of the resurrection Aquinas has many vain queries; as Aquin. supplem.
tertiae part. q. 81. ar. 3 c.
whether all shall arise in the male Sex, and Ib. q. 8. ar. 2.
whether the hairs and nails shall rise up with the body; with many others of
like sort, which I pass over because I would leave room for others of another
kind, which manifest the Papists to be the greatest doters upon impertinent and
unprofitable questions, and the boldest determiners of doubtful things, that
are. This appears not only by their disputes and questions, such as I have
observed already; but by their resolution of many doubts (as they pretend) by
divine revelation; which may best be delivered by way of question and answer,
(as in form of a Catechism) diverse of which are set down in two such Papists
books, as usually supplied matter to their Priests for Sermons to the people;
of which the one is the big book of the lives of the Saints, called by
themselves the Golden Legend: though by by those who have read it with
indifferency, the lying legend, made by Jacobus de Voragine, as he is
ordinarily termed (but as Posse. Apparat. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 794.
Possevine corrects the name, Jacob de Varagine, Archbishop of Geneva) his book
was printed at Venice, ann. 1575. The other book is a book of selected Sermons,
printed by James Kavinell, for the use of simple Priests who want cunning to
preach: So in the title of the book, the time and place of the first
publication of it I find not noted. This premised, I will begin the questions
out of their former book of lies with the author of lies the Devil.

Quest. 1. What is the proper likeness of the Devil? Leg. aur. fol. 244. p. 1.
col. 2.
He is like an Ethiopian, more black then thunder, his face sharp, his beard
long, his hairs hanging unto his feet, his eyes flaming as hot as fire,
casting out sparkles of fire, and out of his mouth come flames of sulphur; his
hands bound with chains of fire behind his back.

Quest. 2. When the Devil had tempted Adam and Eve, or Adam by Eve, to eat the
forbidden fruit, what penance did they undergo, (after they had yielded to the
Devil) and were expelled out of Paradise?

Thebook of selected Sermons printed by James Kavinell Dominic. Sep. mages.
fol. 8. p. 1. col. 2.
Ans. For many years before their death they stood either of them in water a
night up to the chin, (far from one another) till their flesh was as green as
grass.

But we must make a long leap into the new Testament, else we shall stay too
long, and make our questions too many.

Quest. 3. Why was Peter bidden to put up his sword when he drew it in our
Saviors defense?

Menot, Sermon. fol. 47. col. 4.
Because he had nor cunning enough to use it; for he cut off Malchus his care
when he should have cut off his head.

Quest. 4. How many thorns were in the Crown that was set upon the head of
Christ?

Apol. for Herodot. l. 1. c. 35. p. 274. out of Bonaventure, Lyra and Maylard.
Just a thousand.

Quest. 5. How many wounds had the body of our Savior in the whole?

Ans. pa. 14. of the office of the Virgin, printed at Paris. ann. 1524.
Five thousand four hundred and sixty.

Quest. 6. What were the thieves names that were cruicified with Christ?

Ans. Leg. aur. fol. 16. p. 1. col. 2.
Dysmas the name of him that was saved, and Gesmas the name of him that was
damned.

Quest. 7. Why was Dysmas saved rather then Gesmas?

Ans. A Franciscan of Bourdeaux Apol. for Herodot. l. 1. c. 33. p. 260.
Because he would not suffer his fellows to rob Christ when he fled into Egypt.

Quest. 8. How know you that S. Thomas Becket (whose salvation has been See
Speeds Chron. l. 9. c. 6. p. 510. col. 2. 43.
called in question, even among our own ca. because of his contumacy against
his King) was saved?

Ans. A Leg. aur. fol. 180. p. 2. col. 1.
young man died and raised by miracle, said, there was in heaven a void seat;
and asking whose it was, answer was made, that it was kept for a great Bishop
of England named Thomas of Canturbury. Symbolum dedit, coenavit. Ter. Andr.
Act. 1. Sen. 1. Durand. Rational. l. 4. c. 25. fol. 133. p. 1. Erasm.
Catechism. Symboli Apostolor. etc. set out with pictures to every Article at
the beginning of the book.


Quest. 9. How was the Creed called the Apostles Creed composed by the twelve
Apostles?

Ans. As a shot made up by guests each paying his share, for Article 1 was laid
down by Saint 1 Peter. Article 2 was laid down by Saint 2 Andrew. Article 3 was
laid down by Saint 3 James the Son of Zebede. Article 4 was laid down by Saint
4 John. Article 5 was laid down by Saint 5 Philip. Article 6 was laid down by
Saint 6 Bartholemew. Article 7 was laid down by Saint 7 Thomas. Article 8 was
laid down by Saint 8 Matthew. Article 9 was laid down by Saint 9 James the son
of Alpheus. Article 10 was laid down by Saint 10 Simon. Article 11 was laid
down by Saint 11 Thaddeus. Article 12 was laid down by Saint 12 Matthias.


Quest. 10. What shall be the condition of the world the last fifteen days
before the day of Judgment?

Ans. See Leg. aur. on the advent of our Lord. fol. 2. p. 2. col. 2. and
compare it with the selected Sermons out of it published by James Kavinell,
fol. 2. p. 2. col. 2. etc. In whose book the days are thus numbered and the
number thus precisely reckoned as precedent immediately before the day of
judgment.
The first of the fifteen days the water shall rise upon the Sea, and it shall
be higher then any hill by forty cubits.

2. The second day the Sea shall fall down so low, that unneath the earth may
be seen.

3. The third day the great fishes, as Whales and others, shall appear above
the water, and shall cry unto Heaven, and God only shall understand their cry.

4. The fourth day the Sea and waters shall brenne.

5. The fifth day all trees and herbs shall sweat blood, and all manner of
fowls shall come together, and neither eat nor drink for dread of the doom
that is coming.

6. The sixth day all great buildings, Castles, Towers, Steeples and Houses,
shall fall down, and brenne till the Sun rise again.

7. The seventh day all Stones and Rocks shall beat together, that each shall
break other, with an horrible noise, the which shall be heard into Heaven.

8. The eight day the Earth shall quake, so that there may no man stand thereon
but shall fall down.

9. The ninth day the people shall go out of their dens, and go as they were
mindlesse, and none speak to other.

10. The tenth day Hills and Earth shall be made even and plain.

11. The eleventh day all graves and tombs shall open, and the bodies shall
stand upon them.

12. The twelfth day Stars shall fall from Heaven, and shall spread out rays
of fire; on this day, it is said, that all the beasts shall come to the field
howling, and shall not eat nor drink.

13. The thirteenth day all living shall die, to the end that they shall rise
with the dead bodies.

14. The fourteenth day the Heaven and the Earth shall brenne.

15. The fifteenth day shall be a new Heaven and a new Earth, and all things
and all dead men shall arise.

I had not been so serious, nor insisted so long in discovery of the foolish
and unlearned questions (such as the Apostle reproves, 2 Timothy 2.23.) of the
Papists, both polemicall Schoolmen, and Legendary Preachers, and their
ridiculous vanity in resolving many curious and superfluous doubts by
revelation; but that I have many of that deceived sort in my parish, (though I
thank God some fewer then I found when I came thither, and I hope to make them
yet sewer, if God please to give me time to effect what I have in desire, and
design, which is, to manifest, that the ruling Romanists are the subtillest
Masters of the subtillest Mystery of iniquity in the world; and their seduced
disciples, (especially the illiterate) the most foolish people in the world,
from whom they keep the Scripture, and so keep them in blind ignorance, that
(like hooded hawks) they may carry them whither they please; for which wrong
they would seem to make them some recompense by setting images before them,
which are commonly called Laymens books, though they can reach them none other
lesson then that a Christian should not learn, viz. falsehood, vanity and
errors, Jer. 10.14, 15. and by pretended revelations, which are either mere
forgeries of their audacious Doctors, or mere fallacies of the great deceiver
mentioned by St. John, Rev. 12.9. who makes them doters about questions and
strife of words, 1 Timothy 6.4. and puffs them up to an affectation of forbidden
knowledge, as he did our first parents, Genesis 3. and their disciples receivers
of any foolish fancy which they suggest unto them.)

But my principal aim in what I have hitherto said in this Chapter, is, to
curb those men of corrupt minds, who are too prone to perverse disputings, such
as the Apostle reproves, 1 Timothy 6.5. and since (by their disputings)
questioning and resolving, aiming to be wise above that is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.
they have bewrayed their egregious folly to the world, we may tauntingly take
up the question of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.20. and put it to them, where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of the world? has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world? he has doubtesse: and we may take the
great School-man and Questionist Aquinas for instance, whom though Bellarm. de
Eccles. Script. ad ann. 165. p. 347.
Bellarmine commend for his holinlesse and wisdom, was neither so holy nor so
wise as he should have been: not so holy, 1. Because he was so bold as to put
to dispute so many undoubted principles of divinity as we have noted.

Secondly, because he lacked humility, without which there is no true
holiness, which he might have learned of his Master Peter Moderatior est
Petrus Lombardus, qui sententias alienas recitans non temere de suo addit, aut
si quid, timide proponit. Erasm. in Epist. ad Caron. delectum Episc. Panorum.
Epist. l. 28. p. 1161.
Lombard, of whom Erasmus righly observes, that resiting the opinions or
sentences of others, he did not rashly add any thing of his own; and when he
added any thing, it was rather with fear then confidence.

Nor was he so wife as he should have been: for as much as he wanted in
humility, so much he had in pride, and as much pride, so much folly; for pride
and folly, as humility and wisdom, are sorted together by the wife man, Prove.
14. v. 3. c. 11. v. 2. And though he looked for credit by his bold inquiries
and conclusions, and had it of those of his own side; yet such as were sound in
the faith, and not partial in affection, discovered and disdained his pride,
and so it was followed with shame, as Solomon observes, Prove. 11.2. whereof we
have a memorable passage betwixt Erasmus, and Dr. Collet, the godly and famous
Deane of Paul's, in K. H. the 8, his days; to whom when Erasmus had much
commended Aquinas, to hear his judgment of him, and he gave him none answer,
he proposed and more vehemently pressed the praise of him the second time: to
which Tanquam afflatus Spiritu quodam, quid tu, inquit, mihi praedicas istum,
qui nisi habuisset multum arrogantiae, non tanta temeritate, tantoque
supercilio definisset omnia; and nisi habuisset aliquid Spiritus mundani, non
ita totam Christi doctrinam sua prophana Philosophia contaminasset. Erasm.
Epist. ad Jodoc. Jonae l. 15. p. 486.
Collet, as if he had been inspired with an answer from God, presently replied,
What mean you so to praise that man to me, who if be had not had much
arrogance in him, would not with such temerity and superciliousnesse have
defined all things? and if he had not had somewhat of the Spirit of the world,
he would not have so defiled the Doctrine of Christ with his profane
Philosophy. How worthy a man Dr. Colles was (for learning and Godliness) they
that desire to know, may find a short story of him in Mr. Fox his Fox Martyr.
vol. 2. p. 54. 55.
second volume of Acts and Monuments, and in the forecited Epistle of Erasmus,
he was so much a Papist (being levened with the corrupt Doctrine of the age
wherein he lived) that King Henry the 8. after a Sermon preached by him in his
presence, and long communication with him, by occasion thereof dismissed him
with these words, Let every one have his Doctor as he likes, this shall be my
Doctor: and yet so much a Protestant both in his preaching and practice, that
as Bish. Lat. in his 7th. Sermon, on the Lor. Prayer. sol. 174. p. 2.
Bishop Latimer sald, he should have been burned in K. H. the Eight his reign,
if God had not inclined the Kings heart to the contrary.

CHAP. III. That disputations on matters of Religion are warrantable by
Scripture and reason, and not only lawful, but sometimes also expedient and
profitable.
THough for the undoubted duties of morality, the Apostle prescribes present
and prompt obedience, without murmurings or desputings, and that in all things
of that kind, Phil. 2.14. yet for matter of faith and conscience he requires
no such facility either in affection, or in fact; but gives leave and leisure,
or rather advise to Christians, to bring both the Spirits and speeches of men
to trial, 1 John 4.1. 1 These. 5.21. and when he requires of Christian
believers that they be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks
a reason of the hope that is in them, 1 Pet. 3.15. he means (doubtless) that
if any cavil at that answer or reason, he that gives it should make answer for
it to defend it; and if this be required of a Christian, much more of a
Minister, who should be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort and convince the
gaiansayers, Tit. 9.11. as it is said of Apollos, that he mightily convinced
the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scripture that Jesus was Christ:
which may stop the mouths of some adversaries; as they say of Mr. Trapp on Tit.
1.11.
Frogs, that if a light be hanged over the lake wherein they lie, will leave
crocking: though some be so contumacious against the truth, so malicious
against them who prevalently plead for it, that they will rather stop their
mouths (by violence) who have overcome them by the power of truth, as they did
by Stephen when they stoned him, Act. 7. v. 54, 57, 59. then confess
themselves convinced or satisfied with the clearest evidence produced in the
plainest cause that can be debated: but this is not the fault of disputation it
self, but the perverseness of the disputant, who will disputare or discedere
(for according to that sense we may make the Etymology of the word) though he
have not one wise word to say for the folly and falsity of his opinion; we
must, as says that ancient Doctor and Confessor H^larius, Non tam evitanda
quam ^futanda [Dogmata] non tam refugere debemus quam refellere, etc. Hilaran
Psalm. l. 2. p. 186.
not flee from the erroneous doctrines of men, a^ afraid to encounter them; but
must refell and conquer them by disputations as Picus Mirandula says, It is
the Disputatio cribrum veritatis. Picus Mirandula. Tom. 2. operum. 3. Epist. p.
853.
sieve or searce to sever the fine flower of truth from the course branne of
error: which is not more for the honor of truth, then for the benefit of
those that do embrace it; for so distinguished, it is not only more amiable to
the eye, and more pleasant to the taste, but more nutritive, as breeding better
and puter nourishment to the soul. And as it is a deed and duty of charity for
such as have the charge of souls to feed them with the finest of the whest,
and with the honey out of the rock to satisfy them, which is the provision
that God is willing to bellow upon his obedient people, Psalm 81. v. last: So
is it also a charitable act and office, not to suffer them to be choked with
the bran of error and Heresy, which many are too forward to obtrude upon
ignorant and inconsiderate people; yea heretical seducement is more dangerous
then so, for the Apostle says of such as Hymeneus and Philetus, who were
heretics, that their speech will ^at like a Canker, or Gangrene, 2 Timothy 2.17.
which is easy to catch, and hard to cure: what their Heresy in patticular
was, is not discovered in the Scriptures, nor in any ancient Author near the
times wherein they lived: of Philetus there is mention but once, that is in the
place forecited; of Hymeneus twice, viz. both here and 1 Timothy 1. last, where
he has another malignant mate named with him, viz. Alexander, whom Saint Paul
delivered to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme: by which we learn,
it was a blasphemous Doctrine, and probably it was (as Theodoret on the 1 Timothy
1. last.
Theodoret conceives) well known to Timothy; and we know that a Canker and
Gangrene are very dangerous diseases, and those who are Spiritual Physicians,
ought in charity to do their best to keep their flocks from such infective and
destructive mischiefs. And if disputation be a means, as being wisely ordered
it may prove, it may be expedient that way to curb and discourage Heretics
from corrupting of them: which may serve also for an antidote to preserve their
ears from the venom and poison of heretical tongues; who, if they be let
alone, without opposition will go on to subvert whole houses, as the Apostle
says, Tit. 1.11. And as for prevention of the spreading of Heresy, so for
recovery of such as are already ensnared by it, and for reconciliation of such
as dissent in judgment and affection, disputations may be requisite and
use^ull; to which purpose Pollid. in vita Aug c. 3.
Honorius the Emperor compelled the Donatists to give meeting to the
Catholi^ks, and sometimes they have proved very advantageous to the truth: Thus
it was in the beginning of the reformation of Religion, when the errors of
Popery were in their nature more gross, more rude in their dress, and their
Priests nothing so politic as since they have been; the Protestants Sir Edw.
Sands Europae speculum. p. 85.
loffired disputations in all places the effects whereof, as were touched
before whether received or refused, drew with them an immediate alteration of
Religion: for if they were received, the better cause prevailed; if they were
not, they who refused gave cause of suspicion, that their Coin howsoever it
were gilded, was indeed but Copper, which could not (as pure gold) endure to be
tried by the touch stone; and the alteration of Religion then was such as
Disputatio Bernensis s^une finem habuit apud illos and aliquot vicinos, missae,
arae and statuae erant abolitae. Surius commentar. ann. 1527. p. 208.
Surius complains of; Masses, Altars and images were abolished.

And as disputation, if ordered as it ought to be, may produce good effects, so
the want of that, especially the refusal of it, when it is importunately
called for by the adversaries, may give them occasion of insulting; and
Taciturnitas corumquiresistere deberent perverrenti^us fidei veritate^, esset
errorisconfirmatio. Epist. Synod. in Council. Basil. Tom. 8. p. 230. col. 2.
the silence of such as should contest with them may be turned to the
confirmation of error, as is observed in the Synodall Epistles of the Council
of Basil, which was likely to have been the ill effect of yours and Doctor
Grewes refusal to encounter with M. Knowles and Mr. Kiffin, if you had not
been as resolute to resist them as they were presumptuous to provoke you to
dispute.

Lastly, as conferences and debates may effect much spiritual good, if managed
as they should be, (and I still understand them with that limitation) so may
they be means of corporal good also; for where no disputations are allowed
of, there the matters of difference are carried with more fraud, force and
violence; as we have touched before upon the Spanish Inquisition, and may
observe further, out of the Neque in disputando apud tales pertinaci
animositate centendentes and annitentes propriae prudentiae, ullus unquam erit
finis; etc. Cochleus Hist. lib. 1. c. 21. Chap. 2. let. n.
Epistle of John Gerson to the Archbishop of Prague, wherein he would not have
him to put the matters in difference with the Bohemian Protestants to
disputation, but advises him to take another course, which is to cut down
Heresy by the Temporal Sword; he means the Heretics: for (says he) by
disputing with such as with pertinacious animosity contend, leaning to their
own prudence, there will never be an end, etc.

This agreeeth well with that of Eccius, who (as we noted before) wrote one
Treatise against disputation with Heretics, another for burning of them; which
Bellarmine would have taken not for a persecution of them, but for an act of
favor and benefit to them, as we shall have occasion more particularly to note
in the fifth chap. Much more charitable and Christian was the Can. 66. Synod
Land. ann. 1604.
Canon of our English Bishops for conference with Recusants; and had they been
as careful to ordain only good and able Ministers as they should have been,
we might have found better fruits of their government then we have done. But
the effects and issues of colloquies, conferences and disputations, I reserve
for another chapter, viz. the fifth now cited.

CHAP. IV. An Historical collection of disputations of several sorts,
principally concerning differences in matter of Religion. In two sections.
1. Containing examples from the Apostles to Luther. 2. Of examples from Luther
to the present age.

OF disputations, some are managed without the strife tongues, Psalm. 31.10. as
the dialogues or colloquies of Plato, Cicero, Lucian, among the Heathens; and
some of Athanasius, Hierome, Augustines tracts among the ancient Fathers;
Galatinus, Erasmus, Peter Martyr, and other, of later times. To this head may
be referred the polemicall discourses, that are read in Schools, or published
in print, or both, of differences in Religion; as Bellarmine calls his
Volumes of controversies, Disputations, though there appeared none opposite to
dispute against him. And some, though agitated with strife of tongues, are not
like the divisions of Reuben, great thoughts of heart, Judge. 5.15. Such are the
disputes now in print, whereof Gilbert Voetius professor at Vtriect was
moderator, betwixt a visible and vocal Opponentand Respondent, contradicting
each other, yet without any hearty opposition; both parties, though adverse in
words, yet of one mind and one judgment: and so it is in the ordinary
Academicall disputations of Oxford and Cambridge, where the controversy is
rather formal then serious, except when the Respondent takes upon him the
defense of some Paradox, as one Mr. Ph. of Mort. College did in my time, who
proposed this for an Actquestion, An liceat pro puncto honoris aliquem
interficere.
Whether for a point of honor it were lawful for any one to kill another:
wherein he held the affirmative, which how it came to p^sse that it was
permitted I know not; sure I am that diverse learned and conscientious men were
displeased with it: or when the Opponent is of a contrary judgment to the
Respondent, as Mr. Tombs to Doctor Savage, when at the Act in Oxford he
disputed against the Baptism of Infants. This was very contrary to manner of
the old Academicks of the Plato's institution, so called from the Academici ex
locivocabulo nomen habuerunt. Cicer. Acad. quaest l. 1. edit. 2. p. 34. 12.
place where the Philosophers met to dispute, I mean for peremptorinesse of
opinion; who were so far from maintaining paradoxall positions or conclusions,
that they would positively conclude, or determine nothing at all, holding as Id
habebant Academici decr^tum, nihil posse percipi. Cic. Ib. edit. 1. l. 2. p.
49. Number. 29.
a decree, that nothing by dispute could be discovered; wherein some were so
absurd (as Chius Metrodorus in initio libri qui est de natura, nego, inquit,
scire nos sciamusne aliquid, an nihil sciamus. Ib. p. 17 Number. 67.
Chius Metrodorus) that they denied a man could know whether he knew any thing
or nothing; and therefore though they disputed much, it was Proprium est
Academiae judicium suum nullum interponere, sed quod in quamque sententiam diei
possit expromere, sed judicium audientibus relinquere integrum and liberum.
Cicer. de divin. l. 2. p. 305.
proper to their discipline to bring in reasons on both sides, to find out what
is most likely, and so without passing any sentence to leave the judgment
wholly to the hearers. The (...). Diog. Laert. in vita Pyrthonis lib. 9. p. 675.
Scepticks in Diogenes Laertius, were of near affinity to them, who were so
called, because they were ever seeking, and never found what they sought for:
there were Sceptick women in the Apostles time, 2 Timothy c. 3. v. 7. Our Seekers
are such in their Religion as those were in Philosophy, but so much the worse,
as it is to be ignorant or unresolved of truth in Religion, especially in such
points as are fundamental, then of points philosophical. But the Academicall
disputations of Christians are as well conclusive as discursive, although it
were better that some Academies were rather Scepticall then definitive, viz.
such as were founded of purpose for opposition to the truth in the name of
Heresy, as that of Dua censis Academia in Relgio superioribus annis a Philip.
2. Rege Catholico instituta, cum per Germ. and Galliam perniciocissimas
haereses increbrescere videret, etc. Jacob. Meddendorp. de Academ l. 3. p. 524.
Dowey by Philip the second King of Spain. The use of Disputations, colloquies
and conferences rightly instituted, and according to the institutions observed,
serves not only to clear problematicall, Non inutiliter exercentur ingenia, si
adhibeatur disceptatio modetata, and absit error opinantium se scire quod
nesciunt. Augustine. Eachirid. ad Laurent. c. 59. Tom. 3. part. 1. p. 218.
and to assure and confirm fundamental doctrines, but are profitable, as
Austine observes, for the exercise of wit, if the disceptation be moderate,
and without the error of such as think they know that they know not.

Though I mention these Academicall disputations, as in honor to learning, to
which we should take all fair occasions to give laudable testimony; especially
since some in these times with a Turkish Antipathy to learning, cry down
Academicall Colleges, Books, Studies, exercises, and would Level those fair
Fabrics, as Babylonian buildings, even with the ground, unless they might
take them in possession for themselves, (which once the Levellers attempted;)
yet I make them rather a Proem then a part of mine historical Catalogue, which
shall consist of the personal debates of such as are far from the professed
Union of the Apostle, in speaking the same thing, and being perfectly joined
together in one mind and one judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. whose minds are contrary,
and their tongues contradictory, and their pens also; when they take them up
like pikes to prosecute the war by writing, which by verbal disputation they
began.

The dispute betwixt Michael and the Arch^ngel, with the Devil about the body
of Moses, mentioned in the 9. of Jude, Jacob. Salianus Anno Mundi 2583. 329.
ante Christi not. anno 1440. p. 310. col. 1.
for antiquity has the precedence of all others; and though some take it in a
figurative sense, the most and best expositors understand it literally: yet
there is great difference what was the difference betwixt them; Jude says the
subject of it, was the body of Moses; and about that, that chief controversy
was whether Moses body should be so buried, that no man should know of his
Sepulcher, as it is said, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Why his buriall-place should be
concealed, the reason which has the best ground, and most concurrent consent
is, because he was so worthy and renowned a man, so much honored by God and
man while he lived, that, considering the people of Isreal's pronenesse to
Idolatry, his body was like to be made an Idol by them: wherein he gainsaid the
Angel, as if he were zealous for the honor of Moses, though he might intend
his dishonor by contemptuous abuse of it by his enemies. But is it not said
that he died on Mount Nebo, (which is the top of Pisgah, whence he saw the Land
of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34. v. 1, 2, 3, 4.) and was buried in a valley in the Land of
Moab, over against Bethptor, Deuteronomy. 34.6. Yes, but for all that though he were
carried by the Divine power or Ministry of the Angel into the valley and there
buried, yet no man saw in what part of the valley his body was interred: But
did not the Devil know the place? if so, he might discover it, and act
according to the evil ends before rehearsed; so that the answer may be, that if
God pleased he could keep it secret from the Devil, if the Devil knew it, he
could make him keep it secret; if he were never so desirous to reveal it: and
herein as Cum Diabolus revelare and prodere vellet Judaeis ad idololatria^
pronis, impeditus est and rohibitus ad Archangelo Michael. Adrichon. Delph.
Theatr. terrae Sanctae in tribu Ruben. p. 126. col. 1.3.
I conceive consisted the contestation betwixt Michael and the Devil, that when
the Devil would have discovered the Sepulcher of Moses to the Jews, prone to
Idolatry, he was prohibited and hindered by the Angel, There is, says Inter
angelos bonos and malos perpetua disputatio est, etc. Luth. Icom. class. c. 36.
p. 100.
Luther, a perpetual dispute betwixt the good and the bad Angels; the good
Angels propose and promote good things; the bad Angels bad: the good answer all
objections, and reprehend them for their Counsels and courses. Another notable
disputation with the Devil we read of, Mat. 4. and Luke 4. Ann. Christi. 31.
Anno. Christi. 34.
called by some a Monomachie or single combat betwixt our Savior and him,
wherein the question was, whether Christ was the Son of God or no; the Devil
was opponent, and Christ the Respondent, as you may read in the two precedent
Chapters. By these two examples we are taught two things, for our instruction
and imitation, from the former, not to give railing speeches in disputes, Jude,
9. By the other we are directed with what weapon to wage our war, ( viz.) the
word of God. But my historical narrative I shall make up of mere humane
examples; beginning first with the Protomartyr Stephen, in the History of the
Acts of the Apostles, Bucolzer. Ind. Chron. p. 135.
which contains the memorable persons and passages of the Church, for the
space of twenty six years, beginning at the ascension of Christ, and ending at
his 59. year, and the 4. of Nero, there, viz. Act. c. 6. v. 9. We read that
there arose certain of the Synagogue of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and
Alexandrians, and them of Cilicia and of Asia disputing with Stephen; the Thema
disputationis est, An Jesus Nazarenus sit verus Messiah, etc. Stephanus
affirmat ita esse, neganti proferuntur argumenta in medium contra sententiam
Stephani, veru^ is ea ita refringit, etc. Centari, l. 2. c. 12. p. 648.
Centur. Magdetur genses, set forth this disputation in a formal manner,
setting down, first the Theme or argument of their disputation, or question,
viz. Whether Jesus Christ be the Messiah foretold by, the Prophets and whether
all things foretold of the Messiah by the Prophets, may be applied to and were
fulfilled in him, and the works recorded of him. Stephen affirms, they deny;
they propose their arguments, Stephen refuteth them etc.

Paul, as himself confesses to God, Acts 22.20. When the blood of the Martyr
Stephen was shed, he was standing by and consenting to his death, and kept the
raiment of them that flew him; and they slew him by stoning him, Acts 7.59. but
God, by that hard-hearted cruelty, and Stephens Patience, Charity, and Piety,
and the divine power concurring together, was occasional and causall for his
conversion, and after that he became a zealous Champion for Christ and his
truth, and disputed for it and him as Stephen did, for he spoke boldly in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and disputed against the Grecians, Acts 9.29. in the
Synagogue of the Jews, and with devout persons, and in the Market daily with
them that met him, Acts 17.17. and c. 19. he disputed daily in the School of
one Tyrannus, Acts 19.9. Whether this Tyrannus were a Prince or some potent man
of rule and authority who founded the School, and allowed it for the exercise
of Scholasticall disputations, or a particular person, the Master of the
School, whose name was Tyrannus; and whether a teacher of Philosophy or
Rhetoric, and whether converted by Paul, he were willing he should make use of
his School for propagation of the Gospel among his Scholars and others who
might have recourse unto him there (the affirmative whereof are the most
probable opinions of the most approved expositions) I dare not determine; but
there is no doubt but he was so enabled by humane learning and divine
assistance to manage a controversy in the cause of Christ, against all
gainsayers, and so zealous to advance it unto victory, that he pretermitted no
opportunity of pleading for it, either by preaching or polemicall contestation.
The story of Paul for such particulars is Pauli curriculum (...) delineabimus,
cumcerta annorum distinctione destituamur. Bucolz. chron. p. 136.
not noted with such a certain distinction of years in the Scripture, that we
can as punctually say when, as of what, with whom, and where he disputed, but
that we may know that all his disputations were acted betwixt the 35. year of
Christ ( Ibid.
when Stephen was stoned, and Paul was converted) and the 68. year Helvic.
chronol. p. 86.
when he was martyred.

After the Apostles time, as heresies begun to spring faster and spread
further, so there were no doubt many conflicts betwixt Christians and
Heretics, besides the controversies with Jews and Pagans, especially such as
pretended to learning, whether as Philosophers, Rhetoricians, and Politicians:
And when we read the refutation of their errors in Justin Martyr, Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Epiphanius and others, we cannot but conceive in probality of
reason, that they had many personal disputes with their adversaries, though we
find them not upon record, or if we did we would not put our selves or the
Reader to such pains to rehearse them all, conceiving it sufficient to select
a competent number of such as are of special note; As that of Ann. Christi
150. Justin. Martyr. Dial. cum Tryphone. a p. 217. ad 371. Graecolat. Paris.
1636.
Iustine Martyr with Tripho a Jew, held at Ephesus; wherein Iustine maintains
against the Jew, that the Christian Religion does not lean to fables, but
rests on demonstration full of the Spirit of God; and that Christians, though
they observe not circumcision, nor the Jewish holy days, and other ceremonies,
they are not therefore transgressors of the Covenant of God: the rest and the
greatest part of the dispute is spent in defending the true Doctrine of the
person and offices of Christ, against all Jewish cavills, and concluded with a
reproof of their gross ingratitude to God, in worshipping the golden Calfe;
after innumerable blessings and miraculous mercies showed to them, Ann. 206.
their great impiety in offering their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, their
killing of Christ, persecution of Christians, and practice of polygamie; for
all which he exhorts the Jews to hearty repentance. Minutius Felix, Minutius
Felix insignis causidicus. Hierom. Tom. 1. p. 229. causidic. Rom in. fori. Ib.
Tom. 3. p. 322.
a famous Lawyer of the Court of Rome, as Hierome calls him, This Dialogue is
in the 9. Tom. Biblioth. Patr. a. col. 1. ad. 22.
published a disputation dialogue wise betwixt Octavius a Christian, and
Cecilius an Heathen; Octavius shows the absurdity, cruelty, and impiety of the
Heathen Religion, and justifies the Christian against the opinion of Cecilius,
and the Scandals put upon Christians by the Heathens, Quasi. Christiani monstra
colerent, infantes convivia incerta vorarent. Ib. Minut. Felix. col. 16.
as if they did worship Monsters, devour infants, and mingled incest with their
banquets: But this dialogue (though taken by some learned men for an
Historical truth) seems rather to be a personated dispute made by Minutius
himself, then a real concertation betwixt any persons so named, wherein, as
Lactantius conceives, that learned Lawyer declares how fit an assertor of the
truth he Declarat qua^ idoneus assertor veritatis esse potuisset si se totum ad
id studium contulisser Lactan. Iustit. l. 5. c. 2. p. 401.
might have been if he had wholly addicted himself to the endeavor thereof.
Anno. 226. Hierom Apolog. adversus Ruffinum Tom. 2. operum p. 224.
Hierome makes a report of a Dialogue or dispute betwixt Origin and Candidus a
defender of the Valentinian Here sie, wherein (says he) me thinks I see two
blind, or dark And abatae qui nocte vel qui cl^usis ocalis pugnant. Erasin.
chil. ad. p. 624 col. 2. and p. 685. col. 1.
Andabata's fighting together: the Valentinians say he Son is of the substance
of his Father, but withal asserts that he was sent from his Father with a
Celestial body (for that was the error of Alphonsus de castro advers. here is.
lib. 4. col. 266. Anno. 226.
Valentinus;) on the contrary part Origin according to Arius and Eunomus,
denies his begetting or generation from the Father, lest he should divide the
Father into parts.

Archelaus Bishop of Mesopotamia wrote a book in the Syriack-Tongue, of his
disputations against a Manichaean Heretic going out of Persia, which was
translated into the Greek, and was in many men's hands in Hieronymus Tom. 1.
operum p. 294. Anno 277.
Hieromes time, but now is lost, as Baron. Annal. Tom. 2. An. 277. parag. 14.
Baronius thinks; this Archelaus flourished near the Emperor Probus his time,
who succeeded Aurelianus and Tacitus: But the errors of the Manichees remain
still upon Aug. de haeres. ad quod vult Deum Haesee. p. 46. Tom. 6. p. 24.
record, they are many and gross, as Austine and Epiphan. 1.2. Tom. 2. p. 149.
precip. p. 155. Ann. 315.
Epiphanius report them; the principal was that of their two contrary
principles, the one good, the other bad, both eternal; and so was most likely
to make one part of the dispute.

There was at the City of Nice a notable disputation Niceph. Callist. Eccl.
Hist. l. 8. c. 15. p. 379.
betwixt one who was a skillful Logician and learned Philosopher, by nation a
Greek, who confiding in his art and eloquence infulted over the orthodox
Christians, but was undertaken and taken down by Spiridian an old man, who
confuted and converted him: about that time was Arius disputed with and
confuted by the Council of Nice: there is question made whether Arius were at
the Council or no, which is discussed by Scultetus medul. Patrum. p. 1. p. 467.
Anno. 349.
Scultetus, and the affirmative proved by him against them that deny it.

Athanasius had a solemn dispute with Arius at Laodicea, which is set down Tom.
2. operum Graecolat. a col. 66. ad. 394.
as a Trialogue, or a tripartite discourse betwixt three persons, Athanasius,
Arius and Probus a Gentile judge, delegated by the Emperor Constantine to
over-s^e and order that affair, and to make report of the passages of it to
himself, which was like to be done with disadvantage to the cavilling Heretic,
who not able to answer Athanasius prooss, charged him with magical Arts, and
there withal fascinating the senses of his judges.

There was a public disputation appointed by Valentinian the Emperor betwixt
Ambrose Bishop of Millain, and Auxentius an Arrian Heretic, who presuming of
the favor of Iustina Augusta an Arrian, challenged the Bishop to dispute, who
refused the challenge, and rendered his reasons thereof to the Emperor; Anno.
386.
which you may read In Ambrose his 32. Epist. to Valentin. lib. 2. Tom. 3. p.
121. etc. and in Baron. Annal. Tom 4. ad ann. Christi 386. paragraph. 16, and
17. Tom. 4 col. 56.
in the works of Ambrose. Chrysostom. in Epist. prior. in Corinth. cap. 1. Homil.
3. Tom. 4. col. 352.
Chrysostom makes mention of a ridiculous dispute in his conceit betwixt a
Christian and an Heathen, the question was whether Paul or Plato were more
learned; wherein though the Heathen preferred his Plato, the Christian his
Paul, yet for humane learning the Christian (as Chrysostom supposed) should
have given therein the better to Plato, that so the prevailing by Paul might
appear to be not by humane wisdom, but by divine grace.

The Emperor Possid. in vita. Aug. c. 3. Tom. 1. Gest. Prim. Collat. p. 2. nu.
1 Ann. 412.
Honorius desirous to bring the Donatists to concord with the Catholics,
compelled them to a collation or conference; or which purpose he sent Marcellus
a Tribune and Notary, to take order for their meeting accordingly; he was, it
seems, Notary for the Emperor, for the Catholic party had two others,
Ianuarius and Vitalis, the Donatists two of their own also, Anno. 410.
Victor and Crescentius: of the collation at Carthage, all the the passages,
the most solemn part of it in three days make up a just Volume of above 400.
pages in 8uo published by Papirus Massonus a Civilian of Paris Anno. 1588.

Augustine, when he was converted from Manicheisme to true Christianity, became
a vigorous and zealous Champion for the truth; and both by his tongue and pen
had many disputations with many sorts of Heretics, as Arrians, Donatists,
Manichees, Originists, Polagians, Priscillians; it is hard to sort them in the
several years, with exact accommodation to the years of Christ, but the most
of them were acted from the 43. year of his age to the Bucolzer. Index.
chronol. ad ann. 430. p. 231.
77. when he died: we shall have occasion to make observation of some of them
in the next Chapter.

Arnobius the younger Bell. de eccl. Script. p. 208.
wrote a book of this title, Ann. 460.
The conflicts of the Catholics with Serapion, concerning the Trinity, and the
Unity of two substances in the single person of Christ; which it is like, had
their passage in alternate turns of objections and answers, after the manner
of disputation, not much before this time.

Tom. 3. conc. p. 853. col. 1. Severiani a Severo exorti vinum non bibunt. quod
fabulosa vanitate de Satana and terra germinasse asserant vitem: carnis
resurrectione^ cum veteri Testamento respuunt. Aug. Tom 6. de haeres. Quod vult
Doumhaeres. 24. Tom. 6. p. 16. Anno. 645.
There was a collation or disputation held at Constantinople, Anno 531.
in the time of Justinian the younger, betwixt the Catholics and Heretics
called S^verians; whose heresy was, that by a sabulous vanity they condemned
the use of wine, as supposing the Devil begat the vine of the Earth: they
denied also the resurrection of the body, and all the old Testament.

In the Council. Tom. 4. p. 624.
fourth tome of Counsels, we find a disputation set down betwixt Pyrrbus
Patriarch of Constantinople, and Maximus a learned Monks; the Patriarch was a
Monothelite, holding but one will in Christ; whereas Christ being God and man,
and so having two natures, he must needs have two wills, one as he is God,
another as he is man, for else he were not perfect God and perfect man: this
twofold will we find Luke 22.42. Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup
from me, nevertheless not my will but thine be done: for this Maximus pleaded
against Pyrrbus as a Monothelite, who held that he had but one will, and that
was divine; I speak the more distinctly of this heresy, because it is known to
few what it is, to fewer how it is to be confuted.

About the observation of Easter there has been much controversy in the
Church many years ago; as in the year 196. the Christians in Asia See Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. c. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Sethus Calvis. chron. p. 485. c. 2.
out of a tradition of John the Evangelist kept the Feast of Easter, upon the
14. day of the month, as Exodus 12.6, 7. What day of the week soever it was,
other Christians in Europe, kept it only that day when our Savior rose from
the dead, and this as by a tradition from Saint Peter, for which Tenet Eusebius
ubi supra. Ann. 546.
Victer the Bishop of Rome was so hot, that he would have excommunicated the
Bishops of Asia for the contrary opinion and practice, but that diverse Bishops,
especially Irenaeus, wrote unto him, that for a difference of ceremonies and
rites, the concord of doctrine and faith should not be broken.

There was another great dissension at Sethus Calvis, p. 577. col. 2.
Constantinople de termino Pasch. anno 546. But the most famous dispute about
that matter was that which B^de Eccles. Hist. gentis Anglor. lib. 3. c. 25.
Ann. 664.
Bid reports, which was carried on most of all by Coleman (whom some account
an Irishman, and some a Scotchman; whereof the cause may be, for that Philip.
Ferrarius. p. 177. c. 1.
some call Ireland Scotland) and Wilfred, a Presbyter of Mercia, whose King
Oswi was present at the disputation, and gave his vote for the observation of
Easter according to S. Peter's order, Ego vobis dico, quia hic ostiarius est
ille cui ego contradicere nolo, sed in quantum novi and valeo hujus cupio in
omnibus obedire statutis, ne forre me advenienre ad fores regni coelorum non
sit qui reserat, averso illo quiclaves tenere probatur. B^dae Ecclesiast. Hist.
lib. 3. c. 25. p. 139.
upon goodly reason, Because Peter (says he) is the keeper of Heaven gates,
whom I will by no means contradict, but as much as in me lies I will obey all
his statutes, lest when I come to the gates of Heaven there be none to let me
in, he being averse who keeps the Keys.

2. Section of examples from Luther to the present age.
From the time last noted Antichrist grew up apace toward his achme; and when
he attained to a predominancie of power, the course was according to the
Council of Gerson, cited in the precedent Chapter, rather to out down Heretics
(as the Papists call all that are not Popishywith the Sword, then to dispute
with them by word, until Luther (stirred up by the Indulgences of Pope Leo the
10. and the covetous and blasphemous selling of them by Tecelius) opposed
rather the corrupt practice of the Court of Rome, then the erroneous Religion
of the Church of Rome. Anno. 15^8.


His first disputation against it was at Heidelberg in the Cloister of the
Melchior. Adam. in vita Luther. p. 108.
Augustinian Monks, which is now called the College of wisdom, and it was of
justification by Faith: at that Disputation Bucer was present, who with a quick
hand wrote what Luther delivered, which he communicated to Beatus Rhenanus with
much praise and applause on Luthers part. Ann. 1519.


That year Bucolz. Index chron. p. 476.
there was a disputation at Lipsia betwixt Luther and Eccius about the primacy
of the Pope, Penance, Purgatory, and Indulgences; and betwixt Corolstadius and
Eccius about free will.

After several Treaties in several places in Germany, Anno 1530.
seven Catholics and seven Protestants were chosen to confer together, to
find out a means of composition; who not being able to agree, the number was
restrained to three apiece: and though some few small Points of Doctrine, and
other petty things (belonging to some Rites) were agreed on, yet in conclusion
it was perceived, that the conference could produce no concord at all, because
neither party was willing to grant to the other any thing of importance. Anno
1541.


The Sleyd. Com. lib. 13. p. 279.
Emperor Charles V. proposed a Colloquie to the Protestant Princes, to be held
at Ibid. l. 14. p. 281.
Ratisbone, betwixt Julius Pelagius, John Eccius, John Gropperus, chosen for
the Papists; Philip Melancthon, Martin Bucer, and John Pistorius for the
Protestants.

To them was delivered a Book by Granvell, given to Caesar, as he said, by some
good man; the Heads whereof he would have them to consider, which were, Of the
Creation of Man, and his Integrity of Nature before the Fall, Of Free Will, Of
the cause of Sin, Of Original Sin, Of Justification of a sinner, Of the Church,
Signs, and Authority thereof, Of the Word, Repentance, Of the Authority of the
Church in Interpretation of Scripture, Of Absolution, Matrimony, Of the
Sacraments, Of Order, Of Images, The Mass, Administration of Sacraments, Of
Discipline of the Church, Ministers and People. Eccius erat impatiens atque
morosus, nam and librum fastidiebat, and collegas minime probabat qui egerant
rem diligenter, and reconciliarunt multa, nec illa quidem levia doctrinae
capita. Ibid.
In this Colloquie Eccius showed himself impatient and froward, and disdained
the Book, and disliked his Colleagues: yet they handled the matter diligently,
and reconciled some Heads of Doctrine of no small moment. Anno 1546.


Sleyd. Com. l. 16. p. 353, 354.
Caesar renewed the Disputation at Ratisbone, but with other Speakers on both
sides, except only Martin Bucer. The Points to be argued on were the same, the
same Presidents and Notaries chosen, two on each side; and withal, an Oath was
required, That nothing should be revealed of the matters in conference, before
it were imparted to Caesar, and States of the Empire: which the Protestant
Disputants could not agree unto, because their Princes had required of them
from time to time to write unto them, how things proceeded in the Colloquie:
Whereupon is was soon after broken up.

About that time,

Melch. Adamus in vita Fred. Mycon. a p. 171, ad 175.
Fredericus Myconius disputed with John Tecelius the Popes Factor for sale of
Pardons; betwixt whom, the Question was not about the lawfulness or validity of
them, but abut the selling of them: For Myconius would have had a Pardon a
freecost, but Tecelius would not allow him one upon such easy terms, and so he
was without one. Anno 1549.


Fox Martyr, vol. 2. p. 756. col. 2.
Mr. Fox said, he had so many Disputations in his hands, and some of them so
long, as all together would make a Volume. And he sets down at large Peter
Martyrs Syllogistical Disputation against Transubstantiation at Oxford Ibid. a
p. 760 to 778.
; and three Disputations held at Cambridge the same year: That of Peter Martyr
is noted by Sleydan also, and well approved of.

There was a Conference at Poisy in France, in the time of Charles IX. Anno
1560. French Hist. p. 737. see of this disput. Peter Mart. 54 Epist. which is
to Bullinger, p. 154. Counc. of Tren. Anno 1561.
which began the 9 of September. and was finished about the 5 of November. Bucolz.
Chron. p. 602.
Bucolzerus says, it was betwixt the Cardinal of Lorain and Theodore Beza. The
Hist. of the Counc. of Tr. l. 5. p. 453, 454.
The History of the Council of Trent says, there was with him Peter Martyr,
and that these two were the chief. The French Hist. of Serres, p. 737
French History, besides them, names Augustine, Marlorat, Francis of S. Paul,
Raymond, and John Viril, with others, to the numbar of 12 Ministers, and 22
Deputies of the Protestant Churches, who offered a Petition to the King at his
first entry, To examine the Confession of their Faith; That the King would be
President with his Council; That the Clergy being parties, should not take upon
them the Authority of Judges; That all Controversies might be determined by the
Word of God; That two Secretaries chosen on either side might examine the
Disputations that were daily written; and that they should not be received, but
signed by either part. These conditions, with little difference, are set down
both in the French History, and the History of the Council of Trent, in the
places sore-noted: but in other particulars their Observations are different,
though not dissentient. Hist. of the Counc. of Trent ib. l. 5. p. 451.
The Cardinal of Lorain likewise desired the Kings presence in the public
Assembly, that it might be more frequent and adorned, to make ostentation of
his worth, promising himself a certain victory. Many of the Divines would have
persuaded the Queen not to suffer the King to be present, that those tender
years might not be envenomed by pestiferous Doctrine: but he was present, and
in a short speech, as he was instructed, made an Exhortation to correct the
things that were amiss, desiring they should not depart till all differences
were composed. Before they entered into open Conference, the Cardinal of Lorain
would treat privately with Beza, before the Queen, Mother; and having heard
him, especially upon the Lord, Supper, Serres French Hist. ubi ante.
I am greatly contented, said he, with it; and hope assuredly, that the issue
of this Conference will be happy, proceeding with mildness and reason.

Afterward, when the Cardinals of Lorain and Turnon endeavored to make delays
in the Conference, the Queen bade Beza begin; who having praid upon his knees,
and deprecated the imputations of turbulency and sedition from himself and his
party, he declared in what they did agree with the Church of Rome, and in what
they did dissent, touching Faith, Good Works, Authority of Councels, of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, Obedience to Magistrates, of the Sacraments, and
entering into the matter of the Eucharist: But he spoke with such heat, (says
Hist. of the Council of Trent, 1.5. p. 452.
the Author of the Trent History) as gave little satisfaction to them of his
own party, but provoked the Prelates to high disdain and indignation. The
Congregation being assembled again, the Cardinal of Lorain made a long Oration,
concluding, when any particular Church is in an error, recourse must be had to
the Church of Rome, The Decrees of General Councels, Consent of the ancient
Fathers; and above all, to the Scripture expounded in the sense of the Church.
When he had made an end, all the Bishops stood up, and said, If the Protestants
will subscribe to this Article, they will not refuse to dispute the rest: but
if not, they ought not to have any more audi^nce, but to be chased out of the
whole Kingdom. Beza asked leave to answer presently: but it seemed not fit to
equalize a private Minister to so great a Prince Cardinal; and so the Assembly
was dissolved. The Prelates were willing that the Colloquie should have been
that ended; but the Bishops of Valence told them it was dishonorable.
Therefore on the 24 day it was again assembled in presence of the Queen and
Princes, wherein Beza spoke of the Church, Conditions, and Authority thereof;
Of Councels, Of the dignity of the Scriptures: So the History of Trent hit the
Serres History of France p. 738.
French History that day; Beza made answer to the Cardinal, and disputed with
Espenceus and Saints: and v. 26. he treated with him again of the Lords
Supper; the other Ministers likewise replied to some Objections of other
Doctors of the Sorbon, and finally all was converted into private Conferences,
without any resolution or conclusion that might end these troubles.

By the appointment of Sigismu^d King of Poland, Anno 1566.
there was a Disputation appointed betwixt the new Arrians, and those who
professed the contrary Faith unto them, at Petricovia in Poland. Here there was
somewhat to do about Presidentship, whether there should be one or more; which
was resolved, that by turns one of each should preside: and being Papists who
managed the dispute against the Arrians, they chose him for the Scribe who had
been a Scribler against Calvin for his Calv. Opuse. p. 682, 683, 684. ad
fratres Polonos.
Epistles ad fratres Polonos. The Arrians would not yield to say Amen to the
prayer of their opposites, because they would not acknowledge a God in Trinity
of Persons. After this they soon brake off without any fruit of their
Conferences, as Possevin. Biblioth. Select. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 363. Anno. 1572.
Possevine, who sets down the dispute, reports.

From that year to 1590, Ant. Possev. Apparat. Sacer vol. 1. p. 480.
Possevine gives a List of 21 Disputations of several Popish Points, held in
several Popish Universities; but they were but such Disputations as Bellarmines
at Rome, without a personal opponent; or if with one, not real and serious, but
only personated.

Stanislaus Roscius, Anno 1574. Melch. Adam. in vita Bullingeri. p. 502.
as I have observed in the 1 Chapter, that he may reproach the Religion of the
Protestants for want of unity, alleges, That from the Disputation at Lipsia,
Anne 1519. to their Synod in Vilna, 1590. they have had above 100 Meetings,
Conferences, Disputations, Councels and Synods, and yet cannot reconcile
themselves to one another; wherein he shows himself a malicious and
slanderous Papist: and to speak with reference to Ferrar. Lexic. Geogr. p. 432.
col. 1. fin.
Vilna in Sarmatia a chief City of Lithuania in Poland, where Roscius was an
Abbot; it was at Vilna where the Jesuit Bucolz. chron. p. 778. Anno 1584.
Scarga rang the Bell to a Parisian Massacre of the Protestants of that City,
where for their too good agreement in the truth in their conceits, they would
make them agree in tribulation for it under their remorsless cruelty: though I
confess the dissension I find in diverse of their meetings is so much, that I
am loath to mention them.

Betwixt these two Chronological terms, Anno 1586. Biblioth. Parv. Tom. 1.
Graec. and Lat. a p. 194, ad 272.
there was published a dispute betwixt Gregentius Archiepisc. Tophrensis (so he
is called) with Herbanus a Jew; wherein Gregantius argues copiously and
vigorously for the Christian against the Jewish Religion.

Philip Mornay Lord of Plessies, Governor of Saumur, Anno 1600. Joh. de Serres
genesis Hist. of France, much augmented out of approved Authors, by Edw. Grims. p.
1052.
accused by the B shop of Eureux to have committed 500 falsehoods in his Book
against the Mass, presented a Petition to K. Henry IV. That his Majesty would
be pleased to appoint Commissioners to examine every passage of Scripture cited
in his Book. The King yielded to his motion, and on the fourth of May appointed
a Conference betwixt them, which began that day in the great Hall at
Fountainbleau: Who were the Commissioners, and in what equipage they were
placed there, is fully set down in the general History of France, written by
John Serres in the Reign of Henry IV. B fore the Disputation began, it was
declared, That it should not bring into debate matters of Doctrine of either
Religion, but only be confined to the Exceptions of the Bishop, and the
Answers of the Lord Mornay made unto them: Who first promised in the general,
Ibid.
that " his hope was, That when he should be equally examined, all men should
find, that he had carried himself faithfully and diligently; although it were
not to be held strange, if in five thousand passages or more, they have found
some wherein his eye, his memory, or his judgment has wavered. Oh, said he,
that the Books of the Roman Church which have been written within this hundred
years were examined with this rigor! how many should you find that could
endure this Trial? Finally, he professed, that, with his Majesty's leave, this
act was particular, and could not prejudice the Doctrine of the Reformed
Churches of that Realm, which had been before him, and should be after him. And
so they entered into the matter. French Hist. p. 1053.
But after the first days debate Mornay fell very sick, so the dispute in that
manner proceeded no further. Whereof we shall speak more in the next Chapter.

The Disputes of Peter de Moulin with the Jesuits and other Papists in France,
are too many to be brought into this Catalogue, wherein I desire to be brief:
as also those of D. Featly, our acute Countryman, both in England and in France.

Anno 1603. was the Conference or Disputation at Hampton Court before King
James: The The first days conference at Hampton Court, p. 1, 2.
parties of opposite opinions were on the one side the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops of London, Durham, Winchester, Worcester, St. David's,
Chichester, Carlisle, and Peterborough; the D^ans of the Chapel, Worcester,
Westminster, Paul's, Chester, Windsor, with Dr. Field, and Dr. King Archdeacon
of Notingham: and on the other, Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Spa^k^, Mr. Knewstubs, and
Mr. Chaderton, Agents for the Millenary plaintiffs, as Dr. Barlow Dean of
Chester (the partial Penman of that Conference) calls them; not that they
were Chiliasts or Millenaries, as many are by a mistaken sense of Revel. 20.6.
but because they agreed much with them who exhibited a Petition to the King
with the Subscription of a thousand Ministers. The matters disliked or
questioned, were reduced by Dr. Reynolds the Foreman, to these Ibid. p. 23.
four Heads.

First, that the Doctrine of the Church might be preserved in purity, according
to Gods Word.

Secondly, that good Pastors might be planted in all places to preach the same.

Thirdly, that Church government might be sincerely ministered, according to
Gods Word.

Fourthly, that the Book of Common Prayer might be fitted to more increase of
piety.

Doctor Francis Write had two Disputations with Fisher the Jesuit; An. 1622.
the latter of them in the presence of King James. With the same Jesuit Dr.
Laud then Bishop of St. D^vids had a dispute also, which are printed, together
with Dr. Whites Reply to Jesuit Fishers Answer, An. 1624.
and the four days Conference betwixt the Jesuit and his opposites appointed
by the State; and of Dr. Reynolds with Mr. Heart, all in the Tower of London,
and published at large in print, I desire rather to commend to the rending of a
judicious Protestant, than to abbreviate any thing out of them.

Of later times, especially since we have been divided into so many Sects, we
have had (though the Military Sword, God be thanked, be sheathed) a great deal
of Word war; many presumptuous Challengers to public dispute, and some too
temerarious undertakers of them: whereof diverse are in print, and some as
worthy are not printed, as that of yours and Dr. Grew's encounter with Mr.
Kiffin and Mr. Knowls at Coventry. These I purposely forbear, because they are
many, and the most of them are of one and the same Argument, the Baptism of
Infants.

I will conclude this Chapter with a few necessary Admonitions to all true
Christians.

First, since in all Ages Truth has met with many enemies, that they do not
content themselves with a bare knowledge or belief of it; but that they
endeavor to be so enabled to plead for, when adversaries rise up against it,
that they may stand up, and stand out in opposition to them: and so may not
only be able earnestly to contend for the faith (once delivered to the Saints,
Jude 3.) but manfully to defend it.

Secondly, out of the precedent examples we may draw instruction for our
direction, how to carry on a dispute, when upon just cause we are to undertake
it, as by that of Michael disputing with the Devil. We may be cautioned against
contumelious speeches against our Antagonist: for he, when he disputed with the
Devil about the Body of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing
accusation, Jude 9. And from our Saviors encounter with Satan, we may be
directed with what weapon, chiefly, to manage our spiritual warfare, even with
the sword of the spirit, the word of God, as he did; and therewith put his
enemy to flight. From the passionate excesses of some Disputants observed in
this Catalogue, we may be admonished of moderation and meekness of spirit; that
by suffering our passions to become rampant, we make not our Judgments to be
couchant. Other particulars I shall make use of, especially in prosecution, and
completing of the sixth Chapter, when I come unto it.

CHAP. V. Of the various Issues and Successes of Conferences, Colloquies and
Disputations about matters of Religion.
IT is the observation of Aug. Thuan. apud Melch. Adam in vita Pet^i Boquini,
p. 146. Lorinus in Act. Apost. cap. 9. v. 29. at. p. 422. Possev. Bibliot.
select. tom. 1. c. 13. p. 365.
diverse learned man, that conflicts in matters of Religion have for the most
part been fruitless of good effects, and sometimes that they have brought forth
much evil fruit. For example: The Collation, Conference or Disputation of
Catholics with the Donatists, though it were fairly carried against them, and
that by the Testimony of the Judge, who was constituted as Moderator in the
cause, yet they would not acknowledge themselves convinced; and when the
sentence of the Judge was produced against them, they raised a slanderous
report against him and their Antagonists, Dicunt judice^ fuisse proemio
corruptu^. Aug. Collat. cum Donatist. tom. 7. part. 1. p. 726.
as if they had corrupted him with bribes to pass an honorable sentence on
their side: which occasioned Augustine to write a Confutation of them after the
public Collation with them.

And in his particular Disputation with Poscentius a Nobleman, and an Arian
Heretic; when he was shamefully foiled, he vain-gloriously gave out, Aug. ab
ipso superatu^ Aug. Epist. Poscent. Ep. 174. tom. 2. p. 898.
that he had gotten the victory of Augustine. But the Examples of our own State
and later times may be more for our instruction and caution: And we have but
too good proof of very bad effects of Conferences or Disputations with Papists;
So in the Dean of Paul's and Dean of Windsors Epistle before the Report of the
Conference with Campian, printed ann. 1583.
as in the year 1581. when Campian that Thrasonical Champion of the Romish
Church, of whom we have made mention before, when discovered by his Antagonists
to be a man of confident undertakings, and impotent performances, yet Reports
and Pamphlets were spread abroad every where by his party, as though Campian,
like some great Bear or Lion, had shaken his Adversaries off, like cowardly
Curs one after another.

What followed upon the disputes with the Jesuit Fisher, and a third with Dr.
Laud, the Bishop of Saint David's, with the same Of Doctor Whites reply to the
Jesuit Fisher, p. 8, 9.
Fisher, Dr. White shows in his Epistle to the Reader, in these words, His
Majesty had experience of the unfaithful dealing of Pontificians, when they
make relation of such things as pass by word of mouth only in private
Disputations; and he well understood how the Cretizing Jesuit had dealt with a
reverend Bishop, and with my self; for had we been Schoolboys of thirteen
years old, he could not have made us seem more childish and unskilful then he
did; dispersing hundreds of papers to his own praise, and to our disgrace.

But such lying reports will, at long running, turn to the disgrace of those
that divulge them: and that the more, by how much they are the more notoriously
untrue; as that fiction of theirs of D. Featly his dispute with the same
Fisher, who was such a busy and pragmatical Jesuit, as to be found fishing
for silly souls in many places: With him the Doctor being drawn to dispute (by
one Mr. Buggs, who in his sickness was solicited to set up his rest for
salvation in the Romish Religion) and the dispute ended: The Romish Fisher
caught and held in his own net by Doctor Featly, in the Preface to the Relation
of the conference, June 27. An. 1623. p. 3.
About a week after the Earl of Warwick, who was present at it, having occasion
to pass over the Seas, and coming to Saint Omers, had the company of Doctor
Weston at his Inn, to whom this Doctor, taking the Earl for a Roman Catholic,
told for fresh and most hapyy news out of England, That at a conference betwixt
Father Fisher and Weston, sweet Jesuits, and two Protestant Ministers, the
Jesuits had quitted themselves so well, and the Catholics Faith prevailed so
far, that two Earls, and one hundred others of the auditory were joined to the
Church of Rome with this encounter of those two Earls. The party to whom he
spoke, was one who could not but smile at this relation; for there Ibid. p. 6.
were not near an hundred of both parties in all at the conference, whereof
twenty were professed Papists, and known Recusants; and for the rest, which
were Noble men, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen of quality, with some few Divines,
there was not any one of them any way staggered in Religion by this meeting:
but on the contrary, they have openly professed that they were much established
and confirmed in the Protestant Religion by it; and Mr. Doctor Featlys
Refutation of an Answer to the Book entitled the Fisher, etc. p. 130.
Buggs himself, whose satisfaction by this conference was principally
intended, who before had doubted of our Church, gave thanks after the
Disputation to Sir Humph. Lynde for the meeting, and assured him that he was
well resolved now of his Religion, that he saw plainly it was but the Jesuits
bragging without proofs; and whereas formerly by their Sophistical persuasions,
be was in some doubt of the Church, he is now so fully satisfied of the truth
of our Religion, that he does utterly disclaim the Popish Priests company, and
their Doctrine also.

Though it be a wicked thing to lie (albeit it were for a good intent, yea, for
the glory of God, Job 13.7. Romans 3.7, 8. and no wickedness as such, is matter
of laughter, but rather of sorrow) yet they mingle such folly and absurdity
with their lying, as the Priests of Baal did with worshipping of their Idol,
that they deserve to be derided for it, as they were by the Prophet Elijah, 1
King. 18.26, 27. and the more, because it is frequent with them, and by some of
the approved as a pious fraud: but sometimes their malignity produces sad
effects, especially of public disputes; as is observable concerning the
Dispute of that Illustrious and Incomparable man, the Lord Morney, as Doctor
Illustri and incomparabili viro Domino Philippo Mornayo, etc. Epist. dedicat.
praefix. Critic. Sacr.
Rivet calls him, and the Bishop of Eureux at Fountainbleau forementioned; the
Noble and Learned Lord confiding in the truth of his Allegations, which were
excepted against, as has been said, wanting the use of his own Library, and
forced to make use of his Adversaries Books: they brought him one Book over
night of one Edition, another in the morning of another; and withal, as Doctor
Sutlives Answer to Parsons, l. 3. c. 12. and out of him Mr. Birkbeck in his
Answer to the Antidotist, added to the second Edition of the Protestants Evid.
p. 474.
some have written, put a powder into the places quoted, the smell whereof was
like to have cost him his life: that he Serres French Hist. Anno 1600. p. 1053.
fell very sick upon the first days conference, so as they could proceed no
farther, is testified in the report of their Dispute in the French History; and
some of his Adversaries spoke suspiciously of his sickness, as if it were more
in his mind then in his Body, being astonisshed with the success of the
praludium of that days Velitation, which Plessaeus attonitus successu
praecedentis velitationis apud Gisbertum Voetium de desperata causa papatus, l.
3. sect. 2. p 681. col. 2.
Gisbertus Voetius disproves: and concerning the cause of his disease, he says
nothing of poison, because he takes it from such Authors of the Popish party,
as if they knew it to be true, would rather conceal it if they could, then let
it come abroad into the world. But the matter is probable enough;

First, because there are such poisons, as will not only make one sick, but
kill him too, though he neither eat them nor drink them; as by anointing the
leaves of a book with poison, whereby Berkbeck ex Binfield ubi ante.
Averroes is said to have killed Avicen; by poisoning of clothes, arms, seats,
saddles, whereof Joh. Mariana de Rege, etc. l. 1. c. 7. p. 67.
Mariana the Jesuit shows many examples in his book De Rege, and Regis
Institutiones; yea, a man may be killed by carrying a poisoned Torch: Anno
1574. Carolus Cardinalis Lotharingiae diem obiit non sine suspicione veneni,
facis per noctent praelatae pestifero odore cerebro corrupto. Bucolz. Index.
chronol. p. 638. ex Thuano.
so was the Cardinal of Loraine, a great and busy man in the Council of Trent,
poisoned with the smoke of a Torch carried before him in the night.

Secondly, it is not improbable, that some of the Lord Morney or Plesses
enemies might both know that there were such poisons, and where to procure
them, and how to apply them; Haereticis obstinatis beneficium est quod de hac
vita tollantur; nam quo diutius vivunt co plures errores excogita^t, plures
pervertunt, and ma jorem sibi damnationem acquirunt. Bellarm. Tom. 2. l. 3. dc
Laicis c. 21. verbis ultimis.
for it seems by that we now noted of the Cardinal of Loraine (which fell out
An. 47.15.) that destructive arts were neither unknown, nor unpracticed at that
time; and the dispute betwixt the L. M. and the Bishop of Eureux was 26. years
after. Any such wickedness is the more probable of a Papist against a
Protestant, because of the Popish Doctrine, which is this, it is a benefit for
obstinate Heretics to be taken out of this life, for the longer they l^ve, the
more errors they invent, and the more they pervert, and procure to themselves
the greater damnation. It was not to be expected, but the disputation being
broken off by the L. M. his occasion, the Papists would insult and report
whatsoever might make for their own glory, and his disparagement, as indeed
they did; but how poorly the Popish Bishop began to make good his charge and
challenge against the L. M. the learned Reader may see by that which Gisbert.
Voetius de desperata causa papatus l. 3. Sect. 2. c. 10. a p. 680, ad 692.
Gisbert Voetius has written of it in his Book Of the desperate cause of the
Papacy, and by the excellent A refutation of calumnious relation of the
conference of Monsieur Plessis, and Monsieur of Eureux by one against N. D. I.
P. 3. part printed by Arn. Hatfield, An. 1600.
Refutation of the Tract set out by the L. M. after the Dispute for his own
just defense, to which the Bishop his Adversary Perronus ad illum librum
nunquam respondit. Ibid. And this was 35. years after, for Voetius his book was
printed An. 1655. and the dispute was An. 1600. and this Apologet. Treat. soon
after.
never made any answer.

But the most certain and remarkable issue or effect of this Dispute was, that
Serres French History ad Ann. 1600. p. 1053.
Canoy one of the Commissioners for the Dispute, President in the Chamber of
the Edict at Charters, left his profession of the Reformed Religion, and became
a Romish Catholic; many thought that Casaubon the other Protestant
Commissioner, and Greek Reader to King H. the Fourth, would have followed the
same course; but he left not the world long in this opinion, having written to
the Synod of Ministers assembled at Gargean, that he was not so wretchedly
instructed in piety, as that for want of knowledge of the truth, he should
suffer himself to be carried away with every humor of Doctrine.

The causes of so little good success of Debates, Disputes, Conferences, or
Controversies of Religion, betwixt parties of opposite opinions are diverse; in
some the prevalent power of fancy or imagination above judgment, is the
cause, that Arguments, whether artfiicial of reason, or inartificial of
testimony, will work little upon prejudicated fancy: of the various working
whereof we may read many observable particulars in the learned discourse of
Picus Earl of Mirandula, of Jo. Picus Mirandula lib. de imaginatione, vol. 2.
operum p. 91. praecip. c. 7, 8, 9.
that Title.

Secondly, With some, custom is a great obstacle against the receiving of
truth: and thence it is that those who have been trained up in untruth from
their Childhood, are with greatest difficulty convinced of it, or converted
from it. We may see the refractoriness of this resistance in Peter, Acts 10.
who, when v. 12,13. a vision was presented unto him, showing him several kinds
of creatures, clean and unclean, and he had a command to kill and eat, v. 13.
Not so v. 14. Lord (said he) why so Peter? he gives this reason of his refusal,
though the command came from Heaven; because of his customary forbearance of
forbidden meats, I have never eaten any thing that is common and unclean.

Thirdly, With others Prava vel honoris, vel pecuniae cupiditas animos
disputantium invasit, ut tanquam in pugna sola spectaretur victoria^ Ludov^
Vives de causis corrupt. artium, l. ^. p. 38.
a corrupt cupidity of glory or gaint is a great cause of their standing out
against clear discoveries; such will not yield to verity, so long as they can
with confidence and impudence make any show or appearance of victory, or
outface the foil they have taken in dispute.

Fourthly, Some withstand the truth in unrighteousness, principally out of
hatred and disdain of their Adversaries, lest it should be thought, that by
them they were brought to yield unto it: this was the humor of the Archbishop
and Cardinal of Capua, who would yield to reform nothing, though many
corruptions were discovered, Nicol. Archiepis, Capuanus, Magna contentione
clamabat ne quid omnino reformaretur, ne Lutherani jactent quasi ab ipsis
propemodum adacti illud fecerint. Job. Sl^idan Comment. l. 12. p. 242. An. 1538.
left the Lutherans should brag that they had been brought to reformation by
them.

Fifthly, Some account it their credit to be no changelings, especially in
Religion; not knowing the difference betwixt constancy and obstinacy.

Sixthly, And often times it falls out, that by the subtilty or eloquence of
Disputants, when they are somewhat evenly matched, the Auditory is kept
pendulous, or irresolute; even he, perhaps, for whose sake the Dispute or
Conference was undertaken, as Ille cujus causa in congressum descendis
Scripturarum, ut cum dubitantem confirms ad veritatem an nagis ad haeresim
deverget, hoc ipso motus, quod te videat nihil promovisse aequo gradu negandi
and defendendi, certe de pari and altercatione incertior discedit, nesciens
quem Haereticum judicet. Ter^ul. praescript. advers. haereticos Tom. 1. c. 18.
p. 170.
Tertull. shows; He, says Tertullian, for whose cause thou descendest into a
Controversy of Scripture, that thou may confirm him against doubting, it is
hard to say whether he tend more to Verity or to Heresy, because he sees thou
prevailest nothing, the dispute going on in an equal degree of denying and
defending: certainly by such a parity in altercation he will depart more
uncertain, not knowing what he should judge to be Heresy.

Seventhly, When Conferences and Disputations in Religion succeed not so well
as good men would have them, is, because they are not ordered or managed in
such a manner as they should be; whereof I shall speak in the next Chapter, as
in its p^oper place. In the mean time this good order will require, that I now
observe, what good success has been the issue of some disputations betwixt
Michael and the Devil in Jude, Christ and the Devil, Matthew. 4. By the way, some
take Michael the Archangel for Christ's Son, for a created Angel to me it is,
which I will now neither determine nor discuss: and for the disputes of Stephen
and Paul, they must needs have the better of their adversaries, because they
were not able to resist the Wisdom and the Spirit by which they spoke, Act.
6.10. not with any evidence of truth, or appearance of reason: yet when the
truth was most illustriously set forth, some were so blinded and hardened with
their own malice and envy, that they could not see it, or would not confess
themselves to be convinced by it; is, as when our Savior had mightily and
miraculously proved himself to be the Son of God by casting out Devils, the
Devil would not suffer his Adversaries to acknowledge it, but stirred them up
to impute the power of the holy Spirit to Beelzebub the Prince of Devils,
Matthew. 12.24. And when Athanasius had a Disputation with Arius, he would not
yield that the power of Truth had prevailed, but Arius in quit nulli dubium est
quin magicis artibus Athanasius non desinat judicum pervertere sensus, etc.
Athanas. disp. contra Arium Laodiceae, tom. 2. col. 393.
most absurdly suggested, that he managed his cause by Magical Arts.

Notwithstanding the issues and effects of some Disputations have been more
successful (besides those which were carried on by a Divine Power against
Humane or Devilish malignity) as that of Octavius a Christian, with Cecilius
an Heathen, set forth by Minutius Felix; whereof we have observed before, that
some take that for a real story, some for a pious discourse composed by
Minutius himself Dialogue-wise, under the borrowed names of Caecilium
superstitiosis vanitatibus etiamnum inhaerentem disputatione gravissima ad
veram religionem reformavit Octavius: sic Minutius Felix Conclus. Dialog. Tom.
9. Bibliothec. Patrum, col. 22.
Octavius a Christian, and Cecilius an Heathen: the effect whereof, whether it
were historical, or poetical, or moral, was such as was answerable to such
convincing premises, viz. that Cecilius converted by Octavius from
superstitious vanities, they parted with mutual congratulation, and Minutius
thereby accounted himself Felix, Post haec laeti hilaresque discessimus;
Caecilius quod crediderit, Octavius quod vicerit, ego quod ille crediderit, hic
vicerit, Ibid.
rejoicing with and for them both.

Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 6. p. 32.
Eusebius and Hierom. Catal. Script. Eccles. tom. 1. p. 292.
Hierome make report of Beryllus Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, that he fell from
the faith to strange doctrine of the Divinity and Humanity of Christ; but
conferring with Origin, was convicted by manifest proof, and recovered to his
former sound opinion. The effect of the Dispute betwixt Baron. Annal. tom. 2.
ad ann. 277. parag. 16.
Archelaus and Manes was rather the confusion of the Heretic then his
conversion; for he run away from his Antagonist when he had convinced him, and
would not appear in his sight any more. And though Augustine sometimes wholly
lost his labor in conflict with Heretics, who continued contumacious and
clamorous against the Truth and him: yet sometimes he was very successful in
his Disputations with them; sometimes as Origin was with Beryllus, Aug. fin. l.
2. de Artis cum foelice Manich. tom 6. p. 657.
as when he brought Felix the Manichean Heretic to a Recantation of his
Error, and subscription against it: sometimes as Archelaus, when he disputed
with Manes, whose foil and flight I have noted in another Chapter: As when
having disputed with Fortunatus a Manichean, and Possid. in vit^ Aug. c. 6.
put him to silence, he put him also to so much shame, that he went out of the
City of Hippo, and returned thither no more. More might be observed of his good
success, either for conversion or victory, but that I must leave a little room
for some other memorable Examples of like sort; not to mention that which I had
occasion to bring in Ibid. c. 4. ad ann. 325.
before, of a subtle Philosopher and Logician convinced and converted by a
plain old man. We may note next the issue of that famous Disputation betwixt
Maximus the Monk, and Pyrrhus the Archbishop of Constantinople, about the Sea
cap. 4. ann. 645.
Will of Christ; which was, that the Archbishop gave way to the Truth proposed
and proved by Maximus. The issue of the Dispute (betwixt Gregentius a Greek
Bishop with Herbanus a Jew) continued about 40 days together, Tom. 1. Bibli.
Patrum Graec, Lat. p. 277.
concluded with the conversion of many from the Jews. I will conclude this
point of the good success of Disputation with one or two domestick^; the one is
of Dr. Reynolds conferring or disputing with Heart in the Tower, who it seems in
one point of moment was brought to acknowledge a Protestant Truth, viz. Heart in
his Epist. to the indifferent Reader, p. 2. before the Conference.
That the opinion which makes the Pope a Temporal Lord over Kings and Princes,
is unreasonable and unprofitable altogether; for he has not to meddle with
them or their civility, much less to depose them, or give away their Kingdoms:
that is no part of his Commission. But the Doctrine of Non licet Christianis
tolerare regem infidelem aut haereticum, si ille conetur subditos ad suam
haeresim vel infidelitatem pertrahere: ad judicare an rex pertrahat ad haeresim
necne, pertinet ad Pontificem cui est commissa cura Religionis, ergo Pontificis
est judicare regem esse deponendum vel non deponendum. Bellar. de Romans Pontif.
lib. 5. c. 7. tom. 1. p. 351. col. 1.
Bellarmine is, (wherein not only the Jesuits, but other Zelots for the
Papacy follow him) That Christians ought not to tolerate an Infidel or
Heretical King, if he endeavor to draw his Subjects to Heresy or Infidelity:
but to judge whether the King draw his Subjects to Heresy or no, belongs to
the Pope, to whom is committed the care of Religion.

So that it belongs to the Pope to try whether he be to be deposed or not.

But had the learned and religious Doctor prevailed nothing at all with his
Adversary, but that Heart had been so hardened in all Popish Errors, as to
renounce none of them, as he did what he could by Sophisms and Lies, by Fraud
and Falsehood to outface the Truth, as Confer. c. 7. divis. 7. p. 377.
Dr. Reynolds justly charge him; yet we cannot but account it an happy effect
of their Dispute, that it produced in print so excellent a Book as the Report
of that Conference is, so full of all kind of Learning pertinently applied,
and meeting with the shuffling shifting Papists at every turn.

Though in this respect this Conference proved in the issue and effect of it
better than was expected, yet it is more strange, and such as the like has
seldom happened, which fell out upon the Dispute of him and his Brother William:
Mr. Fullers Church-Hist. of Great Brit. l. 10 p. 47. 48.
John Reynolds, Mr. Hearts Antagonist, at the first was a zealous Papist, whilst
William his Brother was as earnest a Protestant; and afterward providence so
ordered it, that by their mutual Disputation John Reynolds turned an eminent
Protestant, and William an inveterate Papist, in which persuasion he died. This
gave the occasion to an excellent Copy of Verses, concluding with this Distich:

Quod genus hoc pugnae est ubi victus gaudet uterque,
Et simul alteruter se superasse dolet?
What war is this, when conquered both are glad,
And either to have conquered other, sad?
The success of the Dispute betwixt Dr. Featly and Fisher both good and bad, I
have observed already in this Chapter. And so much may suffice for the issues
and effects of Colloquies, Conferences and Disputes in matters of Religion.

CHAP. VI. How Disputations are to be ordered that the Truth may be cleared;
and being cleared, both it and they who plead for it may be secured from
reprochful mis-reports.
THough nothing be many times more rashly undertaken than a dispute of
Religion, yet in nothing is more prudence and caution required than in that,
that it may be managed to the best advantage for victory on the Truths side.
And therefore where there is an association of Ministers, it will be agreeable
to their goodness and wisdom, to join in a resolution not to enter the Lists
of public Disputation with any, though provoked, without a serious
consultation of the Brotherhood, to deliberate,

First, Whether the matter be fit to be disputed or no.

Secondly, Concerning the persons who are to be actors in it, or present at it.

Thirdly, What shall be the Laws and Conditions of Dispute.

First, whether the matter be fit to be disputed or no: (...) Greg. Nazianz.
Orat. 31. tom. 1. q. 531.
Gregory Nazianzen propounds it as matter of special consideration, that we
dispute not of matters which are above the model of our own wits, and the
Auditors apprehension and ability to conceive. The Emperor Sozomen. Histor.
Eccles. lib. 7. c. 6.
Gratian would not allow the Arrians to dispute of God, and therefore by an
especial Law forbade such Disputations, because the Mystery of the Trinity is a
Mystery of Faith far above the reach of Humane Reason. In lower and more De
vulgaribus rebus disputantem aliquem vinci minime grave est; ne que enim omnis
est, etc. gravissimum autem est divinitatem detrimento affici, camque sophistis
prodere. Elias Cretens. Comment. in Nazianz. orat. 23. tom. 2. col. 852.
vulgar matters for a man to be overcome or gravelled, as Elias Cretensis
notes upon Nazianzen, is no great matter, because every one has not the art
of disputing or solving of Sophisms; but it is a sad thing for the Divinity of
God or Christ to be disparaged, and as it were to be betrayed into the hands of
Sophisters. The Heathens were wary in preserving the reverence of Religion,
that they held it Mala and impia consuetudo est contra Deos disputandi, sive ex
animo id fit sive simulate. Cicer. de nature. Deor. lib. 2.
an evil and impious custom to dispute of their gods, whether an adversary or
in good earnest.

Though he who has this fundamental infidelity in his heart, may be disputed
out of his Atheism by secret conference, yet it is no way lawful to enter the
Lists of public Disputation with an Atheist, as if it were a problematical
point whether there were a God or no; no more meet is it to entertain a public
dispute with Antiscripturists, especially now, since his The humble Petition
and Advice to His Highness the L. Protector, etc. p. 27, 28, 29.
Highness the Lord Protector, his Council, and the Members of the Parl^ament,
take an Oath To uphold and maintain the true Reformed Protestant Christian
Religion in the purity thereof, according to the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and to encourage the profession and professors of the same. Nor will
it, as I conceive, be fit to admit the Arminians to a public Dispute,
especially of Mr. John Goodwyns fancy or faction; as his absurd and horrible
Errors have been lately and lively set forth in their colors by Page 65, 66,
67, 68, 69. of his solid and acute Confutation of Mr. Joh. Goodwyns
Calumniatory Cavil in his Book which he calls (...), or The Triers, etc.
Mr. Marchiamont Nedham. And as it is matter of religious piety to forbear such
disputes upon any point as may violate the Majesty of Religion; so I believe it
is a civil duty which we owe our Superiors, who are pleased to protect
Orthodox Religion, not to offer any part of it whereof they take the Patronage,
as in the Oath forementioned, and without their license and allowance in such
a way as their prudence shall approve of: And it cannot but be matter of great
offense and scandal to any prudent and pious Christian, to have any fundamental
point of Faith once delivered to the Saints, delivered up to be tossed upon the
tongues of men; it may be such as G^eg. Naz. Orat. 33. tom 1. p. 531.
Nazianzen taxes, as making a sport in a trifling manner to dispute of divine
matters. Nor are some questions more to be forborne for their sacred Sublimity,
than others for their ridiculous Levity; as, whether according to the Multa
renascentur quae jam cecidere, cad^ntque Quae nu^c sunt in honor vocabula, si
volet usus; Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquendi. Horat. So the
Greek word (...), Tyrannus, was anciently taken for a King in a good sense,
when Homer called Jupiter (...): But for many hundred years ago it has been
taken in an ill sense, Tempore Lucae vocabulum illud Tyrannus tantum
accipiebatur in malam partem apud Gaecos and Latinos. Estius Act. Apostol. 19.
v. 9. So the word Idiot in Lukes time was taken only for one that is unlearned
and ignorant. So Peter and John are called (...), that is, Unlearned and
Idiots, Acts 4.13. And 1 Cor. 14.16. How shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned, (...), of the Idiot; and 23. If there come in those that are
ignorant and unbelievers, (...), that is, Idiots and unbelievers. So the word
Knave, in Chaucers and Gowers time, and in the Stat. 1. c. 3. ann. 14 of Ed. 3.
signified a servant. See Minshaws Dictionary, verbo Knave: and the French word
Madam, is of that latitude in the proper original signification, that any woman
that has a servant, may by her servant be called Madam. Were it not now an
unreasonable innovation, to go so far out of the received use of words, as to
call a King a Tyrant, an Apostle an Idiot, an honest Servant a Knave, an
ordinary Husbandmans wife Madam? The first would be dangerous, the second
blasphemous, the third slanderous, the fourth ridiculous, because quite out of
use in our manner of speech; as the word Thou is, as applied to Superiors in a
civil, or rather by the Quakers in an uncivil sense.
Law of Language, which is a common use, we should say You in civility to our
Superiors, or Thou unto all, with those proud, rude and railing Levellers, the
Quakers: On whose absurd and novel vanity I will here bestow a marginal Note
(h) and no more.

There is another question of note, but neither for the superlative eminency,
nor for the extreme lowness and lightness of it, as that of the Quakers, but
for the subtilty, unprofitableness and impossibility to be determined by
public and personal disputation; and that is the captious question of the
Papists, touching the Visibility of the Church in all Ages: In which point they
have made bold Challenges to the Protestants party, who in my poor opinion
should rather have disputed altogether against the unreasonableness of the
question, than have undertaken the discussion of it, as Dr. Featly did with
Fisher: For though he said much very learnedly and wittily after his manner,
partly to show the impertinency of the Proposal, to prove the Protestant Church
visible in all Ages, and to name visible Professors of Protestant Religion in
all Ages; and was very cautelous in his distinctions and assertions, for the
framing of his Conclusions to the first question, which was, that The Romish
Fisher caught and held in his own Net, part. 1. p. 103.
The Protestant Church, according to the distinctions and assertions premised,
has been in all Ages in some degree visible: And used the like prudential
course concerning his Conclusion of the latter question, Of the Names of
Protestant professors in all Ages; yet he undertook to give in a Catalogue of
them in every Age, beginning with the Evangelists and Apostles, and going on
from Clemens Romanus to Clemens Alexandrinus, with whom he makes up his second
Century. Dr. Featly Romish Fisher caught and held in his own Net, par. 1. p. 8.
Of which question himself confesses, that it required rather a large
Historical Volume, than a brief Syllogistical Dispute. For what time would be
required to bring such a Debate to a satisfactory Issue? how many days
dispute, how many months, yea how many years will be taken up in
distinguishing legitimate Writings of the Ancients, from such as are spurious
or suspected for such even by the Papists themselves, who reckon of those
ambiguous Brats no fewer than 187 several Treatises? and then for the
legitimate works, how many are corrupted, and which Edition of them is the
truest? and when that is known, Where shall we find the doctrines in
difference betwixt the Papists and us discussed or resolved, when many of them
were altogether unknown in their days? For those that speak any thing of the
matters in question, it is hard to judge what is their settled judgment in any
point; for sometimes they play the Orators, flourishing with all figures of
Rhetoric, which must not be taken in a Dogmatical sense; as Dum essem
adolescens, imo pene puer -- Scripsi ad avunculum, sed in illo opere pro aetate
tunc lusimus, and calentibus. adhuc Rhetorum studiis, etc. nunc jam cano capite
and arata rugis front, etc. Hieron. ad Nepot. Tom. 1. p. 11. princip. Epist.
Hierome confesses of himself in his Epistle to Nepotian, While I was a young
man, said he, and in a manner a Boy, I wrote unto my Uncle Heliodorus, but in
that work I did but play with Rhetorical Studies, and painted my paper with a
Scholastical flourish; now my head is gray, and my forehead furrowed, I write
in another manner. Which may give them cause in their elder years, to retract
and correct what they wrote when they were not so ripe in judgment being
young: So did Augustine in his two Books of Retractions. And some things they
have written in passion, violently turning from one extreme to another: So did
Dionysius Alexandrinus; and therefore Basil. Episi. 41. Maxim. Philosoph.
Basil compares him to a Gardener, who when a bough grows crooked one way,
writhes it to be as crooked they other way. And in examining of these humane
Testimonies, it will require time and judgment to distinguish particular
Opinions from Church-doctrines. Now by that time all assertions in difference
have been carried through all Ages, with all the distinctions and cautions
until Luthers time, the Protestants bringing their proofs, and the Papists
theirs, and time allowed for each party to make Exceptions as they please, how
many years will be spent, and at last how fruitless will all this labor be?
when if there were such consent to be found among them, as the Papists brag of,
it would make but an humane Faith, which might be subject to falsehood, as Quod
historici quidam meminerint eorum conciliorum, non potest parere nisi fidem
humana^ cui potest subesse falsum. Bellarm. lib. 2^ Sacr. offic. c. 25. verbo
ult. Tom. 3. Contr. p. 86.
Bellarmine confesses. And yet both the subtle Jesuits, and silly Papists by
their Instruction, call for this trial of Religion by bringing a Catalogue of
Professors in all Ages; on which the Jesuit Fisher so pertinaciously insisted,
The relation of the Conference, Jun. 27. 1623. p. 28.
that he would not answer Dr. Featly touching Christ and his Apostles in the
first Century, unless he first brought in a Catalogue of Professors of
Protestancy throughout all Ages: And which showed his impiety and absurdity in
the highest degree, in the Catalogue called for, he would Ibid. p. 27.
not allow the Doctor to begin with Christ and his Apostles.

This plainly bewrayed the Jesuits great diffidence in his crazy cause, and
his craft to secure it from a due trial, which this way he knew could never be
effected: and with this fallacy they have locked up their seduced Proselytes in
misbelief; so that we know not how to deal with them: for they will not hear us
in any thing, unless we speak to the point of visibility in all ages; and if we
offer to answer them in a readier and surer way, by the infallible Testimony of
the Scriptures, they will not accept of it: yet notwithstanding all the
adva^tage they have had by the predominacy of their power over Persons, Books
and Presses, to print and suppress what they please: we need not decline that
way of trial out of any distrust in our cause, since there is yet so much upon
record for us, and against them; that if such a tedious and dilatory discussion
of our differences were to be undertaken by dispute face to face, they could be
no gayners in the utmost issue of it, as we may well judge by Mr. Berkbeck in
his Protestants evidences of the second Edition printed this year in Folio, so
much amended and augmented above the former in Quarto, that I take it to be the
best Book extant in that kind.

When upon deliberation a resolution is made what shall be disputed on;

The next consideration is concerning the Persons.

For the Persons, and they are chiefly, 1. Disputants. 2. Presidents, or
Moderators. 3. Notatories. 4. Witnesses. 5. For others, whether admitted by
choice, or promiscuously without limitation or exception.


First for the Disputants; in them these four qualifications are chiefly
requisite: 1. They must be learned. 2. Of quick conceit. 3. Temperate, not
passionate, or choleric. 4. Pious, preferring Verity before Victory.


First, they must be learned in the Learned Languages, in Arts, and Histories,
in Textual and Polemical Divinity; for they may in conflict be put to it, to
make use of all the learning they have.

Secondly, They must be quick in conceit, because they must presently without
pause or study take their advantage, either of objecting or answering.

Thirdly, They must be temperate, not passionate, or choleric like Costerus
the Jesuit; for Costerus, of whom Doctor Halls observation is, Dr. Hall. 1.
Decad. of Epist. Epist. 5. p. 282.
that he wa^ more teasty then subtle, more able to wrangle then to satisfy:
for passion will blind the judgment, so as to make a man less fit to make use
of his own strength, or to take advantage of his Adversaries weakness; besides,
if a man be choleric, it will make him forget the moderation of Michael the
Archangel, in forbearing railing accusations, Jude 9. And the caution of Haec
est modestia disputantis ut nulla adferatur audientibus ex disserentis sermon
molestia: Chrysostom. in Epist., ad Hebr. chapter 2. homil. 3 Tom. 4. col. 1679.
Chrysostom, which is, that the modesty of the Disputants should be such, that
nothing drop from their mouths which may be offensive to the ears of the
hearers, which does not only give distaste to them, but takes off much from the
acceptance both of the Disputant and the cause disputed; one that appeared in
Beza's disputation at Poysie, when though he were an excellent learned man, and
pleaded the cause of Reformation very sufficiently against the Romanists, was
taken up and commanded to conclude; Hist. Conci. of Trent, l. 5. p. 453.
because in the matter of the Sacrament he grew into an heat, which not only
very much provoked the Prelates to indignation and disdain against the new
Evangelists, as the Cardinal of Tornon called him and his party, but gave ill
satisfaction to those of his own side: but this exorbitancy of passion is more
familiarly the offense of the Romish wranglers, who are chosen of purpose by
their party for Disputants, because of their zeal to the cause, which kindles
quickly into choler, as we have partly observed in Eccius and Gretz^r; and may
further note in one of Doctor Featleys Antagonists (Doctor Eglestone) who was
so transported with passion, as to say to him, The Romish Fisher caught and
held in his own Net, par. 3. p. 128.
I will be hanged at the next Gallows if I make you not confess that it implies
no contradiction, for an accident to be without a subject; if he would have
stood to his word, he had been sure to be hanged; for it was not in his power
to force the Doctor to such a confession.

Fourthly, The Disputants ought to be pious, that (out of conscience) they may
prefer Verity before Victory. Of this mind doubtless was the Apostle Paul, when
he professed he could do nothing against Victoria nihil dulcius, Cicer. Act. in
verrem, fol. 876.
the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. to a corrupt and carnal mind nothing is more sweet
then victory; but if truth appear to have the preeminence, a godly man will not
be ashamed to yield unto it, though with change of his opinion; for he takes
not himself to be of so great authority and fame, as to be ashamed that he
erred, as Ne erubescas de commutatione sententiae; non es tantae authoritatis
and famae, ut errasse te pudeat. Hieron. Apolog. advers. Ruffin. Tom. 2. p. 199.
Hierom said to Ruffinus, do nothing through strife or vain glory, Phil. 2.3.
as the Papists did against the Protestants in the Council of Trent, Hist. of
the Council of Trent, l. 1. An. 1530.
when as Cardinal Langi Archbishop of Saltzburg said, that the Reformation of
the Mass was honest, the liberty of meats convenient; but that a poor Monk,
meaning Luther, should reform all, was not to be endured: some conceive it
matter of moment, that the Disputants be matched in quality and calling, as in
the The Romish Fisher caught and held in his own Net, p. 3. p. 118, 119.
Disputation betwixt Master Walker and Doctor Egleston.

Before I dispute upon the question, says Mr. Walker, I desire to know your
quality and calling, whether you be a professed Popish Priest or no?

Dr. Egleston. I am a Roman Catholic, not a Priest, but a Doctor of Physic.

Mr. Walker. I desire then another Adversary, some of the Priests here present,
that we may dispute on equal terms; I hold the calling of a Protestant Preacher
and Divines, more honorable then any Popish Priesthood; and therefore if your
Priests think themselves too good to dispute with me, you shall not brag that
your Laymen are fit matches to dispute with Protestant Preachers and Divines.

Dr. Egleston. Mr. Walker, you being a Divine, ought to give me, though a
Layman, the best satisfaction you can.

Mr. Walker, I am ready to give you satisfaction, if you come as a Layman,
ought to a Divine, that is, with a desire to hear, and to be instructed in all
humility, not with a mind to contradict and oppose the truth.

And so they proceeded to Disputation, as in the relation quoted in the Margin;
and it may be the Doctor of Physic was a better Divine then the Priests that
were present.

Doctor Brian in this respect might have had more just cause of disdain, to
take Mr. Only for his match, then Mr. Walker Doctor Egloston, since the
disparity was more betwixt them two, then betwixt a Divine that was not a
Doctor, and a Doctor that was not a Divine.

This for the qualification of the Disputants. Now, secondly, for a Moderator,
or President, to manage the disputation with decency and order.

It is requisite that some person of worth for wisdom and gravity (and if it
may be also of power and authority, so that his power be not biased by
partiality on either side) be President and Moderator to manage the
disputation with order and decency, for prevention of vain jangling and
confusion: when disputations are national, and particularly authorized by the
supreme power; that power commonly makes choice of a President, or of
Commissioners to preside over the disputation: so did the Emperor Aug. Breric.
Collat. Praefa. Tom. 7. par. 1. p. 684.
Honorius, who published an Edict for disputation betwixt the Catholics and
Donatists at Carthage, and by the same Edict ordained one to preside in the
disputation, who was called a Judge. So did the Emperor Sleyd. Com. l. 16. p.
353.
Charles in the Conference at Ratisbone. In that at Poysie in France betwixt
Beza and the Popish party: Beza and those of his Hist. of the Council of Trent.
l. 5. p. 451.
side desired, that the King and his Council would be present to govern the
action, with especial exception against the Clergy, that none of them might
preside, because they were their professed adversaries; and some of them
unwilling that the Protestants should be gratified in that request, would have
persuaded the Queen Mother to keep her son King Charles away, lest being young,
he should be led away by the plausibility of error. So in the concertation at
Fountainbleau, betwixt the Lord Morney and the Bishop of Eureux, King Henry the
Fourth was prsent and President the first day, yet appointed he Commissioners,
because himself would not be engaged to attend the debate until it were ended;
though he did so, because it brake off after one day by the sickness of the
Lord Morney, as has been said before. In the public Disputations at Oxford
and Cambridg, betwixt the Protestants and Papists, in King Edward the sixths
time, certain Commissioners were sent in the name of Fox Martyr. vol. 2. p.
756. col. 2. and 760. col. 2.
Visitors, to the number of five to each University, to oversee the Disputation
orderly carried on, and to make report of it to His Majesty. In the three days
conference at Hampton Court, King James himself was President, and it was well
he was so, else some of the Prelates would have soon put to silence Doctor
Reynolds and his assistants; for when that Reverend, Religious and Learned
Doctor did but modestly observe a The second days conference at Hampton Court.
p. 25.
Contradiction in the Service Book about Confirmation, one place confessing it
was a depraved imitation of the Apostles, another grounding it upon their
example, Act. 8.9. and thereupon desired that the contradictions might be
considered, and the ground of conformation examined: the Bishop of London cut
him off, and kneeling down, most humbly desired His Majesty that the ancient
Canon might be remembered, which says, Schismatici contra Episcopos non sunt
and endi: was there any thing in the Doctors speech which deserved so sharp a
censure, as that for that he should be called a schismatic, and such a
schismatic as might not be suffered to speak, because that which he speaks
both piously and prudently, is said by a pettish Prelate to be spoken against
the Bishops? But had he not cause to be much moved? the partial Penman of that
Conference will tell you he had: for Ibid.
some of these men (says he) the evening before, and the same morning had made
a semblance of joining with the Bishops, and that they sought for nothing but
unity; but now they struck at their overthrow (if they could) all at once.
Episcopacy, or rather Prelacy, surely is like the Apples of Sodom, if such a
tender touch of the Doctor would overthrow all at once: But the Doctor and
those of his mind, though as peaceably minded as any, should have been
overthrown at once, if the King (who acted the office of a Moderator) had not
been more moderate, and given some check to the Bishops choler, Page 28.
telling him, he should have suffered the Doctor to have taken his course and
liberty; concluding, that there is no order, nor can be any effectual issue of
disputation, if each party might not be suffered without chopping, to speak at
large what he would; and therefore willed, that either the Doctor should
proceed, or that the Bishop would frame his answer to the motions already made.
And this is the proper work of a President, or Moderator at a Disputation or
Conference.

Sometimes the power which does authorize the Dispute, leaves liberty to the
Disputants, by consent, to choose their President or Moderator; So did Sigismond
King of Poland to the Trinitarians and Antitrinitarians for their Disputation
at Petricovia, Antho. Poss. Biblioth. Sele. Tom. 1. l. 8. c. 13. p. 363.
who after some debate, resolved that the President should be chosen by turns
one out of each party.

I will give you but one Observation more concerning this matter; and it is
that memorable one betwixt Ambrose Bishop of Millain, and Auxentius and Arian
Bishop; the Arian challenged the Orthodox Bishop to dispute, procured the
Authority of the Emperor Valentinian (a Child not yet baptized) by the favor
of the Empress Justina an Arian, for his summons to appear in the Emperors
Court or Consistory, signifying that certain learned Jews and Pagans were
chosen as Judges on Auxentius part, and allowing him to make choice of his
Judges. Ambrose from such premises expecting no good conclusion, refused to
answer either the challenge of the Arian, or charge of the Emperor; and Ambrose
Ep. 32. l 5. Tom. 3. p. 121, etc.
makes his Apology to the Emperor with a modest boldness, giving him all
reverential and dutiful terms, yet freely without fear, pleading with him the
right of his cause.

3. The next particular is the Persons requisite for the ordering of a Dispute,
are Notaries, who have an Notariorum arserat, ut quae dicebantur notatis
quibusdam exciperent tanta celeritate, ut non dictantis tantum sed loquentis
vocem assequerentur, unde Graecis (...) dicuntur. Erasm. in vita Origin. fol.
3. p. 1.
art of short and swift writing, to set down what is spoken in disputation,
when it is spoken. This was the manner of public disputations before Epiph.
contra Photinianos Haeres. 71. l. 3. Tom. 1. p. 197. col. 1.
Epiphanius his time, as he shows by example; and so it was in the
disputation betwixt the Catholics and Donatists, wherein Apertis notariotum
tabulis disputatio coepta est Possidon. in vita Aug. c. 6.
Augustine had to do; and in his disputation with Aug. de actis cum Foelice
Manich. fine lib. 1. Tom. 6. p. 633.
Foelix the Manichean, there were Notaries on both sides.

In later times the like has been observed, as in the controversy at
Petricovia in Poland, that we may be sure it was waged betwixt Papists and
Arrians: Anthon. Possev. Biblioth. Select. videat lit. c.
Possevine relates, the Scribe or Notary was a noble personage, who had
written against Calvin. In the conference at Ratisbone, betwixt the Protestants
and Papists, the Protestants moved, that what passed in the conference may be
Protestants, qui viderent quibuscu^ adversariis essent commissi, collocutionem
omnem and acta describi petunt. Sleyd. comment. l. 16. p. 353.
set down by Notaries: and at that in Poysie it was one of the conditions of
the Colloquie propounded by Beza and his associates, Hist. of the Council of
Trent, l. 5. p. 451.
that there should be Notaries chosen by both parties: so was Mr. Alesbury
chosen to write the Conference or Dispute betwixt Doctor Featley and See the
Romish Fisher caught and held in his own Net. part 1. p. 46.
Fisher. The office of a Notary is faithfully, and without partiality, to write
what passes betwixt the adverse parties. Against a false Notary the Emperor
Alexander Severus was so severe, that he Notarium incisis digitorum nervis, ut
nunquam scribere posset. Bucolz. Index Chron. ad An. 223. p. 171.
caused his fingers to be cut off, so that he could never write after. Mr.
Fisher the Jesuit, I believe, had not read that story, when he thrust himself
into a Notaries office, at a Dispute betwixt Dr. Featley and Mr. Musket, and
Romish Fisher, etc. p. 37.
falsified that office. Some that mean not well have no mind of Notaries,
Pascentius verba sua excerpi noluit. Aug. Epist. 174 Tom. 2. p. 901.
as Pascentius the Arrian, Augustines Adversary, who would not yield to have
his tongue followed by the Notaries pen; the Popish party liked not the motion
of the Protestants for Notaries in the Conference at Ratisbone, alleging it
would draw out the debate too long, if that might be an exception, then it
cannot well be so, at least not so well: now in our more expert age, wherein
there are many, who by Brachygraphy, can write as fast as most men ordinarily
speak. Possidon. in vita, Aug. c. 17.
The want of Notaries in a private Dispute betwixt Augustine and Pascentius,
gave him occasion and encouragement to brag that he had the better of it, and
put Augustine to make a confutation of that falsehood, by their testimonies who
were present at it. From the same cause was it, that Dr. Fr. White was
represented so silly a Disputant with Fisher, as if he had been a Schoolboy of
thirteen years old; for he Doctor Fr. White his reply to Jesuit Fish. answ.
Pre. p. 9. princ. and fine.
confesses there was not a word written at that time, when he and his
Adversaries disputed together.

The fourth sort of persons convenient to be present at a Dispute of Religion
are such, as for their integrity and discretion, are worthy to be witnesses of
what passes in Dispute. Such are not superfluous (besides the Notaries) to
attest the transaction of every days dispute, and the whole at the last: and
such had Possid. vide lit. q.
Augustine in his private dispute with Pascentius, though without Notaries. And
by such was the cause and credit of the Protestant Religion, and the Champion
for it Doctor Featly, righted against the fictions and falsehoods of Fisher and
his party, concerning the close of their conference, which in truth was thus;
Fisher refusing to answer to Christ and his Apostles, the Protestant party
present called off, or rather pulled off the opponent Doctor Featly; so the
conference brake up: and this is attested The Romish Fisher, etc. par. 1. p.
45, 46.
by the subscription of two Earls, two Knights, three Esquires, one Doctor, two
Batchelors in Divinity, besides the Notaries chosen by both parties.

Fourthly, For other Auditors, it were to be wished that none were admitted,
but such as in some competent measure are able to judge, and are not weaklings
in the Faith, since the Apostle says, him that is weak in the Faith receive,
but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. But it cannot be that (as it was
at the conference at Ratisbone and Hampton Court) the hearers should be always
only such as are particularly called, or admitted: and we find examples of
promiscuous admission of all persons, both in ancient and in latter times; for
the former we have an instance in Augustines time, when at his disputation with
a Manichean Doctor Convenerunt in unum, concurrentibusque plurimis viris
studiosis turbisque curiosis. Possidon, de vita Aug. p. 6.
there came together not only many studious men, but the curious multitude: and
when Gregentius disputed with Herbanus the learned Jew, the (...), etc.
Biblioth. veterum patru^ Graeco Lat. Tom. 1. p. 194.
whole City came thronging together to hear. The disputations of latter times
especially, since those errors which heretofore used for fear or shame to sneke
into corners, have got the impudence to give affront to Preachers in the
Pulpit, and their maintainers to challenge them to dispute; a kind of necessity
has been put upon some to contest for the truth in the most public Audiences
and Assemblies of the people. Thus much for the persons considerable in and
about disputations of Religion.

Our next observations must be set upon Rules and Laws, whereby disputations
must be regulated in order to an happy issue and success.

First then, According to the religious Aphorism of (...). Greg. Nazianz. Orat.
1. Tom. 1. p. 1.
Nazianzen, the work must begin with God, and end with God by prayers and
praises, for he is the father of Lights, James 5.7. and can make dark things
clear; and when he sets a light before men, he can open their eyes to see it,
and bind their hearts to embrace it.

Secondly, Whatsoever point or Doctrine we bring to discussion, we must make
Gods word the authentic rule of trial, receiving nothing as matter of Faith
Fundamental to Salvation, but what is in express terms contained in it, or by
just consequence deduced from it.

Thirdly, The matter in question must be truly and clearly stated and agreed
upon before the disputation begin, else it may be See the explication of the
proverb, c. 4. lit. w.
Andabatarum pugna, a blind buffeting of the Disputants betwixt themselves, or
a beating of the air, as the Apostle phraseth it. Alternis vicibus contentioso
fune uterque diem in vesperam traxerunt, nubulo quodam veritas obumbrabatur.
Tertull. advers. Judaeos c. 1. princ. cap. Tom. 1. p. 198.
Tertullian in the beginning of his book against the Jews, observes such a
disputation betwixt a Christian and a Jewish Proselyte, who drew out the day as
by a cord of contention until night; in the mean time the truth was
overshadowed by a cloud, which was to be cleared up by determining the Summum
quaestionis ipsius certis lineis determinemus, Ibid. c. 2. p. 19^:
sum of the Question, within certain lines or limits of resolution for the
state of it, as he speaks afterward. If this be not first done, nothing in
the dispute can be well done, no orderly proceeding can be made in the way, but
a wild wandering out of the way; which might justly have moved your Adversary
Mr. O. in sober sadness (without any jeering) to confess that he was miserably
overseen, yea, in the understanding of that very question upon which he
disputed, until he came to page 113. of his Examination of your Reply, which in
all contains but 130.

Fourthly, That the Disputation be not drawn out by Rhetorical Exspatiations
(as the Jesuit Cotton was used to do, who was, as Petrus Cottonus Rhetoricus
jactantior quam dialecticus acutior. Daniel. Cham. Praefat. ad 2. par. Epist.
Jesuit.
Chamier says of him, rather a braving Rhetorician then an arguing Logician)
but rather contracted by Logical Argumentation. Some have no mind of Logical
Disputes, because there are others who use Sophistry, or fallacious
Conclusions, which Contorta Sophismata, sic enim app. Hantur fallaces
conclusiunculae. Cicer. Acad. quaest. Edit. 1. l. 2. number. 67.
Cicero calls writhed and pricking Sophismes, for Logic; and which Seneca
gravely derideth, Non debuit hoc nobis esse propositum argute disserere, and
Philosophiam in has angustias ex sua majestate detrahere, neque quicquam aliud
istae disputationes sunt quam inter se perite captantium lusus. Senec. Epist
48. p. 464. Edit. Lipsian.
as a degrading of Philosophy from the latitude of her Majesty into streights;
and mere plays or triflings betwixt such as are cunningly captious: and when
Doctor Featley required of his Antagonist M. Fisher, that both the opponent and
respondent should be tied to Logical form: Fisher answered, that he did not
hold that fit, because the company understands not Logic form; to which the
Doctor answered, there are of the company that understand Logic as well as you
or I, the rest are men of understanding and reason; and I am resolved to keep
Logic form, and expect from you direct answers: Romish Fisher, E. c. 1.1. par.
p. 8.
and well he might, for Logic is nothing but Reason brought into Rule;
wherewith by the light of Nature many are well endowed, though they have not
the art of Logic: but it seems they meant a strict Form of Logic by
Syllogismes, Ibid.
though the Question of the visibility of the Church in all ages (which they
had in debate) required, as the Doctor told the Jesuit, rather a large
Historical volume, then a brief Syllogistical Dispute: and for Logic, I know
not how any dispute can be well ordered without it; since, as Aug. Tom. 1. p.
375. Dialectica nihil aliud docet quam consequentia demonstrare, seu vera
veris, seu falsa falsis, Aug. contr. Crescon. Grammat. l. 1. c. 20. Tom. 7.
par. 1 p. 261.
Augustine says, it teaches nothing else but to demonstrate consequences true
or false, from true or false principles; Nunquam doctrina Christiana
dialecticam formidat; sicut eam in Stoicis non reformi dabat Apost. quos secum
volentes confer non respuit. Ibid.
which Christian Doctrine (says he) is never afraid of; as the Apostle Paul
did not fear it in the Stoi^ks, whom he did not refuse, when they were willing
to confer with him.

But for Logickly strict Form of Syllogism throughout the disputation, it
cannot well be observed, much less is it of necessity to be required; and
indeed it was very seldom practiced by the Ancients; yea, that great Disputant,
Augustine himself, though he have not only written a Aug. Tom. 1. operum p. 375.
Treatise of Logic, but an Aug. contra Crescon. Gra^mat. l. 1. ubi supra.
Apology for Logic, puts very few of his Reasonings into Syllogistical
Form. And when they Syllogize, some of the show themselves no very good Artists
at it, as we may see by Gregory Nyssens ten Syllogismes against the Manichean
Heretics: and for latter times, Greg. Nyssent Tom. 3. p. 180. (...).
though some disputations have been carried on by a Series of many Syllogismes
artificially concluded in Mood and Figure, Fox. Martyr. vol. 2. p. 757, 758,
759, 760.
as that of Peter Martyr against Doctor Tresham, Chadsey, and Morgan before the
Kings Visitors at Oxford, Ann. 1549. ordinarily they have passed by Alternation
and Reciprocation of Reasons and Exceptions, without forming of Syllogismes in
Mood and Figure, and have not been the less profitable and successful; as we
see in that excellent Debate or Dispute, called a Conference betwixt Doctor
Reynolds and the Jesuit Heart.

Fifthly, That there be allowed an equal vicissitude for objecting and
answering without interruption; and that none interpose, or take upon them to
be Disputants, but those that were agreed upon before the disputation began:
the care of these cautions belongs especially to the Moderators or Presidents
office, as King James his example shows in the conference at Hampton Court,
by reproving the Bishop of London for interrupting Doctor Reynolds, as has
been brought in already, though to another purpose.

Sixthly, When there is an Intermission, or end of the disputition, First, the
Notaries writings are to be compared, and if they differ, to be reconciled.

Secondly, The Disputants are to have liberty to revise their own Reasons,
Objections, and Solutions, and to correct them by altering, adding, or
expunging, so as may make for the amendment of their own Arguments and Answers.
This liberty Dr. Reynolds and Mr. Heart allowed one another.

Thirdly, When each side is satisfied, and that their opinions and pleadings
are set down as they would have them, then the Parties, Notaries, and Witnesses
hands are to be subscribed to them.

Seventhly, Sometimes secrecy is required upon oath, that nothing be revealed
to any one absent from the conference, until a certain time; Sleyd. Comment. l.
16. p. 534.
as when the Emperor imposed this condition on the conference at Ratisbone,
viz. that nothing should be communicated to any one not present, before the
Emperor and Princes of the Empire were made acquainted with all the
transactions under the hands of the Notaries; which the Protestant party could
not yield unto, because their Princes required an account of their proceedings
of the Colloquie from time to time: this occasioned the breaking up the
conference abruptly without fruit, but not without mutual offense on both sides.

There be some other Rules which might have augmented the number, if I should
have counted on with them; but I have virtually premised them already in the
qualifications of the Disputants: I shall add no more but only this advice,
that the dispute, according to the admonition of Nazianz. Tom. 1. orat. 1. p. 1.
Nazianzen, begin and end like the eighth Psalm, with glory to God. If
Colloquies, Conferences, and Disputations of matters of Religion were thus
begun, continued and concluded, the truth would be not only militant against,
but triumphant over rebellious error, which presumes to affront it, and
sometimes to challenge it into the field, and over reproachful rumor which
dogs it with barking obloquie afterward; and so there would be no need of
playing an after game with the Adversary, as now there is with yours, of whom,
with what he has written against you, I shall in that which follows,
according to your request, give you a reason of my former advice, not to honor
him any more by taking him for your Antagonist; and so from Disputations in
general, I shall pass to your Disputation with Mr. O. in particular.

CHAP. VII. Of the Disputation at Kenelmworth, betwixt John Brian Doctor in
Divinity, Minister at Coventry, and John Onley Pastor of a Church at Lawford
(as he styles himself.) How it was occasioned, undertaken, and continued at
diverse monthly meetings there.
THe occasion of the Disputation (as it is related in Doctor Brians Letter to
me, and in both his and Mr. Onley's Epistles printed with, and prefixed before
the printed Disputation) was this; When the Lecture at Kenelmworth, at the
Monday monthly meeting there was agreed upon by many Ministers, and begun
December. 1. 1655. for the setting up, and settling of a Gospel Order in Parochial
Congregations. Doctor Brian, who took the first turn in it, held it on himself
the space of six months together; the Text he treated on was Colos. 2.5. Though
I b^ absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding
your order, and the stedfastness of your faith in Christ. In my second Sermon
(says he) I desired any that should hearme, or hear what I delivered touching
the way of reforming our Parochial Church's, which we resolved on, if they
doubted of the truth of any thing, they would signify their doubts or scruples
in writing, and I would endeavor to satisfy them. Accordingly a godly Brother
of the Congregational way (Lieutenant Fox by name) sent in sundry objections to
the Doctors third discourse upon that Text, and some letters passed betwixt
them, whereof he ( i.e. Mr. Fox) desired not any publication (though for parts
and piety he is judged no way inferior to Mr. Onley) but he, viz. Mr. O. the
next day openly declared his dissent, and desired to dispute with the Doctor
publicly upon these two Questions.

First, Whether the Parish Assemblies of England generally be true visible
Churches; which Mr. O. denied.

Secondly, Whether every Brother, though no Elder, that has received abilities
from God (whereby he is enabled to preach) may publicly preach; which he
affirmed; appointing me, says Doctor Brian, to be Opponent in the first, and
Respondent in the second question the next monthly day.

It would have signified some modesty in Mr. O. not to have appointed Dr. Br.
but to have the turns of dispute as he would appoint them.

I need not tell you (says the Doctor) how many disswasions I had from entering
the lists with an illiterate Adversary, as Mr. O. was taken for by many: among
others this that in so doing, I should disparage my self, nor was there any
probability of good to come of it; which it had been well, if he had heeded so
far, as to refuse not so much the dispute it self, as to undertake it with such
an unequal opposite. But he argued himself into an acceptance of the challenge,
out of some reasons of piety, charity, and humility, which (as event has
proved) were misapplyed to Mr. O. and that rather by his injurious misdoing,
then by the Doctors imprudent mistaking. Besides he had an inducement to
adventure some inconveniences by the dispute (while but doubtful) from the
experience of his contestation with two Anabaptists of London, Mr. Knowles and
Mr. Kaffen, who came from thence to Coventry, with a great deal of confidence
to confront Dr. Brian, and his worthy Brother Dr. Grew in a public
disputation: for which purpose, though the Magistrates of the City, and at
their request, promised to lend the Town Hall (upon the boisterous misbehaviour
both of themselves, and of many of their followers, on the Sabbath day before
the disputation (who flocked in great numbers thither, to countenance and
encourage their Champions) they recalled their concession, and for the same
cause the Committee of Parliament residing there, for bade the dispute. The 2.
Doctors notwithstanding were necessitated somewhat to Symbolize with the
Anabaptists, viz. so far as to a non-obedience of their Governors therein, and
that rather in hope of their pardon, then in contempt of their power; because
the Anabaptists imputed these prohibitions, not so much to the prudence of the
Magistrates, as to the diffidence of the Doctors to undertake the defense of
their professed judgment and practice: and this sinister suggestion so far
swayed with some religious persons, that they inclined to make a Schism from
the Church, if these far-fetched Fencers should find none to take up the Sword
and Buckler against them. For prevention of which scandal, they were publicly
encountered, the truth so strenuously asserted, and they so fully confuted (in a
very numerous Auditory) that such as before were wavering, and in a manner
tottering toward a revolt (if they should have had cause to glory, that they
put off their harness, because none durst put on any to combat with them) were
thoroughly satisfied, and firmly settled and established in the truth. The like
bravadoes Doctor Brian might expect from his Thrasonical challenger, if he had
not been undertaken, and his factious adherents would have triumphantly
traduced him, that he durst not commit his cause to such a public trial, and
so they might have gained a great advantage, which might have confirmed his
fellow-Sectaries, and dissetled the simple, too much addicted to listen after
novel fancies, and to like them too well. Besides, he might have good hope also
that the success of a disputation at Kentlmworth would be such, as there was of
that at Coventry. And so the day prefixed to begin the disputation being come,
nine Arguments were brought by the Doctor, in vindication of the Affirmative in
the first Question; and when half the time was spent in debate of the two
first, Mr. O. (as himself says) moved for the rest of the time to oppose in
the second question, which was granted only with a motion of reading the other
seven in the Congregation: whereto Mr. O consented, desiring a copy of the
Arguments undisputed of, to return an answer to be likewise publicly read the
next meeting, which was Monday month after; according to which, Mr. O. drew up,
as he says, a Reply, and read it in the Congregation.

CAAP. VIII. Of the printing of the Disputation. By whose motion it was made.
By whom, and how managed.
IMmediately after what Mr. O. had drawn up was read, a Gentleman then present,
desired that the Disputation might be printed, and desired Mr. O. to move it to
the Doctor, which he did; whereto he replied, if he might reply he was willing:
but said withal, that he had twelve Arguments more in proof of the question: to
which I replied (says Mr. O.) I was contented he should reply to mine answer
to the nine first without any rejoinder, provided I might answer to the twelve
last without his reply, only till they were printed; and then each should be
at liberty to write what he pleased. To this motion of printing the Doctor
yielded in the close of the third or fourth days disputation. viz. that Mr. O.
his Arguments, Answers, Replies, and Rejoynders might be put in print, and (for
his proviso) Doctor Brian gave him liberty to oppose what he pleased, and take
in also the help of Mr. Marley, and those other seven who assisted him in
disputation, that the utmost he and they could object further against our
Parish Churches, might come under one view: and withal, the Doctor wished him
to forbear in stead of arguing, to make any more excursions by tedious and
impertinent declamations against our Ministers and Members, wherein all your
answers (says he to Mr. O.) for the most part spend themselves. So in the
Epistle of Doctor Brian to Mr. O. I have related the more out of both their
printed Testimonies, touching the disputation and impression of it, because the
printed book is very hard to come by, though Mr. O. says it was published with
both their consents, which may be very much doubted of for diverse reasons. For,

First, there were no public Notaries and Witnesses, to write and attest what
passed in dispute betwixt them.

Secondly, Though there were copies taken of the dispute, the chief penman of
the whole was Mr. O. who In the Disputat. p. 46.
confessith, by reason of a mighty crowd of people he could hardly breathe, or
write one perfect sentence of Doctor Brians Sermon: and there might be as much
difficulty in taking by his pen other Dictates delivered by word. The crowd it
is like was very great, for Dr. Brian speaking of seven which took Mr. O. his
part in the disputation, who were Antipedobaptists; he in his answer says, J.
O. in his Exam. of the Doctors Reply. p. 23, 24.
he believes there was seven times seven thrice told that took his part, that
is 149. and I believe for one such a one, there was 20. at least of a contrary
judgment.

Thirdly, But if there were a perfect copy of the Dispute made up by the Doctor
and him, that copy was committed to Mr. O. his hand to be promoted to the
Press, and no copy kept, whereby it might be known to be truly printed: such
was the Doctors candid and suspectless dealing with his adversary, which laid a
great engagement upon him, of fair and ingenuous correspondence with him again.

Fourthly, When the book was printed, he should have sent the Doctor a copy of
it, before he had printed his Letter of consent unto it, that he might allow or
disallow it, as he should see cause.

Fifthly, Mr. O. having the Manuscript in his own hands, might have altered his
own part for the better, the Doctors for the worse at his pleasure. And that he
had a mind to magnify himself, and disgrace the Doctor all he could, is plain,
both by the book of the disputation, and by his latter book of the Examination
of the Doctors Reply. For the former, it may appear to any indifferent Reader,
that for a good part of the Book, from the beginning (wherein Doctor Brian is
Opponent) he expresses the promptness of a ready Text-man, and the acumen of a
Polemick School-man, as his assiduous and uncessant (yet very powerful)
preaching, shows him an excellent Pulpitman: But in the relation of the
latter part of the Book Mr. O. so enervateth the vigor of his discourse, as if
he had suffered a failing of his faculties, as Sampson did when his locks were
shorn. And this he did that he might have more hope to appear a conqueror in
the conflict. To which end he contracteth the Doctors Speeches, and enlarges
his own after what size he pleases: so that he neither does, nor can
acknowledge he has done him right in the printed Edition of that disputation.
And who that knows his eminent abilities for quickness of conceit, soundness
of judgment, and liveliness of spirit, and volubility of speech, can imagine
that he would suffer Mr. O. to enlarge his answer to his ninth Argument, of
less then four lines, to well toward forty; and in that answer to sum up the
Dispute into a Triumphant Compendium for his own reputation, and the Doctors
reproach, without one word of Reply for himself or his cause? As in this
printed disputation he has done him little right, so in the other Book he has
done him a great deal of wrong, for not being contented to magnify his own
performance, with a mastership in the Dispute, as himself sets it forth (when
it had been honor enough for him, in that Doctor Brian accepted of him for his
Antagonist, though he had submitted to him as his convert) he published another
Book as an examination of the Doctors Reply; wherein he took a great deal more
liberty to traduce him. But that which I will observe at present, is his
unworthy dealing with the Doctor, in the publication of those two Books: for
because he could not for shame but publish something in the dispute, which
might appear answerable to Dr. Brians deserved estimation (for otherwise
hundreds would have accused him as a falsary) that book of the dispute was
rather suppressed, then commonly sold; for so soon as I heard that it was to be
printed, I wrote to my Stationer for it, and remembered him of it with much
importunity many times for many weeeks and months together, to procure one for
me; and though he used his best endeavor and diligence to that purpose, he
still returned a non est inventus for that book: but so soon as I heard of Mr.
O. his second book, and sent for it, I received it by the first return of the
Carrier afterward: the readiest reason of which difference I conceive to be
this, Mr. O. his falsehood in the former Book, might more easily be discovered
then in the latter; and his honor to the Doctors dishonor in the later was
more set forth, then in the former. In the publication whereof, besides the
offensive Contents of it, he gav^ Doctor Brian cause of complaint, in that this
later Book against him (much more against him then the former, because it was
much more contumelious and insolent) had been abroad a long time, before he had
any notice thereof. Truly whatsoever Mr. O. thinks of his own omission
herein (and it may be his desire was, that he of all men should never have seen
it) I could not but take it for a part of ingenuity and justice (when my case
was like his) to give as timely intelligence as I could, of what I had
published against his Friend mine Adversary Mr. S. by leaving one of my Books
with his Stationer G. C. so soon as it came from the Press, to be sent to him
with speed: and so I dealt with Doctor H. for (having received some copies of
my first Book against him, first of all upon Friday night) I sent my servant
with one to him the next Saturday following.

CHAP. IX. Of Mr. Onley his Quality and Condition, his Wit and Utterance, his
Ignorance and Arrogance, his reprochful speaking of such as are not of his
Sect, and partiality to himself and them, his carping at the Magistrates for
meddling with matters of Religion, and countenancing of Ministers.
I Shall say little of the man, but what I find published to the world by his
own Pen, and if that have betrayed him to the condemning censure of pious and
judicious Readers, he must blame himself, not me, who have no exception against
his person. I confess he once makes mention of me, In the Exam^ of Dr. Brians
Reply. p. 32.
as of an Adversary, but dismisseth me without any incivility at all. And I am
so far from detracting from any commendation due unto him, that I shall not
fear the sharp Criticisme of Baronius concerning Onuphrius, which was,
Aventinum infectum Haeresis scabie bestiam indigne nimis Onuphrius homo
Catholicus pectine scalpit eburneo, dum eum praedicat virum esse disertum.
Baron. Annal. Tom. 10. Anno 996. col. 496.
that he being a Catholic, did too unworthily claw a beast infected with a
scab of Heresy, with an Ivory comb, when he commended Aventine for an eloquent
man; I should not, I say, fear such a censure.

Though for the two first particulars, as some have represented him to me, I
should say of him, as Augustine did of Tychonius Donatista homo quidem acri
ingenio and ubere eloquio praeditus. Aug. l. 1. contr. Ep. Parmen. c. 1. Tom.
7. par. 1. p. 9.
Tychonius the Donatist, that he is a man endowed with a sharp wit, and copious
utterance; and that made him more able, and more willing to wrangle with the
Doctor, and to his partial adherents to seem victorious, when in the judgment
of the most judicious and equal hearers, he was vanquished, as some of them
have told me; and I conceive I have the more cause to believe it, because in
whatsoever he most excelled the Doctor, was far above him, being eminently
endowed with all kind of learning: wherein to speak to the third particular
[Mr. O. his Ignorance] he was very deficient, though he bring in now and then a
few words of Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that an illiterate Reader may take him
for a learned man. And if he had been such a one indeed, he would not have
brought in Historical reports of matters of importance done many hundred years
before he was born, without quoting some Author of account; as for that of Mr.
O. his Exam. of Dr. Br. Reply. p. 7.
Paphnutius, who though but one man, prevailed for the liberty of marriage of
Clergymen, against a General Council; for which he should (and no doubt would,
if he had been versed in venerable Antiquity) have cited Council. Nice. prim.
Tom. 1. Counc. p. 423. col. 1. edit. Bin. 1636.
the Council of Nice, or Socr. Scholast. li 1. c. 8. Niceph. Eccles. Hist. l.
8. c. 18, 19.
Socrates Scholasticus, or Nicephorus, or some other Historiographer of some of
the precedent ages. In which story, though he glory very much, and repeat it
several times without proof, it makes as much for the credit of the Quakers,
against his schismatical party, as for them against the more numerous company
of regular Professors of the Doctors way; for which purpose he produces the
singular example, but it bewrayes more ignorance of Antiquity in that: for the
first division of Parishes by Honorius Bishop of Canterbury, Mr. O. in the
Misput. p. 14.
he cites a very late Novellist Mr. Saltmarsh, and by him learned Mr. Seldom
(in his Book De Decimis) an Epithet and Subject in learned Mr. Seldom well
matched, and as well in ignorant Mr. Saltmarsh and Mr. O. both, in this
particular especially; for the Book is not, as the Author entitles it, De
Decimis, but the History of Tithes: and in that Seld. Hist. of Tithes. c. 9.
paragr. 3. p. 256, 257, 258.
History he disproves their opinion, who hold that Honcrius Archbishop of
Canterbury divided his Province into Parishes, or Parochial Limits, such as we
have; for the word Parochia in his age, may be taken rather for a Diocese, then
for a division of lesser compass, as in later times; for in the Prelacy of his
next successor but one, whose name was Theodorus, An. 673 there was a Council
celebrated at Herudford, as Beda reports, whereof in the second Canon it is
ordained, Nullus Epis coporum Parochiam alterius invadat, sed contentus sit
gubernatione creditae sibi plebis. Council. Herudford: cui Praesidebat Archiep.
Theodor. can 2. apud Bed. Eccles. Hist. Gent. Anglor. l. 4. c. 5. p. 160.
that no Bishop invade another Bishops Parish, but that he be content with the
government of the people committed to his charge. That which answers to the
extent of a Bishops authority in the language of those times, was not of so
narrow a circumference as a Pastoral charge. The truth is, neither Mr. O. nor
Mr. Seldom, though an industrious Antiquary, could determine the Antiquity of
Parochial Divisions. H^norius Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis circa annum a salute
reparata 636. Angliam primus in Parochias, ut legitur in Historia Cantuariensi,
distribuere coepit. Camb. Brit. p 99. and 100. edit. 3.
Cambden I confess assigned the Division of Parishes in England to Honorius for
the person, and to the year 636. for the time; but he gives too short a note of
it, to resolve the doubts that are moved about it: and by that which next
follows, we may conceive he means the division into Diocesses or
Bishoprics, according to the Canon now cited. For mine own and others
satisfaction I made a more serious search into the question, the result whereof
I delivered in the sixth Reason annexed to the petition to his Highness the
Lord Protector, and to the High Court of Parliament, for the establishment of
Ministers in sequestered Benefices for their own lives.

Now if I may be allowed to plow with mine own Heyser, though it were not known
to be mine (the Book being published under the name of Pkilotheus Philomystes)
I conceive it convenient to repeat it here, not only to discover the ignorance
of Mr. O. and Mr. S. but to take off the edge of their confidence, when they
cry out upon Parochial divisions as of Antichristian institutions: for the
original of Parochial partitions Doctor Tooker of the Fab. of the Church and
Church Livings. p. 44.
Tooker and Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. p. 333.
Mr. Hooker refer it to Evaristius Bishop of Rome, Anno 112. but neither quote
any Author for it. They that do name the Book called the Pontificale of
Damasus, who was Bishop of Rome about the year 367. but that (say Baron. Annal.
Tom. 4. ad Ann. 384. number. 22.
Baronius and Possev. Appar. Tom. 1. p. 410.
Possevine) was not the Book of any Damasus at all, but of Anastasius
Bibliothecarius, says Bellarm. de Eccles. Scrip. p. 123.
Bellarmine; and whose Book soever it was, it is (for diverse untruths)
disapproved by Baron. ubi supra.
Baronius, and Bin. Tom 1. con. p. 61. col. 2.
Binius: others refer the distinction to Dionysius who was Bishop of Row, Anno
261. as Bin. Ibid p. 121. col. 2.
Binius accounts, but Baron. Tom. 2. number. 17.
Baronius reckons Anno 270. and Baron. ubi supra.
reports it rather as a Renovation in his time and by him, then a new
institution.

Obj. But if the division be derived from a Bishop of Rome, it is Popish, and
by consequence Antichristian also.

Answ. Not so neither; for in the primitive times, when Christianity was
persecuted, Mr. Fox Martyr. vol. 1. p. 732. col. 2.
22 Bishops of Rome for it were martyred one after another, from the Apostles
time downward, to the end of the third Century; and it will be no good manners
neither in morality nor Christianity to call them Antichristian, who laid down
their lives for Christ's sake.

Obj. But they are called Popes, and is not that Popery which comes from the
Pope?

Answ. The Title Pope signifies Father, and anciently was not appropriated to
the Bishops of Rome, but communicated to Bishops in common, as Onuph. in Bonif.
3. p. 81. col. 1.
Onuphrius a learned Papist confesses: all Bishops were called Popes, until
Justinians time, says Pamel. Cypr. p. 11.
Pamelius, as Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria was called Pope by Epiph. haeres.
Tom. 2. haeres. 68.
Epiphanius, so Heraclius by Apud Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c. 6.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Cypriano Papae Moys. and maximus Ep. 26. p. 32.
col. 1. edit. Pamel.
Cyprian is often called Pope, yea by the Benedict. Papam Cyprian. sic clerus
Roman. ad clerum Carthag. Ep. 3. p. 10. col. 2. Cypr. Papae clerus Romans Ep. 30.
p. 55. col. 1. Cypriano Papae Presbyt. and Diacon. Romae. Ep. 31. p. 36. col.
2. and in fine Epist. optamus to beatiss. and gloriosiss. Papa. p. 38. Ibid.
Clergy of Rome (albeit he were not Bishop of Rome, but of Carthage) and by a
Pope (it was Pope Seldom Spicil. ad Eadmerum. p. 205. ex Gervasio Dorobernensi.
M.S.
Urban the second) was our Archbishop of Canterbury called Pope of the other
world, meaning, of the Island of great Britain, severed by the Sea from the
world. Hierom, though (as has been noted) he were respective enough of the
reputation of the Roman Prelate, familiarly applied that title to others as
well as unto him, as to Hieron. ad Heliodor. Epitaph Nepotiani Tom. 1. p. 27.
and Tom. 6. Proem. in Jonam propher. p. 123.
Cromatius, to Hieron. Apolog. advers. Ruffinum l. 2. Tom. 2. p. 225. ante
medium.
Epiphanius, to Hieron. Ep. ad Chromatiam Tom. 1. p. 216. circa med.
Valerianus, to Hi^ronym. ad Princip. Marcellae viduae Epitaph. Tom. 1. p. 119.
prope initium.
Athanasius, to Ibid. Tom. 2. p. 311. Ep. Theophilo and p. 310. Ep. Pammach.
and Marcello.
Theophilus, to Idem Tom. 5. p. 63. in Prolog. in 10. vision. Esa.
Amabilis, to Idem Tom. 4 p 64. de viro perfect. sub nomine H^eron.
Ambrose, to Symbol. Suffin. inter opera Hieron. Tom. 4. p. 129. lin. 1.
Symbol. Hieron.
Laurentius, to Tom. 2. p. 368. Ep. August.
Alipius, and to Idem Tom. 2. p. 322, 351, 358, 368, etc.
Augustine; none of which were Bishops of Rome, but of other places.

Ob. But if Bishops, it is enough to discredit all they do, for says Mr. O.
(and therein he bewrays his gross ignorance again) Mr. O. in Dispute. p. 30.
the Devil ordained the Pope, the Pope the Bishops, and the Bishops you, to
Doctor Brian; how can you be true Ministers by him that was none himself?

By that which has been observed of the Title Pope, as in the ancient
acception of it, the Devil no more ordained the Pope, then he did Bishops.

For, Bishops as Bishops were ordained neither by the Pope nor by the Devil,
but by the Holy Ghost, as we have it Act. 20.28, Take heed to your selves, and
to all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you (...) Overseers, the
same word elsewhere is rendered Bishops, Philip. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.2. Tit. 1.7.

The Popes now adays, and of long time ago, are made by Cardinals, and he
makes them again, as Ice and Water produce one another; but the Pope seldom
makes Bishops, but Bishops make Bishops, both according So in the Canon of
those that are falsely called the Canons of the Apostles. Bin. Tom. 1. Can. 1.
p. 16. Council. Arelatens. Ann. 314. It was ordained there should be Bishops to
consecrate Bishops, three at the ^east. Arelat. Can. 21. Tom. 1. Council. p.
267. col. 1.
to Ecclesiastical constitution, constant custom, and usage of the Church.

If the Bishops were Popish and Antichristian, it does not follow, that all
they do is Popish and Antichristian.

For first, Popes and Papists of all sorts and ranks, do some things as men,
by the light of Reason, and instinct of natural conscience, as Romans 2.14, 15.
So if Honorius did divide his Province of Canterbury into Parishes, as many
hold he did (particularly Godwin in his Godwins Catalogue of Bishops. p. 52.
Catalogue of Bishops) it was (as he says) that he might appoint particular
Ministers to particular Congregations; a course so rational, that no man can
justly take exception at it; for does not common reason dictate the same for
the ordering of all civil Societies, subdividing a Nation into Counties,
Counties into Hundreds, Hundreds into Cities, Towns and Villages? and are they
not governed by Judges, Justices, and Constables, High and Petty, and all
limited within certain precincts, and divided according to the vicinity of
their habitations, as the meaning of the word (...) i.e. juxta habitare, to
dwell nigh together:
Paroecia intimates; and so in ordering of Armies, Academies, Colleges and
Schools. The course taken according to Reason, is to divide and subdivide into
Companies and Classes, and to set Officers over them, so as may most conduce to
the benefit of all: and if we shall renounce Reason, and act by Antipathies,
Purch. Pilgr. ^. ^ c. 1^.
we may perhaps become as wise as the Pagans in Pegu, who both men and women
make their teeth black, because dogs teeth are white; and they scorn to imitate
a canine Candor.

Secondly, Some things they did as men ingenuously educated, and endowed with
knowledge of Arts, and Tongues, and Histonies, and so many who are in their
Religion and Profession Popish, have written diverse excellent Books and
Discourses of all sorts.

Thirdly, Some things they do as Christians, assenting to the authority of
Scriptures, and teaching and practicing many things consonant to the truth and
tenor thereof, so many of them (even the most Antichristian as the Jesuits)
have written diverse godly discourses and commentaries upon many Books of the
Bible, and some upon all, which are very conducible to the understanding of the
Sacred Text.

Fourthly, Some things they dictate, and do as Antichristian, and in such
things only we are to depart from them; if the Devils believe there is one God,
we may believe so too, and therein we do well, James 2.19. and if we should not
do so, woe should be worse then Devils; whatsoever is good, in whomsoever, is
from God; and it is more to be esteemed in relation to him, then to be
condemned in relation unto others, though they he never so wicked.

Fifthly, For the Bishops that ordained our Presbyters, they ordained them as
Presbyters, or Ministers, for such they were before they were Bishops; and so
being Presbyters or Ministers, those whom they ordained might well be true
Presbyters and Ministers also.

I will note but one thing more of his ignorance, and that is a probability
that he cannot be learned, from his condition and course of life; for as one of
his disciples told Doctor Brian, and the Doctor wrote unto me in his Letter,
March 6.16.56, He painfully follows Husbandry all the Week days, and preaches
to a congregation of Anabaptists and Vniversalists on the Sabbath.

How he should be Learned who spends the most of his time as a Husbannman,
unless, as Amos an Herdsman at Tekoa, he were divinely inspired, Amos 1.1. and
cap. 17. ver. 14, 15. I cannot conceive: but if he be such a man as he takes
upon him to be, we may in his Name give answer to the Apostles question, Who is
sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2.16. Here is M. O. a man sufficient, and
more than sufficient for the Ministry; for he can act the part of a laborious
Husbandman six days together, and on the seventh can perform the Office of a
Spiritual Pastor to a Church or Congregation of Christians. And besides his
Sermon-sufficiency, is so well furnished with Polemical Divinity, that he dare
challenge our most learned Doctors to dispute with them in the greatest
Assemblies; and if he may be allowed to report the passages of the Disputation,
will baffle them in print into shameful silence, and leave them to be laughed
at. Such was his vapouring vanity in his Examination of Doctor Brians Reply,
where having made a ridiculous Argument in the Doctors Name, he exposes it to
this scornful question, Spectatum admissirisum teneatis? Mr. O. his Exam. of
Dr. Br. Reply, p. 61.
This may fitly lead in the next note of him, which we may take for an effect
of his Ignorance, that is, the Arrogance of his Spirit.

For the Novice or young Scholar (who has least knowledge) is apt to be lifted
up with pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. and who but an ignorant and arrogant man would in
the Title Page of his Examination of the Doctors Reply, affront him (so well
known to be every way a man of great worth) with such disdainful and
disgraceful words as these, The Invalidity of his Answers, his Sophistical
helpless impertinent self-contradicting Allegations, are presented to himself
and others, etc. And as he begins, so he holds on the same insulting style,
and concluding as he began, Ibid. p. 115.
I have (says he) passed through your Reply, and it is proved empty in
relation to the Vindication of your Ordination and Entrance. And in the last
page but one of his Examination, his words are these, Ibid. p. 129.
Thus in the midst of many Employments Temporal and Spiritual, seldom allowing
me one hours opportunity together to attend on this task, I have given you
(says he to Doctor Brian and the world) an account of the unsatufactoriness
and insufficiency of your Answers: And yet he confesses the Doctor so
sufficient, See page 15. of his Epist. to the Churches of his way. 1 King.
12.10.
that he is as well able to draw something out of any thing, any thing out of
nothing, to his present purpose, as any man he knows in England. But for all
that, when he came under your hands, mighty Mr. O. (whose little finger.
Rohoboam like, is thicker than the loins of Solomon) he was able to do nothing
but mar his own Cause, and shame himself, that you might have the more
glorious victory over both. It was well for him that you had so little leisure
to attend on this task as you say, else if you had had time enough to manage
your Contestation against him to your best advantage, Puritanulum istu^ in
jocos and tricas contererem. Weston. de triplice hominis officio.
he might have been handled by you, as Weston the bragging Papist threatened the
learned Doctor Reynolds, which was, that if he could come by him, he would
grind that little Puritan into jests and trifles.

But the Doctor is (though such a one as before we have represented him to the
Reader) but one man, and to conquer him is nothing with this Goliath, unless he
bid defiance to the whole Host of Israel, and (with him) may stalk it over all
the Parish Churches of this Nation; yea, and with them over all the Churches of
Europe and New England, as trodden down by his strength. He professes his
opposition of them in that latitude, in the first page of his Examination, and
makes account he has so far carried the Cause against the Doctor (as by the
passages already noted may appear) wherein though he disclaim all appearance of
Popery both in the Dispute and Examination, Ibid. page 115, 129.
he bewrays a Papal proud Spirit, even the Spirit of Pope Victor, who would
have Excommunicated all the Churches which did not observe his rule for the
time of Celebration of the Feast of Easter; as has been noted under another
Title.

The next notorious quality of Mr. O. is his railing and reproching in his
Examination of the Doctors Reply: as where he sets upon him with these
uncivil terms; Exam. p. 60.
Tour doting dregs of desperation, and denial of the greatest part of the very
Gospel it self, by which you are involved in a labyrinth of absurdities,
errors and confusions: And afterward in the same page, Sure, says he, you see
not what makes for you, and what against you: There is one part of the Gospel
that you confess not, but reproach, contemn, vilify and deride, viz. The Death
of the Lord Jesus Christ for all men in the world, which is commonly called
Universal Redemption. How far that Doctrine is to be denied, contemned,
vilified, and to be bewailed rather than derided, for the horrid Blasphemies
concomitant with it, and consequent upon it, the Reader may be shortly and
sufficiently informed by Mr. Marchemont Nedham, Page 67, 68, 69
in his forementioned Book against Mr. John Goodwyn. And against the Ministry
in general, Mr. O. venteth himself in this virulent manner:

Mr. O. and those of his strain, think they spite the Ministers of England
much by calling them Priests, Page 32.
and their Ministry a Priesthood, as Mr. O. does here and * elsewhere, in a way
of reproach, wherein they bewray both their ignorance and malice: for 1. The
Etymology of the word, it is either from the Latin word Praeest, he
presideth, or the Greek word (...), one set over another; or it is a
contraction of the word Priester in Low Dutch, which is a contraction of the
word (...) in Greek, signifying an Elder, and so it is a Name of honor; for
the Lord has said, Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the
face of the Elder, Lev. 19.32. And that this is at length, what the word Priest
is in short, is evident by the alteration which Archbishop Land made in the old
Service Book of England, when it was to be sent into Scotland; for every where,
where the English has the word Priest, the Scotch Service Book has the word
Presbyter: nor is the word Priest a word of disparagement in the New Testament,
since the word Priest and Priesthood is ascribed to Christ above or about ten
times in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

The same is given in an honorable sense unto Christians in 1 Pet. cap. 2.
where they are called An holy Priesthood, ver. 5. a royal Priesthood, ver 9.
and holiness and honor do well sort together, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. and Rev. c. 1. v.
5. c. 5. v. 10. they are (as by Titles of honor) called Kings and Priests, c.
20.6. Priests alone, in regard of their spiritual Sacrifices, as of praise,
Heb. 13.15. of prayer, Psalm. 141.2. of a broken and contrite heart, Psalm.
51.17. of Alms, Heb. 13.16. by presenting their bodies a living sacrifice unto
him, Romans 12.1. by mortifying inordinate affections and evil concupiscence,
Col. 3.5. and by offering themselves as dying Sacrifices for Christ's sake,
Phil. 2.17. when they shall be called unto it. Thus we are not ashamed to own
the name Priest, but take it for a term of honor, both in the native sense of
the word, and use of the Gospel: yet so we do not appropriate it to our selves,
nor can they impose it upon us in any signification which has affinity with a
literal Sacrifice, either Jewish or Popish. In which respect, and because in
the New Testament Gospel Ministers are never called Priests (as by a peculiar
Title) Archbishop Whitgift in his last Book against Mr. Cartwright, p. 722. Mr.
Hookers Eccles. Polit. lib. 5. parag. 77. p. 419. speak rather against, than
for the use of it, as so limited to restrained.

The Priesthood of this Nation (says he) are proved to be a company of
covetous greedy dogs, that never have enough. Page 34.
And where good Sir, is that proved? or when will it be proved? ad Graecas
calendas? not before. But why does he thus bark at, yea bite the Ministry under
the Title of Priesthood? It is very like he thought his Master, Mr. Saltmarsh,
had proved it, or could prove it, when he confidently demanded, What is the
maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, but Jewish and Popish undeniably? This is
some of the vanishing vapor of his Pamphlet, which he calls The Page 25. See
the Answ. to it in my Light for his Smoke, p. 19. Exam. p. 123.
Smoke of the Temple.

Afterward Mr. O. renews this Reproach again in these words, O ye Priests! ye
violently clasp and gripe into your clutches (to maintain you in Lordly Pomp)
the Tenths; nay, if all considered, the fifth part of the Nations increase, and
poor men's labors, though many from whom you exact them, can hardly get bread
for their Families. It is an easy matter to make this saving Doctrine of
Tithes, as well as the other of Universal Grace, plausible to carnal and
covetous people; and with such, to aggravate the denial of the one, and
assertion of the other to an high degree of hatred. But we look for Reason, not
Railing, to evince the unlawfulness of Tithes, and with Mr. O. and his party,
not so impotently to rail, prattle or scrible against them, as they use to do,
but seriously and solidly to set upon the Confutation of those which plead
their lawful Tenure, against their cavils and clamours who except against them.
And because it may be they know not who they be, if they have any heart to
undertake such a Task, they may be better acquainted with them by the Catalogue
at the end of this Discourse. And if the Books be too many for them to meddle
with, let them confute but three of them; one of Sir Clement Spelman an
English, another of Sir James Sempell a Scottish Knight, the third of Mr.
Prynne. I choose them before others, not only because they have written very
sufficiently and fully of the point in question, but because they cannot be
justly suspected of partiality, since none of them ever had any Ministerial
Function for their Calling, nor any Ministerial Maintenance for their Living:
And if they will confine themselves to one only, let it be that of M. Prynne,
whose integrity hat been eminently tried, and yet was never tainted. And that
they may presently perceive what his Tenet is, I will set down the summary
Contents of his Book, as he has set it forth in the Title Page. But besides
Mr. O. his quarrel against the maintenance of Ministers, he charge them with
Covetousness in an excessive degree, calling them greedy dogs, who can never
have enough.

A Gospel Plea (interwoven with a Rational and Legal) for the Lawfulness and
continuance of the ancient settled Maintenance and Tenths of the Ministers of
the Gospel; proving, That there is a just, competent, comfortable Maintenance
due to all lawful, painful Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel, by Divine
Right, Institution, and express Texts and Precepts of the Gospel; That Glebes
and Tithes are such a maintenance, and due to Ministers by Divine Right, Law
and Gospel; That if subtracted or detained, they may lawfully be enforced by
coercive Laws and Penalties; That Tithes are no real burden nor grievance to
the people; The abolishing them no benefit to Farmers, Husbandmen, or poor
people, but a prejudice and loss; That the present opposition against Tithes
proceeds not from any real grounds of Conscience, but base covetousness, carnal
policy, and a Jesuitical and Anabaptistical design to subvert and ruin our
Ministers, Church, Religion. With a satisfactory Answer to all Cavils and
material Objections to the contrary. By William Pryn of Swainswick Esquire.

Words bad enough for Hippolitus Cardinal of Medicis, Hist. of the Council of
Trent, lib. 2. p. 251.
Pope Clement the sevenths Nephew, who had by his gift all the Benefices of the
world, Secular and Regular Dignities and Parsonages, simple and with Cure,
being vacant, for six meneths, to begin from the first day of his possession,
with power to dispose and convert to his use all the Fruits:

Or bad enough for the Popish Priests in King Henry the eighths time, against
whom these Articles, with diverse others, Mart. Hist. of 20 Kings, page 381, 382.
were exhibited: Besides their Ecclesiastical Bentfices, they became Farmers of
great Granges, taking them in Lease in every Shire, and became Husbandmen and
Grasiers, many of them kept Tanning-houses, and were Brokers, Buyers and
Ingrossers, snatching up all, and enforcing Tradesmen to buy those Commodities
at the second or third hand at unreasonable prices; yea, diverse ignorant men
among them held and enjoyed 8, 10.12, yea more Benefices and Spiritual
promotions severally, and yet lived not upon any of them.

Too bad for such as were under the Bishops Government, when one man had two
Benefices, a Deanery, and an Arch-deaconry, as D. D. of A. and some had more
both in value and variety than he had. But since by the late Reformation
Pluralities are taken away by Authority, and Ministers are now confined to, and
contented with the Revenue of a single Incumbency, (and some of them I am sure
refused to be doublebeneficed while the Law did allow them) what ground or
color can Mr. O. have for such an outrageous Reproach? or what motive, but his
own malice, and the instinct of the accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10. thus
all-to-be-slander them, not only in condemning their Title to Tithes as Jewish
and Popish (as before is observed) but in charging them with clasping and
griping into their Clutches a fifth part of the Nations increase? Wherein 1. He
implicitly taxes Gods dealing with his own peculiar Nation the Jews, as
guilty of partiality to the Priests, and of oppression of the people; for the
proportion paid from the one to the other, was much more than the Ministers of
England receive or require of their Parishioners. 2. When he numbreth 8432
parishes in England, Disp. p. 7. Exam. p. 29.
as diverse times he does: 1. According to his manner, he quotes no Author for
it; and I find a difference betwixt him, and those who have been more diligent
in Inquisition, and more exact in computation than he, Speeds Catal. of
Religious houses, etc. at the end of the Reign of K. H. S. p. ult. of that
Catalogue.
as Mr. Speed, who reckons but 8327 in England, and in Wales 905: in both,
9232. 2. Of so many parishes in diverse Counties, the greatest part of the
increase tithable, is taken up by the Title of Impropriations, whereof the
Incumbent Minister has no part. 3. Where there is a Minister possessed of a
Legal Right to require and receive Tithes, it is not in his power to clasp or
gripe into his Clutches, as Mr. O. malignantly phraseth it, any more than his
due: The Parishioner who has all the Ten parts within his compass, may easily
lessen his portion, yea he may take all the ten parts into his possession, and
put him to sue for his tenth part, as one who took that defrauding Doctrine
from Mr. O. his Church (though now he be gone beyond it, whither he, as well as
Mr. Fisher, may follow and overtake him) and by the practice of it, has for
three years together robbed the Minister of his Right, inning it with his own
nine parts into his Barn, and persisting in his dishonest dealing with such
Impudence, as to contemn the Law, and to call him Thief, who does but with
lenity and mildness require an account of his injurious dealing. And hence it
comes to pass, that there is a vast difference betwixt the true value of a
Benefice, and that which it yields to the Incumbent Pastor; that may be well
worth 400 pounds per Annum, and this not amount to half so much hire to him
that labors in the Word and Doctrine: And many can speak much herein upon
certain experience, and yet many times a rackt rate and estimation is set upon
them both, that there may be more color to oppress the Minister by Taxes and
other expenses. M. O. Exam. p. 325.
But where is that Lordly Pomp he speaks of maintained by such clasping and
griping into the Clutches of the priests? Where are those pompous priests to be
seen? There was a time when the Popish Secular Clergy were a scandal to their
Regular Clergy, Bern. Ser. 133. in cant.
as in the time of Bernard especially, when that devout Abbot set them forth in
their pomp and pontificalibus, wearing gold in their Bridles, gold in their
Saddles, gold in their Spurs, having their Tables abounding with variety of
meats meats and drinks, over flowing with surfeiting and drunkenness; which yet
has been exceeded by some English Clergymen, as by George Nevil Archbishop of
York, See Godw. Ca talog. of Bish p. 612. in Ed. 4 time, an. 1466 Mart. Hist.
of Eagl. p. 368. in H. S. his reign.
who at the Feast of his Installation (the greatest that ever was for any of
his rank) was attended with Earls and Lords, and by Cardinal Wolsey, who was
served with Dukes and Earls when he washed his hands. The Bishops since the
Reformation of Queen Elizabeth being by Office Lords of the Upper House of
Parliament, and having precedence before Lords Temporal, were pompous and
Lordly enough: but since by this last Reformation, the Hierarchy is come down,
and their Revenues gone, I do not think but it will be very hard for Mr. O. to
find out a Minister (a parish Minister) that lives in Lordly pomp, or any
thing like it; and therefore by charging them first with ravenous Avarice, and
afterward with Lordly pomp (as if according to that of the Orator, That which
they got with greediness, they lavished out in Luxury) is not their double sin,
but his double slander; Quod per scelus adeptus est; per luxuriam effundit.
Cicer Orat. pro Q^.
not their guilt, but his gaul and guile to make them odious, which yet with
judicious Readers may produce a contrary effect; and the od^um he intends
against them, may recoyl upon himself, for charging upon Oxthodox Ministers
such notorious and extravagant untruths; of which Calling there are now more
good and fewer bad (blessed be God) than ever they were in any Age: And
therefore such excessive Revilings of them are not only most unjust, but most
unseasonable.



Yet he has not done with the slander of Covetousness, for to render the
Parochial Ministers more worthy of reproach, and less capable of excuse for that
Crime, and indeed hopeless of all cure. His next Charge, That this iniquity
came in with the first foundation of Parochial Divisions; and so as he says,
though most untruly and absurdly of Churches, it will follow it cannot be
reformed.

Fifthly, Therefore to give you his own words, Exam. p. 32.
The end why England was first divided into parishes, was, at first, to
distinguish the flock asunder, that so the shepherds, or rather the
sheep-shearers, says he, might know where to look for their fleeces. And to
this he adds a Marginal Note, as corrupt a Gloss as the Text, and the Note is
this, A work they can well enough away with still, or any thing else that makes
for their honor or profit, the two things on which the Priesthood -- moves.
Was that the first or chief end of dividing England into Parishes? what proof
have you of that Mr. O? your second-hand citation of Mr. Saltmarsh out of the
book of learned Mr. Seldom De Decimis? I believe you have no better: and how
little credit is to be given to that Testimony (as you bring it in) you may
read by review of mine answer to it.

If you had read Mr. S. you might have learned to make a more charitable
construction of limiting public Ministries, and allowing maintenance for
Ministers, Seldom Hist. of Tithes. c. 9. p. 259.
who writes thus of them: when devotion grew firmer, and most Laymen of fair
estates desired the Country-residence of some Chaplains, who before lived in
common with the Bishops, that they might be always ready for instruction of
them, their families and adjoining Tenants, etc. That was the first and chief
end of building Oratories and Churches, and of endowing them with peculiar
maintenance from the founders for the Incumbents, which should there only
reside: and where we read of the division of the Province of Canterbury into
Parishes by Honorius Archbishop thereof: the reason rendered is, that he might
appoint particular Ministers to particular Congregations: those are the words
of the Godwins Catalogue of Bishops. p 52.
Eccles. Historian, which point to the work of the Minister among the people in
the Church, not to his reward from the people, either in the fields of corn, or
flocks of sheep.

He has many other reviling terms, which brought together, would make a great
bundle of unsavory weeds: but I pass over, conceiving a less proportion like a
poysie, may suffice to show the bitterness of his spirit toward Ministers, and
Churches in general. I will add but one reproach more against Doctor Brian in
particular, which I may not omit to remember and refute; Exam. p. 29.
it is in the Epilogue of his latter Book: Had I time, as I have not (says he)
by being maintained like you by the sweat of other men's brows, as I desire not,
etc. In which words are implicitly comprised a Negative Thesis, that a man,
especially a Minister, should not be maintained by the sweat of other men's
brows; and a Positive Hypothesis that Doctor Brian is so maintained.

For the first; if since God laid the Law upon Adam, that in the sweat of his
face he shall eat bread, Genesis 3.19. it has been unlawful for one man,
especially for Ministers, to live by the labors of the people, why did God
maintain his worship by the Ministry of the Levites in that manner all along
the old Testament? and if it be unlawful under the new Testament for
Evangelical Ministers to be corporally supported by those who are spiritually
instructed by them; why did the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we have sown unto
you spiritual things, is it much, if we reap your carnal things? And does not
Solomon say, the King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5 9. and yet he
does not, nor is it fit he should put his hand to the plow as you do? nay it is
so far from being a fault, to live by the labor of another, that we must one
labor for another, in one kind or other: and there is a sweat of the brain as
well as of the brow; And you, methinks Mr. O. should experimentally know them
both to be painful, and that of the brain more painful of the two, unless you
preach by Enthusiasme, without any study: for of the sleep of a laboring man,
Solomon says, it is sweet, Eccles. 5 12. (i. e.) the bodily labor: but the
labor of the brain will not suffer; and the fault is not for a King or a
Councellor, or a Judge, or a Warrior, a Minister, or an Artificer to live by
the sweat of the Husbandmans brows; for without his labor no society of men
could subsist: but to live idle like a Drone among the Bees, to take no pains
for his living; for such idle persons should not live by the Apostles sentence;
when we were with you, this we commanded you, that if any would not work,
neither should he eat, 2 These. 3.10. This for Mr. O. his Thesis; now for his
Hypothesis, as to Doctor Brian compared with himself; he is not (says he)
maintained like Doctor Brian, with the sweat of other men's brows, if he mean
that he lives idle, so as not to deserve his maintenance of those for whom he
labors, he knows neither his worth nor his work: if he did, and were (as he
is) an Adversary, and as such an one, would not withhold the truth in
unrighteousness, as Romans 1.18. he would confess him as able, as painful,
powerful and profitable a Minister (no disparagement to any) as any of his
knowledge this day in England, and well worthy of a far more liberal salary
then he receives; for besides his preachings, which are very frequent, both on
the Sabbath, and on the week day, he catechizeth daily from house to house
every person in every family within his parish, and yet does much good service
in other places, as just occasion requires, and opportunity serves, both as a
learned man, and as a godly Minister: and were he Minister of a Country Parish,
where Mr. O. labors as an Husbandman, I would endeavor to persuade him to pay
him Tithes, with the words of Augustine, that worthy African Doctor, and famous
Disputant, Meus est homo quem feci, mea est terra quam colis, mea sunt semina
quae spargis, mea animalia quae fatigas, meae sunt imbres and pluviae, and
ventorum flamina mea sunt, meus est solis calor; and cum omnia m^a sunt
elementa vivendi, tu qui manus accommodas, solum decimum merebaris: Deus sibi
tantum decimum vendicans, nobis omnia donavit, ingrate fraudator and perside,
etc. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 219. Tom. 10. p. 640.
or rather the words of God, for he speaks in his name to the Husbandman: Mine
is man whom I have made; mine is the earth which thou tillest; mine is the seed
which thou dispersest; mine are the cattle which thou weariest in tillage; mine
are the showrs of rain which moysten the earth, and make it fruitful; mine are
the blasts of winds which fan the air; mine is the heat of the Sun, which warms
both earth, and seeds, and plants, and makes them grow; and when all the
Elements of life are mine, thou who only lendest thy hand to all these means,
and deservedst but a Tenth, have nine parts, and God has reserved but a Tenth
for himself, and will thou withhold that, thou ungrateful and perfidious
wretch, will thou defraud him of that? pay to God the tenth, lest he bring thee
to the tenth, etc.

The next ill quality which I shall note in Mr. O. is his Partiality, whereof I
will give three Testimonies in stead of many more, which I might produce out of
his examination of the Doctors Reply; one at the beginning of it in his
Epistle, as he styles it, To the impartial Reader, to which it might be truly
added, From a most partial Writer: There he speaks much against Epistolary
prejudice, to make the Readers to reject the opinion which the Writer opposes,
when himself is so forward to commit the same fault, that he is guilty of it in
the Title page, where he anticipateth the Readers judgment of the cause
(before it be heard) with notorious calumnies of his adversaries part of the
difference and egregious flatteries of his own in these words which I have
cited in part At page 126.
before under another Title, and to another purpose: but in this place it will
not be impertinent to set forth more fully his malignant partiality.

Doctor Brians Reply to the Answer of his ten first Arguments, levied (says
he) to prove the Parishes of this Nation true Churches, Examined.

The invalidity of all his answers, his sophistical helps, impertinent
self-contradicting allegations are presented to himself and others, to the
clearer discovery of the Popish, Political, Antichristian, and like present
constitution of the Parochial Assemblies of this Nation, having yet never been
true Churches from their very foundation, nor possible to be made true by
Reformation, having had never yet any true Gespel-constitution.

As also the Antichristian Call, Entrance, Doctrine, etc. of the National
Ministry in part unvailed.

With a Confirmation of some of those precious Apostolical truths, so
vehemently cried down as Heretical, so far as directly or occasionally there
was way made for their vindication; By J. O. an unworthy servant of Jesus
Christ, and of his poor despised Church. To which he annexeth two Texts of
Scripture, Jer. 15.14, 15. and Revel. 18.11, 15. both against Babylon.

That which in all this is principally now to be noted is his palpable
partiality, and most apparent contradiction betwixt the contents of his Title
page, and his Epistle to the Reader: but withal, I might observe many gross
untruths, both against the Doctor and the Churches, owned and defended by him,
and against the Call, Entrance, and Doctrine of the National Ministry, which he
calls Antichristian; when, for ought I can perceive by the printed
Disputation, or his Examination, he does not know who is Antichrist, or what is
Antichristian. But these are met withal elsewhere in this discourse, as just
occasion required. For the present I shall only commend unto the Reader this
observation of Mr. John Onley and his adherents, viz. that most indiscreetly
and absurdly they usually renounce that which in the Romanists is agreeable to
the Dictates of Reason, Conscience, and Scripture, as Popish and Antithristian,
as I have already showed in this Chapter, and agree with them in that which is
truly popish and Antichristian, as Error, Pride, Schism, Censoriousness,
Malice, Slander, sophistical Subtilty, as their writings and doings do declare,
especially Mr. J. O. in his dealing with Doctor Brian, in his unfaithful
publication of the disputation at Kenelmworth, and in his other bitter and
insolent Book of Examination afterward.

The second proof of his partiality is this; when Doctor Brian has proved our
Churches of England to be true Churches of Christ by convincing arguments; Nam
quae non prosunt singula, juncta valent. Disp. p. 6.
(convincing if taken together, though all of them be not of equal evidence and
vigour^) all that avails nothing toward Mr. O. his satisfaction, unless he
prove an impertinency to the Question, viz. That they were true Churches from
their very foundation, that is, as he explaineth himself more fully elsewhere,
that all the parishes of this Nation, in their first division into Parishes
were visible Saints, and that those Churches gathered by preaching only 500.
Exam. of Dr. Br. Reply. p. 30, 37. Ibid. p. 24. Disp. p. 5.
years before Augustine the Monk, were such as our Parishes now are, or that
they are such now, as they were then: and this he makes the life of the
Doctors cause; and if he prove not this (says he) he does nothing, whereas it
is neither the life nor limb of his cause; no, neither hair nor nail of it;
neither a skirt nor an hem: but indeed meet nothing to the purpose. And
therefore the Doctor did justly and discreetly decline it as impertinent,
saying, it is our Churches present, not their primitive state which I undertake
to vindicate; and this upon very good reason. For,

First, The Churches, whose primitive constitution was the best and nearest to
that of the Apostler, both in time, matter, and form, as that of Jerusalem,
Rome, Antioch, and the Churches of Asia, long since are fallen from the faith,
and have unchurched themselves by their Apostasy.

Secondly, It is but a Jesuitical evasion from the pertinency and life of the
cause of a true Christian Church, to wave the present qualifications and notes
of it, and to put all the weight and stress of the trial upon the Historical
report of precedent times; as while we prove our Church to be a true Church,
and our Faith a true Faith by the Scriptures, as Doctor Featley d^d against
Fisher the Jesuit, that would be taken for no good proof with him, unless he
deduced the visibility of the Protestant Professors, through all ages from the
Apostles to Luthers time; and he professed he would not proceed in the dispute,
unless that were first done, as is observed before.

Thirdly, If it were pertinent, and were also proved by Chronological History,
it would serve but to make up a mere Humane and Historical Faith, which is not
effectual to Salvation; and the doubt of it where it is required and not proved
(as it is no easy matter to do) may raise perplexing doubts and fears of
salvation in weak, though well-minded Christians; as causing suspicious
conceits of their being in a true Church, out of which, as out of Noah's Ark
(the common saying is) none are saved.

Yet this unsound and groundless assertion of his, which has neither proof of
Scripture, Reason, or of any humane Author of credit or account, be not only
puts into the very front of his Examination (frontinulla fides) but
repeateth it over and over, both in the Disputation and Examination, to puzzle
the simple Hearers of the one, and Readers of both; Disp. p. 1, 6, 7, 12. Exam.
p. 11, 12, 13, 24, 27, 28, 30, 37.
and to make them believe that there was somewhat in it, which made the Doctor
afraid to meddle with it; whereas it was a mere extravagancy from the question
in hand, which to such as are intelligent, shows Mr. O. to be a Jesuitical
shifter; and that he may appear more and worse then a Jesuit, he takes upon
him to be a Pope, peremptorily defining tanquam ex Cathedra Pestilentiae, not
only that our Churches have never been true Churches from the foundation of
them, but that it is not possible for them to be made true by reformation. Thus
in the Title page of his Examination, wherein his ignorance, confidence, and
imprudence are all of them superlative, and worthy of none other answer then a
scornful silence.

Yet the other part of his partiality which now I am to prove, will implicitly
at least confute it fully; for he that is so injurious, as to impose upon the
Doctor such an impertinency, as the life of his cause, and to regard none of
his proofs, though never so pregnant, for the truth of our Churches, is so
gracious to his own side, as to resolve that a true Church may be constituted
thus, A company of true Believers assembled in the Name of Christ, willing to
follow him in the way of his ordinances revealed in his word, and yet seeing
their want of a personal succession, and yet knowing it their duty, and the
will of Christ, it should be performed, did appoint one that was unbaptized to
reassume and set afoot this ordinance of Christ. And if so, how partial is Mr.
O. who makes it impossible for our Churches to be made true by any reformation?
for how easy a matter is it for Churches to be reformed after that manner?

The third partiality of Mr. O. appears in his Epistle to his Schismatical
Sister-Churches, where he takes upon him to make a long Paraphrase on the
words of Ananias to Saul, Acts 22.18. but when Doctor Brian makes but a short
one on the words of Peter, Acts 2.39. The promise is made to you and to your
Children: saying, if the promise be made to believers and their children, the
command must reach not only to them but to their children, as running thus, be
baptized you and your children, for the promise is made to you and to your
children.

To this Mr. O. in a jeering manner replye^^, As if Peter Were not wise enough
to express his own meaning, to direct us who should be, or the grounds upon
which they should be baptized, without your priestly prudence: surely might you
have come to the honor, or been worthy to have been a Dictator to Peter, you
would have taught him to have said some what from whence Infants right of
Baptism might have been proved. With this partiality appears a spice of his
insolency formerly observed. But if Doctor B^ian had been worthy, and had taken
upon him to play the Dictator, he had acted that part a great deal better, by
deducing Infants Baptism from the words of Peter, then Mr. O. did, dictating
such an Aphorism out of his own fancy, concerning necessary recourse to the
primitive constitution of a Church, to prove it to be a true Church at present,
which we have now examined and refuted.

The fourth partiality I shall mention is this; he will not be turned over by
Dr. Brian to Mr. Hollingworth for satisfaction concerning the name Parish, and
parochial precincts; Exam p. 22, 23. Disp. p. 48.
yet in a matter of greater difficulty (as the setting up of Church-ordinances
by an unbapt zed person) he turns his Reader over to an obscure Treatise,
entitled, The way to Zion: and Doctor Brian citing Mr. Baxters 27 Arguments for
Church Membership, Mr. O. puts him off with Mr. Fishers Reply, Exam. p. 128.
in his imagination proving the contrary, where he has this ill hap to make
his reference, and to bestow a commendable Epithet upon a Quaker (for such an
one is Mr. Fisher now become) and as such an one Mr. O. must be a sharp
adversary against him, Epist. p. 15, 16, 17. Disp. p. 15, 18, 19. Exam. p 32,
38, 39, 42, 43, 45, 47, 50.
unless he will be partial in that also; for he writes sharply against the
Quakers. But Mr. Baxter is a more rational, religious, sound, and settled
Divine, then that there can be any fear at all that he will ever turn or become
so wretched a changeling.

I will take but one exception more out of the two Books of his publication,
and that is concerning the Civil Magistrate, against the exercise of whose
authority in matters of Religion he often utters his dislike, especially as
it is assistant to Ministers in the Ministerial function; whereof I will
mention but one passage of some importance, Exam. p. 53. margin.
though it be with him but in a Marginal note, which is this; [The Sword of the
Magistrate being your best relief, without which I think you would live but a
while.] Whereof his meaning may be, that their authority maintains the
Ministers public maintenance, without which they could not subsist. But
consider the spightful spirit of him and his Sect against them, as supposing
them and their Churches to be Romish, Popish, Antichristian, and Babylonish;
and so would have them used no better then Babylon (but would stir up mortal
enemies against them, as against her, according to that of J^r. 50.14, 15. in
the Text set in the Title page of Mr. O. his examination) there is a just cause
of jealousy, by that speech, of as malicious a meaning as may be toward them,
because of the affinity of their principles with those of the Donatists, and of
their consanguinity in practice with the bloody-minded Ad hanc haeresin, id
est, Donatist. ^in Africa, and illi pertinent qui appellantur Circumcellinnes,
genus homi^u^ agreste, and famosissimae audaciae, non solum in a lios immania
facinora perpetrando, sed, etc. Aug. d^ haeres. Tom 6. p. 33.
Circumcellions, to which Sect they are sorted by Augustine in his Catalogue of
Her^sies.

CHAP. X. A Conclusive Answer to Doctor Brians desire of Advice (whether it be
better to let Mr. O. alone, or to answer him according to his folly) sent him a
good while ago by his Son, but now published with enlargement, for satisfaction
of others as well as of the Doctor himself: Reasons many and weighty for the
Negagative.
WHat was my mind (in answering your request by your Son when he brought you
Letter, the Disputation at Kenelmworth, and Mr. O. his Examination of your
Reply, after the reading of what you sent me, and writing of these Papers I now
send you) in the same I persist with stronger confidence then I had at first;
and for it I shall now give you clearer and fuller evidence of the expedience
of my Advice then at that time I could do, which was the same that Hezekiah
gave to his people concerning railing Sabshtkah, answer him not, a Kings 18.16.
and Isa. 36.21.

My Reasons are,

First, I thought you came much below the elevation of your own worth, when you
entered the Lists with an illiterate man, as Mr. J. O. is, albeit of a wrangling
wit; though there was a kind of necessity I confess at that time, for the
exercise of your humility upon his proud challenge, as of your ingenuity and
ability in the conflict.

Secondly, I suspected your confidence in committing the copy of your dispute
to his publication by the Press, would be abused by him, and so I believe it
was more ways then one, as I have showed.

Thirdly, I saw the arrogance of the man's spirit in the Title page of his
Examination, which made me deem him an indocible Sophister, far from the good
mind of Hierom, who desired proficiency in what is good, and to change his mind
from any thing that is bad. Utinam mihi sic semper disputare contingat, ut ad
meliora proficiens -- deseram quod male tenebam. Hieron. ^dve^sus Luciserian.
vol. 2. p. 147. Disp p. 33.
Your self had some experience of his refractory humor; when though he did or
might have heard from your mouth a satisfactory discourse, in vindication of
the Ministry of England, wherein all that he had objected, and much more was
fully answered; yet he said, that you would not, or could not prove it a true
Ministry.

Fourthly, I observed how perversely he dealt with you, in imposing
unreasonable conditions upon you in disputation, wherein if you did not
satisfy him, all you did was nothing; whereas that with him of so great moment
was nothing to the purpose, as I have showed: and in a wilful refusal to
consult with any Author of your proposal for his satisfaction. You turn me over
to Mr. Hollingworth (says he) in answer to which shift, I tell you once more,
in that path I will not follow you; for in this controversial age, so many
books have been written on both sides, if we should take this way, when should
we answer our selves? To return each other to others works, you may find me
(and I could you as easily) work till you are weary, to answer all books, Mr.
O. Exam. p. 22, 23.
pro and con, about this subject; then in doing of which (seeing enough is said
already) I hope to employ my self better.

For what you shall answer your self, either of your self, or by the pens of
others transcribed for your self, let it be Mr. Hollingworth, Ibid.
or who it will be, I will not decline the answering thereunto; but at your
return to them I will not go, it being you I deal with. Wherein refusing your
offer, he renders a reason which makes against him, viz because in this
controversial age, so many books be written on both sides; why then should any
more be added by you and him of the same controversy, when they have been more
accurately discussed already by writing and printing, then by polemical
concertation in discourse (whereof much is merely extemporary) they are like to
be? And he says, he hops to employ himself better; and if he can employ
himself better then by reading such Books, as were advisedly and deliberately
dictated, to satisfy such as doubt, and settle doubtful Readers in the truth
in question; sure you may employ your self better, then in putting your self to
the pains and expense of time, to write out Arguments and Answers for his
sutisfaction; because he wants the books you direct him to, or will not be at
cost to buy them, or trouble to peruse them; and if he did read them, would
bring a resolution rather to cavil at them, then to receive resolution from
them. When you have leisure to wash a Black-moor, you may spare some time to
spend upon your self-conceited and self-willed adversary Mr. J. O. for such an
one will every judicious man judge him to be, who reads with indifferency the
Disputation and Examination published by him against you.

Fifthly, you have too much precious work in your hands every day, then that
you can warrantably lay any part of it aside, to contend with such an obstinate
adversary as Mr. Onley is; and I am verily persuaded, and I assure my self,
many that know your various and uncessant pains for the souls of your people of
Coventry, are of my mind, that thereby you do more good in a week there, then
you shall do by disputing with, or writing against a perverse Anabaptist a
whole year together.

Sixthly, There are so many now engaged in the defense of the Churches of
Christ (for now Mr. O. sets himself against all the Churches of Europe, and New
England, besides Old England) that so much work cannot in reason fall to your
share, as still to manage the defense of them all against him, or any such
obstreperous talker; especially having such a weighty burden of pastoral
employment continually upon you.

Seventhly, If you should set all aside, and encounter him at the Press, as you
have done by Disputation in the Church, it would be to little purpose or
profit, both in respect of Mr. O. and of his party. For,

First for him, unless you answer him in every particular how impertinent
soever, you shall still be under his exception and insultation, to the great
prejudice both of your cause and person; for he not only taxes you for
deficient answering already, saying, to a great part of his answer you have not
said one word, and that your Reply passes over just half his Answer, without a
word of Reply. Exam. of Dr. ^. Rep. p. 28. Ibid. p. 115.
But such is his insolency, that (as if he had authority to prescribe your part
of the controversy, as well as to dispose of his own) he lays this severe
Law upon you, if you contest with him again, exactly to answer to each
particular plainly and downrightly by reasons and Scriptures directly to the
purpose, or else to confess you cannot, by saying nothing. Neither so nor so;
For datur tertium, a man may silently pais by an especial part of his Book
written in defense of a precious truth, Mr. O. his Exam. of Dr. Br. Reply, p.
69.
as he phraseth it, that is, Universal Redemption, because it is discovered to
be a pernicious error, and abundantly confuted by Doctor Kendall, in answer to
M. John Goodwins Book called Redemption Redeemed; and another part as
impertinent as that so often inculcated position of Mr. O. Of the first
constitution of Churches; and another part is answered by Dr. Br. before, as
that for the Vindication of the Ministry of England: no need then of confessing
you can say nothing, Disp. p. 33.
because you do not say all things as he appoints you. Mr. Fisher made a more
modest resolution concerning his adversary and himself; If any one answer
(says he) and I have satisfaction from him to the contrary, he shall hear of
my Recantation; if I have not, he shall see it by my silence. Mr. Fisher in his
answer to Nobody in 5 words. p 465.
So may you better signify your dissatisfaction with Mr. O. his Examination of
your Reply by your silence, then endeavor his satisfaction by a printed answer
unto it, and that upon his reason, viz because he would not lose any more time
from preaching, at I see I must (says he) if I meddle any more at the Press
with this subject.

Secondly, It would be to as little purpose and profit, in respect of his
party, Vestra solum legitis, vestra amatis, caetera causa incognita
condemnatis. Cicer. l. 2. de nature. deorum. p. 216. Medicamenta nesciunt, and
insani sunt adversus antidotum qua sani esse potuissent, Aug. confess. l. 9. c.
4.
who are so possessed with prejudice against your cause by their teachers,
odious invectives and exclamations against you, your Church and Ministry as
Popish and Antichristian, that they will not only not buy, but not so much as
look upon an Apology for you, being sick of the perverse partiality which the
Orator reproves in some Philosophical Heretics of his time, You read only
what is written for your own side (says he) and love only what is your own,
for other things you condemn them, the cause unheard. And as Agustine observes
of some of like distempered passions, though so much the worse, as errors in
Divinity are worse then errors in Philosophy: They know not what is Physic for
them, and are mad (says he) against the Medicine which shouldoure them of
their madness. Such are many of the besotted Proselytes of seducing Teachers of
the present age.

In respect of such froward and perverse opposites, as both they and they
leaders (for the most part) manifest themselves, silence may sometimes be more
seasonable then Replications and Rejoynders: for, Quorum dicta contraria si
toties refellere velimus, quoties obnixa front statuerunt non carere quid
dicant, dum quomodocunque nostris disputationibus contradicant, quam infinitum
and aerumnosum and infructuosum? etc. Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 2. c. 1. Tom. 1. p.
63.
as Augustine puts the case, If we should set our selves to refell the
contrary Tenets of those who have hardened their foreheads, so as to resolve
they will have somewhat to say, so they may any way gainsay our disputations,
how endless, how grievous, how unprofitable will our trouble be?

Eighthly, If there were a necessity that Mr. O. should be further answered by
you, or some body for you, you have three Sons, the youngest of whom would be
able enough to undertake him by an Examination and Conviction of his
Examination of error and slander, of pride and vanity: but neither would I have
any of them put to so unprofitable a Task, because I hear they are all of them
daily employed in better work. Therefore,

Ninthly, If after these Animadversions upon him and his Book, it be requisite
to take any further course to take down the Tympany of Mr. O. his swelling
self-conceit, I shall propose it to the serious considerations of our Venerable
Society, at their meeting at Kenelmworth, to invite him to a public
Disputation there once again, to be ordered and managed according to the Rules
forementioned. So you have mine advice as you desired, with what I further
promised; for which, if any thing be worthy of your acceptance and theirs, who
are our Brethren in interest and affection to the cause wherein you first, and
now I am publicly engaged, I desire your thanks to God for it, and prayers for
me.

Yours in the dearest relations of Christianity and Friendship, JOHN LEY.

The Catalogue of Books in defense of the lawfulness of Tithes promised before
in Chap. 9.
1. THe maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, by Rich. Eburne. printed
1619. for Eleazer Edgar, to be sold at the Windmill in Paul's Churchyard, in
4to 2. The Scourge of Sacrilege, by Sam. Gardener, DD. printed for Tho. Man,
1611. 8vo. 3. Tithes examined and proved due to the Clergy by Divine Right, by
George Carlton, for Clement Knight at the Lamb in Paul's Churchyard, 1611. in
4to. 4. Revenue of the Gospel, by Fulk Roberts, printed by Cantrel Logge at
Cambridge, 1613, in 4to. 5. The Anatomy of Ananias, or Gods censure against
Sacrilege, by R. G. printed by C. L. at Cambridge, 1616. 4to. 6. Levi his
complaint, by Will. Guild of Edenbury, 1617. in 4to. 7. Sacrilege sacredly
handled, by Sir James Sempel, printed at London for Edm. Weaver, 1619. to be
sold at the great North door of Paul's, in 4to. 8. Animadversions on Mr. Seld.
Hist. of Tithes, by Rich, Tollesley, printed by John Bill, 1619. in 4to. 9.
Diatribe upon the first part of the Hist. of Tithes, by Rich. Montague, for
Mattk. Lownes, printed 1621. in 4to. 10. The poor Vicars Plea, by Tho. Reeves
Dr. of the Civil Law, printed by John Bill, 1621. in 4to. 11. The Question of
Tithes Revised, Arg. for the morality of Tithing cleared, by William Sclater
DD. printed by John Legate, 1623. in 4to. 12. A new discovery of personal
Tithes, by Cornelius Burges, printed for William Sheffard in Popes-Head-Alley
1625. in 12mo. 13. An answer to the Jewish part of Mr. Seld. Hist. of Tithes,
by Stephen Nettles, printed at Oxford, 1625. in 4to. 14. Jacobs Vow, or the
true Hist. of Tithes, by Rich. Perrot at Cambridge, by Tho. and John Buck,
printed 1627. in 4to. 15. Gospel-maintenance, by Rich. Johnson, for
Mich-Sparks, printed 1633. 16. Liberal maintenance manifestly due to the
Minister. of the Gosp. by Joshuah Meene, printed for Laur. Chapman at Chancery
Lane end in Holborn, Ann. 1638. 17. The Parsons Law, by William Hughs of Grays
Inn Esquire; for the Author printed 1641. in 8vo. 18. The complete Parson, by John
Doderige, for John Grove, printed 1641. in 4to. 19. The maintenance of the
Sanctuary, for John Maynard at the George in Fleetstreet, near St. Dunstans
Church, printed 1642. in 4to. 20. Nolime tangere, Anno 1642. 21. Tithes
remounted and advanced, by Martin Bown for Tho. Bates at the Maidenhead on
Snow-hill, near Holborne, printed 1646. in 4to. 22. A defense of the Right of
Tithes against sundry late scandalous Pamphlets, by E. B. printed by George
Miller, 1646. in 4to. 23. Sacrilege a Snare, by Lancelot Andrews, for Andr,
Heb at the Bell in Paul's churchyard, printed 1646. 24. The Preachers Plea, by
William Tipping Esquire; for Christopher Meredith, 1646. in 12mo. 25. De non
temerandis Ecclesiis, by Sir Henr. Spelman at Oxford, for Henry Hall printer
there, 1646. in 4to. 26. Sir H. Spelmans greater work concerning Tithes, for
Philemon Stephens, printed 1647. in 4to. 27. An answer to a Letter by Sam.
Turner, concerning the Church and Revenue thereof, printed 1647. in 4to. 28. The
Civil Right of Tiths, by Charles Enterfield, for John Holden at the Anchor in
the N. Exchange. 1650. in 4to. 29. The muzzled Ox treading out the corn, for
Will, Hope at the Unicorn in Cornhill, printed 1650. in 4to. 30. The Ministers
Hue and Cry. by Rich. Culmer, printed by A. Miller 1651. in 4to. 31. The
Undeceiv. of the people in point of Tithes, by Philem. Trelaine Gent. for Jo.
Clark under Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1651. in 4to. 32. The Right of Tithes
asserted, 1653. in 4to. 33. A second vindication of Tithes against a paper
styled, Tiths totally routed by Magna Charta, printed for Tho. Heath, near the
Piazza of Coven Garden, printed 1653. in 4to. 34. The maintenance of Minist. by
Tithes, by John Gauden DD. for Andr. Crook, printed 1653. in 4to. 35. Tithes
the Churches Right, by the Laws of God, Nature, and this Nation, by Bovil
Turminger, for Rich. Lowndes, 1653. in 4to. 36. An Apology for pious and
painful Ministers, printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the Old Bailey,
printed 1653. in 4to. 37. The Worcester petition to the Parliament for the
Ministry of England defended, for Tho Underhill, by Fr. Tytan, 1653. in 4to.
38. A Gospe pl lea for Maint. and Tenths of the Ministers of the Gospel, by
Will. Prynne Esquire; for Mich. Sparks, printed 1653. in 4to. 39. The Civil right
of Tiths, proving 1. That the propriety of Tithes is not in the Landholder. 2.
Nor in the State. 3. But in the Incumbent, for John Wright at the Kings head in
the Old Bailey, printed 1653 in 4to. 40. An argument in defense of the Right of
Patrons to Advowsons, and of the Right of Tithes, for Edw. Blackmore at the
Angel in Paul's Churchyard, printed 1653. in 4to. 41. The Parsons Guide, on the
Law of Tithes, by W. S. Esquire; printed for Will. Lee, D. Pakemere, and G. Bedel,
at their shops in Fleetstreet, printed 1654. in 4to. 42. The due Right of
Tithes examined by an aged Gentleman, for Tho. Pierripont at the Sun in Paul's
Churchyard, printed 1654. in 4to.
I have more then these, and there are some more which I have not, but these
may suffice.


