A Few, and New OBSERVATIONS, UPON THE BOOK OF GENESIS. The most of them
certain, the rest probable, all harmless, strange, and rarely heard off
before.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOTE Staffordiens.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger in the year, 1642.

TO My dear and loving Countriemen of the County of Stafford, and other my
friends r^siding in the City of LONDON. Health, Content, Prospe^ity, Eternity.
THESE few Collections (worthy and worthily honored Friends and Countrie-men)
were not intentionally and purposely studied for when I first took them up,
but I took them upon another occasion. For having spent some years in
compileing the Harmony of the four Evaugelists, among themselves and with the
Old Testament, and in exp^aining of their sense and language, and for that
purpose having read over the Old Testament as expressly as I could, to bring
it to help and further me in the works these observations, (and such other upon
the other Books) picked up by the way which I observed either very rarely, or
not at all to have been observed by any heretofore. That work from whence
this proceeded, would now begin to creep forth to the public view, were but
printing as pregnant a Mother for such babes as she used to be in former time.
These small and few sparks which have flowne from that Auvile, I have chosen
to present to your hands and favorable acceptance, partly for a token of my
love and observance of so worthy friends, and partly because that if the
briefnesse of these Collections (which I have been forced to straiten to this
small compass, that I might relate them to the dimension of such Books as are
now only printed, for greater volumes than these do not now find vent) If
they should breed any scruple or doubting, you know where to find the Author
for further satisfaction. If these find easy and gentle entertainment, more of
the like stamp are ready to show themselves in order upon the succeeding
Books as the printing of these times will bring them forth.

Yours ready to serve you. I. L.
Aug. 25. 1642.
A Few, and new Observations, UPON THE BOOK OF GENESIS.
CHAP. I.
THE Scripture the word of Knowledge, begins with the Story of the Creation,
because first, the first stepp toward the knowledge of God is by the Creature,
Romans 1. 20. Secondly, the Story of the Creation pleads for the justice of
God, in planting and displacing of Nations as he pleases, since the Earth is
his own and he made it. Thirdly, the Resurrection is taught by the Creation,
and the end of the world from the beginning, for God that made that to be, that
never was, can much more make that to be, that has been before, namely these
our bodies, Heaven and Earth, Center and circumference created together in ^he
same instant, and clouds full of water (not such as we see made by evaporation,
but such as are called the Windows or Cataracts of Heaven, Genesis 7. 11. 2 Kings
7. 19. Mal. 3. 10.) created in the same instant with them, verse. 2. The earth
lay covered with waters, and had not received as yet its perfection beauty and
deckage: and that vast vacuity that was between the unequal of those waters,
and the concave of the clouds, was filled as it were with a gross and great
darkness, and the Spirit of God moved the Heavens from the first moment of
their creation in a circular motion, abo^e and about the earth and waters, for
the cherishing and preservation of them in their new be^un being, and verse 3.
Twelve hou^es did she heavens thus move in darkness, and then God commanded
and there appeared light to this upper Horizon, namely to that where Eden
should be planted [for for that place especially is the story calculated] and
th^re did it shine other twelve hours, declining by degrees with the motion of
the heavens to the other Hemisphere, where it enlightened other twelve hours
also, and so the first natural day to that part of the world was six and
thirty hours long, s^l^^ng wa^ Ioshuaes day, Josh 10. And so long was our
S^v^our clo^ded under death.

V. 6 When the l^ght began to set to the Horizon of Eden, and the evening or
night of the 2d. day was come, God commanded that the Air should be spread out
instead of that vacuity, which was betwixt the waters upon the Earth, and the
waters in ^he clouds, and in four and twenty hours it was accomplished, and
the Air spread through the whole universe with the motion of the Heavens. In
this second days work it is not said as in the rest that God saw it good,
because whereas this days work was about separation of waters, they were not
perfectedly and fully parted, till the waters which covered the Earth were
couched in their channells, which was not till the third day: and there it is
twice said that God saw it good once for the entire separation of the waters,
and again for the fructification of the ground.

Verse. 9. In the new created air the Lord thundered and rebuked the waters,
Psalm. 104. 7. So that they hasted away and fled all westward, into the
channells which the Lord had appointed for them. And still as they flowed away,
and dry land appeared the earth instantly brought forth trees and plants in
their several kinds. This production was only of the bodies and substances
of them, for their verdure and maturity was not till the sixth day: And now was
Eden planted with the bodies of all trees fit for meat and delight, which by
the time that Adam is created are laden with leaves and fruit.

Verse. 14. The Moon and some stars created before the Sun: She shone all
the night of the fourth day in her full body, and when the Sun appeared in
the morning, then was her light augmented, yet her body obscured from the World
till the sixth day at even, which was her prime day, and she showed her crescent
and gave light to Adam, who was but newly got at that time out of the
darkness of his fall, by the luster of the promise.

Verse. 21. Whales only of all brutes specified by name, to show that even the
greatest of living creatures could not make it self.

Verse. 25. Beasts wild and tame created, and all manner of creeping things, and
the World furnished with them from about Eden as well as with men: of clean
beasts were seven created, three couples for breed, and the odd one for Adams
sacrifice upon his fall, but of unclean only one couple for the propagation
of the kind.

26 Man created by the Trinity about the third hour of the day, or nine of the
clock in the morning.

CHAP. II. The three first verses, that treat of the institution of the
Sabbath, are according to their proper Order of time, to be taken in at the end
of the third chapter.

Verse 4 etc. On the morning of the sixth day a mist, that had gone up from the
Earth fell down upon it again in rain or dew, and watered the Earth, with
which watering the trees and plants budded to maturity in a trice: this dew
being as a natural cause thereof, yet the effect being withal exceeding
supernatural, because so s^eedy.

Verse. 7. Of the dust of the Earth thus watered, God created the body of man,
and to this the Psalmist alludeth, The dew of thy youth, Psalm. 110. 3. And into
that Earth so prepared, he breaths the Spirit of Life and Grace, Ephesians. 4. 24.

Verse. 10. Eden watered by a river that overflowed it once a year, after the
manner of Nylus and Jordan. chap. 13. 10.

To Adam thus created and made Lord of the creature, the Lord himself brings
the creatures to receive their names, which he gives to them agreeable to
their natures, and that at the first sight, showing at once his dominion over
them, and his wisdom, among them all he sees no fit match for himself, but
by seeing every one of them mated, and that they came before him by paires, he
is brought to be sensible of his own want of a fellow: which thereupon God
provideth for him out of his own body of a rib, which part of him might best
be spared. And thus the Creation ends in the making of the woman.

CHAP. III. The woman thinking it had been a good Angel that spoke in the
trunk of the Serpent, she enters communication with the Devil: who
perceiving her both to add and to diminish to, and from the Commandment that
was given them, grows the more impudent to tempt, and seduceth her by the
lust of the flesh and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, as 1. John
2. 16. And she persuades her husband, and so they both are fallen on the very
same day that they are created, Genesis 9. 1, 2, 3. Psalm. 49. 12.

Christ is promised before the man and the woman are censured: and they are
questioned also before they be sentenced, but so was not Satan, for God had
mercy in store for them, but none for him. The curse is not upon man himself
but upon the Earth, to teach him to set his affections on things above and not
on the cursed ground, and not to look for an earthly Kingdom of Christ on this
Earth which the Lord has cursed.

Adam apprehends and lays hold upon the promise by Faith, and in evidence
of this his faith he calls his wives name Eve or Life, because she was to be
the mother of Christ according to the flesh, by whom life should come; and of
all believers that by faith should live in him, for an outward sign and seal
of this his Faith, and for a further and more lively expression of the same;
God teaches him the rite of sacrifice, to lay Christ dying before his eyes in
a visible figure: And with the skins of the sacrificed beasts God teaches him
and his wife to cloth their bodies. And thus the first thing that dies in the
world is Christ in a figure.

At the end of this third chapter imagine the three first verses of chapter. 2.
concerning the Sabbath to be observed, to come in, and suppose the texture of
the story to lie thus. Adam thus fallen, censured recovered, instructed and
expelled Eden on the sixth day, the next day following he by Gods appointment
keeps for a Sabbath or an holy rest, and spends it only in divine duties.
Now the reason why it stands in the place where it does, chap. 2. Is partly
because Moses would lay the seven days, or the first week of the world
altogether without interposition, and partly because he would show by setting
it before Adams fall, that had he persisted in innocence, yet must he have
observed a Sabbath.

The seventh day or Sabbath is not bounded in the text with the same limits
that the other days are, for it is not said of it as it was of them, The
Evening and the Morning were the seventh day, because a time should come when
it should have a new beginning and end, and though to the Jews it was from
Even to Even yet from the beginning it was not so expressed.

CHAP. 4. Cain and Abel twins of one birth; and first was borne he that was
natural, and after he that was spiritual.

The faith of Abell appeared in the very materials of his sacrifice; it being
of slain beasts and so a representation of the death of Christ: for this, it
is fired from Heaven, and Caines is not, though his dry ears of Corn were
materials farie more combustible. Cain and Abell were both their own Priests,
for it cannot be proved that Sacrifices were ever offered but upon emergent
occasions, till the Law fixed it for a common service: and he that had such an
occasion, had liberty to be his own Priest, even under the Law as it appears
by Gedeon, Manoah, etc. and then much more was that liberty before.

The word Sin, in verse. 7. seems rather to signify an offering or
atonement for sin then punishment: For first God comes not to deject Cain
lower then he was, but to raise him from his dejection, as it appears both by
his deigning to give him an Oracle from Heaven, and also by the words wherewith
he begins. Secondly if the words, Sin lies at the door, intend sudden
Judgment ready to devour him, what dependence can the words following have
with these? If thou do not well, thou shall certainly be punished, and thy
brothers desire shall be subject to thee: for this were to threaten poor Abell
more, or at least as much as Cain. Thirdly the Original word Chateath as it
signifies Sin, so also does it the sacrifice for sin, as Hos. 4. 8. 2 Cor.
5. 21. And all along Leviticus, and it was the custom, according to which
Moses speaks as best known, to lay the Sacrifice at the Sanctuary door.

Verse. 14. Cain sensible of his punishment though he was not of his sin,
beggeth of God, that he might die to ease him of it, Therefore let any one that
finds me kill me, but this God denies to him reserving him to a lingering
punishment: and Caine being assured of long life, gives himself to all
sensuality, to sweeten it as much as he can, and this is the way of Caine, Iud.
verse. 11.

Ver. 23. Lamech in horror of Conscience for his Polygamy, which now began to
be examplary to the general corruption of the world, acknowledges his sin
seaventie times greater than Cains, and his desert of punishment
proportionable: for Cain had slain but one man and but the body, but he by his
evil example had killed old and young and their very souls: and therefore he
makes his complaint to his two wives that had brought him to it.

CHAP. V. A Chronicle of 1556. years: and all the years are reckoned complete
but only Noah's five hundredth year, in ver. 32.

Ver. 3. Seth borne in Original sin: the Father of all men in the new world
after the flood, Numb. 24. 17.

Ver. 23. Enoch lives as many years as be days in a year.

Those that lived nearer the flood lived the longer unmarryed because they
would not generate many children for the water.

V. 29. Noah a comforter, because in him liberty should be given to the World
to eat flesh.

CHAP. VI. In the general corruption of the World, Noah the eight person in
descent from Enoch, in whose time profaneness began, as 2 Pet. 2. 5. Escapes
the abominations and desolation of the times.

CHAP. VII. VIII. IX. The flood: the Beasts in the Arc live without enmity,
which shows how the words, Genesis 3. 15. about enmity with the Serpent, are to
be understood, the Serpent and Noah are now friends each to other: this is
alluded to, Esaias, 11. 6. 7 Noah is in the Arc just a complete and exact year
of the Sun, but reckoned in the text by Lunary Months. Universal darkness
all the forty days raines. The door of the Arc under water: The Arc
draws water eleven Cubits. The waters when they came to abate while they lay
above the Mountains, fell but one Cubit in four days, but far faster
afterward. After their coming out of the Arc for a whole half year together,
Noah and his family, and all the Creatures live upon provision that was still
in the Arc, for they came out just upon the beginning of Winter, when there
was neither grass corn nor fruits till another spring: The forbidding to eat
flesh with the blood, condemns the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

CHAP. X. XI. Seventy Nations dispersed from Babel, but not seventy Languages:
the fifteen named in Act. 2. were enough to confound the work, and they may
very well be supposed to have been the whole number. Sem as he stands in the
front of the Genealogy of the new world, has neither Father nor Mother named
nor beginning of days nor end of life. Nahors life is shortened for Idolatry.

CHAP. XII. Abraham at 75. years old receives the promise, and comes into
Canaan and just so many years did Sem live after Abraham's coming thither and
so might well be Melchizedeck in chap. 14.

Ver. 6. 7. Abraham builds an Altar near, if not upon mount Gerizim the hill
of blessing: and verse 8. Another altar he builds near unto, if not upon mount
Ebal, the hill of cursing, Deuteronomy 27. And so takes possession of the land by
faith in the very same place, where his sons the Israelites did take
possession of it indeed, Josh. 8. 12. etc. 30.

V. 11. When he is ready to enter into Egypt whither famine drove him, as it
did his posterity afterward, he is afraid of his life in regard of Sarah, who
being a white woman would soon be taken notice of by the Egyptians who were
blackmoores. This was one mai^e inticement to Joseph's mistres to cast an eye of
lustfulnes upon him, because he was a white man and she a Moore. Of the same
complexion was Pharaohs daughter whom Solomon took to wife: of whom that in
the first and literal acceptance is to be understood, which spiritually is
to be applied to the Church, Cant. 1. 5. 6. I am black but comely: and I am
black because the Sun has looked on me, and that Psalm. 45. 13. The Kings
Daughter is all glorious within: for she was a Blackmoore without.

V. 20. Pharaoh plagued for Sarais and Abraham's sake who was an Hebrew
Shepherd, gives charge to the Egyptians, making it as it were a law for
time to come, that they should not converse with Hebrews nor with foreign
Sheepheards, in any so near familiarity as to eat or drink with them, which
the Egyptians observed strictly ever after, Genesis 42. 32. and 46. 34.

CHAP. XIII. Abram and Let quarrel, and part in the valley of Achor: and this
is at the very same time of the year that Israel came into the Land, viz. in
the first month of the year, or Abib,

CHAP. XIV. Noah in the blessing of his son Sem, makes him in a special
manner Lord of the Land of Canaan, Genesis 9. Hither therefore came Sem, and built
a City, and called it after his own peaceable condition Salem: here he reigned
as a King, but so quietly and retiredly as that he was a Priest also. In this
sequestration of the father from worldly cares and affairs, Elam his eldest
son and heir apparent, though he were seated far distant in the East, yet it
concerns him to have an eye to Canaan, and how matters go there, for the
land by bequest of his grandfather Noah, descended to him as by the common
law. This title brings Chedorlaomer an heir of Elam from Persia into Canaan,
when the five Cities of the plain rebel. Into this war he takes three
partners younger brothers of the House of Sem, Amraphel of Arphaxad, King of
Chaldea, Arioch of Lud, King of Ellasar bordering upon Babylonia and Tidal of
Assure King of Nations, and late built Niniveh. These four thus banded together
and all children of Sem, and all in claim of his land against the usurping
Canaanite, are resolved to march over and so they do, all that Country both
within Jordan and without. Their first inrode is upon the Rephaims that lay
most North and lay first in their way; and so over run, the Zuzims in Ammon,
Emims in Moab, Horites or Hivites that were Troglodytes or dwelt in the rocky
Caves of Mount Seir in Edom, as Ier. 49. 10. Obad. ver. 3. And all the
Canaanites South-East and full South to Hazezon Tamar a point below the dead
Sea: There they turn in to the land of Canaan properly so called, and as they
had subdued all the Countries from North to South without Jordan, so now they
intend to do from South to North within. And so they did: but when they were
come to Dan the North out-going of the land, Abram overtaketh them and
conquereth the conquerours, and now he is doubly titled to the land, namely by
promise and by victory. This Sem or Melchizedeck observes upon his return
with triumph, and perceives that it was he and his posterity to whom the Lord
had designed that Land in the prophetic spirit of Noah, and had refused the
heirs that were more apparent in common law and reason: and therefore he
brings forth bread and wine the best fruits of the land, and tenders them as
livery and seisin of it, to him, whom he perceived that God had chosen and
pointed out for the right heir.

CHAP. XV. All fear of claim by any of Sems sons was now past, because of
the late conquest, but only of Aram the youngest, who had no chalengers or
children, in the war of him was Eliezer descended who was Abrams chief
servant, and where is the title by Sems resignation, was to descend to Abram
and his heirs, Eleazer was like to be next if Abram had no child of his own.
When this jealousy somewhat troubles Abram, God removes it by the promise of
a son of his own Loins: and by a Covenant with sacrifice, even of all
manner of creatures that were to be sacrificed.

CHAP. XVI. Abram assured of a son of his own body (but not whether by Sarah
or not) takes Hagar to compass the promise, she wearied out by Sarai's
strictness, is travailing to her own Country Egypt, and by the way has a
vision of the Angel of the Covenant, which was strange to her to have visios
out of Abrams house: therefore she called the name of the Lord that spoke unto
her; Thou art the God of vision: for she said, did I here also look after a
vision, in a place so far distant from Abrams family? and the well also where
he spoke unto her was called, The well of the lively one of vision.

CHAP. XVII. Circumcision instituted in Hebron, and about the time of Easter
the place and time of the year where and when the Baptist was borne, who was to
bring in Baptism instead of circumcision. Abram and Sarah upon Circumcision
says Rabbi Plenahem, were as new creatures, and therefore also must they have
new names.

CHAP. XVIII. The three Persons in the Trinity in the shape of 3. men appear
to Abraham and dine with him, and eat the First flesh that is mentioned eaten
in all the Scripture Abraham beggeth for Sodom till he thought he had bin
gotten within the compass of righteous ones in Lots family, and then he
cease.

CHAP. XIX. The Son and the Holy Ghost come into Sodom to destroy it, and now
they are called Angels, because they were sent, by the Father, Lots wife is
struck dead with lightning, and stiffened and fixed in the place where she
stood, and of a salt and brackish smell, and therefore called a pillar of salt:
Sodom destroyed by a strange fire, and the memorial of so great a Judgment
preserved to this day by as strange a water; Jordan before that time had an
issue further, but from that time it pleased God to stop it, and to lay that
valley up on a fatal poole. Lot had two Daughters at the least that perished
in the fire and brimstone, as well as he had two that escaped. It is observable
how soon after the institution of Circumcision those Cities come to
destruction, which so hideouslly abused that member, wherein the Covenant for
the land was sealed.

CHAP. 20. 21. Abraham flitteth into the land of the Philistims, that Isaac
might be borne out of the land of Cannaan properly so called for the greater
mystery to his birth. God himself comes in visible form, as c. 18. Sarah
has once a greater measure of the Spirit of Prophecy then Abraham, namely in
the matter of casting out the bondwoman and her son. There is good probability
of Ismaels salvation. Abraham consecrateth a grove at Beersheba, that he might
have hallowed wood, for his sacrificing fires, as well as holy fire for his
sacrifices.

Chap. 22. Abraham passed through ten temptations, and the sacrificing of his
son the last and greatest.

Chap. 23. When Rebeccahs sun is risen in the last chap. Sarah sets in this.
The first foot of land, and all the land that Abraham has in Canaan in
possession is only a place of burial: God by this very thing drawing him, and
his to look after the spiritual part of the promise.

Chap. 25. At what time Abraham married Keturah is uncertain: the text has
laid it after Isaacs marriage, because it was fit that all the actions of
Abraham which any whit concerned the promise, should be handled first and
together, before the other which either did not at all or did it the less. But
that Abraham was married to this woman, long before Isaacs marriage or Sarahs
death, is probable upon these conjectures. 1. He that held it strange to have a
son at an hundred years old, it is not like he would marry at an hundred and
forty. 2. In c. 24. 36. when the servant is to make the match for Isaac, he
says that Abraham had given all his estate to Isaac, which had bin unnecessary
to mention, had he had no more children but Ismael who was gone from his house
long before.

Abraham's disposing of his sons into the East Countries or Arabia, was not upon
usurpation, but upon just claim by conquest, c. 14. All these countries were
of the land of Canaan, and of the promise and therefore are circumcised ones
seated in them instead of Canaanites.

When the text has recited these sons of Abraham and their settlement, it
brings him and Ismael to their graves: Not that they died before the birth of
Jacob, and Esau as the text has laid it, for Abraham lived till they were
fifteen years old, and Ismael till they were at their climactericall year of
63. but now has Moses no more to say of them, and therefore he concludes their
story at once. Esau borne all hairy over like a kid, but of a reddish color,
and therefore they called him Esau, Factus, made, and perfected already as
having both his beard and pubes as soon as he was borne.

In a sore year of famine in the land, Esau sells his birthright for want of
meat.

Chap. 26. The famine that had caused him to part with his birthright causes
Isaac his father to part out of the land of Canaan. The Philistims Africans by
descent Genesis 10. 14. and tawny like them) do soon espy the beauty of Rebeccah
a white woman.

Chap 27. Isaac being arrived at the age of 137. years, at what age Ismael his
brother had died, by his example, begins to think of his own death, and to
dispose himself for that. He sends Esau to hunt for venison for a trial,
whether he should bless him or no, for missing of venison before, he had lost
his birthright, and if he miss to day as he did then, it would be a sure
sign that he must lose the blessing: And so though Isaac had passed away the
maine blessing at unawares, yet when Esau comes home sped of a prey, he sees
that it was the will of God he should have some blessing, and so blessed him
also. Esaus garment, in which Jacob obtained the blessing, were the garments of
the Priesthood which belonged to the first borne.

Chap. 29 30. Jacob stronger then three men, and rolleth away the stone from
the wells mouth alone, which they could not do with all their strength united
he is deceived by Laban by a suborned person, and embraced Leah thinking he
had embraced Rahel, as he deceived his father by a suborned person, taking on
him to be Esau when he was Jacob: He serves in hardship in his marriage week,
and brings festivity to other; but labor to himself; Joseph, Zebulun and
Asher were in their mothers wombes at the same time, but Joseph borne last,
Dinah was not borne in these seven years unless she were a twin with Zebulun.
Reuben about five years old following the reapers finds Mandrakes and
brings the Apples thereof to his mother, for which poor rate Jacob is in
manner sold for a time by Rahel.

Chap. 31. Rahel ste^leth Labans Teraphim for a civil use: to preserve the
memory of some of her ancestors whereof they were the pictures, and which Laban
had impiously Idolized.

Chap. 32. Jacob for distrust in the promise so far upon Esaus approach that
he sends him above a thousand cattle of all sorts of which he had vowed the
tithes to the Lord, and before he paid them, is met by the way by the Lord, and
in danger to be killed by him: but by prayer and supplication he prevails
with the Lord, and escapes only with a lame leg. This lamenesse of Jacob was
not reputed to him for a m^ime, but like the honorable scars of a valiant
Captain, for a special dignity. For at Bethel he exercises the part and
office of a Priest, which if his halting had bin reputed for a maime he had
been disabled to do, and his posterity in all succeeding ages, reserve the
honorable memory of this his lamenesse, in not eating the sinew that shranke.
That was the first Cereremonie that distinguished Israel for a peculiar people,
because with this his lamenesse Jacob is first dignified with the name of
Israel. Circumcision differenced them not from the other seed of Abraham, by
Hagar and Keturah, but this curiosity in meats first begins Iudaisme. They
refrained not to eat the joint where the sinew was, as a leg of Mutton or of
Beef, for the legs of the Passover were to be eaten, Exodus 12. 10. but they
spared the sinew. And that not in abomination or abhorring of it, but in honor
and special respect, because it bare the memorial of their first naming
Israel: The portion of meat that Elkanah gave to his beloved Hannah, Manah
Ahhath Appaijna the portion of representation may not unfitly be understood of
this joint and the same piece of the meat did Samuel reserve from for Saul, in
honor, The Cook took up the leg, 1 Samuel 9. 24.

Chap. 33. 34. Shechem an Hivite by original, c. 34. 2. is an Amorite by
habitation c. 48. 22. So Anah the Hivite by descent, c. 36. 2. Beeri the
Hittite by habitation in one place, c. 26. 36. and an Horite by habitation in
another, chap. 36. 30. 24.

Judah was not at the murder at Shechem, but at Chezib upon the borders of the
Philistims, married and resident there, many miles distant.

Chap. 35. The Proselytes of Shechem admitted to Jacobs family by Baptism, for
circumcision to the Shechemites was become deadly.

Benjamin borne by the strength of the promise, v. 11. for Jacob was now past
the natural vigor of generating, and therefore he justly calls his name
Benjamin, the son of the right hand.

Chap. 36. Strange alteration of names in this chapter, from what they are in
others, Judith chap. 26. 34. called Aholibamah because of her Idolatry. Anah
her father, chap 36. 2. an Hivite by original, is Beeri an Hittite chap. 26.
34. because he dwelt among them about Beer-la-hai-roi. Bashemath c. 26. 34. is
Adah here, to show Gods dislike against Esaus matches Mahalath, is Pashemath to
show the Canaanitish qualities of a daughter of Ismael.

Compare this genealogy in this chapter with the same in 1. Chron. 1. and Timna
which is here a woman and a man's concubine, is there made that man's son, for
the Scripture uses to speak short in known stories.

Chap. 37. When the text has dispatched with Esau the hater of his brother
that lost his birthright by his own fault, it falls upon Joseph the hated of
his brethren, that obtained the birthright by the fault of another. He
feeding the flocks with his brethren joyneth in company with the sons of the
handmaides, for Leahs children cared little either for them or him. Among them
where he thought to have respect, he found hardship for they made him as their
slave or servant, Vehu nagnar, and he was a servant with the sons of Bilhah
and zilpah, ver. 2. This evil report of his brethrens usage of him he told his
father, whereupon he made him acoate of diverse colors as abadge of the
birthright which his father intended to confer upon him, that his brethren
for this should respect him the more. But this procures their greater hatred,
Reuben only excepted who sought his good though he had gotten his birthright,
which shows that the incestuous man was now become a penitent and holy.

Chap. 38. Judah punished in his children and his own shame for the sale of
his righteous brother. He was married about eight years before Joseph was
sold, being then not above twelve years of oge if he were so much. Therefore
the words in the beginning of the chap. At that time, have not so much any
reference to the exact time of Judahs marriage, as to the miscarriage of Er and
Onan, which befell not long after Joseph was sold, and so teach of his
requital in his children for the sale of his righteous brother.

Chap. 39. 40. 41. Joseph made a slave: his Blackmoore mistress lusts after
his beauty and whiteness. By the interpretation of other men's dreams he is
promoted as by the relating of his own he was sold into misery. Pharaoh gives
him a new name after their Oracular God Baal Zephon, Zophuath-Paanea.

Chap. 42. Joseph's words (...) v. 15. 16. not an oath by the Creature bnt an
apprecation and prayer for Pharaohs life: So let Pharaoh live as ye are spies
as Lev: 25. 36. helps to explain the verb.

Chap. 47. Pharaoh having never seen so old a man as Jacob, nor so grave a
head nor so gray a beard in all his life, in admiration asks him no other
question but concerning his age.

Chap. 48. The birth right which Jacob intended for Joseph before his sale is
conferred and confirmed upon him, when Ephraim and Manasseh are taken by him
for his sons, as Reuben and Simeon: and hence came Ephraim to be first borne
among the tribes, and therefore Moses choseth Joshua one of that tribe for
their conductor into Canaan.

Chap. 49. Jacob blesses every one of the Tribes v. 28. therefore in his words
to Reube^ Simeono^ and Levi which are the most bitte^, we must find a blessing
or we lose his se^ce. His words also concern the futur events of the Tribs, as
much or more then the twelve Patriarks that stood before him. v. 1. These
ground-workes being then thus laid for the understanding of these his last
words as necessarily they mnst, let it be tolerated to touch upon some of them
of the most difficulty, as far as Grammatical construction, and truth of
history will warrant and justify.

Reuben thou art my first born, my might and the beginning of my strength.
there is a remnant of dignity for thee, and a remnant of strength: For so the
word (...) signifies many times in the Bible, and so was Reuben dignified in
leading the Van in the wars of Canaan, Josh. 4. 12. And so had he a residue
of strength in being frontier against the Hagarens, 1 Chronicles. (...) Ne relinquas
(...) Venditionis sipsorum.
5. 10.

V. 4. Unstable as water in affecting the Priesthood. Number. 16. 1. 2. and in
refusing of the land of promise, Number. 32. (...) Leave no remnant of thine
instability, etc.

V. 5 Simeon and Levi brethren, their traffickings are instruments of cruelty
for their pretense of trading with Shechem they made an instrument to execute
their bloodinesse*

V. 6. For in their anger they slew a man, as for their will they would bough
an ox. For they used circumcision, as a means to master and murder me, as if
they should have cut the sinews of an ox to bring him under to their will. V.
13. Zebulon shall dwell at the haven of the Seas: the Sea of Galilee or the
lake of Genezaret East, and the Sea of Phaenicia or the Mediterrania
North-West. V. 14. Issachar is an Ass. of bone couching down between two
burdens of the Kingdom of Phaenicia on the one side, and the Kingdom of
Samaria on the other. V. 22. Joseph is a son of fruitfulnes, his fruitfulnes
in sons shall be by the well: In Daughters it goes even to the Enemy. This
Interpretation of that part of Joseph's blessing be referred to the cens^re of
the learned Reader as conjectured at, rather the^ boldly averred, and that upon
these considerations. First that there is a plain Antithesis betwixt Ben and
Bavoth, and therefore is to be construed accordingly of son* and daughters.
Secondly, that the word Ben is by his place in regimine, but by his vowel not,
so is Porah by his last letter in regimine, but not by his place: and therefore
both of them to be rendered something answerable to this their double
condition, Ben-Porath Joseph is a son of fruitfulnes, here they have the due of
their place, and Porath Ben fruitfulnes of sons: here they have the due of
their vowels and letters. Thirdly, that Porath also is to be understood in the
latter clause, Porath Bavoth fruitfulnes in daughters. Fourthly, that Shur
signifies natively in Hebrew an Enemy ps. 92. 12. and it is but from the
Chaldee idioms that it betokens a wall. Joseph's fruitfulnes in sons then did
chiefly show it self by the well of Shechem where Joshua of Joseph assembleth
all the tribes as Prince over them, and there also Ieroboa^ of Joseph raises
up that house to a Kingdom. From these words of Jacob the inhabitants of
Sychar had their warrant to maintain, that their well was Jacobs well and that
his sons and cattle drank of it. For it might not have bin dug of a 1000.
years after Jacob was dead and gone, for ought any Samaritane alive could tell,
if he fetched not his authority from these words of Jacob; who having given
that portien of ground to Joseph. Genesis 48. 22. does here intimate that there
was a well in it, and besides that well in his house should rise to honor. His
fruitfulness by daughters you may see in Judge. 21. where the daughters of
Iabesh Gilead and of Shiloh both of Joseph make up the breach of an hostile
tribe the tribe of Benjamin, or else it had decayed.

FINIS.

