EXCEPTIONS MANY and JUST Against two Injurious PETITIONS EXHIBITED TO THE
PARLIAMENT.

The one July 16. 1653. The other Aug. 4. 1653.
Both of them not only against Tithes, but against all Forced or Constrained
Maintenance of Ministers, Examined and found many ways faulty against Piety
and Justice, and as such now discovered, By THEOPHILUS PHILADELPHUS.

The Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of
the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

Luke 10.2. The Labourer is worthy of his hire.

Luke 10.7. Do ye not know that they which minister about holy things, live
of the things of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers
with the Altar. Even so the Lord has ordained, that they which Preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel.

1 Cor. 9.13, 14. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 2 19. Tom. 10. p. 640. Meus est homo quem
feci, mea est terra quam colis, mea sunt and semina quae spargis, mea animalia
quae fatigas, mei sunt imbres, and pluviae and ventorum flamina mea sunt, meus
est solis calor and cum omnia mea sint elementa vivendi, tu qui manus
accommodas solum decimam merebar is -- Deus sibi tantum decimam vendicans nobis
omnia condonavit ingrate fraudatur and perfide -- read domino pluenti mercedem
etc.

OXFORD, Printed by L. LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for THO: ROBINSON.
Ann. Dom. 1653.

TO THE Ministers of England in GENERAL.
Dear Brethren, the Scripture gives you the title of Watchmen, and overseers,
Ezekiel. 3.17. Act. 20.28. and these Titles admonish you of your office, which is
to Watch and Oversee yourselves and others, Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17. Open your
eyes I pray you, and look first within you, and then about you, and above you,
that you may discover (if it may be) why God raises such swarms of
Adversaries, (so many thousand Petitioners) to storm you, and to starve you,
why so many call you Priests in spite and scorn, who would be your Priests to
sacrifice you, if that Gods providence by the civil and military sword, did
not protect you, and Black coats who would (were it in their power make you
like the Priests of Ceres, by a Tunicam quam initiationis die induerant, novam
nunquam eruebant, quoad tandem lacera gestari, amplius nequiret. Lud. de Vives
in Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 7. c. 20.
ragged, or like to Bedlams, by a naked beggary brought upon you) while you
have leave to wear them (though many weary of the contempt of them, and some
fearing peril by them, have put themselves into other colors) let them mind
you as (mourning habits) of your sad condition, first and most by sin, and
then of the bitter fruits, which God many times serves up, as a second course
to those, who use to glut themselves with sweet meats.

Give me leave I beseech you (not as a Diocesan, or provincial Inquisitor, to
put upon you any Visitation Articles: or as a Canonical Informer, to present
you for any crime or excess which I knew by any one of you, I would rather
cover it in charity, then discover it with Scandal, but to be your
remembrancer, admonitor, or (if that be too much) Petitioner, praying you to
examine, and consider with your selves, whether you have not been too much
addicted to ease and delicacy of life, whether you have so ordered your own,
and your Wives and Childrens, and servants conversation (so far as in you
lay) as by them to set an imitable example of sobriety, piety, modesty, and
gravity before their eyes, whose ears you fill with instructions and
directions in all moral duties, whether you have not been more remiss and
indifferent in public and common concernements of Religion, then in your own
particular interests, whether you have accounted your Parochial Incumbencies
as burdens, and Pastoral charges to bestow your vigilance and diligence upon
the souls of your People, or as Benefices whereto you intentively apply your
selves, for your Benefit and advantage in this World, taking the oversight of
the flock, rather for filthy Lucre, then of a ready mind 1 Pet. 5.2.

Whether you have made your selves known to be the Disciples of our Savior, by
that Christian character of his John 13.35. Of mutual love one to another, and
have not rather uncharitably censured and estranged your selves from your
Brethren, for very small, and mere problematicall dissentings in opinion,
whether with David Psalm. 119.136. you have bewailed the wickedness of others,
especially theirs, whose duties and sins are of nearest affinity and offense
to your own, It may seem very strange, that an heathen Pharaoh, should be so
favorable to his Priests, that in a time of extraordinary dearth, he would not
suffer their lands to be sold, as the lands of his other Subjects. Gen, 47.26.
That Jesabell should be so free and bountiful, as to feed 400 false Prophets
at her table 1 Kings 18.19. In his Apology for D. Featly called Sacra Nemesis
Sect. 10. p. 163.
That the Jewish Priests and Levites, (of whom many were more lewd, then I hope
are most of you) enjoyed Tithes, and many other emoluments, amounting to a
far greater value, then all the revenue remaining to the Ministers of
England, and were never deprived of them from Moses to Malachy (for the space
of 1038 years) That in the time of the Bishops in every Parliament since the
Reformation (as a late Writer observes) there has been a Bill put in against
double Beneficed Ministers, pursued with all vehemence and eagerness but ever
stopped with a cross Bill against Impropriations, that then the great scandal
and aggrievance was Plurality, and Non-residence, and the great business of
Religious Christians, to buy Impropriations, for encouragement and support of
Incumbent Pastors, That now on the contrary, in this age (pretending an higher
degree of reformation, and a greater zeal of propagation of the Gospel) the
cry should be up so loud, to put down all set and certain maintenance of all
Ministers, even of those who out of conscience, have refused Pluralities, (when
by the favor of Patrons they were pressed to accept them) and by the Law of
the Land were allowed to enjoy them, and who are most constant, and
conscionable in discharge of their duty of Preaching twice a day to their
single charges: and lastly, That Godly persons (such as many would seem to be,
and that may be diverse are, though in this point exceedingly misled) should
join with the profane and covetous whom God abhors Ps 10.3. To make their
portions fat with the spoils of the Ministry, and that this should be so
impetuously pursued, by way of petition to the Parliament, as if it were the
first and principal work they had to do. This is it, which may make us first
admire, and then with Rebecca to inquire of the Lord why is it thus Genesis 25.22.
May it not be, because the Lord looks for, (but finds not) more proficiency
toward perfection of us of this generation (according to our greater means,
and clearer light) then he did of those who served at the Jewish or Popish
Altar, or of such Protestant Clergy men, who have alterd the office of an
Evangelicall Minister, from fishing for men, Mat. 4.19. to fishing for
preferrement, and his conversation, from the simplicity and Godly sincerity of
the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.12. to a subtle and ungodly plausibility, to humor and
please men more then God, what ever that is (for which God has raised this
storm against us) let us beseech him to show us the means whereby it may be
calmed, and to help us effectually to apply them, that his displeasure may be
appeased toward us, and that our ways may so please him, that our enemies may
be at peace with us. Prove. 14.7.

There be some of our Tribe who take it not for a Tempest but for such a
favorable Gale of wind as may blow them some good, or at least not blast them
or do them any hurt: and of these I find three sorts. 1. Some have their
portion of Tithes in such small and Scattered parcells that they hope for more,
but fear not less, by taking away of Tithes. 2. Some have the less need to
be gatherers of Tithes, because having gathered Churches in Cities or great
Towns where many of their Church members are Rich and bountyfull to them, I
have heard it from a very honest Citizen who (though none of the Richest) gave
(for his part) 101 a year, and so many more joined with him in such
contribution to their Minister, as made up no less then 3001 a year, which
was paid him with love and chearfullnesse, and this he had without any great
expense either ordinary, or extrordinary, wherewith country Benefices
(consisting most of Tithes) are heavily burdened. 3. Some who having an elder
Brothers blessing in their portion of such revenues, are willing to give up
Tithes upon fair hopes given them that a more quiet, and comfortable provision
will be made for them for by some they be excepted against as causes of much
contention betwixt a Minister and his People, to whom I shall say something
which does jointly and something that does severally concern them. 1. That
which is of common concernement is, that none should regard his own particular
interest, so as to prefer it before the common good of able and Godly
Ministers in General and it for the common good both of the Generation
present, and of posterity, that Tithes be continued (as is sufficiently prooved
in the Resolution of a doubt concerning the Alienation of Tithes from Ministers
added to Sr Henry Spelmans larger Treatise of that Subject, Printed by Philemon
Stephens An. 1653.) 2. And severally I say 1. To the Minister who is tuck up to
so short an allowance in Tithes, that by Tithes (more proportionably
distributed) he may be like to have a more competent allowance allotted unto
him, then any way else. 2. For those who are better maintained without Tithes it
must be consideed that the number of such is but small, and few places there
are in these times (wherein many men's estates are so decayed and their opinions
so diversifyed) which have a competent number of men, who for their Wealth are
able and with good will would be ready to support a learned, and Orthodox
Minister, with any congruity to his condition, in regard either of his worth or
of his charge, and in some places they are geneeither so poor, so profane or
so like these plundering Petitioners, that a good Minister may be more like to
be starved the^ maintained among them, Yea there are some of those, who have
refused Tithes, and cast themselves upon the Benevolence of their People upon
fair offers from them who have been put to complain not only of the cooling of
their affections, but of their breach of promises made unto them for their
covenanted pentions.

Whereupon they have concluded that Ministers must have their maintenance by a
legal right or else (for the most part) it is like to come short of the
Levites allowance. Judge. 17.10. Thirdly to such as have sufficient subsistence
by Tithes, which the Laws allow and maintain as their Right; I say they
should not be willing to change it if they might have as much, or more, with
more ease, and quietness in another way; Naboth would not part with the Vineyard
which was the Inheritance of his Fathers, though Ahab offered him a beter for
it. 1 Kings. 21.2. For it is better to enjoy a revenue of an ancient and well
grounded Title, then to take a new one of another kind, though of greater
value. It has been a project of some men (where in some Ministers have acted
their part) M. H. P.
to reduce all Tithes to a common stock, or bank, to be dispensed by
Commissioners, and Committees, or some other public Officers, from whose
hands Ministers should receive yearly stipends in a proportion, which they
call a competency of which an eminent Preacher says thus.

A Competency, what is that and who shall judge of it? now the good Lord keep
his Clergy from the vulgar competency, I speak what I know, and I speak it
with a wet face, and a bleeding heart. I know Preachers of excellent parts that
spend their strength in the Pulpit, who cannot lay out 50s in 5 years upon
Books, but they must fetch it off the Backs, or out of the Bellyes of their
poor Children, call you this a Competency, well, if we deserve no kindness,
yet do us justice, let us have what your fathers gave us. Mr Rob. Harris now Dr
Harris Presid. of Trin. Coll. in his Sermon on Isaiah. 38. called Hezck.
Recovery.


Thus he Preached above twenty years ago, when neither thousands nor hundreds
appeared in a Petitionary way to or for the taking away of Tithes.

And if then it were thus, how much worse would it be with the most of the
Ministers of this Nation, if their own Right taken from them, they were to be
stinted by some State officer, what they should have, and at what rate they
should live.

In short, the inconveniences, and evil consequences of this change, from an
Ecclesiastical to a Political Title, are neither few nor small. For

1. It cannot be good for the Minister, to change either his paymaster, or his
payment, and it is sit, that he whose work he does, and whose servant he
is, should pay him his wages, God is his Master, and the wages he assigns for
his work is Tithes, which he has not only ordained, but every year by his
blessing on the creatures provideth for him.

2ly Since Tithes are by the production of the Divine benediction, they make
both a more Honorable, and more comfortable allowance, then a money pension
arising from trade and commerce can be, wherein there passes much sin
betwixt the buyer and the seller Prove. 20.14. In this respect, the Country
Minister has somewhat to cheer him up against the disparities, betwixt his
condition, and theirs who officiate in the City, which I have experimentally
observed, having exercised my Ministry, both in London and elsewhere, in London
I had much and comfortable communion with many worthy and well minded Citizens,
many friendly and free invitations and entertainements, freedom from public
Taxes, the Parishioners of their own accord paying my part as well as their
own; In the Country, I have found it quite contrary, yet there also I confess
is much difference; for in some places I have met with Godly and ingenious
people, who have used me as well and respected me as much as I could wish, in
some others I have felt the worst of that wicked proverb Pinch on the Parsons
side in unjust and unproportionable assessements and other such injurious
usages, as a Samaritan would scarce put upon a Jew, or a Jew upon a Samaritan.

3. The Ministers maintenance by Tithes being according to the Measure of Gods
blessing upon the whole, is most equal in respect of them that pay, and him
that receives Tithe, whether the increase be great or small, they
proportionably share in gain or loss, and when there is a plentiful crop, as
the quantity is advantageous to both, so when it is scant and short the value
of it by a dearer rate of the measure makes some amends to both, and so it may
best serve for all times (whether they abound or abate) which is not to be
expected from a stinted Pention for

4. This Pention of the Minister must either be changed many times as Laban
changed the wages of Jacob, changed not by diminution as his was, (for if he
had increased upon his changes, Jacob would not have remembered it as matter of
aggrievance) but by augmentation, or it will be much to the prejudice of poor
Ministers many ways, in regard of the different rates of things in several
ages whereof see many observiable instances with their proofs in the
Resolution of the doubt forementioned as of 20 mark a year at one time enough
honorably to maintain a studdent in the Innes of Court and this a charge only
to be borne by the Sons of Noble men, Resolution of the touch of the
alienation of Tithes p. 56.
and 10 marks a year sufficient for a Vicar to maintain himself, and to
keep hospitality when a quarter of Wheat at the dearest rate was twelve
Shillings, and the lowest sometime but one Shilling, and a man might buy a
Yoke of Oxen for a mark which whether we refer it to the Plenty of provision,
or paucity of People or scarcity of money wherein the later ages most abound,
because it is continually dug out of the Earth, and seldom buried in the
earth again, (what ever might be the cause and sometimes altogether might
concur) it may reduce the Minister to streights, if those things he must
necessarily use increase in price and his pention like a Dwarse grows not at
all.

5. The change of Tithes into state pentions is like (though it be pretended to
make for the Ministers ease and comfort) to prove extremely troublesome and
oppressive to him, for Ministers will be put in many places to take a part of
their own portion for a favor, which hitherto they might wholly claim and
recover as their right: the charge of the new Officers of this design will eat
up a great part of the Tithes of each Parish and when a Minister comes for his
pay they will tell him perhaps money is not come in, or laid out to others that
come before him or were worthy to be served before him, and will weary him by
long and tedious attendances (with such an intent as Felix had when he sent for
Paul the oftener before him, hoping that Money should be given him of Paul that
he should loose him. Act. 24.26.) That they may dispatch of his business when it
has been daily a great deal too long already.

For such ill dealing some Ministers had just cause to complain of some
Committee Men of the late Parliament because when they had augmentations
assigned them by the Parliament, they could not obtain them without great
diminution, by their charge of jornies, and long waiting upon them before they
could get their due from them, which if the prises of corn and other necessary
provisions, should rise and their pentions should fall short or but be at a
stand might half undo them; of this kind I have heard strange relations, and
those by such honest men that they are not to be thought more strange then
true. This I know that when I had an order by Authority of Parliament to
receive a sum of thirty pound from a Committee in London, and had as many
friends and friendly incitements as I thought sufficient, to quicken them to
expeditious payment, I was so long put off, that having no Ieasure to wayt any
longer, I left my suit to the solicitation of a friend, who after many
addresses and disappointments but at last procured the payment but with the
defalcation of six pence in the pound, which yet I took the better because I
heard others had sped much worse with such crookt fingered Trapezites.

6. We have cause to fear as bad dealing by these new Projectors, for Mr H.P.
has told us, That by this checquer work of Church Revenues the state may have
a stock ready upon any great occasion of Public affairs, and if the State
please not to pay in the money they borrowed who shall compel them? And what
if the State should be behind with the Soldiers in their Pay, and they should
seize on these Ecclesiastical Treasuries for their Arreares, As -- how shall
poor Ministers do, if that be pleaded against the payment of their Pensions?
By such a trick as this, were the Boores of Holland cheated by the Prince of
Orange who told them, Phil. Trelayne in his Treatise of the Undeceiving of the
People in point of Tithes. p. 26.
if they prospered in their War with the King of Spain, they should pay no
Tithes to their Ministers, and in the mean time that the Tithes should be
taken up toward the maintenance of the wars, but when the Wars were brought
to a good issue, and they expected to be exempted from the payment of them to
any; they were told they should Pay none to the Ministers as they had done
formerly, but that they were such a considerable Revenue that the State could
not well subsist without them.

7. But if we account it no credit for our country to be like those crafty
Merchants of Holland, but mean fairly to manage the maintenance of Ministers
(chiefly for their ease and Benefit (and if the intent be so, we despair of
the event to be answerable to it) though at first the Trustees of this
Ecclesiastical Treasury may be chosen for their prudence and integrity, or may
in policy (to gain reputation to this ne Project) endeavor to give as much
content as they can in such an office to Plundered Ministers, yet in after
times the Trust may be put into their hands, who have as hard hearts to Godly
and Orthodox Ministers, as these two troops of Petioners against them.

8. If we look abroad into other Churches of the reformed Religion, we may
observe (besides that we now noted of Holland) their sad condition by taking
Tithes from them, and their just and passionate complaints of their penurious
pentions, as of Luther in Germany, Calvin in Geneva, Knox in Scotland. For the
first Luther says I have only Nine old sexagenas, besides these there comes
not an halfepeny out of the City to me, or my Brethren, There is need of the
elloquence of Pericles to wrest little more from them, which (if as all) is paid
with a Malignant mind. Ego pro me^ Stipendio annuo tantum novem antiquas
Sexagenas habeo praeter hos ne obulus quidem aut mihi aut fratribus e civitate
accedit. Luther. Tom. 2. Epist. Fol. 131. B. Periclea Eloquentia opus est ut
vel pauxillum emumgas quod tamen satis malign praebetur Luth. in Genesis 31. Tom.
3. Operum at. Fol. 33. A.


2. Verisimile est etiam tune neglectos fuisse doctores and verbi Ministros,
quae tamen turpissima est ingratitudo quam indignum est enim fraudare victu
corporali eos a quibus animae pascuntur non dignari terrena compensatione a
quibus caelestia bona accipimus. Calvin. comment. in Epist ad Galat. cap. 6. v.
6. Videbat Apost. ideo negligi verbi Ministros quia verbum ipsum contemnebatur
fiert enim nequit si verbum habetur in pretio, quin Ministri quoque honest and
liberaliter tractarentur deinde his astus est satonae alimentis fraudare pios
Minisros ut ecclesia talibus destituatur. Ibid. See more of this in his Coment
on Genesis 27. v. 32.
Calvin says It is like that then (that-is) in the Apostles time the Doctors
and Ministers of the word of God were too much neglected, which is a most vile
and filthy ingratitude, for how unworthy a thing is it to defraud him of
Corporal diet who feeds their bodies with Spiritual, and not to vouch safe a
terrestrial recompense for celestial receipts. -- The Apostle saw that the
Ministers of the Word were neglected because the Word was contemned for it. It
cannot be (says he) (if the Word be held in good account) but the Ministers
will be Honorably and liberally dealt withal, Besides it is the subtilty of
Satan to withhold from Godly Ministers sufficient means that the Church may be
deprived of the fruit of their Service.

3. For Mr Knox, of his discontented mind, at such a mutation of Ministers
maintenance, to that which I have observed elsewhere, I will add only this. M.
Knox in his Epist. to the Bishops and Ministers of Scotland added at the end of
S. Henry Spelmans larger Treatise concerning Tithes. Print. 1647.
How a competence may be provided (says he) except by restoring the Church to
her Rights (that is quite contrary to taking away of Tithes) I do not see what
this Right is, if I should stand to define and justify it, here I should exceed
the bounds of an Epistle, many of this time have cleared the point
sufficiently. I could add much more of his sort, but his example is mine
admonition not to exceed in that kind.

Let their misery, be a monitory to all Ministers, which may be threefold.

1. Not to give any consent or countenance, to deprive themselves and
successors, of that salary for their service, which in the wonted way they may
receive, rather as the blessing of their heavenly Father, (for such is their
maintenance by Tithes) then as any Beneficence of man, though he be at pain to
till the ground, Mr Knox in hss Epist to the Bishops and Ministers of Scotland.
Aug. 3. 1571.
and at cost to sow the seed: If men will spoil (as a Godly and Famous
Minister of Scotland said to the Ministers his Countrymen) let them do it at
their own peril, but communicate ye not with their sins of what strate
soever they be, neither by consent nor silence, but by public protestation
make this known to the World, that ye are innocent of such robberies, which
will ere long, provoke Gods judgment upon the contrivers thereof.

2. To commend this cause to God, with prayer and fasting, that he would be
pleased to guide the spirits of the Committee and Parliament, so to debate and
determine this great doubt (and yet no great doubt if it were not for great
concupiscence, of the World, and great slighting of an Orthodox and regular
Ministry) as may be most agreeable to the gracious will of Almighty God, and to
happy progress of the Gospel.

3. If any of you single, or by associated counsels, and endeavors can in any
warrantable way, hopefully set on foot and prosecute any likely means, to
incline the minds of the Committee and Parliament to establish Tithes,
(ratified by so many Parliaments, and never yet condemned by any) that your
delay not to do it, since they that are on the destructive part are vigilant
over all advantages, if not violent to advance their project to speedy effect.

Ob. But have their not been many acts of Parliament, wherein the Rights and
Revenues of the King, Bishops, Deanes and Chapters have been confirmed, and
notwithstanding that, are they not now all confiscated, alienated, and put into
other hands.

Ans. They are so, but that is, because they have taken away the Offices of
Kings, Deanes and Chapters, on which those Rights and Revenues were founded,
and the foundation dug up, the superstruction cannot stand as before: But
yet the State has declared none intention to put down the Ministry, and I
hope never will do.

Ob. But if we appear zealous in this cause, it will be said we are covetous,
and as we have been accounted contentious with the State, for the settlement of
them.

Ans. If not content with the 10th, we should incroach upon any of the nine
parts of the Parishioners, they might call us covetous, as we may call them, f
they deny or detain the 30th from us: But it is no covetousness for a man in
a just and reasonable way to require his own, but rather a matter of duty,
because if he have not his due, he cannot maintain himself and his Family,
and if he be not careful to provide for them, the Apostle judges him a denyer
of the Faith, and so worse then an infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. Nor is the fault of
contention to be imputed to Tithes, more then to the purchasing of Lands,
taking of Leases, making of Joynters, or other conditions of Marriages, or then
to borrowing and lending, or any other civil contracts, concerning which more
suits are raised then about Tithes, and if there were not, it is not the fault,
either of Tithes or of the Minister, but the Peoples, there being of them (in
most places) ten who would covetously detain them, for one that will
conscientiously pay them. And if a man be put to go to Law, as the Lender to
sue the wicked borrower who pays not again Psalm. 37.21. He is the
contentious person, who will do no wrong, or will do no right without suit,
not he that being necessitated to it, flies to the Law, or Lawmakers for
refuge and protection. Besides as the provocation to that is not the Parsons,
but the Parishioners fault, so it is the greater, because he can have no fairer
probably occasion for it. And therefore it was the manner of a Religious Capt.
R.W.
Captain, (a true Cornelius of mine acquaintance) when some of his Neighbors
entreated him to go with them to their Minister, as a Mediator for composition
of their Tithes, to tell them, there was no need of any mediation for this
matter, for the Parson neither will, nor can do you wrong, unless by taking
any part of your nine parts, and if he will not compound with you, at your
rate, give him the tenth in kind, and so shall you be sure to give him no more,
then his due.

Ob. But when we have done what we can the Parliament will do what they please
So said K. James in his Speech in the Star Chamber. An. 1616. p. 553. Operum
in Fol.
for (as the old Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say) he knew not what an Act of
Parliament would not do in England.

Ans. Though they have power to do what they will, and so much is said of a
King, and somewhat more, Where the word of a King is, there is power, and who
may say unto him, what do thou, Eccles. 8.4. Yet we must hope in the
exercise of the supreme Authority, they will make their Justice, and goodness,
as apparent unto us, as their Power and Greatness.

Ob. We might hope so, if there were not many thousands, who solicit them
against us, as was noted of the former Petition, subscribed with many thousands
of hands.

Ans. Though there be Thousands, who (being as opposite in their principles, as
new light, and old darkness, like Herod and Pilate, reconciled against Christ)
combine against us, the one sort out of an erroneous antipathy, to a standing,
fixed, and Orthodox Ministry, the other out of an impious contempt of the power
of Godliness, both out of an unconscionable concupiscence of having more then
their own, yet if the case of Tithes were rightly stated, the drift and scope
of the alienation of them from the ministry generally nnderstood, and a course
taken to procure hands to a Petition for the continuance of them, according to
their ancient Right, and countenance would be showed by them, who are in
Authority, to such as subscribe it, I doubt not but the greater number of the
most true believing, and Godly living Christians of all ranks, and states
throughout the whole Nation, would appear against the many millenary
complaynants, and every thousand of those, worth ten thousand of these.

Ob. Yet it may be in the Committee concerning Tithes, (who thereafter as they
represent the cause, with favor or offense toward us, will have a great
influence upon the Votes and determinations of Parliament) we have but a few
friends and among them, are many military men, two Major Generals, eight
Colonells, and one Captain, who will be like to slight us, because they have
obtained so many Victorious successes, by Sea and Land.

Ans. First, Though we know not of many friends, we may have more then we know
of, and shall (we trust) have yet more, when our case is thoroughly known, and
duly considered.

2. For the Military men, I can say somewhat upon mine own certain knowledge:
at the Committee for Plundered Ministers, Colon. Fleet-wood now commander in
chief over Ireland.
I found more favor from one Colonel (whose name I then knew not, and I
thought he had not known me) then of any, yea or of all the rest, (one ancient
friend excepted) though at that time they met in an extraordinary number.

3. They are too wise (seeing though they have had many glorious victories,
their work is not wholly done, and yet perhaps may be long in doing) to slight
the whole Body of the Ministry, and those who adhere to their just Interest in
this particular.

4. That their advances against their enemies may not remove them from the
solid basis of holy humility (besides which, they can find no sure or safe
footing any where) I shall make bold to mind them of what a zelot of theirs
has written of the Army in his Hist. Mr. I. S. in his Epist. to all true Engl.
men prope finem.
Anglia Rediviva, Or Englands recovery. But we would least of all be thought by
this History of things done, to fix unconquerablenesse and unvariable success
upon this Army, that were to dare providence to undo us, we know we are as
soon broken as made up, as soon flying as conquering, we desire therefore
friends not to believe the Army shall do more, because it has done so much,
and that it cannot be conquered, because it has conquered, but that it shall
be still victorious, while God is in it, and no longer. And he will be in it
and with it, so much the longer, as they keep the closer to the Military rule
of the Emperor Aurelianus, as Flavius Vopiscus relates it. Si viris Tribunus
esse, imo si vis vivere, manus militum confine nemo pullem alienum rapiat, ovem
nemo contingat uvam nullus anterat. Segetem nemo deterat, oleum, salignum nemo
exigat; Annon sua^ coutentus sit. De praeda hostis, non de lacrymis
provincialis habeat. Flav. Vopis. in Aureliano.
If thou will be a Tribune, nay if thou will live, contain thy Soldiers in
their duty, Let no man take so much as a sheep, or a chiken from another, nor
let him tread down the Country man's corn, or exact of him oil, or salt, or
wood, but be content with his stipend, and if he add to it, let it be by the
spoils of the Enemies, not by the tears of the Provincial Subjects. Yet was
this Emperor though so precisely in it, but an Heathen, would it not then
seem a prodigidesigne ons of injustice and Impiety in Christian Governors,
whether Civil or Military, if they should make no scruple to spoil all the
Ministers of their own Nation, of their due maintenance, whence they are most
anciently, and most Lawfully possessed, and that not for the present only, but
for perpetuity, (...) Romans 3.31.

And if that hitherto we have said, albeit it seems very good and most just
in our eyes (though not in ours only) should in theirs seem otherwise who are
to judge our cause, and so their determinations should dash all our hopes into
despair of help from them, we may yet comfort our selves, if we have done
our endeavor to uphold the right of Religion, in the maintenance of the
Ministry, (for their poverty will breed contempt of the word of God, and that
contempt Atheism.) For mine own part, what ever the issue be of this great
debate, it shall not repent me to have done something, (as the suddenness of
the occasion would permit) toward the discovery and prevention of this grand
sacrilegious oppression of us, and I shall not cease humbly to supplicate, and
importunately to solicit the Almighty Majesty, with my heartiest prayers,
that he will be pleased to clear his clouded countenance toward us, and to
cheer up our hearts, by making our cause, and our persons more gracious in the
eyes of our Governors.

And if after all this our God see it good, either to chastise us for our
errors, or to exercise our patience and humility by poverty and contempt
(according to that of David, I am a poor man and lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel
18.23.) We may yet in respect of men hold up our hearts, and our heads with the
Heroic Aphorism of Luther, Insultat Nobilitas nostra miseris Pastoribus
Ecclesiarum. mihi autem dubium non est futurum esse, ut unus pius and fidelis
Pastor, centum talibus Nobilibus anteferatur. Luth. in Psalm. 121. Tom. 4. op.
Lat. Fol. p. 429.
Our Nobility (says he) insult over the miseries of Ministers, but I doubt not
but a time will come, that one Godly and Faithful Pastor, will be better
accounted of, then an hundred such Noble men.

We fear not any such disdain from any either Noble or Ingenuous Gentleman;
the scorn we may expect is rather from such as have so little worth in them
(either for wit or Grace) that we might be more displeased at their respect
(as Antisthenes was when hearing that the Wicked men commended him he said he
was afraid that he had done something ill, that such as they speak well of
him,) then to be troubled at their contempt (especially for poverty) since even
Heathens by the light of Nature and experience have observed that those who
have deserved best have had the least part of the wealth of the World.

But for us as we have more precious Promises. 2 Peter. 1.4. as we are
Christians then ever the Heathens heard of, out of which we may draw comfort
against every cross, so as we are Ministers if we be reduced to an indigent
condition we must (though we do not monopolize the word Cleros or Clericus)
make especial use of that title to our selves which common use rather then
peculiar Right has appropriated unto our calling as Hierom expounds and
applies from the word (...) in Greek which signifies lot or portion are men
called Clerks (says he) either because they are the Lords lot and portion, or
because God is theirs: (...) Greece, sors Latin appellatur: propterea vocantur
clerici vel quia de sort sunt domini vel quia dominus sors (i.e.) pars
Clericorum est: qui autem vel ipse pars est domini vel dominum partem habet
talem se exhibere debet ut and ipse qui possideat dominum and possideatur a
domino. Hieron. ad Nepot. de vita Clericor. Tom. 1. p. 13.
he then who is the Lords portion or has the Lord for his portion (says he)
must show himself such a one as possesses the Lord and has the Lord for his
possession.

If the Lord be our portion we may be as Paul says as having nothing yet
possessing all things. 2 Cor. 6.10. For God is all in all. 1 Cor. 15.28. And if
we be his Portion we must be admonished, and may be comforted with the words of
the Apostle Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousnes and be
content with such things as ye have, for he has said I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee. And so with him I leave you who is Almighty to Protest you,
and Alsufficient to furnish you with what his Wisdom knows to be most
convenient for you.

From Oxford Aug. 9. 1653. Your Sympathizing Brother Theophilus Philadelphus.

ERRATA.
Page 6. l. 4. r. since p. 8. l. 33. r. commentatour p. 8. l. ult. r. have p.
10. l. 3. r. Antichristian. p. 14. l. 27. r. Word. p. 17. marg. r. sacra
Nemes. p. 31. r. propose.

The former Petition presented to the Parliament July 16. 1653. Examined and
Convicted of Impiety and Injustice.
SECT. I.
BEfore I meddle with the matter of this Petition I have somewhat to say to the
men that drew it up or subscribed it, and that must be to distinguish: for
being This Petition with many thousand hands was presented to the Parliament on
Sat. 16 of July 1653. See Merc. Polit. nu. 163. p. 260.
many thousands of them, as the Reporter gives in the account it is not
probable they were all wholly of one mind in this matter, or all of them well
affected to the Parliament.

For we know that the most of those who are zealots for the taking away of
Tithes, are worst affected many ways: every covetous man would be glad of any
occasion to save or gain, to take up with the angle, to catch with the net, to
gather with the dragge, as Hab. 1.15. Every profane person who hates to be
reformed, will be very well pleased to take or keep any thing from the Godly
Minister, who reproves his ill manners, and who will not permit him to profane
the Sabbath, John Spietlehouse in his vindication of the Army for their late
dissolution of the Parl. p. 9.
nor to take the Sacrament of Lord Supper to his own condemnation. Every Royal
Episcopal and ceremonial opposite to the present Ministry will be willing to
keep back the Tithe, seeing their own Clergy are out of Office, (as Mr
Spittlehouse observes) and of how many of these may we say (without such a
lavish confidence, as Solomon notes to be the property of a fool) that they
are either well affected, or adherers to the Parliament, as the Title
specifieth.

2. There are some who pretend to Religion, whose principles are very unsound,
denying first Tithes, and then the Ministry, or first the Ministry, and then
Tithes, (the one for the other, Tithes that they may starve the Ministry, and
the Ministry, that they may feed themselves with Tithes) and then Scripture. I
could name the man, whose consciences was extremely cramped against the
payment of Tithes, yet had he it so enlarged and loosned, that he would have
farmed the Parsons Tithes of his Neighbors lands, in hope by the bargain to
save his own.

3. Some would have Tithes taken away from the Minister, but not from
Impropriators, to that purpose was a Petition presented to the Lord General
July 4. 1652. The Armies Diurnall, nu. 187. p. 2832.
(from diverse said to be well affected persons in the County of Lincoln) with
respect and reservation of other men's Rights (i.e.) of Impropriators.

4. Some though they Petition against the payment of Tithes, are so well minded
to the Ministers of the Gospel, that they would have them allowed an
Honorable and Comfortable maintenance, whereof more in the answer to the
latter Petition.

5. The Petitioners we now are to deal withal, without all Justice, would
have Tithes taken away from Ministers, and without all mercy, would have no set
or certain maintenance set up in stead thereof. To this though it may be
thousands have subscribed, I hope of many of them that they are like those who
were deceived by Absolon, followed him in the simplicity of their heart
(knowing nothing of the depth of his design 2 Samuel 15.11.) being ignorant of
the contrivers of this petition, and not apprehensive of the evil event, if
they should prevail in it, with an implicit faith in their good meaning, who
were more active in that put their hands unto it, as diverse have done, without
reading what they subscribed, being told but some, and that the least offensive
part of the contents thereof.

6. Some would have those, who are possessed of the nine parts to have the
tenth added to them, and,

7. Some would have all so alienated out of private hands, as to be made up
into a public stock, at the disposal of the State, of which two last, I have
occasion to speak particularly in another place.

From the Petitioners with their different desires and designs we come now to
the Petition it self, which we shall not need to set down entirely
altogether, since though handled severally, the reader may make up a perfect
copy of it, taking it along as it is marked, distinguished by a different
character, for more distinct consideration, and more punctual application. I
shall divide the Petition into 1. A Preamble. 2. The motion of the Petitioners.
and 3. Their motives of obtainment. 1. Of the Preamble.

SECT. II.
The Petition.
For as much as the original ground, of our many years burdensome Wars and
Miseries, has been from the Encroachments, and Innovations, which have been
made and enforced upon the People, at the pleasures of some men, ruling merely
according to their will, and power.

ANSWER.
THis part of the Preamble, penned as a preparative to the removal of the
pretended oppression of Tithes (the only thing which in particular the Petition
complains of) is so far from making way to what the Petitioners would have,
that it rather affords matter of defense to the cause they oppose, for they
complain. 1. Of Burdensome Wars and Miseries. 2. Of the original ground of
them. 3. That ground is said to be Encroachments, and innovations enforced upon
the People. 4. Those Encroachments and Innovations they charge upon those, who
at their pleasure rule according to their own will and power.

1. For Burdensome Wars and Miseries: If you mean by Miseries, such as
commonly come by Wars, as in reason they may, for as men are mustered for
War, so are Miseries mustered by War, payment of Tithes is neither War,
nor any Military misery produced by it, but rather the contrary, for when War
makes wast of all, as Joel 2.3. (speaking of an Army of enemies) The Land is as
the Garden of Eden, before them and behind them a desolate Wilderness, yea and
nothing can escape them: There is nothing left to be tithed, and we have seen
by sad experience in our own Nation, Ministers driven from their charges,
people plundered of their horses, where with they should till their ground,
their corn, has been trodden down or eaten up by the Troopers, and the Tithe
could not be had where nine parts were gone, or not be much where they were
much diminished.

2. Nor was the matter of Tithes ground or cause of the Nations quarrel, no
war was raised, nor a sword drawn, nor a blow given, either for, or against
them. All men know, and the Petitioners annot deny but that the visible grounds
and causes of the War, were of another kind, which had no affinity at all
with payment of Tithes, or takiug of Tithes, I say visibly, for secretly and
out of sight, some might, and happily did engage on a side, with such minds as
they had, who said, Let us take the houses of God in possession. Psalm. 83.13.
hoping to have their share in a parcel of Tithes as others had in the Bishops,
and Deane and Chapters Lands.

3. For Encroachments and Innovations, the taking of Tithes is neither. Not an
Incroachment, for an incroachment, is an unlawful intrusion into the right of
another, particularly where Rights are situate in vicinity, the taking of
Tithes is no such thing as shall be showed in due place, especially as it is
brought in this Preamble, as a ground or cause of our National War. Much
less can Tithing be called an Innovation, since it has the prescription of
about 3599 years in the World, and in this Land has been received and
practiced before the Conquest, and drawn along downward to this present age.

4. Nor is the tenure of Tithes dependent upon the pleasure of such as rule
merely according to their own will and power (prerogative like) for Tithes
have been Authorized and Established by many Parliaments, wherein no arbitrary
power can be exercised.

SECT. III.
The Petition.
And for as much as those many victories, mercifully vouchsafed by Almighty
God, in approbation of his cause, has not been obtained at a low and easy
rate, but as through a Sea of blood, and all kind of miseries, whereof we have
had a large proportion, thereby rendering the cause more precious to our
thoughts.

ANSWER.
HEre 1. They make mention of our manifold victories. 2. Of the means by which
they were obtained, the vouchsafement of Almighty God. 3. His meaning by that
mercy to show his approbation of that cause which prevailed. 4. The price the
success has cost, not being obtained at a low rate, but as through a Sea of
blood, and all kind of miseries. 5. Their own participation of them, in a large
proportion. 6. Their more precious estimation of the cause for that reason. And
what is all this, or any of this, to the taking away of Tithes.

1. We have had many victories, thence it may follow we may be able to put
down Tithes but not that it is a matter of duty, or justice so to do.

2. The means whereby these victories were obtained, was the Mercy of God
vouchsafed. If so, we have cause to conceive that mercy was vouchsafed, because
the Parliament so soon as they were Assembled was respective of Gods servants
making it May Hist. Parl, L. 1. p. 78.
their first care to vindicate destressed Ministers and afterward So in the
Letter M. Speaker to the Moderator of the general Assembly of Scotland,
written by the command of the Commons Assembled in Parl. Aug. 3. 1648. p. 8.
Augmenting their Maintenance out of the Impropriations of Bishops the Estates
and Revenues of Deanes and Chapters and out of the impropriations of
Delinquents which they bought out and settled upon Churches that wanted
maintenance to a very great value, rather then that this Mercy was afforded
that Ministers might be reduced to a more miserable condition, than the meanest
labourer in the land, who for the work he does may recover his wages in a
course of law, which as these Petitioners would have it, Ministers may not.

3. If his meaning in that mercy were to show his approbation of the Cause (as
I believe it was) yet we may be too hasty to conclude that God likes out cause,
because we like our success against our enemies. By the wars between the
Israelites and the Benjamites Jud. 20. That cause must be justly considered,
and if so, no man can advisedly say it was any part of Gods intention by our
victories either to Ratify or Nullify any claim, or right, or title to
Tithes which was no part of the contestation betwixt the Parliament and the
Kings party nor betwixt the English and the Scots or Irish, no more than it is
now betwixt the English, and the Dutch.

4. Whereas they say these victories were obtained, as through a sea of blood
and all kind of miseries though their Hyperbole swells high, yet will it not I
trust be able to drown the ancient Right of Ministers Maintenance, while the
Appeal is made unto them who will act by the dictates of their one judgment,
and conscience and not by the passionate expressions of men.

5 For their own participation of the bloody miseries of war in a large
portion, sure they have survived their sufferings we cannot conceive how that
should concern the Ministers portion save that if it were as soldiers their
receiving of pay for their employment, is a warrant for us to do the like for
ours 1 Cor. 9.7. Who goes a warfare at his own charge?

6. If as they say this renders the cause more precious to their thoughts,
(though for Gods and their Countries sake, they should more highly value it for
their own) we kmow not why the price should be so much increased upon us
(above all the free borne subjects of this Nation, that we and our successors
must loose all our dues assigned for our duty, and settled upon us in Right of
perpetuities, by many reiterated laws of the land wherein we live, while
others enjoy what they have, whether by Gift, or purchase, or Inheritance
without impeachment.

SECT. V.
Petition.
And whereas among the rest of the aggreivances of this Commonwealth, the
unlawful Antichristian, and unsupportable oppression of Tithes and forced
maintenance is not the least, by which our Consciences are ensnared, our
estates destroyed our persons imprisoned daily, for that which has noe
foundation nor warrant from Christ or his Apostles, throughout the whole Word
of the Gospel.

ANSWER.
Until now the Petitioners said nothing against Tithes, directly or
indirectly, though they meant their preamble should make way for their maine
charge, which now comes in so full, that if it could be as fairly prooved as
it is fully spoken, I should think it worth, I say not of a sea of blood as
they phraise it but not of a drop of Ink, to be bestowed on the defense. But
here is nothing but odious, and exasperating words without any matter of Truth
and Weight to bear them up, which tumbled out in a disorderly passion, will
require a more methodicall disposal of them before I answer them, as thus.

Their exceptions against Tithes, are Negative, or Positive. The Negative. 1.
That they are not lawful (i.e.) there is no Law for them. 2. That they have no
foundation nor warrant from Christ or his Apostles throughout the whole Word of
the Gospel. 2. The positive are that 1. Against both 1. Against piety, because
they are Antichristian. 2. Against charity, because they are oppressed with a
term of aggravation, unsupportable oppression, and this they say of all
constrained maintenance, as well as of Tithes, their proof of this oppression
is twofold, 1. By them their Estates are destroyed. 2. For them their persons
imprisoned daily. 3. Against both piety, and charity, the charge is, that
thereby their consciences are ensnared.

1. They say, Tithes are unlawful, the word [unlawfull] may be taken two
ways, 1. For that which is against Law, so are all the breaches of any
express and formal Law, whether it be of precept, or prohibition, in this
sense, I do not think they mean that Tithes are unlawful, for then they
would have said, that Tithes are against the law of God, which if they had
said, they could never have proved. 2. For that, for which there is no Law, and
in this sense, I take it, they take the word [unlawfull] for that Answers that
they say that they have no foundation nor warrant etc. And can they say that
Tithes are unlawful, or that there is no law for them, when the Law of God is
so clear for them in the Old Testament, from the first Historical, to the
last Prophetical writer, and the Law of man is so much for them, as to
imprison their persons, who contumaciously stand out against the payment of
them.

But there is no foundation, nor warrant for them, from Christ and his
Apostles, throughout the whole word of the Gospel, To which I answer, 1. That
the full resolution of this objection which is made by some, as much against
the Christian Sabbath or Lords day, as against Tithes, would require a large
discourse, if it had not been fully Answered already by others, whom I have
named in the Epistle Dedicatory: but 2ly I therefore briefly answer. 1. That
neither Christ nor any of his apostles have said any thing against Tithes,
which doubtless they would have done, if there had been so much evil in them,
as those Petitioners heap up, against them.

2. That Christ speak rather for them, at least for a constrained or forced
maintenance, then against them where he faith Mat. 5.17. He came not to destroy
the Law (meaning chiefly the moral Law which afterward he vindicateth from the
corupt Glosses of the Jewish Doctors) he virtually ratified his own Law of
Tithes and that of Solomon Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and
with the first fruits of all thine increase. Because as some learned Expositors
take it, he ratified the eight Commandament which fobiddeth not only robbing of
men but of God, of which sin God passionately Complains Malac. 3.8. And where
our Savior taxes the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees for being curious
in the Tithing, Mint, and Annise, and Cummin omitting in the mean time the
weightier matters of the Law, he approoveth of what they did for Tithing. Saing
these things you ought to have done, and blames their omission of what they did
not Mat. 23.23. and Luke 11.22. And where he says concerning the Apostles
pains and pay The Labourer is worthy of his hire 7. He means that their
maintenance was not a benefice of Alms but a recompense of Justice; and if so
who will be so unjust as to detain that which is the Spiritual laborers due,
by civil Justice constrained to pay it.

3. For the Apostles let Paul, speak 1 Cor. 9. from 7. to the 14. verse, Who
goes a Warfare any time at his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock and eats not of the
milk of the flock? Say I these things as a man, or says not the Law these
things also, for it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? Or
says he it altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt, this is written:
that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that thresheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is
it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things? If others be partakers
of this power over you, are not we rather?

Do ye not know, that they which Minister about holy things live of the things
of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar are partakers with the Altar.
Even so has the Lord ordained that they which Preach the Gospel should live
of the Gospel. Upon this last verse Even so has the Lord ordained. etc. Mr.
Trapp in 1 Cor. 9.14.
an ingenuous and religious contemplatour, brings in this note as from
another: As they of old lived of the Altar, by Tithes, so Ministers now, how
else will men satisfy their Conscience in the particular quantity they must
bestow upon their Ministers, the Scriptures speak only of a Tenth. Let them
that deny it show us another ordinance of God for the maintenance of
evangelicall Ministers: In the mean time they cannot but confess, that God
would hate the Ministers of the Gospel, as well provided for as the Ministers
of the Law, and this by ordinance, and that by good Congruity, as a Learned
expositor though a Papist well collecteth. Si enim Ministris Antiquae legis
atributum suit a Deo jus ex suo Ministerio vivendi quanto magis aequum erat
idem jus a domino constitui pro Ministris novae legis Estius in 1 Cor. 1.14.


If so, then it is not in the power of men, to cast out what poor Pittance
they please; they must live of Gospel maintenance, and claim what they have,
of right, as by his appointment who might have taken 9 parts for his own
service, and left only a 10th to those who deny it, or grudingly pay it; Quid
faceres si novem partibus sibi sumptis tibi decimum reliquisset? Aug. de Tract.
Serme. 219.
And what conld they do more or worse, if God should deal with them after
that manner. Besides the same Apostle shows that Ministers should have an
honorable maintenance, Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of
double honor, especially those that labor in the word and Doctrine. 1 Timothy
5.17. But if they have no better allowance then Free-will-offering, in most
places they shall rather meet with double contempt, then with double honor,
and he would not have them only honorably but plentifully provided for, else
how should they be able to keep hospitality which he requires, 2 Tym. 3.2.
where among the qualifications of an Evangelicall Bishop, one is, that he be
given to hospitality, which that he may do the better, what he prescribes to
the Galathians, must be observed. Let him that is taught communicate unto him
that Teaches him in all good things. Gal. 6.6. That is not contribute to him
as an Alms, but communicate as in a way of commerce, or exchange of Carnal
things for things spiritual, as later interpreters after Oecumenius observe.
As then it is they Ministers duty to make the people, partaker of spiritual
things, so it is their duty to return unto them carnal things, as the Apostle
resolves Romans 15. v 7. And where both live under an Evangelicall Magistrate,
the people may be as well constrained to do their duty, as the Minister his. I
might here urge Heb. 7.26. and out of that place collect a stronger argument
for the continuance of Tithes, as a right to the Evangelicall Ministry, then
any out of the New Testament can be framed against them, but because that is
sufficiently done by D. Jones Com. in Heb. 1, 2, 6. p. 161.
Dr Jones in his Commentary on Heb. 7.26. and more largely by D. Slater in his
Book of the Ministrs Portion a p. 18. ad 38. Print. 1623.
Dr Slater, in his Book of the Ministers portion, and by the latter so soundly,
as that he is unanswerable, as a Learned Doctor forementioned testifies of
him, in this particular especially I will forbear to insist upon it.

SECT. V.
THeir Negative objection answered, we come to the Positive.

1. Against piety because antichristian. Tithes are so many years Anticristian
that they cannot in their original be Antichristian. (i.e.) so long before
Christ that they cannot be from his opposite who was since Christ.

2. Suppose the Pope to be Antichrist (which diverse late writers besides
Papists The examiners of the Confession of Faith of the Assembly Chapter 25. p.
274. etc
though I make no doubt of it.) And Papists who make him their infallible Guide
Antichristian, and we took the practice of Tithes Imediately from them, it
will not follow thence that Tithes are Antichristin no more then that the old
Testament was Jewish because the Ancient Christians had it from the Jews, nor
the old and new Testament both of them Popish because we received the whole
Bible from the papists, since it was an especial providence of God, to make
them both keepers and deliverers of the same divine Word, by which their
heresies are confuted. 3. In Antichristian Doctors and Papists, we must
distinguish betwixt that they deliver as men, as Ingenuous, Learned, and moral
men, as Christians, and as Antichristians: First, as men they are endowed with
the light of nature, and natural Conscience, which in a good measure, teaches
the difference betwixt good and evil, and inclines to the choice of the one,
and eschewing of the other, as we read Romans 2.14.15. 2. As Learned and Moral
men, they have been Authors of many profitable Books, of Histories, and
Tongues, and Arts, Philosophy natural and moral. 3. As Christians, they
acknowledge the Old and New Testament, and diverse of them have made Learned
Commentaries upon them. 4. As Antichristians, they maintain many errors
against the true faith of Christ. Now for Application of this distinction,
though whatsoever comes from a Papist, may before it be tried, be suspected,
yet what they do or write, under the three former notions, is not simply to be
denied or refused for their sakes, but only what may be referred to the Fourth
denomination. The want of this caution, Valentinus Gentilis leave Quod
ecclesiae reformatae adhuc in fide Trinitatis cum papistis convenirent B; llar.
Praefat. in lib. de Christo Toms 1. p. 271
Geneva because he found that they agreed with the Papists in the Doctrine of
the Trinity, and the want of this distinction and Application, has led many
inconsiderate Christians, both into the same and other dangerous errors in our
days. 4. It may be more Antichristian to deny Tithes, then either to demand or
pay them, for as some hold, there is an Antichrist in man The examination of
the confession chapter 15. p. 178. and Joseph Salmon a member of the Army, in his
Book of Antichrist in man. Printed for Giles Corbet 1649. in 80 p. 4.
and this Antichrist, is the fleshly wisdom, the spiritual Serpent, that a
man is deceived by the wisdom of the flesh, the Carnal policy of the
Creature. Now no doubt this wisdom and Policy, will dispose the men of this
World, to save their Tithes if they can, and to cavil, and put in all the
rubbs and demurres they can, against paying of them, especially if they be men
who have lately purchased, and are now become owners of Lordships, who before
our late Wars, would have been glad of a Tenantship in an ordinary Farm,
this Antichrist, will spur up these to use all possible means they may, to
have their Manors Tith-free. There are another Sect of Antichristians newly
sprung up, a sort of Familists, and Quakers, of whom some say, Christo. Feake,
John Simpson, Geor. Cockain, Lawrence Wise, in Epist. before the discovery of
mystical Antichrist containing an examination of many Doctrines of the people
called Quakers in Yorkshire, for Tho. Brewster 1653. p. 42.
They are far worse then those gross and Popish Antichristians, who live in
the midst of Antichrists Babilonish territories and dominions, these
Antichristians doubtless, agree with these Petitioners in condemning of
Tithes, since they deny propriety and inequality of men's Estates in so much
that some of them are not free to be Tenants to other men.

SECT. V.
The next positive objection is, that the taking of Tithes, is against Charity,
because that it is Oppression, and that in a grievous degree, unsupportable
oppression, destroying their Estates, Imprisoning their Persons daily.

ANSWER.
NO oppression at all, therefore no unsupportable oppression, for what is taken
or kept from them? Is it not Tith to which they have no more title then
Ministers have to the 9 parts, which they possess: for if they be Landlords,
they never bought the 10th: if Tenants they pay not for it, by either fine or
rent; the 10th being reserved as the Ministers particular portion, unless it
be alienated by way of impropriation; and then also it is of a distinct title,
and tenure from the other parts of the years increase, and this distinction, is
as ancient as Collation or distribution of the Land of Canaan among the Tribes
of Israel. and in this Nation, when all the lands of England were the demesnes
of the King, within a little of eight hundred years ago the Church was first
endowed with the Tenth, and then the remaining 9 parts disposed of assigned and
confirmed to the Nobility Gentry and other Subjects of the Kingdom. Were the
Israeltes (Gods peculiar people when by the miraculous goodness of God toward
them, they were first possessed in the land of Canaan put under the yoke of
unsupportable oppression, and kept under until Malachy for a thousand years
together, the contrary is most clear by Gods emphaticall expostulation with
them in the 3d of Malachy, A part whereof is that they brought an oppression
upon themselves, yea and procured a curse upon the whole nation Mal. 3.8.9. By
their unfaithful dealing with God and his Ministers in this matter, and their
only way to be delivered from that curse, was to pay their Tithes better then
they had done, and so it should be far better with them, for then God
promised That then he would open the windows of heaven and power out a
blessing, that there should not be room to hold it, and that he would rebuke
the devourer for their sakes that he should not devour the fruits of their
ground nor their vines cast their fruit before their time. There be that faigne
such a difference and feign would make it good betwixt their state of the Jews
and ours as that might be an oppression with us, that was not with them, but
their conceits are groundless, and for such are discovered by the Authors
forementioned, which if they be too large for the Petitioners to read, let them
but be at the cost of 3d to buy a little book called the Vndeceiving of the
People in Point of Tithes, Printed for J. Clarke in Cornhill 1653. And at the
pains of reading but 15 leaves in 40 for it arises not above the account of
30 pages, and they shall find it sufficiently confuted; and for our own Nation
they may see it in page 16 of the same Book that it is well toward 800 years
making the computation from 855, to the year current 1653 since Tithes were
Collated on the Church of England, and have the English all this while been so
dull and stupid, as not to show themselves by some memorable act notoriously
sensible of such an unsupportable oppression? Until within these last
halfescore years? May it not be matter of wonder that the chief patriots of
this Nation when they contested with the King for Rights and privileges, and
against the oppression of the prerogative power, the Council of State, the
Star Chamber, High Commissioners Consistory Courts never brought in this
grand aggrievance, this unsupportable oppression of Tithes, and that where the
People were perhaps by the Craft of some counterfeit Joseph Ben Israel stirred
up in hope to have each of them a share in the spoils of the ministry, to
petition against Tithes to the last Parliament as many of them did, that they
could not make appear to them, when they were thought to be most sincerely set
to promote the public good of this commonwealth, that there was any such in
jury or oppression in them.

But the Petitioners say our Persons are imprisoned upon it daily, meaning for
nonpayment of Tithes, to which t may be answered. First, that it seems not
probable sure, such as deny the payment of Tithes find more and greater
friends, either to keep them from Prison or deliver out of it, if they be
committed then others in former times have done. Secondly, if more be
imprisoned now then have been, it may be, because being made more obdurate in
their error and more contumacious against the Justice of the Land then they
should be, and then meek spirited, and religious Christians would be, whereto
they are the more animated by some eminent in nothing but in rash censuring and
peremptory prattling, confidently foretell that Tithes will down, must down,
shall be down, and they dare engage an hundred to five upon it. But their
groundless presumption and precipitated predictions, shall not make us suspect
the prudence sincerity and justice of the Parliament.

SECT. VII.
The Third and last general objection positive is that Tithes are against
Piety and Charity both: by insnaring their Consciences, which we must conceive
to be in that taking of Tithes, being (as they mistake it) unlawful,
Antichristian, etc, they are by such severity as is used to recover them,
tempted against Conscience, to make payment of them.

ANSWER.
IF the case were such with the Petitioners, as it is with the Reformed
Protestants in France, who are forced to pay Tithes to Popist Priests, for the
service of Antichrist, they might have some more apparent cause of complaint,
for oppression by Tithes, especially in respect of Conscience, but they very
well know, that they without scruple of Conscience, may lawfully suffer, what
another without wounding of his Conscience cannot offer to them, and the
Petitioners, if they could deny these for a while, until they had made a just
difference betwixt Conscience and Worldly lusts, they would never think it
lawful for them, to withold the Tithes until an Officer lay hold on them,
to bring them to prison, for refusing to pay it. Suppose the State should make
an unjust War as they judge of it, and make Military Assessements to
maintain it, when they know they shall be forced to pay their part, if they
withstand it, will they think it their duty in Conscience (rather then submit)
to stand out to Imprisonment. This is of a much contrary savor, to that
meekness and patience, which our Savior commands unto his Disciples practice
Mat. 5.40. when he faith unto them, if any one will sue thee at the Law, and
take away thy Coat, let him take thy Coat also. May we say in like case, not so
Lord, I will go to prison rather then to part with either, of such a mind he
seemed to be, who not long since, being demanded the Tithes which he never
denied, until he was denied to be the taker of the Tithes of the Minister from
his Neighbors) said he would rott in prison before he would pay them as he had
done, which all men who know him, conceived (though he made profession of an
higher strain of Religion then the World could teach him) to be the dictate
rather of Covetousness then of his Conscience, for he might have suffered
without offense for that, what the Law had ordered in that behalf or if his
sufferings which patience, and silence might have employed his consent to what
he accounted to be Antichristian or any way unlawful, he might have paid the
Tithes with an express profession or protestation of his Judgment and
Conscience (more truly his conceit and concupicence) against it and how could
he doubt had not greediness of gain bemisted his eyesight that he might with
good conscience have parted with so much of his own estate, (undoubtedly his
own) rather then to go to prison for non payment of that which the Law
resolves to be the right of another man. Doubtless if conscience were not
blinded with a pin and a Webb of worldly mindedness it would dispose a man
to a doubtful ease, rather to part with some of his own Nine parts for fear
of doing wrong rather then to invade and lay violent hands upon the tenth. Upon
this ground was set up the payment of Mortuaries as a supplement or satifaction
for such Tithes as through Inconsideration or Oblivion might be unpaid, or
detained from the Parson, in the Parishioners life time, and it was called a
mortuary, because it was to be paid at the death (not that he might be prayed
for when he was dead, to ease his soul of the pain of Purgatory, as some have
ignorantly imagined) as Lindwood Fr vinc l. 1. tit. de consuetud. cap.
Statuimus. Fol. 14, 15, 16. Seldom of Tithes cap. 10. p. 287. Altar Damascenum
majus. 450, 451. Non remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur oblaturm. Aug. Ep.
54. Mared.
Authors of most credit have reported, the rise, and use, of such extraordinary
payments. I shall not need now, to answer the scrupling or insnaring the
conscience, in respect of Judaisme, as if Tithing were a typical Ceremony
abolished by Christ. 1. Because the Petitioners have neither said expressly,
nor by intimation, any thing thereof. 2. Because the wisest of those who are
adversaries to the payment and taking of Tithes, have least to say with any
probability or appearance of an objection, under the title typical Judaisme.

SECT. VIII.
The Petition.
We are therefore emboldned in Conscience toward God and you, to present
these our just desires, for the welfare and preservation of the Commonwealth,
which will be established by righteousness, and therein implore your serious
endeavors, that this unjust oppression of Tithes and forced maintenance, may
be abolished, as a testimony of your resolution, to instate this Commonwealth
in all their just rights, and Liberties, and in so doing, you will engage the
hearts of all honest and Godly people of this Nation, who have been bowed down
under this oppression, and all being disingaged from corrupt and self
interests, will cheerfully adventure their lives and Estates, for your
preservation, and the Nations Peace, being the just end of our War, the
proper and long hoped for fruits of Righteousness, bringing glory. to God in
discharge of your trust to him, and to this wearied Commonwealth, in loosing
the bonds of wickedness, and setting us free from Antichristian tyranny.

ANSWER.
Here are many things of several sorts jumbled together, by the Petitioners
which must be reduced to a Logical Analysis, that they may be distinctly
answered, though by them confusedly composed or put together, we shall martial
them in this method, the whole contains two principal parts. 1. A Motion. 2.
The Motives subjoyned to procure it such acceptance and success as they desire.

1. For their Motion, it is, that the Parliament would use their serious
endeavor, that this unjust oppression by Tithes, and forced Maintenance may be
abolished. As motives hereto, they make it matter, 1. Of Conscience, 2. Of
Justice, 3. Of Piety, 4. Charity, 5. Of Prudence. 1. Of Conscience, for
Conscience toward God and the Parliament, moved them to present the motion
unto them. 2. Of Justice, for they call it their just desire, and make freedom
from Tithes, one of the Peoples just Rights and Liberties, and the just end of
our War, and the discharge of trust reposed in the Parliament. 3. Of Piety
bringing glory to God. 4. Of Charity, in easing them, who have been bowed down
under this oppression, and setting them free, from the yoke of Antichristian
tyranny, and bring succor to this wearied Commonwealth, and a means of its
welfare and preservation, in loosing of the bond of Wickedness. 5. Of
Prudence, hereby you shall honor your selves, by giving testimony of your
resolutions, to instate this Commonwealth, in all their just rights and
Liberties.

2. You will engage all the hearts, of all the honest and Godly people of this
Nation, who being disingaged from corrupt interests, will cheerfully adventure
their Lives and Estates for your preservation, and the Nations peace. This
being the sum of their desires, aims, and hopes, we shall now make a more
particular and punctual answer thereunto.

And First, of their motion they implore, Their serious endeavors, that this
unjust oppression of Tithes, and forced Maintenance may be abolished. That it
is neither Oppression, nor Injustice, for Ministers to take Tithes of the
People, and to require them according to the Law, has been made manifest
before, that it is a Forced Maintenance, is their fault, who will not do right
unless they be forced to it. But whose Maintenance do they mean, whether the
Ministers only, or theirs also, who live upon, and are maintained by
Impropriations, they cannot in reason except against the one, and accept of the
other nor should they think the latter, an oppression, rather then the former,
unless because there are more of them, then of Impropriations: and on the
other hand, they should less grudge the allowance, of those that labor for it
as Ministers do, then those that labor not, but if they intend the taking
away Tithes from all that claim and receive them from the people as their
right: then I demand of them, 1. Whether that either or both of them shall have
any thing given them as a valuable consideration, for that which is taken from
them, they seem to incline to neither, for with them both, the one and the
other are unsupportable oppressions, so far they are impartial, if so they
may find it, a more difficult matter, to take away Tithes, then they are aware
of: For though Ministers obliged to an higher degree of selfe-denyall then
other men, for the things of this World, and having a right to Tithes, but for
term of life, and no heirs or successors in sight, to lay hold on the
interest that is taken from them, may quietly suffer themselves to be deprived
of them, and some endowed with a greater measure of grace, may be affected,
like to those Religious Christians, who took joyfully the spoiling of their
goods. Heb. 10.34. yet Lay-Impropriators, being about Of 9000 Livings in this
Kingdom, there are above 4000 so castrated by Sacrilegious Impropriators. So
he who writes in an Apology for D. Featly in a Book which he calls Sacra
Remiss. Sect. 10. p. 63. Sir Henry Spelman reports the Ministers to be but 3845
that is 55 fewer then the former number yet a great one. Sir H. S in his
Apology for his Book De non temer. Eccles. p. 10.
Four thousand, many of them, Noblemen and Gentlemen civil corporations and
others, besides Colleges in both Universities, who account their right in
tithes, as sure as land of Inheritance to themselves, their heirs, executors
and Assigns, will not be so tame if they be taken from them, unless by a just
and satisfactory rate, they be purchased of them, the cost whereof will amount
to so great a value, as may puzzle the wisest heads how to find out any way,
without a far more insupportable oppression, then these Petitioners complain
of: to redeem them from the hands of those who at present are possessed of
them, and if that could be done, and were done, and the Ministers portions
taken from them, as if they were stolen goods in the hands of Fellons, without
any recompense or certain means of temporal subsistence, how abominable and
scandalous, partiality and tyranny would that appear to be, to all truly
Religious and Conscientious Christians.

A Second query to be resolved by them, may be this, whether they intend, that
the Tithes should be taken from the present owners of them, and the right, and
the disposal of them, devolved into the hands of Feofees or Committees
Authorized by the State, to receive them, to set or let them, and the Moneys
made of them, made up into a common stock for public use, if so, such a
course may give them more cause of complaint for oppression, then the Minister
ever did or could do, since they will have to do with their superiors in
power, who may make them pay what they please to impose, and they may impose
more then is right, upon the wrong report of some malicious neighbor, who may
overrate their portion, besides some quick course may be taken with them, for
speedy payment, perhaps before hand (as in some other cases) so that they shall
not have credit enough, to run behind in Arrears one year or two, as many are
wont to do with their Ministers: or whether they would have every one, who
has a right to the nine parts, to be endowed with the tenth also, which
heretofore they had not, if this be their mind, they will show themselves no
good friends to the Parliament, nor to many of these, who in most doubtful and
dangerous times, have most faithfully adhered to them, since by the spoils of
the Ministry, those generally shall be most gratified, who wish no good
success, nor prosperity to the public affairs, until Royalty, Prelacy,
Ceremonies, Superstition, the Service Book, confused Communions at Easter, Mad
and Pagan Revels at Whitsontide and Christmas, as Papists or Pyetide, as some
Anti-papists call it, be restored.

SECT. IX.
NOw from their motion and their meaning in it, to their motives, which we
will take in the order premised.

The First is, their consciences toward God and the Parliament. Conscience
toward God? To robb God of his right, when they should honor him with their
own substance Prove. 3.9. And the laborers in his harvest of their hire, that
crying sin James 5.4. Is this Conscience? If it be, it is of too near
affinity to theirs, who think it matter of Conscience, and think they do God
good service in killing of his servants, Ioh. 16.2. And was it their duty, a
duty of Conscience, to petition the Parliament, to Vote the Ministers into a
miserable condition (by taking from them and theirs their maintenance) whom
they ought to protect in all their just rights and Privileges, as well (if not
more tenderly, then any Subjects of th^s Nation: Is not this such a Conscience
as the Jews had (such in intention, but I trust will never be such in
success) when they stirred up devout and honorable Women, and the chief of
the City of Antioch, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and
expelled them out of their coast. Act. 13.50.

Their Second motive is, that it will be an Act of Justice to take away Tithes,
for as they justly desire it, so should the Parliament in justice grant it,
restoring to the people, their just rights and Liberties, according to the just
end of our War, and the trust they have undertaken: Wherefore they cannot
fail without injustice. And all this is just nothing, since the justice of the
Ministers cause against the Petitioners Criminations, is already sufficiently
cleared in Section 6th.

The Third motive is taken from Piety: To take away Tithes will bring glory to
God, as they conceive it, but they are as much mistaken in the end, as they
were in the beginning of their malevolent motion, Conscience stirred them up to
Petition, and in Petitioning their aim was, and the end of their desires, if
not denied, would be the glory of God, as much belike as it was to the glory of
King David, to have his Servants beards cut, coats curtaild by Hanun the
Ammonite, 2 Samuel 10.4. their piety in this is much like their Conscience, as
but now was observed.

4th Motive to induce putting down of Tithes is, that Charity requires it, for
it will be a lifting, and holding up of those, who are bowed down under the
oppression of them, a setting of them free from the yoke of Antichristian
tyranny, a bringing of succor to this wearied Commonwealth, and a means of
its welfare and preservation, a loosing of the bond of wickedness. To all
these particulars, I have formally or virtually answered before, so that I need
do no more here, but to direct to their place of refutation, which is Sect. 6.

SECT. X.
THe 5th Motive is such as that it requires a distinct consideration by it
self and it is a motive of prudence, if the Parliament upon their Petition
will use their serious endeavors that this unjust oppression of Tithes may be
abolished. 1. They will give Testimony of their resolutiou to instate this
Comonwealth in all their just Rights and Libertyes.

Where the Petitioners seem to make Ministers no part of the Commonwealth who
(besides their Spiritual Ministry toward the Souls of men are both a
considerable portion of the whole and bear a larger portion in public
payments, then other men.

2. For that they intimate that by taking their estates from them they shall
give testimony of their resolutions to instates this commonwealth in all their
just rights and privileges, the quite contrary will be a clearer and a readier
Inference for has not the Parliament as good Authority, and may they not with
as much justice take away the means and revenues of other Subjects of this
Nation, as well as of Ministers, and rather because many by treason may forfeit
their Lands and inheritances from themselves and their heirs; but the fact of a
Minister cannot transmit the guilt of such a fact or forfeiture upon his
successor. Because he is not in his predecessors Loins, as the Child in the
Loins of his Parents Levi in the Loins of Abraham, and all of us in the
Loins of Adam and it may somewhat scruple the Consciences of a Christian to
impoverish the Ministry because their destitution may produce great detriment
to the progress of religion which whosoever dares violate will not stick much
at an act of Ministry in secular matters Dionisius made bold to robb the
Temples of his heathen Gods of their Rights and ornaments, and when he had done
so he set them to sale in the open Market wheereby when he had made up a great
sum of money, Ferunt sublata de fanis in forum protulisse and per praeconem
vendidisse exactaq, pecunia edixisse ut quod quisque a sacris haberet id ante
diem certum in suum quidque fanum referret ita ad impietatem in Deos in homines
adjunxit injuriam. Cicero de natura Deorum l. 3. P. 255. Nu. 63.
he made proclamation, that all he had sold, should be again restored to the
Temples from whence he had taken them, and so says the Roman Orator, who
reports the story. To impiety against the Gods, he added injustice toward men,
yet to give the Devil his due, it seems he was more loath to stand-guilty of
Sacrilege, then of simple theft, for he so ordered his cheating traffic, as
in the last account to make his Subjects rather then his gods to be loosers by
the bargain.

And whereas these Petitioners, so press the putting down of Tithes, as an
earnest of instating the Commonwealth, in all their just Rights and Liberties,
by which they mean not the representative of the people Assembled in
Parliament, but particular Subjects, it may be a leading case for them, to
loose their Rights and Liberties, and when all are set free from Tithes, at
that gappe may break in, as it did in Germany, the Levelling Bonorum
communitatem humanitati cu^ primis esse consentaneum. Sleyd. comment. l. 10.
prior.
Community, which takes away all bounds of propriety, where walls and hedges,
locks and bolts, will not be endured, as being injurious encroachments upon
Christian liberty, and therefore Factum est ut vulgus ab operibus atque labor
desisteret and qua quisque re careret ab aliis qui abundabant etiam invitiis
acciperet Jbid.
it may be lawful for those that have strength enough in their hands, to break
down such partition walls, and to break up locks and bolts, and any thing that
stands betwixt them and their due limited Liberties, so it was believed and
practiced, by such as the Devil stirred up to hinder, and to slander the work
of Reformation in Luthers time, with this community of Goods, they held an
equality of Ex dignitate sunt omnes aequales Sleyd ibid. 51. 64.
persons, and then what is the Landlord better then the Tenant, and why should
he Labor and Sweat, fare hard, and wear poor apparel, that his Landlord
and Landlady, may live as idely as the Lillies of the field, which may fare as
deliciously as the rich glutton, Luke 16. and be as gloriously arraied as Herod
Acts 12. yea why should he pay a fine or a rack-rent, and he and his Family
rise up early, sit up late, eat the bread of Carfulness, not only to uphold
their idleness, luxury, and bravery, but their vain pastime, gaming, hunting,
hawking, and so give his money to maintain Cards and Dice, and his Childrens
bread to dogs, and their flesh to nourish birds of prey, and though such
mutterings be but the wicked issue of Satan's Conjunction with humane
corruption, for it is the undoubted will of God, and a special part of his
divine providence (without which the world would soon fall into horrid
confusion) that there be degrees of prelation, and subordination, of
pre-eminence, and dependence betwixt man and man, in respect of wisdom power
honor and riches.

But yet we must take heed that by one unrighteous principle and practice we
draw not on another, and truly from the denial of all set maintenance to
Ministers to the denial of fines and rents to Landlords there is but a very
little way of distance, and the passage from them to these is down the hill,
for though both be very ungodly and unreasonable, yet upon such tenets as are
now given forth the pretense of oppression may be more colourably pleaded
against fines and rents and harriots and services of Tenant to the Landlord
then against Tithes to the Minister and if these Petioners should prevail in
their motion for the one it would be a motive to others to hope that they may
be freed from the other also, and so far the Devil has driven on the design
of boundless liberty amongst us already, for there be some of those new
Antichristians before mentioned who arenot free to be Tenants to other men,
Examination of the Quakers Doct p. 42.
that is they have such a latitude of Christian freedom that they cannot put
themselves into so narrow and servile relation as tenantshippe beings with it.

SECT. II.
THe other motive of prudence to the abolishing of Tithes, is that in so ding
the Parliament will engage the hearts of all the honest and godly people of this
Nation who have been bowed down under the oppression and who being disingaged
from Corrupt and self interests, will chiefly adventure their Lives and States
for their preservations and the Nations Peace.

Where there are two particulars which deserve distinct consideration: the one
who will be engaged to the Parliament upon the taking away of Tithes, the other
how far they will be engaged.

For the first they say all the Godly and honest of this Nation who are bowed
down under the opression of Tithes, and disengaged from corupt and self
interests where they bring in the Godly people with two qualifications of
little affinity one with the other, for to be disengaged from corrupt and self
interests, very well agrees with the sincerity of of the most sound hearled
Christians, but to say that those who account Tithes such a burden as to be
bowed down under them if they speak it either of all, or of greater number of
the better sort of men is as hard to be prooved, as easy to be spoken, for very
many truly religious men are rightly informed and well persuaded of the Right
of Tithes and pay them as dues, to which they are obliged by Justice and
conscience, and many of the wiser sort of Godly persons account it their
privilege to have the Ministers maintained by Tithes whereto they have an
ancient and a legal Rightand that they are not put to it as the Christians are
in France, to give them pentions out of the nine parts besides the payment of
the Tenth, to Popish Priests and hold it a privilege and liberty of an English
Subject if he have a son sit for the calling of the Ministry to breed him up
to that calling, and that when he has bestowed cost upon his education to that
purpose, and he is both furnished with gifts, and employed in a Ministerial
office that he should have beneficium propter officium the wages assigned to
the work and though the number of Ministrs be much less then the roast of the
Nation, (as among the Israelites, the Levites were not as some mistake the
matter the tenth or twelfth part of the posterity of Jacob, but not so much as
the sixtith part of the descendants from his Loins) yet they are a very
considerable part of the Common wealth who in any public charge pay a bove
the portion of other men as has beeen noted before, and have a capacity and
opportunity to serve the State more then is incident to the condition of other
men, not only in the time of peace but of war also: I had it from a Courtier
of good credit, that the last king, when a Cour-chapline Dr R.
was rather popular then Courtlike in his Preaching, and his Sermon relished
more for the Peoples right then of the Kings prerogative that checking him for
it, told him he looked for as good service from his Clergy in the Pulpit, as
from his Army in the Field, and he meant it not only by their prayers (as his
Grandmother did when she more feared the prayers of John Knox and his
Disciples then an Army of 20 thousand Mr Trap in Acts 10.4.
men) but by their instructions and persuasions of the People. There are yet
enough ready to bear witness and worthy to be believed in a cause of weight
who well remember that the Ministers who have been of a contrary Judgment to
these Petitioners in point of Tithes) have done such good offices to the
Parliament and the Army, with the People as (to speak modestly without
upbrading of either) might render them more capable of their protection then of
their opposition.

The other particular is, how far they will be engaged, they say they will
cheerfully adventure their Lives and Estates for the Parliaments preservation,
and for the Nations Peace, viz. in so doing that is if they will use their
serious endeavors that the oppression of Tithes and forced maintenance may be
abolished it is much to be feared as before has been touched, that the
Petitioners here are not disingaged from corrupt and self interests, since
some of them hope thereby to gain that which the Minister must loose but for
the condition of their engagement in so doing. It was held a very politic
caution in the 3d Article of the late National League and Covenant that they
who took it were no further bound to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's
person and Authority then in the preservation and defense of the true Religion
and the Liberties of the Kingdom. So that if he set hmselfe against either of
these the engagement did not oblige to his defense, so their engagement being
but conditional in so doing if the Parliament will not do so as they would
have them, they are discharged from adventnring themselves or estates for their
preservation and the Nations peace, there was never such a capitulation put
upon any Parliament, nor ever was the Nations peace put upon such unequal and
unreasonable terms. But say the Parliament, should assent to their proposal,
would that content and quiet them, would they not moove for somewhat more,
which the Parliament might conceive to be much worse for the Nations welfare,
and therefore in prudence and conscience, must think it fit to be denied, there
be some to whom the Answer of Sir Walt. Rawleigh to Q. Elizabeth may be
applied, who when she asked him when he would give over his begging, he told
her Majesty, not till she gave over giving: So some are of such unstable
spirits, and boundless desires, that they make the obtainment of one favor,
the inducement to moove for another, and if they sped in never so many, they
are all lost in the last, wherein their humor is not satisfied.

But it will be a great deal too much to grant what they moove for, in their
present Petition, for besides the knot for the lawfulness of Tithes, by
Scripture and reason, especially for a settled and certain maintenance (which
cannot be expected without constraint) it will not consist, I humbly conceive,
with the prudence of the Parliament (after they have incurred the offense of
the Royal party, by putting down Kingship, the Prelaticall, by putting down
Bishops, Deanes and Chapters, the superstitious party by putting down the
Service Book, the Profane party, by putting down Stage-plaies, December
Saturnals commonly called Christmas holidaies, and carnal sports and
recreations on Sabbath day.) by gratifying them herein, to give just cause of
discontent, to all Regular and Orthodox Ministers of the Land, and to all those
who are for a set, certain, and sufficient maintenance for them, which I am
confident, is the mind of the most and best of all the people of the English
Nation.

If it be said, that by taking Tithes from the Ministers; and in giving them to
the People (though they constitute no other Maintenance that may be required
and procured by force of Law, for one they shall loose, they shall oblige
hundreds. I answer, though it would be a great beneficence from the Parliament
to the people, to give them the Tithes they never had in Right, nor in
possession, by these Petitioners complaint of them, as unsupportable
oppression, they would learn to take them, not as favors, but as just Rights,
since they are bound in justice to free them from, or if they should apprehend
them as free-will-offerings or donatives that would work upon them, but for a
very little while in any way of grateful resentment, since their manifold
Antipathies, under the Tithes now mentioned (being in them mightily predominant
above all ingenuity) would soon bury it in the grave of oblivion, or stifle it
with a stronger sent of malignant disaffection toward them. Whereas if they
were kept up as the constant Revenue of Incumbent Pastors, as the souls of the
people, as well as the bodies of Ministers, might be better provided for, so
the State might have better service from them both, of which something has
been said, which the Reader may remember, and apply to this point, though I do
not repeat it in the place.

SECT. XII.
There remains only one prudentiall motive more, besides the common
formality, And your Petitioners shall etc. And that is, Thus will your light
break forth as the Morning, and your righteousness shall go before you.

ANSWER.
HOw necessary it is, that the Parliament should be, as we hear they are, much
in prayer, and that all the well affected of the Nation, should heartily pray
for them, not only that no corrupt ends, and self interests of their own, may
dispose them to act otherwise, then according to the rule of truth and justice,
but that they may not, by any importunity of subtle insinuations, be swayed
from their own syncerity, to serve the partial and pernicious designs of
other men, such a one is that of the Petitioners, as not only against Tithes,
but against all forced and constrained maintenance, whereby they plausibly
pretend, that it will be, a means to bring glory to God, a way to the welfare
of the Commonwealth, that thereby it will be established by Righteousness,
and that then the light of the Parliament, if they use their serious endeavors
to abolish Tithes, will break forth as the Morning, and their Righteousness
go before them.

Before we believe any of this, we must believe the Jews were not deceived,
when they imputed their prosperity to their burning incence to the Queen of
Heaven, and pouring out Drinke-offerings to her. Jer. 44.16, 17. Whereas the
truth was, for that wickedness (as the Prophet tells them, from v. 22. to 26.
of the same Chapter, all their calamities under which they groaned, came upon
them. We know not then, how from such injurious acts, as the Petitioners
propose and plead for, to foretell such fair and favorable effects as they
promise, except as Micajah said to Ahab in an Ironicall sense, Go against
Ramoth Gilead and prosper. 1 Cron. 1.5. So the result of what has been said on
both sides in this matter, might be given up to the Parliament, as in a summary
conclusion in this manner.

Though Pharaohs favor were such to his Idolatrous Priests, that in a time of
extraodinary dearth, he would not diminish their means, but made a reserve or
exeption of their Lands alone which were not alienated, as the Lands of his
other Subjects Genesis 47. v. 21. Though the sacrificing Priest of the old
Testament had a liberal allowance allotted them by God, though the Apostle Paul
in the New Testament held the Ministers of the Gospel, as worthy to be
maintained as the Ministers of the La, and that it was but a small matter v. 9.
That they who sow Spiritual things should reap Carnal things though Popish
Priests have Tithes paid nuto them, not only by their own disciples, but by
the Protestants of France (albeit they also bear the charge of their own
orthodox Ministers by giving them pensions) though in the time of the Prelates
tithes were generally paid even to the Idle and scandalous Ministers and that
according to the Law of the Land (for Easter dues were not to be detained from
them, unless upon a due and orderly conviction they were put out of office)
though many of them rich and being qualified to hold plurality of Benefices
with care of Souls, yet now, when the Ministers be neither Heathenish,
Popish, nor Prelaticall, though you have so far reformed them as to make them
more entirely Incumbent upon their Spiritual employments by debarring them of
the exercise of all civil offices, and now though the iniquity of the times by
multiplicity of errors and heresies makes more need of Learned and Orthodox
Ministers, and more work for them which will put them to more charge of books
to be furnished for that work though they have done faithful and profitable
service for the commonwwealth for which some of them have been paticularly
thanked by the Council of State, not withstanding all this now take away the
Tithes, and let them have nothing as they may claim as their Right to
mainetaine them. And what you take from them bestow upon those who hate both
you and them and thereby give the occasion to insult over their poverties who
would not bow to a compliance with their superstitions or profainesse. Let them
be spoiled of all they have that they be tempted to perplexed thoughts for
their future provision what they shall eat or what they drink, and wherewith
they shall be clothed and to dishonest shifts as the unjust Steward was and in
the next generation (by inhumane persecution worse then Dioclesians) for want
of means to feed the Ministers, let there be want of Ministers to feed the
People. This shall make much to the glory of God for the Welfare, Peace and
Preservation and prosperity of this Nation. It shall bring in the bloody Irish
Rebls, and the barbarous theevish Highlanders meekly submit their necks to the
yoke of the English Government then the greatest Dutch men of war shall be
willing to strike sail, to your smallest pinke or pinnace, yea and the High
and Mighty Sates of the Netherlands shall come down and beg conditions of
peace at your hands, and be glad to buy it at any rate you will be pleased to
set upon it, then neither the French, nor the Dane, shall dare to affront
you, or make any attempt against you by Land or by Sea, lastly then thongh the
reproach of your unrighteous dealing blast your Names with blackest defamie our
Light shall break forth as the Morning, and your Righteousness shall go
before you making way for your gracious acceptance before God and man.

This in effect though not in form, is the equipollence of the Petitioners
propose and promise in their Petition to the Parliament, which their wisdom I
doubt not, discernes too well to expect they should prosper the better at home
or abroad by any such means as these Petitioners have projected.

They will say perhaps I have made their matter worse then it is by mine
aggrivation, for though Tithes and all constrained maintenance be taken away
the People shall not want Preachers for there be many will Preach for nothing.
It may be so, and for some that will take that office upon them, and drive
other Trades besides their Preaching may be worth nothing, and yet I think
they will not long hold out in that work, at that rate the Bucol Index Chron.
ad An. 1535. p. 534.
Jesuits when they began to set up and to gain customers, and credit,
professed they would both preach in Churches and teach in Schools for nothing
But when upon such fair pretenses they had put themselves into acquaintance
and employment they found a way of thriving in worldly wealth (time for time)
above not only the Tithtaking Clergy but above all other religious orders of
the Church of Rome, for in less then 100 years they have increased from ten
(their founder Phil. Alegamb. Biliothec. Script. societat. Jes. Statim post
prefat. and censur.
and nine more) of his brotherhood to See the progress of Ignatius written by
L. O. and Printed with S. Edw. Sands Europae Speculum An. 1632. p. 56.
11875 fellows and 475 Colleges from the year 1534 or 1535 to the year 1632.

But if the Petition had been liable to so many exceptions as you have made
against it, especially for the principal part of it the abolishing of Tithes,
the Petitioners had not received thanks from the House by the Speaker as they
did Saturday 16 of July. 1653 with this answer that the House was in debate of
the thing they Petitioned for (as Mercurius Politicus Mercur. Politicus number.
163.
has reported both the presenting and the acceptance of that Petition.

Ans. It is the wisdom of Parliament, and has been their practice heretofore
to receive Petitioners who complain of oppression, with patience and
indulgence, for thereby they come to know the State of things better then
otherwise they would do, since complaints raise debates and debates beget
votes and determinations which may stint the strife. Secondly, their thanks is
no argument of their approbation of the Petitioners Motion for they might
thank them for somewhat else as the former Parliament thanked the Petitioners
of Kent, (mooving them against Tithes as these do, but with more moderation
and equity toward the Ministers) for their former So in the resolutions
concerning the Alienati of Tithes forecited p. 15.
services and good affections to the Public, promising to take their petition
into consideration in due time, and in the mean time rerequiring them to take
care, that Tithes be paid according to Law, no less was meant doubtless by
the present Parliament, though there were more hope given for speedy decision
of the doubt in question because it was in debate already, wherein the Lord
direct them to such a resolution as may be most pleasing to himself, and most
comfortable to those who are truly Godly and most profitable for the
propagation of the Gospel, and for prevention of scandal to the Christian
Religion professed amongst us.

AN ANSWER TO THE Later Petition.
THE three Authorized Intelligencers, for the News both of and to this Nation,
have given notice this week, of a Petition against Tithes, presented to the
Parliament from the County of Kent, with much difference for the measure, but
without any contradiction for the matter they move for.

The Armies Diurnall nu. 191. p. 2905.
For one of them says no more of it but this. A petition from Kent was
presented to the Parliament, for the taking off of Tithes. That is all he says
of the Petition, the acceptance it had is another thing whereof we shall speak
afterward.

The Reporter of the several proceedings of State Affairs number. 202. p. 3189
Another says somewhat more but not all in these words.

The Petition.
To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, the humble Petition of many
of the well affected of the County of Kent, was this day delivered.

Humbly desiring that Tithes of all sorts, root and branch, may be abolished,
and that the Jewish and Antichristian burden on the estates and consciences of
the Godly may cease, and that we may not be ensnared with forced maintenance,
or any thing like it instead thereof. And your Petitioners shall own the Lord
in you, and bless the Lord for you, and pray, and hope, and wait to see your
hands stretched out for the Lord, till you shall help to tear the flesh of the
Whore and burn her with fire.

A Mesc. Polit. number. 165. p. 2636.
Third far larger then the other two.

ANSWER.
Which having read (after some silent admiration of such an high degree of
malevolence against the Ministers of God, as the Petitioners discover) I could
not but be very sadly affected, as Joseph Scalig. Et uberioribus lachrymis
deploravit nimiam vivacitatem suam quod ad ea usque tempora durasset quibus in
dubium vocaretur meritum and satisfactio servatoris nostri Jesus Christi. Bucol.
Ind. Chr. ad annum 1609. p. 773. edit. 5.
Scaliger was, to think how long I had lived, having lived to see such impious
injustice, so bold faced, as to offer to tempt the Supreme Judicatory of the
Nation professing themselves protectors of Religion and Learning, to persecute
the Preachers of the Gospel, by taking from them, that supply for their
subsistence, which Moral equity, Christian piety, and Civil Justice, have
conferred on them, and confirmed to them, as their Right, this moved me again
while my spirit was warm in the former work, to bestow some serious thought
and observations upon this later, as well as the former petition, and though
they agree in the sum and substance of their desires, and that wherein they
agree, be wholly answered already (so that what confuteth the one confuteth
the other) yet what I find in this from Kent, differing from the other (from
whence I know not, but not from Christendom for ought I see in it) worthy of
consideration, I shall take notice of it, and make answer to it, as it shall
deserve: and first for the threefold report of this petition, of the two former
which are shorter, we may say as a learned D. Done in his Apology for the
Jesuits, at the end of his Ignatian Conclave.
Doctor said of writing of the Jesuits, he favors them most who says least
of them, and for the Third, which is longer then both, as a Learned man being
demanded, which of Ciceroes orations he liked the best, answered The longest,
so on the contrary, we may say of these three relations of the Kentish
petition, that the longest is the worst, for we have in them three degrees of
comparison, malum, pejus, pessimum, whereby I mean not to reflect any offense
upon the Reporters, but on the matter reported, for they who said less, happily
might think they said enough of it, except it had been better and he that set
it forth more largely meant it may be to give a more complete character of the
spirits and dispositions of the Petitioners, for further information and
satisfaction of the Reader for which he deseveth thanks.

Here though the proverb say of evils, the least is to be chosen, I shall
choose the greatest, not doubting to fit an antidote answerable to the
dimension of the malignity thereof, and yet I shall not need to be very long
about it, since the work for the chief part of it, is already done, in the
return which has been fitted to the former petition.

And for the later, what I shall say concerning it, I shall reduce, 1. To the
Petitioners. 2. To the Petition it self.


wherein I shall distinctly consider, 1. What they purpose unto the Parliament.
2. By what inducements they would prevail in their proposal.


And under these two heads, I shall set down all their Petition, in such sort
as that though it be brought in by divided Portions an ordinary Reader
following the distinct character may so put them together, as to make it up
into an entire piece at his pleasure.

3. After that with, modesty and humility, I shall speak somewhat of the
Parliaments Answer unto that.

The Title of the Petitioners.
1. For the Petitioners though we hear nothing of their number covnted up to
thousands, as was noted of the former Petitioners yet they are men of account
not only such as call themselves (as they did) the well affected but some of
them also Justices of peace.

ANSWER.
THey may be so and yet not have dignity and worth in them to give any
reputation to such a Petition it is one of the great inco^eniences if not
mischiefs which has ensued upon many revolts from and rebellions against the
Parliament (where in the County of Kent has not had the least share of guilt)
that the number of men of eminecy where in they might confide has been very
small for as it was in the first reformation of Queen Elizabeth for want of
learned and orthodox Divines there was a necessity to make use of Mechanical
Men out of the Shop no less learned the^ Popish Priests who attatined to
Ecclesiastical dignities Prebends and Rich Benefices as Cambd. Hist. of Qu:
Elizab. An. 1559. l. 1. p. 19.
Camb. observes. So now in many Contryes, such is the scarcity of those whom
the Parliament dare trust in offices of authority, (though some of them whose
parentage parts and estates gives them a prelation above others, constantly
adhered to them) that they are feign to abate many grains of Weight and worth
in High Sheriffs and Justices of Peace more then heretofore, and to put in some
into these offices who had little else to commend them to any employment of
power and credit, but the^ that they were Anti-royalist, Anti-prelatists,
Anti-presbiterians: And that these Justices are above all the Anti-ministerians
and Anti-decimists they are eo nomine less to be valewed and more and more
unworthy of their places, because as Justices of Peace, by ordinance of
Parliament they are to relieve Ministers in point of Tithes against such, as
unduly detain them from them.

But be they what they may be, were they Justices of the Highest rank, and of
the best qualifications that ever acted in those offices, such a Petition as
they have subscribed, would much more disparage them, then they could honor
such a Petition, which now in the Second place comes to be considered, and
therein, 1. What they propose unto the Parliament. 2. By what inducements they
would prevail in their proposal.

The Petition.
For the first their motion is, That Tithes of all sorts, root and branch, may
be abolished, and that the Jewish and Antichristian Burden on the Estates and
Consciences of the Godly may cease, and that we may not be ensnared with forced
maintenance, or any thing like it instead thereof.

ANSWER.
That Tithes are neither a burden, which any good man should be unwilling to
bear, nor Jewish nor Antichristian, nor a snare to the conscience, has been
abundantly showed, in the answer to the Former Petition: yet there is something
observable in this, that was not in that, for it more fully expresses, how
far they would stretch the line of confusion, and to lay the stone of
emptiness, Isay 34.11. upon the Portion of the Ministers, viz. Tithes of all
sorts Root and Branch may cease, and no forced maintenance or any thing like it
in stead thereof. All sorts of Tithes, that is great and small praediall and
personal, the Tithes of Impropriators as well as of Incumbent Pastors.

I cannot tell whether in this Latitude they mean the Tithe of the Sea, as
well as the Land, Resolved that the tenth of all prises taken or to be taken,
and customarily due to the L. High Admiral be appointed for sick and wounded
men. Merc. Polit. nu. 165. p. 2640.
for there is such a Title which the Lord Admiral was wont to have of Sea
prizes, and is now assigned to succor sick and maimed Soldiers. Tith or
Tenth, by which upon some common offense, as the Lot fell, every Resolved that
the tenth of all prises taken or to be taken, and customarily due to the L.
High Admiral be appointed for sick and wounded men. Merc. Polit. nu. 165. p.
2640.
tenth Soldier was to be cudgelled. But sure they mean as many as they know
of and suspect may put them to any cost or expense: They add root and Branch,
these words are taken out of the 4th of Malachy 22, 23. where God threatens the
wicked with burning vengeance, which will leave neither root nor branch, and
those wicked ones, are principally they, who in the precedent Chapter, he had
arraigned for robbery in Tithes, and in offerings, if they had but made one
step back, and compared the sin and punishment together, they might from
both, with more prudence and better conscience, have taken the Text for a
prohibition of them, that they should make no motion against Tithes, or a
commination against them, if they did so, then have presumed to use that of
root and Branch against Tiths, either to pluck them up by the root, or so much
as to croppe their branches. After Tithes of all sorts, they move against all
forced maintenance, non enduring any thing like it in stead thereof. What shall
Ministers have no Tithes, though by so many titles due unto them, no certain
maintenance, nothing like that? Whether their dislike of Ministers, or the
likeing of their Idol Mammon, which they hope to increase, by this saving the
ablative doctrine, as some call it, is hard to say, but easy to see that no
Petition like this for injustice and impiety, was ever made by any sort of men,
pretending to any Religion, true or false, to any Parliament that ever this
Nation had, whether Popish or Protestant, or of what denomination soever, old
or new, yet they call themselves, not only the well affected, but the Godly,
for the Petition runs thus, -- That the Antichristian burden -- on the Godly
may cease, and their next words are, that we may not be ensnared. Godw. of Romans
Antiq. l. 4. c. 6. p. 275.


Fairefall their petitioning predecessors, and Countrymen of Kent, who when
they presented their desires to the last Parl. For the taking away of Tithes
The resolution of the doubt cited at the letter R. p. 7, 8.
professed their good meaning, to establish a sufficient maintenance for Godly
and well deserving Ministers, yea a very good meaning to extend it so far, as
to succor and provide for their Widows, and Fatherless Children, which was
the eighth proposition of their new project. yet the Parliament (though they
civilly entertained the Petitioners, telling them that they took notice of
their good affections to the public) sent them away with a charge, that
Tithes were paid according to Law. And their Petition (so far as it was
against Tithes, was found many ways faulty, and was accordingly See the
resolution of the doubt touching alienation of Tithes annexed to Sir Henry
Spelm. larger Treatise of Tithes Printed 1647 from p. 7. to p. 22.
refuted in Print.

Thus much for the proposal or request to the Parliament: Now we are to
observe, by what inducements they endeavor to prevail, which they set down,
partly as a Prologue, partly as an Epilogue to their petition forementioned,
their prologue in these words.

Petition.
Though the Kings of the Earth, have been unwilling that the anointed Jesus
should Reign, yet the observation of the outgoings of the most high in these
later days, causes your Petitioners, to believe that the day of the
accomplishment of the promises on that behalf of the Sun of Righteousness,
is dawned if not approached very near its noone, who is weary always, to
behold the burdens on the backs, the yoaks on the necks, and to hear the
groans and cries of his people, wherefore he has powered forth a spirit which
has encountered and vanquished our open oppressors, and powered contempt upon
those, who were but partial deliverers. The sun of whose power set a noone
because it ripened not, the desires and Petitions of Gods people, by a
favorable influence, but suffered their hopes to blast, after so many promises
and protestations, and so much expense of Treasure and blood. The same God who
has pulled them down has set you up, but not to rule for your selves, but
for the people God, not to seek your own, but the honor of Christ, and we
can do no less then hope and Pray, that the spirit of the Lord may fall down
upon you (and to teach you to rule after the heart of Christ) to whom we make
hold to make this humble address, not to interrupt your weighty affairs, nor
misdoubting your wisdom and faithfulness, but to show, how our hearts own
you as our Parliament, and to confess we dare not neglect our Assistance to
the great work of the Lord, though it be but in being your remembrancers, of
what you have proposed to us of your desires, in your late Declaration, to the
breaking of all our yoakes, and removing all our Burdens, at which our Souls
joy, and to keep warm the breathings of that spirit, we humbly crave leave to
spread before you, one grand burden under which we have groaned till our
hearts ache.

ANSWER.
IN this part (which is a large porch to a little pile of building) their
discourse is made up of five sorts of persons, 1. The Kings of the earth. 2.
The anointed Jesus. 3. The late Parliament. 4. The present Parliament. 5. The
petitioners themselves.

1. Of the Kings of the Earth, they say, that they have been unwilling that
Christ should reign, which is true enough, not because they say so, but
because we read so, the Kings of the Earth set themselves etc. the rulers take
Counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed, saying let us
break their Bonds, and cast away their cords from us, Psalm. 2. v. 2, 3. And as
true that they would not have him to rule over them shall be destroyed, Luke
19.4, 27. He shall break them with a rod of Iron, and dash then in pieces like
a Potters vessel. Psalm. 2.9.

But what is this to the taking away of Tithes, were they not Heathen Kings Ps.
2.1. Who never received the Law of Tithing who were most unwilling that Christ
should reign over them and were not the most notorious, such under whom Christ
in his Members underwent those ten most cruel persecutions in the first
Centuries in the Christian profession? Truly this if it be brought in as any
reason or inducement to the removal of Tithes (and if it be not what makes it
here) is so far repugnant to all reason, that may rather argue thus
Constantine protecteth Christ's Ministers in their persons, in the execution of
their offices, and of enjoyment of their portions; therefore he is willing that
Christ should reign, then on the contrary Julian though he suffer them to live
and permit them to Preach spoyleth them of their means and mayntenance,
therefore he is willing that Christ should reign when as a Learned and Zealous
Divine as great an enemy to Popery and Superstition as any man, M. Knox. in his
Epistle to the Bishopps and Ministers of Scotland Printed at the end of S. Hen.
Spelm. Appology for his Book de non Temerand: Ecclesiis.
Of all the persecutions intended against Christ, that of Julian was held most
dangerous, for says he to kill the Ministers of the Gospel is nothing so
hurtful, as to kill the Ministry, when men are taken away there is hope others
will be raised up in their places, but if the means of mayntenance be taken
away there follows the decay of the profession it self, men do not apply
themselves commonly to callings for which no rewards are appointed, and say
that some have done it out of Zeal, some out of heat of Contention, yet in
after times, it is not like to continue so neither let any one tell me that a
Minister should have other ends proposed to him then worldly mayntenance, I
know that to be truth yet as our Lord said in the Gospel these things ye
ought to have done, and not to leave the other undone (speaking of payment of
Tithes to the Pharisees) it behooves them (says he) to be paid, if not it is
not to be expected that men should follow that calling.

2d. Person they bring into their prologue Christ where two things are
observable. 1. His glorious advances toward the height or high noone of his
dominion. 2. His tender compassion to his people being weary always to behold
the burdens on the backs, the yoakes on the necks and to hear the groans and
cries of his People. 3. His assistance of his servants to encounter, and
vanquish their open enemies, and oppressors. 4. His pouring contempt upon those
who were but partial deliverers. For the first they set him up in a Royal
equipage, which were well done if they did it to a good end but put their act
and end together, they are both like the Jews arraying him like a King Math.
27.28, 29. And afterward ranking him among Thieves v. 38. Nay worse then so,
for it is better to suffer as an evil doer with innocence 1 Pet. 4.15, 16.
Then to act with evil doers with anevill conscience, but these would make
Christ like Joseph. wars of the Jews. l. 2. c. 13. p. 623.
Gessius Florus president of Judaea a patron of Thieves they would rob and
spoil Christ's servants of their means, and Christ their master must bear the
name of it, as if it must be done by his warrant and to his honor. The holy
Apostles had not so learned Christ, and therefore they well deserved the Apology
of the Town Clarke of Ephesus, when pleading on their behalf, he told the
tumultuous multitude they are no robbers of Churches Act. 19.37.

2. For his tender compassion to his People they speak of, we confess he is
very sensible of their sufferings in all their afflictions he was afflicted
Isaiah. 63.9. And when Saul persecuted the Christians he took his tyranny as
acted against himself Act. 9.4. But this is very ill applied to the payment of
Tithes, that is neither such a Burden on their backs, nor yoke upon their
necks, as should make them groan or cry, if they be sick of Ahabs disease when
he betook him to his bed and refused his meat because he might not have
Nabothes Vineyard 1 Kings. 21.4. Christ will not sympathize with them in such
suffering, and their concupicence after the Ministers maintenance (which makes
them sick to the heart and their hearts to ache as they say of themselves) is
far worse then that of Ahab for he would have given him a better! Vineyard or
a valueable consideration in money for it. v. 1, 2. But they would have Tithes
taken away, and all certain maintenance and nothing like it in stead thereof,
wherein if they should prevail (which God forbid) the groans and cries of the
spoiled and oppressed Ministers would be heard and heeded pittyed, and they
relieved by Christ, as for them if they know the plague of their own heart
(which by their words seem to be too much love to the things of this Life,
which makes them discontented with their own estates, unless they may have
others added to it, and too little love, if not a great deal of hatred to the
Ministers of Christ, whom they would give up to ignominious misery) they would
find more cause of groaning, and cries, and heart aching for that, then for any
thing they do or can endure by payment of Tithes.

3d Thing they Speak of Christ, is the pouring forth of his Spirit which has
encountered and vanquished their open opressours by this it should seem that
Tithetakers are not open opressours (and if oppressors at all they must be
open for Tithtaking is no secret business) for they have not been encountered
but by some unconscionable litigants at law, and such Petitioners to the
Parliament much less are they conquered, no nor was Tithes any part of the
public quarrel as has been already observed, in an answer to the former
Petition.

Petition.
The 4th particular of Christ, is that he has powered forth contempt on those
who were but partial deliverers what contempt he has powered out and for what
may fitly come under the eonsideration of the 3d sort of persons viz. The late
Parliament whom they mean to be but partial deliverers, of whom they further
say in the next words -- the sun of whose power set at Noone because it
ripened not the desires and petitions of Gods People by a favorable influence,
but suffered their hopes to blast after so many promises and protestations and
so much expense of treasure, and blood. Wherein are two things to be noted. 1.
What they suffer. 2. And why.

ANSWER.
FOr the first they suffered contempt. They did so, and more contempt then was
fit to be suffered, if it had been cast upon a single and private Subject for
base and scurrilous Ballets were made and sung in the open market places of
Towns, and in the chief Streets of London until by public authority some
were clapped up in Prison for that which they well deserved. Another contempt
they intimate in the phraise of the Prophet Amos c. 8. v. 9. The sun of their
power set or went down at Noone that is their Sunshine glory as the great and
most awful Assembly of this Nation was suddenly turned into a Night like
darkness of obscurity and privacy, and this at noone if they mean that they
were interrupted in their work, when but half the day was done or time spunne
out, for noone is the middle of the day it is not like they intended to sit as
long as they had done another twelve years, yet it was a contempt cast upon
them, I confess they were forced to dissolve when they might have been so
happy as with prudence and honor freely to have given up their power and
places to a new representative. But why came this contempt upon them? That the
second particular, to which I will not take upon me to return any answer of
mine own, because I will not intrude myself into the Secrets of God, or
Mysteries of States.

Petition.
The reason they render is, Because they ripended not the desires and Petitions
of Gods People, by a favorable influence, but suffered their hopes to blast
after so many promises and Protestations, and so much expense of blood and
Treasure.

ANSWER.
ALL which having reference to their request following, we may guess their
meaning to be, that they were but partial deliverers, the Sun of whose power
set at noon etc. because they did not free them from the oppression of Tithes,
if so, does it not imply a commination to the present Parliament, that if they
do not understand and vote down Tithes as an oppression, their Sun may be
like to set at noone, as well as the others, and truly, if men like minded to
these Petitioners, had had so much power in their hands, as to scatter them
when they were met in a collective body, it is very probable, that the
receiving Petitions for Tithes, the Ministry and Universities (as they did)
might have been a principal cause of such a dissolution. But that God had no
quarrel at them nor powered any contempt upon them, for that is clearly
evicted, by what has been answered to the former Petition. Besides the prime
cause (upon In the Declaration of the Lord General Crumwell and Councrll of
Officers April. 22. 1653. p. 5.
better warrant then these Petitioners words appears to be) the purpose of
perpetuating themselves in the supreme government.

4. Of the present Parliament they say, that the same God who has pulled the
former Parliament down, has set them up, not to rule for themselves, but for
the people of God, not to seek their own but the honor of Christ. Wherein
their words be good, and if their meaning be no worse, they may pass without
exception: But if they mean themselves only, or their own party, to be the
people of God, and their Petitions though most unrighteous and unreasonable, as
this is, must sway the votes and determinations of Parliament, their opinion is
a mere deceit, and their expectation, I trust, will be deceived.

Petition.
5. For themselves they say, We can do no less then hope and pray that the
spirit of the Lord may fall down upon you (and teach you to rule after the
heart of Christ) to whom we make hold to make this humble address, not to
interrupt your weighty affairs, or as misdoubting your wisdom, and
faithfulness, But to show you how our hearts own you as our Parliament, and
to confess we dare not neglect our Assistance to the great work of the Lord,
though it be but in being your remembrancers of what you have proposed to us in
your late Declaration, to the breaking of all our yoakes, and removing all our
burdens, at which our souls joy, and to keep warm the breathings of that
spirit, we humbly crave leave to spread before you, one grand burden, under
which we have groaned till our hearts ache.

ANSWER.
Which words may be resolved into these particulars.

1. Their professed 1. Good opinion of the Parliament. 2. Great affection to
the Parliament. 3. Zeal for the Parliament. 4. Their joy in the Parliament.
2. Their own sad condition, by the grand burden of Tithes under which they
groan until their hearts ache.
1. For the First, their good opinion of the Parliament: They make no doubt of
their wisdom and faithfulness. 2. For their great affection to the
Parliament, they desire by this to show, how they own them as their Parliament.
3. Their zeal for the Parliament, in praying that the spirit of the Lord may
fall down upon them, and teach them how to rule after the heart of Christ. 4.
their joy in the Parliament, for their Declaration to break off all their
yoakes, and remove all their burdens.
1. For the First, we think so well of the Parliaments wisdom, that they need
not the advice of these petitioners, and their faithfulness, that they will
not be corrupted by their solicitations, to act otherwise then according to
the rule of piety and Justice. 2. For the Second, their hearts owning this
Parliament, that's somewhat, for some great enemies to Tithes have taken the
boldness to tell the World in print, that there has been no Parliament since
there was not a King to parley withal. But not much, for it may well be
suspected, as was observed of the other petitioners that it is with an implicit
condition that the Parliament own them and their cause, as they represent it
under the notion of oppression by payment of Tithes. 3. For their professed
zeal in praying for the Parliament, that the spirit of the Lord may fall down
upon them and teach them to rule after the heart of Christ, we say Amen to this
prayer, only with this addition, that the spirit of God, and heart of Christ,
and the word of God, and Christ, may all work together, for their guidance and
direction, both in their consultations and conclusions. 4. Whereas they
profess their joy in the Parliament, for their Deolaration to break all their
yoakes, and to remove all their Burdens. We question whether the Parliament
in any Declaration, has specified Tithes to be a burden or a yoke, we
believe they have not, nor can they on the sudden, take off all burdens,
while there is so great a necessity to maintain a fighting Navy by Sea, as
well as an Army by Land.
2. The other part, which is the close of their prologue, or proem to their
proposal against Tithes, is their sad condition, by that grand burden under
which they have groaned till their hears ache, besides what we have observed
before of the burdens on the back, and yoakes on the necks of Gods People and
of their groans and cries. We shall here touch only at two things, the one is
how such Joys as but now they professed, and such groaning and aching of the
heart (by the grand burden not yet moved) can agree together. The other is,
that suppose Tithes were a burden they may be mistaken in the weight of it,
and I think many are so, who when Wars and plunder have impoverished, many
obstructions of Trade been an hinderance to the recruiting of their state, and
great payments have oppressed them, by the clamors of such as these Petitioners
put all their aggreevance upon the Score of Tithes which without the other
detriments would never be matter of complaint to any but to such as are
wayward or covetuous. Thus much of their Prologue, their Epilogue is but short,
no more but this upon the granting of their request your Petitioners shall own
the Lord in you, and Bless the Lord for you, and Pray and hope and wayt to see
your hands stretched out for the Lord, till you shall help to tear the Flesh
of the Whore, and burn her with fire.

If they put down Tithes, and all forced maintenance, and set up nothing like
it in stead thereof, then they will own the Lord in them, and bless God for
them, what not otherwise, if the Lord be and appear in them will they not own
him, but upon their own conditions, we see nothing in their Petition that may
induce us to conceive their sense to be any other then hypotheticall. But what
o they mean by Praying, and Hoping, and Waighting to see their hands stretched
out for the Lord till they shall help to tear the Flesh of the Whore and
burn her with fire, What Whore do they mean whose flesh shall be torn, and
what tearing, burning, if they mean by the whore Joseph Salmon in his Book of
Antichrist in man.
that common whore not commonly known until a late writer made discovery of
her calling her the whore, the Babylon, the Antichrist in man, that is the
fleshly Wisdom or carnal policy of the Creatures, as he extends the Word,
that is no work either for this or any other Parliament, if they mean as most
of the Orthodox Protestants hold the Antichrist of Rome (and so far their words
[their hands stretched out till they shall help to tear) induce us to stretch
fanaticall fancy by tearing and burning her the utter ruin of that Archenemy
of Christ Revel. 17.16. To which place they allude (though cat, they say tear
the flesh) how is it like to be done by any acting of this Parliament which is
limited for its sitting to the space of a year and a little more, and then
what an abuse is this of the holy Word of God the holy practice of prayer and
the venerable Assembly of the Parliament to seal or shut up their suits unto
them with such a fantastical conclusion.

The Acceptance of their Petition.
THat I may not make an end, or take my leave of my Reader with such a
distasteful folly. I will make up my last period with the Parliaments
acceptance of, and answer unto these importunate Petitioners, which is set
down in this sort.

The Petitioners called in, and being come to the Bar Mr Speaker by command
of the House returned them this answer. Mercur. Pol. number. 165. p. 2636.
Gentlemen the House does take notice of your good affection to the Parliament,
and has commanded me to tell you that the Business in your Petition shall be
in due time under consideration, and the House will do therein as the Lord
shall direct them. Wherein they show their civility by their smooth courteous
answer to so rough and rigorous a Petition, their wisdom in accepting of their
affection as it was pressed, not of their Judgment, and in that they would not
rashly, but upon due consideration return an Answer, and their Piety, in that
they resolved to do there in, as God shall direct them.

Now the God who stands in the Congregation of the Mighty. Ps. 28.1.
Observing both what they do and with what minds and to what ends they act,
direct their counsels and debates to resolutions of Piety and Justice that
they may not do unjustly, by the misguidance of false information or corrupt
affection nor accept of the persons of the wicked for fear or favor or reward
v. 2. But Defend the Poor, and Fatherless, do Justice to the afflicted and
needy, v. 3. Defend poor and despised Ministers who are as Fathers having none
of their Tribe as heretofore in places of Anthority, as Fathers to Protect
them, Deliver the poor and needy out of the hand of the wicked. v. 4. Deliver
those that are Poor from their Poverty by supplying them with means of
comfortable subsistence, and by keeping those that are not poor, that the
hands of the Wicked may not impoverish them; and good Lord make the Rulers whom
thon have set over us Rich in Grace Heroic in Spirit to act for thee, thy
cause, thy truth, thy Church; and all faithful Pastors, who feed thy flock,
that they may be fed with that portion which thy gracious Benificence has
provided for them.

FINIS.

